Master GEREE'S CASE of CONSCIENCE SIFTED.

Wherein is enquired, Whether the KING (considering His Oath at Coronation to
protect the Clergy and their Privileges) can with a safe Conscience consent to
the Abrogation of EPISCOPACY.

AUG. de Trin. l. 4. c. 6. Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo
Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit. CYPR. Ep. 27 Dominus
noster, cujus praecepta metuere, and observare debemus, Episcopi honorem, and
Ecclesiae suae rationem disposuit. Dr. CORN. BURGES. Fire of the Sanctuary. p.
68. Men now count it an high piece of zeal to direct their Directors; and like
Clock-makers to take the Church all in pieces at their pleasure. By EDWARD
BOUGHEN, D. D.

LONDON. Printed in the year, 1650.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND PIOUS PRINCE, CHARLES, KING of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Guardian of the Church.
SIR,
IT may seem strange to some; but, my hope is not to Your Majesty, that I make
this Dedication, at this time, to Your sacred Person. The matter of this
Treatise is in Your behalf; it justifies Your solemn Oath at Coronation, the
just necessity of this Oath; as also Your Crown and dignity, and the goodliest
Flower in that Crown, Supremacy. To whose hands then should I chiefly present
it, but to Yours? The times affright me not from my faith, and duty. I remember
well, that during the Eclipse of heaven and the King of heaven, there was one,
that durst acknowledge our Saviors Kingdom; and in the full assurance of his
title, preferred his petition to him as a King. And shall I be ashamed to do
the like? I know, You are my only Sovereign here on earth. I know, You
represent my Savior in his kingly office* though Your Crown be wreathed with
thorns. With all humility therefore I present this acknowledgement of my most
loyal affections, which are due to Your sacred Majesty, from

Your poor, but most faithful Subject, Edward Boughen.

To the intelligent READER.
I Was entreated by a very good Friend to take Mr. Gerees Case of Conscience
into consideration, and to bestow some pains in disclosing the weakness and
foulness of his arguing. Truly I was willing to undeceive my seduced
Countrymen, and ye ded to his request. The Treatise I find to be small, but
dangerous. It aims at the ruin both of Church and Kingdom. It persuades the
King, that his Oath as Coronation is a wicked Oath, and that he ought to break
it. And then woe be to his Soul, and the Kingdoms safety. Yea he affirms it to
be I. D. P. 4.
Vinculum iniquitatis, the bond of iniquity. Thus he has knit up out most
gracious Sovereign, with all His religious Predecessors, in the bundle of
iniquity No sooner read I this, Psalm. 39. 4.
but b my heart was hot within me; and while I was musing upon this, and the
like blasphemies* the fi^e was kindled within me, and at the last I spoke with
my tongue. 2 Samuel 1^. 9.
Why should this Shimei blaspheme my Lord the King? and Psa^ 89. 50.
slander the footsteps of those anointed of the Lord, that have so long slept
in peace? 1. Reg. 2. 44. 45.
Because he has done this wickedness, the Lord shall return it upon his own
pa^e And King Charles shall eblessed; and his throne shall be established
before the Lord for ever. Consult I pray you, with Dr. Cornelius Burges a
feirce Assembly man, and of great authority among them; and he will tell you,
that The fire of the Sanctuary p. 22^.
God is tender not only of the safety, but also of the honor of HIS ANOINTED.
In so much, that Ib. p. 272.
he has made a law to all, not to revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of the
people. Which Law (says he) not only proh^biteth imprecations, and seditious
railings which are an HELLISH IMPIETY, though it be but in word only, ^e the
Prince never so impious) but even all rude, bitter, and unseemly speeches. And
Mr. Nathaniel Ward in his Sermon upon Ezech. 19. 14. preached before the
Commons, June 30. 1647. affirms Nathan Ward p. ^lt.
that besides the male administrations of Government by Magistrates themselves,
there is no readier way to prosti^ute it, then to suffer vile men to BLASPHEME
AND SPIT IN THE FACE OF AUTHORITY. All this Master Geree has done most
undeservedly. If then I shall clear the Kings Oath from these foul
imputations, I shall prove Mr. Geree to be involved A^* 8. 23.
in the bond of iniquity. And he that is so, Ib v. 21.
his heart is not right in the sight of God, Ib. v. 23.
he is in the very gall of bitterness Just in Simon Magus case. I shall
therefore take up S. Peter's words, and advise him, to Ib* v. 22.
Repent of this his wickedness, and to pray God, if perhaps the thought of his
heart may be forgiven him. If you conceiv^^ I have ventered upon some
questions, not so fit to be handled* and without my Profession, I beseech you
take notice, that this Minister has led me into these undesired, and
unpleasant paths. He that undertakes to answer a book, is bound to confute
all, but what he approves. Silence in such passages, speaks consent. Good
Reader, let true reason, Scripture, and authority guide thee, and then thou
shall be sure to judge impartially.

Take notice, that J G. stands for Mr. John Gerees Case of Conscience.

I D. for Jus Divinum regiminis Ecclesiastici.

Sir Robert Cotton; for his Treatise, that the Sovereigns person is required
in the great Councels, or Assemblies of the State.

His Majesty's Oath published by Himself in an Answer to the Lords and Commons
in Parliament. 26. May. 1642.
SIR, will you grant and keep, and by your Oath confirm to Episcopus.
the people of England, the Laws and Customs to them granted by the Kings of
England, you Lawful and Religious Predecessors; and namely the Laws, and
Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy by the glorious King S. Edward,
your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the true profession of the
Gospel established in this Kingdom, and agreeable to the Prerogative of the
Kings thereof, and the ancient Customs of this Realm?


Rex. I grant and promise to keep them.


Episcopus. Sir, will you keep Peace and godly agreement entirely (according to
your power) both to God and the Holy Church, the Clergy and the people?


Rex. I will keep it.


Episcopus. Sir, will you (to your power) cause Law, Justice, and Discretion in
mercy, and truth to be executed in all your Judgments?


Rex. I will*


Episcopus. Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and rightful Customs,
which the Commonaltie of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend and uphold
them, to the honor of God, so much as in you lies?


Rex. I grant and promise so to do.


Then one of the Bishops reads this Admonition to the King, before the people,
with a loud voice. OUR Lord and King, We beseech you to pardon and grant, and
to preserve unto us, and to the Churches committed to our charge, all
Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice: and that you would protect and
defend us, as every good King ought to be a Protector and Defender of the
Bishops and Churches under his Government.


Rex. With a willing and devout heart I promise and grant my part, and that I
will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches committed to your charge*
all Canonical privileges* and due Law and Justice: and that I will be your
Protector and Defender, to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom by right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under his Government.


Then the King arises, and is led to the Communion Table where he makes a
solemn Oath, in sight of all the ^^op^e, to observe the premises, and laying
his hand on the Book says,

The Oath.

The Things, that I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, so p(...)
me God, and the Contents of this Book.


The Contents.
CHAP. I. Whether the King may lawfully consent to the abrogation of
Episcopacy. 1. CHAP. II. Whether the Kings Oath taken at his Coronation, be an
unlawful Oath. 4. CHAP. III. Whether Prelacy in the Church of England were an
usurpation. 9. CHAP. IV. Whether the King may consent to the abrogation of
Episcopacy, if so that calling be lawful. 18. CHAP. V. Whether ye have not
bound your selves by your Solemn League and Covenant to maintain Episcopacy.
22. CHAP. VI. Whether the King, without impeachment to his Oath at Coronation,
may consent to the abrogation of Episcopacy. 31 CHAP. VII. Whether the King may
desert Episcopacy without perjury. 37. CHAP. VIII. Whether the Kings Oath to
the Clergy be injurious to his other subjects, and inconsistent with his Oath
to the people. 41. CHAP. IX. How far forth, and wherein the Clergy is subject
to a Parliament, and to what Parliament. 52 CHAP. X. Whether it be lawful for
the King to abrogate the Rights of the Clergy. 60. CHAP. XI. Whether the
Clergy and Laity be two distinct bodies, or one body Politic. That
Churchmen in all ages had some singular privileges allowed them. 69. CHAP.
XII. Whether to sit and Vote in Parliament be incongruous to the calling of
Bishops. 78. CHAP. XIII. Certain light and scandalous speeches concerning
Prince and Priest, tenderly touched. 87. CHAP. XIV. Whether the Lands of the
Church may be forfeited by the misdemeanour of the Clergy. 93. CHAP. XV.
Whether it be lawful to take away the Bishops Lands, and to confer them upon
the Presbytery. 104. CHAP. XVI. How far forth the King ought to protect the
Church and Bishops. 114 CHAP. XVII. Whether there be two Supremacies in this
Kingdom. 127
Mr. GEREES Case of Conscience SIFTED.
CHAP. I. Whether the King may lawfully consent to the abrogation of Episcopacy.
1. I Find a Case of Conscience proposed by Mr. Geree, and this it is; I. G. p.
1.
Whether the King (considering his O that Coronation, to protect the Clergy
and their Privileges) can salva conscientia consent to the abrogation of
Episcopacy? But why (I pray you) is the question proposed here, when you have
determined it before? For does not your Title page speak thus? In this Case of
Conscience it is cleared, that the King may, without impeachment to his Oath,
touching the Clergy at Coronation, consent to the Abrogation of Episcopacy.
Thus you have full magisterially determined, before the question be so much as
proposed. Is this the fashion, first to resolve, and then to argue the case?
This may be the course of Heretics; it is otherwise with good Catholics. But
you are resolved to maintain, that a Christian may swear and forswear, without
the least prejudice to his soul.

2. And your practice is accordingly; witness the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy; which you with your great Masters have taken more then once. And
those of your persuasion have taken up Arms against their Sovereign Lord,
without impeachment to their Oath of Allegiance; and maintain that Mr.
Challenor^ Speech.
The Parliament is subordinate to no power under Heaven, without any breach of
the Oath of Supremacy. And your self, like a good Preacher of Gods Word, have
taken the Oath of Canonical obedience to the Bishop; and yet endeavor the
abrogation of Episcopacy, and the extirpation of that Order, from whence you
had your Orders, and without which you could have had no Orders.

3. Me thinks, the Smectymnuans should not endure this Proposition, since with
them a Bishop and a Presbyter are one and the same. Thus, while you endeavor
to ruinate Episcopacy, you subvert the Presbytery, according to their tenets. I
wonder much, how your case has passed so long unsifted, and uncensured by the
Divine Masters of your learned Assembly.

4. But I shall take it for your best advantage, as it is distinguished, or (as
we say) a distinct order from Presbytery. I shall also take into consideration,
the several motives, which you produce for the Abrogation of Episcopacy.

5. Whereof your first is this; that I G p. 1.
there is no hope of the Kings or Kingdoms safety, without an union between
our King and Parliament. I must confess with anguish of spirit, as matters
have been handled, the King and Kingdom are driven into a great straight; and
an Union between our King and your Parliament has been prayed for, and sought
for by all commendable, or tolerable means. The hope left us is only in our
God and Savior, whose custom it is to S. Luke 1 51. 52.
scatter the proud in the imagination of their hearts; to pull down the mighty
from their throne, and to exalt the humble and meek. Thus can he I^. v. 49. 31.
show strength with his arm, and do great things for us. And this, I hope, in
his due time he will do, and reduce this Kingdom from irreligion and
sacrilege; and not cast off the innocent with the profane blasphemers. Oh,
that we might beg that blessing from Heaven, to see a Parliament rightly
regulated, religiously minded, and without any by ends of their own: Ex. 18.
21.
men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness. Such, as
will not be Ex. 23. 2.
led by a multitude to do evil, or to subvert the truth. I am certain, we
should then have an Union, a blessed Union between King and Parliament.

6. But by you it seems, that That such an union is ^a^tum ^^n ^^p^^si^i^e,
(...) the King condescend in the point of Episcopacy l. G. p. 1.
there is now no probable or possible means of reconciliation left, in man's
judgment, unless the King yield to the extirpation of Episcopacy. You should
have added, unless he lay down his Lands, Royalties, and just Prerogatives at
his Subjects feet: unless he abandon the wife of his bosom, and become a
stranger to the Children of his loins: unless he sacrifice his friends to the
malice of his foes, and the ruin of whole families to their avarice: unless
he cast off the Service of God, that most excellent form of Common Prayer, and
give up the houses and lands of God, and all that is accounted holy, to satiate
their sacrilegious appetite.

7. But, in sober sadness, do you believe that the Abrogation of Episcopacy is
that, they yawn at? You are mistaken, good brother, the Episcopal houses and
lands, as also what ever belongs to Deans and Chapters, to Archdeacons and
Prebendaries, are the things they hunger and thirst after; they will wipe your
mouths of all such morsels: as their Ordinances for the sale of such Lands
have fully manifested.

8. And whereas you seem to be much troubled for his Majesty, lest For the King
to condescend renitente conscientia, though it might gratify us, it would be
sinful to himself. I. G. p. 1.
he should condescend renitente conscientia, against conscience, to gratify
you in this kind, and to bring sin upon himself. Which you perceive, and in a
manner confess, he must do, if he do, as you would have him: for you say, It
would be sinful to himself. Thus you endeavor to persuade our Sovereign into
sin, upon pretense to sin: how you can salve it, we shall see hereafter. In the
mean space I must tell you, that you trouble your self for the King, blessed be
God, without cause; for we cannot perceive, that He is inclinable to gratify
you in this kind. Neither does every reluctance of conscience make a grant
sinful; but only when my conscience checks me upon just grounds. It is not
the renitence, or struggling, of conscience, but the pulling down of Gods
Ordinance, Episcopacy, that makes the sin; though, I confess, the sin is the
greater, if it be done upon deliberation against conscience; let the pretense
be, what you please. If this indeed should prove to be the Kings case, which
God forbid, then must it necessarily follow, that I. G. p. 1.
it would be sinful to him; and so he should forfeit inward to procure outward
peace; and be represented to times in the glass of conscience, to adventure
the heavenly, to retain an earthly Crown. Nothing more certain. Woe then be to
him, or them, who ever they be, that plot, how they may endanger the Kings
earthly Crown, that so they may deprive him of his heavenly inheritance. He
has been tried as gold in the furnace; he has been enforced through fire and
water; but for all this, with Gods blessing he shall arrive in the haven of
happiness.

9. But there is an The oath taken at the Kings Coronation has been pressed by
some learned Pens with that probability, etc. I. G. p. 1.
Oath, that stands in the way, which was taken at the Kings Coronation. This
has been pressed by some Learned pens, with that probability, that (by your own
confession) may stumble a right intelligent Reader. But you are none of that
number, you stumble not, but smoothly pass over such rubs; and though Neither
have they that I know, received an^ satisfactory answer in Print I G p. 1.
they have not hitherto received any satisfactory answer, yet now we shall have
it in Print It may ^e a work worthy some pains to resolve this case* and clear
your obj^ctions, that while they stand unanswered, cast an ill reflect on both
upon the King in condescending to abrogate Episcopacy, and the Parliament, in
pressing him to it. I. G p. 1.
. By your pains the Obj^ctions shall be cleared, which while they stand
unanswe^ed, cast an ill reflection upon the King, in condescending to abrogate
Episcopacy. I beseech you, do you dream? Who told you, that His Majesty had
condescended to this impious and Antichristian demand? No, no, blessed be God,
he has done Christ, and his Church, and himself that honor, in the refusal
of this Proposition, that His memory shall be glorious in our Histories, and
his Name high in the book of life. But for certain, they will cast an ill, a
foul, an infamous ref^^ction upon those, who ever they be, that shall press
him to this unchristian act. This you, and your Masters of the Assembly can
never avert with all your Dutch devices, and Geneva fallacies. I say it now, it
shall be explained hereafter.

10. But why am I so forward, when The bond of the Kings Oath may be taken off
two ways Either by clearing the unlawfulness of it I. G. p. 1.
the Kings Oath may be taken off two ways; either by clearing the
unlawfulness of it; or else by manifesting, that Though it be granted, that
Episcopacy is lawful* yet notwithstanding that his Oath, the King without
impeachment may consent to the abrogation of Episcopacy I G. p. 2.
though Episcopacy be lawful, yet notwithstanding that his Oath, the King may
consent to the abrogation of Episcopacy. Both these your ways shall be
severally taken into consideration; and first for the unlawfulness thereof.

CHAP. II. Whether the Kings Oath taken at his Coronation, be an unlawful Oath.
1. YOu say, and say truly, that It was vinculum iniquitatis, and so void the
first day: for qui jurat in iniquum obligatur in contrarium, ^. G p. 1.
the oath, which is vinculum iniquitatis, the bond of iniquity, is void the
first day. And your reason is firm; for Qui jurat in iniquu^, obligatur in
contrarium, he that swears to do that, which is unjust, is bound to perform
the contrary. Your argument hitherto is good; and upon these very grounds we
will join issue. But how will you prove, that his Majesty has sworn to
uphold that, which is unjust or impious? This shall be done by manifesting that
I. G. p. 1.
the King has sworn to maintain that, which is contrary to Christ's
Institution. And what is that? Episcopacy, say you. Your resolution is high and
peremptory, as if you were settled upon infall blegrounds; which upon just try
all will dissolve into sand. And yet with you I readily acknowledge, that I. G
p. 1.
If Prelacie in the Church be an usurpation contra^y to Christ's Institution;
then to maintain it, is to sin, and all bonds to sin are frustrate.

2. I hope you use no tricks; but fairly without any fallacy, according to
the question proposed, by Prelacie you mean Episcopacy, properly and strictly
so called. Otherwise there are four terms in your syllogism. Now if this
proposition be firm, upon the same grounds it will follow, you cannot deny it,
that If Supremacy in the Parliament be an usurpation contrary to Christ's
Institution; then to maintain it, is to sin. But Supremacy in the Parliament
is an usurpation contrary to Christ's Institution; Ergo to maintain it, is to
sin. That Supremacy in the Parliament is contrary to Christ's Institution, is
evident by St. Peter, who places Supremacy in the King; in these words, 1 S
Pet. 2. 13, 14.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
unto the KING as SUPREME, or unto GOVERNORS, that are SENT BY HIM, by the
King. And every rational man cannot but discern, that there can be but one,
not two Supremes, in the same Kingdom, I. G. p. 9.
as you would have it. But of this more fully in the last Chapter. Secondly, it
follows, If ordination by Presbyters be an usurpation contrary to Christ's
Institution, then to maintain it, is to sin. But O^dination by Presbyters is an
usurpation contrary to Christ's Institution. To maintain it therefore is to sin.
The minor with Gods blessing, shall suddenly be made good against the
Presbyterian Jus divinum. Thirdly, If Episcopacy in the Church be no
Usurpation, but Christ's Institution, then to endeavor the extirpation thereof,
is sin. But Episcopacy in the Church is no usurpation; but Christ's Institution.
Therefore to endeavor the extirpation thereof, is sin.

3. That Solemn League and Covenant.
you, your Assembly, and Parliament, have made and taken an oath to extirpate
Episcopacy, is too notorious to be denied. But if I shall prove, that
Episcopacy is not contrary to Christ's Institution, then shall I clear the
Kings oath from sin. Secondly, if I shall demonstrate, that Episcopacy is the
Institution of Christ, then is your Covenant g vinculum iniquitatis, the very
bond iniquity; ^. G. p. 1.
and you are bound in conscience publicly and penitently to retract it. That
the same Order cannot be Christ's Institution, and contrary to Christ's
Institution, is so apparent a truth, that a mere idiot may discern it. But the
Order of Bishops is Christ's Institution: and yet ye have sworn to up with it
root and branch. Much like to those in the Prophet, Ier. 11. 19.
Let us destroy the tree, with the fruit thereof. And yet the root of
Episcopacy is our B. Savior; Who is called S. Pet 2. 25.
the Bishop of our souls; from him it takes his rise; from him it receives
life, it springs up, and is watered with the dew of his heavenly blessing.

4. We know, that he, from whom a family springs, is called the root of that
family. That As Scripture is the Rule of Church* Government* so Christ is the
sole root and fountain wh^nce it originally flows I. D. p. 50
our Savior is the root of Episcopacy, that from him it received being and
life, is evident in the Apostles strictly so called, who had their Orders
immediately from Christ, as is evident S. Mat: 10. S. Luk: 9. S. I^: 20. 21.
etc. To them he gave power to ordain Apostles, in Gratis accepistis, gratis
date. S. Mat. 10. 8. so S. Ambr. de dignit Sacerd c. 5.
Ambrose, so S. Hieron. in Mat. 10. 8.
Jerome, so Gen^ad apud Balsam. p. 1085.
Gennadius Patriarch of Constantinople, with seventy and three Bishops more in
a full Synod. Our Saviors words are (...), which the Greeks understands thus,
A gift ye have received, give ye this gift. This Commission he renewed unto
them after his Resurrection, in these words, S Ioh 20. 21.
As my Father sent me, so send I you. So S. Hilar in Mat. can 10
Hilarie, so Cyril in Io. l. 12 c. 55.
S. Cyril, and other with them, upon the strength of this commission Christ's
Apostles ordained some other to be Apostles, conferring upon them the same
honor and power which they themselves had received from Christ. This is
evident in S James Bishop of Jerusalem, in Epaphroditus, Bishop of Philippi,
and in Apollos Bishop of Corinth. These are called Apostles in Scripture; S.
James, Gal. 1. 19. Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 25. Apollos, 1 Cor. 4. 9. And these
are confessed to be Apostoli ab ipsis, Ap stolis ordinati, Apostles o^dained by
the Apostles; Even by Hieron i^ Gal. 1. ^9.
S. Jerome, Calvin in 1 Cor 4. 9.
Calvin, and your mighty champion Wall* Messal. p. 41.
Walo Melsalinus.

5. Apostles they were at that time called, but afterward that title, upon
just occasion was taken from them, and the name of Bishop was settled upon them,
and their successors in Office. So Theodoret. Theo in Phi. lip. 11.
The same persons were sometimes called both Presbiters and Bishops, but those
who are now named BISHOPS, were then called APOSTLES. But in process of time
the title of APOSTLE was reserved to those, who were (...) APOSTLES properly
and t^uly so called. And the name of BISHOP became appropriated to those, who
were lately called APOSTLES. Hence is it, that Timothy and Titus are called
Bishops and Apostles: Bishops in the postscripts of those Epistles, which were
written to them by S. Paul; but Apostles by Ignat ad Ephesians.
Ignatius, Theodoret* in 1 Timothy 3 1.
Theodoret, and Walo. Messal. p ^0 43.
many other.

6. Bishops they were at that time called, when Episcopacy was distinguished
from the Presbyteriall Order; But I^ p. 53.
Apostles they were named, when a Bishop and a Presbyter were one and the same.
These were Timoth^m Apostoli munere and officio functus est Ib p 42. 52.
Apost^es not only by name, but in office and power; and Ib. p. 47 50. 244.
governed Churches and their Presbyter-Bishops by the same right, and with the
same authority, that the chief and prime Apostles swaied them with. And as
they governed, so they, and they only ordained Pres^yters.

7. From hence we argue thus. They, that have the same name and office with the
true Apostles, are of the same order with the true Apostles. Bu^ Bishop
Timothy, and Bishop Titus, and Bishop Epaphroditus have the same name and
office with the true Apostles. They are therefore of the same order with the
true Apostles. Smect. Answ. to the Remonst. p. 21. and 26.
The major is Smectymnuus his Proposition, and not to be doubted of. The minor,
or second Proposition shall be justified by Salmasius; who in several passages
acknowledges this name, and office, and power in Epaphroditus Bishop of
Philippi. Take this for all; Epaphroditus by S ^au^ ^^ called the Apostle of
the P^^lippians, b^caus^ h^ had sent him to the Philippians to confirm their
Church, and therein to ordain them ^resbyters and Bishops Walo. Messal p. 58.
Epaphroditus Pau^o dicitur Apostolus Philippensium; quia ad Philippenses eum
miser at ad Ecclesiam eorum confirmandam, and constituendos in ea Presbyteros
and Episcopos* That the name of Apostle was usually given to Timothy and Titus,
I have already manifested. That the Apost^licall power was in each of them, is
evident by those Epistles, which S. Paul wrote unto them: and more briefly in
these words to Titus Tit. 1. ^.
For this cause left I thee in Creete, that thou should SET IN ORDER, o^
redress, WHAT IS WANTING, or a miss, and ORDAIN PRESBYTERS in every City as I
have appointed thee. Herein is both Jurisdiction and Ordination allowed him;
and the maine power of the Apostolical Order consists in Jurisdiction and
Ordination. Herein the Bishops, and only Bishops, succeed them.

8. Since then the Apostleship and Episcopacy, are one and the same Office, he
that is the root and author of the one, is the root and author of the other.
But Christ is the root and author of the Apostleship; he is therefore the root
and author of Episcopacy. In Covenanting then to take away Episcopacy root and
branch, you have done no less then Covenanted to take away Jesus Christ, Ephesians
4 11. 1 Cor. 12 28.
who gave the Ap^stles, and u ordained them in the Church. Indeed ye have taken
the ready way to root him out o^ our hearts and souls. For ye have absolutely
stripped the Church of the three Creeds, the ten Commandments, and the Lords
Prayer, with the Epistles and Gospels; wherein was daily mention made of our B.
God. and Savior, as also of his power, pleasure, and mercy. And what I pray
you, is become of the Lords Supper, S. Luke 22 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
which we are commanded to administer and receive, in remembrance of our B.
Savior? And ^ Joh. 6. 53.
unless we eat his flesh, and drink his blood, in that holy Sacrament, we have
no life abiding in us. Many Parishes in this Kingdom have been utterly deprived
of this heavenly Supper, even since their lawful Parsons or Vicars have been
imprisoned, or sequestered by your instigation. So farewell ro^t and branch, and
fruit, as much as in you lies. And now, I hope, the Kings Oath is clearly
discharged of sin; and your Covenant sufficiently proved to be the bond of
iniquity.

9. But how comes it to pass, that if root and branch must up, yet by your
Ordinance some branches of that root may be preserved? For it is resolved, that
Ordinance for Ordinat. p 2.
Ordination performed by a BISHOP, being a Presbyter, j^yned with other
Presbyters, is for substance va^id, and not to be disclaimed^y any, that have
received it. And most probable it is, that you are a branch, or sucker, of that
root. For Ib. p* 13.
Presbyters so ordained, shall he admitted to a charge, without any new
ordination. Is not this a flat contradiction? some branches lopped off, and
some spared; is this according to your solemn league and Covenant? Indeed had
they taken all branches away, which spring from that root, there had hardly
been a man of any learning left. And is not that Clerk, who has been ordained
by a Bishop, a wise man, to swear to root himself up, if not here, yet out of
the land of the living. For he that is not a member of the Church militant, can
never be a Saint in the Church triumphant.

CHAP. III. whether Prelacy in the Church of England were an usurpation.
1. THe Question proposed is, of Episcopacy; the Oath is for the maintenance of
Episcopacy; and your endeavor is for the abrogation of Episcopacy. According
to your sense therefore by Prelacy I understand Episcopacy, which you have
vowed and covenanted to extirpate. Whether upon just grounds, or no, shall be
now enquired. For the Office is either good or bad, lawful or unlawful,
necessary or indifferent. If in it self bad, and utterly unlawful, God forbid,
but we should join in the extirpation of it. If indifferent, it is in the
breast of authority, to allow, or disallow it. But if simply lawful, and good,
and necessary, for the being and continuation of a Church, then it is not in
the just power of man to discard it, or cast it off. And yet you resolve, that
I. G. p. 1.
the Kings Oath to uphold Episcopacy is sin. If sin, then it necessarily
follows, that Episcopacy in it self is naught, and utterly unlawful. Thus in
the first place you condemn all the Kings and Queens of this Kingdom, that
have taken this oath. Secondly, you condemn those many Saints of God, that
have discharged this Office of Episcopacy. Thirdly, You condemn all those
Fathers, and Councels, which justify a necessity of Bishops. And last of all
you condemn the whole Church of Christ, which from her Infancy has been
governed by Bishops. Is not this to Psalm 89 50.
blaspheme the footsteps of the Lords anointed? Is not this to question the
actions of those Saints S. Jude v. 3*
to whom the Faith was first delivered? Is not this to vilify the Spouse of
Christ, and Christ himself* who has suffered the Church to err so foully
from the beginning.

2. But how shall it be proved, that Episcopacy is so bad, that it is a sin to
defend it? An universal Proposition must have an universal Proof.
Exparticulari nonest syllogizari. A particular makes no proof, but for that
particular, whereof it treats. I^ I manifest, that Monarchy, or Arist^cracy
has been a^used in such a State or Nation, by such or such a Prince, or
Peers, do I therefore justify, that it is a sin to defend Moarchy, or
Aristocracy; O^ if I shall make it appear, That some Parliament men have
abused that trust, which is committed to them, is therefore a Parliament
naught? This follows not; but hereby I manifest, that they who at that time sat
at the helm in that place, did abuse that, which in it self is good. Is the
Apostleship naught, because Judas abused himself and that? Is Episcopacy bad,
because Gregory VII* of Rome, George of Cappadocia, or Paulus Samosatenus
abused their place and function? Far be it from me to argue, or conclude in
this manner. I have learned to distinguish between the office and the Officer:
The Office may be simply good, and the Officer extremely bad. This then is no
argument against Episcopacy, though perchance you may prove, that Episcopacy
has been ill managed.

3. But view we your own words, which are the minor of your conditional
Syllogism; which are these. I. G p 1.
And truly as Prelacy stood with us in England ingr^ssing all ruledome in the
Church into the hands of a few L. Bishops, I think it may be cleared to be an
usurpation. And truly I think not. So you and I are of two several opinions.
But truly your thinking shall be cleared ^y this one argument. I. G p 1.
That power, that dispoiles any of Christ's Officers, of any Privilege, or duty
indulged or injoined them by the word of God, that power is an usurpation
against the word. But this Prelacy did, as it stood in England Ergo, English
Prelacie was an usurpation against the word of God.

4. How properly you speak, and how strongly you argue, let the intelligent
judge: That you, and others may be sensible of the strength of your argument,
under favor of Parliament, I shall invert it thus. That power that despoiles
any of Christ's Officers of any privilege or duty indulged or injoined them by
the word of God, that power is an usurpation against the Word. But this the
Parliament does, as it stands now in England Ergo, the English Parliament is an
usurpation against the word of G^d. I hope you know your own argument; though
it alter a term, it alters not the form. I G. p 2.
The Major, you say, is clear of it self, it needs no proof, as you conceive.
The difficulty is in the Minor; and that I make good thus, out of your own
words. I. ^* ^* ^*
Presbyters are by Christ's warrant, in Scripture endued with power to rule in
their own congregations, as well as preach. But the Parliament has banished
many hundreds of us from our own congregations, and barred us from preaching
therein. Ergo, The Parliament has despoiled many of Christ's officers of their
privileges and duties indulged, and enjoined them by the Word of God. You
cannot deny us to be Christ's officers, since we are Presbyters. That we are
Presbyters, is acknowledged by your great Masters; Ordinance for Ordinat. p 2.
who grant all those to be Presbyters, who have been ordained by a Bishop
j^yned with other Presbyters. And so, I am sure, we are.

5. Let a review be taken of the soliditie of your former argument; and then we
shall find you offend in limine, in that Major, which is so clear of it self.
For do not you say thus? That power, that despoils any of Christ's ^fficers of
any privilege, or duty indulged or enjoined them by the Word of God, that
power is an usurpation against the Word. Had you said, That power, that
wrongfully, or causelessly despoils any of Christ's officers, etc. you had said
something. You have not, it seems, learned to distinguish between justly and
unjustly; but we must. And yet I. G. p. 2.
this Proposition is clear of it self, if we take your word. But Gods Word and
yours, are two. Gods Word says, Romans 13. 1.
Non est potestas nisi a Deo, There is no power but of God; but you say, that
there is a power, which is an usurpation against the Word of God. But how can
that be usurpata, which is data; both usurped, and given? That it is given by
God, Thou could have no power at all, ag^^nst me, except it were given thee
from above S. Jo. 19. 11.
our Savior testifies, S. Joh. 19. 11. Indeed this power may be abused; and
the abuse of this power is an usurpation. The office is from God, the abuse
from our selves. But you cannot, or will not distinguish between the office and
the abuse. If all ^ffi^es must be discarded, because the officers have done a
miss, what office will remain in this Kingdom? I fear, not one.

6. We read, that Ier. 20. 2.
Pas^ur the High Priest set Jeremie the Prophet in the stocks for preaching the
truth, Ier. 19. 14.
which the Lord had commanded him to preach. And yet who dares say that the
High Priesthood in the old Law was an usurpation? We know, that Prove. 8. 15.
the office of a King is Gods own ordinance; and yet we dare not say, that the
power of Jehoi^kim King of Juda was an usurpation against Gods Word, when Ier.
26. 23.
he slew Vrijah the Prophet. But we may safely and truly justify, that he
abused his power. And so did King Zedekiah, when Ier. 32. 3.
he imprisoned Jeremiah for prophesying, what the Lord had enjoined him to
denounce. Both Regal and Priestly power are the gift of God; they cannot
therefore but be good. But the abuse of this power to other ends then God gave
it, is the viciousness of man, and therefore bad. 1 Reg. 2. 27. 31.
Solomon made just use of this power, when he despoiled Abiathar the High
Priest not only of his privileges, but also of his office, and of all that
belonged to his office. The reason is, because Ib. v. 26.
Abiathar for his treason deserved this and an heavier doom. And I presume, it
was no usurpation in St. Paul, when 1 Timothy 1. 20.
he delivered Hymeneus unto Satan, that he might learn not to blaspheme: nor
yet when he Gal* 1. 9.
anathematized and accursed those Preachers, that taught otherwise, then they
had received. If then our Bishops have made use of this power in silencing or
depriving heretical, schismatic, or seditious Preachers, 2 Timothy 3* 2. etc.
they have done no more then they ought to do. This therefore is no usurpation,
but a just use of that power, which with their Orders was conferred upon them
for this end and purpose.

7. I have done with your Major; now to your Minor. I. G. p. 1.
But this Prelacy did* as it stood in England. What did it? why it Ib
despoiled Christ's ^fficers (the good Presbyters that preached up the Scottish
discipline and doctrine) of their privileges indulged, and duty inj^yned them
by the Word of God. If they deserved this censure, it was no despoiling, but a
just deprivation. If they deserved it not, let it be proved. I am sure, Courts
and Committees have been long enough open, to receive large informations, and
easy proofs against them. And I am as sure, that our Savior never indulged
any such privilege to his Apostles, or any other of his ^fficers, as to vent
heresy, schism, or sedition. If any Bish^p be faulty, I plead not for him. I
justify Episcopacy, not the Bishop. Judas was bad, cut his Episcopacy good;
Judas offended, but not his office. Judas was cut off, not his Episcopacy; Act
1. 22.
the office is continued, and a good man must be put into it. So St. Peter. And
Act* 1. 20.
let another take HIS BISHOPPRICK. So the Spirit of Prophecy. Prelacy
therefore is not in fault; but the Prelate. And it is as false a speech to say*
Prelacy despoils any, as to say, Judicature wrongs any. Since we know, that
Judicature is blameless, when the Judge is criminous. And as improper a speech
it is to say, that a man is despoiled of his duty: I may be forbidden my duty,
but not spoiled of it: because I am bound to discharge it, though forbidden, if
unlawfully forbidden.

8. But what are these privileges, and duties, whereof they are said to be
despoiled? The particulars are these; Presbyters are by Christ's warrant in
Scripture endued with power to rule in their own Congregations, as well as to
preach. See 1 Timothy 3. 5 and 5. 21. Heb. 13. 17* 1 These. 5. 12. I G. p. 2.
Power to rule, and to preach in their own congregations; and this power they
are endued with ^y Christ's warrant. Power to Rule, and by Christ's warrant,
sound high, and raise attention. And this they have as well, as much, as power
to preach; if we may believe you. As if they had ruledome (as you call it) from
Christ himself. If this be doubted of, you give us Scripture for it, and that
in four several texts. The first is this, 1 Timothy 3. 5.
If any cannot rule his own house, how shall he take care for the Church? Here
is care to be taken for the Church, but no rule given to a Presbyter in the
Church, unless you allow him as much power to rule in his Parish, as he has
in his own house. To which assertion no man, I conceive, will subscribe. It is
required indeed, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
if any Layman desire to be a Presbyter-Bishop, that before he be ordained, he
be known to be such a one, Ib. v. 4.
that could rule his own house well. But what is this to prove, that by Christ's
warrant in Scripture a Presbyter is endued with power to rule in his
eongregation? Alas, I. D. p. 12^*
this government, as your learned brethren confess, is but domestical in
private families; not Ecclesiastical in the public congregation. In like
manner 1 Timothy 3* 12*
Deacons must be such, as rule their houses and children well. And yet ye allow
them no ruledome in the Church, but set Lay-Ruling Elders to overtop them. No
warrant here for this Presbyteriall ruling power; what may come hereafter,
shall be examined.

9. The next proof is from the same Epistle; the words are these; 1 Timothy 5* 2^*
I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels,
that THOU OBSERVE THESE THINGS without preferring one before another, and do
nothing partially. This is something, were it to the purpose. Here is a large
authority given to Timothy in this Chapter; and a charge in this verse, that
he be careful to discharge his office with integrity. But what is this to the
point in question? Alas, you are clean mistaken in your mark. It rests upon you
to prove, that this power in Scripture is given to a Presbyter-Bishop; whereas
it is here given to an Apostle-Bishop; who is clean of another, an higher
order. If I should justify, that a Sergeant at Law has power to hear and
determine Suits in Westminster Hall, because the Justices of the Kings Bench,
and Common Ple^^ have such a Commission, you would think, I were beside the
cushion; and so are you.

10. In the third place, you produce a text of the same Apostle to the Hebrews;
where-in he commands his brethren, to Heb. 13. 17.
obey those, that have the oversight of them, and to submit themselves un^o
them. No question, but they ought to do so. But who are these Praepositi, these
Rulers, here mentioned? Are they Presbyters only? Presbyters are not mentioned
here; and it is impossible to prove, that Presbyters only are intended here;
unless they be the only Church-governors. It is rather to be believed, that
all Church-governors, or else the chief Governors, were here intended. That he
speaks of Presbyters, I deny not; but that he speaks of Presbyters only, I
utterly deny. When you can prove, that only Presbyters Ib
watch for the souls of the people, and that they only must give an account
for those souls, then shall I readily acknowledge, that the Apostle speaks only
of Presbyters in this place.

11. If the Kings Majesty should command his Soldiers to obey their
Commanders, could any man imagine, that he spoke of the Lieutenants and
Captains only? No wise man can have this imagination: but this must reach, to
Majors, and Colonels, and all other in authority. Thus, when the Lord commands
his people, to obey those Governors, that watch for their souls, he means not
only Deacons and Presbyters, but Bishops also. For as in an Army there are
Captains over soldiers, and Commanders over Captains; so in the Church, which
is C^nt 6. 3.
aci^s ordinata, a well-ordered Army, there are Episcopus est pres^yt^^is
pr^positus Cypr ep. 10
Praepositi populo* and Praepositi Presbyteris, Spiritual Governors of the
people, and some set over both people and Presb^ters. Such were the Apost^^s in
Scripture, and such their 2 Cor ^. 23. Philip. 2. 25*
(...), their copartners in labor, and successors in office; whom we now call
Bishops. Such were Timothy and Titus, 1 Timothy 5. 22. Tit* 1. 5.
who had not only the power of Ordination, but of Jurisdiction also: that is,
they had authority, not only to set in order, what was amiss in the Church,
and 2 Timothy 3. 5. Tit 2. 15. and 3. 10.
to reform the Laity; but to 1. convent, 2. silence, and 3. excommunicate the
Clergy, even Deacons and Presbyters, if they deserved it.

12. For convention, in the first place observe, that 1 Timothy 5. 19.
S. Paul acknowledges in Bishop Timothy power to receive an accusation against
a Presbyter, or Elder; and upon proof to rebuke him. Which could not be done
without conventing him. 2ly. That the power to silence preaching Presbyters was
in Bishop Timothy, these words manifest, 1 Timothy 1. 3.
Thou may command some that they teach no other doctrine. And as for Bishop
Titus Tit. 1. 11.
(...), it be hoves him to stop the mouths of the disobedient and deceitful,
as also to Tit. 3. 9.
stay foolish questions and contentions. And if this will not serve, then must
they proceed to higher censures even to excommunication. For does not S. Paul
command Timothy, to 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5.
withdraw himself from those, that teach unwholesome Doctrine? And what this
means let Beza speak; Beza and Piscat. in loc.
Gravissime damnatos extra Ecclesiam ejicit, he casts for^h these as condemned
men out of the Church. For as S. Cyprian speaks, Si qui cum Episco^p^ non sunt,
in Ecclesid non sunt* Cypr. ep. 69* n. 31.
They that are not in communion with the Bishop, are out of the Church. Timothy
then being Bishop of that Church, and withdrawing his communion from them, they
were no longer members of the Church. This power, we see, was in the Apostle
Bishops; but no man can show that ever it was in the Presbyter Bishops, Par
enim in parem non habet potestatem; it is a sure rule, that no man has power
over his equal, while his equal.

13. The last place is reserved for the first in Scripture, which you have kept
for your reserve to help at a dead lift; and this it is. 1 These. 5. ^2.
We beseech you, brethren, that ye know them, which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you: A great friend of the Presbytery tells
us that Hilar. Dial. Romans in loc. apud Ambros.
this is the same with that, which the Apostle speaks in another Epistle that
those Presbyters are worthy of double honor, who labor in the word and
doctrine. So then, in his judgment, this rule, you so much boast of is, but
your laboring in the word and doctrine. And surely he has two able men, that
back him very well, viz. The^d^ret and Ca^vin. Theodoret d Theodoret* in 1
^he^. 5. 12.
tells us, that when S. Pau says, Qu^praesunt, th^se that are over you in the
Lord, it is all one* as if he ha^ said, they that ^ff^^ up prayers and
supplica^ions for y^u. And Ca^vin thu^, Calvin in loc.
Qu DOCENDO rite and fideliter GU^ERNANT, who by TEACHING orderly and
faithfully GOVERN the people. And el^ewhere Calvin I^stit. ^. ^. c. 3. Sect. 15.
he expounds this kind of G^verning by boris and salutaribus consiliis popu^o
praeire, by guiding the people with good and wholesome counsel. The Preifis
rule then consists in 1 Prayer for Gods people, in 2 Admonishing, 3
Inst^ucting, and 4 Advising them; as also in 5 conveying to them those heavenly
blessings by the Sacraments; which in an ordinary way they could not otherwi^e
obtain. This is all the rule, that I can find belonging to Presbyters. And this
was ever allowed you in your own Congregations, while ye behaved your selves as
the Ministers, of Christ in all meekness and sobriety, dividing the Word of
God aright; and while ye kept within the ru^e of faith.

14. Thus your ruledome (my fellow Presbyters) is come to no great matter by
these texts. Show me one place of Scripture, that allows Presbyters to
excommunicate, or absolve, of their own authority; and I shall be of your mind,
and justify, that ye have sustained much wrong; If ye have been suspended from
officiating, or silenced, ye may thank your unbridled tongues, which have been
so lavish in venting unsound and seditious doctrine. The Bishop in these cases
has but discharged that duty, which is required of him by Gods Word. 1* Tim.
6. 3. 5. 2. Tim. 3. 5. Tit. 1. 11. Tit. 3. 9. And it is no more, then the
Presbytery chalengeth to it self in those places, where it has gained
autho^i^y.

15. As Prelacy stood in ^ngl^nd, the Presbyters were ^x^^^^ed from all
soc^^tie in Rule. I. G p. 2.
That ye were excluded from all society in Rule* is that, which troubles you.
Society pretends equ^litie, and Rule is that which ye affect. So ye may be made
Bishops, or Bishops fellows, equal with them in rule and authority, all shall
be well, but till then we must expect no p^ace, if ye can hinder it. H^d your
leading Churchmen be^n made Bish^ps or Deanes, the Kings oath had been most
just, and unalterable; yea unquestion^ble. Some men's mouths have been stopped so
heretof^re; the more the pity: And ye have gaped after such morsels. What the
benefit has been, is sufficiently discerned, and ambitious malcontents shall
no more, I hope, be tempted in this manner to continue among us, when they are
neither with us, nor of us. But, I pray you, what Society in Rule, can you
challenge with the Bishops, when by Scripture ye are made subject to them? We
know your pride; Ye would feign be hail-fellows with your Governors both
Ecclesiastical and Civil. Feign would ye have the raines in your own hands,
with Phaeton, though it were with the same issue. But how shall they learn to
govern, that know not how to obey? All Baristers are not qualified to be Judges.

16. But there is another thing, which troubles you marvelously, that you deem
to be Which was much more prejudicial to the dignity and lioerty of the
Ministry, the Presbyters were subjected to a Lay Chancellor. I. G. p. 2.
much more prejudicial to the dignity and liberty of the Ministry; namely to
be subjected to a lay Chancelour. And yet how many lay Chancelours have you
subjected us to? The Clergy and their priviledge^ are subject to the
Parliament. I. G. p. 7.
To the whole Parliament; that is plain; and yet not so much as one Presbyter
among them: And to every Committee-man both in City and Country, Whose busy
Apparators are all persons disaffected to the Doctrine and Discipline of the
Church of England. And all this is for the dignity and liberty of the
Ministry, according to your new Magna Charta. Thus much to manifest, that ye
are deeply plunged in those crimes, which you boldly charge upon others. But
this is no new, no strange thing. For this has been generally observed; when
your great Masters blemish our most gracious Sovereign with any foul or
illegal surmise, they usually act it themselves. Dominisimiles, such Masters,
and such Chaplains. Greg Naz. orat. 52. ^ 15.
Par autem erat, ut vel quod accusant, non facerent, vel quod facerent, non
accusarent. But it were meet, that either they should not do, what they blame;
or not blame, what they do.

17. And now, I beseech you which is most prejudicall, to be subject to one lay
Chancelour in a Diocese, or to those great lay Courts of Lords and Commons and
others at Westminster? to so many lay Committees in the City; to so many in
every County? Without whom ye are not able to subsist, nor to abide in your
Congregations, if these men take but the least offense against you. And how can
the Gentry and Comminaltie of this Kingdom take it well, that you complain so
much of one lay Chancelour in a Diocese, and yet enthrall them to so many lay
Elders, Parochial, Classical, Provincial, and National. Say not, that there
be preaching Elders joined with them, least it be returned upon you, that the
lay Chancelour is but the Bishops Officer in such cases of Judicature, as
belong to his profession; and to the Bishop he is accountable. But you can
endure no loy Judges over you, on any hand. And whereas An^ was not here
^^urpation against Gods direction? I. G. p. 2.
you charge the lay Chancelorship with usu^pation contrary to Gods direction, I
am certain, ye have made use of it against Gods direction. For how many of you
have been instituted into Benefices by lay Chancelours? Qu^ jure, comes not now
to be scanned. Thus ye can abuse them, and yet use them. But I shall turn you
over to the Doct^rs of the Commons; them it concerns, they are well able to
argue the case with you, and to wash off these aspersions.

18. Your first argument is, I hope, sufficiently confuted in the eye of
indifferent and judicious men. I shall not therefore any longer insist upon it,
but observe, at how low a rate you value authority. Nor Bishop, nor King, nor
your Idolized Parliament shall be a Power, but an usurpation against God and
his Word, if they deny you any privilege indulged, or debar you any duty,
which ye suppose to be enjoined you by the word. If they sequester you from the
Pulpit, or from ruling in your congregations, farewell my great Lords and
Masters at Westminster. And when they have sold the Bishops and Chapters lands,
they shall no longer be a Parliament, but an Usurpation; because they have I.
G. p. 6.
despoiled you of those lands, which ye lay claim to, and which they ought to
have disposed of, to supply you and your predicant brethren with such
maintenance, as your selves hold sufficient.

CHAP. IV. Whether the King may consent to the abrogation of Epi^copacy, if so
that calling be la^full.
1. SAving your argument, in the first place this is certain, ^f Episcopacy be
lawful, then the Kings Oath at Coronation was not as you would have it
vinculum iniquitatis, a bond of iniquity. And hereupon it follows, quod non
obligatur in contrarium, that he is not bound to break this oath. Take this by
the way. You must then seek some other way, to clear it to us, that it is
lawful for his Majesty to wave this oath. But your own conscience seems to
check you for your former resolution; you therefore confess, that Though this
way o^ i^validating the K^^gs oath be most satisfactory to some, I. G. p. 2.
this way of invalidating the Kings is most satisfactory but to some.

2. Surely if to some it be satisfactory, those some are such, that are either
very weak, or wilfully blinded with avarice; 1 Timothy 6. 5.
Whose gain is godliness. But the end will prove, that 1 Timothy ^ 8.
Godliness is pr^fitable to all things. Genesis no^e in loc.
That is (as the Geneva Note has it) he that has faith and a good conscience,
is promised to have all things necess^ry for this life, and to enjoy life
everlasting. This would be seriously laid to heart.

3. But though your former argument seem satisfactory to some Yet to those that
are not onvin^ed of the unlawfulness of Ep^scopacy, it will not hol^. I. G. p.
^
yet to some it will not hold; namely to those that are not c^nvinced of the
UNLAWFULNESS OF EPISCOPACY. What? so satisfactory and yet not hold? Alas,
alas, what creatures have you to deal with? Pity it is, that you have to
deal with learned and rational men, and not with Ignoramus and his Dull man.
What shall now become of your Case of Conscience? Why? It would cast the
res^lution of th^s ^ou^t a^out the oa^h, upon another qu^stion touc^^^g the
l^wfulnesse of Episcopac^, which is a lar^er field. I. G p. 2.
It will cast the resolution of this doubt upon another question. From one
question to an other. And what is that? The lawfulness of Episcopacy. This is a
large field, that you are not acquainted with. And yet to satisfy the
conscience of your Reader, you have already concluded, that I. G. p. 1. 2.
Episc^pacy is an usurpation against the word of G^d; and therefore sinful and
unlawful. How? Conclude first, that Episcopacy is unlawful, and then I shall
endeav^u^ to show, that though for argument s^ke, it be grant^^, that
Episcopacy ^e lawful I G. p 2.
grant it to be lawful. But this is granted only for argument sake. That is,
because your argument is so loose, that it proves just nothing against
Episcopacy. For a firm demonstration admits of no contradiction, it leaves no
doubt behind.

4. Well, be it lawful, I. G. p. 2.
yet not withstanding that his O^th, the King without impea^hment may in this
circumstance consent to the ab^^g^tion of Episcopacy. What mean you by
circumstance? Is the Kings O^^h, or Episcopacy, or the abr^ga^i^n of Episcopacy
but a circumstance? A circumstance is that, which is not substantial, or
essential to the point in question; but comes in upon the by; at most, for
illustration. The question is, I. G. p. 2.
Whether the King, notwithstanding his oath, may consent with a safe
conscience, to the abrogation of Episcopacy? All these then I take to be
essential to the question; unless a safe Conscience be with you and with your
brethren but a circumstance. And yet it is such an ingredient, that a man may
neither swear, nor consent to, nor act, but what he may undertake with a safe
conscience. 1. S. Joh. 3 20.
For if our heart (if our conscience) condemn us, God is greater then our
heart, and knows all things; His Majesty, I make no question, has sadly
thought on this.

5. That he may abrogate that which is lawful, you say, and we deny not, since
God has given Kings a power nt only over things indifferent, but even in such
things, as are lawful, and honest, and in their kind necessary for the
preservation of a Commonwealth. This is evident in Jonadab the son of
Rechab, Ier, 35. 6, 7.
who commanded his posterity, that they should neither drink Wine, nor build
House, nor sow seed, nor plant Vineyard, nor have any. And yet as lawful, and
necessary, as these things were, Ib. v. 8.
they obeyed their fathers voice. Ib. v. 19.
God approves of their obedience, and crowns it with a blessing. And what a
father is in his own family, that is a King, at least, within his own
Dominions.

6. But here the case is different, for the question is concerning Christ's own
Ordinance and Institution; which the King has sworn to maintain. This then
being lawful, and legally sworn, the oath may not in any wise be dispensed
with. Nay, if we say, that the King, or any authority upon earth, may alter,
or abolish any one Ordinance of our Savior, we contradict our selves, and
complie with the Papists. What reason bring we against the half Communion, but
Christ's own institution, who commanded it to be delivered and received in both
kinds. And Calvin in Amos 7. 13.
Calvin deservedly reproves Bishop Cardiner for attributing this power to a
King: Now if Episcopacy be our Saviors institution, then may no humane power
root it up; least they that do it, be rooted out of the land of the living. But
that this very order, which we now call Episcopacy, is Christ's own institution,
is already proved cap. 2. 6. 7 8.

7. Besides, if this be the only Order, to which Christ has given power to
ordain Presbyters and Deacons, who shall confer these Orders, when Bishops are
taken away, and utterly extinguished? Say not, that in case of necessity
Presbyters may ordain, when you maliciously make the necessity. God provides
for such necessities, as are enforced upon us, or happen casually and
inevitably; not for those, whereinto we wittingly and wilfully plunge our
selves; Delve up the root, and God will hardly work a miracle to provide sap
for the branches, or body of the tree. Aug. ep. 180.
Sine nostro officio est plebi certa pernicies. It is S. Austins. Without our,
without the EPISCOPAL OFFICE there is certain ruin to the people. S. Austine
was a Bishop, when he resolved thus, and wrote it to a Bishop. Nunc malori
liberate and fiducia veritatem profitemur: ne al^oqui per ^miditatem hac poena
mulctemur, ut Deo minime placeamus Greg. Naz. Orat. 35 n. 2.
That I may speak plainly; God and the times require it: No Bishop, no Priest;
no Priest, no Lords Supper; no Lords Supper, no Salvation, according to the
ordinary way prescribed by our blessed Savior.

8. This shall be made good, first according to your Protestation; secondly,
according to your Solemn League and Covenant. In your The Protestation.
Protestation, ye have vowed in the presence of Almighty God, to maintain and
defend the true Reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the doctrine of the
Church of England. This doctrine is punctually and carefully delivered in the
39 Articles. According to which Articles I proceed thus. The ordinary way to
heaven is by the Word and Sacraments. No man may preach, or administer the
Sacraments, but he that is lawfully called and sent. None are lawfully called
and sent, but they only, who are called and sent by those, that have
authority. But Bishops, and only Bishops have authority to send in this kind.
And therefore No Bishop, no ordinary way to heaven.

9 The first Proposition is not doubted of by Protestant or Papist; it is
therefore taken for granted. The second Proposition is in terminis let down
Art: 23. It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of PUBLIC
PREACHING or MINISTERING THE SACRAMENTS in the congregation, before he be
lawfully called and sent, to execute the same. The third is likewise expressed
in the same Article. Those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be
chosen and called to this work by men, who have public, authority given unto
them in the congregation to call and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard.
And who are these men, that have this authority? Bishops, only Bishops; So the
36 Article. The book of consecration of Archbishops and Bishops, and ordering
of Priests and Deacons, does contain all things NECESSARY to such consecration
and ordering And whosoever are consecrated or ordered according to the Rites of
that Book, ^^e decreed to be RIGHTLY, ORDERLY, and LAWFULLY CONSECRATED and
ordered. But therein the Bishop only has authority to ordain. And in the
Preface to the Book of Ordination it is resolved that I is requisite that NO
MAN SHALL EXECUTE ANY OF THESE ORDERS, except he be called, tried, examined and
admitted, ACCORDING TO THE FORM FOLLOWING in that Book.

10. Thus we cannot but see, that according to the express doctrine of this
Church of England without a Bishop no Sacraments, and consequently no
salvation. For though God can save without means, yet he has tied us to the
means; and the means must be used, if we desire to be saved Art 36.
This book was composed and set forth in the time of K Edward the sixth, by
those holy men, who afterward were blessed Martyrs, and at the same time
confirmed by full consent and authority of Parliament. VIII Elis. 1.
After this in the time of Queen Elizabeth it was again confirmed, and always
ratified with the 39 Articles; and XIII. Elis. ^2.
the Clergy enjoined to subscribe to this book, in and with those Articles,
that so they might be known to be in Communion with the Church of England. Thus
far with the Protestation.

CHAP. V. Whether ye have not bornd your selves by your Solemn League and
Covenant, to maintain Episcopacy.
1. NOw I descend to your Solemn League and Covenant, wherein ye have
publicly vowed to endeavor the Reformation of Religion according to the word
of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. I shall therefore prove
first by the Word of God, and secondly by the best reformed Churches, that ye
have solemnly bound your selves to maintain Episcopacy, if so ye are resolved
to keep this branch of your Covenant.

2. First, we know, that Act. 4. 12.
there is no other name under heaven, whereby we may be saved, but only the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, we are agreed, that Romans 10. 17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Thirdly, our Savior
says flatly, S. Joh. ^. 53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man; and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. We cannot therefore but acknowledge, that without the Word and
Sacraments, there is no salvation. Since then all those, that are in Orders,
exercise Artic. 26.
the ministration of the Word and Sacraments, not in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do MINISTER BY HIS COMMISSION AND AUTHORITY; we are therefore to
enquire, who have this Commission given them in and by the word of Christ. For
S. Paul wonders, Romans 10. 15.
how any man can preach, in public, except he be sent. The Commission for
preaching was immediately given by our B. Savior, both to the twelve Apostles,
and to the seventy Disciples. To the twelve, St. Luk 9. 2. St. Matthew. 28. 19.
To the seventy, St. Luke 10. 9. 16. The Commission to consecrate and administer
the Lords Supper, is given to the twelve Apostles, St. Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11.
24. Gal 1. 1.
St. Paul, and Act. 1. 26.
St. Matthias also were immediately admitted to the Apostleship by Christ
himself. These, and only these, who are here mentioned, were immediately
ordained by our B. Savior.

3. But our Savior having commanded and provided, that S. Mat. 28. 19.
All Nations should be taught, and baptized; and having Com: Prayer book, at
the Communion.
instituted, and in his holy Gospel commanded us to continue a perpetual
memory of his precious death, until his coming again; that this might be done,
he gave his Apostles this large commission, S Ioh. 20. 21.
As my Father has sent me, even so send I you. And how was that? even to
preach, to baptize, to consecrate, and administer the Lords Supper; to bind
sinners, and loose the penitent; and to ordain other Apostles and Presbyters,
which might continue these blessings to his people in all ages. As also
elsewhere in S. Matt. 10. 8.
(...). A gift ye have received, give this gift. The Greeks take not (...)
adverbially, but substantively: and I believe, in the East they understand
their own, the Greek tongue better, then we do in the West. And as they were
commanded, they did. Act 14. 4. 14.
S. Paul and S. Barnabas were Apostles; and them we find ordaining Presbyters
in every Church, where they come. Act. 14. 23. 2 Timothy 1. 6.
S. Paul himself ordains Timothy to be the Apostle, or Bishop of Ephesus. He
gives the power of Ordination to Titus. Tit. 1. 5. And acknowledges it to be
in Timothy. 1 Timothy 5. 22. These were the Apostles, or Bishops properly so
called, of their several Churches. These had the power of Ordination, but not
the Seventy, not those of the inferior order, not mere Presbyters.

4. Besides, does not St. Paul justify, that Romans 10, 15.
none may preach, except they be sent? Talk not of an inward calling, or
extraordinary sending. Neither of these will serve the turn, without the
outward, without the ordinary Ordination. St. Paul's words are full to this
purpose. Heb. 5. 4.
No man takes this honor [of Priesthood] to himself, but he that is called of
God, as Aaron was. The extraordinary calling, which some pretend to, is
abolished, in that, No man takes this honor to himself. How then must he
attain the Priesthood? The Apostle tells you, he must be called of God, as Aaron
was. And how was that? Non immediate a Deo, sed mediante hominis ministerio; he
was not called or ordained immediately by God, but by the interceding Ministry
of man. The Apostle therefore does not say, He, that is called of God, as Moses
was; but, He, that is called of God, as Aaron was. But we know, that though
Exodus 28. 41. Exodus 29. 9. etc.
Moses were immediately ordained by God, yet Levit. 8. 12.
Aaron was not, he was ordained by Moses. And yet both Psalm. 99. 6.
Moses and Aaron are among his Priests; for Moses discharged the Priests
office, before Aaron was ordained. Exodus 24. 4. etc. Exodus 29. 12. 18. 25. 36.
etc. Exodus 30. 29. 30.

5. I have done with your first way, having, according to your Covenant, proved
by Scripture, that none may confer Orders in the Church of Christ, but only
Apostles, or Bishops, as we take them in a strict and Ecclesiastical sense:
that is, only such, as are of the same order with the Apostles, and may fitly
be called Apostle-Bishops.

6. We are now cast upon the Example of the best reformed Churches, which may
raise some dust. For when we descend to comparisons, we cannot but displease
those, who are left out of the superlative. Yet this I dare say, that those
Churches are best reformed, which come nearest to the Primitive Church in
Doctrine and Government. For to reform is not to innovate, but In primaevam and
veram formam reducere, to settle it in the ancient and true state. For Ier. 6.
16.
thus says the Lord; Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the OLD WAY,
WHICH IS THE GOOD WAY, AND WALK THEREIN, and ye shall find rest for your souls.
This rule therefore is given by Zanchius, Zanch.
Exempla veteris Ecclesiae nobis debent esse instar praecepti; and your learned
Ministers of London second him, assuring us, that I. D. p 11.
the examples of the ancient Church bind us as firmly, as any precept. And
reason good, since Hug. Grotius de Jure belli. l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 5. and 7.
the custom of the ancient Church is Optima legis interpres, the best
interpreter of the Law of Christ. The ancient Church then ought to be a pattern
to all Reformers.

7. Well, what kind of Government was there in the primitive Church? Peter
Moulin testifies, that Statim posttempora Apostolorum, aut etiam eorum tempore,
constitutum est, ut in una uroe unus inter caeteros Presbyteros Episcopus
vocaretur, qui in suos collegat hateret pr^^minentiam Pet. Molin de Munere
Past. p. 20 21.
either in the Apostles times, or suddenly after, Bishops had praeheminence
over Presbyters, in the several Cities, wherein they were settled. This
Government is very ancient; and in the Church of Christ every thing the MORE
ANCIENT it is, the TRUER AND BETTER it is. Zanchius justifies it. Zanch. de
vera reformand^ Eccles ratione. These. 5.
In Ecclesia Dei, quo quid ANTIQUIUS, eo etiam est VERIUS, ideoque and MELIUS.
And lest I may seem to wrest that famous learned man's words to another sense,
then he intended them, I shall give you his resolution at large concerning this
point in question, whether Bishops, or no Bishops: and this it is. Ib. These. 7.
Sect. Pono.
Hoc unum addo, me coram Deo IN MEA CONSCIENTIA, non alio habere LOCO quam
SCHISMATICORUM, illos OMNES, qui in part Reformationis Ecclesiarum ponunt
NULLOS HABERE EPISCOPOS, qui AUTHORITATIS GRADU supra veros compresbyteros
emineant, ubi liquido, possint haberi. Praeterea cum D. Calvino, NULLO NON
ANATHEMATE DIGNOS CENSEO, quotquot illi Hierarchiae, quae se Domino Jesu
Christo snbmittit, subjici nolunt. These are his words in Latin; and to your
comfort you shall have them in English: like them as you please. This one thing
I add (says learned Zanchius) that IN MY CONSCIENCE before God, I esteem ALL
those NO BETTER THEN SCHISMATICS, who make it A PART OF REFORMATION TO HAVE NO
BISHOPS in the Church (where they may readily be had) which maybe above their
true fellow-Presbyters IN DEGREE OF AUTHORITY. Yea, with Mr. Calvin, I HOLD
THEM WORTHY OF THE MOST GRIEVOUS CURSE, who will not submit to that SACRED
PRELACY, which is subject to Christ. He was far from a Rooter.

8. Neither is Zanchius alone, he has that moderate and judicious Melancthon
to second him; who is so right and home for Episcopacy, that he comes with his
Jurisdictionem ^otsm, (...) reddo Episconis. Melane. ad Ioach. Carner ^1 ep. 99.
Ego reddo, I, for my part, restore the whole Jurisdiction and dignity to
Bishops. And Io.
he wishes with all, that he and the rest of his friends might redeem peace,
though it were upon harder terms. Yea, he affirms, that Io. ep 104.
he sees not, quo ore, with what face they can take from Bishops their
Ecclesiastical government. And then he adds: Ib.
That I may speak my mind Vtinam, utinam POSSEM, non quidem dominationem
confirmare, sed ADMINISTRATIONEM EPIScOPORUM restituere: I would to God, I
would to God, IT WERE IN MY POWER, not to confirm the Dominion, but to restore
the ADMINISTRATION OF BISHOPS. For I see, I see (says he) what a ^inde of
Church we are like to have, when the Ecclesiastical policy shall be
dissolved. Video postea MULTO INTOLERABILIOREM futuram TYRANNIDEM, quam antea
unquam fuit I see, we are hereafter like to have a FAR MORE INTOLERABLE
TYRANNY, then ever we have known heretofore Note that; and consider, whether
experience has not made us sensible, that his words were but a Prophecy of
these times. And after this he expostulates the same business with Camerarius,
and questions, Ib. ep. 106.
Quo jure, by what law it might be free for them, to subvert the
Ecclesiastical Policy; if so the Bishops would yield unto them, what is meet?
The question being thus proposed, his resolution follows; Ib.
Et ut liceat, certe non expedit; but suppose it lawful yet is it not
expedient. Luther himself was ever of this opinion; whom some, I perceive, love
merely for this; because by his means they had shaked off their Bishops, and
thereby gained Libertatem minime utilem ad posteritatem, such a LITERTIE, AS
WILL BE LITTLE FOR THE GOOD OF POSTERITY. This he spoke, and we feel. Ib.
For what kind of state shall the Church be in, in after ages, if all ancient
customs and manners be utterly abolished, and no certain Governors
established? God knows, and we imagine.

9. Hitherto you have seen, how Zanchius for himself and Calvin; and Melanthon
with Luther, did endeavor, even in the shell, to crush that new model, I. D.
Passim.
which ye boast to be of divine Right, and yet confess, that I. D. Pre^at.
Sect. The imputation.
it is not much above fourscore years standing; and that but Ib.
in some Churches. For, the truth is, ye can give us no President for the
Presbyteriall Government in any one Orthodoxe Church, for 1500 years after our
Saviors ascension. All this while the wisdom of God, it seems was breeding
this truth, and stayed for you, and such as you are, to be her midwives. Her
pangs were long and doubtful, but now Juno Lucina has done her part, and the
strip^ing reckons fourscore years, and that but in Cantons, in some odd
corners of the world. Truth it is, he was creeping in here about seventy years
since; but banished he was as dangerous to the Crown. But now he is returned
in a fresh suite, and has got the hand both of King and Bishops; yea he has
put the Peers shroadly to it; even those, that complied with him.

10. It may be, for all this, you will reply, that these are but the opinions
of a few particular men. What say you to that memorable convention at Auspurg,
where met all, or most of the learned, that endeavored the Reformation? These
were, at least, the whole Reformation representative; and Melancton gives them
that very title in his Apology. Wherein he tells us, that P. Melane. Apo^.
confess. Aug cap. de ord Eccles.
ALL THE REFORMATION did often profess in their meetings at Auspurg, that they
desired exceedingly, to Politiam Canonicam non reprehendimus. ^b. c. de ^otest
Eccles.
preserve that Ecclesiastical Policy, which was settled by the Cannons of the
Church: as also to continue those very Degrees in the Church, which were agreed
upon by humane authority. These pious men desired not the subversion, but the
Reformation both of Church and Churchmen. Yea, Ib. de ord. Eccl.
by Protestation they clear themselves to all porsterity, that it was neither
their intent, nor fault, to overthow the Order, or authority of Bishops.
Melancthon therefore, in behalf of all his brethren, acknowledges, that Ib. de
Potest. Eccles.
Bishops have both potestatem ordinis, and potestatem Jurisdictionis, power of
Order, and power of Juridiction. And I believe, that these men had seriously
considred of their Protestation.

11. But what is this, that he calls power of Order? Surely a power to do that,
which Presbyters could not do; that is, a power at least, to ordain Ministers.
For Veteres ho^ saepe habent, non differte aliare ab Episcopo Presbyterum, nisi
quia ordinandi potestatem non habet. Calv. Instit. l 4. Sect. 15.
herein by Calvin's confession, was the difference between a Presbyter and a
Bishop properly so called, in the opinion of the ancients, that a Bishop has
power to ordain, but not a Presbyter. Indeed the resolution of the ancient
Church is this, Epipha. haer. 75.
Presbyterorum ordo non est potens generare patres; the whole Order of
Presbyters is not able to beget Fathers, that is, Presbyters for the Church;
but Bishops are able: The Order therefore of Bishops and Presbyters is not one
and the same. Hence it follows, that there is a necessity of continuing Bishops
in the Church, if so we desire Presbyters; since without a Bishop no Presbyter;
and without a Presbyter (at least) no Lords Supper.

12 Besides, your grand Champion Walo Messalinus acknowledges, that Vbi
distingui ordines and gra^us caepti sunt, atque Episcop(...) exit it
Pr^^ly(...), tum ordinatio non potuit esse utriusque commnois. Wall. Messal p.
299.
from the time that those Orders and degrees were distinguished, and that a
Bishop became greater then a Presbyter, ORDINATION COULD NOT BE COMMON TO THEM
BOTH. But those Orders and degrees were from the beginning distinguished by our
Savior, though not by these specificall titles Observe, I beseech you. In the
first place S Luk 16. 13.
he names the Twelve, those of the higher Order, Apostles; and after this,
those of the lower Order, the Seventy, are called Diciples, as I conceive, 3.
Luk: 10. 22. Or else in the four Evangelists they are distinguished from his
other Diciples by number only, and not by title. In the other writings of the
New Testament they are distinguished into Apostles and Presbyteres, or Bishops.
Qui Apostoli vocabantur duo rum generum fuere, primi and secundi. Primi a
Christo missione suam acceperunt, immediate ab ipso missi Secundi ab ipsis
Aposto lis Walo Messal. p 4^.
The Apostles are of two sorts; either such as were immediately ordained by
Christ, or such as were ordained by those Apostles. The former are called the
Apostles of Christ; or Ephesians 3. 5. Apoc. 18. 20
the holy Apostles; and sometimes ^ Cor 11. 5. etc. ^2. 11
the chief Apostles. The other are styled Phil. 2 25.
Apostoli vestri, and ^ Cor. 8. 23.
Apostoli Ecclesiarum, your Apostles, and the Apostles of the Churches; because
they had set Cities, and a certain people committed to their charge. The
twelve were ordained by our Savior, while in the flesh he was conversant here
on earth. But S. Matthias, and S. Paul, after his ascension were Gal. 1. 1.
called to be Apostles by Jesus Christ and God the Father. These did ordain,
but not the Seventy, not Presbyters, or such as in Scripture text are called
Bishops. S. Paul and S. Barnahas were Apostles; those we find ordaining
Presbyters, Act: 14. 23. And S. Paul professes, that he ordained Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 6.

13. Let us now descend to those Apostles, who were ordained by Christ's
Apostles. Such were S. James, Appollos, Epaphroditus, Timothy, and Titus. None
of these were immediately ordained by Christ; and yet they are called Apostles.
The three former plainly in Scripture, as is heretofore evidenced; Walo Messal.
p. 40. 41. 43. etc.
the latter by your good friend Salmasius. That Timothy and Titus did ordain,
is too plain to be denied; and Ib. p. 38.
for Epaphroditus we have an acknowledgement likewise from Salmasius.

14. These Offices were necessarily to be continued in the Church; for Ephesians 4.
12.
Christ gave them for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ Ib. v.
till we all grow up unto a perfect man: Which is now but in fieri, in
polishing, not perfected, neither will it be, till the second coming of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. For Col. 1. 24.
the Church is the body of Christ, which will have her imperfections and
blemishes, till she be made fully complete in the Kingdom of glory. Our Savior
therefore says, S Mat. 28. 20.
Behold I am with you always, even unto the end of the world: which could not
be spoken of their persons, but of their Office, I. D. p. 14. 32. 168.
as is confessed by the London Ministers: Since their persons were shortly to
leave this world; but their Office is to continue, till heaven and earth pass
away. When therefore Calv. in ep. Ded. ad Edvard* Somerseti Ducem.
S. Paul had lively described the true Government of the Church, and instructed
Timothy the Bishop of Ephesus 1 Timothy 3. 15.
how he ought to behave himself in the Church, he charged him in the sight of
God, and before Jesus Christ, e 1 Timothy o. 13. 14.
that he keep these commands without spot, and unrebukeable, until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. But this he could not do in his own person,
which was shortly to depart; Calvin therefore readily acknowledges, that
Calvin arg in 1. and 2. ad Tim.
these things were written not so much for Timothy s as for other men's
directions, that were to come after him; since Beza in 1 Timothy 3. 14.
herein (as Beza observes) many particulars belong to the daily Office of a
Pastor. These things then must be daily and duly done, as occasion requires:
But diverse of these ought, and might be done by Timothy only, and by such as
were of his rank; but by no other; needs therefore must this Order be
continued for the edifying and perfecting of the body of Christ. This Office
then being quotid^a^um munus an Office of daily use, must of necessity be
continued in the Church.

15. But what Office was this, that Timothy and Titus did bear in the Church?
Let Salmasius speak. Walo Messal. p. 4^.
They at that time were mamed Apostles, and revera erant EPISCOPI JVRE EODEM ET
ORDINE, QUO HODIE HABENTUR, qui Ecclesiam regunt, and Presbyteris praesunt, and
indeed were BISHOPS IN THE SAME RIGHT, AND OF THE SAME ORDER, WHEREOF AT THIS
DAY THOSE ARE ACCOUNTED, Who govern the Church, and rule Presbyters. But this
very Office was none of those, which were extraordinary, and to continue for a
season only, no, no, in Beza's judgment it is quotidianum munus, an Office of
daily use; of necessity therefore it must be perpetull in the Church. And yet
the duties of that Office were such, Calvin. in 1 Timothy 1. 3.
quibus sustinendis non alius quilibet (e vulgo pastorum) par fuisset, as none
of the vulgar Pastors, no ordinary Presbyters, were meet to undertake. And what
are these? Tit. 1. 5.
Even to redress, what is amiss, and to ordain Presbyters. These are matters
of moment, and require more then ordinary discretion. Ib.
For this cause S. Paul left Titus at Creete; and for this very end Ad
Philippenses eum misit, ad Ecclesi^m eorum confirm and am, and constituendos in
ea Presbyteros and Episcopos. Walo Messal. p. 58.
he sent Epaphroditus to Philippi, though at that time there were in that City
many Bishops. Phil. 1. 1. If then there needed no ordination, but every man
without orders might have discharged Presbyteriall duties; or if the
Presbyter-Bishops of that City might have set that Church in order, and
therein ordain Presbyters, Why did S. Paul send Epaphroditus to Philippi, to
do those things, which might either have been left undone, or at least have
been done as well without him. Surely S. Paul imposes not needless businesses
upon any.

16. Bishops there were (you will say) before in that Church; if then it belong
to the Episcopal Order to ordain, and reform in the Church, what is amiss,
why was Epaphroditus sent thither? Take notice (I beseech you) that those
Bishops were but Presbyters, or Presbyter. Bishops; Chrysostom. in Philip. 1. 1.
which Order never had the power either of Ordination or Jurisdiction. S. Paul
therefore sends unto them, Epaphroditus an Apostle-Bishop, who could perform
both. This you see acknowledged by your most able and subtle advocate.

17. Well, let it be, what it will, lawful or unlawful, it is all one, in this
exigent or distress that his Majesty is put to, I. G. p. 2.
notwithstanding that his oath the King (say you) without impeachment, may in
this circumstance, consent to the Abrogation of Episcopacy. His Majesty's oath
now falls in question; and I shall be willing fairly and calmely to consider,
wherein, and how far forth a Christian King is bound to keep, or break his
Oath.

CHAP. VI. Whether the King, without impeachment to his Oath at Coronation, may
consent to the Abrogation of Episcopacy.
1. THis question has two branches. The first, Whether a Christian King be
bound to keep his Oath. The second, Whether he may notwithstanding his Oath,
consent to the Abrogation of Episcopacy. His Majesty's Coronation deserves also
to be looked upon; since an oath deliberately and solemnly taken, deserves the
more seriously to be thought on; and will draw from God the heavier doom, if
despised, or slighted.

2. By your own confession it is evident, that I. G. p. 1.
an oath against Christ's Institution is vin^u um iniquitatis, an impious oath,
and ought not to be observed; but to be cut off with shame and sorrow; since Ib:
all bonds to sin is frustrate Confess we must, that an oath against God
revealed will or honor, is a bond to sin; and therefore no sooner made then
void, and to be abhorred Such is your Covenant against Episcopacy. And had the
King either through misunderstanding, ill advice or fear taken that irreligious
Covenant, he had been obliged, by your confession, to have made it frustrate;
since it is a bond to sin, because it is against Christ's Word and Instituition,
as is manifested c. 2. and 4.

3. But Ie^. 4 2.
an oath taken in truth, and righteousness, and judgment, because it is of
such things, as may justly and lawfully be performed, yea because God approves
and ratifies this oath, is vinculum aequitatis and necessitatis, such a bond as
equity and conscience bind us necessarily to perform, to the utmost of our
power. But such is his Majesty's Oath at Coronation concerning the Church, the
Spouse of Christ.

4. No unrighteousness can ye show in it, the lawfulness of Episcopacy, as
also their just right to govern Presbyters, is sufficiently justified c. 4. No
untruth; for our Sovereign has sworn to maintain an Ordinance of truth, of
Christ himself. And sub paena judicij, upon pain of judgment he is bound to
make good this his Oath, so justly taken, least he fall into the hands of God,
and so into eternal judgment. Hoc jus ipsum postulat, quo quisque tenetur.
Zanch. in 3 praecept. de Juramento. These 3. Sect. Actionem.
For Justice requires, that every man, much more a Christian, and a King, keep
his Oath made upon such grounds, Ib, Sect. Quid fit.
though it be with hazard both of Crown, and life, and all that may be
endangered upon earth.

5. Consider, I beseech you, how Ib. These 6. Sect. Quid. sit.
in an oath we call God to record; and we make him not only our witness, but
our surety, that we will, with his blessing, perform, what we have vowed, or
sworn in his name. And not only so, but we call upon him to be our Judge, and
the Revenger of our perfidiousnesse, if so we wittingly depart from this Oath.
With what face then can we fall back, and wilfully incur perjury? Is not this
as Philo Judaeus has it, to Philo Iud de special. leg ^ 1.
make God a shelter for our wickedness, and to cast our sin upon him? That so
to the infamy of Christian Religion, we may ^oder up a fair repute before
men. Is not this to cast aside not only a forehead, but all conscience, and
the fear of God? Oh, (says S. Austin) Quid i^^a caecitate tenebrosius, ad
obtinendam inanissimam gloriam, errorem hominis aucupari, and Deum teste^ in
cord contemnere? Quasi vero ullo modo comparan^u^ sit error illius, qui te
bonum putat eirori tuo qui homini de (...) bono placere stu^^s, de (...)
displices Deo Aug. in Gal c. 6.
What blindness can equal this, to hunt after a little vain glory by
deceiveing man, while in thy heart thou sleightest God the searcher of all
secrets? As if his error, who thinks thee good, were comparable with thine, who
seek to please man with a show of good, whilst thou displealest God with
that, which is truly naught.

6. But this is no new thing to you, that have dispensed so long, so often, so
variously with so many Oaths of Supremacy, Allegiance, and canonical
obedience: That have done so many strange acts, contrary to your faith, and
subscription. Take heed in time, lest not only your oaths, but your own
handwriting arise in judgment against you, for casting off the Book of
Ordination; For renouncing the Book of Common Prayer; For disclaiming the
Articles of the Church of England, with those three Creeds, the glory and hope
of all good Christians. Thus you, and your brethren, are become Apostata's and
renegadoes to all Religion and piety; graceless, faithless, perjured men. God
of his mercy give you a sense of these sins, that so you may in time repent,
and make some satisfaction to the Church of Christ, by an open confession, and
by a full detestation of those presumptuous and crying sins.

7. This Oath his Majesty took solemnly before God, in the house of God, in
the presence of the Nobility, and Clergy, and a multitude of his liege people.
And shall not all these oblige him so much the more to be tender of this Oath?
Zanchius tells us, that Gravius est peccatum, facere contra publicum s^^enne
jusju andum, quam contra privatum. Zanch. in 3 praecept. These. 4 Sect. Actionem.
it is a more grievous sin to offend against a public solemn oath, then
against one made in private. What may we then think of an oath taken with such
high Solemnity?

8. This Oath was voluntarily, freely taken, without compulsion, or persuasion;
so no excuse that way. Indeed it was taken Jer. 4. 2.
in truth, in judgment, and in righteousness. In truth, his sacred Majesty
resolving truly to keep it: In Judgment, judiciously, upon mature
deliberation; and in righteousness; intending that every branch of this Oath
should be justly and righteously observed in all his Courts of Justice. How
then can he infringe this Oath?

9. He made this promiss^ry Oath to a great body of this His Kingdom, the
whole Clergy of this Land; and those not the meanest of his Subjects. And not
only so, but to holy Church his mother, and to God the Father of us all. How
can he then disclaim this Oath? which so obliges his conscience before God.
that Omnino juramentum quisquis suum. sine ullo prorsus dot^, aut
de^raudatione, ^u^^ Gentium legeque Dei, ipsis etiam hostibus, and latronibus
fervare teneatur: eosque a nemine hominum ta^i i^r^meto lib rari possit. Zanch
in 3, praecept. These. 6.
^ad he bound himself by such a tie to highway robbers, or to his professed
^nemies, he had been bound by the Law both of Nations and Christianity,
strictly to have observed it without fraud or coven. Talk not of a
dispensation. Nor life, nor death, nor principalities, nor powers, whether
civil or spiritual, can possibly discharge him of this oath; no more then
they can me of my oath of Allegiance. And yet it is a point of your Religion to
persuade to perjurie; as if it would ease your consciences, to have millions
concur with you in the same perfidiousnesse and end.

10. Is perjurie a sin, or no sin? If it be a sin, and an heinous sin, Genesis 39.
9.
how then can I commit this great wickedness, and sin against God? Is it no
sin? If you be of that mind, speak out, show your self in your true colors.
What Religion are you of, I know not well; little use has your conscience made
of Religion in this case. Your eye is wholly upon the Parliament, and the
present necessity, those members have wrought our good King and this whole
Nation. Necessity has so far prevailed with you, as rather to be forsworn,
then to forgo your present maintenance. But our most gracious Sovereign, whom
God ever bless, has wholly fixed his heart upon God, and his Word, wherein we
are charged Levit. 19. 12.
, not to swear falsely by the name of the Lord; no, S. Matthew. 5. 33.
nor to forswear our selves, but to perform our oaths unto the Lord. Mark;
though the oath be made to the servant, it must be performed unto the Lord;
because the caution is given to the servant in the Lords behalf; yea upon the
Lords credit; for by his name, and upon his book we swear to do it. And if we
do it not, Exodus 20. 7.
the Lord will not hold us guiltless. Minus dicitur, plus intelligitur; by
this one word much may be understood; For Mal. 3. 5.
the Lord will come against us in Judgment, and call us to an account for our
oaths. S. Isa. 5. 12.
Oaths therefore must be avoided, lest we fall into condemnation. For perjurie
is a foul, a dangerous, a damnable sin. Zech. 8. 17.
Odious it is to God, because, Levit. 19. 12.
it defiles his most holy name. Hos 4. 2. 3.
For this very sin the land mournes; I beseech God, it become not disolate.
Sure I am, Zech. 5. 4.
a curse will enter into his house, that swears falsely; it will settle
there, till it have consumed the timber and stones thereof. Or as the wise man
has it, Ecclus. 23. 11.
his house shall be full of calamities, and the plague shall never depart from
it. Let Zedekiah be our evidence. 2 Chronicles, 6. 13.
He took the Oath of Allegiance to Nebuchadnezzar; but slighted it, and
rebelled against that his Sovereign Lord, who had so highly honored him, and
trusted him with a Kingdom. But what became of him? 2 Reg. 25. 6. 7.
The Caldees came, besieged Jerusalem, conquered it, took Zedekiah prisoner,
and slew his sons before his eyes. This done, they put out his eyes, and in
fetters carried him captive to Babylon. Here was an end of the Kings of that
Land, descended from the Tribe of Judah. Are not here the timber and stones of
his house, his strong men, and the sons of his loins utterly consumed?

11. Think not to excuse your selves or any other, by some later Covenant; this
will not serve the turn. Was the first sworn in truth, and judgment, and
righteousness? or was it not? Does it truly and justly agree with the Word of
God; at least, not contradict it? If so, thou art bound in justice to observe
it, lest judgment fall upon thee. For this is a true rule, if Zanchius
mis-guide us not, Zanch. in 3. praecept de Juramento These. 6. Sect. Prima
igitur.
Posteriores promissiones, etiam juramento firmatae, nihil de prioribus
detrahere, aut imminuere possunt: Later aths cannot possibly make the former of
no, or less validity. Why then do you persuade the King to break his oath? He
that enticeth a man to perjurie, under pretense of piety and Religion, Nihil
judicandus est dicere, qui dicit aliquae iustae esse mendacia, nisi aliqua
iusta esse peccata, ac per hoc aliqua iusta esse, quae iniusta sunt. Quo quid
ab surdius dici potest? Aug. cont. mend. c. 15.
what does he else but affirm, that some perjuries are lawful. Which is as
much to say, as some sins are lawful. Which is naught else, but to conclude,
that some things are just, which are unjust. I appeal to men of understanding,
whether this proposition savours of piety, or discretion. Think not then to
ensnare prudent and conscientious men, with such frivolous and senseless
pretenses; which favor strongly of absurdity, if not of Atheism.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the King may desert Episcopacy without perjury.
1. GIve me leave to pass over a few pages, and to take that into
consideration, which follows next in reason, though not according to your
method. We are now fallen upon a strange question, too high to be proposed by
any Subject. But you have enforced me to make that a question, which is harsh
to loyal ears, lest I may seem to avoid your subtle and saucy cavils, as
unanswerable. For do not you say* that I G. p. 7.
your second Ant^gonist plainly ^ffi^ms, that the King cannot desert Episcopacy
without flat perjury? His words are far more mannerly: but I am bound to trace
your steps; and shall, with Gods assistance, manifest, that His Majesty
without violation to his Oath, and to Religion, may not desert Episcopacy, and
leave it naked to the subtle fox, or the merciless swine.

2. First, according to your own confession, his sacred Majesty has sworn to
almighty God, in his holy place, before a solemn Assembly, to I. G. p. 8.
protect the Bishops, and their privileges to his power, as every GOOD KING in
his Kingdom IN RIGHT OUGHT to protect and defend the Bishops, and Churches
under their Government. 1. Good Kings protect Bishops; and good they are in
doing so; there is no evil then in protecting Bishops. 2. They ought to do it:
it is therefore their duty; and to fail of this their duty, when they may
choose, is sin. 3. In right they ought to do it: they do wrong therefore, if
they do it not. This right is grounded upon Scripture; for God says, Es 49. 23.
Erunt Reges nutritii tui, Kings shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be
nursing Mothers to the Church. Who then dares say, they ought not, or shall not?

3. Besides, what is done in right is injurious to no man; since jus and
injuria, right and wrong cannot consist in the same action, under the same
consideration. And yet no right is done, but it is displeasing to the adverse
party. God did right in protecting Moses and Aaron, against Korah, and his
confederates. He did right in destroying those factious and rebellious persons;
and yet Number. 16. 41.
this was displeasing to all the congregation of the children of Israel. And
shall God or the King forbear to do right, because the multitude murmr at it?
This be far from the Lord and his Vicegerent. A Judge is sworn to do right. If
then he do not right to the utmost of his understanding, he is perjured. And
the more eminent a man is in place, the greater the sin. You know, to whom it
was said, Sam. 12. 14.
Because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme, the child that is born unto thee, shall surely dye. And of
Jer^boam it was said, z Go, tell him, thus says the Reg. (...) etc*
Lord God of Israel; For as much as I ex^^ted the from ^m^^g the people, and
made thee Prince over my people Israel: and yet th^^ have done evil above all
that were before thee, and have cas^ me behind thy (...)* Therefore behold, I
will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam* etc.

4. Secondly, the King has sworn to be the Protect^r and Defender of the
Churches under his Government: and this, you will confess, the King ought to
do. But the King does not protect the Church, unless he protect the Bishops;
since without Bishops the Church must needs crumble away, and come to nothing.
The Bishop is the ministerial Spouse of the Church: how then can the Church be
protected, if her husband be taken from her, or stripped of his means? Just as
our wives are maintained with the fifth part. Fed with an Ordinance, with words;
but where is the fifth part? which of our wives have had that justly paid them?

5. The Bishop is, under Christ, the Father of the Church. Destroy the Father,
and how shall the Children be provided for? Nay who shall beget children of the
Church, when she is void of an Husband? And the Bishop is the only Husband of
the Church; Council. Chalced. can. 25.
take ^way the Bishop, and the Church is a Widow; if you will believe the
Council of Chalcedon. C. 5.
I have heretofore manifested, that none but a Bishop can ordain either Priest
or Deacon. And Zanchius determines, that Ministris carere non potest Ecclesia,
qui externas res administrent, ver^um and Sacramenta. Zanc. in 4. praecept. de
Minist Eccles. 9. 1. Sect ontavo.
the Church may not want Ministers, who are to administer these external
things, the Word and Sacraments. Remove the Ministers that have this power
derived unto them from Christ, and the Sacraments must fail, and consequently
the Church. For what Act. 19.
is the Church, but a Congregation of Christians, wherein the pure Word of God
is preached, and the Sacraments duly administered, ACCORDING TO CHRIST'S
ORDINANCE. But, according to Christ's Ordinance, none may administer the Word
and Sacraments but Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Take these away, and what
becomes of the Sacraments? Take away Baptism, and according to Gods ordinary
and revealed way, we cannot become Christians, ^. Joh. 3. 9.
we cannot be born anew of water, and of the holy Ghost. And when we are become
Christians, take away that food of life, the Lords Supper, and we must needs
famish: for S. Ioh. 6. 53.
unless we eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood (in that
blessed Sacrament) we have no life in us. Hence is that of Calvin: Neque vel
Solis lumen ac calor, velcibus ac potus tam sun* prae send v^tae foven dae ac
sustinendae necessari^, quam est conserv^ndae (...)rris Ecclesiae postolicum,
ac (...)storale munus. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. *3, Sect. 2.
The light and heat of the Sun, meat and drink are not so necessary for the
cherishing and sustaining this present life, as the APOSTOLICAL and P^storall
OFFICE is for the PRESERVATION OF THE CHURCH on earth. If then it be proved,
that Bishops properly and strictly so called, be of the same office and order
with the Apostles, then have we Calvin's acknowledgement, that the Church cannot
subsist without Bishops.

6. Indeed it cannot, if we believe S. Cyprian; for he says, that Cypr. ep.
99. n. 31.
we ought to know Episcopum in Ecclesia esse, and ECCLESIAM IN EPISCOPO; that
the Bishop is in the Church, and the CHURCH IN THE BISHOP: it stands and falls
with him. What then becomes of that Church, where there is no Bishop? Ib.
Si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in Ecclesia non esse. We must also know (says
that blessed Martyr) that they, which are not with the Bishop, are out of the
Church. Thus the Bishop is in the Church causaliter, causally; but the Church
in the Bishop virtually. The fountain is in the brook causally; and the brook
in the fountain virtually; because from the fountain the Rives derives his
being, from thence it is derived and fed. Damn up the fountain, or divert his
course, and what becomes of the river? Thus is it between the Bishop and the
Church. Hence I infer, that the matter of the Oath is lawful: I conclude
therefore, with the Author of the Review, that I. G. p. 7.
His Majesty is bound in Religion and conscience to protect the Bishops with
their Churches, and privileges. Unless it be so, that you can bring him a new
Christ, who will ordain another way to heaven.

7. But, say you, * it is a ground laid down by this Author, that Ib. ^
no oath is obligatory beyond the intention of it. That is, according to the
common, plain, and literal meaning thereof, otherwise we know no intention of
an oath. We must therefore look back to the intention of the first framers
thereof, as also to the good and security of those, to whom, and for whose
sake, it is taken. n. That I propose to consideration, whether the in tention
of this Oath be not only against a ty^^nnous invasion on the rights of the
Clergy: not against an o^derly alteration of them, if any prove inconvenient,
and to protect them against violence, not against ^egall ways of change. I. G.
p. 7.
the intention of this oath, and the framers thereof, is against a tyramous
invasion on the rights of the Clergy; as also to protect them against
violence, no question at all is to be made; and you do well to acknowledge it.
So far then the King is to protect them to the utmost of his power. And
hitherto, by the assistance of God, he has done it: and my trus^ is in Jesus
Christ, that he will strengthen our good King to live and dye in this pious and
Princely resolution.

8. This Oath is to the Clergy; the King then must have an eye upon them, and
their intention, who so humbly beg his protection, and to whom he makes this
oath. Aug. ep. 225.
Expectationem enim eorum, quibus juratur, quisquis decipit, non potest esse
non perjurus: For he that deceives their expectation, to whom he swears, cannot
but be perjured. This S. Austin proves at large in the preceding Epistle;
wherein Aug ep. 224.
he wonders, that any man should be of such an opinion, as to conceive, that a
man might incur certain perjurie, to avoid uncertain danger, loss or death. It
is a rule therefore in the Canon Law, C. Quacunque 22. quaest. 5.
Quacunque art verborum quis juret, Deus tamen, qui conscientiae testis est,
ita hoc accipit, sicut ille, cui juratur, intelligit. What art soever a man use
in the words of his Oath, God who is witness of the conscience, takes the Oath
in that very sense, wherein the party takes it, to whom we swear. Otherwise we
shall not only deceive others, but we shall cheat our selves into
equivocation, wherewith of late we have so justly charged the Jesuits; and for
which the Fathers most deservedly heretofore condemned Eusebius hist. l 6. c. 31.
the Helcheseites, Iren. l. 4. c. 53.
Valentinians, Sulpit. Sever. hist. l. 2.
Priscillianites, and Hierom. ep. 65. c. 1.
the followers of Origin. Truly, I am much afraid, we are fallen into such
times, as Roger Hoveden complains of under K. Steven; Perjurare fidem, mentiri,
nobile factum: Prodere vel Dominos, actio digna viris. Rog. Hove. in R. Steph.
p. 485
wherein it was accounted a noble act to lie, and forswear; and a manly deed to
betray their Lords and Masters.

9. And is not this, which is wrought against the Clergy, a tyrannous
invasion? What Law is there to countenance, what of late years has been done
against us? Where is the orderly alteration, you speak of? Has not all been
done by tumults, and insurrections? Have not diverse of the Peers been
assaulted, and many of the Commons vilified, and terrified by a seditious
faction, that so they might bring them to their own bend? How many have been
enforced to fly with all secrecy from Westminster, because they would not
pass their Vo^es against Law and conscience? Was it orderly to frame Petitions
at Westminster, against the Bishops and Orthodox Clergy, and then to gleane
hands in the Country from factious spirits, to your own Petitions? Was this an
orderly alteration, without any pretense of Law, to deprive us of our
freeholds, to plunder our houses, to imprison our persons; and to thrust into
our Benefices men with unwashed hands, Felt-makers, Blacksmiths, Tailors, and I
know not whom? And yet all this has been done by our great Masters in Israel.

10. By your own confession, the King has taken an oath to protect the Clergy
and their rights against violence, and a tyrannous invasion. But how shall he
protect us, that is not able to secure himself? This, it seems, was his duty,
and with Gods assistance in his power, when his sacred Majesty took the Oath.
His duty still it is, though he be robbed of his power. And when God shall
restore him to his power, he is bound to discharge this duty. For you
confess, that I. G. p* 8. 9.
his Majesty is engaged to his power to protect the Bishops and their
privileges. And if he break this solemn Oath, in his own person, with what
conscience can he punish perjurie in others?

11. An orderly alteration, or Legal ways of change, who condemns? But we
justly complain, that no such alteration has been endeavored. For that is
not orderly, which is illegal: neither can that be imagined rational, which
is wrought by violence, or forced upon a King. He is to be ruled by the word of
God, and right reason, Sir Ed: Coke in Litleton* ^. 2. Sect. 138.
which is the life of the Law; not to be overawed, or over-swayed by a faction.

12. That This is as much, a(...) rational for a King to underta^^ and th r^.
f(...) in ^^g^^ reason the Oat^ should have no other ^^n^e I G p. 7.
it is rational for a King to undertake, to protect the Clergy against
violence, you acknowledge; and it is no more then all the Kings Ministers are
bound in conscience to perform, The King has done it, blessed be God, to the
utmost of his power. Whether the Kings Officers, and those he has put in
trust, have done their duty, wi(...) be answered for at an higher bar. In
right reason the Oath should have no other sense. Th^^ sense then it has; and
we desire that sense may be made good by Parliament, and we restored to our
free-holds, according to reason, and Law; and satisfaction made us for our
losses, and illegal imprisonment, ^ill an orderly and Legal change be made.

CHAP. VIII. Whether the Kings Oath taken to the Clergy, be injurious to his
other Subjects, and inconsistent with his Oath to the people.
1. YOu Object, and we confess, that This Oath to the Clergy, must not be
intended in a sense inconsistent with the Kings Oath to the people, first taken
for their protection in their Laws, and Liberties. I. G. p 7.
this oath to the Clergy, must not be intended in a sense, inconsistent with
the Kings Oath to the people? How? Inconsistent with the Kings Oath to the
people? What? All blind but Mr. John Geree, and his confederacy? King and
subject, Priest, and people, composers, approvers, takers, all dimme-sighted?
How came you to spy this foul mistake? Surely this is one of your new lights;
for both these Oaths as you please to call them, have happily stood, and may
long stand together. There was a time, when the devil had found a device, to
set God and Caesar at odds: but our Savior set them to rights; S. Mat. 22. 21.
Give (says he) unto Caesar what belongs to Caesar, and to God, what belongs
unto God. That difference being reconciled, that Arch enemy of man, has found
out a late device, to raise a quarrel between Clergy and people, as if the
Liberties of the one could not consist with the Rights of the other. But we
have learned of our blessed Master to set these also at one, and beseech his
Majesty, to give unto the people what belongs to the people, and to the
Clergy, what belongs to the Clergy. We desire nothing, that is theirs; and we
are certain, that no good man will repine, at what is justly Gods, or ours.

2. It is Gods command to Rom 13 7.
give every man his due. And if any Law be made contrary to this, it is no Law.
The reason is, because Ib. v. 1.
all power i^ from God, and under God. Lex divina sicut a solo Deo ^^rtur, ita
a solo also tolli, aut abroga^i po^est Lex autem human^ sicut per hominem
con^tituitur, ita ab homine tolls, aut abroga^i potest. Franc. a V^ctor. Relect
3 n 16.
That Law then, that God has made, man may neither abrogate, nor alter; it is
only in the Lords breast to do it. Indeed what is settled by man, may be
changed, or abolished by man. But man must be careful, that the Law be just.
Tho. 1. 2^. ^. 96. 4.
Lex enim non obligat subditos, in foro conscientiae, nisi s^t justa: No Law
binds a subject in case of conscience, unless it be just. Indeed it bind^ them
not to performance, but to submission. Though they be not bound to perform,
what is enjoined; yet must they submit, to what shall be inflicted; since
resistance is damnable. To. 13. 2.

3. Since then it is only the just Law that binds us to obedience, it will not
be a miss to set down, what Laws are just, and what not. Tho. Ib.
That a Law be just (says Thomas) three ingredients are requisite: first,
Power in the Lawmakers; 2ly. the end, that it be for the common good; and 3ly.
the form; namely, that all burdens and taxes be equally, evenly laid upon
the Subjects; not more upon one then upon another, but proportionably upon
every man according to his estate. Laws so qualified, are just, because
impartial.

4. From hence we may safely conclude, that I*b.
those Laws are unjust, where, in the first place, the Imposer wants
authority. 2ly. When burdens are imposed, that are not for the common good,
but for private interest, gain, or glory. 3ly. When taxes, or subsidies,
though for the public good, be unequally laid. Or, in the last place, when
Laws contradict Gods written Word: For Gul. Ockam de Jurisdic. in causis
matrimon.
all Laws ought to be so framed, vt illis, quos tangunt, prosint, and nemini
praesertim notabile afferant n^cumentum: That they may be commodious for those,
whom they concern, and yet not be evidently injurious to others. From these or
the like grounds, I find it resolved by the Sages of this Kingdom, that
Fitzherbert. not. brev. tit. Protection. p. 28.
the King may grant privileges to any Corporation, so they be not prejudicial
to some other of his Subjects.

5. But wherein is the Kings Oath to the Clergy, inconsistent with his Oath to
the people? Because his Majesty has first (say you) taken an oath for the
protection of the people in THEIR LAWS and liberties. Their Laws? The peoples
Laws? Who made them makers* or Masters of the Laws? Do the people use to make
Laws in a Monarchy? Behold, all are Lawmakers. Who then shall obey? None but
the Clergy* Thus the Clergy must obey the people; and if obey, then please.
For whom we obey, them we must please. And yet there is much danger in pleasing
the people: For Gal. 1. 10.
If I should please men, (that is, the common people) I were not the servant of
Christ. The plain truth is, the Laws are the Kings Laws, so we call them, and
so they are; and his subjects must observe them. Otherwise Romans 13. 4.
he bears not the sword in vain. The Liberties indeed are the peoples,
granted and confirmed unto them by the Sovereigns of this Realm. But wherein
For then the latter Oath would be a present breach of the former, and so
unlawful. I. G. p. 7.
will the latter Oath be a present breach of the former and so unlawful? One
would think, here were some great wrong offered to the people, as if some
immunities, or means were taken from them, and transferred upon the Clergy by
this Oath. But when all comes to all, it is no more then this, that Ib.
One of the privileges of the people is, that the Peers and Commons in
Parliament, have power, with the consent of the King, to alter what ever in any
particular estate is inconvenient to the whole. I had thought, that this
privilege, you speak of, had not been a privilege of the people, but of the
Parliament, that is, of the Peers and Commons, representees of the people met
in a lawful and free Parliament with the Kings consent. Not of the
representees of the people alone. But you would feign incense the people a new
against us, under a pretense, that all is for their good, and for the
maintenance of their privileges; because they are represented by the House of
Commons. Whereas the truth is, you endeavor to devolve al upon that House, for
the erection of P^ssbytery; That so both Church and State may be Democraticall,
both settled under a popular government.

6. Let us take a view of this passage, and see what truth is in it. One of the
privileges of the people is, say you, that the Peers and Commons in Parliament
HAVE POWER TO ALTER whatever is inconvenient. How the Lords will take this, I
know not, though of late they have been so passive. Can they endure, that their
power should be only derivative, and that from the people? Your words are
plain; one of the privileges of the people is, that the peers have power. As
if the Lords had no power in Parliament, but what issued from the peoples
privileges. Why then are they called Peers; when they are not so much as Peers
to the people, but their substitutes, if not servants? Surely you lay the Lords
very low. And if it be one of the peoples privileges that the Lords have
power; then is it also one of their privileges, that the Lords have no power,
that the people may take it from them, when they please. Cuius est instituere,
ejus est and destituere; they that can give power, can also take it away, if
they see good. This of late has been usually vaunted against the House of
Commons; and you say as much to the House of Peers. Whereas the peoples
privileges are but several grants of the Kings of this Land, proceeding
merely from their grace and favor. Alas, the people has not so much as a vote
in the Election of Peers; neither have they liberty to choose Members for the
house of Commons; no, not so much as to meet, for any such purpose, until they
be summoned by the Kings Writ. So the peoples privileges depends upon the
Kings summons; no such privilege till then.

7. And whereas you say, that the Peers and Commons have power to alter,
whatever is inconvenient; You are much mistaken. When by the Kings summons
they are met in Parliament, they have power to treat and consult upon
alterations, as also to present them to his Majesty, and to petition for such
alterations, where they see just cause. But they have no power to alter: that
is in the King; or else, why do they Petition him so to this day, to make such
changes good, as they contrive? Hoc est testimonium regiae potestatis, vbique
obstinentis principatum. This a full testimony of the Kings power in all
causes, and over all persons, that the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament are feign to Petition for his Royal consent and confirmation,
before they can induce an alteration. The truth is, the Power of making laws is
in him, that gives life to the Law, that enacts it to be a Law: not in them,
that advise it, or Petition for it. Eccles. 8. 4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; it is his word, Le Roy Le V^lt,
that makes it a Law; then it is a Law, and not before. No power makes it a Law
but his. For Ib. v. 3.
he does, whatsoever pleases him. When it pleases him; not when it pleases
them: many times therefore he rejects Bills agreed by both houses, with his Roy
ne veult, the King will not have them to be Laws. The reason is given by that
renowned Justice Jenkins; because Lex terrae. p. 14 and 15.
the Law makes the King the only Judge of the Bills proposed. Eccles. 8. 2.
I counsel thee therefore to keep the Kings commandment (or, to take heed to
the mouth of the King) and that in regard of the Oath of God. Genesis note in loc.
That is (says the Geneva Note) that thou obey the King, and keep the Oath,
that thou have made for the same cause. This is agreeable to Scripture. And the
wisest of this Kingdom not long since acknowledged, that 1 I^c. 1.
without the Royal consent, a Law can neither be complete nor perfect, nor
remain to posterity. A Law it is not, it binds not, till the King speak the
word. Yea the Kingdom of Scotland has declared, that the power of making Laws
is as essential to Kings, as to govern by Law, and sway the Scepter. Declar.
of the Kingdom of Scotland. p. 34.

8. But if this be the peoples privilege, that the Peers and Commons in
Parliament have power WITH THE CONSENT OF THE KING to alter, what is
inconvenient: Whose privilege is it, I pray you, for the Lords and Commons,
without the Kings consent, to make alterations, and abrogations with root and
branch? This is no privilege of the people, nor yet of the Houses; Lexterrae,
p. 29
Because (as Justice Jenkins observes) it is against their Oaths to alter the
Government for Religion. For (says he) every of them has sworn IN THIS
PARLIAMENT, That His Majesty is the only Supreme Governor in all causes
Ecclesiastical, and over all persons

9. But what inconvenience, I pray you, arises to the people from the rights
and privileges of the Clergy? Not tithes. No, say you, I D. p. 33.
that justify them to be due to your precious Presbyters, by divine right. Not
the Bishops revenues. By no means; I. G. p. 6.
they must not come into any man's hands but yours; who are the Parochial
Pastors; These must be your maintenance. Ib.
To seize them to private or civil Interest, is detestable sacrilege, cried
out upon all the world over, and to be deplored of all good men. So you with
your Master Beza. Indeed to take them away from those, that are entrusted with
them, would prove marvelous inconvenient to the people.

10. How many inconveniences will arise to the people of this Kingdom, by
stripping the Clergy of their immunities, and lands, cannot suddenly be
discovered. Some of them I shall lay down, and leave the rest to be displayed by
those, that are cleared fighted. First the curse, that is likely to fall upon
this whole Nation by sacrilege. For a national sin must have a national
punishment. Deuteronomy 25. 2.
Admensuram delicti erit and plagarum modus; according to the fault, and the
measure thereof, the number of the stripes shall be. Let it be considered, how
from several Counties multitudes came in with Petitions, for the exrirpation
of Episcopacy. By whose instigation the Petitioners best know. Think not to
avoid the scourge, because multitudes conspired in the sin: c Exodus 23. 2.
We must not follow a multitude to do evil. Hope not to lie hid in a throng;
Number. 32. 23.
be sure, thy sin will find thee out, as Josh. 7. 18.
it did Achan among the thousands of Israel. His nobility could not excuse him.
Remember that this was for sacrilege; for Ib. v. 21.
he stole two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold, Josh. 6. 19.
which were consecrated unto the Lord. This is a dreadful sin, Genesis 4. 7.
it will lie at thy door; it will be a stone of offense to thee, at thy going
forth, and thy coming in.

11. I know there are men of several minds met at Westminster. Some are
wholly bent upon Church lands, and are resolved to swallow them up, come what
will come. Others are content to Covenant, Vote, or do any thing to save their
own stakes; For to what purpose were it for them to withstand? Alas, they are
but an handful; they may wrong themselves, but no good can they do to Church,
or King. But we forget the Lords rule; Exodus 23. 2.
Thou shall not speak in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest judgment.

12. Some young gentlemen there are, that must plead Ignorance in their votes,
as being not acquainted with the state of the question; much less with the
mystery of iniquity, which works powerfully in the sons of disobedience.
But they must know, that there be sins of ignorance; for these there must be an
atonement made by the Priest, and without this, for ought I read, no
forgiveness. Levit. 4. Yea, says the Lord, Levit. 5. 17.
If a soul sin, and commit any of these things, which are forbidden to be done
by the Commandments of the Lord, though HE WIST IT NOT, yet is be guilty. And
he shall bear his iniquity, for Ib. v, 19.
he has certainly trespassed against the Lord. But to bring it home a little
nearer to these times, that are so violent for sacrilege, let all Achans
brood give ear to the words of the Lord, Ib. v. 15. 16.
If any person transgress, and sin through ignorance, by taking away things
consecrated to the Lord, HE SHALL RESTORE THAT, WHEREIN HE HAS OFFENDED, in
taking away of the holy thing, and SHALL PUT THE FIFTH PART MORE THERETO, AND
GIVE IT UNTO THE PRIEST. Then Ib. v 15.
shall the Priest make an atonement for him, not before; then shall the sin be
forgiven him, not before. Here then remains no excuse for any, that have the
least hand in sacrilege, without restitution. But why do we Romans 2. 22.
abhor Idols, and commit sacrilege? Why rob we God, as if he were an Idol, not
sensible of these wrongs, nor able to revenge them?

13. Next, when the Church is stripped of her means, what kind of Clergy
shall we have? 1 Reg 12. 31.
Jeroboams Priests; the lowest, and meanest, of the people. For as now, so
then, 2 Chronicles. 11. 13. 14.
the Priests and Levites followed their true liege Lord. For that Arch-rebell
and his sons had cast them off from executing the Priests office. This being
done, 1 Reg. 13. 33.
who would, might consecrate himself, and be one of the Priests of the high
places. Like King, like Priest; each had alike right to their places. A lively
character of our times. These are called the Devils Priests, 2 Chronicles. 15. 11.
men that wanted either the knowledge, or the fear of God, or both. And surely
this is the ready way to fi^^ our Priests places with men void of Learning, not
1 Timothy 3. 2.
apt to teach, not Tit. 1. 9.
able by sound doctrine either to exhort, or to convince the gainsayers. Now S.
Peter tells us, that 2 S. Pet. 3. 16.
the unlearned and unstable (ungrounded men) wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction. What then shall become of the people? S. Mat 15. 14.
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. This will bring
us to that pass, which Bishop Latymer speaks of, Bp. La^yme^ Ser. 5 before K.
Edw: VI.
We shall have nothing but a little ENGLISH DIVINITY; which will bring the
Realm into very barbarousnesse, and utter decay of Learning. It is not that, I
wis (says that good Bishop) that will keep out the Supremacy of the Bishop of
Rome. And this will be a strange dishonor to this Nation, which has always
abounded with Learned men.

14. 3 Hospitality will come to nothing; 4 your rents will be racked; and 5
your sons barred from one fair and most commendable course to preferment. For
with us no one family, or set persons are tied to be Priests, as was the Tribe
of Levi. The qualification of the person, and not his pedigree, is with us
inquired into. What understanding man then will freely dedicate his son to the
Ministry, and be at an extraordinary charge to breed him up to Divinity,
when his reward shall be certain poverty? And what Scholar of worth will desire
Orders, when he knows, that by these he shall be exposed to contempt and
beggary? Though we love the Priesthood, when we are miserable in it; yet no man
affects the Priesthood, that he may be miserable. I know many, since our coat
is grown so contemptible, who intended Divinity, that have diverted their
study to Physic; knowing that this Nation is careful of their bodies, though
careless of their souls.

15. Is it not enough by this extirpation to bar your selves from heaven,
unless ye sink your posterity into the same damnation? Is it not enough to
murder Priests, unless ye slay the Priestood also? Certainly ye run the ready
way to do it. If ye will not believe Bishop Latymer, because a Priest; yet
trust Sir Edward Coke, because a Lawyer and a Statesman. This great learned
man assures us, that Sir Edw: Coke Reports, 2d. part. Levesque de Winchesters
Case. fol. 44.
It is a more grievous and dangerous persecution to destroy the Priesthood,
then the Priests. For by robbing the Church, and spoiling spiritual persons of
their revenues, in short time insues GREAT IGNORANCE OF TRUE RELIGION, and of
the service of God; and thereby GREAT DECAY OF CHRISTIAN PROFESSION. For none
will apply themselves, or their sons, or any other they have in charge, to the
Study of Divinity, when after long and painful study they shall have nothing
whereupon to live. Will not our Church then come to a sweet pass? And yet to
this pass we are almost brought.

16. All the inconvenience, that Mr. Geree presses, is this, that I. G. p. 7.
we are not subject to the Parliament, to be whipped and stripped as they
please. If we be not subject to them, I am sure they have made us so. But how
far forth, and wherein we are subject to the Parliament, and what Parliament,
shall speedily be taken into consideration. Chap. 9.

17. You speak much of Ib.
a former and a latter Oath; the former to the people, the latter to the
Clergy. As if His Majesty took two several Oaths, at two several times.
Whereas in truth it is but one Oath, The Kings Oath taken at Coronation I. G. p
1.
as you acknowledge p. 1. taken at the same time, and, as it were in a breath.
Indeed there are several privileges proposed to the King, which he first
promises, and afterward swears to maintain. As for the promise, it is first
made in gross to the people of England; and afterward to the several States
of this Realm; but first to the Clergy by name. In general to the people of
England, the King promises to keep the Laws and Customs to them granted by his
lawful and religious Predecessors. Under this word People are comprehended the
Nobility, Clergy, and Commons of this Kingdom. Afterward distinguishing them
into several ranks, he begins with the Clergy, promising that he will keep to
them the Laws, Customs, and Franchizes granted to them by the glorious King S.
Edward his Predecess^^. Secondly, he promises to keep peace and GODLY
AGREEMENT entirely, to his power, both to God, the holy Church, the Clergy,
and the People. Here also, you see, his promise to the Church, and Clergy,
goes before that to the People. In the third branch His Majesty promises to
his power to cause Law, Justice* and discretion in mercy and truth to be
executed in all HIS JUDGMENTS, to all before named. Next he grants to h^ld and
keep to the Comminalty of this HIS KINGDOM, the Laws, and rightful Customs,
which they have TO THE HONOR OF GOD [mark that] so much as in him lies. The
Commonalty, you see, are not mentioned, till we come to the fourth clause. And
last of all, lest the Bishops, though implied in Church and Clergy, should
seem to be omitted, and an evasion left to some malignant spirits, to work
their ruin, and yet seem to continue a Clergy; the King promises to the
Bishops in particular, that he will preserve and maintain to them all
Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that he will be their
Protector and Defender. How then can he desert them, or leave them out of his
protection?

18. These promises made, the King arises, is led to the Communion Table,
where laying his hand upon the holy Evangelists, he makes this solemn Oath in
the sight of all the people: The things, that I have promised, I shall perform
and keep; So help m^ God, and the contents of this Book. Though then the
promises be several, the Oath is but one: and so no former, no latter Oath;
not two, but one Oath. The Kings Oath to the people, first taken for their
protection* etc. I* G. p. 7.
The Kings Oath to the people is not first taken; but you are wholly mistaken.

19. If any man desire to know, who the People and Commonalty of this Kingdom
are, let him look into Magna Charta; where he shall find them marshalled into
several estates, Corporations, and conditions. There you shall also see the
several Laws* Customs, and Franchizes, which the King and his religious
Predecessors have from time to time promised, and sworn* to keep and maintain.
That Great Charter begins with the Church; Mag. Charta ^^ These words are added
to avoid all scruples that this Great Parliamentary Charter might live, and
take effect in all successions of age^ for ever. Sir Ed Coke in loc.
Inprimis concessimus Deo: First, we have granted to God, and by this our
present Charter have confirmed, f in behalf of our selves and our Heirs for
ever, that the Church of England be free, and that she have her Rights entire,
and her Liberties unmaimed. Now Sir Edw: Coke, that Oracle of the Law, tells us,
that Sir Edw Coke Proeme to Magna Charta.
this Charter for the most part is but DECLARATORY OF THE ANCIENT COMMON LAWS
OF ENGLAND: to the observation whereof THE KING WAS BOUND AND SWORN. And not
only the King, but Ib.
the Nobles and Great Officers were to be SWORN to the observation of Magna
Charta: Ib.
which is confirmed by thirty and two Acts of Parliament.

20. The Liberties of this Church, as I have gleaned them from Magna Charta,
and Sir Edw: Coke are these. First, that Sir Ed Coke in Mag. Chart c. 1.
the possessions and goods of Ecclesiastical persons be freed from all unjust
exactions and oppressions. Secondly, that Mag Cha c. 14.
no Ecclesiastical person be amerced (or fined) according to the value of his
Ecclesiastical Benefice, but according to his Lay tenement, and according to
the quantity of his ^ffence. Thirdly, that Ib. c. 1.
the King will neither sell, nor to farm set, nor take any thing from the
demeans of the Church in the vacancie. Fourthly, that Sir Ed. Coke in Mag.
Chart. c. 1* Sect. Et habe. bunt.
all Ecclesiastical persons shall enjoy all their lawful Jurisdictions, and
other rights wholly without any diminution or subtraction whatsoever. Fifthly,
Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton l. 2, Sect. 201.
A Bishop is regularly the Kings IMMEDIATE OFFICER to the Kings Court of
Justice in causes Ecclesiastical. Sixthly, Ib. in Sect. 136
It is a Maxim of the Common Law, that where the right is spiritual, and the
remedy therefore only by the Ecclesiastical Law, the conusans thereof does
appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court. Seventhly, Ib. in Sect. 201.
Sir Edw: Coke tells us from Bracton, that Nullu^ ali^^ praeter Regem potest
Episcopo demandare inquisitionem ^^cienda^. Bract. l. ^. 10^.
no other but the King can demand (or command) the Bishop to make inquisition.
Eighthly, Sir Ed. Coke in Mag Chart c. 1. Sect E^ habeat.
Every Archbishopric and Bishopric in England are holden of the King per
Baroniam (by Baronry). And IN THIS RIGHT THEY THAT WERE CALLED BY WRIT TO THE
PARLIAMENT, WERE LORDS OF PARLIAMENT. Sir Ed Coke instit part l 4 c 1. Sect O^
what persons.
And every one of these, when any Parliament is to be holden, ought ex debito
Justitiae (by due of Justice) to have a Writ of Summons. And this is as much as
any Temporal Lord can challenge. The conclusion of all is this, that Mag. Cha.
c 38.
neither the King, nor His Heirs (or Successors) will ever endeavor to
infringe or weaken these Liberties. And if this shall be done BY ANY OTHER,
nihil valeat, and pro nullo habeatur, let it be of no force, and pass for
nothing. Hence Sir Ed Coke Proeme in Mag. Chart.
it is provided by Act of Parliament, that if any Judgment be given CONTRARY
TO ANY OF THE POINTS OF THE GREAT CHARTER, by the Justices, or by any other of
the Kings Ministers whatsoever, IT SHALL BE UNDONE, AND HOLDEN FOR NAUGHT. Let
all true hearted Englishmen observe this, that are lovers of their Countries
liberties.

21. We have seen, what the King has granted and sworn, as also in what order;
and that the Oath is but one. And yet Mr. Geree goes forward, as if it were
certain without question, that this to the Clergy, were a several Oath from
that to the people. Confidently therefore he presses it, that He cannot
afterward in^age himself to any particular estate to exempt it fr^ this power:
for by that Oath at least cessit ^^re suo I G p* 3
the King cannot afterward engage himself. Whereas he engaged himself alike to
his people at the same instant, that he would preserve the privileges both of
Clergy and Commonaltie, because both his people. Now, why His Majesty should
be bound to maintain the privileges of that one estate, rather then of the
other* I cannot conceive. Especially when I consider, that Conce^^imo Deo, quod
Ecclesi^ A^glicana libera ^it Mag. Cha. c. 1.
the privileges of the Clergy are granted to God; without whose blessing nor
privilege, nor people can be preserved. The King then herein non c^^sit jure
suo, has not yielded up the Clergy or his right to any other; neither can he
with a safe conscience do so. But since Sir Ed. Coke Proem. in Mag. Chart.
Magna Charta has been so often confirmed, even by 32. several Acts of
Parliament, the Parliament, in that sense you take it, has parted with that
right it had, by these several Grants and Confirmations: and we ought in
justice to enjoy our privileges, and they to maintain them* unless they mean
to affront and subvert so many Acts of Parliament, and that main Charter and
honor of this Kingdom. As if they only had the judgment of
infa(...)ibilitie; which Scotland denies. Declarat. of the Kingdom of Scotland,
p. 19.

CHAP. IX. How far forth, and wherein the Clergy is subject to a Parliament,
and to what Parliament.
1. THe net is prepared, the snare laid, danger is at hand, and yet we must
not forsake, or betray the truth in time of need. The noose laid by our Church
adversary, is this: I. G. p. 7.
The Clergy and their privileges are subject to the Parliament, or they are
not. To this we must say, yea, or nay; and the man thinks he has us sure
enough. But the man is mistaken, one mesh is not well made up; and I must tell
him that we are subject to the Parliament, and we are not. Subject we are to
the Parliament, consisting of head and members; but not to the members without
the head, not to the members alone; since we are subject to the members merely
for the heads sake; and in those things only, wherein he subjects us to them.
Set apart the head, and we are fellow members, fellow subjects. For Iowe no
temporal subjection to any or many Subjects, but only for the Kings sake.
Though the Parliament be a great, a representative, an honorable body, yet it
is but a body: And that body, with every member thereof, owe obedience and
service to the head; not one to another. I say nothing, if I prove it not by
Scripture. 1 S. Pet. 2. 13. 14.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; Whether it be
to THE KING AS SUPREME; or unto Governors, AS UNTO THOSE THAT ARE SENT BY HIM,
by the King. As if he should say, Submit your selves to the King, for the Lords
sake; and to other Governors for the King^ sake. For King^ have their
Commission from God; but all State Governors from the King: and Iowe them no
subjection beyond their Commission. If then it shall please the King to give
the members of Parliament power over us, we must submit either by doing, or
suffering. Either by doing, what they shall command, or by suffering, what
shall be inflicted on us.

2. Subjection is not due to them, as they are great, or rich men; but as they
are the Kings Ministers. This is evident, because Lex terrae. p. 8.
all Commissions breath and expire with the King Ib. 7.
Upon death of the King follows necessarily the dissolution of Parliament. None
of us, that are mere Subjects, have at such a time power one over another, but
only by advice; none of us authority, but only as this or that man has
gained esteem by his wisdom and integrity. Only the Preisthood never dies,
because Christ ever lives, from whom the Priest has his Commission. But all
other subordinate powers expect a new Commission from the succeeding Prince.
This experience taught us upon the death of Queen Elizabeth.

3. Though this be truth, yet no truth can charge us, that I hope they will not
now claim an exemption from secular power. I. G. p. 7.
we claim exemption from secular power. You see, we acknowledge our selves
subject to the King, as also to those Ministers, that he sets over us. But as
these may not exceed their Commissions given by the King; neither may the King
exceed his Commission granted him by God. The Kings Commission is like the
Priests, 2 Cor. 13. 10.
ad aedificationem, non ad destructionem, for upholding the Church and service
of God; not for the ruining of either. And the King may not grant a larger
Commission to his ministers, then himself has received from the King of
Heaven* His Commission is, to be Es. 49. 23.
a nursing father to the Church, not a step-father; to Meaning, that Kings
converted to the Gospel, shall bestow their power and authority, for the
preservation of the Church Gen note in Is. 49. 23.
preserve to her all her rights and dues, to see, that she be provided with
necessaries, and to protect her against her profaine and sacrilegious enemies.
Surely if our Sovereign has entrusted the Parliament with any power over the
Church and Churchmen, it is but with some part of that, wherewith God has
enriched him, and no other.

4. Well, But if the^ be under Parliamentary power, how can it ^ationally be
conceived to be th(...) meaning of the Kings Oath to pr^s^rve the privi^edges
of the C^er^^ against that power to which they are legally subject? I. G. p. 7.
if we be under Parliamentary power, it cannot rationally be conceived, to be
the meaning of the King so to subject us to the Parliament, as to forget, or
renounce his has, by destroying the privileges of the Clergy (which he has
swo^ne to preserve) against (or in dishonor to) that power to which they are
legally subject* How far we are legally subject to this Parliament, I know; and
how far we are* or may be under Parliamentary power, I have already declared.
The power we are legally subject to, is his Royal Majesty; and it is not, it
cannot be, the meaning of the Kings oath, to preserve our privileges against
his own power* or to exempt us from his Jurisdiction. Let the world judge,
whether your, or our privileges and principles be distructive of legal power.
We are bound by Canon Canons Eccles. ^an. 1.
faithfully to keep and observe, (and as much as in us lies) to cause to be
observed and kept of others, all and singular Laws and Statutes made for
restoring to the Crown of this Kingdom, the ancient Jurisdiction over the
State Ecclesiastical, 1 Eliz. 1.
AGAINST ALL USVRPED and foreign POWER. Mark that; it is not only against
foreign, but it is against usurped, and all usurped power* Show me, if you
can, one such loyal Canon or resolution from any Presbyteriall Assembly. Ib.
This Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical is by the Laws and Statutes restored to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm, and not upon the Parliament; because it is by
Gods Word settled upon the Crown.

5. Can Eccles. can. 2.
This authority in causes Ecclesiastical was in the godly Kings amongst the
Jews, and Christian Emperors in the primitive Church; and has been exercised
by the Kings of this Realm, according to an Act of Parliament in that behalf,
An. 32. Henr. 8. c. 36. According to this Statute were the Bishops and the rest
of the Clergy assembled b^ King Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth for composing
the Articles of Religion, which were allowed to be holden and executed within
this Realm, by the assent and consent of those Princes; and confirmed by the
subscription of the Archbishops and Bishops of the upper House, and of the
whole Clergy in the nether House in their Convocation. As is to be seen in
the R^tification of those Articles. Agreeable to the same Statute, the
Archbishops, Bishops and other of the Clergy were summoned and called by K.
James to treat of Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical; Which were by them
agreed upon An. Dom. 1603. and were by the same King of blessed memory
ratified and confirmed by his Letters Patents. And I am certain, that we have
subscribed and sworn, 1 Eliz 1.
That the Kings Majesty under God is THE ONLY SUPREME GOVERNOR of this
Realm, and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual, or ECCLESIASTICAL THINGS OR CAUSES, AS TEMPORAL.

6. The substance of your touchie argument is, I hope, satisfied in the eye of
every moderate and discreet man. The rest* that follows is but a Rhetorical
flourish, or reiteration of what passed before, as if Or how were the Oath in
that sens^ consistent with the p^ivil^^^e of the Nation* formerly ^^orn to ^y
the King. I. G. p. 8.
the Kings Oath to the Clergy could not be consistent with the privileges of
the Nation, formerly by him sworn to. As if, without peradventure, there were a
former and a latter Oath, which I have proved to be most false. And as if we of
the Clergy were none of the Nation. Or as if we were bastards, and not
legitimate; slaves, and not freeborn subjects. And yet, blessed be God, diverse
of our Orthodox Clergy are as well descended, as any that speak against them,
Is this, my good brother, to Thou shall count the Priests holy, and reverence
them. Genesis note in Levit. 21. 8.
reverence the Priests, and count them holy? Is this the way to invite men of
worth, to incorporate themselves into your Presbyteriall Hierarchy? Surely we
are a part of this Nation, to whom this promissory Oath was made. Our Rights
consisted comfortably many years with the privileges of the people, to the
honor of this Nation, and to the astonishment of others. With what face then
can you say, that the Kings Oath to the Clergy cannot be consistent with the
privileges of the Nation? Whereas it is evident, that in three or four years
this Nation is so weary of the Presbyteriall encrochments, that they can no
longer possibly endure them.

7. But by your words it seems, If the Oath had such a sense in the times of
Popery, when the Clergy were a distinct Corporation, yet when that exemption
was abolisht, as a branch of Antichristian usurpation, the change of their
condition must needs change the intention of the Oath. I. G p. 8.
when and while the Clergy were a distinct corporation from the Laity, the
Oath had this sense, viz. that the Kings oath to the Clergy was consistent
with the privileges of the Nation* That must be the sense, if I know what
sense is. But the Clergy were and are a distinct corporation. In ceasing to be
Popish, we are not ceased to be Priests: neither is that necessary and just
exemption, or distinction yet abolisht. If it be, why are you so zealous, to
distinguish us and our privileges, from the people and their privileges?
Whereas if we be all one without distinction, our privileges must needs be the
very same; and so no inconsistencie at all. But of this more fully Chap. 11.

8. A Popish exemption it was for the Clergy to be free from the Kings
Commands. But this is abolished, and we readily submit to every Ordinance of
man; and wish, that you, and your Assembly brethren would learn the same
Christian obedience. A Popish exemption it is for the Bishops and their
Churches to know no Governor but the Pope. That also is disclaimed, and at the
Kings Coronation it is publicly acknowledged, that the Bishops and their
Churches are under the Kings government. The Antichristian usurpation is
condemned, and true Christian subjection justified. The King is the ^nely
Supreme O vern^r, to him we owe obedience, and to others for him, and under
him. And though all Antichristian usurpation were abolish^d upon the death of
Queen Mary, yet in all the Acts since that time to this present Parliament the
Lords spiritual are distinguished from the Lords temporal, the Clergy from
the Laity, and the Convoc^tion from the Parliament. Yea even in these times of
confusion, the Clergy are doomed by your great Masters, to be unfit for Lay*
or Civil imploiment* If there be no such men, then was that sentence
senseless: and while we are of the same Corporation with them, we are as
capable of any office of State, as the rest of our fellow subjects, even to be
Members of both Houses. But this distinction is still on foot; the Kings Oath
therefore to us is still binding; especially since our immunities may as well
subsist with the privileges of the Commons, as the privileges of Bristoll
with the Franchizes of London.

9. Indeed you may well twit us with the change of our condition; for we have
just cause with Bishop Latymer to complain, that B^. Latymers Sermon. before K.
Edw. VI. March 8* 1549.
there is a plain intent to make the Clergy slavery: which was far from the
intention of this Oath, till your faction prevailed in the change. But what
inconvenience will follow, if we confess, that the intention of the Oath was
changed, with the change of our condition? Not that, which you aim at. For
therein, and so far forth only is the intention of the oath changed, as our
condition is changed. But wherein is our condition changed? A Church we are
still; Bishops and Priests we are still; only our condition is thus far
changed* before we were subject to Antichristian usurpation, but now we are
altogether for Christian Allegiance. Before our Bishops and Priests were
subject to the Pope; but we submit wholly to the King. And I hope, we shall not
fare the worse for that. The Kings Oath is, to protect the Church, as it is,
not as it was; not as she was popish and superstitious, but as she is Catholic
and Apostolic. Then she was subject to the Pope, and free from the King, but
now she is subject to the King, and free from the Pope. But you would feign
enforce us to our old vomit; for we cannot but discern, that a far more
intolerable tyranny is drawing on, by how much the more dangerous it is to be
subject to a multitude, then to one; to a multitude at home, then to one
abroad: Both of them being equally destructive to the liberty of the Church,
and alike contrary to the Word of God.

10. Besides, the change of our condition is either for the better or the
worse. If for the worse, this is to maintain Popery. He that says our
condition is changed for the worse, justifies, that it is better for us to be
subject to the Pope, then to the King. If for the better, then must the
intention of the Oath be changed for the better. For are not these your words,
that the change of the Clergies condition must needs change the intention of
the Oath? Without question the intention of the Oath was to protect all his
subjects in their several places, dignities, add degrees; and not to suffer
them to oppress or devour one another, to see justice done for them and upon
them, according to the Laws established; and not to yield to any Law, that may
be distructive to the rights or liberties of any of his subjects.

11. The intention of the Oath is, to maintain the ancient, legal, and just
rights of the Church; and to preserve unto the Bishops due law and justice. We
desire no more, and no man may with reason deny this, to be the intention of
the Oath. The The words are plain: Sir, will you grant, and keep, and by your
Oath confirm the Laws, Customs, and Franchizes granted to the Clergy by the
glorious King S. Edward* your Predecessor, etc. And again; Our Lord and King,
we beseech you to pardon and grant, and preserve unto us, and to the Churches
committed to your charge, all Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice.
All this the King has sworn to perform; and has acknowledged, that by right
he ought to do it. And would you have him to be forsworn, and to neglect that,
which by right he ought to make good? Surely you would make an excellent
ghostly father for the man of sin.

12. Neither is this the peculiar opinion of us Churchmen only; that great
Oracle of the Law resolves, that Ecclesia est infra aetatem, and in custodia
Domini Regis, qui tenetur jura and haereditates suas manu tenere, and
defendere. Sir Ed: Coke in Mag, Chart. c 1
The King is bound to maintain and defend the rights and inheritance of the
Church. And he gives two reasons for it; first, because the Church is always
in her minority, it is under age: Seconly, she is in Wardship to our Lord the
King. And then he adds, Ib.
Nec est juri consonum, quod infra aetatem existentes, PER NEGLIGENTIAM
CUSTODUM SVORUM exhaeredationem patiantur, seu ab action repellantur: Neither
is it consonant to the Law (nor yet to conscience), that those who are under
age, should either be spoiled of their inheritance, or barred from action at
Law, THROUGH THE NEGLIGENCE OF THEIR GUARDIANS. Especially Kings being by
divine Ordinance made Guardians and nursing fathers to the Church. Es. 49. 23.

13. You see, we have divine and humane Law for what we say, we claim no
Unless they will say, that the Crown stands still engaged to them, to maintain
such priviledge^, as by Act of Parliament were long since abolisht: which is to
make his Oath to them contariant to that taken before, for the maintenance of
the Laws. I. G. p. 3.
privileges long since by Act of Parliament abolisht. We desire not his
Majesty to contradict, but to ratify bis Oath, and to maintain those Laws he
found in force. But as for you, all your endeavor is to persuade the Laity,
that our weal is their woe, and that the upholding of the Clergy in their due
and ancient state, would be certain ruin to the Commons. As if our Privileges
were like Genesis 41. 4*
Pharaohs lean kine, ready to devour the fat of the Laity: as if our aim were
to reduce Antichristian usurpation, and to subvert the ancient Laws. Whereas
every man may readily discern, that these are but pretenses. The true end aimed
at in these invectives and incentives, is that the caninus appetitus the wild
ravenous stomachs of M. Geree and his fellow Presbyterians may be satisfied.
But at seven years end they will be as lank and hungry as Pharaohs famished
kine. It was so with King Henry VIII: and it will be so with all, that tread in
his steps.

14. It*s apparent then, to make the intention of the Oath to be against legal
alteration of their privileges by Parliament, makes it unlawful, and so not
obligatory. And if it be not intended against legal alteration, the King may
pass a Bill for the abolition of Episcopacy when his Houses of Parliament
think it convenient, and petition for it, without violation of his Oath* I. G.
p. 8.
Its apparent then to make the intention of that Oath to be false and
fallacious, and under pretense, that it may not be against legal alteration,
so to wrest it, that it may be to the ruin of a great body of his subjects,
and those not the worst; that it shall be against all Law and conscience, (for
f that Law, which is unjust is no Law): That it shall be to the subversion of
the true Religion and service of God, to the distraction of his people, and to
the eternal dishonor of himself and the whole Kingdom, makes his Oath in your
sense utterly unlawful. And if unlawful, then is it not obligatory either in
foro conscienciae, or in foro justitiae, either before God, or any good man;
unless it be to do the contrary. But if this Oath in the true and literal
sense be not against legal alteration, but against unjust oppression,
sacrilege, and profaneness, manifest it is, that it is both lawful and
obligatory; and the King may not, without violation of his Oath, and certain
danger of the pure and undefiled Religion, pass a Bill for the abolition of
Episcopacy, what ever His Houses of Parliament think, or Petition, or press
never so violently.

15. But your opinion is, that the King may pass a Bill, for the abolition of
Episcopacy. And what I think, or what the King thinks; it is no matter if His
Houses of Parliament think it convenient, he may do it. It is wonder, you had
not said, he must do it. Indeed you say that, which is equivalent; for are not
these your words; I. G. p. 9.
He cannot now deny consent (to their abolition) without sin? And if the King
without sin cannot deny it, then must he assent unto it. Thus by your words it
seems, he is at their disposing, not they at his. Indeed, if a man may believe
you, the power is in the Houses, and not in the King. For do not you say, that
Ib. p. 7.
the Peers and Commons in Parliament have power, with the consent of the King,
to alter whatsoever, etc. And again; Ib. p. 5.
There Is no question of POWER IN THE PARLIAMENT to overruled it. The power, it
seems, is in them, consent only in the King. And here, The King may pass a
Bill, when His Houses think it convenient. Well, he may, and he may choose; he
may consent, or dissent. He that has power to consent has power also to
dissent.
Cujus enim est consentire, ejus est and dissentire. And so long we are well
enough. For the Kings Negative in Parliament is a full testimony of his Supreme
power. Hence is it, that the Houses Petition for his consent, which they need
not do, if the power were in the Houses. Besides, His Houses, the Kings Houses,
you call them; and so they are. This also manifests, that they are at his
disposing, and not He at theirs. They must therefore wait his pleasure, til he
thinks it convenient. His consent they may Petition for, enforce they ought
not, since they are his subjects; enforce it they cannot, since 1 Cor. 7. 37.
he has power over his own will. And whatever you suppose, it is in his power
to consent, or dissent, when he sees it convenient; and consequently to keep,
or not to keep his Oath. His affirmative makes it a Law; his negative denis it
to be a Law. For Lex terrae, p. 14, 15.
The King is the only Judge, whether the Bills agreed upon, and presented, be
for the public good, or no: And to take away the Kings negative voice, is
contrary to your Covenant; it diminishes the Kings just power and greatness;
and cuts off all Regal power. Witness the Declaration of the Kingdom of
Scotland. p. 18.

CHAP. X. Whether it be lawful for the King, to abrogate the Rights of the
Clergy.
1. THe question proposed is concerning Episcopacy; but now you are fallen to
the Rights of the Clergy. As if this were a sound and unanswerable argument,
It is lawful for the King to abrogate the Rights of the Clergy: Ergo, It is
lawful for him to abrogate Episcopacy. It is for all the world, as if one
should say, It is lawful for the King to take away the Rights of Lawyers;
Ergo, he may also take away Judicature. Yet all men would say, that this were
flat tyranny; since without Judicature no man can compass, or enjoy his own
with peace.

2. But I shall return your argument so upon you, as shall concern you more
nearly. It is lawful for the King to abrogate the Rights of the Clergy: it is
therefore lawful for him to abrogate Presbytery. How like you this? Is it not
your own argument, changing term Episcopacy into Presbytery. Ye have struck
out the former and set up the latter in the place of Episcopacy. And your
scholars, by the same argument, may live to root up thut too, if any lands be
annexed to this great Diana of Geneva. Thus you have made a rod to scourge your
selves with.

3. But you will say, that though it be legal for the King, to take away the
Rights, yet he may not destroy the Order. And why so? Because the Rights are
granted by man, but the Order was settled by God: And what God has ordained,
is not lawful for man to abrogate. I must return you the same answer, since
it is sufficiently justified. C. 4. 5. That the Order of Episcopacy is the
immediate institution of our B. Savior, and Ministerial root, from whence all
Orders spring. Though then this be I. G. p. 2.
the usual way of clearing this your assertion, and you Ib.
conceive it to be a sound resolution, yet learned men see, that you have said
just nothing, unless you confess, that the Order of Presbyter may likewise be
ex^i^pated by Royal authority.

4. But return we to the Rights of the Clergy, and take notice upon what
grounds you suppose it lawful for the King to abrogate those Rights, which he
has vowed so solemnly to maintain. Ib.
The King (say you) is sworn to maintain the Laws of the Land in force at his
Coronation. Yet it is not unlawful for him after to abrogate any of them, upon
the motion, or with the consent of his Parliament. I am glad that you
acknowledge it to be the Kings Prerogative, to maintain the Laws of the Land;
and that it is not unlawful for him, to abrogate any of them with the consent
of his Parliament. If he be bound by Oath, either he has power to maintain
these Laws, or not. If he has not power, it is a senseless Oath. If he has
power, where is it? What is become of it? Has he resigned it? We know the
contrary. Has he forfeited it? To whom? To his subjects? He can no more
forfeit his Regal power to his subjects, then a father the right of fatherhood
to his children. He is no more a King upon condition, then a father is a father
upon condition. His power he has not from the people, but from God. Prove. 8.
15. Cujus iussu nascuntur homines, huius iussu and Reges constituuntur. Iren.
l. 5. p. 601.
Per me Reges regnant, by me Kings reign, says God. And, I hope, God speaks no
untruth. His substitute the King is, for 2 Chronicles. 9* 8.
He sits on Gods (not on the peoples) throne; and Ib.
King he is for the Lord, in his stead.

5. If you object misdemeanors, or bearing arms against His Parliament; your
self say, that I. G. p. 2.
He is sworn to maintain the Laws of the Land. The Laws, Liberties, and
Properties were all at stake, they were trampled upon by his faithless, but
potent Subjects. This enforced him to take up Romans 13. 4.
that sword, which he ought not to bear in vain, but to Ib.
execute wrath as the Minister of God, upon them that do evil; upon such, as
plunder his good subjects, and turn them out of house and home. For 1 S. Pet.
2. 13, 14
the King is made by God the Supreme Governor, for the punishment of evil
doers, as also for the praise of those, that do well. But suppose the King were
a tyrant, as bad as bad may be, yet Magistratibus ex animo de^erendus est
honor, (...) etiam tyrannis. Beza in Act. 23. 5
we ought from our hearts to give him all due honor; so Beza; and not to rob
him of his just power. If he sin Psalm. 51. 4.
it is against God only; and to him only he must account; not to his Subjects.

6. Well, bound he is by Oath, I. G. p. 2.
to maintain the Laws, while they are Laws. As yet then the rights of the
Church are safe, and the King is bound to maintain them. But how long are these
Laws in force? Ib.
Till they are abrogated BY JUST POWER IN A REGULAR WAY. They are your own
words, and we subscribe them. But the just power is in His Majesty, by your
own confession, both The King is sworn to maintain the Laws of the Land in
force at his Coronation Yet no man questions, and the constant practice shows,
that it is not unlawful after to abrogateany upon the motion, or with the
consent of HIS PARLIAMENT. I. G p. 2
to maintain, and to abrogate Laws. And the regular way, say you, is at the
motion, or with the consent of HIS PARLIAMENT. But with all our loyal
Predecessors we say, at the petition, or humble suit [not at the motion] of His
Parliament. And His it is, his they are all, though Members of Parliament,
since the Parliament is His. They are not then a Parliament of themselves, at
their own choice, or disposing, nor yet without him. His they are; I am sure,
they should be so; I would to God they were so. Declarat. of the Kingd. of
Scotland. p. 22.
The King is the fountain of honor and power within his own Dominions. And
Eccles 8. 4.
who may say unto him, What do thou? Why do thou honor this man, and not
that? Why do thou call a Parliament at this time, and not at that? Ib.
Impius est, qui Regi dixerit, inique agis: He is impious, that says unto the
King, thou dealest unjustly, or unequally. So the Fathers read that place. No
obbraiding, no controulling of a King; Lex terrae, p. 19
He can do no wrong. So the Law.

7. His, the Kings, they are, when they are met, and set in Parliament, Sir Ed.
Coke in Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 164.
His great Council, Magnum Concilium Regis; I. G. p. 8.
His Houses, Ib. p. 2.
His Parliament. And Sir Ed: Coke in Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 164.
therefore called so, that they may Parlar la meant, speak their minds freely
for the general good. Him they may entreat, not control; advise, not command;
persuade, not enforce. Suppose, the King grants them power and authority, he
grants them none either over, or against himself: this he cannot do. This were
to set the Members above the Head, and to make his Subjects superior to
himself. This were to despoil himself of the power of the Sword. But this he
may not do, since 1 S Pet. 2. 13.
God has made him supreme, and Romans 13. 4.
given him the charge of the Sword. And His Majesty may not invert that order,
which God has set; neither may he repeal Gods ordinance, or make it void. God
has laid the charge upon him, and he cannot with a safe conscience decline it,
or neglect it.

8. Observe, I beseech you: Genesis 41. 40.
though Pharaoh set Joseph over his house, and over his people to rule and arm
them at his pleasure: though Joseph were so Ib. v, 43. 44.
made Ruler over all the land of Egypt, yet without him no man might lift up
his hand or foot, within that land; yet Joseph is not king. Ib. v. 40.
Pharaoh keeps his throne; and therein is he greater then Joseph, who still is
but Pharaohs deputy, though Gen 45. 9.
Lord of all Egypt. And though he be Ib. v* 8.
a father to Pharaoh, yet Ib. v* 19* and 21.
is he still at his command. Thus is it with the Parliament of England; though
they are put in highest trust by the King, yet are they still at his disposing,
either Lex terrae, p. 27
to be adjourned, prorogued, or dissolved at his pleasure; and are at his
command in all things lawful and honest. To this great Council we are no
further to submit, then in those things they are sent for by the King, and so
far forth as they have commission from him. S. Peter says the same. 1 S. Pet.
2* 13, 14.
Submit your selves unto THE KING AS SUPREME, or unto Governors AS UNTO THEM,
THAT ARE SENT BY HIM, by the King. So far forth, and in such things, for which
they are sent, I owe them obedience; but no further.

9. How far forth the King is sworn to maintain the Laws of the Land, and upon
what grounds they may safely be repealed, we have already seen. Now we are
called upon to descend to the Rights of the Clergy; whereof your resolution is
this, by way of consequence. I. G. p. 2.
So the King by his Oath is bound to maintain THE RIGHTS OF THE CLERGY, while
they continue such. But, blessed be God, such they do continue: the King
therefore by Oath is bound to maintain them.

10. Ib.
But (say you) if any of their Rights be abrogated by just power, he stands no
longer engaged to that particular. Why, I beseech you, do you leave out
something here, that you held necessary for the abrogation of the Laws of the
Land. Before it was, that the Laws might be abrogated by just power in a
regular way. But here you grant, that the Rights of the Clergy may be
abrogated by just power. But what is become of the regular way? Was it
forgotten? or left out on set purpose? Surely there is a my fiery in it; for
your argument ought to proceed thus:

By what means the Laws of the Land may be abrogated, by the same means may the
Rights of the Clergy be abrogated.

But the Laws of the Land may be abrogated by just power in a regular way.

Ergo, The Rights of the Clergy may be abrogated by just power in a regular
way.

Thus the Syllogism stands fair for the form; and the Major or Minor
Proposition must be denied by the respondent: otherwise he is at a nonplus,
and convinced. But your conclusion is, So, or, Ergo, the Rights of the Clergy
may be abrogated by just power. But this so is faulty; and so is the
Syllogism; because the minor terminus is maimed in the conclusion; it comes
not in whole, as it should do. The reason why, is plain; because you are not
able to set down a regular way, wherein, or whereby those Rights, you aim at,
may be abolished.

11. And what wonder, that you can find no regular way for the Clergy and
their rights, since you have put them clean out of the regular, the right way.
And when ye will find the regular way, God knows; for, plain it is, that ye are
out of the way. Ye wander this way, and that way, like men in a Maze, or
misled by an Ignis fatuus, by Jack in a lantern. No rule at all you have to be
guided by but only this, that the Book of Common Prayers must down, and
Episcopacy shall not stand. So farewell heavenly devotion, and all true faith;
and farewell Church. If this be not to be possessed with the spirit of
giddiness, and impiety, I know not what is.

12. But, I pray you, give me leave, before I pass further, to tell you, that
Just power goes always in a regular way. And when it leaves that way, it
cease to be just; unless enforced by such necessity, as cannot be provided
for in a regular way. That power only is just, which does nothing wittingly
but what is just; and distributes to every man and society their several
dues. If it do otherwise, we cannot call it just, unless we desire to incur
that sentence of the Almighty, Prove. 24. 24.
He that says unto the wicked, Thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
Nations shall abhor him.

13. Well, be it just, or unjust, be it never so much cursed at home, or
abhorred abroad, you are resolved to justify the Abrogation of the Rights of
the Clergy. What? A Clergie-man, and a Preacher of the Word of God, and
altogether for ruin and destruction? Surely you are not a Preacher of that
Word, which S. Paul taught; for he professes, that 2 Cor. 10. 8.
authority is given to men of our calling, not for destruction, but for
edification. Show me one Preacher in the word of God, besides Corah and his
confederates, that ever spoke, or wrote any thing against the Rights of the
Clergy. You cannot possibly, unless you bring in Judas with his S. Matthew. 26.
^.
Ad quid, finding fault, with that cost, which was bestowed upon our Saviors
person. Indeed no man so fit for your turn; Christ is the head of his body, the
Church. Col. 1. 18. 24.
he robbed and betrayed the head, and you the body. But you know, what censure
is passed upon him for it; S. Joh. 12. 6.
This he said, because he was a theife, and did carry the bag. He did, and you
would. It is private, not public interest, that stirs up ambitious and
greedy spirits against Christ and his Vicegerents. I can show you Romans 11. 13.
S. Paul magnifying his office, and 1 Cor 9. 1. etc. 2 Cor. 10 4 etc. 2 Cor.
11. 7. 8.
justifying the privileges thereof. But you are none of S. Paul's followers;
Demetrius and Alexander, silver-smiths and Copper-smiths, are your good
Masters, and with them I leave you.

14. But what are these Rights that you are so eagar to have abrogated? Every
subject in his several place and degree has right to his lands, to his goods,
to his liberties and privileges: and so has every Clergie-man; unless we of
the Clergy be no longer subjects, but slaves. Would you have all these, or
only some of these abolished? A question it was at first, but now I see, what
they are. First, I. G. p. 4.
Episcopacy. 2ly, Ib. p. 4. 5.
The Clergies privileges, and immunities. 3ly, the Ib. p. 4.
Bishops Ecclesiastical, or sole Jurisdiction in so large a circuit. 4ly, Ib.
The Bishops great revenues. Thus the Rights of the Clergy, are precisely
inventoried, that so neither root nor branch may escape their fingers.
Episcopacy we have already taken into consideration; now let us take a survey
of the rest.

15. But first let us observe the course, you propose, to strip us of these
Rights. Your method is subtle, and your expressions at first view seem
moderate: you put us in equal balance with the rest of our fellow subjects.
Thus you argue; I. G. p. 2.
It is not unlawful to abrogate ANY of the Laws of the Land: It is not
therefore unlawful to abrogate ANY of the Rights of the Clergy. Thus far your
argument seems to proceed fairly. But how comes it to pass, that out of this
Any of the Kingdom, you conclude against All the Rights of the Clergy? For
what have the Clergy besides their Orders, privileges, and immunities;
besides their Jurisdiction and revenues? And yet all, all these you expose to
the mercy of a Parliament. But, in good sooth, do you think, that if it be
lawful for a Parliament to alter or abolish any particular Laws of the Land,
that therefore it is lawful to take away all, that the Clergy have, or should
have? Indeed this is something answerable to the proceedings of these times. It
would sound very harsh, if it were thus resolved; It is lawful for King and
Parliament to abrogate any of the Laws of the Land: It is therefore lawful for
them to abolish all the Laws of the Land. And yet this is your manner of
arguing. As if a particular included the general; as if any were equivalent to
all. Which is apparently false; for universals are of a far larger extent then
these individua vaga, uncertain notions. Though all comprehend any, yet any
comprehends not all. For lawful it is not to subvert the fundamental Laws;
therefore not all. This were to raze the foundation of the Kingdom. Were this
justified of any particular Corporation, or body politic, besides the Clergy,
it would not be endured. Oh, how would the Citizens of London storm, if we
should conclude thus; It is lawful to take away any of the Laws of the Land;
and therefore it is lawful to take away all the Rights of the City of London.
Yet let wise men judge, if this be not your argument right. But the Clergy is
become the ass of the times; it must bear all, or sink under the burden.

16. But you say, that this is to be done I. G. p. 2.
by just power in a regular way. Well and good. But can that be a just power,
which deals unjustly? For Iust^s est animus qui scientia atque ratione, in vita
ac moribus* sua cui. que distribuit. Aug. de Trin* l. 8. c. 6.
Justice gives to every man his own; according to Gods Command, Romans 13. 7. q
Ea, quae contra legem Dei fiunt, ju^ta esse non poss^nt. ^ug cont mendac. c. 15.
Render to every man his due. The Law of God we confess to be the Supreme Law?
Whatever then is done against the Law of God, cannot be just. Yea though it be
done by a Law, no Act can justify it; since a Law contrary to Gods Word, is no
sooner made, then void. I speak to Christians. But with you I. G p. 5.
the Law shall be valid, though injurious. To the injuriousnesse of this Law I
shall submit, because a subject; but never acknowledge any validity therein,
because a Christian.

17. By a just power, we see, this cannot be done; how then shall it be done in
a regular way? A regular way, as you conceive you have set down; wherein any
Law of the Land may be abrogated. And that is, I. G. p. 2.
upon the motion, or with the consent of the Parliament. How comes this to
pass? Because the Parliament consists of the head, and the representative body
of the whole Kingdom. And who are these? First Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton, l. 2.
Sect. 164.
the King, who is the head. 2ly, the Lords spiritual and temporal: and 3ly,
the Commons. But the Parliament is maimed of late. Lex terrae, p. 15
1. The House of Commons represents the greivances of the Country. 2. The
House of Lords advise his Majesty with their counsel, and propose for the
common good, what they conceive meet. 3. It is no Statute, if the King assent
not to it: and he may disassent. Lex terrae p. 7.
It is in the Kings power to assent to these proposals, or to disassent, to
make them Statutes, or no Statutes. And that the Crown may receive no
detriment, the King has the Judges of the Land, his Council, and other
Officers of State present, to prevent such mischiefs. The Lords take care of
their Lands and honors, that they be not damnified by any new Law. The Knights
and Burgesses by the several Counties and Corporations, are entrusted with
such things, as concern their general or particular good. And all are to take
care for the good of the Church, the common mother of us al. In these things
every man does, or ought to provide, that all things be so done for the Common
good, that (if it be possible) nothing be done to the prejudice of any.

18. And reason for it: for as 1 Cor. 12. 13.
by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body spiritual, or mystical, so
by the goodness of God we all are under one King incorporated into one body
politic. Ib. v. 14.
But the body is not one member, but many. Indeed Ib. v. 19.
if it were all one member, where were the body? And God has so tempered this
body together, that Ib. v. 21.
every member has need one of another; and Ib. v. 22.
those, which seem to be most feeble, are necessary. All this was done by the
great wisdom of God, Ib. v. 25.
that there might be no divisions, or distractions, in the body: but that the
members should have the same care one for another. Thus God has knit us
together with the bonds of a mitie and necessity, that we might love one
another sincerely. But Charity is so far from doing wrong, that 1 Cor. 13. 5.
she seeks not her own. Which is thus to be understood, according to S.
Austins expression, Aug. in Reg. 3.
Quia communia propriis, non propria communibus anteponit: Because Charity
prefers the Common good before her own private interest, and not her own
private interest before the Common good. Where this love is, there is the
Commonwealth. But what state is that Kingdom in, where they that are entrusted
by the public, seek their own, and endeavor with might and maine, to make
that theirs, which is none of theirs? Where under pretense of the Common good,
they ingrosse all into their own clutches? Is not this the crying sin, the
grand Monopoly of these times?

19. The regular way to abrogate any of the Rights of the Clergy, or Laity, is
at their own motion, or consent, made and delivered by their representatives in
Parliament, or Convocation. Henry VIII, with Cromwell, and the rest of his
blessed Council, after banishment of the Popes power, knew not which way to
make a title to Monasteries with their lands and goods, but only by grant and
surrender of the Abbots. With them therefore he labors by his great and active
servant Cromwell; who prevails with some by promises and large annuities; with
other by violence and the sword: as is manifested by Master Spelman, in the
Preface to his ever honored fathers book De non temerandis Ecclesiis. The
Statute therefore 31. Hen. VIII. C. 13. tells us, that These Grants Surrenders,
etc. were made FREELY, VOLUNTARILY, AND WITHOUT COMPULSION, to the King, his
Heirs and Successors. What ever the truth be, this was the only legal
pretense they could devise. And this is the only course you can take, to make
a plea in Law to the Church Lands. You are feign therefore at last to persuade
the Clergies consent, p. 5. But of that in due place.

20. In the mean space thus much by the way. Either we are subjects, or no
subjects; If we are subjects, then ought we to have the liberties and
privileges of subjects; whereof this is one, that not so much as a Subsidy,
or a little Ship-mony be taken from any one of us, without our assent yielded
either by ourselves, or by such as we put in trust. And this present Parliament
has often protested before God and the world, that the Rights and Liberties of
Subjects they do and will defend with their lives and fortunes. Why then are
our Rights and Liberties so struck at, and exposed to contempt and sale? Are we
no subjects? Surely we were borne so. How then did we forfeit The ancient
Rights, Laws, and Liberties, are the birthright of the Subjects of this Land.
Declarat. Parl. July 12. p. 458.
our birthright? By taking Orders? Then is it better to be Mr. Gerees groom,
then himself. And, it may be, this is the reason, why so many step up into the
Pulpit without Orders, lest perchance they lose their birthright.

21. It may be, you will say, that we were not born Priests or Clergymen. You
say right; neither is any man born a Lawyer, a Goldsmith, or a Draper. And yet
when any of our brethren undertake these professions, they enjoy the Rights and
Liberties, they were born to, with some additions. And why not we? And yet we
poor Clergymen are the only freeborn Subjects, that are outlawed, as it
were, and cast forth as dung upon the face of the earth. Surely it is better to
be a Parliamentarians footboy, then 1 Cor. 4 1.
a Steward of the mysteries of Christ. And yet such we are. Little do these men
consider, that all Subjects are born alike capable of these Rights, if so they
be fit to take Orders. The wrong therefore is done alike to all freeborn
Subjects; perchance to Mr. Speakers grandchild. Since then I. G. p 2.
the Kings Oath (as you confess) is against acting or suffering a tyrannous
invasion on Laws and Rights; it must necessarily follow, that as he may not
act, so he may not suffer any such tyranny to be used. Hitherto he has
withstood these temptations: and God, I hope, will ever deliver him from them,
and from the hands of his enemies. Even so Amen, Lord Jesu.

CHAP. XI. Whether the Clergy and Laity be two distinct Bodies, or one Body
Politic. That Churchmen in all ages had some singular privileges allowed
them.
1. THat with some color you may persuade the people, that it is lawful not
only to clip the wings, but to pick the carcass, and to grate the very bones
of the Clergy, you tell them, that I. G p. 3.
this Oath was so framed, when the Clergy of England was a distinct Society or
Corporation from the people of England. When was this Oath, I beseech you,
framed? You should have done well to have pointed out the time; and not tell
us, that This distinction of the Clergy from the Laity, that they should be a
distinct Province of themselves, being a branch of Popery, s with it quite
extinguished. I. G. p. 3.
this distinction is a branch of Popery. But this is the fashion of such, as
you are, when you intend to disgrace, alter, or destroy any thing, that
concerns the Church, then presently it is Popery. Thus you cast a mist before
the peoples eyes, that loath Popery; and yet know not, what Popery is.

2. But this His Majesty's Oath is grounded upon the Word of God, who has made
promise to his Church, spread among the Gentiles, that Es 49. 23.
Kings shall be her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers. When
therefore Christian Kings are inthroned, they take a most solemn Oath, not
only to administer true justice to the people, but that they will also
maintain the Rights and privileges of the Church and Clergy, as by right they
ought to do. The reason is, because there are so many envious and mischievous
eyes upon the Church: because Psalm. 83 5. etc.
the Edomites and Ishmaelites, the Moabites and Hagarens, have cast their heads
together with one consent, and conspired to take her houses and lands into
possession. Gods Word prevails with few; the Kings sword therefore must stand
between the Church, and such sacrilegious spirits.

3. If they fail in this duty, then Isa. 3. 14.
will the Lord enter into judgment with the Ancients of the people, and the
Princes thereof. What, for this cause? Yes, for this very cause: Ib.
For ye have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of the poor is in your houses.
Is this any thing to the Church? Yes marry is it, the Geneva Note tells you so.
Genesis note in loc.
Meaning (says the Note) that the Rulers and Governors had DESTROYED HIS
CHURCH, and not preserved it ACCORDING TO THEIR DUTY. Those, who are guilty of
this mischief, let them beware: His Majesty's comfort is, that he has
withstood these impious designs according to his duty. For Isa. 54. 15.
whosoever shall gather himself IN THEE, AGAINST THEE, shall fall. Genesis note in
loc.
Meaning the DOMESTICAL ENEMIES OF THE CHURCH, as are the HYPOCRITES. Dear
brother, take heed to your feet, and remember, that Heb. do. 31.
it is a dreadful thing to FALL into the hands of the everliving God. But view
we your reason.

4. I. G* p 3.
The Clergy and Laity (say you) were distinct bodies; but this distinction is
taken away, and Laity and Clergy are now one body Politic. One body Politic?
Are we so? Whence is it then, that the Bishops are thrust out of the House of
Peers; and that none of us may vote, or sit in the House of Commons? Are we of
the same body; and yet have no privileges with the body? In at subjection, out
at immunities? In at taxes, out at privileges? This is one of those even
Ordinances, which your blessed Covenant has hatched. Of the same body we are,
under the same power, subject to the same Laws, and yet not capable of the same
privileges. Is this equality? Scoggins doal right, some all, and some never a
whit.

5. Neither do we say, that we are a several or distinct body; but we are a
several state, or Corporation in the same body. One body, but several members
in and of the same body. In Ecclesiastical persons of this Kingdom are
commonly three qualities or conditions: one is natural, the other two are
accidental. 1. Englishmen and denisons of this kingdom we are by birth: 2.
University men by matriculation and education: and 3. Clergy men by
Ordination. By the first we have an interest in the privileges of the kingdom.
By the second we have an interest in the immunities of the Universitie. By the
third we have an interest in the Rights of the Church. The later privileges do
not annihilate that right or claim, which we have by birth. Neither cease we to
be the Kings Subjects, because Clergy men. In taking Orders we put not off
Allegiance; we rather confirm and enlarge it. For Thou which teach another,
teach thou not thy self? Thou, that preachest, a man should not steal, do
thou steal? Romans 2. 21.
a shame it is for us to teach others, what we do not our selves. And our duty
it is, to Tit. 3. 1.
put every man in mind to be subject to principalities and powers, and to obey
Magistrates.

6. That there are several relations in us of the Clergy, and that we have
several privileges by these relations, will appear evidently in S. Paul, who
was Romans 11. 1.
an Israelite by blood, Act. 22. 25.
a Roman by freedom, but Gal. 1. 1.
an Apostle by Ordination. By his Orders he lost none of his former privileges,
but 1 Cor. 4. 1. and 9. 4. 5. 1^.
acquired new, whereto he had no right as Israelite, or Roman. Yet, as
occasion serves, he stands upon his privileges as a Roman; and both Act. 22.
26. 29^.
the Centurion and the Commander in chief were afraid to offend against that
law, or privilege. But we with bl^shlesse foreheads trample upon Gods Laws, and
the privileges of his nearest servants. But though S. Paul stand upon his
privileges, and e magnify his office, yet f he acknowledges Romans 11. 13. Act.
25. 10.
himself to be Cesars subject, and that at his tribunal HE OUGHT TO BE JUDGED.

7. Our Savior himself had several Relations: S. Matt. 22. 42. etc.
he was the Son of David, and the Lord of David; the Son of David, according to
his humanity; but the Lord of David, in his Deity. As Lord of all, he
receives tithes and sacrifices; h as a Subject he S. M at. 17 27.
pays tribute to Caesar: and when an arraigned person, i he acknowledges S.
Ioh. 19. 10. 11
Judge Pilate to have power against him. Besides this, he is a King, a Priest,
and a Prophet: a King, to command; a Priest, to offer sacrifice; and a Prophet,
to foretell, what he sees meet. Nay there is hardly a Citizen of London, but
has a treble relation to several privileges: 1. to the general Rights as he
is a free denison of this Nation; 2. to others, as he is Citizen of London; and
to a third sort, as he is free of this or that Company. And shall the meanest
Freeman enjoy his several Rights, when the Ministers and Stewards of God are
cut out of all. Are we dealt with as the Dispensers of Gods high and saving
mysteries? Nay, are we so well dealt with as the lowest members of this Nation?
Is not this the way to lead in Jeroboams Priests; to fill the Pulpits with the
scum of the people, and to bring the Priesthood into utter contempt? O all ye,
that pass by the way, behold, and consider, if ever the like shame befell any
National Church, that is threatened to ours, at this day. But Iud. 21. 25.
thus it comes to pass, when there is no King in the Israel of God.

8. If this distinction between Clergy and Laity be a branch of Popery, how
comes it to pass, that those great Reformers, and zealous enemies to Popery,
suffered the Clergy to continue a distinct Province of themselves; and that
they did not with Popery quite extinguish this distinction? Why does Q.
Elizabeth call them 8 Eliz. 1.
a great State of this Kingdom, if they be no State at all? Why did King
Edward VI. that virtuous Lady Queen Elizabeth, and wise King James, summon the
Bishops to convene in Convocation as a distinct society; and to vote in the
House of Peers as Lords spiritual; plainly by title distinguished from the
Lords temporal? I. G. p. 3.
Undoubtedly (say you) all privileges of the Clergy, that are (or were)
contrariant to the Laws of the Land, were abolisht in the reign of Henry the
eight. They were so. It follows therefore undoubtedly, that these privileges,
which were continued through so many Princes raigns that were enemies to
Popery, were neither Popish nor contrariant to the Laws of the Land. And yet
some of those times were not over favorable to the Clergy.

9. That we are a distinct society, or Corporation from the people is evident;
by the Coronation Oath, by Magna Charta, by several Acts of Parliament, and by
Scripture itself. The Coronation Oath observes the distinction of Clergy and
People; and assures us, that they shall be distinctly preserved. Magna Charta
does the like: and the Acts of Parliament distinguish the Kings subjects into
Clergy and Laity, allotting to each their several privileges; allowing the
people to take many courses, which the Clergy may not. This distinction is
approved by Scripture, where Numb. 3. 12. and 18. 6.
the Lord takes the Levites from among the children of Israel. S. Paul assures
us, that Heb. 5. 1. p Occumen. in loc.
Every High Priest is TAKEN FROM AMONG MEN. And the Scholiast tells us* that
(...) is there taken for (...) as if the Apostle had said, he is set apart from
men, from the Common people. This exemption or distinction, which you are
pleased to call I. G. p. 3.
a branch of Popery, or Ib. p. 8.
of Antichristian usurpation, is here justified by Gods own word. And Josephus
that was well skilled in Moses writings, and Judaicall Antiquities, testifies,
that Moses tribum Levi, a communione populi segregavit. Joseph. Antiq. l. 3 c.
13.
Moses did separate the tribe of Levi from the community of the people. He
might have said, that God himself did it; for the text says plainly, that
Deuteronomy. 10. 8. Number. 16. 9.
THE LORD SEPARATED THE TRIBE OF LEVI to bear the Arc of the Covenant, to
stand before the Lord, to administer unto him, and to bless in his name. From
that time forward Number. 1. 47. 49. Number ^. 33. etc.
they were not numbered amongst the rest of the people; Number. 3. 12.
the Lords they were: and Number. 1. 51.
the rest of the tribes were strangers to their office. Genesis 47. 20 22.
The very light of nature taught the heathen to distinguish between Priest and
people; and to allow them distinct privileges. And the light of Scripture
taught Christians to do the like: hence is it, that not only in the Canons of
the Church, but also in the Imperial constitutions this distinction between
the Clergy and Laity is most frequent and familiar. Otherwise what strange
confusion must necessarily have overspread the face of the Church, if this
distinction had not been religiously preserved? What diverse would not see,
these times have enforced us to feel.

10. And yet for all this, we say not, that Undoubtedly that privilege was
abolisht, that any Society should be exempt from secular power: for that were
to set up two Supremacies ^ G p. 3.
we are exempt from secular power; neither set we up two Supremacies. This will
prove to be your Popish or Anarchicall doctrine; yours, I say, that would so
fain cast this aspersion upon us. For do not you tell us, that Ib. p. 9.
there is a Supremacy in the King, and a Supremacy in the Parliament? Are not
here two Supremacies set up by you; that so you may make the Parliament
Law-lesse, and subject to no power? We detest and have abjured the Popes
Supremacy; and not only that, but all other Supremacies, besides the Kings,
within these his Majesty's Dominions and Countries. For we have sworn, that
King Charles is THE ONLY SUPREME GOVERNOR of all his Realms, over all persons
in all causes. But you induce the peoples Supremacy. Whereas we know no
Coordination but a Subordination of all persons severally and jointly to his
Majesty, and to his Majesty only, within all his Dominions.

11. We protest before God and the world, sincerely and from the heart, that
the King is major singulis, and major universis, greater then any, and greater
then all the Members of his Dominions, whether in, or out of Parliament: and
that he is Tertul ad Scap. c. 2.
homo a Deo secundus, and solo Deo minor, second to God, and less then God
only. To this our best Lawyers bear Testimony, even that Bracton. temps H. 3.
l. 4. c. 24. Sect. 5. Sir Ed^: Coke in Litleton La. Sect. 140.
the King is Superior to all, and Inferior to none. And our 3. Ed. 3. 19.
Acts of Parliament say the same. Thus much in substance we have sworn; and we
unfainedly believe, that all the world cannot absolve us of this Oath. As
therefore we hitherto have done, so shall we still, by Gods grace, bear faith,
and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs and successors, though it be to
the hazard of our liberty, of our estates, and lives. Yea we acknowledge our
selves obliged to the Laws of the Land in all those things, which concern the
right and peaceable administration of the State. To the King we pay first
fruits and tenths: which Lay Impropriators are seldom charged with. To the
King we grant and pay subsidies after an higher rate, then any of the Laity, by
many degrees. Where then are the two Supremacies, which we erect?

12. It Is true indeed, that Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 136.
For deciding of controversies, and for distribution of Justice within this
Realm, there be TWO DISTINCT JURISDICTIONS, the one ECCLESIASTICAL, limited to
certain spiritual and particular cases. The Court, wherein these causes are
handled, is called Forum Ecclesiasticum, the Ecclesiastical Court. The other
is SECULAR and general; for that it is guided by the Common and general Law
of the Realm. Now this is a maxim, affirmed by the Master of the Law, that Ib.
The Law does appoint every thing to be done by those, unto whose office it
properly appertains. But Cod. Asric. can. 59.
unto the Ecclesiastical Court diverse causes are committed jure Apostolico,
by the Apostolical Law. Such are those, that are commended by S. Paul to
Timothy the Bishop of the Ephesians, and to Titus the Bishop of the Cretians.
First, to 1 Timothy 5. 1^.
receive an accusation against a Presbyter, and the manner how. 2ly, to Ib. v.
20. Tit. 1. 13.
rebuke him, if occasion require. 3ly. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. 5.
If any Presbyter preach unsound doctrine, the Bishop is to withdraw himself
from him, Beza and Piscat. in loc.
that is to excommunicate him. 4ly, 2 Timothy 3. 2. etc.
In the same manner he is to use blasphemers, disobedient and unholy persons,
false accusers, trucebreakers, Traitors, and the like. 5ly, Tit. 3. 10*
The Bishop is to reject, Piscat. in loc.
that is, to excommunicate, all Heretics after the first and second admonition.

13. Sir Ed. Coke in Litletop, l. 2. Sect. 136.
These things the Ordinary (or Bishop) ought to do De droit, of Right (as Sir
Edward Coke speaks) that is to say, he ought to do it by the Ecclesiastical
Law IN THE RIGHT OF HIS OFFICE. These censures belong not to secular Courts;
they are derived from our Saviors Preistly power, and may not be denounced by
any, that is not a Priest at least. And, Ib.
a Maxim it is of the Common Law, (says that famous Lawyer) that where the
right is spiritual, and the remedy therefore ONLY BY THE ECCLESIASTICAL LAW,
the c^nusans thereof does appertain to the Ecclesiastical Court. But Ib. Sect.
201.
A BIHOP is regularly THE KINGS IMMEDIATE OFFICER to the Kings Court of Justice
in causes Ecclesiastical. Therefore not a company of Presbyters: no rule for
that. And this is it that wrings and vexes you so sorely. For your a me is And
why may not the great revenues of the Bishops b^ divided, to maintain a
preaching Minister^* and their Jurisdiction also, for the better over sight and
censure of manners? I. G. p. ^.
to share the Bishops Lands and Jurisdiction among you of the Presbyteriall
faction. This your vast covetousness and ambition have of late cost the Church
full dear, and have been a maine cause of these divisions and combustions. By
these means you have made a forcible entry upon Nabaoths Vineyard. It were
well Ahab and Jezabel would beware in time. However, wise men consider, that
every one, that steps up to the Bar is not fit to be a Judge; nor every one,
that lays about him in the Pulpit, meet to be a Bishop.

14. Besides, in those Epistles this power is committed to single Governors, to
Timothy alone, and to Titus alone. But Timothy and Titus were Bishops strictly
and properly so called; that is, they were of an higher order then Presbyters,
even of the same with the Apostles. Hence is that of S. Cyprian, Cyp ep. 27. n.
1
Ecclesia super EPISCOPOS constituitur, and omnis actus Ecclesiae PER EOSDEM
PRAEPOSITOS gubernatur. The Church is settled upon BISHOPS, and every Act of
the Church is ruled BY THE SAME GOVERNORS. By Bishops, not by Presbyters. Now
the word of God is, norma sui, and obliqui, the rule, whereby we must be
regulated: from which if we depart, we fall foul, or run awry. Since then
the Church is settled upon Bishops, it is not safe for any King or State to
displace them, lest they unsettle themselves and their posterity. They that
have endeavored to set the Church upon Presbyters, Quod non peri^^ium metuere
debemus,
have incurred such dangers, as they wot not of. For if we believe S. Cyprian,
de ^ffenla Domini, quando aliqui de Presbyteris
they offend God, ^ec Evangelii,
they are unmindfull of the Gospel; ^ec loci sui memores,
they affront the perpetual practice of the Church; sed neque suturum Domini
judicium, neque nunc sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod nu^quam omnino
sub antecessoribus factum est, cum contemptu and contume^ia praepositi totum
sibi vendicent? Atque utinam non
they neglect the judgment to come; and prostrata fratrum nostrorum salute sibi
omnia vindicarent Cyrp ep. 10.
endanger the souls of their brethren, whom Christ dyed for. Neither is this
the opinion of S. Cyprian only; Ignatius speaks as much; Ignat ad Philadelph p
91.
(...), As many as are Christ's, cleave fast to the Bishop. But these that
forsake him, and hold communion (...), with the accursed, shall be cut off with
them. This is Ignatius genuine resolution, attested by Vedel^us from Geneva:
and if true; a most dreadful sentence for those, that endeavor the
extirpation of Episcopacy.

15. As for the Privileges of the Clergy, which you are so earnest to
ruinate, I shall manifest, that they have footing in the Law of Nature, in the
Law of Moses, and in the Gospel. In the Law of Nature. Genesis 14. 10.
Abraham give tithes to the Priest of the most high God, Genesis 47 22.
The Priests in Egypt had lands belonging to them, as also portions of the
Kings free bounty. And the same Law of Nature taught Pharaoh and Joseph Ib.
and v. 26.
not to alienate either the Priests lands, or other their maintenance in time
of extremest famine. By the light of Nature Ezra 7. 24.
A^taxerxes King of Perfia decreed, that it should not be lawful for any man
to lay toll, tribute, or custom upon any Priest, Levite, Singer, Porter, or
other Minister of the house of God. And 1 Mac. 10. 65.
King Alexander son of Antiochus Epiphanes made Jonathan the High Priest a
Duke, and Governor of a Province. Ib. v. 62.
He commanded him also to be clothed in purple; and Ib v. 63.
caused him to sit by, or with, his own Royal Person. Ib. v. 89.
He sent also to the same High Priest a Buckle or collar of Gold, to wear;
even such as were in use with the Princes of the blood. And Ib v. 63.
by Proclamation he commanded that no man should molest the High Priest, or
prefer complaint against him. And can it be denied, that Heb. 7. 1.
Melchisedec, Priest of the most high God, was King of Salem, and made so by
God himself?

16. In the Law, Ecclus 45. 20.
the Lord made Aaron more honorable, and gave him an heritage. He divided unto
him the first fruits of the increase; and to him especially he appointed bread
in abundance. Exodus 28. 2.
For him he ordained glorious and beautiful garments. Ecclus. 45. 7.
He beautified Aaron with comely ornaments, and clothed him with a robe of
glory. Ex. 28. 36. 37.
Upon his head he set a miter, and Ecclus. ^5. 12.
a crown of pure gold upon the miter, wherein was ingraved Holiness; And this,
if I mistake not, is Philo Iud. de vita Mosis.
that (...), which Philo tells us, was set upon the Priests head, and is the
chief ornament of the Eastern Kings. The reason, he gives for it, is this;
because Ib.
while the Priest is discharging his duty he is more eminent then any person
whatsoever, even then Kings. But I rather conceive, it was because at that time
he represented, or prefigured the Royal Preisthood of our Savior.

17. For the Gospel, we have prophecies, in what state and honor Priests ought
to be had among Christians. Witness that Evangelicall Prophet, whose words are
these, Es. 61 6. s^ Soli Episcopi and Presbyteri propri^ jam vocantur in
Ecclesia Sacerdotes. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 10.
Ye shall be named THE PRIESTS OF THE LORD (as they are at this day): Men shall
call you the Ministers of our God. Ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and
ye shall be EXALTED WITH THEIR GLORY. This is one* the other shall be from that
royal Psalmist; Psalm. 45. 17.
In stead of thy Fathers thou shall have children, whom thou may make
PRINCES in all Lands. Do not you go about to make the Word of God a lie, while
you endeavor to dis-inherit the Clergy of these privileges and honors? But
Romans 3 4.
God shall be true, he shall be justified in his sayings; and every man shall
be a liar. Behold, how these prophecies were fulfilled under the Gospe^l. When
our Savior sent forth his Apostles and Disciples to preach the Gospel, and to
dispense his heavenly mysteries, he daines them with this honor, to rank them
for usage with himself; S. Mat. 10 40. S. Luke 10. 16.
He that despises you, despises me; and he that receives you, receives me.
To intimate to all Christians, that they ought to use his messengers, as they
would Christ in his own person. For whether well, or ill, he will take it as
done to himself. Hence is it, that Gal. 4. 14.
the Galathians received S. Paul as an Angel of God, even AS CHRIST JESUS. Yea
Ib. v* 15.
they were ready to pull out their own eyes, to do him a pleasure. And Act. 28.
27. 10.
when this Apostle came to Melita, he, and those that attended him, were
courteously entertained, honored they were with many honors, and enriched with
gifts, by the Prince of that Island, and his people.

18. Some, it may be, may conceive, that these were but personal honors; and
that they belong to them only, whom Christ immediately ordained. But the
Scripture will teach us a better lesson. For does not our Savior say, S. Ioh.
13. 20.
He that receives whomsoever I send, receives me? Now we know, that our
Savior sends not only by himself, but by those also, to whom he has given
power to send, and ordain. Thus by S. Paul he sent Timothy and Titus: and we
find Act. 14. 20.
S. Barnabas with S. Paul ordaining Presbyters in all Churches, where they
came. This therefore is a general rule; 1 Timothy 5. 17.
those Governors, who labor in the Word and Doctrine (whether they be ordained
by Christ, or his Apostles, or any other, to whom this authority is duly
given) are WORTHY OF DOUBLE HONOR; that is (says Primasius) Primas. in 1 Th ^.
^ 23
both in love, and place. Thus 2 Cor 7. 15.
Titus by the Corinthians was received with fear and trembling, and memorable
obedience. Theod. in loc.
They honored him (as Theodoret speaks) as their Father, and reverenced him as
their spiritual Governor. These honors are due, not so much in respect of
personal worth, as in regard of the office, which they bear. This appears by
S. Paul; who wills the Philippins not only to Philip. 2. 29.
receive Epaphroditus, their Apostle, or Bishop, with all gladness; but,
(...), he charge them to hold SUCH, AS HE WAS, in honor and reputation. All
must be thus honored; but those most, that are most worthy.

19. Constantine, the first Emperor that ever was christened, had learned this
lesson; Ruffin hist. l. 9. c. 10.
he therefore did reverence the Bishops, ad imaginem quandam divinae
praesentiae, as if he had some resemblance of God before his eyes. Theod. hist.
l 1. c. 11.
He kissed those Bishops skars, that had suffered for Christ's most holy Name.
Eusebius. de vi^a Constant. Mag. l 1. c. 33.
He entertained diverse of them at his own table: and Gelas. Cyzie. l. 1. c. 37.
at their departure he bestowed upon them many and goodly gifts. Ruffin. hist.
l 9. c. 10.
Upon Bishops he conferred very many privileges, and the highest Honors he had
to bestow. He ordained, that Eusebius de vita Constant. M. l 4. c. 27.
those Canons, which were agreed upon by the Bishops, and had received his
Royal approbation, should be of more sacred authority, then any Law or
sentence, that should pass from his highest Judges: and that none of his
Princes should dare to infringe them. To conclude, Theodoret. hist. l. 1. c. 2.
he commanded the Governors of his several Provinces to give reverence and
honor to Bishops; threatening no less then death to such as should revile or
abuse them. What reverence and esteem Bishops were of with his several sons,
though differing in Religion, the Church History manifests: for these and all
other privileges were inviolably preserved to the Church, till that Apostata
Julian ware the Crown. But those pious and orthodox Emperors, that succeeded
him, raised up the Church, and made good her former privileges.

20. The reason why good Princes were so careful of the Church and Churchmen,
was Eusebius. de vita Constant M. l. 1. c. 35.
because they were confident, with Great Constantine, that God gave a blessing
to their affairs, for the Bishops sakes. And those two wise Emperors Leo and
Constantine profess with Justinian, that Ius Graeco-Rom^tom. 2. lib. Leonis
and Constant Tit. 3. n 8.
the peace and felicity of their people, as well for body as soul, depend upon
the harmonious consent of the Imperial and Episcopal functions. Mark that. In
Scripture 2 Reg. ^. 12. etc. 13. 14.
the Prophets and servants of God are called the charet of Israel, and the
horsemen thereof; because Gen note in 2 Reg. 13. 14.
by their prayers they did more prosper their Country, then by force of arms.
Yea Ib.
by them God blessed his people. These were the Church Priviledges; and these
the opinions the most Christian Princes had of Churchmen. And you cannot say,
that any of these Emperors had any dependence upon the Pope, or any compliance
with him. But we are fallen into those times, wherein it is accounted loss, to
bestow cost upon Christ; piety, to rifle the Church; and good service to God,
to murder his Apostles and Priests. Indeed, what ever is good and commendable,
is now with the round brotherhood cried out upon as Popish. By this time, I
hope, it appears, that Immunities arising from the error of the times, not the
tenure of Scripture. I. G. p 4.
these immunities, which belong to the Church, arise not from the error of the
times, as you suppose, but from the tenure of Scripture. That Is the tenure, we
hold by.

CHAP. XII. Whether to sit and vote in Parliament be incongruous to the calling
of Bishops.
1. SOmething an hard theme to treat upon, and unpleasing to the times. And yet
I must say something to it, lest I seem to desert the cause, to blame our
Predecessors of indiscretion, and to acknowledge that weakness in our Bishops,
which the wisest of this Kingdom know to be far from them. What? Not contented
to strip us of our rights, lands, and privileges, but you must twit us with
the loss of One of the privileges of the Clergy was for the Bishops to sit
and vote in the House of Peers. yet that is abolish^ as incongruous to their
calling I. G. p. 4.
the Bishops Votes, as if they were neither fit to sit or vote, in the House of
Peers? That this has been done cannot be denied; but how justly I shall not
question for the honor I bear to my Sovereign. Yet thus much is evident to
every single eye, that we have had many even and conscionable Parliaments,
wherein Bishops have voted: what kind of Parliament we have had without them,
some will make bold to speak hereafter. But a word in private. Were they not
thrust out, lest the King should have too many faithful Counselors in the
House? Were they not removed, to make way for these civil broils? The
Incendiaries knew full well, that those messengers and makers of peace would
never have passed a Vote for war.

2. But what were the motives, that wrought upon His Majesty, to yield to have
the Bishops turned out of that House, Lex terrae p. 14
wherein they had voted from the first day, that ever Parliament sat in
England? And before ever there was an House of Commons, they had their Votes in
the great Councels of the Kingdom; as Sir Robert Cotton manifests in his
Treatise, that the Sovereigns person is required in the great Councels of the
State. p. 3. etc. If at any time they have been forced out of these
Parliaments, or great Assemblies, it has been with so ill success, that with
all possible speed they have been recalled. Will you hear the motives? Surely
they were the very same, that drove the King from Westminster, and London. I
remember, the Clothiers were persuaded in a mutinous manner to cry down the
Bishops votes, because they had no market for their clothes. And now they cry
out, that they want wool to make clothes. Is not this the blessing they have
gained by that hideous and senseless outcry?

3. But why was this privilege abolisht, as incongruous to their calling? Are
Bishops unfit to advise, or assent in framing Laws? Surely they are rational
men, and learned men. By reason of their age, and offices, which they have
heretofore passed through, they must needs be men of much experience. And it is
to be presumed so many, for so many, as conscionable, and as much for the
common good, as any. And such men are most fit to prepare, and commend Laws for
and to Kings. For I have learned, that Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton, l 2. Sect. 138.
this is a strong argument in Law, Omne factum, si recte factum non est,
peccatum est, Nec recte factum esse ullo modo potest, quod non a recta ratione
proficiscitur. Aug. de util. credendi. c. 12.
Nihil, quod est contra rationem, est licitum, Nothing contrary to reason, is
lawful. For REASON IS THE LIFE OF THE LAW; nay the COMMON LAW it self IS
NOTHING ELSE BUT REASON. Which is to be understood of an artificial perfection
of reason, gotten by 1 long study, 2 observation, and 3 experience, and not
every man's natural reason: for, Nemo nascitur artifex, no man is born Master
of his profession. Against reason therefore it is, that men of long study, much
observation, and experience, should be excluded from voting in matters of such
high concernment. And some men, that have scarce any of these, should be
admitted, as if they were born wise, or gained Stateexperience by hawking, or
hunting. It Is true, that Gu^d. Pancirol. de Magistrate* Municipal. c. 2.
Senatore sons might be admitted to the government of the Commonwealth, before
they were five and twenty years of age: but Ib. c. ^.
before they were twenty and five years complete, they could give no suffrage
among the rest of the Senators, though Senators. This was the wisdom of that
thriving Roman State.

4. Now give me leave to enquire more strictly, what it is, that is incongruous
to the calling of Bishops. Is it to sit in the House of Peers? or to Vate in
the House of Peers? or both? That the Lords Spiritual have sat and voted with
the Lords Temporal, cannot be denied. The Acts of Parliament speak it, from
the first Session to this last. Let it not be thought incongruous for Bishops
to sit with the best of Subjects. ^useb. de vita Constant. M. l. 1. c 33
They sat at Constantines own table. Nor to be numbered among Peers. Psalm. 45.
17.
The prophecy says, that they may be made Princes. Nor to vote in matters of
State: since usually they are men of great Learning, of much experience,
observation, and conscience. Such as fear God, honor their Sovereign, and love
their Country without by ends. Such they are, and such they ought to be. And
though sometimes there be a Judas among the twelve, yet is the Calling never
the worse.

5. Had it been incongruous to their Calling, Melchisedech that was both King
and Priest had never been a type of our Savior. The Law of God and Nature
abhor that, which is incongruous. Had it been incongruous to the Priesthood,
God had never made Moses and Eli Governors of his people, in temporal affairs;
for Psalm. ^9 ^.
they were both Priests. Exodus 18. 14. 17. etc.
Jethro, Priest of Midian, was of excellent use to Moses in State affairs. And
it may not be forgotten, that 2. Reg. 12. 2.
King Jehoash thrived, as long as he hearkened to Jehoiada the High Priest. But
when he slighted the Priests counsel, he suddenly fell into the extremest
miseries. 2 Chronicles. 24. 21. 23. etc. Our Histories will likewise tell you, how
K. Henry VII. prosper'd by applying himself to the advice of his Bishops,
Morton, Denny, Fox, and others. And how his Son K. Henry VIII. never thrived,
after he turned his ears from the counsel of his Prelates. And yet he excluded
them not from Parliaments; he could not be drawn to that. Sure, had this been
incongruous to their calling, your fellow- Ministers of London would never have
granted, that two distinct offices may be formally in one and the same person;
as Melchizedech was formally a King and Priest. I. D. p. 212.

6. A wonder it is, that you and your faction should spy thi^ incongruitie,
which was never discerned by the wisest of our forefathers. The Writ, which
summons the Parliament, runs thus, Justice Ienkins Inconven. p. 4.
Rex habiturus colloquium and tractatum cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus. The King intending a Conference and Treaty with his Prelates, and
Great men, and Peers. This Writ, as some report, was framed under K. Henry III.
and is continued in the same terms to this day. And yet no incongruitie
discerned in it, till ye came in with your new Lights, which issue from your
light brains. But now the Bishops must no more vote, no, not sit in Parliament;
because you, forsooth, conceive it to be incongruous to their calling. But will
any wise man take your word for a Law, or imagine it to be more authentic,
then the resolutions of all our forefathers? You have no way to finger the
Bishops lands and Jurisdiction, but by turning them out of the House. This,
this was it, that moved you to charge their presence in Parliament with
incongruity.

7. The Lawyers tell us, that Ib.
the Writ of Summons is the basis and foundation of the Parliament. And Ib.
if the foundation be destroyed, what becomes of the Parliament? Truly it
falls; says Justice Jenkins; according to that Ib. p. 5.
maxim both in Law and Reason, Sublato fundamento opus cadit, the Foundation
being taken away, the work falls. If then it shall be proved, that you
endeavor to ruin the Foundation, the Writ of Summons, it must necessarily
follow, that you endeavor the ruin of the Parliament. By the Writ the King is
to have treaty with his Prelates. But you suffer him to have no treaty with
his Prelates. Where then is the Writ? Nay, the Bishops are quite voted down
root and branch. How then shall he treat in Parliament with those, that have no
being? The Lord commands Exodus 25. 10.
the Ark to be made of Shittim-wood: If there had been no Shittim wood, the Ark
could not have been made. If there be no Prelates, where is the treaty? Where
the Parliament? It will not serve to slip in the Presbyters; they are not the
men, they are not called for. Sit Ed. Coke Instit. part 4. c 1. Sect. Of what
persons.
These are Episcopal privileges: Mag, Charta. c. 38.
all other Ecclesiastical persons are to be contented with those liberties and
free customs, quas prius habuerunt, which they enjoyed heretofore.

8. The Writ summoned this Parliament, for the defense of the Church of
England. Herein you have also made the Writ void; for you have destroyed the
Church of England. And in destroying the Church, you have destroyed the Writ.
The Commission is for defense; they then that destroy, what they are bound to
defend, overthrow their Commission. S. Mat. 10. 12.
Our Savior sent his Apostles to preach peace; Romans 12. 14.
to bless, and not to curse; Gal. 1. 10.
to please God, and not man. If then we preach war, and not peace; if we
curse, when we ought to bless, if we please men, and not God, we forfeit our
Commission. S. Paul is plain; Ib.
If we please men, we are none of Christ's servants; much less Apostles. For
Romans 6. 16.
his servants we are, whom we obey, whom we please. If then we prove S. Mat.
25. 30.
faithless and unprofitable servants, we shall be turned out of our Masters
house, even out of doors, and cast into outer darkness. Upon these grounds I
argue thus. He that overthrows the prime intention of the Writ, overthrows the
Writ. But you have overthrown the prime intention of the Writ. Therefore you
have overthrown the Writ. That you have overthrown the prime intention of the
Writ, I prove thus. The prime intention of the Writ is for the State, and
defense of the Church of England. But you have Defensionem Ecclesiae
Anglic^^ae, that is gone. Just Ienkins Inconven. p. 5.
overthrown the State and defense of the Church of England. You have therefore
overthrown the prime intention of the Writ. The second Proposition cannot be
denied, it is so palpably true. The former is Sir Edw: Cokes; his words are
these. Sir Ed Coke Instit. part 4. c. 1. Sect. The matters.
The State and defense of the Church of England is first in intention of the
Writ. And Justice Ienkins Inconvenien p. 5.
if the Writ be made void, all the process is void; and so farewell Parliament.

9. Besides, I have learned, that Ib. p. 4.
the assembly of Parliament is for three purposes. First, for weighty affairs,
that concern the King. Secondly, For the defense of his Kingdom. And thirdly,
for defense of the Church of England For the King, no question, but the Bishops
are faithful to him. We see, they have constantly adhered to him in these
times of trial. In Gods and the Kings cause they have all suffered, and some
died commendably, if not gloriously. For the defense of the Kingdom none more
forward with their advice, purses, and prayers. And for the Church, who so fit,
who so able to speak as Bishops? Versed they are in the divine Law; in Church
history, and in the Canons of the Church. They fully understand not only the
present, but the ancient state of the Church. They know, what is of the Essence
of the Church; what necessary, and what convenient only; what is liable to
alteration, and what not. These things are within the verge of their
profession, and most proper for them to speak to.

10. When King David first resolved to bring up the Ark of the Lord from
Kiriath-jearim, into his own City, 1 Chronicles. 13. 1.
he consulted with the Captains of thousands, and hundreds, and cum universis
Principibus, and with all his Princes, about this business, Ib. v. 7.
By their advice he orders, that the Arc should be carried in a new Cart; and
Vzzah and Ahio are to drive it. But what becomes of this consultation? 2 Samuel
67. Vzzah died before the Ark, for usurping that, which did* not appertain to
his vocation^ for this charge was given to the Priests, Genesis Note in 1 Chronicles 13
10.
An error was committed clean thorough, and Vzzah suffers for it. Though David
were a marvelous holy man, and a good King, and had a company of wise,
religious Counselors about him, in the removal, and ordering of the Arc,
they were mistaken, because they did not advise with the Priests about it. For
May. 2 7.
the Priests lips preserve knowledge* and they shall inquire of the Law at his
mouth. And Numb. 4 15.
the Law will not have a Cart to carry the Arc, nor Laymen to meddle with it.
David saw his mistake with sorrow; and confesses to the Priests, that 1 Chronicles.
15. 13.
he and his Counselors had not sought God after the due order. And why so? Ib.
Quia non eratis praesentes (so the Fathers read) because the Priests were not
present, and he had not consulted with them about this sacred business. And
hence it is, that Ib.
they did illicitum quid, something that was unlawful. That then a thing be not
unlawful, we must consider, not only what is to be done; but the order and
manner is to be considered, how it ought to be done; least failing of the due
order, it prove unlawful. Most Christians know bonum, what is good; but few
are skilled in the been, how it ought to be done; and that is it, that makes so
many ruptures, so many breaches, and factions in the world, because every man
will prescribe the order, and manner; which, God knows, they ttle understand.

11. When therefore David had once more resolved to fetch up the Arc from the
house of Obed Edom, he calls for the Priests, and acknowledges, that 1 Chronicles.
15. 2.
none ought to carry the Ark of God, but they; and that Ib. v. 13.
therefore the Lord had made a breach upon him and his, because the Priests had
not brought it up at first. That this fault may be duly and truly mended, Ib.
^. 12.
David commands the Priests to sanctify themselves, and to bring up the Arc.
They did so, Ib. v. 1^.
they brought it up upon their shoulders, Number. 4. 15.
according to their duty. And 1 Chronicles. 15. 26.
God helped the Levites, that bare the Arc; because it was now done in due
order. It is no shame then for us, to acknowledge our error with David, and
with him to amend, what is amiss. Yea this was such a warning to him, that 1 Chronicles. 17. 1.
he would not so much as resolve to build an house for the Lord, till he had
acquainted the Prophet Nathan with it. In matters therefore, that concern the
Arc of the Covenant, the Church of the living God, it is not safe to do any
thing without the Priests advice. If then the chief and maine end of calling a
Parliament be for the good of the Church, it is most necessary to have the
chief Fathers of the Priests present. But Sir Edward Coke assures me, that this
is the main end of calling a Parliament. His words are these; Sir Id Coke
Inssit. part. 4. c. 1. Sect. The matters.
Though the State and defense of the Church of England be last named in the
Writ, yet is it FIRST IN INTENTION. And what is first in intention is chiefly
aimed at, all other things that are handled, are but as means to effect that.
It is not then incongruous, but most consonant to the calling of Bishops to sit
and Vote in Parliament.

12. Besides, Ib.
if the honor of God, and of holy Church be first in intention, how shall the
honor of God, and of the Church be provided for, how defended, when the
Fathers of the Church are discarded, who know best, what belongs to Gods
honor; who are most able to speak in defense of the Church, and to show how
she ought to be provided for? Shall she not in their absence be laid open to
the subtle foxes, and merciless bores to wast and distroy her? Yea Just.
Ienkins Inconven. p 5*
by this means she is already distroyed. So pious Justice Jenkins. The
incongruitie then is not to the Bishops calling, but to the covetousness of
bores and foxes.

13. Another incongruity will follow upon this. Just Ienkins Inconven. p ^.
Instit. ^^^. 4* c 1. Sect Of what persons*
The whole Parliament is one corporate body consisting of the HEAD AND THE
THREE ESTATES. If one of the Estates be wanting, it cannot be called a whole,
but an imperfect, a maimed Parliament. But Sir Ed. Coke Ib.
the Bishops are one of the three Estates. Suppose them to be the more feeble
and less honorable Estate, or Member, yet 1. Cor. 12. 22. 23
this very Member is necessary; and the body is but lame without it. Take heed
then, that the excluding of Bishops, be not incongruous to the Parliament. I
see not, how it can be incongruous to the Prelates to suffer wrong, since 1 S.
P^^. 2* 21.
for this purpose they are called. But it is incongruous to the Parliament, to
be without them; since without them, it is not a whole, but an imperfect
Parliament. For I have read, that Lex terrae p. 14
Bishops were in all Parliaments, and voted in them, since we had any. Yea,
that great Master of the Law justifies, that Sir Ed Coke Instit. part. ^ c. 1.
Sect. Of what persons.
every Bishop ought ex debito justiciae of due justice to be summoned by Writ,
to every Parliament, that is holden. But if they leave out the Bishops, they
begin with injustice, and lay but an ill foundation for so great a Court of
Justice. And where injustice bears the sway, there is little Justice to be
hoped for. So they are incongruous in the first stone, or foundation of a
Parliament.

14. There is a Statute, that no Act of Parliament be passed by any Sovereign
of this Realm, or any other authority what soever, without the advice and
assent of the three Estates of the Kingdom, viz. of the 1 Lords spiritual,
and 2 temporal, and the 3 Commons of this Realm. And all those are solemnly
cursed, by the whole Parliament, that shall at any time endeavor to alter this
Act, or to make any Statute otherwise then by the consent of all these, or the
Major part of them. This, as the learned in the Law report, is upon record in
the Parliament Roles.

15. And what comfort, I beseech you, can his Majesty have to call a
Parliament without Bishops, since he cannot assure himself of Gods assistance
without them? Beda Eccles* hist l. 3. c. 7.
Cenwalch King of the West Saxons was sensible, that his Province was destitute
of Gods protection, while it was without a Bishop. Indeed Bafil. M. ^p. ^1.
a good Bishop is (with Gregory, Metropolitan of Cesarea) not only the beauty
of the Church, and a fortress to his flock, but he is the safety of his
Country. It was the religious conceit of our country men heretofore, that Rog.
Hoveden. in Hen. ^. p* 601.
both King and Kingdom have by the Church a solid, ^ sure foundation for their
subsistence. And it was the usual saying of King James, Confer. at Hampt.
Court p. 36. and 82.
No Bishop, no King. In Scripture the Priests are called 2 Reg. 13. 14.
the Charets and horsemen of Israel; because by their prayers the Country
prospered more then by force of arms. And the Greek Fathers observe, that 1 Timothy 2: 1.
the Bishop is therefore to pray for all, Occumen. in Ioc.
because he is the Common Father of all, be they good or bad.

16. And as he can have little spiritual comfort without Bishops; so ^4 Ed. 1
c. 1. and 14. Ed. 3. c. 1.
without them he can have no temporal releife, no Subsidies granted for his
own supplies, or for the defense of the Kingdom. I am sure, none have been
granted him at Westminster, since the expulsion of the Bishops. Thus have you
molded up such a Parliament, as was never known in this Realm, since these
great Councels of State were first assembled. For though the Bishops were by
his Majesty summoned according to justice; yet were they afterward turned out
at the instigation of a strong and tumultuous faction; and not suffered to vote
in matters that concerned either Church or State. Thus ye are become Hos. 5. 0
like the Princes of Judah, that remove the bounds; That is as the Genevians
interpret, Genesis note in Ioc.
ye have turned upside down all political order, and all manner of Religion.
Hos. 5. 10.
Therefore upon those, that have done so, the Lord will power out his wrath
like water; which will surely overwhelm them, as it did those desperate sinners
in the deluge. Thus I have manifested, that it is not incongruous to the
calling of Bishops to sit, and vote in Parliament; but to exclude them is
incongruous to the being of a Parliament, to the weal of the King, and safety
of the Kingdom.

17. And yet, as if what-you had delivered, were ex tripode, as sure as Gospel,
And then why may not the removal of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction be
consented to, as well, if it prove inconvenient and prejudicial to the Church.
I. G. p. 4.
from barring their votes, you deduce an argument for taking away their
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. If one be abolished, why may not the other be
removed? As if, because my cassocke is taken from me, I must necessarily be
stripped out of my gown It Is true, if this be also done, I must bear it
patiently; but my patience does not justify their action, that do me the
injury. Neither does the former fact justify the latter: truly no more then
David's folly with Bathsheba can countenance the murder of Vriah. The question
is not de fact^, but de jure, not what is done, but whether it be justly done.
If the fact may justify a right, then may we maintain robbing upon Salisbury
Plain; because it has been done there more then once. A wonder it is, you had
not framed your argument thus: who knows not, that the Parliament caused the
Arch Bishop of Canterbury to be beheaded? And then why may they not hang the
rest of the Bishops, if their lives prove inconvenient, and prejudicial to the
Church? But with Julian the Apostata, ye had rather slay the Preisthood, then
the Priests.

17. Indeed The abolition of the one, is no more against the Oath then of the
other. I. G. p. 4.
the removal of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is no more against the Oath
then the abolition of their Votes. Both alike in respect of the Oath; but if we
consider the several authorities, from whence they are derived, we shall find
a difference; because the most part of their Jurisdiction is the grant of God;
but their Voting among the Peers is by the favor of Princes, grounded upon the
right of Nature, and that civil interest, which every free denizon ought to
have in some measure, in disposing of his own, and assenting to new Laws. But
suppose Princes may revoke their own favors, can they without peril to their
souls, cut off that entaile, which God has settled upon his Church? I
believe, no. But you will only remove it, not abolish it. And removed it may
be from Dorchester to Lincoln, from Crediton to Exiter. But the removal of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction from Bishops to Presbyters, is utterly unlawful;
since without sin we may not alter the Ordinance of God, who settled this
Jurisdiction upon Bishops only, and not upon Presbyters; as is demonstrated in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIII. Certain light and scandalous passages concerning Prince and
Priest tenderly touched.
1. There Is a great cry in the fourth page against the Jurisdiction of Bishops,
^ inconvenient and prejudicial to the Church; against unlawful immunities,
Anti-Evangelicall Pomp, combersome greatness, and Forfeiture by abuse. All
these are cried out upon, but none of them proved. I shall therefore pass
these by as a distempered foame, or pulpit froath. Yet thus much I must say,
that the Immunities of the Clergy, are held by Law, or not. If by Law, then
are they not unlawful, but legal. If legal, it is presumption in you to call
them unlawful. If unlawful, show against what Law. We take not your word to
be so authenticke, as if we were bound to believe, what ever you say.

2. Something answerable to this it is, that you tell us, I. G. p. 4.
when this Oath was framed, the Church was endued with the ignorance of the
times. But when was that time? For that we may go seek; for you relate it not.
If you had, perchance we might have showed you as wise, and as learned men in
those times, as Westminster affords at this day.

3. And yet upon these imaginations you conclude, that In all which respects
the Oath was invalid* being vinculum iniquitatis. I. G. p. 4.
the Kings Oath is invalid, and not only so, but that it is vinculum
iniquitatis, the bond of iniquity. The respects, you rely upon, are only
these. First, that Ib. p. 1.
Prelacy is an usurpation contrary to Christ's institution. 2ly, that Ib. p. 3.
the Clergy ^e of themselves a distinct Province, is a branch of Popery. 3ly,
that Ib. p. 4.
Bishops sitting and voting in the House of Peers, is abolisht as incongruous
to their calling. 4ly, that Ib.
the Church was endowed with diverse unlawful immunities. And last of all, that
Ib.
when this Oath was framed, the Church was indewed with the ignorance of the
times. The four former have been pretily well sif^ed, and a non liquet is
returned, I find them not proved. When you make good the last, I shall, with
Gods blessing, return you an answer.

4. In the mean space I cannot but tell you, that you have wilfully and
dangerously scandalized diverse Princes or blessed memory; and charged them
almost as deeply, as Act. 8. 23.
S. Peter did Simon Magus, with the bond of iniquity. A binding, in intangling
sin. Surely those Princes if you may be credited, took this Coronation Oath
either ignorantly, o^ maliciously. If ignorantly, they are simple, or
careless: If maliciously, they were neither good Kings, nor good Christians.
But light forsooth, has shined forth since those mistie days. I fear this
late light, is but a false light: for it was never spyed by any, that were not
condemned Heretics, till now of late.

5. Well, think men, what they please, you have lately discovered, that the
Jurisdiction, which was inconvenient and prejudicial in the Bishops, will
prove very convenient and commodious for the Church in preaching Presbyters.
Those immunities, that were unlawful in them, will be lawful in you. That
pomp, which was Anti-evangelicall, and carnal in them, must needs be
spiritual and thoroughly sanctified to such Evangelists as yourself. That
combersome greatness will but fit your shoulders; and those great promotions,
will not at all be unwildy to Presbyteriall Saul, which did comber Bishop
David. And I. G. p 4.
those privileges, which were disadvantagious to the Church, and hindered the
growth of religion, while they were in Episcopal hands* will in a Classical
Assembly turn to the advantage of the Church, and further her edification. If
this be not your meaning, let the world judge. For these are your words; Ib.
And why may not the great revenues of the Bishops, with their sole*
Jurisdiction in so large a circuit, be indicted and convict to be against the
edification of the Church; and it be found more for the glory of God; that both
THE REVENUE BE DIVIDED, to maintain a preaching Ministry, and THEIR
JURISDICTION also, for the better oversight and censure of manners. You have
indicted them indeed, and their revenues, as if under the Bishops there were no
preaching Ministry, no censure of manners; as if under them there were nothing
to the edification of the Church or the glory of God. Whereas it is well known,
that whilst the Bishops enjoyed their Jurisdiction, other manner of Sermons
were preached, then have been ever since.

6. You have already vaunted, that the Bishops revenues and Jurisdiction are
against the edification of the Church; and I make no question, but you will
justify, that the abolishing of the three Creeds, is much to the edification
of Gods people. And is not the silencing of the ten Commandments, for the
better oversight and censure of manners? Thus you have also condemned that most
excellent form of Divine Service, and vented multitudes of heresies; and all
for the glory of God. But when these things come to try all we shall certainly
see, who will be convicted by that grand Jury, S Mat 19* 2^.
that shall sit upon twelve thrones, Judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Not
only of Israel according to the flesh, but of Israel also according to faith.

7. But why are you so suddenly fallen from an abolition, to an alteration?
Before you profess, I. G. p. 4.
That the abolition of the one, is no more against the Oath, then of the other.
There you would have the Bishops Jurisdiction abolisht with their Votes. But
here you will have the Jurisdiction divided, their domination altered, and all
to maintain a preaching Ministry. This you call Ib.
the removal of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; in the same page. Aaron
must lay down his Miter and holy garments, that Korah may put them on. And S.
Paul must resign his Apostolical rod to Simon Magus, to Alexander the
Copper-smith, and to the brethren in Q^irpo. And why so? Alas, the
Apostle-Bishops Ib.
do not further, but hinder the work of the Gospel; They are superannited and
decrepit; away with them by all means, and bring in the young, lusty
Presbyter-Bishops, Ib.
where strong holds are to be vanquished. These are the men will do the work, or
the Pulpit and Church shall ring for it. This you call Ib.
a good plea to ALTER the useless Anti-Evangelicall pomp. Indeed '^is the best
you have; and make the best you can of it, it will prove but an
Anti-evangelicall and Antichristian plea; if we trust Scripture.

8. Yet, that this may be done according to your design, you allow the King
thus much power, Ib.
that he may, notwithstanding his Oath, consent to ALTER the Clergies
immunities. No Oath shall stand in the way, so ye may gain by it. What? again
fallen from the question? From abrogation to alteration? What if I should tell
you, that you have altered the state of the question? That abrogation is the
repealing, the disanulling of a Law; and not the changing of it? But this is no
error with you, whose aim is to have Episcopacy abolisht, that so the
immunities and lands thereof may be transferred upon the Presbytery. This is
the alteration you gape after. Yes, you would so; Ib.
settled you would have them upon preaching Ministers, and Ib. p. 6.
upon parochial Pastors: as if none were Preachers or Pastors, but you of the
Presbyteriall cut. I will not say, that you are Heretics in this and in other
your new-forged doctrines, invented to subvert Monarchy and Episcopacy. But I
shall tell you S. Austins opinion, and so leave you to the opinion of the
world. Haereticus est, ut mea fe^t opinio, qui alicuius temporalis commodi and
maxim gloriae principatusque sui gratia, falsas ac novas opiniones vel gignit,
vel sequitur. Aug deutil* credend. c. 1.
He, in my conceit, is an heretic (says that Father) who FOR ANY TEMPORAL
COMMODITY, and chiefly FOR HIS OWN GLORY AND PREFERMENT, does either raise or
follow false and new opinions. And are not pelf, honor, and preferment the
cause of all these fidings, and seditions, in Church, and State? If these times
speak it not, I am deceived. As for your opinions, it has been sufficiently
manifested, that they are both false and new.

9. Be your opinions what they will, their immunities and rights must down, or
you will fail in a Dilemma. I. G. p. ^.
The Clergy (say you) either hold their rights and immunities by Law, or
otherwise. This is not to be denied. But what follows upon this? Ib.
If by Law then the Parliament, which has power to ALTER ALL LAWS, has power
to alter such Laws as give them their immunities: and those Laws altered, the
immunitie cease; and so the Kings engagement in that particular. If not by
Law, it is but an usurpation. You say it, and we grant it. For truth it is,
that we claim no rights and immunities, but what the ancient and Christian Laws
of this Realm have confirmed unto us by Act of Parliament.

10. You say, that the Parliament has power to alter all Laws. What if a man
should say, that this assertion is not true? I conceive, it were no blasphemy.
Indeed it is a blasphemous position to broach the contrary. None but an Atheist
dares justify, that Princeps supra legem divinam non est, positailla quippe ab
eo est, qui supra ipsum est: neque supra naturalem, quae aboleri non potest
nisi cum natura ipsa. Io. Be daeus de Jure Regio c. 2.
the Parliament, or any mortal Soveraigntie, has power to alter either the
Law of God, or the Law of Nature. And yet these are Laws. And who, but an enemy
to his Country, and a friend to confusion, dares affirm, that the Parliament
has power to alter the Monarchical or fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. I am
sure Justice Jenkins resolves, that Lex terrae p. 29.
by the Law of the Land a Parliament cannot alter any moral Law.

11. Give me leave to propose your own Argument in terminis, in behalf of the
City of London. The Citizens of London either hold their rights and immunities
by law, or otherwise. If by law, then the Parliament, which has power to alter
all Laws, has power to alter such Laws, as give them their immunities: and
those Laws altered the immunity cease. If their immunitie be not by Law, it
is an usurpation without just title; which upon discovery is null. How like you
this, my rich Masters of London? Has not Mr. Geree set you in the sleep way to
ruin? But ye may, perchance, have a confidence, that the Parliament will not
serve you so. Be of that mind still. The power, it seems, is in their hands:
how they will use it toward you, I cannot say. How they have used it toward
us, and toward our good Sovereign, ye know. And can ye look to fare better?
Remember, what our Savior says, 8. Joh. 15. 20
The servant is no greater then his Master. If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you. As they have used your Lord and King, they will use
you. The courtesy ye are like to find, is that, which Ulysses had from
Polyphemus, to be their last breakfast.

12. Well, I. G. p. 5.
upon the alteration of the Law, the immunitie cease, and so the Kings
engagement in that particular. An Ordinance of Parliament has absolved many a
subject from his Oath of Allegiance: and now we shall have a Law, to absolve
the King from his Oath of protection. But I am sure no Law can absolve him from
a duty inherent to his Crown. And All Kings by the Royal Office, and Oath of
Coronation, are obliged to protect their Laws and Subjects. Declarat of the
Kingd. of Scotland. p. 20
such is the duty of protecting his Subjects from oppression, and the Church
from sacrilege. You cannot therefore possibly absolve him from this
engagement. Besides, it was never conceived, that an Ordinance was of
sufficient force to alter a Law. The Kings engagement therefore stands as yet
in this particular.

13. But suppose, there were such a Law, as you-speak of, could it be just? I
have learned from your London Ministers, that I. D. p. 6.
(...) Law, is so called in Greek, from rendering to every person, what is
just, meet, equal. In very deed, as the great Lawyers speak, Calv. lex Jutid.
in verbo Ius.
Jus, idem est, quod justum and aequum* The Law is nothing else, but that which
is just and right. If it be otherwise, it is not jus, but injuria, an injury,
but no right. You are pleased to acknowledge I. G. p. 2.
our privileges to be our rights. How then can they be taken from us without
injuri^^ And it is not lawful, with the supreme Judge, for any Prince or Court
to deal injuriously, with the meanest, that are subject to them. Justice it is,
to give to every man his own. Injustice then it must needs be, to spoil any man
of that, which is his, either by the Laws of God or man. Suppose us to be in
equal balance with our fellow Subjects, and that we have no other right to our
lands and privileges, but by the Laws of the Realm: what reason can be given,
why we should not peaceably enjoy, what is ours, by the Law of the Land, as
well as the rest of our fellow Subjects? We have the same right; and why not
the same protection?

CHAP. XIV. Whether the Lands of the Church may be forfeited by the
misdemeanour of the Clergy.
1. WE shall have reason to work us out of our rights, and Law to turn us out
of the Kings protection. But such reason and Law, as may with much ease, and
more equity be returned upon your selves. Your reason is this; because
Engagements to a Society to maintain their rights, indulged for the personal
worth of present incumbents, or to promote the usefulness of the office: if in
their matters they prove prejudicial to the office, or the succeeding officers
by their ill demeanor forfeit them, their engagement becomes alterable. I G p.
5.
these rights were indulged to the Clergy, for the personal worth of present
incumbents. If therefore their successors forfeit them by their ill demeanor,
these rights may be taken from them. This is easily resolved, not so easily
proved. For the truth is, these rights were not given to particular persons,
but to a succession of Bishops and Priests, and other Officers for Gods
service. Or rather, these lands and privileges were given to God and the
Church, for the maintenance of these offices. My unworthiness makes not the
office the worse; neither can my wickedness make a forfeiture of Gods
inheritance. I may, 1 Reg 2. 27.
with Abiathar, justly be deprived of my place, and the benefits thereof; but
the place, and the rights thereof fall not into a Praemunire; a good man even
Ib. v. ^5.
Zadok succeeds this traitor Abiathar, and enjoyes not only the office, but
all the profits* that belonged thereto. This was Solomon's justice; he knew, how
to distinguish between the faulty Priest, and the faultlesse office. But you
are a rooter; if a twig be in fault, up with b^ai^h and root. This is your
justice. But Genesis ^8. 25 26.
it is far from the ju^ Judge of all the world, to root up the righteous with
the wicked. And surely we ought to endeavor to be righteous and just, as our
heavenly Father is just.

2. Have you a desire to know, what true justice is? It is that, Lactan.
Instit. l. 6. c. 9.
Quam uniformen ac simplicem proposuit omnibus Deus, not what we fancy, but
what to all men God has proposed uniform, and alike, plain and simple; such as
can admit of no cavil or misconstruction. Vbi iusticia ve ra non est, nec ius
potest esse. Quod enim iure fit, just sit. Quod autem fi^imuste, nec ^^re
fieri potest. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 19. c. 21.
Where this true justice is wanting, there can be no Law, no right. For that
which is done by right, is done by Law. And that, which is contrary to right,
is contrary to Law. Nothing can be according to Law, but what is according to
justice. For justice is that, which gives lif^ and being to a Law. And to say,
that this or that is an unjust Law, is a flat contradiction: since it is jus a
justicia, Law has the Latin denomination from justice: See c. 13. Sect 13.
and the Greek from rendering to every man, what is just* and meet. And the
Latin word Jus signifies both Law and Right. An unjust Statute therefore there
may be, an unjust Law there cannot be. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 2. c. 21.
N^n enim jura dicenda su^t, vel putanda, iniqua hominum constituta: for the
unjust Constitutions of men, are not to be called, ^r esteemed Laws. And they
that frame unjust Decrees, are not Princes, but tyrants: neither are their
Subjects, Freemen, but slaves. Neither can the State, they live in, be called
a Commonwealth; since, as Scipio Africanus observes, and S. Austin approves,
Aug de civit. Dei l 2. c. 21.
Respuplica and res populi, the Commonweal and the weal of the people, are one
and the same. And then is it truly a Commonweal, Ib.
Cum been ac just geritur, when it is fairly and justly governed, either by
one King, or by a few Noblemen, or by all the people. But where the Government
is unjust, there is no Commonwealth. It is S. Austins; Aug. Ib. l. 19. c. 21.
Vbi justicia non est, non est Respublica. Take away justice, and farewell
Republic. For how can that be for the general good of all, where justice is
not equally distributed to all of whatsoever profession.

3. But I. G. p. 5.
there is a great deal of difference (say you) between an engagement made to
persons, on valuable consideration, and that which is made gratis to an office
or society subservient to public good. So much difference indeed there is,
that the settling of land upon a corporation is more firm then any entaile upon
a family; because persons dye, but Corporations live. If gratis make the
difference in your opinion, it makes none in Law: For that land ^^ as much
mine, which is conferred upon me by deed of gift, as that which is conveyed to
me by purchase. What difference, I pray you, between lands, purchased by the
society of Goldsmiths, and such as are freely given to that Company? Are not
the later as much theirs, as the purchased lands? Are they not alike settled by
the same Law, and justified alike by the same Law? And Of the later sort, is
this engagement to the English Clergy. Ib.
of this very sort is this engagement to the English Clergy. And never a whit
the worse for that. For of this sort is that magnificent maintenance, which was
settled upon the tribe of Levi, by God himself: all given gratis. Ezra 6 8, 9.
And of this sort are the engagements made to them by Darius King of Persia.
And yet Ib. v. 11. 12.
whosoever shall ALTER this word, let the timber be pulled down from his house,
and being set up, let him be hanged thereon: And for this let his house be made
a dunghill. And the God, that has caused his Name to dwell there, destroy all
KINGS and people, that shall put their hand to ALTER and to destroy this house
of God. Of this sort also were Ezra 7. 15, 16.
the silver and gold, which were freely offered by King Artaxerxes and his
Counselors, by the Priests and people to the God of Israel, for the house of
God. Of this sort also was Ib. v. 24.
the relaxation of all toll, tribute, and custom to the Priests and Levites; a
free gift. And yet Ib. v. 26.
Whosoever will not do the LAW OF GOD AND OF THE KING, in these things, let
judgment be speedily executed upon him, whether it be 1 unto death, or 2 to
banishment or 3 to confiscation of goods, or 4 to imprisonment. And was not
this privilege granted, for the grace and favor that Ezra 1. 8.
Shesbazzar and Ezra 7. 6.
Ezra found in the eyes of those Kings? Or, if you will, for their personal
worth? And yet this grant is called not only the Law of the King, but the Law
of God: and delivered so to posterity by Ib.
Ezra aready scribe in the Law of Moses, and the penman of God.

4. Suppose we also, that I. G. p. 5.
these rights were indulged for the personal worth of the present incumbents;
may they therefore be alienated, because some succeeding officers demean
themselves amiss? So say you; but you are wide of the mark. These lands and
immunities were not made to any particular persons, but to the office or
society; or to God for their use. What is given to a person for life, goes not
to the Office, but dies with the person. But what is settled upon an Office,
lives with the Office. Cap. 4. 5.
And I have manifested, that Episcopacy is a living Office; an Office, that
must last, while Christ has a Church on earth. Persons may forfeit their
place, and the benefits arising from thence to their incumbency; but the
Office, if necessary, must continue. Act. 1. 25.
Judas by transgression fell from his Office; but the Office fell not with him;
no, Ib. v. 20.
another, a Saint may, and must take his Bishopship, or Apostleship, and the
Rights that belong thereto.

5. However then some such favors may be granted to an Office, with relation
to the personal worth of the present incumbent, yet being given to promote the
usefulness of the Office, it shall be no movable; it is fixed (as the Lawyers
speak) to the freehold, and shall abide, till the Office be found useless, and
therefore abolisht. But till then There Is no injustice done to make a Law to
overrule or alter this engagement. I. G. p. 5.
it is injustice to alter, or alienate those rights, without which the
usefulness of that Office cannot be so well promoted. Injustice it is, to take
that away, which you never gave, and is so useful for the Office, let the
Officers fault be what it will. It is wild work to punish the Office for the
person: This is none of Gods course. o The sons ^1 Samuel 2. 12. 22.
of Eli were as bad as bad might be; God destroys them, but not the Office,
neither yet does he fleece it. But before I pass further, I must make this
observation: The quarrel you pick with the Clergy, to rob them of their
lands and privileges, will suite with any society, or Corporation. If it shall
please your great Masters to say, that the Drapers, or Grocers, or that great
Corporation of London have so demeaned themselves, that they have forfeited
their lands and immunities, up they go; they shall be in the same state with
us. They that uphold their power by the sword, do usually what they list, not
what they ought. If Parliaments might utterly be abolished for misdemeanour and
miscarriage, I presume, this Island should never see another Parliament.

6. You speak largely There Is no question of power in the Parliament, to
overrule it. I. G. p. 5.
of the Parliaments power. It is out of my element, and I am tender to meddle
with it. I know it is large in a free and full convention, when the Members
constitutive are present: But how large, I shall leave it to the learned of the
Law to define. Yet this I dare say, whatever their power be, they cannot make
that just, which is unjust; nor that truth, which is a lie. 1 Reg. 21. 13. 16
Ahab and Jezabel had power to overruled the Elders and Nobles of Jezreel; and
to take away both Naboths vineyard and life, without any cause at all. You will
not, I hope, justify any such power, or Act. It Is true; Naboth has lost all
at a blow; but it was by tyranny, not by Law: Because there was no equity in
the sentence. And yet there were as good witnesses came against Naboth, as any
appear against Episcopacy.

7. But you have been at the bar of late, and have learned a Law distinction,
which neither Scripture, nor Fathers, nor Scholmen ever taught you, and this it
is. The engagement were gone in Law, though not in equity. The order would be
valid in Law, though injurious. I. G. p. 5.
An engagement may be gone in Law, though not in equity. And that an Order of
Parliament will be valid in Law, though injurious. How? valid in Law, though
injurious? The learned in the Law deny, that an Order of Parliament is valid in
Law. And some of their own creatures in their circuits have rejected some
Orders from Westminster, because they were contrary to Law. But you, my
Masters, that have been so forward with your purses, bewar. Ib.
He speaks of sums of money, borrowed upon the public faith, for public
good: For Ib.
the Parliament may ordain release of the engagement. Here Is divinity without
equity or conscience. But it is like the rest.

8. Gone in Law (says this conscientious Preacher), not in equity; valid in
Law, though injurious. Behold Law without equity; a Law, and yet injurious. God
bless me from such Law, and such Divinity. I ever thought, that Law and equity
had gone together, and that Law could not have stood with injury: Since (as S.
Austine speaks) Aug. in Psalm. 145. 6.
Jus and injuria contraria sunt, Law and injury are contraries; and can no
more consist then light and darkness. And if with Tho. 2. 2^. q. 57. 1. 2m.
Thomas, and I. D. p. 6.
the London Ministers, Jus be that, which is prescribed, or measured by Law;
then either that is no Law, which prescribes, what is not right; or else
injury shall be right, because it is prescribed by Law. I hope, you are not of
this mind.

9. If the Fathers were not quite out of date, I could tell you, what S.
Austine says. And yet why may not I make use of him as well as your fellow
Ministers of London? Behold then the very case. Aug. in Psalm. ^45. 6.
Quid si a liquis condat jus iniquum? What if any shall make an unjust Law, a
Law without equity? Is not the case put right? If it be so, take his
resolution. Ib.
Nec jus dicendum est, si injustum est. If it be unjust, it is not to be named
a Law. And yet with you it shall be a Law though injurious. Thus your case of
conscience is resolved against conscience; for all injury, if understood, is
against conscience. Surely the Parliament is much beholding to you, to stretch
your conscience, and their fringes so much against conscience. For you justify
a power in them to do injury; and not only so, but a power to make Laws, to
justify this injury. And yet The Kings Oath is against acting or suffering a
tyrannous invasion on Laws and rights, not against a Parliamentary alt^ration.
I. G* p. 2
in them this shall be no tyrannous invasion on any Societies rights, because
done by a Parliament. That title is a salvo for all blemishes and injuries. No
tyranny, no invasion, if done by a Parliament: as if they were infallible, and
could not err; impeccable, and could not do amiss. Or as if God himself did
alter his own Laws, that their alterations might be irreprovable.

10. I must confess, the next is a very conscientious proposition, of another
die; and this it is. So if there be no injury, the King and Parliament may
cancel any obligation. I. G p. 5.
If there be no injury, the King and Parliament may cancel any obligation.
Without peradventure they may. But what makes that So there? As there is no
question of power in the Parliament, to ordain an injurious Order, or a Law
without equity: SO IF THERE BE NO INJURY etc. What So, and no otherwise? Then
have they no power at all to cancel any obligation, because the Parliament
has no power to make a Law without equity. If this do not follow, let men of
understanding judge. And if you have no better argument to prove, that it is
lawful for the King and Parliament to abrogate the immunities, and to take
away the lands of the Clergy, you will never be able to approve the
lawfulness thereof.

11. What is according to Law, true Law, is lawful; and what is lawful, is
according to Law. If lawful, not injurious; if injurious, not lawful, not
valid in Law: since nothing is valid in Law, that is injurious. To what purpose
then are those words; Ib.
The abrogation will be just, as well as legal, there will be no injury done?
Surely none, where Law is of force; for where Law is, there can be no injustice
countenanced. But where your Law bears sway, an order may be legal, though
injurious; for your words are, Ib.
The order would be valid in Law, though injurious.

12. And as for Where there is forfeiture by miscarriage, or the privilege
indulged to a Ministry, proves prejudicial: the abrogation will be just. Ib.
forfeiture by miscariage, the forfeiture in justice must fall upon him, that
miscarries, that is, upon the person, not upon the Office; for an Office duly
settled can no more make a forfeiture, then it can miscarrie. Such an Office is
Episcopacy, which was duly settled by Christ himself. And I hope you have not
so far forgotten your self, as to say, that an Office immediately instituted
by our blessed Savior can run into a forfeiture by miscarriage. What reason
can you give, why that should suffer, that cannot err; that never offended?
This is none of Gods justice. And it is well known to the wise, that Bishops
hold their lands, revenues, and immunities not as granted to their Persons, but
as annexed to the office for the continual and comfortable maintenance
thereof. Our religious Predecessors had learned of S. Paul, that 1 Cor. 9. 7.
no man feeds a flock, but he eats of the milk of the flock. And that Ib.
v. 11. and Romans 15. 27.
it is the duty of the Gentiles to minister unto them in carnal things, of
whose spiritual things they have been made partakers. Indeed If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing, if we shall reap* your carnal
things? 1 Cor. 9. 11.
he makes a wonder, that any man should doubt of it; For how can the Office be
maintained without means? Surely, though Act. 20 34. and 1 These. 2. 9. 2 These.
3. 8.
S. Paul did sometimes work with his own hands, that he might not be
chargeable to new converts; yet he tells the Corinthians, that 2 Cor. 11. 8.
He robbed other Churches in taking wages of them, to do the Church of Corinth
service. Yea this Apostle justifies, that 1 Cor. 9. 4.
he has power to eat and drink of their charge, and to 2 These. 3. 9.
live upon their cost. And that 2 Cor. 12. 13.
he wronged them, when he did otherwise.

13. We confess, that The privilege indulged to a Ministry (which ought to
hold nothing but for public good) proves predudiciall. I. G. p. 5.
the Office was provided for public good; and that those, which are of the
Office neither hold, nor ought to hold any thing but for public good. Is the
Ministry Lawful, or no? Was it settled by Christ, or no? ^. D. p. 114. etc.
Your London Ministers have concluded for the Divine right of Ministers, or
Pastors, and Teachers: and I know, you subscribe to their doctrine. There may
not then be any forfeiture of the Ministry, since the Ordinance of Christ
cannot be forfeited by the miscarriage of man; that is out of all peradventure:
Of privileges perchance there may be a forfeiture, where they prove
prejudicial to the public good. But if and where never prove any thing,
unless you can justify, that these privileges have been prejudicial to this
Church and State.

14. Our religious predecessors began the Great Charter with Mag* Char. c. 1.
Concessimus Deo, First of all we have granted to God, and by this our present
Charter have confirmed for us, and for our heirs for ever, that the Church of
England be free; and that it have all her rights entire, and her liberties
unhurt. Rog Hoveden in Hen. 2. p. 601.
William the Conqueror began his reign with confirming the liberties and
privileges of the Church. And he gives this reason for it, Ib.
Quia per eam and Rex and regnum, solidum habent subsistendi fundamentum;
because both King and Kingdom have by the Church a solid foundation for their
subsistence. Had that Prince been always of the same mind, he had never
defiled his hands with sacrilege, nor plunged himself and issue into so deep
a curse. For after he began to ransake Churches, to rifle Monasteries, and to
expose holy ground to wild beasts, and Church Lands to his pleasure, he and his
became most unfortunate. He rips up the bowels of the Church his mother; and
sucks her blood: and the son of his loins rebels against him, beats him, and
draws blood from him. The Conqueror turns God out of his inheritance, and his
son Robert endeavors to do the same to him. What afterward befell him, and
all his issue, I shall not need to relate, Prefat. de non temerand. Eccles.
Mr. Spelman has lately saved me that labor; to him I remit you. In whose
treatise you may briefly see the lamentable end of all that great Conquerors
posterity. To this I shall add, and wish all my country men to observe, that
in the strictness of Reformation Episcopacy was continued, as most useful for
the Church.

15. But though Episcopacy have not been prejudicial heretofore, it is likely
now to prove so. For unless they degrade themselves, unless they will
patiently I hope, they will not be so tenacious of their wealth and honor, as
to let the Crown run an hazard, rather then lay down their miters, and endanger
the whole Land to be brought to nothing, rather then themselves to moderation I
G. p. 5.
part with their wealth and honor, and lay down their Miters, the Crown is
like to run an hazard, and the whole Land be brought to nothing but misery. I
am sorry to read these lines from a professed Preacher of the Word of God; for
so you style your self. And yet I am glad, you deal so fairly with us, as to
give us notice, what has been the cause of your factious preaching, the
Countries and Citys tumults, and this detestable and deplorable rebellion? 1
The Bishops great wealth, 2 their honor, and 3 their Miters: these three 1
Their wealth they are already stripped of; 2 Their honor lies in the du^; and
3 their Miters have not been seen many a fair year, unless it be upon their
arms. We know no more what a Miter is, then a Bishop knows what great wealth
is; by speculation merely. Few of them have gained so much by the Church, as
their breeding cost their parents. And yet the Clergy is the only profession
repined at.

16. You should have done well, mutatis mutandis, to have directed this passage
to the Parliament with this small alteration. I hope, you will not be so
tenacious of that wealth, and honor, you have gained in these tumultuous
times, as to let the Crown run an hazard, rather then lay down this usurped
power, and endanger the whole Land to be brought to nothing, rather then your
selves to moderation. O, that they would bow down their ears in time, and
embrace this counsel; then might they yet heal the sores of this shaking Land;
and save their own souls. But the blame and danger are laid upon those, that
least deserve it; that stood in the gap, as long as possibly they could, to
avert Schism, Heresy, Blasphemy, Atheism, Rebellion, and bloodshed. All
which, since the Bishops have been stripped of their honor and power, have
overspread the face of this Land.

17. Suppose, the Bishops were faulty, shall God be turned out of his
possessions, because his servants are to blame? Mr. Seldom can tell you of a
Charter of King Edgar, which will teach you to distinguish between God and man;
between Gods right, and man's fault. In Cod. Edgar^ apud Seldom. in Notis. ad
Eadmer. p 159. n. 10.
Inviolabilis stet Monasterei Winton libertas; Ersi Abbas, vel fratrum aliquis,
incitante Daemone, reatus quippiam contraxerit; quia Deus, qui hanc privilegii
largifluam donationem locumque cum universa Monachorum familia, ruraque omnia
sa^io subiecta coenobio possidet, nunquam rea^um commisit, nec ullo unquam
tempore committet. Sit igitur prae^ata libertas aet^rn^, quia Deus libertatis
possessor aeternus est. Ib.
Although the Abbot, or any of the Covent, through the incitement of Satan,
fall into sin, let the liberty of Winchester Monastery stand inviolable;
because GOD, who POSSESSES the plentiful munificence of this privilege, as
also the place, with the whole family of Monks, and all the lands belonging to
that holy Monastery, NEVER COMMITTED SIN, neither will in future times commit
any. Let therefore this LIBERTY, or privilege, be ETERNAL, because GOD THE
POSSESSOR OF THIS LIBERTY is eternal. The same say all good men for, though
the Bishop be faulty, God is not, cannot be. The possessions therefore, and
rights of the Church must stand inviolable. The faults are the Bishops, the
lands are Gods. Let not God suffer for the Bishops irregular behavior. Let the
Bishop be deprived of his place and profits, but not God of his lands. Act* 1.
20.
Episcopatum ejus accipiat alter, according to the Holy Ghosts prescription,
Let another, a good man, take his Bishopric, that Gods service may be duly
celebrated, his Name glorified, and Christ's flock faithfully provided for.

18. But say we, what can be said, the Bishops are to blame, and must be
brought to moderation. And how must this be done? By being brought to just
nothing. For, according to your doctrine, Episcopy must be abrogated, and their
Lands alienated. This we simple men take to be extirpation, or annihilation.
But such discreet, conscionable men, as you are, know it to be but moderation.
Should God return this moderation upon your heads, the Presbyteriall Government
would come to, what it should be, even to nothing.

19. Well, their wealth, their honor, and their miters are in fault: and the
Bishops must be corrected, for not laying down all these at this blessed
Parliaments feet, to redeem the Kings Crown. Good King, he suffers for the
Bishops obstinacy; and they, poor men, have parted with all, but what they may
not part with, namely, their fidelity to God and the King. Have you not
already dis-roabed them of their honors? Have you not plundered their houses,
and seized their Lands? Have you not made them house-lesse, harbourlesse, not
able to keep a servant? What would you more? But, let me tell you, your great
Masters might have purchased better houses and lands at a cheaper rate. This
they will be sensible of, when the accounts are cast up as well elsewhere, as
at London.

20. The Bishops wealth, honor, and miters were your aim; these you have
preached for, these you have fought for; what would you more? All these your
Masters have, and the Crown to boot; and yet not quiet. Indeed all these thus
gained will not afford a quiet conscience. That there may be some show of
legality, Take it at the worst, it is but for the King to get the Clergies
consent I. G. p. 5.
the King must get the CLERGIES CONSENT, and the Bishops must lay down their
Miters. And then 'twill pass for current, that these Acts were passed by their
own consent, and so no wrong done. No injury done to him, that consents.
Volenti non fit injuria. True it is, undone they are without consent: but if
they consent, they undo themselves, and wrong their souls. And a madness it
were to be chronicled, if I should cut mine own throat, to save my enemy the
labor. How then can I give away Gods inheritance to the Edomites and
Ishmalites, lest perchance they enter forcibly upon it? And yet the Bishops are
much to blame, if they will not do this: if not, the Crown will run an hazard,
and the whole Land be brought to ruin.

21. What is to be done in this case? Surely if the Bishops knew themselves
guilty of the difference between the King and his subjects, God forbid, but
they should be willing to part with all, they may lawfully part with; and Jonah
1. 12.
be earnest with Jonah, that they might be cast into the sea, to allay this
dangerous storm, if that would do it. But Ambros. orat. in Auxent. de Basil.
tradend. ep. l 5.
what is Gods and the Churches, they cannot give away, or alienate. No, no,
says S. Ambrose, I cannot deliver up that, which I have received to preserve,
not to betray. The Lands of the Church they may take, if they please.
Imperatori non dono, sed non nego. I give them not to the Emperor, but I deny
them not. Tradere Bafilicam non possum, sed pugnare non debeo. Ambros, ep. 33.
I withstand him not; I use no violence. Ambros. orat. in Auxent. de Basil.
tradend.
What I do, is for the Emperors good; quia nec mihi expediret tradere, necilli
accipere; because it would be neither safe for me to give them up, nor for him
to receive them. What beseemes a free Priest, I advise freely; si vult sibi
esse consultum, recedat a Christi injuria; If he desire to prosper, let him
forbear to wrong Christ. Observe what belongs to the Church, is Christ's, not
the Bishops. If any part of it be diminished, the wrong is done to God, and not
to man. Act. 5. 1. etc.
Ananias laid down his possession at the Apostles feet; but kept back part of
the price. Here was wrong done; But to whom, think you? Not to the Apostles;
no: Ib. v. 4.
he lied not unto men, but unto God; he cozened God, and not man. This was the
moderation of S. Peter, and S. Ambrose; and we may not be drawn from this
moderation. Advise your great Masters to embrace so much moderation; as to
wrong no man, but S. Mat. 22. 21.
to give unto Caesar, what belongs to Caesar, and to God, what belongs unto
God. Till then, however they may seem to prosper, they will never be secure.

CHAP. XV. Whether it be lawful to take away the Bishops lands, and to confer
them upon the Presbytery.
1. THe Church at this present, is much like her S. Luke 23. 33.
Savior hanging between two thieves: but in so much the worse case, because
neither of these are for our Savior. One, the Independent, is wholly for
stripping the Church of all settled maintenance: With him the Minister is to
rely merely upon the peoples benevolence. And reason good; for he is no longer
a Minister, then it pleases that Congregation. But the other, the Presbyterian
is like the chough in the fable, that would feign prank up himself with other
birds feathers. I. G. p. 6.
The Bishops lands and revenues must be diverted, and divided, to maintain
Parochial Pastors; so you call them. Ib.
Sacrilege you condemn; but theft you like well of, so you and your fellow
Presbyterians may be gainers. Quocunque modo rem, is profitable doctrine; so
you may have it, you care not, how you come by it, nor who smarts for it. S.
Luke 10. 30.
The man of Jerusalem fell into such hands.

2. To abolish Prelacy, and seize the revenues of Prelates, to private, or
civil interest, undoubtedly could neither want stain, nor guilt, Such kind of
Impropriation as happened in the days of H. 8. was cried out of, all the
Christian world over. I. G. p. 6.
Prelacy must be abolisht; that is agreed upon. So far you go with your
Parliament, but you are against seizing of the Prelates revenues, to private,
or civil interest. That is, as I conceive, to any particular man's use, or for
the service of the State; as ye call it. I am just of your mind, and resolve
with you, that this kind of impropriation could want neither stain, nor guilt.
Such was that in the days of, K. Henry the eight; which was deservedly cried
out of, all the Christian world over. But cry out you and your Mr. Beza with
your Stentorian voices, upon this Ib.
detestable sacrilege, your good Masters are resolved upon the question, and
have exposed the Bishops lands to sale. So they may have these revenues to
dispose of, they will venture stain, guilt, and curse too, say what ye can.

3. I must confess, you would feign set a fair gloss upon this detestable
act. You would have Who knows not the great defect amongst us, of congruous
maintenance for* Parcchiali Pastors, by whom the work of the Ministry is
chiefly to be performed, I. G. p. 6.
those large revenues (as you are pleased to call them) to be passed over from
the Fathers of the Church, to the sons of the Church; from the Bishops to
Parochial Pastors, or Presbyters. I call these parochial Pastors, sons of the
Church: because, though they be called Fathers in respect of their
Parishioners; yet are they but sons in respect of Bishops, from whom they have
their orders, and by whom, as Ministers, they are begotten. For Presbyters have
not power to ordain a Deacon, much less to ordain a Presbyter; as C. 4. and 5.
has been already manifested, and shall be more fully, if God give me life and
leave, to examine the Divine Right of Church Government.

4. But since If those large revenues of the Prelates were diverted ^o supply
with sufficient maintenance all the defective Parishes in England, there would
^e no danger of sacrileg^ I. G. p. 6.
these revenues must be diverted, or passed over from the Fathers to the sons,
to supply them with sufficient maintenance, who shall make the conveiance? And
when the conveiance is drawn with all the skill that may be, it is nothing
worth, till the proprietary, the true owner give his consent, and confirm it.
Desire you to know, who is the true owner? Look upon God, he has accepted
them, and taken possession of them; his they are by deed of gift. The Charters
usually run thus; Concessi, offero, confirmavi DEO and Ecclesiae, I grant,
offer, or confirm TO GOD and the Church, such and such Lands, Manors, or
messuages. When they are thus offered, God accepts of the gift, and sets this
stamp upon them, Numb. 16. 38.
They offered them before the Lord, THEREFORE THEY ARE HALLOWED. And again,
Levit. 27. 28.
Nothing devoted, or separated from the common use, that a man shall devote
unto the Lord ( whether it be man, or beast, or LAND OF HIS INHERITANCE) MAY BE
SOLD, OR REDEEMED: every devoted thing is MOST HOLY UNTO THE LORD. When it is
once separated from common use, it may no more return to common use; since (as
your Geneva Note tells us) Genesis note in Levit. 27. 2^.
It is dedicated to the Lord WITH A CURSE To HIM, that does turn it to his
private use. And of this curse they have been sensible, that have turned it to
such use. Observable therefore it is, that Caiet, in Levit. 27. 28.
this word, which we here translate devoted, or dedicated, signifi^s properly,
destroyed, quia destruction imminet usurpan^il us illa, because destruction
hangs over their heads, that usurp them. Jos. 7. 1. etc. We translate this word
accuesed: and Jos. 7. 25.
^ cu^se fell upon Achan openly for meddling with the accursed or devoted
silver, and gold, and a costly garment. God made A^^ma^ example of his justice
to all posterity, that so the dreadful end of him and all his, might strike a
terror into the hearts of all covetous persons; that they meddle not with that,
which is dedicated to the Lord.

5. Achans fault was, that Ib. v. 11.
he clancularily stole it, and dissembled, and put it among his own stuff. But
what you do shall be in public, enacted by Parliament; and they shall not be
seized to private or civil interest. Your purpose is to have them diverted, or
settled upon your selves, and your fellow Presbyters, who are no private or
civil persons. Oh, no, you are the men, by whom the work of the Ministry is
chiefly performed. And yet I cannot but observe, that here is a diversion; and
what is diverted, runs not in the right channel, it is enforced another way.
But I. G. p. 6.
this (you say) will not be to ruin, but to rectify the devotion of former
ages, and turn pomp into use, and impediments into helps. There needs no
proof for this, Ipse dixit, Mr. Geree has delivered this in the Pulpit; It is
enough, so it come from him, who is so well skilled in devotion, and able to
rectify former ages. But I am none of your credulous followers; my faith is
not pinned to your sleeve. Indeed, to deal plainly with you, I am of another
mind, and suppose, I have good reason for it.

6. That revenues were very anciently settled upon the Church, can be no new
thing to them, that are skilled in Councels, Fathers, and Church History. But
who were these lands settled upon? To whose trust were these committed? Eusebius.
hist. l. 1. c. 35. Sozom l 1. c. 8.
That Constantine settled revenues upon the Bishops, is too too evident to be
denied. That the Bishops had houses and lands long before Constantines time, is
manifest by the Council of Angur, Can. 15. As also by that of Eusebius. hist. l.
7. c. 24.
Paulus Samosatenus; whom the Emperor Aurelian ejected out of the Episcopal
house, after he had been deprived of his Bishopric of Antioch by a Council of
Bishops. Cypr ep 56. 36 60. 61.
In S. Cyprians time and writings we read that the Church was endowed with
means. A little higher we may go in our own country, Mat Westminst. An Dom 187.
we find King Lucius in the year of grace 187. settling possessions upon the
Church.

7. Neither were these means very small; as some conceive. Possed, de vita.
August c 1.
S. Austine was a Gentleman well desended, and had a fair estate left him. And
yet he professes, that Aug ep. 225.
the possessions of his Bishopric of Hippo, were twenty times more then the
lands of his inheritance. And yet his was none of the richest Bishoppricks in
Africa. Such was the devotion of former ages.

8. Of these revenues the Bishops had the profits; they did Aug. ep. 224.
uti frui rebus Ecclesiae (as S. Austin speaks) tanquam possessores and Domini;
they were Gods trustees; and yet as possessors and Lords they disposed of the
Church goods. Possid. de vita August. c. 23.
At his See the government of the lands and oblations belonged to him; but Ib
c. 24.
to some of his Clergy he committed the charge both of the one and of the
other. But so, that once a year at least, he had an account from them, as from
his Stewards. Ib. c. 25. Council. Antioch. can. 25.
At his charge, as it were, the Presbyters and other Clerks of that Church were
fed and clad. Indeed Cypr. ep. 38. and Council. Chalced. can. 26.
the lands and goods of the Church were so at the Bishops disposing, that the
Steward might not distribute any of them, as he thought meet, but as the Bishop
directed him. This was not only by custom, but by Canon, that the * Council.
Anti. och. can. 25.
Bishop have (...) power to dispose the goods of the Church upon the needy.
And Council. Ancyr. can. 15.
if it happened, that any of the lands were alienated, or sold in the vacancie,
it was in the succeeding Bishops power to ratify or make void the sale.

9. Neither did the Bishops innovate any thing therein; they followed the steps
of the prime and Apostolic Church; as is to be seen Apost. Can. 41. and in the
Acts. There we read, that the Christians, who were so charitably minded, Act.
4. 34. 35. 37. and 5. ^.
sold their lands, or houses, and laid the prices thereof (not at the
Disciples, not at the Presbyters, but) at the Apostles feet. After this indeed
Act 6. 3.
the Disciples choose out men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost, and of
wisdom, that might dispose of these legacies to such, as were to be relieved by
the Church Stock. But this they did not of their own heads, but at the Apostles
directions, who reserved this power to themselves. The text justifies it; Ib.
Whom we may appoint over this business. So the Apostles. Hence is it, that S.
Paul commanded Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus, to take care, that the Presbyters be
well provided for: 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Let the Presbyters, that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor, of
double maintenance. And to what purpose was this charge to Timothy, unless he
were to provide for the Presbyters of his Church? I am certain, that it is most
consonant to common sense, Nature, and Scripture, that 2 Cor. 1^. 14.
parents provide for their children, and not children for the parents. And is
it not reason, that he, who sets the Presbyters on work, should pay them their
wages? But Bishop Timothy was to set them on work; 2 Timothy 2. 2.
Those things, that thou have heard (or learned) of me, the same commit thou to
faithful men, who shall be ABLE TO TEACH others. And 1 Timothy 1. 3.
charge them, that they teach no other doctrine then this. But if they do, what
then? 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5.
withdraw thy self from them. That is, eat not with them, let them not come to
thy table, allow them no maintenance. What counsel the Apostles gave others,
without question they observed themselves. But S. Paul commands, that 1 Cor. 5.
11.
we eat not with open and notorious sinners; and S. John, that we 2 John 10.
receive not deceitful Preachers into our houses. The same rule then they
observed themselves. For in those times Possid. de vira August, c. 25.
the Bishop and his Presbyters did usually live in the same house, and eat at
the same table. In those times the Bishops provided for the Presbyters; but our
start up Presbytery will so provide, that the Bishops shall have just nothing
left them to relieve their own wants; all must be for Mr. Presbyter.

10. And why so? Because there are many I. G. p. 6.
defective Parishes in England, which want suffi^ient maintenance to supply
their Parochial Pastors with. But from whence comes this defect, or want of
maintenance? Surely not from the Bishops, not from their greediness, and
wretchlesnesse: but from that detestable sacrilege ( Ib.
as Beza and you call it) which was by Parliament acted and ratified under the
reign of King Henry VIII. At the dissolution of Abbeys the Appropriations of
Tithes were taken into Laymens hands; which heretofore were appropriated and
annexed to this or that particular Religious House; Prefat. de non temerand.
Eccles.
Which house (according to Mr. Spelman) was the perpetual incumbent Parson of
each of those Rectories, and did duly officiate the Cure, by one of their own
fraternity. Then were there few, or no defective Parishes. But upon these new
Statutes the Lay Appropriatoes swept all into their own custody and possession.
From hence arises the want of congruous maintenance, in too many Parishes, for
him, or them, that serve those Cures. And shall Bishops smart for it, when
Laymen have done the mischief, and purse up the profits? Dat veniam corvis,
vexat censura columbas; when the Laity offends, the Clergy suffers. Is this
Justice? But so the Parliament do it, it is with you I. G p. 5.
valid in Law, though injurious. But God and you are of several minds.

11. Nay, if this be done, if Bishops lands be removed to Presbyters, I. G. p.
6.
there will be no danger of sacrilege. How prove you that? Ib.
This (say you) will not be to ruin, but to rectify the devotion of former
ages, and turn pomp into use, and impediments into helps. This is somewhat like
Cardinal Wolseys pretense, who dissolved forty small Monasteries of ignorant
silly Monks, to erect two goodly Colleges, for the breeding up of learned and
industrious Divines. Was not this to turn impediments into helps? Lo, he
removed lazy drones, that did little but eat, and drink, and sleep; that so
learned men might be provided for, who would labor in the Word and doctrine,
and might be able to do Church and State good service. Was not this as fair a
pretense as yours, or as any you can invent? And how was this accepted of? God,
that forbids theft, will no more endure the offering gained by theft, Deuteronomy. 23.
18.
then by adultery. One of his Colleges dies in the conception; the other
remains unfinished to this day: and it pities me to see her foundations under
rubbish. And a misery it is to take into consideration the ruin of this man,
as also of that King and Pope, who gave him license to commit this sin. This
attempt and grant opened a gap to the most profuse sacrilege, that ever
Christian Nation, before that time, had been acquainted with. And yet, for
ought I find, by this particular sacrilege there came no gain into any of their
private purses.

12. But, I beseech you, what is the meaning of these words, this will turn
pomp into use? What your intent is, perchance I may guess: but to take them
according to the plain and literal sense, I can make no other construction of
them, then this: If the Prelates revenues were diverted, to supply with
sufficient maintenance all those Parochial Pastors, that want congruous
maintenance, this would turn pomp into use. That is; that pomp, which the
Prelates made no use of, the Presbyterians would turn into use. If this be not
the Grammatical sense, I appeal to any rational man. And their Essay in the
Divine right of Church government, shows what their proceedings would prove. I
must confess, ye have marvellously improved the impediments, and turned them
into helps. For the power and Jurisdiction of Bishops, which were the main
impediments to Schism and Heresy, you have covenanted to root up; and have
brought in all the helps, that may be, to further irreligion, and Atheism.
While the Bishops had power, heresies were rarae nantes, seldom seen, and
suddenly suppressed, if any such crept in. But now they flow in by shoals, and
have Pulpits and Presses cloyed with them. Does not your own Mr. Edwards
profess, that never was there such plenty of Sects and Heresies? As many more
in truth, as ever the Church knew in former ages. Only, as Theod. hist. l. 3.
c. 11.
by Julian the Apostata, both Pulpits, and Presses are locked up to the
Orthodox; no coming there for them, lest perchance they infect the Auditories
with sound and Apostolic Doctrine.

13. Parochial Pastors are most necessary men; by them the work of the
Ministry is CHIEFLY to be performed. This is true, and not true. True in the
Fathers sense; not in yours. Ignat. ad Romans p. 250. Hieron. Damas. ep. 57. 58.
Basil. M. ep. 292. Cypr. ep. 3 n. 6. and ep. 38. n. 3.
In the Fathers sense a Pastor is a Bishop strictly so called, as by his Order
he is differenced from a Presbyter; and (...) is no petty Country or City
Parish; Council. Antioch can. 9. 19. Christ. Justellus in cod. Eccles. univer.
can. 88.
it is a whole City, with the Precincts and Country adjoining, which were
under the jurisdiction of the City, and repaired thither for justice, if
differences arose. With them Paraecia was the same, that a Diocese is with us.
So a Parochial Pastor, in the ancient and Church sense, is a Diocesan Bishop:
and in this sense, the work of the Ministry is CHIEFLY PERFORMED BY THE
PAROCHIAL PASTOR. This Pastor indeed can perform all Ministerial acts; diverse
of which are clean out of a Presbyters power. And yet you say, that by the
Parochial Pastor, who is with you but a Presbyter, the work of the Ministry
is chiefly performed. Not so, my good brother not so, not that work, without
which the Church cannot possibly subsist. And that is twofold; first Tit. 1. 5.
the ordering of the Church; and 2ly, ordeining of Presbyters. The chief works
of the Ministry, according to St. Paul, are to 1 regular the Church, and to 2
beget those, by whom the Sacraments may be administered, and absolution
pronounced. But these works may not, cannot be done by any, or many Presbyters.
In your sense therefore this proposition is false.

14. But why chiefly? What, because Presbyters offer up the prayers and
supplications of the Church? Because they are the usual Preachers, and
dispensers of the Sacraments? These indeed are the most usual and daily
offices, and very necessary; but I dare not say, that by them these offices are
chiefly discharged. What say you to that principle of reason, That, by, or for
which, any thing is made so, is more so.
Propter quod aliquid est tale, illud est magis tale? Especially if it be such
an efficient or ministerial cause, without which, in the ordinary way, there
can be no such thing. But by a Bishop a Presbyter is made a Minister of these
holy duties; and in the ordinary way, without him he could not be a Presbyter.
The Bishop then does chiefly perform the work of the Ministry. The reason is,
because illo mediante by his means, or mediation, that is done, which without
him could not be done. The work of Justice is usually performed by the Justice
of the several Benches. But I presume, you will not say chiefly; that you will
reserve to the Parliament; since you have sworn that to be Solemn League and
Coven. n. 4.
the Supreme Judicatorie of this Kingdom. And in this treatise you have
concluded, that I. G. p. 9.
The Parliament is the Supreme Court, by which all other Courts are to be
regulated. And as all Courts are to be regulated by Parliament, so are all
Presbyters to be guided by their own Bishop.

15. Chiefly, say you; only, says your Ordinance for Ordination; wherein you
make the Presbyter the only Minister. In your Solemn League and Covenant, ye
resolve and vow Sol. League and Coven. n. 2.
the extirpation of Archbishops and Bishops. And in both ye lay the whole work
upon the Presbytery; as if they were the men, that could discharge all sacred
and Ministerial duties. No such matter; the contrary is manifested. Can any man
imagine, that a common soldier, or an ordinary mariner, does perform the
chief work in an army, or ship, because they take the greater toil to the
outward eye? No, no; it is the Pilot in a Ship, the Colonel in a Regiment, the
Admiral in a Navy, and the General in an Army, that discharge the chief
duties. Without these there would be wise work by Sea or Land. Ev^ry one, that
can pull a gable, or manage an oar, is not fit to be a Pilot. Every man that
can and dare fight, and charge p I. D.
with courage, is not fit to be a Commander. But the Church is both a ship, and
an army. And I dare say, that every one, that can talk lavishly, or make a
rhetorical flourish in the Pulpit, is not fit to be a Bishop, or Governor, in
the Church of Christ. And yet Tit. 1. 5.
(...) for this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in order
the things, that are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every City. These are
the duties of a Bishop; without which the Church will suddenly be out of frame,
and crumble into nothing.

16. In a ship, or regiment, no man comes to sit at the stern, no man attempts
the chief command, the first day; if he do, both ship and regiment suffer for
it. No; they are trained up in their several professions, and by degrees they
rise till they come to the highest. Thus was it in the ancient, and thus is it
in the present Church. If any be suddenly raised to a Bishopric, it is seldom
for the good of that Diocese.

17. But you and your fellow Presbyters want congruous and sufficient
maintenance; down therefore must the Bishops; and their Revenues must be
divided amongst such good Pastors, as you are. The Levellers doctrine right;
the Nobility and Gentrey have too much, and the godly of the land to little:
all therefore must be shared, that Jack and Tom may have a congrurus
maintenance. If the great men of the Land will not yield to this, the
Parliament shall be garbled, the Nobility and Gentry shall be turned aside; and
then look for a new Covenant, and a fresh extirpation. Dukes descend from
profane Esau; Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, etc. are but heathenish titles,
invented by the children of darkness, and the children of light defy them.
What? Are we not all Adams sons? Are we not brethren in Christ? Is it not fit,
that we should all have share, and share like, as had the children of Israel in
the land of promise? As long as the Church only was struck at, it was well
liked of; but now patience perforce, we must be leveled both in Church and
State. We shall find, that there is such a sympathy between them in all
Christian Commonwealths, that they stand and fall, swim and sink together.

18. What? talk we of Levelling? That is enough to destroy the State and face
of a Kingdom. But in your project there will be no danger. How? No danger? No
danger, (say you) of sacrilege. No danger in the subversion of the Church?
Surely this must be ruin to Episcopacy, and consequently to the Church. For no
Bishop, no Church. Cypr. ep. 37. n. 1.
Ecclesia enim super Episcopos constituitur; for the Church is founded and
settled upon Bishops. So S. Cyprian. Think not, that we exclude Christ. Christ
it is that laid the foundation, and settled the Church so. And it is not for
man to unsettle it, or to lay another, a new foundation. For other foundation
can no man lay, then that is laid by Jesus Christ. But Ephesians. 2. 20.
we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets. And Bishops and
Apostles, are of the same order; they are one and the same. Cypr. ep. 65. n. 3.
Apostolos, id est, Episcopos and Praepositos Dominus elegit. So S. Cyprian,
the Lord made choice of APOSTLES, THAT IS OF BISHOPS and Prelates. When
therefore our Savior founded the Church upon the Apostles, he founded it upon
Bishops. Who dare then after this foundation? He that endeavors it, does not
build, but destroy the Church.

19. Is there no danger of sacrilege in robbing father and mother? The Bishop
your father, and the Church your mother? For as in the Church you were born
anew of water and the Holy Ghost; so if you be a Presbyter, as a Presbyter you
have your being from a Bishop; or else you have no such being. But you return,
that ye rob not the Church: for you intend, that these revenues shall be
settled upon Churchmen; that is, upon Presbyters. Suppose, you rob but one,
but your Father, the sacrilege is detestable. For does not the Lord say, Prove.
28. 24.
Who so robs his father, or mother, and says it is no transgression; the
same is the companion of a murderer. But to make the sacrilege more odious, I
shall manifest, that ye have not only robbed your Father, but your Mother
also. The Bishop your father is the husband to his particular Church; If then
you rob him of his means, who will succeed in his room, and become an husband
to that Church? For though there be a thousand Presbyters in a Diocese, yet,
Council. Chalced. can 25.
if she be without a Bishop, that Church is a widow. So that great Council of
Chalcedon. Thus ye rob the Bishop of his means, and that Church of her husband.
And wile a widow, she can bring forth but a bastard brood. Consider that.

20. Upon these motives I must tell you, that if his Majesty shall gratify
either the Parliament, or the Assembly, in the abolition of Episcopacy, and in
sacrificing the Church Lands to your, or their sacrilegious avarice, it will be
such A work, for which following generations should not need to pity the King,
as put upon it by misfortune: but rise up, and call him blessed, whose many
other disasters ended in so good, and so useful a work. I. G. p 6.
a work, for which following generations shall have just cause to pity, and
lament him, that so good a man should either be cheated, or enforced into so
foul a sin. His children and the whole Kingdom would rue it; and the
generations to come (unless the world turn Presbyterian) will speak of Him as
of King Henry the eight: with this difference, that King Henry wilfully plunged
himself into this sin, and King Charles was driven into it by an Atheistical
and bloody faction. But I am confident, his Majesty is seasoned with better
principles; he knows, it was 1 Samuel 15. 24.
no excuse for Saul, to confess, that he had sinned, because he was afraid of
the people, and obeyed their voice, not Gods directions. Ib. ^. 26.
This King knew Gods Word, and rejected it; God therefore rejected him from
being King, and his seed from the throne. A lamentable case, to be frighted by
a multitude, out of Gods favor, and the Crown. But I hope, you have no Saul
in hand: Our good Kings Crown you may cause to totter, but not his resolution.
Ye may, and have robbed him of his Prerogatives, revenues, and liberty: but you
cannot imprison, or force his conscience, that will enjoy her ancient
privileges, and freedom; and these disasters shall end in a Crown of glory.
His memory shall be honored in our Annals, and his posterity flourish in these
thrones.

Amen, Amen.
CHAP. XVI. How far forth the King ought to protect the Church and Bishops.
1. IT is confessed to my hand, that You see the engagement put upon the King,
is but to his power: as every good King ought inright to protect and defend the
Bishops and Churches under their government. I. G p 8
the King is engaged to his power, to protect the Bishops, and their
privileges; as every good King ought in right to protect and defend the
Bishops and Churches under their Government. Reason requires no more; and
Religion requires so much. For by that God, whom we serve, Kings are made
Guardians, and Isa. 40. 22
nursing fathers to the Church; and by the same God this engagement is put upon
them. Not by man, not I answer from the expressions in the Oath it self, a^
they are set down by the same author. I. G. p. 8.
by the Author, as you seem to intimate; nor yet by the Bishops. One of the
Bishops indeed, in the behalf of his brethren, and the whole Clergy, humbly
beseeches his Majesty to protect and defend to them, and to the Churches
committed to their charge, all Canonical privileges, and due Law and Justice.
The King with a willing and devout heart premiseth, to be their protector, and
Defender to his power, by the assistance of God. And afterward at the
Communion table, he makes a solemn Oath, upon Gods own book, to observe the
Premises. This engagement then is not put upon the King, but with a willing
heart he takes it upon himself; acknowledging that he ought to do so, if he be
a good King. Yea, (says Sir Edward Coke) Sir Ed. Coke proem. in Mag. Chart.
the King is bound and sworn to the observation and keeping of Magna Charta.
His Majesty then is but entreated to do, what he is sworn and bound to do.
And since sworn and bound, he may not with a safe conscience give them up to
the Psalm. 80. 13.
wild boares of the forest to root up the plants, or suffer the wild beasts of
the field to devour this Vine, Ib. v. 25.
which the Lords right hand has planted.

2. That Such power is no further, then he can do it, without sinning against
God, and being injurious to the rest of his people. I. G. p. 8.
the King is bound no further to exercise his power in the protection of the
Church, then he can do it without sinning against God, is most undoubtedly
true: and it were not the part of a Christian to desire more. For we know, that
Romans 13. 1. 4.
the King receives his power from God, which is to be used, not against, but
for God. Not to protect the Church to his power, is to break his Oath, it is to
desert that trust which God has committed to his charge: and is not this to
sin against God? In the discharge of this duty, he is so far from being
injurious to the rest of his people, that if he should forbear it, it would
prove the greatest mischeife, that can be imagined, to his people, and to their
posterity, in their souls, in their estates; and a perpetual infamy to this
Nation. I need not prove it now, it is already done, Cap. 8. Sect 10. 11. etc.

3. That When he has interposed his authority for them, and put forth all the
power he has to preserve them: he has gone to the extent of his power, and as
far as good Kings are bound in right. I. G. p. 8.
his sacred Majesty has interposed his Authority for the Bishops, and put
forth all the power he has to preserve them, is that which vexes your
confederacy. And yet you cannot deny, but that every good King is bound in
right to do so. What we ought to do, is our bounden duty; and what we do in
right, is justly done. Oh, that this had been done in the right time. Indeed he
is not only bound, but he finds it more then necessary to protect and preserve
them; for in protecting them, he protects himself, his throne, and his
posterity. Alas, he was struck at thorough the Bishops sides. His wise Father
descried this long since, Confer. at Hampt. Court. p. 36.
No Bishop, no King. What the Father spoke, his Son our good King has found
true by woeful experience. His Crown has sunk with their Miters.

4. Well, by your own confession, what our gracious King has done, is right,
and what good Kings are bound to do, to the extent of their power. Thus our
good King is justified by his enemies, as S. Mat. 27. 4.
our Savior was by Judas. If his Majesty have endeavored to do that, which
is right, what are they, that have hindered him from doing it? Have not they
done wrong? How can they excuse themselves before God or man, that have so
manacled our betrayed Sovereign, that he cannot do, what good Kings are bound
in right to do? Is this to be good? Is this to be just? Then have all the
Saints of God been utterly deceived.

5. If after all this he must let them fall, or support them with the blood of
his good Subjects. I. G. p. 8.
If after all this He must perforce let the Bishops fall; you and your Schism
have much to answer for, that have driven him to this necessity. You seem to
pity his good subjects, who with their blood have endeavored to support
Episcopacy. Their swords were not drawn to maintain this Government, or the
Religion established; they never learned to fight for Religion. What they did,
was done in submission to his Majesty's just commands, and to manifest their
allegiance. But if these be good; that have endangered their lives to uphold
Bishops, what are they, I beseech you, that have spent their blaod to root them
out? Surely in justifying the former, Mr. Geree has condemned the latter; and
when the waspes find it, he must look to his ears:

6. I must confess, it is an hard case for one man to And those unwilling too,
to engage their lives for the other privileges. I. G. p. 8.
engage his life for the maintenance of other men's privileges. But who did so?
Not a man engaged himself; but the Kings command, the Oath of Allegiance, and
the Laws of the Land engaged every good Subject, to assist his Sovereign to the
utmost. The King, according to his Oath, endeavored to maintain the Laws of
the Land, to protect the Members of both Houses driven from Parliament, to
support the Bishops; and to suppress those seditious and sacrilegious persons,
which plotted and covenanted the ruin of Religion, root and branch. Though
much the greatest part of the Nobility, Gentry, and learned in the Law, were
deservedly moved to see Majesty dethroned and blasphemed; Religion spurned at,
and vilified; the Fathers of the Church scandalized, and persecuted; the Laws
of the Kingdom, and liberties of the Subject slighted, and trampled on; yet
not a man of these took up the Sword, till he was commanded by him, to whom the
Laws of the Land, and the Word of God have committed the power of the Sword.
This may not be called backwardness, or unwillingnesse, but pious discretion,
which ever waits upon the Sovereigns call. When therefore His Majesty had set
up his Standard, I may truly say, Jud. 3. 9.
the governors of our Israel offered themselves WILLINGLY among the people;
they did the King service to the utmost. Had there not been a backdoore to let
in a foreign Nation, to divide the Kings forces; had not some of Nehem. 6. 17.
18. 19.
the Nobles of Judah conspired with Tobiah, held intelligence with him, and
acquainted him with Nehemiahs secrets, there never had been so many
Thanksgiving days, nor so much boasting, that God prospered the cause. God
suffered David his own chosen servant, his anointed, and a man after his own
heart, to be hunted as a Partrige upon the mountains, to be frighted from his
throne, and to live like a forlorn man; and yet in his good time he restored
him to his Scepter in peace, and subdued the people to him.

7. And whereas you term them others privileges, as if they concerned no man
but the Clergy; I dare boldly say, they concern every man, as he is a member
of this Church and Realm. 1 Cor. 9. 11.
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we reap
your carnal things? And if we reap not your carnal things, how shall we sow
unto you spiritual things? This is worthy of consideration; unless you have
laid aside all care of the soul. Have we some privileges, that the Laity have
not? They are not ours alone; they are every man's, that enters into Orders. And
Orders are indifferently proposed to all, of all families whatsoever, so they
be sufficiently qualified. High and low, noble and ignoble have reaped the
benefit of these privileges. I have known some of high birth in Orders; and
some of good rank, that have taken Sanctuary under a Priests coat. And we read
of Iud. 17. 7.
a young man of the tribe of Judah, of the most remarkable family, that was
glad to turn Priest, and to Ib. v. 10.
serve by the year for ten shekels of silver, a double suit of apparel, and
his victuals. If then our Calling suffer, all families suffer in it, and with
it.

8. But what if the Laws of the Land, what if Magna Charta do oblige all men to
stand up for the due observation of these privileges? If so, then must every
man readily acknowledge, that all good Subjects are bound to obey His Majesty,
when he commands that, which the Law requires. View we then the words of that
Great and justly magnified Charter, which are these. Mag. Charta c. 37.
Reserving to all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all persons, as
well Spiritual as Temporal, all their liberties, and free customs, which
they have had in times past. And all these customs and liberties aforesaid,
which we have granted to be holden within this our Realm; as much as
appertains to us and our Heirs, we shall observe. And ALL MEN of this our
Realm, as well SPIRITUAL AS TEMPORAL ( as much as in them is) SHALL likewise
OBSERVE THE SAME, AGAINST ALL PERSONS. Mark that: are we not all, both
spiritual and temporal, bound to maintain each others privileges, as much as
in us lies?

9. I know, you will return, that Abbots and Priors are provided for by the
same Law; and yet they have since been taken away by Act of Parliament. I
confess it: but I shall desire you to observe in the first place, how they
prospered, that were the contrivers and procurers of that Act. 2ly, I cannot
but take notice, that you with your Master Beza call that disso^ution I. G. p.
6. ^
detestandum sacrilegium, detestable sacrilege, and such as was cried out of
all the Christian world over. It is not therefore to be drawn into president.
3ly, consider, I pray you, that 25. Ed. 3.
they who did so, are styled Enemies of our Sovereign Lord the King* and his
Realm. 4ly, that great Council. Chalced. can. 24.
Council of Chalcedon, consisting of above 600. Bishops, resolves, that no
Monastery, consecrated with the Bishops liking, may be turned to a secular
dwelling. And those that suffer any such thing, are liable to the Canonical
censures. 5ly, you will, I hope, make a difference between our Saviors
institution, and man's invention. Bishops are of our Saviors own institution,
but Abbots and Priors are titles and orders of man's invention. And yet Statut.
de provisor. 25. Ed. 3.
hospitality, and alms, and other works of charity, for which these
fraternities were erected, failed much with them. How those means were
employed, I shall not enquire; but I am certain, that good and pious men have
wished, that the abuses had been pruned off, and that the lands had been
disposed of according to the Doners intentions. This indeed had been piety,
not sacrilege.

10. How often have the Kings of this Realm engaged themselves to observe Magna
Charta, and to maintain the rights and liberties of the Church? Are not these
the words of the Statute, Stat. of the Clergy. 14. Ed. 3. 1
We take the Prelates and Clergy with their possessions, goods, and chattels
INTO OUR SPECIAL PROTECTION AND DEFENSE? The Princes of this Land have bound
themselves strictly to keep this Great Charter; and have provided, that if any
other shall do, or procure to be done, any thing contrary to this Charter, it
is to be accounted void, as soon as procured. Take the words of the Charter.
Mag. Charta. c. 37.
We have granted unto them (the Spiritual and Temporal persons of this Realm)
on the other part, that neither we, nor our Heirs shall procure, or do any
thing, whereby the liberties in this Charter shall be infringed, or broken. But
suppose, they shall make any such grant through ignorance, wilfulness, or
evil counsel, shall it be of force? The Law says, no. For it follows
immediately; Ib.
And if any thing be procured BY ANY PERSON contrary to the premises, it shall
be holden OF NO FORCE, NE EFFECT. You and your great contrivers, what have ye
labored for, all this while? What have ye fought for? what have ye shed so
much blood for? For wind, nothing but wind. For all the Westminster Orders and
Ordinances contrary to this Charter, shall be holden of no force, ne effect.
You had best then keep your paper for a more necessary use.

11. And yet you tell his Majesty, that I. G. p. 8.
it is not equal to engage the lives of some to uphold the honor of others.
Is it equal then, I beseech you, to engage the lives of some, to destroy the
honor and estate of others? All this while you have been on the destructive
part, all for rooting up, what the Lords right hand has planted, and for
alienating the Lords inheritance. And that ye might effect, what ye have
subtly projected, ye have engaged the lives of many, who were very unwilling,
to uphold the honor of some at Westminster, that had overlashed, and ran
themselves upon dreadful rocks. I would to God, the Commons of this Kingdom
would lay it to heart, how That were to be cruel to many thousand, to be
indulgent to a few, I. G. p. 8.
cruel ye have been to many thousands to be indulgent to a few, to uphold the
honor of a few. Consider, how many thousands in England and Ireland have been
plundered, sequestered, imprisoned, maimed, and murdered, because they would not
submit to the illegal, unjust, and irreligious decrees of the men at
Westminster. A complete Mercurius Rusticus will make after ages stand amazed,
and their hearts bleed within them, to consider, that such a Nation as this, so
blessed with peace and plenty, should be so miserably deluded, as to undo
themselves wilfully, and sheath their swords into one another bowels, to save
a Lord and five Members from trial by Law.

12. That you may persuade us, some way or other, that the King ought to give
up the Bishops, and their lands, since he has hitherto protected them to the
utmost of his power, you argue by supposition. I. G. p. 8.
Suppose (say you) a King put a Commander into a City, and give him an Oath to
maintain the privileges of it, and keep it for him to his power: and this
Commander keeps this Town, till he have no more strength to hold it, unless
he force the Townsmen to arms, against the privilege, which he has sworn
to maintain. Well, what then? If this Governor now surrender this Town upon
composition, does he violate his Oath? Thus far Mr. Gerees question: what think
you of it? What any man thinks, is no matter; I think, none will affirm it. I.
G. p. 9.
Mr. Geree thinks none will affirm it. And I think, there be many, that will
affirm it; and I am one of that number. Good Lord, to see, how Mr. Geree and I
differ in opinion! His is but thought without proof, but I shall give you
reason for what I think, and say.

13. If this Casuist speak to purpose, as he ought, he speaks of a King of
this Realm; and no town within this Realm has any such privilege, as not to
bear arms against the Kings enemies; or not to keep it for his Majesty, to
the utmost of their power. The reasons are these: First, Mag. Charta, c. 37. 38.
these are the Kings Dominions and Countries. 2ly, These Towns and Cities are
part of these Dominions. 3ly, The inhabitants and Citizens thereof are his
Majesty's subjects. 4ly, Sir Ed Coke in Litleton. l. 2. Sect. 139.
All lands and tenements are holden either mediatly, or immediately of the King.
5ly, This City or Town is the Kings; otherwise how could he put a Commander
into it, and give him an Oath to keep it for him? I speak of Towns within
these his Majesty's Dominions, which in all writings are called the Kings
Cities, Counties, and Towns. 6ly, It cannot be imagined, that the Kings of this
Realm would grant any privilege destructive or dangerous to their own
safety. And we must take notice, that Sir Ed Coke in Mag. Chart. c. 1.
All Liberties at the first were derived from the Crown. Add hereunto the
several Acts of Parliament, wherein Statute of Armor. 7. Ed. 1. and 1. Eliz.
3.
the Peers and Comminalty confess themselves to be bound, and make faithful
promise, to aid their Sovereign at all seasons; as also to assist and defned
his, or their, rights, and titles, to the utmost of their power, and therein to
spend their bodies, lands and goods, against ALL PERSONS, whatsoever. But new
Lords, new Laws; and these Statutes are out of date.

14. By this time, I hope, you see, that no townsmen have any such privilege,
as to refuse to bear arms in the Kings behalf. But they are bound by their
allegiance, and the Laws of this Land to keep those Towns for his Majesty, and
to defend them with all their might against his foes. If then the inhabitants
shall be backward, the Commander ought to force them to arms: and if he do it
not, he violates his Oath, and the Townsmen their fidelity. And now you may
tell your friend, that helped you to this supposition, that he is no skillful
Apprentice at Law. If then Such is the case with the King in this particular.
I. G. p. 9.
the Kings case be such in this particular, his Highness may not recede from
his Oath, nor do any thing contrary thereto.

15. Though this may seem reasonable to sober men, yet I. G. p. 9.
the only objection (as you conceive) which lies against this, is; that
though it be not in the Kings power to uphold them, yet it is in his power not
to consent to their fall. Though this be not the only, yet is it a just
objection, or rather a resolution; which being rightly harkned to, will
preserve the King from sin in this particular. For how ever you are so uncivil
with his Majesty, as to call it If the King should be peremptory in denial,
what help would this be to them? Such peremptorinesse in this circumstance
might in danger his Crown, not save their Mitres. I. G. p. 9.
peremtorinesse in him to deny assent to the fall, or abolition of Episcopacy;
yet such as are learned to sobriety, know this to be Christian prudence, and
true fortitude, S Mat. 10. 28.
not to fear them, that can imprison him, that can rob him of this earthly
Crown, and slay his body, but to stand in aw of him, that can slay the soul,
that can deprive him of his heavenly Crown, and cast him into the infernal
pit. Oh, Hebr. 10. 31.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; we are not
therefore to be threatened, or frighted into sin. These things you can press
violently in the Pulpit, but now you are beside both Pulpit and text, beside
modesty and truth. It is Justice, Religion, and courage, not peremtorinesse, to
deny the least assent to sin. That it is sin to yield to, or confirm the
abolition of Episcopacy, is already manifested C. 4. 6. Since it is to destroy
an Ordinance of Christ; which cannot be done without sin.

16. However then he may endanger his own Crown, not save their Mitres, yet he
shall be sure, by denying assent, to save his own soul: for Vsque adeo peccatum
voluntarium malum est, ut nullo modo sit peccatum, si non sit voluntarium. Aug.
de vera Relig c. 14.
without consent no sin; and without sin no damnation. Deuteronomy. 22 26.
A woman ravished is free from fornication, because she assents not, but is
really enforced; and yet Ib. v. 25.
he, that commits that sin upon her, must die for it. This is the Kings case
right: if he yield not, this is a rape upon his power, no sin in his person,
since no assent. Hence is it, that Idolatry and Oppression in Scripture are
charged upon Kings; because their assent makes a Law. Without the Kings
affirmative every Ordinance imposed upon the people is not Law, but Tyranny;
since it is not legal, but arbitrary. Our brethren of Scotland say as much.
Take their words. There can be no Law made, and have the force of a Law without
the King. Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland. p. 19.

17. That Though it be in his power to deny assent to their abolition, in a
natural sense, because Voluntas nonpotest cog^; yet it is not in his power in
a moral sense, because he cannot now deny consent without sin. I. G. p. 9.
it is in his Majesty's power, or not in his power to deny assent to the
abolition of Bishops, is most certainly true. But we must learn of you to
distinguish between a natural and a moral sense* and then we shall find both
true, that he can, and he cannot deny consent. In a natural sense he may, but
in a moral sense he may not. In a natural sense he may; because the will
cannot be enforced. In a moral sense it is not in his power; because he cannot
now deny consent without sin. So it is, and it is not in his power, or rather
as S. Austine speaks, Aug. de Fide cont, Manish c. 9.
In potestate est, quod in voluntate esse non debet: That is in our power,
which ought not to be in our will; Hoc habemus in potestate, quod cum volumus,
possumus. Aug. cont Maximin. l. 3. c. 14.
The King then has it in his power to yield, or not to yield; because he may
do, which he pleases. The book of God stands by, and advises him to do that,
which is right in the sight of God, proposing blessings if he do so; and
menacing curses, if he shall do any thing contrary to Gods revealed will. And
all this while it does but instruct and persuade him to do, what he ought and
may, when he will. This then being in the Kings power, he must take heed, he
incline not to sin.

18. I cannot but resolve, that to forsake the natural sense, if good, is to
be unnatural. To renounce the moral sense is against good manners, and the
moral Law. If therefore both senses may be kept, we are to preserve them both
safe. With confidence therefore, I speak it, that it is not only in his
power, but Far are we from taking away his Negative voice. Exact Collect, of
Remonst, and Declarat, p. 727.
it is his duty to be Master of his negative voice, and to deny consent. If he
deny consent, he does his duty, and observes his Oath. If he yield assent, he
breaks his oath, and fails of his duty. And this will prove no less then
sin. I have already demonstrated, that Episcopacy is agreeable to the word of
God, and that it is the Institution of Christ himself. It is sin therefore to
abolish it, or to consent to the abolishing thereof. You neither have, nor can
justify the contrary out of holy writ, or from the ancient and Apostolic
Church. And yet the Observations upon the Ordinance for Ordination have been
extant in Print above these three years. But you and your Assembly Rabbines
take no notice of it, because you have not what to say against it.

19. But though you have neither Scripture, Councels, nor Fathers, for the
abolishing of Episcopacy, yet you have reason grounded upon policy, to work
his Miajestie to yield to this abolition. For (say you) he cannot now deny
consent without sin. It seems then, he might, without sin deny consent
heretofore: but not now. And why not now; as well as heretofore? Because (say
you) I. G. p. 9.
if he consent not, there will evidently continue such distraction and
confusion, as is most repugnant to the weal of his people; which he is bound
by the Rule of Government, and his Oath to provide for. Thus sin shall vary at
your pleasure: sin it shall be now, that was none heretofore. That shall be sin
in King Charles, which was virtue and piety in Queen Elizabeth, and all their
religious ancesters.

20. Romans 4. 15.
Where no Law is, there is no transgression. Before then you prove it to be a
sin, you must prove it to be against some Law either of God or man. Not against
the Law of God; that is already proved. Not against the Law of man; since no man
can sin against that Law, to which he is not subject. Declarat. of the Kingd.
of Scotland. p. 19.
The Laws are the Kings; he gives Laws to his subjects, not his subjects to
him: and we know no Law of his against Bishops. Indeed the Laws of this Land
are so far from the extirpation of Bishops, that Lexterrae. p. 14.
the fundament all Law of this Kingdom approves of them. They then that are
enemies to Bishops, are enemies to the fundamental Law of this Kingdom. And
what is fundamental, is in and of the foundation. If then a Law be made to
extirpate Bishops, it grates upon the foundation, it is against the
fundamental Law of this Realm, and it contradicts that Law of Laws, the word
of God. Besides, we are assured by that learned in the Law, Justice Jenkins Ib,
p. 29.
that it is against the Kings Oath, and the Oaths of the Houses, to alter the
Government for Religion. But an alteration of this Government, must necessarily
follow upon the abolition of Episcopacy. Yea with Bishops, not only the Church
and Religion will be ruined, but the very Government and Laws of the Kingdom
will be so confounded, that the learned in the Law will not know, where to find
Law. They must burn their old books, and begin the world upon the new model.
All this will amount to no small sin; it will be to the shame of this Land; to
the ruin of those two noble professions, Divinity and Law; and to the common
misery of the people.

21. These reasons premised, I shall justly return your own words upon your
self, in this manner. It is not in the Kings power to consent to the abolition
of Episcopacy, because he cannot now yield consent without sin. For if he
consent, there will evidently follow such distraction and confusion, as is most
repugnant to the weal of his people; which he is bound by the Rule of
Government, and his Oath to provide for. I say so, and true it is; because it
is evident to every discerning eye, that there are as many, and those more
considerable, that are cordially for Episcopacy and Common Prayer, as are
against them. Indeed they are not so factious, so mutinous, and bloody as the
other. What multitudes are there in this Kingdom, that mourn and grieve to see
Religion so oppressed, so trampled on, and almost breathing out her last? In
truth it is palpable, that these seditious and irreligious courses have
engendered, and propagated, and will continue such distraction and confusion in
Church and State, as is most repugnant, not only to the present, but to the
eternal wedl and salvation of his people: both which he is bound to provide
for, but more especially for the later.

22. And whereas you say, Such distraction and confusion will continue, unless
Episcopacy be abolished; if seems, you are resolved to continue these
distractions. But, God knows, and your words testify, that it is not the
calling or the office of a Bishop, that is offensive; it is I hope they will
not be so tenacious of their wealth and honor, as to let the Crown run an
hazard, and endanger the whole Land. I. G. p. 5,
their honor, and their wealth, which you aim at; That the revenues be divided
to maintain a preaching Ministry. I G. p. 4.
these, with their revenues must be shared amongst you of the Presbyterian
faction; and then all shall be well. Till then we must look for nothing but
fire and sword. Hence it evidently appears, that neither Episcopacy, nor the
Kings dissent, but your ambition and avarice have been the true cause of these
distractions and combustions. Number. 16. 2.
Such a sedition as this there was in the time of Moses about the Priesthood;
because every man might not sacrifice, as, when, and where he pleased. Because
Corah might not wear a Miter, and go into the most holy place, as well as
Aaron. And yet who dares say, that the Priestood was the cause of those uproars?

23. That insurrection was against Moses and Aaron, against Prince and Priest:
but against the Prince for the Priests sake; because the Prince would not
endure, that every one should meddle with the Priests office, or strip him of
his means and honor. That conspiracy was linsie-woolsie, loomed up of Clergy
and Laity. Korah, the son of Levi was the ringleader; and Number. 16, 16. 17. 35.
with him two hundredth and fifty of his own Tribe. To these were joined Ib. v
2.
Dathan and Abiram, great Princes, and men of renown; such as were eminent in
blood, and of the tribe of Reuben. And was not the cry the same then, that is
now? Ib. v. 3.
Moses and Aaron, Prince and Priest, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; Wherefore
then lift ye your selves above the congregation of the Lord? The Prince and
Priest did but their duty; and yet are obbraided with pride. God raised them to
their places; and they are charged to raise themselves. But Moses justly
retorts upon them, what they had falsely cast upon him; Ib. v. 7.
Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi. What? Ib. v. 9. 10.
Is it not enough for you, that God has separated you from the multitude, that
he has taken you near himself, to do the service of the Lords tabernacle, but
you must have the Priests office? But you must be Ib. v. 40.
offering incense, as well as the High Priest? The Priest of the second Order
would needs be equal with the chief Priest, the Priest of the first Order. And
is it not so now? Have we not just cause to say to you, Ye take too much upon
you, ye Presbyters, ye sons of Bishops. What? Is it not enough for you, that
God has separated you from the multitude, that he has taken you near himself,
to do the service of the Lords house, and to administer the Sacraments; but you
must have the Bishops office? But you must be giving Orders, as well as the
Bishop? Surely this is to assume that power to your selves, which God never
committed to any Presbyter, while a Presbyter.

24. Last of all, I cannot but observe, that when the Lord had punished these
schismatic and seditious persons, Ib. v. 42.
the tumult arises afresh against Moses and Aaron; they cry out upon them as
Ib. v. 41.
murderers, as if these two had slain the people of the Lord: for thus they
call that factious and damnable crew. But the Lord decided the controversy,
and showed manifestly, who were His; first Ib. v. 49.
by consuming the mutineers with the plague; and secondly, by causing Numb. 7 8.
Aarons rod, when it seemed to be quite dead, to revive, even to bud, and
blossom, and bear fruit in the Tabernacle. Ib. v. 10.
Thus the mouths of the rebellious Children were stopped, and Gods Ordinance
justified. Psalm. 54 7.
Oh, that salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: Oh, that the Lord would
deliver his people out of Captivity. Oh, that we might see Aarons rod once more
bud, and blossom, and bring forth Almonds. Ib. v. 8.
Then should Jacob rejoice, and Israel should be right glad.

CHAP. XVII. Whether there be two Supremacies in this Kingdom.
1. IN this Treatise That was to set up t^o Supremacies. I, G. p. 3.
you blame those, that seem to set up two Supremacies; and yet you cannot see
the same beam in your own eye. You are of kin, sure, to those Lamiae, those
witches, that were blind at home, but quick-sighted abroad. Thou, that find
fault with another, do the same thing. For do not you say plainly, that I.
G. p. 9.
there is a Supremacy in the King, and a Supremacy in the Parliament? I hope,
you know your own language. Clodius accusat. It is an usual thing for your
confederacy, to charge the King and his good Subjects with that, which your
selves are either guilty of, or intend to induce.

2. What, two Supremacies, two superlatives, at the same time, in the same
Kingdom? Is this possible? What, because there is summus and supremus; because
there are two superlatives of the same word, shall we therefore have two
Supremacies in the same Realm? Is not this flatly against the Oath of
Supremacy? Wherein you, and I, and your great Patriots, have sworn, that the
Kings Highness is the ONLY SUPREME GOVERNOR OF THIS REALM, and of all other
his Highness Dominions and Countries. But the King has been so long out of
your eye, that he is now out of your mind, and the Parliament shall at least
be his corrivall in the Supremacy. Take heed, take heed of perjury. I can tell
you of several Acts of Parliament since the Reformation, that 3 Eliz. 9. etc.
lay a penalty of forty pounds, upon every particular perjurie. If His
Majesty had all these forfeitures, they would satisfy his debts, and make him
a glorious King after all these pressures.

3. But you clip His Majesty's wings, though ye make him fly; and tell us, as
That the Supremum jus dominii, even that, which is above all laws, is in the
King, which, under favor, I conceive, in our State is a manifest error. I. G.
p. 9.
you conceive, that the Supremum jus Dominii, the supreme right of Dominion,
which is above all Laws, is not in the King. To say it is in him, is in this,
in our State a manifest error. Why, what is become of the Oath of Supremacy?
Have we forgot that? Was not that provided for this State? In our State this is
no error; in yours it may be; or else you are in a manifest error. Certainly
the members have sworn, that the King is the ONLY SUPREME GOVERNOR OF THIS
REALM, or State. And that he is so, as well IN ALL Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as Temporal. If He be the only Supreme,
how shall we find another Supreme, or an equal to him within his own
Dominions? If He be so in all things and causes both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, what thing or cause is there, wherein he is not the only Supreme;
or wherein he has any other Supreme joined to him? For certain, these
particles Only and All, are exclusive of any copartner.

4. But you will chalk out a way, whereby to elude, or avoid this Oath, and the
restrictions therein. There Is a supreme Parliament, as well as a supreme King.
Or, a Supremacy is in the Parliament, and a Supremacy in the King. An excellent
Arithmetician, he has learned to multiply; of one, and one only, he has made
two. Thus have they raised division out of unity: and from hence are these
distractions and divisions, which are so repugnant to the weal of the people.
This is one of their new lights, which is borrowed from their multiplying
glass, that makes a molehill as big as a mountain, and a Spider as large as
a Sea-crab. But when the multiplying glass is laid aside, the spider will be
but a spider.

5. Well, let us see, how you make good this twofold Supremacy. I. G. p. 9.
The Supremacy, or the Supremum jus Dominii, that is over all Laws, figere or
refigere, to make, or disanull them at pleasure, is neither in the King, nor in
the Houses apart, but in both conjoined. Here then we are fallen back to one
Supremacy. And this Supremacy is not the Kings only; but it is the
Parliaments, as well as his. This is to skip from Monarchy to Aristocracy.
Kingdoms endure no corrivals; and Rex non pare^ habet in regno suo. Bract.
temps. el. 3. l. 4. c. 24. Sect. 5.
Kings have no Peers. But this man has found one thing, wherein the King has
Peers; and consequently is not the only supreme Governor of this Realm.
Strange, how that Parliament, and all since that time have been so mistaken, as
not to see their own right, but to ascribe all to the King; and that in a point
of so high concernment. Surely they wanted this young Preacher, to bring them
in a new light. But I believe, it will appear, that the Supremacy over all
Laws to make, or disanull them, is in the King alone, at the Petition of both
houses: and that those Parliaments knew full well.

6. For satisfaction in this point I shall observe, what Scriptures, Fathers,
and some modern writers have resolved concerning Kings. S. Petter plainly and
fully 1. S. Pet 2. 13. 14.
ascribes Supremacy to the King. Submit your selves (says he) to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: Whether it be to the KING, as SUPREME; or
unto Governors, as unto them, that are sent by him. Kings are sent by God; to
them therefore we submit for the Lords sake. All other civil Governors are
sent by the King; to them therefore we submit for the Kings sake, that sent
them. Answerable hereunto are those passages in Tertullian, that Tertul. ad
Scap. c. 2.
the Emperor is homo a Deo secundus, and solo Deo minor, Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
in Dei solius potestate, a quo secundus, post quem primus, the man second to
God, and less then God only. That he is in the power, or under the Command of
God only; from whom he is the second, and after whom he is the first. Optatus
says as much; Optat. l. 3.
Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem; There is
none above the Emperor, but God alone; who made him Emperor. And what the
Emperor was in the Empire; the same is the King of England within his own
Dominions. For 16. Rich. 2. 5.
the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in
subjection to no Realm, but IMMEDIATELY SUBJECT TO GOD, AND TO NONE OTHER.
Hence is it called 24. Hen. 8. 12. and 1. Eliz. 1.
an Empire; and 1. Eliz. 1.
the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

7. The Greek Commentators are so full for obedience to Kings, that Chrysostom.
Theodoret. Theophilact. Occum. in Romans 13. 1.
they will not yield, that an Apostle may be freed from this subjection. This
doctrine S. Paul justifies; Act. 25. 10.
I stand (says he) at Caesar's Judgment seat, WHERE I OUGHT TO BE JUDGED. And
after this appeal he resolves, that Ib. v. 11.
no man, not the President himself, may judge him, or deliver him to be judged
by any other. Nay after this the President himself might not release him. So
King Agrippa, Act. 26. 32.
Had not this man appealed to Caesar, he might have been set at liberty. Are
not these strong evidences of the Kings Supremacy? That learned Grotius gives a
sure rule, whereby to know, on whom the Supremacy is settled. Hug Grot. de Jure
belli l. 1 c. 3. Sect 7.
That (says he) is the Supreme civil power, cujus actus alterius juri non
subsunt, whose actions are not subject to any other man's censure, or Law. But
such is the King, Atnob. in Psalm. 51. 4.
Qui sub nullo alio, sed sub solo Deo agit, who lives in subjection to none,
but to God only. For Eccles. 8. 4.
who may say unto him, what do thou? When therefore David had sinned, he
cries out unto the Lord, Psalm 51. 4.
In te solum peccavi, against thee only have I sinned, thou only can call
me to account Hence is that resolution of all the learned of this Church, in
the time of King Henry VIII. among whom were Bishop Carnmer, and Bishop
Latymer, Instit. of a Christ man fol 86. The supreme and Sovereign Prince has
none between him and God, representing the person of God, executing his office,
and in this respect bearing his name: to whom only he is accountable Dr. Corn
Burgess, Fire of the Sanct. p. 263.
Although Princes do otherwise, then they ought to do, yet God has assigned NO
JUDGES OVER THEM in this world, but will have the judgment of them reserved to
himself. And the judgment of the great Lawyers in France is this, Rex solus,
omnium subditoru^, tam Laicorum, quam Ecclesiasticorum, in suis ditionibus
supremus est Dominus Common fact. and Postulat ^^g. cogni p 38
Rex solus* THE KING ONLY IS THE SUPREME LORD of all the Subjects, as well Lay,
as Ecclesiastical, within his own Dominions. Arnob. in Psalm. 51. 4
All other men live under judgment; and cum deliquerint, peccant Deo, peccant
and legibus mundi; and when they offend, they sin against God, and against
the Laws of the Land.

8. But I know, you rely more upon the Laws of this Land, then upon the Laws
of God; and upon our Lawyers, rather then the Fathers, and out best Divines. I
shall therefore transgress my profession. and show you, what their opinion is.
24. Hen. 8. 12. and 1 Eliz. 1.
This Realm (say the Statutes) is an Empire, whereof the KING IS THE SUPREME
HEAD; and consists of the Spiritualty and Tempora^ty, OVER WHICH THE KING
HAS WHOLE POWER, AND JURISDICTION. Are you of this Realm, or are you not? I^
^on be, then are you either of the spiritualty or tempora^ty And if of either,
then wholly under the Kings power The whole power is his; Why seek you to rob
him of it? Of this Realm the King not the Parliament, is the Supreme head: One
head not two. He that makes two Supremacies, makes a Bull; and he that se^^ two
heads upon one body, frames a monster.

9. Indeed they are so far from having any Supremacy, that they are Subjects as
well in, as out of Parliament. Sir Rob. Cotton. p 5.
When King Edward the Confessor had all the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom
assembled in Parliament, he calls them all, his liege men My Lords, you that are
MY LIEGE MEN. Perchance you may say, the King calls them so, but that makes
them not so. You shall therefore have their own acknowledgement, in Parliament,
thus. 1. Eliz. 3.
We your most loving, faithful, and obedient SUBJECTS, REPRESENTING THE THREE
ESTATES OF YOUR REALM of England. Thus the whole Parliament united into one
body. False therefore is that proposition, that the King is Major singulis, sed
minor universis, greater then any, and less then all the Inhabitants of this
Realm. For here the representative body of the three Estates of this Kingdom,
assembled in Parliament, in their highest capacity, acknowledge themselves to
be the Queens Subjects, and her most obedient Subjects; because to her, they
thus assembled, did justly owe both subjection, and obedience; which none that
are supreme, can owe. And these are due to his Majesty and a singulis, and ab
universis, from one, and all; from every one singly, and from all jointly.

10. Secondly, when they are assembled in Parliament, they Petition, as well as
out of Parliament. This is evident by the Acts themselves; wherein we read,
that 16. Ri^. 2. 5.
our Sovereign Lord the King, by the assent aforesaid, and at the PRAYER OF
HIS COMMONS. The same words are repeated 2 Hen. 5. c. 6 and 9. And in Queen
Elizabeth's time, the Parliament humble themselves in this manner, 1. Eliz. 1.
That it MAY PLEASE YOUR HIGHNESS* that it may be enacted, etc. I might come
down lower, but I shall satisfy my self with Sir Edward Cokes report, Sir Ed
Coke instit. l 4. c 1. Sect. The several forms
who assures us, that in ancient times all Acts of Parliament were IN FORM OF
PETITIONS. Mr. Geree himself acknowledges, they should be so now. I. G. p. 8.
The King (says he) may pass a Bill for the abolition of Episcopacy, when HIS
HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT think it convenient, and PETITION FOR IT. Either then the
Houses have no Supremacy, o^ else they humble themselves too low, when they
Petition His Majesty. But this Supremacy of Parliament is one of the new
lights, that were lately wafted into this Land in a Scottish Cookboate.

11. Thirdly, what Supremacy can there be in those, that may not lawfully
convene, or consult, till the King summon them; and must dissolve and depart,
when the King command* The Writ it self runs thus, Rot. Clausa. An. 59. Hen. 3.
prelatis and Magnatibus nostris, QUOS VOCARI FECIMUS. To the Prelates. and our
Nobles. WHOM WE HAVE CAUSED TO BE CALLED. And Sir Rob Cotton, p. 3,
Sir Robert Cotton, out of Elie Register, tells us that Parliaments were
assembled at first as now, Edicto Principis (not at their own, but) at the
Kings pleasure. And Sir Edward Coke assures me, that Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton,
l 2 Sect. 164.
None can begin, continue, or dissolve the Parliament, but BY THE KINGS
AUTHORITY. And let me tell you, that if his Majesty shall withdraw himself
from Parliament, it is not for your great Masters to enforce him to return, but
to Sir Rob. Cotton p. 8.
pray his presence, and to inform his Majesty, that if he forbear his presence
among them forty days, that then by an ancient Statute, they may return
absque domigerio Regis, to their several homes. This is all they ought, or may
do.

12. Fourthly, whereas, according to your words, I. G. p. 9.
the Parliament is to regulate all other Courts; the Court of Parliament is to
be regulated by the King. For the time, that is already manifested, to be at
his Majesty's pleasure. And for the matter, that is prescribed, and limited by
the King; Rot. claus. An. 59. Hen. 3.
super praemissis tractare, to consult and advise upon such things, as the King
nominates, and prescribes. And if credit may be given to John Speed, he tells
us, that Speed in Ric. 2, c. 13. n. 102.
the great Lawyers Judgments, in King Richard II. time, concerning orderly
proceedings in Parliaments, run thus. That after the cause of such assembly is
by the Kings Commandment there declared, such Articles, as by the King are
limited for the Lords and Commons to proceed in, are first to be handled. But
IF ANY SHOULD PROCEED UPON OTHER ARTICLES, AND REFVSE TO PROCEED UPON THOSE
LIMITED BY THE KING, till the King had first answered their Proposals, contrary
to the Kings Command; such doing herein contrary to the rule of the King, ARE
TO BE PUNISHED ASTRAITORS. And he cites the Law books for what he says. Truly
I am the rather induced to believe, what Speed delivers, because Sir Edward
Coke gives us the reason, why, and how far forth, the King relies upon his
Parliaments. Sir Ed. Coke In sti^l 4 c. ^. Sect How Parliaments succeed.
The King (says he) in all his weighty affairs used the advice of his Lords
and Commons; so great a trust and confidence he had in them. Always provided,
that both the Lords and Commons keep them within the Circle of the Law and
Custom of the Parliament. The reason, why the King uses their advice, is
because he has a great trust and confidence in them. But always provided that
they keep themselves within the Circle of the Law, and Custom of Parliament.
But how if they deceive the Kings trust, and abuse his confidence? How if they
break the Lawful Circle, and transgress the Customs of Parliament? How then?
What Speed has recorded, I have shown you. But what the King may do in this
case, I shall leave to the Masters of the Law to determine.

13. Last of all, the King regulates their consultations. For in his breast it
is, whether their Bills shall become Laws, or no. Observe; though the advice
and assent be theirs, yet the power of Ordaining, Establishing, and Enacting,
is in the Sovereign. The Statute books shall be my witnesses. 12. Ed. 4. 3.
and 2. Men. 5. 6. 9*
THE KING by the advice, assent, and authority aforesaid, HAS ORDAINED AND
ESTABLISHED. And again, 13 Eliz. 2* and 27. Eliz 17.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE QUEENS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, with the assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons, etc. Hence is it, that they
are called The Kings Laws. And Sir Fd. Coke in Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 140.
the King is called the head of the Law; because from him it is derived; from
him the Law receives both life and force. Praesumitur Rex habere omnia jurain
scrinio pectoris sui. Ib.
His breast is the Shrine, or deske, wherein all the Laws are stored up, and
preserved. If any man make question of this, present experience will satisfy
him. For do not the Houses at this day Petition His Majesty, to make that a
Law which they have voted? Take their own words in that high Message sent to
Holdenby house in March last. We the Lords and Commons, assembled in the
Parliament of England, etc. Do humbly present unto your Majesty the humble
desires and Propositions, agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms
respectively. Unto which WE DO PRAY YOUR MAJESTY'S ASSENT. And that they, and
all such Bills, as shall be tendered to your Majesty in pursuance of them, or
any of them, may be ESTABLISHED AND ENACTED FOR STATUTES AND ACTS OF
PARLIAMENT, by your Majesty's Royal assent. Which words, though very high, do
manifest, that there is neither Majesty, nor Supremacy, nor power in this, or
any other Parliament, to make, or repeal Laws. It is at the Kings pleasure to
establish and enact them for Laws and Statutes, or not. This our neighbor
Scotland sees, and confesses that Regal power and authority is chiefly IN
MAKING AND ENACTING LAWS. Declarat. of the Kingd. of Scotland. p. 18.

14. From hence it appears, first, that there is no Supremacy in the
Parliament, without the King. Secondly; That the Supremum jus Dominii, the
supreme right of Dominion, which is over laws, to establish or disanull them,
is in the King alone. For a Bill not established, is of no force, it is no Law.
3ly, that I. G. p. 9.
the King is the supreme Magistrate (as you are pleased to call Him) from whom
all power of execution of Laws is legally derived. And 4ly, if the power of
execution be derived from the King, much more is the power to regulate. For he,
that gives them power by his Commission, to put the Laws in execution, he gives
them rules in the same Commission, whereby they must be guided; and sets them
bounds, which they may not pass. If they transgress either, the King has a
legal power to revoke their Commissions, and to dispose of them, to whom, and
when, he pleases. Hence is it, that all Courts, and the Judges of those
Courts, are called the Kings Courts, and the Kings Ministers of Justice. And
when we are summoned to appear in any Court of Justice, the Process runs Coram
Domino Rege, before our Lord the King: because the Kings person and power is
there represented. And though His Majesty be overborn, and against all Law
and reason kept from his Courts of Justice, yet in all Writs you are fain to
abuse his Name; though he be no way accessory to these lawless, and illegal
proceedings. How these Courts have been regulated, since His Majesty's forced
departure, this Kingdom is very sensible, and laments to consider it; God amend
it.

15. Upon these grounds I argue thus. They, that are Subjects; they, that are
suppliants; they, that owe obedience to an higher; they, that cannot lawfully
convene, or consult, till they be called by another; they, that must dissolve
their meeting at another command; they, that are to be regulated by another;
they, that can only advise, persuade, entreat, but not enact a Law, have no
Supremacy. But the whole Parliament severed from the King, are Subjects, are
suppliants; they owe obedience to an higher; they cannot lawfully convene, or
consult, till they be called by His Majesty; at his command, they are to
dissolve their meeting; by him they are to be regulated; and The Houses of
Parliament without the King cannot enact any Laws. Declarat* of the Kingd. of
Scotland p 19.
without him they cannot enact a Law. The Major is evident, to every
intelligent eye. The Minor is demonstrated, Sect. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. I
must therefore upon these premises necessarily conclude, that the Parliament,
in that sense you take it, has no Supremacy.

16. That nothing may be wanting, I shall give you the resolution of our Sages
at Law, concerning the Kings unseparable and incommunicable Supremacy; that so
all mouths may be stopped. Bractons resolution is this, Bract. temps. H. 3. l.
4. c. 24. Sect. 1.
Rex habet potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes, qui inregno suo sunt. The
King has power and jurisdiction over all, within his own Kingdom. Plowden
says as much; ^lowd* 234. 242.
The King has the SOLE GOVERNMENT of his Subjects. Here is no man, no Society
of men exempted; all under the King, and solely under the King. Where then is
the Parliaments Supremacy? Not in this kingdom; it must be looked for some
where else.

17. Secondly, Bract ib.
Ea, quae sunt Jurisdictionis and pacis ad nullum pertinent nisi ad regiam
dignitatem: Those things, which concern Jurisdiction and Peace, belong to none
but only to the Royal dignity. Ib.
The same he affirms of restraint, and punishment. These then belong not to
the Parliament; since that cannot challenge Royal dignity. Where then is their
Supreme power? All power almost consists in Jurisdiction, ordering of Peace,
and punishing offenders. And all these are flowers of the Crown. Yea, Lex.
terrae: p. 4.
the power of the Militia, of eoyning of money, of making Leagues with foreign
Princes; the power of pardoning, of making of Officers, etc. All Kings had
them, the said Powers have no beginning. If then all these and many more are
peculiar to Sovereignty, what is left for the Parliament? Why surely if you
will, to be the Kings Supreme or chief Council, and his capital Court. This
they are; and this is an high honor to them being rightly used.

18. Thirdly, Bract. temps. H. 3. l. 4. c. 24. Sect. 5.
Omnis sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo; Every one is under the King; but the king
is under none, but God only. The Supremacy then must needs be in the king; who
is superior to all but the God of heaven. And over the Supreme there can be no
earthly superior. To admit a comparative above the superlative in the same
kind, is a solecisme not only in Grammar, but in reason, and Religion. Yet,
though no superior, there may perchance be an equal to this supreme. There may
so; but not within his own Dominions. Ib.
Rex enim non habet parem in regno suo; 3 Ed. 3. 19.
The King (says the Statute) has no Peer in his Land. And if Justice Jenkins
may be heard, he tells us, that Lex terrae p. 7.
the Houses in Parliament confess, the King to be above the representative
Body of the Realm. They are not therefore his equals; and so have no Supremacy.
When I can be persuaded, that any, or all the Members of the Body are equal to
the Head, then I shall be apt to believe, that there may be two Supremacies in
a Kingdom. But I am confident, that Nee regna socium far nec tedae queunt.
a wife may as safely admit of two husbands, as a Kingdom of two Supremes. For
Sir Ed Coke Reports, part. 2. Magd. College Case.
the king is Sponsus Regni, that Husband, who by a Ring is espoused to this
Realm at his Coronation. But a Ring is superstitious, and husbands are grown
out of date. The only thing in request is liberty, to take or leave what and
whom we please.

19. But I. G. p. 9.
the Parliament is the supreme Court, by which all other Courts are to be
regulated: what say we to that? This I say, that the Parliament is Sir Rob.
Cotton. p 1.
Curia capitalis, the supreme Court of this Kingdom: and yet his Court it is,
whose Courts the rest are. It is therefore called Ib.
Curia Regis, and Sir Ed Coke in Litleton, l 2. Sect. 164.
Magnum Concilium Regis, The kings Court, the kings great Council: yea and the
kings Parliament. Sir Rob. Cotton justifies it from the Parliament Rowles. Sir
Rob. Cotton p. 8.
Henry IV. began his first Parliament. November. 1. Ib. p. 9.
The King began his second Parliament Jan. 20. And of Henry VII. thus: Ib p. 11.
It is no doubt, but he would have been found as frequent in HIS GREAT COUNCIL
OF PARLIAMENT, as he was in the Star Chamber. And this very Parliament, how
often have they called themselves, The kings great Council? They are so, and
they are no more. But why am I so careful to heap up instances? Your self call
it. His, the Kings, Parliament, p. 2. and His Houses of Parliament, p. 8.

20. If then in your sense, we take the Houses without the King, there is no
Supremacy in them, either severally, or jointly: since they are but Subjects,
and the representative body of Subjects. And under this consideration they
cannot regulate other Courts, unless the king give them power to do so. But
take the Houses with the king, and then it is most true, that there is a
Supremacy in the Parliament; and that it has power to regulate all other
Courts. But this Supremacy it has by, and from the king; and from no other. We
therefore profess with that learned Mr of the Law, that Sir Ed Coke in
Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 164.
the Parliament is the HIGHEST, AND MOST HONORABLE AND ABSOLUTE COURT of
Justice of England, CONSISTING OF THE KING, the Lords of Parliament, and the
Commons. The Lords are here divided into two sorts, viz. SPIRITUAL AND
TEMPORAL. When such an Assembly meets, and each House and the Members thereof
keep themselves within their proper limits, I dare be bold to say, that this
Court is assembled as it ought, Sir Rob. Cotton p, 3.
for provision for support of the State in men and money; and well ordering of
the Church and Commonwealth; and determining of such causes, which ordinary
Courts nesciebant judicare, were not skillful to determine. Ib.
These are the causes of such Assemblies.

21. But truly, when they are thus assembled, I do not conceive, that they have
power to The Supremum jus dominis, that is over all Laws, to make or disanull
them at pleasure, is neither in the King, nor in the Houses aparti but in both
conjoined. I. G. p. 9.
make or disanull all Laws at pleasure; but upon just and necessary occasion.
For there is great danger in altering Laws without urgent cause. Innovation in
government makes an alteration in State: and sudden alterations are not for the
safety either of bodies natural, or bodies politic. Observe, what the mirror
of his time K. James speaks: In his Proclamation before the Book of Common
Prayer.
We are not ignorant of the inconveniences, that do arise in Government, by
admitting Innovasion in things once settled by mature deliberation: And Illud
exploratissimum est, leges patrias aut mutare, aut ad earum obsequium sese non
accommoda* re, negotium semper cum periculo fuisse conjuncti^simum. Smith, de
Repub. Anglorum l. 1. c. 5.
how necessary it is to use constancy in the upholding of the publik
determinations of State. For that such is the unquietness and unstedfastnesse
of some dispositions affecting every year new forms of things, as if they
should be followed in their unconstancy, WOULD MAKE ALL ACTIONS OF STATE
RIDICULOUS and contemptible. Whereas the STEADFAST MAINTAINING OF THINGS BY GOOD
ADVICE ESTABLISHED, IS THE WEAL OF ALL COMMONWEALTHS. There is often danger,
seldom pleasure in the change of Laws. Truly since the Laws-have been
neglected, and variety of Ordinances have supplied their room, Psalm. 80. 5. 6.
We have been fed with the bread of tears, we have had plentiousnesse of tears
to drink. We are become a very striffe unto our neighbors; and our enemies
laugh us to scorn.

22. That the King in Parliament does usually make or alter Laws, as the
necessity of the times, and common good of his Subjects require, is no rare
thing. Yet this ought to be done with much care and deliberation; that so
nothing be enacted, which may be justly grievous or destructive to his liege
people. Sithence, according to your determination, I. G. p. 9.
He cannot lawfully make any engagement to any, against the Laws, and LEGAL
RIGHTS of others. Your reason is because, Ib.
that were not Cedere jure suo, sed alieno, a parting with his own, but with
other men's rights. The same reason will hold against the Parliament. Suppose we
should grant, what we may not, that the King and Parliament are equals; it
follows necessarily, that whatsoever is unlawful for one, is unlawful for any
other of the same rank and power. If then it be not lawful for the King,
neither is it Lawful for his great Council, to take away the legal rights of
others against Law. And therefore not the legal Rights of Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters, or any other of the Clergy. For by the Laws of the Land, we have as
firm an interest, and as true a freehold in those possessions, wherein to we
are admitted, or inducted, as any other of his Majesty's subjects have in
theirs. Boast not of your power; Potentia sequi debet ^u^^ti^m, no^ praeire
Augde Trin l. ^^. c. 13.
power must attend upon Justice, not go before it, nor overruled it. I^ Justice
take place, it is a judicial, a just power; but if power over sway Justice,
the Government proves tyrannical.

23. As for the power of making Laws, we must know, that The forms or Acts of
parliament sometimes beein with Concessimus, or Statuit Rex And of latter times
Laws and Statutes begin, as Deinz enacted by the King, etc Declarat. of the
Kingd of Scot and, p. 19.
by the Common Law, which is guided by the light of nature, and the word of
God, that power is acknowledged to be in the King. Who is leg^^us superior, as
Not Brev. tit. Pro^ection fol 28
Fitz harbert speaks, above the Law. But the Sovereigns of this Realm to
reitifie the tender care they have of their peoples welfare, and the desire
they have to enjoy their love, have so far condescended in the Stature Law,
that they will not henceforth do so without the advice and assent of the
Houses. This is not to give them a Supremacy, but to admit them to advice.
This is the way to win the most refractary, to submit to those Laws, whereto
they have given consent either in person, or by proxy. Besides, P^u^imum ^acit
ad populum corrigendum multorum in una re sententia atque consensus. Hieron. in
Gal. 1. 2.
what is concluded on with good advice, by Common consent, and has the
opprobation of diverse wise, learned, and religious persons, gives better
satisfaction to all in general, then what is done by one alone, be it never so
well done. And yet to this day the power of ordeining, establishing and
enacting Laws, is reserved wholly to the Crown. Most of these Statute Laws are
as so many Royal legacies bequeathed to this Nation, by the several
Sovereigns and Fathers of this Country. Sir Ed: Coke in Mag Chart. c. 1.
Not a Liberty or privilege, Sir Ed. Coke in Litleton, l. 2. Sect. 139.
not any Land or tenement, but is originally derived from the Crown. Such has
been the goodness and bounty of our Princes to us their unworthy subjects. All
we have, is from them: and now we take all from them. Is this gratitude? We
serve God and the King alike; we are resolved to seize upon all, that is called
sacred. And I have learned, that not only Notit* Imperii Orient. c. 159.
the Kings house, but Lex terrae. p. 5.
his very lands are called in Law Patrimonium sacrum, the holy Patrimony. Is
not this that sacra fames, that sacred hunger, which is so greedy of all that
is called sacred?

24. Brand not us, poor Clergymen, with foul and fained aspersions; delude
not the People with false and forged suggestions. This Oath to the Clergy,
cannot engage him against the legal privileges of the people, or Parliament I.
G. p. 9.
Whose legal privileges, or rights have we invaded, or sought after? When did
we ever desire, or persuade his Majesty, to do the least injury to people, or
Parliament? Your own conscience clears us in the general. And your own
profession is, that I. G p. 5. 6.
you cannot but have a better conceit of the major part of the Clergy, at this
time, that they will not be so tenacious of their wealth and honor, as t^ let
the Crown run an hazard. If then we will, and have parted with that, which is
justly ours, rather then in the least manner we would prejudice the king, or
wrong our own consciences; certainly we cannot persuade the king Ib. p. 9.
to make any engagement to us, against the Laws, and legal rights of others.
If any particular person have offended in this kind, we make no Apology for
him: upon just proof let him have a legal censure. This Kingdom cannot but
take notice, that we have been so far from incroaching upon others, that we
have parted with u^ own rights, though not with Gods. We have deserted all we
had, to preserve a good conscience. This is truly cedere jure suo, to part with
our own, that we may not fail that trust, which is committed to us. We
justify Gods right, and lose our own.

25. We confess, that I. G. p. 9.
the king is bound to maintain the legal privileges of people and Parliament;
but not so, as to destroy Gods rights, or the privileges of his Ministers.
That be far from him. Romans 137.
Suum cuique, the true Princely justice is, to be just to God and man; to give
God what is his, and impartially to his subjects, what is theirs, as also what
truly belongs to them in their several places and professions. His Majesty
knows full well, that the liberties of the Subject, the privileges of
Parliament, and rights of the Clergy, have long consisted and prospered
together. Take away the Vine, and the Elm will bear no fruit; take away the
Elm, and the Vine will fall to the ground, and be trod to dirt.

26. That One of which is to be ready, by confirming needful Bills to relieve
the^ against whatsoever grievance they suffer from any. I. G. p. 10.
the King has been always ready to confirm needful (not wanton, not
malicious, not destructive) Bills, cannot be denied by any of his impartial
and conscionable subjects. The quarrel raised against him is, because he will
not suffer Gods inheritance, and the Churches patrimony to be devoured; because
he will not endure Gods service, and all Religion to be trampled on; because he
end eavours to relieve his poor people the Clergy, against whatsoever
greivance they suffer, or threatened to be enforced upon them. The same favor
he always has, and is at this time forward to afford to all his good people,
and loyal subjects. Yea, even to those, that are neither good, nor loyal.

27. But before I take my leave of your Case of Conscience, I shall resolve
you, what a pious design you have ventered on, and what a rock you have run
your self upon. You will, I hope like the better of it, because it comes from
that Law, you most delight in. The Statute says, 25 Ed. 3. 2.
when a man secular or Religious slays his Prelate; to whom he OWES FAITH
AND OBEDIENCE, it is Treason. If then it be Treason to slay the Prelate, what
sin is it to murder Prelacy? certainly by how much the sin is greater to
destroy the species, all mankind, then one particular man; by so much is the
Treason more heinous more abominable to kill Episcopacy, then any one Bishop
whatsoever. And yet this you have endeavored to the utmost of your power. For
this I shall leave you to the Law, and to those, 1. S. ^et. 2. 14.
whom the King shall send for the punishment of evil doers. Pray we therefore
for the safety of our Sovereign, and that he may with speed be restored to his
throne; for these times have made us sensible with Rabbi Chanina, that Apud Jo.
Coch in Notis ad Maccoth c. 1. n. 31.
were it not for fear of him, alter alterum vivus devoraret, one would devour
another quick.

28. Thus I think the Case is sufficiently cleared, that notwithstanding the
Kings Oath to the Clergy at his Coronation, he may consent to the extirpation
of Prelaey out of the Church of England. I. G. p. 10
Thus I think, by this time, I may safely conclude, that it is sufficiently
cleared, that neither as a king, nor as a Christian, may his Majesty in
Justice, or conscience, engage himself, or yield consent either to the
extirpation of Episcopacy out of this Church of England, or to the abrogation
of the just privileges of his Clergy, or to the alienation of their Lands.
Since by your confession, Ib. p. 9.
he cannot lawfully make any engagement to any, against the Laws and legal
rights of others. And the King is so just; that he will never do, what he
cannot lawfully do.

Observe the plagues of such men, as are never touched with the miseries of
others. They commonly fall under the same judgment, which others unpittied have
tasted before. D. Corn. Burges. Fire of the Sanct. p. 50. 51.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 6. l. 34 Melsalinus, r. Messalinus. p. 20. l. 34. Cardiner r. Gardener.
P. 21. l. 33. let, r. set. p. 30. l. 21. perpetull, r perpetual. p. 31. l 29.
cut off. r. cast off p. 33. l. 20 teneatur, r. tenetur Ib. l. 23 possit. r.
posse. Ib. in marg. l 12 quisquis r. quisque p. 34 l. 12. are you of r. you are
of. Ib l. 16. Nation r. Nation into Ib l. 3^ disolate. r. desolate. p. 35 l 29.
VIII. r. VII. p 38 l* o Rives r River. p. 44. l. 7 depends, r. depend. Ib. l.
17. obstinentis r. obtinentis. p. 51 in marg. l. 13 concessimo, r. concessimus.
p 53. l. nlt. distructive, r. destructive, p. 54. l. 10. not upon, r. not set
upon. p 55 l. 25. abolishet, r. abolished. p. 50. l 2. Overnor, r. Governor. p.
60 l. 21. changing term, r. changing the term. Ib, l 32. 1. and the
Ministerial. p. 6^. l. 2. yet r. that p. 83 l ult ttle, r. little. p 84 l. 34.
distroied, r destroyed. p. ^^0. l. penult. regular, r. regulate p. 111. l. 18.
the Justice, r. the Justices. p. 113 l. 17. after, r. alter. p 116. in marg. l.
24. other, r. others,


