A SUMMARY OR COMPENDIUM, OF The Life of the most Famous PHILOSOPHER Renatus
Descartes.

Written originally in Latin by Peter Borellus Physician to the French King; to
which is also added an Epitome of his Life by Marcus Zurius Boxhornius
Historiographer at Leyden.

LONDON, Printed by E. Oaks, for George Palmer at the King and Duke of York's
Head near Arundel-House in the Strand, 1670.

The Authors Epistle Dedicotory to Paul Pellisonius Fontanerius, Counselor,
and Secretary to the French King, Kingdom, and Crown of France.
SInce you have vouchsafed, from my very infancy, to show your benevolence
toward me, and to oblige me to you by many signal favors; I should be guilty
of gross ingratitude, if I left not some Monument of my Respects to You. Permit
me therefore, Renowned Sir, to wear your Name in the Front of this small
Treatise, which may produce a larger. I shall not undertake, according to the
usual mode of Epistolary Addresses of this nature, to expatiate upon your
deserved commendation, which, I am confident, is unwelcome to You, and
sufficiently known to all the World: All I desire is, that the present and
future Age may testify, that I am no ways unmindful of the benefits You have
been pleased to confer upon me; and that I shall ever acknowledge my self to be
infinitely obliged to You:

Farewell.
THis Translation, or rather Collection, out of Peter Borellus, Physician to
the French King; and Marcus Zurius Boxhornius Historiographer in the University
of Leyden, presents you with the Life of the Famous Monsieur Descartes, giving
you an account of his Parentage and Education, during his Minority, as well as
the Course and Method of his Study, in his Riper Years; together, with an exact
Catalogue of all his Manuscripts, which were found at Stockholme in Swedeland,
after his Death; and the names of all his Books that have been Published, with
the Places where they were Printed; as also the several Epitaphs that were
bestowed upon him by his Contemporaries, after his Decease. If this Epitome
receive a kind entertainment; it is very probable (when the Author, according to
promise, exposes a larger Treatise to public View, concerning this Subject)
that it may be also taught to speak English, for the satisfaction of those who
want the advantage of the Latin, and are only skilled in our Mother Tongue.
This Compendious Discourse of the Life of so Eminent a Person, and great a
Light in the Firmament of Learning, is all that we can furnish you with at
present, till we meet with an opportunity to gratify you with a more Complete
Relation in a larger Volume.

THE LIFE OF Renatus Descartes.
THat there are certain Wits, whom Nature (like her most conspicuous
Luminaries) only exposes to view, and immediately withdraws them from our
sight; and by a certain kind of envy, for which I want a name, suddenly
snatcheth away with one hand, what she liberally contributed with the other, is
a thing notorious to all men. Yet such Wits are rarely produced by her in the
compass of an Age. Wherefore the Great Descartes being one of that number, it
seems to me a piece of injustice and ingratitude, that the Life of so famous a
Person should never as yet be printed or published in any place whatsoever. And
although, my stilebe too unpolisht for so sublime a Subject; yet I have
presumed to make an Essay in this weighty matter, and endeavored to give you a
Compendium, the proportion of the foot of that Lion, as a forerunner of a more
full description of his Life, hoping it may be acceptable; to the end, that so
great a Light might not be in a manner hid under a Bushel; for what the Roman
Naso sang of old concerning Pythagoras, we may deservedly apply to him.

-- isque licet regione remotus
Mente Deos adiit, and quae Natura negavit
Visibus humanis, oculis ea pecteris hausit;
Cumque animo, and vigili perspexerat omnia cura
In medium discenda dabat --
Translated to my hands by Mr. Sands.

Though far from Heaven his minds divine ascent
Drew near the Gods, what Natures self denies
To humane sight, he saw with his Souls eyes,
With studious care his knowledge he professed.
This renowned Person began to draw his first Breath in the year 1596, between
the Britains and Poictevins, in the City called Castrum Eraldum, born of a most
Noble Father, Senator of his Country, whose Family was illustrious for their
ancient Nobility, and was the only Son of his second Wife; he was a man of no
mean estate, since he had between six and seven thousand pounds a year.

He himself has given you a Relation of his first course of Life, in the third
Page of his Treatise de Methodo, as Claubergius Professor at Teutoburg upon the
Rhine has observed; who affirms that Descartes made every thing that was
knowable, the Subject of his study, being in one of the best Colleges,
imagining that he should find out the Truth among those that were Learned; but
being frustrated of his expectation, nine years were elapsed, before he could
discover what Course he was to steer.

He was thin faced, of a pleasant countenance, speaking seldom, but
excellently; healthful, sober, concealing his own parts, a hater of Disputes,
but by proving the truth, he detected error, a most bitter enemy to
ostentation; preferring Reason before authority, though he made use of it: he
delighted to discourse with Women; he often desired the renown of other
persons, as he himself tefieth; for he was no Boaster; nay, he was so modest,
that he had not the confidence to assert what he understood.

He was educated and taught in the Schools of Flexia, and had run through the
whole course or race of his Study at seventeen years of Age.

His Portraicture is carried about in all places, and in Holland and Paris to
be had in Copper: and because he was good both at the Pen and the Pike, he
loved the valiant as well as the prudent and Learned, and so by a happy
conjunction of Arms and Arts, in his younger years he made it his business to
understand Military Discipline among the Hollanders, the best Nursery for
Soldiers; and as a Voluntary underwent all the dangers of War without any Pay,
for the space of three years, he only received one Duplio, a piece of Money so
called which he always kept as the Monument of his Warfare; he also refused
public command, because he had a desire to perform the duty of a private
Soldier, that he might be the better acquainted with that Art, and the
laboriousness thereof; and was twice present at the Siege of Breda, and in the
Battle of Prague, from whence he visited Italy, having first taken a view of
the large Engines of Tycho Brahe, and discoursed with his Relations.

But in Italy he met with Galileus and other eminent Persons, and thence he
came to the Siege of Capha or Gava near Genoa, and at length returned to
France, and was present at the Siege of Rochel, and in other Military
Expeditions; nay, he went voluntarily to that Siege. He performed a memorable
thing before Cardinal Barbarini, the Popes Nuncio, then Cardinal Berullius and
other renowned and ingenious men, who assembled together to hear Monsieur
Chandou Dispute of the new Principles of Philosophy: and when he had gained the
applause of them all for his Speech, Descartes only excepted, they asked his
opinion concerning his Arguments, who commended the Authors Speech, but not the
Company, because they were only satisfied with a bare probabilty, and did
engage to prove any probable Truth, false, by twelve several Arguments, and so
on the contrary; which when he had attempted, they were struck with admiration
and astonishment; therefore they inquired of him, whether there was any way to
avoid Sophisms; and he assured them that the Truth might be Mathematically
demonstrated in all things according to his Principles: then they entreated him
that he would publish them; which request he was compelled to condescend unto,
and betook himself to Holland, that he might the better prepare his conceptions
for the Press.

Afterward he would needs take a journey into Denmark, where Stephen
Bressiaeus our Countryman, a most skilful Physician and Chemist, and a person
very ingenious in Mechanics (who visited him out of his earnest desire of
Learning) accompanied him; but he was detained by the Emperors Forces in the
County of Embden; then he endeavored to see Tyrol and Venice, and designed from
thence to go to the Siege of Casal, which lasted above two years after all,
which are sufficient testimonies, that he understood the Intrigues of
Government.

But he returned again to Amsterdam, being accompanied with our friend
Bressiaeus, that he might be present at the Kings return. He was in Holland in
the year 1648, and thence called by the King to Paris, upon very honorable
terms.

Whilst he continued at Paris, he so disposed of his annual Revenues, that he
might receive them by the hands of a friend where he pleased. Therefore he went
to Holland, where, in a Desert, he composed his so much applauded Works, of
which we will give you a Catalogue.

He had also before visited Germany and Huugary, whilst he was in pursuit of
the Truth; where he was present at the Emperors Coronation.

When he could not fine out that Democritical Truth among men, which lies hid,
as it were in a bottom; he fell upon the Contemplation of the Book of the
World, and of himself, and studied Anatomy, Chemistry, etc. from whence he
extracted admirable things; he was slenderly stored with Books, because he
understood they were not true, the Mathematical only excepted; wherefore being
asked by a friend, whether he had a Library, and desired to show it; lifting up
the cloth, he discovered to him a Calf dissected; Behold, says he, my
Library! O noble expression! so Hippocrates found Democritus heretofore
studying among Animals dissected: he was not tempted with the desire of gain,
honor, or worldly Dignities, but he did Philosophize, out of the love he had to
virtue, and his desire to make inquisition after the Truth. In this he did
imitate the Ancients, which was the reason that he, according to their Custom,
spent some years in Travel, and visit in the Armies, Cities and Courts of
Princes. His chiefest design was to discover the equability of Judgment, a
virtuous mind, and the necessity of a Method; whilst he followed the War, in
the Winter he employed his vacant hours in Philosophical Contemplations, and
being desirous to unlock the Arcana of the Mathematics and Philosophy with the
same Key, he did so admirably conjoyn Nature and Discipline, that he obtained
his end.

Yet he run through all the Arts and Languages, and in a short time turned over
all sorts of Books, being in quest of the Truth, he perused those that were
superstitious and false, that he might leave nothing unsaluted.

He was so excellent in Philosophy, that according to that constant desire
which he ever had of restoring Philosophy, and reforming his own knowledge, he
did invent an absolute new Philosophy, and invented the true Principles, and
most emnent Method thereof, insomuch that his works were printed in all parts,
and publicly professed by many famous men, and taught as now at Paris, where
there are several private Academies, in which his Philosophy is only read.

When he found that there was nothing worth his knowledge among men, he made
choice of a desert (as Democritus and other true Philosophers did) at Egmond in
Holland, and there led a solitary life for the space of five and twenty years,
and discovered many admirable things by his contemplation.

He was so eminent in the Mathematics, that he did things beyond apprehension,
especially about Prospectives; and to the end that he might prove his
experiments, he prepared Prospectives of a large size, either of ice or
artificial black polisht marble made hollow according to his desire, and the
various forms he phancyed by the assistance of Bressiaeus, a most ingenious
man; and when he had accomplished his design, he brake them in pieces, and made
new ones of the same matter.

And before the same Bressiaeus, by a hidden secret in the Optics he would
show him a company of soldiers marching in his chamber, which he did much
admire; but this proceeded from the small figures of Soldiers which he
concealed, and brought forth multiplied without doors. He believed the Heaven
was fluid, as in truth it is, for the air alone is the Heaven, nor differs it
from ours, therefore it is confounded in the History of Genesis.

He did acknowledge Democritus his Atoms to be the Principles of all things, as
he most excellently proved.

He had many, nay an innumerable, number of friends; among whom were Cardinal
Barbarini, and Berullius; Elizabeth Princess of Bohemia, Monsieur Chau^t,
Monsieur de Clervelier, Mervenus, Monsieur Desargnes, Monsieur Holleng,
Monsieur de Faber Governor of Sedam, Gassendus Balsaack, for whom Bressiolus
did no ill office against Father Goulu his Enemy at Cardinal Barbarini's; yet
he had some that did hate and envy him; for envy always aims at high things;
but he confuted their writings excellently. His chiefest enemies were the
Fathers of the Christian Chruch.

Cyrianus Lentulus, Confessor of Hereborn, injuriously objected to him, that he
compared himself to God, saying at the end of his notes, humane things are not
to come in competition with those that are divine; he farther says, that he
doubted all things; which is a mistake, but heretofore indeed, like the rest of
vulgar Philosophers, he was skeptical, before he had reformed Philosophy. he
calls him also a Person of small esteem; but the Learned Clanbery replies
excellently, you call him a man of mean repute, whom prudent men style Natures
Darling, and one that Pythagoras would truly call Philosopher. Revius Governor
of Westfrizeland in Holland was so bold as to call him Magician and Atheist;
and so formerly all men of great Learning were accused of being Magicians,
because they did things beyond the apprehension on of Sciolists; as Gabriel
Naudasus, in his Apology for those men that were accused for dealing with
Magic, strongly proves.

Yet so many were the plots contrived by his Antagonists Peripatetick
Professors, (whose weak sight could not endure the rays of so great a Luminary,
because like the Sun he obscured their smaller lights,) that they stirring up
their Pupils and the whole City to a mutiny, durst banish him from the City of
Vtreck by the sound of a Bell, whom Kings and Queens that were remote did in
vit, and cherished in their bosom.

The integrity of his life purged him from all calumnies; yet he on the
contrary was no Detractor, nor injurious to any person. For he never committed
injuries to memory, but to oblivion, and arrived at the wonderful knowledge of
God by contemplation on the Creatures. It were as hard a task to reckon his
followers, and admirers, as to count the stars, or number the sand.

The Learned Gassendus also, and Koberval his worthy successor, writ some
things against him; but this was done rather out of an earnest desire to
enquire after the truth, then out of any hatred; Marinus Mersenus being an
affector of curiosity, promoting and stirring them upto it, that he might
oblige men of such great parts to discourse of many rare things, to satisfy
his own curiosity.

In fine, this Learned and famous man was called from his retirement by
Christina the quondam Queen of Swedeland, and infinitely beloved by her,
insomuch that she would hear him almost constantly arguing, which much
prejudiced his health; for he being always bare, and discoursing with her, the
major part of the night, upon those subjects she most desired, by that means he
had little rest, and fell into a distemper, which he neglected, thinking it an
usual disease, and that he might soon be freed from it; but when shortly after
he perceived it was another kind of malady, and understood it was an
inflammation of the Lungs; he ordered a vein tobe opened, which proved
ineffectual, and on the seventh day of his disease, he deceased: which proves
these known Verses to be true;

Annos and Regnum Filii Regente,
Legatus Ordinarius Petrus Chanul
Hoc monumentum
Ad gloriam Die, bonorum omnium datoris,
Gallici nominis honorem,
Perpetuam amici Chariss. memoriam
Renati Descartes poni curavit Anno 7. ab excessu Ludovici Justi.
The Third Front.
Renatus Descartes Perronii Dominus, etc. Ex Antiqua and nobili inter Pretones
and Armoricos gente;

In Gallia natus.
Accepta quantacunque quae in scholis tradebatur eruditione, expectatione sua
votisque minore. Ad militiam per Germaniam and Pannoniam adolescens profectus,
and in otiis hybernis naturae mysteria componens cum legibus Matheseos,
Vtriusque arcanaeadem clave reserari posse ausus est sperare.

Et omissis fortuitorum studiis, in villula solitarius, prope Egmundum in
Hollandia,

Assidua 25. annorum meditatione, auso potitus est;

Hinc orb toto celeberrimus:

A Rege suo conditionibus honorificis evocatus:

Redierat ad contemplationis delicias, unde avulsus, admiratione virtutum,
Maximae Reginae;

Quae quicquid ubique excelluit suum fecit, Gratisssimus advenit, serio est
auditus, and defletus obiit.

The fourth Front.
Noverint posteri Qualis vixerit Renatus Descartes;

Vt cujus doctrinam olim suscipient, mores imitentur, post instauratam a
fundamentis Philosophiam,

Apertam ad penetralia Naturae Mortalibus viam

Novam, certam, solidam.

Hoc unum reliquit incertum, Major in eo modestia esset, an scientia. Quae vera
scivit verecunde affirmavit.

Falsa, non contentionibur, sed vero admoto refutavit: nullius Antiquorum
obtrectator, nemini viventium gravis.

Invidorum criminationes purgavit innocentia morum:

Injuriam negligens, am irtiae tenax, quod summum tandem est:

Ita per Creaturarum gradus ad Creatorem est conatus;

Vt opportunus Christo, gratiae authori, in avita Religione quiesceret.

I nunc viator, and cogita, Quantus fuerit, Christinaeque qualis aula, cui
mores isti placuerunt.

This Monument was in form four square, but somewhat long, eight foot and a
half in height, four in breadth, and seven foot and a half in length; the
height or pile had three Divisions: the Basis being somewhat larger with three
pedestals, the Tables whereon the Inscriptions were, were four, and the
Ornament at the top made of one stone covering the whole monument a foot and a
half.

Many persons besides bestowed Epitaphs upon him at his Death; which we judge
not convenient to be here inserted.

He left many posthumous Works, as well published as in Manuscript; the latter
Monsieur Chaunt Ambassador in ordinary of Swedeland preserves, and de
Clervelier, who will shortly publish his select Epistles.

A Catalogue of the Manuscripts of Descartes, found at Stockholm after his
Death. Anno 1650.
A. December codices Responsionum ad quaesita eruditorum circa Mathematicas
disciplinas.

B. De Numeris irrationalibus, de quantitate linearum quae in dato circulo
inscriptae sunt quantitatem Circumferentiae cui datae lineae subtenduntur,
cognoscere, aliaque propostta ac demonstrationes.

Problema ad numerum reperiendum, cujus parts aliquotae sub duplices sint.

Propositio de Parabolis compositis, and de partibus aliquotis numerorum.

Cogitationes variae de animo.

Quaestiones quaedam de numeris.

Considerationes quaedam Physicae incipientes.

Quare pueri labuntur in somnum, dum cunae concutiuntur.

Promiscuae Animadversiones de coelis.

Physicae Quaestiones, and Consideratio Physica.

Thaumantis Regia.

Epistola de Mersenum.

Liber anni 1619. Kal. Jan. sub titulo Parnassi de considerationibus
Mathematicis.

C. Olympica and ad marginem 11. Novembris coepi intelligere fundamentum
inventi mirabilis.

Quaedom in scientias considerationes.

Quaedam de Algebra. Democritica. Experimenta. Praeambula.

D. Introductio ad Algebram suam 155. page

E. Scriptum sic inciens. Vitellio sic numerat.

Aliud, Metallorum pondera. Primae cogitationes circa generationes animalium
19. fol. cont.

De Magnete Kircheri. De formatione Animalium. 5. folia.

Historiae Metallorum. Remedia, and vires Medicamentorum.

Observationum de natura Plantarum and Animalium page: 16.

De partibus in inferiore ventre contentis.

F. Codices novem de Regulis utilibus and claris, ad ingenii directionem in
veritatis inquisitiene.

G Descriptio Corporis humani. De natura Hominis and Animalium; an imperfect
piece.

H. Progymnasinata de partibus aliquotis numerorum.

1. Epistolae.

K. Secunda pars tractatus de Passionibus.

L. Querela Apologetica ad amplissimum Senatum Vltrajectinum, contra Voetium
and Dematium.

M. Progymnasmata de solidorum Elementis.

N. De natura Passionumnimae.

O. Sub forma Epistolae ad Dominos...... nine Books.

P. Collectanea de calculo ad Geometriam utilia; in twelve Books.

Q. Veritatis Inquisitio Lumine naturali. fol. 13.

R. De Musica fol. 8. written in the year 1618.

S. Explicatio machinarum, quarum open, parvis cum viribus, magna tolli possunt
onera. 6. page

T. Epistolarum ad varios fol. 262. in 4o.

V-Epistol. ad Serenissimam Principissam Bohemiae 19. fol. in 4o. and two in 80.

X. De doctrina Principiorum suorum, in 14. leaves, but in some things varying
from the Treatise published of that Subject.

Y. Tractatus de Geometria.

Z. De responsionibus ad Objectiones quasdam, etc. in 14 several leafes. These
are is Manuscripts.

Here follow those works of his that were published in French and Latin.
Method de bien conduire la raison, pour trouver la verite dans les sciences.
16. 7. 4. Besides, la Dioptrique les Meteores and la Geometry, which are
essays of that method, Printed at Leyden, and sold by John le Maire.

Renati Descartes meditationes de prima Philosophia, in which God's existencie,
and the immortality of the Soul is demonstrated; at Paris, by Michael Soly in
S. James' street, at the sign of the Phoenix, Anno 1641. in 80. It contains six
meditations, and answers to some objections; He also dedicates his Opus
Theologicum to Gassendus, printed at Paris.

Renati Descartes meditationes de prima Philosophia. In which God's existencie,
and the distinction between the soul and body of man are demonstrated; to which
are several objections made by learned men against those demonstrations of God
and the Soul, with the Author's answer thereunto. The second edition, with the
Addition of seven objections never before made public, at Amsterdam, by Lewis
Elzevir, Anno 1642. in 24. with the Epistle of Father Dinet the Jesuit, in
which he answers many objections made by a certain person.

Renati Descartes Principia Philosophiae, dedicated to Elizabeth eldest
daughter of Frederick King of Bohemia, Count Palatine, and Elector of the
sacred Roman Empire, Printed at Amsterdam, for Lewis Elzevir, Anno 1644. It
contains four parts; to which are annexed his Specimina Philosophiae, seu
dissertatio de methodo rectae regendae rationis and veritatis investigandae.
His Dioptrice and Meteora translated out of French, perused and corrected by
the Author.

Les Passions de l' Ame, par Rene Descartes, at Amsterdam, by Lewis Elzevir,
An. 1650, in 8. In this Treatise there are three parts; it was published by
Monsieur Degmont, who adds the Epistle he writ to him concerning that Subject.

Clauberg quotes his Meditationes, Objectiones, Responsiones, and Epistolae ad
Dinetum, Voetium; the third Edition, by Elzevit, Anno 1650.

Geometria a Renato Descartes 1537. published in French, and now with the notes
of Florimond'de Beaume Counfellour to the French King in the Court at Blois,
turned into Latin, and illustrated with a Comment; by the labor and industry
of the Mathematics in that University, Printed for John Maire, at Leyden, An.
1640. in quarto.

This Treatise of Geometry, with his Specimina Philosophiae Descartes,
published in French without a name to it; but it being earnestly desired by
many persons who were ignorant in the French Tongue, Schelten translated it
into Latin and published it.

Renati Descartes Musicae compendium. Trajecti ad Rhenum, Printed by Gilbert a
Zull and Theodorus ab Ackersdijck, Anno 1650. in quarto.

Les Meditations Metaphysiques de Rene Descartes, touchant la Premiere
Philosophy. In which God's Existencie, and the real distinction between the
Soul and the Body of man, are demonstrated, translated out of the Authors
Latin, into French, by Monsieur le D. D. L. N. S. and

Les objections faits contre ces Meditations par diverses persons Doctes,
avec les responces del' Autheur; Translated by M. B. L. R. Printed at Paris,
and sold by the Widow of John Camusat and Peter le Petit; as also

La responce au recueil de ses principales Instacnes. This Translation was by a
great Lord.

Books composed concerning Descartes his Philosophy, either approving, or
disapproving thereof.
Nova Renati Descartes sapientiae, fusiore quam antehac, methodo detecta, by
Lentulus.

De Philosophia Cartesiana amplectenda, ambigendi impellentes causas initio
suae novae sapientiae, in octavo by Clauberg, who relates and confutes them.

De methodus Carthesianae consideratione Theologica, by James Revius, Dr. in
Divinity and President of the College of the most Illustrious States of
Holland and Westfriesland.

Abstersio Calumniarum. By the same Author.

Statera Philosophiae Carthesianae, by the same person.

Defensio Carthesiana adversus Revium Theologum Leidensem, and Cyriacum
Lentulum Professorem Here bornensem, by John Cla uberg professor in the public
University of Teutoburg upon the Rhine; pars prior exoterica, in qua Renati
Cartesii dissertatio de methodo vindicatur, simul illustria Carthesiana Logica
and Philosophica Specimina exhibentur; at Amsterdam, by Lewis Elzevir, 1641. 6.

La Philosophy Divisce entoutes ses parties, Establisur des Principes evidens,
and expliquee en Tables and Discourse ou particuliers, ou tiresdes anciens and
des nouveauk Autheurs, and principalement des Peripateticiens, and de
Descartes, Composed by James de Roure at Paris, and sold by Thomas Jolly, Anno
1654. in 12.

Abstersio macularum Renati Descartes.

Notae and Sermo extemporaneus, three Books heretofore made concerning
Cartesius in Holland, where many rare things are discourst of, concerning him.

Disquisitio Metaphysica, seu dubitationes and instantiae adversus Renati
Cartesii Metaphysicam and Responsa. Printed at Amsterdam by John Bleau, Anno
1649, in quarto; Dedicated to Serberius.

Considerations sur le Traite des Monsieur Descartes des passions de l'Ame, By
N. Papin Dr. in Physic, Printed at Paris, sold by Simon Piget, in the rue St.
Jaques a la Syrene, Anno 1652, in octavo. Where be expiatiates in the praise of
Descartes.

Brevis replicatio reposita brevi explicationi meant is humanae, seu animae
rationis domini Henrici Regii Med. ac Phil. Ultrajectini notis Cartesii in
programma ejusdem argumenti firmandis, veritatique magis illustrandae; By
Tobias Andreas A. L. M. Greek and Latin Professor in the University of the
States of Groenig and Oulandia, Printed at Amsterdam, by Lew is Elzevir. an.
1653.

Henrici Regii Ultrajectini Philosophiae naturalis editio secunda, priore multa
locupletior and emendatior, Published at Amsterdam, by Lew is Elzevir, 1654.

Specimina Philosophiae Cartesianae, by Dan. Lipstorp Lubeker, to which is
added by the same Author Copernicus Redivivus, at Leyden, by John and Daniel
Elzevir. Anno 1653.

Physique expliquee suivant le sentiment des amiens and des nouveaux
Philosophes, and Principalement de Descartes by James de Roure, the second
Edition printed at Paris, by Thomas Jolly. Anno 1654.

Monsieur de Clercelier will suddenly publish his Epistles translated by
Monsieur Picot, as also his Objections he has put in another Language.
Monsieur Hollenc, a Dutchman, has many of his Epistles with their Answers.
Francis Schoten, Professor of the Mathematics at Leyden, in his Epistle to the
Reader, styles him a most Noble and incomparable Person.

These Verses are deservedly placed upon his Effigies.

Talis erat vultu Naturae filius unus.
Qui mente in matris viscera pandit iter,
Assignansque suis quaevis miracula causis,
Miraculum in reliquum solus in orb fuit.
Here Is Natur's Darling in Effigy,
Who reached his Mothers secrets by his brains,
The natural cause of wonders shows, whilst He
The only wonder of the world remains.
He had an admirable method peculiar to himself, which he made use of; and by
which he examined all Propositions; first whether they were possible, and then
by the same method he taught the solution of them; which is judged to be
contained in his Geometry.

I shall not attempt the relation of the Elegies bestowed upon him, because
they are infinite; it shall suffice if I affirm that he was deservedly
applauded by all Authors that writ of him; among whom John Clauberg extols his
modesty and other qualifications in a Speech.

Henry More, a Learned Englishman, in his judgment of his dissertations speaks
thus of him.

In your method by a certain elegant and sportive kind of modesty, you manifest
your self a man of such parts that nothing can be phansied or desired more
pleasant or amiable then your virtuous inclination, and natural disposition,
nothing more noble or generous.

Gassendus himself could not avoid writing to him thus.

To the famous Renatus Descartes;

Renowned Sir, Our friend Mersenus made me happy, when he communicated those
your sublime meditations concerning the first Philosophy; for the excellency
of the argument, the readiness of the wit, and the perspicuity of the style was
wonderfully taking; therefore I do freely rejoice on your behalf, that you
should so nobly and successfully attempt to advance the bounds of Learning, and
facilitate those things that were counted the most absttuse in all former Ages.

A certain Divine objecting against his meditations expresses himself thus;

Truly, as far as I can perceive, Monsieur Descartes is a man of such admirable
wit and great modesty, that Maevius himself could not but fall in love with
him, if he were present,

We thought it not impertinent to insert the Opinion of some persons concerning
the Place of Descartes his Nativity; which is, that he was not born in the very
Castle Eraldum, but at Tours, near that Castle.

Marcus Lurius Boxhornius Historiographer in the University of Leyden upon the
death of Descartes.
To Renatus Descartes that nocle Frenchman Sieur de Perron.
WHO knowing how much we are ignorant of, and that the greatest part of what we
know not, and that most people are ignorant of those things they boast and
presume to understand, and that by this means such things are taught and
delivered which must be unlearned; though it seemed good to him to doubt of
those hitherto received opinions of Philosophers; that doubting he might find
out a plain way to wisdom both for himself and others; who restored the
Philosophy that was aequaevous to Nature; and so consequently that which was as
true as ancient; and brought the same out of that filthy servitude wherewith it
had been enslaved for many Ages, and as it were manumitted it; who by his wit
and experiments surveying the Universal Nature of things, and making a diligent
and serious inspection into her closest cabinet counsels, was not satisfied
with those things that were ancient, for their antiquity; nor did those that
were modern dissatisfy by reason of their novelty for he was sensible that what
is now old was once new, and what is now new will in process of time become
old, but as he found them either true or false; therefore a new and true way of
Philosophizing was set up, which will continue, and in time grow old; the
famous Peter Chaunt, Ambassador from the Most Christian King to Christina, the
Most Noble and Learned Queen of Swedeland, erected this Monument with that of
Marble.

The same Authors Epitaph.
Qui sibi demeruit totum Cartesius orbem,
Extremum fati transigit ille diem.
Avia cui veterum visa est sapientia, veram
Praetulit antiquae, praeposuitque novam.
Sunt imitatores servum pecus, hunc venerare,
Naturam agnosces hoc praeeunte ducem.
Here lies Descartes who deserved to have
A world, intombed in a single Grave.
To him old Learning crabbed seemed, the true
He did prefer to the old, proposed the new;
They are dull that Ape him, do you reverence pay
To him that taught, that nature leads the way.
These verses were annexed by Christian Hugenius, to the Effigies of Descartes,
lively represented by Francis Schoten.
Primus inaccessum qui per tot secula verum
Eruit e terris longae ealiginis umbras,
Mysta sagax. Natura, tuus sic cernitur orbi
Cartesius: Voluit sacros in imagine vultus
Jungere victurae artificis pia dextera famae;
Omnia ut aspicerent quem saeculo nulla tacebunt.
Truth that lay shrouded in the veil of night
For many Ages, he first brought to light:
Thus Nature, thy Interpreter, we see
Carts; and the Artist strives by skill that he
May match his Statue to his long-lived fame;
To let all see each Age proclaims his Name.
Thus the great Descartes lived and died, after four months residence in
Swedeland; where, in that small tract of time, he had so ingratiated himself in
the favor of the Queen, that, as Daniel Lipstorp, Professor of Philosophy at
Lubeck, affirms, she did condescend to water his arm with her tears; he left
us wonderful praises of him, and proves that he was accounted chief among those
persons that were eminent above other men; and that Philosophy was beholding to
the same Descartes for a new birth; and relates many things concerning his
life, viz. that his Father was a noble person of Poictiers, and lived a private
life at the Town of Limonum in that country, a long time; and that afterward
he was made Lord President in the chief Court of Kenes in the Duchy of
Britany, who died whilst Descartes was in the Low Countries. He goes on
farther; that he made his Compendium Musicae when he was twenty years of age.
He gained Vreter, and Becman Moderator of the College of Dort, and a most
Famous Philosopher and Mathematician, as his friends and admirers, soon after
he had solved those Propositions in his Method which were thought impossible
for all persons. But before he betook himself to his retiring place, he had
seen the Military Discipline of France, the Low Countries, Denmark, Germany and
Italy. At Vlme he saluted John Faulhabertus a Famous Mathematician, and when he
had cleared unto him many knotty difficulties in the Mathematics, as also to
Peter Roten of Norimberg a Mathematician, he soon gained the love of all the
learned Men there.

Then he visited the more Northern parts of Germany, and saw Pomerania, the
Marquisate of Brandenburgh, Megapolis, Holsatia, Denmark, and from thence went
to Holland; afterward he went to Italy through the Netherlands, and then
arrived in France, and resided three years at Paris. There he was acquainted
with Monsieur Claudius Mydorgius a Parisian Senator, and Treasurer of France;
Florimond de Beaune a Senator in the Court of Parliament at Blois, John
Baptista Morinus Mathematical Professor, etc.

Then leaving Paris, as also his Brothers, Sisters, etc. He came to his
Philosophical Retirement at Egmond, where he continued some time; then he was
at Endegest, then at Amsterdam, then at Leward in Westfrizeland, then at
Daventry, then again in a little village near Harlem, then again at Harderwick,
then at Vtrecht in Holland, then at Leyden; but he most frequently lived in
villages, where he composed his books in this subsequent order; his
Dissertation concerning Method, his Dioptricks and Meteorologicks: then his
Geometry, upon which Treatise Florimond de Beaune and Francis Schoten made
Annotations; then he compiled his Meditations, and his Principles of
Philosophy; he also made his Tractate of Man, of the Generation of Animals, and
his Geometrical Analysis, which will speedily be published: as also a small
Treatise concerning Mechanics, which with two Epistles to the most Serene
Princess Elizabeth, I have delivered to the Printer, that they may be made
public.

Among his friends and admirers are to be reckoned C. Salmasius, S. Maresius,
Abraham Heidan, Professors in Divinity; Adrian Herebord, James Golins, John de
Raey a Physician, Godfrey ab Hastrecht a noble Leodicensian, Cornelius Heegland
a noble Dutchman, Monsieur Picot a noble Frenchman, Monsieur Chilot the
Mathematician, and an innumerable number of other persons.

That we may also lay some stone to adorn the Tomb of Descartes, take this
Epitaph of him.

The Epitaph of Descartes.
Siste gradum, Viator; hic enim in parvulo isto Sarcophago vir latet, quem
totus vix olim orbis continere potuerat; ingenio enim suo omnes antiquos super
avit Philosophos. Is fuit qui Naturae velum, quo se ab hominum conspectu
retrahebat, solus amovit, quique rebus antiquis, novitatem, obscuris lucem, and
novis authoritatem dedit: sed immodicis brevis sit aetas, and rara senectus,
nobis subito ereptus est; senex enim ante aetatem profunda sua et universali
eruditione cum esset, mors illum pro vero seen in aetatis suae flore sustulit.
Lacrymis tuis dignus fuit profecto quisquis es, praesertim si literariae
Reipublicae membrum existas: erat enim Doctorum ornamentum, Philosophorum
gemma, Mathematicorum Corona. Hominumque omnium Decus; virtutes omnes in illo
tanquam Gratiae conjunctae manibus erant; adeo ut dubitasses quaenam earum in
eo magis emineret, ut sol inter astra minuta, vel Luna inter ignes minores, per
totum orbem effulsit. Cumque non sibi, sed aliis natus esset, unicuique fere
Nationi per aliquod tempus sese ostendit, ut eas grata sua praesentia
erudieret. Lugeant ergo omnes immaturum ejus obitum, ejusque exemplo caeteri
Philosophi filo Cartesiano quod in suis nobis reliquit seriptis e rerum Naturae
Labyrinthis sese extrlcare tentent, ut tanquam Pygmaei Gigantis illius humeris
insistentes aliquid, si possibile sit, ulterius conspicere valiant; ad hominum
omnium, praecipue Literatorum, utilitatem, propriamque suam laudem, nostri
semper Authoris lauds decantantes, quod viam ad abstrusiora penetranda iis
monstraverit, quodque veritatis in profundo delitescentes detegendi amore
eremos longissimo tempore coluerit, ut tandem scientia satiati quantum apud
homines licet, cum illo ad Beatorum seeds conscendere valiant.

Now, Courteous Reader, you have the promised Epitome of the Life of Descartes,
and of all things that could possibly come to our knowledge concerning him; may
you enjoy it with all the satisfaction imaginable; and if we find that this is
acceptable, it will be an encouragement to us to offer unto you something more
perfect.

Addition.
Cornelius ab Hogeland dedicated his Cogitationes de Existentia Dei, and Animae
Spiritualitate, etc. to Monsieur Descartes.

FINIS.
Observations out of a French Epistle of Descartes, to Father Marinus Mersenus.
THe reason why I am of opinion that some certain portions of the most subtle
parts of the blood are conveyed to the stomach and intestines through the
Arteries to help digestion, is, first, because I have observed that the saliva
or spittle, which when we eat, or have a desire thereunto, and have only an
imaginative faculty, comes to the mouth in such abundance, proceeds not only
from the kernels or Glandules arising from the root of the tongue (or probably
proceeds only to the throat (unless it be transferred to the mouth of the
vessels by the assistance of the tongue) but from the Arteries arising from the
gums: for I have made so clear an experiment hereof, that beyond all dispute
the same work is performed by these Arteries which are carried to the
Intestines and Ventricle; since we see that purgative medicines do draw the
largest quantity of humors from the whole body to the Intestines, and we know
no other passage (in my apprehension) to those humors; for the veins are
obstructed by a thousand valves, as may be experimented if both in the
mesenterium of a live Dog be tied, the Arteries between the Intestines and the
Ligature will swell, and no farther; and the venae lacteae as well as the other
veins do the contrary. But those Sanguinal parts which enter into the stomach
cannot retain it is reddish color, no more then the saliva (which helps the
digestion of food whilst masticated in the mouth) nor of tears or sweat which
are by the same means separated from the blood, passing through the extremities
of the Arteries; for this redness proceeds from its more viscous parts, which I
judge are of irregular forms, and resemble twigs which mutually embrace and
intersect one another; and this is the reason they cannot possibly make their
way through such narrow passages, but only those that are most subtle, which I
fancy to resemble needles that pierce the narrowest holes; and the faculty of
their segregation is sufficiently and experimentally manifested in extravasated
blood; for we see that after Phlebotomy the serous matter of the blood in the
Porringer separates it self, and is clear; whereas the remainder which is red
or black is congealed. As to the cause of Chylification in the veins, I know no
other but that which causes the Intestines to lie out of the belly when
wounded with a sword, viz. the compression of the cuticles or other particles
which contain them; and besides, the more fluid parts of that Chyle are capable
of this penetration by their own weight without compression: like water which
passes from coagulated milk or curds, through the holes of the vessel into
which it is put by their own natural agitation; for I conceive that every part
of any liquor is in perpetual motion; and farther, the action of the muscles
does very much conduce hereunto, in regard that it causes the parts of the
Chyle from that part of the holes where it finds a passage, to enter into the
venae lacteae as well as the other veins; for I make no difference between
them, but only this, that their juice is white, because they are accompanied
with none of the Arteries; but the others red, because intermixed with the
blood flowing from the Ar- Nor do I only reckon the pectoral muscles, those of
the Abdomen and Diaphragm in the number of muscles, but almost all the whole
substance of the Intestines and Ventricle; and I have made this observation in
the dissection of live Dogs, that their Intestines have a regular motion,
nearly resembling that of respiration. But this motion of the muscles is not so
absolutely necessary, as the motion of the sieve is to expel the dust, because
then the parts of the Chyle have a voluntary motion of their own, which the
other has not. And this comparison of the searse or sieve does please me
extraordinarily, and seems very proper for the explaining of the various
separations of the blood which are made in the Cystis fellea, the Reins, and
other parts of the body, the Spleen only excepted; for I do not judge that the
melancholique humor therein is conveyed thither by the means of this
separation; but I rather think that the blood gains this quality in the spleen
it self. For some Serses are made to separate the dust from the grain that is
round in shape; others, in which Oats and not Rye are sifted; others on the
contrary are made for Rye, and not for Oats, and that according to the
largeness and figure of their holes; and by this means I am of opinion that
those small ductus by which the Choler passes to its Cystis, are of a
different forth from those by which the serum is transmitted to the Reins, etc.
And as to that clammy substance, or filthy matter which is sometimes found in
Urine; that generally flows from the Reins, or such parts as are subject
thereunto; and if it happen that it proceeds from the superior parts, the
reason of that may be gathered from hence, that it proceeds from more
penetrative parts then those by which the blood is dyed with a red color;
because they penetrate a place, which passages the other could not permeate;
for by what means can we imagine that the blood should be impeded, but that it
may flow through such passages as are large enough for it is reception.

This Noble Extract out of Descartes contains many rare modern opinions in
Anatomy, which possibly may prove advantageous, if truly and equally balanced.

The Abstract of another Epistle to the same person, Anno. 1632.
I Am not so rude, but that I desire all persons should think well of me, yet I
had rather they should not at all make mention of me, for I am more fearful
then desirous of fame; and do imagine that she always by one means or other
impairs the fruition of the leisure and liberty of those that are famous: Both
which I so perfectly enjoy, and so highly esteem, that I think there is no
Monarch in the World whose Treasury is so richly stored as to enable him to
purchase them of me: Yet all this shall not obstruct my perfecting of that
little Treatise which I have begun; but I shall desire you to conceal this,
that I may have the liberty of laying it aside; and this I do at vacant hours,
because I take much more delight in forming my own judgment, then in publishing
any of my own conceptions, of what Nature soever they be. Now I am intent both
upon Chemistry and Anatomy, and daily increase my knowledge in some particular
or other, in which the turning over of Volumes left me dissatisfied.

Out of another Epistle, to the same person.
I Cannot but admire that you should freeze water with water, and not with Ice;
since the experiment is a thing so faisible, that it is almost impossible to
err in the attempt, and I my self have effected it above a hundred times. True
it is, that a sufficient and large quantity of Oil, Ice, or Snow, is
necessarily requisite, but Snow is better than Ice, because it will better
incorporate with the Salt, and the quantity thereof must also be great about a
third or fourth part o^ the quantity of Snow, and the Vessel which contains the
fresh water used in this mixtur^ must be buried, and remain i^ the ground till
it be almost al^ melted; and the water will freeze as soon as the Snow i^
melted.

He says also, that it is not the water which hinders the light from
penetrating to the bottom of the Sea; or passing through a very thick glass,
the glass it self; but the impurities that are intermixed in them, which are
not transparent.

He farther adds, that Sea water is not so salt in havens, on shores, and near
the poles, as in other places.

The Abstract of another Epistle to the forementioned Mersenus.
YOu desire to know of me the reason why a long Bow, or any other Bow, loseeth
it is force if it stand long bent; the cause is easily found out by my
principles; for the pores which I call Ellyptical at first, do sensibly by
degrees grow to be round in form, by reason of those small particles of subtle
matter have a constant inward influence upon them. This subtle matter hinders
us from throwing a stone, or raising our bodies to a prodigious height; for
were it not for this matter which makes all heavy bodies tend downwards, a
stone would mount up to the Firmament when thrown upwards; and when we by a
leap or jump raise our selves from the ground, we should ascend without falling
down again.

And a little after.
That which makes us rise when we leap, is only the reverberation of our
strength, whereby we beat the earth before we raise our selves from the ground:
now this strength being consumed, we must of necessity fall down again; nor is
it possible that we should continue hovering in the air, unless we could, with
so much activity beat the air with our feet and arms, that it could not so
suddenly recede as it does, which is requisite to the raising of our bodies
higher, and is the course that birds make use of in their flight.

And Farther.
But I am not so destitute of Books as you imagine; for I have still the
summary of St. Thomas, and a Bible which I brought with me from France:
Besides, he entreats him not to discover the place of his Residence, because he
desires little or no company.

He adds further in another place; I rejoice to hear that Monsr. Morier has
some hope of perfecting his Work concerning Prospectives; but I only confide in
Monsieur de Beanne; and if he succeed not in his Enterprise, I my self will
make an essay.

He says also; If that subtle matter with which the earth is environed, should
not turn about, no body could be ponderous; and if it took its compass about
the Moon, all things would tend toward the Moon, etc. This subtle matter which
is in our bodies, does not continue there a moment, but departs from them, and
a new matter perpetually enters; and it is true, that that matter does not
immediately invigorate our motions, but our animal spirits, which are contained
in the nerves, and are as it were agitated in those passages by this subtle
matter.

As also; I do not at all wonder how small bullets should be found enclosed in
stones, but admire that they were not converted into stones.

He afterward fully informs him in many particulars, and then proceeds: If it
be true that the Magnet (as you inform me in your writings) declines now less
from England than formerly, this indeed is a thing worthy our strict
observation; whether this mutation appears to be done by degrees, or
otherways. This Epistle was penned in the year 1639. in the close thereof.

The Abstract of another Epistle to the same Person, bearing date in the Month
of March, Anno 1641. Amsterdam.
I Am glad that Monsr. Picot has relished my Meta-physicks; for you know,
there is more joy in Heaven for the conversion of one sinner, than a thousand
just persons that persevere.

Out of another Epistle to the said Father Mersenus, from Endegest, bearing
date the 20th. of October. 1642.
THere are several ways of preventing the offensive smoking of chimneys,
according to the various causes of the smoke; and the most usual occasion is,
that the Chambers for the most part do not receive a sufficient quantity of air
from without, to supply the place of the smoke that goes out of the room; for
it is observable, that the fire, by its violence, expells a great quantity of
air with those small particles of wood, which intermixing with the air, causes
the smoke, as the grosser parts of the wood make ashes; and since there can be
no vacuum in Nature, it necessarily follows, that there must be a constant
access of fresh air into the Chamber, and that in as large a quantity as the
smoke that goes out; as may be seen in Chemical furnaces, at the bottom
whereof there is a hole which receives a great part of the wind wherewith the
fire is kindled, which wind is nothing else but air expelled from the place
which the smoke, proceeding from the fire, tends to: so that when a Chamber is
close shut, the smoke must needs fly about it, that is, that the smoke which
is caused by the fire must fill the chamber, because the air of the chamber
tends only toward the fire; and the usual remedy in such cases is, to open the
door, or windoors; but because this is somewhat incommodious, it may be avoided
by making holes behind the chimney, which are opposite to the fire, or behind
the bed-stead.

Out of another Letter to the same Person, dated at Amsterdam, May, 1643.
I Return you thanks for the secret of Father Grandamicus, about the making of
a Needle without declination: indeed, I am apt to believe that it declines less
than others do, but yet not altogether without any declination.

Also, The Experiment of the weight which inclines from the South to the North,
is Very observable, and agrees very much with my observation concerning the
Flux and re-Flux of the Sea; but I would fain know how many feet long the
thread was, to which the weight was fastened, that I might thereby understand
whether I could try that Experiment here; for I judge it to be of a very great
length: I would also be sensible of the time when it vergeth toward the South
or North; if my conjecture deceive me not, that must happen when the Moon
approaches near our Meridian, or withdraws from it.

The Extract of another Letter, dated at Endegest, December. 17th. 1642.
VOetius his Treatise against me, entitled, The Cartefian Philosophy, is in
the Press; but I will give a concise Answer to that large Volume; and so they
shall be both published together.

I am pleased to receive an account of you, concerning what you writ to me
about. He is a person very curious, and skilled in abundance of those petty
Chemical secrets which are carried about by such kind of men. If he had
proceeded at the same rate whilst he was with me, he could not but have
understood many things, as probably now he does: but you are sensible that I do
not at all value those kind of secrets; that which I much esteem him for, is,
that he is well skilled in the manual operation of such things as are
prescribed to him, and is very ingenious. He profers his service to me, but I
would not have him come at present, because I will not employ my self about
Experiments, till I have completed my Philosophy for the Press. But if at any
time afterward he is at liberty, and cannot dispose of himself to better
advantage, I should be satisfied, if he would be with me; yet I must beg of you
not to acquaint him herewith; for many things may fall out in the interim,
which might hinder him, and I would not, ut in calculo suo falleretur, that he
should be frustrated of his expectations, as most Alchymists are; but if you
understand his condition, and course of life, you may, if you please, acquaint
me therewith. I suppose Bressiclus, the Gratianopolitan, is the person he
speaks of, a Chemical Physician, who being a great Admirer of his Philosophy,
visited him, and cohabited with him a long time, in order to the trying of
Experiments, he being a most ingenious and excellent Artist.

The Abstract of another Epistle.
I Was overjoyed when you did inform me that a Brassplate did weigh no more
when hot, than cold; for that is a principal thing in your experiment
concerning the Aeolipile; and beyond all dispute, now, this being granted,
without doubt, that which increases its weight four or five grains, when it is
heated, is only the rarefaction of the air therein contained, and by this
method of weighing the air is found out.

Also, If two bodies be thrown up on high, the Air resists the lighter body,
which is the reason it cannot mount so high as the other body.

Likewise, The reason why a pair of Bellows, when opened, are filled with air
is, because the air, when you move them to blow, is crowded out of that place
which the lower part of the bellows receives, being lifted up; and because that
air can find no room for it self in any other part of the World, therefore it
retires again into the Bellows.

I thought it not amiss to insert here some scattered pieces, which are found
in his French Epistles; that the opinion of so Eminent and Exemplary a Person,
concerning the various and curious Arcana of Nature, might not be buried in
Oblivion.

FINIS.

