THE TRUTH OF GOD CLEARED, And above the DECEIT ADVANCED; Which is proved to
be the same that ever was in all Genetions.

By one of that number who in scorn are called Quakers, Edw. Bourne.

London. Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1657.

TO THE READERS.
Readers,
Whoso shall read this same', let meekness and moderation guide you, and do
not reject nor disregard that which you have not proved and tried, lest you
speak evil of the the things you know not; but try it by that which will render
every thing as it is, which leads to equity, and to do as you would be done
unto, such whose hearts are honest, and do desire to live to God, if they did
but know the truth, whose breathing is after righteousness, such may receive
satisfaction, who shall receive the truth in the love thereof; but for scoffers
and scorners, I take little notice of, whose folly is manifest to the
sober-minded. That which my soul longs for, is, To see righteousness
established in the Earth, that Justice and Equity might stream forth as a
River; I having been pressed in spirit thereunto, have written this, that I
might have the answer of a good conscience with the Lord, unto whom all must
give an account, who will reward every one according to their works, and
herein is my love reached forth to others, that they may turn to the light,
that from the Lord God they may receive refreshment, and find satisfaction, as
I have done; To whom be praise and Dominion for ever, who has counted me
worthy to suffer for the testimony of his glorious Truth.

E. B.

THE TRVTH of GOD CLEARED, And above the DECEIT Advanced, etc.
LET all flesh be silent before the Lord God for ever, who is appeared in the
Riches of his love, and is become the Teacher of his people himself, who has
given his Son for a Covenant of Light, and for Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, who is the Light of the world, and lights every man that comes into
the world, the end is, that all men through him might believe.

And know this of a truth, all that shall read the same, that there is no other
way that leads to God, but by taking heed to the Light which Christ has
enlightened ye withal, to be guided by it alone; this is that which Paul
testified of, who (speaking of them which held the truth in unrighteousness)
said, Romans 1.18, 29. Tit. 3.11, 12. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.
That which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it
unto them; and this is that Grace of God which has appeared unto all men,
which taught the Saints to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; and the sure Word of
Prophecy which Peter declared of, is the same, unto which you do well to take
heed, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; and by this
the sure Foundation may be known, and not by any other way, even the Rock upon
which Christ said he would build his Church, against which the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail; and no other Foundation can any man lay, but that which is
laid already; The Lord said, I will lay in Sion for a Fonndation, Isa. 28.16
a tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation; This is the Stone
which is set at naught by you builders, (said the Apostle) which is become the
head of the Corner, Christ the Light of the World was set at naught by the
builders in the Apostles time, and so is he set at naught by the builders in
this age, who stumble at the Light, and say it is not sufficient to lead to
God, and call it a natural Light, and so show that they are in the same
ignorance, and darkness, and blindness, as others were in before, who stumbled
at the Light. This is him which the Scriptures declare of, Joh. 1.10, 11, 12.
Who came into the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him
not; he came unto his own, and his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, to them he gave Power to become the sons of God. Read and
understand, every one, with the Light which Christ has enlightened you withal,
and consider in the fear of the Lord, for it is an earnest thing; Who can say
that there is not something in them which calls to purity and holiness, and to
walk blamelesly before the Lord, which never consented to your evil deeds, but
always did witness against them, and let you see that you should not do so:
Therefore all that shall read this, be satisfied herein, that this is the
manifestation of the Spirit, which is given to every man to profit withal; and
the not taking heed to it, is the cause of condemnation.

Therefore hear this, and know ye assuredly, (all ye that breath after the
living God) that the Way which leads to him is nigh you, and the Way is the
same now, as ever was in all generations, and Christ is the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever, who has enlightened every man that comes into the World
with the true Light; this was the Rock that followed the children of Israel
in the Wilderness; and the Spirit of Christ was in the Prophets, who testified
beforehand of the sufferings of Christ, and of the glory that should follow:
Moses the Servant of the Lord said to the children of Israel, This Commandment
which I command thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off;
but (says he) the Word is nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou
may do it, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And the Apostle said, The Word is
nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is, the Word of Faith which we
preach, Romans 10.5, 6, 7, 8. Christ said, The Kingdom of God comes not with
observation; neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for behold, the
Kingdom of God is within you; and John said, The Anncinting abides in you, and
you need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you,
and is truth, and is no lie.

Therefore all people, high and low, of all Degrees, take heed, and hearken
diligently to the Light which Christ has enlightened you withal, that your
souls may live; and learn of Christ to be meek and lowly in heart, that in him
your peace may be, though in the World you may have tribulation; and be ye
Followers of him, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Father; and
regard not the reproaches that the World may cast upon you for the sake of
Christ, but account it greater Riches then the Treasures of Egypt; Moses chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to be counted the Son
of Pharaohs Daughter; he chose rather to suffer with them, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season; for he had regard to the recompense of Reward.
Therefore fear the Lord God, and come to repentance; forsake that which is
evil, and follow that which is good, that the Wisdom which is from above, you
may receive, and be guided by it alone, which is pure, and peaceable, and
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of good Fruits, that you may know the
Lord God to be your Teacher, and his Law written in your hearts, and his Spirit
put in your inward parts; this is the Covenant which the Lord said he would
make with the House of Israel, Heb. 10.8. And cease from following of such as
say they are Ministers of Christ, but are found to be out of his Doctrine, and
in the steps of the false Prophets, who preach for hire, and divine for money,
and are called of men Masters, which Christ cried vvo against; and he is the
same for ever, and the vvo is to such now as are found in their stops which
Christ cried woe against, Matt. 23. if you would own Christ, then own his
Words; but if you deny his Words, do you not deny him? Consider, Why do you
call him Lord, Lord, and do not the things which he commands? But by the pure
Light of Christ which has shined in our hearts, to give us the knowledge of
the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, do we see them to be out of his
Doctrine, and in the steps of the false Prophets, and therefore with the Light
we cry vvo against them. Consider; Did ever the Ministers of Christ sue men at
the Law for Tithes, and recover trebble damages, as some of these have done, as
may easily be proved? Was ever the Ministry of Christ attended with
persecution, as this is? Was ever any sent to prison for speaking in their
Assemblies, or for asking a sober question? And do you believe that such are
Christians that are strikers, and fighters, and are ready to murder, who hale
out of the Synagogues, and before Magistrates, such which the Lord does send
amongst them? But Christ's Words are fulfilled, who said to his Disciples, Ye
shall be brought before Rulers for my sake, for a testimony against them,
Matthew. 10.17, 18.
and they shall scourge you in their Synagogues, and ye shall be hated of all
men for my Names sake, but he that endures to the end, shall be saved; and in
this have we hope, and in him have we peace, who is the Light of the World,
and they who follow him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life: If our hope were in this life only, we were of all men, most miserable,
who have no helper in the Earth, but in the Lord alone is our trust; and the
Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I trust in him; but the
portion of the Beast, and the portion of the false Prophet, is in the Lake,
where the fire is not quenched.

Therefore all people which shall read this, be warned and fear the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth who is the God, and changes not, who lives for ever; and take
heed to the Light which the Son of God has enlightened ye withal, that it may
guide you in every thing; God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke
to our Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by Son,
who is the brightnuss of his Fathers glory; Therefore hear him; this is that
Prophet whom Moses spoke of, whom God would raise up; and it shall come to
pass, that every one which will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from
amongst the people. Now he that receives not the Light which Christ has
enlightened him withal, he hears not this Prophet; and let such read their
portion, which is, To be destroyed from amongst the people.

Therefore seek the Lord while he may be found; call upon him while he is near;
let the wicked forsake his Ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon him; obey the light of Christ in your consciences,
and kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way when his Wrath is
kindled but a little; blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
Wherefore repent and bring forth fruits to God; for the Lord will not be
mocked; and know this, That such as you sow, such shall you reap; he that
sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting; the Axe is laid to the Root
of the Tree, and every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, is to be hewn
down, and cast into the fire.

All who profess Christ, priests and people, may we reason with you, and try
you by your fruits whether you do possess him? Have you learned of Christ to be
meek and lowly? Have you learned of Christ to love your Enemies? Have you
learned of Christ to bless them that curse you, and to pray for them which
despitefully use you, and entreat you? If you say you have, Then why does
persecution attend your Ministry? Why do your Hearers offer violence to such
as the Lord sends amongst you, who offer no violence to them, but are as Lambs
amongst Wolves? Are they not through envy haled before Magistrates, and sent
to prison, though they come in meekness, and in the fear of the Lord, to warn
you of the evil you live in, that you might forsake it and turn to God by
repentance, the Scriptures declare that he that hates his Brother is a
murderer; Christ's command is swear not at all. Do you and your hearers obey
him herein? clear your selves if you can, and because of Oaths the land
mourns; but surely the Lord will plead the cause of the Innocent, and save them
that trust in him, but it will go ill with them that gainsay the truth.

Search the Scriptures and see whether ever such fruits did attend the
Ministers of Christ, Romans 8 36.37.
but for the sake or Christ they suffered as it is written: For thy sake we are
killed all the day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the slaughter: But said
the Apostle; Who shall separate us from the love of Christ; shall tribulation
or distress, or persecution, or famne, 2 Cor. 6.4 5, 6, etc.
or nakedness, or peril or sword? Nay in all these things we are more then
Gonquerers through him that loved us: They approved themselves as the Ministers
of Christ in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in
stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings, in fastings,
etc. And the Apostle said, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer persecution: Christ said to his Disciples, If the world hate you, you
know it hated me before it hated you, if you were of the world the world would
love his own, but because you are not of the world, but I have chosen you out
of the world, therefore the world hates you: The Servant (said He) is not
greater then his Lord, if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you, if they have kept my sayings, they will keep yours also: But in him have
we peace who said; Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake,
for theirs is the kingdom of Heaven, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you
and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake,
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heaven; for so
persecuted they the Prophets that were before you: And others had trials of
cruel mockings, yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment; wherefore as the
Apostle said, Seeing we also are compassed about with so great a Cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto
Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith Who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross, dispiseing the shame, and is set down at the right hand
of the Throne of God. Come you Professors Teachers and People, may we reason
with you and try you further whether you be Possessors, what do you believe of
them who put Christ to death, and yet builded up the Tombs of the Prophets, and
garnished the Sepulchers of the righteous, and said if they had been in the
days of their Fathers they would not have been partakers with them in the
blood of the Prophets; Mat. 23.29.30, 31, 32, 33.
would not you have joined with them in putting Christ to death; had you been in
those days? If you say you would not, who shall believe you, while envy and
hatred and persecution attends you, who persecute him in his members, now where
he is made manifest; therefore as Christ said, Fill up then the measure of your
Fathers, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation
of Hell? what ever you profess, though you may talk of the Scriptures, and
Christ's words, and the Prophets and Apostles words, yet being found out of his
Doctrine, and in the same nature as they were in, who put Christ and the
Prophets to death, it is a sure testimony that you do not possess him.

You that are wise and have an understanding beyond many, so that by your own
natural wisdom and reason you may dive deeper into the knowledge of things
then others, yet stumble at the truth, and stumble at the light, by all your
wisdom you cannot find out the things of God, the reason is because you are not
turned to that which gives the knowledge thereof, which is the light, which
Christ has eulightned you withal, this is foolishness to your wisdom; but
indeed this is it which leads to the true Heavenly wisdom, he that has an ear
to hear let him hear it, and he that can receive it let him, all that ever yet
knew the Lord ever since the world began, it was by taking heed to that which
God had made manifest of himself in them, this is the light which shines in
darkness, and God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of his glory in the face of
Jesus Christ, while you seek to know the Truth by Books and Authors, who were
not come to that of God in them; your labor is in vain, it will profit you
nothing; the Prophets and Apostles being come to this; the end of their Writing
and Speaking was to bring others to the same, that is, The manifestation of the
Spirit, which is given to every man to profit withal; hear what the Apostle
said, He that will be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise; and
said he, We are fools for Christ sake. Therefore to the light which Christ has
enlightened you withal, turn your minds, and receive the kingdom of God as a
little child, and be willing to learn of him, else you cannot enter therein;
therefore to it incline your minds, that you may be made wise indeed: the
Wisdom of this World is foolishness with God; and they who are wise therein,
their Wisdom will fail them; the understanding of the prudent shall come to
naught; the Lord will bring it to pass: Therefore be content to be stripped of
that, and to part with that knowledge which you have not come rightly by, and
wait at Wisdoms Gate, to be instructed there; for whose finds it, finds
life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord; but he that sins against the
Light, wrongeth his own soul, and all they who hate it, love death.

You Lawyers, take heed of self ends in all you do and do nothing contrary to
the righteous Law of God, which is just and equal; but speak the truth from
your hearts, and do to others as you would be done unto; now if you act
otherwise, he which searches the heart, and tryes the reins, knows it, who has
a Witness in you, which is pure, which is the light of Christ in your
consciences, which will be your condemnation.

And all you who are in power to judge and determine of causes and
controversies between man and man, have no respect to any man's person, but let
that which is just take place; and judge as you would be judged of the Lord,
the righteous judge of Heaven and Earth, before whom all must appear to receive
according to the deeds done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they
be evil. Therefore take heed to the Light which Christ the Son of God has
enlightened you withal, that you may know the Law of God written in your
hearts, and the Lord God to be your Lawgiver, you being subject to him alone,
in every thing doing that which is just and equal, and as you would be done
unto; and herein will be your peace, and the light of Christ in your
consciences will justify you; but if you do otherwise, the light which lets
you see it will be your condemnation.

Hear this you Professors, Priests and People, The Fruits of the Spirit is,
love, joy, long-suffering, forbearance, meekness, gentleness; and the like; and
when I see these fruits proceed from you, I may have some ground to believe
that you do possess what you profess; but while I find it otherwise, you being
in envy, persecution and strife, it is a sure evidence to me that you are out
of the life of him whom you profess, though you may have the Prophets Words,
and Christ's Words to talk of, yet being found out of their practices, and in
the same nature as they were which put the Prophets and Christ to death, it is
a sure testimony that you are out of the life which they were in; he that lives
in envy, is in the nature which Cain was in, who slew his Brother; he that
denies the light, is in that nature which Corah was in who gainsaid the truth,
and was swallowed up of the Earth; and he that receives the Wages of
unrighteousness, is in the error which Balaam was in, who erred after it.

Therefore all who desire to know the truth, and live therein, and the Worship
which God accepts, who is a spirit, and must be worshipped in spirit and in
truth, look not for any other thing; but take heed to the Light which lets you
see your evil deeds, that you may be guided thereby; loving it, this is the way
which leads to life; but hating it, it will be your condemnation; and said
Christ, who is the same for ever, This is the condemnation, That Light is come
into the world, and men love darkness rather then the light, because their
deeds are evil: Therefore to the Light take heed, and follow the same, and you
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life.

And now you who are my Companions in tribulation, who are hated, and
reproached, and persecuted for the Truths sake, whether by imprisonment, or
otherwise, be faithful to the Lord in your several measures, and clear your
consciences to such who live without the fear of God, and are found out of the
Saints practices, as by the Lord you are required; and sanctify the Lord God
in your hearts, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread; and fear
not the power of the Enemy, but be bold and valiant for the truth upon Earth,
and follow Christ, who is our Leader, and the Captain of our Salvation, and
lift up your Heads, for the day of your Redemption draws nigh, and blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you falsely for the sake of Christ, rejoice and be glad, for great is
your reward in heaven.

And to the Lord God be glory, and honor, and thanksgiving in the Church of
Christ for ever, who is appeared in the riches of his love, and is become the
Teacher of his people himself; and let all Disputers, and all flesh be silent
for ever, for he is found who could never be known by worldly wisdom, who has
preserved me in tumults, in bonds and imprisonments, and is become my support
and comforter, whose love I cannot express, O that I may never forget the same.

Concerning the passages about my imprisonment.
BEing moved by the Lord, I went to the Idols Temple, and continued there about
an hour before the Priest had ended; and that I might give them no occasion to
say that what I did was done maliciously, or of purpose, or wilfully, I forbore
till all was ended by the Priest; for I was taught to be wise as a Serpent, and
harmless as a Dove; and though I stood there peaceably, yet suffered I violence
from some, who struck off my Hat, and plucked it off from my head, and
threatened me with words; but I bore these things, and was willing to be eased
of the burden that lay upon me; and when the Priest had done, I offered to get
upon a Form; and being much pressed in my Spirit thereunto, I said I had
something from God to say or speal, to them, and I was willing that all might
hear me, that I might be clear before the Lord God, concerning them; and I
spoke as to all people, to fear the Lord God, and repent, but the violence of
some against me was such, that I could not clear my conscience to them as I
would have done; but as I had opportunity, I spoke to them in the fear of the
Lord, that I might be clear before him; and being thrust by the violence of the
people into the Graveyard, where they compassed me about, I spoke to them
again, and as I remember, the people were still and quiet about me, and I
looked to see how I might get from them; but Richard Moore, and William
Collins, who is a Parliament Man, laid hands on me, and William Collins said
they would take an order with me for making a tumult; to which I answered, It
was not me that made it, but it was them who offered violence to me; but he
haled me away by violence from the people; I have not written this out of any
envy that I bear to him for it; the Lord who knows my heart, is my Witness in
this thing: I being come before Gervase Buck, who is in Authority to do
justice; but what justice he did me, let the Witness of God in his conscience
(which is just) and in the consciences of all who shall hear thereof, judge,
for I desire no other Witness but that: He questioned me about my coming unto
the College, (as it is called) I answered, I came in obedience unto the Lord
to warn the people to fear the Lord God, and repent: He said, If I had a good
exhortation, I should take a better opportunity to speak to them; but could I
take a better opportunity to speak to people, then when they were assembled
together? And could the opportunity be at a better time then when the Lord
required it? Let the truth judge herein. But upon the Oath of one whose Name
is Urban Air, (which Oath was but seemingly) was I sent to prison, where I
have continued near eleven Weeks, as by the Copy of the Mittimus will appear.
This is (as near as I do remember) in part the truth of the passages about my
imprisonment.

VVorcester-Gaol, the 24th. of the 10th. Month, 1657. Where I suffer for the
Testimony of the Truth, Edw. Bourne.

THE END.

