A TREATISE OF COMMUNION UNDER BOTH SPECIES. By the Lord JAMES BENIGN BOSSUET'
Bishop of Meaux, Counselor to the King, heretofore Preceptor to Monseigneur
le DAUPHIN, first Almoner to Madame la DAUPHINE.

printer's device of Sebastian Cramoisy, featuring two flying storks or cranes
fighting for a snake or worm; in the background a town in the countryside; the
whole framed by a snake with its tail in its mouth, forming a circle

PRINTED AT PARIS By SEBASTIAN MABRE CRAMOISY, Printer to his Majesty.
M.DC.LXXXV. WITH PRIVILEGE.

THE PVBLISHER TO THE READER.
MANY doubtesse will wonder that I, who cannot well endure the very Name even
but of a Papist in Masquerade, should yet translate and publish a Book of
popery, and this too in a point peradventure of higher concern then any other
now in debate between Papists and Protestants. To give therefore some account of
my proceeding herein, it is to be noted, that the Church of England (if I
apprehend her doctrine aright concerning the Sacrament of the last Supper) has
receded from the Tenent of the Church of Rome, not so much in the thing
received, as in the manner of receiving Christ's Body and Blood: both Churches
agree, that Christ our Savior is truly, really, wholly, yea and substantially
(though not exposed to our external senses) present in the Sacrament. And thus
they understand the words of Christ: This is my Body which shall be delivered
for you. This is my Blood which shall be shedd for the remission of sins: my
Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed, etc. Only the Papists say,
This real presence is effected by Transsubstantiation of the elements; and
Protestants say, noe; but by some other way unintelligible to us. Nor is the
adoration of Christ acknowledged present under the forms of bread and wine so
great a Bugbeare as some peradventure imagine. For as John Calvin rightly
intimates adoration is a necessary sequel to real presence. Calvin. de
Participat. Corpor. Chr. in Coena.
What is more strange (says he) then to place him in Bread and yet not to
adore him there? And if JESUS CHRIST be in the bread, it is then under the bread
he ought to be adored. Much less is the Oblation of Christ when present upon
the Altar, under the symboles, such an incongruity as to render the Breach
between Papists and Protestants (by Protestants I mean Church of England men)
wholly irreparable; for if Christ be really present under the consecrated
species upon the Altar, why may he not so present be offered a grateful
Sacrifice to his heavenly Father, in thanksgiving for blessings received, in a
propitiation for sin, and in commemoration of his Death and Passion? 1. Cor. 11.


But the main stone of offense and Rock of scandal in this grand Affair is
Communion under one kind, 1. Pet. 2.8.
wherein the Roman Clergy are by some heartily blamed for depriving tke Laity
of half Christ, and half the Sacrament. For my part I am not for making wider
Divisions already too great; nor do I approve of the spirit of those who tear
Christ's seamelesse Garment, by fomenting and augmenting schisms in the
universal Church. Indeed I do not find it any Part or Article of the
Protestant faith to believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, one
half of Christ is in the bread, and the other half in the Wine; but on the
contrary, that in some exigences (as of sickness) a man may receive under one
kind or species, all Christ, and an entire Sacrament. So that upon the whole
matter the difference herein between the Church of England and the Roman,
seems to me from the concessions of the most learned and ancient Protestants
(for I wave the figments of modern Novelists) reducible in great measure to
mere form and Ceremony. It is true Christ instituted this Sacrament at his
Iast Supper under two kinds [which he did as well to signify by a corporeal
Analogy to bread and wine, the full effect and refreshment this divine food
works in the soul; as also (say the Papists) to render the Sacrifice of his
Body and Blood upon the Altar, distinctly commemorative or representative of
his Passion; and therefore when he said: Luke. 22.
This is my Body which is (now) given (not only to you but) for you, 1. Cor. 11.
he added, This (not only eat but) do (that is Offer or Sacrifice) in
remembrance of me: Act. 13.2.
Hence the Christians in the Acts of the Apostles are found Ministering that is,
as the Greek text has it, sacrificing to the Lord, of which Sacrifice Saint
Paul also speaks, We have an Altar (says he) whereof they have no right to
eat who serve the Tabernacle] But that Christ gave his Body separated from his
Blood under one element, and his Blood squeezed from his Body under another,
and that, by consequence, he that receives under one kind receives only half
Christ, and half a Sacrament, is (as Saint Austin attests) a Judaicall way of
understanding this Mystery no wise agreeable (as is before said (to the doctrine
of the Church of England. Jo. 6.53.
Nevertheless this Communion under one kind, though in my judgment but a bare
Ceremony, yet has been since the reformation always regarded as a mighty
eyesore, and alleged as one sufficient cause of a voluntary departure and
separation from the preexistent Church of Rome. Wherefore being conscious of
the dreadful guilt, danger and mischeife of Shisme, and unwilling to shutt my
self out of Christ's visible sheepfold upon dislike of a Ceremony, so to loose
the substance for the shadow; after having duly examined the Arguments made by
some Protestant divines against the Papists on this subject, I thought it
prudence and justice, both to my self and them, to hear also what the Papists
could say in their own defense: And least I might be imposed upon by the
malice or ignorance of any in a business of this high nature, I made choice of
an Author, whose learning and virtue renders him omni exceptione major above
the reach of calumny to denigrate, or even criticisme to find a blemish in. A
person who (were he not a Romanist) might justly be styled the Treasury of
Wisdom, the Fountain of Eloquence, the Oracle of his age. In breife to speak
all in a word, It Is the great James formerly Bishop of Condom now of Meaux.
Whether the Author enoble the work or the work the Author I dare not say, but
it is certain that if he write reason he deserves to be believed; if otherwise
he deserves to be confuted; And however it be, It Is no fault (especially in
Protestants who adhere to the Dictamen of their own Judgment without penning
their Faith on Church Authority) to read him, and this too without Passion or
Prejudice. To which end I have here, as a friend to Truth and lover of unity,
translated his Treatise into English, for the benefit of such as being of the
same spirit with me, are yet strangers to the French language.

A TABLE OF THE ARTICLES contained in this Treatise.
THE FIRST PART. The Practice and Judgment of the Church from the first ages.
I. AN Explication of this Practice. p. 2 II. Four authentic Customs, to'
show the judgment of the primitive Church. p. 7 First Custom. Communion of
the sick. p. 8 III. Second Custom. Communion of little Children. p. 65 IV.
Third Custom. Domestic Communion. p. 94 V. Fourth Custom. Communion at the
Church, and in the ordinary Office. p. 119 VI. A continuation. The Mass on
Good Friday, and that of the Presanctifyed. p. 131 VII. The Judgment and
Practice of the later ages founded upon the judgment and Practice of the
primitive Church. p. 160
THE SECOND PART. Principles on which are established the judgment and
practice of the Church: of which principles the Pretended Reformers make use as
well as we.
I. FIrst Principle. There is nothing indispensible in the Sacraments, but that
which is of their substance or essential to them, p. 167 II. Second Principle.
To know the substance or essence of a Sacrament, we must regard its essential
effect. p. 173 III. That the Pretended Reformers do agree with us in this
principle; and can have no other foundation of their discipline. An examen of
the doctrine of M. Jurieux in his Book entitled, Le Preservatif, etc. p. 165
IV. Third Principle. The law ought to be explained by constant and perpetual
Practice. An exposition of this Principle by the example of the civil law. p.
194 V. A proof from the observances of the Old Testament. p. 205 VI. A proof
from the observances of the New Testament. p. 224 VII. Communion under one kind
established without contradiction. p. 260 VIII. A refutation of the History
concerning the taking away the Cupp writ by M. Jurieux. p. 279 IX. A
reflection upon concomitancy, and upon the doctrine of the sixth chapter of the
Gospel of Saint John. p. 306 X. Some Objections solved, by the precedent
doctrine. p. 322 XI. A reflection upon the manner how the Pretended Reformers
make use of Scripture. p. 334 XII. Occurring difficulties; vain subtilityes of
the Calvinists and M. Jurieux: the judgment of antiquity concerning
concomitancy: reverence exhibited to JESUS CHRIST in the Eucharist: the
doctrine of this Treatise confirmed. 342
A TREATISE OF COMMUNION UNDER BOTH SPECIES.
A division of this discourse into two parts.
THIS Question concerning the two Species, whatever is said thereof by those of
the Pretended Reformed Religion, has but an apparent difficulty, which may be
solved by the constant and perpetual practice of the Church, and by Principles
assented unto by the Pretended Reformers themselves.

I shall then in this discourse lay open. 1. This Practice of the Church; 2.
These Principles on which this Practice is grounded.

Thus the business will be cleared; for on the one side we shall see the
constant matter of Fact; and on the other side, the assured causes of it.

THE FIRST PART. The Practice and judgment of the Church from the first ages.
I. An Explication of this Practice.
THE Practice of the Church from the Primitive times is, that Communicants
received under one or both kinds, without ever imagining there wanted any thing
to the integrity of Communion, when they received under one alone.

It was never so much as thought on, that the Grace annexed to the Body of our
Lord was any other then that which was annexed to his Blood. He gave his Body
before he gave his Blood; and it may be further concluded from the words of S.
Lukc, and S. Paul, Lukc. 22. v. 20. 1. Cor. 11. v. 24.
that he gave his Body during the supper, and his Blood after supper, in such
sort that there was a considerable interval between the two actions. Did he
then suspend the effect, which his body was to produce, until such time as the
Apostles had received the Blood? or did they so soon as they had received the
Body at the same instant receive also the Grace which accompanied it, that is
to say, that of being incorporated to Jesus Christ, and nourished by his
substance? Undoubtedly the later. So that the receiving of the Blood is not
necessary for the Grace of the Sacrament, nor for the ground of the Mystery:
The substance is there whole and entiere under one sole Species; and neither dos
each of the Species, nor both together contain other then the same ground of
sanctification and of Grace.

S. 1. Cor. 11.27.
Paul manifestly supposes this Doctrine when he writes, that He who eats
this Bread or drinks the Chalice of our Lord unworthily, is guilty of the
Body and Blood of our Lord: From whence he leaves us to draw this consequence,
that if in receiving the one or the other unworthily we profane them both, in
receiving either of the two worthily we participate of the Grace of both.

To this there can be no other reply, but by saying, as the Protestants also
do, that the disjunctive particle or which the Apostle makes use of in the
first part of the Text, has the force of the conjunctive, and of which he
serves himself in the second. This is the only answer M. Exam. de l'Euch. V
I. Tr. 7. Sect. p. 483.
Jurieux affords to this passage, in the treatise he lately published upon the
subject of the Eucharist; and he calls our Argument a ridiculous cavil, but
without ground. For though he had made it out, that these particles are
sometimes taken the one for the other, yet here, where S. Paul uses them both
so manifestly with design, in placing or in the first part of his discourse,
and reserving and for the second, we must of necessity acknowledge, that by so
remarkable a distinction he would render us attentive to some important truth;
and the truth which he would here teach us is, that if after having taken
worthily the consecrated Bread, we should so forgett the Grace received,
afterward to take the sacred liquor with a criminal intention, we should be
guilly not only of the blood of our Lord but also of his Body. A truth which
can have no other ground then what we lay dowen (viz) that both the one and
the other part of this Sacrament have the same foundation of Grace, in such a
manner as that we cannot profane one without profaning both; nor also receive
either of the two devoutly, without partaking of the sanctity and virtue both
of the one and the other.

It Is also for this reason, that from the beginning of Christianity the
faithful believed, that after what manner soever they communicated, whether
under one or both species, the Communion had always the same efficacy of
virtue.

II. Four authentic Customs to show the judgment of the Primitive Church.
FOUR authentic customs of the Primitive Church demonstrate this Truth. These
customs will appear so constant, and the oppositions made against them so
contradictory and vain, that I dare avouch an express acknowledgement of them
would not render them more indisputable.

First Custom. Communion of the sick.
I Find then the custom of receiving under one kind or Species in the
Communion of the sick; in the Communion of infants; in domestic Communions
formerly in practice when the Faithful carried the Eucharist home to
communicate in their own houses; and lastly (a thing which will much surprise
our Reformers) in the public and solemn Communions of the Church.

These important and decisive Points have, I confess, been frequently handled;
yet peradventure all the vain subtilities of the Ministers have not been
sufficiently examined. God by his Grace assist us to perform this in such a
manner that not only antiquity may be illustrated but that truth also may be
come manifest and triumphant.

The first practice I insist upon, is that the sick were usually communicated
under the Species of Bread alone. The Species of wine could not be either so
long or so easily reserved, being too subject to alteration, and JESUS CHRIST
would not that any thing should appear to the sense in this mystery of Faith
contrary to the ordinary course of nature. It was also too subject to be spilt,
especially when it was to be carried to many persons in places far distant, and
with very little convenience during the times of persecution. The Church
therefore would at once, both facilitate the Communion of the sick, and avoid
the danger of this effusion, which was never beheld without horror in all ages,
as hereafter shall appear.

The example of Serapion recorded in the Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius. l. VI.
c. 44. edit. Val.
makes clear what was practiced in regard to the sick. He was in penance: but
as the law required that the Eucharist should be given to Penitents when they
were in danger of death, Serapion perceiving himself in this state, sent to
demand this holy Viaticum. The Priest, who could not carry it himself, gave
to a young man a small parcel of the Eucharist which he ordered him to Moisten
and so convey into the mouth of the old man. The youth being returned home
moistened the parcel of the Eucharist and at the same time infused it into the
mouth of Serapion, who having by degrees swallowed it, presently gave up the
Ghost. Although it appears by this relation, that the Priest sent only to his
penitent that part of the Sacrament which was solid, in that he ordained only
the young man, whom he sent, to moisten it in some liquor before he gave it to
the sick person, yet the good old man never complained that any thing was
wanting: on the contrary, having thus communicated he departed in peace: and
God who myraculously preserved him until he had been partaker of this Grace,
enfranchised him immediately after he had received. S. Denis Bishop of
Alexandria, who lived in the third age of the Church, writ this history in a
letter cited at large by Eusebius of Caesaraea, and he writ it to a renowned
Bishop, mentioning this passage as a thing then usual, by which it is
demonstrative that it was received and authorized, and moreover so holy that
God was pleased to confirm it by a visible effect of his Grace.

The most able and ingenuous Protestants Willingly acknowledge there is no
mention made, Tho. Smith. Ep. de Eccles. Gr. hod. stat. p. 107. 108. 2. ed.
130. and seqq.
but of the consecrated Bread in this passage. M. Smith a Protestant Minister
of the Church of England accords hereunto in a learned and judicious Treatise
which he writ some years since; and he owneth at the same time, that there was
nothing reserved but the consecrated Bread in Domestic communions, which he
regards as the source of that reserve which was made for the sick.

But M. Hist. de l' Eucharist. I. p. chap. 12. p. 145.
de la Roque a famous Minister who has writ an history of the Eucharist, and M.
Du Bourd. deux rep. a deux Traitez sur le retranchement de la coupe. Second
rep. chap. 22. p. 367.
du Bourdieu a Minister at Montpellier, who has lately dedicated to M. Claude a
treatise concerning the taking away of the Cupp, approved by the same M.
Claude, and by another of his brethren, have not the same sincerity. These
would willingly persuade us that this Penitent received the holy Sacrament
under both kinds, and that the two species were mixed together, as it was
often practiced, but a long time after these primitive ages, and as it is still
practiced in the East at the ordinary communions of the faithful. But besides,
that this mixture of the two species, so expressly separated in the Gospel, is
but a late invention and appears no sooner then in the VII. age, where it
appears even then only to be forbidden, as we shall see hereafter; the words
of S. Denis Bishop of Alexandria will not bear the interpretation of these
gentlemen, sayng the Priest, of whom he there speaks, does not command to
mingle the two species, but to moisten that which he gives, that is to say
without doubt the solid part, which having been kept several days for the use
of the sick according to the perpetual custom of the Church, stood need of
being moistened in some liquor that it might enter the parched throat of an
agonizing man.

The same reason makes the Fathers of the III. Council of Carthage, to which S.
Conc. Carthag. III. c. 76. t. 3. Conc. ult. edit. Paris.
Augustine subscribed, say, that the Eucharist must be infused into the mouth of
a dying man: infundi ori ejus Eucharistiam. This word infused, infundi, dos not
denote the blood alone, as it might be imagined; for from what has been said
out of Eusebius and the history of Serapion we find, that although the
consecrated bread and the solid part of the Blessed Sacrament were only given,
yet they expressed it by infusion when they gave it steeped in any liquor for
its more easy reception only. And Rufinus, who writ in the time of the III.
Hist. Eccl. Eusebius. Ruf. init. lib. 6. cap. 34.
Council of Carthage, in his translation of Eusebius expresses Serapions
communion no other wise then the Council, saying that they caused a little of
the Eucharist to be infused into his mouth: Parum Eucharistiae infusum jussit
seni praeberi. The which demonstrates the custom of these primitive times, and
explicates what was meant by this infusion of the Eucharist.

It is the interest of Truth only which obliges me to make this remarke, seeing
in the substance it imports little to our subject, wheather the body or the
blood alone were given to the sick, and that in short it is still to
communicate under one species alone. For as to the distribution of the two
species mixed together, I fear not that any one who is sincere (if never so
little read in antiquity) should imagine it to have been in use in these
primitive times, during which it appears not upon any account that so much as
the Idea was had of it. The History of Serapion makes it sufficiently appear,
that the consecrated bread alone was carried from the Priest to the sick; and
that it was in the sick man's house they moistened it, to the end he might
swallow it with more ease; and that they were so far from the thought of
mingling it with the blood, that they mad use of another liquor to steep it in
a common liquor taken at the house of the sick. In fine, this distribution of
the body and blood mixed together begins not to appear till the VII. Conc.
Brac. IV. t. 6. Council. ult. edit. c. 2.
age in the Council of Brague, where it is moreover forbidden by an express
Canon. From whence it is easy to comprehend how much a coustume, which at first
appears only in the VII. age in a Canon which disapproves it, is short not
only of the third age, and the time of S. Denis of Alexandria, but likewise of
the fourth and that of the third Council of Carthage, (viz) three or four
hundred years.

We shall see, in another place, hwo much difficulty was made to admit of the
establishment of this mixture even in the X. and XI. age especially in the
Latin Church; and this will serve as a new argument to demonstrate how little
it was thought of in the primitive times, and in the III. Council of Carthage:
from whence may be undoubtfully gathered that the Communion which was there
ordained for the sick was, without doubt, under one species, and moreover, like
that of Serapions, under the species of bread only.

Neither will there be any difficulty to acknowledge this when we reflect upon
the manner how S. Ambrose communicated at his death in the same age. We have
the life of this Great man writ at the entreaty of S. Augustine and dedicated to
him by Paulinus S. Ambroses Deacon and Secretary (whom Erasmus improperly
confounds with the great Saint Paulinus Bishop of Nole) in which he relates
that S. Honoratus the famous Bishop of Verceil, who was come to assist this
Saint at his death, heard this voice three times during the silence of the
night. Rise, stay not, he is going to dye. He went down, presented him the body
of our Lord, and the Saint had no sooner received it but he gave up the ghost.
Who dos not see that this great Saint is represented to us, as one for whom God
took care that he should dye in a state where nothing more could be desired,
seeing he had just received the body of his Lord? And at the same time who
would not believe, that he had communicated aright in receiving after the same
manner that Saint Ambrose did in dying; after the same manner that Saint
Honoratus gave it; after the same manner it was writ to Saint Augustine; and
after the same manner the whole Church saw it, without finding therein any
thing of new or extraordinary.

The subtility of the Protestants is at a loss about this passage. Georg.
Calixt. disp. cont. comm. sub una specie n. 162.
The famous George Calixte, the most able amongst the Lutherans of our times,
and he who has writ the most learnedly upon the two species against us,
sustaines, that Saint Ambrose received in both kinds; and for an answer to
Paulinus, who relates only, that the body was given him which he had no sooner
received but he gave up the Ghost; this subtle Minister has recourse to a
Grammatical figure called Synecdoche which puts the part for the whole,
without ever so much as offering to bring us one example of such a kind of
speech in a like occasion. Oh strange effect of a prejudicate opinion! We see
in the Communion of Serapion an assured example of one only species, where the
restriction of the figure Synecdoche cannot have the least admittance, seeing
Saint Denis of Alexandria expresses so precisely, that the bread and solid part
alone was given. We find the same language and the same thing in the Council
of Carthage, and we see at the same time Saint Ambroses communion, in which
there is no mention of any thing but the body. Nay further (for I may well here
presuppose what I shall presently demonstrate) all ages show us nothing but the
body alone reserved for the ordinary communion of the sick: and yet this
consequence must not be allowed, and a Synecdoche without aledging one example
must be preferred to so many examples that are received. What blindness, or
rather what cavil is this!

If these Gentlemen would act sincerely and not study how to evade rather, then
to instruct, they would see that it dos not suffice to allege at random the
figure Synecdoche, and to say that it is ordinary, by the use of this figure,
to express the whole by its part. All things are eluded by these means, and
nothing of certain is left in speech. A man must come to the matter proposed in
particular, and to the place under debate. He must examine, for example, weather
the figure he would apply to this relation of Paulinus, be found in any other
of the like nature, and weather it agree in particular to that of this
Historian. Calixt dos nothing of all this because all this would only have
served to confound him.

And at the very first sight it is clear and certain the figure of which he
speaks is not one of those which are common in ordinary speech, as when we
say to eat together, to express the whole feast, and to drink as well as to
eat, or as the Hebrews mentioned bread alone to express in general the whole
nourishment. It is not the custom of Ecclesiastical language, nor in common
use to name the body alone to express the body and the blood, seeing on the
contrary we may find passages in every page of the fathers, where the
distribution of the body and blood is related in expressly naming the one and
the other; and it may be for certain held that this is the ordinary practice.

But without tiring our selves unprofitabley in the search of those passages
where the Fathers may have mentioned the one without the other, nor the
particular reasons which might have obliged them to it; I will say (sticking to
the Examples debated of in this place) that I have never seen any relation,
where in recounting the distribution of the body and the blood, they have
expressed only one of the two.

And if I have not observed any example of this, neither has Calixte remarked
any such more then I; And what ought to make any one believe that there is
none, is that a man, so careful as he has been to heap together all he can
against us, has not been able to find any.

I find also M. Du Bourd. chapter 17. p. 317.
du Bourdieu (who has writ since him, and read him so well that he follows him
almost throughout, and therefore ought to have supplied his defects) tells us,
not upon occasion of Paulinus and Saint Ambrose but upon occasion of
Tertullien, that if this Father in speaking of Domestic Communion (of which
we shall also treat in its proper place) has mentioned nothing but the body
and consecrated bread, without naming the blood or the wine, it is that he
expresses the whole by the part, and that there is nothing more common in books
and ordinary in humain language. But I find not, that in the matter we treat
of, and in the relation which is made of the distribution of the Eucharist, he
has found in the Fathers, any more then Calixte, one single example of an
expression, which according to him should be so common.

Behold two Ministers in the same perplexity Calixtes finds the body alone
mentioned in the communion of the sick, and M. du Bourdieu the same in
domestic communion. We are not astonished at it: we believe that the body
alone was given in both these Communions: These Ministers will believe nothing
of it: both of them bring the figure Synecdoche where by to save themselves:
both of them are equally destitute of Examples in the like cases: What
therefore remains but to conclude, that their Synecdoche is but imaginary, and
that in particular, if Saint Paulinus speak only of the body in the Communion
of Saint Ambrose, it is in effect that Saint Ambrose did receive nothing but
the body only, according to custom? If he tell us that this great man expired
immediately after having received, we must not here search after subtilityes,
nor fancy to our selves a figure: It is the simple truth and matter of fact
which makes him thus plainly relate what passed.

But to the end we may complete the conviction of these Ministers, supposing
that their Synecdoche is as common in such like cases as it is rare or rather
unheard of: let us se whether it agree with the passage in question, and with
the History of Saint Ambrose. Paulinus says, S. Honoratus being gone to repose
during the silence of the night, a voice from heaven advertised him that his
sick man was going to expire; that he immediately went down, presented him with
the body of our Lord, and that the Saint give up the Ghost presently after
having received it. How comes it to pass that he did not rather say that he
dyed immediately after having received the precious blood, if the thing happened
really so? Were it as ordinary as Calixtus would have it, to express only the
body, to signify the receiving of the body and the blood, by this figure, which
puts the part for the whole: it is as natural also, for the same reason and by
the same figure, the blood alone should be sometimes made use of to express
the receiving under both the one and the other species. But if ever this should
have happened, it ought to have been chiefly upon the occasion of this Communion
of Saint Ambrose and of the relation which Paulinus has left us of it. For
since he would show the receiving of the Eucharist so immediately fallowed by
the death of the Saint, and would represent this great man dying as another
Moses in the embraces of his Lord; If he intended to abridge his discourse, he
should have done it in abridging and shuning in the relation of that part or
action wherein this Holy Bishop terminated his life, that is to say in the
reception of the blood, which is always the last; and the rather because this
supposed the other, and it would have been in effect immediately after this,
that the Saint rendered up his blessed soul to God. Nothing would have so much
struck the senses; nothing would have been so strongly printed in the memory;
nothing would have presented it self sooner to the thoughts and nothing by
consequence would have run more naturally in discourse. If therefore no mention
of the blood be found in this historian, it is indeed because Saint Ambrose did
not receive it.

Calixtus foresaw verry well, Ibid.
that the recitate of Paulinus would form this idea naturally in the readers
minds, and it is thereupon that he adds, it may verry well be that they
carried to the Saint the precious blood together with the body as equally
necessary, but that Saint Ambrose had not the time to receave it being
prevented by death: Oh unhappy refuge in a desperate cause! If Paulinus had
this idea; instead of representing us his holy Bishop as a man who by a
special care of the Divine Providence dyed with all the helps which a
Christian could wish for, he would on the contrary by some word have denoted,
that notwithstanding this heavenly advertissement, and the extreme diligence
of S. Honoratus, a sudden death had deprived this sick Saint of the blood of
his Master and of so essential at part of the Sacrament. But they had not
these Ideas in those times, and the Saints believed they gave and received all,
in the body only.

Thus the two answers of Calixtus are equally vain. In like manner M. du
Bourdieu his great follower has not dared to express eather the one or the
other, and in that perplexitay whereinto so pecise testimony had thrown him he
endeavors to save himself by answering only that. Du Bourd. rep. chap. 13. p.
378.
Saint Ambrose received the communion as he could; not dreaming that he had
immediately before said they had given the two species to Serapion, and that,
if it had been the custom, it would not have been more difficult to give them
to Saint Ambrose. Moreover if they had believed them inseparable as these
Ministers with all those of their religon pretend, it is clear that they would
raither have resolved to give neither of the two, then to give only one. Thus
all the answers of these Ministers are turned against themselves, and M. du
Bourdieu cannot fight against us without fighting against himself.

He has notwithstanding found another expedient to weaken the authority of this
passage, and is not afraid, in so knowing an age as this is, to write that
before this example of Saint Ambrose there is not any tract to be found of the
Communion of the sick in any words of the ansients. Ibid.
The testimony of Saint Justin, who in his second Apology says they carried
the Eucharist to those that were absent touches him not: Ibid. 382.
For Saint Justin, says he, has not expressly specifyed the sick; as if their
sickness had been a sufficient cause to deprive them of this common
consolation, and not raither a new motive to give it them. But what becomes of
the example of Serapion? Is it not clearly enough said that he was sick, and
dying? It Is true: but the reason was, because he was one of those who had
sacrifised to Idols, and one that was ranked amongst the penitents. He must
have been an Idolator to merit to receive the Eucharist in dying, and the
faithful who during the whole course of their lives have never been excluded
from the participation of this Sacrament by any crime, must be excluded at
their death, when they have the most need of such a succor. And thus a man
amuses himself, and thinks he has done a learned exploit when he heaps
together, as this Minister does, the examples of dyinh persons where there is
no mention made of communion; without reflectinh that in these descriptions we
often omit that which is most common, and that probably wees hold not have
known by this testimony of Paulinus that his Bishop had communicated, if this
writer had not intended to show us the particular care which God took to
procure him this grace.

But is this Minister ignorant that in these occasions one only positive
testimony renverses the whole fabrik of these negative arguments, which they
build with so much industry upon nothing? and is it possible he should not lee
that the example alone of Saint Ambrose shows us an established custom, seeing
that so soon as Saint Honoratus knew this great man was dying, he understood,
without having need that the Eucharist should be mentioned to him, that it was
time to carry it to this sick Saint? No matter: The Ministers would have one to
doubt of this custom, to the end they may give some resemblance of singularity
and novelty to a communion, which was but too clearly given to a Saint, and by
a Saint, under one species. And what shall we say to Calixtus who seems to be
astonished that we dare count Saint Ambrose amongst those who communicated
under one species Calixt. v. 163.
in dying? Is it not effect an unheard of baldness to say this after a grave
Historian who had been an eye witness of what he writes, and who sent his
history to Saint Augustine, after having writ it at his entreaty? But the
business is they must be able to say they have answered; and when they are at
a non plus it is then the most confidence must be showen.

In a word, we find in Paulinus nothing but the common customs of the Church
which every where makes no mention but of the body, when it mentions that which
was kept for the sick. Cone. Tur. II. c. 3. Tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
The second Council of Tours celebrated in the year 567. ordaines that the
body of our Lord should be placed upon the Altar, not in the rank of the
Images, non in imaginario ordine, but under the figure of the Cross, sed sub
Crucis titulo.

By the way it may be noted that there were Images placed in the Churches, and
that there was a Cross during these primitive ages: it was under this figure
of the Cross they reserved the body of our Lord, and the body only; for this
reason peradventure it is, that Gregory of Tours at the same time this Council
was held, tells us of certain Vessalls or Tabernacles in form of Towers,
Greg. Tur. L. I. cap. 8.6.
wherein the Box or Pix containing or Lord's Body, was reserved, and which were
placed on the Altar in time of Sacrifice; without doubt in Order to the
Adoration of the Sacrament so reserved.

By the Ordinance of Hincmarus the famous Archibishop of Reims who lived in the
1 x. age, Cap. Hincmar. art. VIII. Tom. II. Conc. Gall.
there ought to be a box where the holy oblation for the Viaticum of the sick
should be decently conserved: both the box and the word it self of holy
oblation show sufficiently to those who understand Ecclesiastical language,
Leo IV. Hom. Tom. VIII. Conc. Spicil. T. II. p. 263.
that only the body was there meant which was ordinarily expressed by this
name, or by that of Communion, or simply by that of the Eucharist. The blood
was expressed either by its natural name, or by that of the Chalice.

We find in the same times a Decree of Leo the IV. Ibid.
where after having spoke of the body and blood for the ordinary communion of
the faithful, when he treats of the sick he speaks only of the box, where the
Body of our Lord was kept for their Viaticum.

This Ordinance is repeated in the following age by the famous Rathierus Bishop
of Verone; and some time after, under King Robert, Gest. Council. Aurel. ibid.
673.
a Council held at Orleans speaks of the ashes of an infant that was burnt,
which some abominable heriticks hept with as much veneration as Christian piety
observes in the custom of keeping the body of our Lord for the Viaticum of the
sick. We find here also the body and the blood expressed in the Ordinary
communion of the Faithful, and the body only for that of the sick.

To all these authorityes we must join here that of the Ordo Romanus, Bib. P
P. part. T. de div. off.
which is not little, seeing it is the ancient Ceremonial of the Roman Church
cited and explicated by authors eight or nine hundred years since. We see
there in two places the consecrated bread divided into three parts, the one to
be distributed to the people, the other to be put into the Chalice, not for the
communion of the people, but for the Priest alone, after he had taken the
consecrated bread separately, as we do at this present, and the third to be
reserved upon the Altar. It was this they kept for the sick, which was for that
reason called the dying peoples part, Microlog. de Ecc. observe. 17. T. XVIII.
Max. 616.
as the Micrologist an author of the eleventh age says, and was consecrated in
honor of the burial of JESUS CHRIST, as the two other parts represented his
conversation upon Earth and his resurrection. Those who have read the ancient
interpreters of the Ecclesiastical Ceremonies understand this language and the
mystery of these holy Ceremonies.

The Author of the life of Saint Basile observes likewise, that this great man
separated the consecrated bread into three parts the third of which he hung
over the Altar in a Dove of Gold he had caused to be made. Amphil. vit. S.
Basil.
This third part of the consecrated bread which he ordered to be placed there,
was manifestly that which was reserved for the sick, and these Doves of gold to
hang over the Altars are ancient in the Greek Church, as it appears by a
Council of Constantinople held by Mennas under the Empire of Justinien. Cone.
Constable. Menna ad s. T. V. Conc.
We see likewise these Doves amongst the Latins, near the same time: all our
Authors make mention of them; and the will of Perpetuus Bishp of Tours remarkes
amongst the vessels and instruments made use of in the Sacrifice, Test. Perp.
T. V. Spicil.
a Dove of silver wherein to keep the Blessed Sacrament, ad repositorium.

Furthermore, without tying my self to the name of Amphilochius S. Basils
Contemporary, to whom the life of this Saint is attributed, I will admit that
the passage taken out of this life proves only for that time in which this
History was writ, let who will be the author of it. Let them say moreover if
they will, that this Author attributes to S. Basil the practice of those times
in which this life was composed; yet is it enough in either case to confirm
what is otherwise certain, that the custom of reserving the species of Bread
only for the sick, is of great antiquity in the Greek Church, seeing that the
life of Saint Basil is found already translated into Latin in the time of
Charles the bald, Aeneas Ep. Par. lib. adv. Graec. T. IV. Spic. p. 80. 81.
and cited by Eneas Bishop of Paris renowned in these times for his piety and
learning, who moreover quotes the very place in this life where mention is made
of these Doves, and of the Sacrament of our Lord kept therein and hung over the
Altar.

Hereunto may be reduced those Ciboriums mentioned amongst the presents which
Charlemagne gave to the Roman Church; Anast. Bib. vit. Leon. III. T. II. Conc.
Gal.
and all antiquity is full of the like examples.

And to the end the Tradition of the first and last ages may appear
conformable to each other, as we have seen in the first ages, in the history
of Serapion, and in the Council of Carthage, that in communicating the sick
under the species of bread only, they moistened it in some liqueur: so does the
same custom appear in after ages.

We see this above six hundred years since in the ancient customs of Clugny,
Ant. Consuet. Cluniac. l. III. c. 28. Tom. IV. Spicil.
collected at that time out of most ancient memorials by S. Udalricus a Monk
of this Order, Hist. Euch. I. P. c. 16, p. 183.
and the Minister de la Roque in his history of the Eucharist cites this book
without any reproach. It is remarked in this book that the infirm Religious
received the body only, which was given to them steeped in unconsecrated wine.
There we find also a cupp in which it was steeped, and thus it was the
Religious of the most famous and most holy Monastery in the world communicated
their sick. By this we may judge of the custom of the rest of the Church.
Constable. Odon. Paris. Episc. c. 5. art. 3. T. X. Conc.
In fine we find every where mention of this cupp which was carried for the
communion of the sick, Constable. Episc. anon. T. XI. Syn. Bajoc. c. 77. ibid. 2. p.
but which was made use of only to give them the consecrated bread moistened in
common wine to facilitate the passage of this heavenly food.

The Greeks also retained this tradition as well as the Latins; and as their
inviolable custom is not to Consecrate the Eucharist for the sick but upon
holy Thursday only, they mix the species of bread, wholly dried during so long
a time, either with water or unconsecrated wine. As for consecrated wine it is
manifest it could not be kept so long especially in those hot countries, so
that their custom of consecrating for the sick only one day in the year,
obliged them to communicate them under one only species, that is under that of
bread which they could keep without difficulty their Sacrifice in leavened
bread keeping better them ours in unleavened, especially after the drying we
lately mentioned.

It is true (for we will dissemble nothing) that at present they make a Cross
with the precious bloods upon the consecrated bread which they reserve for the
sick. But besides that this is not to give the blood of our Lord to drink as it
is expressed in the Gospel, nor to mark the separation of the body and the
blood, which alone persuades our Reformers of the necessity of the two species:
It abundantly appears that at the years end nothing remains of one or two
drops of the precious blood which they put upon the heavenly bread, and that
there is nothing left for the sick but one only species. To which we must add,
that after all, this custom of the Greeks to mix a little of the blood with
the sacred Body (concerning which we see nothing in their ancient Fathers or
Canons) is new amongst them; and we shall find some occasion to make this
more clearly appear in the following discourse.

Those who deny every thing, may deny these observances of the Greek Church;
but they do not therefore cease to be indubitable, and no one can deny it
without a wonderful insincerity, if he be never so little read in the
Euchologes of the Greeks, or instructed concerning their rights.

And as for the Latin Church, Conc. sub Edg. Rege Can. 38. T. IX. Conc. p. 628.
Conc. Bitur. c. 2. ibid. p. 865. Constit. Odon. Paris. Episc. T. X. p. 1802.
Constit. Episc. anon. T. XI. 1. p. Innoc. IV. Ep. X. ibid. 1. Conc. Lambeth. c.
1. ibid. Syn. Exon. c. 4. ibid. 2. p. Synod. Bajoc. c. 12.77. Conc. Ravenn. II.
Rub. VII. Conc. Vaur. 6.85 ibid.
the Councils are full of necessary precautions for the conserving of the Body
of our Lord, the carrying it with respect and a convenient decorum, and to
cause a due adoration to be rendered to it by the people. They speak likewise
of the box and linen in which it was kept, and of the care which the Priests
ought to have to renew the Hosts every eight days, and to consummate the old
ones before they drunk the holy cup. They ordain likewise how those Hosts,
which had been kept too long, should be burnt, and the ashes reserved under the
Altar, without so much as ever speaking, amongst so many observances, either of
vialls to conserve the precious Blood in, or of any precautions for the keeping
of it, although it be given us under a species much more capable of alteration.

We may aledge also upon the same account a Canon, which all the Ministers
object against us: It is a Canon of the Council of Tours, which we find not
in the volumes of the Councils, Burch. Coll. Can. l. V. c. 9. Yvo dec. II. P.
c. 19.
but in Burchard and Yvo of Chartres collectors of the Canons of the eleaventh
age. This Canon as well, as others says, that the holy oblation which is kept
for the sick, that is the species of bread as appears by what follows, ought
to be renewed every eight days: but id adds, which we find no where else in
the West, that it must be dipped in the blood to the end it may be said truly
that the body and blood is given.

If this Canon gave us any difficulty, Aubert. de Euch. lib. II. in Exam. Pii.
p. 288.
we might say with Aubertin, what is very true, that Burchard and Yvo of
Charters collected many things together without choice or judgment, and that
they give us many pieces as ancient which are not such. But to act in every
thing which sincerity, it may be said, that this Canon so exactly transcribed
by these Authors is not false, as also that it is none of those which were
admitted, since we see nothing like it in all the others.

Moreover this Canon which does not appear but in above named collections for
certain was not made any long time before, and the sole mixing of the body and
blood shows sufficiently how far short it is of the first antiquity. But let it
be in what time it will, it is apparent that before it was made it was the
custom to name the body and blood even in giving the body only, and this by
the natural union of the substance and the Grace both of the one and the
other. We see nevertheless that this Council had some scrupule concerning
this matter, and believed that in expressing the two species, they ought both
of them to be given in some manner. In effect, it is true, that in some sense,
to be able to call it the body and the blood the two species must be given,
because the natural dessine of this expression is to denote that which each of
them contains in virtue of the Institution. But it will be granted me that to
mix them in this manner, and let them dry for eight days together was but a
very weak means to conserve the two species; and how ever it be this part of
the Canon which contains a custom so particular, cannot be a prejudice to so
many decrees, where we see not only nothing resembling it, but moreover quite
the contrary.

That which is most certain is that this Canon makes it appear they did not
believe the holy liquor could with ease be conserved in its proper species, and
that their endeavors were cheefely to conserve the consecrated bread. As to
the other part which regards the mixture, what we have said tooching the
Grecians may be applied here; and all the subtility of the Ministers cannot
hinder but it will always be certain by this Cannon, that they never believed
themselves bound either to make the person communicating drink, or to give him
the blood separated from the body, to denote the violent death of our Lord, or
lastly to give him in effect any liquor at all seeing after eight days, it is
sufficiently clear there remained nothing of the oblation but the dry and
solid part. So that this Canon so much boasted of by the Ministers without
concluding any thing against us, serves only to show that liberty which the
Churches thought them selves to have in the administration of the sacred
species of the Eucharist.

After all these remarks we have made, it must pass for constant and
undeniable, that neither the Greeks nor the Latins ever believed, that all that
is writ in the Gospel tooching the communion under two species, was
essential and expressly commanded; and that, on the contrary, it was always
believed even from the first ages that one sole species was sufficient for a
true communion seeing that the custom was to keep nothing for, nor give
nothing to the sick, but one only.

It serves for nothing to object, that the two species were frequently carried
to the sick, and more over in general that they were carried to those that
were absent. Saint Justin, Just. Apol. 1.
I own is express in this matter: But why do they allege to us these
passages which serve for nothing? It is one thing to say, as Saint Justin does,
that the two species of the Sacrament were carried at the same time (as M. de
la Roque speaks) it was celebrated in the Church: Hist. de l'Eucharist. 1. P.
c. 15. p. 176.
and another thing, to say they could reserve them so long a time as was
necessary for the sick, and that it was the custom to do so, especially in a
time when persecution permitted not frequent Ecclesiastical assemblyes. Hier.
Ep. IV. ad Rust.
The same thing must be said of Saint Exuperius Bishop of Toulouze, of whom
Saint Hierome writ, that after he had sold all the rich vessels of the Church
to redeem captives and solace the poor, he carried the Body of our Lord in a
basket, and the Blood in a vessel of glass. He carried them says S. Hierome,
but he does not say he kept them, which is our question: And I acknowledge that
when there was any sick persons to be communicated, in those circumstances
where they could commodiously receive both the species without being at all
changed, they made no difficulty in it. But it is no less certain, by the
common deposition of so many testimonys, that where as the species of wine
could not be kept with ease, the ordinary communion of the sick, like that of
Serapion and Saint Ambrose, was under the sole species of bread.

In effect, Hist. Fr. Script. T. IV.
we read in the life of Louis the VI. called the Gross, written by Sugerus
Abbot of Saint Denis, that in the last sickness of this Prince the Body and
Blood of our Lord was carried to him, but we see there also that this
faithful Historien thought himself obliged to render the reason of it, and to
advertise, that it was as they came from saying Mass, and that they carried it
devoutly in procession to his chamher: which ought to make us understand in
what manner it was used out of these conjunctures.

But that which putts the thing out of all doubt is, that in substance M. de la
Roque agrees with us as to the matter of fact in debate. There is no more
difficulty to communicate the sick under the sole species of bread, then under
that of wine only, a practice which this curious observer shows us in the VII.
Hist. Euch. I. p. chapter 12. p. 150. 160.
age in the cleaventh Council of Toledo Canon XI. He says as much of the
eleavent age and of Pope Paschalis II. Conc. Tolet. XI. Pasch. II. Ep. 32. ad
Pont.
by whom he makes the same thing to be permitted for little infants. He is so
far from disapproving these practices that he is careful to defend them, and
excuses them himself upon an invincible necessity, as if a parcel of the
sacred bread could not be so steeped that a sick person or even an infant might
swallow it almost as easily as wine. But the business was that he must find
some excuse to hinder us from concluding, from his own observations, that the
Church believed she had a full liberty to give one species only, without any
prejudice to the integrety of communion.

Behold what we find tooching the communion of the sick in the tradition of
all ages. If some of these practices which I have observed concerning that
veneration which was paid to the Eucharist astonish owr reformers, and appear
new to them, I engage my self, to show them shortly, and in few words, (for it
is not difficult) that the original of it is ancient in the Church, or reather
that it never had a beginning. But at present (that we may not quit our
matter) it is sufficient for me to show them, (only by comparing the customs
of the first and last ages) a continual Tradition of communicating the sick
ordinarily under the sole species of bread; although the Church always tender
to her children, if she had believed both the species necessary, would rather
have had them consecrated extraordinarily in the sick persons chamber, Capit.
Anytonis Basil. Episc. temp. Car. Mag. cap. 14. T. VI. Spicil.
as it has been often actually practiced, then to deprive them of this succor:
on the contrary she would have given them so much the rather to dying persons
by how much they had a greater combat to sustain, and at the article of death
the most need of their Viaticum.

Lastly, I do not believe the Gentlemen of the pretended Reformation will raise
us here any difficultyes upon the change of the species of which we shall have
occasion to speak often in this discourse. Those Cavils with which they fill
their books upon this point, regard not our question, but that of the real
presence, from whence also, to speak heartily, they ought to have been
retrenched long since; it being clear, as I have already remarked, that the
Son of God who would not in this Mystery do any miracle, apparent as such to
the senses ought not to suffer himself to be obliged to discover in any
conjuncture what ever that which he designed expressly to hide from our
senses, nor by consequence to change what ordinarily happens to the matter
which it has pleased him to make use of to the end he might leave his body and
blood to the faithful.

There is no man of reason who with a little reflection, will not of his own
accord enter into the same sentiment, and at the same time grant that these
pretended undecencyes, which are brough against us with so much seeming
applause, avail only to moove the humain senses; but in reality they are too
much below the Majesty of JESUS CHRIST, to hinder the course of his dessigns,
and the desire he has to unite himself to us in so particular a manner.

It happens thus so very often in these matters (and especially to our
Reformers) to pass from one question to another that I esteem my self
obliged to keep them close to our question by this advertisement. The same
reason obliges me to desire them not to draw any advantage from the expression
of bread and wine which will occur so often, because they know, that even in
believing as we do, the change of the substance, it is permitted us to leave
the first name to those things that are changed, as well as it was to Moses to
learn that a rod which was turned into a serpent, Exodus 8.12.
or that water which was become blood, Ibid. 21.24.
or the Angels men because they appeared such, Genesis 18.2.26.
not to allege here Saint John, who calls the wine at the marriage of Cana,
water made wine. John. 2.9.
It is natural to man, that he may facilitate his discourse, to abridge his
phrases, and to speak according to the appearances neither is advantage
usvally taken from this manner of speech; and I do not believe that any one
would object to a Philosopher, who defends the motion of the Earth, that he
overthrows his hypothesis when he says that the Sun rises or setts.

After this slight digression to which the desire of procceding with
clearenesse has engaged me, I return to my matter, and to those practices
which I have promised to explicate whereby to show in antiquity the communion
under one species.

III. Second Custom. Communion of little Infants.
THE second practice I undertake to prove is that when the Communion was given
to little children that were baptized, it was given them in the first ages, yea
and ordinarily in all the following under the species of wine only. S. Cyp. Tr.
de Lapsis.
Cyprien who suffered martyrdom in the third age authorizes this practice in
his treatise de Lapsis. This great man represents there to us with a gravity
worthy of himself, what passed in the Church and in his presence to a little
girl to whom had been given a little moistened bread offered to Idols. Her
mother who knew nothing of it, omitted not to bring her according to custom
into the Church assembly. But God, who would show by a miraculous sign how
much they were unworthy of the society of the faithful who had participated of
the impure table of Devils, caused an extraordinary agitation and trouble to
appear in this child during prayer: as if, (says S. Cyprian) for default of
speech she had found her self forced to declare by this means as well as she
could, the misfortune she was fallen into. This agitation, which ceased not
during the whole time of prayer, augmented at the approaching of the Eucharist,
where JESUS CHRIST was so truly present. For, (as S. Cyprian pursues,) after
the accustomed solemnityes, the Deacon who presented the holy cup to the
faithful being come to the order or rank of this child, JESUS CHRIST who
knows how to make himself be perceived by whom he pleases, caused this infant
at that moment to feel a terrible impression of the presence of his Majesty.
She turned away her face, says Saint Cyprian, as not able to support so great
Majesty; she shuts her mouth, she refused the Chalice. But after they had made
her by force swallow some drops of the precious blood, she could not, adds this
Father, retain it in those defiled entrals, so great is the power and Majesty
of our Lord. It became the body of our Lord to produce no less effects; and
Saint Cyprian who represents to us with so much care and zeal together the
trouble of this child during all prayer time, not mentioning this extraordinary
emotion caused by the Eucharist, but at the approaching and receiving of the
consecrated Chalice without speaking one only word of the body, shows
sufficiently that, in effect, they did not offer her a nourishment that was
inconvenient to her age.

It is not that they could not, with sufficient facility, make a child swallow
a little of the sacred bread by steeping of it, seeing it appears even in this
history, that the little girl mentioned here had in this manner taken the
bread offered to Idols. But this is so far from hurting us, that on the
contrary it lets us see how much they were persuaded that one sole species was
sufficient, because there being in deed no impossibility of giving the body to
little infants they so easily determinated to give them the blood alone. It
suffised that the sollid part was not so convenient to that age: and on the
other side as they would have been obliged to steep the sacred bread to the
end they might make little children swallow it; so in these ages, where we
have seen that they did not so much as dream of mixing the two species, they
must have been obliged to take an ordinary liquor before that sacred liquor the
blood of our Lord, contrary to the dignity of such a Sacrament which the Church
has always believed ought to enter into our bodies before all other
nourishment. August. Ep. 118. ad Jan.
It was always (I say) believed; and not only in the time of Saint Augustine,
Ep. 118.
from whom we have borrowed those words we last produced, but in the time of
Saint Cyprian himself, as it appears in his letter to Cecilius, Ep. 63.
and before S. Cyprian seeing we find mention in Tertullian of the sacred
bread which the faithful took in secret before all other nourishement, Lib.
II. ad ux. 5.
and in a word before them all because they speak of it as of an established
custom. This consideration which alone was the reason why they gave the blood
only to little children though never so strong in it self, would have been
forcelesse against a divine command. It was therefore most certainly believed
that there was not any divine precept of uniting the two species together.

M. Hist. Euch. I. p. chapter 12. p. 145.
de la Roque would gladly say, though he dare not do it in plain terms, that
they mixed the body with the blood for infants, and imagines, it might be
gathered from the words of Saint Cyprian, though there is not one syllable, as
we see, which tends to it. But besides that the discipline of that time did
not suffer this mixture, Saint Cyprian speaks only of the blood, It is the
blood, says he, that cannot stay in defiled entrals, and the distribution of
the sacred Chalice of which alone this infant had participated, is too clearly
expressed to leave the least place for that conjecture which M. de la Roque
would make. Thus the Example is precise: the custom of giving the Communion to
little children under the species of wine only cannot be contested, and that
doubt which they would raise in the mind without any ground, shows only the
perplexity they are thrown into by the great authority of Saint Cyprian and the
Church in his time.

Certainly M. Hist. Euch. I. p. chapter 11. p. 136. chapter 12. p. 150.
de la Roque would have acted with more sincerity, if he had kept himself to
that Idee which first presented it self as it were naturally unto him. The
first time he had spoke of this passage of Saint Cyprian, he told us that they
powered by force into the mouth of the child some of the sacred Chalice; that is
without question some drops of the precious blood pure and without any mixture,
just as it was presented to the rest of the people who had already received the
body. And on the other side we have even now seen that this Minister does not
blame the Pope Paschalis the II. who, according to him, permitted little
children to communicate under the sole species of wine: so much did his
conscience dictate that this practice had no difficulty, in it.

As for M. du Bourdieu, Du Bourd. I. rep. p. 37. Et repliq. chapter 20. p. 341.
this passage of Saint Cyprian had at the first also produced its effect in his
mind; And this passage having been objected to him by a Catholic, this
Minister easily accorded in his first answer, that in effect nothing had been
given to this child but the consecrated wine alone. He comes of in saying that
the ancients who believed the communion absolutely necessary for little
infants, gave it them as they could; that it was for this reason Saint Cyprians
Deacon believing this child would be damned if it dyed without the Eucharist,
opened by force its mouth, to pour into it a little wine, and that a case of
necessity, a particular case cannot have the name of a custom. What efforts
are these to elude a thing so clear! Where are those extraordinary reasons
this Minister would here imagine to himself? Is there one single word in Saint
Cyprian which shows the danger of this infant as the motive of giving it the
Communion? Dos it not on the contrary appear by the whole discourse, that this
blessed Sacrament was given to it only because it was the custom to give it to
all children so often as they were brought to the assemblyes? Why will M. du
Bourdieu divine that this little girl had never communicated? Chapter 20. p. 345.
Was she not baptized? Was it not the custom to give the communion together
with baptism even to infants? To what purpose is it therefore to speak here
of a fear they should have, least she should be damned for not having received
the Eucharist, since they had already given her it in giving her baptism? Is
it that they believed also in the ancient Church that it did not suffice to the
salvation of a child to have communicated once, and that it should be damned if
they dit not reiterate the Communion? What chymeras do men invent, rather then
give place to truth, and confess their errors with sincerity! But to what end
do they throw us here upon the question of the necessity of the Eucharist, and
upon the error they would have Saint Cyprian to have been incident to in this
point? Grant it were true that this holy Martyr and the Church in his time
should have believed the Communion absolutely necessary to infants, what
advantage would M. du Bourdieu draw from thence? and who dos not on the
contrary see, that if the two species be essential to Communion, as the
Pretended Reformers would have it, the more one shall believe the Communion
necessary to little children, the less will he be dispensed with in giving
them both these species? M. du Bourdieu foresaw verry well this consequence so
contrary to his pretentions; and in his second reply he would divine, though
Saint Cyprian has said nothing of it, and against the whole connection of his
discourse, that this little girl when she was so cruelly and so miraculously
tormented after the taking of the Blood, had already received the Body without
receiving any prejudice thereby: where is a man when he makes such answers?

But why do we dispute any longer? There is no better proof, nor better
interpreter of a custom then the custom it self, I would say, that there is
nothing which demonstrates more that a custom comes from the first ages, then
when it is seen to continue successively to the last. This of communicating
little children under the sole species of wine, which we find established in
the III. age, and in the time of Saint Cyprian, continued always so common
that it is found in all after ages. It is found in the V. or VI. Jobius de
Verb. incar. lib. III. c. 18. Bibl. Phot. Cod. 222.
age in the book of Jobius, where that learned Religious speaking of the three
Sacraments which were given together, in a time when the Christian Religion
being established very few others were baptized, no more then at present, but
the children of the faithful, speaks thus. They baptize us, says he, after
that they anoint us, that is they confirm us, and lastly they give us the
precious Blood. He makes no mention of the Body, because it was not given to
children. And for this reason he takes great care in the same place to explain
how the Blood may be given even before the Body a thing which having no place
in the communion of those of riper years, was found only in that which the
Faithful had all of them received in receiving the Blood alone in their
infancy. So that this custom has already passed from the III. age to the VI.
it stops not there, we find it even to the last ages, and even at present in
the Greek Church. Allat. Tract. de cons. utr. Eccles. Anno. de Comm. Orient.
Thom. Smith. Ep. de Ecc. Gr. stat. hod. p. 104. 1. ed. Hugo de S. Vict. erudit.
Theol. lib. I. c. 10. Bib. PP. Par. de div. Offic.
Allatius a Catholic and Thomas Smith an English Protestant Minister each of
them relate it equally after a great number of Authors, and the thing it self
has no difficulty.

It is true M. Smith has varyed in his second edition. For they were afraid in
England to authorize an example which we make use of to establish communion
under one species. M. Smith after having remarked in his Preface the advantage
we take from it, Praef. 2. edit. init.
thinks he can remove it by two or three very feeble testimonies of modern
Grecians who studied in England, or who live there, and whose writings are
printed in Protestant towns.

The last testimony he alleges is that of an Archbishop of Samos whom we have
too much seen in this country, to rely much upon his capacity any more then
upon his sincerity. He is at present established at London; and M. Smith
produces us a letter which he writ to him, wherein he says, that after the
baptism of infants, the Priest holding the Chalice where the blood is
together with the body of our Savior reduced into little particles, takes in
a little spoon one drop of this blood so mixed, in such sort that some little
crumbs of the consecrated bread are found in this spoon, which suffices to make
the child participate of the Body of our Lord. M. Smith adds that these crumbs
are so little, that they cannot well be perceived because of their smalnesse,
and that they stick to the spoon though never so little dipped into this holy
liquor. See here all can be drawn from a Grecian who is entertained at London,
and from M. Smith, in favor of the communion under both species given in
baptism to children in the Greek Church: That is that they gave them the
blood in which the body was mixed, with so little of design to give them the
sacred body, that they give them not any part of that which they see swim in
the holy liquor, and which they give to them of riper years, as M. Smith
himself says. They content themselves to presume that some insensible
particle of the consecrated bread sticks to the spoon of the child: see what
they call communicating them under both species. In truth had not M. Smith done
as well to change nothing in his book; and will not every man of sense believe
himself obliged to stand to that which he said ingenuously in his first
edition, so much the rather because he sees it conformable to the ancient
Tradition which we have exposed?

And if we find the communion of little children under the sole species of
wine in the Greek Church, we find it no less amongst the Latins. It is
found, according to M. de la Roque in the Decrees of Pope Paschal II. as we
have lately seen, that is to say in the eleventh age. It is found till the
XII. age in the same Latin Church; Hug. de S. Vict. erud. Tb. l. III. cap. 20.
and Hugo de Sainto Victore, so much praised by S. Bernard, says expressly,
that the Blessed Sacrament was not given to little infants in baptism but
under the sole species of blood; teaching also afterward that under each
species the body and blood of Christ were both received.

We find the same doctrine with the same manner of communicating little
children in William de Champeaux Bishop of Chalon, Ex lib. manuscript. qui
dicitur Pancrisis relat. in praef. Saec. 3. Bened. p. 1. number. 75.
intimately conversant with the same Saint Bernard. Father Mabillon Benedictin
Monk of the Congregation of Saint Maur, (whose sincerity is not to be called
in question any more then his capacity) has found in an ancient manuscript a
long passage of this worthy Bishop, (one of the most famous of his age for
piety and learning) where he teaches that he who receives one sole species
receives JESUS CHRIST whole and entire, because (adds he) he is not received
neither by little and little, nor by parts, but whole and entire under one or
two species: from whence it eomes that they give the Chalice alone to infants
newly baptized, because they cannot receive the bread; but they do not
therefore less receive JESUS CHRIST whole and entire in the Chalice alone.

The Ministers confounded by these practices found established without an
contradiction in all past ages, fly ordinarily to incident questions, Du Bourd.
1. rep. p. 36. and sec. rep. c. 20.21.
to withdraw us from the principal. They exaggerate the abuse of Communion of
little infants, (for so they call it against the authority of all ages;) an
abuse which they say was founded upon the great and dangerous error of the
absolute necessity of receiving the Eucharist in all ages under pain of
eternal damnation, which, according to them, is the error of Saint Cyprian,
Saint Augustine, Saint Innocent Pope, Saint Cyril, Saint Chrysostom, Saint
Cesarius Bishop of Arles, and not only of many of the Fathers, but also of many
ages. Oh holy antiquity, and Church of the first ages too boldly condemned by
Ministers, without reaping from thence any thing but the pleasure to have made
their people believe that the Church could fall into error even in the purest
times! For as to the substance what availes this controversy to our subject?
The ancient Church believed the Eucharist necessary for little infants? We
have already demonstrated that, supposing the two species to have been of the
essence of this Sacrament, that belife would have been a new motive to give it
them under both. Why therefore give they it them but under one? and what can
these Ministers say here, if not to answer us, that the ancient Church added to
the error of believing that the communion was absolutely necessary to
salvation, that of beleving the communion to have its entire effect under one
sole species, and that by making an antiquity so pure to err, they be willing
to show themselves visibly in an error.

We have, God be praised, a doctrine which obliges us not to cast our selves
into such excesses. I could very easily explicate how the Grace of that
Sacrament of the Eucharist is in effect necessary to all the faithful; how the
Eucharist and its grace is virtually contained in Baptism; which produces in
the faithful that sacred right which they there receive to the body and Blood
of our Lord, and how it belongs to the Church to regulate the time of
exercising this right. I might also show upon these grounds that if some one,
as for example that William Bishop of Chalons quoted so faithfully by Father
Mabillon seem to have believed the necessity of the Eucharist, yet this
opinion was so far from universal, that we find it strongly opposed by other
authors of the same time, Hug. de S. Vict. lib. I, erud. Theol. c. 20. Hist.
Euch. l. p. chapter 11. p. 139. Fulg. Ep. ad Ferr. Diac.
as by Hugo de Santo Victore cited in M. de la Roques book and many others. I
could also tell you how these Authors have explicated S. Augustine according to
S. Fulgentius, and show with them by express passages, and by the whole
doctrine of this Father how far he is from that error they attribute to him.
But my design is here to teach what we ought to believe concerning the two
species, and not to trouble my self and my readers with these incident
questions. Therefore I enter not into them, and without burdning my discourse
with an un profitable examen, I shall deliver in few words the faith of the
Church.

The Church did always and dos still believe that infants are capable to
receive the Eucharist as well as Baptism, and finds no more obstacle, as to
communion, in these words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.22.
Let a man examine himself and so let him eat, then she finds, as to Baptism,
in these words of our Savior, Teach and baptize. Mat. 22.19.
But as she knows that the Eucharist cannot be absolutely necessary to their
salvation, after they have received a full remission of their sins in Baptism,
she believes that it is a matter of discipline to give or not to give the
communion at that age.

Whereupon for good reasons she gave it the space of eleaven or twelve hundred
years, and for other good reasons she ceased to give it from that time. But
the Church which found her self free to communicate or not to communicate
children, could never have believed she had liberty to communicate them in a
manner contrary to the institution of JESUS CHRIST, nor would ever have given
one only species, if she had believed the two species inseparable by their
institution.

In a word, to disengage our selves at once from these unprofitable disputes:
when the Church gave the communion to little infants under the sole species of
wine, she either judged this Sacrament necessary to their salvation, or she did
not. If she did not think it necessary, why should she press so to give it,
as to give it wrong? And if she judged it necessary, it is a new demonstration
that she believed the whole effect of the Sacrament included under one sole
species.

And further to show this was her belief, the same Church which gave the
Eucharist to little children under the sole species of wine, gave them it when
more advanced in years without scrupule under the sole species of bread. None
is ignorant of the ancient custom of the Church, to give to innocent children
that which remained of the Body of our Lord after the communion of the
faithful. Some Churches burnt these sacred remainders, and such was the
custom of the Church of Jerusalem, as Hesychius Priest of that Church relates.
Hesych. in Levit. lib. II. 68.
JESUS CHRIST is absolutely above all corruption: but humain sense demanded
that, out of respect to this Sacrament, that should be observed which least
offends the senses; and it was thought much better to burn these sacred
remainders, then to see them changed by keeping them after a manner less
becoming. That which the Church of Jerusalem consumed by fire, the Church of
Constantinople gave to be consummated by little children, looking upon them in
that age, where their baptismal grace was entire, as its most holy vessels.
Evag. lib. IV. c. 35.
Evagrius writes in the VI. age that this was the ancient custom of the Church
of Constantinople. Conc. Matisc. II. c. 2. T. I. Conc. Gall. Hist. Euch. I. P.
chapter 16. p. 183.
M. de la Roque takes notice of this custom and shows us the same practice at
the same time in France, where a Council ordained that the remainders of the
Sacrifice, after Mass was finished, should be given sprinkled with wine
Wednesdays and Frydayes to innocent children, to whom they ordained to fast
that they might to receive them. It was without doubt the Body of our Lord
which they received as well as the rest of the faithful. Ibid.
Evagrius calls these remainders the particles of the immaculate Body of
JESUS CHRIST our God, and thus it is that M. de la Roque translates it. The
same Evagrius relates that this communion preserved a Jewish child, which had
communicated in this manner with the children of the faithful from a burning
fournace whereinto his father had thrown him in hatred of that communion he had
received, God being willing to confirm this communion under one species by so
illustrious a miracle. None ever dreamed of saying they did amiss in giving
the body with out the blood, nor that such a communion was defective. If the
custom have been changed, it has been upon other reasons, and after the same
manner other things of discipline have been altered without condemning the
precedent practice. So that this custom, although it have ceased to be in
practice in the Church, remains in Historyes and Canons in testimony against
the Protestants: The communion of infants is a clear conviction of their
error: The youngest sort of infants communicate under the sole species of
wine, and the children of a more advanced age under that of bread, both one and
the others concurring to make apparent the integrity of communion under one
species only.

IV. Third Custom. Domestic Communion.
THE third practice is that the faithful, after having communicated in the
Church and in the holy assembly, carried with them the Eucharist to communicate
every day in their houses. The species of wine could not be given them, because
it could not be conserved, especially in so little a quantity as that which is
made use of in the holy Mystyres; and it is certain also that it was given them
under the species of bread only. Tert. de Orat. c. 14.
Tertullian who mentions this custom in his book de Oratione, speaks only of
taking and keeping the Body of our Lord; and in an other place he speaks of the
Bread which Christians eat fasting in secret, Lib. 11. ad ux. 5.
without any other addition. Saint Cyprian lets us see the same practice in his
treatise de Lapsis. This custom which begun during the persecutions, and
whilst Ecclesiastical meetings were not free, did not cease nevertheless to
continue for other reasons during the peace of the Church. We learn from
Saint Basile that the Solitaryes or Hermites communicated after no other manner
in the deserts where there was no Priests. Bas. Ep. 289.
And it is certain moreover that these wonderful men not coming to the Church
but at most on principal solemnityes, could not possibly have conserved the
species of wine. There is likewise no mention in Saint Basil but of that which
was put into the hand to be carried to the mouth, that is to say of consecrated
Bread, and this is that which they had the liberty to reserve, as the same
Father expresses: to which he adds, that it is indifferent to receive in the
hand one or many morcells, making use of a word which can constantly signify no
other but a parcelle or portion of some sollid thing; and this makes Aubertin
also understand it only of the sacred Bread. Aub. lib. 11. p. 442.
And although Saint Basil makes it clear as well by these terms, as by the
whole connection of his discourse, that the faithful in these occasions took
and reserved the body only, yet he concludes that their communion was no less
holy nor less perfect in their houses then in the Church. I. Part. c. 14. p.
173. Hier. ad Param.
He says also that this custom was universal throughout Egypt even to
Alexandria. M. de la Roque concludes very well from a passage of S. Hierome,
that it was also at Rome, where without going always to the Church, the
Faithful received every day the Body of our Lord at home; to which this Father
adds: Is it not the same JESUS CHRIST which we receive in the house and in the
Church? To show that one of these communions is no less entire nor less
perfect then the other. The same M. Hist. Euch. I. part. c. 15. p. 176.
de la Roque grants that the Christians of the first ages sent the Eucharist
one to another in token of communion, as in effect it appears by a letter of
Saint Ireneus that it was sent from Rome even to Asia, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. V.
c. 24.
and moreover that they carried it with them in their voyages by sea, Hist.
Euch. I. p. chapter 14. p. 174.
and by land: which confirms the use of that species which alone could be
carried, and which alone could be conserved so long time inso little quantity.
Witness Satyrus brother to Saint Ambrose, Amb. de ob. frat. Sat. T. 4.
who, as this Saint relates, though only a Catechumen, obtained of the
faithful by the fervor of his faith this divine Sacrament, wrapped it in a
linen cloth, and having tied it about his neek, threw himself into the sea
with this precious pledge, by which he was also saved. I need not mention the
other passages where this custom is established, I. Part. c. 12. p. 159. c.
14. p. 172. and seq.
seeing M. de la Roque acknowledges it and dispenses with us as to the proof of
it. Joan. Mosch. Prat. Spir. T. XIII. Bib. PP. p. 1089.
We find even in the passages which he quotes in what manner the holy
oblation was carried, and it appears that it was in a little coffer, or in a
verry clean linning. He finds some foot stepps of this custom in the time of
Saint Hormisdas Pope, that is in the beginning of VI. age; and it is true that
under this Pope a false report of a persecution being spread abroad in
Thessalonia, Inter Ep. Horm. Papae, post ep. 62. Sugg. Germ. etc. and post Ep.
67. Ind. Joan. Episc. T. V. Conc.
the Eucharist was distributed to all the faithful by baskets full for a long
time. Those who distributed it are not blamed for giving it in this manner, but
for having maliciously frightened the people by the rumor of an imaginary
persecution.

In short we must not look upon this manner of communicating at home as an
abuse, under pretense that this practice was not continued: for in matters of
discipline only, as this is, the Church has reasons to forbid at one time, what
she permits at another. It is in the time of persecutions, that is in the most
holy times, that these customs have been for the most part in practice, so the
Communion under one species is authorized by the constant practice of the best
of times, and by the exemple of all the Martyrs. It is moreover certain that at
this time they communicated oftener under the sole species of bread, then under
both species, seeing it was an establissed custom to communicate every day in
their houses under that species only, whereas they could not receive both
species but in Church assemblyes, which Were not so frequent; and no body ever
suspected, during so many ages, that either of these ways of communicating was
defective or more imperfect then the other. Those who know, with how much
respect they treated holy things in these days, will not find it an
irreverence to put the Communion into the hands of the faithful, no more then
to permit them to carry it to their particular houses, where it is certain, to
our shame, that there was more veneration then there is at present in our
Churches.

We know likewise the extreme care Christians took to keep this precious
depositum of the body of our Lord, and above all to hide it from profane hands.
We see in the acts of the Martyrs of Nicomedia that when the Magistrates
visited the chamber where S. Domna lived with the Eunuch Indes who served her,
Act Mart. Nicom. ap. Bar. an. 293.
they found only a Cross, the book of the Acts of the Apostles, two matts
spread upon the bare ground, which were the beds of these Martyrs, an earthen
censer, a lamp, a little box of wood where they placed the holy Oblation they
received. They found not the holy Oblation which they had been careful to
consummate. It belongs to the Protestants to tell us what these Martyrs did
with this Cross and this censer. Catholics are not in pain about them, and
they are over joyd to see amongst the utensils of these Saints, together with
the simplicity of the primitive times, the marks of their religion, and of the
honor they rendered to the Eucharist. But that which makes for our purpose is
that we manifestly see in this history how the Eucharist was kept, and what
care they took not to let it fall into the hands of infidels. God himself
assisted some times, and the Acts of Saint Tharsicius an Acolyte show that this
holy Martyr being met by Pagans whilst he carried the Sacraments of the Body of
our Lord, would never discover what he carried, and was killed with sticks and
stones; after which these infidells searching him they neither found in his
hands, nor in his clothes any parcells of the Sacraments of JESUS CHRIST, God
himself having provided for the safely of these heavenly gifts. Those who are
acquainted with the style of these times, acknowledge it in these acts, where
it is spoke of the Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST, and of the Sacraments of his
Body. They made use of this word Sacrament indifferently either in the plural
or singular number in speaking of the Eucharist, sometimes to express the
perfect unity, and sometime to make it appear that there was in one sole
Sacrament and in one sole mystery (for these terms are equivolent) yea and in
each particle of this adorable Sacrament, many Sacraments and many mysteryes
together.

This keeping of the Eucharist under the sole species of bread in particular
houses, confirms what ought to be believed of the keeping of it in the Church,
or the Bishops houses for the use of the sick; and such practices which
sustain one another so well put the doctrine of the Church out of all dispute.

All that the Ministers answer hereto, serves only to discover their
encumbrance.

They all accuse (with one accord) this custom of profanation and abuse even
after they had established it as universal for many ages, Hist. Euch. I. P.
chapter 11. page 159. chapter 14. p. 175. Bourd. rep. chapter 19.
and what is yet more strange during the purest times of Christianity. This
answer refutes it self; and it will be an easy matter to grant it, seeing the
whole consists in this to know whether all the Martyrs were profane persons, or
whether the Ministers who accuse them be not temerarious.

Calixtus and M. Calixt. n. 11. Bourd. rep. chapter 19. Conc. Caesaraug. C. III.
Conc. Tol. I. C. XIV. T. II. Conc.
du Bourdieu who exactely follows him mention two Canons of the Church of
Spain, one of the Council of Saragoza, and the other of the first Council of
Toledo, where those who do not swallow the Eucharist received from the hands of
the Bishop are expelled as sacrilegious and excommunicated persons.

M. Hist. Euch. I. P. chapter 14. p. 174.
de la Roque answers them that he dos not believe this Canon of Saragoza was
made to abolish the custom of carrying away the Eucharist and keeping of it.
And he says the same afterward of the first Council of Toledo; which he
proves from the eleaventh Canon of the eleventh Council held at the same place.
Conc. Tol. XI. C. XI. T. VI. Conc.


And though the opinions of M. de la Roque were not to be relied upon, it is
sufficiently clear that these two Councils held in the IV. age or there about,
could not have detested as a sacrilege a custom which all the Fathers show us
to have been common in those times, as we have proved by the acknowledgement
even of the Ministers themselves.

In fine these Councils speak not of those who receiving in the Church a part
of the consecrated bread reserve another part for domestic communion; but of
those who receiving the communion from the hands of the Bishop swallow none at
all of it. Behold what these Councils forbid and it is not difficult to guess
at the motives of this their prohibition, seeing the I. Council of Toledo
(which in the XIII. Canon so severely blames those who affected in assisting at
the Church never to communicate there;) when it condemns in the following
Canon, as sacrilegious persons those who swallow not the communion after they
have received it from the hand of the Priest, makes it known sufficiently by
this connection that its intention was to condemn another manner of avoiding
the communion so much the worse because it showed either a sacrilegious
hipocricy or too visible an aversion to this holy mystery.

These unfortunate people who so obstinately avoided the communion were the
Priscillianistes, heretics of those times and places, who mixed themselves
ordinarily with the faithful. But if they will not grant this to have been the
motive of that Canon, they cannot at least deny but there are other evil
motives not to swallow the Eucharist which might be condemned in these
Councils. A man may refrain from the Eucharist out of superstition, he may
reserve it to abuse it, he may reject it out of infidelity; and the XI. Council
of Toledo informs us that it was such a sacrilege which the first condemned.
These or the like abuses taken notice on in certain places might have given
occasion to local prohibitions, which brought no prejudice to the customs of
other countries: and it is certain moreover that what is practiced in one place
as well as in one time with reverence, may be so badly practiced in another
time and place, that it shall be rejected as sacrilegious. Therefore in what
manner soever a man will take these Canons, they do not in any sort authorize
the error, of them who would make the practices of the holy Martyrs and of the
whole ancient Church pass for an abuse, and who can find no other answer to
an invincible argument but in condemning their proceedings.

M. du Bourdieu endeavors to come of by an other evasion no less impertinent.
He would have it be believed that the faithful communicated under both species
in these domestic communions and reserved them both: Rep. chapter 18.
for which he brings after Calixtus four testimonies, Just. apol. 2.
that of Saint Justinus who says that after consecration in the Church the
Deacons carried the two species to them that were absent; That of S. Gregory
the great, Greg. Dial. III. c. 136.
who relates that in a voyage from Rome to Constantinople and in a great
tempest the faithful received the Body and the Blood; that of Amphilochius,
who tells us in the life of S. I. vit.
Basile that a Jew jayning himself to the faithful in their assembly, carried
away to is house some of the remainders of the Body and Blood; and lastly that
of Saint Gregory of Nazianzen who relates of his sister Saint Gorgonia that she
mixed with her tears what she had gathered of the species or symboles of the
Body and Blood, Naz.
he ought to have translated it of the Body or the Blood, as it is in the text
and not of the Body and the Blood as he has done thereby to insinuate that both
the one and the other were reserved together.

Of these four examples the two first are manifestly nothing to our subject.

We have already remarked with M. de la Roque that in the example of Saint
Justinus the two species it is true were carried, but presently after they had
been consecrated, by which it dos not appear that they kept them, which is
precisely our question.

To show that in the passage mentioned by Saint Gregory the faithful had kept
the two species in their vesselle from Rome to Constantinople, it ought before
to have been certain that there was no Priest in this vesselle who could
celebrate, or that Maximian of whom Saint Gregory speaks in this place, was
none, though he was the Superieur of a Monastery. This great Pope says nothing
of these circumstances, and leaves us the liberty to supply them by other
reasons, of which the principal is drawn from that impossibility already so
often remarked of keeping so little quantity of consecrated wine so long a time.

What M. du Bourdieu says here that they durst not have celebrated in a ship
shows that he searches only to cavil, without so much as considering that even
at present we celebrate in all sort of places when there is a reason for it.

So that of these four examples behold two of them already useless. The two
others, with the passages of Baronius and the learned Aubespinus Bishop of
Orleans with which they defend them, may verry well prove that the blood was
not refused to the faithful to carry with them if they required it (for upon
what account should they also refuse it, and believe that the Sacred Body with
which they trusted them was more precious then the Blood?) but can never prove
that they could keep it any long time, since that nature it self opposed it,
nor that it was the custom to do it, the Church being so well persuaded the
communion was equal under one or both species, that the least difficulty made
them determine to give it either in the one or the other kind. We see also in
that passage of Saint Gregory of Nazianzen that the dos not say that his sister
watered the Body and the Blood with her tears, as if it had been certain she
had the one and the other, but the Body or the Blood, to show that he did not
know which of the two she had in her keeping it being ordinary to reserve the
body only.

What serves it therefore to cavil as a constant practice? Truth ought always
at the last to come to light? And M. de la Roque, he who of all the Ministers
has examined this matter with most exactness, ingeniously confesses that the
faithful carried home the bread of the Eucharist to take it when they would,
Hist. Euch. I. P. chapter 12. p. 159.
saving himself as well as he can from the consequence by the remarke he makes
that this abusive and particular custom cannot prejudice the general practice,
and that even those who carried the Eucharist home dit not probably do it till
after they had eaten a part in the assembly, and participated of the Chalice of
our Lord.

Calixtus brings himself of with the same answer almost. Disp. number. 10.
At the beginning of the treatise he has given us about communion in both kinds
he had heartily owned that some reserved the sacred bread to eat it either in
their houses or on a journey; and after having related many passages, amongst
others that of S. Basil which suffers no evasion, he had concluded, that it was
certain from these passages that some moved by a religious affection toward
the Eucharist, carried away with them a part of the consecrated bread or of the
holy symbol. There is no body who reading these passages even in Calixtus
himself dos not see that these whom he calls so slyly some, are the whole
Church: and when he adds that this custom was tolerated some time, this which
he calls some time, is as much as to say four or five hundred years, and that
in the time of the greatest purity; and this which he calls tolerated is no
other then universally received in these beautiful ages of the Church, no body
ever attempting either to blame them, or to say that this communion was
unsufficient.

In the sequel of his dispute Calixtus chafes, and labors to prove by the
examples already refuted, that this communion might be made under the two
species. But he returns at last to the solution which he at first had given,
that the faithful, who communicated under the sole species of bread in their
houses had received the species of wine in the Church, and that there is no
example that they ever communicated publicly under one species for a thousand
or cleaven hundred years. As if it did not suffice to convince him that
communion under one species had been declared perfect and sufficient; or that
it was permitted to communicate contrary to the order of JESUS CHRIST, and to
divide his mystery in the house rather then in the Church; or lastly that this
parcelle of sacred Bread which was taken in private in the house was not given
at the Church it self, and by the hands of the Pastors for that use.

Behold the vain Cavills by which these Ministers think to elude a manifest
truth: but I will not leave them in their error as to public communion; and
although it suffice to have for us this communion taken in private with the
approbation of the whole Church, we shall presently se, that communion under
one species was no less free in solemn assemblyes then in the house.

V. Fourth Custom.
Communion at the Church and in the ordinary Office.
I Place therefore as the fourth practice, that in the Church it self and in
the assemblyes of Christians it was free for them to receive either both
species or one only. The Manicheans abhorred wine which they believed was
created by the Devil. The same Manicheans denied that the son of God had shed
his Blood for our redemption, believing that his Passion was nothing but an
illusion and a fantastical appearence. These two reasons gave an aversion from
the precious Blood of our Lord which was received in the Mysteryes under the
species of wine: And as, to hide themselves the better, says Saint Leo, and to
spread more easily their venom, they mixed themselves with Catholics even to
communicate with them, so they received the Body of our Lord only, avoiding to
drink the Blood by which we were redeemed. This fraudulent proceeding of
theirs could hardly be discovered because Catholics themselves did not all of
them communicate under both species. At the last it was taken notice of that
these Heretics dit it out of affectation: in so much that the Holy Pope S. Leo
the Great would that those who were known as such by this mark, should be
expelled the Church; and Saint Gelasius his disciple and successor was obliged
to forbid expressly to communiacte any other ways then under both species: a
sign that the thing was free before, and that they would not have thought of
making this ordinance, but to take from the Manicheans the means of deceiving.

This practice is of the V. I. Part. chapter 11. p. 144.
age. M. de la Roque and others relate it together with the judgment of these
two Popes, and take their advantage from it. But on the contrary this practice
shows clearly that there was need of a particular reason to oblige the
faithful to a necessity of communicating under both species, and that the
thing was indifferently practiced both ways before: otherwise the Manicheans
would immediately have too much exposed themselves, and could not have expected
to be suffered.

But if it had been freely permitted, say the Ministers, to communicate under
the sole species of bread when they would, the Manicheans could not have been
distinguished by this mark: as if there were no difference betwixt a liberty
to receive one or both species, and a perpetual affectation of these Heretics
obstinately to refuse the consecrated wine. What an effect of prejudice is this
not to observe wilfully a thing so manifest!

It Is true that this liberty being allowed, there must have been time and a
particular vigilance to discern these heretics from amongst the faithful.
And this was also the reason of the long continuance of their deceit, and that
which caused a necessity at last, in the time of Saint Gelasius, of making an
express order to take equally the body and the blood, under pain of being
deprived of them both.

M. Ibid. p. 283.
du Bourdieu conceales here from us with a great deal of artifice the motive
inducing this Pope to make that prohibition. See here the words of the Decree.
Qui proculdubio (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur adstringi) aut
integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integra arceantur. Gel. ibid.
We have discovered that some persons in taking the sacred Body only, abstain
from the holy Chalice, which persons truly, (because they seem to adhere to I
know not what superstition) let them either take the Sacrament under both
species, or let them be entirely deprived of the one and the other. This
particle because of Pope Galasius, which shows manifestly that the
superstitious abstinence of these Heretics was the particular reason why he
obliged them to both species, is left out by this Minister; for se what he
makes this Pope say: I know not what superstition they are addicted to: either
let them receive the entire Sacraments, or let them be deprived of the entire
Sacraments.

He durst not let that particle appear in his translation by which this Pope
shows expressly that his prohibition had a particular motive, for fear it
might be too easily concluded against him, that there was nothing in it self
more free then to communicate without receiving the Blood, since that there was
need of reasons and a particular occasion to oblige the doing of it.

There is likewise another crafty artifice, but verry feeble in the translation
of this Minister. For instead of what the Pope says (as I have above
translated it) Which persons truly, Nescioqua superstitione decentur adstringi.
becanse they seem to adhere to I know not what superstition, that is to say
indefinitely, as is manifest, to some certain superstition, which he will not
vouchsafe to express; Du Bourd. ibid. p. 283.
this Minister makes him say both precisely and more strongly: I know not what
superstition they are addicted to, to the end he might conclude a little after
that this did not concern the Manicheans, whose errors, says he, this
learned Bishop was not ignorant of, nor of those which were in vogue in his
time.

Calixtus had endeavored before him to distinguish the practice of Heretics
mentioned by Saint Leo from this prohibited by Saint Gelasius, thereby to
hinder any one from believing that the Decree of this last Pope in favor of
the two species was to be regarded as in relation to the errors of the
Manicheans. What dos this pitiful refuge avail him? Seeing that it appears
clearly by the terms of this Decree, that it had a particular motive, what dos
it import us whether it were the Manicheans error, or some other such like
superstition? And is not this always sufficient to let us see, (take it which
way you will) that it was necessary the Church should have some particular
reasons to oblige them to both species?

But as to the whole it cannot be doubted but this superstition of which Saint
Gelasius speaks here was that of the Manicheans, seeing that Anastasius the
Bibliothecarian says expressly in the life of this Pope, Vit. Gel. T. IV.
Conc.
that he discovered the Manicheans at Rome, that he sent them into exile, and
that he caused their books to be burnt before the Saint Marys Church. We do
not in effect see what other superstition besides that of the Manicheans could
have inspired a horror to wine and that of the Blood of our Lord. On the other
side it is manifest that these Heretics had unheard of artifices to insinuate
themselves secretly amongst the faithful, and that there was in their
prodigious discourses such an efficacy of error, that it was a most difficult
thing to efface wholly those impressions they left in the mind. None therefore
can doubt but that these superstitious people of whom Saint Gelasius speaks,
were the hidden remainders of those Manicheans that Saint Leo his predecessor
had discovered thirty or forty years before; and whereat Saint Gelasius has
said they are addicted to I know not what superstition, it is not that he did
know verry well their errors, but he speaks this out of contempt, or rather,
because this obscure sect changed it self into a thousand shapes, so that what
remained of this poison was not always known, or it was not always thought
convenient to explicate it to the people.

But behold the last refuge of these Ministers. They maintain we are in the
wrong in searching a particular reason of the Ordinance of Saint Gelasius,
since he establishes it manifestly upon the nature of the Mystery. Let us once
more therefore relate the words of this Pope already cited, and let us add
thereto their whole consequence. We have discovered, says he, that some
persons take only the sacred Body, and abstain from the sacred Blood, which
persons truly (because they seem to adhere to I know not what superstition)
let them take both parts or let them be deprived of both, because the division
of one and the same mystery cannot be done without a great sacrilege.

To understand aright the consequence of these words, we find that the
division which he accuses of sacrilege was that same grounded upon the above
mentioned superstition where the Blood of our Lord consecrated under the
species of wine was regarded as an object of aversion. Indeed it is a deviding
of the mystery to believe that there is one part of it which JESUS CHRIST did
not institute, and which ought to be rejected as abominable. But to believe
that JESUS CHRIST has equally instituted both parts, and not withstanding to
take but one, not out of contempt to the other (God forbid) but because we
believe that the virtue of both is received in either, and that in them both
there is but one sole fondation of Grace: if this be to divide the mystery, the
primitive Church dividid it when they communicated the sick, little children,
and generally all the faithful in their houses under one sole species. But as
we cannot have such an opinion of the ancient Church we must of necessity
avouch that to divide this mystery some thing more must be believed and
practiced then that which is believed and practiced by all Catholics.

VI. The Mass of Holy Friday, and that of the Presanctifyed.
THE ancient Church was so far from believing that to give this Mystery under
one sole species was to divide it, that she had certain solemn days in which
she distributed nothing but the sacred Body of our Lord in the Church, and to
all the assistants. Such was the Office of Good Friday in the Latin Church; and
such was the Office of the Greek Church every day in Lent, except Saturday and
Sunday.

To begin with the Latin Church, we find in the Ordo Romanus, Bib. PP. Var.
T. de div. Off.
in Alcuinus, or in that ancient author whose explication of that book we
have under his name, in Amalarius, in Abbot Rupert, in Hugo de Sainto Victore
what we practice even to this very day, that they dit not consecrate upon Good
Friday, but that they reserved for communion the Body of our Lord consecrated
the day before, and that they received it upon Good Friday in unconsecrated
wine. It is expressly remarked in all these places that the Body only was
reserved without reserving the Blood, the reason of which is (says Hugo de
Sainto Victore,) Hug. de S. Vict. erud. Theol. l. III. c. 20.
that the Body and the Blood are received under each species, and that the
species of wine cannot be kept with security. This last reason we find in one
of the editions of Amalarius, which is no less his then the others, this
Author having frequently reviewd his book, several of which, so reviewed, have
been preserved to our days. Such was likewise the practice of Jonas Bishop of
Orleans, and of many other Authors; and without troubling our selves with these
criticismes, the matter of fact is that Amalarius after diverse mystical
reasons which he brings for this custom according to the example of other
Authors, concludes that it may be said yet more sincerely that the consecrated
wine is not reserved, because it is more subject to alteration then the bread.
Which confirms in short all what we have shown tooching the communion of the
sick under the sole species of bread, and shows verry vell that the Eucharist
which was constantly kept for them during many days according to the spirit of
the Church, could not be kept for them under the species of wine, since they
fear even that change which might, happen to it from one day to the next, that
is from Thursday to Good Friday.

I might here take notice that the Church endeavors not only to avoid the
corruption of the species which change the nature, and the necessary matter of
the Sacrament, but also every change which makes the least alteration in them,
being desirous out of respect to this Sacrament, that all there should be pure
and propper, and that the least even sensible disrelish should not be suffered
in a Mystery where JESUS CHRIST was to be the banquet. But these remarkes being
little necessary to our subject are for another place; and it suffises us to
see here, that they reserved at that time, as we do to this verry day do,
nothing but the sacred Body for the service upon Good Friday.

Nevertheless it is certain by all the Authors and by all the passages we
have lately quoted, that the Priest, the whole Clergy, and all the people
communicated this holy day, and by consequence communicated under one species
only. This custom appears principally in the Gallican Church, since most of
these Authors were of it, so that it ought to find a particular veneration
amongst us: but it would be too visable in abusing ones self to say, that a
custom so firmly established in the VIII. age had no higher a beginning. We
find not the original; wherefore if that opinion, which believes communion
under one species to be sacrilegious, should be admitted, we must say that the
primitive Church had purposely made choice of Good Friday, the day of our
Blessed Saviors death, on which she might profane a Mystery instituted in
memory of it. They communicated after the same manner upon Easter Eve seeing
that on the one side it is certain by all Authors that Good Friday and Easter
Eve were days of communion for all the people, and on the other side it is no
less constant that they did not Sacrifise during these two days; A thing
which occasions that even at this day we have no proper Mass in our Missel
for Easter Eve. So that they communicated under the sole species of Bread kept
from Holy Thursday; and if we will believe our Reformers they prepared
themselves for a Paschal communion by two sacrilegious ones.

The Monks of Clugny, as holy as they were, did no better then others; and the
book of their customs, once already cited in this discourse, shows that six
hundred years since, they did not communicate at that holy time but under one
sole species.

These practices let us see sufficiently the universal custom of the Latin
Church. But the Greeks go yet further: They do not consecrate upon fasting
days to the end they may not mix the joy and solemnity of the Sacrifice with
the sorrowfulness of a fast. From whence it is that in the time of Lent they
do not consecrate but upon Sundays, and on Saturdayes upon which they fast
not. Upon other days they offer the Sacrament reserved on those two solemn
days, which they call the imperfect Mass, or the Mass of the Presanctified,
because the Eucharist which they offer in these days had been consecrated and
sanctified in the two precedent days, and in the Mass they call perfect.

The antiquity of this observance cannot be contested, being it appears in the
VI. age in the Councile in Trullo: Conc. Trull. c. 52.
where we see the fondation of it from the IV. age in the Council of Laodicea,
Conc. Laod. c. 49.91.
and there is nothing more remarkable amongst the Greeks then this Mass of the
Presanctified.

If we would at present know what it is they offered there, we have no more to
do then to read in their Euchologes and in Bibliotheca Patrum the ancient
Liturgies of the Presanctified; Euch. Goat. Bibl. PP. Paris. T. II
and we shall there see that they reserved nothing but the sacred Bread: It is
the sacred Bread which they carry from the Sacristy, it is the sacred Bread
which they elevate, which they adore, and which they incense, it is the sacred
Bread which they mix without saying any prayer with unconsecrated wine and
water, and which in fine they distribute to the people. In so much that all the
Lent, that most holy time of the year, they communicated five days of the
week under the sole species of Bread.

I know not why some of the Latins have undertaken to blame this custom of the
Greeks which neither the Popes nor Councils ever reprehended; and on the
contrary the Latin Church having followed this custom upon Good Friday, it is
manifest that this Office, with the manner of communicating practiced in it, is
consecrated by the tradition of both Churches.

What is here most remarkable is that though it be so apparent that the Greeks
receive not any thing upon these days but the Body of our Lord, yet they
change nothin in their ordinary formularyes. The sacred gifts are always
named in the plural, and they speak no less there in their prayers of the
Body and the Blood: so steadfastly is it imprinted in the minds of Christians
that they cannot receive one of the species without receiving at the same time
not only the virtue, but the substance also both of the one and the other.

It is true the modern Greeks explane themselves other ways, and appear not,
for the most part, very favorable to communion under one species: but it is in
this the force of truth appears the greater, since that in despite of them,
their own customs, their own Liturgies, their own Traditions pronounce
sentence against them.

But is it not true will some say that they put some drops of the precious
Blood in form of a Cross upon the parcells of the sacred Body which they
reserve for the following days, and for the Office of Presanctified? It is
true they do it for the most part; but it is true at the same time, that this
custom is new amongst them, and that in the substance to examine it entirely,
it concludes nothing against us.

It concludes nothing against us, because, besides that two or three drops of
consecrated wine cannot be preserved any long time, the Greeks take care,
immediately after they have dropped them upon the consecrated bread, to dry it
upon a chafendish and to reduce it to powder, for it is in that manner they
keep it as well for the sick as for the Office of the Presanctified: A certain
sign that the authors of this Tradition had not in prospect by this mixture
the Communion under both species, which they would have given in another manner
if they had believed them necessary; but indeed the expression of some mystery,
such as might be the Resurrection of our Lord, which all Liturgyes both Greek
and Latin figured by the mixture of the Body and the Blood in the Chalice,
because the death of our Lord arriving by the effusion of his Blood, this
mixture of his Body and his Blood is very proper to represent how this man-God
took life again.

I should be ashamed to mention here all the vain subtilityes of the modern
Greeks, and the false arguments they make about the wine, and about its more
gross and more substantial parts, which remain after the sollid bodies with
which wine may be mixed bacome dried: from whence they conclude that a like
effect is produced in the species of consecrated wine, and therefore that the
Blood of our Lord may remain in the sacred Bread even after it has been upon
the chafendish, and is entirely dry. By these wise reasonings the Lees and the
Tartar orsalt would still be wine and a lawful matter for the Eucharist. Must
we thus argued concerning the mysteryes of JESUS CHRIST? It was wine, as
properly called so, that is a liquid and flowing wine which JESUS CHRIST
instituted for the matter of his Sacrament. It is a liquor which he has given
us to represent to our eyes his Blood which was shedd; and the simplicity of
the Gospel will not suffer these subtilityes of the modern Grecians.

It must also be acknowledged they arrived to this but of very late, and
moreover that the custom of putting these drops of consecrated Wine upon the
Bread of the Eucharist was not established amongst them but since their
schism. The Patriarch Michael Cerularius, who may be called the true author of
this schism, writes notwithstanding in a book which he composed in defense of
the Office of the Presanctified, That the sacred Breads, Synodic. seu Pand.
Guill. Bevereg. Oxon. 1672. Not. in Can. 52. Conc.
which are believed to be, and which are in effect, the quickening Body of our
Lord must be kept for this sacrifice, Trull. T. II. p. 156. Leo All. Ep. ad
Nihus.
without sprincling one drop of the precious Blood upon them. And we find
notes upon the Councils by a famous Canonist who was one of the Clergy
belonging to the Church of Constantinople, in which he expressly takes notice,
that according to the doctrine of Blessed John (Patriarch of Constantinople)
The precious Blood must not be sprincled upon the Presanctified which they
would reserve, Harmenop. Ep. Can. sect. 2. Tit. 6.
and this, said he, is the practice of our Church. So that, let the modern
Grecians say what they please, their tradition is expressly against this
mixture; and according to their own authors, and their own proper tradition
there remains not so much as a pretense to defend the necessity of the two
species in the Presanctified mysteries.

For can any one so much as conceive what Patriarch Michael in the work by us
newly cited says, That the wine in which they mix the Body reserved, is
changed into the precious Blood by this mixing, without so much as prononcing
upon the wine, as appears by the Euchologes, and by Michaels own confession,
any one of the mystic and sanctifying prayers, that is to say without
prononcing the words of consecration, be they what they will (for it is not to
our purpose to dispute here of them:) A prodigious and unheard of opinion; that
a Sacrament can be made without words, contrary to the authority of the
Scripture, and the constant tradition of all Churches, which neither the
Grecians nor any body else ever called in question.

By how much therefore we ought to reverence the ancient traditions of the
Grecians, which descend to them from their fathers, and from those times whilst
they were united to us; by so much ought we to despise those errors into
which they are fallen in the following ages, weakened and blinded by schism. I
need not here relate them, because the Protestants themselves do nor deny but
that they are great, and I should recede too far from my subject: But I will
only say, to do justice to the modern Grecians, that they do not all hold this
gross opinion of Michaels, and that it is not an universal opinion amongst
them that the wine is changed into the Blood by this mixture of the Body
notwithstanding that Scripture and Tradition assign a particular benediction
by words as well to it as to the Body.

We are much less to believe that the Latins who exposed to us but even now
the Office of Good Friday could be fallen into this error, since they
explicate themselves quite contrary in express words; and to the end we may
omit nothing, we must again in few words propose their sentiments.

It is true then that we find in the Ordo Romanus and in this Office of Good
Friday that the unconsecrated wine is sanctified by the sanctified bread which
is mixed with it. The same is found in the books of Alcuinus and Amalarius
upon the Divine Office. Alc. de Div. Off. Amal. lib. r. de Div. Off. Bib. PP.
de Div. Off.
But upon the least reflection made of the doctrine they teach in these same
books, it will be granted, that this sanctification of the unconsecrated Wine
by the mixture of the Body of our Lord, cannot be that true consecration, by
which the wine is changed into the Blood; but a sanctification of another
nature, and of a much inferior order: such as that is of which Saint Bernard
speaks when he says that the Wine mixed with the consecrated Host, Bern. Ep.
69. p. 92.
although it be not consecrated by that solemn and particular consecration
which changes it into the Blood of JESUS CHRIST, becomes notwithstanding sacred
by tooching the sacred Body of our Lord, yet of a quite different manner from
that consecration which, according to this Saint, is made by the words taken
out of the Gospel.

That it is of this imperfect and inferior sort of consecration which these
Authors we explicate do here speak, will be acknowledged an undeniable truth,
if we find that these Authors, and in the sames places, say there cannot be
made a true consecration of the Blood of our Lord but by words, and by the
words even of JESUS CHRIST himself.

Alcuinus is express herein, when explicating the Canon of the Mass as we
have it to this day when he comes to the place where we prononce the
sacramental words which are those of JESUS CHRIST himself, This is my Body,
this is my Blood, he says, these are the words by which they consecrated the
Bread and the Chalice in the beginning, by which they are consecrated at
present, and by which they shall be consecrated eternally, because JESUS CHRIST
prononcing again his own words by the Priests renders his holy Body and his
sacred Blood present by a celestial bcnediction. Amal. l. III. 24. ibid.
And Amalarius, upon the same part of the Canon says no less clearly, that it
is in this place and by the pronunciation of these words, that the nature of
the Bread and Wine is changed into the nature of the Body and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST; Lib. I. 12.
and he had said before in particular concerning the consecration of the
Chalice, that a simple liquor was changed by the benediction of the Priest into
the Sacrament of the Blood of our Lord: which shows how far he and Alcuinus
were from believing that the only mixing them without any words could produce
this effect. When therefore they say that the pure wine is sanctified by the
mixture of the Body of JESUS CHRIST, it appears sufficiently their meaning is,
that by tooching the Holy of Holyes this wine ceases to be profane, and becomes
some thing of holy: but that it should become the Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST;
and that it should be changed into his Blood without prononcing the words of
JESUS CHRIST upon it, is an error inconsistent with their doctrine.

All those who have writ of the Divine Office, and of that of the Mass use the
same language these two Authors do.

Isaac Bishop of Langres their contemporary, Isaac Ling^^t. Specil. T.^. p. 151.
in his explication of the Canon and place where they consecrate, says that
the Priest having thetherto done what he could; to the end he may then do
something more wonderful, borrows the words of JESUS CHRIST himself, that is
to say these words, This is my Body: Powerful words, says he, to which the
Lord gives his virtue, according to the expression of the Psalmist; words which
have allvayes their effect, because the Word who is the power of God says and
dos all at a time: in so much that there is here made by these words contrary
to all humain reason a new nourishment for a new man, a new JESUS borne of the
spirit, an Host come down fro heaven, and the rest, which makes nothing to
our subject, this being but too sufficient to show that this great Bishop has
placed consecration in the words of our Savior.

Remigius Bishop of Auxerre, in the book which he composed of the Mass
toward the end of the ninth age, is visibly of the same judgment with
Alcuinus, seeing he has done nothing but transcribe word for word all that part
of his book where this matter is treated of.

Hildebertus Bishop of Man's, Hildeb eod. T. Bibl. PP.
and afterward of Tours, famous for his piety as well as for his eloquence,
and learning, and commended even by the Protestants themselves, because of the
praises he has given to Bengarius; yet after he was returned, or pretended to
be returned from his errors, affirms in express words that the Priest
consecrates not by his own words, but by those of JESUS CHRIST; that then under
the sign of the cross and the words, the nature becomes changed; that the
Bread honors the Altar by becoming the Body, and the Wine by becoming Blood:
which obliges the Priest to elevate at that time the Bread and the wine,
thereby to show that by consecration they are elevated to some thing of a
higher nature then what they were.

The Abbot Rupertus says the same thing, Rup. de Div. Off. l. II. c. 9. and
lib. V. c. 20. Hug. de S. Vict. erud. Theol. l. III. c. 20.
and after him Hugo de Sainto Victore. We find all these books collected in
the Bibliotheca of Patrum, in that tome which bears the title de Divinis
Officiis.

This Tradition is so constant especially in the Latin Church, that it cannot
be imagined the contrary could be found in the Ordo Romanus, nor that it could
have entered into the thoughts of Alcuinus and Amalarius, tho they had not
explicated themselves so clearly as we have seen they have. But this
Tradition came from a higher source. These many fore cited French Authors as
were preceded by a Bishop of the Gallican Church, Eusebius. Gailic. sive Euch. T.
6. Max. Bib. P P. hom. V. de Pasch.
who said in the V. age, that the creatures placed upon the holy Altars, and
blessed by the celestiallwords, ceased to be the substance of Bread and Wine,
and became the Body and Blood of our Lord; and Saint Ambrose before him
understood by these celestial words, Amb. de init. c. 9.
the proper words of JESUS CHRIST, This is my Body, this is my Blood, adding,
that the consecration as well of the Body as of the Blood, was made by the
words of our Lord. And the Author of the book of Sacraments, be he whom he
will Saint Ambrose or some other near unto his time, Amb. lib. IV. Sac. c. 5.
who imitates him troughout who ever he be well known in antiquity, speaks
after the same manner; and all the Fathers of the same time keep the like
conformity in their language; and before them all Saint Ireneus laughed that
ordinary bread is made the Eucharist by the invocation of God which it receives
over it; Iren. IV. 34.
and Saint Justin, Just. ap. 2.
whom he often cites, said before him that the Eucharist was made by the prayer
of the word which comes from JESUS CHRIST, and that it was by this word, that
the ordinary food which usvally, by being changed, nourishes our flesh and our
blood, became the Body and the Blood of that JESUS CHRIST incarnated for us:
and before all the Fathers, the Apostle Saint Paul clearly remarked the
particular benediction of the Chalice, 1. Cor. 10.16.
when he said, the Chalice of benediction which we bless. And to go to the
very original JESUS CHRIST consecrates the Wine in saying, This is my Blood,
as he had consecrated the Bread in saying, This is my Body: in such sort that
it cannot enter into the mind of a man of sense, that it could ever be
believed in the Church, the Wine was consecrated without words by the sole
mixture with the Body: from whence it follows that it was under the Bread
alone that our Fathers communicated upon Good Friday.

VII. The sentiments and the practice of the last ages, grounded upon the
sentiments and practice of the primitive Church.
THUS many constant practices of the primitive Church, thus many different
circumstances, whereby it appears in particular and in public, and always
with an universal approbation, and according to the established law, that she
gave the Communion under one species, so many ages before the Council of
Constance, and from the origin of Christianity till the time of this Council,
do invincibly demonstrate that this Council did but follow the Tradition of all
ages, when it defined that the Communion under one kind was as good and
sufficient as under both, and that, in which manner soever they took it, they
neither contradicted the institution of JESUS CHRIST, nor deprived themselves
of the fruict of this Sacrament.

In matters of this nature the Church has always believed she might change
her laws according to the conjuncture of times and occurrences; and upon this
account, after having left the Communion under one or both species as
indifferent; after having obliged to both species for particular reasons, she
has for other reasons reduced the faithful to one sole species, being ready to
give both when the exigence of the Church shall require it, as it appears by
the Decrees of the Council of Trent

This Council, after having decided that Communion under both species was not
necessary, Sess. 21. post Canon.
proposes to it self to treat of two points. The first, whether it were
convenient to grant the Cupp to some countries; and the second upon what
conditions it might be granted.

They had an example of this concession in the Council of Basile, where the
Cupp was granted to the Bohemians, upon condition they should acknowledge that
JESUS CHRIST was received wholly and entirely under each of the two species, and
that the reception of both the one and the other was not necessary.

It was therefore doubted a long time at Trent whether they should not grant
the same thing to those of Germany and France who demanded it, in hopes thereby
more easily to reduce the Lutherans and the Calvinists. In fine the Council
judged it most expedient, for many important reasons, to remit the matter to
the Pope, Sess. 22. in fine.
to the end he might do herein according as his prudence should dictate what
might be the most advantageous to Christianity, and the most convenient for the
salvation of such as should make this demand.

In consequence to this Decree, and according to the example of Paul the III.
his successor Pius the IV. at the instance of the Emperor Ferdinand and some
other Princes of Germany, by his Breifs of the first of September 1563. sent a
permission to some Bishops to render the Cupp to the Germans upon the
conditions set down in these Breifs conformable to those of Basile, if they
found it profitable to the salvation of souls. This was put in execution at
Vienna in Austria, and in some other places. But it appeared presently that
their minds were to much exasperated to receive any profit from this remedy.
The Lutheran Ministers sought nothing but an occasion to cry in the ears of
the people, that the Church herself acknowledged she had been deceived, whilst
she had believed that the substance of the Sacrament was received entirely
under one sole species: a thing manifestly contrary to that declaration she
exacted; but passion makes prevaricated persons under take and belecve any
thing. So that they ceased to make use of that concession which the Pope had
given with prudence, and which it may be at another time in better dispositions
would have had a better effect.

The Church which ought in all things to hold the balance equal, ought
neither to make that appear as indifferent, which is essential, nor that as
essential which is not so, and ought not to change her discipline but for an
evident advantage to all her children; and it is from this prudent dispensation
whence all the changes are come which we have remarked in the administration
of one or both species.

THE SECOND PART. Principles upon which are established the judgment and
practice of the Church: of which principles the Pretended Reformers make use as
well as we.
SUCH has been the practice of the Church. The Principles upon which this
practice is founded are no less certain then the practice has been constant.

To the end that nothing of difficulty may remain in this matter, I will not
allege any one Principle that the Reformers can call in question.

I. First Principle.
There is nothing indispensable in the Sacraments, but that which is of their
substance or essential to them.
THE first Principle I establish is, that in the administration of Sacraments
we are obliged to do not all that which JESUS CHRIST has done, but only that
which is essential to them.

This principle is without contest. The Pretended Reformers do not immerge or
dipp their infants in the water of Baptism, as JESUS CHRIST was immerged or
dipped in the river of Jourdan when Saint John baptized him, neither do they
give the Lords Supper at table or during Supper, as JESUS CHRIST did; neither
do they regard as necessary many other things which he observed.

But must especially it imports us to consider the ceremonies of Baptism,
which may serve for a ground to many things in this matter.

To baptize signifies to dippe or immerge, and herein the whole world agree.

This ceremony is drawn from the purifications of the Jews; and as the most
perfect purification did consist in a total immerging or dipping in water,
JESUS CHRIST who come to sanctify and accomplish the ancient ceremonies, was
willing to choose this as the most significative and the most plane, to
express the remission of sins, and the regeneration of a new man.

The Baptism of Saint John, which served as a preparative to this of
JESUS CHRIST was performed by dipping or immerging.

That prodigious multitude of people who flocked to this Baptism, Math. 3.5.6.
Luke 3.3. John. 3.23.
caused Saint John to make choice of the borders of Jordan, and amongst those
borders, of the country of Annon near to Salim, because there was much water
there, and a great facility to immerge or dipp the men who came to consecrate
themselves to Penance by this holy ceremony.

When JESUS CHRIST came to Saint John to the end that by receiving Baptism he
might elevate it to a more wonderful effect, Mat. 3.16. Mark. 1.10.
the Scriptures say that he ascended out of the waters of Jordan to denote that
he had been wholly and entirely immerged, or dipped.

It does not appear in the Acts of the Apostles that the three thousand, and
five thousand who were converted at the first Sermons of Saint Peter were
baptized after any other manner: and the great number of these converts is no
proof that they were baptized by sprinkling, as some would conjecture. For,
besides that nothing obliges us to affirm they were all baptized upon the same
day, it is certain that Saint John Baptist who baptized no less then they,
since all Judea flocked to him, did notwithstanding baptize them by immersion
or dipping, and his example has showed us that to baptize a great number of man
they were accustomed to make choice of a place where there was much water: to
which we may further add that the baths and purifications of the ancients, and
principally those of the Jews rendered this ceremony facile and familiar in
this time.

In fine we read not in the Scriptures of any other manner of baptising, and
we can show by the acts of Councils, and by ancient Rituells that for thirteen
hundred years the whole Church baptized after this manner as much as it was
possible.

The very word also which is used in the Rituells to express the action of
Godfathers and Godmothers when they say that they elevate the child from the
font of Baptism, shows sufficiently that it was the custom to immerge or dipp
them in it. Though these truths be without dispute, yet neither we nor the
pretended Reformers regard the Anabaptists who hold that this immersion is
essential and no ways to be dispensed with, and neither the one nor the other
of us have any difficulty to change this plunging (if I may call it so) of the
whole body, into a mere sprinckling or a pouring upon some part of the body.

No other reason can be given for this change, but that this immersion or
dipping is not essential to Baptism; and the pretended Reformers agreeing
herein, the first principle we have laid must be also without contest.

II. Second Principle.
To know the substance or essence of a Sacrament, we must regard the
essential effect.
THE second principle is, that to distinguish what appertains or does not
appertain to the substance of a Sacrament, we must regard the essential
effect of that Sacrament.

Thus, though the words of JESUS CHRIST, Baptize, signify immerge or dipp, as
has been already said yet it was believed that the effect of the Sacrament was
not restrained to the quantity of the water: so that Baptism by infusion and
sprinckling or by immersion or dipping appearing in substance to have the same
effect, both the one and the other manner is judged vallid.

But (as we have said) no essential effect of the Body distinct from that of
the Blood can be found in the Eucharist: so that the Grace both of the one and
the other in the ground and in substance can be no other but the same.

It is nothing to the purpose to say, that the representation of the death of
our Lord is more exactly expressed in the two species; I grant it, in like
manner the representation of new birth of the faithful is more exactly
expressed by immersion or dipping, then by mere infusion or sprinckling. For
the faithful being dipped or plunged in the water of Baptism is buried with
JESUS CHRIST, Romans 6.4. Coloss. 2.12.
according to the expression of the Apostle; and the same faithful coming out
of the waters, comes out of the Grave with his Savior, and represents more
perfectly the mystery of JESUS CHRIST that regenerated him.

Immersion by which water is applied to the whole body and to all its parts,
does also more perfectly signify that a man is fully and entirely washed from
his spotts. And yet Baptism given by immersion or plunging is of no more
vallue then Baptism given by mere infusion and upon one only part: it
suffises that the expression of the mystery of JESUS CHRIST and of the effect
of Grace be found in substance in the Sacrament, and that an ultimate
exactness of representation is not there requisite.

Thus, in the Eucharist, the signification of the death of our Lord being found
in substance when the Body delivered for us in given to us, and an expression
of the Grace of the Sacrament being also found when under the species of Bread
the image of our spiritual nourishment is administered unto us, the Blood which
dos nothing but add to it a more express signification, is not there
absolutely necessary.

This is what is manifestly proved by the very words of our Lord and the
reflection of Saint Paul, when relating these words, 1. Cor. 11.25.26.
Do this in remembrance of me, he immediately after concludes, that so often as
we eat this Bread and drink this Cupp we show forth the death of our Lord.
Thus, according to the interpretation of the Disciple, the Masters intention is
that when he ordaines we should be mindful of him, we should be mindful of
his death. To the end therefore we may rightly understand wheather the
remembrance of this death consists in the sole participation of the whole
mystery, or in the participation of either of its parts, we need but consider
that our Savior dos not expect till the whole mystery be ended and the whole
Eucharist received in both its parts, before he says, Ibid. 24.25.
Do this in remembrance of me. Saint Paul remarked that at each part he
expressly ordained this remembrance. For after having said, Eat, This is my
Body, do this in remembrance of me, in giving the Blood he again repeates, As
often as you shall drink this, do it in remembrance of me; declaring unto us
by this repetition that we show forth his death in the participation of each
kind. From whence it follows that when Saint Paul concludes from these words,
that in eating the Body, and drinking the Blood we show forth the death of the
Lord, we must understand that this death is not only shown forth by taking the
whole, but also by taking either part, and the rather because it is otherwise
apparent that in this mystical separation which JESUS CHRIST has signified by
his words, the Body separated from the Blood, and the Blood separated from the
Body have the same effect to show forth the violent death of our Lord. So that
if there be a more distinct expression in receiving the whole, Representation
more pressing.
it dos not cease nevertheless to be true, that by the reception of either
part his death is wholly and entire represented, and the whole Grace applied to
us.

But if any here demand, to what purpose then was the institution of both
species, and this more lively represention of the death of our Lord which we
have here remarked, it is that they will not reflect of one quality of the
Eucharist, well known to the ancients though rejected by our Reformers. All the
ancients believed that the Eucharist was not only a nourishment but also a
sacrifice, and that it was offered to God in consecrating of it before it was
given to the people: which is the cause why the table of our Lord, so termed
by Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 10.21. Heb. 13.10.
is called Altar by the same Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrews. It is not
our business here neither to establish nor explain this sacrifice the nature
of which may be seen in our Treatise of the Exposition, Exp. art. 14.
and I shall only say, because my subject requires it, that JESUS CHRIST has
made this sacrifice of the Eucharist to consist in the most perfect
representation of the sacrifice on the Cross that could be imagined. Whereupon
it is that he said expressly, This is my Body, and This is my Blood, renewing
mystically by these words, as by a spiritual sword, together with all the
wounds he received in his Body the total effusion of his Blood; and although
this Body and this Blood once separated ought to be eternally reunited in his
Resurrection to make a perfect man perfectly living, he would notwithstanding
that this separation once made upon the Cross should never cease to appear in
the mystery of the holy table. It is in this mystical separation that he would
have the essence of the sacrifice of the Eucharist to consist to make it a
perfect image or representation of the sacrifice of the Cross: to the end that
as this later sacrifice consits in the actual separation of the Body and
Blood, this likewise which is the perfect image of it should consist also in
this representative and mystical separation. But whether JESUS CHRIST has
separated his Body and his Blood either really upon the Cross, or mystically
upon the Altars, yet can he not separate the virtue, nor effect that any other
Grace shall accompany his Blood shed then that same in the ground and in
substance which accompanyes his Body immolated: which is the cause that this so
lively and so strong a resemblane or expression, necessary to the sacrifice, is
no more so in the reception of the Eucharist, it being every whit as impossible
to separate in the application the effect of his Blood from that of his Body,
as it is easy and natural to represent to the eyes of the faithful the
actual separation of the one from the other. For this reason it is that we
have found upon so many occasions in antiquity the Body given without the
Blood, and the Blood given without the Body, but never one of them consecrated
without the other. Our Forefathers were persuaded that the faithful would be
deprived of some thing too precious if the two species were not consecrated in
which JESUS CHRIST had made together with the perfect representation of his
death the essence of the sacrifice of the Eucharist to consist; but that
nothing essential was taken from them in giving them but one, because one only
contains the virtue of both, and the mind once preoccupayed by the death of
our Lord in the consecration of the two species, receives nothing from the
Altar where they were consecrated which does not conserve this figure of death,
and the character of a victime: in so much that whether we eat, or whether
we drink, or whether we do both together, we always apply the same
death, and receive always the same Grace in substance.

Neither must so much stresse be put upon the eating and drinking, seeing that
eating and drinking spiritually, is apparently the same thing, and that both
the one and the other is to believe. Let it be then that we eat, or that we
drink according to the body, we both eat and drink together according to
the spirit if we believe, and we receive the whole effect of the Sacrament.

III. That the Pretended Reformers do agree with us in this principle, and can
have no other foundation of their discipline.
An Examen of the doctrine of M. Jurieux in his book entilled, Le Preservatif,
etc.
BUT without any further dispute, I would only ask the Ministers of the
Pretended Reformed Religion whether they do not believe, when they have
received the bread of the Lords Supper with a firm faith, they have received
the Grace which does fully incorporate us to JESUS CHRIST, and the entire
fruict of his sacrifise? What will then the species of wine add there unto, if
not a more full expression of the same mystery?

Furthermore, they believe they receive not only the figure but the proper
substance of JESUS CHRIST. Whether it be by Faith or otherwise, is not to our
present purpose. Do they receive it whole and entire, or do they only receive
one half of it when the Bread of the Lords Supper is given to them?
JESUS CHRIST is he divided? And if they receive the substance of JESUS CHRIST
whole and entire, let them tell us whether the essence of the Sacrament can be
wanting to them?

And it can be no other then this reason that as persuaded them they could give
the bread alone to those who could not drink wine. This is express in the VII
art. of the XII. chapter of their discipline, which is that concerning the
Supper.

This argument proposed at first by the great Cardinal Richelieu entangled
very much the Pretended Reformers. I have endeavored in my Exposition to solve
some of the answers they give thereto, Exp. art. XVII.
and I have carefully related what their Synods have regulated in confirmation
of that article of their discipline. The matter is left without contest: those
who have writ against me have all of them with one accord acknowledged it as
public and notorious; but they do not likewise agree in the manner of answering
it.

All were not satisfied with the common answer, which only consists in saying
that those mentioned in the article of their discipline are excused from taking
the wine by their incapacity of drinking it, and that it is a particular case
which must not be drawn into a consequence; for on the contrary they saw very
well that this particular case ought to be decided by general principles. If
the intention of JESUS CHRIST were that the two species should be inseparable:
if the essence or substance of the Sacrament consist in the union of the one
and the other: since essenses are indivisible, it is not the Sacrament which
these receive, it is a mere human invention, and has not its foundation in
the Gospel.

They were forced therefore at last, but with extreme pain, and after
infinite turnings and windings, to say that in this case he who receives only
the Bread dos not receive the Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST.

M. Jurieux who writ the last against my Exposition in his book entitled, Le
Preservatif, Preservatif, art. XIII. p. 262. and suiv.
after having seen the answers of all the others, and after having given
himself much trouble sometimes in being angry at M. de Condom, who amuses
himself (says he) like a petty Missioner in things of so low a nature and in
these old kind of cavils, sometimes in putting as much stresse as he can upon
this impossibility so often repeted; at last concludes that the party mentioned
to whom the Bread alone is given, p. 264.
to speak properly dos not take with the mouth the Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST,
because this Sacrament is composed of two parts, and he receives but one: Exam.
de l'Euch. Tr. 6. sect. 7.
this he likewise confirms in the last book he set forth.

This is what the Pretended Reformers durst nost (that I know of) hitherto
affirm. Verily a Communion which is not a Sacrament is a strange mystery; and
the Pretended Reformers, who are at last obliged to acknowledge it, would do as
well to grant the consequence we draw from their discipline, seeing they can
find no other way to unty this knott, but by a prodigy never heard of in the
Church.

But the doctrine of this Author appears yet more strange when considered with
all its circumstances. Preservatif, p. 266. 267.
According to him, the Church presents in this case the true Sacrament; but
nevertheless, what is received is not the true Sacrament, or raither, it is
not a true Sacrament as to the sign, but it is a true Sacrament as to the
thing signified, because the faithful receive JESUS CHRIST signified by the
Sacrament, and receive as many Graces as those who communicate under the
Sacrament it self, because the Sacrament is presented to him whole and entire,
because he receives it with heart and affection, and because the sole
insuperable impossibility hinders him to communicate under the sign.

What do these subtilityes avail him? He might conclude from his arguments,
that the faithful who cannot, according to his principles, receive the true
Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST seeing he cannot receive an essential part, is
excused by his inability from the obligation to receive at all, and that the
desire he has to receive the Sacrament supplies the effect. But that upon this
account we should be obliged to separate that which is inseparable by its
institution, and to give a man a Sacrament which he cannot receive, or rather
to give him solemnly that which being not the true Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST,
can be nothing else but mere bread, is to invent a new mystery in Christian
Religion, and to deceive in the face of the Church a Christian who believes he
receives that which in reality he does not.

Behold nevertheless the last refuge of our Reformers: behold what he has writ
who writ against me the last of any, whose book is so much spread by the
Protestants through France, Holland, and other parts in diverse languages, with
a magnificent Preface, as the most efficacious antidote the new Reform could
invent against this Exposition so often attaqued. He has found out by his way
of improving and refining of others, this new absurdity, that what is received
amongst them with so much solemnity when they cannot drink wine, is not the
Sacrament of our Lord, and that it is by consequence a mere invention of
humain wilt, which a Church who says she is founded upon the pure word of God,
is not afraid to establish without so much as finding one syllable of it in
that word.

To conclude, JESUS CHRIST has not made a particular law for those we here
speak of. Man could not dispense with them in an express precept of our Lord,
nor allow them any thing he did not institute. Wherefore either nothing must be
given them, or if one species be given them, it must be believed, that by the
institution of our Lord this single species contains the whole essence of the
Sacrament, and that the receiving of the other can add nothing but what is
accidental to it.

. IV. The third Principle. The law ought to be explained by constant and
perpetual Practice.
An exposition of this Principle by the example of the civil law.
BUT to come to our third Principle, which alone carries along with it the
decision of this question. This is it. To know what appertains or does not
appertain to the substance of the Sacraments, we must consult the practice
and sentiment of the Church.

Let us speak more generally: In all practical matters we must always
regard, what has been understood and practiced by the Church, and as herein
consists the true spirit of the law.

I write this for an intelligent and clearsighted Judge, who is sensible, that
to understand an Ordonance, and to discern the meaning of it aright, he must
know after what manner it was always understood and practiced: otherwise since
every man argues after his own fashon, the law would become arbitrary. The
rule then is to examine how it has been understood and how practiced: in
following which a man shall not be deceived.

God to honor his Church, and to oblige particular persons to her holy
decisions, would that this rule should have place in his law, as it has in
humain laws; and the true manner to understand this holy law is to consider in
what manner it has always been understood and observed in the Church.

The reason of this is that there appears in this interpretation and
perpetual practice a Tradition which cannot come but from God himself,
according to this doctrine of the Fathers, that what is seen always and in
all places of the Church cannot come but from the Apostles who learned it from
JESUS CHRIST, and from that Spirit of truth which he has given for a teacher.

And for fear any one should be deceived by the different significations of
the word Tradition, I declare that the Tradition I allege here as a necessary
interpreter of the law of God, is an unwritten doctrine procedeng from God
himself, and conserved in the judgment and practice of the universal Church.

I have no need here to prove this Tradition; and what follows will make it
appear that our Reformers are forced to acknowledge it at least in this
matter. But it will not be amiss to remove in few words the false ideas which
they ordinarily apply to this word of Tradition.

They tell us that the authority which we give to Tradition, subjects the
Scripture to the thoughts of men, and declares it imperfect.

They are palpably deceived. Scripture and Tradition make together but one and
the same body of doctrine revealed by God; and so far is it that the obligation
of interpreting Scripture by Tradition subjects the Scripture to the thoughts
of men, that there is nothing can give it more preeminence above them.

When particular persons are permitted, as it is amongst our Pretended
Reformers, to interpret Scripture every one according to his own fancy, there
is liberty necessarily given to arbitrary interpretations, and in effect
scripture is subjected to the thoughts of men, who interpret it each one
according to his own mode: but when every one in particular is obliged to
receive it in the sense the Church does receive and always has received it,
there is nothing elevates the authority of Scripture more, nor renders it more
independent of all particular opinions.

A man is never more assured to understand aright the spirit and sense of the
law, then when he understands it as it has always been understood since its
first establishment. Never dos a man honor more the Lawgiver, the mind is
never more captivated under the authority of the law, nor more restrained to
its true sense, never are particular lights and false glosses more excluded.

Thus when our Fore Fathers in all their Councils, in all their Books, in all
their Decrees obliged themselves by an indispensable law to understand the Holy
Scriptures as it has been always understood; they were so far fom believing
that by this means they submitted it to humain phancies, that on the contrary
they believed there was no surer means to exclude them.

The Holy Ghost who dictated the Scripture, and deposited it in the hands of
the Church, gave her an understanding of it from the beginning and in all ages:
in so much that the sense thereof, which has always appeared in the Church, is
as well inspired as the Scripture it self.

The Scripture is not imperfect because it has need of such an interpretation.
It belonged to the majesty of Scripture to be concise in its words, profound in
its sense, and full of a wisdom which always appeared so much the more
impenetrable by how much the more it was penetrated into. It was with these
characters of the divinity that the Holy Ghost was pleased to invest it. It
ought to be meditated on to be understood; and that which the Church has
always understood thereof by meditating upon it, ought to be received as a law.

So that that which is not writ is no less venerable then that which is,
whilst both of them come by the same way. Each one corresponds to the upholding
of the other, seeing that Scripture is the necessary groundworke of Tradition,
and Tradition the infallible interpreter of Scripture.

If I should affirm that the whole Scripture ought to be interpreted after
this manner, I should affirm a truth which the Church has always
acknowledged: but I should recede from the matter in question. I reduce my
self to things of practice, and principally to what is of ceremony. I
maintain that we cannot distinguish what is essential and indispensable from
what is left to the liberty of the Church, but by examining Tradition and
constant practice.

This is what I undertake to prove by Scripture it self, by all antiquity, and
to the end that nothing may be wanting in point of proof, by the plain
confession of our very adversaryes.

Under the name of ceremony I do here comprehend the Sacraments which are in
effect facred signs and ceremonies divinely instituted to signify and confer
Grace.

Experience shows that what belongs to ceremony cannot be well explained, but
by the received manner of practicing it.

By this our question is decided. In the sacred ceremony of the Lords Supper
we have seen that the Church has always believed she gave the whole
substance and applied the whole virtue of the Sacrament, in giving only one
sole species. Behold what has been always practiced; behold what ought to
stand for a law.

This rule is not rejected by the Pretended Reformers. We have even now seen
that if they had not believed that the judgment of the Church and her
interpretation stand for a law, they would never have divided the supper in
favor of those who drink no wine, nor given a decision which is not in the
Gospel.

But it is not in this only that they have followed the interpretation of a
Church. We shall shortly see many other points, where they cannot avoid having
recourse to this rule we propose.

I establish therefore without hesitation this general proposition, and I
advance as the constant practice, acknowledged by the ancient and modern
Jews, by the Christians in all ages, and by the Pretended Reformers
themselves, that the ceremonial laws of both the old and new Testament cannot
be understood but by practice, and that without this means it is impossible to
comprehend the true spirit of the law.

V. A proof from the observances of the old Testament.
THE matter is more surprising in the old Testament, where every thing was
circumstanced and particularised with so much care: yet notwithstanding it is
certain that a law written with so much exactness stood in need of Tradition
and the interpretation of the Synagogue to be well understood.

The law of the Sabbath alone fournisheth many examples of this.

Every one knows how strict was the observance of this sacred rest, Exodus
16.23.35.3.
in which it was forbid under pain of death, to prepare their diet or so much
as to light their fire. In a word the law forbid so precisely all manner of
work, that many durst scarce move on this holy day. At least it was certain
that none could either undertake or continue a journey; and we know what
happened to the army of Antiochus Sidetes, Joseph. Ant. 13.16.
when this Prince stopped his march in favor of John Hyrcanus and the Jews
during two days on which their law obliged them to a rest equal to that of
the Sabbath. In this strict obligation to remain in rest Tradition and custom
alone had explicated how far one might go without violating the tranquillity
requisite during these holy days. From hence comes that manner of speech
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles, from such a place to such a place, is a
Sabbath days journey. Act. 1.12.
This Tradition was established in the time of our Savior, neither did he nor
his Apostles who mentioned it ever reprehend it.

The exactitude of this rest did not hinder but that it was permitted to untye
a beast and lead it to drink, Luke 13.15.14.5.
or to pull it out if fallen into a ditch. Our Lord who alleges these examples
as public and notorious to the Jews, does not only not blame them, but
further authorizes them, though the law had said nothing concerning them, and
that these actions seemed to be comprehended under the general prohibition.

It must not be imagined that these observances were of little or no importance
in a law so severe, and where it was necessary to take care even to an iota and
the least title, the least prevarication drawing down most terrible pains and
an inevitable malediction upon the transgressors.

But behold a thing which appears yet more important in the time of the
Machabees a question was proposed whether it was permitted to defend ones life
upon the Sabbath day; 1. Match. 2.32.38.40.41. 2. Match. 15.1.2. etc.
and the Jews suffered themselves to be killed, til such times as the
Synagogue had interpreted and declared that self defense was permitted, though
the law had not excepted that action.

In permitting self defense, they dit not permit an onsett, what advantage
soever might thereby arrive to the public, and the Synagogue durst never go so
far.

But after the Synagogue had permitted self defense there remained yet one
scrupule; Joseph. Ant. 14.8.
(viz) whether it were permitted to repair a breach upon the Sabbath. For
although it had been decided that they might defend their lives when they were
immediately attaqued, yet they doubted whether that permission extended to
those occasions where the attaque was not so immediate. The Jews beseeged in
Jerusalem durst not extend the dispensation so far, and let themselves be taken
by Pompey. The scruple appeared a little to nice, and I bring this Example to
show how many cases might happen in which the law had not provided, and where
the declaration of the Synagogue was necessary to the quiet of there
consciences.

It was an indispensable law to observe the new Moons to the end they might
celebrate a Feast which the law ordained precisely upon that day, and might
also calculate exactly the other days which had their particular observances.
There were no Ephemerides regulated in those first times and besides the Jews
never trusted to any thing of that nature, and not being willing to expose
themselves to the errors of calculation, they found no other security then to
cause some persons to observe upon the highest mountains when the Moon should
appear. Neither the manner of observing this, nor of coming and declaring this
to the Council, nor that of publishing the new Moon, and the beginning of the
Festival were expressed in the law. Tradition had provided for these; and the
same Tradition had decided that what was requisite in order to the observation
and declaration of the new Moon was not contrary to the law of the Sabbath.

I will not speak of the sacrifises, Levit. 2 4.8. Number. 28.9.
nor of the other ceremoneyes which were performed upon the Sabbath day
according to the law, because the law having regulated them, we might say it
had made an exception in this point: but there are many other things which were
to be done on the Sabbath day in cases which the law had not regulated.

When the Passover fell upon the first day of the week, which is our Sunday,
there were diverse things to be done for the preparation of the Paschall
sacrifise. The victime was to be chosen, it was to be examined by the Priests
if it had the qualification requisite, it was to be led to the Temple and to
the Altar, to be immolated at the hour prefixed. All these things with many
others were done upon the vigil of the Passover. The levained bread was
likewise to be cast away, which according to the precise terms of the law,
Exodus 12.15.
ought not to be found throughout all Israel, when the day of the Passover
begun. The law might have regulated that these things should be done upon the
Friday, when the Passover fell upon Sunday; or otherwise dispense with the
observance of the Sabbath to accomplish them. It would not do it: Tradition
alone authorized the Priests to do their functions; and we may say in these
cases, as well as in those which our Blessed Savior has noted, Math. 12.5.
that the Priests violate the Sabbath in the Temple, and are without reproach.

And does he not also approve what David did, Ibid. 4.
when pressed with hunger he eat the Bread of proposition contrary to the law,
1. Kings. 21.4.
and followed the interpretation of the High Priest Achimelec, though it were
no where written.

The Passover and all the Feasts of the Israelites as well as their Sabaoths
begun in the evening and at the time of Vespres according to the express
disposition of the law: but though the true time of Vespres be the setting of
the Sun, yet the Vespres were not taken so precisely amongst the Jews. The law
nevertheless had not determined it, and custom alone had regulated that
Vespres or the evening should begin presently after midday, and when the Sun
begun to decline.

Neither could it also be determined by the precise terms of the law what was
that time betwixt the two Vespres, which is ordained for the Passover in the
Hebrew text of Exodus, Exodus 12.6.
and Tradition alone had explicated that it was all that time which was
comprehended betwixt the declining of the Sun, and its setting.

It cannot be denied but that all these things were of an absolute necessity
for the observation of the law; and if it appear that the law would not
foresee them, it ought to be concluded that it would leave the explication of
them to custom.

The same thing may be said of diverse other ceremonies, which, according to the
terms of the law, concurred precisely at the same time, neither was it
possible to perform them together. For example, the law ordined an evening
sacrifise which ought to be offered every day, and this was that they called
the Tamid or the perpetual sacrifise. There was that of the Sabbath, and that
also of the Passover which weere all to be performed at the same hour; in such
sort that upon Easter day, according to the prescript of the law, these three
sacrifises concurred together: There was nevertheless but one only Altar for
the Sacrifises, and it was neither permitted nor possible to offer all these
sacrifises at the same time. Nor did they know how or where to begin; and in so
strict an observance as the law exacted in all rigor, they might have fallen
into an unavoidable labarinth, if custom had not explicated that the more
ordinary sacrifise ought to be offered first. So that they were not afraid to
anticipate the perpetual sacrifise to give place to that of the Sabbath, and
that also of the Sabbath to give place to the Passover.

If we stick to the precise terms of the law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.1.2.3.
we find no marriage with strangers forbidden but only those which were
contracted with the daughters of the seven Nations so often detested in the
Scripture. Ibid. 2. Ibid. 4.
It was these abominable Nations which were to be exterminated without mercy.
It was the daughters of these Nations who should seduce the Israelites, and
allure them to the worship of false Gods; and it was for this reason that the
law forbid to marry them. There was nothing of this kind said, neither of the
daughters of the Moabites and Ammonites, nor of those of the Egyptians, and so
far was marriage from being forbidden with the daughters of the Moabites, Ruch.
4.
that Booz is praised by the whole Council and by all the people for marrying
Ruth who was of that Country. Behold what we find in the law, and
nevertheless we find that in the time of Esdras it was a thing established
amongst the Jews to number the Egyptians, 1. Esd. 9.^.10.19. 2. Esd. 18.1.2.
etc.
the daughters of the Ammonites and Moabites, and in a word of all strangers in
the same rank vith the Chananites: in so much that they broke all the
marriages contracted with these women as abominable. From whence comes this, if
not that since Salomons time a long experience having taught the Israelites
that the Egyptians and other strangers did no less seduce them then the
Chananites, they believed they ought equally to exclude them all, not so much
by the letter and propper terms, as by the spirit of the law; which they also
interpreted contrary to the precedent practice in respect of the Moabites, the
Synagogue always believing herself to have received from God himself a right
to give decisions, according to occurring necessityes?

I do not believe that any one will persuade himself that they observed
according to the letter and in all sorts of cases, Exodus 21.24.28. Lev.
24.19.20. Don't. 19.21.
that severe law of Talionis so often repeated in the Books of Moses. For
even to regard these terms only eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand,
bruise for bruise, wound for wound, nothing dos appear to establish a more
perfect and a more just compensation; yet nothing is in reality further from
it, if we weigh the circumstances, and nothing in fine would have been more
unequal then such an equality: nor indeed is it always possible to give to a
malefactor a wound altogether proportionable to that he had given his brother.
Practice taught the Jews that the true dessigne of the law was to make them
sensible there ought to be a reasonable compensation, profitable both to
particulars and to the public, which as it consists not in a precise point,
nor in a certain measure, the same practice determined it by a just estimation.

It would not be hard to allege many other Traditions of the ancient people as
much approved of as these. The ablest writers of the new reform do grand it.
When therefore they would destroy all unwritten Traditions in general (under
pretense of the words of our Lord where he condemns those Traditions which
were contrary to the terms or to the sense and intent of the law, Math. 15.3.
Mark. 7.7. etc.
and in short those which had not a sufficiently sollid foundation) there is no
sincerity in their discourses: and all men of sense will agree that there was
lawful traditions though not written, without which the practice it self of
the law was impossible; in so much that it cannot be denied but that they
obliged in conscience.

Will the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion permit me to mention in
this place the Tradition of prayer for the dead? This prayer is manifest by the
Book of Machabees: 2. Match. 11.43.46.
neither need we here enter into dispute with these Gentlemen whether this
Book be canonical or no, seeing it suffices as to this point that it was
certainly writ before the Gospel. This custom remains to this day amongst
the Jews, and the tradition of it my be asserted by these words of Saint Paul:
1. Cor. 15.29.
What shall they do else who are baptized, that is to say purifyed and
mortifyed for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? JESUS CHRIST and his
Apostles had found amongst the Jews this Tradition of praying for the dead
without reprehending them for it; on the contrary it passed immediately from
the Judaicall to the Christian Church, and Protestants who have writ books
where they show this Tradition was establised in the primitive times of
Christianity, could yet never show the beginning of it. Notwithstanding it is
certain there was nothing of it in the law. It came to the Jews by the same
way which handed to them so many other unviolable Traditions.

But if a law which descendes to so minute particulars, and which is (as I may
say) wholly literal, stood in need, that it might be rightly understood
according to its true sense, of being interpreted by the practice and
declarations of the Synagogue, how much more need have we in the law of the
Gospel where there is a greater liberty in the observances, and where the
practices are less circumstanced.

A hundred examples will manifest the truth of what I say. I will draw them
from the very practices of the Pretended Reformers themselves, and I will not
stick at the same time to relate together with them (as a thing which will
decide the matter) what passed for current in the ancient Church, because I
cannot imagine that these Gentlemen can with sincerity reject it.

VI. A proof from the observances of the New Testament.
THE institution of the Sabbath day preceded the law of Moses and had its
ground from the creation; and nevertheless these Gentlemen dispense as well as
we with that observance without any other foundation then that of Tradition
and the practice of the Church, which cannot be dirived from other then divine
authority.

The allegation that the first day of the week consecrated by the Resurrection
of JESUS CHRIST, Act. 20.7. 1. Cor. 16.2.
is mentioned in the writings of the Apostles as a day of assembly for
Christians, and that it is also called in the Revelations, Apoc. 1.10.
the day of the Lord, or Sunday. Is vain for besides that there is no mention
made in the New Testament of that rest annexed to the Sunday, it is moreover
manifest that the addition of a new day dit not suffice to take away the
solemnity of the old, nor to make us change the Preceps of the Decalogue
together with humain Tradition.

The prohibition of eating Blood, and that of eating the flesh of strangled
creatures was given to all the children of Noe before the establishment of
legal observances, from which we are freed by the Gospel, and the Apostles
have confirmed it in the Council of Jerusalem in joining it to two unchangeable
observances, of which the one is the prohibition to participate of sacrifices
to Idols, and the other the condemnation of the sin of fornication. But because
the Church always believed that this law though observed during many ages was
not essential to Christianity, the Pretended Reformers as well as we dispense
with themselves about it, though the Scriptures have no where derogated from so
precise and so solemn a decision of the Apostles expressly registered in their
Acts by Saint Luke.

But to show how necessary it is to know the Tradition and practice of the
Church in what regards the Sacraments, let us consider what is practiced in the
Sacrament of Baptism, and that of the Eucharist, which are the two Sacraments
our adversaryes acknowledge with one accord.

It is to the Apostles, that is to the heads of the flock, Math. 28.19.
that JESUS CHRIST gave the charge of administering Baptism: Tertull. de Bapt.
Council. Illid. c. 38. etc.
notwithstanding the whole Church has understood, not only that Priests, but
Deacons also yea even all the faithful, in cases of necessity, were the
Ministers of this Sacrament.

Tradition alone has interpreted that Baptism (which JESUS CHRIST committed
only into the hands of his Church and of his Apostles) could be validly
administered by Heretics, and out of the communion of the truly faithful.

In the XI. chapter of the Discipline of the Pretended Reformers, and first
article, it is said that Baptism administered by him who has no vocation at all
is wholly null; Discip. c. XI. art. 1. and observe.
and the observations drawn from the Synods declare, that to the validity of
this Sacrament it suffises that these Ministers have an outwardly seeming
vocation, such as is that of Curates, Priests, and Religious men in the Roman
Church who are permitted to preach. Where do they find in Scripture that this
outwardly seeming vocation can confer a power which JESUS CHRIST has given
only to those whom he himself did effectively call.

JESUS CHRIST said, Baptize, that is immerge or dipp, as we have often
remarked. We have also related that he was baptized according to this form;
that the Apostles followed it, and that it was continued in the Church till the
XII and XIII. ages; and notwithstanding Baptism by infusion or sprincling is
admitted without difficulty by the sole authority of the Church.

JESUS CHRIST said, Math. 28.19. Mark. 16.15.16.
Teach and baptize; and again, He that believes and is baptized, shall be
saved. The Church has interpreted by the sole authority of Tradition and
practice that the instruction and faith which JESUS CHRIST had united to
Baptism, might be separated in order to little infants.

These words, Discip. c. XI. art. VI. Observe. p. 166.
Teach and baptize, did a long time perplexe our Reformers, and occasioned them
to say till the year 1614. that it was not lawful to baptize with out a
precedent or an immediately subsequent sermon. This is what was decided in the
Synod of Tonneins conformably to all the precedent Synods. But in the Synod of
Castres in 1626. they begun to relaxe as to this point, and it was resolved not
to press the observance of the regulation of Tonneins. Lastly in the Synod of
Charinton in 1631. (in which they admitted the Lutherans to the Supper) it was
declared, that preaching before or after Baptism, appertains not to the
essence of it, but to discipline of which the Church has pover to dispose. So
that what they had believed and practiced so long, as prescribed by
JESUS CHRIST himself, was changed; and without any testimony of Scripture they
declared that it was a thing concerning which the Church might ordain as she
pleased.

As for little infants, the Pretended Reformers say verry well that their
Baptism is founded upon Scripture, but they cite no express passage, and they
argue from farfetched, not to say doubtful yea and even false consequences.

It is certain that all the proofs they can draw from Scripture upon this
subject have no force, and that they themselves destroy those that might have
any.

That which might have force to establish the Baptism of little infants, 1.
Tim. 4.10.
is that on the one side it is written JESUS CHRIST is the Savior of all,
Math. 19.14.
and that he himself has said, Suffer little children to come unto me; and on
the other, that he has prononced none can come unto him, nor have any part in
him, if he do not receive Baptism, conformable to these words: John. 3.3.5.
If you be not borne again of water and the Holy Spirit, you shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God. But these passages have no force according to the
doctrine of our Reformers, since they believe it as of faith that Baptism is
not necessary to the salvation of infants.

Nothing affords them more difficulty in their Discipline, Discip. c. XI. art.
VI. Observe.
then to see every day that anxiety of Parents of their communion to have their
little children baptized when they are sick or in danger of death. This piety
of the parents is called in their Synods, an infirmity. It is a weakness to
fear least the children of the faithful should dye without receiving
Baptism. One Synod went so far as to permit them to baptize their children
extraordinarily in evident danger of death. Ibid.
But the following Synod reprehended this weakness; and these strong in faith
effaced that clause where they testified some regard to that danger; because
it gives some ouverture to the opinion of the necessity of Baptism.

Thus the proofs drawn from the necessity of Baptism to oblige the giving of
it to little infants, are destroyed by our Reformers. Let us see those they
substitute in their place, such as are inserted in their Catechism, in their
Confession of faith, Cat. Dim 50. Conf. de Foy art. 35. Form d'administrer le
Bapt.
and in their prayers. That is that the children of the Faithful are borne in
alliance, conformable to this promis: I shall be thy God, and the God of thy
seed to a thousand generations. From whence they conclude that the virtue and
substance of Baptism appertaining to little children, they should do them an
injury to deny them the sign which is inferior.

By the like reason they will find themselves obliged to give them the Supper
together with Baptism; for those who are in the alliance, are incorporated to
JESUS CHRIST: the little children of the Faithful are in the alliance; they
are therefore incorporated to JESUS CHRIST; and having by this means
(according to them) the virtue and substance of the Supper, it ought to be said
as of Baptism, that the sign cannot be refused them without injury.

The Anabaptists maintain that these words, let a man try himselve and so let
him eat, have no greater force to exact years of discretion to receive the
Supper, then these, he that shall believe and shall be baptized, have to exact
them in Baptism.

The consequence drawn amongst the new Reformers from the alliance of the
ancient people and from Circumcision mooves them not. The alliance of the
ancient people (say they) was contracted by birth because it was carnal; and
upon this account the seal was printed in the flesh by Circumcision
immediately after birth. But in the new alliance, it dos not suffice to be
borne, we must be newborn to enter into it: and as the two alliances have
nothing of resemblance, there is nothing say they to be concluded from one sign
to another, so that the comparaison which they make of Circumcision with
Baptism is void and of no effect.

Experience has shown that all the attempts of our Reformers whereby to
confound the Anabaptist from Scripture, has been weak and feeble. So that at
the last they are obliged to plead practice. We find in their Discipline at
the end of the XI. chapter, the form of receiving persons of a more advanced
age int their Communion, where they make the Anabaptist who is converted
acknowledge that the Baptism of little infants has its foundation in Scripture
and in the perpetual practice of the Church.

When the Pretended Reformers believe they have the express word of God it is
not their custom to ground themselves upon the perpetual practice of the
Church. But here where the Scripture furnishes them with nothing whereby to
stop the mouths of Anabaptists, they were necessitated to support themselves
else where, and at the same time to acknowledge that in these matters the
perpetual practice of these Church is of an unviolable authority.

Let us come now to the Eucharist. The Pretended Reformers boast they have
found in these words, Drink ye all of it, Math. 26.27.
an express command for all the faithful to participate of the cupp. But if
we tell them that these words were addressed to the Apostles only who were
present, and had their entire accomplishment when in effect they all drunk of
it, as Saint Mark says, Mark. 14.23.
What refuge will they find in Scripture? Where can they find that these
words of JESUS CHRIST, Drink ye all of it, are to be applied to any others
then to those to whom the same JESUS CHRIST said, Do this? Luke 22.19.
But these words, Do this, regard only the Ministers of the Eucharist, who
alone can do what JESUS CHRIST did, that is to say consecrate and distribute
the Eucharist as well as receive it. By what therefore will they prove that
these other words, Drink ye all of it, have a further extent? But if they say
that some words of our Lord regard all the faithful, and others the Ministers
only, what rule will they find us in Scripture whereby to distinguish which
appertain to the one and which to the others, seeing JESUS CHRIST speaks
every where after the same manner, and without distinction? But in fine let it
be as it will, say some of them, these words of JESUS CHRIST. Do this,
addressed to the Holy Apostles, and in them to all Pastors, decide the
question, seeing that in saying to them, Do this, he ordaines them to do all
that he did, by consequence to distribute all that he distributed; and in a
word to cause to be done by all succeding ages what JESUS CHRIST had caused
them to do. This is in effect the most plausible thing they can say; But they
are nothing the wiser, when we show them so many things done by JESUS CHRIST
in this mystery, which they do not believe themselves obliged to do. For what
rule have they to make the distinction? And since that JESUS CHRIST comprehends
all he did under this same word, Do this, without explicating himself any
further, what other thing remains, except Tradition, to distinguish what is
essential from what is not? This argument is without answer, and will appear
so much the more to be so, by how much we shall more exactly descended to
particulars.

JESUS CHRIST instituted this Sacrament in the evening, at the beginning of the
night in which he was to be delivered. 1. Cor. 11.23.
It was at this time he would leave us his Body given for us: Luke 22.19.
To consecrate at that same hour would be to render the memory of his passion
more lively, and with all to represent that JESUS CHRIST was to dye at the last
hour, that is to say, in the last period of times. Notwithstanding none
believe these words, Do this, bind us to an hour so full of mysteries.

The Church has made a law to take that fasting which JESUS CHRIST gave after
Supper.

If we regard Scripture only, and the words of JESUS CHRIST which are asserted
in it, the Pretended Reformers will never have any thing of certain as to what
relates to the Minister of the Eucharist. The Anabaptists and other such like
sects, believe each Faithful may give this Sacrament in his family without
necessity of another Minister. The Pretended Reformers can never convince them
by Scripture only. They cannot prove against them that these words, Do this,
were addressed to the Apostles only, if these, Drink ye all of it, prononced
in the following part of the same discourse, and with as little distinction,
were addressed to all the faithful, as they tell us every day. And on the
other side it will be answered that the Apostles to whom JESUS CHRIST said, Do
this, assisted at his holy Table as simple communicants, and not as persons
consecrating nor distributing or as Ministers: from whence it may be concluded
that these words do not confer upon them any Ministry in particular. And in
short it could not be decided but by the help of Tradition that this Sacrament
had any Ministers specially established by the Son of God, or that these
Ministers ought to be those to whom he has committed the charge of preaching
his word.

This is that which made Tertullian say in his book De corona militis, De cor.
mil. c. 3.
that we learn from unwritten Tradition only, that the Eucharist ought not to
be received but from the hands of Ecclesiastical superiors, Et omnibus
mandatum a Domino.
althoug the commission to give it (if we regard precisely the words of
JESUS CHRIST) was addressed to all the faithful.

The same Tradition which declares the Pastors of the Church sole Ministers of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, teaches us that the second order of these
Ministers, that is to say, the Priests have part in this honor, although
JESUS CHRIST said not, Do this, but to the Apostles only, who were the heads of
his flock.

We do not read that our Lord gave his Body or his Blood to each of his
Disciples; but only that in breaking the Bread he said to them, Take and eat;
and as for the Cupp, it is likely that having placed it in the midest of them
he ordained them to partake of it one after the other. The Synod of Privas, one
of the Pretended Reformation, Disc c. XII. art. IX.
mentioned in the IX. Article of the XII. chapter of their Discipline, says,
that our Lord permitted the Apostle to distribute the Bread and the Cupp one to
the other, and from hand, to hand; But though JESUS CHRIST did do it after this
manner, constant practice has interpreted that the consecrated Bread and Wine
should be given to the faithful by the Ministers of the Church.

Conformably to the example of our Lord and the Apostles some of the Pretended
Reformers would have Communicants to give the Cupp to one another; Syn. de
Privas, ibid. Syn. de Saint Maixent. Disc. c. XII. Observat. apres l'art. XIV.
and it is certain this Ceremony was a solemn sign of union. But the Synods
of the Pretended Reformers did not judge it necessary to follow herein what
they acknowledged to have been practiced by JESUS CHRIST and his Apostles in
the institution of the Supper, and on the contrary they attribute to the
Pastors only the distribution of the Cupp, as well as of the Bread.

All Antiquity allows to Deacons the distribution of the Cupp, Conc. Carth.
IV. c. 38. etc.
though neither JESUS CHRIST nor his Apostles ordained any thing of this nature
that appears in Scripture: None ever opposed it, and the Pretended Reformers
approve this practice in some of their Synods quoted amongst the observations
upon the IX. Disc. c. XII. Observe. sur l'art. IX.
article of the chapter concerning the Supper.

They have since that changed this practice, Ibid.
and attributed to the sole Pastors the distribution of the Eucharist, yea even
that of the Cupp to the exclusion of Deacons, and Elders themselves though they
seem amongst them to represent the second order of the Ministers of the
Church, that is that of Priests, who have always constantly offered and
distributed not only the Sacred Chalice, but moreover the whole entire
Eucharist.

Our Pretended Reformers did not at first arrive to this decision. Ibid.
Observe. p. 184. and seq.
Their first Synods said that the Ministers only should administer the Coupp as
far as it might be done. This restriction continued under two and twenty
successive national Synods, evento that of alais which was held in our days
in 1620. There they ordained that these words, as far as it might be done,
should be expunged, and the administration of the Cupp was reserved to the
Ministers alone. Till that time the Elders and the Deacons also had upon
occasion administered the Eucharist, and principally the Cupp. Ibid. p. 186.
The Church of Geneva formed by Calvin had this practice, and it was but in the
year 1623. that they there resolved to conform themselves to the sentiment of
those of France. This business did not pass without contradiction in the
Provinces. The reason of the Synod of Alais, as it is inserted in the
discipline, is that it appartained only to the lawfully established Pastors to
distribute this Sacrament: a Maxim which visibly regards Doctrine, and which
by consequence (according to the Principles of the new Reformation) ought to be
found expressly in Scripture; from whence it follows that all the Synods and
Pretended Reformed Churches until that of Alais did grossly err against the
institution of JESUS CHRIST. Or if they answer us that these words were not
verry clear (as these variations seem sufficiently to show;) they ought to
acknewledge with us, that to understand these words a man is obliged to have
recourse to the interpretation of the Church, and to that Tradition which
subjects us to her.

To be assembled together at the same Table is a sign of society and
Communion which JESUS CHRIST would have to appear in the institution of his
Sacrament, for he was at Table with his Apostles. Ibid. Observe. apres l'art.
XIV. p. 189.
Some Churches of the Pretended Reformers to imitate this example, and to do
all that our Lord had done ranged the Communicants by table-fulls. The Synod of
Saint Maixent cited in the same place rejects this observance.

What was there seemingly more opposite to what had been practiced at the
institution, then the custom of carrying away with them the Communion, and of
receiving it in private? We have seen notwithstanding that this was practiced
in the primitive times of martyrdom not to say any thing here of the following
ages.

There appears nothing in Scripture of the reserving (as it should be) the
Eucharist for the use of the sick: nevertheless we find it practiced from
the very original of Christianity.

Those who mixed the two species, and took them both together appeared as
much estrainged from the terms and design of the institution as those who
received under one only. These two articles have had their approbation in the
Church, and the practice of mixing, which displeases our Pretended Reformers
the least, is that which we find the most forbiden.

It is prohibited in the VII. Conc. Brac. IV. T. VI. Conc. c. 2.
age in the IIII. Council of Brague. It is prohibited in the XI. Conc. Clarom.
C.
age in the Council of Clermont where Pope Urbanus the II. was in person with
about two hundred Bishops, and by Pope Paschalis the II. The Council of
Clermont excepts the cases of necessity and precaution. Ep. 32.
Pope Paschalis excepts the Communion of infants and of the sick. This
Communion which the West permitted not but with these reservations, was infine
established there for some time; and moreover is become from six or seven
hundred years the ordinary Communion of the whole East without being regarded
as a matter of schism.

The most important thing in the Sacraments is the words which give efficacy to
the action. JESUS CHRIST has not expressly prescribed any for the Eucharist in
his Gospel, nor the Apostles in their Epistles. JESUS CHRIST in saying, Do
this, only insinuated that they should repete his proper words by which the
bread and wine were changed. But that which has determined us invincibly to
this sense is Tradition. Tradition has also regulated those prayers which ought
to be joined to the words of JESUS CHRIST; and it is upon this account Saint
Basil in his book of the Holy Ghost places amongst unwritten Traditions,
Basil. de Sp. S. 27.
the words of invocation which are made use of in consecration, or to render it
word for word, when the Eucharist is shown.

By the VIII. article of the XII. chapter of the Discipline of the Pretended
Reformers, it is left indifferent to the Pastors to use the accustomed words in
the distribution of the Supper. The article is of the Synods of Sainte-Foy, and
of Figeac in the years 1578. and 1579. And in effect it appears in the Synod
of Privas held in the year 1612. Ibid. Observe. sur l'art. IX. p. 185.
that in the Church of Geneva the Deacons do not speak, no nor even the
Ministers in the distribution. So that the Sacrament, according to the doctrine
of our Reformers, consisting only in the usage of it, it follows that they
acknowledge a Sacrament which subsists without words. In the same Synod of
Privas, Ibid.
the Deacons who give the Cupp are forbidden to speak, because JESUS CHRIST
spoke alone; and the Church of Mets is exhorted to conform in this to the
example of JESUS CHRIST without nevertheless using any violence.

The example of JESUS CHRIST does not therefore make a law, according to this
Synod; and according to other Synods it is freely permitted to separate in the
celebration of this Sacrament, the words which are indeed the soul of the
Sacraments, as the example of Baptism may make apparent, not to allege here
the harmonious consent of the whole Christian world, and of all ages.

We see by these decisions that what JESUS CHRIST did dos not appear to be a
law to the Pretended Reformers. A distinction must be made betwixt that which
is essential and that which is not so. JESUS CHRIST dit not do it himself, he
only spoke in general, Do this. It belongs therefore to the Church to do it,
and her constant practice ought to be an unviolable law.

But in fine to attache our Ministers in their own fortress, seeing they place
the stresse of their argument for the most part in these words, Do this: let us
see when JESUS CHRIST pronounced them.

He dit not pronounce them until after he had said, Take, Luke 22.19.
eat, this is my Body. For it is then that Saint Luke alone makes him add, Do
this in memory of me; this Evangelist not mentioning that he said the like
after the Chalice.

It is true Saint Paul mentions, that after the consecration of the Chalice,
JESUS CHRIST said, 1. Cor. 11.23.
Do this in remembrance of me so often as you shall drink. But after all, this
discourse of our Savior, to take it in rigor and in its precise terms,
imports only a conditional order, to do this in remembrance of JESUS CHRIST as
often as one shall do it, and not an order absolutely to do it: the which I
could prove by Protestant interpreters, if the thing were not of it self too
clear to need a proof.

And thus the words, Do this, would be found absolutely applied to these words
only, Take, eat, and the Protestants would loose their cause.

But if they say, as some of theirs do, that these words attributed to the
reception of the Body, Do this in remembrance of me. have the same force as
these which are said after the Chalice, As often as you shall drink do it in
remembrance of me, the one as well as the other ordaining only to do it in
remembrance: and not absolutely their cause will be but the worse, because on
that account there will not remain in the whole Gospel any absolute precept
(contrary to their doctrine) to receive either of the species much less both.

It serves them for nothing to answer that the institution of JESUS CHRIST
suffices them, seeing the question always retournes to know what appertains
to the essence of the institution, JESUS CHRIST not having distinguished it,
and all the foregoing examples demonstrating invincibly that it cannot be
learnd but from Tradition.

If they add, that in all cases they cannot be deceived in doing what is
written, and what JESUS CHRIST did: this is with a seeming reason to leave the
difficulty untouched, because on the one side they have seen so many things
which ought to be observed though they be not regulated in Scripture; and on
the other part they see also so great a number of those that are written and
done by JESUS CHRIST, which are not observed amongst themselves, without
finding any thing in Scripture which can assure them they are less important
then others.

So that without the assistance of Tradition we should not know how to
consecrate, how to give, how to receive, nor in a word how to celebrate the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, no more then that of Baptism; and this discussion
may aid us to understand with how much reason Saint Basil said, that in
rejecting unwritten Tradition the Gospel it self is attached and Preaching is
reduced to mere words, Basil. de Sp. S. cap. 27.
the meaning of which is not intelligible.

In effect all the answers and all the reasonings of these Ministers do
manifestly produce nothing but new difficultyes, and the sole means to
disentangle themselves, is to search, as we do, the essence of our Lords
institution, and the right understanding of his commands in the Tradition and
practice of the Church.

If therefore she has always believed the grace of the Eucharist was not
restrained to both species; if she has believed that Communion under one or
both species was a saving Communion; if the Pretended Reformers have followed
this sentiment in a certain case not mentioned in the Gospel, that is to say,
in regard of those who drink no wine: what difficulty can be found in a thing
regulated by such certain principles and by so constant a practice?

VII. Communion under one Species was established without contradiction.
WE see also that Communion under one species was established without noise,
without contradiction, without complaint, in the same manner as Baptism was
established with bare sprinkling, and other innocent customs.

The fear they had to spill our Saviors Blood in the midst of a multitude
which approached to Communion with much confusion, was the reason why the
faithful being always persuaded that one sole species was sufficient,
insensibly accustomed themselves to receive in effect but one only.

There was so great difficulty not to spill this precious Blood in those
Churches where there were but few Ministers; and where there was a numerous
Congregation the precautions which were necessary in distributing of it rendered
the service so long especially on great solemnities, and in great assemblies,
that for that reason they easily brought themselves to the usage of one sole
species.

In the conference held at Constantinople in the year 1054. under Pope Leo the
IX. Disp. Humb. Card. apud Bar. app. T. XI.
between the Latins and the Greeks, Cardinal Humbert Bishop of Sylva candida
produced a custom of the Church of Jerusalem, attested by a passage of an
ancient Patriarch of this Church. This custom was to communicate all the
people under the species of bread solely and seperatly, without mingling it
with the other according to the practice of the rest of the east. There it is
expressly noted that they reserved what was remaining of the consecrated Bread
of the Eucharist for the Communion of the day following, without giveing there
the least intimation of the sacred Chalice; and this custom was so ancient in
that Church that it was attributed to the Apostles, I am willing to acknowledgd
that those of Jerusalem were mistaken in that point, seeing there are none but
those customs that are as well universal as immemoriall which according to
the rule of the Church, ought to be referred to that original. Nevertheless
by this means we see the antiquity of that custom. It was received in the holy
city, and throughout the Province that depended upon it, as the Cardinal
affirmed. Nicetas Pretoratus his Antagonist dos not in the least contradict
him: The wholl world resorted to Jerusalem, and went with a holy zeal to
communicate in those parts where the Mysteries of our salvation were
accomplished. It was with out doubt the vast multitude of communicants which
made the custom to communicate under one species be embraced: not one person
complained of it; and Cardinal Humbert who appeared concerned at the mixture,
says not a word concerning the Communion under one species.

There are many other reasons which induce us to think, that the usage of one
sole species bigan on great festivalls, by reason of the multitude of
Communicants; and however it was, it is certain the people without the least
reluctance conformd to that manner of communicateing, grounded on the ancient
faith which they had embraced (viz) that they received under one sole, and
under both the species, the same substance of the Sacrament, and the same
effect of grace.

The most certain mark that a custom is held as free, is when it is changed
without any trouble, so when they defisted either to administer the Communion
to little infants, or to baptize them by immersion, not one person was
disturbed at it: just so they brought themselves to communicate under one
species; and for many ages the people communicated not but in that manner, when
the Bohemians bethought themselves to say that it was ill done.

I do not find that Wiclef their chief Leader as rash as he was, did yet
condemn that custom of the Church: at least it is certain, there is nothing
to be seen of it neither in the letters of Gregory the eleveinth, Tom. XI. Conc.
nor in the two Councils held at London by William of Courtenay, and by Thomas
Arundel Archbishops of Cantorbury, nor in the Council at Oxford, celebrated by
the same Thomas under Gregory the XII. nor in the Council at Rome under John
the XXIII. Tom. XII. Conc.
nor in the third Council of London under the same Pope, nor in the Council
of Constance, nor finally in all the Councils, and all the Decrees, where the
condemnation of that Arch-Heritick and the Catalogus of his errors are
registered: by which it appears, that either he did not insist upon that point,
or that there was no great stir made about it.

Calixtus agrees with Aeneas Sylvius an Author near those times, N. 24.25. an
author about those times.
who writ this History, that the first who moved that Question was one named
Peter Dresde Schoolmaster of Prague, and he made use against us of the
authority of that Passage in S. John: If ye eat not the flesh of the Son of
Man, and drink not his Blood you shall have no life in you. This Passage missed
Jacobel de Misne who caused the whole Church of Bohemia, toward the end of the
XIV. age to revolt. He was followed by John Hus in the beginning of the XV. age
so that the contest between us about the two species has no higher an original.

Moreover it must be remorked that John Hus did not presume at first to say
that Communion under both species was necessary: Ibid.
It suffised him that they should grant it was permitted and expedient to give
it; but he ditermined not the necessity of it: so certain and established a
thing it was, there was no such necessity.

When any change of essential customs is made, the spirit of Tradition always
living in the Church, is never wanting to make an opposition. The Ministers
withal there great reasonings, find yet very great difficulty to accustom
their people to see their children dye without Baptism, and in despite of the
opinion they have infused into them, that Baptism is not necessary to
salvation, they are not able to divert the trouble so funest an event produces
in them, nor scarce restrain the Fathers who absolutely require their children
should be Baptized in that necessity, according to ancient custom. I my self
have observed it by experience, and the same may be seen by what I have cited
out of their Synodes: so true it is that a custom which an immemoriall and
universal tradition has imprinted in their minds as necessary has an
irrissistable power; and so fare are men from being able to extinguish such a
sentiment in the wholl Church, that it is very dificult even to extinguish it
amongst those who with a deliberate resolution contradict it. If there fore the
Communion under one sole species has passed without contradiction, and without
noise, it is, as we have said, that all Christians from the infancy of
Christianity were nourished in that faith; that the same virtue was diffused in
either of the two species, and that nothing of the substance was lost when but
one of them only was received.

It was not needful to use any extraordinary effort to make the faithful
enter into this sentiment. The Communion of infants, the Communion of the sick,
domestic Communion, the custom to communicate under one or both species
indiferently in the Church it self, and in holy assemblies, and in fine those
other things we have seen, had naturally inspired all the faithful with this
sentiment from the first ages of the Church.

So when John of Pick ham Archbishop of Cantorbury in the XIII. Conc. Lameth.
C. I. T. XI. Conc.
age with so much care caused his people to be taught, that under that one sole
species they had distributed to them, they received JESUS CHRIST whole and
entire, it past without the lest difficulty, and not one person in the least
contradicted it.

It would be cavilling to say that this great care makes it appear, they met
with some opposition in it, because we have already seen that William
Archbishop of Chalons, and Hugo de Sainto Victore, (not to ascend any higher at
present) had constantly taught above a hundred years before him, the same
doctrine, not one finding in it any thing either new or strange: so much
naturally dos it take an impression in the mind. We see in all times and in
all places the Pastoral charity careful to prevent even the least thoughts
which ignorance might chance to let fall into the minds of men. And in fine it
is de facto certain, that there was neither complaint nor contradiction upon
this article during many ages.

I do also positively aver that not one of those who believed the real
presence ever ingenuously called in doubt this integrity, that I may so say, of
the person of JESUS CHRIST under each species, seeing it would have been to give
a dead body, to give a body without blood and without soul, the very thoughts
of which strikes a horror.

From whence it comes that in beleiving the real presence, one is carried to
believe the full sufficiency of communion under one species. We see also that
Luther was naturally induced to this opinion, and a good while after he had
made a public revolte from the Church, it is certain that he had the matter
still as indifferent, or at least of small importance, highly censuring
Carlostadius, who had, contrary to his advice established Communion under both
kinds, and who seemed, Ep. Luth. ad Casp. Guttol. Tom. II. Ep. 56.
said he, to place the whole reform in these things of nothing.

He also uttered these insolent words in the Treatise which he published in
1523. upon the formula of the Mass: If a Council ordained or permited the two
species, we would in contempt of that Council receive but one of them, or we
would neither take the one or the other, and curse those whoreceive bothin
virtue of that Ordinance: words which show clearly that when both he and those
of his party are of late so obstinately zealous for the two species, it is
rather out of a spirit of contradiction then any sollid reason.

In effect he approoved the same year the common places of Melancton, where he
putts amongst things indifferent Communion under one or both species. In 1528.
Visit. Sax. T. VI. Ihen.
in his visitation of Saxony he left them expressy the liberty to receive but
one only, and persisted still in that opinion in 1533. fiveteen years after he
had erected himself as a Reformer.

The whole Lutheran party supposes that nothing either essential or necessary
to salvation is lost, when one does not communicate under both species, seeing
that in the Apology of the Confession of Ausbourge (a treatise as authentic
with that party, as the Confession of Ausbourge it self, and equally subscribed
to by all those who embraced it) it is expressly set down, Apol. Aug. Cons.
That the Church is worthy of excuse for not having received but one sole
species, when she could not have both. But the case is quite otherwise in
regard to the authors of this injustice. What a notion of the Church is this
which they represent to us before Luthers time as forced to receive but half
of the Sacrament by the fault of her Pastors! as if the Pastors themselves were
not by the institution of JESUS CHRIST, a part of the Church. But in fine it
appears from hence (by the concession of the Lutherans) that what distroyed the
Church, according to them, was not absolutely essential, seeing it can never be
excusable nor tolerable to receive the Sacraments, upon what account soever
contrary to the essence of their institution, and that the right administration
of the Sacraments is no less essential to the Church, then the pure preaching
the word of God.

Calixtus who relates carefully all these passages, N. 199.
excuses Luther, and the first authors of the Reformation, upon this account
that having undertook (see here a memorable acknowledgment, and a worthy
beginning of the Reformation) upon this account (sais Calixtus) that the first
authors having undertaken it (the Reformation) rather by the violence of others
then by any voluntary motive, that is to say rather out of a spirit of
contradiction, then out of a sincere love of truth, they could not at first
discover the necessity of the precept to communicate under both kinds, nor
reject that custom, behold what Calixtus says, and he sees not how much
himself over throws the evidence he attributed to this precept in makieng it
apparently unknown to the first authors of that new Reformation, and by those
whom they believed chosen from God for this work. Could not they have
perceived a thing, which Calixtus finds so clear? or has not Calixtus
overdone it, when he gives us that for so clear and manifest which is not at
all perceived by such Doctors?

But to say no more of them, Calixtus himself, that very Calixtus who has writ
so much against the Communion under one kind, in the end of the same treatise
where he has opposed it so much, is so far from treating of it as a matter
where on salvation depends that he declares, De Communione sub utraque n. 200.
and jud. n. 76.
he does not exclude from the number of the truly Faithful our ancesters who
communicated under one kind above five hundred years since, and that which is
much more remarkable now those who communicate so at this very day seeing they
candoe no better, and concludes in general that whatever we think or what ewer
we practice concerning the Sacrament, cannot put any obstacle to our salvation,
nor a warrantable matter of separation, because the reception of this Sacrament
is not of essential obligation. Whether this principle of Calixtus be true and
the consequence rightly drawn from it is not our present dispute. It is
sufficient fore that this zealous defender of the two kinds is forced at last
to grant, that a man may be le saved in that Church where there is but one kind
only received: by which he is obliged to aknowlegd, either that a man may
obtain salvation out of the true Church, which certainly he will not grant,
or, which he will mentaine as little, that the true Church may remainsuch, and
yet want a sacrament, or, which is more natural, and what we also in effect
do affirm, that Communion under both kinds is not essential to the Sacrament
of that Eucharist.

Behold whether these great disputes against Communion under one kind tend.
And after having exercised all his subtelty he is comes at last by all these
efforts to acknowledge tacitly that which he had endeavored to oppose by such
studied and elaborate treatises.

VIII. A refutation of the History concerning the taking away of the Cupp
written by M. Jurieux.
IN the last Treatise that M. Jurieux published, he proposes to himself the
making an abridgment to the history of taking away the Cupp, Exam. de l'Euch.
6. Traite. 5. Sect.
where although he gives us for indisputable all that he is there pleased to
impose it will be easy for us to dectet almost as many falsityes as he has
mentioned matters of fact.

He proposes nothing new upon the Gospels and the Epistles of Saint Paul
concerning which we have sufficiently spoken. From the Apostles times he passes
to the following ages, where he shows without difficulty, that the use of the
two species was ordinary. But he soon perceived that he brought nothing against
us if he said nothing else: for he knows very well we mentain that at the same
time the two species, were in practice they were not believed so necessary but
that they communicated as often and as publicly under one only, without any
ones complaint. To take away this our defense, and to say something concluding,
it did not suffice to assure us that the use of the two species was frequent
but he ought also to assure us that it was regarded a indispensable, and that
they never communicated after any other manner. M. Jurieux found that he ought
to say this: he has said it in effect; but he has not so much as offered to
prove it, so much did he despair of succeding in it. Only by a bold, and
vehement affirmation, he thought he might supply the defect of a proof which he
wanted: It is (say he) a thing notoriously known, and that as no need of
proof, it is a matter not in the least questioned. These affirmative manner of
speeches impose upon men: the Pretended Reformers believe a Minister upon his
word, and cannot imagine he dars venture to avouch any thing as not contested
when de facto it is. Nevertheless the truth, is that there is not any thing not
only more contested, but also more false then that which M. Jurieux gives us
here as for indisputable as equally confessed by both parties.

But let us consider his words as they lie with what follows. This is (says
he) an affair which is not contested. During the space of above a thousand
years, none in the Church, had ever undertaken to celebrate this Sacrament,
and communicate the Faithful otherwise then the Lord had commanded it, that is
to say under both species; except when to communicate the sick with more
facility, some undertook to moisten the bread in the wine, and to make them
receive both the one and the other kind at the same time.

The proposition and the exception are neither the one nor the other made with
sincerity.

The proposition is, that during the space of above a thousand years none had
ever undertaken to celebrate this Sacrament, nor to give it otherwise then
under both species. He confounds at the very first two very different things,
to celebrate this Sacrament and to give it. None ever celebrated it but under
both species; we grant it, and we have shown a reason for it drawn from the
nature of a Sacrifise: but that none ever gave the two species, is what we
dispute; and good order, not to say sincerity, dit not permit that these two
things should be equally joined together as indisputable.

But that which seems most intolerable, is that it should be asserted that
during the space of above a thousand years the Communion was never given but
under both species, and that this also should be a thing notorious and public,
a thing which needs no proof, a thing which is not contested.

We ought to regard public faith, and not to abuse these weighty expressions.
M. Jurieux knows in his own conscience that we deny all he here says: the
sole titles of the articles of the first part of this discourse show clearly
enough how many occasions there are where we uphold that Communion was given
under one kind: I am not the first that have said it (God forbid) and I do
nothing but explicate what all other Catholics have said before me.

But can any thing be less sincere, then to bring here no exception from
ordinary communions but only that of the sick, and with all to find there no
difference but in this that they then mixed the two species together: seeing
M. Jurieux would relate nothing but what is not contested by Catholics, he
ought to speak after another manner. He knows very well we maintain that the
Communion of the sick consisted not in giving them the two species mixed, but
in giving them ordinaryly the sole species of bread. He knows very well what
our Authors say upon the Communion of Serapion, upon that of Saint Ambrose,
upon others which I have remarked; and that in a word we say the ordinary
manner of communicating the sick was to communicate them under one sole
species. It is already to much to dare to deny a matter of fact so well
established: but to advance this boldness to such a height as to say the
contrary is not contested, is what I know not how M. Jurieux could resolve upon.

But what is it he would be at, when he affirms, as a thing not contested by
us, that during the space of above a thousand years the Communion was never
given otherwise then under both species, except in the Communion of the sick
where both the species were given mixed together. What a strange kind of
exception is this, Both species were always given, except when they gave them
both mixed together. M. Jurieux would willingly have said much better then he
did. But in affirming, as he does, that during the space of above a thousand
years they never gave the Communion but under both species, he saw verry well
that he ought at least to except the communion of the sick. He would have done
it had he proceeded heartily, but at the same time he foresaw by this exception
alone he lost the fruict of so universal a proposition; and otherwise, there
was not any likelihood the ancient Church sent dying persons to the Tribunal
of JESUS CHRIST after a Communion received contrary to his command. So that he
durst not say what naturally occurred, and fell into a manifest labarynth.

In fine, wherefore speaks he only of the Communion of the sick? Whence comes
it that in this relation he has said nothing of the Communion of infants, and
domestic Communion, both which he knows verry well we allege as given under
one species only. Why does he dissemble what our Authors have maintained, what
I have proved after them by the Decrees of Saint Leo and Saint Gelasius; that
it was free to communicate under one or both species, I say in the Church it
self, and at the public Sacrifise? Was M. Jurieux ignorant of these things to
say nothing of the rest? Was he ignorant of the Office of Good Friday, and of
the Communion then and there under one sole species? A man so learned as he,
did he not know what was writ concerning this by Amalarius and Authors of the
VIII. and IX. ages, whom we have quoted? To know these things and to affirm
as an indispautable practice, that during the space of above a thousand years
the Communion was never given but under both species: is it not manifestly to
be tray the truth, and defile his own conscience?

The other Authors of his Communion who have writ against us act with more
sincerity. Calixtus, M. du Bourdieu and the others endeavor to answer those
objections we make. M. Jurieux follows another method, and contents himself
to say boldly, That during the space of above a thousand years none ever
undertook to communicate the faithful otherwise then under both species, and
that this matter is not contested. This is the shortest way; and the surest to
deceive the simple. But we must believe that those who love their salvation,
will open their eyes and not suffer themselves to be any longer imposed on.

M. Jurieux has but one only remaning refuge: to wit, that these Communions so
frequent in the ancient Church under one species were not the Sacrament of
JESUS CHRIST, any more then the Communion which is given in their Churches in
bread alone to those who drink no wine. In answering after this manner, he
would have answered according to his principles, I confess: but after all I
maintain he had not the boldness to make use of this answer, nor to impute to
the ancient Church this monstrous practice where a Sacrament is given which is
in reality no Sacrament, but an humain invention in Communion.

Nevertheless in a history such as he had promised it was his business to
have always related these considerable matters of fact. He says not one word
of them in his narrative I wonder not at it, for he could not have spoken of so
many important practices, without showing that there was at the least a great
contestation betwixt them and us; and it pleased him to say, that it is a thing
which has no need of proof, and is not contested.

It is true that in another place in answering objections, he speaks a word or
two of domestic Communion. But he comes of in answering that it is not certain
whether those who carried away with them the Eucharist after this manner, Ibid.
Sect. VII. 483. 484.
carried not also the wine, and that this later is much more likely. It is not
certain: this last is much more apparent. Certainly a man thus positive as he
is diffides verry much of his cause when he speaks at this rate; but at least,
seeing he doubts, he ought not to say that it is a matter without contestation,
that no body ever undertook during above a thousand years to communicate the
Faithful otherwise then under both species. Behold even in the first ages of
the Church an infinite number of Communions that he himself durst not affirm
to have been under both species. It was an abuse, says he. What then? the
practice was to be related; the question concerning the abuse would come after,
and we should then see whether or no it were fit to condemn so many Martyrs,
so many other Saints, and the whole primitive Church which practiced this
domestic Communion.

M. Jurieux cuts of the discourse with too much confidence: Is there the least
sincerity (says he) to draw a proof from a practice opposed to that of the
Apostles, which is condemned at present, and which would pass in the Church of
Rome for the worst of crimes?

Was it not his business here again to make the world believe that we
condemn together with him and his the practice of so many Saints as contrary
to that of the Apostles? But we are far from such horrible temerity. M.
Jurieux knows it very well; and a man who boasts thus much of sincerity, ought
to have so much of it as to take notice that the Church (as I have shown
elsewhere) dos not condemn all the practices she changes; and that the
Holy Ghost who guides her, makes her not only condemn ill practices, but also
to quitt good ones, and forbid them severely, when they are abused.

I believe the falsity of this History which M. Jurieux gives us of the first
ages of the Church for a eleaven hundred or a thousand years appears
sufficiently: what he says of following times is no less contrary to truth.

I have no need to speak of the manner how he relates the establishment of
the real presence and Transubstantiation during the X. age: that is not to our
present subject, Sect. V. p. 469.
and otherwise nothing obliges us to refute what he advances without proof.
But that which is to be remarked is, that he regards Communion under one kind
as a thing which was not introduced but by presupposing Transubstantiation. All
in good time: when therefore it shall henceforth appear (as we have
invincibly shown) that Communion under one species was practiced even in the
first ages of the Church, and in the times of the Martyrs, it can be no more
doubted but that Transubstantiation was also at that time establised; and M.
Jurieux himself will be obliged to grant this consequence. But let us return
to what follows in his History.

He shows us there Communion under one species, as a thing first thought of in
the eleaventh age, after the real presence and Transubstantiation had been
well established: For then they perceived (says he) that under a crumme of
bread, Ibid. 470.
as well as under every drop of wine, the whole Flesh and all the Blood of our
Lord were included. What happened upon it? Let us hear: This false reason
prevailed in such a manner over the institution of our Lord, and over the
practice of the whole ancient Church, that the custom of communicating under
the sole species of Bread was insensibly established in the XII. and XIII.
ages. It was insensibly established; so much the better for us. What I have
said then is true, that the people reduced themselves without contradiction and
without difficulty to the sole species of Bread, so well were they prepared by
the Communion of the sick, by that of infants, by that which was received at
home, by that which was practiced in the Church it self, and finally by all
those practices we have seen, to acknowledge a true and perfect Communion under
one species.

This is an untoward and troublesome business for our Reformers: They have
great reason indeed to boast of these insensible changes where in they putt the
whole stresse of their cause; they never yet produced, neither will they ever
produce one example of such a change in essential matters. That indifferent
matters should be insensibly changed and without contradiction, is no such
great wonder: but (as we have said) the faith of the people, and those
practices which are believed essential to Religion are not so easily changed.
For then Tradition, the ancient belief, custom it self, and the Holy Ghost
who animates the Body of the Church oppose themselves to his novelly. When
therefore a change is made without difficulty, and without being perceived, it
is a sign the matter was never believed to be so necessary.

M. Jurieux saw this consequence; Ibid.
and after having said that the custom of communicating under the sole species
of bread was establised insensibly in the XII. and XIII. age, he adds
immediately after: It was not however without resistance; the people could not
suffer without great impatience that they should take from them half of
JESUS CHRIST; they murmured in all parts. He had said a little before that this
change, (verry different from those which are made after an insensible manner,
without opposition, and without noise) was on the contrary made with great
noise and splendor. These Gentlemen answer things as best pleases them: the
present difficulty transports them; and being pressed by the objection, they
say at that moment what seems most to disentangle them from it, without much
reflecting whether it agree, I do not say with truth, but with their own
thoughts. The cause it self demands this, and we must not expect that an
error can be defended after a consequent manner. This is the state in which M.
Jurieux found himself. This custom, says he, that is to say this of
communicating under one kind, was insensibly established; nothing can be more
quiet and tranquile. It was not nevertheless without resistance, without
noise, without the greatest impatience, without murmuring on all sides; behold
a grand commotion. Truth made him heartily speak the first, and the adhesion
to his cause made him say the other. In effect nothing can be found of these
universal murmurs, of these extreme impatiences, of these resistances of the
people; and this induces to the establising an insensible change. On the other
side it must not be said that a practice which is represented so strange, so
unheard of, so evidently sacrilegious, was established without repugnance, and
without taking any notice of it. To avoid this inconvenience a resistance must
be imagined, and, if none can be found, invented.

But furthermore what could be the subject of these universal murmurings? M.
Jurieux has told us his thoughts of them: but in this point he coheares as
little with himself as in all the rest. That which caused these murmurings, is
(says he) that the people suffered with the greatest impatience that they
should be deprived of one half of JESUS CHRIST. Has he forgot what he even now
said, that the real presence had made them see that under each crumme of bread
the whole Flesh and all the Blood of JESUS CHRIST were contained? Ibid. p. 469.
Dos he reflect upon what he is presently about to say, that if the doctrine of
Transsubstantiation and of the real presence be true, Sect. VI. p. 480.
it is true also that the bread contains the Flesh and the Blood of
JESUS CHRIST? Where then was this half of JESUS CHRIST taken away, which the
people suffered (according to him) with the highest impatience? If a man will
have them make complaints, let him at least afford them matter conformable to
their sentiments, and such as carrys a face of probability.

But in reality there was none. Nor dos M. Jurieux show us any in the Authors
of that time. The first contradiction is that which gave occasion to the
decision of the Councile of Constance in the year 1415. It begun in Bohemia
(as we have seen) about the end of the XIV. age: and, if according to the
relation of M. Jurieux, the custom of communicating under one sole species
begun in the XI. age, if they do not begin to complain, and that in Bohemia
only, but toward the end of the XIV. age; by the acknowledgement of this
Minister, three hundred whole years should be passed, before a change so
strange, so bold, if we believe him, so visibly opposite to the institution of
JESUS CHRIST and to all precedent practices, should have made any noise.
Believe it that will: for my part I am sensible, that to believe it, all
remorse of conscience must be stifled.

M. Jurieux must without doubt have some of them, to fee himself forced by the
badnesse of his cause to disguise truth so many ways in an historical
relation, that is, in a kind of discourse which above all others requires
candor and sincerity.

He does not so much as state the question sincerely. V. Sect. p. 464.
The state of the question (says he) is very easy to comprehend. he will then I
hope declare it clearly and distinctly. Let us see. It is granted (adds he)
that when they communicate the faithful, as well the people as the Clergy,
they are obliged to give them the Bread to eat: but they pretend it is not the
same as to the Cupp. He will not so much as dream that we believe Communion
equally vallid and perfect under eather of the two species. But being willing
by the very state of the question to have it understood that we believe more
perfection or more necessity in that of the Bread then in the other, or that
JESUS CHRIST is not equally in them both: he would thereby render us manifestly
ridiculous. But he knows verry well that we are far from these phancyes; and
it may be seen in this Treatise, that we believe the Communion given to
little children during so many ages under the sole species of wine, as good and
vallid as that which was given in so many other occurrences under the sole
species of Bread. So that M. Jurieux states the question wrong. He begins his
dispute concerning the two species upon that question so stated: He continues
it by a history where we have seen he advances as many falsityes as facts.
Behold here the man whom our Reformers look upon at present every where as the
strongest defendour of their cause.

. IX. A reflection upon concomitancy, and upon the doctrine of the sixth
chapter of Saint John's Gospel.
IF we add to the proofs of those practices which we have drawn from the most
pure and holy source of antiquity, and to those solid maxims we have
established by the consent of the Pretended Reformers; if we add I say to all
these, what we have already said, but which it may be has not been
sufficiently weighed, that the real presence being supposed, it cannot be
denied but that each species contains JESUS CHRIST whole and entire: Communion
under one species will remain undoubted, there being nothing more unreasonable
then to make the grace of a Sacrament, where JESUS CHRIST has wouchsafed to be
present, nor to depend of JESUS CHRIST himself, but of the species under which
he is hidden.

These Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformation must permit us here to explicate
more fully this concomitancy, so much attaqued by their disputes; and seeing
they have let pass the real presence as a doctrine which has no venom in it,
they ought not henceforth to have such an aversion from what is but a manifest
consequence of it.

M. Jurieux has acknowleged it in the places heretofore mentioned. Exam. p. 480.
If (says he) the doctrine of Transubstantiation and the real presence were
true, it is true that the Bread would contain the Flesh and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST. So that concomitancy is an effect of the real presence, and the
Pretended Reformers do not deny us this consequence.

Let them then at present presuppose this real presence, seeing they suffer it
in their brethren the Lutherans, and let them consider with us the necessary
consequences: they will see that our Lord could not give us his Body and his
Blood perpetually separated, nor give us either the one or the other without
giving us his person whole and entire in either of the two.

Verily when he said, Take, eat, this is my Body, and by those words gave us
the flesh of his sacrifise to eat, he know verry well he did not give us the
flesh of a pure man, but that he gave us a flesh united to the divinity, and in
a word the flesh of God and man both together. The same must be said of his
Blood, which would not be the price of our salvation, if it were not the Blood
of God; Blood which the Divine Word had appropriated to himself after a most
particular manner by making himself man, conformable to these words of Saint
Paul: Heb. 11.14.17.
Because his servants are composed of flesh and blood; he who ought in all
things to be like unto them, would partake both of the one and the other.

But if he would not give us in his Sacrament a flesh purely humain, he would
much less give us in it a flesh without a soul, a dead flesh, a carcass, or
by the same reason a flesh despoiled of blood, and blood actually separated
from the body: otherwise he ought to dye often, and often to shed his Blood, a
thing unworthy the glorious state of his Resurrection, where he ought to
conserve eternally humain nature as entire as he had at first assumed it. So
that he knew verry well that we should have in his flesh his Blood, that in
his Blood we should have his flesh, and that we should have in both the one
and the other his blessed soul with his divinity whole and entire, without
which his flesh would not be quickening, nor his Blood full of spirit and grace.

Why then in giving us such great treasors, his holy soul his divinity, all
that he is; why I say did he only name his Body, and his Blood, if it were not
to make us understand it is by that infirmity, which he would have common with
us, we must arrive to his strength? And why has he in his word distinguished
this Body and this Blood, which he would not effectually separate but during
that little time he was in the sepulcher, if it be not to make us also
understand this Body and this Blood, with which he nourishes and quickneth us
would not have the virtue, if they had not been once actually separated; and
if this separation had not caused the violent death of our Savior by which he
became our victime? So that the virtue of this Body and this Blood coming from
his death, he would conserve the image of this death when he gave us them in
his holy Supper, and by so lively a representation keep us always in mind to
the cause of our salvation that is to say the sacrifise of the Cross.

According to this doctrine, we ought to have our living victime under an
image of death; otherwise we should not be enlivened. JESUS CHRIST tells us
also at his holy table: I am living but I have been dead; Apoc. 1.11.
and living in effect I bear only upon we the image of that death which I
have endured. It is also thereby that I enliven, because by the figure of my
death once suffered, I introduce those who believe, to that life which I
possess eternally.

Thus the Lamb who is before the Throne as dead, Apoc. 5.6.
or rather, as slain, does not cease to be living, for he is slanding; and he
sends throughout the world the seven Spirits of God, and he takes the book
and opens it, and he fills heaven and earth with joy and with grace.

Our Reformers will not, or it may be cannot yet understand so high a mystery,
for it enters not into the hearts but of those who are prepared by a purifyed
Faith: But if they cannot understand it, they may at least understand very
well, that we cannot believe a real presence of the Body and Blood of
JESUS CHRIST without admitting all the other things we have even now
explicated; and these things thus explicated is what we call concomitancy.

But as soon as concomitancy is supposed, and that we have acknowledged
JESUS CHRIST whole and entire under each species, it is verry easy to
understand in what the virtue of this Sacrament consists. John. VI. 64. Cvr.
lib. IV. in Joh. c. 34. Ia. Anath. XI. Conc. Ephesians. p. I. T. III. Conc.
The flesh profits nothing; and if we understand it as Saint Cyrille, whose
sense was followed by the whole Council of Ephesus, it profits nothing to
believe it alone, to believe it the flesh of a pure man: but to believe it the
flesh of God a flesh full of divinity, and by consequence, of spirit and of
life; it profits very much, without doubt, because in this state it is full
of an infinite virtue, and in it we receive together with the entire humanity
of JESUS CHRIST, his divinity also whole and entire, and the very source or
fountain of graces.

For this reason it is the Son of God, who knew what he would place in his
mystery, knew also very well how to make us understand in what he would place
the virtue of it. What he has said in Saint John must therefore be no more
objected: John. 6.54.
If you eat not the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink not his Blood, you
shall not have life in you. The manifest meaning of these words is there is no
life for those who separate themselves from the one and the other: for indeed,
it is not the eating and drinking, but the receiving of JESUS CHRIST, that
gives life. JESUS CHRIST says himself, and as it is excellently remarked by
the Council of Trent, Sess. XXI. c. 1.
too injustly calumniated by our adversaryes: He who said, John. 6.54.
IF YOU EAT NOT THE FLESCH OF THE SON OF MAN, AND DRINK NOT HIS BLOOD, YOU
SHALL NOT HAVE LIFE IN YOU, has also said: Ibid. 52.
IF ANY ONE EAT OF THIS BREAD, HE SHALL HAVE LIFE EVERLASTING. And he who said,
Ibid. 55.
HE WHO EATS MY FLESH, AND DRINKS MY BLOOD, HAS ETERNAL LIFE, Ibid. 52.
has said also: THE BREAD WHICH I WILL GIVE IS MY FLESH WHICH I WILL GIVE FOR
THE LIFE OF THE WORLD. And lastly he who said. Ibid. 57.
HE THAT EATS MY FLESH, AND DRINKS MY BLOOD, REMAINS IN ME AND I IN HIM, has
also said: HE WHO EATS THIS BREAD, Ibid. 59.
SHALL HAVE ETERNAL LIFE; and again: Ibid. 58.
HE THAT EATS ME LIVES FOR ME, AND SHALL LIVE BY ME. By which he obliges us,
not to the eating and drinking at his holy Table, or to the species which
contain his Body and his Blood, but to his propper substance, which is there
communicated to us, and together with it grace and life.

So that this passage of Saint John from whence, as we have said, Jacobel
took occasion to revolt and all Bohemia to rise in rebellion, becomes a proof
for us. The Pretended Reformers themselves would undertake to defend us, if we
would, against this passage so much boasted of by Jacobel, seeing they own
with a common consent, this passage is not to be understood of the Eucharist.
Calvin has said it, Call. Inst. IV. etc. Aub. lib. I. de Sacr. Euch. c. 30. etc.
Aubertin has said it, every one says it, and M. du Bourdieu says it also in
his Treatise so often cited. Repl. chapter VI. p. 201.
But without taking any advantage from their acknowledgements, we on the
contrary with all antiquity maintain that a passage where the Flesh and Blood
as well as eating and drinking are so often and so clearly distinguished,
cannot be understood merely of a communion where eating and drinking is the
same thing, such as is a spiritual Communion, and by faith. It belongs
therefore to them, and not to us, to defend themselves from the authority of
this passage, where the business being to explicate the virtue and the fruict
of the Eucharist, it appears that the Son of God places them not in eating and
drinking, nor in the manner of receiving his Body and his Blood, but in the
foundation and in the substance of both the one and the other. Whereupon the
ancient Fathers, for example Saint Cyprian, he who most certainly gave nothing
but the Blood alone to little infants, as we have seen so precisely in his
Treatise De lapsis, Test. ad Quir. III. 25.20.
dos not omit to say in the same Treatise, that the parents who led their
children to the sacrifises of Idols deprived them of the Body and Blood of our
Lord: and teaches also in another place that they actually fulfill and
accomplish in those who have life, and by consequence in infants, by giving
them nothing but the Blood, all that which is intended by these words: If you
eat not my Flesh and drink not my Blood, you shall not have life in you. Aug.
Ep. 23.
Saint Augustine says often the same thing, though he had seen and examined in
one of his Epistles, that passage of Saint Cyprian where he speaks of the
Communion of infants by Blood alone, without finding any thing extraordinary in
this manner of communion; and that it is not to be doubted but the African
Church, where Saint Augustine was Bishop, had retained the Tradition which Saint
Cyprian so great a Martyr Bishop of Carthage, and Primate of Africa had left
behind him. The foundation of this is that the Body and Blood inseperably
accompany each other, for although the species which contain particularly the
one or the other in virtue of the institution are taken seperately, their
substance can be no more separated then their virtue and their grace: in so
much that infants in drinking only the Blood, do not only receive the
essential fruit of the Eucharist, but also the whole substance of this
Sacrament, and in a word an actual and perfect Communion.

All these things show sufficiently the reason we have to believe that
Communion under one or both species contains, together with the substance of
this Sacrament the whole effect essential to it. The practice of all ages
which have explained it in this manner, has its reason grounded both in the
foundation of the mystery, and in the words themselves of JESUS CHRIST; and
never was any custom established upon more sollid foundations, nor upon a more
constant practice.

X. Some objections solved by the precedent Doctrine.
I Do not wonder that our Reformers, who acknowledge nothing but bare signs in
the bread and wine of their Supper, endeavor by all means to have them both:
but I am astonished that they will not understand, that in placing, as we do,
JESUS CHRIST entirely under each of these sacred Symboles, we can content our
selves with one of the two.

M. Exam. Tr. VI. Sect. 6. p. 480. 481.
Jurieux objects against us, that the real presence being supposed, the Body
and the Blood would in reality be received under the Bread alone, but that yet
this would not suffice, because, it is true, this would be to receive the Blood,
but not the Sacrament of the Blood: this would be to receive JESUS CHRIST
wholly, entirely, really, but not sacramentally as they call it. Is it possible
that a man should believe it is not enough for a Christian to receive entire
JESUS CHRIST? Is it not a Sacrament where JESUS CHRIST is pleased to be in
person thereby to bring with himself all his graces, to place the virtue of
this Sacrament in the signs with which he is veiled rather then in his proper
person which he gives us wholly and entirely; Is not this (I say) contrary to
what he himself has said with his own mouth, John. 6.57.58.
he who eats of this Bread shall have eternal life, (and), he who eats me
shall live for me, and by me, as I my self live for my Father and by my Father?

But if M. Jurieux maintain in despite of these words, that it dos not suffice
to have JESUS CHRIST if we have not in the Sacrament of his Body and his Blood
the perfect image of his death; as he does nothing in that but repete an
objection alread cleared, so I send him to the answers I have given to this
argument, and to the undeniable examples I have set down, to show that by the
avouched confession of his Churches, when the substance of the Sacrament is
received, the ultimate perfection of its signification is no more necessary.
But if this principle be true even in those very Sacraments were JESUS CHRIST
is not really and substantially contained as in that of Baptism: how much the
rather is it certain in the Eucharist, where JESUS CHRIST is present in his
person, and what is it he can desire more, who possesses him entirely?

But in fine, will some say, there must not be such arguing upon express
words. Seeing it is your sentiment that the VI. chapter of Saint John ought to
be understood of the Eucharist, you cannot dispense with your selves in the
practice of it as to the letter, and to give the Blood to drink as well as the
Body to eat, seeing JESUS CHRIST has equally prononced both of the one and of
the other, If you eat not my Body and drink not my Blood, you shall have no
life in you.

Let us once stop the mouths of these obstinate and contentious spirits, who
will not understand these words of JESUS CHRIST by their whole connection. I
demand of them whence it comes they do not by these words believe Communion
absolutely necessary for the salvation of all men, yea even of little infants
newly baptized. If nothing must be explicated let us give to them the Communion
as well as to others, and if it must be explicated, let us explicate all by the
same rule. I say by the same rule, because the same principle and the same
authorite from which we learn that Communion in general is not necessary to
the salvation of those who have received Baptism, teach us that the particular
Communion of the Blood is not necessary to those who have been already
partakers of the Body.

The principle which shows us that the Communion is not necessary to the
salvation of little infants baptized, is that they have already received the
remission of sins, and a new life in Baptism, because they have been thereby
regenerated and sanctified: in so much that if they should perish for want of
being communicated they would perish in the state of innocence and grace. The
same principle shows also, that he who has received the Bread of life, has no
need of receiving the sacred Blood, seeing, as we have frequently
demonstrated, he has received together with the Bread of life the whole
substance of the Sacrament, and together with that fubstance the whole
essential virtue of the Eucharist.

The substance of the Eucharist is JESUS CHRIST himself: The virtue of the
Eucharist is to nourish the soul, to conserve therein that new life it has
received in Baptism, to confirm the union with JESUS CHRIST, and to replenish
even our bodies with sanctity and life: I ask whether in the very moment the
Body of our Lord is received, all these effect be not likewise received, and
whether the Blood can add thereunto any thing essential.

Behold what regards the principle: let us come now to what regards the
authority.

The authority which persuades us that Communion is not so necessary to the
salvation of little infants as Baptism, is the authority of the Church. It is
in effect this authority which carries with it in the Tradition of all ages,
the true meaning of the Scripture; and as this authority has taught us that he
who is baptized wants not any thing necessary to salvation, so dos it also
teach us that he who receives one sole species, wants none of those effects
which the Eucharist ought to produce in us: From hence in the very primitive
times they communicated either under one or under both species, without
believing they hazarded any thing of that grace which they ought to receive in
the Sacrament.

Wherefore, though it be writ, If you do not eat my Body and drink my Blood,
John. 6.54.
you shall have no life in you; it is also writ after the same manner, John.
3.8.
If a man be not regenerated of water and the Holy Ghost, he shall not enter
into the Kingdom of God: The Church has not understoud an equal necessity in
these two Sentences: on the contrary she always understood that Baptism which
gives life is more necessary then the Eucharist which conserves it. But as
nourishment follows birth, if the Church had not known her self taught by
God, she durst not any longtime refuse to Christians regenerated by Baptism
that nourishment which JESUS CHRIST has prepared for them in the Eucharist. For
neither JESUS CHRIST nor the Apostles have ordained any thing left by writing
concerning it. The Church then has learnt by another way, but always equally
certain, what she can give or take away without doing any injury to her
children, and they have nothing to do but to rely upon her faith.

Let not our adversaryes think they can avoid the force of this argument,
under pretense that they do not understand these two passages of the Gospel as
we do. I know very well they do neither understand of Baptism with water this
passage where it is said, If you be not regenerated or borne again of water and
the Holy Spirit, nor of the eating and drinking of the Eucharist this other
where it is writ, If you eat not and drink not: so that they find themselves
no more obliged by these passages to give the Eucharist then Baptism to little
infants. But without pressing too close upon these passages, let us make them
only this demand. This precept, Eat you this, and drink you all of it, which
you think is so universal, dos it comprehend little children that are
baptized? If it comprehend all Christians, what words of Scripture exclude
little children? Are they not Christians? Woust we give the victory to the
Anabaptists who say they are not, and condemn all antiquity which has
acknowledged them as such? But why do you except them from so general a
precept without any authority of Scripture? In a word, upon what foundation has
your Discipline made this precise law, Discip. chapter 12. art. 2.
Children under twelve years old, shall not be admitted to the Supper: but for
those above that age it shall be left to the discretion of the Ministers, 1.
Cor. 11.28.
etc. Your children are they not Christians before that age? Do you reject them
till that age, because Saint Paul has said: Let a man prove himself, and so
let him eat? But we have already seen that it is no less precisely written,
Math. 21. Mark. 16. Act. 2.38.
Teach and baptize; he that shall believe, and be baptized; do penance and
receive Baptism: And if your Catechism interpret that it ought to be only in
regard of such as are capable, Dim. 50.
why shall we not say as much of the proof recommended by the Apostle? Be it
as it will, the Apostle dos not decide which is the age proper for this
probation. One is at the age of reason before he is twelve years old, one may
before this age both sin and practice virtue: why do you dispense with your
children in a divine precept whereof they are capable? If you say that
JESUS CHRIST has remitted that to the Church, show me that permission in
Scripture; or believe with us that all that which is necessary to the
understanding and practice the Gospel is not written, and that we must rely
upon the authority of the Church.

XI. A reflection upon the manner how the Pretended Reformers make use of
Scripture.
SAINT Basile advertises us that those who despise unwritten Traditions do at
the same time despise the Scriptures themselves which they boast to follow in
all things. Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27.
This misfortune has arrived to the Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed
Religion: They speak to us of nothing but of Scripture and boast they have
established all the practices of their Church upon this rule. Notwithstanding
they easily dispense with many important practices which we read in express
terms in Scripture.

They have taken away the Extreame-Unction so expressly ordained in the
Epistle of Saint James, James 5.1^.15.
tho this Apostle has annexed to it so clear a promis of the remission of sins.

They neglect the imposition of hands practiced by the Apostles toward all the
faithful in giving the Holy Ghost, and as if this divine Spirit ought not to
descend otherwise then visibly, they despise the ceremony by which he was
given because he is now no more given after this visible manner.

They have no greater esteem for the imposition of hands, Discip. chapter 1. art.
s. and Observe.
by which the Ministers were ordained. For although they do ordinarily practice
it, they declare in their Discipline they do not believe it essential, and
that one might dispense with a practice so clearly set down in Scripture.
Poit. 1560. Par. 1565.
Two national Synods have decided there was no necessity of making use of it;
and nevertheless one of these Synods adds, they ought to make it their
business to conform to one another in this ceremony, because it is expedient
for edification, conformable to the custom of the Apostles, and to the
practice of the ancient Church. So that the custom of the Apostles manifestly
written and in so many places in the words of God, is no more a law to them
then the practice of the ancient Church: to believe ones self obliged to this
custom is a superstition reprehended in their discipline, Chapter 1. art. 8.
such false ideas do they frame to themselves of Religion and christian liberty.

But why do we speak here of particular articles? The whole state of their
Church is visibly contrary to the word of God.

I do here with them term the state of the Church the society of Pastors and
people which we see there established: Conf. de Foy art. 31.
this is that which is called the state of the Church in their confession of
Faith, and they there declare that this state is founded upon the extraordinary
vocation of their first Reformers. In virtue of this article of their
Confession of Faith, one of their national Synods has decided, that when the
question shall be concerning the vocation of their Pastors who have reformed
the Church, or concerning the establishment of the authority they had to
reform and to teach, it must be referred, according to the XXXI. article of
the Confession of Faith, to an extraordinary vocation by which God interiourly
pushed them on to their ministry: yet in the mean time they neither prove by
any miracle that God did push them interiourly to their ministry, neither do
they prove, (which is yet more essential) by any text of Scripture that such a
vocation should ever have place in the Church: from whence it follows that
their Pastors have no authority to preach, according to these words of Saint
Paul, Romans 10.15.
How shall they preach unless they be sent, and that the whole state of their
Church is without foundation.

They flatter themselves with this vain thought, that JESUS CHRIST has left a
power to the Church to give her self a form, and to establish Pastors when
the succession is interrupted; this is what M. Jurieux and M. Claude endeavor
to prove without finding any thing that ressembles it in Scripture, seeing on
the Contrary JESUS CHRIST has said, As my Father sent me, John. 20.25.
so send I you, and Saint Paul an Apostle by JESUS CHRIST did establish Titus
so as that he might afterward establish others, Gal. 1.1. etc.
Tit. 1.5.
in such sort that the mission came wholly from JESUS CHRIST sent from God.
Behold what we find in Scripture; and what they would say at present of the
authority of the people is but a mere illusion.

The same error induces the Ministers to say the Church has the liberty to
fraime Ecclesiastical government as she thinks fit; to take away or retain
Episcopacy; to make Ancients and Deacons for a time, Chapter 3. des Anciens and
Diacres. art. 6.7. and Observe.
that is to say, send them back at pleasure to a common secular life after
having consecrated them to God; to give them power to decide what concerns
doctrine together with the Pastors in equality of suffrages, that is to say,
to admit them without being Pastors (for they are not so upon any account in
the new reform) to a function the most essential to Postorall authority: all
which we find in their discipline and in their Synods, without so much as one
sole text of Scripture, to second them either in these or in the power it self
which they vainly attribute to themselves of disposing all things according to
their own fancy.

In these matters and in many others which I could remarke, they have not only
no holy Scripture for them, as they are obliged: but moreover they dispense
with themselves to follow it, without having neither any reason or Tradition to
support them. On the contrary Tradition has always received both
Extreame-Unction and the imposition of hands, (as well that which is given to
all the faithful, as that which is made use of for the consecration of the
Ministers of the Church, and the successive mission of her Pastors) and
likewise those other things which our Reformers have despised. In this their
license is excessive; but it ought at least to render them more equitable
toward us, whilst in the administration of the Sacraments the we receive for
a legitimate interpreter of Scripture constant Tradition and universal
practice of the Church.

XII. Occurring difficultyes: vain subtilityes of the Calvinists, and of M.
Jurieux: the judgment of antiquity concerning concomitancy: reverence exhibited
to JESUS CHRIST in the Eucharist: the doctrine of this Treatise confirmed.
We should here have finish this discourse, if charity which urges us to
procure the salvation of these Gentlemen of the Pretended Reformed Religion,
did not oblige us to remove some scruples, which the perusal of these
practices, I have related, may perchance have raised in their minds.

It is incessantly inculcated by the Ministers, that this concomitancy, upon
which we establish the validity of Communion under one species, is a mystery
unknown to the ancient Church, where none ever mentioned as a matter of faith
that together with the Body of our Lord, his Blood, his Soul and his Divinity
were necessarily received. They add that this doctrine of concomitancy being,
according to us, a necessary sequel of the real presence, it may be believed
that this real presence was unhnown where they know not this concomitancy.

The Ministers retort upon us those precautions we allege in our own behalf.
We do not find, say they, in the ancient Church any of these precautions now
established in these later ages for keeping the Eucharist, for exciting the
people to adore it, for hindering least it should be let fall upon that ground.
This fear (add they) was no impediment for so many ages to the giving the
Communion in botk kinds to all the people; and these new precautions serve for
nothing but to let us see they have a different opinion of the Eucharist from
that of the primitive times.

For a conclusion they tell us, that we have given our selves an useless
trouble in proving with so much pains it is free to communicate under one or
boath species, seeing all that can arise from this proof is that at last we
must leave the choice to the people, and not restrain a liberty which
JESUS CHRIST himself has given them.

But to begin with this objection which seems the most plausible: who on the
other side dos not see more clear then the day that it is in the power of the
Church to make choice of one part in things which are free, and that when she
has chosen that, it ought not to be permitted to contemn her decrees? Ep. ad
Jan. lib. de Bapt. etc.
Saint Augustine has very often affirmed, it is an insupportable folly not to
follow what has been regulated by a general Council or by the universal
custom of the Church. But if our Reformers be not disposed to believe Saint
Augustine in this; will they themselves allow that any one of theirs who, under
pretense that Baptism was so long given by immersion, should doubt with the
Anabaptists of the validity of his Baptism, and should be so obstinate as
either to make himself be rebaptized, or at the least to make his children be
baptized according to the ancient practice? But if he should require the
Communion should be given his son but yet an infant under pretense, that it was
given to little children during a thousand years, would they esteem
themselves obliged to condescende to his desire? On the contrary would they not
treat such an one and all like him, as unquiet and turbulent spirits who
trouble the peace of the Church? Would they not tell them with the Apostre: If
any one amongst you be contentious, 1. Cor. 11.16.
we and the Church of God have not this custom; and, if they have never so
little ingenuity, would they not find in this sole passage enough to make them
submit to the authority of the customs of the Church? Nay further, it is
certain that the ancient Church, although she baptized little infants which
were presented to her, yet did not always with the outmost rigor oblige their
parents to present them at that age, upon condition they baptized them when in
danger; and the Ecclesiastical history lets us see many Catecumens of a more
advanced age without the Church having forced them to be sooner baptized. The
Pretended Reformers who believe not the necessity of Baptism, and cannot
produce any divine precept which obliges it to be given to infants, are much
more free in this matter. Discip. chapter XI. de Bapt. art. XVI. and Observat.
This freedom has it hindered the severe regulations of their Discipline, which
obliges parents under the pain of the most rigourouse censures to present
their little children to be baptized? Let them grant with us that the Church
can make laws in indifferent matters; and if they acknowledge from so many
examples that Communion under one or both species is of this kind, let them
cease to cavil with us, and to give themselves an useless trouble about this
matter.

But it may be they would say, that in these practices I have related, those
who communicated sometimes under one species, communicated also sometimes under
the other; which suffices in the whole to accomplish the precept of our Lord:
as if our Lord would at the same time inspire us with a firm faith that we
loose nothing by takind one species only, and yet oblige us under pain of
damnation to receive them both; a cavil so manifest that it dos not merit to
be refuted.

We must therefore at length examine once again what is essential to the
Eucharist, and prescribe our selves a rule to understand it aright. This is
what these Gentlemen will never do, if they come not back to our principles and
to the authority of Tradition. M. Exam. T. VI. sect. s. p. 465.
Jurieux goes too far when he proposes for a rule according to the principles
of his Religion, to do universally all that JESUS CHRIST did, in such sort
that we should regard all circumstances he observed, at being of absolute
necessity. These are his own words. He alleges to this purpose the ancient
Passover of the Jews, where after having cut the throat of a lamb in the
morning, Ibid. Sect. 6.474.475.
another was to have his throat cut in the evening, to be roasted, to be eaten
with bitter herbs, to be consumed the same night, and nothing of it to be
reserved till the following day. He represents the necessity of all these
ceremonies, and not only the substance but all the circumstances. This word of
JESUS CHRIST, Do this, makes him conclude the same of the Eucharist. So that
we should be restrained, according to his principles, to all that JESUS CHRIST
did, and not only to bread and wine, but moreover to the hour, and to the whole
manner of receiving it; Sup. 2. p. art. VI. p. 296.
and the rather because (as we have seen) every one had its reason, and
mystery, as well as that which Moses ordained concerning the ancient
Passover. Nevertheless how many things have we remarked which neither these
Ministers nor we observe? Ibid.
But behold one which I omitted, and which may in this place give great light.

Amongst other things which our Lord observed in the last Supper, one of those
which the Calvinists believe as most necessary, is the breaking of the bread.
The Lutherans are of a contrary opinion, and make use of round breads which
they break not. This is a matter of great contest betwixt these Gentlemen. The
Calvinists lay much stresse upon this that the Evangelists and Saint Paul do of
one common accord write that the same night JESUS CHRIST was delivered to the
Jews, 1. Cor. 11.24.
he took bread, blessed it, brook it, and gave it. They insiste much upon
this breaking of the bread, which according to them represents that the Boby of
our Lord was broken for us upon the Cross, and remarke with great care that
Saint Paul, after having said that JESUS broke bread, 1. Cor. 11.24.
makes him say according to the Greek text, This is my Body broken for you; to
show, as they pretend, the reference this Bread broken has to the Body
immolated. So that this breaking appears to them necessary to the mystery; and
this is it which makes those of Heidelberg say in their Catechism much
esteemed by those of their party, Catech. Heid. qu. 75.
that as truly as they see the bread of the Supper broken to be given to them,
so truly has JESUS CHRIST been offered and broken for us.

There was a proposal made for an accord or union with the Lutherans, Colloq.
Cassel an. 1661.
and a conference was held for this about twenty years since, that is in the
year 1661. The Calvinists of Marpourg hereupon found quickly a distinction,
and in the declaration which they gave to the Lutherans of Rintell, they said,
that the breaking appertained not to the essense but only to the integrity of
the Sacrament, as being necessary because of the example and command of
JESUS CHRIST: so that the Lutherans ceased not to have, without this breaking
of the Bread, the substance of the Supper, and thus they might mutually
tolerate one another. The Calvinists have not been, that I know of,
reprehended by any of theirs, and the union which was made had on their side
its entire effect: in so much that they cannot hereafter insist upon the words
of the institution seeing one may by their own acknowledgement hay the
substance of the Supper without entirely subjecting himself to the
institution, example and express command of our Lord. What would they say if
we should make use of such an answer? But as all is permitted to the Lutherans
so all is insupportable amongst Catholics.

The other objections carry no greater weight and are as easily solved.

The concomitancy upon which the Roman Church grounds Communion under one
species is not (say you) found in antiquity. First what I have drawn from the
ancient Church to establish this Communion, is matter of fact; and if Communion
under one species suppose concomitancy together with the reality, it follows
from thence that both the one and the other were believed in antiquity where
Communion under one kind was so frequent. Secondly, Gentlemen, open your own
books, open Aubertin the most learnest defendor of your doctrine: Aub. lib.
III. p. 431. 485. 505. 539. 570. etc.
you will find there in almost every page passages taken from Saint Ambrose,
Amb. lib. I. in Luc. Cyr. Hieros. Cat. 5. mist. Greg. Nyss. orat. Cathec. Cyr.
Alex. lib IV. in Joan. c. 3. 4. Chrysostom. hom. 51.83. in Mat. lib. 3. de Sacerd.
4. etc.
from Saint Chrysostom, from the two Cyrilles and from many others, where you
may read that in receiving the sacred Body of our Lord they received his person
it self, seeing they received (say they) the King in their hands: they received
JESUS CHRIST and the Word of God; they received his Flesh as living; not as the
flesh of a mere man, but as the Flesh of a God. Is not this to receive the
Divinity together with the Humanity of the Son of God, and in a word his
entire person? After this what would you call concomitancy.

As for those precautions used least the Eucharist should be let fall upon the
ground, there needs only a little fincerity to acknowledge they are as ancient
as the Church her self. Aubertin will show you them in Origines: Orig. in
Exodus hom. 13.
Cyr. Hier. Cat 5. mist. Aug. 50. homil. 26. Aub. lib. II. p. 431. 432. etc.
in S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, and in Saint Augustine not to mention others. You
will see in these holy Doctors (expressions strange to the ear of Reformere
viz) that to let full the least particles of the Eucharist, is as if one should
let fall gold and precious stones, is as if one should prejudice even his own
limbs; is as if one should let slip the word of God which is annonced to us,
and wilfully loose this seed of life, or rather the eternal truth it brings
us.

There needs no more to confound M. Jurieux. Exam. T. VI. sect. 5. p. 469.
At that time, says he, that is to say in the eleaventh age when, according to
him, Transsubstantiation was established, they begun to think of the
consequences of Transsubstantiation. When men were persuaded that the Body of
our Lord was contained whole and entire under each little dropp of wine they
were seized with a fear least it should be spilt. If then this fear of
effusion seized also our Forefathers from the primitive ages of the Church,
then did they already believe Transsubstantiation and all its consequences. M.
Jurieux goes on: They trembled to think the adorable Body of our Lord should
lie upon the ground amongst dust and dirt, without a possibility of taking it
up. If the Fathers have trembled to think of it as well as they, then had they
according to him the same belief. He is never weary of shewin us this fear of
effusion as a necessary consequence of the belief of the real presence. Ibid.
Sect. 7.
This reason (says he) that is to say that which is drawn from the fear of
effusion, may be proper for them, that is to say for the Catholics: but it is
of no account to us who do not acknowledge that the Flesh and Blood of our
Savior are really contained under Bread and Wine. You see, Gentlemen; your
Ministers would fear, as well as we, this spilling or effusion, if they
believed the same real presence: the Fathers then once more believed it seeing
they had, as it is manifest, the same fear and apprehension.

It is in vain that M. Jurieux scoffs at this fear. Ibid. 469.
In an age (says he) when men were not as they are at present ashamed to carry
upon their faces the character or mark of their sex, they dipped a great
beard into the sacred Cupp, and carried back with them a multitute of Bodies of
JESUS CHRIST which hang at each hair. This gave them horror, and I find they
had reason. This fine fancy pleased him. P. 485.
I am in pain (says he in another place) to conceive how the Faithful of the
ancient Church dit not tremble to see so many Bodies of JESUS CHRIST hang at
all the hares of a great beard after receiving the sacred Cupp. How came it
they had not an horror to see this beard wiped with a handkerchief, and the
Body of our Lord put into the pocket of some seaman or soldier? As if a seaman
or soldier were less considerable in the eyes of God then other men. If this
unseasonable buffoon had remarked in the ancient Fathers with what decency and
respect they approached to the Eucharist; if he would have regarded in Saint
Cyrill after what manner the faithful at this time tasted the sacred Cupp,
Cyr. Hier. Gat. 5. mist.
and how they were so far from suffering one drop of it to be lost that with
respect they touched that moistness which remained upon their lips to apply
it to their eyes, and the other organs of the senses which they believed to be
sanctified thereby: he would have found it a thing more worthy himself to
have heartily set forth this act of piety, than to make his party laugh by the
ridiculous description we have now heard. But these seoffers may do their
worst, their railleries can do no more injury to the Eucharist, then those of
others did to the Trinity, and to the Incarnation of the Son of God; and the
majesty of these mysteryes cannot be debased by such discourses.

M. Jurieux reprefents us as men who fear least there should arrive some
offensive accident to the Body and Blood of our Lord. I do not perceive (says
he) that he is better placed upon a white cloth then in the dust; and seeing
we can behold him without horror in the mouth and stomach, we ought not to
be astonished to see him upon the pavement. In effect to speak humanly and
according to the flesh, the pavement is perhaps a place as much or more proper
then our stomachs; and to speak according to faith, the glorious state of
JESUS CHRIST at present dos equally elevate him above all: but respect and
decency will have it, that as far as lies in us, we should place him, where
himself would be. It is man that he seeks, and he is so far from having on
abhorrance from our flesh, seeing he created it, seeing he redeemed it, seeing he
vallues it, that he willingly approches to sanctify it. What ever has a
relation to this use, honors him, because it has a dependence upon that
glorious quality of Savior of man kind. We do, as much as lies in us,
endeavor to hinder whatever may derogate from the veneration due to the Body
and Blood of our Master; and without fearing any accident should happen
prejudicial to JESUS CHRIST, we avoid whatever might show in us the least
want of respect. But if our precautions cannot prevent all, we know that
JESUS CHRIST, who is sufficiently guarded by his own Majesty, is contented with
our zeal, and cannot be debased by any place. A man may railly if he will at
this doctrine: but we are so far from blushing at it, that we blush for those
who do not remember that those railleries they make use of against our
precautions reflect upon the Holy Fathers no less cautious then we. If it was
fitting to augment them these later ages, it is not that the Eucharist has
been more honored then in the first; but raither that piety being relaxed it
was necessary it should be excited by more efficacious means: in such sort
that these new and needful precautions; in denoting our respects, make it
appear there has been some negligence in our conduct.

For my self, I easily believe that amidst the order, the silence, the gravity
of ancient Ecclesiastical assemblyes, it seldom or never arrived, that the
Blood of our Lord was spilt: it was only in the tumult and confusion of these
last ages, that these scandals frequently arriving caused the people to desire
to receive that species only which they saw less exposed to the like
inconveniences; so much the rather because in receiving it alone, they knew
they lost nothing, seeing they possessed him whole and entire who was the sole
object of their love.

Nevertheless I will not deny but that after Berengarius had rejected, (in
despite of the Church of his time and the Tradition of all the Fathers) the
real presence of JESUS CHRIST in this Sacrament, the belief of this mystery
was (as I may say) enlivened or animated, and that the piety of the faithful,
offended by this heresy, sought how to signalize it self by new testimonies. I
acknowledge in this the spirit of the Church, which did not adore JESUS CHRIST
nor the Holy Ghost with such illustrious testimonies til after heretics had
denied their divinity. The mystery of the Eucharist ought to be in equal
proportion with the rest, and Berengarius his heresy must not serve the Church
less then that of Arius and Macedonius.

As to what concerns adoration, Cyr. Hier. Cat. mist. 5. Amb. lib. III. de
Spir. S. c. 12. Aug. Tr. in Ps. 98. Theodor. Dial. II. Chrysostom. lib. VI. de
Sacerd. Aug lib. II. p. 432. 803. 822. Hist. Euch. 3. p. chapter 4. p. 341. and seq.
what necessity is there that I should speak of it after so many passages of
the Fathers, cited even by Aubertin, and since him by M. de la Roque in his
history of the Eucharist? Do not we see in these passages the Eucharist
adored, or rather JESUS CHRIST adored in the Eucharist, and adored by the
Angels themselves whom Saint Chrysostom represents to us as bowing before
JESUS CHRIST in this mystery, and rendering him the same respects which the
Emperors Gards rendered to their Master.

It is true, Hist. Euch. III. p. chapter 4 p. 541. and seqq.
these Ministers answer, that this adoration of the Eucharist is not a
souveraine adoration rendered to the Divinity, but an inferior adoration
rendered to the sacred Symboles.

But can they show us the like adoration rendered to the water of Baptism?
Chrysostom. lib. VI. de Sacerd. etc. Theod. loc. cit. etc. sup.
What can be answered to those Passages where it appears the adoration rendered
here is like to that which is rendered to the King when present? that this
adoration is rendered to the mysteryes, as being in effect what they were
believed to be, as being the Flesh of JESUS CHRIST God and man? These Passages
of the Ancients are formal, and till such times as our Reformers have
comprehended them so far as to be convinced of it, they will at least see this
inferior worship, upon which they make so many cavills; they will see a
worship distinguished from the supreme worship; yet nevertheless a religious
one, seeing it makes a part of the divine service, and of the reception thus of
the Holy Sacraments. By justifying themselves so so concerning the Eucharist,
they take from themselves all ways or means of accusing us in relation to
Relics, Images, and the veneration of Saints. So true it is that their Church
and Religion ressembles a ruinous structure, which cannot, as I may say, be
covered on one side, without being exposed on the other, and can never exhibit
that perfect integrity, and proportion of parts which compose the beauty and
solidity of a building.


