The CASE between Doctor John Badger and the College of Physicians London:
Who in July, August, and September, in the year 1683, Presented himself to the
President and Censors to be examined: Doctor Thomas Coxe President. Doctor
Thomas Collins Senior Register. Censors*
Doctor Walter Charleton, Doctor Thomas Allen, Doctor Nathaniel Hodges, Doctor
Edward Hulst,


AND was by them examined Three several Times in Latin, according to the Form
of the Statutes in that Case provided; and was approved by them, and had leave
given by the President and Censors, after Examination to visit the Fellows, and
did accordingly visit all the Fellows, in order to be admitted Licentiate, and
at the same time was requested and desired by them, in the behalf of the whole
College; and withal complemented, how extremely I should oblidge and highly
honor that Society, if I would be pleased to suspend my Admission of
Licentiate (and which they confessed they could not deny) till such time as I had
quitted my Employment in Pharmacy, and completed my Degree (being then
Batchelour in Physic) of Doctor in the University; and that then, without any
farther trouble of visiting the Fellows, or other Examinations, and for the
very same Fees, by virtue of those Examinations standing registered in their
Books (if they escape the fate of being cut out, as some other things have
been) I might be admitted Candidate, the more honorable station in their
Society, and which I better deserved, and they did then propose to me Doctor
Lister's Case, as a President for the same thing: On these Considerations I
submitted to and gratified their Request.

Four years now elapsed, and by their advice, having regularly completed my
Degree of Doctor in Physic (July 6. 1687.) performing all Exercises required
by the Statutes of the University of Cambridge (and as 14, 15 of Hen. 8.
accomplishing all things for his Form, without any grace) as my Diploma to them
shown, and the Register in that University will sufficiently testify; I
applied my self to the then President of the College in the year 1687, for my
Admission (as formerly directed and promised, by the President and Censors, in
the behalf of the whole College in the year 1683.) from whom I had a courteous
reception, and acknowledgement that it was all the Reason and Justice in the
World that I should have my Admission, besides, says he, we cannot deny it
you; and then advised me to wait till next College day, and there give my
attendance; which I accordingly did, and was then deferred to another
opportunity, by reason the College was then engaged in private business (viz.
Making New Statutes of Exclusion) and no public business would at that time be
entered on; I attended again and again, and was still deferred: During these
delays the private business is effected, and the New Statutes of Exclusion are
made, and promulgated in the Theater, September 28. 1687.

After these New Statutes were made, I was advised to wait on the President and
Censors on a private College day, to demand my Admission, and did accordingly;
and had for Answer from them their New Statutes, which Mr. Register would needs
read: To which I answered, These Statutes cannot relate to my Case, being made
above four years since the desires, requests, and directions of this Board, in
behalf of the whole College, were made to me to suspend my Admission till I
had completed my Degree of Doctor; besides, I have lately attended several
times on the College for my Admission in July, August, September 1687. since I
was Doctor in Physic, and before these Statutes were made or promulgated.

However, so it was, that unless I would abjure the Company of Apothecaries (as
well as I had, by their advice and directions, quitted my employment in
Pharmacy in the year 1684.) and bring it attested under the hand, or by the
person of a Public Notary, that I had relinquished and abjured that Society, I
should not be admitted.

And now, I will give you some Statutes of the College, as also an
Advertisement published in the Gazette; with what they have annexed to his most
Sacred Majesty's Letters, and published by the consent of the whole College,
to show to the World their fair dealing with all men, and care for the Public
Good.

STATUTES of the College of PHYSICIANS.
Chap. 11.
Of the Candidates. We will and ordain, That each Candidate and Licentiate,
before they be admitted, visit all the Fellows of the College twice, to ask
leave, to wit, the first time before any Examination, the second, when the
Examinations are ended.

Chap. 15.
Of Licentiates. Seeing by no means (unless by Examination) it can be manifest
to us, how every one is qualified, to be admitted to the Practice of Physic
according to the Laws of the Kingdom; We appoint and ordain, That none be
admitted to the Practice of Physic within the City, Suburbs, and seven miles
round about, unless he has been first examined thrice (on so many days
appointed for that purpose) by the President and Censors, and by them approved
and permitted to the Practice of Physic.

For we think it just, That the Censors and Fellows should admit to the
Practice of Physic all examined persons, as many as they shall find qualified,
as well for Learning as Manners, lest our College should be accused of a
Monopoly; yet so that they obey the Statutes of the College.

Gazette N. 2325. Thursday 1 March 1687.
WHere as there are in and about this City several Persons practicing Physic,
who have not yet been examined and licensed by the President and Censors of the
College of Physicians, these are to require all such persons forthwith to
repair to the said President and Censors, for their Examination and License to
practice, that they may hereby prevent their being prosecuted according to the
Laws and his Majesty's special Command.

A short Account of the Institution and Nature of the College of Physicians
London.
Published by the College 1688.
THe College of Physicians in London, being constituted of Men of generous and
liberal Education, and instituted for public benefit, out of which no person
of sufficient Capacity and Learning can be excluded, consists of a President,
Fellows, Candidates, Honorary Fellows, and Licentiates.

Now, of all these several Ranks and Degrees of Practisers in Physic, none of
them is confined to any certain number, but the Fellows and Candidates; so that
the rest being wholly unlimited, no person can be excluded out of the College,
or debarred from Practice, but such as are so wholly illiterate and unskilful,
that they dare not adventure to submit themselves to the Examination and
Judgment of the President and Censors of the College, either as to the
goodness of their Medicines, or their own skill in all or any part of Physic,
though the President and Censors be men strictly sworn to do Justice to all
persons who shall present themselves or their Medicines to their Scrutiny and
Examination.

From hence it manifestly follows that the College of Physicians is very far
from being a Monopoly, since it cannot reject any of the King's Subjects who
are duly qualified for the Exercise of all, or any part of Physic.

From all these their Statutes and published Advertisements to the World, it
manisestly follows that Doctor John Badger is and has been legally and duly a
Member of the College of Physicians London for these Ten years last past,
although his Name be not printed in their New Catalogue of 1693. Or the
College guilty of publishing to the World most notorious falsehoods; and to use
their own words, is very far from being any other then a perfect Monopoly and
Confederacy, that excludes regularly Commenced Doctors in our own Universities,
and the King's Native Subjects, duly qualified for the Exercise of all and
every part of Physic.


