A BRIEF Discovery or Description Of the most Famous Island Of MADAGASCAR or
St LAURENCE in Asia near unto East India.

With Relation of the Healthfulnesse, Pleasure, Fertility and wealth of that
Country, comparable if not transcending all the Eastern parts of the world, a
very Earthly Paradise; a most sitting and desirable place, to settle an English
Colony and Plantation there, rather then in any other part of the known world.

Also the Condition of the Natives, their inhabiting, their affability, Habit,
Weapons, and manner of living, the plenty, and cheapsie^sse of Food, Flesh,
Fish; and Foul, Orenges and Lemonds, Sugar, Ambergris, Gold, Tortle-shels,
and Drugs, and many other Commodities sit for Trade and Commerce, to be had and
gotten there at cheaper Rates then in India or elsewhere.

Also trading from Port to Port all India and Asia over, and the great profit
gained thereby.

The chiefest place in the world to enrich men by Trade, to and from India,
Persia Moco, Achine, China, and other rich Eastern Kingdoms. I being the
fittest place for a Magazine or Storehouse of Trade between Europe and Asia,
far exceeding all other Plantations in America or elsewhere.

Also the excellent means and accommodation to fit the Planters there, with
all things needful and superfluous for back and belly (out of India near
adjacent, at one fourth part of the price, and cheaper then it will cost in
England; yea, Fat Bullocks, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Poultrey, Rice, (and Wheat and
Barley reasonable, etc.) exceeding cheap, for the value of twelve pence or one
shilling English, will purchase or buy of the Natives as much as 5, 6, 7 pounds
or more in England, in this famous Island at their first arrival, which no
other Country has afforded.

By R. B. and Francis Lloyd, Merchants.

The second Edition corrected and amended.

London, Printed for John Hardesty, at the Sign of the Black-spread Eagle in
Duck-lane. 1647.

TO His most Royal (and I trust in God (yet) Most Gracious Sovereign Lord
King CHARLES of England, etc. and to the Right Honorable the Peers, Lords and
Commons Assembled in the High and Honorable Court of Parliament.
MOst Gracious, Sacred and dread Sovereign, and most Honorable pious Pears
and Commons in Parliament Assembled: The despicable condition of my poor Estate
(ruined through envy, malice, and revenge abroad in India, and cruelly
oppressed by deep ingratitude, partiality and injustice at home in England;)
the weakness and infermity of my decrepit person (debillitated by along
continued sickness now almost six years complete) with my simple Ignorant and
weak understanding (yet true loyal hearty affection to my King and Countries
glory and renown) right Humbly, and in all Lowly and Reverend Submission to
Your Highness, and Honors Virtues and Authority, craves pardon and remission
for my boldness, in interrupting your most serious and most weighty affairs
of State, with the dull apprehension of my zeal and affection to Gods glory,
the Honor of my gracious Sovereign and his most Royal Posterity, and the
welfaire and accommodation of my indeared native Country, which has induced or
rather impulsed, and coacted me to come to counsel before I am called, and to
lend the opinion of an unintelligent and unfortunate Merchant, concerning the
aptnes, accommodation, and assured great benefit of this Kingdom of England by
settling a considerable Plantation in the most famous Island of the world
(Madagascar or Saint Lawrence) and that thereby the glory of Almighty, your
Majesty's Honor, and the Commonwealths happiness may redownd to all the
world, as well out of Asia as Affryca (or rather more and better) in hopeful
or assured expectation) as out of America and other parts of the world. May it
therefore please your Highness and Honors, to pardon my servent zeal and
affection to this worthy design; which if the Laws of England did forbid or
give causion to the projectors of new business to the Commonwealth, under pain
of loss of life if their projects proved hurtful to the same (as that (as I
take it) of the Lacedaemonians or some otherwell governed Commonwealth (and
such law perhaps not hurtful to this Kingdom) yet would I adventure without
any hope or expectation, to my self of reward or accommodation to) exhibit
this project (so apparently beneficial to the commonwealth in my own strong
confident opinion) if so be it should please, his Royal Majesty and the
Honorable High Court of Parliament, to undertake it as abusinesse of State and
of great consequence to this Kingdoms its welfare and Indemnity.

To insist upon a large Epistle were obnoxious to Your Majesty, and Honors
weighty and importent affairs, and my dull apprehention, with the
tymorousnesse of my deep offense in such bold presumption, forbids me to take
that unpleasing task upon me, I verily acknowledge it a transcendent, haughty
presumption in me to exhibit so rude and unpollisht a Pamphlet to Your
Highness and Honors perusal (yea to the meanest of the Honorable House of
Commons) which though it cannot expect gracious acceptance from any, yet if it
incur not unto me thereby Your Majesty's and Honors just indignation, for my
impulsed zeal to my King and Countries good out of the small experience and
weak iniuditious apprehention of my unfortunate travels, until such time as
more juditious and better intelligent persons by their more skillful prevalent
persuasive pens give better encouragement, for speedy and effectual means to
proceed in so weighty (yea most hopeful successful) a business, I shall
have some cause (yet) to rejoice in the depth of my misery and affliction; in
the mean time my daily earnest Prayers to God, shall be for his abundant
blessings, spiritual and temporal to his Sacred Majesty, and his most Royal
Posterity, the Right Honorable High Court of Parliament, and all His Majesty's
true Loyal Subjects; and that the Lord Jesus would please to break in pieces
the most hurtful Cords of Contention with the spirit of truth and concord, and
put away from all them that prosesse his name the offense of quarrels and
dissension among them, that we may be joined together in one mind, in truth
love and Christian Charity, to the praise honor and glory of God Almighty; and
such shall be ever the prayers,

Of Your Sacred Majesty's, and Your Honors most Loyal Subject and Servant.
Richard Boothby.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, this Book was intended to have been divulged in August,
anno 1644. but many lets have impeded the same, my own weakness of body: the
hinderance of a captious licencer, blameing the rudeness of the style and my
placeing Madagascar in Asia, which he would needs have to be in Africa, but
whether in Asia or Africa I yet rest unresolved, by the opinion of some
Seamen accounting it in Asia; some detrac(...)nesse it has had by long
detention of some chief member of Parliament, to whom I committed the perusal,
which their multitude of more weighty affairs would not admit time for it is
perusal; and lastly occasioned by the visit (in my long continued sickness)
of an East India Merchant, Mr. Francis Lloyd my loving friend, whom I had not
seen in seven years or more before, who beareing of my intention desired to
have a sight of the rude manuscript, which after some time he returned me and
offering to add some what thereunto touching the encouragement for a
plantation at Madagascar, and the assured great benefit by trade from thence to
all parts of the world, by making or settling there a Magazine or store house
for trade into all Christian and heathen Kingdoms, which his free offer I
thankefully accepted, knowing his intelligence in the Eastern parts of the
world, to be second to none of this Nation, he having been many times employed
Factor and Purser of the Admiral ship into India, and five times at
Madagascar, and often visited those many rich kingdoms, and got great
experience in the trades, traffic and commerce of them all from place to
place, which now he having performed, I have here into inserted, yet not
desirous to attribute vain gloriously to my self, nor to detract from his
deeper judgment (far beyond my own) who never was but once in India, and that
but one year and half, that time a close prisoner (not for any crime) but in
malice and revenge of a lewd President and counsel in India, I have caused his
advice and intelligence to be marked with some mark or sign, and his name in
the margen(...)t, thereby to be distinguished and known from what is of my
own weak capacity, and so to give him his due desert far surpassing mine, and
second in that kind to none in England. Therefore gentle reader I entreat thee
to accept both our endeavors and hearty well wishings, to Gods glory, his
Majesty's honor, and the welfare of our endeared native Country in good part,
which we refer to thy charitable censure.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. The occasion of printing this rude Treatise or pamphlet, Prince
Ruperts intent to plant at Madagascar, Master Walter Hamonds book in praise of
this Island will give good encouragement for a plantation, be that is Lord or
King of Madagascar may easily in good time be Emperor of all India, also the
cheapnesse of necessaries both for back and belly to be had out of India for
the present relief of the planters. p. 1 CHAP. II. The Countries situation
under the Tropic of Caprieorne, the healthfulnesse of the Country, Augustine
Bay a che^^e and excellent harbor for multitude of ships, the pleasantness
and fertility of the Country, a second land of Canaan or a Paradise of the
world, the Portugals rich trade to Mussambeg on the coast of Malindia. p. 4.
CHAP. III. Hogs in Malinda have stones in their mawes as precious as rich
Jewels, the affection of the inhabitants to our Nation above all others,
Portugal Friars stain to accompany the King of Madagascar at his death to
heaven, great store of wild Foul and Turkies, the envy of the East India
Company against a plantation may give the better encouragement thereunto: no
Gold Silver nor any rich commodity of so high esteem in Madagascar as red
Cornelian Beads. p. 7. GHAP. IIII. The comeliness of the Natives though naked,
yet personable and of pleasant countenance, their weapons not dangerous or of
great annoyance, their small use and unskilfullnesse in labor or manufacture,
great probability of sugar and spices at Madagascar, the praise of the Island,
comparable with the land of Canaan. p. 11. CHAP. V. The Idolatrous worship of
God, or the Devil, the Natives addicted to theft and robbery. A project of the
Bishops disposed to plant at Madagascar, Madagascar sauegard rashly attained
unto. p. 15. CHAP. VI. Great encouragement to the plantation, the cheapenesse
of clothing or apparel to be had out of India for the use of the planters,
the rich attire for persons of quality to be had there exceeding cheap, all
sorts of herbs roots fruits and fowls to be had in plentiful abundance in
Madagascar, trees yielding great store of pleasant liquor nothing inferior to
wine and sugar in England, the excellent virtue of India Mirabolins. p. 20.
CHAP. VII. The cheapenesse of all sorts of eattell and food at Madagascar, the
Turkies before mentioned in Mr. Lloyds intelligence are not so large and good
as ours, and I rather account the Sants or such like foul but being all over
speckled black and white our people give them the name of Turkies, the great
benefit to be made by dayries at Madagascar, with the means to accommodate the
making of butter and cheese in that hot Country, as also for poudering of Beef
and brewing of good Beer. p. 24. CHAP. VIII. The accommodation and means for
dayries, brewing of beer and powdering of meat for the use of ships at sea,
the means to make Saltpeter cheaper then in India or elsewhere, all sorts of
excellent materials for building to be had in Madagascar, poor artificers may
live by their labors in all sorts of manufacture, out strip all Nations of the
world for the price of their labor, trade and commerce to and from Madagascar
will exceed in benefit all other. p. 27. CHAP. IX. The Riches to be aecrewd by
Trade between England and India, may all be converted by a free Trade to the
Planters at Madagascar, the benefit of particular commodities, to and from
between India and Persia; the Piscash of a Chain of Gold given by Podomsee,
though of 500. pound Value not comparable to the benefit he received by freight
and custom in his Massy Treasure in Pearls, the Massy rich Trade of
Pearls, and Diomonds from Persia into India, etc. p. 30. CHAP. X. The mighty
loss to the Portugalls in Customs, by the loss of Ormus, which might have
been turned to the benefit of the English, who Conquered it and indiscreetly
deserted it to the benefit of the Persians. p. 34. CHAP. XI. A brave Sea fight
with the Portugals upon the coast of India, another brave Sea fight with one
English ship against many Portugals in the gulf of Persia, the Portugals
cruelty te our men taken prisoners in cool blood. p. 38. CHAP. XII. The
Portugals mediation for peace with the English Nation, the Persians valuation
of Ormus, at twenty Millions of treasure, now they are possessed thereof, which
the English might have enjoyed, if they had had wise Governors, Committees,
and Agents, of the India corporation; the exceeding folly of the East India
court, in sending treasure into Persia, to touch at Surrat, where the money
being inverted in commodities would have turned almost to double money profit,
the unconsionable custom of India Courts in not shipping out our own rich
native commodities, which would yield good profit, but transporting much Gold
and Silver, to their countries loss, and proof of their ill office to the
Commonwealth; the way to drive a rich trade into India, without transportation
of treasure. Multitude of English commodities beneficial for transportation
into India, to save exportation of treasure, if the India courts were good
members of the commonwealth; the beneficial trade in India, between Surrat
and Goa near adjacent: all commodities from Surrat to Bantam vendible, at
great beneficial prizes. p. 43. CHAP. XIII. The exceeding rich trade from
Surrat to China, and also a rich trade from China to India, though this
beneficial trade be neglected by the English sluggish injudicious Court
Committees; if a free trade were open, diligent industrous Merchants would
leave no place unassayed where there is great hopes or certain assurance of
large profit, the profitable trade from India to Moco in the Red Sea, the way
to enrich our usurers with more security of conscience by letting Moneys at
interest to Heathens rather then to Christians and at double the Rates, for
their greater encouragement. Industrious men in open trade will find out far
more several sorts of Commodities, then the India injudicious Courts (never
exercised in the practick of that commerce) do look into, and no doubt but as
beneficial. p. 48. CHAP. XIIII. A beneficial trade to be made at the Port of
Swollow road, where all Christian Ships and others resort at fitting times;
encouragement to young Merchants or decayed persons of a good and honest repute
at home in their own Country, a means to draw on Adventurers in purse and
person to Madagascar. p. 58. CHAP. XV. The valor of the English Nation against
the Salvages in Virginia and New England, also of the Spaniards against a civil
nation in America, or the west Indies, also of the Spaniards and Portugals
against the Brasilians, and against the Indians a mighty warlike nation, also
the design of other Nations, jeering us for not settling a plantation somewhere
in India for our succor and defense, ought to stir us up to such an
enterprise, the honor and blessing of a pious christian nation, to settle true
religion among Idolatrous heathen people, to Gods glory and honor; The
barbarous cruel oppression of the Dutch against the English at Amboyna in east
India, being to mighty and to strong for the English to resist. p. 62. CHAP.
XVI. Esquire Courteen his worthy enterprise to settle the beginning of a
Plantation at Madagascar, the partiallity injustice and ingratitude of the
India Courts against their true loyal Brothers Servants; and corrupt favor to
their Iugling, debauched, undeserving, mere hireling Servants. A commodity of
great value to be regarded and searched for out at Madagascar and of great
advantage to the obtainers thereof; Prince Rupert in a great forwardness to a
hopeful Plantation at Madagascar, the Earl of Arundels intention to supply
Prince Ruperts failing in the project for Madagascar. p. 66. CHAP. XVII. The
use of Ordnance, Guns and Printing long in use in China, before used in
Christendom, good admonition to give the glory to God, in this action and all
others. p. 70.
Excellent Encouragement for Settling an English Plantation at MADAGASCAR in
ASIA.
CHAP. I. The occasion of printing this rude treatise or pamphlet, Prince
Ruperts intent to plant at Madagascar, Master Walter Hamonds book in praise of
this Island will give good encouragement for a plantation, he that is Lord or
King of Madagascar may easily in good time be Emperor of all India, also the
cheapnesse of necessaries both for back and belly to be had out of India for
the present relief of the planters.
FOr as much as great talk and rumor has happened this last spring, 1644.
about diverse of his Majesty's subjects adventuring to Madagascar or Saint
Lawrence in Asia near unto East India, and there to plant themselves as in
other parts of America, and that some by report are already gone upon that
voyage, and for that my self have been heretofore desirous to deliver my
opinion thereof (in regard of my being and abode upon that Island, three
months or more together) as first about eleven or twelve years past by the
right Worshipful Doctor Henry Gouch master of Trinity College in Cambridge,
whom himself had in his passage into Persia (in company with the right
Honorable Sir Dodmore Cotton and Sir Robert Sherley Ambassadors from his
Majesty King Charles of England to the King of Persia) being in that Country,
whom I satisfied the best I could out of those brief notes which I had taken,
not expecting to have been required my opinion thereof (which otherwise I would
have been more exact and diligent in my observations) yet gave him some content
chiefly (I think) with a book I lent him to take a Copy of the writing of the
priests or religious men there, which Master Doctor Gouch told me was the
ancient writing of the Egyptians in Hierogliphycks or Characters of strange
shapes like beasts, fowls, worms, serpents, etc. or like unto utinsels or
tools of laboring men in several Vocations, which having perused and copied
out, he returned to me again with thanks. Secondly, about six or seven years
past, the Honorable Endimion Porter and that noble well affected Gentleman
Captain John Bond, to that Plantation desired me to give them some of my
observations in writing (it being at that time when as the right Honorable the
Earl of Arundell, and other honorable persons intended to persuade Prince
Rupert to undertake that business, which no doubt had he performed, would have
been more effectual to Gods glory, more advantage and more honorable and
beneficial unto himself and brethren then to countenance a civil war in this
Kingdom so much at all times respective to him and his family) which though
more rudely and more defective for want of my papers lost, I performed, was
acceptably of them also received (with the Book formerly mentioned, which they
presented to his Majesty as a present of some respect) and though the Book was
grossly charactared and bound up by the salvages, yet it cost me the price of
six or eight fat Oxen: I also gave Master Porter some of the salvages weapons
as darts, and a long knife about two foot long the blade and haft together,
much of an equal length, and also a curious India painted Bow and Arrows,
with a Quiver lined with crimson Velvet, for all which they offered to bring me
to his Majesty to kiss his hand, but I denied not thinking my present worthy
so great an honor, and therefore desired to be excused. Thirdly, because I
understand that M. Walter Hamond Surgeon, who was at the same time of my
last being at Madagascar with us in company, has lately written a book of the
worthiness of that Country and the benefit thereof to the encouragement of
adventurers, and dedicated the same to the noble Gentleman Captain John Bond
(which yet I have not seen) I have (for the reasons premised) adventured to
take in hand to deliver my opinion in writing to public view (though rudely)
and far inferior in such abilities to that honest able person master Hamond,
to the further encouragement of the worthy adventurers and planters that shall
think good to adventure their purses and persons in that right worthy and
famous action (which peradventure I may hit upon such encouragements by way of
Trade or act of Commerce (more proper to my vocation) as may give more
encouragement for the proceedings herein then in any other already settled in
the parts of America: for as our English proverb has it, That there is no
service like to the service of a King, nor no fishing comparable to the fishing
in the Sea. So I will add a third true proverb, that there is no trading or
commerce equivolent for profit to that of East India and the parts adjacent,
and the more beneficial, by the comodity of the fruitful rich Island of Saint
Laurence or Madagascar, its situation or placing near India, Persia, the red
Sea, Achin Jaua major, Bantam, Jombee, Maccassar, Mallabar, the five Kingdoms
as I take it of Decanij, Golicunda, Bengala, and China, etc. and multitudes of
rich Kingdoms in and near India, which being inhabited with Christians would
prove the Magazine for trade of all the Oriental parts of the World (as of
late Ormus in Persia was so accounted, and at present with us in Europe
Amsterdam or Holland is held in that estimation. And great possibility there is
(in my simple opinion) that what Prince soever of Christendom is once really
possessed and seated in strength in that brave fruitful and pleasant Island (by
computation three times as big as England) may with ease be Emperor or sole
monarch of East India, with all her multitude of rich and large Kingdoms,
which no doubt but the eyes of many Princes of Europe are fixed upon it, but
that great disturbance in most parts thereof (as at present unhappily in
England) do hinder and give impediments to their wished designs, which in
zeal to Gods glory, my Gracious Sovereign his honor, and my native Country
its welfare and prosperity: I from the bottom of my heart wish that some more
learned and persuasive pen then mine rude and ignorant, might prevail with his
gracious Majesty King Charles, the right Honorable high Court of Parliament,
and all true hearted able persons of Nobility, Gentry, etc. to take in hand
though in these obstructive times to adventure each man some small proportion
of means throughout this Kingdom, which though but small to every particular
person, yet no doubt would amount to a considerable sum of money, sufficient to
undergo that action as a business of state, which for the better accommodation
therein, that plantation may be served for a time withal necessaries both for
back and belly, and also superfluity out of India, for one fourth part of a
penny, or three parts of four cheaper then out of England to other plantations
in America, as far distant (if I be not deceived) from England as that
Country is from India or further. That I may give such advice and encouragement
as my weak capacity shall conceave, I will descend to some particulars.

CHAP. II. The Countries situation under the Tropic of Capricorn the
healthfulnesse of the Country, Augustines bay a chief and excellent harbor
for multitude of ships, the pleasantness and fertility of the Country, a
second land of Canaan or a Paradise of the world, the Portugals rich trade to
Mussambeg on the coast of Malindia.
ANd first to the situation of the place, I mean Augustine Bay, the chief
harbor in that Island, it is seated and placed near the Tropic of Capricorn,
in 23 degrees of South Latitude. The Country is (as all those parts so near
the Line are) hot, but yet in my opinion not so hot as Surrat in India, which
lies in 21 degrees north latt. near the tropic of Cancer, during my abode
there above three months, in June, July, August and September, 1630. I could
ever endure to wear an English suit, and that of cloth, which I could never so
well brook in India, and is of so healthful condition or constitution, that
in almost four months of our abode there, being about 460 persons in two
ships the Charles and the Jonas, we did not bury one man in all that time (nor
to my knowledge) was there any sick, and besides the Company we met with four
ships out of England at that place, which continued with us making merry,
refreshing and feasting about three weeks, in which ships could not be less
(by my computation) then 600 men at least, and also another ship that came with
us out of India, and abode with us a longer time, and departed from us to
return into India three or four days or some short time before the English
fleet came in, containing in her 150 men, yet not one of all these great
numbers dyed or were sick during their abode there to my best remembrance.
That haven that we all anchored in is called Augustines Bay, a very large and
safe harbor for Shipping (which skillful seamen can discribe better then my
self) and may contain (by report of some) 1000 or more or many hundred sail
of ships in good and sure hold for Anchoring, of great depth within a bow shoot
of shore or thereabouts. The Country about the Bay is pleasant to the view,
replenished with brave woods, rockie hills of white marble and low fertile
grounds: what is within the land I can say little having never been above a
mile from the sea side, but many of our men which have stragled further have
given their good report thereof, as also the fame and report of others that
have either read or heard of the riches of this Country, that the same
abounds with mines of Gold and Silver and other minerals: moreover that in
the Island is a large plain or champion country of Meadow or Pasture ground as
big as all England: which if it be so, which I am somewhat doubtful of for the
large extent, yet without question very large in many places, must by
reasonable consequence afford multitude and variety of Fowls and Beasts and
other creatures for food, clothing, necessary use and delight, and no doubt
but such low grounds affords also store of large and small Rivers, Tanks and
Ponds replenished with multitude of good Fish, water Fowls, etc. and it is
apparently manifest or very probable by the quantity of brave fat Oxen, Cowes,
Sheep and Goats brought down and fold unto us by the natives for refreshing
so many people, that the Country is very fertile, selling us brave fat Oxen for
about eight, nine or ten pence an Ox, worth by computation in England, six,
seven, eight, or ten pounds an Ox, and after that rate for Goats and Sheep
or a little dearer, they sold also good Capons for three half pence or two
pence a piece, and excellent good Orenges and Lemmons reasonable, and the
common men drank good store of Milk (though out of their Callibasses not very
cleanly) (the Bay or creek near the Bay) affords us store of excellent Fish
of many sorts as Pikes, Mullets, Breames and many others which I cannot call to
mind their names: and shellfish, as Crawfish, Shrimps, Prawnes and some
Lobsters and some Oysters, and sure the place affords abundance and variety
of shellfish of strange sorts, as appears by the abundant diverse shapes of
of their shells curious to behold, and the shells of esteem in England, by John
Tredescant and Master Slade dwelling about Lambeth, who treasured up such to
please curious people, and to adornish rocks and water-workes in gardens of
great persons, of which sort Master Slade had of me (gratis) some quantity. And
without all question, this Country far transcends and exceeds all other
Countries in Asia, Africa and America, planted by English, French, Dutch,
Portugal and Spaniards: and is likely to prove of far greater value and
esteem to that Christian Prince and Nation that shall plant and settle a sure
habitation therein, then the West Indies is to the King and Kingdom of Spain.
And it may well be compared to the land of Canaan that flows with milk and
honey, a little world of it self adjoined to no other land within the compass
of many leagues or miles, or the chiefest paradise this day upon Earth.

This gallant Island of Madagascar does afford these several rich commodities
as follows, Mr. Lloyds Intelligence.
Ambergris, Gold, (the old Earl of Denbigh brought from this Island of
Madagascar Gold land, which he presented to the Kings Majesty and the Council
board, and I was at the Council board, when this Gold sand was in question and
approved of) And there is also Tortle shells, which do sell at Surrat for
twelve shillings per pound: Copper, Alloes Cicatrina, excellent good Rice,
Honey and Wax, Dragons Blood, diverse rich Gums, Ebbany, Sandle wood, Cohooe
wood, which does sell at Surrat for four pence per pound; Tamerin, and diverse
rich Drugs: you may get by slaves of both sexes and timber either to Persia or
else to Moco in the red sea 50000 pounds per annum, and your slaves will put
you to little charges, for they do live upon rice and water. This Island of
Madagascar is about nine hundred miles in length. There is many Kings upon this
Island, the south part of it lies in 25 degrees and 35 min. and the northern
part short of the equinoctial the inhabitants goes handsome in their
accoutrements, and speak the Arabian Tongue, and they have Juncks which they
Trade to and fro to the four Islands which lies about thirty leagues off, viz,
Joanna, Malalo, Combro and the Majottes: and to the Coasts of Malindia. The
Island of Saint Laurence is a gallant place for to have a Magazine or
Randezvouze, for the Coast of Malindia lies off this Island forty or fifty
leagues. The Portugals has a great fortification at Mussambeg therein, and
upon these coasts the Portugals get most of their riches, and drives all their
Trade in India, otherwise it was impossible for them to hold out so long,
because of their great loss both by the English and Dutch. The Portugals
drives such a gallant Trade upon this Coast from 26 degrees south latitude to 3
degrees north latitude, they get great store of Gold, Elephants teeth, Wax,
Ambergris and diverse sorts of rich Gums and commodities, which cost the
Portugals a very small matter, for they trade with Knives, Bells, Pentathoes,
Barbars-aprons, course Calicoes, looking-glasses, etc. I have been taking of a
Juncke twenty eight years since which came from this coast of Malindia, laden
with Elephants teeth, Ambergris and rich Gums. The Portugals coming from
Mussambeg and bound for India, they always touch at the Island of Saint
Laurence and there they buy slaves for their plantation. I have been about
seaventeen years since taking of a Junck which was laiden with slaves of both
sexes and Sandall wood which came from Mussambeg and so to Saint Laurence and
their laden, and bound for Goa, as we found by a Portugal pass.

If I may be worthy to advice, after a trade is once settled at Madagascar, what
a brave gallant trade may be had upon the coast of Malindia three or four small
ships may be employed all the year long, coasting and trading along the coast
from 26 degree south latitude to 3 degrees north latitude, and putting off
course Indian commodities may lade your ship with rich Commodities much
acceptable and vendable in those parts, so that you need not to carry any Money
out of England into India.

CHAP. III. Hogs in Malinda have stones in their mawes as precious as rich
Jewels, the affection of the inhabitants to our Nation above all others,
Portugal Friars slain to accompany the King of Madagascar at his death to
heaven, great store of wildo Foul and Turkies, the Envy of the East India
Company against a plantation may give the better encouragement thereunto: no
Gold Silver nor any rich commodity of so high esteem in Madagascar as red
Cornelian Beads.
THe East India Company they have sent out about twenty five years since
Elephants teeth in the ship by me, for the Elephants teeth is in great request
all over India, the Portugals do put 2000 Tuns yearly off which they get on
the coast of Malindia: also on this coast there are many wild Hogs, and in the
mawes of them there grows stones which the Portugals calls Petra le Porkco,
which is mighty in request and esteem in all India and Asia for expelling of
Poison. The like thing is not to be had in the world for that purpose, for your
Beazor stone is not in that request by many degrees (and little esteemed of in
those parts) for the Portugals do drive a very great Trade in India and Asia by
this excellent Jem which they call Petra le Porkco. I have read of it, and
likewise in a Manuscript of the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Row when he was
employed Lord Ambassador by His Majesty King James into the East India for to
settle the Trade for the East India Company in those oriental parts, wherein
he does write far more at large then I do express. It is conceived by
diverse wise men where these Hogs are on the coast of Malindia, that the soil
is very good; and that it does afford excellent good grass, herbs, fruits and
drugs, which is the chief cause of the extraordinary goodness and virtue of
the stones which grows in the said Hogs mawes, which is in that great esteem
and request all over India and Asia that none can parallel it. This said coast
of Malindia is near adjoining to Madagascar: likewise there is above 1500 Tuns
of Wax yearly which is brought from the coast of Malindia to India which is in
great request, rich Gums and diverse sorts of Drugs, also the Portugals bring
great store of very sine Gold and Ambergreece from Mussambeg to Goa.

So that all the world may understand what rich Trade the Portugal has on the
coast of Malindia, and has for this many hundreds of years maintained a very
strong Garrison at Mussambeg, for their is 100 pieces of Ordnance in their
Castle. I am confident the richest and best trade the Portugal has in Asia
cannot parallel this on the coast of Malindia, furthermore if Saint Laurence
Island had once a plantation set led, what a brave gallant place of commerce
there would be: for this Island does stand in the very Center of the World for
trade, ye may build small ships, for their is good store of Timber, for the
Natives do build Juncks of 200 Tuns a piece at the northermost part of this
Island.

The Country people do love and much affect our Nation. And one Andrew Pela who
is one of their Kings living near the bay of Augustine (did offer both to
Captain Weddle and my self, if we would come and live with them, that they
would let us have so much land that would serve or maintain one hundred
thousand men) we had this King aboard the ship Charles and made much of him,
and gave him a present at his return. In this Kings discourse we found how
cruel the Portugals had been to them, coming a shore and carrying men, women
and children perforce away: they cannot endure the Portugals, telling me how
they did betray them with pictures.

At any time when our seamen do show a picture for to trucke for a sheep or
the like, they will start back and run away crying out, Portugals, Portugals,
Portugals, for they cannot endure Images. But at the northermost part of this
Island, there were Priests and Friars which did live with them for a time,
thinking to convert them: the King of that place departed this life, the
Natives of that Country put the Friars and Priests to death, telling them the
reason before they put them to death, because they were religious men, that
they must prepare themselves to dye, for to keep the King company to God, this
trick they put upon the Portugals for they are generally hated, I dare say no
man can give a better or perfecter account then my self, I have failed round
about this Island, and have been a shore five several times, and for the
commerce I was the man that did deal for all (or whom I should appoint in my
absence) because we would keep to our price and not to under rate our dainty
commodities, which is the long Cornelions: which five or six do purchase an
Ox worth here in England ten twelve thirteen fourteen fifteen or sixteen
pounds an Ox, fifteen good Sheep for the value of nine pence; I have caused
the Steward of the ship to weigh the rump of a sheep after it was slayed and
it weighted thirty pounds odd ounces.

The tropic of Capricorn lies 23 degrees 30 minuits south latitude of
Augustine bay, where our ships ride is just under. In this bay there is three
banks very good ground to anchor upon, and many sail of ships may ride in
fifteen fathom water very secure; for I have a draught of the bay.

There is good store of refreshing, Fish, Flesh, and Foul, I gave leave to one
of our men to lie a shore one night, for to kill foul that comes to roost
toward the evening in the woods, he killed 35 wild Turkies in one night, for
there is great store of wild foul, the place is very healthful, I have been
there when we have come out of Europe, five ships together, we have landed at
the bay 80 sick men, and about 40 of them was lifted in blankets out of the
ships into the boats and so carried a shore, for they were not able to go nor
stand, and after they had been but three days a shore, they were all well and
able both to go and run, and at this bay I have been many times, there is good
watering and wooding that our carpenters did cut down good timber and sawed
and made both planks and boards, which was used aboard our ships, I have been
seven miles up in the land from the bay. I did present Mr. Endimion Porter with
some novelties which I got at this bay of St. Augustines (viz) Turtle shelles
which he promised to make himself combs with them, also I gave him some
dragons blood and diverse sorts of other gumes, after which he sent his coach
for me and carried me to the Council board, and Prince Rupert was there at
that time, and I did deliver my opinion at that time (and since) which
business was concluded upon and past the Broad Seal for the conclusion, for
the Island of St. Laurence.

Sr. Maurice Abbot, Alderman Garway, and four more of the East India Company
did oppose this business of Madagascar at the Council board, saying this
Island was very unhealthfull, which I, Mr. John Cartwright and Bartholmew
Churchman did justify, that the said Island of St. Laurence was the
healthfullest place in the world, and the East India company were blamed for
disparaging this Island, etc.

The Northern part of this Island is brave good ground and grass, and better
harbor for shipping then Augustine bay, and there is the best commodities to
be had. Rice, Sugar great store, Coconuts, Plantans, Pomgranets, Woshee, which
we call in India Toddy, and fine good building for their houses, and fine
traffack to and fro with their Junks; I have failed two days and a half about
three or four leagues from the shore, we sounded and we had twelve fathoms
water, we sailed in this two days and half two hundred and thirteen miles,
from the northermost part toward the southern part of this Island; and in this
distance it did appear to be curious dainty pasture ground, green and full of
trees, and fine low level grounds: this I will justify upon my credit;
likewise there do lie off this Island many small spots, rocks and small
Islands, between St. Laurence Island and Mauricious; and there is a great
current which does set you to the westward.

For the inhabitance of this Island of Madagascar, R. B. his intelligence.
without question it is well peopled (though about the sea side we saw not
above by computation 200 or 300) which live not there continually as we
supposed by their ill accommodated houses, or booths made of boughs and sticks,
small and low like hogsties or calves coopes; the people are affable and
courteous unto us, whatsoever they are unto others; and finding our men
straggling abroad and not knowing the way back to the ships, would peaceably
conduct them back to their tents and randezvous, (but yet its dangerous to
trust them two far) for experience has taught our nation, the treachery of
the Salvages in Virginia and new England etc, yet 10 or 12 of our men made
motion to our Admiral Captain John Weddall, of their willingness to abide
there until more shipping came to discover the country, if so be he would
furnish them with arms and necessaries but he and the rest (chief in the
fleet) thought it not good to adventure them, although the natives desired
Captain Weddall to abide there and be their King and Governor; and to take
their parts in battle against other Salvages which they accounted their enemies.

They live as we conceive by tribes or families, and the eldest are most in
esteem with them, and their Captain was Andream Pela the chief of note at the
sea side, who sold us but reasonable cattle at our forementioned prizes; but
our long abode there caused more (further inland men) to come down and to
trade with us, bringing us better cattle at cheaper rates, with Capons,
Orenges and Leamonds, which before we wanted, and his name was Massy Chora,
whom Andream Pela would have had us to make war against, telling us he came to
rob them of their treasure and jewels, being Indian red cornelion beads, both
round and long squared, which are of most precious esteem with them, sleighting
Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, or other metals, or glass beads, or Corrall, or
Amber beads, or any other toys, unless they may have them gratis.

These long red cornelion beads etc, must be provided before hand in India, or
else the people that come thither for refreshment or for plantation, must not
expect their accomodable and desired refreshments. At our voyage outward we
wanted them, and could get none or very few cattle, and they old and lean,
for silver and corral beads of forty times the vallue of cornelions, which they
call at St. Laurence Haranga, and were to be bought in India for eight
shillings or ten shillings per hundred or there abouts, for which, about six,
seven, or eight of them a fat Ox as a foresaid might be bought, but at our
return we were well furnished with them and wanted not for them, excellent
sustenance for our selves, and the four English ships that met with us, which
otherwise they must have missed of their refreshment, and have been forced as
we were outward bound to sail to the Islands of Commoro, Ioanna or Malala,
where of a salvage nation about 200 leagues distant, we were forced to buy
worse cattle for forty or fifty shillings a piece, in royalls of eights, then
a St. Laurence for a few beads as aforesaid.

CHAP. IIII. The comeliness of the Natives though naked, yet personable and of
pleasant countenance, their weapons not dangerous or of great annoyance, their
small use and unskilfullnesse in labor or manufacture, great probability of
sugar and spices at Madagascar, the praise of the Island comparable with the
land of Canaan.
THe Inhabitants both Men and Women are of a comely feature in person, and
amiable countenance as in many places of Europe, only black, or rather tauney,
naked and without clothing, only a small covering to hide their shame, by a
girdell or skin about their loins, or a rag or clout tacked in before and
behind between their legs to hide their nakedness, unless some chief women
amongst them, having a piece of striped Cahico cloth or pintado tacked about
their loins and reaching down to their knees or shorter. Their Haranga or
Cornelion beads, they wear about their necks and in their ears, stringed so
long that they reach below their breasts, or lower, according to their
abilities, some having more choice clear red cornelion then others, whereof in
their bargains they are very choice to pick out the most clearest and freest
from spots; their hair both of men and women is decently cut, and formed not
much unlike to our Cavalero fashion at present in England, short before, long
on the sides and longest of al behind, which both short and long being platted
or breaded as gentle women, has their hair in three plats, becomes them
well, and they have on the tops of their heads a parcel of hair almost or
about half a foot long standing upright by tying or rolling it about with a
thread or silk, or some kind of string.

Their weapons are darts of several sorts, some biger and some lesser, some
broad and pointed like lances, and some lesser bearded like fish hooks or broad
arrow heads; which the smaller that are bearded I have seen them darth fish
swimming in a shallow place of the sea near the shore, and by a line tied to
their dart drawn them up out of the water; they also have knives long and
narrow but not fit to stab withal but rather to cut withal as a bill, but of
these I saw not many, not above two or three, but of darts some men may and do
carry with them of both sorts half a dozen or there abouts, but few that carry
above one two or three which are not dangerous, unless at a near distance, and
yet cannot come with that violence or swiftness but may be avoided by stepping
aside or by putting by with a staff or the like; and their bodies being naked
are subject to all annoyance of the like or better arms of offense. There
heads being uncovered and the mornings cold until about eight of the clock or
later, they hover together about fires which they quickly kindle, by taking of
a small round stick no bigger then a tobacco pipe, at the middle or thicker
end, which set with one end upon a broad piece of wood or chip, and rolling the
longer round stick hard in the palms of their hands upon the other piece of
the wood the heat thereof presently kindles fire, which with other dry
combustible stuff ready at hand they kindle a fire to warm them, or to dress
their meat, which is very slovenly, taking it cut out of an Ox, with the head
of a great dart (with which they will quarter an Ox presently, and hit the
joints so justly as it is not to be conceived, unless a man saw it) and lay
their pieces a little upon the coals, and eat it better half raw, and full of
ashes, yet some I think they sees, for I have seen among them a kind of pots
or kettles, which whether of earth or metal (being very black) I cannot tell,
for I never handled them, and whether made in the Country or brought unto them
by Portugalls or some heathen nation is uncertain. The fat or suet of their
cattle they save, and the better sort of them rub their heads and hair every
morning therewith, which lies in lumps upon them until the heat of the Sun
melt it, and then it moystneth their heads and discendeth over their bodies,
which they also grease or anoint, and those of the better sort that do so
their bodies are smooth, plump and decent, but strong of smell, and they that
want that means are the poorer sort or slaves among them have their bodies of
an ill aspect, dry and scurvy, parched with the Suns heat, and feeding more
hard and coursly, (of what we know not but of durty gutts or puddings) have
their bellies swollen as if they had the dropsy: and though they have good store
of fat cattle yet the poorer sort of people are very hungry, for they will lie
about our tents and gather up the worst scraps we cast away, and in their
Cannowes will lie about the ships calling out for Tellahenna and Tellaffunga
(as I take it meat and bread) which the mariners and others for their disport
will fling them out neats feet which they regard not, and dry marrow bones or
the like which will speedily sink, for which they will suddenly leap out of
their boats and dive a great depth after them and bring them up in one hand,
their Cannowes or boats are made of one piece of timber long and narrow like a
hogs trough, upon the upper part whereof they fasten two sticks a cross, their
boats half a yard or more from each end, about two yards long or longer, and
upon each side to meet with the ends of these staves or sticks they fasten two
more which stay up their boats from overturning and do so leake that they sit
in water, and continually ladeth out water, and one or two more sit therein
with little paddles not much bigger then shittle cockbattle-dores to row with
all.

They make little use of labor or manufactures, and those of small value, I
have seen a carpenter (for so I may term him) making a Cannow or a boat of a
piece of timber like a hogs trough (as aforesaid) having no better a tool then
a little axe, such as children or youth may play withal, the Iron or bit
thereof not above two inches bread which must needs make long labor. I have
also seen a Smith at work to make dart heads in a strange manner, having no
other tool that I could see but only a stone for the anvill and an other for
his hammer; and for his bellows two hollow canes about three quarters of a
yard long, and about the thickness and roundnesse of a man's leg or thigh,
which being placed together close to a little fire, with small holes to let the
wind out at the bottom; they had to drive the wind out two staves like
churme staves, wrapped about half the length of the staves at the bottom, with
a sheep or goats skin the wool side outward, (like a sponge as gunners at sea
use to wipe their guns and make them clean) which being lifted up and pressed
down again forces out the wind as aforesaid. And also as I remember I saw
one weaving as if it had been our poor people or beggars in England, sitting
in high ways weaving course tape, so he weaved narrow striped stuffes of
cotton yearn about a quarter of a yard broad, which I suppose they sew two or
three breadths together to make coverings for the better sort of people their
shame or nakedness. Where they have their materials is uncertain, whether
gotten in the Country, or brought unto them by Portugalls or other Nations,
what other food they have besides F^esh and Fish, as Corn Rice and other sorts
of Craine is doubtful, yet there we saw some of them have some small
quantities of Rice and Grauanees (so called in India) which are a kind of
smaller sort of Beans, and of much use for diet in India, and in the English
house at Surrat they eat them being young, buttered instead of green Pease, but
are not so pleasant as our pease when they grow old or at the worst. I have
also seen some at one time knawing and suck green Sugarcanes, which is a
certainty that Sugarcanes grow there, and perhaps quantity of Sugar may be
made thereof, and no doubt but vines are in the Country, for I have seen some
wild Vines growing upon the rockie hills in Augustine Bay, some of our people
have said that they have heard it from the Portugals that the Country does
afford Pepper and other Spices, which our English also do assume who have been
far within the land, failing some days journey in a large navigable River,
where they met as they reported many people offering them cattle for a half
or one forth part the price we paid for them at Augustine Bay, and having
showed the Natives Pepper, Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, they made show to them of
store in that Country, certain days journey or nights sleeps distant, by
winking and putting their heads under their hands, and pulling them back
again, they report also of large plain pastures and meadows replenished with
cattle of all sorts, Beeves, Sheep and Goats feeding thereon, and without all
question the Country lying in or near the same degree of Lattitude or distance
form the Line as India, does produce the same fruits, as Coco-nuts Plantans
Musk-millions and other pleasant Millions as great as our English Pumpeons, and
also the Toddy trees which produce as good liquors as white wine and sugar,
with which in regard of the cheapnesse thereof in India, our English and Dutch
Mariners drink so much of it as to be often drunk or foxed therewith. The
Country extends it self in length from about II and half degrees south lat. to
26 degrees. In which large extent it comprehends many famous Countries that lie
either under the Line, or under or near both Tropicks, and so by consequence
must in likelihood (or rather assured probability) participate of the
fertillity, pleasure and wealth of them all; if not antecede transcend and
superabound them all, being indeed the paradise of the World, especially being
once inhabited with Christians or civil people, skillful in Agriculture and
manufactures, and all sorts of Mecannick laborers and handicrafts.

In further commendation thereof I will make bold (I hope, without offense) to
extol it as Moses did the land of Canaan, i'ts a good land, a Land in the
which Rivers of waters and Fountains spring out of valleys and Mountains, a
Land of Wheat and Barley, of Vineyards, of Fig Trees and Pomgranets, a Land of
Oil Olive and Honey, a Land wherein thou shall eat without scarcity, neither
shall lack any thing therein, a Land whose stones are Iron, and out of whose
Mountains thou shall dig Brass.

CHAP. V. The Idolatrous worship of God, or the Devil, the Natives addicted to
theft and robbery. A project of the Bishops deposed to plant at Madagascar,
Madagascar sauegard rasbly attained unto.
THus in truth without dissimulation have I showed what my memory does at
present call to mind, having lost or given away such brief notes or papers
which I had taken at my being there, yet one thing more I call to mind which I
may not forget, touching their manner of Idolatry or devilish Worship and
Sacrifice, which some of our people conceives was rather to the Devil (not to
hurt them) then to God; but I am not altogether of their opinion, but rather
think the contrary, by their feasting and rejoicing a little before our
departure, as a kind of thanksgiving to their Idol God or Gods, for the benefit
they accrewed by the trading they had with us, and praying for our prosperity
and often return as some were opinionated, the circumstance I will declare as
brief as I can and as my memory does best serve me; one morning the Salvages
killed an Ox (and I do not remember that I did see or hear that during our
abode there that they killed many other) and a post about eight or nine foot
high was set up near their booths upon which the head and horns of the Bullock
were placed and the post all daubed with the blood thereof and the Ox cut out
and divided among the better sort of them and eaten half raw and half broyled
upon coals and full of ashes, and whether before or after their feast (for I
have forgotten) they came out of the woods from their booths into a plain a
bow shoot or two from their habitation, where were stuck up in a row about 50
or 60 great poles as big as the bigger fort of Hop-poles, all the bark pilled
off and made white and were placed by computation about four yards a funder
and between every pole about three foot distance a stone about the bigness of
a great Turnip or Apple placed in a straight row and in the middle of the poles
a cross pole laid about a yard or an ell high whereon they hanged all or many
of their Chains of Beads or Haranga and near unto having their Alter of Beads
(as I termed it) before them sat all the Ancient Men Women and Children, and on
the other side of the Alter and poles was two Companies of young men about 20
or 30 or more in a company, each having a dart in his hand and ranked as I take
it by three in a rank or row, each Company being distant from the other about
4 or 5 rods or more, being thus set in a comely posture they sang and danced
keeping even strole and action with their feet and hands according to their
tune, (as I have seen in a market Town in the Country where I was borne,
diverse Gentlemen, etc. associated together having for their pleasure a noise of
Musitions playing before them with every one a cipresse hatband (then in
fashion) put over their faces dance the measures through the Market, and
chiefest streets in the town, (and so into an Inn and Tavern to make merry
together,) these Salvages keeping as even measure proportionably to their sound
or singing as the other do to their music.

And in many postures of their dancing they would make show of fight or
defiance one company against the other, presenting their darts against each
other, and sometimes again of a sudden both sides gathering themselves into
a round ring and laying their heads together as at a consultation, and then
suddenly again fall into their posture of danceing as decently as a company of
trained Soldiers into their several postures, and each party had of their
side a Trumpeter sounding with a confused harsh noise, a large crooked Rams
horn.

Their Priests(as I call them of one which I bought a book as aforementioned)
laying their fore fingers upon one of the strange shapes or characters therein,
would preach or read a lecture or homily upon that text a good space, and then
remove his finger to another, this feasting dancing or sacrificing was upon a
sudden dissolved by reason the multitude of our men on shore who hearing of
these sports, came flocking thither apace to see them, but the Salvages fearing
(as I conceive) least our men should rob them again of their Haranga, which
they prized as dear as we do Diamonds and other rich Jewels; took them all
from their Alter and departed again to their tents or booths and so this
exercise ended: yet a word or two concerning their justice or punishing of
offenders, their chief Captain or Commander had lost out of his booth some of
his Jewels which were found stolen by a young maid or girl belonging to an
other man either his daughter or slave, the Father or Master of the maid to
clear himself as innocent of the fact, took his lance or great dart and
presently slew the girl (surely it was not his own daughter but rather his
slave, else though a Barbarian, he could not have been so cruel to his own
flesh and blood); and this may give some testimony that they have some kind of
government or law among them: but yet they are adicted to theft and robbery, is
again apparent; for when they met our men in the woods although they did them
no harm, yet they would search their pockets for beads and rob them of them,
and yet bring them down to their ships when they could not well tell how to
find the way.

And my self standing among our ships Pursers and others, buying cattle for
the ships provision, and having a chain of beads in my hand, a young man
snacht at them to have gotten them from me but mist of his purpose and ran
away, but one of our men in company standing by shot an arrow after him but
mist him, and we never saw his face again.

It is great pity so pleasant and plentiful a Country should not be inhabited
with civil people or rather Christians; and that so brave a Nation of person
and countenance (only black or tauny) should be so blindly lead in their
devotions being as some suppose Mahometans in regard of their manners and
customs of circumcision, or rather as some suppose descended from Abraham by
his Wife, or Concubine, Keturah, whose children begotten of her because they
should not be a let or impediment to the promised seed by Isaac: Abraham did
send them away to inhabit in the East (as Scripture mentions,) A happy thing
it were both for them and this Kingdom if that project had or should go
forward which a Gentleman of Huntington shire bred a Merchant, in love told me
and he heard of it from others (or rather as I understand it from Bishop
Moretans own mouth) that if the Bishops of England (lately dismissed from
voting in Parliament, and tyrannizing in temporal authority) should still
continue in disrespect with King and Parliament, they or most part of them
would go and plant a Colony in Madagascar, or in Saint Laurence, and endeavor
to reduce those ignorant souls to Christianity; which God grant that by them
or others such a pious design may speedily take effect, and that there may be
among Christians there seated, more harmonious concord in Religion then in
Virginia (by report) has lately happened, where disagreeing in points of
Religion as at present unhappily in England they have taken up arms one side
against the other, and slain of themselves or killed by the Natives 1700 which
is doubted the Virginians will make use of such discention and cut all their
throats on both sides, and so the loss unrecoverable to this Kingdom, of that
famous plantation; and excellently accommodated, after 40 or 50 years, or more
hard durance of many the first Planters, (which God forbid) and grant better
news to succeed; and that these Countries already planted and this most
hopeful at Saint Laurence may be special receptacles and succors to truly
religious English Protestants, if it shall please God to punish the Nation for
the crying sins thereof, by the prevalence of Malignants tirannous Papists
which God avert. By loss of my papers, and notice taken therein of things
convenient to the furtherance of a Plantation at Saint Laurence, I am deprived
of some good parts of their language or speech, which in my conceit was not
difficult to attain; but perusing an old table book I found some few words of
their language, penned down for my remembrance, which are somewhat difficult
at present to read, being 14 years ago written in such imperfect Manuscript.

Yet I thought it not amiss to penn down what I have lately found, which with
the help of others especially of one William Casey late Purser of an Indian
ship, who took more pains therein then my self (if his papers can be found)
will give some light therein to the help of others that will endeavor to
attain the knowledge thereof; the particulars which I have now found I will
here manifest so well as I can.

Viz (nooroon no zeff) how call you this. Tona a man. Codez a woman. Tope a
child. Coma a house. Ose or Angomba a cow. Gose a sheep. Cowhee bread. Camba
water. Bingta or Sooa the head. Nunqua the eye or ear. Toee the nose. Umqua or
Song the lips. Coonqua or Niffa the teeth. Goma or Soca the chin. Coaqua or
Effena the arm. Cabed the elbow. Unaqua or Tanga the hand. Hongko the finger.
Chamkee or Noeno the breast. Oncoma the neck. Hicuma or Toa the belly. Coa or
Ungoote the knee. No or Vote the leg. Iqua or Kambo temba the foot. Hica or
Vota the yard or virill. Charaqua the cod. Anatnicke the little finger. Voylee
the buttocke. Lemboshe the back. Sowkee the shoulder. Mise yea. Maligna a
root that smells sweet and is like a bulrusb. Moade a chain of small beads.
Voyla hair. Maca an eye. Saffee an ear. Leela the tongue. Hoho the thumb.
Fala tanga the palm of the hand. Choroqua the nails of the hand. Syra salt.
Humeray tomorrow. So a pot. Pingbara a gun. Vyra a sword. Fajaro a little
dart. Leffo or Mura a lance or great dart. Caba a bat or cap. Lomba clothes.
Memma a cloak or skin. Hoboqua shoes or slippers. Aqua an arrow. Fenga or
Talle a rope. Siffe a knife. Hicha a bow. Hehoo a turn spit. Acuto to dart.
Renova milk. Hihoo a small fish. Longora a great fish. Hirhoree brass.
Chichata or Ruttee naught. Chara good. Longasba a good man or friend. Laga
Rattee a bad man or foe. Cheruse nay. Calibus a bottle cup or basket.
CHAP. VI. Great encouragement to the plantation, the cheapenesse of clothing
or apparel to be bad out of India for the use of the planters, the rich
attire for persons of quality to be had there exceeding cheap, all sorts of
herbs roots fruits and fowls to be bad in plentiful abundance in Madagascar,
trees yielding great store of pleasant liquor nothing inferior to wine and
sugar in England, the excellent virtue of India Mirabolins.
TO the furtherance of this renowned plantation, these advantageous commodities,
benefits, and accommodation as felloweth (far above other plantations) are
inducements sufficient to persuade pious virtuous rich men and others that
desire the advancement of Gods glory, the honor of their Sovereign Prince the
the welfare of their own native Country, the inrichment of themselves and
their posterity and the charitable relief of Gods poor Elect upon Earth to
enterprise this worthy action.

And in the first place the Country is healthful and pleasant, Secondly its
already of it self furnished with most chief things necessary to sustenance
of man's life, especially, Beef Mutton Goats Poultry Fish and Foul. Thirdly
it affords Oxen for present tillage (the chiefest of all wants in all other
plantations) which no other has done or affords. Forthly it is as near or
nearer to India then other plantations to England, where all things either for
necessity or superfluity are to be had for the fourth part of the price, and
less then in England, or other Christian Kingdoms; as Rice and excellent
dainty food (as it is cookt in India) whereof Kings and great men daily eat
with pleasure and contentment and never furset therein; Wheat Barley and other
sorts of grain and good rack, and excellent strong drink made of Rice, which
mixed with Sugar, water and Leamonds or surrop of lymes, or drunk alone, all
which are to be had exceeding cheap, with all manner of spices make, a
pleasant, wholesome drink, surpassing any wine to be had in London of which
good use may be made (though water there is more contentfull, it being so good
and better then in England) until beer made of malt by barley may be brought
to perfection which may suddenly be affected as I shall show hereafter.

Also from India may be had clothing fit for those warm Countries to
maintain a man or woman neately comely and cleanly for twenty shillings a
year and under, nay I dare make it good for ten shillings a year, bedding
exceeding cheap and dainty either for cotton wool, or silk cotton, far
better and more desired then fetherbeds, or down-beds, and coverlids (whereof
in those warm countries they use but few) of all prizes and curiosities even
fine dainty quilts for five shillings a piece, sheets and all sorts of linen
so cheap and fine that no part of the World affords the like. Again good
shirts whiter and finer for mean people at-eight ten or twelve pence a piece,
and cheaper, and not so fine and white to be had in England for three or four
times dearer in price (my self have worn no other these sixteen years of
which six of three shillings a piece have lasted me continually three years
together, of the like finenesse not to be bought under twelve shillings a shirt
or dearer in England, shoes of English fashion for sixpence a pair, and
boots for two shillings a pair, capps or mountei^s light and easy, and far
better then stiff heavy hats made of satin and taffaty, fine painted linen,
etc. quilted or inbroydered much cheaper then hats.

The better sort of people that affect to cloth themselves, wives and children
in rich gentile fashion, may do it of satin taffaty wrought damask black,
or colored, and rich stuffes mixed with gold and silver thread: at cheaper
rates then with our cheap English cloth or stuffes. Jewels of all sorts,
Pearls Diamonds and other rich stones with curious bracelets for Gentlewomen;
and others of Crystal agget, Jasper, Cornelion, red and white, and Elutropian
stones, etc. cheap, with rings and pendants of the same, so cheap that I have
sold that in England (to be sold again by Exchange men and Goldsmiths) for
five or ten shillings a ring or pendant which have not cost me in India above a
penny or two pence per ring or pendant; likewise Estredges feathers, for women's
fannes or for use of Gentlemen, Captains, Soldiers, and other uses, etc. with
curious paper or leather fannes gilded and painted; with brave Cabanets of
Ivory, Ebony, and Sandall wood, etc. artificially inlayed with mother of
pearl, Aggets and other stones and Ivory, so cheap as cannot be imagined,
with all dainty purfumes of Civic, Musk, Amber-grease (and rose water in
abundance) extraordinary cheap; which I hope will induce Lords, Ladies,
Knights Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, Farmers, Artificers and Manufactors to put on a
resolution to undergo a pleasant easy votage of three or four months; which
Portugals, Dutch, Danes, etc. have undertaken, to far remoter parts at great
danger and hazard to plant themselves, and in no comparison for profit and
pleasure with Madagascar or Saint Laurence. I pray God the Kings Majesty and
the State of this Kingdom may take it into speedy consideration, least they be
prevented by some other Nation (who no doubt have curious eyes and intents to
this design) as of late the right honorable the Earl of Southampton, and the
noble Gentleman Mr. John Craven, brother to the right honorable the Lord
Craven, who intending to send out ships and Planters to the Island of
Mauritious beyond Saint Laurence, and had disbursed many thousand pounds to
that intent, yet neglecting speedy opportunity the Dutch hearing of their
honorable design made more speedy have and prevented them, and have now
planted in that Island to their great renown and accommodation (in time) and
great loss to those honorable persons and this Nation.

All sorts of fruits, herbs, roots and flowers (of great esteem in India) of
what Nation soever, may be transported thither, and will assuredly grow in so
rich and fruitful grounds, and for more speedy growth; if those transported
out of Europe or England sail, at the first for want of skill to preserve the
seed etc. in regard of the length of the voyage, yet those out of India (not
above one fourth part of the way) may be brought good both to sow or to plant,
as raddish, lettice, carrets, turnips, onions, and mustard seed, and many other
of moreworth then these in England. And no doubt but this Island affords (if
not may easily be transported thither) those excellent trees for good and
pleasant liquor, drink, as Toddy and Palmito trees, which trees distill, by art
taken from them plenty of excellent drink, no way inferior if not better then
white wine and sugar, especially the Palmito wine; but the Toddy wine (except
some of the best sort) tastes as if it did come out of Horns, and therefore
(if not there already) may be transported the Coco nut tree, which yields a
nut as big as a child's head, whose kernel is excellent meat, and of that
fruit is made also oil, vinegar and other dainties, and the tree it self
yields thread or yarne fine and course, to make ropes, cordage, cables for
ships and many other uses. There may be also had many other trees of excellent
fruits as Mirabolins, and Plantans, which our English term them Apples of
paradise, wherewith the Serpent beguiled Eve, the Mirabolins and Plantans from
the trees are far dantier in taste then our Apricocks, and what they are
preserved, are well known to Confectioners and Physicians, for health and
pleasure. The Plantan grows by clusters as a too or more or less together, as
big as a large bean cod, and is so pleasant in taste, cutting it in small
pieces, as parsnips to butter, men use to eat it continually at meals, with
viniger, pepper and salt, to abate the sweetness, and the tree being about the
bigness of a reasonable Apple tree, bears no boughs but great leaves an ell
long, or longer, and both leaves and body are excellent meat for Cowes, for the
body is no harder then a well grown cabbidge, and may be cut down by a good
sword at a blow; two or three, my self have cut down many at Moalala to carry
aboard the ship, to feed cattle that we bought their to preserve.

There is five sorts of Mirabolins the one is like our Apricocks or great plum,
Mr. Lloyd, his intelligence.
the stone is eight square, it is an excellent preserve and in great request,
and sells very dear in Persia and elsewhere, the other four sorts is used in
physic, the Doctors and Drugsters can tell the several names, virtue and
quality concerning the four elements of man's body, in India there is some of
these Marabolins worth fifty or a hundred pound a piece, which holding in the
parties hand which is sick, will cure him of his disease suddenly or
forthwith, either of the bloody flux and fever and two other diseases which I
have forgotten.

Now for to make it appear, the curious virtue of these four sorts of
Marabolins which cures diseases holding them in the hand is thus; at the time
of the year when they prune or lop their trees they do cut off all the
branches and boughs only one sprig left, and it is a hundred to one that the
tree hears, for if one tree bears, a hundred will not but die, but commonly
one in a hundred will bear: but one or two Mirabolins at the most will grow
upon that one sprig of the tree, for all the virtue does grow out of the tree
into one or two Mirabolins, which are of the bigness of an Apple which will
cure several diseases holding of one of these Mirabolins in the hand of the
party which is sick. This is very true and certain, which diverse Banian
Doctors and Brachmans has told me, they are very dear and scarce for to be
had: for great men in the Country do buy them, if any of our English Doctors
did but know the virtue of these great Mirabolins, they would be worth a
thousand pounds a piece and it would be a present for a King.

But for the four small sorts of Mirabolins are in great plenty in India and
very cheap, for I bought three thousand weight after the rate of a sarthing a
pound, and sold them here in England for three shillings four pence a pound by
the great, which the Drugsters sells them for six shillings, eight pence per
pound. I do believe their be diverse trees of Mirabolins which do grow on the
Island of St. Laurence, or else they may be easily planted, by reason the
clymat does agree with India: for their be many sorts of trees, and plants,
which grow in the Island of Madagascar which do grow in India; and equal of
raste and goodness.

The defect of Cammels, Horses, Asses, Mules, Elephants, Bussels, and Persia
sheep (of high esteem in India,) may have their race or breed from Persia, and
bred up in Saint Laurence; and (a more rich and fruitful Country) will yield a
great price in India and brought to Saint Laurence by English or Indian
shipping at cheap rates, a Horse in Persia, to be bought for 567 or 8 pounds
is worth in India 20 30 40 50 or 60 pounds or more, according as they prove.

CHAP. VII. The cheapenesse of all sorts of cattle and food at Madagascar, the
Turkies before mentioned in Mr. Lloyds intelligence are not so large and good
as ours, and I rather account the Sa^ts or such like foul but being all over
speckled black and white our people give them the name of Turkies, the great
benefit to be made by dayries at Madagascar, with the means to accommodate the
making of butter and cheese in that hot Country, as also for poudering of Beef
and brewing of good Beer.
THe Persia sheep are of great price in India, and their skins are as soft as
silk, and curiously curled, of mixed color black and white, inclining to
gray, are of great esteem in Christian cold Countries, I saw the Palsgrave or
Prince Elector sitting at dinner in winter with his Majesty King Charles,
having his coat lined with them, whereupon I sent to a friend in Persia to
send me a few who sent me seven, which cost there about sixteen shillings a
piece, which M. Ganthorne the Kings Furrier seeing, would needs buy them of me,
and gave me thirty three shillings a piece for them, and more I might have had
it I would have urged him, which race once gotten and breed in so rich a
country at no charge, must needs be very beneficial to the planters, besides
the accommodation of their dainty flesh, better then any other mutton in the
Eastern parts of the world, equal or better then our English mutton, having a
curicus meat in their great and weighty tails, weighing a stone two or three
in weight, or more in some as I have heard reported. And Saint Laurence Oxen
(especially white) to be bought there for twelve pence per piece or there
abouts, would yield in India the larger sort twenty pounds per piece; my self
had a couple of white Oxen in India to draw my Coach, for which I refused 45
pounds, and the tallow and skins of these Oxen to be transported for England
costing nothing there, will redound to great profit of the planters. These Oxen
and Cowes both of India and Saint Laurence, have bunches upon or between their
shoulders, like Camm^^s, of dainty meat, like or as good and better then the
brisket piece of a young calfe, which weighs three four or five stone a
piece, according to the magnitude. The flesh of these Oxen is daintier and more
pleasant than ours, cutting as white as veale: if a race of our English breed
(and young calves) be carried thither they will there mightily improve, and in
regard of their horns, far in beauty exceeding those in India, etc. and
white will no question but out sell the Indian breed, especially if of
Lancashire or the adjacent counties their breed; Hoggs they have plenty out of
India for little or nothing, if the country affords none, for they regard
them not accompting them polluted. But Turkies from England bred in Saint
Laurence and their breed carried into India would be of great esteem, whereof
many have assaid to transport, but failed either for want of good room to keep
them in, or by negligent attendance, or killed to make meat for sick or dainty
people in the voyage, yet in an English fleet that we met with at Saint
Laurence at our return from India, I saw three or four preserved alive,
Rabbots and Pigeons would do well to be transported for breed; but for
Pigeons India will afford store. And garden pease and beans and others, with
oats and tares is not amiss to be transported for plantation, and would be of
great esteem in India. Butter and Cheese to be made at Saint Laurence would be
an excellent commodity for India, as well as for the Plantation, and shipping:
and the country will afford them speedily Cowes enough to make it; but some may
allege the country is too hot to make it good, or to make beer, or to powder
beef; all which by art and industry of man I conceive may be helped, to the
furtherance whereof I will make bold to lend my weak advice (with desire of
pardon if I err) but surely had I made another voyage into India, (which
malice has prevented me of) I would have made experience of these things, (and
whatsoever I have before or shall hereafter in this discourse make mention of
to that end) first to place a house in the coolest place they can find and
most in shade from the sun, then the dairy house on the north or coolest side,
under ground or in a vault or celler, paved all with the coolest stones that
can be had, and the sides thereof also, and if it be paved with stones from
Ormus in Persia (whereof all the houses their are builded,) which stones beaten
to powder is excellent good salt, perhaps may be most cool and befitting, and
in the midst thereof a small tanke or pond of running or standing water, if it
can be near a river or well to have the water continually running fresh in
though by a small stream, and so issuing out again the better; if not, it may
be done as in India, almost in every house of note, to have water carried in
leather sacks or barrels upon Oxens backs, and put into an earthen cistern, and
from thence by pipes to issue forth in small streams into the tanke, which if
it be lower then the cistern, will be with more case effected. The top off the
dairy house to be open, with a lower or open place as a turret or pidgeon house
top, so boarded every way with boards standing out at length to catch the wind
and drive it down into their dairy houses to cool it, as the Cattanents
(which I think the Portugals so call them) to let the air down into their
chiefest rooms for coolness, of which I only saw the fashion at Ormus. And
no question but many English who have seen the form thereof in Spain,
Portugal, or other hot countries, can give good direction for the performance
thereof.

CHAP. VIII. The accommodation and means for dayries, brewing of beer and
powdering of meat for the use of ships at sea, the means to make Saltpeter
cheaper then in India or elsewhere, all sorts of excellent materials for
building to be had in Madagascar, poor artificers may live by their labors in
all sorts of manufacture, out strip all Nations of the world for the price of
their labor, trade and commerce to and from Madagascar will exceed in benefit
all other.
THe dairy house (or brew house especially for cooling the wort or liquor) this
fitted, then round about the sides thereof leaving passage sufficient to go
between the same and the tanks, shelves or strong board p'anks may be framed to
place leaden troughes a foot or half a foot deep, or more or less as shall
be found most convenient, place ing the troughes half an inch or more in
ascent or descent with a hole at one end to be stopped and opened at pleasur,
to let out water to be put thereinto, with water let their be put a sufficient
quantity of Saltpeter proportionable to the troughes or vessels of water. In
which troughs or vessels let the dairy woman set their milk pins of Earth,
Wood, Brass or any other metal, or lead, as shall be found most convenient
and necessary, which will keep their milk and cream so cool or cooler then
in the English dayrie houses; The experience whereof I have seen and is well
known to India Merchants, by cooling of water to drink, for a a bottle of
water set out a little while in a small tub of water cooled with saltpeter,
will make the water in the bottle so cool that a man can hardly drink it, it
will be so cool to the teeth almost to make the chops to chatter. And thus I
think beef laid in salt in dry vessels of stone lead or other metal set in
saltpeter water, will keep it so cool, that it may easily take salt; and the
coolers for woort in brewing of beer so ordered, may happily also cause good
beer to be made, which if it can (as I am confident it may) be brought to
pass, will be such an accommodation and benefit to the plantation both for its
own use, and to transport butter and cheese into India, (where it is not good
and but of final quantity, and the country not stored with many Cowes, which
makes it dear, also as dear or dearer then in England at highest rate) and
of beef for victualing of ships to sea as the value will be inestimable.

At the Island of Madagascar I do verily believe and am confident there may a
good dairy be made and to make very good butter and cheese, Mr. Lloyd, his
intelligence.
which will sell both well in India, Persia, Arabia, and all the South seas
over, (in a hundred several places) likewise for victualling of ships, both
English, Dutch, Danes and Portugals, and that Cheese which we carry out of
Europe to India, the Banians do give us twelve pence per pound. At Moca in the
Red Sea they do make very good cheese, like unto our English cheese, and there
it is fa^re hotter then at the Island of Saint Laurence. But concerning salting
of Beef it will keep for three or four months, we have kept it but it will
eat very dry, the reason is, because we press it with weights for to fetch
out the blood, otherwise it will not keep. The best way to keep and preserve
Beef or Mutton, (is to make it into Jerkins) the flesh and meat which the
Indians do carry for their sea store, which is cut in little pieces, like unto
steaks, they first salt it a little, and so dry it in the sun, till it be so
hard as glue, which will be so hard, and then you may carry it in baskets to
sea, and water it about one hour before you boil it, and it will be so fresh
as though it was newly killed. It will keep twelve months at the least, and
far better for the healths of men's bodies, this is true to mine own knowledge
and experience.

Now to answer yet one objection that may be made, that saltpeter is dear, and
will be so chargeable, that it will not quit the cost; to which I answer that
saltpeter is cheap in India, worth a very small matter a hundred weight^, and
will be transported into Saint Laurence for one fourth part or perhaps one
eighth part of the charge it costeth by transporting the same in great
quantities into England, and salt also is in India good cheap. Yet to lessen
the charge thereof, both may be had exceeding cheap made in Saint Laurence,
for my self have seen salt naturally made of it self, lying in the concaves
and hollowes of the rocky Hill in Augustine Bay, which the high water filling
those concaves with salt water, and at the ebb when the Sun has power over
it has been converted into salt; moreover it seemed strange unto me, one
accident there happening during our abode in that country. The English for their
recreation had made a parcel of ground by much treading and playing at nine
pinns so bare, as a bowling alley or much traveled highway, and one day it
chanced to rain, which rain stood in small puddles in some lower places of
the alley, which the next day by the heat of the sun was converted into salt,
brown as our bay salt here in England, and that by reason of the saltness of
the earth in that place so near the sea, not a bow shoot from the same, which
may be occasioned by overflowing of the same at some times of the year in that
low ground, and the grass growing thereon is salt, which for my experience I
have also tasted.

Now if saltpeter may there be made of salt earth (as I take it is in England,
which I have seen saltpeter men to taste of, to know thereby whether it were for
their use or purpose or no,) then assuredly saltpeter may be made there for a
trifle, having a dainty brook of of fresh water issuing out of the rock in the
bay enough to turn a mill, if such fresh water be useful for steeping thereof
(howsoever for other occasions it is exceeding useful and in especial for
present use for the business before premissed, it issuing out of the rock
eight or ten foot high or more, at low water may with ease and small charge be
carried in pipes upon the land, within a stones throw thereof or nearer,) and
there saltpeter may be made to send into England much cheaper then out of
India, brought down to the Port Town a thousand miles and more upon Cammels
backs: and being a great deal nearer England, about a fourth part or the way,
may be shipped home for less freight, especially by ships to convey planters
into that Country, and there they may even at the first return lade perhaps
hides and tallow which will not stand them in a penny, though for many
thousands.

For building in this brave Island there is abundance of good timber and stone,
and no doubt but brick also may be made as well as in India and Persia, where
many buildings are made of unburnt brickes dried only with the heat of the sun.
And no doubt but in short time (being planted, diligent skillful men will find
out there as well as in other the like and not so likely countries; Mines of
Gold, Silver, Brass, Lead, Iron, Tin and other minerals, with precious and
costly drugs for physic, and Allows we made there some; sold in London at
six shillings eight pence per pound, and excellent materials for Diers uses and
multitude of other commodities that cannot at present be conceived. And the
Country being well planted with Artificers and manufactors will outstrip all
others in the world for manufactures (which though I should grieve to give
encouragement to employ men therein, to the hurt of my native country and to
the robbing the poor therein of their labor, yet being wrought there by our
own natives, or by other slaves of Freemen, to the benefit of the English
Planters, I do not conceive any wrong done to the Commonwealth, and will draw a
boundance of poor people into that, and disburden our own of many unnecessary
idle vagrant people, which think themselves born for no other use but Natus
consumere fruges, and and to live upon Industrous men's labors. But that is a
business beyond my reach and capacity, and therefore leave it to the deep
Judgment of judicious Statesmen for ( ne Suitor ultra crepidam.)

These encouragements already mentioned, may enduce all understanding and
industrious, pious, Charitable men, to take opportunity to advance this
unparaleld project yet much more, that which is yet behind to express, may
animate them thereunto.

And that is by the exceeding great profit to be made by Trade and Commerce to
and from thence in all parts of the world, far transcending all Trade and
Commerce elsewhere; For that Country being once well planted and inhabited
with Europian Christians, will draw Trade from all the Oriental parts of the
world, as India, with her multitude of Rich and Spacious Kingdoms, as also
those large and rich dominions of Persia, Arabia, China, Achin, and the
Countries adjacent to Moco, Bagdat or Babylon in Perua, and will also draw
Trade and Commerce from all the wealthy Europian Kingdoms, as England, Spain,
Portugal, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark; the Low-Countreyes and other
Principalities, and prove the best and chiefest Magazine or Storehouse both of
exportation or importation of Trade, between all Europe and Asia, which must
needs make that Country rich and to flourish above other Kingdoms.

And because I have gone thus far with my rude and unskilful Pen, to mention
the benefit of Commerce in general. I will descend a little to particulars, to
give some People better satisfaction: yet before I proceed therein, I will
endeavor to clear my self of aspertion, which I expect will be cast upon me by
the unworthy Governor and Committees of the Honorable East India Corporation,
who I presume will tax me, of perjury and false-hood, to the same Honorable
company, whereof my self am a Member, for discovering that which may prove
hurtful or prejudicial to that worthy Society: (though unworthy Government)
as one already has endeavored though he shall never be able to make his
accusation good, but by sturring therein shall rather discover his own shame
and Malignant Spirit.

And I trust in God that the discovering of any matter that the knowledge
thereof shall tend to Gods Glory, my Royal Sovereigns Honor, (the yet
hopeful gracious King Charles) and the welfare of the Commonwealth wherein I
am born and live, shall not be accounted perjury either by Gods or man's Law,
though it tend to the prejudice of a Corporation whereof I am a Member, and
have taken Oath, to perform all good and no bad Service, to the prejudice or
detrement of the said society (which as I take it) always in all Oaths to
Corporations include the greater good to God, King and Country, to be
proferred before the lesser.

And because I have had experience of the envy and malignancy of East India
Courts, to neglect their own and Common good, and yet hinder, private persons
from doing good to themselves in particular, like unto the Dog in the Manger,
neither eating Hay himself nor permitting the Ox to eat it, and also to take
the Childrens bread, and cast it unto Dogs (which I presume I am able to
prove) I have rather thought good to employ my tallent the best I can to do
good to all men (but especially to the household of faith) rather then hide in a
Napkin, or bury it in the earth to the loss or offense of any. And to this
purpose most humbly and submissively, I entreat all good men to accept of my
weak endeavors and abilities in as good and Charitable away or respect as
they are offered unto their perusal.

CHAP. IX. The Riches to be accrewd by Trade between England and India, may all
be converted by a free Trade to the Planters at Madagascar, the benefit of
particular commodities, to and from between India and Persia; the Piscash of a
Chain of Gold given by Podomsee, though of 500. pound Value not comparable to
the benefit he received by freight and custom in his Massy Treasure in
Pearls, the Massy rich Trade of Pearls, and Diamonds from Persia into India,
etc.
FOrmerly in this Treatise, I have said that there is no Trade like to the
Trade and Commerce of India (which the Planters at Saint Lawrence may reap to
themselves if they pleased) which I make good thus. The India Trade to and from
India generally produces in 18. months time and less 3. 4. or 5. for one in
some particulars, much more the tradeing in India in several Kingdoms from Port
to Port, and from India into Persia, the Red Sea and Achin, China, and other
parts produces in 6. months generally 30. 40. 50. and 60. per cent. and more,
the particulars of several commodities from India into Persia, and from Persia
into India, I will only instance in having thereof been an eye witness, and
the others only by report, which others upon examination can and will no doubt
give better intelligence of, to whom I refer the Reader, especially to Master
Richard Wild, who told me he had made 7. for one, from Surrat to Bantam.

A Valuation of certain goods bought at Surrat in India in December 1629. And
sold at Gombroone in Persia, February 1629. viz.
Sugar. 90 per cent profit. Green Ginger 70 per cent. profit. Indico 50 per.
cent. profit. Rice. 50 per. cent. profit. Cotton Wool, 120 p. cent. pro.
Mirabolins, 70 per cent. profit. Shashes, 50 per cent. profit. Saraie Benjamin
double Money. Cardimon. 60 per. cent. profit. Soap. 80 per. cent. profit. Blew
Canches. 40 per cent. profit. Tobacco, 4 for 1 Gunderoone, 47 per cent. profit.
Blew Chundres, or Arse-clout, 40 per cent. profit. Pentadoes. 35. p. cent.
profit. Dry Ginger. 75 per cent. profit. Narrow Baftas. 40 per. c. profit.
Broad Baftas. 30 per cent. profit. Blew Baftas, 40 per cent. profit.
Sugar Candy, 75 per cent. profit. Nosar or Saldermoniack, 65 per cent. profit.
Fincades, 35 per cent. profit. Red Selaies, 70 per cent. profit.
A Valuation of goods bought at Combroone in Persia in February 1629. and sold
at Surrat in India 1629. and in March 1630.
Runas, 50 per cent. profit. Walnuts double Money. Wormseed, 30 per cent.
profit. Cheekens in Gold, 4 per cent. Almonds, 50 per cent. profit. Gauls, 50
per cent. profit. Royalls of 8. 8 per cent. profit. Raysons solis 8 per cent.
profit. Almond large, 30 per cent. profit. Pistachees, 5 per cent. profit.
Rose Water, 20 per cent. profit. ABC or Abcees persia silver coin one and a
half per cent. profit.
With Multitude of other commodities both outward and inwards, between India
and Persia (in especially Spices as Pepper, Cloves, Mace, and Nut-megges) which
malice and revenge, prevented me of the knowledge and insight thereinto, being
most injuriously confined a Prisoner into Persia, and not to carry one penny
worth of goods, for my own Account, which others of far inferior place then
my self, made their voyage in 3. or 4. months worth unto them 1.2.3. or 4.
thousand pounds a man.

There is no Trade like to the Trade of the East India and Asia, Master Lloyds
intelligence
And if there was once a Plantation settled at the Island of Saint Lawrence, in
7. years time there would be a fine Gallant Trade or Commerce; for the Junckes
from many places of India, and diverse other places in Asia, would come and
Trade with you; but he that should happen to be Governor of this Island, must
have a special care, not for to take above two of the hundred for Custom
(which by that means will encourage them for to come the more freely, for to
Trade with them from India to Persia) the next year after we had taken the
Island of Kishme and Ormus in the Gulf of Persia, which I was there, and an
actor in taking of these two Islands, I sold at Gombroone, Tobacco for 20 for
one, Sticklack Pepper; Sugar, Suger-Candy, Dry-Genger, Preserved Ginger,
Preserved Mirabolins, Preserved Bills, Cardimums, Soap, and diverse other
Commodities at 4. for one.

Rice, Cotton-Wooll, 10. for one. Indicoe, Shashes, Narrow Baftas, Broad
Baftas, Birames, Pintathose, Pentolowes and diverse oother Commodities, for one
and one forth per cent. Cloves, Mace, Nut-meggs, Long Pepper, Cuburbs which do
sell at Gombroone dearer then in England. And likewise your Cashaw lignum,
Cashaw Fistula, and China Roots do sell at the like profit; From Persia to
Surrat Horses 3. for one profit, Pearls 20 per cent. profit, Silk. 12. per
cent. Carpits 10 per cent. Ruburb 10 per cent. Assafettida 12 per cent.
Brimston 30 per cent. Lapistutia, 20 per cent. And the last time that I was in
Persia, one Podomsee a Banian Broker of Surrat, and his Brother was the Dutch
Broker, I called him brother, he was my Broker, he gave me a Gold Chain which
came six times about my neck and under my shoulder, very curious work-manship
which cost so much as the Gold: This Pishcash he gave me, to give to my
Mistress; Also this Podomsee did love me better then any English man, he called
me his great Brother, which is in their language Marrabigee (being a good
Lapidarie, having great skill in Pearls:) ( vergenor) and other Banian
Merchants sent him to Persia, paying the President for his passage, and he,
because he loved me so well, would go with me in the same Ship, and diverse
other passengers; And by all means he and diverse other Merchants would return
with me in the Ship Charles, and two days before we came away, he brought to
my house at Gombroone a Supeta and desired me to take great charge of it and
that I would put it into my Cabine: not telling me what was in it, but after we
came to Sea, and bound for Surrat, this Podomsee, with three other Banian
brokers, did open the aforesaid Supeta in my Cabine, and for 14. days
together, they did nothing but sort Pearls, my friend told me, and showed me
Pearls worth 10000 pounds per piece: Some Round, and some Pendant of the
bigness of a Pigeons Egg; some of these Pearls wayed 50. and 55. Carrets a
pecce.

And I asked what that Supeta of Pearls was worth, he told me 10. Millions.
This Podomsee bought some Pearl at Gombroone for me, and also some Diamonds; I
sold my Pearls in England five for one profit, and my Diamonds six for one
profit: upon my credit this is very true.

A man that has any understanding, may see how the Honorable Company is
wronged, and what able men the Committee of this Honorable Society do employ,
for their Factors, sending home Raw Silk, which do make hardly two for one
profit.

CHAP. X. The mighty loss to the Portugalls in Customs, by the loss of
Ormus, which might have been turned to the benefit of the English, who
Conquered it and indiscreetly deserted it to the benefit of the Persians.
THe East India Company at my last arrival from India, hearing that I, Master
Clement, and Captain Wedall, had 18. Balls of Silk, whereof they had us in
examination who bought it, I told them I bought 12. Balls, and that Master
Clement bought six; they asked me what I paid for it I told them the truth,
They told me I bought it so cheap as their Factors did at Spahan, for
Lapistutia, Wormseed, Ruburb, Gauls, Assafettida do make 4. for one profit in
England, there are diverse other Commodities which will make good profit.

Now the Merchants which comes many hundreds of miles, out of the further most
parts of Persia: to meet our Ships at Gombroone, they know we do stay but
about 5. Weeks, and they know that the English and Dutch men, will put off
their goods at very reasonable profit, before they will carry it back again to
Surrat, that is the reason, the prize is so much fallen, as it has been, for
your English Factors will give you so much as the Persians, Banians and Jews,
for they double their Money, to Spahan, your India Merchants do send to Persia
great store of Steel; Tin, and Sinomon, which they make great profit off;
when the Portugalls had Ormus, it was the Gallantest place of Commerce and
Magazine of the world none like it, as Healine reports, (if all the world was a
Ring, Ormus may be the Jem,) Merchants come from most parts of the world for to
trade at it. All Asia did come, and brought Commodities to this famous Island,
the Portugalls took a small Custom of all those that brought goods thither;
the Portugalls lost 260000 pounds yearly, when they lost the City of Ormus (for
Custom of goods) and made the King of Persiapay Custom for their own goods,
otherwise the Portugalls would let nothing pass into the Gulf, the English
went every year with a great Fleet of Ships for to carry a small quantity of
merchandise for to supply their Factory, as Royalls of 8. Cloth, and Tin, so
they brought back some years 150. 250. 300. Balls of Silk, which had it not
been for the Portugals, a small Ship would have been sufficient to have carried
and recarryed our small Cargazeen of goods: For the Portugal kept the Gulf by
force from all Nations, and every year met us with a great Fleet of Ships, at
Cape Gascosse Road, which is entering into the Gulf, and we have had many
great Sea fights with them, which put the East India Company to a very great
charge yearly, nevertheless the Gulf did ever belong to the Persian King,
which bred a heart burning to the Persian Empire.

The next year after the last fight at Cape Gascosse, we went with a great
Fleet into the Gulf of Persia, expecting to have an other Fight with Jack
Portugal; the names of the Ships are these, in the Jonah, Captain Weddall, in
the Whale, Captain Woodcock; in the Dolphen, Captain Stevens; in the Lion,
Captain Beauerstone; in the London, Captain Bligh; in the Rose, Captain
Johnson; and in the Richard Captain Dauice; with the Robert and Shilling,
which were two small Ships of the burden of 200. Tons a piece, all which
Ships were of good force, and carried 236. pieces of Ordinance and
extraordinary well manned, and provided for war; and entering into the Gulf,
came out a boat from Cape Gascoffe Road, with some refreshing, and a letter
from our English Factors, and a letter from the Caune of Persia, and Pilats for
to Pilate our Ships a great way down into the Gulf, to a place where our
Merchants, the Caune and diverse Sultans were, at a place called Custake; at
which place we received 800. Balls of Silk; and there the English and Persians
did enter into Articles to this purpose, that the English would join with the
Persians in the taking the Island of Kishme, and the Island of Ormus, from the
Portugalls. The Persians promised that we should have all the trade of Persia
to our selves, and our Custom free; and half the custom of all other Nations
that brought goods into the Gulf, and the English to have all the Christians
that should be taken at our disposal, and the Persians to have all the
heathens, the Mariners of our Ships to have 6. Months pay gratis, and what
Ammunition we spent in the siege, to be all made good, and the East India
Company to have straight for their Ships, and the English to have half the
Treasure, Pillage, Ammunition, and Ordinance of both the Islands of Kishme, and
Ormus, Ships, Galleys, Frygots, Cities, Towns, Villages; and for to have the
command of the Castles. These in short was agreed upon, which was at that time
of both sides performed. It will be too tedious for me to relate the whole
proceedings. The Portugalls did surrender both the Castle of Kishime to us and
likewise the Castle of Ormus, we gave them two Ships to carry both men, women,
and Children, with some provision, and some Baggage to Muskat; but the Persians
put all the heathens to death, I have seen 1000. heads for a breakfast cut off
in a morning. Although we had the possession of the greatest Jewel of the
world, as Healine and other authors do report; if the Commanders, and those of
the Counsel at that time had had so much understanding as B^lames Ass., they
would not have given it away to the Persians, until such time the King and
State of England had been made acquainted therewith; and also the Honorable
Company of East India adventurers: for Ormus being the primest place of the
world, and the richest trade for the Portugalls, whatsoever they desired for
their Commodities they had, for none brought goods into the Gulf, but they,
for they served all Persia, and most parts of Arabia, and from those parts was
transported into other Countries by Land, and most part of Turkey, and all parts
of Asia, came to trade with them; from all parts of India, from the coast of
Cornidell, Banggalla, from the River of Ganges, from all parts of the Island of
Sumatra, which is the richest Island in all the world, for there is more Gold
upon this Island then all the world beside, for the Poet wrights and calls it
the Gold of Opher, and Solomon had his Gold from this Island, besides many rich
Spices, Gums and Druggs, also from the Straights of Malaco, and from the
Straights of Sindia, Java major, from the coast of Chouchichina, Burnua, the
Molookcos, and from all parts of China, and the Maneelous; from all these parts
they came with Junckes, very richly laden to the Portugals at Ormus, for the
Portugals did make them come to trade with them, otherwise they would make
prize of their Junckes wheresoever they met with them; for the Portugals was as
King of all the Oriental Seas for many hundred of years before the English
ever knew it; at the taking of the Island of Ormus, there was over the
Castle-gate, the date and the year of our Lord God, which was at that time
500. years since they builded the Castle, which I and diverse other English
took special notice of, saying amongst our selves, that the Portugals had been
many years in India, before they builded the Castle of Ormus, and they were
the first that did discover all these rich places of India, and Asia. So all
men may plainly see that the Portugals did make choice of the best places of
their plantations for a Magazine, and the hopefull'st of a commerce of rich
trading. I do verily believe that the City of London and Amsterdam, join them
both together, could not parallel the rich trade of Ormus, when it did flourish
before the English traded into India: and has been such a heart burning to the
Portugal, since, that they have endeavored to raise all their forces in
India, which the least Galloones they had did carry 48. pieces of Brass
Ordinance, besides they had many more out of Spain, many Frigots and Galleys.
And all the prime Commanders, Officers, Mariners, and Common Soldiers made a
great fast; and all took the Sacrament before their great Fleet went out from
Goa, to fight with the English in the Gulf of Persia. The Portugalls taking
the Sacrament, to take and burn and sinck our Ships, and to beat us out of the
Gulf of Persia, which at that time they failed of their purpose: and we could
not make great braggs of our Victory, so every year, we did expect a meeting
with the Portugals: so the English and the Dutch did join together in a Fleet
to overcome the Portugalls and did meet once in two years in the Gulf and had
a great Fight, and the Portugal had almost surprised the Dutch Admiral, if it
had not been for our Vice Admiral, for which afterward the Dutch Admiral
gave our Vice Admiral his Gold Chain for releiving of him, so that their was
no great victory at that time gained, but the Portugals seeing we were to
strong for them, they left us, and went to Muscat to recruit themselves, but
never came into the gulf with their fleet of ships to meet our fleet any
more.

CHAP. XI. A brave Sea fight with the Portugals upon the coast of India,
another brave Sea fight with one English ship against many Portugals in the
gulf of Persia, the Portugals cruelty to our men taken prisoners in cool
blood.
THe Portugals did endeavor before to beat us out of India, because they did
first discover it. And the last fight that ever the Portugals had with the
English in India I was in, the Portugals did challenge both the English and the
Dutch, to fight with them, the Dutch had six sail of ships and the English had
the ship Jonah riding in Swallow road, and the Portugals had their seven great
Galloons and twenty four Frygots each Frygot had 200 men a piece in them, and
the Portugals riding on the other side of the Bar in Swallow hole or road
where we lade and unlade our ships, so that the Portugals could not come to
them, for but one ship at a time can come over the Bar, and at a high water on
a spring tide, so they could not come together. But the Palsgrave, Dolphin and
the ship Lion, coming out of Europe, and we had many sick men in these three
ships and falling on the coast of India between Bassine and Dabull, in the
morning at the sun rising we spied two Frigots which we found to be spies, we
called a counsel presently, and met aboard the Admiral, and all concluded
that the Portugals had a fleet of ships near to Surrat which we found to be
true, and we plying off it up to Surrat with the wind and tide, being short of
Surrat twenty leagues, and in the interim fitting our ships for fight, which
did weary and tire our men, and the two frigots aforesaid keeping us company
with out shot of our Ordinance between the shore and our ships, about twelve of
the clock we spied the Portugals great Armado containing seven great Galloons
and twenty four sail of Frigots, so soon as they had espied us they all
weighed anchor setting sail toward; us, and we making to them, within three
leagues one of another, and making of their colors very plain; one Admiral,
two vice-Admirals, a rear Admiral, and three other great Galoons, with twenty
four Frigots; we did suppose and conclude that the Portugals had another
fleet and had taken Swallow hole or road where we lade and unlade our ships,
because they had two vice Admirals, which was a great policy of the Portugals,
and sending one of our men up into the main top gallant top, espied seven ships
riding in swallow road we all concluded that the Portugals had taken the road:
otherwise if they had been our friends, they would come out and help us, which
said seven ships as we heard the next year was six sail of Dutch ships and
the ship Jonah which the Portugals had challenged to fight with, so that the
Dutch thought themselves too weak to fight with the Portugals. But Captain
Kerredge then being President at Surrat he would have come out with the Jonah
alone to help us, but that he was persuaded to the contrary by the English and
Dutch, so we tacked about for to get sea room, and about two a clock the ship
Palsgrave, Dolphin and Lion, met the Portugals great fleet, all the sails of
their ships crossed with red crosses: they shot at us as though they had been mad
and after they had discharged their Ordinance, our men stood up and played
about them like brave gallant Soldiers, giving the enemy three broad sides for
their one, and about four a clock we shot down the Admirals maine top mast,
at which all our men gave a great shout; and about twelve a clock at night two
of their galloons clapped our rear Admiral aboard, throwing wild fire into
her, that the ship was all of a light fire, and we doing our best (to relieve
her) and being in that great distress the Master caused an anchor to be let
fall, whereupon the two galloons brake off their grabnels from the ship Lion by
reason that the tide does run so strong that the Portugals and we did drive to
sea, and did continue in fight all that night and the next day and the next
night and all the next day and night; so that we did maule them that most of
their masts and yards were shot off: and in the morning they were almost out of
shot of us, we edging to them, I made a shot at the Admiral but he would not
answer us any more, we had spent half our ammunition which we carried out for
the relief of our ships which we had in India; for we did fight three days
and nights, our ordinance went off so fast as small shot, that you could hardly
see the sky for fire and smoke. The Natives of India did see the light of our
powder in the sky, and did hear the report of our ordinance, and also
Captain Weddall in the great James coming from Bantam, on the coast of India;
who did likewise meet pieces of masts, yards, timber and dead men swimming on
the water, and we were at that time about sixty leagues at sea, and yet they
heard and saw the light of our ordnance; so the Portugals was glad to leave us
and went for Goa: and we steered our course for the Island of Sacatora for to
stop our leakes and to mend our ships, being very much battered, shot and
torn, that we had not a yard square canvas in all our sails but that there
was a hole shot through, but all this time we did not know what was become of
the ship Lion, which was our rear Admiral, till the next year; that after
the Portugals galoons broke their grabnels from the ship Lion, could not come
to her any more, because the tide would not suffer them, and the ship Lion
riding at anchor, that in an hours time both we and the Portugals fleet had
lost sight of her; in the mean time the ship Lions company put out their fire,
and throwing many deadmen overboard, whereof the Captain was one, and fitting
their ship for to steer their course for Persia because they all supposed the
Portugals had another fleet at swollow road, because they met us with two vize
Admirals: the Portugals well knowing that the Ship Lion what case she was in,
sending four Frygots after her into the Gulgh of Persia; and these four sail
of frygots went to Muskat for more help to surprise the ship Lion, and in the
mean time the ship Lion arived over against Gombroon and had unladed all their
goods and merchandise, and left it in the costody of Thomas Joyce being pursers
mate of her; and the next day after the Portugals came with twelve frigots and
galleys, and did set upon the ship Lion and after half a days fight all the
frigots and gallyes laid the Lion aboard and did enter her with many men and
they blowed them up, the Portugals did enter them again several times, so
that they were forced to blow up all their deckes with many hundred of the
Portugals, and seeing they could do no good in entering the Lion, then they
fired her with wild fire, that the mast did burn so much that coals fell
down on the deck; our stout gallant English men endeavored still to put out
the fire, and to put the Portugals off which lay round about her (our men
throwing fire balls and pots of powder into them, yet could do no good, for
our men could not use their Ordinance, if they opened a port hole the Portugals
did let fly a hundred small shot in, so that our men could not rowse out a
piece for to do any execution, so that our brave Englishmen were put to their
shifts, either to surrender, or to burn, or else to blew themselves up, so Mr.
Johnson who went out Pursur of her, was by the ships company chosen Captain of
her after the other was slain in fight with us, so with unanimous consent
rather then to yield to the Portugals upon any quarter, saying amongst
themselves, never any English ship was taken or surrendered to the Portugals. So
one gallant Englishman who was both Purser and Captain of the ship Lion seeing
no hope or recovery for to put out the fire, the ship being much burned, that
coals of fire fell down on the deck from the top of the mast: our English
was contented to die with their brave Commander. They all concluded, and in the
first place they all commended their souls into the hands of the Almighty
their Creator, and in the second place, all agreed to lay a train of gunpowder
to the powder room, and so to blow up their ship; before they would be a prey
to the enemy. This sad accident was performed in the twinkling of an eye, and
four great frigots which had two hundred men at the least in each frigot,
which lay aboard of the ship Lion, perished all together: some of our men so
soon as fire was laid to the train leapt over board, and after the blow was
past the other frigots and galleys lying off our ship, seeing our men swimming
in the water for life, shot at them and darted at them with pikes; the
Portugals took up twenty five of our men which was not slain, yet some
wounded, and the next day in cold blood they put all our men to death excepting
one Winterton, which was Steward of the ship Lion. Hugh Frerow being at that
time Admiral of those twelve sail of Frigots and Galleys, and formerly
commander in chief of all the Portugals Sea forces in the Oriental parts; who
many years before we took in the Castle of Kishme, and it was ordered by the
Sea counsel that Hugh Frerow should be sent aboard the ship Lion, and so to
carry him a prisoner to the President and counsel of Surrat. And on the coast
of India, Mr. Beaverstone, Mr. Wheately Purser, Cap. Richard Swanley then
Masters mate, and other Officers of the Lion being very merry, Hugh Frerow
understanding that, took his opportunity, andthe ships long boat being close
by the quarter of the ship, he and his two slaves that tended upon him, he
lying in the round house went over the ships quarter, and got into the boat,
and cutting the boat rope got clean away, and landed near to Surrat river and
so to Daman: the Ship rideing at anchor some five miles from the shore, and
some two hours after coming out of the great cabine missing their boat, and
looking for Hugh Frerow, found that he was gone, and the boat out of sight,
the said Winterton at that time was steward of the Lion, and bringing provision
to the said Frerow during the passage between the Gulf of Persia, and the
coast of India, Hugh Frerow came very well acquainted with Winterton, upon
which he gave him his life, but did put the rest of our men to death as
aforesaid, which was twenty four men; cutting off our men's heads in the prow
of the frigot, and letting the bodies of our men fall into the water, holding
our men by the hair of their heads, because their heads should not fall
overboard, And a ter they had cut off twenty three of our men's heads, the
Masters boy of the Lion being very unwilling to die making great moan and
begging upon his knees to Hugh Frerow for his life, the pretty boy saying, that
he had no hand nor any of his friends in the taking of Ormus, yet all this
could not prevail with the bloody hearted Portugals, and in cold blood (says
Hugh Frerow) cut off his head or else in time he would prove so very a rogue as
the rest, which was at the taking of Ormus; and after so done he caused a long
stick to be put through the cheeks of our men's heads, and put on a raft, and so
to be driven to the Castle of Ormus, that the Persians should see and take
notice how cruelly they had used our men, because we took Ormus from them; and
afterward Hugh Frerow writ a base reproachful letter, but especially to
Captain Weddall, calling him Piscadoris, and sent this letter along by
Winterton, who was an eye witness to this sad tragedy, to our Merchants at
Gombroone; landing him three miles short of the Town of Gombroone. At the Ship
Palsgrave and Dolphins arivall, we understood by good intelligence of the
Natives of India, of the Portugals inveterate divelish malice to us, for taking
Ormus from them, and how all took the Sacrament and swore by the blessed
Virgin Mary, that they would never return to their wives and children, till
they had either taken us, or fired us, or else to sink us; the Portugals had
many fasts to this purpose for to destroy us, and that whenever they took
the English, that then they would cut off all their heads; and the Dutch, that
they would hang them up by the members till they died. This was their malice
because we took Ormus from them, and hindering of them of their trade in
India. This fleet was the greatest that they have had in India; I do believe
and have been credibly informed, that they had in the fight fifty men for one
which was a great advantage, but it was the great mercy of God, to preserve us
from our enemies.

CHAP. XII. The Portugals mediation for peace with the English Nation, the
Persians valuation of Ormus, at twenty Millions of treasure, now they are
possessed thereof, which the English might have enjoyed, if they had had wise
Governors, Committees, and Agents, of the India corporation; the exceeding
folly of the East India court, in sending treasure into Persia, to touch at
Surrat, where the money being invested in commodities would have turned almost
to double money profit, the unconsionable custom of India Courts in not
shipping out our own rich native commodities, which would yield good profit,
but transporting much Gold and Silver, to their countries loss, and proof of
their ill office to the Commonwealth; the way to drive a rich trade into
India, without transportation of treasure. Multitude of English commodities
beneficial for transportation into India, to save exportation of treasure, if
the India courts were good members of the commonwealth; the beneficial trade
in India, between Surrat and Goa near adjacent: all commodities from Surrat to
Bantam vendible, at great beneficial prizes.
THe Portugals never since dared for to attempt to fight with us any more, Mr.
Lloyd, his intelligence.
but the Portugals has endeavored and sent many messengers to the President
and council at Surrat, for to desire that a peace may be concluded between
them and us, which since is performed between the President and Council of
Surrat, and the Viceroy of Goa, and likewise confirmed by both the States of
England, and Spain, but I have heard many Portugals tell me, that the English
has done them more wrong then the Crown of England can make them satisfaction,
for taking Ormus from them, and for to give it to the Persians; I must needs
confess the like was never known, that one Christian warring against another,
and then for to give the prey and all the benefit to the Heathen.

The Persians I am confident will not leave the Castle of Ormus, for twenty
Millions of Treasure. I have been in Persia many times since we took Ormus,
and the Persians has told me as much: the Persians has flourished gallantly
since they have gotten Ormus in their custody, for Gombroon when I first knew
it, had but eighteen houses in it; and now it is a great City or Town as most
in England, it may compare for commerce of trade, that there is not the like
place of trade in all Persia; also it is become the best Port Town and does
bring more custom to the King of Persia, then all the port Towns besides;
this the English might have enjoyed, if they had been wise, or had but good
descreet Factors and Commanders, which has brought such exceeding loss to the
Adventurers, I may boldly say many Millions, since Ormus was taken.

And herein by the way, let not the India Courts at home maliciously malign
(as they have done a long time, to the utter ruin of me and mine, for my good
service done them, and acknowledged by their own acts of Court) for casting
aspertion upon them, (in information to my countrymen in general, and to the
Honorable Adventurers in particular,) of their indiscreet and injuditious
managing the India trade, far from the repute of prudent Merchants, which has
brought such exceeding loss to the Adventurers of the second stock, and to my
self a poor member of the company in particular, which I manifest in these
few words.

The India Court have shipped for many years together great quantities of Silver
and Gold, viz, 20 30 40 or 60 thousand pounds per annum. into Persia to buy
silk, which money has been at all times first brought to Surrat in India, and
from thence transported into Persia untoucht, which being invested at Surrat in
commodities as aforesaid, would have turned to the companies great profit, 40
50 60 or 80 per Cent. (...) money yielded them not a penny profit; for they
might have had the same money in Royals of eight for their commodities at the
port Town of Gombroone, to have fitted their turn at Spahan where it was to be
invested in silk, and if they had carried up the commodities themselves to
Spahan, as the Persia Merchants, that came to the port Town with ready money to
buy the commodities, they might peradventure have advanced their profit as much
more; for it is very probable that Merchants would not come down fifteen
hundred miles by land to buy commodities with ready money, but to their great
advantage.

The India Company transport but little of our native commodities, viz Cloth
and other woollen manufacture, which though they vend not in great quantities,
(as in Germany, Low Countries, Turkey, Muscovia, Denmark etc.) yet when they
are sold they go off at great profit, especially if transported from the port
of Surrat, unto remoter parts of India, and my self have made double and almost
treble money of cloth above the price in London; but the maine of their
exportation is in Gold and Silver, which whether they be good common wealths
men or no I leave to the judicious state of this Land to examine and consider.

But I know and am certainly assured, that a great trade may be driven in India
without any money at all exported (as by experience in the several rich Factors
returned, who carried smaller or no stock at all) (of which I could nominate
many) yet by 5. or 6. years employment or some longer time, have brought home
Estates of 5.10. or 30. thousand pounds a man, their sallery not paying their
charge by a quarter part more or less, which I manifest thus. A good stock
once settled in India of 100000 pounds more or less by goods, of several sorts
exported from England, as Cloth, Kersies, fine light Stuffes, Quicksilver,
Lead, Tin, Iron, Steel, Currall, Amber, Ammell, Tapestry, hangings,
Pictures, Swords, Blades, Knives, Scissers, Sheeres, Rasors, Looking-Glasses,
Glasse-Beads, Spectacles, Locks, Keys, Hinges, Horses, Bitts, Stirrops and
Curry-Combes for Horses and Oxen, and Nails of all sorts; French and
Norrembour toys, etc. Iron-wyer, Brasse-wyer, Shaven-latten, Red, white, and
thin plated Iron, Muskets, Pistolls, Fowling Pieces, Brass and Iron Ordinance,
Conny-Skins, and Lambe-Skins white, and dried in Colors, fit for Persia, and
cold Countries, as Foot-Clothes, Sumpter-Clothes for Cammels, and
Horse-Clothes, for a trial; and to bring Cloth in more use in these hot
Countries, Lists of Clothes (to make Carpets for ordinary people to set upon)
Remnants and Tailors Shreds of Cloth and Velvet, and Satin, and Silk for
imbrodery, and to lay under Carpets and Cover-lids of Colors, Leather
curiously cut out in works and usual in India, and to be brought home for
many uses, some Silk out of Europe of more esteem then India Silk; as colored
Sattens, Taffeties, wrought Taffeties, unwrought Grograms, Tammets, Durettoes,
Says, and other light Stuffes of each some small quantities for trial to
bring them in use, with stripped Hangings, fit for paling to great men's Tents,
with multitude of other English and Europian Commodities to save the
exportation of Gold and Silver, which time and industry of men will find out,
if an open and free trade were for all men to make use of (or in an interloping
trade leaving the quintessence and choycest Commodities to the India company)
these commodities are the chiefest of them with others to be found out (with
some assistance of some reasonable quantity of Gold and Silver at first
tolerated, if which permition) a standing stock may be raised and kept in
India, which with credit will be abundantly heaped upon them, that have but a
small stock in the Country, a mighty trade may be driven to all the Kingdoms
of India and Asia, and to great profit; and the Surplus thereof still yearly
after one or two years made hence into England will much advantage the state
of this Commonwealth (in my simple opinion) and for the better accommodation
of this tradeing, small Ships of a 100. or 200. or 300. Tun may be kept in
India, to make speedier returns then by India Junckes from place to place,
which notwithstanding may be much useful, for ladeing and transporting of
gross commodities, as Cotton, Cottonyarne, Rice, Tobacco, Sugar, Ruinas,
Gauls, Brimstone, Allome and such like, of small valuation yet great in Bulk,
and profitable both for exportation and importation to Surrat and other parts
in India; and the other English Ships to be laded with finer and less bulkey
Commodities, which as long as Peace continues in those parts between us and
the Dutch, and Portugals, there is little or no danger, the seas of themselves
(taking opportunity of the munsones or trade winds) as pleasant sailing in, as
in the River Theames or Narrow seas in fair or summer weather. And this course
as I conceive will save an infinite charge of shipping, which now the company
are and have been at to pass continually between India and England, their
abode in the Country until they be worn out and decayed, and so dangerous to
come home a long voyage; whereas shipping upon advice from India sent out once
a year strong and in good case to stay there a month, two or three for their
relading and recreation, will be of much less Charge and danger in coming
home. What I write here is out of the little intelligence I have gotten by
being one year at the Northern parts of India, at Surrat, and half that time a
close prisoner, most injuriously and wickedly oppressed for my affection and
endeavors to do God and my Country the best service in my poor power. At
Bantam and the Southern parts of India; I never was, and therefore cannot in
large thereupon, but leave it to others of better understanding and abilities
to act that part.

From Surrat to Goa, trade produces 30. 40. and 50. per cent. innumerable of
many sundry sorts of Commodities, (...) after ^Loyd ^^telli^^^ce.
which the Portugals comes to Surrat, and at Combay 100. Sail of Frigots do
lade yearly which I have seen and known to be true, and from Goa to Surrat do
produce 20. 25. 30. per cent. and for Sinomon and Folium-Indium 50. per cent.

From Surrat to Massalapattam with Persia commodities will produce 30. 40. 50.
per cent. by the several Goods expressed as aforesaid brought from Persia to
Surrat.

And from Surrat to Bantam you cannot lay out your money amiss, for the worst
commodities which is vendible for Bantam; will produce 70. 80. per cent. Blew
Byrams Canekeenes, 100. per cent. Pentathoes and checker Stuffes, stripped
Stuffes, Tapeseekes, Pattollowes of Cotton and Pattollowes of Silk, course
Girdles, course Shashes, Indico, blew Chundres, Chaders, and Bralls 110. per
cent. Cotton-wooll, Soap, Cumming seeds, Mustard seeds and wheat 8. 9. 10. for
one profit. There is in most parts of the South seas no Wheat grows, that
there may be many ships laden with Wheat put off yearly at a mighty great
profit, Narrow and broad Baftas white, at 80. 90. per cent. Narrow and Broad
Baftas Blew at 110. 120. per cent. and many innumerable of commodities which
will produce great benefit.

This I know to be true to my knowledge; and Persia commodities do likewise
yield one and a half and two for one profit; before Bantam was opened I have
sold all these particular goods at Jacatra, which the Dutch calls Battavia which
is 13. Leagues beyond Bantam at the several Prices as aforesaid.

And from Bantam most of these commodities is transported to Achine, Tickeo,
Priman, Jambee, Japarra, Macasser and China, which do produce 1.2.3. and 4.
for one profit, so he that does intend for to go to any of these places, I do
wish him not to sell his commodities at Bantam, for there they buy most part of
these goods for to vend at these several places, yet Java Major do vend
abundance of these several particulers aforesaid; this is very true and
certain to my knowledge.

CHAP. XIII. The exceeding rich trade from Surrat to China, and also a rich
trade from China to India, though this beneficial trade be neglected by the
English sluggish injudicious Court Committees; if a free trade were open,
diligent industrous Merchants would leave no place unassayed where there is
great hopes or certain assurance of large profit, the profitable trade from
India to Moco in the Red Sea, the way to enrich our usurers with more security
of conscience by letting Moneys at interest to Heathens rather then to
Christians and at double the Rates, for their greater encouragement.
Industrious men in open trade will find out for more several sorts of
Commodities, then the India injudicious Courts (never exercised in the practick
of that commerce) do look into, and no doubt but as beneficial.
NOw from Surrat to China, Captain Matthew Wills his information.
English Broad Cloth and Kerseys, do produce 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. for one
profit; Indico, Narrow and broad Baftas, Blew Byrams, Cankeens, do produce
6.8. and 10. for one profit, Narrow and broad Baftas, white Pepper, Cloves,
Mace, Nutmeggs, diverse several sorts of goods do produce 3, 4, 5, 6. for one
profit.

This Captain Matthew Wills told me, for he was commander of the Ship London,
which was the first Ship that ever the English had in those parts, for the
Portugals did Freight him by the consent of the President and Council of
Surrat, the reason was that the Dutch and Portugals was at difference at that
time, so that they were feign to freight one of our Ships presently after the
Peace was concluded between the English and Portugals; and from China to Goa
and so to Surrat produced mighty profit in several commodities, as China raw
Silk, and woven Silk, in abundance of varieties of all Stuffes, Cobweb
Lawnes, Cloth of Gold, Tissue, and silver, for a boult of rich Damask
containing 32. yards, for 3. or 4. Rials of 8. a piece; of China Earthen ware,
they bought for little or nothing far cheaper then we buy our Earthen ware in
England, China Roots, and diverse other druggs and commodities, for there is
great store of Coper, worth little or nothing, and great store of Gold; for the
Portugals brought abundance of Gold cast in the fashion of Sugar-loves, and do
produce 40. 45. and 50. per cent profit in India, But from Bantam, Macasser,
Japarra, Jambee, Achine, Tickeo; Prima^, do yield many rich commodities,
Cloves, Mace, Nutmeggs, Tortleshells, long Pepper, white Pepper, and several
sorts of round Pepper, Cuburbs, Cashaw-Lignum, Cashaw-Fis^ula, Lignum-Allowes,
Ruburb, China Roots, China Ginger preserved, Tamerin preserved China Ware,
Musk, Civet, and diverse of innumerable of druggs and commodities which do
produce 2. 3. 4. for one profit in Persia and Moco in the Red Sea; these
commodities will yield good profit at Surrat, but not so much as at Moco or
Persia, I bought at Battavia 6. Butts of Tortle Shells which I sold at Surrat
for two for one profit; and diverse other several sorts of commodities as
aforesaid, which I sold at Surrat for 50. 60. 70. and 80. per cent: which at
that time we bought our commodities at Battavia, which was at the worst hand
because the Dutch made the Chinaces, Javaes, pay custom in their own Country
and all other Nations both in and out, for then at that time Bantam was not
opened; and after the English went to Bantam the Javaes came within the Dutch
Court of Guard, and entered into the Town of Jacatra, and killed many of the
Dutch, and made them fly into the Castle, and the Javaes persuing of them to
the Castle walls, for they hate a Dutch man so bad as the devil, and do love
the English extraordinary well, so since Jacatra which the Dutch call Battaiva
which in English is new Holland, is not one third part so big as it has
been, because that the Javaes does Sally into the Town and burn it, the
Javaes are very desperate. About 20. years since the Dutch had three men of
War riding in Bantam road, the Admiral carried 36. Pieces of Ordinance, the
Vice Admiral 32. Pieces, the Rear-Admirall 26. Pieces, there came three Javaes
in a little Boat aboard the Admiral, two of them went into the great Cabbine,
and killed the Captain, Master, two Merchants and three men more, and yet these
three Javaes got off clear: I saw these Ships in Bantam Road; also the trade is
very much decayed, the Dutch has not the sixth part of custom and other duties
as they had formerly. So much for the Southern parts in brief,

From Surrat to Moco in the Red Sea, Tobacco does produce 10. and 12. for one
profit, Rice does produce 6. and 7. for one profit, China ware 4. and 5. for
one profit, Cloves, Mace; Nutmegs, and Pepper, do produce two for one profit,
narrow and broad Baftas white, 70. per cent. Narrow Bastas blew, Byrames and
Canikeenes two for one profit, Chaders, Bralls, Pentathose, Barbers aprons,
Sallowes, fine Shashes, course Shashes, course and fine Girdles, do produce
two and a quarter for one profit, Sugar, Ginger, preserved, Suger-candy,
Cotten-wooll, Cardimons, Soap, and Shoes, will produce two and three for one
profit: also, all your Persian commodities will yield very good profit at Moco.

There is diverse sorts of several commodities which you bring from Surrat, and
out of the South-seas which produce 2, 3, 4, and 5. for one profit; this I know
to be true, for I have sold many of these commodities as aforesaid at Moco.

And from Moco to Surrat, Estridges Feathers, Ruinas, Opium, Beazer Stones,
Cloth of Tissue, many rich Gums and Druggs, which do produce two for one
profit and upwards; but for your Estridge-Feathers, I do wish no man to sell
them at Surrat but for to bring them for England, for I have made ten for one
profit selling of them in England.

And now I do return to the first center from which I began: The Island of
Madagascar or St. Lawrence, a gallant commerce of trade may be made in few
years, if wise and discreet men had but the managing of it, in a very short
time it might be made a second Ormus, for it does stand in the very center of
the world for trade withal Nations, and nearer by 2000. Leagues then Ormus was
to all Nations in Asia, for the Northermost part of this Island does lie within
eleven degrees and a half of the Equinoctial, which is very near to Cape
Comrine, which is the Southern most part of India; so that, most parts in
India, Asia, Africa, do lie near adjacent to Madagascar, and many commodities
which this Island does afford is transported to the neighboring Countries as
aforementioned: and in short time all the Countries in Asia and India would
come and trade with you, and Portugals and many other Nations if once a trade
was settled.

Eccles. 34. 9, 10, 11. and 12.
9 A man that has traveled, knows many things, and he that has much
experience will declare wisdom. 10 He that has no experience knows little:
but he that has travailed is full of Prudence. 11 When I traveled, I saw many
things: and I understand more then I can express. 12 I was often times in danger
of death, yet I was delivered because of these things.
1 Samuel 17. 29. What I have I now done is where not a cause.

There is yet another good way in my weak Judgment to raise a great fortune
and increase of wealth thereby which me thinks our rich usurers and money
Mongers should look after, and that is by raising a banck or stock in India,
to be put out at interest at the usual rates there, that is one pound, and one
pound and five shillings a month, or more; accompting 28. days to a month,
the time of the moons circumference, which makes 13. months in the year,
and so produces 13.1. per cent. interest, per an. at the least rate, and 16.
pounds 5. shillings per cent. at the highest rate; which is double the rate in
Christendom, and not so offensive to God in letting out money to the h^ath^n
and Idolatrous people, and the hazard of breaking and loosing of their
principal nothing at all dangerous, or far less then in England, the name
of a Bankroupt being more odious, and stricter Laws to bind men to honest
performance of such covenants: and the usurers or money masters in banck may
get more, and advance their estates by furnishing men with moneys (or wares at
a dearer rate, provided in fitting season) upon their several voyages to
Persia, Bantam, Moco, etc. at 20. or 25. per cent. profit or more at the ships
return, bend^s the over ratement of their goods 10. or 20. per cent. which in
all will produce 30. or 40. per cent. profit or more, which is usual in 6.
months or shorter time, and at 60. per cent. profit to Achin upon a years
voyage or less, more then the overratement; and the superfluity of their stock
may be returned home by exchange either to English at 50. per cent. profit or
dearer rates, especially to Dutch and Portugals, etc. and away by exchange may
peradventure be found from Persia into Turkey to Constantinople at a far
greater advantage; for the usual Rates of the exchange from India to Spahan in
Persia (at my being in those parts) was 60. per cent. profit, and sure from
Spahan to Constantinople will be an advantage gotten, and so also raised from
Constantinople to London, to the Bankers great improvement of their stock, and
a good help or stay in these obstructive dangerous plundering times, to have
some part of their Estates abroad in security to great advantage, rather then
to hide it in the earth (where no doubt but much treasure is at this time
hidden in England) to preserve it from the spoiling hands of Malignant
Plunderers, as it is often times (to their griefs) met withal, or utterly
lost to their posterity (through great secrecy) thus much for the trade
outward, and in India, and now for the trade home wards from India, that is
most beneficial and advantageous making 3. 4. or 5. for one or more as before
I have related.

The commodities from thence are innumerable and of many sundry sorts all
beneficial, yet the India company looks after noon but the chief, as
Callocoes, or Bastas broad and narrow, (white and colored) Dimmities,
Necaines, Saloes, Pintadoes and other sorts of Lynnen or Stuffes made of Cotton
Yarne, and Cotton Yarne it self, and Cotton wool, and Spices of all sorts, as
Pepper, Cloves and Mace, Cynomon and Ginger, Sugar, Wormeseed, Rubarb, and
Green-Ginger, China Roots, and many sorts of druggs, and Salt-Peeter, Indico,
Gulmack, musk, Civet, Ambergris, Pearl, and Diamonds, etc. of which sorts
some also they regard not but permit their Merchants (servants and seamen) to
trade in also, excepting Chiefly, Linnens, Spices and Indico and some other of
special note for most profit.

But India affords and would afford many more rich commodities to industrious
understanding Merchants, either in an open free or interloping trade, if men
might have liberty and convenience to pass into India.

Those which Judgment leads me to conceave beneficial (and which if I could
have obtained liberty for my passage into India for considerable freight, which
was maliciously denied me (a member of the company) and granted (to Aliens) and
strangers of foreign Nations, Enemies in religion, and to the accord of
commerce (gratis) I would have put in practice and made trial to mine own and
Countries welfare, according to that small insight I had attained by my short
time of abode in that Country) are these as follows, besides those before
mentioned and neglected by the India company, of which none have yet made trial
of or very few, and are not nor should not have been prejudicial to the
company in no degree: As Gunpowder, and Soap, for a penny a pound, better then
our Castle Soap; dying stuffes, and the ingredients thereto, and skill to make
the Colors to hold as in India, Pintadoes, which our English dyers much
effects and desires (as I have heard say) the Art thereof, and the Art of
laying on Gumlack in colors upon Turners wa^e, much desired in England, also
Cammels hair, for Beaver-makers, and Felt-makers, brought over rough and
unpickt and sold by Turkey Merchants for about 18. per pound, but might be had
cheaper in India and Persia then in Turkey, and the hairs thereof being picked
out in India, as at home it costeth the Beaver maker 9 pence per pound, the
picking may be done in India for a penney the pound or thereabouts, and takes
away almost one half of the weight, then its worth 4. shilling per pound, and
is far less Bulkey and more fitting for transportation, and is better hair
then that brought out of Turkey, as a Pattern of a Felt made in Persia showed
to a Beaver-maker (Master Rogers by name) who vallued the Felt at 30.
shillings, and cost me in Persia not above five shillings at the most, and from
thence by his advice its possible to bring Felts ready fitted to the Block for
any fashion in request, at far cheaper rates then to be made in England; also
in these distractive, murdering, killing times of war, Buffe to be made in
India would prove an excellent good and profitable commodity, to be made much
better of their strong Busttle hides, and far cheaper then at home.

Persia sheepe-skins an excellent Fur, fine and warm, worn by Princes in
Christendom, and useful to make Cover-lidds like Ruggs for great Persons
Bedds, bring soft as Silk, and finely Curled and of a Grayish color, of which
I know none but my self have ever made trial of, and sold them to good profit
and more might have made of them but that I sold them to a friend, I would have
put many commodities to the trial of making their which the Country yet
affords not, as Fustians, strong, Dimmities, fine and course Buckerams black,
and in colors, all sorts of Tapes made of calico, fine and course, broad and
narrow, Leather Tand or untand and in colors, Goat Skins, Parchment, and
Paper, fitted to the sizes in England, and Gilded Leather for Hangings,
curious Painted and Gilded Bedsteeds, Stools, Chaires, round Tables inlaid
with mother of Pearl, Aggets and Cornelians, Quilts, Curtains and hangings of
Silk, Pintadoes and fine imbrodred guilted Cappes, Wastcoats, and underbreeches
for men, excellent for use and cheap, and some for women, both for rich and
poor, Covers for Books of all sizes, excellent good and cheap
Estridge-Feathers, Leather and Paper Fannas, curiously wrought and gilded for
Gentle-women, Bead^s, Pendants, and Rings of many sorts of Stones, as
Crystal, Agget, Cornelion, Jasper, Elitropian, etc. Agget Cups and Dishes of
several sorts, and Turtle Shells, with curious Chests, Cabinets and Boxes of
Ivory and Ebony, inlay'd with several materials, Silk of all sorts, China,
Persia and India Velvets, Sattens, Taffities, Damasks, Persia Mellicks wrought
with Gold, and India Cottens, also variety of desirable Stones of several
sorts, fit for Tomb-makers, Chimny Pieces, and Pavements, for Noblemen and
great persons, Summer-Roomes, cut and carved in several Fashions, Formea and
Figures, according to Musters in other materials, in regard of their cheapnesse
and workeman-ship, in cutting such hard Stones in India will be of much Account
in this Kingdom and ^se where among persons of several qualities, conditions,
and Arts. The variety of several commodities is so great and their quantities
to be had in these parts, that I should spend a great deal of time and Paper
in recounting them, and yet should not be able to reckon up halt their numbers;
for new will daily be found out if open or free Trade were once on Foot; all
which would convert to the benefit of the plantation at Saint Lawrence or
Madagascars and no doubt but employ much more shipping, and men to be made
active and skillful Mariners and Seamen then yet that trade has produced. If
I had made another voyage into India I would have endeavored to have
transported Maultilers, distillers of Strong Water, Brewers of Beer and Wine,
makers of Tobacco, Cutters to have made India Tobacco, Curers to have made
India Tobacco (ill cured there) as good as Vrinas or other Countries of far
greater esteem in Persia) yet that of India yielded in Persia as before
mentioned four for one; Gardiners, Painters, or good Picture makers,
Clock-makers, etc. with mow^^ and their utensels to teach the Indians the use
of Hay-making, (...) of which in time of drought (commonly 6. or 7. (...) and
almost starved, which might also (...) my Contrymen. I would also have (...)
of Flax and Hemp by transporting seed thither, which it should take effect and
grow as in cooler Countries Chritian Linen (as I call it) would be made there
and brought into all parts of Christendom at far cheaper rates then now it
is at, and be of more esteem in India and other Eastern Countries then
Callicoes or other heathen Linen, and all these things whatsoever mentioned in
this Treatise, the plantation at Madagascar or Saint Lawrence may have the
benefit and accommodation thereof, either by manufacture already made or to be
put in practice there, in regard of the cheapnesse of the labors of men women
and Children in India, at a penny, three half pence, or two pence a day to
maintain themselves and families, and much more cheaper may it be done at
Madagascar, where all sorts of better diet may be had, cheaper then in India,
and slaves both in Madagascar and India and other parts may be bought for a
trifle, besides the Plantation once settled, multitude of arts men would flock
out of India and other parts to live among Christians, where they may be more
free from injustice and wrong, tirranny and oppression, then in any Eastern or
Asian Kingdoms else besides; yet one thing more I have forgot concerning
defense against Foreign Enemies or Natives; for Foreign Enemies, that
requires greater Judgment then for mine fortification defensive and offensive,
to which I refer my Censure but for defense or offense against the Natives
(Salvages) its more ease to defend or resist then in any other habitable places
of the world, where English have seated themselves.

For (as I understand it) they (the Salvages elsewhere) have not only Darts,
but Bows and Arrows more dangerous to annoy a far off, and more numerous to
discharge, as also great knotty Clubbs, but here at Saint Lawrence they have no
weapons but Darts, and of them not numerous, nor easy to carry; and for
defense of or from them I will make bold to lend my advice; In India Buffe (as
before mentioned) may be had in great quantities and very cheap, with which
men being armed only upon their Shirts and Linen breeches, with Coats and
breeches, and if they please Buskins to tie about their Legs, there is no
fear of Darts to hurt or annoy them as I conceave, which also is lighter and
easier then other Iron Arms; for offense to them, light Muskets, Carbines are
useful, and fowling Pieces will do good Service; to them may be added light
short Swords, and dainty light Bucklers to be had in India: and also India
light and short Bows with forked or broad Arrow heads exceeding cheap, which
notwithstanding their Gunnes and Swords and Bucklers they usually have both
Bows and Arrows in a light quiver, at their backs, and by which Children or
Boys of 10. or 12. years of age may do good Service against the Salvages,
who may keep themselves in safety at further distance then their Darts can
reach, and yet annoy the Enemy exceedingly If he State of this land please to
lay some easy imposte or excise upon trade in general, to and from India, and
from port to port their, and to other Eastern Countries, it will be no burden
but an exceeding gainful Trade, and exceeding helpful and advantageous to the
Plantation. As also a Remonstrance set out in public, to excite men both
traders and others, to voluntary contribution, it will also much a veil (as by
example) even aboard the English fleet Anno 1628. consisting only of two
Ships, the Jonas 7. or 800. Tun and Expedition about 200. Tun, Captain Swanly
Admiral, at whose motion the whole Fleet of poor Seamen, contributed 250.
pounds toward the furtherance of an Hospital at Black Wall for the relief
of decayed or wounded India Seamen, with a provisoe that the India Court
should fix in the said Hospital in some convenient place, a table fairly
written, expressing every Benefactors name, with his sum contributed, purposely
required for the encouragement of others to follow their example, and not to
forbear such charitable actions, which some Seamen excepted against having
formerly contributed to Schools and Churches in Virginia, and Wapping Church,
and other men assumed the glory to themselves, which much discouraged them; and
must needs be a blur to the India Court to reject their voluntary contribution,
by subscription to be abated out of their wages, in neglecting and refusing
such free benevolence, which being followed was hoped and promised by all
Merchants, and Seamen, would have ere this day have amounted to such a
considerable sum of money as would have purchased many hundred yea perhaps
thousands of pounds per annum. 10 that Hospital. But that clause or provisoe,
to have the Benefactors names set up (as before related) in the Hospital, has
caused the same to be had still in contempt or of little use, because it should
not dim the India Governors and Committees their fames and estimations, by
raising an Hospital out of their poor servants purses, and shame of their
own backwardness. But such free benevolence and contribution to the
furtherance of the plantation, and set on foot (which I persuade my self will
be much more enlarged by Merchants and Sea men, that know or conceive the
accommodation thereof) will add exceedingly to the bringing that business in
a short time to good perfection.

And if his Majesty please to add or bestow, titles of honor or dignity to
deserving men, according to the number of the people they transport, plant and
settle their habitation in Madagascar at their own charge: to be conferred
upon them either imediately by himself, or else in that Country by a Viceroy,
Lieutenant, or Deputy, authorized by his Majesty thereunto, (as honor of that
Country to be of great esteem) it may peradventure induice rich monied men,
Gentlemen and Younger Brothers, etc. to be more forward in the accomplishment
of this worthy design to its better perfection.

It Is now about thirteen years since I returned from India, and in the way
home from Saint Laurence, my affections have ever since been bent again to
these parts, and to endeavor to do my King and Country service, as well as to
benefit my self, and to that end gave the India Court some hint or
intelligence thereof, which they contemned. But envey, malice, revenge, and
cruel oppression, has hundred it for nine years together, before I could
come to any (though bad end) with the Indian Court for the intollorable wrongs
sustained by them and their servants: and sithence sickness now almost six
years complete has let me to undertake again that voyage (either by
Dutch or Portugals Ships which I intended having most maliciously been denied
my passage in the English Ships) and now in regard sickness has so
debilitated my body in all parts and members thereof, that I am not able to go
or ride, and with much pain impulsed to scrubble this rude discourse, and
being aged sixty years, and now not fit for travel, having one foot and more
already in the grave, and so dearly affecting the furtherance of this so
hopeful and accommodable a plantation, especially in this turbulent
troublesome and obstructive times, which causes many good men and women, to
forsake their native Country, I have attempted (presuming upon courtuous
acceptance, the maine and I expect and look after) to publish this rude yet
true discourse or tracktat, as many witnesses yet living (I doubt not) but will
give good testimony of what I have herein related, as that worthy noble
Captain (so well approved of by the right Honorouble the high Court of
Parliament) Richard Swanley, Mr. Gregory Clements, and Mr. John Cartwright,
Merchants, Captain William Swanley, Cap. John Proud, Mr. Walter Hamond
Chirugion, and Mr. George Gosnell Purse's mate in the Charles, Captain John
Weddall Admiral but dead, John Hamerton and Thomas White, Citizens of London,
and abundance of Seamen more whose names I have now forgotten or not living as
also Mr. Richard Wild and Mr. George Page, though deadly adversaries to me and
mine (not only maliciously threatening but wickedly executing our ruin, all at
one time resident at Saint Laurence three months together) and I appeal also
to the testimony of M. William Methold, at present Deputy governor of the
India Company, and Mr. Thomas Kirridge, a present Committee therein, and many
Southern factors with whom I have no acquaintance, hoping that some of them
whose abilities and judgments exceed mine, will for the Glory of God and the
good of their King and Country, add their more prevalent persuasions both by
tongne and per, to this most honorable and famous action; for want of which my
prayers to God shall not be wanting to put good Christians in mind to
undertake this most honorable pious action, and to prosper their handiworke
therein, to Gods glory, the honor of King Charles, and his Royal Issue, and
my endeared native Country its welfare and accommodation, which my rude pen has
begun, and as it were broken the Ice for their more clear and easy passage to
so good and pious a work, which I much desire and should joy to see performed,
as also more especially to see or hear that the right honorable the High
Court of Parliament, would take it into their consideration to make it a
business of much good consequence to the state of this Kingdom; or others,
Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, etc. had begun to set the action on
foot, wishing also that I had either ability of purse or strength of body,
(being at present descrepit in all my limbs) to further the same which I would
not spare, though assured to be no gainer thereby my self, and though I should
in that action lose my life, and bury my bones in the vast ocean sea, or in a
barbarous Country.

CHAP. XIIII. A beneficial trade to be made at the Port of Swollow road, where
all Christian Ships and others resort at fitting times; encouragement to young
Merchants or decayed persons of a good and honest repute at home in their own
Country, a means to draw on Adventures in purse and person to Madagascar.
ONe thing I had forgotten which now comes to my mind, which will with all the
other advantages in trade, add much to the benefit, either of private men, or
to the accommodation of the plantation as aforesaid, and that is as follows;
at Swollow road, the port or haven for Ships sent to Surrat in India, upon the
shore in open fields is usually kept a Bazor, Market or Fair, during the abode
of the English Ships there, which sometime lasts a month two or three
together, where the English have a Tent for their President or Council to sit
or lie in at their pleasure, and their to are annexed a Tent for the Merchants
of the Maryne, the Companie's servants, (so called because they are allotted to
do service there in lading and relading of the Ships) and the English house
Purser or his Mate, has another Tent accommodable for him to give order for
buying provision of fresh victuals for the Ships, and other services. And the
Dutch company likewise have the same convenience, distant about a quarter of a
mile one from the other. But the Bazor or market place for provision of
victuals, or for sea commodities, and Mariners their investments for
merchandising of all sorts, is annexed to the English Tent, like a little Town,
with a street or two, and many Tents of Banians, richly furnished with all
manner of wares, which they sell both to English and Dutch, but most to the
English, who are the more Royal Merchants; and the Banians buy also such goods
as they bring out of England, or from other parts in India, where they have
been in trading. By which means the Banians get great store of wealth by such
trading at the Maryne, with English, Dutch, Portugals, and others; the benefit
whereof may all be accrewed to the English, which had I gone a second voyage
for India, either for the company if they thought good, or my self, I would
have put in practice, and am assured of great advantage and profit to have
redounded thereby; and the more encouragement I had thereunto by some of the
chiefest Banians themselves, who put it into my head, and promised to be my
assistants therein and laid me down a way how to effect the same to my great
profit, viz by buying in the time of raynes 56 or 7 months time beforehand all
sorts of vendible commodities fit for sale at the ships arival, and to sell the
same again unto the seamen and mariners at 20 or 30 per cent. profit, ready
money; and faithfully promised to assist me with moneis for the investments at
easy rates, and so to put them off again for me as aforesaid, some good
experience I had of their affection and fidelity toward me in a high degree,
though a close prisoner.

It fortuned that during that time the ship Jonah returned from Bantam to
Surrat with store of Spices, especially Cloves, which at their departure from
Surrat to Bantam, and about six months past were a drug or unvendible
commodity, but at the Ships arival inhausted suddenly to a great price, to
almost double money the price they cost at Bantam, whereupon the Banian Usurers
and Brokers pitying my intolerable wrongs, came to visit me and offered me
great courtesies beyond my expectations, which was in advising me to buy up
presently all the Cloves in the Ship Jonah, amounting to many thousand pounds,
and they would sell them again for me to 40 50 or 60, per cent. profit, I made
them courteous and thankful reply for their freindly advice, and made known
unto them the impossibility in me to effect it, partly in regard for want of
moneys to buy them up, which must be with ready money, and partly in regard I
was a prisoner and had not liberty to go about such or any other business. To
both which impediments in me, they propounded present cure and accommodation,
and first for moneys they would supply me, with such quantities as the
business should require; and secondly, for want of my liberty, they advised me
presently to write to Captain Richard Swanley, Commander of the Ship Jonah,
with whom they knew I had good correspondency and friendly familiarity, to
procure his assistance therein, upon which their encouragement and friendly
persuasions; I wrote presently to Captain Swanley, to entreat his furtherance
therein, and to allot him the half share therein, and to furnish him with
money, but he being overawed by the usurping power of a tyranus Prendent, with
whom at that present he was out of favor, durst not attempt the business,
which might have been beneficial to us both some thousand of pounds, which by
his neglect, fell into the hands of his and my adversaries, Richard Wild
President, and George Page one of the Counsel

And this I conceive needful to manifest for two reasons, the one to give
information what benefit may be made by the Marine trade only, without
ventering further to sea, which my self if I could have obtained (but most
ungratefully denied) passage into India for my money (which was freely given to
aliens and strangers) I would have made my chiefest investments in that way of
commerce (which would not in any sort have been prejuditiall to the India
Company) and would not have doubted thereby to have raised as great or greater
fortune to my self proportionable to my pains and small adventure, then the
India Court has done or is like to do to the honorable Companies
advancement, with their Massy Hock and credit, which perhaps was the cause of
their envy toward me, least it should turn to their great reproo^e. The
other reason is for the encouragement of all honest industrious Merchants,
whose fortunes have failed in their lawful vocations, especially my dearly
affected Brethren the Merchant Adventurers of England, (who in regard of their
best acquaintance and intelligence in general who above all other Merchants)
with various multitudes of Europian commodities and manufactures, fit for
traffact and commerce) are the fittest men for these India employments, both
for exportation and importation) whose welfare prosperity and felicity I wish
as my own) these Merchants I say or other, if they have lived at whom or
abroad in credit which the Banians of India make good inquiry after, and demean
themselves civilly in India, not rioting and lavishing in those unhealthfull
and dangerous sins to purse, body, and soul, Sha viva venus deport
themselves affably and courteously toward the Banians, who themselves will do
no great wrongs nor offer affront to any but will patiently bear all affronts
and not resist in word or deed (but yet perhaps will conceal malice along
time, until opportunity to wreake private revenge) they shall never want
credit to far greater sums then they shall either need or reasonably desire.

I will yet make bold to add somewhat more, to the furtherance of this
plantation, If such course or better (as wiser men then my self shall
conceive) be taken to encourage adventurers as was used at the first plantation
of Virginia, it would peradventure prove succesfull (in my weak apprehension)
this is to allot every adventurer a 100 acres of Land for every 12 pound 10
shillings or less disbursed upon superscription in a brook to that purpose,
and proportionable for smaller sums of moneys, though but 20 shillings
adventure but none lower, which my foolish conceit leads me to imagine, will
make the adventures to rise to a greater and more considerable sum, to set that
work afoote more speedily, laying aside the advancement, by way of Lottery so
much asperced with infamy for robbing of poor people, and waste ull expense of
a vast sum so collected, as in the last project for Virginia, unless upon
better approbation, and prevention by the States of this Kingdom, moreover to
allot every laboring man or artificer, that will adventure his person, and
bear his own charge, a 100 acres of land free inheritance: and if some
reasonable proportion be allotted to women in that kind, it may peradventure
add encouragement to them the sooner to adventure their persons in the voyage,
also to proportion to every apprentice, (youth, boy, or young maid or girl,)
transported at their matters c^arge after the expiration of seven years, the
inheritance of a 100 acres more or less as wiser judgments shall better
approve of.

And no doubt but if Commission be given to the Justices of every County, and
Corporation in England (with encouragement of the Godly Ministers in their
several parishes to incite men thereunto by application of the glory done to
God, to conver ignorant souls to Christianity, to add honor and renown to
their gracious Sovereign, and is royal posterity, by enlargement of his
dominions, to accommodate the welfare of their own native Country, and comfort
to their poor Christian Brethren therein, with the great hopeful assurance to
raise their own fortunes and posterity to great wealth and dignity) to frame
books for superscriptions to that purpose, and show their forwardness by
their own good example, it will draw on adventurers apace, and cause that most
worthy famous Plantation to flourish suddenly. And if freedom of customs be
for a time remitted as at present to the adventurers, to Trenedado in America,
it will also add greater encouragement to the undertakers of this worthy noble
action.

CHAP. XV. The valor of the English Nation against the Salvages in Virginia
and New England, also of the Spaniards against a civil nation in America, or
the west Indies, also of the Spaniards and Portugals against the Brasilians,
and against the Indians a mighty warlike nation, also the design of other
Nations, jeering us for not settling a plantation somewhere in India for our
succor and defense, ought to stir us up to such an enterprise, the honor
and blessing of a pious christian nation, to settle true religion among
Idolatrous heathen people, to Gods glory and honor; The barbarous cruel
oppression of the Dutch against the English at Amboyna in east India, being to
mighty and to strong for the English to resist.
IF any yet object the difficulty of settling a hrme plantation in this
excellent country of Madagaicar, in regard of the large extent thereof, and
multitude of inhabitants therein (as Moses foretold what the children of
Israel might pretend) saying in their hearts this nation is more then I how
can I cast them out; Moses made reply and said, thou shall not fear them, but
remember what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh and unto all Egypt, for the
Lord thy God is among you, a God mighty and dreadful, and surely if we of
England take this work in hand to Gods glory as they did (though not to cast
out but to convert souls) so shall the Lord our God do unto all the people
whose face we fear, either to convert or to confound them, let us again
consider this peoples nakedness, their want of Arms and unskilfullnesse in
managing war, against experienced and well fenced soldiers, and let them
also take notice of our nations valor pains and enterprises, of greater
difficulty and hazard, and no way so comparable for pleasure, profit,
convenience, and accommodation, as in Virginia and New England, and let them
moreover call to mind the valor of the Spaniards in America, in conquering
the great and rich Empire of west India, with a handful of men in comparison
of the multitudes of the people therein, who (as I take it being long since and
many years past, since I read that story) with 300) orse entered the great City
of Mexico, and took their Emperor prisoner, in the company of multitudes of
this people, riding in his throne of State upon men's shoulders. Let them yet
not also forget the Spaniards or Portugals their conquest over Brasillia that
populous nation: and of the Portugals in East India forceing trade and
commerce, and building strong Cities and Forts, inhabiting therein in very
prime places of India, as Goa, Dua, Damon, Dabull, Muscat, Mallaco, etc. maugre
the opposition of a mighty warlike Emperous the great Mogull, and the like at
Ormus in Persia volens nolens, that most famous ancient warlike Nations, King
and Kingdom of Persia, in an Island within three leagues of his maine Land,
that afforded not the planters any succor at all, not so much as timber to
build or wood to make fires withal, or cattle or grain to feed upon, or
grass to sustain cattle, no not so much as a drop of fresh water to quench
their thirst, in so hot a clymate, but what the dewes from heaven afforded
them, or they brought with them, or forced their sustenance from the Persian
and Arabian coasts near adjacent, and yet brought their admirable work to
royal perfection, building that famous sumptuous rich strong City and Castle
therein, surpassing the chief Cities of the world for wealth, for which it was
accounted as the Diamond in the Ring, so the chiefest City for wealth in the
round ring of the world, until the English for wrong 'sustained by or from the
Portugals, over came it, and beat them out thereof (with the assistance of the
Persians by land) and most indiscreetly left it to the disposal of the King of
Persia; who would have been glad that the English would have kept it in their
possession. But now having found that sweetness of the enjoyment, many hundred
thousand pounds will not recover it again, from him to its former perfection.

And let us not contemn the valor of the Hollanders who in our days
indespite of that mighty Emperor of Java Major, have builded themselves a
famous strong City in his Country formerly called Jacatra, but since called
Batavia, (the ancient name by report, of Holland) for which the Emperor was so
enraged against the Dutch, that at my being in India, in the year 1629. the
report was that he vowed by his heathen Gods, to race the City and expel the
Dutch, though with the loss of the lives of many 100000 of his people (a most
desparate daring nation of them selves, who will venture upon most desperate
designs though apparent death before their eyes, as many experiences have bin
proved of late; a desperate enraged Java adventured to come a beard an English
Ship himself, with an intent to kill all the men aboard, or to die himself;
upon which desperate design he flew 4. 5. or 6. English or more before the
rest could knock out his brains and slay him) whom yet he threatened and put in
execution to scaile their walls with heaps of his own subjects dead bodies,
forcing them on by an Army behind them to hinder their retreat, but to this
day cannot prevail against them. Then why should the English Nation be
daunted; so famous for valor in all parts of the known world, to enterprise
this most noble and beneficial plantation, that ever was yet attempted, and
defended (if quarrelsshould arise) to cause to take arms against such weak
and impotent people as well (if not more rather) then at present the
adventurers into Trenedado in America, to a place (as I conceive) strongly
defended by Spaniards, who will oppose our Nation, with their utmost force and
policy as to their most deadly foes (though at present counterfeit friends)
how necessary is also this plantation in regard of the trade and commerce
already on foot by the English in India, our own: Nation (especially Merchants
and Seamen acquainted therewith are capable of.) And other Christian Nations
jeere us for not settling a place of refuge for our selves (in 30. years time
as some of them have attained to great perfection in shorter time) upon any
occasion either prevention of distaste to the English inhabiting among the
tyranous jealous nations of Moors) to fetch them off in time of danger, if
contention or cause of difference should happen as is likely, and we have had
experience thereof who upon every slight occasion terrify our people with
whipping and chawbucking, and often impose upon them great fines and mucts,
with strict hard and cruel imprisonments until they have enforced the payment
of their unjust oppressions, or for preventing our own or other nations from
robbing, sea roving and piracy in those parts, to the great damage of the
English Nation, which this plantation well accommodated will give good remedy
there against: or to preserve the credit accommodation and reputation of the
English by trade and commerce or otherwise, as well in the oriental as
occidentall parts of the world, which if we neglect the Dutch or Portugals or
both will out top and domineere over us by expelling us out of India, and
encroach that wealthy action of commerce to their exceeding great advantage,
and our irrecoverable, and deplorable loss.

What an honor, accommodation and happiness must it certainly be, to a pious
Christian protestant Nation, unspotted and undefiled with Idolatry, Atheism,
Papisme, Anabaptisme, Brownisme, Antinomianisme, or otherwise heresy or error,
to be possessed with a quiet peaceable secure and wealthy habitation, in so
excellent, pleasant and fruitful a Country, a little world in it self, though
large in extent, compared with England (being by computation 3. times as big
or greater) for its defense distant from all other Countries many 100. leagues,
whether neither Heathen, nor Idolatrous superstitious or Malignant Christians
can come to hurt or annoy them (being once settled therein) but by their own in
supportable charge cost damage and apparent danger of life both by sea and
land.

And what an addition will it be to Gods glory to reduce and convert so many
100000. of brave personable affable people (poor ignorant souls) to
christianity, as the Spaniards boast of their works of supererogation in that
kind in west India; but God forbid that we or any other Christian nation
should christen them in their own blood, or baptize them (as by report) the
Spaniards have done in their west India Plantation or conquest, even to the
massacring of all or most part of the Natives and national inhabitants
therein, and that with unheard of before and unparalleled tirannous cruelty, by
tying many of them together and laying wagers who should slay most men, women
and children, at one thurst, with their long rapiers through their bodies. I
should greatly rejoice, to see the day though I despair to taste of the
comforts, as Moses did of the land of Canaan, that the English, Scotch and
Dutch all of one Religion, could perfectly and christianly agree together in
the enterprise and undertaking of this most honorable action (there being
scope and room enough for them all even the whole 3. Nations) which I conceive
would make them a terror, to all atheistical heathen and Idolatrous
Christians.

But should as heartily grieve to hear of such persidious treacherous acts
among Christians, as that heretofore committed by the Dutch Commanders at
Batavia, upon the English at Amboyna in India, which has been twice published
in print to the world, and yet no restitution made for the intolerable wrongs
sustained to His Majesty's subjects, neither for the lives of the Massacred,
nor the damage of the Merchants (wherein I my self suffer in great proportion.
And I pray God we never hear of any more such cruel Actions, and affronts
from them, which may in time prove prejudicial and disastrous to both Nations
whom (I conceive) it much concerns to live, as near neighbors in Peace,
Unity, and Amity together (which God grant to his glory and the comfort of both
Nations.)

CHAP. XVI. Esquire Cuourteen his worthy enterprise to settle the beginning of
a Plantation at Madagascar, the partiallity injustice and ingratitude of the
India Courts against their true loyal Brothers Servants; and corrupt favor to
their Iugling, debauched, undeserving, mere bireling Servants. A commodity of
great value to be regarded and searched for out at Madagascar and of great
advantage to the obtainers thereof; Prince Rupert in a great forwardness to a
hopeful Plantation at Madagascar, the Earl of Arundels intention to supply
Prince Ruperts failing in the project for Madagascar.
REport has lately since the beginning of this tractat brought to mine care
that, that Noble Esquire Cuorteene has set out this spring 1644.3. Ships
furnished with men, and all things fitting for present Sustenance, Defense,
Accommodation, for an immitation of a Plantation at Madacascar * to which Right
Noble enterprise, the God of all grace, mercy and goodness, grant him his
blessing and prosperous success, the comfort of him and his and to the
encouragement of others, to second this right worthy noble enterprise, and
grant the means which he has (by report) used to find, trade, and commerce
with the Natives, by causing to be made glass beads, in form and color to
the Harranga, or Cornelians, (so highly by the Natives valued, be not contemned
as counterfeit, and so deprive them of present succor and releif (until they
can provide more store of the Harranga, out of India) whereof I make some
doubt, knowing their Curiosity and skilfullnesse, to make choice of the right
Cornelions, and their difference in esteem of their Color, Beauty, and
Splendour free from spots and blemishes.

The worthiness of this worthy noble Esquire Courteene (for encouragement to
others) to join with him in this his most worthy noble action I cannot choose
but commend unto the world, though I came a stranger unto him, (and neither
expect accommodation from him nor familiarity or acquaintance) and that is,
that he not being bred a Merchant, but a Gentleman at the Innes of Court, and
in the Kings Court should be able of himself (with the aid of a few
intelligent trusty Servants) to manage so weighty a Trade and Commerce into
India, as he has done answerable in great proportion, to the great action of
the whole East India Corporation, whose Governors, Deputies, and 24. or 26.
Committees all bred Merchants of esteem in their Vocation, with their multitude
of Servants and Officers; of much more difficulty, discontent, discouragements
injudiciousnesse, partiallity in Justice and oppression in Government,
favoring (for by respects) Juglers, imposters, debaunched, and defamed
persons, and malicious revengefull Tyrants (mere mercenary hireling Servants)
in their employments in India, and discountenancing, ingratefully,
disrespecting and cruelly oppressing their approved honest loyal brother
Servants (intolerably wronged and abused in their Service in India, contrary to
their own knowledge and check of their own accusing consciences, and faithful
promise, of restitution of wrongs, and orders of their own Courts, for
gratification of their good Service as hereafter peradventure, I shall be
coacted or impulsed (as God shall enable me with strength of body (at present
very weak) and ability of understanding to express and divulge to the world
(both to the vindication of my own good name, credit, and reputation and
admonishment to others (honest Merchants) that shall enter into their Service,
to be cautious in their accord Covenant and agreement with such ungrateful,
partial, and injust persons, against whom though I could be content for
Charity sake (having to that end deferred it 13. years) to put up the
affronts, and bury them in the grave of oblivion, yet perhaps my urgent
necessitated case, will yet enforce me to make humble appeal and submissive
Petition, for justice against them, to the right Honorable High Court of
Parliament though with much grief and tymorousnesse and regreet, to give the
least disturbance to the weighty use and important affairs of the State and
Kingdom in general, by affording redress of intolerable wrongs and
oppressions to my self and family, in particular utterly ruined in wordly Esate
thereby, whose sentence though it be Summum Ius in the severest kind as the
present India Governor has out of his own accusing conscience in open Court
acknowledged and Voted, and the present Deputy who since my return from India
employed thither president (the place with my self was Ordained to execute) and
understanding there more fully the wrongs I suffered, did by his kind Letter,
condole my wrongs endured under a Tyrant President his Predecessor (a man of
matchless malice) and since his return now at present Deputy Governor has
by his Letters to me expressed his grief and sorrow for my wrongs and
discurtesies the Court offered and affronted me withal, which lay not in his
power to remedy; and yet ingratefully for private respects and unconscionably
in opposition to Republicke good lately rejected my honest humble Petition, and
denied that to me a loyal Member of the Honorable Corporation for valuable
consideration, which they have freely and gratis afforded to Dutch and
Portugals their deadly Enemies, in opposition to trade and commerce in India)
yet I say, that sentence proceeding from that pious just and Right Honorable
High Court of Parliament shall be more acceptable unto me then great
benevolence, gratifications, and restitutions of wrongs, from so corrupt a
Court; now after 13. or 14. years detraction and procrastination of time (so
far quelling me, pressing me down, and disinabling me to wage Law with such
potent oppressing adversaries, which some of themselves have not stuck to tell
me, that they are and will be to mighty for me to wage Law withal, and thereby
have hindered and prevented my endeavors to get means in my lawful vocation to
obtain maintenance to my self, wife and 5. Children all thereby impoverished
and undone, which notwithstanding I pray God to remit and forgive their
ungrateful and uncharitable oppression since (which themselves blush and are
abashed at, yet for their reputation sake, will not reverse their former injust
censures and decrees) as Saint Stephen prayed for them that stoned him to
death: Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

I have omitted one thing to give advice of, and that not out of
forgetfullnesse or neglect to others good (but to deal plainly with you) in
hope to make a private benefit thereof to my self (still expecting and desirous
of a second employment into India. And that was this, at my last being at
Madagascar, it was my chance to epsy just at our landing place, within a Rod
or two of shore in water, not above three Foot deep, a thing swiming on the top
of the water a kind of Jellye like unto the Spawn of Froggs, about the quantity
by my computation of a Peck or less, but the color at the sudden seemed
black, especially in the middle or thickest part thereof, but at the sides and
thinest parts of an exceeding orient or splendant blew or purple color, which
being desirous to apprehend and to see what it was, yet to eager for the
apprehension before I well pondred to effect it, so rashly prevailed with two
Mariners to go into the water, and seek to take it in their hands between
them, and they as heedlesly endeavored; but coming to take it up in their
hands it broak all into pieces, some sinking and some dissolving, but that
which made me admire and cause me to conceave highly thereof was, that it dyed
a great part of the Salt water into a most glorious purple color, which I then
supposed it was the purple of the Sea, which if memory fail me not, I have
either read or heard to tell of, to be as precious as a Jemme of high esteem.

And now being unlikely (yet exceeding willing though Aged, Lame, and decrepit)
to see these parts again) I thought not fit to detain longer from the
knowledge of my Contrymen wishing industrious men to take pains in the
search thereof, which no doubt near shoares about that Island may be found in
some quantity; which if they find by this weak description, I advise that 3.
or 4. men at the least, seek to get under it a long Cloth or Sheet, and so
lifting it up gently on all sides, that it slide not out again and to draine
the water out of it, It may be presently put into some Vessel of Wood, Stone,
Brass, or Pewter for its preservation, and as occasion is offered by trial of
some small quantity at a time may be dried in the Sun and put in Boxes, my
weak opinion is that it is a rich commodity, and may peradventure be worth the
weight of it in Gold, which I would be glad to hear before I dye, that store
thereof may be found, and good experiment made of it. And perhaps no ill
Counsel to the India Company to give order to their Ship Commanders, to take
some pains in searching there for the same by their Boats Rowing along the
shore to discover new Creekes or Bays or other accommodations that the Island
may afford.

Yet further to inform you of an intention for the Plantation and sending of
Planters to the Island of Madagascar or Saint Lawrence. LLoyds in ^lligence.


After that it was agreed upon at the Council Board, that Prince Rupert should
go as Vize Roy for Madagascar, he was to have 12. Sail of his Majesty's King
Charles, and 30. more Merchant men for to attend him in the Plantation and to
have supplies yearly out of England, and likewise it was agreed upon, and a
charge given to the Governor Sir Morris Abbot, Sir Henry Garway and others of
the Committee of that Honorable society of the East India Company, to give all
their loving assistance and furtherance to Prince Rupert in this design
whenever he came into Asia or India. And all other parts near adjacent, to
the Island of Saint Laurence: I was at that present time when this was ordered,
at the counsel table, and the charge given the aforesaid Governor and
Committees of the East India Company to that purpose. But Prince Rupert going
into France and Germany, about his weighty affairs, and in the mean time it
was thought fit and concluded upon; that the Earl of Arundell Earl Marshall
of England, should go Governor for Madagascar or the Island of St. Laurence,
being the most famous place of the world for a Magazeine to be settled.

This noble Earl has written a book to that purpose, and has allowed
weekly means to diverse Seamen which have good judgment and experience all
over the Oriental Seas, and at Madagascar. This Honorable Earl was in that
resolution and readiness, that there were bills in print set upon the pillars
of the Royal Exchange and other parts of the City, of his forwardness
toward The Island of St. Laurence: but being a Parliament coming, hindered that
design for Madagascar.

CHAP. XVII. The use of Ordnance, Guns and Printing long in use in China,
before used in Christendom, good admonition to give the glory to God, in this
action and all others.
THere are ill effects that fall upon the commonwealth in the form of trade
and commerce, (...) after (...) ^loyds intelligence.
in two several particulars, first by the East India trade, there is a very
great loss to the King in his customs, by loss of all the custom which that
trade would have produced in all this time, and of the increase also of trade
which that employment had brought with it, his Majesty's farm of his customs
had yielded many thousand pounds a year, more then now they have done: if the
East India Company had but received satisfaction for their wrongs done to them
in India by the Hollander; lastly their fishing upon our coasts the
commonwealth loses that which they gain, which is mavelous increase of
trade, of ships and Mariners, whereby their navigation is mightily
strenghtened, their Mariners multiplied, and their trade increased; of all
which this commonwealth is deprived, and theirs enriched. Well may the Indians
ascribe so much to the light of their understanding, that they do account the
rest of the world blind in comparison of them; only they vouchsafe to the
people of Europe this honor, to call them one eyed men, which also M^sseius
takes notice of, in his history of the Indies, that those people dare beyond
modesty to brag, that the Chinese have two eyes, the Europians one, and all
the rest of the people of the world are blind, and indeed they do approve
themselves to be quick sighted enough, for they are the Antipodes of
Christians, and are in situation farthest remote from them, and yet can find
the means to pry into the mines and treasure of the Christian world.

For the Chinese are absolutely the gallantest Nation in the world, they had
the use of Printing, and of Powder and Ordinance of 500. years, before any
Christian knew it, likewise they have the old Testament, and I have seen them
play stage plays in India, upon the History of the old Testament. Also they
do write of the creation of the world 6000. years before us or any other
nation, this is very certain and true upon my credit; and therefore I say it
is high time that the Parliament will be pleased for to cast an Eye in the
Government of Trade, for the decay of Trade is exceeding great, and the
Commonwealths loose infinite.)

Now for conclusion of this rude indigested Pamphlet (truly though unskilfully
related) be pleased to accept of the good counsel of Moses; to the Children of
Israel (if it shall please God of his free grace mercy and goodness to grant
so great a blessing to this Nation in these distractive times) which may
induce, impulse, and compel good Christians to seek out for safety to their
persons sustenance for their livelihood, and freedom to serve God, in a true
religious way, acceptable to His Sacred Majesty and consenant to the prescript
rule of the Gospel to remember; That when thou have Eaten and filled thy
self, thou shall bless the Lord thy God for the good Land, which he has
given thee (as it follows in the latter end of the eighth Chapter of
Dutrenomy,) and beware left thou say in thy heart, my power and the strength my
own hand has prepared me this abundance, consonant to this is that good
advice of Famous Du Bartus in French, translated by worthy Iosuah Silvester.

Neva disant ma main faict cest aennre,
On ma vertut cebel aennre ae par faict;
Mais dis ainsi dien par may a faict,
Dieu est santheur dei peu de bien que je' onre.
Say not my hand this work to end has brought,
Nor this my virtue has attained to;
Say rather thus, this God by me has wrought,
Gods Author of the little good I do.
FINIS.
Errata.
COurteous Reader, by reason of the false transcribeing of the Copy these
faults are past, which we desire you to mend with your Pen.

In the Epistle to the Reader l. 9. for detractnesse read detractment. in the
Contents, Chap. 7.1.3. the Sants, r. them Phesants. page 1. l. 14. desirous, r.
desired. p. 2. l. 28. denied not, r. denied it, not. p. 24. l. 25. The Sants,
r. them Phesants. p. 26. l. 26. Cattanents, r. Catavents. p. 27. l. 16. with,
r. to which, p. 28 against line 22. R.B. wants in the margin. p. 32. l. 28.
Almond, r. Allom. p. 44. against line 7. R.B. wants in the margin. p. 52. l.
22. accord. r. action. p. 54. in line 14 and 15. blot out Cutters to have made
India Tobaeco. p. 55. l. 4. then for mine r. then mine for. p. 61. l. 3. sha
viva, r. alea vina. p. 66. l. 23. immitation r. initiation. p. 67. l. 4. came,
r. am. p. 71. against line 29. R.B. wants in the margin. p. 72. l. 6.7.8.9. for
Neva disant ma main faict cest annre,
On ma vertut cebel aunre and par faict;
Mais dis ainsi dien par may a faict,
Dieu est santheur dei pen de bien que je' onre.
read, Ne va disant ma main a faict cest oeuure,
Ou ma virtue ce bell oeuure a par faict;
Mais dis ainsi dieu par moy ^ our a faict,
Dieu est l' autheur du peu de bien que je' our.



