MARCELIA: OR THE Treacherous Friend.

A Tragicomedy.

As it is Acted at the Theater Royal, by His Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mrs. F. Boothby.

Licensed,

October 9. 1669. Roger L'Estrange.



London, Printed for Will. Cademan at the Pope's Head in the lower Walk of the
New-Exchange, and Giles Widows at the Maidenhead in Aldersgate Street,1670.

To the Honorable and most Accomplished Lady YATE, of Harvington in
Worcestershire.
MADAM!
SInce the most weak, ought to endeavor the most powerful Defenders; I could
no where elect a person whose Accomplishments renders them so capable to that
requisite, as your Ladyship: Which Motive I only have to hope and plead my
Pardon by, for my Presumption in imploring your Protection. Madam, This earthy
effect of my ignorant Brain, you will find an Engine, which will give all your
Perfections and Virtues employment in the most eminent degree; since it not
only requires your unequaled Eloquence and Wisdom, to appose the Censuring
world, upon this uncommon action in my Sex: but your Goodness to pardon the
many and high defects, which you will there find to condemn.

Sinners look not upon their own weak merits, but Heavens Bounty, when they
implore Benefits: For if they should turn their Eyes to their inward View, and
regulate their Petitions by their Deservings; they would blush and grow dumb to
all Requests. This Line, Madam, I must draw to my own Center; who must wholly
ow all your transcending Favors, to your generous and noble Humor, which
makes the World your Admirers, and fixes unalterably to the power of your
Commands,

Your most humble Servant and Kinswoman, F. Boothby.

PROLOGUE TO Marcelia.
I AM hither come, but what do you think to say?
A Woman's Pen presents you with a Play:
Who smiling told me I Would be sure to see,
That once confirmed, the House would empty be.
Not one yet gone! --
Well, I Will go tell her you are all so just,
You Will laugh at her on Knowledge, not on Trust.
I know she will send me back, but what to do,
[He goes off. When I have learned of her, I Will tell it you.
[Comes again. Guess now the Message: she prays ye to be gone,
You Will crowd her Wit to death in such a Throng
Of Wits, she says, which no Consumptions have,
And hers is weak, even going to the grave.
She wonders much that ye should all desire
To stay, and witness when it does expire.
[One comes to him. Mess. Hark ye the Poetess does angry grow.
Prol. I cannot make'em whether they will or no.
It Is better be a Dog, than Woman's slave,
That knows not what she would, or would not have.
With Ballading I think she mad is grown,
And by her Prologue fain would make it known.
She need not be so hasty; faith her Play
Will witness that her Reason's gone astray:
For when that it is done, I Am almost sure,
You Will give her Bedlam for Reward or Cure.
[Another comes to him and whispers. What more? nay then I never shall have
done;
Now I Have command to court ye one by one:
When I return to send her word by me,
Who will her Judges, who her Lawyers be.
If that the Wits will plead her cause, she will stay;
If not, she fairly means to run away:
For if her Judges they resolve to sit,
She neither Pardon nor Reprieve shall get.
But still she hopes the Ladies out of Pride
And Honor, will not quit their sexes side:
Though they in private do her faults reprove,
They Will neither public scorn nor laughter move.
But should they all in censuring be severe,
It Is still the Critic Men she most does fear:
For if that Solomon now lived, and writ;
They Would cry, Pish, hanged, there is nothing in it of Wit.
The ACTORS Names.
Sigismund, -- King. Melinet, his Favorite. Lotharicus A noble man, in love
with Marcelia. Euryalus, A noble man, Sister to Marcelia. Almeric, an Eminent
Lord. Valasco, an Eminent Lord. Lucidore, a wild Lord. Peregrine, a Traveller.
Moriphanus, a proud, silly, rich fellow. Graculus, his Man, Du-prette, Servant
to Melinet, Meraspas, Servant to Lotharicus. Philampras, a Villain. Three
Villains more. Marcelia, a noble Lady, Consin to Melinet. Desha, her Woman.
Calinda, the Kings Mistress. Ericinia, her Friend. Arcasia, a Lady. Perilla, a
rich Widow.
Pages, Foot-Boys, Maskers, Guards and Attendants.

The Scene, FRANCE. MARCELIA: OR the Treacherous Friend.
Act I. Scene I.
Enter Valasco and Almeric. Alm. HAve you seen Melinet of late?


Val. No, not since he missed the place he thought himself so sure of at the
Court; his aspiring soul will not easily let him digest the cross events of
Fate.


Alm. It seems a marvel to me he had it not, for the King does reflect upon him
more than common rays of favor; such, as in my mind may reasonably give his
hopes large compass.


Val. Ho does so, but this was a grant of our deceased King, which his Majesty
promised to ratify; or else doubtless he had carried it: but men of his
temper, and nobly born, without Estates, think Fortune is a cripple, if she
does not with winged have answer their deserts.


Alm. Hold, here he is coming, with a musing and unsatisfied countenance.

Enter Melynet. Val. How now, Melynet, what, dull and melancholy?

Mel. My looks, my Lord, wear my fortunes livery:
But I was just now thinking how many considerable
Places I have been likely to possess;
And my stars, my unlucky stars,
They still prevent me with their baser influences.
Oh I could curse them! had they made me a fool,
Or without Spirit or Ambition:
I should have thankd 'em; but they 've furnished me
With all the requisites to a rising Fortune,
And yet deny success.

Val. IN faith, the truth of it is, they have afforded thee
Wit, subtilty, policy, and what else is necessary,
Enough to have discharged any office in the Kingdom,
To thy own advantage; and that is now the only end
To which most of the greatest Statesmen tend.

Alm. I, for they are wiser than in the old time,
When Honor and Honesty were so much adored:
They of that age were altogether in love with Fame,
And having their lives read with admiration in a chronicle.
But the Politicians now are of another stamp:
What Is present's only theirs, they cry; and had rather
Purchase one life here in a good estate,
Than the inheritance of that talked of,
That is to come hereafter. It Is true,
Expectation is a hungry Diet.

Mel. You would think so, if your Lordship were to live Upon it as many do.

Alm. I should so, but not in thy condition,
Who art already looked upon by every man of judgment,
As in all likelihood to be the Court Blazing-star.

Mel. That expression will bear a various in^e pretation:
Or great, or mischievous, or both: perhaps
By divination he gives it for my Motto.
Well, I beg your Lordships pardon, for I must leave you.

Val. Why, pry' thee, what have of business
Calls you away?

Mel. I am engaged to meet six or seven Friends.

Val. No friends, as you love me: a Friend is a thing
More rare than a Phoenix, and thou talk of them,
As if they were as common as Fishes
And did like them increase and multiply.

Mel. Well, your Servant.

Exit Melynet. Val. I wonder whether the King still intends the
Marriage of Calinda: there are many
Wagers in the town about it.

Alm. O! Monarchs and Subjects are two different things*
And a sudden rise to eminent Honor or Fortune,
Commonly proves like the Turks Mutes to an old
Affection; strangle in quite: and it is whispered
By the most knowing. that the Kings Love has at present
the cold fit of an aguish distemper on it, to that Lady.
But well, are you for my company this afternoon, or not?
For I am designed to go home: I am promised the sight of
A fellow that will needs be thought a Lord:
They say he will make a man die with laughing.

Val. Then I Am resolved not to see him to day:
For I have a great mind to live ill to morrow,
And for this afternoon I Will throw it away
Amongst the Ladies.

Exeunt. Scene 2. Enter Calinda and Ericina.
Eric. Let not your grief take yet such full possession
Of your heart, till more of time gives the assurance
Of what is only now your passions fear.

Call. Alas Ericina! it is that uncertainty
Which makes Loves greatest Hell: were I but once
Assured, I should be less concerned.
But whilst I doubt I nothing can resolve:
Reason and scorn, which then would prove my cure*
I am now by that unhappy motive (that you urge
To lessen my affections) forbid their use:
For it is not his new acquired greatness
Can keep my heart in slavery. It was
His Noble Mind I loved. And that the greatest
Ebb of Fortune could never have given change to.
Indeed I did adore his virtues, and made
Him Sovereign of my heart, despising in
My thoughts for him, all those that only could
Pretend advantages in Wealth, which possibly
They did inherit by their Fathers crimes.
But if I find he is turned Apostate
To what gave being to my Passion:
I shall depose him here, to let him see
[Points to her heart. His Honor lost, his Crowns despised by me.

Eric. If the assurance of his unconstancie
Will prove so much less afflicting than the fear,
Force your belief to that Conclusion,
His actions afford enough of cause.

Call. Ah! Ericina, thou then do think him changed.

Eric. It ill would suit the Friendship I profess,
Still by dissembling my thoughts to his advantage,
To help to shipwreck so your quiet,
Urging the Uncertainty of what,
I must confess I do no longer doubt.

Call. Nor I no longer that I Am quite undone!

[Aside. Eric. And I will tell you.

Call. Oh hold, Ericina;
Keep to thy self those thoughts, which if set free,
With furious floods of grief would deluge me.

Eric. Can you believe your ruin I design?
Whose life is dearer to me far than mine.
No, Calinda, what I have done was only but to try,
Whether the Cure your Reason did propose,
Your Courage could endure the application of.

Call. How could your pity let you make experiments,
On my Misfortune to improve your knowledge?
Or what of satisfaction do you find
From the assurance that my tongue had boasted,
Without consulting of my heart, the resolution
Of that indifferency and change, if he
Prove false, my soul can never find for him.
You used to take so great an interest in
My sufferings as made their weight seem less.
But you unkindly now do seek to multiply my griess,
and they already overpress my Mind.

Eric. My love can easily forgive the highest
Injuries with which you charge my innocence:
For, I perceive, the disquiet of your thoughts dethrones
Your Reason. But it is hard to be Physician,
Where the Disease admits such alteration,
As makes the Remedy uncertain.

[Enter Page. Page. Madam, my Lord Valasco, with some Ladies,
Are come to wait upon you.

Call. Go, let them know I Will attend them.
How ill does Conversation suit my mind,
Who can in nothing, now, contentment find!

Exeunt. Scene 3. Enter Almeric and Peregrine.
Per. This Kingdom has known strange and wonderful
Changes since my absence* for who would ever have thought
Sigismond should have come to be our Sovereign?
Heaven having given so many just Pretenders
To the Grown, before his Right could put in claim.

Alm. It Is true, Peregrine, but Fortunes children
Are always heirs to what she pleases.
And all his actions both in Peace and War,
Have still been crowned with such success and glory,
As made him justly thought one of her Darling sons.
And though there are many whose wants in worth,
And height of Envy, made them strive to clip
His Honors wings: yet I must needs confess,
I think he merits what he wears.

Per. I doubt not your Opinion; but with what
A kind of temper did he at first demean
Himself in his new Sovereignty?

Alm. With such a Moderation as showed he thought
The weighty troubles that do attend the Crown
Of a well governing Prince, would far exceed
The pleasure of an expected Power and Greatness.

Per. Yet we see those cares which Crowns create,
Are burdens, which all the great ones of the world
Do strive to carry; to which when right of birth
Is wanting, they make usurping Power, and
Treasons guilt become their unresisted title.
And certainly, what is so often purchased
By the death of Millions, and the height of Crimes,
When lawfully acquired, may well excuse
A more than common joy expressed in such
An elevated Fortune.

Alm. No doubt it does; and 'twas the general expectation, and our surprise the
greater, finding his looks And actions show such an unmoved indifferency.


Per. That might beget amazement, for sudden satisfaction or high cares seldom
or never keep within those bounds, Reason or policy prescribes them. But he
resolved to show by something far from common in Mankind, Fortune was Just, not
blind, in giving him a Scepter. But who amongst all the Court is likely to
carry The name of Favorite?


Alm. He that possesses the greatest share is Melynet, Nephew to the late Lord
Euryalus, that was the fair Marcelia's Father. His growth in greatness was like
a Mushrom, so sudden, which has begot much wonder in the Court.

Enter Lucidore. Oh Lucidore!

Luc. Nay hold, no quarreling; I have been suffering Sufficiently for my breach
of promise.

Alm. Why pr'ythee? what Disaster, that the knowledge may make some satisfaction?
For I dare swear it is some Comical accident.

Luc. If to lose a Man's Reason first, and then all his Money, be matter of
Mirth; it is so: for that is the true character of my condition.

Alm. As how?

Luc. Why, just as I left you the other night, I met with our new Favorite;
and straight my brain was seized with a piece of policy, to try if I could
drink away his Understanding, and keep so much of my own to play the Justice of
Peace with him, and sift out the Reason of his so much admired greatness with
the King: but I, like other Statesmen, failed in my Design, and made my self as
incapable of Questions, as he was of Answers. But that which makes me the most
mad, and will make thee the most merry, was, that I must needs be shaking of my
Elbow, and pay the first Tribute to his fortune and succes in Gaming.


Alm. Why, you could do no less in complement, than since you would learn him
to play, to teach him at your own costs and charges. But now confess, what did
you lose?


Luc. Enough to have purchased half his patrimony,
When he came to Court: a thousand pound,
And something more.

Per. He plays deep for a new Gamester, but he thinks With reason, his
Fortune's like to have no bottom.

Alm. I pity thy condition, for I know thy losses
Would have made thee merry a month together,
In ways much more agreeable to thy humor.

Luc. It would so; but it is gone, and the Devil go with it: The wish is no
Treason I hope, for he was never yet, to my knowledge prohibited a Favorites
company.


Per. If he were, they would divide the soul of their usual preferment from the
bodily.

Alm. I, for give him his due, he is a sociable Fellow, and infinitely esteemed
by all persons of all conditions, the Clergy, Statesman, the Lawyer, the
Citizen, poor and rich, all strive for his Friendship, his Counsel, his
Assistance; there is such pulling and halling who shall have him, that it is
well he can be here, and there, and everywhere.


Luc. That Is no part of my Faith; for he has often failed me in business of no
small concernment to his service, and my satisfaction: and yet I am certain he
has not had a more faithful Friend in all the world than I have been, take one
time with another.


Alm. That I Will witness for thee is a truth, and therefore
He cannot be excused of ingratitude, if he
Gives thee any reason of complaint.

Luc. I know not the Design, but I am confident
He will send me to heaven whether I will or no.

Alm. If he does, thou will be the first Saint,
That ever came there of the Devils making.

Luc. If I am, as sure as thou live, he does intend that wonder; well,
farewell.

Alm. Nay, we will all go together.

Exeunt. Scene 4. Enter Sigismund and Melynet, and a Guard at distance.
Attendants.
Mel. Sir, I perceive something does discompose
The quiet of your mind, and would it not
Appear too bold presumption in a Subject,
I would most humbly beg the cause.

Sig. Melynet, your judgment makes a true interpretation, and it is only from
thy Love and Interest that I can hope a change.

Mel. Your Majesty's high bounty that raised me from that nothing which I was
in fortune to what I am, by the so envied glory of your favor; besides the
duty which I ow you as my Sovereign, doubly commands my life to be a ready
Sacrifice on all occasions, where that offering can purchase you the least of
satisfaction.


Sig. Thou art my Friend, what name commands a greater Distance I Will forget; but
what I now shall try thy kindness in, Requires more thy wit and judgment use,
Than dangers hazard. You have a Kinswoman,


Melinet, whom I have found too fair, and fear
That I shall find as cruel: it is Marcelia, I wear
Her chains, yet not without attempting to have
Broke them; but I perceive resistance is in vain.
The more I strive, the faster I am tied.
Nothing but Death her Fetters can divide.
But why standst thou so surpised, as if thou did
Rival me in my passion?

Mel. I wish I did Sir, so that there were no other;
But what concern I show comes from my feared defect
Of power, not will, to serve your Majesty's Commands.

Sig. I do believe thee, and I know
The interposing Difficulty that stands
Between me and my hopes; a pre-engagement
Of her heart to brave Lotharicus: but may not
A King and Crown laid prostrate at her feet,
Tempt her Ambition to command her love?
Has she put off so much her Sexes frailty,
That such a Present cannot shake her constancy?

Mel. She has often in my hearing given him that
Assurance, Sir, and though words are but airy
Sounds, till the temptation proves their substance:
Yet I have so much knowledge of her humor,
As makes me fear they shall not want that seal.
But all that my power can act in her persuasion, Sir,
To move her to a sense of that high glory,
I will give your Majesty the assurance of in some few days.

Sig. Go my dear Melinet and sound her thoughts;
For thou will in her answer to me bring,
The happiness or ruin of thy King.
Exit Melinet. Oh mighty Love! whose power is not limited
More in a Prince than Slave! how do thou force
My heart to turn a Rebel to my virtue!
Making my passion master of my honor,
My Reason of no farther use than no condemn the crime
I act in giving to another that heart,
Which I so often vowed to my Calinda!
Thus in my soul I find a civil war;
But Love over Virtue has the victory far:
For whosoe'er does see Marceliaes eyes,
Must break their faith, and fall her sacrifice.

Exit. Scene 5. Enter Moriphanus and Graculus.
Mor. Sirrah, I would fain know why you should pay me less respect than Beggars
do? they can say, My Lord, and your Lordship.


Gra. Because I know you better to be no Gentleman. [aside But if I must say,
an' please your Lordship, what shall I say to make your Lordships honorable
title pass for current, if it should be questioned?


Mor. What should thou say? say I am an outlandish Lord. Well, a man of
ambitious thoughts had better be hanged, than keep a fellow that cannot make a
lie.


Grac. Good my Lord pardon me, I shall have one presently; but my Lord, you
have not the mien nor breeding of a Lord: I think I had best say you are a
sprout of one of those English Lords of Nol's new creation in the old Rebel^ion.


Mor. IN faith Graculus 'twill do rarely well.


Grac. But my Lord, since you are resolved upon so much ^reatness, you must
needs enlarge your retinue.


Mor. So I will, Graculus, and I will keep them all in several Liveries.


Grac. They will be taken for other men's Servants then.


Mor. No, no, thou art a fool; they will be all known (...) be my men, and only
wearing the several Liveries of those several Families that have matched into
my house.


Grac. What a most excellent fancy was this! some of the chief Liveries, I hope
Master. (I cry your Lordship mercy) shall be black and green, orange tawny and
red, and black and deep blew.


Mor. Excellent well! thou have a rare conceit in the choice of colors; but
pr'ythee let my own suit be trimmed with the black and deep blew.


Grac. It Is ten to one but your cowardly carkas may be trimmed with black and
blew before you leave the town.


[asi Mor. I have one thing more to tell thee of; I Will leave the taking of my
boys to thee: but be sure thou do instruct them, that as they follow me, ever
as I turn my head (as I shall do very often) that they all stand still and put
off their hats, for it is a great point of breeding in all Foot-boys, and of
state in Masters. And go to my Tailor, and bid him make have with my clothes,
and let every thing that is in the Mode be doubled upon them.


Grac. I shall, my Lord.


Exeunt. Scene 6. Enter Melinet and du Prette his Man.
Mel. Have thou been with my Lord Lotharicus?


Du-Pr. Yes Sir, and he bid me return his service, and tell you he will not
stir abroad, in expectation of your company; but he prays it may be before the
hour of his usual visits.


Mel. Well, leave me.


Exit du Prette. Alas my Lord! I must prevent those visits:
The ruin of your Love must lay the strong
Foundation to my lasting Greatness.
In which design, if that my plot does fail,
Farewell my puff of honor -- for all actions,
The never so well designed by strength of reason,
And prosecuted by the faithfullest Love,
If unsuccesful, finds small acknowledgement.
It is only being blessed by Fortune in the end, that gives the intention value.
That Is the unjust scale, by which the world weighs all things. But why should I
condemn ingratitude as Vice, that for ambition turn a Villain, and betray my
friend? Yet it is not I am guilty, though I act the Crime; it is the abusive
world which throws such heaps of injuries and scorns on wanting Virtue, that
man's courage cannot bear it; at least mine shall not, if a stretched Conscience
will relieve me.

I Will grasp a fortune though I heaven let go,
That I have heard of, but it is This I know.
Act II, Scene I.
Enter Peregrine, Lucidore, Almeric and Valasco. Alm. When will thou grow tame,
Lucidore?


Luc. When Usurers commonly grow mad, when I have lost all my money, and that I
am forced to think of Marriage for the convenient support of some rich widows
Jointure, which very reflection should I continue in it but a quarter of an
hour, it would make me look as serious as any English sanctified Brother, that
intends the Reformation of Religion.


Per. Are you so great a Woman-hater then?


Luc. No Sir, you mistake me: I am not an Enemy to the Sex, but to that
ceremony; I would be a Ladies servant, but not her Prentice: I love not to seal
words of Complement for term of life, as that of taking a woman for better for
worse.


Val. If living single were an argument of Understanding, we might justly be
esteemed one of the wisest Nations of the world; for most of our young Gallants
decline Marriage, and take Mistresses, by which they gain diseases in their
youth, to make a Wife necessary for a Nurse in their age: and things taken by
way of necessity, can lay no charge upon us for defect of Reason.


Luc. Right, for it is then the offspring of it.


Alm. Well, could I have my wish, it should be to see Lucidore in Love.


Luc. Why, I am in Love, infinitely in Love, up to the head and ears in Love.


Alm. Sure thy Mistress is very kind then, thou art so merry.


Luc. She is so, she denies me nothing that I ask her.


Alm. She is very coming too it seems. Pr'ythee tell me, is she thy particular
Mistress, or is she one that may be generally so to all thy Friends?


Luc. No Sir, I will assure you I am not so free to keep a communicative
Mistress.


Val. Why, can thou seriously love any thing?


Luc. Yes, when the object's worthy; and I presume her infinitely so, her
charms beget so many slaves.


Per. I fain would see her: I dare be confident she will make none of me.


Val. Nor of me.


Alm. And I dare warrant you for my particular.


Luc. You are all fair promisers, Gentlemen; if you will lay a hundred Pistols
a piece, or so, you shall see her: Nay more, I Will take your own words whether
you love or not; you shall be the accusers of your own hearts, and then I Will be
the Executioner of your Purses. This is fair play, here is no false Dice nor
Cards, all is above board.


Per. That Is true, but you hold the sight too costly; you forget that we can
see the Creation of the World for 18 pence, where there are twenty fine sights
besides the Woman. A hundred Pistols to see a Woman! Why, it had been enough
for Adam to have offered, when Eve was promised and not made.


Luc. Well, I percieve you have examined your Conscience, and find you are
frail, and date not venture your Money, for all your boasting.


Alm. But we will hazard our Liberties, and that is of greater value.


Luc. I, but I never loved to expose my friends to danger, unless some profit
may accrue by it to them or me; and all from this will be the certain knowledge,
that you know not your selves, and that is an Article of Faith I have already
put into my Creed.


Val. But it is not in ours, and we would not have thee have the start of us in
Faith and Works too.


Luc. Well, I Will leave you Gentlemen.


Per. Faith thou shall not, for we will go with thee and see thy Mistress.


Luc. Well, I will for this once save your longings: the name of a Mistress has
so wound up your curiosities, that I find your tongues will be like the
perpetual Motion in importunities, till that be satisfied.


Per. Shall we go with thee now, and see her?


Luc. No, I am otherwise engaged; to morrow I am at your service.


Alm. Remember your promise, and do not have us answered, you are from home, as
Misers use to do to save their meat, when a friend bids himself to Dinner.


Luc. No, for there must be no Courtship you know, that is against the Laws of
Friendship, to buy a bargain out of another man's hands.


Exeunt. Scene 2. Enter Melinet and Lotharicus.
Mel. You have often encouraged me to hope all proofs of your affection, and I
cannot doubt your friendship.


Loath. You need not, your own merits, and relation to Marcelia, has fettered me
your servant; therefore command me without the introduction of a Complement.


Mel. Why then, my Lord, I know you have an interest in Arcasia, and I must beg
you to make use of it to my assistance, for I confess my heart has found the
power of her Charms.


Loath. You need not blush to own them, she is an object worthy of your
inclinations; and I am glad your choice directed you, where I may pay part of
the obligations back I have so often owed unto your friendship: not but your
own deserts will be your best Orators.


Mel. My Lord, I know my self better, than to admit the least hope from those
vain apprehensions: but being presented by you, the esteem she holds of your
judgment will doubtless keep her, from searching too inquisitively into those
defects, which might with justice blast my hopes.


Loath. You are too eminently deserving for to need such an impostor help: but
Melinet, be confident I will speak the truth, with all the earnestness a Friend
can urge: to promise more were to exceed my power.


Mel. If you could persuade her to the Gardens, you would have greater
opportunity and more of time.


Loath. I will, and use all my interest.


Mel. Pray be secret in it.


Loath. You need not fear, she has too many Pretenders that would become
concerned.


Mel. I fear you not to any but Marcelia.


Loath. Well, be confident she shall not know it.


Mel. Give me your hand and honor upon it.


Loath. There it is, an Oath I never broke yet, and so farewell, for I must go
and see her: your servant.


Mel. I would go too, but I saw her but last night, and she likes not my
company, she will needs have it that I am melancholy grown.


Exeunt. Scene 3. Enter Graculus and a company of Beggar-boys.
Grac. Come Boys, let me see you make your legs, whilst I have it in my head
how it may be done: for I have bin at the Dancing-schole a purpose to learn my
self, that I might correct you upon knowledge. Come my brave Boys, the most
mannerly shall have the best Livery. [The Boys put off their hats, and make
several ridiculous Congies.] Excellent well done: I do not think there is a
parcel of better bred Boys in Town, considering their Qualities. Let me see you
run Boys. [They run. Oh bravely done! they are so nimble of heel, they will
quickly run out of a Foot-body into a Gentleman of the Chamber.


Boy. Would you would let us go Sir to the Dancing-School, that we might see
the fashion of it; I warrant you we would observe, and have some of it away
with us.


Grac. These Rogues would watch their time, and be stealing: take heed of that
Boys; at the end of that hangs a Halter: Never go beyond the Rules of Cheating,
by that you will secure your Necks, and it will put a value on your Wit; it is
a general quality, and much approved: He that has never made use of it, has
never bin truly in the Fashion. Your Gentile Cheats, they go to Gaming-houses;
your Complementing Cheats, frequent Ladies Lodgings; your Flattering Cheats,
follow Courts; your Learned Cheats; the Bar; your Seditious Cheats, the
Pulpit: And such Cheats as you and I may be, and I thank Mercury I am,
Noble-mens-services, or the places about Fools, Prodigals, or allowed of
Madmen, which is the same. But you must be secret, Boys; keep your tongues
idle, and set your wits to work, and in a short time we will be our Masters
Equals in Fortune, keep men our selves, and be company for the best.


Enter Valasco and Perigrine. Val. What Is that Fellow going to do with those
Boys?


Per. I warrant he is some Parish Officer, and is having them to some House of
Correction.


Val. I Will ask him. Prithee Friend, what do thou intend to do with those Boys?


Grac. Perform one of the works of mercy on them; cloth the naked: put 'em
into Liveries, and let 'em out like Hackney-Coaches. It will be no small
convenience to younger Brothers when they go a woing, to make themselves
Fortunes among some of the She slender-wits, with full Purses, who are so taken
with a Feather, Pages, and Footmen, that they had rather marry a man well
attended, without either brain or money, then any one of more substance, and
less show.

I hope you are no Courtiers, Gentlemen.


Val. Why prithee?


Grac. For fear you should beg a Fine for my having the benefit of my brain for
my Fortune, or get my design prohibited; but if you do, there is thousands will
curse you; who, according to their occasions, would be glad (I most heartily)
to know where to increase or lessen their Retinue, as their Purses would permit
'em, which is most commonly a young huffing Gallants very uncertain friend?


Val. Do you hear this jearing Rascal?


Per. It was ever so; your ordinary Fellows have no Breeding; they will throw out
their jests at any time, let it light where it will, though their Crowns be
cracked for it: and though they be blunt Fellows, their words many times have
sharp edges.


Val. Well, farewell Friend; if we are no Courtiers, one of us has bin a
Soldier, and they ought by their Profession to be as good at begging.


Grac. That Is true, but they are not so successful; they commonly act like
themselves bluntly, without consideration, and are usually denied without much
ceremony; therefore if one of you is still a Soldier, you might be heartily
glad if the King could unanimate you* and set you up in his Armory, that when
he had no Wars, you might have no wants.


Per. Well, God a-mercy Tell-troth.

Grac. Come Boys, I Will go case you first,
[Exit per with Valasco.] Then have you to my Lord in Whimsey.

Scene 4. Enter Melynet, and presently after a Page.
Page. Sir, here is a Letter my Lord Lotharicus sent when you were abroad.

[Exeunt. Breaks it open, and reads.
Mel. -- My Lord, I have persuaded your Fair Mistress to the Gardens this night;
where, if you think fit, you may take the opportunity of discovering your
Passion: if not, I will, according to my promise, be your faithful Advocate;
and hope to place you in that esteem in her thoughts, as may give you what is
but Justice, the Precedence of all the rest of your Rivals; which is a service
passionately courted by

Your faithful servant, Lotharicus.




And must be treacherously rewarded!
Base Fortune! that offers me no other ways to come to
Greatness, but by the paths of Infamy! But hold Honor,
forbear thy whispers in my Soul.
I Am too far gone, thou sound'st retreat too late,
And now, for Virtues pay, no more will wait.
I Will not rewards in the other world expect,
And present benefits for hope neglect.
It is Ambition's Dictates I pursue,
And following them, I cannot stay with you:
Then toss my Soul no more in Tempests so,
Nor make my Conscience thus my Fortunes Foe.
Go, and in Princes minds take up thy Seat,
I Will not forget thee quite, when once I Am great.
Marcelia, I am coming to throw such rage and jealousy into thy heart, as
shall, like Lightning, consume thy love for thy Lotharicus; I Will raise a
Tempest that shall destroy him, and give no warning by a Thunderclap.


Exit. Scene 5. Enter Marcelia and Desha.
Marc. Methinks this day has time much longer then usually they are; strangely
long, to me at least it seems so: How has done to thee?


Desha. As others, Madam; I have no cause to make me judge this days motion
slower then the rest.


Marc. No more have I.


Desh. It would not seem so tedious then in passing. But Madam, I much wonder*
My Lord Lotharicus has not bin here to day.


Marc. Very well applied: but the hours took not their increase, I will assure
you, from his absence; not but that his company would have made 'em much more
pleasant I confess.


Desh. And by consequence not so long.


Marc. I wish my Cousin Melynet were here; and yet his conversation now is not
very diverting: The flowing of his Fortune has given his Mirth an Ebb.


Enter a Page. Page. Madam, here is my Lord Melynet.


[Exit Page. Desh. Madam, you see your wishes has their grant, as soon as asked.


Enter Melynet. Marc. Cousin, your servant: you were the last I was talking of,
and sure I am you are the first I see.


Mel. I dare not credit such a Complement; two such Obligations are too
eminently great at once, for any but Lotharicus.


Marc. If you knew how unkind he has bin to day, you would not judge so.


Mel. Alas, I know.


[Sighs. Marc. What?


Mel. I know not what I was about to say, my head's so full of business, one
thought drives out another.


Marc. Sure whatsoever they are, they are but troublesome reflections; they
have changed your humor strangely. But pray Cousin tell me, What is it that so
much destroys the quiet of your mind, and makes you wear so sad a countenance?
You need no: fear to trust me with a secret, though I am a Woman: My friendship
cannot let me see you so much a stranger to your wonted temper, without desire
to bear a part of your misfortune.


Mel. I do so little doubt your kindness, that I fear your love would make you
take the greatest share; and that almost certain knowledge makes me keep it
from you. But leave this discourse, Has not Lotharicus bin here to day?


Marc. No Cousin; he has not bin so kind.


Mel. Not here to day! poor Cousin.

Sighs.
Marc. What Is the matter, dear Melynet, tell me; You look surpised: is not
Lotharicus well?


Mel. Very well.


Marc. Why did you sigh, and look so sad?


Mel. Sure you mistook: And if I did, it was only pitying your condition: I
know the time must seem tedious when an expected Lover does not come: And if
you please to make it less appear, we will take a walk into the Gardens.


Marc. I shall willingly accept that offer; for some Air, after so hot a day,
will not appear unpleasant.


Exeunt. Scene 6. Enter Lotharicus and Arcasia, in a Garden.
Loath. Are you still resolved then to make all your servants equally unhappy
Madam? Shall not he be blessed to boast the glory of your favors?


Arcas. I am so far, my Lord, from putting such a value on my weak Merits, that
I conceive he would be most unfortunate that I should choose; and therefore
being so equally obliged to all for their esteem, I will never be so
injuriously unjust to any.


Loath. I am sorry I must prove so unfortunate a Suppliant for one whom I so
much esteem, and does so well deserve.


Arcas. My Lord, I should but ill demonstrate the friendship that I have still
professed to pay you, if my consent to your request should give you power to
wrong your friend so far: You see I am too sollicitous to keep up your interest
in all hearts, as well as mine, e're to consent to be the cause that you should
justly forfeit it.


Loath. I Will stand the hazard, Madam, of all dangers in that kind; my fears are
far greater from my unsuccessful suit; and therefore it is in vain to think to
complement me out of my request: that Court-quality I am too well acquainted
with, to be deceived in Madam.


Arcas. I see, my Lord, our intentions want Interpreters, as well as Languages;
they are so seldom undertood in their true meaning. But since you will force
me in my own vindication to make good what I Have said, I think you do not love
your friend, or else you would not prefer him where you have given such convincing
proofs you did not like; for if you had, you would have doubtless asked the
service for your self, as well as have bespoken it for another. -- It takes; I
could laugh extremly [aside. to see how strangely I have surpised him, and how
seriously he is studying complementally to word a Tragical Denial to my Comical
Affection.

I perceive, my Lord, you little thought to have found a Courtship where you
came to make one; but persons of Merit are often subject to such accidents. I
have heard some swear they have had a hundred of them in their days; nay some,
more then Arithmetic could number: I hope your Conquest is not yet arrived to
such a large account: You see, my Lord, how different our intentions are, I
strive to gain you for my self, and you to win my for another.


Loath. I know, Madam, the greatness of your heart too well, to have the vanity
to think you would throw away your favors on one, whose wants in all things
worthy such a blessing, forbids his boldness to attempt to beg it.


Arcas. My Lord, pray spare that confidence in your friend behalf, which for
your self do so much decline: And to recompense that Obligation, I will no
longer fright you with my pretended Passion: I am your friend in substance,
your Lover but in Chimera: But I thought it Justice to deprive his heatr of
quiet, that came to rob my Soul of Reason.


[They walk up and down, and talk softly; he makes several bows and submissions
to her. Enter Melynet and Marcelia. Marc. There Is Lotharicus Cousin.


Mel. Where? Ha! Lotharicus, and she with him!


Marc. Who is it Cousin? do you know her?


Mel. No matter who she is, or whether she were at all.


Marc. I am afraid, and yet I know not what I fear: I Will go meet her, and see
who she is, see if I know her.


Mel. Her name's Arcasia; go not for the world; you are undone and if you do.


Marc. Why, what secret does your Soul contain, by which you judge I must be so
unfortunate? I must and will go.


Mel. Pray stay, your Passion will betray too much Love, and make that prove
his scorn, which once created all his happiness. Come, let us be gone.


Marc. Cousin, you are unkind, to put my till-now settled joys upon the rack of
so much fear: I cannot stir; I here shall fix like a cold Marble Statue.

See how he does his Adorations pay!

Thus, poor Marcelia, he did thee betray!

Methinks his Soul should shake to let Heaven see his Perjury: But Cousin,
could you, as I am sure you did, know he was false, and keep me ignorant of his
being so?


Mel. I must confess I did, and found it too weighty for my friendship to
support, and thought your Love would prove less able.


Marc. He then is false: unhappy knowledge, that comes so much too late, and
yet so too too soon!


Mel. If your Courage equal but your other Excellencies, and that you will
command your Passion to obey your Reason, I will secure you a Revenge shall
equal his High Perjury,

And make him burst with rage, or else return,
And in the Hell of his past falsehood burn.
But you must never let him know that you do think him changed for then all
that you act, he will suppose the violence of your Love, and prove his
pleasure, not his torment. Befriend your Sexes Honor, and be not thought to
whine, to love, and be despised: Scorn and neglect him, but give him not a
reason why; you are sufficiently convinced within; you have a Cause, and need
not justify the Act by a Demonstration of it; that may Eclipse your Glory, and
augment his Pride.


Marc. Oh that my dear Brother Euryalus were returned from his Travels! But I
have ever known you Master of so much Reason, that I can hope no better
assistance In this Extreme, where I will act a part, Your friendship counsels,
though it break my heart.


Mel. Come, let us be gone then, least we are discovered.


Marc. We need not: See, they are about to leave the Garden by the other gate.
Oh my Lotharicus! But why do I say my Lotharicus?

The art false Lotharicus,? and lost to me,
Unless these wash away thy Perjury.

[She weeps. Mel. Can you shed tears for one that you should hate? Such
meanness shows you merit such a Fate.

Leave: you have made a Conquest much more glorious, the King adores you, whom
if you never can love, will make you at least thus far fortunate, that your
perfections will with greater splendor shine in the whole worlds Opinion. My
advice is, that you use it to your own advantage, and either build your
Fortune, or reduce your Servant; for if you fail in both, your judgment will be
questioned.

By favoring one, the other may repent;
And all I wish is but your high content.
If that your seeming change cannot make him burn,
To build your greatness, all your Passions turn:
Command, as Sovereign, him you would obey;
Make him your Slave, that did your Love betray.

Marc. I cannot promise I shall e're be free,
But I will colors wear of Victory;
And my sad thoughts dress up in such disguize,
As shall deceive the most informing eyes.
Thus I an inward Martyr must become,
And seem to triumph, when I Am most undone.

Exeunt. Scene 7. Enter Moriphanus and Graculus.
Mor. In my mind, Graculus, I am most completely modified: All the rest of my
Brother Gallants may keep their beds, or put on their riding suits to day; I
shall not leave, I think, an eye of a Lady for one of them: I shall have a
fling at all their hearts; I am armed from head to foot with such an assault of
bravery, Graculus; some will be taken with the Graniture of my shoes, others
with the silk of my Suit; some with my Band, others with my Perriwig will be
lost in Love. The Widow Perilla, and all.


Grac. But the Devil a one with your person, I [aside dare swear. -- But you
have left out the wonderfull'st temptation of all, your Lordships Wisdom.


Mor. I had forgot it, it was quite out of my head, Graculus: if it had bin
much in the mode, I should have remembered it: but hang'* it is almost out of
fashion: not one Gallant of a hundred makes any reckoning of it. To say the
truth, Graculus, it may well be left off now, for it has bin in use ever since
the creation by report.


Grac. It Is very true in troth, and things of much greater value have bin laid
aside for antiquity sake: for, for ought that I can find, it is all that can be
alleged against Honesty, that it is old. But I hope there will be some
Wardrobes made of these castaway clothes of our Ancestors* that the next Age,
if they like it better than ours does, they may bring it into use again: for
they are now both ashamed to show their faces. -- But my Lord, you have forgot
to buy a Sword.


Mor. But I remember that it is unlawful to commit Murder, that is the reason,
Graculus.


Grac. The Reason, for what?


Mor. For not laying out my money to no purpose, on a thing I shall never use.


Grac. You know not what occasion may be offered.


Mor. I know the greatest that can be, shall be none to me: whem I Am resolved,
I Am resolved. Besides, I have made a solemn Oath on my own part to that, never
to break it; and that makes it a double obligation.


Grac. You had as good put it to the hazard in the Natural way of breaking it,
if an affront require it; for I doubt you will hardly live without.


Mor. I Will warrant thee, Graculus, I Will come into no such Criminaries; I Will not
fight for my Religion, I Will soone^ leave it: nor for my Estate, I will sooner
let it go. And if it were not High Treason against the King, and
hanging-Treason against my own Neck, I would tell thee what I would do for the
King too.


Grac. Never fear my Lord; you know if you should come to be hanged, the sooner
it is done, the sooner you are out of the danger of attempting or receiving
Manslaughter, or wilful Murder.


Mor. I well tell thee, for I cannot hold; why, Graculus, neither more nor
less, then I will do for my Religion, and my Estate; that is as good as to say,
and the very self-same thing that I have said, I will not fight: No, and if
nothing else can serve turn, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, they
shall even take their course with me Graculus.


[Knock without. ( Graculus looks out, returns and says. Grac. My Lord, here is
all your Pages, Footmen, Gentleman of the Horse, Secretary, Valet de Chamber,
Steward, Butler; here is all your whole Family in view.


Mor. Why, I did not bid thee take me any other servants but Footmen.


[Enter all the Boys in Liveries. Grac. No more I have not, my Lord, but all
these several Officers are to be hatched out of these Eggs.


Mor. I am much pleased: I Will go to a Play first, then to the Gardens, come
home late, go to bed without a supper, for fear of being sick with a full
stomach.


Grac. But what shall the Boys and I do, my Lord?


Mor. Do as I do* I Will have as much care of their healths, as of my own.


Grac. So, very good; here is clothing of the naked, and starving of the
hungry: The last is to be put for a Spiritual Work of Mercy, for it has much of
Air in it.


Mor. I cannot see my way Graculus; I Will turn the hinder part of my head of
hair before.


[Going out he stumbles. Grac. Hang these Perriwig makers, they have made the
Bush so big, the Owl cannot see through it.


Exeunt. Scene 8. Enter King and Lords.
Alm. The King is strangely discomposed.


Val. I, and if I am not much mistaken, it is some Female Beauty causes his
high distemper.


Lucid. Well, if this be the effects of Love, I hope I shall never let my eyes
sacrifice the contentment of my heart to any She alive.


Alm. Indeed when Women govern there, farther then in Complement, they
strangely unhinge men's humors.


(The King whispers Valasco. Valasco goes to them again.) Val. It is his
Majesty's will that we should leave him: Only, if Melynet comes, that happy
Favorite of Fortune, he is allowed admittance.


(Exeunt all but the King. King. Were Friendship half so diligent as Love's
impationt, Melynet had e're this crowned my desires with some assurance of
success, or left me to the force of my Despair; for hopes and fears are the
Gonvulsions of the mind: Fantastic Fortune! that made me both at once, a
King and Captive, fettering my heart when thou did Crown my head.

By Acts, like these, it is Love does make us know,
He in his Slaves does no distinction show.
When by a Sov'raigns right I Millions sway,
That makes me most a Woman's Power obey.
I, that my Neighboring Kingdoms keep in fear,
Can nothing bring to daunt this passion here.
(Points to his heart. It braves my Courage, and my Honor too;
Oh Conquering Love, what is it thou can not do!
Thou tumblest mighty Empires to the ground;
Nothing beyond thy Circulation's found.

Enter Melynet. Mel. Welcome my dearest Friend, beyond all wishes but
Marcelia's Love.

I dare not ask thee, yet I fain would know,
What I shall hear too soon, or else too slow.

Mel. Sure, Sir, my Looks does not a Sentence wear,
To give your wishes reason to despair:
My Face would ill interpret (then) the joy
I have, and bring you, if it hopes destroy.

King. Does my fair Mistress then my Love allow?
Tell me Melynet, tell me quickly how?
I am impatient; thou did never know
What Passion was, thy answer comes so slow.
Will she, for me, her loved Lotharicus quit?

Mel. Love is a Child; she will rule it with her wit. I find Sir, nothing so
powerful in her heart, to give your Majesty's hopes discouragement: Something
has lately happened, by which Lotharicus has lost some ground in her affection;
and that which makes me almost confident, Sir, of your success, is she seems
much more to doubt the truth I tell her of your Love, then disapprove it; and
where that is strongly urged, the Present never is unwelcome.


King. It Is true: but their desires of taking in of heart proceeds not always
from their Inclinations; it is the general humor of that Sex to glory in the
number of their Sacrifices, yet hardly will allow in their whole lives to pay
the interest of one Offering back.


Mel. Were they as cautious in their gifts of Love, as you conclude them, Sir,
their Sex had never bin taxed of so much Levity.


King. My fears are only now, she will not change; and if she does, I then
shall fear as much she will change again.

How can he happy be, whose unkind Fate,

Gives in his grearest joy, a doubting State?


Mel. Never give way, Sir, to thoughts so injurious to your quiet; her Reason
will soon shake off her Feverish Relics of Affection to Lotharicus: they will
perhaps some little time make a weak opposition; but the Antidote I have given
her of your Majesty's inclinations, will infallibly expel that poison.


King. I Will go and visit her presently, Melynet, that from my own experimented
hopes, as well as thine, I may secure my heart.


Mel. Sir, if I may without offense persuade your Maesty, defer it till the
solemnity of your Birth-day's past: I then will bring her to the Court, and
there the particular honor that your Majesty may do her by a public Address,
giving by that the Laurel to her beauty from the other fair ones, will
infinitely conduce unto the conquest. There is no surer way, than baiting of
their pride to catch their hearts.


King. I will expect that seeming Age of time.
How I shall pass it, none but those can tell,
That heaven has seen, and yet must stay in hell.

Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
Act III. Scene I.
Enter Lucidore. Luc. I must go look my longing Lords, and whet up their
desires of seeing my Mistress, with a day or two's expectation longer, the
sight will come too cheap else, and lessen their obligations, if I afford it at
their first request.


Enter Valasco, Almeric, Peregrine. Val. Oh my Lord, you are well met: we were
coming to you for performance of your promise: we could hold out no longer, you
have raised our hopes to such a height of expectation.


Alm. IN faith the fancy of her beauty does so hant our imaginations, we cannot
sleep nor eat quietly for conceiting of her, what I dare swear shall never
prove.


Luc. Well, conceit her what you please, you are not like to see her this two
long days, and so farewell.


Per. Nay, we will go with thee and hant thy ghost, till thou let'st us see the
desired apparition.


Exeunt. Scene 2. Enter Lotharicus at one door, and Melinet at another.
Loath. I do not think but we were both of us upon one design, going in pursuit
of one another.


Mel. You have reason to believe, my Lord, I carry a passion in my heart,
sufficiently impatient till I know my doom, which you ere this had found the
effect of, but that Marcelia has kept me some hours her Prisoner, to make me
promise to carry her to Court.


Loath. I then perceive I am discarded from that service: and were you any but
the person that you are, I should grow jealous of you.


Mel. To divert you from that humor, pray satisfy my wishes, how do you find
Arcasia's inclinations? I durst not come my self, and stand the Sentence.


Loath. I cannot give you hopes as you deserve; her resolution seems at present
to be fixed still to be Mistress of her own freedom; She says, the service of
no man living shall prevail to buy her out: I hope time may change her humor;
Women's first resolutions seldom stand good in Law against their second
thoughts: This for your satisfaction, you have no Rival that is more fortunate.


Mel. If I must not possess her heart, I Will pleasure take at least to think no
other does.

And hope, while it is to an Election free,
Fortune at last may kindly give it me.

Exeunt. Scene 3. Enter Marcelia.
Marc. How shall I force my self to show disdain,
Since still, in spite of me, he here will reign?
Love will not quit this place to rage or scorn,
Points to her heart. But keeps his Interest as the Eldest born.
Reason and Honor, whither are ye gone?
That I this Childish Passion find so strong.
Will you be slaves to Love? resign the Field?
So many Odds, and yet so poorly yield.
But it is not much our weak Sex should submit,
Since Man's courageous Soul cannot Master it.

Enter Page. Page. My Lord Lotharicus is come, Madam.

(Exit Page. Marc. Well.
Enter Lotharicus at a distance. He comes.

Grief now retire; act here thy Tragic part,
Points to her heart. But do not make my eyes betray my heart.
Loath. I Am come Marcelia. --

(Goes to embrace her. Marc. -- Whither pray so fast?
(Puts him back. They often fall that make too much of have. --

Loath. Has my forced absence made you angry grow?

Marc. You do mistake; your coming makes me so.

Loath. Ha! what is this I hear! I know it cannot be,
Thou art not changed thus to thy self, nor me.
This coldness comes not, Dearest, from thy heart;
It is some pretty trick of Love and Art.
Yet sure you do not so my passion doubt,
You need to take these ways to find it out.

Marcelia turns aside. Marc. I scorn much Art, but I could rage express,
To see he would fool me with a new Address.
(Turns to him. Indeed I do not; and I must confess
With the same truth, my own is grown much less.

Loath. I am surpised; Can you unblushing say,
You have your Faith and Honor thrown away?
Come, come, no more; you will make my fears, too strong:

Marc. I care not what they are, so you would be gone.

Loath. What is it you mean, Marcelia? what to do?

Marc. No more, nor less, but tell you what is true.
I Am changed: Is that so great a wonder grown?
There are examples from both Sexes known.
I wish you would leave me now; I fain would be
From Conversation, as from Passion free.
This is no Complement I must confess:
But, without study, it is my humors dress.

Loath. Are you Marcelia that I did adore?
I may be gone, grief lets me say no more.

Exit. Marc. He Is gone, and does a seeming passion show,
(sighs Such as none hardly from a true can know.
It is no wonder Women ruined be,
If all can counterfeit as well as he.

(Sits down. Enter Melynet. Mel. What new misfortune does your Soul oppress?

Marc. Lotharicus has bin here; you now may guess.

Mel. For him still sad! Fie, fie, you are too blame,
To let your Love so much your courage shame.

Marc. When Love and Reason has a War begun,
Grief cannot be hid, until the Vict'ries won.

Mel. If he were here, I Am sure he was so wise,
With his first flame, his fecond to disguize:
I know he with great oaths confirmed his Passion,
He did not else dissemble well in fashion.

Marc. He did as much as Love could make those do,
That found their Mistress false, when they were true.

Mel. That sight, I hope, straight moved you to belief.

Marc. It did not that, but it increased my grief.
No, I have done, what I but ill could do,
I scorned him much, to keep my word with you.
I hope that time will make it natural grow;
Till then my heart will never quiet know.

Mel. No more, no more of these sad thoughts; I am come to beg a favor of you;
it is to go to Court with me to night, and see the Mask; it will divert you
much.


Marc. Such sights to sickned joys sorrows augment,
A Grave can only (now) give me content.

Mel. I must not, nor I will not be denied.

Marc. I Am by my promise, to your counsels tied.

Exeunt. Scene 4. Enter Moriphanus, Graculus, and Footmen.
Mor. There Is to be some doings to day at Court, it is the King Birthday;
Graculus, thee and I Will go see it.


Grac. I wish we could, my Lord, but they will not let us in.


Mor. Not let us in! that is a good one; not let us in!

Walks up and down, and looks upon himself, pulls out a great deal of money.
Not let us in! what think thou, Graculus, will not good store of these
tempt? Besides, I am as gallant as the proudest of them, and as impudent as the
best: And I Will tell thee, Graculus, they shall not keep us out: I Will fill my
Hat of these, and cry, Make room Courtiers.


Grac. That, I confess, my Lord, will be an excellent Orator for us; it is the
most taking Language to speak in to all persons; it is strangely intelligible!
-- But, my Lord, let you and I do a frolic for once: You are infinitely brave,
and I am in my worst Clothes, and for sport's sake, let us see which shall get
in firft: Let me carry the full Exchequer in my pocket, and do you carry an
Eloquent Oration, which shall be picked out for your purpose from some of
Cicero's works.


Mor. Tell not me of works, as long as I carry a Key shall do the work for us
both.


Exeunt. Scene 5. Enter Lotharicus.
Loath. How weak is man, to place so much of his contentment in a Woman, whose
change depends on their unconstant humors, not their Reason! Those joys must
needs be still uncertain of which they are Foundations. Ha! now I think of it,
Melynet told me she ^^d engaged him to carry her to Court: Sure she does ^^sign
some Conquest there; perhaps Ambition has supplanted Love. Oh Jealousy! thou
Torturer of the heart! I find thou now begin'st to seize my Soul! I Will be there
too --.


By strict observance I Will her thoughts discover;
See if I Am scorned in hopes of some new Lover.
Exit. Scene 6. Enter several Lords and Ladies, and take their Seats: Presently
after the King, Lucidore, Perigrine, Almeric, and other Attendants. The King
looks round, and bows to all the Ladies.
King. Look to your hearts, my Lords, to night; Love is resolved, I find, to
set them all to work: He has sent so many Beauties hither, I fear I shall go
off my self a Prisoner.


Per. If you become engaged, Sir, it is all our duties to attend your Majesty.


Luc. I am gone already.


Alm. How Lucidore? what is become of your Mistress?


Luc. Faith even crowded up in a corner of my heart, out of civility to make
these Ladies room.


King. Which is the Beauty that has charmed thee, Lucidore?


Luc. Your Majesty would laugh, if I should tell you how that devilish little
blind God has served me.


King. Prithee let me hear then.


Luc. Faith, Sir, that the Ladies might not fall out about the Conquest, he has
made me in Love with all; with every one: he has compounded their several
Beauties, and given it me at once in a Pill.


King. So many Ladies taken in Love-powder at once, I confess, is a good large
proportion.


Luc. All my hopes is, they will prove like Leaden Bullets, one make another pass.


King. Well, well, Lucidore; Cupid will find his time to make you love in
earnest, grow tame, and melancholy.


Val. Sir, he has a Mistress for all he talks thus madly, and has engaged that
we shall see her.


King. He Is mad indeed then


Luc. Does your Majesty think that Love will bring me into my wits?


King. I think it can hardly put thee farther out.


Luc. Well, if he turns once a mender of Head-pieces, by my consent he shall be
employed first among Statesmen, that sit at the Stern in Government of Nations:
As for my particular, I Will dispense with my own cure; till he has done his work
in that kind; for the general good ought to be preferred before private interest.


Alm. He has found him an employment will hold him tack till the day of
Judgment, without having any thing to do with private brains.


The King talks to Almeric: Moriphanus knocks to get in, Valasco looks out,
sees him, and turns to Lucidore. Val. Of My Conscience here is the supposed Lord
at the door, we have heard so much talk of by his incomparable dress.


Luc. Prithee let him in, he will make us very merry: It will be more
divertisement to the King and Ladies, then the Masque.


Val. But he has brought a whole Regiment of Footmen with him.


Luc. Keep them out; but let him in prithee.


Enter Moriphanus and Graculus. Lucidore goes to the King. Luc. And please your
Majesty, here is a supposed Lord will make you laugh: He takes himself, I
believe, for an Ambassador; he comes from Yellow-land, a Country adjacent to
Green-land, I am confident by his dress.


King. I confess, if his inside be like his King smiles. out, he will not be
wanting to us for sport: I think you must attaque him Lucidore.


Moriphanus looks much upon himself, and walks up toward Lucidore. Luc. I see
he will begin with me first, and please your Majesty.


Mor. I hear there is to be dancing here to night; so I was resolved to come
and make one, with the rest of my fellow Noblemen.


Luc. You wrong your self, my Lord, if you think here is any one fit to be your
fellow, you are not to be matched in never a Court in Christendom.


Mor. No, Sir, I came not with that intention; my heart is disposed of, and
therefore you will loose your labor, loose your labor in troth, to speak in the
behalf of any of these Ladies, if they were in love to death with me; for all
that I can do for them, after I have said, Dye they must, and dead they were,
is, God have mercy of their Souls.


Luc. It Is a hard case for you all, Ladies; you hear the doleful answer before
you ask the question. To Graculus. Pray what is your inexorable Lords name?


Grac. He Is of an ancient Family, I assure you, Sir; he is allied to above three
parts of the world; his name, Mor-if-an-ass, which is by interpretation,
turning it backward, -- If an Ass, there is more.


Luc. I am informed of your Pedigree, my Lord, by your man; I am acquainted
with abundance of your house, I thank' em, they have made me very merry.


Mor. I believe your Lordship, they will let none be sad of their acquaintance;
every one that comes into their companies, or mine, we look upon as one of us.


Enter Melynet and Marcelia at one door, and Lotharicus at another privately.
The King looks earnestly on Marcelia. King. Melynet, you are a happy man; and
will be no less envied, whose interest could bring so great a wonder to the
Court to night, so daz'ling a Sun at midnight.


Mel. She will be much more envied Sir, and if she shine fo in your Sphere.


King. Bring here that conquering Beauty.


Marc. I know the distance of a Subject, Sir, too well, proudly to take what I
have so little Title to by Birth or Nature.


King. By one it is lefs then you deserve; and you already have gained that
interest here, Points to his heart. you easily may make the other undisputed
too.


Marc. Victories so much above belief, excuse those that your Majesty gives
them to for your divertisement, from a Reply.


King. But you have no cause Madam, to plead that reason for your silence; you
know your power too well, but you decline to own it from other Motives, which
in your answer, possibly, would speak you cruel.


Marc. I know none, Sir, shall ever keep me from, the due sense of what your
Majesty is, and what I am; and if I both remember well, I hope my actions never
shall offend my duty.


King. But if time, Marcelia, gives me no more of happiness then that, I shall
be at as great a loss as now: Love does require to be answered with something
of the same Species of its own.


Marc. Who wants the one, Sir, in that measure as their condition and their
obligations ought to have it, never pays the other well.


The King talks to her softly, she smiles, and seems satisfied with what he
says. King. Come fair Marcelia, I wish it may prove worthy the honor of thy
view.


The King leads her off; all the rest of the Lords and Ladies follow. --
Moriphanus catches one of the Ladies, and says: Mor. By your leave, my Lady, I
am resolved to lay hold of you for my share.


(She laughs: He leads her out under the arm. Lotharicus stays behind, and
grows into a rage at the Kings Courting Marcelia. Loath. Hell, and its Furies!
Oh I must be gone!
My Rage will for my Reason prove too strong.
Woman! what art thou but man's tempting shame.
That did at first his soul with weakness stain:
And still that power keep, and still betray.
Oh that some Plague had took you all away!
False Sex! that neither truth nor love does know,
But what ambitious pride can overthrow.
Thou Storm of Jealousy, thy sury lay,
Or else my duty will be cast away.
Oh Love! how you those raging Billows roll,
Which whirl-winds of despair raise in my soul!
Hold, hold, Revenge! if thou the Victory gain,
I shall my Honor with some Murder stain.
It is my King that does my Rival grow;
That Name is Sacred: Reason, keep it so
Cruel Marcelia! since thou false would prove,
Why did you place so high your change in Love?
Had any other robbed me of my rest,
My Sword should search my quiet in his breast.
Hence, hence, false woman! you are unworthy grown;
Still in this injured heart to keep thy Throne.
In vain, Lotharicus, thou hop'st relief,
Till death does give it, by the force of grief.

Exit. Scene 7. Enter Masquers, etc. The Masque ended.
King. You are sad, Marcelia, you take no pleasure in these divertisements.


Marc. I must confess, Sir, my humor was ever dull, unfit for mirth.


King. If you continue it, I shall become so too by Sympathy.


Exeunt Omnes: The King leading out Marcelia. Scene 8. Enter Lotharicus.
Loath. -- My heart affords my soul no rest.
But I will leave the Kingdom, go and try,
Whether my Love will with her absence dye:
That is a cure in Infant Passions known;
But thine, Lotharicus, too strong is grown:
She in thy Soul her Empire will possess;
Not all thy Power can make her Power less.

Enter Melynet. Mel. My Lord, I Am come as much oppressed with trouble from my
Friendship, as I am sure you must be from your Love, to see your self so
wronged by an unconstant Woman.


Loath. Her injuries to me, will prove advantages to you; therefore you have no
reason to share my grief, no more then I can take contentment in those joys her
change may bring you, in the increasing favors of the King.


Mel. My Soul is not so mean, to wish to build my rising Honor on my Friends
misfortunes: No, Lotharicus, whatsoever you think, my heart is generous enough
to be content, that they should ebb to nothing, if that could bring Marcelia
back to what she ought to be, and make you happy.


Loath. No more, dear Melynet, you are too brave, and I too base to doubt thee:
But I have received such wrongs from Love, as something may excuse my
questioning of Friendship.


Mel. It may, and justly does; you're wronged indeed; we both are injured; for
she unworthily could find no other out, to make an instrument to your abuse,
and her design, but me: I must be chose out that unhappy man to carry her to
Court; as if she thought the trouble would not be great enough, unless she made
your Friend to help it forward.


Loath. No, it was not that; she did believe your power there would make her
more regarded, that gave you the employment.


Mel. Curse on the Cause, if her desires from that did find success; my power
there made your affections ruin. What fatal minute was my unhappy interest
born in! But I Will revenge my self; I Will set all the Engines in the Court to
work, and blast her growing hopes of ever being a Queen: It Is those that puff
her up to the contempt she does express of your affections.


Loath. Has she then boasted to you of her neglects?


Mel. I, and gloried in her Falsehood; but I hope she shall be made repent from
her lost expectations.


Loath. I must confess that would allay part of my misery, to see her
unsuccessful in her ambitious wishes; the news of that would be acceptable when
I am gone.


Mel. You gone! whither my Lord?


Loath. I do intend to leave the Kingdom with all the speed I can.


Mel. I cannot wish it; yet I must confess it is wisely done.

I must approve what I would fain prevent;

But I believe you will then find most content.

And, may be, when she knows that you are gone,

Her pride may grow more weak, her love more strong.


Loath. I know not that; but I must beg your pardon sor I must go and take some
Order about my Journey: I will not now bid you my last Adieu; but when we meet
again, I then believe that we shall part for ever.

Exit Lotharicus.
Mel. I shall be much deceived else: All things happen as I could wish; Fortune
has plotted for me.

She Is a good Assistant where she is a Friend,

Fix her but constant stars until the end.


Enter Du-Prette. Du-Pr. My Lord, the King has sent for you.


Mel. I Will go to him presently; but I must give thee instructions first
concerning that I entrusted last night to thy fidelity: Lotharicus intends to
travel speedily; make it thy business to know directly when he goes, and follow
him; I Will furnish thee with moneys this night: Do it as soon as thou can with
any safety, thy reward shall wait thee: Be sure and speedy, and make thy Master
thine for ever; and one more powerful then he to pay thy services.


Du-Pr. I want not courage, Sir; and for my Conscience, it reaches, I Will assure
you, from one Pole to the other; he cannot travel out of the compass of it.


Exeunt. Scene 9. Enter Lucidore, Peregrine, and Valasco.
Per. What ail'st thou to laugh so? To Lucidore.


Luc. To think how impatient you are to see one of the oldest Witches in the
world: For, to deal ingenuously with you, my Mistress is neither better nor
worse, but even so.


Alm. Why, thou have not brought us hither to put such a trick upon us?


Luc. Put her upon you: As bad as she is, I love her too well, and have too
much use for her my self, to complement you so far to make you any such offer.


Per. We shall without any opposition in our inclinations leave you her
possession: Were she blind, lame, deaf, or dumb, or any thing else but Old,
'twere tolerable: But Old do you say?


Luc. I, as the Creation almost.


Per. Why, certainly thou art turned Projector, and think to go to heaven
with a new invention by the mortified way of sinning: you had even as good take
the old Road, for the Devil will way-lay you in the journey; and where he sends
a Post-boy for a Guide, the Passengers commonly lodge at his Inns.


Val. What is she Old does he say? O most abominable, insupportable,
intolerable, Old! Why art thou so mad in all things else, and so tame in the
choice of thy Mistress? Old! Oh Time! what would women give they had you by the
ears, to pull you back again!


Per. We may let that string alone; for there are some of our Sex would be
bribing as deep as any of them for that benefit, for many reasons: First,
because they would have the World a little like Heaven, by times going backward
and forward, and by that means prevented of coming to an end. Secondly, from a
just belief, that Ladies dout not of that in us, which we so much despise in
them; they care not to marry Methusalem, no more then we do the Witch of Endor.


Luc. And yet, before any of your brains are worthy of the place of
Privy-Councel, Old Age must have lent you some of his Experiments, as well as
Nature Wit.


Alm. Then thou took'st thy Mistress to fit thee for a Politician?


Luc. If she live so long with me till I come to be made use of in that kind, I
shall owe much to her power I dare swear.


Val. Prithee, for laughter-sake, let us see this Wonder-worker.


Luc. Well, keep your distance, and you shall.


Alm. Thou have given us caution enough in her Character of Antiquity for that.


Per. I Will be hanged if she be either Old, or Ugly; she might be her own
Guardian then; he need not keep her under Lock and Key.


The Scene opens, and there lies heaps of money up and down; and there stands
five persons about the Table with bags in their hands, dressed in Antic habit:
(as others at the door) They come out and dance, and keep time with their Bags
and Pockets. Luc. What think you, Gentlemen, of her? There she is; and her
Attendants: Her servants shall give you a Dance. They all laugh. The Dance
ended.

You see this is the Mistress of my heart and pleasure; I purchase her by the
sale of my Lands.


Per. And yet I Will be hanged if she does not run away from thee.


Luc. Well, I am of thy mind for that: But do you not all love her? Confess,
confess.


Per. The truth of it is, we should all lie horribly if we did deny that; we
all adore her, and are her most humble and faithful servants; for without her,
there is no satisfaction in this World.


Luc. No, nor hardly a place in the other World, in Hell or Heaven, but what
she helps to purchase. You may send your Venture by her to which you please.


Val, That Is true Lucidore; but I believe thou only keep'st a Correspondence in
the Lower Region.


Luc. I do so: It was always my Fortune to keep company with such as you are,
all Merchants of that place: I do not think yet amongst us all, we have
interest enough to make one Bill of Exchange so good as to pass there.


Per. There Is not one of a thousand that goes about to try till fifty or
threescore, nor so much as think of it; the Seas are very rough thither, and
troublesome.


Luc. I, hanged; and one shall be sure to be pleasure-sick all the way, and
must be still taking of bitter Potions to expel the gross humors of our
inclinations; not one Cordial allowed of; live or die, sink or swim, not one
satisfaction to be had till the Voyage is ended: I am not old enough yet to
think of Fasting and Prayer,; when I have some years over my head, I shall
begin to do as other Grave ones have done before me, leave those Vices that
will no longer keep me company, and think of Heaven out of necessity.


Per. Nay, I dare swear, thou will not endeavor to go thither, till thou art a
Criple both by diseases and time, if Death will let thee live so long.


Luc. I believe thou would be as glad as I, that thy life was
Copy-hold-Land, that as one were out, thou might renew another.

I hate such Fools, us cannot be content
With pleasures which that World to this has lent.

(Exeunt Omnes. The End of the third Act.
Act IV. Scene I.
The Scene changed to Lions. Enter Lotharicus passing one way, and Euryalus
another. Eury. Ha! my dearest Friend Lotharicus! what unexpected accident of
Fortune has given me this happiness at Lions?


Loath. Her most malicious one to me.


Eury. How? Does our meeting, after so long an absence, prove so unwelcome?
Time has a changing power over all things then I see.


Loath. Do not injure so much that friendship I have preserved so faithfully,
and will continue to my Grave, that little time my griefs will let me live.


Eury. I fear Marcelia's dead, and dare not ask: The sadness of thy look
confirms it to me.


Loath. She is indeed; and I, that Death no longer can outlive.


Eury. Poor Sister! Poor Marcelia!


Loath. You need not grieve, my Lord, she is only dead to me.


Eury. Can you believe I can be so insensible of loosing in a Sister, what you
so much lament the loss of in a Mistress? If she had perfections that rendered
her worthy of your sorrow, they have as just a claim to mine.


Loath. Oh, dear Euryalus, it is not the death she ows to Nature makes me sad;
it is her death to me, and all the Vows she made me.


Eury. How? do you tell me she is unworthy grown; so lost to Virtue? Lotharicus,
do not strain friendship up so high, by charging of my Blood with Crimes.


Loath. I give them not that name; but I, with joy, would empty all my veins,
and let life out, so that my knowledge gave my words the Lie.


Eury. Grown false without a Cause?


Loath. I say not so; I will not make her Accusation more guilty then it is.


Eury. I understand not this mysterious Language; if you have basely given her
reason for to change, condemn not the effect of your own Act; but draw, and
justify your injuring me in her.


Loath. She has a cause from her Ambition; but my Love was never yet so Criminal
to give her any: You are like to have the King your Brother; that will render
you I suppose contented, though it make your friend still miserable.


Eury. How, the King!


Loath. Yes: I give not this account for fear of fighting; you know I dare, and
can, defend my life, though now death would become so welcome, I should
unwillingly resist it.


Eury. Never think a Crown can come in competition with my friendship; I love
my Sovereign as a Loyal Subject, will give my Life and Fortunes to preserve his
Rights, and him: This is my duties Obligation: But I had rather give Marcelia
to thy Arms, then see her placed upon his Throne; nor shall she sit there and
triumph over thy injured joys.


Loath. I cannot wish, my generous friend, that you should make your sense of my
unhappiness, an injury to your Fortunes.


Eury. I Will sink 'em all, but I Will restore thee to thy lost contentment. I Will
teach her ignorant Soul, that Acts of Honor is the Noblest greatness: I had
rather have her live in Fame for Virtue when she is dead, then in a Title.


Loath. Pray force not her inclinations: I had rather still be miserable, then
make her so from your Power. Gifts of constraint, though in themselves the
highest blessing, are burdensome: Her person, without her heart, can be no
happiness; and both, I know you cannot give me the possession of.


Eury. No more, my friend. How long do you intend to stay in these parts?


Loath. But till to morrow: My thoughts are restless, and I follow them.


Eury. How far do you intend to travel?


Loath. Till I arrive at my wished journeys end.


Eury. What place is that?


Loath. It Is Death, it is Death, my Friend: till then I Will rove about the World,
and give my self no constant habitation.


Exeunt. The Scene changes. Scene 2. Enter Marcelia and Desha.
Marc. My Brother is come to Lions, I hear; I will go write him word how false
Lotharicus is proved. Go, send the Page where I bid you.


Desha. Yes, Madam.


Exit Desha. Marc. What strange effects of Fortune do I prove!
How variously she in my life does move!
A Prince so brave, and in his Power so great,
Forced to beg favors humbly at my feet:
She never for thy glory more could do,
Then she in that, Marcelia, did for you.
Pride could not raise, nor swell my hopes more high,
Then she has given me Power to satisfy:
Nor can she bring my heart to more distress,
Then she has done in all my happiness:
Then bribes me with a Crown to be content,
And makes Ambition prove Loves Monument.
But love, if true, did never Power know,
That greater, then it self, could ever grow;
But that of Heaven; when it within the Soul
Does monstrous prove, and Virtue would control.
No, no, I still must love whilst I have breath;
Nothing can give my passion date, but death.
But that Lotharicus may not pleasure take,
To think that his does sleep, and mine does wake;
I Will force my courage, give me to thee King,
Though I shall be a heartless offering:
And on a Throne in secret mourn that Fare
Destroyed his Love, and raised me to such State.
As Princes ought, I then will act my part,
Not make my face prospective to my heart;
Nor give the Kings contentment cause to doubt,
When his confined, my Love does wander out:
My griefs and passions all shall inward burn;
The brave, their bodies, makes their troubles Urn.

Exit. Scene changes to a Garden. Scene 3. Enter Perilla and Arcasia.
Arcas. This fine Evening, methinks, should fill the Garden full of company.


Enter Moriphanus, Graculus, and Boys. Ha! what have we here? A Knight of the
Sun upon my life.

Per. You are mistaken, he goes for an Outlandish Lord.


Arc. Prithee what is his name?


Per. Moriphanus.


Arc. Oh, I know him now, at least in Character: he seeks to be your Servant.


Per. You are much deceived, it is to be my Master: The first time of his Visit
he speaks all Matrimony, and left the discourse of Love for the second
Interview: Marriage is the Captain, I will assure you, of his discourse, and
Love the Lieutenant.


Arc. Nay, it is well if affection has any office in business of that kind; for
there is nothing speaks a Gallant now so ill-bred, as Marrying and Loving both
in a place. But prithee let us make toward him, for I long to be censuring your
Servant: Perhaps I may find more Merit in him then report speaks, for that
seldom knows any meanin disparagement, or praise.


(Laughs. Per. If your curiosity be so great, you shall go by your self, for
I Am resolved he shall not see me.


Arc. If his company be so troublesome, the most certain way to be-rid of it,
is to marry him; and at the present put on your Mask, and that will secure you:
for I must go that way and meet him.


(Laughs extremely. Per. Prithee what is the matter you laugh so exceedingly?


Arc. I am conceited you used your Servant very roughly when he waited on you
last: Confess, did not you make your servants beat him?


Per. Why should you think so prithee?


Arc. By the trimming of his Suit with that deep Blew and Black: upon my
Conscience it is an Emblem of some favors of yours in that kind; for he looks
like one that would be cudgelled, put off his hat, and give thanks.


Per. Nay, for that matter, I dare swear for him, he would, as submissively as
any man, take a beating, if any one would bestow the pains to give it him.


Arc. Well, I am most strangely taken with the Mounsieur, as I live; I Would give a
hundred Pistols he were in love with me: My Doctor tells me I am going into a
Consumption; but I dare swear his company but one two months would cure me. O
most incomparable Don Quixot! what faces and postures he has!


Per. Prithee let us go, thou have laughed enough; and if thou hold'st thy
humor any longer, thou will put me into the same vein, and that will make me be
looked on as a mad Widow.


Arc. The more mad, the more fashionable; as long as thou art sure thy Husband
is safe enough, for ever coming back again to use thee worse by taking of it
ill, thou need'st not care.


Per. What would I give now that my Year of Mourning were as much worn out as
my Melancholy?


Mor. Have I not seen you before, Ladies?


(Comes to them. Arc. That Question you must answer your self; examine your
memory, and give account to your knowledge: But if you have seen me before, and
have forgot me, I shall take it inconceiveably ill, that you should have turned
me out of your head as long as the room was empty.


Mor. What fine expressions these Ladies have for any thing they speak of,
Graculus?


(Aside to his man. Grac. O yes, my Lord, they are so used to good Language,
they can call you a Fool in a Complement, and you shall be never the wiser for
it.


Mor. Not the wiser for it, say thou?


Grac. No, not one jot In Faith.


Arc. Do you remember as yet?


Mor. No, upon my Honor, I cannot call to mind neither your face, nor hers in
the Mask.


Arc. Then your Lordship knows a face no better in a Vizard, then out of it.
Are you not acquainted with out names neither?


Mor. No, I swear upon the Title of a Lord: But pray Ladies, do me that high
favor to tell me what I may call you.


Arc. Why, we will give you leave to be our Godfather; call us what you
please; but we dare not trust you with our Names, you are so great a Gallant:
Shall we Perilla?


Mor. What is she my dearly beloved Mistress Perilla?


Arc. I thought as much; no sooner know her name, but taking away her
reputation: You are gotten into the perfect Road of the Town I see.


Per. I am Perilla, since I am discovered, but not your Mistress.


Mor. By my Honor, I Will swear before all the Judges in the Kingdom, you are,
and shall be.


Per. What, whether I will or no? Pray how many Mistrises more has your
deserving Lordship?


Per. Not in possession, but in report; for a right Gallant never keeps account
in that kind upon truth, but as his humor serves him for boasting, and his
memory to repeat over a good long Catalogue of Ladies names.


Arc. Be sure to reckon, my Lord, that none of the rest of the Modes of the
Town may give in a larger Bill of Ladies favors; for if you do, you are lost if
you think of Marriage with her; for she has sworn whosoever she makes her
Husband, shall have bin as much, if not more, the Favorite of her Sex, then any.


Mor. Why, I can be as much as the best then in their esteem.


Arc. Can be? that is not enough, there is no glory to be had in that by talking
upon supposition: You must say you have bin.


Per. Well, you will not confess then how many Mistrisses you have had, my Lord?


Mor. If you examine me upon Oath, I must; for my Conscience is very tender.


Per. Upon Oath? you may be confident I do.


Mor. Why then truly I must needs say, I have had all the Ladies almost in the
Suburbs, and City, from the Bib to the Furred Gown, lay aside all thoughts of
their Honor and Virtue for my sake.


Per. Well, your Lordship has gained much upon my affection, by this
acknowledgment of the general favor you have had amongst us: I Will have your
Mistrisses poll'd, and if no young Blade bring me a larger Bill of Fare out of
the Country, it is ten to one but you shall know my mind in a week or two.


Enter Peregrine and Lucidore. Per. That Is the Widow I told thee of;
Moriphanus is her Servant.


Luc. He shall be hanged before he shall have her; I could almost love her
enough to Marry her my self.


Per. Nay, she is very rich too.


Luc. Double temptations! I am resolved I Will get acquainted with her; and if
she and I can agree,'it is odds but I shall have a sting at Matrimony before I
die.


Per. Well, Arcasia, let us leave the Garden now, the Air is sharp, and if I
stay longer, I am afraid my Love will catch cold.


Arc. What, when the Fire's by?


Mor. It cannot indeed, Madam; if you mean me, I Will stay as long as you please.


Per. I wont venture it longer; I find it not well already.


Exeunt omnes, praeter Lucid. and Peregrine. Luc. Come, Peregrine, let us
follow that day star.


Exeunt. Scene changes to Marseills. Scene 4. Enter Du-Prette and 3 Villains.
Du-Pr. I am mad that Philampras is not to be found.


1 Vill. Why, you know it was not to be done till to morrow.


Du-Pr. That Is true; but the wind may serve before that time, and then he is
gone: Now we may be sure of him; he must come this way from the place he sups.
Be sure that you dispatch him.


2 Vill. Fear not; we'll make him safe enough for ever rising in judgment
against you in this world, what e're he does in the next.


Enter Lotharicus, and two lighting him with Torches. Du-Pr. Here he comes.


The Villains assault him, and the men with Torches run away: Lotharicus draws
to defend himself. Loath. I would willingly die, but not by the hands of
Villains.


He fights bravely, kills one of the Villains; they wound him in many places,
and he falls. 3 Vill. He Is gone to Heaven or Hell, and has took one of us with
him for his Attendance.


Du-Pr. Are you sure he is dead?


3. Vill. I, sure enough, unless he has more lives then one.


Du-Pr. For fear he should not, I Will give him my last blessing.


1 Vill. Hold; he is dead I Will warrant ( Pulls out a Pistol. you; and the noise
of that going off, will bring in company, and betray us: If you are not
satisfied, we'll open two or three Casements more to let his Soul pass out by;
but it is unnecessary.


Hark; I hear a noise; let us fly; we shall be taken.


(They go back to wound him again, and hear a noise. 3 Vill. What shall we do
with our dead companion?


1 Vill. Leave him, he is not known here.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Meraspas and Philampras, and two other men with Torches.
Phil. Pray let us make all the have we can: I have bin all this Evening to find
you or your Lord out.


Meras. Had not your business bin of such high importance to my Lord, as you
say, I would have borrowed an hours time longer to have drank with my friends
here.


1 Man. Another time will do as well: we will go with you as far as the house,
and there take our leaves; to morrow we'll meet again.


Meras. I wonder what it is a clock?


Phil. Between eleven and twelve.


2 Man. What Is that lies yonder?


(1 Man steps forth. 1 Man. Ha! a Gentleman killed.


Meras. Heaven bless my Lord. (Goes to him and looks. O, it is my Lord! It is
my Lord that is murdered! Oh cursed Villains that have done this, and cursed I
that was not with him to have hope to defend his life, or lost my own in
endeavoring of it! What shall I do?


2 Man. There is no remedy now, poor Gentleman.


Meras. Pray help me take up his Body, and carry it home.


(Exeunt with Body of Lotharicus. Scene changes to a Garden. Scene 5. Enter
Calinda and Ericina.
Eric. Are you resolved still to give up your self to so much sadness? Is it so
great a wonder to find men false, that you no better are prepared, from
reasonable expectation, to meet this change and common trouble?


Call. It is true, Ericina, our afflictions do usually receive abatement from
not being single Sufferers; but love admits not of allays, like other ills; nor
is that humor (in my mind) so generally to be boasted of: Besides, Love, when
it first takes Possession of our hearts, deprives us of our Reason; and that is
the chief resisting strength, by which we opposition make against all other
accidents of Fortunes malice.


Eric. I cannot think a Passion by Gods and Men so Deified, can carry in it so
much destructive danger; for if it robs our Souls of Reason, it makes us like
to Beasts: And certainly Heaven never designed that Metamorphosis, from whence
we have received the highest proof of that All-conquering Passion: Besides,
some with their Reason make their Choice, and what it does approve, it may
subsist with, or banish it, if it too far intrude: That Reason is very weak and
sluggish, that suffers and Passion to grow so strong as to supplant it.


Call. I do not wish thee so much ill as it is unhappily to Love, or else I
should be glad to see how you would rule your inclinations, which I confess you
manage well in supposition.

-- Would mine were governed by fancy too;
I, Player-like, could reign as well as you.
We can, unmoved, hear others sufferings tell,
Which, if our own, we should not bear it well.

Eric. You can no trouble have but what is mine;
My love does make my share as great as thine.
Unkind Calinda, what is it you intend?
To punish your false Lover in your Friend.
Can his inconstancy make you despise,
That friendship which you once so much did prize?
If you so great injustice will allow,
Never censure him; he did not break his Vow:
And who the self-same Errors will commit,
In prudence ought in others pardon it.

Call. You of injustice talk, whilst only I
Find from you both so much you fain would die.
Friendship and Love to me are cruel grown;
I wish to Heaven that I had neither known.
Were yours true, you would not mine suspect,
Our doubt grows strongest from our own defect.
You on my Love a blemish fain would throw,
That in your change you might less guilty show.
Those that are wise do setting Suns forsake,
And with the rising ones their friendships make.
You know who it is has set his heart on fire;
Improve your interest e're the flame expire.
Love that plays Truant once without a cause,
Will still an Outlaw be to Honor's Laws:
And days, whose mornings do appear most bright,
Are often over-cast before it is night.
If she his seeming passion entertain,
His half-made vows will cost his eyes some rain.

Eric. She cannot greater showers for Love let fall,
Then I shall do for friendships Funeral.
Calinda, by my death you soon will know,
Whither to that I have bin true or no:
Then I am sure that you will grow more just,
And shed some tears for your unkind mistrust.

Call. If that can cure thy griefs my doubts have bred,
I Will make my eyes another Deluge shed,
Dear Ericina, can y' a pardon give,
To an offense makes me unfit to live?

Eric. I can forgive much more then you can do:
Love, in that kind, never yet a limit knew.

Call. I grieve to think I should a debt contract,
Of which I cannot pay the Interest back.

Eric. And I am sad to see your heart possessed
Still with that Love, which gives your thoughts no rest.

Call. Thy charming voice would make them calmer grow.

Eric. I Would sing, and never give off, if I thought so.

Call. Sing then that Song my humor suits and mind,
I Will sit down here, if thou will be so kind.

She sits down, and leans melancholy upon her arm. SONG.
Eric. 1.
Oh, you powerful Gods, if I must be,
An injured Offering to Love's Deity,
Grant my revenge, this Plague on men,
That Women never may love again:
Then I Will with joy submit unto my Fate,
Which by your Justice gives their Empire date.
2
Depose that proud insulting Boy,
Who most is pleased when he can most destroy:
O! let the World no longer governed be.
By such a Blind and Childish Deity;
For if you Gods be in your Power severe,
We shall adore you not from love, but fear.
3
But if you will his Divinity maintain
Over men, false men, confine his ^o^^'ring reign;
And when their Hearts Love's greatest torments prove,
Let that not pity, but our laughter move.
Thus scorned and lost to all their wishes aim,
Let Rage, Despair, and Death, then end their flame.
It Is very late, my dear Calinda, and we had best be gone.


Call. It may be so, for time does slowly pass,
That runs by high Afflictions Hourglass.

Exeunt. Scene 6. Enter Euryalus reading a Letter.
Eur. It thou had such reason for thy change, I do not blame thee then,
Marcelia; I would I had received thy Letter sooner, e're Lotharicus and I had
parted, I would have justified thou Nobly did to slight him, and entertain
the Kings Address, since he so basely left thee for another; nor shall he escape
the punishment of his Perjuries, for I will follow him to give him death.


Enter Du-Prette, and two Villains fighting. 1. Vill. Did thou think to make
us do thy work, and cheat us of our wages? we pursued thee hither to Lions to
give thee death for thy deceit.


They wound him, he falls. Enter Euryalus passing, and two Footmen. Du-Fr. Oh
Lotharicus, Lotharicus! thy murder is revenged. Oh Heaven! how constantly you
still pursue.

Eur. Ha! what art thou that talk of Lotharicus murder? Tell me, or I will
take that remnant of thy life away, and by thy words, host that black guilt
upon it? Speak quickly.


Du-Pr. Sit, it is not the threat of Death can force me to confess. since I
shall make my life, by doing it, a forfeiture to Justice: But from repentance
and remorse I tell -- my name's Du-Prette, and I know you to be my Lord
Euryalus: I Will say no more whilst Witnesses are by; now take my life, and if
you think it fit; or if you let me longer live, I will inform you all I know;
that which shall give your Courage and your Sword new edge, and Noble work.


Eur. Help carry him off.


(The Footmen take him up. Look that thou do, as promised, then discover;
I Will spare one Villain to betray another. Exeunt. Scene changes. Scene 7. Enter
Lucidore and Peregrine.
Luc. That little Trumpeter, Cupid, has so perpetually sounded in my thoughts
the Widows Perfoctions; her Wit, her Beauty, and her Wealth, as he has caused
an uproar in my heart, and some of my own Subjects has listed themselves
Soldiers under her Command.


Per. Which prithee are turned Rebels?


Luc. My Will, my Inclinations, my Covetousness, and my Vanity, to take her
from the rest of my Servants; and they so ^^outly fight my former resolutions,
and my reason, that, hang me, I believe they will get the day, and tumble me
headlong into a Married Life, and make me grow gray, and grave, with a
Whither-go-ye, squalling Kitlings, and Curtain Lectures.


Per. Certainly thou art a strange lover of Hell, that thou will be running
into it before thy time.


Luc. No, you mistake; Marriage is a preparative for another place, both by the
mortification of it, and the honesty.


Enter Moriphanus, Graculus, and Footmen. Per. Your Rival has bin to see the
Widow.


Luc. I Will Rival his Coxcomb if he comes any more there. Do you hear Sir? --
(Turns to Moriphanus. I am informed you are the Widow Perilla's servant.


Mor. I scorn your words; I her servant! I Would have you to know I think to make
her my Wife, and she thinks to make me her Husband. I her servant!


Luc. Well, whatsoever she thinks, you had best think of her no more, or win
her now by your Sword.


Mor. Win her? did not I tell you just now, I have won her already? and I am
not such a Fool to fight for any thing that is my own: Stake another Lady to
her, and have at you who shall have both.


Luc. But then you shall fight.


Mor. Shall fight?


Luc. I shall fight, or be beaten.


Mor. Oh, I thought you had bin a man of that Authority, to have made me fight
whither I would or no. I tell you then, Sir, I love her so well, I Would sooner be
beaten for her sake, then fight for any woman in the world besides.


Per. This is a rare Coward; we'll have excellent sport with him.


Luc. Why, you may take your own Election, either fight, be beaten, or forbear
coming there.


Mor. Well, Sir, since I may take my own choice, I Will take time to consider of
it; I will not resolve on any thing too hastily.


Grac. My Lord, you know your own certain mind already, and had as good tell it
before you go.


Moriphanus offers to go off, and Lucidore takes him by the sleeve. Luc. Nay,
you are not like to stir till you have, Sir.


Mor. Why, Sir, then I will, because I don't much care if I do.

(Studies. And now, Sir, I have considered of it, I Will neither sight nor be
beaten for any woman, as long as there is God's plenty of them in the world.
Here Is a quarter and a do about a woman indeed!


Luc. Why then you will come no more there?


Mor. No that I will not: But what if she comes to me? I warrant you will go and
challenge her too, and fight with her: you think she is to be won by fighting;
but, alas, you are deceived, she is not to be won by the Blade; there is a Bill
in the case which you know not of, which will prevail before the Sword.


Luc. But it shall not be long before I know the Bill, and the business.


Mor. But what if I will not tell you? am I bound to tell you all that I know?


Luc. No, not if you will fight, but you must otherwise, I tell you that.


Mor. You should not need to press me thus to fight, had I not made a vow, the
last man I killed in seven years, never to answer not make a challenge to any
man living: no, you should have no cause to call upon me twice.


Grac. To run away.


(A side. Mor. You Would find I would not be abused. O that the time were expired!
you put me into such a rage, that my passion must vent it self some way.


Falls a crying, and turns to Grac. Graculus, did never hear that fighting
was Physical?


Grac. Not I, upon my life, my Lord.


Mor. Why then if thou dare take my word for it, it is.


Grac. But Sir, what makes you weep?


Mor. My vow, Graculus, my vow!


(Wipes his eyes. Per. Your pretense of a vow, is but an excuse for your
Cowardice.


Grac. Why, in troth, my Lord, if I were as you, I would fight, and for once
break a vow made in cold blood, now your courage is so spurred and chafed with
these quarrolling Lords.


Mor. Let me see, let me see. Hum; no way ( Studies. left to break this rotten
Engagement, and fight?


Grac. Yes, my Lord, you may easily break it where it is rotten.


Luc. If you can find none in your Conscience, send but for half a dozen
Advocates, give 'em double fees, and they will find you one in theirs, and a point
in Law to make it good.


Mor. If it can be done by them; I Will make my own Conscience do it as well, and
save me that charges: And suppose I am resolved to fight, there is more to be
considered of then just that; there is time, weapon, and place.


Per. That you shall have the liberty to Elect.


Mor. Well then, let me consider; as to the time I cannot do it this seven
years, I am sure, I have business for every particular day; and if I appoint
ten or twenty years hence, and am called to take my place of Honor in the other
world before, then you will say, I am not a man of my word; a Knave, a Cheat, a
Rascal, or some such thing: Therefore it shall be a Duel in the other world.


Grac. O brave, my Lord, that will do rarely: But who shall be your Seconds?


Mor. Hold thy prating: I Will nominate my self who shall be both our Seconds: He
shall have Alexander the Great, and the Maid of Orleance, and I Will have
Sampson, and William the Conqueror.


Grac. I, my Lord, do so; stand to your hold; for you may lend Sampson, if you
list, one of your Jaw-bones, and then he shall fight with Alexander the Great.


Luc. If you will fight, or dare fight, fight now for your Mistress: we'll find
another quarrel to exercise your courage in the other world.


Mor. I tell you I will not fight a stroke till the time appointed; so I may
have some cowardly dog-trick or other put upon me: I Will have all that ever
lived from the Creation, to that day, stand by when I Duel, to see that there
is fair play. And so no more of that: I Am in great have, and must leave your
angry Honors.


Luc. Hold, hold.


Mor. I Will neither hold, nor stay: I am going to the Cutlers to bespeak weapons
against the time appointed; and do you hear, be sure you meet me there.


Exeunt. Scene 8. Enter Melyent reading a Letter.
Mel. Lotharicus dead! thou have bravely done,
And justly the reward of Death have won;
Which thou shall have; but e're thou come at it,
Thou must another Tragedy commit.
My Fortune now is almost made secure,
There is but one blow more it can endure:
Euryalus, thou must not live to be
An interposing Cloud' twixt that and me:
For e're my greatness shall be so withstood,
I Will make my passage through a Sea of Blood.
My Soul is with too towering hopes possessed,
To be by thoughts of Conscience now suppressed:
Nor shall Euryalus prolong the date,
Which I have given for his dying Fate.

Exit. Scene 9. Enter Euryalus in disguize, and Desha.
Eur. Pray go tell your Lady here is a Gentleman has business of importance
with her, and desires to tell it her in private.


Desh. I shall acquaint her, Sir.


Exit Desha. Eur. All things are in this Kingdom as plentiful and prosperous,
as if that none but Saints inhabited it.
But surely Sin's infection is grown high,
When Monarchs once their Souls with Murders Dye:
For they are Suns on which the Subjects gaze,
To gather rules for mannaging their ways.
How strictly then are they to Virtue tied,
Who, by Example, are a Nations Guide?

Enter Marcelia. (puts her back. Marc. Oh, my dear Brother! dear Euryalus, how
-- He

Eur. You Are grown unworthy of such kindnesh now.
It is not love has brought me back, but hate.

Marc. Oh Heaven, what have I done to make you say it!

Eur. What have you not, could base and barbarous be?
Murder Lotharicus, dishonor me.

Marc. I kill Lotharicus! Heaven knows that I,
False as he is, to save his life would die.
For worlds I would not live that grief to know.

Eur. What Devil helps thee to dissemble so?
Has that black Favorite of Hell's design,
Taught thee this virtue with the rest to join?
Was It not enough you did his life betray,
To serve your pride made that be took away;
But with your cursed malicious blasting breath,
Strive, in his Fame, to give him second death?
Or, did your Soul such sharp reprovements give
To your false heart, that feared to let him live?
Could bubling Greatness thy ambition swell
To such a height, to send thee Post to Hell.

Marc. I have no guilt, I hope, can bring me there,
But in my Grave you will throw me by despair;
For nothing's left to make me wish to stay,
If my Lotharicus be took away.
Where he in ashes is, I Would rather be,
Then here possess the whole worlds Monarchy.
Thy deadliest stroke thou now have given, Fate;
Marcelia's strength cannot support the weight.
In life I nothing now but horrors see,
Since earth is robbed ( Lotharicus) of thee.
All it possessed of great and brave, now lies
Gluttonous Death, thy malice Sacrifice:
Since thou his Noble life refused to spare,
No longer this unhappy one forbear.
I court thy cold embraces to this breast,
For till my soul's with his, I never shall rest:
And sure it cannot be long before it be,
Since grief and love both strive to set it free.

Eur. What Is this I see? certain I Am in a dream;
Falsehood cannot pretend such high extreme.
Marcelia, what to judge I do not know,
Since for his death you so much passion show.

Marc. Judge what you will, my Innocence you will prove,
By that which quickly will your doubts remove.

Eur. Then it is that devilish Melynet has laid
That plot, which both his Love and Life betrayed.
Treacherous Serpent! Monster of Mankind!
How could thy Noble Blood such tincture find?
Or thy false Soul permit thee to divide,
Two hearts which thou did find so strongly tied?
For he did for thy change such trouble show,
As nothing but the highest flame could know:
His daily wishes were, he might expire,
Because he had outlived Marcelia's fire.

(Points to her head. Marc. Add, add no more, least reason quit this place,
And after that, then this be left by Grace.
(Her heart. I am a Mortal, and no more can show
Of power, in my passons overthrow.

Eur. To raise thy miseries I do not design.
But I would have thee th'top of Honor climb:
Refuse the King, then do thy Honor right,
To show that greatness dazles not thy sight;
For his consent was given to the fact;
And marrying him thou will his guilt contract.

Marc. I Will sooner be to a dead body joined,
Then ever in his guilty Arms confined:
No, no, Euryalus, his Crown cannot take,
That Love away, his Virtues could not shake:
From one revenge I gave him my consent,
And from this second I Will his hopes prevent.

Eur. Dear, dear Marcelia, my most Noble part,
Thou make me jealous of thy generous heart.
Lotharicus will surely in his Grave,
Rejoice to see thou art so true and brave,
For Melynet, wh' has raised him self so great,
By strangling Virtue in it is proper Seat;
I Will trust this Arm to find me out the way,
The price of Murder in his heart to pay.
The King is by that awful name secute;
Subjects are bound what they do to endure.
Heaven reserves it self the punishing them:
They are not here to give account to men.
Who strikes at them, Divinity gives a blow;
Whose Viceroys Monarchs all are here below.

Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
Act V. Scene. I.
Enter Moriphanus and Graculus. Mor. A very likely matter indeed, that she
should refuse to marry me because I would not fight for her: No, no, she is not
so ungodly, and loves me better then to desire I should venture my life:
Besides, I never told her, or said such a word, that I would kill my self for
her, or kill any man for her, nor go to the Devil for her; and thou may be
sure she does not look that I should do more then my bargain.


Grac. Why, my Lord, are you so ignorant, I mean unknowing, to set any bounds
to your promise to a Mistress? Why, you should run full speed unto all you
thought she would have, or could possibly desire, to make her think you were
one mad, and dying for her; and when y' have won her, and are married, then you
may do as most married men does, pace them in the performance, or quite bedridden
them; or if you will keep in the rank of the best Husbands, why then you must
make your Wife Parson of your Courting, Vows, and Promises, and give her the
Tyths; for when they have run out of their wits so far, that it cannot keep'em
from going to Service, it is fit they know they have a Master.


Enter Perilla and Arcasia. Per. Your Servant, my Lord.


Mor. No, Madam, I am not so happy to have it so yet. Was not that well
answered, Graculus?


(To his man. Grac. It was answered like your self, my Lord.


Per. Do you observe, Arcasia? The veriest Fool that is can expect Government
if he marries.


Arc. And well they may: It is but reasonable, that those Fools that can get
into that Authority, should govern those Fools that gave it. Don't you think it
fit in judgment, that the least Fool should rule the greater?


Per. I Will not speak my Opinion to the prejudice of my intention. But, my Lord,
pray what gives me the honor of this early visit? for I had hardly dined when
you came.


Mor. I Will tell you a thing, but I would not have you trouble your self about
it.


Per. Truly, that high affliction that put me into this habit, was so great,
that it must be something extraordinary can move me now to any sense of sorrow.
-- But let me know it.


Mor. I am very much afraid this will; and for all I came on purpose to tell it
you, and it is very fit you should know it, yet you shall not know it, unless
you swear, and give me your hand, you will not grieve about it.


Per. I cannot promise you it shall not trouble my heart, if it should concern
you: but I will not make the least sigh of it.


Mor. Why that is it now; it does concern me.


Per. Well, if it does concern you never so much, I will keep my word, since
you have engaged me.


Mor. Then to tell you the truth, the short and the long is, it was ten
thousand to one you had never seen me again: I was set upon, and like to bin
killed about you; my Man can tell here; I brought him on purpose to justify
it, if you should not believe it.


(Perilla and Arcasia laugh. Per. In troth I cannot but be extremely merry to
hear the danger is over. Lord, I do but think what a pickle I should have bin
in, if I had known it when it was, by the joy I find now for the escape.


Grac. He was in a pickle enough for himself and you too, I Will swear for him,
Madam: the thoughts of never seeing you again wrought strangely upon him, to my
knowledge, in that little time; that fear made him go lighter from the
Gentlemen in personal weight, then he met them.


(They laugh extremely. Arc. It seems there was very fowl play; two against one.


Per. Pray, my Lord, who were those Cowards?


Mor. My Lord Lucidore, and Peregrine.


Per. It Is one of the humors, I ever knew, to forbid other Suitors, and not
offer to come a woing himself.


(aside. Mor. Nay, I shall always be in danger of my life till we are married;
every one will have a fling at it, thinking you love me best.


Per. Alas, my Lord, I would not marry you now you have told me this, for all
the world: for hitherto they have only intended to kill you, because as yet you
have only intended to marry: but if you should marry in earnest, they will kill
you so too, for they will grow desperate when they are out of all hopes: So I see
plainly I shall be a Widow presently; my Vail will be no sooner off, but on
again; and to loose you so soon, would quite break my heart.


Mor. Truly I believe it would; for the thoughts of it almost breaks mine
already.


Per. Nay, now I think of it, it was told for certain by my Nativity, that my
second Husband should be killed.


Mor. But are you to have no more?


Per. O, yes, yes!


Mor. Why then I Will be the third; I Will tarry with all my heart for you, till
the danger be over, that is to come upon the second.


Per. There Is a far worse, and more un-gentleman-like death threatens my third
and fourth, then all the rest; for the one will be hanged, and the other --


Mor. What will become of him?


Per. Why, without any ceremony, he is to hang himself.


Mor. I had rather be him then any of the others, because I know mine own
natural aversion against death, and should have this comfort, at least, that I
should not be forced to die against my mind, as long as I was to be my own
Executioner.


Arc. That Is a thing indeed, my Lord, would make the danger much less; but if I
may advise you, run not the hazard, you know not what a good Wife may tempt you
to.


Per. I am resolved, I love him so well, he shall never while I live get my
consent, to put him into the danger of it, nor my self into the possibility of
so much grief.


Mor. Well, mere love of one another I see makes us both resolve never to marry
together: Now there is not one of a hundred does so I believe: --

(Exeunt Perilla and Arcasia. For all that, Graculus, I shall never put her out
of my mind.


Grac. No, my Lord, if you stay here; no man can forget a dead Wife but by
change of Air; therefore you must needs go and travel, to get you a fresh
appetite to a new affection.


Mor. Will that do it, Graculus?


Grac. I marry will it Sir, I warrant you; it is a receipt Probatum. --


Exeunt. Scene 2. Enter Almeric and Lucidore.
Alm. It Is true as I tell thee; Peregrine is taken with Arcasia, and has made
an invitation to thy Widow, and her, to the Gardens; he intends to give them
an entertainment there.


Luc. Prithee let us be his unbidden Guests for once, we'll not be in his debt,
I am resolved I will send in my dish.


Alm. A match, a match.


Exeunt. Scene 3. Enter King and Melynet.
Mel. Lotharicus death, Sir, gives an absolute security to your love. --


King. It does enlarge my hopes of having now the full possession of Marcelia's
heart; but still a gallant man must be lamented; I, and my Kingdom both, may
justly mourn his death.


Mel. No doubt, Sir, he does deserve it; and did not your Majesty's concern
balance my sorrow, the loss of such a friend would cause much greater trouble
in my Soul. But all things, Sir, does, and shall still give place unto my duty.


King. I doubt thee not in any thing, my Melynet. But does Marcelia know yet of
Lotharicus death?


Mel. No, Sir; but intend she shall.


King. Prithee do; for I shall long to know how she does take it. It Is natural
in Lovers to be curious in the search of that which gives them the highest
troubles: and when there is a real wanting cause, our jealousies do commonly
create us some suppositions; and mine does strongly work in doubts, for all her
seeming kindnesses and promises, they are all but empty nothings to that passion
her heart once had, and I fear still conceals for dead Lotharicus.


Mel. I cannot think it Sir: but I will soon inform my self, and give your
Majesty satisfaction.


Exeunt. Scene 4. Enter Peregrine, Perilla, and Arcasia, in a Garden. A Table
set out with several Meats and Wine: with Attendance.
Pereg. I could wish I had given my Lord Lucidore an invitation.


Peril. I wish you had, for he is most excellent company.


Per. And much your servant, I am sure, Madam; he is one of your secret Lovers
that has not yet made discovery of his flame; but it will not be long before
the fire break out, I am confident.


Arc. I do not think he is constant enough, to think and say all at one time,
he loves.


Peril. Indeed, he does not seem to be of a humor, that his heart should be in
any danger of ever being made a woman's prisoner.


Per. Would he were here to answer for himself: I could find of my heart to
send one of my Boys to find him out.


Arc. You Will put him upon 24 hours search then: When he goes out in a morning,
by report, he is commonly lost all that day to any Enquirers. But perhaps his
usual curiosity of seeing the Beauties, may bring him hither anon.


Peril. Why, does he take such pains to be rid of his liberty, to come here to
seek for a Conqueror?


Pereg. No, Madam; it was his Opinion of his own invincible strength made him
so bold to attempt the danger: He used to swear, as long as Cupid was a Child,
he feared him not; he had not so poor a spirit to be worsted by a Boy: If he
lived so long till he came to be a man, which he had bin these two thousand
years a coming to, and not one jot the forwarder yet, he would then stand upon
his guard against him.


Enter Music. Mus. My Lord Lucidore sent us hither to give your Lordship a new
Lesson.


Per. I thank him; I wish his Lordship had come himself too.


(They all laugh. The Music (espying the Boys coming at the other end of the
Stage with a dish) begin to play. Boy. It Is very hot, it burns my fingers; and
it is very heavy too: we'll set it down and dance a little risk.


They dance. Enter a Mercury with a great Chasi^-dish of Coals; reaches up the
dish, sets it thereon. Mercury. Why, what have you done Boys? the dish is quite
cold: you forget you carried your Lords Love, which is a Native of Freezland.


Boy. Why, can it be cold already?


Merc. Cold already? I, hot and cold, and cold and hot, a hundred times over,
to a hundred several Ladies.


Takes up the Coals, and blows under it. Boy. Pray stay a little, and we'll go
fetch some Bellows, and make it boil.


Merc. Be quick.


Exeunt Boys. Enter presently again with two more Boys, each with Bellows. They
dance with Mercury in the middle, with the dish and fire in his hand, every one
by turns blowing under the Dish: The dance ended, Exeunt Boys. Mercury comes up
with the dish to the Table. Merc. My Lord Lucidore presents this to you, Madam.


Exit. Perilla opens the dish, there is the form of a Heart made with wings, in
it a Copy of Verses directed to the Incomparable Widow. ( They all laugh
extremely. Pereg. What is in it, Madam?


Peril. Nothing but a copy of Verses.


Arc. But I am much taken with the Case they came in; I have a great conceit
all men's hearts are thus provided, they are so soon here, and there, and every
where.


Pereg. All men's are not, Madam; some are fixed.


Arc. That is then where the Ladies get to them by some more then common
device, and clip their wings. But Perilla, the Verses* we will participate as
far forth as the hearing the Courtship.


( Perilla reads the Verses. Perilla. Widow, Faith I will tell thee true*
My heart's inflamed, and it is by you
But my passion will decay.
If you make too long delay.
Flames that with most vigor burn,
Soonest into ashes turn:
Then resolve, and quickly too,
Shall I stay, or bid adieu?
Foolish Lovers that do place
All their pleasures in one face;
Let them for favors long expect,
I soon will have, or soon neglect:
This is not common Courtships way*
But since I loved you it is a day:
And if you cannot pay the score,
You Are poor, and I will trust no more.
I Have ways my Fortunes to undo*
Without the help of lending you:
I can both drink, and game, and swear,
Does this not tempt you (...) tell me fair.
Yet I Will a kinder Husband be,
Than those that sin more secretly.
But if you proudly now deny
To love me, Faith I will not die.

Enter Lucidore with Three Trumpeters, Almeric standing at a distance as not to
be seen. Luc. Sound a Charge.


[Trumpeters sound. Perilla. Why you make Love in open court, my Lord.


Luc. I do so, Madam, to prevent the scandal of the world, which would go near
else to say, I stole your consent, if you and I should marry.


Perilla. But why did you make your Trumpeters sound a Charge?


Luc. It is the assault of my Love against your Liberty, unless you will come
presently to party, and give me some hopes of an honorable peace betwixt us:
nay, I have began my war in perfect form, I have sent two or three Heralds to
proclaim it in the Marketplace.


Perilla. Yet, for all that, you have not done like a fair Enemy, to surprise
me without any knowledge of such an intention.


Luc. All stratagems are allowed of, Madam. Could you expect I would give you
notice to fortific your self against my siege? Faith I'ad bin an ignorant
Soldier then indeed.


Arc. No, my Lord, she could not in justice; for if you had, she would have so
strengthened her self with an Army of Reasons of her own and from her Friends,
that her heart would have proved another Candy, impregnable.


Per. And quite tire out the Turkish Emperors Constancy.


Luc. But, I hope my fair Widow will not be so cruel to wrack my expectations
so long; for if she should, I have no more to confess than I will confess now,
that is, that I love her infinitely, passionately, unexpressibly, as much as
ever any man did or will love any of the Sex: I do indeed, Dear Widow! but now
if you should heep me in a great deal of pain by making a Chancery-suit of our
Affections, it is ten to one but I shall rather deny all this truth again, than
endure such an endless torment.


Per. Faith, Widow, you must now resolve: this new fashioned suitor will have
his alms or his answer quickly.


Arc. I, Madam, you must needs tell my Lord what you will do, you don't know what
an injury you may do him, by keeping him long in suspense; for if his heart
should have taken post to any other place, how do you think his body should
know where to find it?


Perilla. We Will petition the King to introduce here the English Law, that is, if
he loses it between sun and ^un, the County must make it good.


Per. That is if it were stolen, Madam.


Perilla. Well, if it has run away, or lost it self, then he must have it cried.


Luc. Never think of these ways to baffle me out of my Heart, Madam, in plain
terms you have stolen it; and if you stir out of this Garden without
restitution, or my consent to keep it, hang me if I send not a Hue and Cry
after you.


Perilla. It seems, my Lord, you are very sharp set to my Estate; if you
possessed that, I believe you would easily bequeath my person for a Legacy to my
next Heir.


Luc. Lord, Madam, that you should think so! As if a Rich Mistress were to be
preferred before a Mistress Rich. Do you think I am so ill bred to displace your
Title so, to put money before it? No, it shall never take the precedence. It is
as much as I desire that I am certain it is one of your attendants: for where
Marriage is made, and that a servant to neither party, there is always to be
sure but beggarly housekeeping, and I love good company as my life.


Perilla. Well, I will not injure my wit so much to take seven years
consideration to make up at last a bad bargain: as if a great deal of time were
requisite to undo ones self in, when a quarter of an hour will serve turn as
well; and precipitated indiscretions always will admit of more excuse, than
premeditated follies. This gives you nay consent so soon, my Lord.


Luc. I care not from whence the line come, so long as it draws to my Center:
I Will accept it good or bad, according to the old Rule of Marriage.


Perilla. Well, once within this month we shall both repent it, after the
Parson has tied us together.


Luc. If we do, and the worst come to the worst, it is but one of us making a
journey into the other world, and unmarrying our selves: and when it comes,
we will have fair play, draw who shall go.


Perilla. A very just bargain.


Per. Nothing will break your agreement then I see.


Luc. But first we will try to break each others heart.


Exeunt. Scene 5. Enter Lotharicus in a Disguise.
Loath. It is some pleasure since I could nor die, at least to think that I shall
now revenge my wrongs my self, on my intended Murderer: and by giving him his
merited Death, punish the false Marcelia too:

And in the bud of her wished Queenships honor,
Nip her support, that treacherous Favorite from her.
She little think Lotharicus does live,
So great a ruin to her hopes to give.
Here he must pass, and in this place I Will stay,
And make Death complement him in the way.

Enter Melynet with two boys, Lotharicus meets him. Mel. Boys go where I bid
you. -- Ha! what is that comes there?


Loath. An injured Lover brought by his despair. -- Lotharicus.


Mel. That Is false I Am sure, I know thou say not true.

Loath. His Ghost is rise to give thy crimes their due:
Villain! I live and with this sword will show,
In my revenge, whether't be true or no:
I all my wrongs upon thy heart will write.

Mel. No more of words, but let us to it, and sight.
Boast not before we do the victory try,
Perhaps it may prove your own lot to die.

Loath. I could have made my self of that secure,
But that my Courage Treach'ry cannot endure.

Mel. I Will thank thy Courage and the debt will pay,
By taking thy unhappy life away.

Loath. Fall on then.
[They fight, Melynet gives back. -- Ha! methinks you back do start,
As if my kindness touched you to the heart.

Mel. What it has done I soon will make thee find:
What think you now Sir, are you paid in kind?

[They fight still. Enter Valasco, Peregrine, they draw and come between them.
Per. Hold this is no good exercise.


Loath. The best that can be, Sir, to us.


Per. How, Lotharicus!


Loath. The same, Sir.


Per. What wonder's this? and fighting with his so beloved friend my Lord
Melynet?


Loath. The wonder is far greater that occasioned it.


Val. My Lord Melynet, I am glad we have prevented the hazard of your life to
farther Revenge.


Mel. You have obstructed me in a Revenge, Which I could curse you for: -- for
by preventing Of his Death, I am undone.


[aside. Loath. We Will not take our leaves one of another, we shall have
opportunity to meet in some other place.


Exeunt severally. Scene 3. Enter King and Almeric.
King. I have not seen Melynet to day: I wonder much he is not come.


Alm. Doubtless it will not be long before he does attend your Majesty.


Enter Valasco. King. Have you not seen Melynet, my Lord?


Val. Yes, and it please your Majesty: I came from him: he is wounded.


King. How? by what means?


Val. My Lord Lotharicus is returned in disguise, and has set upon him as he
was going to Marcelia.


King. Thou do mistake, Lotharicus is dead I Will assure you.


Val. And please your Majesty he has got such favor in the other world to come
and live again; for I am sure it is not half an hour since Peregrine and I
parted them.


King. Are you sure it is he?


Val. As sure as my name is Valasco.


King. What should the meaning of this be? Go and cause him to be brought
before me; I Will hear the motion of this bold attempt upon the life of Melynet my
self. Are his wounds dangerous?


Val. No, Sir, very slight: they have both some little hurt.


King. Sure Lotharicus's jealousy has caused this quarrel with Melynet,
because he knows I have a value for him, and by that concludes that he has
injured him to Marcelia.


Alm. And please your Majesty, Love from so strong an argument may be excused
to grow suspicious.


Exeunt. Scene 7. Enter Marcelia meeting Euryalus.
Eur. I am come to tell thee strange news, Marcelia; Lotharicus is alive in the
Town: he has wounded Melynet, and is a Prisoner for it by the Kings command,
and is to be brought before him to the Court: the business is made very foul,
as if he had surpised him cowardly.


Mar. What a compound of joy and sorrow have you given me? Poor Lotharicus!
thou will find a cruel Judge: I fear they must, by heightning thy guilt, help to
abate their own. I Will go to the Court my self: and hear his sentence, and share
his sufferings, if my interest cannot take him off; I Will try my power first,
then show my resolution.


Eur. Thou make a generous and brave Resolve, we both will go together: I Will
there discover my self, and help to justify my Friend, and if there be
occasion against his guilty adversary. It will be time to go, Marcelia.


Marc. My dear Lotharicus, thou now shall find,

When most distressed, Marcelia is most kind.


Exeunt. Scene 8. Enter King, Melynet, and all the Lords, Guards and Attendants.
[King talks to Melinet. King. I am sorry having ever had so great an esteem of
Lotharicus, he should give me cause to condemn him for his Rashness: but Reason
is destroyed in the wisest men, when passion does command. -- Bring in
Lotharicus.


Enter Lotharicus with a Guard at one door, and Euryalus and Marcelia at
another. King. What makes me happy in thy presence now, Marcelia?


Marc. Though it is not fit* Sir, Women hither come:
Yet I most humbly beg to hear his doom.

King. Nothing's unfit Marcelia does desire,
Or of her King, or Servant can require.

Loath. There stands my torture greater than I can
[aside. Receive from the command or power of man.
She comes to feast her pride, only to see,
How much my Passion still does fetter me.
Inhumane Woman! lost to all that sense
Which thy soft Sex to suff'rers do dispense.

King. What was the cause Lotharicus, that armed your malice against the life
of Melynet?


Loath. My injurius, Sir.


King. In your opinion. Were every man a fitting and allowed of Judge in's own
cause, we need not then have Ministers of Justice.


Loath. I question not the prudence of considered and allowed of Laws, Sir;
though now I sought not their assistance. But, Sir, in my own defense, I humbly
do present your Majesty this Paper; which renders me incapable their benefit,
and made me strive, by my own hand to take what I can never expect to have by
any other means.


King. How have you forfeited your right in that kind, more than your other
fellow subjects?


Loath. You Will in that Paper find, Sir.


The King reads and changes countenance, grows into fury: turns to Melynet.
King. Traitor! what have thou done? is this thy hand? is it? I know it is:
wherewith thou have set the feal of my dishonor; charge me with the consent of
Murder, and mountain up my promises their recompense! -- Here, Read it
publicly; my brow wears not a guilt so dark to keep it in obscurity, although
I ow that intended kindness to brave Lotharicus's Loyalty.

Peregrine reads.
Per. Du-Prette, be sure and speedy in the death of Lotharicus, the King is
impatient till he hears it, he will double thy rewards I promised.


King. There Is enough.

Turns to Melynet. How durst thou assume the injuring thy Sovereign so?

Though I Marcelia loved, I never did design to buy her favors at the price of
all my Honors. By noble ways I bid thee seek to gain me her affection, but not
by guilt and treacherous baseness, Villain. The share thy veins has in her
blood, gives thee thy life: but never after this day see thy incensed Monarch's
face again! But how came you by this Letter, Lotharicus?


Loath. Sir, one Philampras, which was hired amongst others, by Du-prette,
Melynet's man to assasin me understanding by Du-prette's Discourse that he had
moneys in his Portmantue, watched his opportunity to take it aways and finding
this Letter there, thought he should make more advantage by that from my
Reward, that his promised recompense for my Murder: so left the money to
prevent Duprette's sudden missing of his Paper; and coming with my man to
discover it, found me as they then supposed killed; but after, on my Recovery,
delivered it into my hands.


King. Oh! how seriously ought Princes first to weigh the lives and souls of
men, before they draw them to their bosoms! for Favorites that are vicious, are
the Cankers of Kings Courts, and eat in their Sovereigns bosoms.


Mel. Sir! --

King. Hold, say no more, thy breath's infectious grown And on my Fame has
Killing poison thrown.
Guard, take him away.

Mel. Vain joys of mortal Life! you fly so fast,
Man hardly knows you are, before y' are past:
Yet we on you do our affections lay,
As if we here eternally should stay.
Honor, thou now do give my soul a view
Of what I left when first I banished you.
O Virtue! how have I bin led astray.
From thy fair paths, into this Lab'rinth way?
I thought my Fortune on a Rock did stand.
But Guilts foundation still proves foolish sand.
When man by Crimes does plots for greatness lay,
Heaven justly frowns and takes his hopes away.
But though my Life bears characters of shame:
My Death shall leave behind a better Fame.
They that will not fall, must not on danger stand;
We carry not our Fates in our own hand.

Exit. King. Though Love, Lotharicus, did make me be Thy Rival, I was never thy
Enemy:
At lest to take thy life by ways obscure,
My soul such abject thoughts scorn to endure.
To witness it, I this for thee will do:
Marcelia freely shall choose me or you.

Loath. Marcelia, Sir, cannot disputethe choice:
Against my self your Goodness has my voice.
And she long since has learned to be so wise,
To leave Lotharicus for such a prize.
Pardon me, Sir, that I am sad, that she
Found not such motives for her love in me.

Mar. I never more desired than what in you
I did enjoy, when I believed you true:
But when by Melynet I was informed,
I and my love was for Arcasia scorned:
I then such Reason had to entertain
So great a Monarch, and so high a Flame:
That all I for his Passion since did do,
Can no condemning censure find for you:
Honor and Virtue still have bin my guide,
My Life has strictly to their Rules bin tied.

Loath. Since Melynet made me so false appear,
You need not more your actions for to clear:
But still as they justly more splendid grow,
My heart does more despairing sorrow know.

King. Which of us two, Madam, shall happy be?

Mar. Heaven leaves me not to an Election free.
Both so deserve, Sir, that If I should choose,
I Would be unjust to him I did refuse.
Oh Gods! what punishment do you design
Marcelia, that neither must be mine!
Love will not let me my Lotharicus leave,
Nor Honor will not permit I him receive.

[The King whispers to Peregrine* Exit Pereg. King. To show that I will still
be here within,
[points to his breast. What I am by my birth, my passions King:
My Empire there, by Reasons power maintain,
As well as to my Crown, new Crowns to gain:
I out of Honor will this Justice do,
Against my Love, Marcelia give to you*
Thou art already of her Heart possessed,
And with her Person now I Will make thee blessed.

Loath. Sir, --

King. No more oppose thy bliss with generous strife,
May you be happy in each others life:
My heart to my Calinda I Will restore,
Whose due it was by faith and love before.

Marcelia and Lotharicus kneel. Loath. May Fortune shower such Blessings on your
head,
That over all the World your power be spread:
That every Monarch that enjoys a Throne,
May that possession from your bounty own.

Eur. Now take the Blessing which I, Sir, do give,
When you are called from hence to Heaven to live:
And may my Friend prove joys so high refined,
he embraces Loath. To equal the vast compass of his mind.

Enter Calinda and Peregrine. Call. Sir, I am come my Duty to express.

King. To me Calinda can own nothing less;
In public I my heart away did take*
And I Will in public Restitution make.

Call. Your Will can strangely of your Heart dispose,
My Will, as yet, o'r mine no Empire knows.

King. Yet it may yours persuade, and command mine.

King. You should not then Marceliaes Love decline.

King. Madam, you have all Reason to express,
As much as you can say in scorns excess:
But Heaven the greatest faults that are forgive,
It Is noble, when we may kill, to let live.

Call. Had you bin still, Sir, to that Maxim true,
I had not then bin scorned, nor left by you:
When you the life did take of all my joy,
You showed not the left pity to destroy.
But you would have, I find, a Woman's breast
With more Compassion and more Love possessed.

King. I Would have thy Heart again thy Love renew,
Since mine does burn with a fresh Flame to you.
Calinda, with my Life I would redeem.
What I have done, to call back thy esteem.

Call. Your Majesty can strangely overcome,
Scarce wish a Victory before it is won:
That price my Heart will never let you pay,
Love's General there, and yields you up the day

King. And if I ever again that gift abuse,
May Heaven all prayers that I make refuse:
I much admired thy Excellence heretofore;
But now Idolater shall turn, and thee adore.
I did not think this would have bin the close:
Man may design, but Heaven will still dispose.
Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
NOw I am sure, all look that I should say
Something like asking pardon for the Play:
With low submission, and I cannot tell what:
Excuse her Writing, Language, and her Plot!
As crafty Poets Guilty cry their Wit,
To make you less severe in lashing it.
But, faith, she scorns such undermining ways,
Of blowing up your pity into praise;
Nor will she do her spirit so much wrong,
To beg what does not to her brow belong.
She says, they are fools force Fate, before they be
Resolved to meet with any Destiny.
But, this revenge she is sure to have on those,
They Will Cowards be esteemed that give her blows.
Which strangely takes her! knowing that ye must
Be to your Honor, or your Wit unjust.
Mark how maliciously her snares she has laid:
Praise or Condemn, you're equally betrayed.
FINIS.

