THE WAY TO HONOR. In three PARTS.

First Part, of Councils and Counselors. Second Part, Of the well-qualified
Courtier. Third Part, Of Martial Prowess and Learning.
Illustrated and adorned by many famous Examples, as well Ancient as Modern.

By B. B. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns, at the lower
end of Cheapside. 1678.

To the Illustrious and Magnanimous Prince Christopher, Duke of Albemarle, Earl
of Torrington, Baron Monk of Potheridge, Beaucamp, and Teys; Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter; one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's Bedchamber;
one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council; and Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Devonshire, and Essex.
May it please your Grace,
IF I should present you with what is contained in this Concise Treatise, of
The Way to Honor, as binding Rules to your Grace, I should be like to that
ridiculous Philosopher, who, not knowing any thing of War, more than some few
Martial Axioms, presumed to read Military Lectures to Hannibal, one of the
greatest Captains ever Nature produced: Your Noble Soul being endued with such
principles of true Honor, that it comprehends all Laws in it self, that direct
and manage you. I only assume the boldness, my Lord, to throw these my Labors
at your Grace's Feet, humbly begging that they may be shrouded under the Wings
of your Grace's most noble Patronage; and I hope your truly Heroic Generosity
is such, that it will not disdain the meaner, and obscurer, as well as more
Glorious and Resplendent Objects: For I am confident I could not choose a more
Glorious Patron of The Way to Honor, than your Grace, the very Mirror of true
Honor, and Epitome of Worth. But if my Presumption in this present Dedication
be great, yet I hope your Grace's greater goodness may be pleased to pardon the
same. And though I am not ignorant that your Grace may be averse from all
addresses of this Nature; yet could not such an apprehension beat me from my
design, being forced to the attempt by the ardent desire I had to show my
humble and profound respects to your Grace's grand, as well Hereditary as
Personal Merits, which are of such a transcendent Quality, as that all your
Noble, and brave Inclinations, and Deportments show you to be the Generous Son
of that incomparable Hero, that miracle of Men, that Wonder of future Ages, the
happy restorer of lawful Monarchy, and Loyalty. But here I must acknowledge my
own insufficiency, to give due Praises to such eminent Virtue, which has raised
it self upon the most solid Foundation of true Honor, that ever bypast Times
could produce, Foreign Nations boast of, or Ancient or Modern Story mention,
and leave it to a more able Pen, to do your Grace, if possible, and the World
that right; but as it is beyond all former example, so I think it is above all
real Character: wishing to see your Grace's Ensigns flourish where the Roman
Eagles never flew.

Generous Prince, the Subject of this ensuing Discourse dis-agrees so much with
my present condition, that it may with some show of Justice give occasion to
Critics to upbraid me with Presumption: but when they know that neither my
Condition, or hopes have formerly been so despicable, or desperate, but that I
might with some reason have aspired to something else then what I am; and
consider, that Fortune takes delight to display upon the Theater of preferment,
the most remarkable tricks of her malice; they will be no more censorious, but
commend the endeavor, though weak, as aiming at the public good.

As that Glorious Lamp of the World distributes Light, Heat, Life, and motion
to inferior bodies, without the least diminution of its Splendour, or inherent
virtues; so may this our Rising-Sun send down benevolent influences on our
rising hopes, before he reach the Meridian of his Glory. Then will we cry out
with Themistocles, we had been undone if we had not been so. I for my part will
court occasions to merit the least favorable Aspect, and always acknowledge my
self to be,

Brave Prince, Your Grace's Most humbly devoted Servant. B. B.

Licensed,

September 20. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

OF COUNCILS AND COUNSELORS.
PART. I.
The PROEME.
SEEING it is most certain, that in Private Affairs the wisest of Men stand in
need of the Advice of others; how much more can such want the Counsel of
prudent Men, who reign over multitudes of People, Tac. ^, 4. an.
(...) encumbered with almost infinite troubles: such, I say, whose least
errors are prejudicial to the whole Kingdom, and sometimes to the whole
World? Therefore as Tyrants hated Faithful Counselors, and did confer great
Honor and Riches, (the just rewards of virtue,) on wicked Men, by whose
Flagitious Impiety their Empires were often brought to destruction: So on the
contrary we read that the best Princes were always accompanied with Honest and
Faithful Ministers. Cajus Caesar had Quintus Pedius; Augustus, Maecenas and
Agrippa: Adrian had Celsus, Salvius and Neratius, Marcus Antoninus, Scaevola,
Mutianus and Volsianus; and Severus had Pompinianus. You shall hardly find,
says Vellius, that eminent Princes did not make use of virtuous Counselors to
govern their Fortunes. Great things, says Cicero, Cic. in Cat. majere.
are not done through Strength or Celerity of the Body, but through Council and
Authority. And I, says Salust, have found by much reading and hearing, that all
Kingdoms and Commonwealths were prosperous, so long as Good Council had
Authority amongst them; but when Favor, Fear and Voluptuousness did corrupt
the same, then incontinently their riches were diminished, their command taken
from them; and last of all they endured the Yoke of Bondage and Slavery: which
was understood, when Pericles, to gain the favor of the Common People, Plutar.
did take away the Authority of the Areopagitae, or Athenian Judges, and did
give the same to the Vulgar. For not long after that Commonwealth did begin to
fall, being shaken with Foreign and Civil War. Dionys. Hal. l. 2.
And Judicious Men do think, that the only cause that made Rome flourish so
long, was, that they did not follow their own, but the Counsel of their Senate.
There is no greater Instrument of a well governed Kingdom, says Tacitus, Lib.
4. Hist.
than a Good Councellor. And to speak it in a Word, the Mind and Understanding
are not more necessary in an humane body, than Council is in a Prince. It was a
saying of one of the Sages of Greece, that in the Assembly of wise men, Princes
themselves grow wise. The Prince becomes good, says Capitolanus, if he make use
of good Men for his Counselors. And let it be granted, that the Prince's
Commands were sometimes hard; yet they will seem just for this only cause, that
they were done with the consent of prudent Men* neither can a Prince show a
greatee evidence of a good Nature, (according to Cominus) than to choose
Counselors famous for their Virtue. For every one will presently judge, that
the Inclinations and Manners of the Prince, are corresponding to those of his
Favourite^. Princes are known by their Counselors, says Oth^ the Emperor Lib.
^. Hist.
in Tacitus. Moreover Subjects will fear to offend, or contradict the Command
of such Princes, wh^m they know to do all things with the consent of Judicious
Men; besides the pleasure which Princes enjoy, who oblige good Men by their
affection and benevolence, on whose Virtue and Fidelity they can securely rely.

CHAP. I. The Definition and Nature of a Council.
A Council, says the Philosopher, is a certain, investigation or search of
those things, by which we can easily come to the end, which we have proposed to
our selves.

But because in this place we are to speak of the Council of a Prince, we call
the same a Lawful Assembly of selected Men, to give Advice to their Prince, in
the administration of Affairs, either in Peace or War; by whose help he minds
things bypast, beholds those which are present, provides for the future,
obtains the happy success of his enterprises, shuns misfortunes, or if that be
not possible, finds a way whereby they may become supportable.

This Council may be considered in three respects, the Persons therein, to wit,
the Councellor who gives Council, and the Prince who asks the same; next,
the things which are handled in the Council, and lastly the end thereof. Three
things are to be regarded, says Quintilian, in Persuasions and Councils: what
it is, who they are, and to what end.

CHAP. II. The Description, Qualification, and Duty of a Councellor.
A Councellor is he, who faithfully and prudently suggesteth to his Prince,
what tends to the good of the Republic.

From which Description we must observe two things, his Qualifications, and his
Office or Duty. That it may be better understood, the Qualifications of a
Councellor are partly from Nature, partly from Industry, and partly from
Fortune; to be more brief, they are either innate, or acquired; innate as the
Genius, comely form of the Body; and parts acquired by Study or Exercise,
Arts, Sciences, etc.

SECT. I. Of his Genius.
Seeing then that none can excel in any Virtue, unless they have the Foundation
of Nature laid, a Councellor must be of a strong and solid Wit. For as great
weights, which cannot be elevated by the mere strength of Men, are easily moved
by Engines; so you shall effect that by your Promptitude of Wit, which you
oftimes cannot do any other manner of way. There are some prompt motions of the
mind, says Cicero, which are quick to excogitate, and fertile to explain and
adorn. It is requisite for a Councellor to have a ready and indefaticable
Genius, in the managing of Civil Affairs, and who knows to fit his Counsels
according to Circumstances. A man is known to have a good Genius, if he be
eloquent, quick of apprehension, prompt in answering, clear in instructing, and
cautious in serious matters. The Wit, says Seneca, is nourished, and grows by
Precepts; adds new persuasions to those already inbred, and amends the bad.

But a Councellor must know how to use this quickness aright, lest he deserve
the name of a Sophister. Whereas therefore we say that a good Genius is
needful, that must not be understood merely of one that is acute and great, but
of one that is prompt and apt, and which has the direct rule of a solid
Judgment. For without this, Affairs many times have destructive and fatal
events. Fiery and too subtle Spirits, says Curtius, Lib. 2.
are fitter to innovate than manage Affairs, and often destroy their own
Authority, if they have any. For it is frequently seen by Natures decree
distributing her gifts amongst Mortals, that a man, although of an excellent
Genius, is nevertheless not fit for every sort of employment, and cannot
happily enough apply himself to the various Inclinations and Humors of Men.
Marcus Cato was such in War, that Men would have judged him to have been born
amongst Swords and Pikes; but if he had applied himself to his studies, you
would have thought that he had his Birth and Education amongst Books. The
moderate and solid spirit of Titus, says Tacitus, and the beauty of his
countenance, joined with a certain Majesty in his deportment did augment his
Fame and Reputation.

SECT II. Of his Form.
The comely Form therefore of the Body, and the Beauty and Gravity of his
Countenance, are great Ornaments to a States man. For although they fade either
through sickness, or length of time; yet what is beautiful purchases Love,
seeing external beauty carries the image of what is Divine: and though
sometimes a beautiful Nature lurks under an ignoble form, or a gallant spirit
is hid in a deformed Body, yet that is very rare. The beauty and comeliness of
Scipio Africanus was an admiration to the Ancient Spaniards. The due symmetry
of parts in the Body is held in veneration, even amongst the Barbarians; So
that they esteemed none capable of great actions, but such as Nature had
beautified with an excellent person.

SECT. III. Of his Age.
It will not be impertinent that the Age also of a Councellor be spoken of in
this place, as another qualification; and what Age is most fitting for the
managing Affairs of State. Youth is obnoxious to diverse pleasures and Lusts, to
Passion, desire of Command, Ambition and Intemperance. Moreover young men's
Understandings and Judgments are not so solid, their experience not so great as
those of riper years; their Authority less with the People, and are more easily
ensnared with the Deceits of their Adversaries: from whence, (and that not
undeservedly,) they are called Abortive Statesmen. It is forbidden, says Pliny
writing to Trajane, that any assume the Name of Magistrate under Ten Years of
Age.

On the contrary, Old age is for the most part Timorous, Suspicious,
Incredulous, and Avaritious. The nearer a Man is to his Grave, he is for the
most part the more anxious and fearful, is also more unable to undergo pains
and troubles, and more forgetful; by which defects many occasions are oft-times
neglected; and his more talkative Nature, if there be any experience therein,
is often turned into obstinacy. For these Reasons Aristotle disapproved of
young men, because they were unexperienced, and old men because they were
unable.

The middle Age therefore is most fit for Counselors, which is from Thirty to
Sixty. I do not deny but that there may be some Men fit for that employ both
before and after that Age: But, according to Furius Coriolanus; It is better
for men under Thirty Years, to go to famous Universities, to travel, to learn
the Manners and Customs of Men and Nations, to know the Courts of Princes, and
to follow the Camp; and for Men above Sixty, to begin to live to themselves, to
make use of what they have purchased by their virtue with ease and quietness,
and to have a care of the health of their Souls only.

SECT. IV. Of the acquired Qualifications of a Councellor.
Subsect I. Of the Knowledge and Fear of God.
Thus much of innate helps, and the Age of a Councellor. Acquired ones relate
to those things which are necessary to the right and happy Government of the
Commonwealth. Amongst which the Knowledge and Fear of God has the first place.
For seeing Impiety does eradicate all Fear of offending, and that the Councils
of the Wicked are fraudulent; It follows that the contempt of Religion does
bring the destruction of Public Affairs. To omit, that it is God only, who
gives Understanding, Fortitude, and Riches; who beats back the Violence of
Enemies, and who gives Victory and Glory to great Men: How I beseech you, can
he give Council in great matters, who has not his mind pure, and shining with
Divine Splendor? For who are acceptable to God, are instructed with Divine
Councils, and for that cause do seldom err. That which even the Heathens did
see, amongst whom the Opinion of Religion, though superstitious and erroniously
false, had great Authority. We are bound in our duty by no greater tie, than
that of true Religion. As therefore the Common-good can be no ways separated
from Honesty, no more can Honesty be separated from Religion. And to conclude,
according to Valerius Maximus; They are deceived, says he, who teach that Men
are kept in their Duty by Humane Power, and not by the fear of Divine
Vengeance. The Councils of Men are punished when they are preferred before
those of God.

Subsect. 2. Of Philosophy.
The second help is Philosophy, of which our Councellor should not be ignorant,
but especially of such as consists in Action, to wit, the Morals; neither would
I have him ignorant of Natural Philosophy, which consists more in
contemplation. It is unseemly for a Minister of State, conversing often with
great and learned Men, not to know the Natural causes of things, how those
Bodies do consist which we call Elements, what Power or Force causes Thunder
and Lightning, what distinguishes the Rainbow with such diverse colors, what
does raise Winds, causes Earthquakes, covers the Channels of the Earth
continually with Waters, and the like.

But let him be chiefly instructed in the Mathematics, the first part whereof
is Arithmetic. For how can he without this understand Accounts of what is
received and given out, if any time the charge of the Treasury or Exchequer be
committed to him.

Geometry and Geography, without which History cannot be well-understood, Lands
cannot be divided, Camps cannot be pitched, Towns builded, Cities and Castles
fortified, are also very needful for our Councellor.

It Is absurd in those having the administration of the Commonwealth to be
ignorant of those things whereby the same does subsist. Which Plato understood,
when he pronounced that famous sentence as from an Oracle, That Commonwealths
should be happy, when either Philosophers did reign; or Princes did addict
themselves to Philosophy.

There is not a more commendable part of Philosophy, says Pliny Epis. 2.
than to do a public good, to know and do Justice, and to put in Practice what
Philosophers teach. This part of Philosophy shows what is honest, and what is
not so, what is the end of good and evil; how a Family should be governed; what
the Power of the Father is, the Husband, and the Master; with what Virtues and
Arts he should be endued who governs; what the best form of Government is; by
what means declining and falling Commonwealths are supported, and the best
Precepts and Laws whereby they are moderated. Crassus does affirm, Apud Citer.
de Orat.
That he cannot be an Orator, who has not learned this part of Philosophy. For
every Oration should be of those things which we ought to do, or which we ought
to shun; wherein seeing all our duty does consist, it follows necessarily, that
he who is ignorant thereof, should want matter in his speech. Therefore he
deservedly exclaims, O Philosophy! the guide of Life, the searcher of Virtue,
the banisher of Vice, etc.

I know that the Opinion of the Vulgar is, that those who in more mature Age
are addicted to the study of Philosophy, are Men given to Solitude, and without
Experience, and therefore upon no account are fit for Affairs of Government;
but they are deceived. For we do not speak here of Philosophy, which consists
in the mere Idea's of the Mind, or of those who without Judgment study the
same, and are wise except in those things wherein they should be: But of such
who join Speculation with Practice. Helvidius Priscus says, Tacitus being but
very young, did apply his notable Genius to the like Studies: he did not, as
many, cloak their idleness with seeming generous pretenses, but did follow the
Teachers of Wisdom, that he might be the more fortified against the changes of
Fortune, and the more able to show himself in the Commonwealth. Being Quaestor
he was chosen to be the Son in-Law of Paetus Thrasea; he was a good Citizen,
Senator, Husband, Son-in-Law, Friend, and sufficient in all the Duties of
Humane Life; an hater of Riches, a maintainer of Equity, and constant in his
Duty without fear. Which are the true Fruits of true Philosophy.

Subsect. 3. Of his Knowledge of the Laws.
In the next place I come to speak of the knowledge of the Laws, which flows
from this Fountain: for although the secret Councils of Princes should not be
too much taken up with deciding of Controversies; yet because the Laws are the
firm and sure Foundations of Commonwealths, it were absurd, that a Councellor
or Minister of Sat should be ignorant of them. Seeing you are most learned in
the Laws, says Pliny in a certain Epistle, whereof a Senator should not be
ignorant, I desire to know from you, whether or not I did lately err in the
Senate; that I may be instructed, not for the bypast (for that is too late) but
for the future, if the like fall out. It Is oft-times needful to establish new
Laws, to punish Traitors and Ambitious Conspirators against the Prince and
Commonwealth. Moreover when the right of any City, Seaport, River or the
like, are debated, from which great Wars do often proceed, by the Knowledge of
the Laws, we are not only able to argue learn'dly concerning the thing
controverted, but also to judge whether the War made for such a cause be just,
or unjust.

Subsect. 4. Of his Knowledge of History.
But above all, the Knowledge of History is most necessary in a Councellor. The
Philosopher does justly affirm, that things done are most profitable to
consultation. For future things fall often out like to those which are bypast.
Of which History furnishes us with such abundance, that it is almost
absolutely necessary to the right Government of our Life, and to the good
Aministration of the Republic. But many Readers and Authors themselves go no
farther than the bare Knowledge of the thing it self. Thucydides, who may be
justly called the Prince of Historians amongst the Grecians, does
notwithstanding so superficially run over that most famous War 'twixt the
Athenians and Lacedaemonians, which was almost the destruction of both
Conquerors and Conquered, that he gives no other satisfaction to the Readers,
but the simple relation of the thing it self. But let Rulers of Commonwealths
learn by the example of the Athenians, to be quiet, so long as they can with
Honor and Security; seeing Arms should be taken up to defend, not to disturb
the public Peace and Tranquillity. Let them not suffer themselves to be
carried away with the desire of enlarging their Command, to the destruction of
their Native Country. Let them not make strange Wars their own with a note of
Infamy, and by seeming to assist their Friends, make a way for their own ruin.
If there does any controversy arise amongst their friends, let them endeavor
to reconcile such rather by their Authority and Council, than by aiding the one
party, which often proves Destructive to all.

But let us come to the Writings of other Authors, who would demonstrate that
Princes ought to be moderate, and to use that Power over their Subjects which
is limited by the Laws. For by the Subjects alienated affections no Power can
long endure. So the Command of one has been given to many, that the same might
be the cause of the people's safety of Glory, and not their Disgrace and
Destruction: such and the like, one may easily gather out of the History of
Lucius Brutus. Livius lib. 12.
He who will have the Example of an Excellent Prince, and of all the Virtues
which adorn him, let him read the story of Hieron King of Syracuse. Livius
23.24.
On the contrary who desires to know the example of Tyrants falling headlong,
despising all Men, and every thing, having his Ears open to the flatteries of
Courtiers, and shut to safe Councils, and the complaints of the miserable; Let
him behold the Sons-in-Law of this good Prince. If any desire to know how much
hurt a Woman can do, let him consider what Demarata did with her Husband
Andronedor. If there be great want in Treasures, and that there can be no
better way to help the same; Let him consult Marcus Marcellus, and Valerius
Levinus, who advised the Senate and People of Rome to a contribution; but so as
to begin with the Temples of their greatest Gods; which had such success, that
the Nobility bringing to the Treasury, whatever Gold or Silver they had coined,
and uncoyn'd, with such zeal to exceed each others Liberality, the Triumviri
were not able to receive, Li^k. 26.
nor the Clarks to write their Names.

In reading therefore of History, let a Councellor not only observe the
Narration of things done, and their several Circumstances; but also the
Councils, Acts, and Events, wherefore that was done, and this omitted;
wherefore some events were fortunate, others unfortunate: If any glorious act
fall out, whether it was done through Chance and Fortune: or through Virtue and
good Council: If any thing fall unhappily out, what could have prevented it;
whether the fault was in the Captain, in the bad conduct of his Army, in the
ordering of it, in his encamping, whereby he might have had an easy retreat,
if routed, and if victorious, what was the cause of it, etc. Let every one
endeavor to know, says Livius, In prefatione.
what were the Lives and Manners of those Men, and the Means in Peace and in
War, whereby they augmented their Dominions: but you may easily know by
contraries: for a little after he says, Then Discipline and Order decaying, and
Ambition and Dissension creeping in, they began to run headlong, until they
came to our times, wherein we can neither suffer our own Vices nor their
Remedies.

Subsect. 5. Of Travel.
It is also requisite for our Councellor, to see diverse Provinces, and famous
Cities, to learn the Manners and Customs of many Nations; to know exactly
their Harbors, Ports, Seas, and Rivers, to come to the Knowledge and
Conversation of great Men, to frequent the Courts of Princes, to know whether
those Provinces which he has seen are well fortified; what Wars they have had
in former times, and upon what occasion. Let him also learn the Power of
Neighbor Princes, that he may know whom to fear, and whom to trust, with whom
to enter into confederacy, and that so exactly, that none can deceive him with
any false relation.

Who doubts but that one so traveled, conversing so long in the Courts of
Princes, and frequenting the company of the Nobility eminent for their Virtue,
is a more able Councellor, than one, who sitting at home, knows nothing what is
done in foreign Nations. Livius Li. 34.
observes that a certain Favorite and intimate Councellor of King Antiochus
being ignorant of Foreign Affairs, was the cause of his ruin by persuading
him to make War with the Romans.

Subsect. 6. Of his Eloquence.
Seeing God has given to Man two most peculiar Properties in the one of which
is the force of Understanding, and Judgment, which we call Reason, in the other
the faculty of speaking, it is not enough to understand aright and judge
prudently, unless you can express the same handsomely.

Therefore it is necessary that a Councellor be eloquent, and that he express
himself readily upon every subject and occasion: For, it may sometimes happen,
that he may be sent to other Princes, or States to persuade or dissuade, to
praise or accuse, to congratulate or threaten, or to speak to the vulgar to
bring them from their fury to reason, and then a Councellor's Speech ought to
be adorned with wise and grave sentences; yet so as not to favor of too much
affectation, but be accomodated to the ears of the hearers, and that his
arguments and reasons be not far-fetched. It Is a good reward of great pains,
says Quintilian l. 10. c. 7.
to have the faculty of speaking readily and wittily. What is more effectual to
allure the will, and move the mind, than Eloquence: But in such cases I do not
commend a tedious and incoherent speech, but such as is succinct and material.
The short Oration of Publius Valerius did bring the armed Roman Multitude to
their wonted Obedience. Valor. Max. l. 4.


Three things are enjoined a Senator, says Cicero, that he be present,
delegibus.
for when the Senate is full it has the more Authority: that he speak in due
time, and that he speak in few words, lest he be burthensom.

I find that there are three several ways in giving of Council, to wit, with
Reason, Authority, and Example: which if joined together must of necessity have
great force. Therefore if a Councellor do not approve of the matter proposed,
or of the Opinions of others who have given theirs before him, let him take
heed that what he speaks against the same may be able to prove it by valid and
firm reasons. And because there are few who take it kindly that their Opinion
should be refuted, he must use all honor and respect in his words, and shun
such as are contentious. Neither let him give his Judgment as infallible,
Matters in consultation, (says the Philosopher) are contingent, and may fall
out other-ways: Therefore it is enough for him to satisfy his Conscience.
Pericles before he spoke any thing in public did always wish, that no word
might escape him which was impertinent.

Subsect. 7. Of his Skill in Language.
I add the knowledge of Languages, wherewith Counselors should be adorned,
especially of such Countries, where his Prince either governs, or which he
uses either as his Friends or Enemies. This knowledge is of great use for the
better managing of Foreign Affairs. The speech of one who uses an Interpreter
can neither be so acceptable, nor so effectual: for thereby you cannot move the
affections of Men, there being a certain Emphasis of Speech and Grace in
Action, peculiar to the Expressions and Practice of each Nation, which not
rightly distinguished, may make so great and irreconcilable a breach; as may
possibly frustrate the intention of the consultation. Themistocles Plutar.
the most active Man of his time in Greece, and the most prudent in giving and
taking Council, when he fled from Athens to the King of Persia, would not
declare his mind, before he had learned the Persian tongue, that thereby he
might be enabled to speak to the King without an Interpreter, which he judged
to be of no small moment.

Subsect. 2. Of his Martial knowledge.
And because according to Cicero, all things are shrouded under the wings of
Warlike virtue; Let a Councellor learn the Art of War, and understand the Order
of Horse and Foot, and the drawing up of an Army: Let him know the distances of
Mountains and Valleys, and the situation of Cities, etc. What is more frequent
in the Secret-council of Princes, than consultations of War, of Armies, of
Camps, Provisions, Stratagems, of fortifying Towns, of repelling the sudden
incursions of Neighboring Enemies, and depopulations of Provinces. There were
none admitted of old into the Roman Senate, whose Virtue was not famous in
Peace and War. Livius speaks after this manner lib. 3.9.
of M. P. Cato. The knowledge of the Laws, says he, has advanced one, eloquence
another, and military virtue the third. But this Man's Genius was fit for every
employment, that men would have thought he had been born for that particular
affair he went about. Valiant of his hands, and famous in many signal fights,
having thereby obtained great Honor, he was a brave General, great Statesman,
and good Orator.

CHAP. III. Of his Office or Duty.
WE have spoken already of the Qualifications of a Councellor, innate and
acquired, now let us come to the Duty of a Councellor; which does chiefly
consist in this, to love his Prince and Country with sincere affection. It Is
nothing to know aright what is to be done, or to be eloquent therein, if the
hatred of the Republic, or any wicked design obstruct the candid expression of
his good Council. Plutarch.
It was a Custom of old amongst the Athenians, that when the people in their
Assemblies did consult concerning the Commonwealth, the Herald with a loud
voice did curse him and his posterity, who did give any bad or pernicious
Counsel, to the hurt or damage of his Country. It was the saying of a wise man,
That there was nothing more dangerous than a quick and subtle spirit, without
fidelity and love to his Prince and Country. We should, says A. ristides to
Herodotus.
Themistocles, not contend with private hatred, but whether of us can be more
beneficial to our Country. Admirable was the constancy of affection which
Fabius Maximus did show to his. Being cheated by the public of the money which
he told down to Hannibal, Li. 3. c. 8.
says Valerius Maximus, for the Redeeming of Captives, he did notwithstanding
hold his peace. The Senate did make, contrary to the Laws, Quintus Minutius,
Master of the Horse, equal to the Dictator, yet he was still silent. Being
moreover often injured, he remained still the same man, and did not suffer
himself to be angry at the Republic.

A Counselor should therefore lay aside hatred against his Adversaries,
favor toward his Friends, arrogance in himself, and all private interests, if
prejudicial to the public good. All men, says Salust, who consult of dubious
matters, ought to be free from hatred, friendship, anger, and pity; for no man
can both serve his own desires and the public good: And in another place, Let
the mind, says he, in consultations be free, obnoxious to neither crimes nor
lusts. Why so? Because it cannot be that one given to vice should not favor
the same.

Let the life therefore of a Councellor be good and just, which may serve as a
rule to other Ministers, and as an Example to his Prince. When at Sparta a
certain vicious Fellow had given a good counsel, the people rejected it. But
the Ephori did command a grave old man to give the same, as pouring it out of a
dirty Vessel into a clean one, that it might be acceptable to the multitude.
Virtues and manners, says the Philosopher, conduce much to persuade. The
foundation of perpetual commendation and good fame, is goodness, fidelity, and
justice, without which nothing can be commendable. Let him not therefore be an
hater of good men, or a calumniator; let him not persecute men with injurious
words or actions publicly or privately.

Truth also should be still in the mouth of a Councellor; for there is nothing
more base than such Counselors, who conceal the same from their Prince. But
truth procures hatred. What then? He deserves not the name of a Councellor,
who is afraid thereof. Who fears hatred too much knows not how to Govern, says
Seneca. We may sometimes not only bear and comply with the errors of our
Prince, but also lovingly cover the same, yet in public Consultations the
truth should never be concealed. The contrary practice made Pliny complain, We
see such Courts, says he, wherein it is dangerous to speak what we would, and
disgraceful to speak what we would not. And in another place he commends
Trajan, because he suffered his Counselors to give their opinions freely, and
that the first was not approved, but the best. Antistius Labeo told Augustus,
that every one ought to give their opinion freely, and without fear in the
Senate. What does it signify, to be knowing and experienced in Affairs, and to
nourish good endeavors, and the desire of well-doing, if the alacrity of the
mind be wanting to express the same when occasion occurs; or if fear,
suspicion, or any other impediment obstruct the free and sincere declaration of
the heart.

But if any be found of a timorous spirit he should be encouraged by his
Prince; for good Princes ought to stir up and animate their Counselors to
speak freely, and to declare unto them that they (Princes) only seek what is
conducing to the public profit Paleot.
, and to hear their opinions with attention, and a pleasant countenance. Who
doubts but that the freedom of good counsel is obstructed when the Prince is
angry, and does manifest that he hears more willingly what pleases than what
is profitable. The safety of that Prince, says the Historian, is desperate, to
whom what is profitable is harsh, and who hears nothing with patience but what
is smoothing. When it was debated in the Roman Senate, whether the Corn
brought from Sicily should be given gratis, or sold for a small price to the
Common People: Coriolanus stood up, and told That they ought not to have any
thing by way of Gift, that thereby they should be the more petulant and
lascivious; that it was better to hold them low with want and penury, whereby
they would of necessity be more modest, and more ready to go about their duty;
that thereby they should employ themselves Dionys. Halicar. l. 7. Live. l. 2.
Plin de Viris illust.
with manuring their Lands, and not with raising and somenting seditions, and
that idleness and luxury which proceeds from abundance would make the Laws
contemned. A noble and Aristocratical opinion, but not at all popular.
Therefore the Tribunes who heard the same in the Senate, did relate it to the
people, by whom incontinently a day is appointed to Coriolanus. But he did
easily free himself of his accusation, though the people were very much
incensed against him. They acknowledged that Coriolanus had done nothing but
his duty. Where is there any liberty of speaking, if not in deliberations and
giving of counsel? King Lysimachus did show great favor to Philippides the
Athenian, because he did speak freely and sincerely, and did lead a good and
honest life, free from adulation. Hieron Plin.
used to say, That there was no man troublesome to him who spoke freely.
Severus did not only show himself courteous and affable to all men, but he
desired them also to speak freely what they thought, and would argue with them
without disdain Aelius Lamprid. in Alex.
or bitterness. Messala Valerius being enquired by Tiberius Tacit. lib. 1.
annal.
, whether he did give his opinion by his command or not, did answer that it was
of his own accord, and that he would never use an other Opinion than his own,
in things belonging to the Commonwealth. And I would advise a Prince not to
trust those who use to praise Tacit lib. 2. annal.
what is either good or bad in him.

But here a Councellor ought to shun two extremes: The one lest he confound his
freedom of speech with boldness and immodesty, which comes to pass, when any
obstinate in their own opinion, under color of freedom, does reflect on
others, which ought rather to be called petulancy, than ingenious and innocent
freedom. For that which is innocent has only regard to the public good, says
Tacitus. The other is, lest under pretext of well-doing he fall into plain
flattery. We shall find an Example of such adulation in Plutarch. Hear, O
Tiberius De descrip. amicorum and adulator.
Caesar, for what we do all tacitly reprehend you, though no man dare do it
publicly; you destroy your body with continual cares for the Republic. Behold
the flattery of some base parasite, to a Bloody Tyrant.

SECT. I. Of his Attention and Diligence.
It is also requisite for a Councellor to give an attentive ear, to whatever
is spoken in Council, and by what arguments they confirm their Opinion, lest he
err in his answers: which Lycurgus desiring to show, of what moment this was,
commanded there should be no pictures in Councel-rooms, lest the thoughts of
Counselors should be diverted; but that they might be wholly taken up with
what they had in hand.

Out of Council let him be diligent in meditating, reading, arguing, and
considering the end of every thing, every circumstance, and the various
contingencies in humane actions; which is a practical knowledge, and very
profitable in the administration of Affairs. Plut. in moral.
It is most requisite in our Councellor to use this exact diligence in
consultations, that he may conjecture by observed experiments what is the evil
consequence of every bad deliberation, and what are the causes of obstructions,
which may be found out by a diligent foresight:

And seeing many inconveniences do arise from his ignorance of that
Commonwealth wherein he serves, and whereof he has the care; it is requisite
that he know the least thing belonging thereto, but especially such as pertain
to the commnnd in which he is: Let him consider the nature of his own and
Neighboring People. Some things are to be regarded in an old and firmly
settled Commonwealth, which is not so much exposed to Envy and Sedition; and
other things are more properly to be regarded in a new ill-grounded one.

He should also know the nature of the Prince and Court, thereby to understand
perfectly the dispositions of other Ministers and Counselors, what the Command
of the Prince is, what Provinces, Cities, Towns, and Forts are under his
Subjection, the Situation of Places, etc. What is controverted in the
Principality, with whom, and for what causes, wherein the People are most
delighted, by what they are fustain'd, how they are affected toward their
Prince, what the customs and subsidies of the people are, what are imported
and exported; what his Treasury is, whether his Subjects are oppressed with
Taxes or other Burdens; whether they are rich or poor, what number of
Soldiers can be raised in particular Provinces; what Leagues, Affinities, and
Confederacies his Prince has with other Nations, what can be expected thereby.
And finally, let him confer all his study, care, thoughts and diligence, in
every thing, which neglected, might prove detrimental to the Republic. Who
knew the Nature of the Vulgar, says Tacitus, Lib. 2. hist.
and the Inclinations of the Senate, were esteemed knowing and wise Men.

It Is the part also of a vigilant and diligent Councellor, to catch hold of any
sudden occasion. Wherefore we see great men have come to that greatness by
prudently laying hold of good occasions. The Popes of Rome used to implore the
aid of the Constantinopolitan Emperors, upon any eminent danger from a Foreign
Enemy, for whose negligence Charles the great was called by Pope Leo the Paulus
Emtlius lib. 2.
third, and he by knowing prudently to lay hold on the occasion, and taking the
patronage of the Roman Church upon him, did purchase the Empire to himself and
his posterity. Upon the like account the French, at the instigation of the Pope
of Rome, did become Masters of the Kingdom of Naples and Sicily. Alphonsus King
of Arragon being called to the Kingdom of Naples by Queen Johanne, and he not
neglecting so good an occasion, did obtain that Kingdom with the great applause
of the Neopolitanes, and consent of the Pope. There could be more examples
produced: but let these suffice to excite the diligence of a Councellor, to lay
hold on occasions, where great prudence is needful.

But it may be inquired in this place, whether a Councellor or Minister of
State ought to be so diligent, that he is obliged to give his Council to his
Prince, although he be not required thereto. The inveterate Custom of requiring
counsel does move the doubt, because this man who intrudes himself in giving
the same seems curious, and would have his prudence esteemed greater than
either that of his Prince, or the rest of his fellow. Ministers. As it is not
the part therefore of a prudent Physician, to intrude himself to a sick person,
not being called, so neither that of a Counselor to a Prince. But
notwithstanding this, the more learned do think, that in matters of great
moment, when necessity urges, he may speak, although not required, for the
public good; and there is no doubt but that this was observed by the Roman
Senators. Is it not granted, says Scaptius to the Consuls, to speak for the
good of the Republic; Which notwithstanding will be the more seasonable and
fortunate, if a Councellor examine diligently his Council which he is to give,
lest he should be deceived, which would be ridiculous; and then all
circumstances, whether he has spoken formerly upon the like account to his
Prince, whether Time, Place, or the State of Affairs do require it, whether it
can more opportunely be deferred, whether he himself be acceptable and in
favor with his Prince; or whether he thinks that it can be done more
effectually by another, whether others did make trial of the like, and with
what success. Another Question may arise in this place; Whether a Councellor
knowing some what to be done in the Council unto which he cannot assent with a
safe Conscience may keep himself at home that day, without being defective in
his Duty? The doubt is, because it is better not to come, than be forced to
assent to a bad Council. But the contrary is clear from the former question:
for if I am obliged to give my Council to my Prince, though not required, for
the Public good; much less can I shun asking. It is so far therefore, from
being a lawful excuse, that on the contrary it obliges a Councellor * the more
to be present that Day. Paleot. 5.4.8.
The occasion of more weighty and difficult Affairs distinguishes true
Counselors from others; for the former, the more dangerous business are, the
more do they prepare themselves for such, for the good of the Republic. The
other do withdraw, when the least Dangers or Difficulties do arise. It was
written above the Gate of the Roman Senate House, Cieere de legibus.
Senatori qui nec aderit, aut causa, aut culpa, esto. Plutarch says of Cato in
ejus vita.
, that he came always to the Senate. He was afraid lest any thing should have
been done through favor in his absence. It Is the part of a good Senator, says
Cicero, to be always present in the Senate. Should he deserve the name of a
Soldier, who being commanded to fight would shun the same for any evident
danger. Neither let it move a Councellor that he himself only shall be of his
own Opinion, and therefore that his coming to Council shall be to no effect:
For besides, that this is no lawful excuse for his absence, How often I pray you
do we see, that one has drawn all the rest of different Opinions to his, by the
strength of Reason and Arguments; but granting that it were; not so, yet it
will be sufficient that he has done his Duty.

SECT. II. Of his Secrecy.
That which next belongs to the Duty of a Councellor is, that upon no account
he divulge any secret committed to him: for if it be hateful to reveal the
Secret of a Friend, in a private person; how much more is it in a Minister of
State to divulge the Councels or Determinations of his Prince, contrary to his
own fidelity. The Law of the Egyptians Diodor. Siculus lib. 38.
did command that Man's Tongue to be cut out, who did detect the Secrets of the
Commonwealth. I say Secrets; for there are several matters handled in Councels,
which are not so, as the reformation of Manners, the punishment of Vice and
Impiety: from the relation of which there is neither scandal nor hurt to be
feared. Tully gives this excellent commendation of Cato: That there was never
word escaped him, whereof he had reason to be sorry afterward. We read that
Quintus Fabius Max. Waler. Max. lib. 2. cap. 1.
was reproved by the Consuls in very sharp words, for speaking something
concerning the third Punick War, which being resolved upon in the Senate
secretly, was to be declared shortly after. The constancy of Pompey was
admirable Val. Max. lib. 3. c. 3,
, who being Ambassador, was intercepted by King Gentius, and being commanded to
reveal the designs of the Roman Senate, did hold his finger to a burning
Torch, by which constancy the King despairing to extort any thing from him by
torments, did insist no farther thereon.

SECT. III. Of his Fortitude.
From this last example it does appear, that a Councellor ought to have a bold
and undaunted courage, lest he be afraid of offending any, when he is about his
Duty. There is nothing more pernicious in a Commonwealth, than such a
Councellor Os^r de Regnum institnm.
who is timorous, who shuns pains and diligence, and who too much fears his
Life and Fortune. Who is not diligent does make no progress in Affairs, he
prolongs them, or leaves the administration thereof to wicked Men, and does
accumulate business upon business; who fears dangers does confirm the boldness
of his Enemies. The Councels of timorous men, says Tacitus, Lib. 3. an nalium.
are uncertain. Metellus perceiving the designs of the Tribunes of the people,
and with what danger they would burst out to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth, chose rather to be exiled, than consent to their Laws. Can any
Man be called more constant than this Man, says Valerius Maximus, who lest he
should have been forced to recall his Opinion, suffered himself rather to be
banished his Country, wherein he had obtained the greatest degree of honor?
Sylla did enter Rome armed and conveening the Senate was very instant, that
Marius should be declared an Enemy, and when none durst withstand him, only
Scaevola would not assent thereto: although says he, you threaten me with
Legions of Soldiers, with whom you have already surrounded the Senatehouse, or
with Death it self, yet shall you not make me declare Marius an Enemy, who
saved Rome and all Italy from apparent ruin. He is not a Man of any Fortitude
whose courage does not grow amidst the greatest dangers.

Yet notwithstanding we ought not to be forgetful of the reverence due to our
Prince: For to give due observance and reverence to him, and to be punctual in
our Duty without fear, are not inconsistent.

But what we have spoken of Constancy, is not so to be understood, that a
Counselor may not sometimes change his Opinion upon any good emergent cause.
It is fitter to change for the better, than insist in what is badly begun.
Neither needs he fear the blame of Levity: For no learned Man, says Cicero,
will call that unconstancy. And in another place, he says, that a constant
obstinate perseverance in one Opinion was never commendable in great Statesmen.

SECT. IV. Of his Temperance.
HOW necessary a virtue this is, will appear from the advantages and benefits
acquired by the due observance of it; for she alone, (like a skilful Pilot)
keeps us steady in the tempestuous occurrences of weighty matters, and makes
every faculty of our Souls officious in their subserviency to Reason, without
which the Soul (as a Bark becalmed at Sea) suffers a vertigo, by the sudden
stop of her progress; and having lost her rudder rowles too and fro in a in a
fantastic motion, till she become drunk with the agitation which has lulled
her functions asleep in vicious stupidity, and made her wholly useless.

How difficult a Virtue this is, may be collected from so numerous a variety of
objects of repugnant natures both exterior and interior, which continually
invade the sensual faculties of the soul to embrace them, affording indeed such
strong Temptations, as no intermission can well afford him time to deliberate
on the refusal.

We would advise therefore our Councellor in the first place, to shun Envy and
Ambition, as more especially coincident to the corruption of his Ministry. For
such infected with those two vices, cannot but have more regard to their own
ends, than to the Honor of their Prince and good of their Country, and are
oft-times the cause of their own, and Countries destruction, of which History
furnishes us with almost innumerable examples.

In the next place it belongs also to the Duty of a Councellor, to shun Avarice
and study Liberality. As Avarice is the root of all evil, so Charity and
Beneficence is the root of all good. You shall do a great good, says Salust to
your Country, your self, and to all mankind, if you eradicate, or if that be
not possible, you lessen the desire of riches: For where that takes possession,
neither Discipline, good Arts, nor a good Genius have any force. And a little
after: But Avarice is a cruel and intolerable wild Beast, which destroys
Cities, Lands, Houses, yea and the very Temples of the Gods, mixeth what is
Divine with Humane, and neither Arms nor Walls do hinder it from penetrating.
Marcus Crassus was the most noble, most eloquent, most learned in the Laws; was
Chief-Priest, and the richest of all the Romans next to Sylla. But insatiable
Avarice did obscure those virtues. If the desire of private gain, says
Demosthenes, do not obstruct the public good, it is in some measure tolerable
for Counselors to be rich: but because we see for the most part, how much a
Minister of State increases in riches, so much is the Commonwealth
depauperated. Let a Councellor therefore beware of too much desire of gain, for
his too weighty Coffers are often the cause of his own destruction,

Let him also shun Prodigality as much as Avarice. Make use of such
Counselors, says Basilius, King James to his Sonnc Prince Henry in his (...).
who have governed their own Estate well; for how can one trust another with
his Estate, who never knew to manage his own aright. Great circum spection is
to be used in Liberality, says Cicero. Our riches should not be so closely shut
up, that benignity cannot open them: nor always so unlocked as to be open upon
every occasion to all.

SECT. I. Of his Courteous and Affable Deportment.
But Meekness, Courtesy, Piety, Benevolence toward our Neighbor, and
Hospitality, are the Concomitants of Liberality. Let therefore a Councellor be
of easy access, let him encourage the bashful and timorous; let him hear
Strangers with Patience and Civility, and let not the reasonable requests of
any be troublesome to him. By which procedure he shall not only do his Duty, but
also obtain the good will of all Men. Marcus Crassus was much commended Plutar.
in Crasso.
because he did not refuse any Citizen at any time his Patronage; was affable
and civil to all, and only of all Men, made Avarice popular.

Great Men use to be touched with the desire of Glory above measure, from
whence Pride and the contempt of others do proceed. A contemning Spirit and
Pride, says Salust, De Bello Jugur.
are the Common-evils of the Nobility. Therefore I would have a Councellor
think frequently, Tacitus lib. 4. hist.
that all things belonging to Mortals are unconstant, and that the more he has
obtained, the more uncertain he is therein: that Modesty and Humility ought not
to be contemned by the greatest of Men; and that God is a lover of Humility and
an hater of Pride and Arrogance. If you would measure your own shadow, says
Archidamus to King Philip, who did write proudly and arrogantly to him, after
his Victory at Chaeronea, you shall not find it one hair greater than before
your Victory.

CHAP. IV. Of the Prudent Deportment of Princes in Councels.
BUT because it is not sufficient to give prudent Council, unless the Prince
make use of it, and it is as great Wisdom, amongst the diverse Councels of many
to discern and put in execution what are best, as to give Council aright; for,
according to Cicero, there is prudence required as well in taking, as in giving
Council. It comes often to pass, that Princes are deceived, to the great
prejudice of the Republic, who attribute too much to themselves and their own
opinion. Ptolomy King of Egypt, having left Alexandria upon some controversy
Plutar. in Ca^one.
with his Subjects, did come to Rome to be restored to his Kingdom by Pompey
and Caesar. Having consulted Cato touching this matter, he was freely and
ingeniously reprehended by him for deserting such happiness, and objecting
himself to the affronts, briberies, and avarice of the Roman Nobility, and
advised to regain the favor of his subjects. But one day waiting long at the
Gates of one of the Senators, he did lament his inconsiderate enterprise, and
that he had refused the advice of so good a Man. Hannibal, when he fled to King
Antiochus, did advise him to make Italy the Seat of the War, which he
neglected: But being overcome by the Romans, he confessed too late that
Hannibal had rightly foreseen, what was absolutely necessary to have been done.
I have oft-times heard, says Livius, Lib. 36.
that he is the first Man who councels aright; that he is the next who can
accept, or make use of a good Council; and that he is the last of all who can
neither give nor receive the same. But because to be first is denied us, let us
endeavor to be second, and whilst we learn to command, let us resolve to obey
the Council of prudent men.

But sometimes Princes are doubtful, timorous, and as Caesar says, every thing
fails them, and so not having their Judgment clear, they are deceived, and
brought to inconveniences. Which Guiceiardin did observe in Peter de Medices
seeking Council and Advice from the Venetians, who endeavored therein to serve
their own ends. Also the Council of Ludovick Sforce may be observed, whereby he
moved the French King to undertake that Neopolitane expedition against the
Arragons.

Great Judgment therefore is needful, not only in choosing Counselors, whether
they are so qualified as we have spoken of formerly, whether they have born any
public charge, and whether they have shown Diligence and Fidelity in the
administration thereof; whether they are the heads of any faction, left under
pretense of Justice they revenge private Quarrels with public Arms: but also
in following Councils. It Is the greatest prudence in humane life, says
Aristotle, to make good use of advice. The words of Mutianus to Vespasian are
to be observed: Tacitus lib. 2.
Whosoever enters into deliberations of great and weighty Affairs, ought to
examine whether what is begun, be profitable to the Commonwealth, honorable
or feisible. He also who Councels must be considered, whether he adds his own
danger to his advice, or to whom the chief praise redounds. Let him therefore
who is to consult consider diligently, whether what is consulted concerns the
Councellor directly, for all Councels in a man's own cause are to be suspected;
or whether it be honest or lawful: for if it deviate from honesty, it is bad:
whether it does principally regard the public good or private profit: let him
hear patiently what is spoken by contrary parties, and disagreeing opinions,
and observe with what Reasons and Arguments they are confirmed. If the business
seem difficult, let him deliberate better, or defer it to another time. There
is no greater Enemy to Consultations, says Livius, than too much have. Too late
and unprofitable repentance does follow such Councels. Therefore the Author of
the Utopian Commonwealth says, That nothing is disputed there Sir Tho. More
lib. 2. de Magistra.
the same day it is propounded in the Council, but deferred till the next
Council-day, lest any should babble out what comes first in his Mouth, but that
he may (...) leisure excogitate with what Arguments he may defend his Opinion;
lest through a perverse and preposterous shame, he should rather destroy the
public safety, than the fame of his own abilities, by his precipitated rather
than considerate Opinion. This precept or advice seems to be taken from the
Emperor Severus, who after the business proposed, did give time to his
Counselors to deliberate with themselves touching all Particulars and
Circumstances, lest they should have been forced to speak of great Affairs
without mature deliberation, which has also been the destruction of many, who
despising slow, yet secure Councels, did embrace contrary ones. Tac. lib. 2.
annal.
Laurentius Medices Duke of Florence, did vary when he consulted his Friends,
whose Fidelity or Constancy he suspected. Whom he resolved to admit into his
consultation, he did consult them not together, but severally; so when he found
many opinions to agree in one, he thought that the best.

It is requisite also for a Prince to know every thing done relating to the
State in his Dominions, left he be deceived by bad Counselors. But he must
take heed in the mean while that he give not too much credit to malicious
detracters and tale-bearers: For mere lies and calumnies are often buz'd in the
Princes ears thereby, from whence do proceed the danger, yea destruction of the
innocent. It Is observed by wisemen, that such persons are never faithful. Says
Tacitus, lib. 4. an.
they are a sort of People found out for Public Destruction.

A Prince should suffer his Counselors to give their opinion freely, so as in
the mean while they be joined amongst themselves by mutual concord. Factions
amongst Statesmen are ever fatal. The pertinacy of private hatred, says
Tacitus, lib. 1. hest.
does often draw on Public Destruction. And in another place lib. 5 annal
The hatred of the Consuls tends to the Destruction of the Commonwealth. Those
great Men have many followers, to whom they easily join themselves, by whose
help they exercise their hatred, to the undoing of many, and sometimes of their
Prince and Country to boot.

I add also, that Princes should choose Counselors not through
recommendations, and friendship, but such as he knows well-qualified, and able
for such employment.

And finally, a Prince ought not to discard or turn off, without great cause,
the good and faithful Counselors of his predecessors, from whom he might learn
much, very profitable to good government. Louis the eleventh, King of France,
advised his Son Charles not to innovate any thing in the Government of the
Kingdom, and to retain his Ancient Favorites, and Servants: For he had found by
experience, that his banishing from the Court, Men of approved virtue, was the
only cause that he had fallen into so many and so great dangers, and of the War
and manifold Conspiracies which did soon after break forth.

CHAP. V. Of Affairs deliberated in Councils.
WE have already spoken of the Persons in a Council, it follows that we speak
something of Affairs and Debates deliberated therein. Such only are to be
agitated in this great Consistory which belong to the greatest Affairs of the
Commonwealth, and to the State it self: As those of Religion, and of the Laws
and Magistrates, Peace and War, of Public Fidelity, of keeping the Public
Peace, of entering into Leagues and defending the same, of the Controversies of
the Grandees, of the Negligence of Magistrates and Officers of State, of the
Secrets of Embassies and the like. Bod. lib. 3. c. 1.
For the Council of Princes ought to be busied with grand Affairs, and not with
trivial Matters, or the small Controversies of private Persons. Whosoever assembles
a Council of great and learned men for matters of small moment, may be compared
to Apion, who having called Homer from the dead did only inquire who were his
Parents.

But if you desire to know where other business should be handled, such as
belong to the Revenues and Treasury of the Prince, to the punishment of
delinquents and the like? I answer, there ought to be more Councils appointed
dissering in Offices, Business and Ministers. The Spaniard has seven, separated
by so many Courts within the Kings Palace, that he may easily go to any as
Affairs call him. The first is that of the Exchequer, which has the care of the
public Treasure, and of the Revenues of the Empire, of the Tributes and
Customs of the Subjects, of what is imported and exported, of the Lands, of
the Crown, of the spoils of Enemies, of Merchandise, etc. The second is the
Court Military, which is employed about the fortification of Towns, the
Custody of bordering places, the provision for Camps and Armies, and the like.
The third is for the Provision of Victual, and has a care that so much abound,
that a part thereof may be sent to Neighboring Provinces. The The fourth is
the Court of Law, whereunto all private, civil Controversies do belong. The
fifth is Criminal, whereunto the cognizance of criminal matters does pertain.
The sixth is Censorial, to which the castigation of Manners is committed. And
the last is the great Court which has the Authority over all the former, and
has the care of making and abrogating of Laws.

CHAP. VI. Of the end of Councils
WHatever man does should always be to some end. Whosoever therefore is ignorant
thereof, loses the hope of obtaining the same. Our Councils must err, says
Seneca, which have not a Mark whereunto they are directed. As therefore a
Physician does propose to himself the health of his Patient, and a General
Victory; so should a Councellor the Glory of God, and the Honor and good good
of his Prince and Country. It is apparent enough, by the reading of Ancient
Writers, that the Roman Senate did chiefly regard, what was conducing to the
good of the Republic, to the profit of the City, and to the Common safety.
Hence you see those usual forms; E Republica esse, also, Si quis aliter
fecisset, eum contra rempublicam facturum. Who rules the Common wealth, says
Cicero, ought to remember two precepts of Plato; the one is, so to regard the
utility of their Country, that whatever they do may tend thereto, forgetting
their own private interest. The other to have a care of the whole Body of the
Commonwealth, lest by only defending one part, they desert the rest: For the
administration of the Republic should tend to the profit of those who are to
be protected, and not of such to whom their protection is entrusted. --
(Claudian.) Tu civem patremque geras, tu consule cunctis.
Nec tibi, nec tua te moveant, sed publica vota.
Thou must a Father to thy Country be,
Provide for all, not for thy self only;
If thou wilt deserve that every Man should love thee,
Let public good not private profit move thee.


The public good should be understood, not so much to belong to the Prince, as
to the Commonwealth. For he himself ought to neglect his own private profit if
it be contrary to the public good. Few have a care of the Public Honor, says
Tacitus, which should be chiefly regarded by a Councellor, and whereof the
Athenians were very careful: For Themistocles had determined, after his victory
over Xerxes, that his Country should obtain the Principality of Greece, and for
that end had refolved to burn the Fleet of the Lacedaemonians privately, that
thereby their Riches and Strength might be ruined; he did therefore tell the
People, that he had something to propose of great consequence, and desired them
to name one to consult with him about it, lest being divulged by the Multitude
it might prove prejudicial to the Commonwealth, whereupon Aristides was named
by the people; who after hearing, seeing Themistocles err in the end, which
was the public honor, did relate that his Council was profitable to the
Republic, but dishonorable and flagitious. The whole Assembly did therefore
incontinently declare, that that Council was to be rejected, which, to the
addition of command did join public dishonor. Tacitus does find amongst the
Writers of those times, that the Letters of Adgandrestius were read in the
Senate, wherein he Promised the death of Arminus, if poison should be sent to
him to effect the same, and answered by them, that the Romans would take
Revenge of their Enemies publicly and armed, and not by fraud and murder.
Whatever Deeds, (says the Lawyer) are against Religion, Reputation, and Good
Manners are upon no account to be done by us.

These are (if not all) at least the chief things which can be spoken generally
of Councils, and which I have brought to an end, with, I hope, no empty
brevity, having added the Testimonies of learned Authors. I therefore leave it
to the Judgment of the candid and judicious Readers.

The end of the First Part.
THE WELL-QUALIFIED COURTIER.
PART II.
THE PROEME.
It Is frequently seen, that Courtiers who cannot obtain those Preferments,
Honors and Riches, whereunto they have long aspired, accuse the ingratitude of
their Prince: sometimes they impute their misfortunes to the envy of their
Fellow-Courtiers; and sometimes to the blindness of Fortune: and then exclame
with Seneca, O Fortuna viris invid afortibus,
Quam non aequa bonis praemia dividis?
O Unjust Fortune, brave Men often find,
Rewards unworthy of a noble mind.


But for the most part in my opinion they complain without cause. For although
Princes do often bestow greater Riches and Honors on Parasites and Flatterers,
and do trust such more willingly, than those to whom (perhaps) they owe their
Life and Scepter: For that saying of Tacitus is most true, That obligations are
acceptable so long as they seem to be within the compass of reward, but when
they are without the same, they procure hatred in lieu of favor. And although
good and modest men are often deluded by the fraud of Wicked Courtiers, by
whose secret accusations, says Tacitus, lib. 1. hist.
they are disgraced, being ignorant thereof, and that they may the more easily
be deceived, they are praised to their faces; yet notwithstanding men may see
(for let us always acknowledge the truth) that the effects of the evils do
proceed from themselves, who are the causes thereof; because they follow the
Court, being destitute of those Arts, Manners, and Qualifications requisite in
a Courtier.

It Is a great folly to undertake any thing above our reach, and there is hardly
so bad a Prince to be found, who desires not that his Affairs should be managed
with diligence and prudence, and consequently does bestow Honors and Riches on
faithful and prudent Ministers.

But Envy, which is always the concomitant of Virtue, and follows her as the
shadow does the body, is often an obstruction of our honest endeavors. Let
that be granted; Yet we must overcome that with our prudence, says Tacitus.

But you insist that the favor of Princes is unconstant, and that those who
can do all and all with them, do often notwithstanding fall into disgrace, yea
and in danger of their Lives.

Namque, hos e Lucret. lib. 5. de. re. not.
summo quasi
fulmen dejicit ictos
Invidia, interdum contemptim in tartara terrae.
As if with Thunder struck than Envy must
What Is high exalted level with the dust.
Hermeas was of great Authority with Antiochus Polyb. l. 7.
: yet he was killed in the sight and by the approbation of this Prince. Lucius,
Aleus Sejanus was in such favor with Tiberius Dio. in Tyberio.
that he made him his Colleague in the Empire; yet he was adjudg'd to dye, his
Body to be thrown into the River Tyber, and his Children to be murdered, and
many others whom for brevities sake I omit.

This is all true, but if we will take a more strict observation, we shall find
that the favor of Princes is not in it self destructive, but to those who know
not how to use the same. Men cannot be cautious enough, says Curtius, lib. 4.
amidst so many flatteries of Fortune. Intolerable ambition and Pride made
Hermeas hated; treason and perfidiousness was the cause of Alius Sejanus's
destruction. Neither ought we to admire that in Courtiers, when we find that
Princes themselves have been brought to ruin on the same occasion.

Quid memorem eversas urbes Regumque ruinas?
Inque rogo Craesum Priamumque in littore truncum,
Cui nec Troja rogus. Quid Xerxem majus et ipso?
Naufragium pelago, quid captos agminereges?
Of ruined Kings why should I mention make?
The fate of Priam, Craesus at the stake.
How Xerxes great from as great Shipwreck fled,
And Kings in triumph often captive led.
On the contrary, if we behold those who from a low birth have become famous,
and ponderate their actions, we shall find that they have been eminently
qualified above others. As Agathocles, Ptolomy the first, Hieron, Servius,
Tullius, Silla, Vespasian, the Emperor Probus, Justin, Ottoman, and many more,
who although of obscure birth, did notwithstanding obtain great Honors, and
royal Dignities, by their virtue and diligence. Great Trees which are long in
growing, says Curtius, are extirpated in a short time. It Is folly for him who
aims at their fruit, not to consider their height. Beware lest in stiving to
get to their top, you do not fall with those Branches you caught hold of.

CHAP. I. Of his Education.
THerefore good Education is most effectual, which directs the Councils and
Determinations of Men's Lives to the exactest rule of prudence and true virtue;
by which Natures are corrected and made pliable. Nature produces youth easy to
be led either way, so that when it finds a Guide, it is induced to follow
either his vicious or virtuous inclinations. A good nature conduces very much,
but then especially when cultivated by an honest Education. He must therefore
have a care who has noble and high designs, to be instructed in all good Arts
and Manners, not to accustom himself to delicate but simple food, not to
idleness but labor, not to riot but decent parsimony, not to temerity and
impudence, but modesty and sweetness; not to licentiousness but fear and
reverence, not to pleasures but to the Liberal Sciences. I wish, says
Quintilian, that we did not so abuse the nature of our Children; that tender
education, which we call indulgence, breaks the nerves of both body and mind.

We see therefore Plato, that most grave teacher of virtue, in almost all his
Dialogues, exhorting Parents to educate their Children aright.

Though this principle unfoldeth many objects necessary to the forming our
present subject. Yet since most of them are rather preparatives than
pollishments, we will here pass by those institutions, that are usually proper
to the two first Ages, infancy and puerility. And taking our Courtier in his
adolescence, propose only in reference to our present subject, those
distinctions requisite to his employment, languages, letters, and travel.

But because we have spoken already of all those in the first part, we think it
superfluous to insist thereon. Only let not a Courtier be ignorant of the
knowledge of Histories, without which a man can hardly obtain the name of a
grave and prudent person. As an old man is esteemed more prudent than a young
man, says Quintilian, because he has seen what has fallen out through the
course of many years: so we must confess that he is the most prudent, who knows
the actions and events, not only of his own but of past Ages. What is prudence
else, but the observation of events, and of things present and future, drawn
from what is bypast. History is the mirror of civil life, where Hero's,
Princes, and Nobles, who are appointed to Govern, ought to behold themselves.
To be short, History furnishes us not only with Examples of civil prudence,
but also with those of Military Virtue. If one would know how to take the
occasions of time and place to fight, let him read the Lives of Plutarch.
Lysander and Xantippus. If he would make use of warlike stratagems, let him
imitate Timotheus, Iphicrates, and Hannibal. If being victorious he would let
the Enemy escape, lest despair should produce boldness, let him read the
Example of Id.
Themistocles to Xerxes. But if any affirm that such things cannot be learned
by reading only, let him propose to himself Lucius Lucullus, whom Cicero writes
at his departure from Rome to have been altogether ignorant of malitary
Affairs, but partly by enquiry, partly by reading, he was become so great a
Captain when he came into Asia, that Mithridates did confess he never knew a
greater. I only add, seeing there are abundance of Historians, that we must
choose the best. Amongst the Grecians, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Plutarch,
and Nicetas were famous. Amongst the Romans, Livy, Tacitus, Salust, Caesar,
Quintus Curtius, and Suetonius. Of modern Historians, Guicciardine,
Conestagius, Cominus, Sleidan, and Davila are the best.

These are so to be read, that we may observe not only what was done, but upon
what occasion, what way, when, and in what state of Affairs.

CHAP. II. Of his sweetness and integrity of Manners in general.
FOR brevities sake, which hitherto I have greatly affected; I will forbear to
speak any more of the rest of the exercises of the mind comprehended in
Learning, or of the exercises of the Body, as riding, fencing, dancing and the
like, of all which our Courtier should not be ignorant, and only insist, though
succinctly, on his sweetness, affability and manners, which Cicero calls the
Ornament of humane life, and which procures the deserved love and admiration of
all. For as the beauty and comeliness of the body attracts the eyes of men, so
a sweet and courteous nature gains the hearts and affections of every one. As
harsh wine, says Socrates, is unpleasant to the taste; so are rugged and
rustic manners to conversation.

SECT. I. Of his Gate, Speech and Habit.
It is not sufficient to do, says the Historian, but it is also requisite to do
with a grace. Let not therefore the Gate of a Courtier incline to levity or
vanity, but let it be grave without affectation.

And because the speech is the Character of the mind, he shall observe a
decorum therein, of Persons, Times and Place, that he may speak pertinently,
and after a different manner to his Prince, Equals and Inferiors. For this
Elegancy in speaking is a sign of the interior virtue, which cannot be
perpetual, unless it proceed from such an excellent inclination of the Soul.
Much can be feigned in the Carriage, Countenance and Speech, which are not in
the Soul; but it is impossible that it can be of any long con^^^uance.

And as to the habit, let every thing be avoided that may therein effeminate:
whosoever has too great a care of his Body, says a Divine, neglects his Soul. Let
the habit of a Courtier be agreeable with a decency to the Country and Court
wherein he lives, handsome and fashionable without affectation, which he should
change according to the Place, Cause, Age, or Time.

Subsect. 1. Of his Deportment toward his Prince.
What we have already spoken is of great moment in our Courtier, but what shall
follow will be of far greater, and the more accurately to be observed, because
we see many err therein.

First we shall show how a Courtier ought to carry himself to his Prince, then
to his Equals, therein to shun envy as much as possible may be, and lastly with
what virtues he should be endued.

Above all things I admonish our Courtier to be such in effect, as he would
desire to seem to his Prince and others, and let not his Tongue dissent from
his Heart. He is as great an Enemy to me, says Homer, as the Gates of Hell, who
speaks one thing and thinks another. No Lie grows old, says Euripides. And as
the love of Men to a painted ^^ore can be of no long continuance, (for with the
first heat the deceit appears, and the face thereby becomes more ugly,) so when
dissemblers are suspected (which commonly happens) they incur the hatred of
their Prince and others. Real pain does follow false pleasure; real disgrace,
false Honor; and real destruction false profit. To omit, that it is against
Christian-piety, which consists wholly in the simplicity of the mind.

Verum hodie laus est non ultima, fingere vultum,
Et simulare probe: Nec qui vel fallere nescit,
Mentirive, ferit Sapientis nomen in aula.
Dissimulation, and well-feigned faces,
Once hateful vices now are no disgraces:
Who cannot cheat, and lie, he strives in vain
The name of wise in Court e're to obtain.
Divis. 1. Of his Assiduity and Diligence.
Having laid this Foundation, I say that Assiduity and Diligence are
necessarily requisite in our Courtier. This is chiefly to be regarded by us,
says Antonius in Cicero; there is nothing which it cannot obtain: For whatever
falls under our charge we accomplish with Care, Vigilance and Labor, and in a
word Diligence, in which one Virtue all the rest are contained. It is good to
be admired in what we have by Fortune. But it is far better to have obtained
what is glorious and honorable, by our own industry; for the former happens to
good and bad, but the other, (according to Demosthenes) to none but generous
and brave spirits. We see Courtiers oft-times complain, that being very
observant of their Prince, they are notwithstanding in little favor, and how
should that be?

The Answer is easy, for when the Sun shines on diverse Edifices, those seem
most illustrious who have the greatest Glass-lights: so Princes advance such
Courtiers most, who by virtue and diligence are the most fit for the
administration of Affairs. By diligence therefore a Courtier will obtain that
his Prince make frequent use of him; for such they favor more than others.
It Is no wonder, says Demosthenes, that he who refuses no pains, is always
present upon every occasion, and neglects not the least moment of time, to
obtain his desires before others. All things fall out prosperously, says Cato
apud Salustium.
Salust, by watching, doing, and consulting aright; but when you addict your
self to laziness and idleness, you shall in vain implore the angry Gods.

We call him a diligent Courtier who seldom removes his thoughts from what is
committed to his charge, who makes it his only care that his Prince receive no
prejudice, Both to foresee and to prevent
Dangers as soon as they are meant.
who spares no pains nor dangers, but rather remains as upon a perpetual watch,
who if he be sent to another Prince, observes his nature and manners, his
strength and power, his customs and treasure, his Confederates and Allies, and
all his form of Government.

And so much of the diligence of our Courtier, where it is to be observed, that
the least affected, and most remote from ostentation, is the most commendable.
As Paterculus observes aright in Piso; that he did what was to be done without
noise. As on the contrary, officious curiosity renders men hateful. To be
curious, says Cicero, is to desire to know what does not belong unto us: which
denotes him to be a man of levity or little sincerity.

Divis. 2. Of his Secrecy.
Philiopides did answer King Lysimachus wisely, when he asked what he should
communicate to him; any thing but your secrets, says he. It is a most dangerous
thing to know the secrets of Princes, because they are always jealous of such
persons, says Cassiodorus. Therefore our Courtier should not reveal the secrets
of his Prince to any, but especially such as he is entrusted with. The Persians
did conceal the secrets of their Kings with admirable sidelity; no fear or hope
could draw one syllable thereof from them, and a man cannot undergo great
Affairs, to whom it is a trouble to hold his tongue, says Curtius. They are
ridiculous, who out of an ostentative vanity, rejoice to relate what is done
every day in the Cabinet-council of their Prince, that thereby they may show
how much they are in favor with him. A certain Athenian did invite the
Ambassadors of King Philip to his house, and some Philosophers, amongst whom
Zeno was one, and when all were merry and argued much upon several Subjects,
Zeno in the mean while was still silent. Which the Ambassadors perceiving, did
ask him what they should relate to their King. That you have seen, answers
Zeno, an old man at Athens who knew how to be silent amongst Cups. It is praise
worthy to speak well, but it deserves no less praise to know when to be silent.
When Aristotle sent Calistines his Scholar and Kinsman to Alexander, he did
admonish him to speak seldom, and prudently to him, who had the power of life
and death upon his tongue. Which advice rejected by Calistines, was the cause
Curtius.
of his destruction.

In the next place I would advise our Courtier, to make as honorable mention
of his former Master (if he has had any) as if he were yet alive; and not to
complain of him, although he thinks it acceptable to his Prince; otherwise he
shall fall into two inconveniences. The one, the Prince shall imagine, that he
may expect the like himself through process of time; the other he will think it
the Courtiers own fault, that he was not in greater favor with his former
Master.

Divis. 3. Of his love and affection to his Prince.
As the rays cannot be separated from the Sun, heat from Fire, cold from Ice,
nor Snow from whiteness, so cannot benevolence, familiarity, society, and
concord be separated from love. Seeing, I say, nothing does more gain affection
than tokens of love, let a Courtier endeavor to the utmost of his power to
make his Prince understand that he loves him. Love (according to the Proverb)
begets love. It were ingratitude, indeed, not to love and favor those, by whom
we know we are not a little beloved, and have our dependence. I would have
signs of this affection toward our Prince shown, so often as occasion requires,
not only in matters of great moment, as to suffer inconveniences, or lay down
your very life for your Prince; but also in lesser concerns, if necessity
requires.

To which it is much conducing to know the nature of his Prince, and of his
Favorites, and to observe to what he is naturally inclined. Histories show by
many Examples how much Aristotle did know the nature and inclinations of
Alexander. And Tacitus says, that Sejanus knew exactly the nature of Tiberius.

The signs of love are these, to honor and respect not only the Prince
himself, but all those whom he favors, to be so subservient to the humor of
his Master, to shun the society of those whom he suspects, providing he avoid
flattery and affectation.

Divis. 4. Of flattery and affectation.
Flattery is the sign of a lying, base, servile spirit, hateful to private men,
and prejudicial to Princes, whom it in infatuates and brings often to ruin.
Therefore as we see them severely punished who throw poison into public
Springs, so should they also, who by their adulation corrupt their Prince and
Master, and draw him from the study of equity to wickedness, and from
continency to follow his lustful inclinations. For the Prince is as a Fountain,
from which the Laws flow, and justice is required; in him Examples of Virtue
should be found; from him aid is implored against wicked Agapediaca.
men, and from him the reward of Virtue is expected.

The other, which our Courtier should shun, is affectation; which though not so
odious, yet is it the symptom of an unsolid and foolish spirit: For that too
much diligence and subserviency to the humors of Princes carries the
similitude of adulation, which is abominable.

To all which I shall only add two directions, the one is, That seeing
prosperous Gales do not always breath in the Courts of Princes, we should, when
they do, catch hold of the occasion. The other is, when you resolve to desire
any thing from your Prince, those things are to be required, which he can
bestow with the least expense.

Subsect. 2. Of his deportment toward his Equals.
Now let us prosecute in few words what a Courtier should observe in his
carriage toward his Equals. And first let him shun as much as possible he can
every accident by which he may incur the wrath of his Companions. If he be
preferred by his Prince, let him not forget or be ashamed of his old Friends,
if honest men; let him not obstinately hinder the profit of others; let him not
baffle his Friends, or jest too satyrically with them: For some there are,
according to Quintilian, who had rather lose a Friend than a Jest. Consider
always diligently for what cause, in what company, against whom, and what is
spoken.

A Courtier should beware that he use not any petulant or proud expression, not
befitting the time, place, or persons.

Next, Let him beware of Flatterers and Dissemblers, for those do insinuate
themselves to pry into men's secrets, that upon occasion they may obstruct their
designs; and it is very difficult to distinguish such men from true friends:
for, according to Quintilian, it is the greatest Art to conceal dissimulation
cunningly. Notwithstanding, if our Courtier will use great circumspection,
learn to know himself, and distinguish prudently his true friends, he shall
easily detect the artifice of Dissemblers. Who therefore do extol
hyperbolically your wit, virtue, and courtesy, and who cover your Vices with
contrary virtues? who call Temerity Fortitude, Negligence Clemency, Prodigality
Magnificence, and that always to your face; such you may justly suspect.

Hunc quem vina tibi, quem mensa paravit amicum,
Esse putas fide pectus amicitia?
Vinum amat and cyathos and summa and ostrea, non te:
Sublato vino, nullus amicus erit?
Think you that friendship always will endure,
Which wine and dainties only did procure?
He loves thy treats, and not thy self; therefore
When they are gone he will be thy friend no more.
Let him be cautious therefore in choosing a Friend, but so as to endeavor to
obtain the love of all; which he shall easily do, if he be humane, liberal and
affable to them.

SECT. II. Of his Virtues.
Now it remains that we speak of the Virtues wherewith our Courtier should be
qualified, for there is nothing which allures more the Affections of Men. We
love those in some respects, says Tully, for their virtue, whom we have never
so much as seen; Who does not hate baseness, avarice, and cruelty? For there is
no man so flagitious, who would not desire to have come to what he has obtained
by wickedness, without a Crime; for the baseness of the guilt does so much
affect those who are addicted to vice, that they are hateful to themselves, and
do carry their punishment in their own Conscience. And although all the virtues
should allure us, and make us love those whom we see endued therewith: yet some
are more becoming, according to the several qualities and conditions of Men. As
for example, magnificence becomes a Prince, but not a Plebeian.

Subsect. 1. Of his Fortitude.
First Fortitude is required in our Courtier, that if it be necessary he may
with an undaunted mind offer himself to dangers for his Prince, his Country and
himself. For as the Palm Tree does not bow down when any weight hangs thereon,
but of it is own accord raises it self up against its burden; so the more a
gallant spirit is oppressed with business or the assaults of Fortune, the more
does he remain crected and undaunted, as Pliny prudently observes. Let not our
Courtier fear too much what can befall him; let him suffer unfortunate accidents
patiently, and let him not do any thing with a timorous and faint heart.

Subsect. 2. Of his Temperance.
But pleasure is the mother of all evil, by whose flatteries what is good by
nature is corrupted: Hence Tully no less truly than clogantly, Who are led away
with pleasures, says he, and give themselves to the allurements of vices and
dishonest desires, let not such endeavor to attain to honors, nor meddle with
the Commonwealth; let brave spirits suffer pains for their Country, and let
them enjoy their lazy idleness. Therefore it is absolutely necessary that our
Courtier be temperate. Temperance, says Seneca, commands over pleasures, etc.
Xenophanes said, that nothing bad could proceed from that man, who had studied
and embraced Temperance. No voluptuous pleasures deceive a temperate man; he
keeps his Hands, Eyes, and Heart free from what does not concern him; is not
ensnared with the pleasures of vice; lives sparingly, continently, strictly,
and soberly. Moreover this virtue is the Mother of good health; as on the
contrary intemperance is the cause of sickness and death. Two things ( says
Cornificius to Herennius) moves men most to wickedness, Luxury and Avarice.
Whores are fatal pleasures; fly from them if you be wise. Caius Gracchus upon
his return from Sardinia told the Romans, that he had so lived in the
Province, that no man could say he had taken a Farthing in Gifts or Bribes; or
that any Whore had entered his House for two years time he had been there. I
shall only add the words of Seneca concerning Ebriety. It does include and
detect every vice, it removes all shame which curbs bad designs; when too much
Wine intoxicates the brain, what ever evil did formerly lurk bursts then out:
then the Whore-Master does not wait for a private room, but grants to his lust
whatever it desires; then the impudent does profess and publish his faults,
then the petulant does contain neither Tongue, nor Hands: Pride grows in the
insolent, and cruelty in the fierce, etc. And a little after, But consider,
says he, what mischief this Vice has done, It has delivered fierce and Warlike
Nations to their Enemies; It has ruined invincible Armies, and destroyed
conquering Princes. Travels, Fights, Rivers falling from unknown places, Seas,
cold Winters, Dangers and Difficulties suffered Alexander to live. But excess
of drinking did destroy him.

CHAP. III. Whether an Ambassador may exceed the bounds of his Instructions.
BEcause Princes do often employ Courtiers in Embassies, I will only move one
question, which I think not altogether impertinent in this place, though it has
little coherence with our precedent discourse, and that is, Whether an
Ambassador may go beyond the limits of his Instructions, if any thing fall out
to the advantage of his Prince, whereof he was ignorant when he the Prince did
give him his Instructions. The cause of the doubt is, that he who goes beyond
the limits of his Commission, though he do it not either out of malice or
pride, seems to contemn his Master, or esteem too much of himself or his own
prudence, which is most odious. And then if the business does not succeed
prosperously, he must incur the blame of disobedience and indeprecable
punishment. But if it succeed, then is it esteemed the benefit of Fortune. In
the administration therefore of public Affairs, it was a crime to do contrary
to what was commanded, though done with Virtue, Valor, and Success. Which
Manlius Torquatus did teach by a sad Example Lib. 8.
, but profitable to Youth in following Ages. I shall only add another of
Crassus Mutianus, who in the Siege of a certain Town, standing in need of a
strong Beam to his battering Ram, did write to an Architect to send him the
bigger of two Masts which he had seen by him; who considering the thing, did
send the lesser, as more fit to make that instrument of War, contrary to what
was commanded him. Incontinently Crassus sends for the man, and having heard
his Reasons, commanded him to be whipped to death: a severe command will some
say, for the Artist thought he had done the best, by the Precepts of Art. I
would grant that, if Crassus had asked Counsel and not Obedience. The Office of
him who commands is corrupted and dissolved, says Agellius, if any answer to
what he is commanded with unrequired Counsel, and not with due obedience. From
which it may be concluded that nothing ought to be done or said but what was
commanded by the Prince. But I think that this Question should be decided thus:
Either he has time to advertise his Prince of any new emergent business, and
may expect other Instructions; or the thing it self can upon no account be
deferred. In the former cases I doubt not but the Prince Octavius Magius.
should be informed thereof. But if the business admit not of that delay, it is
better to adhere to his instructions. It can hardly be expressed how much
disobedience displeases Princes. But if the matter be of great consequence;
the hurt which may proceed from thence must be considered diligently, and care
must be had that he be not deceived in his opinion, and then that course must
be taken which tends to the manifest profit and honor of his Prince, the
causes whereof must be presently signified to him by Letters. But if the profit
be dubious, he must not do any thing easily beyond his Commission; lest he
endanger his fame and reputation, if any thing fall out unfortunately. For
Princes use to observe, not the Actions, but the Events thereof.

The end of the second Part.
OF MARTIAL PROWESS AND LEARNING.
PART III.
The INTRODUCTION.
MAny Men are persuaded that the ancient Writers have treated so gravely and
accurately of every thing belonging to human life, that there is no subject
almost left to after-ages, (though perhaps no less learned) wherein to exercise
their Wit, Parts, and Learning; concluding it most necessary to admire,
believe, and rest in Antiquity. Yet, as the honor of doing valiantly is no
robbery of the Hero's of ancient times, but their fortiude rather set as an
example to be imitated by brave Martial Spirits; so the Learning of the
Ancients should not be neglected, but should move Men qualified with
literature, not only to follow their footsteps, but animate us, if possible, to
exceed them for the benefit of our Age and Country. Now, though I (for my part)
come far short of the Ancients in either; yet I hope I shall be pardoned if I,
a little, in this third and last part of my discourse, endeavor what I think
necessary for public good.

Seeing therefore it is often inquired, whether Mars or Minerva is the more
profitable to Mankind, and whether Soldiers or Gown-men ought to have the
precedence: We shall in short declare what is probably and usually alleged on
both sides, for the satisfaction of those to whom the naked truth is more
acceptable than common opinion; whereas I hope I may, in some measure, answer
the expectation of the curious, as also confirm my self in the love of virtue.

When this visible World could not subsist without order, and human pravity
grew daily to be the most Potent, God, after the Flood, ordained politic
Government and Principalities, to contain the rebellious in their duty, and to
punish public Enemies endeavoring the destruction of Mankind; and then
through process of time Families were collected in one Society, Laws were
established, and Judges and Governors were appointed. And because God and
Nature did endue every man with a gift to exercise some peculiar Art, Faculty,
or Science; and that there is no man who does not stand in need of the help of
another, Arist. Polit. cap. 2. August. lib. 15. de civit. Dei.
diverse Degrees and Orders of Societies were afterward appointed, which being
sociably joined amongst themselves, at length made a City or Commonwealth, such
as are mentioned by Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, and Polybius. Yet it is most
certain, that Military Virtue and Learning did exceed all other Faculties,
invented either to sustain or adorn Civil Life.

CHAP. I. Whether Mars or Minerva are to be preferred.
BUt although a Commonwealth stand in need of both alike, and both ought
equally to be honored; yet it has come to pass, through Pride and Ambition,
(which two Vices sprung chiefly from the depravation of Humane Nature) that
Military men have not so much deserved, as usurped the first place, having
despised and contemned those, who applying themselves to Learning with no less
pains and danger, have done excellent service to their Country. On the
contrary, Learned men complain, that they are defrauded of their due honor,
and endeavor to recover the same: It is necessary therefore to search out the
Reasons of this Controversy.

We come now to the Arguments of both Parties: The first for the Military
Prerogative is thought to be Antiquity; for Nimrod, the Son of Chus, by his
Martial Prowess subdued Nations, and brought in the use of Arms.

An other very strong Argument is, that Empires are commanded by Arms, as with
a Bridle, and so transmitted to Posterity, of which we are furnished with
almost innumerable examples out of Histories, as well Sacred as Profane. But
the most remarkable is, the counsel of Pansa and Hircius, which Experience
proved. Those men did persuade Julius Caesar to govern by Arms the Empire of
Rome obtained by his Martial Virtue; when he by doing the contrary, was the
cause of his own destruction.

Thirdly, they say, by Arms our Country is defended; and when our Enemies are
overcome, and all danger removed, a general safety is procured. Examples are in
readiness to any read in History. On the contrary, Countries wanting Military
defense, are exposed to the Rapine of Enemies. Poor Hungaria gives an example
of this; and many think that the boldness of the Turk had not succeeded so far,
if Ladislaus the Successor of Mathias Corvinus in that Kingdom, had observed
more diligently Military Discipline.

Fourthly, It makes much for Soldiers, that the World admires Power, Warlike
Glory, and Triumphs; which because notorious, needs no probation.

Fifthly, The Art Military consists in the active part, when the knowledge of
Learning is only busied with mere Contemplation; therefore Martial Prowess is
the more honorable.

Sixthly and lastly, Brave Warlike actions make men immortal, and therefore
the more to be esteemed.

I answer to what was spoken in the first place of Antiquity, that it is very
much controverted, whether Learning had its Birth after the expedition of
Nimrod, who began to Reign in Babylon, or invented by the Aethiopians, as
Diodorus Siculus asserts in his fourth Book, or taught first by Moses,
according to Lib. 8. and 10.
Eusebius. For Josephus in his first Book of Antiquity says, that Letters were
in use before the Flood; and that the Sons of Seth, the Son of Adam, did write
in two Pillars, one of Stone, and the other of Brick, the nature of the
Heavens, and the motion of the Stars. Epigenes also makes mention, that there
were Observations of the Stars many years before the Flood; from which it
appears, that the use of Letters has been from the beginning, which are the
words of Pliny in the seventh Book of his Natural History. It might therefore
be, that Moses or Abraham, to whom Philo attributes the invention of Letters,
did restore those again which perished in the Flood, which were transferred
from the Syrians to the Phoenicians, and from them to the Graecians by Cadmus;
and then enriched and further propagated by Palamedes in the time of the Trojan
War. But to conclude, it is agreed upon, that time only does not introduce true
Pre-eminence, that Excellency which is requisite being wanting.

The second Argument is refuted thus, Arms only are not sufficient, nor are
great exploits done by them only. Moreover in time of War when Martial prowess
does act, barbarity reigns, Countries are laid waste, Justice neglected, and
horrid Cruelties committed. Italy of old, the Mistress of the Universe, did
give a most clear testimony of this, when it was delacerated so miserably by
those Northern People the Goths, Huns, Vandals, and Lombards. On the contrary,
in time of Peace Learning flourishes, and Justice is administered. Moreover
Affairs happen often, which require learning and prudence more than armed
force. Hence is that of Cicero in his first Book de Officiis, Cedant arma
togae, concedat laurea linguae, that is, Let Arms give place to the Gown, and
let the Laureat Soldier give place to the eloquent Orator. Neither when the
Sword rages can Princes want the industry of learned men, for in declaring,
managing, and ending the War, there is great need of such. Wherefore the
ancient Grecians did so join both Arts together, that thereby they not only
overcame the Persians, but also subdued other Warlike Nations. The Romans
famous for their Martial Valor were also no less learned: for (according to
the Comic Poet) its nothing to be brave abroad, unless men be wise at home.
And as reason and judgment are more excellent than the strength of the body, or
boldness in fight: So a Scholar is more to be honored than a Soldier. John
Galeass Duke of Millan, being an Enemy of the Florentines, used to say, That he
received more hurt by the Letters of Collutius Pierius, than by a thousand
armed Soldiers: To confirm which, we shall bring in that saying of the most
wise Cato in his Oration against Catoline; Non solis armis Respublica Romana
crevit, sedalia fuere qua illos magnos fecere, domi industria, foris justum
imperium, animus in consulendo liber, neque delicto neque libidini obnoxious.
The Roman Commonwealth did not increase by Arms only, but there were other
things which made it great; industry at home, a just command abroad, freedom in
Consultations, obnoxious to neither Crimes nor unlawful desires. Florus says,
That Empires were obtained by strength, but preserved by equity and justice.
Wise Antiquity made use of the Fiction of Pallas, whom they made the Praeses of
War and Learning.

Thirdly, It was argued for Military Virtue, that our Country was defended by
Arms. We grant this partly, but yet not by Arms only, as appears from what is
already spoken. For if defense (according to the ancient Military Law) is
better than offense, it certainly consists more in counsel and prudence, than
in fighting. It has been the destruction of many, and of their Country also, to
trust to the hazard of a Battle. Again, Arms are more easily taken up, than
laid down; therefore its most uncertain to put confidence in Arms only.

Fourthly, it was argued for martial prowess, that Warlike Glory is in greater
admiration than Learning. To which I answer, that whereas Kings and Princes do
honor the one more than the other, that is occasioned through Ambition, or
greedy desire of command: neither can Glory purchased by Arms be of long
continuance without Prudence and Learning; for it is the opinion of the
judicious, that military discipline, (from whence Warlike Glory does flow as
from its Fountain) did take its original from Homer. That learned man Alianus
did teach the Emperor Adrian an excellent military order of drawing up of
Soldiers, in equal proportions and just distances. The Macedonian Phalanx
(which Alexander the great made use of with so much success and glory) is
thought to have proceeded from one verse of Homer. Johannes Bodinus in method.
hist. makes mention, that Selimus causing Caesar's Commentaries to be translated
into his own natural Language, was so expert in his manner of warfare, that in
a short time he joined a great part of Africa and Asia the less to the Empire
of his Predecessors. Valerius Maximus makes mention that Lucius Paulus had not
routed the Persians, Lib. 6.
if Gallus Sulpitius the Philosopher, had not removed that fear in the Roman
Camp, proceeding from a sudden Eclipse of the Moon, by discoursing elegantly of
the nature of the Heavens, and the cause of that change.

The answer to the fifth Argument is easy. For we speak not of that Learning
which consists merely in the Idea's of the mind, or in fantastic Aristotelian
notions, but of such as joins knowledge and practice together, which will not
always be kept in obscurity, but will shine at length, to the good of the
Republic, Agesilaus King of the Lacedaemonians said (when it was debated
whether Justice or Fortitude had the precedence) that there was no need of
Fortitude, if all men would adhere to Justice. Baldus affirmed, that Common
wealth stood more in need of Gown-men, than Soldiers, because times of peace
are of longer continuance than those of War.

The true glory of Ancient Princes chiefly consisted in the honor, they paid
to Learning and learned men, and in that they used their Council and Assistance
in governing their Kingdoms. For as in Diseases of the Body one skiful
Physician is better than a thousand Mountebanks; so when the whole Commonwealth
is affected, one learned Gown-man is worth a numerous Army. Lampridius says,
that the good Emperor Aurelius, and the brave Severus, did always converse
familiary with prudent and learned men, and in civil Affairs did use the
Council of learned men only; but in any military business (besides old
Officers) they consulted also the learned. Many Kings at the point of Death
have recommended their Children and Successors to learned men's tuition, calling
them not only their Friends and Fathers, but also their best Treasure. On the
contrary vicious Princes have vilipended learned Men, and esteemed it more
laudable to extol toll those, who were most agreeable to their pernicious
inclinations, whose service they could use in the perpetration of their crimes,
and oppression of their Subjects.

We are to answer now to the objection of the immortality of warlike Prowess;
thus we must be forced to confess, if we behold the perpetual memory of both,
that it is rather contained in Learning than in martial Prowess. To the former
we are indebted for the remembrance of what is either well or ill done, and so
without it the Art of Governing would be imperfect, and next to Oblivion. Who
would have known the Caesar's, (says Pliny the second, in his Epistle to
Cornelius Priscus) if Suetonius had not lived? Who would have known Scipio and
Pompey, so famous for their great triumphs, if Learned Men had not written in
their praise? And seeing the acts of fortitude in one Individual, are only
during the life of one Man, whatever is written for the benefit of the
Republic is continual, according to Vigetius, in his second Book de re
militari.

And, though amongst the Scythians, and other fierce and barbarous Nations,
Arms had the precedence; and that by an ancient Ethiopian Statute those were
made, Kings who exceeded others in the stature of Body; yet, on the contrary,
amongst the Gracians, Egyptians, Indians, and Persians (according to Bonsinus)
Wisdom and Learning were so much preferred, that they did choose Kings from the
Altars of their Gods, and Schools of Philosophers. For Learning infuseth into
Men the sense of a Divinity, informs their Manners, and conserves the
Commonwealth. The Lacedaemonians (by the Law of Lycurgus) did not give honors
to the rich and potent, but to those endued with Prudence and Virtue. And in
the Indian Kingdoms and Countries, found out by the Portuguesses, Learning is
in great esteem; for none there, without it, can obtain any Office, much less
the Osor. lib. 3. de gloria.
Principality. Homer the Father of Poets makes Pallas always a Friend to
Achilles and Ulysses, which he did because they were Men of reason, and good
Counsel. And in his 2. lib. Iliadum Agamemnon desires in his Army not ten
Ajaces, but Nestores. And the Wisdom of Aeneas is said to have been of more use
in the defense of Troy, than the valor and strength of Hector. The
Commonwealth of Venice seems to be of longer continuance than that of Rome,
not so much for her martial Valor, as politic Government.

SECT I. Showing the People incline either to Mars or Mercury, as their Prince
is inclined.
Thus considering what is already spoken, it will not be difficult to find out
what Profession is the better. But now Learned Men, to the shame of a Nation,
do vail to Soldiers, give them a tacit renunciation of their right, and
acquiesce in the vulgar Opinion, which is, for the most part, ever false.

I would allow indeed, that our Nobility and Gentry following the Wars for the
safety of their King and Country, should not be defrauded of their due honor,
so as Gown-men on the other side be not wronged, and vilipended; and I do think
that neither Party should permit the other to give their judgment in their own
proper cause, which I shall in this place forbear also to do, and only say,
That Men are stirred up to those Professions and Arts which are in greatest
esteem for the time; according to Plato in his 4th. Book de Republica. Nero
declaimed in the first year of his Reign, according to the Example of Pompey
the Great, and Augustus Caesar, and immediately there was such abundance of
Orators, and the Study of Eloquence so flourished, that many from low fortunes
were made Senators, Sueto. de clara Rheter.
and obtained great honors. In the Reign of Charles the fifth all his
Courtiers did learn the French Tongue, because the Emperor himself delighted
in it. So Aristotle truly said, that lib. 2. Polit. c. 9.
the inclinations of Princes were examples to his Subjects: because the Life of
a Prince is a perpetual Law or Decree concerning Manners, as Pliny does
elegantly show Trajan and Claudian, wittily in his admonition to Honorius.

Componitur Orbis,
Regis ad exemplum, nec sic inflectere sensus,
Humanos edicta valent, ut vita regentum,
Mobile mutatur semper cum Principe vulgus.
Men follow still the footsteps of their King,
Nor are Laws able humane minds to bring
Under command, so much as his life, why?
The Vulgar with the Prince does change always.
Count Palavicin is introduced in Castilion's Courtier, and alleging some
subtle reasons, does conclude that Arms had the precedence, yet he courteously
avoids the opinion of Petrus Bembus his Colloquutor. For this man does quote
Alexander the Great, who did not envy Achilles for the glory of his martial
fortitude, but that he had Homer for a publisher of his praises. The Author
also in his true Courtier (wherein he represents the Idea of a Prince) requires
Letters to go hand in hand as inseparable Companions. The Emperor Frederick
the third used to say; that he could in one hour make many Soldiers, but that
in his whole life he could never make a Politician. Caesar, says Heliodor, can
give Riches and Honors, but he cannot make an Orator.

SECT. II. Learning has by many been slighted, and by as many esteemed.
But Letters have had powerful Adversaries, and what is good pleases but few.
The Emperor Licinus called them a public plague. Valerianus was also a great
Enemy to learning. And it is said that Nero's Mother diverted him from the
study of Philosophy. Luis the eleventh King of France would not have his Son
Charles the eighth instructed in Letters and liberal Sciences. And the Father
of Eberhart, Count of Wittenberg, did upon his Deathbed bind his Counselors
by an Oath, that they should not permit his Son to learn the Latin Tongue.

How much more is the Judgment of Alexander the great, (though most desirous of
military glory) to be esteemed. For writing to his Master Aristotle, he told
him that it was his desire rather to excel in Knowledge, than in Arms. That
Myrrour of Princes, Alphonsus King of Arragon, did prudently affirm, that he
would rather lose his Kingdom, than be ignorant of that Learning with which he
was indu'd. The Emperor Leo, and his Son Constantine, desired nothing more
than to advance Learning: And their Successor to their Empire and Virtue, did
give admirable respect to Learned men, saying, that he had rather be famous by
his Learning, than by his Empire, as Baptista Egnatius relates in the Lives of
the Caesar's. Jovius in his Elogies of Martial Hero's, observes the saying of
Mathias King of Hungaria, that a King could not be famous in War, unless
fortified with Learning; he knew the manner of War-fare of every Age, and the
very Stratagems of the Ancients drawn out of Histories, seeing those
Experiments, which would be of great use in War, cannot be understood but by
long Experience, which could easily be comprehended by reading the examples of
Antiquity: Therefore many Princes in the managing of difficult Affairs, have
too late bewailed that they did not in their Youth apply themselves to
Learning: Insomuch that some in more mature years have not been ashamed to
learn the Latin Tongue, as did that Noble Elector of Saxony: For Learning is
the Nerves and Arteries of good Government, and the Ornament of Civil Life. For
the most part, it is despair or constraint makes a Soldier, which is thought to
be the last refuge of hope-despairing men. We see many accustomed to unhonest
actions go to the Wars, but few return with Honor or Riches. Finally, such is
for the most part the condition of Affairs, that more is lost than acquired in
War, wherein wholesome counsel seldom finds acceptance; nor is it tolerable to
err twice, and wherein (according to Julius Caesar) Fortune shows her
unconstancy most: But she has not so much power over Learned men, for where
ever they go, they carry all along with them, and even in Shipwreck they lose
not any thing, when Soldiers are in a perpetual fear of losing all.

SECT. III. Showing some Noble Souls to be tam Mart, quam Mercuria
But some men do argue, that there are many Soldiers, who with great honor
have joined Martial Prowess and Learning together; therefore that Learned men
only are to be Post-pon'd.

To which it is answered, that many have endeavored, but few obtained that
honor. For Nature (according to Plato) produces men regularly qualified for
one Art or Science only, and making have to two so different, she perfects
neither well: Amongst the Ancient Graecians, Pericles, Xenophon, and
Thucidides; amongst the Romans, Julius Caesar, Lucullus, and Cato, were eminent
in both. And Vellius Paterculus in his second Volume of the Roman Story, writes
after this manner of Drusus Claudius, who died in Germany, That it was
uncertain whether his Genius was more fit for Martial, than Civil Affairs. But
commonly, without perpetual exercise, to which the short life of Man can hardly
be sufficient, a perfect Soldier, i. e. a great Captain, and an excellent
Gown-man, able to govern the Helm of Affairs (for we speak as well of Knowledge
as of Experience) can hardly be found in one Individual. If any attain to this
Heroic Excellency, as Antonius Duprato, Great Chancellor to Francis the first
King of France, by whose Valor the Suetzers were overthrown in a great Battle,
or Mathaeus Cardinal of Sedun, who a little before o'recame the Army of Lewis
the Eleventh in Italy; or if any for the future shall be famous for both those
noble and glorious qualities, and thereby shall be useful to their Country, in
equity they ought to be ranked above the degree of either ordinary Captains, or
Gown-men. Perseus the Son of Jupiter having ended the War in Mauritania with
happy success, and obtained the Kingdom of the Argives, in the end erected a
public School in Helecon, and was himself famous for his Learning; for which
causes the Poets feign that he was placed amongst the Stars.

SECT. IV. The Decision of the Controversy.
Having refuted therefore that Objection, it seems to give the precedence to
Learning, because Soldiers are but the Executioners of Learned Gown men; and
therefore the Law says, that Soldiers ought to be Defenders, not Lords and
Masters.

Now though it is not our intention to determine positively in so difficult a
matter, yet we will conclude by a threefold distinction, for thereby are
contrarieties oft-times accorded. If I found a Guide, says Socrates, who knew
how to distinguish aright, I would follow his footsteps, as those of some Deity.

The first distinction is, That men must regard the Custom of the place, and
accordingly either Soldiers or Learned men are to be preferred: For Custom and
Use is of no contemptible Authority, especially if it be continued with public
consent.

The other distinction is drawn from the time; for sometimes Learned men,
sometimes Soldiers are in the greater esteem. That Vulgar saying does agree to
this, Distingue tempora, and quadrabit Scriptura.

Thirdly, Acts are diligently to be considered; for a Gown-man in any act
agreeing to his Calling, is without doubt to be preferred; as on the contrary,
a Soldier in Military actions has the precedence. Isocrates writing to the
Lords of Mytilene, advises them to give the next honor to themselves to
Learned men.

But this notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, but that Military Dignity is of
a large extent; for it comprehends Knights, Barons, Earls, Marquesses, Dukes,
and the very Emperor or King himself, whereby a certain rule for this
Pre-eminency can the less be given, for it varies daily, according to age,
office, or employment, favor, dignity, time, place, act, custom, will,
pleasure and inclination, which nevertheless ought not to be prejudicial to
Gown-men, and that for the public good, in whose favor Degrees and Orders
were introduced. In this case then men must have recourse to Custom, and the
before-named distinctions.

CHAP. II. Admonition to such as incline either to Learning, or Arms.
SEeing therefore due honor is given to virtue, which we will distinguish into
military and civil, ingenious youth is to be admonished, that the fewer attain
to this double dignity, the more earnestly they may endeavor the same, and
being of noble Parents they may make themselves famous by following their
footsteps in virtue; and in what Families military glory has been resplendent,
they may imitate their Ancestors, not neglecting Literature, whereby Men are
rendered more capable of performing great Enterprises. Let those who apply
themselves to Learning through their innate inclination, know that a large
Field of Glory is Patent to them, unless leaving their study they be drawn to
vice, or to do any thing against their Vocation. For there cannot be an equal
condition of all Men in this Life, nor can this civil Society consist without
distinction of Persons and Qualities, that some may command, others obey. And
seeing the Office of Magistracy is divided into Laws divine and humane,
consisting morally in the defense of the innocent, and punishment of the
wicked, the Commonwealth cannot well want either order.

SECT. I. What true Nobility is, by way of Digression.
But it will not (I hope) be altogether impertinent in this place to make a
short Digression concerning true Nobility, which I shall touch in few words.

First therefore, where the excellency of Virtue is absent, the reward thereof,
i. e. the honor of Nobility, is due to no Man, and so the cause ceasing, the
effect also ceases.

Secondly, the inveterate Custom of making Men of good Birth, and void of
Virtue noble, seems unreasonable; therefore it is either absolutely to be
cancelled, or reduced to the square of Equity.

Thirdly, Riches ought not to come into consideration, for they are things
separated from Nobility; and in respect thereof Merchants or Mechanics
abounding in Riches, yea base Fellows incapable of Dignities may be called
Noble, because Riches are fluent and mutable, and Virtue immovable and
permanent. There was no entry to the Temple of Honor at Rome but through that
of Virtue, thereby signifying that there was no true Honor without Virtue.

Fourthly, if Men consider Power of it self, it cannot make true Nobility, yet
the common error has taken such deep root, that it can hardly be eradicated.
But every Man is more to be esteemed for what he has acquired by his own
virtue, than of what is left him by his Ancestors.

Ovid. 13. Meta. Nam genus and proavos and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ca nostra voco.
Our birth, and what does not from us proceed,
Can with small reason be called ours indeed.
The Vulgar does abuse the name of true Nobility, and judges according to the
objects; when notwithstanding true Nobility consists not in what is only
external, as Antiquity, Riches, great Possessions, and Dignities, but requires
an interior perfection. Yet we see unworthy men honored, and he is for the
most part of less esteem who is endued with wisdom and learning, if poor, than
a rich person with an empty head. I would not what is said to be otherways
understood, than that the presumption of high birth should so long have place,
as men nobly born show themselves worthy of the honor they by their birth
assume, and then its just to use them with all honor and respect.

But (according to Mathaeus de afflictis) the first species of Nobility flows
from divine wisdom; The second from true Virtue; The third from dignity and
secular Power; The fourth from his Lands and Possessions which he holds
immediately of his Prince; The fifth from Military Orders or Degrees. I speak
of such who have Commissions from the King or Commonwealth; for to be a
private Soldier, is rather a slavery than an honor. The sixth is from the
Antiquity of Noble Progenitors, which if joined with virtue (according to
Baldus) makes true Nobility, who calls it generosity adorned with magnanimity.
The seventh species proceeds from their Office or Calling. I shall say no more,
but refer the curious to that famous Treatise of Andreas Tiraquillus concerning
this subject.

SECT. II. Of the tragical fates of many brave men, both Statesmen and Martial.
NOW (as we hinted before) Civil Government consists in Gown-men and Soldiers;
for as humane health consists in the harmony of the body and soul, and as the
heart and brain are refreshed with sweet Odours and Ointments, and as humane
actions are better performed by the right disposition of the mind; so in the
prudent conjunction of those two noble Qualifications does the healthful
temperature of the Politic Body consist. Justice and Fortitude are famous
Virtues, and Augustus Casar is much commended by Suetonius for both. If
Learning for some contrary Custom is not so much esteemed as Martial Prowess,
yet is it necessary in a well-governed Commonwealth, that they walk hand in
hand. I am not able to extort the Sword from the Soldier, or willing to extol
the Learned to the others prejudice: for the one is joined with dangers, the
other with pains and watchings. Moreover for many and just causes I am to
acquiesce in the opinion of others, lest in the decision of so difficult a
Question, I incur the hatred and disdain of the more learned and judicious.

First therefore, I observe, that both were ordained by God, and both necessary
to the Commonwealth. The greatest defense of the Republic (says the Lawyer)
proceeds from Martial Prowess and Justice. Both have a lawful Function, because
our Savior at his coming did not abrogate Civil Polity, as Julian the
Apostate and his impious Parasites blasphemously cried out. Christ approves of
warfare in the Centurion: Nature teaches this in irrational Creatures. The Bees
bred only to the use of mankind, have their King, their Camps, their Officers,
they march out to Battle, draw together, fight abroad, toil and labor at home;
they reward industry, and punish idleness. So War is approved by the Law of
Nations, provided it be just, and undertaken by the command of the Prince or
Commonwealth. So learned men do exercise a no less lawful and beautiful
Function, for without such the world would be a Chaos of confusion.

Secondly, Soldiers ought to be contented with their pay, and ought not to
wrong or oppress any. So a Minister of State should be contented with his
Salary, and not to extend his hands to iniquity.

Thirdly, An excellent Soldier and Scholar are in great esteem, both at home
and abroad, and obtain perpetual honor. Pirates desired to see Scipio the
African, when he lived in his eclipsed glory at Linternum. And certain Nobles
came from the remotest parts of Spain, not to see Rome the most glorious City
of the Universe, but Livius famous for his Eloquence. And such is the sweetness
of Learning, that it moves the affections of the weaker Sex. Olympia Fulvia of
Ferrara, a most ingenious Woman, in those latter times lived and dyed in
Germany, whose Orations and learned Works are yet extant. After the same
manner, many Virago's endued with masculine courage, have affected and obtained
the honor of warlike fortitude. The Roman Virgin Clelia, being one of the
Pledges given to King Porsenna, in the nightime escaped her Guards, took
Horse, and by her speedy passing the River, not only freed her City of a
dangerous siege, but of all fear.

Thirdly we read that many Warlike Hero's, and Eminent Gown-men, who at home
and abroad have deserved well of their Country, have fallen from the height of
Honor into great Calamities. Therefore we may exclaim with Lucan, in his First
Book of the Civil War 'twixt Caesar and Pompey.

Invida fatorum series summisque negatum,
Stare diu, nimioque graves sub pondere lapsus.
Fates envious course continuance does deny,
To mighty Men, who greatest falls do try.
What is more famous than the exile of Scipio Valor. Max. lib. 5. cap. 3.
and Themistocles? Franciscus Bussonus General of the Venetian Army, a Man
Valiant and active against Philip Duke of Millain, after his taking of Verona
and Brixia, was accused of perfidious delay, brought to Venice in the course of
his Actions, and there Petrus Just. l. 7. hist. Venetae.
beheaded. Conradine, the Nephew of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, for the
loss of a Battle at the instigation of the Pope, and the Archduke of Austria,
had his Head struck off in the Marketplace of the City of Naples. Socrates the
wisest of Greece, by the testimony of the Oracle, dyed a Val. Max. lib. 7. cap.
2.
violent death. Cicero the Fountain of Roman Eloquence, was first banished
Plut. in vita Ciceron.
and then beheaded. William Hugonet, Chancellor to Charles Duke of Burgundy,
after the death of his Prince at Nancy, was beheaded by the People of Gaunt.
That famous Lawyer Alpianus was banished by Heliogabolus. Bellisarius and
Narses, two famous and glorious Captains, after they had obtained great and
honorable Victories, were thrust from their commands, and reduced to misery by
the Emperor Justinian. Gonsalvo, having obtained the name of great Captain by
the consent of all Christendom, after he had confirmed the Kingdom of Naples to
his Master, Jovius in his life.
by his singular Virtue and Constancy, was required to give up his Accounts,
and thereby brought in disgrace. I shall forbear to produce examples of latter
Favorites, as also of those who have suffered for the glory of God and good of
their Country, (because I do not intend here a Martyrology.) If we would but
look into the Courts of Princes even of latter times, what a Multitude of evils
and misfortunes would offer themselves? and how many examples of the Courts
inconstancy could we instance.

Subsect. 1. Showing the causes of their so sad fate.
I judge the causes thereof to be, either those in great favor with Kings and
Princes do put too much confidence therein, or oppressed with envy (which is
the inseparable Concomitant of Virtue and Felicity) they fall into disgrace; or
Fortune (according to her custom) at length deserts Men loaded with riches and
honors; or their Spirits fail them being oppressed with the weight of affairs.
Injustice and desire of private gain have also been the ruin of many. Hence
you may see Men blinded with avarice and ambition run beyond the limits of
their duty, and many (according to Polybius) more fit to innovate than manage
affairs. To which may be added the change of the Prince his inclination, which
appears after Favorites have acquired great riches and dignities. For
(according to Martial,) Immodicis brevis est aetas and rara senectus.

Next the divulging of the Prince's secrets: And finally the anger and
suspicion of Princes: for such give themselves up to their own humors, and
whilst they endeavor to confirm their authority, they err sometimes in the
excess of punishing.

These are the ordinary causes of the ruin of many brave Men. There are also
other Theological reasons. First, the godly Man is not innocent before God,
it is needful for all Men to be subject to afflictions, that therein their
divine virtues may be exercised. Before I was afflicted I went astray, says the
Psalmist, and trouble gives understanding, says Esaias. Secondly, that it may
appear, that all things are not ruled by human Counsels, because it is written,
I will destroy the wisdom of the wise.

The more therefore with the Apostle to Timothy is the safety of Princes to be
recommended to God, that they may do what is good and just in his eyes, lest
afterward Vices turn into Manners, where at length (according to Seneca) there
is no redress. Let their Ministers, who are entrusted with Offices either
military or civil, endeavor to follow the Dictates of Virtue, hoping felicity
in their actions from God to whom they must give an account. Whereby it will
come to pass that they shall have comfort in whatsoever calamity, and shall not
suffer any thing, but what will be conducing to the good of their Souls. But
lest we involve our selves in this Labyrinth beyond our intention, let us refer
the whole matter to the secret, yet just judgment of God.

CHAP. III. Showing that Arms and Learning go hand in hand together.
IT follows therefore that Letters and Arms should not only accord, but be
inseparably conjoined, besides the Reasons abovementioned, because Martial
Prowess does furnish matter to Learning. Hence was Hercules called Musagetes,
and was adored in a Temple dedicated to himself, and the Muses; as on the
contrary Learned men do Eternize the Memory of virtuous actions, that they may
be also Immortal to Posterity. Suetonius Tranquillus writ a Book of such as
were famous in the Roman Commonwealth, either for their warlike actions, or
civil policy. Saint Jerome following his Example, writ a Book of Holy Men,
famous in the Church of God. And in latter times, Paulus Jovius did honor,
with splendid Elogies, men famous either for their Martial Prowess, or their
refined and learned Wits.

The dangerous Contentions for Honor ought to be shunned, and the same given
to Virtue, whose proper reward it is, and that without any envy, whereby whole
Commonwealths have perished, and of which History furnishes us with many
famous Examples. Who contend for Honor in a Commonwealth (says Plato) are like
Mariners striving in a Tempest who should be Pilot, which cannot be without the
evident danger of all. It Is the part therefore of wise men to hate Emulations,
and the greedy desire of Vainglory, and to follow Honor, but not ambitiously
to covet the same. Ambition was prohibited of old at Cicero de Orato.
Rome, by the severest Laws. If all the induements of Body and Mind, and all
External Dignities were considered, we would find that they were not sufficient
to the tranquillity of Humane Life; we should augment therefore the care of
Piety, and lessen the solicitude of perishing things, and especially that
specious trouble which we see most strictly joined with acquired Power. It is
written, Do all to the Glory of God; this is the end which all Christians
should propose to themselves; the rest do not only perish with us, but in the
midst of our course they withdraw themselves, and vanish. The Government of men
is obnoxious to diverse Changes, therefore it stands in need of men fitted for
all times, as diverse Remedies are to be used according to the nature of men's
Diseases: Sometimes Arms, sometimes Learning is required, and neither can
subsist without the other. It is absolutely necessary, that Justice be attended
with Arms; and it is certain, that God is the Fountain of Justice, and that the
highest and lowest Vocations are governed by him: Therefore we should pray for
Concord, Humility, and Mutual Love.

The Conclusion.
NOw at the close, Ingenuous Youth should be admonished, that as the Civil
Perfection of Man consists in Military and Doctoral Dignities; and as in this
Politic Government diverse Offices are required, they would study those two
Noble Arts without pride, or mutual contempt. And let those who are to be
Soldiers consider, that the Defenders of their Country shall have Glory on
Earth, and Felicity in Heaven. But where there is a necessity of War, let it be
undertaken, that nothing seem to be required but Peace; whereby (according to
Hist. Roman. lib. 2.
Velleius) the Laws and Justice flourish: For a certain Honorable Peace is far
better than an uncertain event of War: All the events of Warare uncertain, says
Cicero. Moreover, although what we know is far less than what we are ignorant
of, for (according to the Apostle) in this life we know but in part: Young men
ought to learn what is necessary to the just Government of the Commonwealth,
whereunto Earthly Riches and Honors should not invite them so much, as that
Celestial Remuneration, of which the Followers of true Virtue are certain.
Finally, let them contain themselves within the limits of their Vocation,
neither let them (allured with the desire of Superiority, which is always
joined with present danger) attempt any thing beyond their ability.

O happy England! if young Men of noble Birth and opulent fortunes, would not
lose their youthful years in riot, voluptuous pleasures, and all sorts of
sensuality; but would instruct and adorn their minds with virtuous Sciences. By
so doing they should not only learn to live well themselves, but also to rule
others aright; they should the better acquire political knowledge, and
instructed with virtuous Precepts of Philosophy should contain themselves
within the limits of their duty, be more fit for the Government of the
Commonwealth either in Peace or War, and extend and augment the splendor of
their Birth by their laudable actions. Those are the Pillars and Supporters of
solid Honor and Glory, by those Wings we mount to Heaven, and by those
watchings and pains we acquire eternal Fame and Glory.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. line 30. for Counselors, read Councellor. P. 13. l. 4. after be, r.
so. p. 16. l. 18. for Treasures r. in the Treasury. l. 27. r. that, after
Liberality. p. 77. l. 24. dele to be. p. 92. l. 21. for Mercuris r. Mercurio.


