THE TRIUMPH OF FAITH OVER DEATH, Or, The Just Man's Memorial: Comprised in a
Panegyric and Sermon, at the Funeral of the Religious, most Learned Dr.
COMBAR, late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge, and Deane of Carlisle

Delivered in Trinity College Chapel, By R.B.B.D. the 29. of March, 1653.

(...)
Spiritus Sanctus non incolit nisi virum fortem.
(...). Chry. 1 COR. 15.55. O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy
Victory? LONDON, Printed by J.G. for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane, 1654.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JEROME, Earl of PORTLAND, etc.
Right Honorable,
IT is an high prerogative of nature, and privilege of Grace, when Good is
annexed to Greatness: And it is better to be without this than not to be great
in goodness. But when both meet in one, they make a glorious, and an happy
conjunction, commanding by a secret power both imitation and honor: Men
usually honor those that are great, whose natures lead them to imitate the
Good.

My honored Lord, though I am a stranger to your Person, yet not so to your
fame; and though you may justly wonder at my hardy attempt in fronting this
Treatise with your noble Name, yet in this forward act I want not a President,
even the learned Austine, Lib. 4. c. 14. Quem non noveram facit, sed amaveram
bominem ex Doctrinae fam^, etc.
who in his Confessions makes an acknowledgement to God of a piece of boldness
in dedicating a Book to a great Orator of Rome, by Name Icherius, whose face
he had never seen. However, if this be objected as a crime, I cannot but
promise to my self your Lordships pardon, especially when your Goodness shall
reflect upon the Spring of this hasty motion: It was the prevailing importunity
of the dearest friends of our late reverend Deane, which forced me to the
Press, and put me upon this bold Dedication, that so they might give to the
World a clear Express of their gratitude to your Lordship, for your high
favors to the most renowned Doctor now deceased, who was a Magazen of
Learning, and an exact Model of virtue, a Picture of Patience, and a Pattern
of Devotion.

It adds not a little to your Lordships honor, that you had relation to Him
as your Tutour, who ever had an high esteem of your noble Person, thus not
unknown to me, who know that men (not rancord with envy) usually love in others
what they see in themselves; and therefore He, whom Combar loved and honored,
must needs be rare and excellent.

My Lord, all that I humbly beg is this, that your Honor would grace Him now
dead with your Tuition, who living did adorn you with His in our Society;
which owes much to your Lordship in promoting Him to be Master of it, who was
it is happy Crown and Glory. In that promotion my self with many others had a
share; and as a Testimony of a thankful breast, I humbly crave your Honors
acceptance of this ensuing Work, which falls as short of the Deceased's merit,
as He outstripp'd the men of this proud Age in knowledge, and sweetness of
Spirit.

With it your Lordship has a tender of my most hearty Devotions; I shall ever
supplicat the Almighty, that when you have finished your Course with the glory
of those two Graces, which are often joynd in the Rev. 2.19. 13.10. Heb. 6.12.
Scripture, and like Eros and Anteros in the Fable live and die together, I
mean Faith and Patience, you may inherit a blessing in the Land of Promise,
the (...). Chrysostom.
Haven of everlasting rest and happiness: This is the unfeigned wish of

Your Honors devoted Servant, R. Boreman.
Jan. 9. 1654.
EPITAPHIVM Reverendissimi, Doctissimique Domi. Doris. Combar, etc. qui devotam
Deo animam reddidit 28. Feb. 1653. postquam annos 78. (plus minus) cum
celebritate nominis compleverat.
COs priscae pietatis atque lima,
Sincerae, Solidae, Piae, sed acre
Novae hujus Logodaedalae, Sonorae,
Fucatae, meretriciae Flagellum:
Atlas Religionis Orthodoxae,
Tibicen fidei, Columna very,
Falsi Malleus, haeresin retundens,
Retundens quoque Schisma Hypocritarum.
Doctrinae jubar, eruditionis
Fundus, Fax Criticae, politiorum
Fons linguarum, idiomatumque nidus,
Cunctas tam been continens loquelas,
Loquelas veteres and eruditas,
Eos quotquot habet, quot Occidensque;
Nido scilicet (add quas ad unguem,
Modernas tenuit) cubabat isto
Chaldaeus, Syrus, Aethiops, Arabsque,
Hebraeus, Samarita, Persa, Coptus.
Flumen nectaris, ingeni Scatebra,
Thesauri sed and Ausoni, Pelasgi
Penus, Flos Latialis, Vmbra Tulli,
Athenae merae, and Attici Leporis
Favus, mellis Hymettii alveare,
Torrens eloquii, Medulla Suadae,
Dicendi Veneresque, Gratiaeque,
Sagax arbiter elegantiarum,
Legendi sine fine dipsas atrox,
Librorum helluo, litterarum abyssus:
Aevi surculus aurei renascens,
Morum stella nitens in his tenebris,
Exemplar probitatis, atque gemma
In hoc stercore temporum refulgens,
Candor, Simplicitasque, Comitasque,
Et mista gravitas suavitate,
Frons jucunda, decor verendus oris,
Iecur fell carens, cor absque fuco,
Ingens pectoris integri serenum,
Musarum meliorum amor, voluptas,
Et gentis decus and dolor togatae,
Hoc uno partiter (facesse livor)
Quo, Combare, jaces, jacent Sepulchro.
J. Duport Gr. Linguae Professor. R.

Joannis Morini Blesensis de reverendissimo decano, Doctore Combar, Testimonium.
ALius praeterea codex (nempe Samaritanus) celebratur, and dicitur esse
Archiepiscopi Armachani, and ab eo e Palaestina in Hyberniam exportatus, qui
Leydensibus Academicis nonnullo tempore fuit commodatus. Istum codicem vir
clarissimus and Doctissimus Thomas Combarus Anglus, quem honoris and officii
reddendi causa nomino, cum textu Judaico verbum e verbo, imo literam cum litera
maxima diligentia, and indefesso labor comparavit, differentiasque omnes juxta
capitum and versuum ordinem digestas ad me misit humanissime and officiosissime.

Excerpt. e Morin. Animadvers. in Censuram Exercitationum, p. 419. Errata in
concione corrigenda.
PAge 16. Line 29. redundant linguis. p. 17. l. 21. for but read heat. p. 19.
l. 8. r. (...).

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF THE Reverend and Learned Religious, Dr. COMBAR.
WE never read of any that were blamed for drawing too much Water out of the
well of Life: The saying of a learned Divine: Dr. F.
Neither can we possibly give too much honor to the Lord of glory and King of
Saints, though we should put our inventions upon the Rack, and scrue up our
expressions to the highest; There are many ways, and diverse means, whereby
God may be glorified by us, but none more effectual, and powerful to the
advancement of his glory then by acknowledging with due Praises, the many
eminent virtues which as so many Rivelets, stream into the Souls of the
Saints from the everlasting Spring of Divine Grace. They glorified God in me,
Gal. 1.24.
So S. Paul of himself, Gal. 1. who though he styled himself out of the depth
of humility the chiefest of sinners, and the least of Saints, 1 Timothy 1.15.
yet in Gods esteem he was as great as the greatest of the latter, and less
then the least of the former.

Now to the glory of God, which is the aim of my weak endeavors, to the
praise of his eternal goodness, which should be the object of yours, I shall
by his blessing and divine assistance discharge a duty, which is patterned to
us by the practice of Heathens, Jews and Christians in all ages; It is to
present to the view of your Meditations one of the fairest Flowers in the
Garden of Gods Church, one of the highest Stars in the lower Firmament; whilst
I embalme the memory of the late Reverend, most learned and pious Saint Doctor
Combar, (once Deane of Carlisle, and Master of Trinity College) with a just
Encomium and Praises due to his rare and transcendent perfections; In the doing
whereof I shall perform a double commendable work. First, a duty of civility
and Christianity to the dead. Secondly, a duty of Piety to the living, whilst
we stir up your devotions to an imitation of the virtues which shined in the
life of the deceased, (...). To speak in the language of the Learned
Nazianzen, whose tongue (the tongue that sored so high in the praise of
Athanasius and St. Basil) would suite well with this great work better than
mine: who when I have said what I can, being not able to speak enough, may
incur that censure of going about or endeavoring to fit a Dwarfs shoe to a
Giants foot.

But to hold your expectation no longer in suspense, I shall lay the foundation
of this structure in his Birth and Education, and then lay upon it the weight
of an holy Life and happy death. This done, refer all to your Godly imitation,
and so commend you to God.

First, for his Birth: We have here a Righteous Branch sprung from a righteous
Stock, his Father a Gentleman of an ancient extraction, as appears by a large
Testimony under the hand of Clurentiaulx the King of Arms, Anno 1571. In the
13. year of the Renouned Queen Elizabeth; He lived at Shermanbury in Sussex,
a Southern moderate Climate, the nurse of many choice mild tempers; He was a
Counselor at Law, which he managed with that reputation for his justice and
equity, that for this, together with his great Hospitality, he was honored in
his generation, Ecclus 44.
and was one of the glories of his times. He dispersed abroad and gave to the
poor, by which means he found in blessings attending him and his, That
pauperum fundus est faecundissimus, that the seed of Alms, sown in the poor
man's field, Aug.
will be so watered with the dew of Gods Benediction, that it shall spring
upward even to Heaven for a reward, and bear fruit downwards, to bring down
a blessing upon ours here on Earth. The Generation of the righteous shall be
blessed: Psalm. 12, 2.
He was indeed blessed with a numerous issue, whereof this was the 12. All
like so many Arrows in the hand of a Giant, which the good Gentleman their
Father shot up to Heaven again, from whence they came, by devoting and giving
them up to God in a virtuous education to be his servants, which they were (as
I am informed) in a constant practice of Piety and Justice. (...). They were
all Gods servants; This whom we now commemorate, marked out to be his
Chaplain, to wear the Ephod with Samuel. This was the Jabez, 1 Chro. 4.9.
more honorable then his Brethren; This the Joseph, the youngest Son but one
(as Joseph was) This the (...) the fruitful bough, Genesis 49.22, 23. The
Covenanters.
even a fruitful bough by a Well, whose branches run over the wall: At whom
too the Berethites, the Archers shot, to their shame and his grief, but his
bow abode in strength, and his Arms were made strong by the hands of the
mighty God of Jacob. Although he were, as ye have heard, the youngest Son but
one by birth, yet he was the eldest in life and knowledge; He surpassed all,
survived all, by which means he had the blessing of the firstborn, no great
nor small inheritance, which fell unto him by descent from his first
progenitors.

Thus the rich jewel of his learning being set in Gold, shined with a greater
luster in the eyes of the Worlds minions; who either despise Learning, the prop
of Religion, and speak against it (which is the mark of a fool, or a profane
Julian) or look on a learned man oppressed, and obscured by poverty, as on a
Diamond in dung, as a Rose set in a Dunghill, they behold and look upon his
learning with pity and disdain; Truly said the Lyrick Poet, Pindarus.
(...): This was verified in our most knowing Deane, He was a star that
blazed in bounty to the poor at home, and to the foreiners from abroad, who
found his heart an Inn to harbor strangers; He was a star that flamed, even
before and after he was torn out of his Sphere, with a great luster and
glorious brightness.

He was borne 1575 on New years day, the day on which our Lord Christ was
circumcised. He was as it were sent by God into the World for a New years gift
to the Church, his Spouses benefit; His Life was an Epiphany, his Death not
without glory, agreeable to the glory of that day on which he was baptized.
This was on the day of Epiphany; in which the Magi were led to Christ by a
star; The 12. Child of his Father borne and baptized on two Holidays
dedicated by the Church and observed in all ages to the honor of Christ; This
juncture of time, This combination of days and actions did prefigure the
holiness of our deceased Saints person.

This glorious Star of grace and knowledge, who was both a Theopompus and an
Ephorus (one whose forward diligence needed a bridle, as there was need
sometimes of a Spur to his meekness.) He took his first rise for learning in
a public School at Horsham in Sussex, where he met with a Master that was
rather (...) then (...), no Orbilius, no Dionysius, no Tyrannus, but an
Isocrates, one of a gentle spirit, not like those now a days who make their
Scholars to hate the Muses, by presenting them in the shapes of Fiends and
Furies, but one who (as it seems) had (as Shoolmasters should do) made a
Grammar of his boys natures, and reduced them to general rules, and finding
this Deodate's disposition to be ingenious and industrious, He therefore
applied himself to his mild (yet agile) temper with all activity and
meekness, knowing that a frown to such a spirit would be as bad as a
correction, and a correction as bad as a gibbet. And in all his life under that
Master, he had but once a Taste of that bitter Cup which was to him as sharp
as death, so great was his industy attended with a rare and stupendous memory;
which Plato calls the Mother of the Muses, Thesaurus eloquentiae, so it is
termed by Rhodigin, Venture animae, so Austine, that which receives, contains
and digests all the Souls notions; It has if good and dextrous, two special
properties, facile percipere, and diu retinere, which were in our deceased
friend rarely excellent; The conjunction of two such Planets in his youth did
presage much good unto him, that he would be eminently (for learning) famous;
His learning was so great that as Seneca says of himself, Non ad usum modo
sufficeret sed ad miraculum procederet. He being able at eight years after the
first and second reading to repeat a great number of Verses; and to confirm
the truth of this we had many an instance in his old age, when he did often, to
the admiration of his hearers, produce what he had treasured up in his youth,
out of Poets, Historians, Orators and others, so readily with that quickness
that he plainly convinced Pliny of a mistake in this, when he says, speaking
of memory, ex omnibus animae partibus est maxim delicata and fragilis in quam
primum incurrit Senectus. His memory lasted even till death, when he, that
seldom or never forgate himself, did devoutly remember God, as hereafter
shall be showed: By the strength of this rare gift having stored his soul with
that knowledge, being furnished with those parts which fitted him for the
University; This slip of grace was planted in our Society, made famous by him,
as it uses to credit others. He was at the age of foureteen when he came
hither, where he was commended by the Wisdom of his friends to the Tuition of
a Gentleman then famed for his exemplary life, one Mr. Tichborne, under whose
care and council this Plant (being watered with Heavens blessings) shot up in
a short time to that perfection that he grew as fast and as high in admiration,
being furnished before he was Bachellour (besides his knowledge in the Arts and
Sciences) with a competent skill in the three Mother Languages, the only Key
to let a soul into the Treasury of the Holy Scriptures: Had you beheld his
course in this quadrennium of his studies, you would have seen an exact model
of a juvenis Academicus, not short of that which we find penned by Campian.

He shunned idleness as the common sewer that takes in all temptations, and
the poole that holds in all corruption: The Devils pillow, where he lies, and
his bed where he conceives and brings forth all kind of wickedness. He did as
S. Hierome reports of himself, he ever found something to do that the Devil
might never find him at leisure for his service: He begun his study with
supplication to the God of grace, and ended it with thanksgiving: and what is
written in the life of St. Bernard might well be said of him, Vt legeret
intelligendi, fecit cupiditas, ut intelligeret oration impetravit, ut
inepetraret quid nisi vitae sanctitas promeruit; Sic cupiat, sic oret, sic and
vivat qui se proficere desiderat. An eager desire of knowledge was a spur to
his great industry in reading, and by prayer he attained to an high degree of
knowledge and measure of understanding, which adorned with an holy life made
him renowned in his generation.

He surely put in practice what he used to repeat to others, (...), Had he
spent six hours of the day in dressing and combing, his soul had not been
polished with piety, or decked with the gems of learning; He well understood
(as he was of a most heavenly spirit) that what Chrysostom affirms is most
true, Chrysostom. in Genesin.
(...), ever went together being never asunder: when the body is pampered the
soul is commonly starved, when too much care of dressing that is used, the
soul is usually left naked; and when the casket is too much regarded, the
jewel is too much neglected, and the adding of too much beauty to the body,
breeds deformity in the Soul.

Being now by his great study and constant industry become, scientiae and
virtutis domicilium, one in whom much knowledge inhabited, and virtue it self
had taken up her lodging; Thus shining in the eye of the Society with a great
beginning, which was varnished with the hope of a greater ending, he was made
fellow by the famous Dr. Nevel, in an other great work a benefactour to our
College, in this a true founder, by his choice of so worthy a member, laying
(as it were) a sure foundation, on which was built a vast Fabric of learning,
which propagates by example, one Scholar begetting another, as one lights his
Candle at the Candle of his Neighbor.

He conceived that a Fellowship and ignorance (especially if debauched with
looseness, either in life or opinions) are asustats, as inconsistent as light
and darkness. That a Fellow of a College should not be like that fellow in
Lycophron, A Fellow of a College, what he ought to be.
by Name Nauplius, who hung out a false light to the deceived Graecians ruin,
who were thereby led to quicksands and fell upon Rocks, but like a
Standard Bearer in an Army, holding forth in the Banner of his person the
insignia of a painful life, joined with holiness and sobriety, after which
the younger sort may march in an exact conformity to His; who by this means
proves with safety and honor a Father, though a fellow, begetting (to use St.
Paul's phrase) by his example Sons to learning and Souls to piety. Thus did this
great Antesignanus in all kind of knowledge.

This Primipilus in sobriety and temperance, This Signifer in industry and
unwearied patience; when he was shut up in his study, he was looked upon being
much in the then Scholars thoughts for admiration: Seneca says, Et magnum est
quod a sapiente viro vel tacente proficias; when he was silent, he spoke
much, his good life was a large Comment upon the word, and a perpetual Sermon:
Oh let me rather so Preach then talk, or rather babble and do nothing: Bona
vita est perpetua oration. Thus he ever taught, even when he was out of the
Pulpit, to which he was no stranger, as is evident by his often visits of
Carlisle, and Worpesden in Surrey, where he discharged his duty, and satisfied
his conscience so often, as he could be dispensed with for absence from the
College; where I have often heard him teach with that meekness and gravity,
as that his very look was able to confute an Heresy. And when he was upon
another Text, and amongst many, upon that which I remember, He that sows
sparingly shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9.6. Me thought his silent gesture
composed even to a smiling sweetness, made another Sermon, and taught us this
lesson, Learn of me for I am humble and meek, etc. Oh how far dissonant to
this sweet soul is their genius, who by their roughness in the Pulpit teach
the people rudeness: His life was (...), Nazian.
a speaking though silent exhortation, so he says of Eleazar the chief among
the Macabees, as this brave man in his time among the Fellows; who honored him
for his Learning, but above all loved him for his humility, whereby he overcame
himself, as in knowledge he excelled others: indeed he was an other Moses, a
meek man, and a very Treasury of knowledge, both in the Greek and Latin
Fathers, together with the Schoolmen and Counsels, Church History and modern
Writers: Add to these his incomparable dexterity in the Eastern and Western
Languages, as Hebrew, Arabic, Coptick, Samaritane, Syriack, Caldee, Persian,
Greek and Latin, in which he was most excellent; likewise the French, Spanish
and Italian, which he understood and could speak. This provision he stored
himself with, partly at home here, and partly abroad in his travells.

For having perfumed the University with the sweet odor of his gifts and
graces, and filled all parts at home with the fame of his high perfections,
knowing likewise (what was it he did not know?) that one year well employed in
Travel by one of a mature judgment, affords a greater advancement in point of
useful and solid knowledge then three in any of our Universities, and that, as
running waters are the purest, so they that traverse the World up and down
have the cleerest understandings, being faithful ey-witnesses of those things,
which others receive in trust. He knowing this, asked leave of his Father and
of the society his Mother to go (as I may so speak) to nurse, i. e. to
travel, to unloade his soul abroad of those rare notions, wherewith he was
big at home, and to unite unto himself the scattered perfections of other
Nations; with this resolution he went guarded by Providence, and garnished with
a chaste gravity, together with a most sage prudence, into the Kingdom of
France, where he lived (and truly lived because without sin) three whole
years in the house of the Judicious, Learned, Religious late Molyn, a buckler
of the Protestant Faith, against Popish superstition; you may guess at a man
by the choice of his companion. And when every day and hour one is bettered by
Communication, judge you in many years how much will be added to that man's
perfection.

In that space he had many disputes (you must suppose) with the Jesuits, whom
he amazed by the strength, and subtilty of his arguments, being indeed in that
way of disputing excellent, another Chrysippus, in disputando pressus, concisus
and subactus, etc. And therefore was he employed at the command of our late
famous King, to dispute at St. Andrews in Scotland in public with the Divines
there, who did then much admire Him for his solid quickness, who was able to
confute them, as they have, since that, themselves by their homebred divisions
and disobedience.

Besides this he was isntrumental to the work of Grace in converting a Jew,
by Name (as I remember) Bardesius; and at length, having won glory to his
Nation by his vast knowledge and stoutnesse in the defense of our Religion, he
came home, returned from this Schole of experience, better and wiser than when
he first went forth. He carried over no vices, and brought back his virtues,
his Chastity, and Gravity, his Prudence, his Sobriety, leaving behind him the
Countries weeds to be possessed by the owners, that is, Levity and softness,
which never durst make the least approach to his settled and composed breast.

His Travel did not end in the Eyes or Tongue, This is most vain and
fruitless, but in the gain and increase of Wisdom, which did quit his labor
and cost; And being settled again in the College, He was looked upon as a
Jewel fit to hang at a Kings Ear; He was accordingly not long after made the
Kings Chaplain, and judged by his most discerning Prince a worthy Pilot to sit
at the Helm, and to steer our College by the compass of his Wisdom and
Justice, which he performed with that moderation and lenity, that had a
Pythagorian lived in those days, who had known the famous Doctor Still, he
would have maintained a (...), and asserted that the Soul of Dr. Still had
animated his quiet breast; And truly that Elogy, which our Records bestow upon
that Doctor, most fitly suits with ours, Se ferebat Patrem-familias providum,
(...), nec Collegio gravis fuit nec onerosus, etc.

He was a Father to the College as well as a Master, taking care that Factions
and Divisions did not go hand in hand with it is dividends, nor exceed the
Rents and Revenues of it: This he effected by suppressing of Parties, and not
fomenting discords, which often run out into contrary Opinions, and commonly
end in Schism and Heresy, the blot of Religion, and the bane of a Society: The
very name of Arminius and Socinus was then hateful to the learned Fellows.

His favor and choice in Elections flew at that height, that it could not be
reached with an eye-blinding bribe; Yet condescended so low, that the Lilly of
the Valley, the flower of Learning, which grew in poverties Garden, was most
watered by his encouragement, which usually fastened on poor, yet eminent
Scholars: What else could be expected from him, who loved Books better than
Money, and preferred not this (as too many do) before Learning and Piety: If
therefore he were to have a statue erected to the honor of his happy memory,
one like that framed by a statuary for Julius Caesar should be set up for him,
Nazi.
who was (...), he should be portraide standing upon a Glole, having a Sword in
one Hand and a Book in the other; Ex utroque Caesar, was his Motto; And thus
our late Reverend Master treading upon the World and its Golden proffers with
scorn, did manage the Sword of his Authority, to the advancement of Learning,
with that mild Justice, that we never heard of an expulsion, but after many
gentle admonitions, so that the Statutes were maintained, and Piety with the
statutes, the only fence and hedge of a College.

Thus having driven this Royal Chariot for 14. years with admiration of all
abroad, with love and liking here at home, at last he was thrown out of the
Box by a blustering Northern storm, against which innocence could not bear
up, as it could not disturb that calm which was in his meek breast, the
Sanctuary of Piety, and the seat of Patience. Indeed as he was (...), Nazi.
so (...): Humility, Faith and Patience (which were a part of his Grace before
and after his Meals) These Graces had taken possession of his Righteous Soul,
for which he ever prayed, and which are always concomitants. And he so
possessed his soul with Patience that when he was snatched from his Domestic
Contents, and his means taken from him by the hand of violence, through this
storm he beheld a higher arm of Providence, and kissed the Rod with
meekness, herein imitating holy Job, of whom he was an exact Picture, and
concerning whom St. Austine says thus ( libro 1. de moribus Ecclesiae
Catholicae) Amisit ille omnes divitias and factus repent pauperrimus tam
inconcussum animum tenuit and infixum Deo, ut satis de monstraret, non illas
sibi fuisse magnas, sed se illis, sibi autem Deum.

It was his vigorous active Faith working by love that was the ground of this
undaunted Patience; Non murmurat, Qui se filium Dei cogitat (Vincentius.) He
that believes himself to be in the number of Gods Sons, will never murmur
nor repine at providence. He believed that Christ had provided for him in
Heaven (...), Heb. 10.34.
an everlasting inheritance, a better and an enduring substance; Therefore he
took joyfully the spoiling of his Goods, and those things which others court
with dazzled Eyes, he did not account worth a glance of his; which like the
Sunne-flower did not open to every blaze, but only to the light and heat of
Christ, the Sun of Righteousness. Whom he loved, whom he served, of whom his
heart was full, dwelling therein by his spirit, which kept out all things else
from coming in; so that there was no room for hatred, no room for malice, no
room for desire of revenge, for he was never heard to dart out of his mouth
any passionate word (from the time he first suffered) against the persons of
his enemies, but only these, God forgive them, This was the Language of the
Son of God upon the Cross; and it is the voice of Gods Sons and Servants.
It was ever His; who was often (like holy David and the melting Prophet Jeremy)
seen (which he desired not) to weep, and being demanded why he did so? He
then replied, it was out of grief, when he considered the miserable sad
condition they were in, who in these times even against the Word, and against
Conscience run (as it were) in a gallop to Hell in the broad way of
Sacrilege, Wrong, and Violence, whilst they forget God, our Lord Christ that
bought them at a dear price; not observing the will of him that died for them,
and would reward their service with Eternal joys as he has promised, but
serving the Devil, who will requite them for their pains with pain and
torments, and that everlasting.

When the good Deane considered this woeful madness in worldlings, and the
miseries which attend their sinful Souls, he used to weep, which is an
infallible sign of a good man and a sanctified Spirit, to weep for the sins
of others: (...), Good men are of a melting, weeping temper and disposition.

It would require a larger time than these straites, wherein I am bounded to
relate unto you the several actions of Piety, which passed from him all the
time of his lingering sickness. He made good by his devoute practices that
saying of Saint Austine, Prove. Gall.
Non potest male mori qui vixit been, he cannot die ill that lives well. It
is never a bad day that has a good night; I could tell of his frequent
ejaculations to God in prayer, which was for the most in Latin, and sometimes
Greek; I could likewise enlarge my discourse in a repetition of his frequent
Alms, his often remembering the poor, knowing that Alms accepted upon the
Altar of Christ's Merits, deliver from death, and that God will not turn his
face from him that turns not away his face from the poor in their affliction,
etc. In a word, he walked (as a friend) with God, as Enoch, Genesis 5.22.6.9.
Noah, and Abraham did. He was much in that great duty of Prayer, he often
spoke to God in it, and loved to hear God speak to him in his Word; He
delighted to read it himself and hear it read, which was constantly and
frequently done by his dear Consort, who one night above the rest reading to
him that passage in the Gospel, concerning Thomas his thrusting his hand into
our Savours wounded side, John 20.27. John 20.29.
He upon this fell a weeping with that expression in his mouth, which fell from
our Saviors to Thomas, Happy are they that believe and see not; He believed
though He saw not, and therefore did he weep; He washed with the tears of
Repentance those wounds of his Lord, which did bleed upon the Cross for his
sins, and in a lively faith touched the print of his Nails, and thrust his
Finger into the hole of his side; Thereby taking a real possession of his
Crucified Savior, therefore presently as he wept he said with Thomas his
(...), My God and my Lord; The Nails and Spears, The bloody Crown of Thorns
which printed his sacred Temples, gored his Lords side, pierced his Hands and
Feet, had so imprinted the love of Christ in the Soul of our dear Saint,
that he was ready with St. Paul, and other holy Martyrs, to die for the Lord
Jesus: on whom his heart was always fixed, by whom it was possessed, in whom
it was established, to whom it was most sincere and truly devoted, as appears
by the constancy of his Faith even to the hour of his Death, which is a clear
evidence and demonstration that he was a true Divine a man of God, one led by
the spirit. You know what S. Paul says Romans 8.14. (...): And (as Chrysostom
notes upon this Text) they only are said to be led by the spirit, who are
carried on to their lives end by it in a continued practice of holiness, and
never fall from their holy profession by means of any secular Fear, Cross,
or Tribulation. Filium Dei se prodit, qui bonum quod cum laud inchoarit, etiam
perfecit, cujus finis exordio respondet. Novar. Bona inceptio sine fine est
instar corporis speciosi sine capite, A good beginning without a good end, is
like a beautiful specious body without an head. The saying of Henry the
Fourth, in an Epistle of his to Otho Bishop of Ramberg.

That consummatu^ est, It is finished, which Christ uttered dying, might
(though not so fully) become him, who finished his course with patience, and
kept the Faith with a Martyr-like constancy and perseverance, being one that
was most constant to his friends, and loving to his enemies, as appeared by his
promoting the servants and retinue of his Predecessor, who had been uncivil
to him, who was civil to all, and well reputed by all; which stirred up Envy
if not Malice, in the breasts of his Adversaries.

When he had almost run his last stage, and near the end of his Race, He was
shot by one of Deaths black Arrows with a Disease in his Feet (which hindered
not his progress in godliness.) That begat another, as it did in Calvin, who
had the Gowte, a Fever and Cholick all at one time; But let us admire our
Dear Friends invincible patience, when he was (as it were) upon the Rack of
torment, my self then with others, demanding, by way of trial how he did? His
constant reply was, very well I thank God. Indeed, he could not but be very
well, who had God for his Father, Christ his Savior, and the Holy Ghost his
Comforter, whose Temple and house, his soul and body was.

He had so resigned up his will to the Will of God, which is the height of
perfection, that whatsoever God did, and whatsoever He suffered, he always
embraced as good. He embraced his cross and looked upon his troubles as the
lot of Gods Children, the Physic of the soul, the Pledge of Divine love, the
badge of his Profession, the Trial of his Faith, the exercise of his Patience,
the Testimony of his constancy, the incentive of his Devotion, and the Mark of
his conformity with Christ his Head: To whom that he might by a closer Union
be joined, now that his Soul was drawing toward Heaven, he desired to receive
his Viaticum, that Heavenly Food, which might (as it did) strengthen his
Spirit in its long journey to Eternity, That, which is a Sacrament as of
thankful Commemoration, so of Confirmation, for that it confirms our Faith
that Christ is and will be in all respects to our souls (I had rather say to
our persons) what the Bread and Wine is to our Bodies.

Had you been present and seen with what flaming devotion, with what burning
Affections and holy Reverence he received that holy Food, the Seal of his
Pardon, That (...) (Ignatius) when in a cold frosty morning being the Lords
Day, he took off all his Caps and sat up in his Bed Bare-headed in honor to
his dread Sovereign, the King of Heaven, his Lord Jesus, exhibited as
Crucified, in that Sacrament, for our sins; Had you but seen this, and heard
the Heavenly expressions that fell from his Lips, you would have concluded,
that as he was a rare Saint, so a most worthy Receiver, and that they, who
contemn this Sacrament, cannot be Saints.

Having thus got faster hold on Christ, and grasping his Savior in the Arms
of his Faith and Thankfulness, Luke 2.29.
He ever after sang old Simeons Song, Domine nunc Dimittis, etc. Lord now
let thou thy Servant depart in peace. He longed after his (...); He
desired to be released from his Prison (the body is no more to the soul) He
often wished to be dissolved and to be admitted to a nearer familiarity with
Christ. And having sent from the Chamber, where he lay sick, many messages to
his Wifes aged Parents, wishing them, and another almost as aged in this Town,
to prepare themselves for their Death, which was approaching: having discharged
this last great act of Charity, declaring thereby that he was loath to go to
Heaven alone, To be happy without company; He suggested this more than once to
his beloved Consort, that when she saw him close his Eyes she should not be
troubled, but conceive that he was asleep. Death was no more to him, which
was entertained with moving of his Lips, and lifting up of his Hands to Heaven,
even when he could not stir nor speak.

His Body after many Toiles and Travells in Gods Service, is now asleep for a
time, but his Soul is awake in Heaven, Wearing the Crown of Perseverance, and
Singing with the Heavenly Chorus of Saints and Angels, a Triumphant Hymn to
the Lamb Christ Jesus, Sitting upon a Golden Throne, who will at the great Day
raise up his Body from its long sleep, by virtue of that Spirit which Raised
up Christ from the Dead, and dwelled in a full measure in the Soul of this our
late Reverend, Learned Master, who me thinks does bespeake us on Earth from
Heaven, in the words of S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.1.
Be ye followers of me, as I was of the Lord Jesus, in Faith, and Love, in
Humility and Patience: Weep not for me, but turn your Tears into practice of my
Virtues; Judge. 9.48.
As ye have seen me do, so do ye likewise: Thus if we do in a strict and holy
conformity, we shall be happy as He is, and partake with him of Glory.

Trin-uni Deo Laus, and Gloria. Amen.
THE TRIUMPH OF FAITH over DEATH.
ROMANS 8.11. If the Spirit of him, that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
Bodies by His Spirit, that dwells in you.


IT is a true saying of Athenagoras, Lib. de Resurrect.
that Christian Philosopher, (...), There is no Truth though never so ancient
and grounded upon the Word, but has a lie attending and cleaving fast unto it;
which must not be understood of the nature of Truth it self, that Virgin
Daughter of Almighty God, but to the malice of the Devil, and to the madness
of Heretics, and others his instruments, that do corrupt and blast it.

It is a Principle all the World over, except among Atheists, that omne verum
est a Deo, omne falsum a Diabolo, omnis error ab homine, All Truth is from God,
as the prime author of it, all falsity from the Devil, all error from man;
The last goes always under the vizard of the first ( i.e. error under the
mask of Truth) But the Second, i. e. falsehood confronts Truth to the face, and
stands in open defiance of it. So bold and daring are Heretics, that they have
in their audacious writings struck at the very Essence, Power, Mercy, Truth,
and Justice of God: of this latter sort are they, who deny the Resurrection, 1 Timothy 2.18
they strike at Gods Power, and overthrow his other Attributes, as Wisdom,
Truth and Justice. Thus did Hymenaeus and Philetus (Men given up to carnal
delights as their Name imports,). The like did the Valentinians, who asserted
most falsely that Christ redeemed only our Souls, and not our Bodies, and so
contenting themselves with vain Phantastike Speculations, they slighted all
good works, as unprofitable and of no use, living in the mean while in all
lewd profanesse: Crames A^b.
And no marvel; Nam qui Resurrectionem carnis non credit, quid ille boni
credat aut faciat? He that believes not the Resurrection of the Flesh after
Death, what good can be expected to be done by him in this Life? To these we
may add the Manichees, who rejected the Resurrection as fabulous, and
maintained that our Souls should be saved without our Bodies. What will not
Men dare say, who reject the Scriptures? A blushing shame would have stained
their Consciences, and a recantation of their error seized on their Tongues,
had they but read and believed that portion of Gods Word, which I have now read
unto you, If the spirit, etc. He shall quicken, or restore to Life your mortal
and dead Bodies, which now, whilst you live, may truly be said to be dead,
because they have the Seal of Death as it were stamped upon them, being by
reason of sin, Aug. lib. 1. de peccatorum meritis c. 4.
mortis necessitati facta obnoxia, ut quasi jam habeantur and dicantur mortua,
So St. Augustine, where he affirms against the Pelagians and Philosophers,
that if man had not sinned, he should not have died out of any necessity of
nature (as they maintained, and with them Eugubinus upon the second of
Genesis.) Against these we must assert with the forenamed learned Father,
Corpus mortale non moriturum, si nimirum in Innocentia persisteret, nunc autem
post peccatune mortuum, Aug. Ibid.
That man before the fall had a mortal body, yet so that he should not have
died, if he had persisted in innocence, but now being wounded by sin, it is a
dead body, and frail Man a composition of Sin, Death, and Misery.

The Text does branch it self into these two Generals,

First, Suppositio. Secondly, Positio, a Supposition and a Position, or
positive assertion.

If the Spirit, etc. Here is the Supposition. He shall quicken, etc. This the
Position.

In the first General I shall unfold or open these four particulars. First,
Quis. Secondly, Cujus. Thirdly, Quare. Fourthly, Quid. Who this Spirit is.
Whose, Why called Spirit, and what is meant by his dwelling in us. If the
Spirit of Him, etc.

In the second General observe with me these two parts. First, Quis fructus
inhabitantis spiritus. The fruit or benefit of the Spirits dwelling in us.
Secondly, quomodo, aut per quem accrescit nobis; How, or by whom it is derived
and conveyed unto us, our mortal or dead bodies shall be quickened or raised to
life by the power and efficacy of the same Blessed Spirit. He that raised up
Christ from the dead, etc.

I shall lead your Meditations through these six stages, and begin; First, with
the Quis, who this spirit is. And whilst I undertake this and my next laborious
task, I shall implore that holy spirit in the words of Divine Nazianzen, Orat.
de Spir. San 1.
defending the Deity of the Holy Ghost against the Macedonians, (...), etc.

First, by the (...), the spirit in my Text we must not understand with the
Macedonians and Socinians (who join issue in their impious Heresies) (...), or
(as it is in the Socinian Catechism) virtutem ceu efficaciam qua homines
fideles sanctificantur and Divinis usibus consecrantur; A bare action, efficacy
or power of God in the Hearts of Men sanctifying their natures, and
consecrating them to Divine uses, This was the cursed Opinion of Samosatenus,
concurring herein with the forenamed Heretics, but by the spirit you must
conceive the third person of the glorious Trinity, who with the Father and the
Son is the same in the Essence of the (...) 3
Deity, and most powerful dignity; And therefore the Scholemen conclude that
this Holy spirit is the Third Person, Non gradu sed ordine, The third in order
not degree, the third, non naturae diversitate, aut Majestatis inaequalitate,
sed susistendi ordine, because He is equal to the Father and the Son, as in
Being or Nature, so in Power and Majesty.

Revel 22.1.
We read in the Apocalypse that St. John saw in a Vision a pure River of living
Water (or water of life) clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of
God and of the Lamb: that pure River of living water, what is it (says Justin
Martyr) but the everliving most pure and loving spirit, John 7.30
who is called (...) living Water, John 7. and proceeds after an ineffable
manner from God the Father and the Son, Aug.
who is Agnus et Leo, a Lamb and a Lion, a gentle Lamb to the Saints, and a
feirce Lion to his Enemies. This forenamed Justin Martyr adds and says, As a
River is of the same nature with the fountain from which it proceeds, so, the
Holy Ghost does so proceed from the Father and the Son, that He partakes of
the same nature and Essence with them, as is evident, first by all those Divine
properties which are ascribed to Him equally with the Father and the Son,
viz. Genesis 1.2 Psalm. 139.7 1 Cor. 2.10 Psalm. 33.6 Es. 61.1 1 Cor. 12.4.12
Eternity, Omnipresence, and Omniscience. Secondly, by his Divine works as
Creation, the mission or sending of Christ, The gifts of Tongues and Miracles.
There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit. To another is given the
working of Miracles, etc. All these things works that one and the self same
spirit.

2 Part.
This (...), The consubstantiality of the Holy Ghost with the other two Persons
is confirmed by the next, which is the second particular of my Text, the Cujus,
Him. If the spirit of Him, etc. Him, that is, the Father and the Son as God,
who by the power of the Godhead raised himself as Man. He was quickened by
the spirit, 1. Pet. 3.1^
that is by the strength or virtue of the Godhead. (...) so Theophylact.

The Holy Ghost is said to be the spirit of the Father and the Son, because
he proceeds from both, which is an Article of our Creed. The manner of which
procession, if I should go about to declare out of the Fathers, Schoolmen and
other Modern Writers, I might either speak and not be understood, or seem
not to understand what I speak, their terms are so obscure, and the modus of
it so difficult; Only this I shall commend to your better understandings, thus
much you must know and believe against the Pneumatomachists, that this
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son denotes his
Communion with both in the Essence or Substance of the Deity, that he is (as
Beza observes from this place) Verus deus, a true Consubstantiall God, who
together with the Father and the Son (as it is in the Athanasian Creed) is
for ever to be worshipped and glorified. As for those Racovian Heretics the
Socinians in Poland, and their English followers the Crellianists, who
maintain the contrary, Coriolan. Epit. Council
I heartily wish they may not find in their Souls and Bodies the weight of
that heavy curse in the This council was held under Pelagius the second 589.
Toletan Council pronounced against the Adversaries of the Holy Ghost, it is
this; Quicunque spiritum sanctum non credit, aut non crediderit a Patre and
Filio procedere, eumque non dixerit co-eternum esse Patri and Filio and
Co-essentialem, Anathema sit. i. e. Whosoever does not, or shall not hereafter
believe that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and shall
not say he is Co-eternall and Co-essentiall with the Father and the Son, let
him be accursed.

The third Particular proposed, 3. Part.
and now briefly to be discussed is, Quare, why this third Person in the
Trinity is called spirit? I answer for these three Reasons. First, Ratione
Essentiae, by reason of his Essence or being, which is spiritual,
incorporeall, and invisible. God is a Spirit. John 4. John 4.2^.
Here spirit is taken not personally, but essentially, as it is common to the
three Persons in the Godhead. God is a Spirit, and the Holy Ghost is perfect
God. Secondly, ratione Divinae operationis, He is called spirit in regard of
his Divine operation, because He, as as it were, spirat, breaths, and that
immediately, into the hearts of Men good motions tending to God and savouring
of Holiness. Whatsoever Gifts and Graces we have, they are all, as it were by
a breath, insensibly and irresistibly blown into, and wrought in us by this one
blessed spirit of Grace, who divides to every man severally (...) as he
pleases, Nazi.
1 Cor. 12.11. This (...), as, implies these four Particulars (...). He gives
Grace to whom he will, what he will for quantity, when he will for time, and
where he will for place. This wind blows where it lists, etc. Joh. 3.8.

Thirdly, Ratione aequalitatis cum Patre and Filio, by reason of his equality
with the Father and the Son, and this is evidenced by that sweet promise of
our Savior, I will pray the Father, John 14.16.
and he shall give you another Comforter; upon which Text Greg. Naz. has this
learned Gloss, which makes for our present purpose, (...), Again, (...), etc.
This term, Another, denotes his equality with the Father and the Son in
Majesty and Power: and because He is God, He therefore with the two other
Persons is to be prayed unto, and praised for Mercies and Graces, which flow
into our Souls from the everlasting spring of his Divine and inexhaustible
fullness.

Luke 11.20
To this end too, and for this cause he is called the Finger of God, Luke 11. If
I by the Finger of God, etc. which is explained, Mat. 10.28.
Mat. 10. If I by the spirit of God, on the former Text Beza has this gloss,
he is called Gods Finger, Quia est Patris and Filii co-essentialis virtus, per
quem exerit Dominus virtutem suam: because he is the Co-essentiall virtue of
the Father and Son, by which both these show their power of working grace in
the hearts of men.

Exodus 31.28.
The two Tables of Stone are said Exodus 31. to have been written (...) with the
Finger of God. (...) a Finger in Hebrew comes from (...) pingere to Paint;
Ambr. Hexam c. 8. Pictu^ es o homo, and pictus a Domino De^^^o, noli bonam
delere picturam, etc.
Thus by the Holy Ghost by the Ministry of this blessed Spirit does God draw
the lines of virtues upon the Souls of his Elect, and lays upon them the
colors of his Grace; whence it is, as St. Ambrose notes, that their Souls are
perfect Pictures of the Almighty God, and of their Lord Christ, and both Souls
and Bodies Temples of the Holy Ghost; which invites me to treat of the fourth
and last Particular of the first General, i. e. Quid, what is meant by the
Holy Ghosts dwelling in us.

And because the Spirit is all the evidence we have for Heaven, and happiness,
4. Part.
and all our hope of bliss depends upon our having of it, I shall first open
the point, first in General, secondly, in Particular, by explaining the
terms, or rather phrase in my Text, the spirits (...) or dwelling in us.
Secondly, I shall endeavor to clear your evidences by acquainting your
devotions with some special Rules or Characters, whereby you may collect to
the eternal comfort of your Souls, that you are the Houses or Temples of the
Holy Ghost.

First, The Heb. (...) from (...) Habitare, etc.
Holy Ghost or Spirit of God dwells in the Soul of a Saint, not locally but
virtually, in that it begets, increases and continues by constant and fresh
supplies of Grace his holy Gifts and heavenly Graces in us, of which we read
Gal 5. Jerem. 11.2. And there be three Reasons why the Holy Spirit is said to
dwell in us, 1. To denote Dominium, his Lordly Power over us. Gal. 5.22, 23
2. To intimate Generalitatem Dominii the Generality of that power. 3. To
demonstrate Stabilitatem Domini, the Stability and Constancy of this Heavenly
and most Holy Inhabitant, Mal. 3.6
who is the Lord that changes not, etc.


First, of his Dominion, etc. They that are truly Sanctified by an orderly
work of the Spirit, which ever begins with conviction and humiliation; The
Holy Ghost has the full disposing of their hearts, as a man that is Lord of an
House has liberty to do with, and in it what he does please. Ephesians. 1.13.4.33
Now the disposing and governing of the hearts of the faithful, stands in
these Particulars, which are the Seals of the Spirit within us.

The first is, Opus generans, To beget in the heart a settled and full
persuasion of a Man's Reconciliation with God in Christ, Romans 8.16. The same
Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God.

This Plerophory, or full persuasion arises from a reflective act of Faith
comparing what it finds in the Word, which is the Testimony of the Spirit,
with that which it finds and feels in our Souls or Spirits, For this (...)
the Spi^^t is said by St. Paul, (...). Gal. 5.22, etc. Idict. Contemplat. c. 24.
and thence drawing this joyful conclusion, that we are the Sons of God. Now
the spirit testifies and assures us in the Word, that they are the elected and
adopted Sons of God, who are sanctified. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Who has chosen you to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit. And he that finds in himself
the Pledges of Gods Eternal favor, the Fruits of the spirit recorded, Gal. 5.
The principal or prime whereof by way of manifestation is Love, that vestis
pretiosa animae, ex pretiosis filis, i. e. Dei beneficis homini collatis
contexta; Love to God and Love to Man, or Love of God for himself, and Love of
Man for God, the former expressed by Universality of 1 John 2.5
Obedience to his Commands, the latter by our mercy and goodness stretched
even to our Enemies, He that finds his Soul decked with this precious Garment,
beautified with this heavenly Jewel, on which is engraven the express Image
of God (who is 1 John 4.7
Love, the God of Love essentially and causally) He may infer from this
gracious work of the Quis justus nisi qui dilectus a Deo Deum ^ccamat, quod in
nobis spiritus De^ efficit, etc. Berv. Ep. 107
Spirit, that he is reconciled to God, that God is his Friend, his Sins
(which God hates, and which makes him an enemy) being pardoned, whence his
person is justified; and God is more delighted with him, because he beholds him
in his Son Christ Jesus, as clothed with his Righteousness, than displeased
with his sins, and daily infirmities. There is more good in Christ for a
godly man, than there is evil in sin against him; and God would not have
left this Jebusite in the Land, I mean sin in the Soul of a righteous man,
if notwithstanding that he could not have loved him. Chamier, 1 John 4.19
God loathes the sin whilst he loves the person. Et qui certus est Charitatis
Dei, erga se idem certus est salutis suae. We love him because he loved us
first. Our love to God is but a reflex beam darted into our Souls from that
Eternal Son of Love, which burns hot without wasting or the least
Diminution.

The second work of the Spirit as Lord in us, is opus supprimens, to suppress
all bad motions to sin, arising either from the corruption of our natures,
from the World without, or the Devil about us, and withal to stir up good
affections and motions to Piety, and godliness; amongst which inward motions
the most principal are these. First, an utter dislike of sin as sin, for
that our good God is thereby displeased and offended. Secondly, an hungring and
thirsting after Grace, an eager desire above all things in the World to be at
unity with God in Christ, and to be reconciled unto him when we have provoked
him by any heinous sin, etc.

The third work of the Holy Ghost in us is opus vivificans, (...), etc. In
Symb. Oriental. Eccles. apud Epiph. ad finem Anchorati.
a quickening or enlivening work. It is the Spirit that quickneth, John 6.63.
As in the first Creation God Created Light before there was life in the
Creature to bring forth and multiply, Genesis 1.3.14.20.24. So in our
Regeneration, which is a new Creation, Psalm. 51.10. there is ever a Principle
of Light infused into the Soul before we can have life, or be quickened in the
exercise or doing of good. That spiritual light is a clear and full persuasion
of Gods love to us in Christ, that He is our Father, and we his Children, that
Christ is our Savior, etc. Such a strong Faith is the Adamant that nothing
will break, the Palm that sinks not under the most weighty burden; The Oil
that ever swimmes above the Water, be this poured in never so great quantity
upon it: It is such a powerful Chimist, that turns Death into Life, Sorrow
into joy, makes riches of Poverty, nay all things of nothing, 2 Cor. 6.10.
as having nothing, yet possessing all things. Lastly, it turns cold fears
into warm hopes, sighs and groans into triumphant and joyful songs, trembling
into leaping and clapping of hands; witness Paul and Silas in the stocks;
witness too, Acts 16.25.
that renownd for undanted constancy Dr. Tailor of Hadley, who, when he came
within two miles of the place where he was executed, fetched a leap or two,
and withal said; Now lack I but two styles, and I am even at my Fathers House
(he meant Heaven) witness likewise that famous Hawks in the book of Martyrs,
who being desired to give a sign whether the Fire was tolerable to be borne,
promised it to his friends, and, after all expectation was past, he lift up his
hands half burned, and being on a light Fire with great rejoicing struck them
three times together. Whence all this? from what spring were derived all these
streams of strength and comfort, but from a lively Faith in Christ, the fruit
and effect of Gods Spirit, and the cause of a lively Hope of happiness, which
Hope is the (...). Cyril.
Root and Seminary of good works, and the Mother of Patience. In a word, it is
this wonder-working Faith that quickens and revives us, first in Adversity,
Secondly, in Death. Thirdly, in Duty.

First, in Adversity.

Let whole troops of trouble, let Sickness or Poverty, etc. seize upon, or
lay seige to a righteous Soul armed with a strong affiance in the Lord Jesus;
it defies this Host, this tormenting Regiment of Sin and Satan, it sees Cant.
2.9.
Christ behind this Mud-wall, and beholds a Savior under this Fides larvam
detrabit Christo. Aug.
Vizard, it discernes a merciful hand through this black Cloud, the hand of a
wise God, and indulgent Father, the Heart of a tenderly loving elder Brother,
who, knowing the mold whereof we be made, does exactly measure out every cross
unto us, and will not load us above the strength of our weak natures; whose
Foundation is frailty, our composition dust and ashes. Therefore a faithful
Soul having an Eye to this gentle Hand, he solaces himself with this
persuasion, from that Principle his Faith extracts this infallible conclusion,
that this trouble or cross is not the Axe of perdition, but the pruning Knife
of correction that God has given a more strict charge to the army of
afflictions, 2 Samuel 18.5.
than David's was to Ioab and his followers, Do the young man no harm, do
mine anointed no hurt, etc. Nay he is assured not only of the Negative, but
also of the Affirmative, that is, not only of this, that his cross or
affliction shall not hurt him, ^quin.
but also do him much good; He knows that affliction is Gods Physic,
Medicina animae, and so it is, sanativa mali praeteriti, praeservativa a malo,
conservativa in bono, it is administered to us by our heavenly Physician, to
cure us of our sins past, by driving us to repentance, to prevent sins to
come, by begetting in us humility and a careful watchfulness over our ways;
And lastly to preserve and keep us in well-doing, whilst God denies a man
health and riches, which He knows would be to him the f^mes of sin and
wickedness: upon these considerations a faithful Soul rejoices in the
cross, and triumphs in his afflictions, which he entertaines with joy, and
embraces with thankfulness, knowing, that comfort is laid up and hid for him,
though for the present it be hid from him, (light is sown for the Righteous)
and that as the cross came from Heaven, Psalm. 97.11.
so it will carry us thither, upon the back (or rather merits) of our crucified
Lord Jesus.

Secondly, as in Adversity, so in Death it self Faith has a quickening virtue,
to support us in our encounter with that Giant, with that great Goliath, who
defies all the Host of Infidells, holds them in bondage all the days of their
lives, and makes their whole life no better than a living Death; Only Faith
encounters with this Giant, and grapples with him as a vanquished underling;
insulting over him, as much as he does over the sons of unbelief; She sets
her foot upon the neck of this King of fears, and so, as a Conqueror, sets up
a Flag of defiance to all petty dangers and fears, which are only dreadful,
because they march toward and tend to Death, the last, the end, and sum of
all feared evils. Let Death dress it self like the cruellest and most bloody
fury, come with all her Racks, Fires, Strappadoes, wild beasts, all her
exquisite tortures invented by the wit of the most savage Tyrants, Faith will
set a Woman, a child to make sport with it, to dare and tire it, and its
executioners.

A faithful man dying looks up to Jesus (as Alexander looked his Physician in
the face, Heb. 12.2. Curt.
when he drank off his potion wherein he was told there was poison) and being
assured that Christ drunk out of Deaths bitter Cup an eternal health to all
Mankind, sucked the Gall and Venom out of it, and made it an wholesome potion
of immortality, upon this assurance he looks into the Grave without fear, and
upon Death without horror, embraces it with joy as old Egredere anima mea,
etc. so said He dying. Hieron. in vita ejus.
Hilarion and the Martyrs did, as being the end of sin and misery, and the
beginning of everlasting felicity. This pious thought had St. Cyprian of it,
who, when he was condemned to die by Valerian, did lift up his hands and eyes
to Heaven, and cheerfully replied at the hearing of his fatal sentence;
Benedictus Deus, etc. God Almighty be blessed for this Gaole-delivery, for that
he is pleased to deliver me from the fetters of my Body.

A man that is in debt fears the face of a Sergeant or Baliffe, nay every one
that wears a Sword is a terror or death unto him; Thus it is with the wicked,
their debts being not paid, the black bills of the Laws endictments against
them being not cancelled, they fear death. It Is otherwise with the Godly,
whose sins are pardoned, and they reconciled to God, they entertain. Death
with the greatest welcome and delight that can be imagined, as a messenger from
their heavenly Father to invite them to a Palace from a Prison, Chrysostom. in Colos.
to a Court of Glory, from a Dungeon of sorrow, to be solaced and feasted
amongst the Saints and Angels with heavenly delicacies, the chief dish of
which glorious banquet is the Vision of Almighty God, to behold the
soule-ravishing aspect of our Lord Jesus now glorified.

Death is the Eccl. 41.1. O Death how bitter, etc.
Rich man's fear, the good man's wish, whose sins are washed away in the blood
of the Lamb Christ Jesus, whose person is therefore reconciled to God, who upon
this ground has a good Conscience, a Conscience that is quiet bona, that is
not troubled nor staind with unrepented sins. He that trembles at the
approach of Death, we may say to that man in the words of St. Austine, O homo
perdidisti fidem; O man thou have lost thy Faith, which in the last place, as
in Adversity and Death, so it has a quickening power to enliven us in Duty.

When there is great Faith in the Heart there will be much prayer in the mouth,
Charity in the Hand, sedulity in the Feet to move with alacrity in those paths
which tend to God, and bend toward Heaven. Faith like the Spring in a Watch
sets all the Wheels or Members of the Body on work, Heb. 11.26. Psalm.
71.20.80.18.119.25.37.88.107.149.154.159.143.11.
Faith reflecting upon the Promises, and having with Moses respect unto the
great recompense of the reward of everlasting Life. Doubtless David prayed to
God for the enlargement or increase of Faith, when he desired so often (as we
find in the Psalms) to be quickened. This liveliness in duty, when we serve
God with cheerfulness breaking through all oppositions to the contrary, as it
is the effect of a strong vigorous active Faith, so it is a thing most pleasing
to God, Romans 12.8. Show mercy (i. e. give Alms) with cheerfulness. God
loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.

As for those weak Christians, Is, 42.3.
those bruised Reeds and smoking flax; who by means of their bodily
distempers, or weakness of Faith, find in themselves some indispositions, and
deadness unto, or about spiritual duties, when their Altar seems to have no
fire, when they pray, but not with wonted fervency, when they hear but not
with an attentive alacrity; Let them not measure their interest or share in
Christ by sense or feeling, let them not be discouraged, though they want
inward comfort, which is oftentimes denied to many a dear Saint, it being a
dish reserved for many a one till he comes to partake of the Heavenly Banquet:
Advise to those tha want comfort in duties.
and let me advise such, although they have no comfort nor delight in duties as
they are performed by them with some imperfection and dryness, yet let them
rejoice in this, that they have so much grace as to do the Wi l of God, even
with some reluctance of theirs; then they discharge their duty for the
substance or matter of it, though they fail in some circumstance or manner of
doing. And let them know too, that that duty is most acceptable to God, Vid.
Fr. de Sales Bp of Geneva his Introduct. to an holy life. l. 4. c. 14. Is.
50.10. Is. 8.17.
which is performed merely out of Obedience to his command, when our vigorous
wills carry us to it, and we take little delight in the performance of it,
because then we seek not to please or content our selves so much as God. And
who is He that walks in darkness and has no light? let him trust in the
Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, who sometimes hides his Face from his
Children; who are of the Family or offspring of faithful Abraham: This King
of Spirits, and Lord of Souls has a Throne of Grace set up in his Childrens
heart, he rules and reigns in them by his blessed and holy Spirit, whose
Dominium and the parts of it you have heard; Now follows the second
particular, which is Dominii generalitas, the Generality of the Spirits Lording
power in us, of which with much brevity and concisenesse.

The Soul of Man may be fitly resembled to Noah's Arc, Genesis 6.16.
in which there were, Genesis 6.16.
First, Second and Third stories, Genesis 6. So in the soul there be upper and
lower rooms, the superior, and inferior faculties, and in all these the Holy
Ghost, by a general command and rule, keeps his abode and residence.

First, it dwells or resides in the understanding, which is the Soul's (...),
the upper loft, by clearing the dark and dim eye of it, by begetting in it a
saving knowledge, whereby we come to know the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. those
things which are revealed to us in his Word concerning our future end, which is
our souls salvation, and the means to attain unto it, which, is by faith in
Christ's satisfaction, made to his Fathers Justice by his obedience to the Law
for us, etc.

Secondly, the Holy Ghost resides in the two other upper rooms, the will and
memory; The former of which is inhabited by this Spirit of Grace, when it is so
subjected to the Divine Will, so drowned (as I may so say) in that great Ocean,
that a man can say with a contented Spirit, as our Savior did, Non mea
voluntas, Mat. 26.39. Venit dolor meus, veniet requies me; venit tribulatio
mea, veniet purgatio mea. Aug in Ps. 61.
Lord, not my will but thy will be done. Of this temper was he in Vincentius,
who used to say that Deus nihil faciebat nisi quod ipse volebat, quia ipse
volebat quod Deus faciebat, that God did nothing but what he willed, for he
willed nothing but what God did, The will of the Lord be done.

Thirdly, in the memory, which is sanctified by the Holy Ghost, when it has an
aptness to retain good things, when it is not like to the Saccus faecinaceus,
the Drugstars Bag, which lets out the pure liquour, and keeps in the Druggs,
but like the sive or fan that lets out the chafe, and reserves the Corn,
such was the memory of the blessed Virgin, Luke 2.19. where it is said of her
that she laid up in her heart ((...), kept close) the things that were related
to her from the Angels by the Shepherds concerning her Son, and our Lord
Jesus. Whose memories are sanctified, they will retain more of a Sermon than a
Song, more of a Chapter read, than a tale or story heard, etc.

Fourthly, there be lower rooms in the Soul, they are the Affections and
Appetites, The Holy Ghost bears rule in these two, when the Soul is truly
sanctified, when we love and desire nothing but God and goodness, when we hate
and shun nothing more than sin and ungodliness, and whatsoever is opposite
to Grace: when we take delight in the service of God, and company of good men,
as David did, and greive for nothing more than sin, Psalm. 16.3.
for that thereby God is displeased and dishonored; when our Hope is set upon
God, so that we can say with that holy Prophet, Psalm. 39. Psalm 39.8.
Truly my hope is even in thee: when we despair of nothing but our own worth
or merit, as availing naught to our salvation: when we fear nothing but Gods
displeasure, or the loss of his love and favor; when we are as bold as Lions,
being engaged in Gods Cause, and when we are angry most with our selves for
offending our good God, and with others, because they anger and provoke him,
whom they likewise dishonor by sin; when our affections are thus sanctified,
thus set upon good objects, thus in tune, thus tempered, thus qualified, they
may be said to be the receptacles of Gods holy Spirit. And so may the appetite
be, when our desires in meat and drink are so ordered, as holy Austines were,
Confess. l. 10. c. 31. Hoc me docuisti, ut quemadmodum medicamenta, sic alimenia
sumpturus accedam, etc 3. Part.
who (as he confesses of himself) ever used his meat as Physic: when too the
desires of apparel or riches are so tempered and regulated, that these three
virtues, Sobriety, Contentation and Chastity, shine in our actions and in the
whole course of our lives, we may infer upon these and the former grounds,
that we are possessed by the Spirit of Grace, that He dwells in us, which in
the Third place denotes Stabilitatem Domini, His continuance or constant abode
in us. For the gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, Romans 11 29. If
once truly sanctified thou shall be surely saved, whom I love, I love unto the
end. The Saints are said, 1 Pet. 1.5. John 13.1.
To be kept by the Power of God through faith unto salvation. It is the
strength and power of grace, fetched from Heaven by Faith in Christ, that
keeps a man from falling away, and makes him hold out his race with
perseverance; which is not opposed to our falling into sin through weakness
and infirmity, but to our lying down, and continuing in sin, as likewise to
ones falling away by a total and final Apostasy.

Defecit Petro confessio in ore sed non fides in cord. Aug. Dan. 4.15.
In all the declinings and failings of the faithful there is still left in
their Souls a root of Grace; Although the Devil cut off the boughs, and lop
off the branches by some strong temptation, yet so long as the root ( like the
stumpe in Nebuchadnezzars, Vision) is fast bound with Iron, i. e. preserved by
Gods Power, it will budde and sprout out again, when, after the Winter of
temptation, the Soul is refreshed with the Spring of Consolation. It is a good
rule of the Schools, Fides quoad actum secundum amittatur, nunquam 'tamen
amittitur quoad habitum and actum primum, quo apprehendit Christum. And this
rule puts me in mind of my promise in my premised method, which was, after the
general explanation of the terms or phrase in my Text, to prescribe unto you
some special rules, whereby you may collect or conclude that you are inhabited
by the Spirit.

1 Cor. 3, 16.
1 Cor. 3. Know ye not that ye are the Temples of God, and that the Spirit of
God dwells in you? It is a thing then that may be known, and I shall rest for
this discovery in the judgment of St. Augustine, If any one (says he) desires
to be assured that his soul is the habitation of the Holy Spirit; Let him
seriously consider, Aug. de Tempore.
Qua humilitate repugnat superbiae. First, whether humility (which is a vile or
mean esteem of ones self) has driven all kind of pride (which is an
inordinate desire of excellency) out of his heart. Secondly, let him examine
and make a special inquiry into himself, whether benevolence or a
well-wishing affection has suppressed in his breast all envy and malice: Qua
benevolentia obluctetur Invidiae. Thirdly, let him consider and inquire, quam
non capiatur adulantium linguis, quamque bonis delectetur alienis linguis, An
pro malo non cupiat malum reddere, malitque multas oblivisci injurias, quam
imaginem and similitudinem Conditoris sui amittere, qui pluit super justos and
injustos, etc. i. e. whether he be not delighted and taken with the airy and
empty sounds of flattering tongues. Fourthly, whether he delights in the
welfare of his brethren, so that another prosperity is a feast to his
thoughts. Fifthly, whether he has not a revengefull spirit, and had rather
forget many injuries, than by revenging himself on his enemies lose the Image
of (or make himself unlike to) his Heavenly Father, Mat. 5.44, 45.
who sends Rain upon the just and unjust, who has likewise said in his
word, Vengeance is mine, etc. Sixthly, Ipsam demum Charitatem omnium virtutum
matrem inquirat; Let him by a strict scrutiny, and narrow search, enquire into
his breast, and see whether that be the seat of Charity, the mother of all
Virtues, and if he finds there the love of God and his Neighbor, so rooted and
settled, that he could be willing to die, and is ready to do any thing for God,
and stands in this frame and posture of mind toward man, that he does to others
what he would have done to himself, being of a merciful disposition, and
bountiful Spirit, Quisquis est hujusmodi, Deum and Rectorem and Habitatorem
esse non dubitet, whosoever he be that is of this heavenly temper, he may
assure his Soul that it is the mansion, or habitacle of God his Maker. Orat.
44.
I might add to these three other marks out of Nazianzen, in one of his
orations, where he ascribes three special operations to the spirit of grace,
1. (...), 2. (...). 3. (...). A purifying, An enflaming, An elevating work or
operation.

They whose souls are purified from fleshly lusts and worldly desires; They
who are zealous in Gods cause, 1 Pet. 1.22. 1 John 3.3. Tit. 2.4.
and zealous of good works; They whose souls are not only like unto fire, but
heat of zeal which enflames them, and love to God, but like fire too in that
they are ever soaring and mounting upwards upon the wings of Prayer and
Meditation, upon the wing of contempt of things here below, The Spirit of God,
Psalm. 143.5, 6. Psalm. 119.48. Col. 3 2.
that descended upon the Apostles in the likeness of fire, dwells in such
Souls, and at the great day, the great God that raised up Jesus from the dead,
will raise up their bodies by virtue of that powerful (...), the Holy Spirit
of grace.

This is the position, a comfortable Thesis, the second general part of my
Text, (...), he shall quicken, etc. i. e. Resuscitabit ad vitam immortalem and
beatam exemplo Christi capitis and primogeniti mortuorum. Estius. ad. General
part.
He shall raise them to life and glory, that with Christ their head and Savior
in Heaven they may be for ever happy. This is the fructus inhabitantis
Spiritus, the blessed fruit or effect of the spirits dwelling in us, which is
the first particular of the last general part of my Text, which is also
seconded with another, and that is, per quem accrescit nobis fructus, by whom
this happiness of being raised to life eternal is derived unto us: This is
effected by the H. Spirit, by the spirit immediately, whose isntrumental action
is used by the Father and Son, who likewise cooperate and concur, though
mediate in this great and glorious work of the Resurrection, as is evident by
the Text, John 5.28.
and the 5. of St. John, where our Savior speaking of himself, says, The
hour is coming in the which all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice,
etc.

To wave all other doubts and doctrines concerning the Resurrection, wherein I
might enlarge my meditations, I shall close all with some few short Uses by way
of Application.

Dalilah did once to Sampson, Iud. 16.9. Up, for the Philistines are upon thee,
etc. Thou have a mortal body, death is at the door; O therefore thou mud-wall
of frailty be not proud whilst the Sunshine of prosperity reflects upon thee;
one blast of death by a sickness, his harbenger, may blow thee into thy first
dust, and tumble thee with thy unrepented sins into hell: one glimpse whereof
(in the judgment of Bellarmine) were enough to make a man from a dissolute one
turn Monk, or (which, I say, is better) a strict Christian. Think of your
houses of clay, your (...), your mortal bodies, and you cannot, you will not
be proud or covetous.

Luke 2, 10.
Again, methinkes this Text sounds in my delighted ear that joyful message of
the Angel to the Shepherds, Fear not death, O mortals, for I bring you good
tidings of great joy, although your bodies be crumbled into dust, yet (...), He
that raisd up Christ from the dead shall quicken, and restore them unto life.
Therefore grieve not much for a friend deceased that lived in the fear of God,
and died in the arms of his mercy, as Moses, and this our deceased friend, a
second Moses, did. Grieve not for him who is passed from a Sea of troubles to
an Haven of everlasting rest; 1, Cor. 6 17.
But rejoice in this that God is your Father and Christ your Savior, that you
are made one with Him by his Spirit; and that by means of this happy union,
you have a communion in his merit, in all the benefits of his Death and
Passion, whereby you are made partakers of Grace here, and shall be of Glory
hereafter.

mortal, this should mind us of our frail condition, that we carry
corruption in our bosoms, and death in our bodies, as well as in our names.
(...) methim, in the Jews language, signifies men both living and dead. O
therefore seeing death watches for us, let us watch and wait for death, as
holy Job did. All the days of my appointed time will I wait, Job 14.14.
till my change come.

Wait Jugiter orando. Poenitendo. Benefaciendo.


By being frequent in prayer. Pray continually. 1 Thessalonians. 5 17.
By repenting daily of your sins; it is Repentance that turns death into life,
and drives out his venom, which is sin, makes it a drone, that it cannot hurt.
Thirdly, wait for it by being much in duty, and in the works of Charity; Then
may thou say with greater security then that heathen Philosopher did,
Epictetus.
(...), let death surprise me so speaking and so doing, etc.

Fourthly, if mortal then so because of sin which stings our bodies implacable
without reconciliation, constant without intermission, and general without
permission of our selves to live in any the least unrepented sin. Non nisi
corpus condignum habero potest caput Christum, Aug. Mat. 9.11.
How can a dead body accord with a living head? Thou deceivest thy self, O man;
who being a rotten nominall Christian, yet pretendest to be in Christ, who is a
sound Physician, who came to heal sin, not to harbor sinners. We read that he
went in to sinners, conversed with Publicans, but sinners shall not go in to
Him, never be admitted into his glorious Presence, I mean such sinners that
delight in uncleanness, and are unwash'd from their habitual and actual
pollutions. Oh therefore wash ye, make you clean. Is. 1.16. for why will ye
die, and venture upon damnation?

The Motto which was in Julian's crest may well be fitted and applied to every
sinful man. It was an Eagle, shot through with a dart, feathered with a quill
taken out of his own wing. Thus an impenitent sinner suffers that to nest in
his bosom, which is his deadliest enemy, will prove his murderer, and bring
him to eternal perdition, etc.

Fifthly, when we consider our bodies mortality; This should deaths cup is
inevitable, and by God appointed for all men to taste of. Heb. 9. statutum est,
etc. Heb. 9.27.
It is a statute Law that is unalterable, and cannot be repealed. Let us then
do that willingly, which must once be done by us of necessity. Death is but the
pulling down of a ruinous rotten Cottage, and erecting instead of it a glorious
Palace. Who will repine at this change, but he that loves his fetters? which
speaks him guilty of folly and madness. O then fear not Death in your
selves, nor lament this happy change in others.

They betray their faith and forfeit their Christianity, who for their friends
departed grieve immoderatly. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. Sorrow not as those do that have no
hope, etc. It is observed that the Egyptians mourned for Jacob threescore and
ten days, Genesis 50.3.10.
Joseph but seven, Genesis 50. Thus where, and in whom; there is more of faith in
the promises, there is less of grief for the loss of our dearest and nearest
alliances.

He shall quicken, etc. in my Text, puts us in mind of a substantial maine
duty, which will quite abolish and take away the fear of death from us; It is
that which is one of the ends of our redemption, Luke 1.71.
it is to live holily; holiness in this life takes hold on happiness. This is
holiness with its consummatum est; Holiness completed, as holiness is
happiness in the bud, or initiated. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
It is a piece or part of the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. Holiness to the Lord was the
superscription of the high Priests Mitre. Exodus 39.30.
It implies a freedom from carnality, and all earthly mindedness, together with
a giving up our selves wholly to Gods service. It is that which S. Paul
earnestly prays to God to infuse into the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13. It is
the beginning and pledge of eternal life. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
Be ye therefore holy as the Lord of life our God is holy. To conclude, he that
lives well will not be unwilling or afraid to die. Aug.
Nihil est in morte quod metuamus, si nihil timendu^ in vita committimus.
Aristippus told the saylours, who wondered why he was not, as well as they,
afraid in a storm; That the odds was much between him and them, You (said he)
fear the torments of a wicked life after your dissolution, but I expect the
rewards of a good one. The virtues of a well-lead life do much facilitate and
sweeten death, Ephesians. 1.13. 4.30.
having the Seal of the Spirit (which I pray God to bestow where it is
wanting, and increase where it is) having this Seal of Grace in us, we may be
sure of our everlasting inheritance in the Heavens. Aug. Selil. c. 35
Vbi erit quicquid voles, and non erit quicquid noles: Vbi erit vita vitalis
dulcis and amabilis: ubi non erit hostis impugnans, nec ulla illecebra, sed
summa and secura tranquilitas, and tranquilla jucunditas: Jucunda faelicitas
and faelix aeternitas: aeterna beatitudo, and beata Trinitas and Trinitatis
unitas, and unitatis Deitas, and Deitatis beata visio, quae est gaudium Domini.

Into which joy of our Lord may we all enter through the Merits of our Savior
and Lord Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be ascribed
all Adoration, Honor, Power and Praise, etc.

Amen.

