(...): Or, The English unparalleled PHYSICIAN AND CHYRURGIAN: Showing The true
Use of all manner of PLANTS and MINERALS. In which is Explained, The whole ART
and SECRESY of Physic and Chyrurgery. Wherein is contained, 1. The cure of any
Internal Disease, which has taken effect, and brought forth Symptoms, either
outwardly or inwardly, in the Head, Stomach, Back, Belly, etc. 2. The making of
diverse rare and excellent Balsames, Oils, Plasters, and Waters, with the
effects thereof. 3. The making and use of Purges, Vomits, Drinks, and Clisters,
according to Rules of Physic and Astrology. 4. The nature and temperature of
Herbs, Plants, and Vegetables, and the use thereof, and the Influence of the
Planets as well over Herbs and Plants, as over the Bodies of Men. 5. The way to
extract the Spirits and Quintaessences of several sorts of Herbs and Minerals,
and the rare Operations they have. 6. The making of Salt of Wormwood, Balm, or
any other Herb. 7. The Cure of any Wound, Contusion, Puncture, or Ulcer in any
part of the Body. All which have been prescribed and practiced by several
Learned Doctors and Chyrurgians.


By D. BORDER, Practitioner in Physic.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, and are to be sold at his house in Grubstreet,
near the Upper Pump. 1651,

To the Right Honorable the Lord BRADSHAW Lord President of the Council of
State, etc.
My Lord,
IT has been the general practice of writers, to dedicate their books of Art
and learning, to learned and honorable persons, under whose patronage they are
protected, find the better acceptance abroad, and the instruments attain the
opportunity to acknowledge their duty and thankfulness to those whom they
reverence and honor. The last whereof was the cause that brought these things
into a book, and the book unto you.

The main subject whereon it consists, is, the very Quintaessence of
Hypocrates, Galen, Ioubertus, Paracelsus; and other learned men of these latter
times, which for the most part have been experimentally tried and approved
excellent, though in general they have been kept secret and hidden from the
public; for whose good I have taken some pains to put them into such a method,
that all that have need may receive benefit and comfort. Having such a Talent
in my hand I thought it my duty to improve it to the best advantage of the
republic; for herein the rich may at least take delight, the middle sort gain
knowledge and experience, the poor find relief, when they want money to seek
for other help, and all sorts of people remedies against all kind of maladies,
sicknesses or diseases incident to man's body, if they be carefully administered
and applied, according to the directions. set down, for here is variety of
medicines according to the nature of the disease, whereas some Emperick of our
time, have but one plaster for all sores.

Here is also set down certain rules and directions for Physicians and
Chyrurgians which are no less necessary to be known, then the subject or
matter on which they are to work; for I find it recorded, that Paracelsus did
more good in his time, by making known the Theorie, then Gallen did in all his
life, which more then doubled the years of Paracelsus.

Non nobis solum nati sumus, etc. is a true position, and was never more really
practiced then by your Lordship, whom God has raised up to be a principal
instrument to preserve this nations peace and tranquillity: and for this cause
the whole Commonwealth challenges an interest to your honor, and look upon
you as their chief protector against the Common enemy, the great Physician, to
cleanse and purge the evil and malign humors; which are apt to arise in the
body politic, that the Godly receive comfortable and refreshing cordials, nay
eve^ the dew from heaven, under a flourishing pious ministry, in a land of
peace flowing with milk and honey. And the great Physician both of soul and
body, preserve you with increase of honor, and length of days, which is the
prayer of.

Your Lordships humbly devoted in all service. DAN, BORDER.

The Table Alphabetical of the Wounds, Maladies, Diseases, and Sicknesses, for
which there be approved remedies prescribed in this Book.
A
AChes of all sorts cured chap. 45. pa. 21. etc. See more in Oils and Ointments.
Apoplexy and the cure See the vertus of Herbs, etc. Agues c. 129. p. 85.
Alopecia, or the coming off of the hair c. 58. p. 29. Almonds swelled and
inflamed c. 64. p. 33. See more in squinancy. Antidotes and preservatives
against infectious air c. 85. p. 50. Asthma or the Tysick c. 105. p. 66. St.
Anthonies fire c. 43. p. 18.
B
BUrsting and the cure thereof c. 111. p. 71. Bruises c. 130. p. 85. c. 141. p.
91. Back and Reins c. 142. p. 91. Benummednesse of the legs or thighs c. 151.
p. 95. Burning or scalding, c. 154. p. 94. The Artificial Balsom and several
other excellent Balsomes and the effects thereof c. 125. p. 81. c. 126. p. 82.
etc. Spitting of Blood, c. 73. p 40. etc. Bleeding at the nose stayed c. 62. p.
31. Bloody flux of long continuance c. 90. p. 52.
C
COntusions in the head or any other part c. 9. p. 5. c. 17. p. 8. c. 97. p.
80. Cancer in the breast c. 32. p. 15. Contraction or shrinking of sinews with
a consumption helped c. 55. p. 27. Cough of the Lungs, c. 69. p. 37. Cough with
shortness of breath c. 70. p. 38. Cough and pain in the side c. 74. p. 43.
Cramp an excellent remedy against it c. 54. p. 27. Catarrhe, Rheum, Cough and
Tysick c. 96. p. 58. Corns on the feet c. 117. p. 77. Chilblains, and their
cure c. 116. p. 76.
D
Dropsies, the signs and the cure thereof c. 77. p. 45. c, 78. p. 46. Drink for
the yellow Jaundies c. 169. p. 107 Drink for spitting blood c. 170. ibid. Drink
for a surfeit c. 171: ib. Drink for restoring any decay of the inward parts c.
173. p. 108 Drink for a woman in danger to miscarry c. 174. p. 109. Drink for
melancholy and choler c. 175. ib. Drink for the Scurvey c. 176. p. 110.
Diet-drink for any disease c. 177. p, 111. Diet-drink opening obstructions,
etc. c, 179. p. 104. Deafness and the perfect cure thereof c. 204. p. 128.
E
Eyes pricked or hurt c. 16. p. 7. Eyes that are sore c. 61. p. 30. Pin and Web
in the eyes c. ib. p. 31. Pearl in the eyes c. ib. Eyes that are dim, an
Ointment c. 99. p. 81. Ears that run c. 123. p. 81. Emrods and their cure c.
91. p. 53. etc. 109. p. 69. Electuary for Gonorrhea or running of the reins c.
88. p. 51. Electuary to expel wind, etc. c. 76. p. 45.
F
Fistulaes in any part of the body c. 40. p. 17. Another, c. 199, p. 123. c.
156. p. 96 Falling sickness c. 66. p. 34. Fevers, Pestilentia, etc. c. 83. p.
48. Flux of all sorts c. 89. p. 52. The fingers and their infirmities, c. 118.
p. 78.
G
Gargarism to purge the brain c. 59. p. 29. ^outs c. 49. p. 23. Gonorrhea, or
the running of the Reins c. 88. p. 50. Another c. 108. p. 69.
H
Head, the cure of any pain there c. 95. p. 57. Head grievously wounded c. 5.
p. 3. Hicket c. 65. p. 34. Herbs of all sorts with the virtues and use of them
c. 204. p. 127.
I
Jaundies, c. 65. p. 35. c. 94. p. 56. Itch, with small Pustules taken away c.
39. p. 16. Impetigo or Lichen c. 41, p. 18. Impostume c. 74. p. 43. Implaister
c. 44. p. 19. Implaister for the Rheum, p. 141. Inflammations of any part of the
body. c. 73. p. 41. Another. c. 43. p. 19 Another c. 64. p. 33.
K
Kidneys that are grieved with the Stone c. 189. p. 118. Another c. 187. p.
116. Kernels c. 102. p. 62. King's Evil c. ib. p. 63,
L
Lips ulcerated c. 21. p. 9. Legs uicerated c. 26. p. 11. Leprosy healed c.
30. p. 13. Lichen cured c. 41. p. 18. Legs swelled c. 25. p. 11 Lungs c. 69. p.
37. See more in the virtues of Herbs.
M
Memory c. 161. p. 103. Medicine for the Piles, c. 43. p. 18. Mouth sore c. 20.
p. 9. Mundifying Ointment c. 40. p. 17. Menstures c. 89. p. 52. Another c. 61.
p. 56. Matrix c. 110. p. 71. Melancholy purged, c. 175. p. 109. Madness c.
188. p. 117. Measels c. 193. p. 102. Mother ibid. Megrom c. 204, p. 132, See
more in the virtues of Herbs. Morbus Gallicus c. 22. p. 10. Hardness of the
Melt c. 107. p. 68 Medicines made of Man c. ibid. p. 133. Mirth. c. 138. p. 89.
Menstrues retained. c. 92. p. 55. Menstrues in melancholy persons. ib.
Melancholy and spleen. c. 82. p. 48 Mother rising. c. 93. ib. Miscarrying of
Women. c. 174. p. 109. Minerals c, 203. p. 126.
N
Neck drawn awry c. 56. p. 28.
O
Oil of Balm c. 134. p. 87. Oil of Lillies c. 133. p. 86. Oil of Roses c. 132.
p. 86. Oil of Exceter c. 130. p. 85. Obstructions opened c. 146. p. 92. Oil of
Worms and the virtues c. 135. p. 87. Oil of Broom and the virtues c. 137. p.
88. Oil of Hempseed and the use c 138. p. 89. Ointment, green c. 139. p. ib.
Ointment for a Crick c. 140. p. 90. Ointment for a bruise c. 141. p. 91.
Ointment for the back c. 142. p. ib. Ointment for stitches c. 143. p. ib.
Ointment for the ears c. 144. p. 92. Ointment for the Lungs c. 147. p. 93.
Ointment for deafness c. 148. ib. Ointment to break a sore c. 149. ib.
Ointment for a scald or burn c. 150. p. 94. Ointment to take away a Wen c. 151.
p. 95. Ointment for Sciatica c. 152. p. ib. Ointment for Shingles c. 153. ib.
Ointment for the Gout c. 155. p. 96. Ointment against the Palsy c. 156. p. ib.
Ointment mundificative c. 40. p. 17. Open obstructions and provoke urine. c.
95. p. 56.
P
Purge the head c. 59. p. 9. 2 Pox. c. 46. p. 21. Plurisies c. 73. p. 40. Pains
in the side c. 74. p. 43. Pain in the belly of wind c. 75. p. 44. Pustules c.
39. p. 16. Plaster c. 44. p. 19. Pains c. 45. p. 21. Pin and Web c. 61. p. 30.
Pearl in the Eye c. ib. Plaster for the stomach c. 76. p. 45. Pestilent
fevers c. 83. p. 48. Poison, Plague, and Pestilence c, 85. p. 49. Another c.
195. p. 121. Preservatives c. 87. p. 50. Piles cured c. 91. p. 53. Pain in the
eyes c. 99. p. 61. Pavaricium c. 103. p. 63. Purge for Melancholy c. 159. p.
102. Pills ib. Pills of Liquorice for a cold c. 163. p. 103. Purge phlegm and
choler c. 169. p 102. Powder for the Memory c. 160. p, 103. Purging Drinks, c.
167. p. 105, etc. Pricking of the Eyes, c. 182. p. 114. Poultis, See Virtues of
Herbs. Precious Waters c. 196. p, 121.
Q
Quartain of long continuance c. 80. p 47. Quintaessence of Man's blood, and use
thereof c. 200. p 12^. Quintaessence of herbs, roots, etc. c, 201. p* 125.
Quintaessence of the four Elements c: 203: p: ib. Quintaessence of Gold c: 203:
p: 126.
R
Ring-worms c: 34: p: 16. See Tetter. Rhume in the head c. 96. p. 58. Another
c. 163. p: 103. Reins of the back c: 108: p: 69. Running of the Reins, c: 88:
p: 50. Rules for Physicians, c: 157: p: 97. Roots, see Herbs.
S
Sale made of Wormwood, or any other Herb c: 204: p: 138. Salve c: 204: p: 129.
Scull wounded c: 7: p: 3. Another c: 11: p: 5. Scald head c: 23: p: 10. Stone
in the Reins or Bladder c: 134: p: 87. Another c: 184: p: 115. Another c: 187:
p: 116. Another c: 189: p: 118. Sores rotten c: 28: p: 12 Surfei: c: 181: p:
114. Shingles c: 37: p: 16. Scabs c: 39: p: ib. Searcloth c: 44: p: 19* Scurvey
c: 50: p: 24. Swelling c: 52: p: 26. Sciatica c: 53: p: ib. Sinews shrunk c:
55: p: 27. Squinsey c: 57: p: 2^. and c: 64: p: 33. Stitch in the side c: 69:
p: 37. Short breath c: 70: p: 38. Stomach c: 76: p: 45. Another c: 191: p: 119.
Swelling of the Spleen, c: 82: p: 48 Suffocations c: 93: p: 55. Sight dim c:
99: p: 61. Scrophulae c: 102: p: 62. Swelling of the Legs and Feet c: 115: p:
75. see more in Ointments
T
Tetters c: 34: p: 14 etc. Tissick c: 96: p: 58, and c: 105: p: 66. Tooth*ach
c: 19^: p: 119.
V
Vomits c: 166: p: 105. Vomiting stayed c: 71: p: 38. Vomiting of blood c: 7^:
p: 39. Ulcers in the mouth c: ^0: p. 19. Ulcers in the throat c: 2^: p: 10.
Ulcers in the Legs, or any other part of the body c: 26: p: 11. and c: 29: p:
12, and c: 104. p: 66. Great Ulcers in a Child, c: 3^: p: 15. Urine provoked c:
94: p: 56: etc. Another c: 112: p: 73: Unguent for the eyes, c: 100: p: 61.
Unguentum, see more in Ointments. Virtues of Herbs and Waters cs 204: p: 127,
etc.
W
Worms c: 180: p: 113. Wounds in general c: 2: p: 2. Wounds in the head c: 5:
p: 3. Wounds with Fractures, c: 8: p: 4. Wounds contused c: 9: p: 5. Wounds by
shot or lance c: 13: p: 6. Wound or puncture through the Arm, etc. c: 18: p: 8.
Wind in the stomach or belly c: 76: p: 47* etc. Water that comfort the
Spirits, helps the Palsy etc. c. 180: p: 113. Water of Barley for an Ague or
fever c: 186: p: 116. Warer for the falling sickness. c: 190: p: 118. Water
against the small Pox, Measels, Fevers, etc. c: 193: p: 120. Water for a sore
c: 194: p: 121, Water very precious c: 196: p: ib. Water against the Pestilence
c: 195: p: ib. Water for a weak back. c: 198: p: 12^.
A Table of English names of such Simples as are mentioned in this Book.
A
ANetum, Anet or Dill. Arthemesia, Mugwort. Apium risne, Chiverill. Astrologia
longae, Red Madder. Astrologia ro^unda, Gallingall. Abrotonum, Southernwood.
Allebrya, Stubwort. Avancia, Bearfoot. Altia, Hollihock. Amarusia, Dog-fennell.
Allium, Garlic. Auricula, Mouse-ear. Apium emo, Crow-foot. Apium ranarum,
Water Crowfoot. Auriga, Knapwort. Anabulla, Spurge. Acus Muscula,
Ground-Meddle. Arch-angell,

B
BAlsamanta vel menta aquatica. Watermint. Balsamenta, Horsemint. Barba Angeli,
Blind-nettle. Bigula, Buglas. Bovibax, Cotton. Bursa-Pastoris,
Shepheards-Pouch. Brauca, Sea-Dock. Borago silvestris, Wild-Burrage. Basilicon,
Dragons. Cerputari^, Dragons. Colabria, Dragons. Bigona cucurbica, Wood Nip.

C
CHeverfoil vel Capri^olium, Woodbine. Culumbaria, Pennywort. Cicuta, Hemlock.
Centauria major, Great Centory. Centauria minor, Little Centory. Capi^li
vencris, Maidenhair. Crocus, Saffron. Canabarina, Wild Hemp. Cepe, Onyon.
Colubina, Coltsfoot. Cardiaca* Cardiater or Elespear. Cicera, French-pease.
Caulus Gallica* Cabage. Cembaria, Pennyworth. Consolida major, Red-Dea^ie*
Cnosolida minor, Bothem, or Dea^ie. Consolida media, White Bothem, or Dea^ie.
Citrago, Medewort.

D
DRagancia, Dragons. Diptanum, Dittany. Deus leonis, Dandelion.

E
ENula campana, Elecampane. Edera, Ivy. Edera terrestris, Ground Ivy. Eufrebum,
Clarey. Eleborus niger, Clove tongue or Podelion. Epatica, Liverwort. Epina,
Fox-glove. Ebulus, The less Wallwort. Enduna, Liverwort. Lacituca* Liverwort.
Epatica, Liverwort. Eupatorium, Wild-sage. Ambros, Wild-sage. Eufragium*
Eyebright. Elleborus albus* Pellitory of Spain.

F
FLaminila, Spearwort. Fuimistere, Femitory. Fragia, Strawberry. Flos
unguentorum, Flower of Ointments. Fabaria, Brook-lime or ^averole. Felix, Fern.
Filependula, Drop-water. Feniculus Porcus, Swines*fennell. Febrifuga, Fetherew.
Filago, Field-water, or Horewort* Flammula minor, The less spear-wort. Flos
campi, Horse-cockle. Fe^i^ugio* Horse*gall.

G
GRanum solis, Gromell. Genestula, Broom. Gracia Dei, Favor of God. Gladiolus,
Flag. Gariofolus, Gilli-flower.

H
HYpericon, St: John's Wort. Herba c^lera^a* Chiverill.

I
IUsquianus, Henbane. Iris, Flower de luce. Jacia alba, Goose-grasse. Ipia
major, Pimpernel self heal or waywort. Ipia minor, Chickweed. Jacitus Rusticus,
Blew Bothem.

L
LIngua ceruma vel Scrophularia, Hearts tongue. Ligustrium, Primrose. Lingua
canis* Hounds tongue. Labrum veneris, Sow-thistle. Lactuca silvestris,
Wild-Lettice. Lactuca leporica, H^re*thistle. Lollium, Cockle. Lappacium.
Red-Dock.

M
MEllilotum, Honey-suckle. Marubium album, Mawort or white Hore-hound. Marubium
rubium, Red Horehound. Masturcium, Town-cresses. Masturcium aquaticum,
Watercresses. Masturcium gallicum, French-cresses. Masturcium p^atium.
Mead-cresses.

N
NEpta, Nep.

O
OCulus bovis, Oxe-eye. Ofinum, Mystelto. Orobus. Mowse-piss.

P
PApaver album, White Poppey. Polipodium, Oak-fern. Petrocilium, Parsley.
Petrocilium egreste, Wild Parsley. Pes Pully, Coltsfoot. Persutaria, Ar^mart.
Pes arie^is, Rams-^oot or lodewort. Plantago major, Plan^any. Plantago minor.
Ribwort.

Q
Quinque folium, vel cinque foil, Five leaved grass. Quercula major. Germander
or hair cloth.

R
RUta domestica, Rue. Rubea major, Red Madder. Rappaver, Radish. Resta bonis.
Cammock.

S
SAturion minor, Crowleek or harebell. Sigillum Sanctae Ma^ia, St. Mary's seal,
Satureia, Savory, Semperania, Sengreen or Howsleek. Stasifragia, Staves-acre.
Speragus. Mawort.

T
TRefoil vel Mellileta, Three leaved grass. Tan^ecum. Tan^e.

The names of Herbs out of which you may by the rules set down in this book
extract Salt, or take the spirits of any of them which is of very excellent
nature and use.
BAlm, Sweet Marserome, Wormwood, Fennel. Rosemary, Sage. Angelica, Costmary,
Cardus Benedictus, Bittony, Mints, Valerian, Spike, Saxafrage, Elecampane, Horehound, Hysop, Coltsfoot. Winter-savory.

Of these herbs following you may make sirrups which are of great use in
several cases.
Hart's-tongue, Horehound, Mugwort, Mirtel, Champeties, Maudlin, Epithimum,
Rubarb, Hysop, Marshmallows, Wormwood, Scurvey-grasse, Comfrey, Bittony,
Succory, Liquoris, Balm, Smallage, Sparagus, Fennel, Parsley, Bruscus.

The Chymicall PHYSICIAN AND CHYRVRGIAN.
CONTAINING Many excellent Secrets, and approved Cures and Remedies for all
kind of Wounds, Pains, Acbes, Diseases or Sicknesses incident to man's body.

CHAP. I.
The Description of an expert Chyrurgian.
A Good and true Chyrurgian, is no other the^ a minister and helper of nature;
who has three operations to perform, in curing of wounds; the first is that he
join the separated parts close together; the second, to preserve it from pain;
the third, that he keep it from putrefaction: all the rest he may leave unto
nature, which will work with good expedition. And this is a sure intention
concerning the cure of wounds: never keep the flesh open with tents or pledgets
neither weaken nature by letting of blood, or by purging nor yet by strait diet
to cause the pain to increase but keep the wou^d always clean* washing it with
aqua balsami, and lay upon the wound, clothes wet in magno licore. This is a
good and an approved order: whereof whosoever will know more, let him look in
Leonardo Fioravante his book, of Rational Secrets, where he shall be satisfied
more at large.

CHAP. II.
The cure of all manner of wounds in general.
ALl kind of wounds, may be healed with these medicines following (according to
the method before mentioned) viz. with our balsamo, with Aqua balsami, balsamum
artificiale, buintaessentia vini, oleum resinae pini, oleum cerae and
terebinthinae, magno licore, cerotum magistrale, ^lixi^ vitae, oleum
hypericonis compositum, flos unguentorum, and Paracelsis.

CHAP. III.
The cause why wounds cannot heal quickly.
THough there be many more, yet chiefly they may be reduced unto two causes.
The one is an immoderate and extreme diet, which weakneth the stomach and body
so much, that nature cannot prevail to conglutinate or soder the flesh
together. And thus through want of natural heat, the wound falls to
impostumation, Gangrena, fistulaes, etc. and can hardly be cured. The second is
the keeping of them too much open by reason of their tents or pledgets, so that
they cannot join together again, but grow to Cancers, and Fistulaes, whereupon
many times the patient remains lame ever after, or else speedy death is the
end thereof.

CHAP. IIII.
Of wounds in the head, how they must be dealt withal.
ALl wounds in the head must be close joined and kept together, the blood must
be crushed out, then wash it well, with some thing that has virtue to liquifie
the blood, as the Quintaess. of wine, or such like. Then lay thereon lint; wet
in oleum benedictum: this medicin you shall cha^g in four days, but every day
once wash the wound round about with that Quintaessence, and anoint with the
said oil, and at the fourth days end dress it again, and let it remain two
days more and after that for a day more, and the wound (by the help of God)
shall be cured in xii or xiiii days. Thus may you deal with all wounds save
those that are made in the belly. As for all other, either simple or compound
wounds: you shall find their cure, methodically showed, in the Rational secrets
of Leonardo Fioravante published in English.

CHAP. V.
The healing of a grievous wound on the side of the head.
THe wound was made on the side of the head, almost to dura matter: but it was
healed in this manner. First there was put into the same the Quintaessence
aforesaid, then a little balsamo, then there was applied a cloth which was wet
in magno licore, made very hot, upon which cloth was laid our secret powder,
covered with lint, and thus he was dressed once every day, till he was whole.
You must note* that whenever the scull is hurt unto dura matter, there must be
cast up at y^ nosethrils our balsamo: that the smell may pierce upward, and
resolve the offense. Sometime also instead of a defensative you may anoint
round about the wound, with the foresaid balm, which preserves from
putrefaction and alteration.

CHAP. VI.
A dangerous wound in the head cured in five days.
IT was healed very quickly by putting therein our Aqua caelestis and balsamo,
and by applying unto the same very hot cloths wet in magno licore.

CHAP. VII.
The cure of a wound on the ear to the scull.
A Sore wound was made on the ear, which was cut unto the scul of the head, and
was healed in this manner first by anointing it with our Quintaessence, which
caused it to war very hot, the space of two hours. After that, there was put in
^ur oleum philosophorum, de teribinthina and cem, and so he dressed it every
day once.

CHAP. VIII.
How three wounds in the head, with fracture of the bone or scull were healed
by, I. P.
A Certain miller in Buckinghamshire called Peter Bull, being sore wounded in
the head, whereof one wound was in the midst of the head with fracture of the
scul, an other within an inch of that, six inches long, he had another wound
over his eye-brow, two inches long; besides the wounds in his head he had also
a great wound in the bow of his arm, beside the elbow so that a man might have
laid his three fingers in it, diverse of his fingers were also cut, and he lost
two joints: This man bled by the space of 7 or 8 hours before it was stinted:
neither was he dressed until the next day, but yet he was cured in this
manner: First the hair was shaven away, round about the wounds on his head, and
the wounds were made clean, then was there dropped into the wound balsamum
sulfuris made very warm: and a fine cloth wet therein was applied to the
wounds, and round about the wounds there was a defensative applied: thus he was
dressed once in 24 hours and within the space of three weeks, he was perfectly
helped, that he ^id wear no plaster at all; also you shall note, that upon the
wound next the cloth, there was laid cerotum magistrale: forget not that this
balsome be always used warm, with a fine linen cloth or a piece of Cambrick,
and not with any ^int; this balsome did cause the hair to grow so fast about
the wounds, that it was fain to be shaved away very often.

CHAP. IX.
O^ contused wounds on the head, or other parts of the body.
THe encient practitioners, have esteemed contused wounds to be very dangerous;
for they say, contus^ens must first be brought to putrifactio^, and turned into
matter: which opinion is not to be allowed, for the bruises are to be dissolved
without (...)ation* which has been a thousand times proved in the wars, after
this manner to have been performed. Recipe, magno licore, oleum benedictum, of
each alike mi^^ them, and being very hot wet clothes there* in and lay there on
twice a day and in 3 or 4 days they will be ^^ssolved* also the ^il of
Frankincense, or oleum philosopho^um de tereb. and cere, will dissolve any
simple bruise in 3 or 4 hours, only by continual anointing the place
therewith, so fast as it drinks in any* Provided that the bruise be not above
6 or 8 hours old, for if it be, then will your work be somewhat the longer,
before it be finished.

CHAP. X.
A contused wound in the head, healed by, I. P.
A Young man of 28 years of age that had a great contusion on the head with a
staff, was helped thereof in nine days, by applying thereunto balsamum
sulfuris, before mentioned.

CHAP. XI.
A wound in the head, with fracture of the scull, cured by, I. P.
A Little boy with a fall from a horse; had a fracture in the scull, which was
healed with balsamum sulfuris, and cerotum magistrale Leonardo. The child, did
at his dressing vomit very often: which argued the breaking of his scul, yet
was he healed in seven days.

CHAP. XII.
To heal wounds speedily.
FIrst wash them very well with our aqua balsami, then join them very close
together, and lay thereon a cloth were in oleo resinae pini: and (through Gods
help) they shall quickly be healed.

CHAP. XIII.
To heal wounds, by shot, or lance.
HE that will cure wounds that are made with sho^, lance, arrows, etc* must
first wash the wound well with urin, and dry the wound well, then let him put
therein* the Quintaess. of wine, and forthwith join the wound close and hard
together. Then let him put immediately therein, five or six drops of our
balsamo artific. and lay ^ cloth upon the wound, wet in magno licore, which
must be applied so hot as he may suffer it; thus must he do the first day. That
being done, he must put thereon our Quintaessence of wine, and then a little
balsamo, after that some magno licore (as before said) and so let him hold on
to the end of his cure.

CHAP. XIIII.
A most singular and wonderful remedy to heal wounds quickly.
VVDunds must be helped with drying medicines, (as was noted in the third
Chapter) such medicines I say, as have birtue, to preserve the part offended
from putrif^cti^. This will be performed, with our a qua balsami, and the oil
distilled from vernice liquid: for these two, a^e apt to heal all sorts of
wounds: if ye wash them with the water, and anoint them round about with the
oil* for they do not only keep the wounds from putrefying* but they help to
cicarrise quickly, and in such manner, as it seems mavelous, most
profitable for the wounded patient, but best for the good and honest Surgeon,
which abhors in his works to play the tinker, which in stopping of one hole
is wont to make three, but with as much safety and speed, as nature and art
will yield, to bring to pass all his honest intentions.

CHAP. XV.
A wound in the eye, with a splinter healed by, W. H.
A Splinter of wood leapt into the eye of a certain maiden, as she was chopping
of sticks. The wound was so griebous, that the gelly of her eye came forth* by
the space of a month: all this while, she could neither see, nor take any
rest. By the blessing of God within four days after she could thread a needle,
and was recovered in this manner. First there was dropped into her eye,
balsamum sulfuris warm, and then a cloth wet therein, was applied thereunto,
by which only she was cured: the maid dwells in Nottinghamshire.

CHAP. XVI.
A prick in the eye with a knife, healed by W. H.
A Child of seven years of age, had a pundure in the eye with a knife which was
cured by dropping therein, balsamum sulfuris warm, and laying a defensative
round about it.

Another cure performed in like manner by W. H.
ONe George Clark, servant to the right worshipfal M. Butler of Denham (then
high Sheriff of Bedford) was healen of a puncture in the eye with the foresaid
medicine.

CHAP. XVII.
An hand flat squatted, and contused, healed by. W. H.
AN old man, called Thomas Smith, of Carlton in Northamptonshire, husbandman,
in lopping of a tree had his hand caught between two boughs, and was squatted
in pieces; this contused hand, was presently put close together, and anointed
with oleum philosoporum de Tereb, and cera, and through Gods goodness, was
perfectly cured in eight days.

CHAP. XVIII.
A wound or puncture through the Arm, I. P.
A Young man called Hudson, a Carpenter of Carlton in Northamptonshire, being
thrust through the arm with a pitchfork, was thus cured: First there was
infected magno licore (as hot as he could avide it) into the wou^d. Then there
was a linen cloth wet in the same oil, applied unto the wound upon the which
cloth, was also laid a pledget of cerocum magistrale: this wounded man was
healed in five or six days.

CHAP. XIX.
Five wounds in the breast.
A Certain man that had five stocadoes into the body, was thus cured: First,
there was put into the wounds the Quintaessence of wine, then were the wounds
dressed, with balsamo artific. which caused him to vomit, and to avoid much
bruised blood. After that he drank every morning a little aqua balsami, and in
short time by Gods help was perfectly cured.

Verbum sapienti sat est, and a man may know by the half, what the whole means.
By these few experimented secrets, you may proceed unto the cure of any wound,
contusion, or puncture, in what part of the body so ever they shall be. The
things wherewith you are to work, as balsamum sulfuris, oleum philosophorum de
Terebinthinae and cera, cerotum magistrale, etc. therefore let us proceed unto
the experimented secrets, concerning Ulcers, and Sores, either simple, or
complicate with diseases, as they have been observed by those which have proved
them.
CHAP. XX.
The healing of sore mouths.
THe Ulcers and Sores that have been in the mouths of young and old, have been
healed, by the lotion or gargarism, made with plantain water, honey suckle
water, and barley water, mixed with saccarum Saturni.

CHAP. XXI.
An Ulcer in the upper lip.
A Certain Porter of London, having an Ulcer on his upper lip, which was like a
Cancer (some called it Noli me tangere) continually running, with filthy
stinking sanies, was thus cured. First he was purged, with Turpetum minerale;
then was the sore dressed with this medicine.

Take Aloes lotae, half an ounce, salis preparati, two drams, Mellis, four
ounces, misce, and utere.

CHAP. XXII.
An Ulcer in the throat, ex Morbo Gallico.
A Young woman, that was much troubled in the throat, with a grievous Ulcer,
was thus cured. First she was purged with Aromatico, and twice or thrice with
our Quintaessence solutive, mixed with syrup of roses, then was the sore
touched with aqua realis, two or three times, with a little lint, and lastly
she used this gargarism.

Take Mellis rosarum two ounces Diamorum two ounces and a half of honey suckle
water, six ounces, oleum vitrioli as much as will suffice to make it tart:
this has been often proved in dangerous cases.

CHAP. XXIII.
The healing of a scald head.
A Woman had all her head, covered with a most filthe scab, which was dry
above, and moist underneath, very noisome to behold, who could neither be
healed by purging, or local medicines, that were used till this medicine was
applied unto her. Once in a day, oleum ligni guaiaci, was applied, and in short
time, the scal fell away, like a scull of an head, and there began hair to grow
underneath it: this cure was performed in twelve days.

Another cure performed upon a scald head.
A Maiden of eighteen years of age, having a huge great scal upon her head, was
cured (after she had taken one dose of Aromatico) by often washing the part
affected, with Matter balsami Fioravante.

CHAP. XXIIII.
An Ulcer on the thumb.
ONe had such a filthy and stinking ulcer on the thumb, that the Chyrurgians
would have cut off the whole thumb. This party was afterward cured, by the
application of Fodicationum emplastri.

CHAP. XXV.
An Ulcerated leg swollen.
A Young boy that had an ulcerated leg wonderfully swollen, was thus cured. He
received at two several times, Quintaessence solutive, with syrup of roses.
Then were the sores washed with salt of vitrioll, dissolved in plantain water:
a cloth being wet therein, and applied thereto morning and evening.

CHAP. XXVI.
Two putrified Ulcers on the leg, healed by I. P.
FIrst this patient was purged with Aromatico Leon. once or twice: then his
ulcers were dressed with this unguent made of rubified vitriol: and a cerot
called the great Cerot. This was applied unto the ulcers, with a pledget of
lint and was suffered to lie 24 hours which mortified the sores. Then was more
of the same unguent applied, and with an instrument the escare was loosed round
about, and in three or four days the escare came away easily, with a pair of
Mullets: then he healed it up with magno licore, and saccarum plumbi, within a
while after.

CHAP. XXVII.
Three Ulcers in the leg, healed by W. H.
A Certain woman of Bedford, had three ulcers in her leg who had sought her
cure at the hands of diverse, the space of 4 years but could find no help yet
she was afterward cured in this manner: first she took in the morning fasting
Aromatico Leonardo, which evacuated her stomach and belly. Then was there
applied unto y^ sores saccarum plumbi, three or four days together, which
caused every day, a certain thin skin to come upon the ulcer^, much like the
film of an egg, the same skin was taken away every day. With this medicine
following, it was dressed the fourth day: which caused it to look fair and red,
the next dressing: and so in short time it was perfectly cured. To one
spoonful of magno licore was put as much saccarum Saturni, as would lie upon a
three pence: and so it was incorporated warm: ye sores were dressed therewith
every day.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The cure of old rotten sores by W. R.
A Certain old woman did in this manner help diverse old sores in the body:
first she purged the patients, and then she applied this unguent to the sores
Take a pot of strong ale, and set it to boil over a gentle fire, till it was
thick like a salve, and then use it. At the first this medicine will smart, and
be somewhat painful to bear, nevertheless it will cleanse and heal. Note.


Also a friend of mine told me that the suyce of Marigold leaves, or the
leaves, boiled to an unguent, will heal all ulcers and wounds.

CHAP. XXIX.
The healing of Ulcers in most parts of the body, but chiefly in the head by,
W. H.
A Certain man being full of ulcers, coming of the pocks, in most part of his
body showing themselves, but chiefly in the head, was cured in this manner.
First he was purged twice or thrice, with Panchimagogon, after that, he kept
his chamber (that had a good fire in it) and took six grains of Turpetum
diaphoreticum, mixed with 1 dram of Amuletum Palmarij. Half an hour before, he
took a draught of fat broth, and kept his bed: and always as he vomited, he
washed his mouth, with a convenient gargarism, and sweat thereon one hour or
two, and then was dried with warm clothes: that done, he reposed a day or two,
and took the foresaid Turpetum again, in manner aforesaid: this he did three or
four times. In the mean while, he anointed his fingers with oleum guaiaci,
which did both cleanse and heal. Also diverse times, he used this potion in the
morning, which caused him to sweat Take 2 ounces of the water of lignum vitae,
made by distillation, and as much of the syrrup of fumitory, and 1 scruple of
the salt of lignum vitae, mix them warm, and drink it fasting. Thus in very
short time he was cured. This one thing must not be forgotten, that when there
shall come any inflammation or soreness in the mouth you do use this gargarism
following. Take plantain water, honey suckle water, of each 4 ounces, barley
water 6 ounces, mel rosarum 2 ounces and a half, Diamorum 2 ounces, oleum
vitrioli, as much as will make it tart: this will heal any sore in the mouth.
Remember also, that if the ulcers be very corrosive and foul you shall touch
them once or twice with oleum vitrioli or oleum tartari faetens, whereby they
willheal the sooner; this has been often proved.

CHAP. XXX.
The healing of scabs like the leprosy by G. M.
A Young man which was thought to be infected we a leprosy, had on his head
and most parts of his body, hard and dry scabs, but he was cured in this
manner: first he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo once or twice. Then every
morning till he was cured, he took 1 scruple of the extract of Camepiteos,
either in a pill or in drink as he thought good. After that his sores were
dressed, with this unguent. Take succi sempermui 2 ounces succi plantaginis 4
ounces and a half, succi solani, 3 ounces, sacchari Saturni 2 ounces and a
half, mix them, and stir them well together over a gentle fire, til all the
saccharum ^e dissolved, and therewith dress the sores twice a day.

CHAP. XXXI.
The healing of a Child that was full of ulcers, coming of the pocks.
A Young child four years old that was grievously tormented with the French
disease, having extreme pain in his body, and being full of sores, was thus
cured. Take the distilled water of lignum vitae, 1 ounce, salis ejusdem, 1 dram
mix them, and thereof the child drank with syrrup of fumitory, or hops, morning
and evening, and sometime the child sweat thereon. Also the sores were anointed
with this unguent. Take oleum guaiaci, half an ounce, balsamum sulfuris half a
dram, saccarum plumbi half a dram, oleum camphorae, five or six drops, the
caput mortuum of aqua fortis 1 scruple, mix them well, and grind them one a
stone, with May butter, and therewith the sores were anointed morning and
evening.

CHAP. XXXII.
A Cancer cured by an old Emperick.
A Certain Emperick did help many cancers, in diverse people (that were troubled
with them) after this manner. He took certain worms, called in latin
Centumpedes, in english sows: they are such as lie under old timber, or between
the bark and the tres. These he stamped, and strained with ale, and gave the
patient to drink thereof morning and evening. This medicine caused many times a
certain black bug, or worm to come forth which had many legs, and was quick,
and after that the cancer would heal quickly with any convenient medicine.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The healing of pocky pustules, with Serpigo, by W, H.
A Certain man having a number of sores, all over his body, and a serpigo in
the palm of his hand, so grievous thata man might have laid great straws
therein, was healed in this manner: first he was purged three times, with six
grains of Turpetum minerale Phaed^onis, mixed with half a dram of Amuletum
Palmarij. That done, he anointed all his sores twice or thrice with oleum
Tartari faetens: afterward with unguentum ex Lithargirio Fioravante Now
touching his hands that had the serpigo, he held the^ morning and evening over
a bath of oats, and other warm herbs, that they might sweat, and then anointed
them, with balsamum sulsuris, and in a short time they were helped. An unguent
made with saccarum Saturni, and oil of roses, will do the like effect.

CHAP. XXXIV.
A tetter or ringworm cured by, W. K.
THere is a certain worm or tetter which many times comes on the back of the
hand or arm, and does corrode like a serpigo, but it is none, which (after the
use of many other medicines) has been cured in this manner. The place was
anointed five or six times a day, with the syrrup of sugar, that the worm might
come to the upper place or skin: then within three or four days after, he
anointed the place with oleum Tartari faetens: and in short time he was cured,
though his disease had continued three years, coming and going. Some have
killed the worm, with oleum vitrioli.

CHAP. XXXV.
A man cured that was full of tetters.
THis was the manner of his cure. He took the rennet of a calf, and drank it in
milk three or four times, and sweat thereupon: then he onointed the parts
affected, with saccarum Saturni, mixed with oil of roses warm.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Tetters in women's breasts, oftentimes cured as follows.
THey took five spoonfuls of Madder, and boiled it in ale, and then strained it
clear, without pressing it at all, and drank thereof, three or four mornings.
Then with the foresaid ointment they used to anoint the parts grieved, and
thereupon (with Gods help) were quickly healed.

CHAP. XXXVII.
The healing of Shingles.
THey took for them Doves dung newly made; and bar^ly meal; stamped them well,
and mixed them with half a pint of vinegar: they used it cold to the place
grieved and applied vine leaves (to keep in the liquor) round about it, then
they bound it up with clothes; and suffered it to lie three days, and then (if
need were) refreshed it again with a new plaster, and at the most with the use
of three applications. it was perfectly helped.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The healing of a plague sore by W. K.
HE took of elder-leaves, as much as was sufficient he stamped them very well
with dry figs, and put there to auxungiae porcinae, and applied it warm to the
sore, three or four times a day, and it quickly brake it.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Scabs, and itch, with small pustules, taken quite away by I. H.
A Certain man greatly troubled, with itch and pustules, in his hands,
proceeding of a dissolved salt in his body could find no help, till he used
this course. He took Panchimagogon twice in three days: that done, he washed
his hands with the salt of vitriol dissolved in plantain water and shortly
after they went quite away.

CHAP. XL.
Three deep Fistulaes in the breast, cured by W. T.
THere was a certain man called R. B. dwelling in London, which having three
deep fistulaes in his breast had been long under the hand of unskilful
Chyrurgians consuming both himself and his substance: but afterward by Gods
help, he using this course was cured. First he was purged every second or third
day, for 5 or 6 days together with Turpetum minerale Phaedronis, receiving
thereof five or six grains in Amuletum Palmarij. Afterward he was caused to
sweat five or six times with this potion following.

Take the distilled water of lignum vitae two ounces, salis ejusdem I scruple,
water of Carduus benedictus 2 ounces, which being mixed he drank it warm in the
morning, and sweat thereon two hours. After he was purged, he dressed the
fistulaes two hours with this unguent until they were mundified) upon tents of
shoe leather. When the fistulaes were cleansed, he dressed them only with
Emplastrum Fodicationis (being made liquid, to wrap up the tent with) till they
were whole.

The mundificative ointment was this.
Take oil of wax, of succinum, of guaiacum, oleum hypeconis compositum, of each
2 ounces, mix them without fire and use it with the aforesaid tents. Also you
shall note, that he drank no other drink then this, all the while. Take lignum
vitae, the bark, salsaparilla of each 4 ounces, the roots of Tormentill,
Bistorta, virga pastoris, liquorice of each 2 ounces, Juniper berries I ounce,
Mallow leaves Senicle, Alchimilla Mugwort, Hypericon, Brunella, Comferry of
each 2 handfuls. Bring these into powder and for every gallon of new tunned
drink, add theceto, two or three ounces of this powder, in a linen cloth:
let it be stale, and let him drink thereof.

CHAP. XLI.
The cure of Lichen or Impetigo, by M. K.
A Certain maiden sixteen years old, had all the flesh on her thumb, and
forefinger eaten away, with the foresaid disease: which was cured by strawing
thereon, saccarum Saturni, and applying thereto Cerotum magistrale Fioravante.

CHAP. XLII.
A great Wenne taken away, by W. H.
ONe that was troubled with a great wen, had it taken away, by washing it with
strong lie made of ^ken ashes. I have been told since of a certain, that i^ ye
rub the Wen often with the hand of a dead man until the Wen wax hot it will
consume away in short time after. Some roast an egg hard, and cut it in the
midst, and lay it thereon, and using this often the Wen will wear away.

CHAP. XLIII.
A Medicine for the piles, and for St. Anthonies fire, for the scalding of
childrens water, to cool skin and heal all inflammations in elder persons.
TAke three or four pound of butter fresh from the Cherm, without any salt, set
it on a few embers either in an earthern or silver pot, and let it clarify
until it be clean, skum off the top and your it into an earthen pot and put to
it as much of the flowers of elders picked from the stalks, and of the green
fresh leaves, and of the inner green bark, the russet outside being scraped
off, of elder and barks of each a third part, so that there be two parts of
leaves and barks, and one of flowers, chop the leaves and barks reasonable
small, put them all into the clarified butter, and set it on some embers and
let it stew softly a good part of a day, there must be as many herbs as will
go into the butter, it must be very green, if once doing will not serve you
must do it twice, when the herbs grow hard in the butter, then they are boiled
enough, when it is almost cold, you must put in two pretty spoonfuls of ^ine
searced sugar, and stir it well together; if the sugar be put in, before it be
somewhat cold it will stick to the bottom and so do no good, keep this in
glasses or pots for your use, for the piles lay a little lump upon a double
rag, and apply it to the place.

CHAP. XLIIII.
The making of a most excellent Searcloath or Plaster.
ON I. Barber, aged about fifty, by an old bruise had his leg ranckled, and a
tumor fallen down into it, whereby the flesh was eaten away to the bone, and
was cured with the applying this Plaster or Searcloath.

Take a pound of Bolealmonack, and a pound of Red-Lead and pound them in a
Mortar very fine, and searce them through a fine silk searcer, and when they be
searced and mingled together, put them into a skillet, and put thereto as much
sallet oil as will wet it thoroughly, and set it over the fire in a brass
skill^t till it begin to boil, then add a spoonful or two more of oil to it,
and sees it to thicken it again, and then add a little more oil again, and
still let it sees upon a very soft fire, stirring it continually with a silver
or brass spoon, and so feed it still with oil, until it come unto the
perfection of a salve, which you shall know by the wetting of the end of a
white linen rag in it, and taking it out till it be cold for when you perceive
by the rag so dipped, being cold; that it feels oily and wet, then by that
you may know that it is not yet come to perfection, and therefore you must let
it boil more till it come to a better perfection; ever and anon trying the
cloth in it, which cloth you may afterward make a Searcloath of, it must not be
any hard cloth but soft, it will be somewhat above half an hour in boiling and
it must be always stirred, and when it is boiled to the perfection; dip your
cloths thoroughly in it, and so take them up and let them cool and then role
them up together, and wrap them up in lether made of sheeps skin let the lether
be white, it will keep good so 7 years, if you keep it close, and if it grow
dry anoint it over with a feather dipped in sallet oil when you apply this
sear-cloth to any wound or sore, warm the searcloth before you lay it to it,
and put so much white leather one the back side thereof, as you put sear-cloth,
and so when the one side is worn long, you may use the other side to it, if the
sores be many, and do stand close together, cut little pieces of the searcloth
and lay them upon each sore, and then lay a big piece of sear-cloth over them
all, but let not the great piece be bigger then to cover the sores, except the
sores have much swelling about it, and in that case let it be bigger, the wound
must be dressed morning and evening with the same sear-cloath, only every time
it is dressed wipe the corruption off from the sear-cloath, which it has drawn
from the sore, and so lay it one again, if the wound be rotten and stinking you
may change the lesser plasters which are next the sores once a week, but
otherwise you may continue to use the same a fortnight or better, but still at
every dressing cleanse the filth off from them, it will take away the
^ottennesse, and draw out the filth and heal it, but it will not heal it till it
have fully cleansed and drawn out the corruption, neither will it suffer any
proud flesh to grow therein.

The rare effects which have been wrought by this plaster is hardly to be
expressed, and after good proof thereof Mr. Cradock of Cambridge, gave 8 pounds
for the Receipt.

Thus much briefly, is expressed and declared concerning wounds and ulcers:
wheresoever they be, or howsoever they arise, by which examples, the juditious
practioner may undertake other things, which are not here mentioned. It
follows now (in manner asoresaid) to set down the observed practices of those
that have cured internal diseases, which have taken effect and brought forth
syntoms, outwardly or inwardly.
CHAP. XLV.
Of the cure of grievous aches and pains, performed by W. H.
A Certain man was greatly afflicted with diverse woeful aches and pains in his
shoulders, who was cured, by receiving a dose of Aromatico, and by application
of emplastrum fae^idum, unto the grieved part.

CHAP. XLVI.
The healing of aches coming of the Pocks, by W. H.
ONe of a very dark and melancholy complexion, to wh^msome men in London, had
given the fume, and the unction three or four times: and yet left him possessed
with most pitiful aches and pains in his joints; who for want of m^intenance
was enforced to go into the country where he was born, and was there pities of
an honest Gentleman, which cured him in this sort. First he (...)ged him twice
or thrice with Aromatico Leonardo: which done, he took for three or four days
together half a dr(...) of the extract of Hormodactiles, with white wine.
Th^^Soan^^ unto the particular parts that were grieved, apply emplastrum
fae^idum, and thus, in short time he was healed thoroughly.

CHAP. XLVII.
A notable experience of a medicine that has brought great ease, to any great
ach or pain, as of the gout or otherwise,
TAke one or two of the foremost sucking whelps of a mastiffe or bear bitch,
kill them, and take forth the guts, fill them with black ^nailes, roast them,
and ^ast them with 12 ounces of oil of spike, colored with sa^fron. Reserve
that which droppeth from them, and mi^ it with as much oil of wax, and
therewith anoint any ac^ or grief.

Another remedy against an ach.
Take a pound of Sage-leaves, a pound of Rue, hall a pound of Wormwood as much
Bay Leaves, boil all these in Smith^-water, and apply them hot to the place.

CHAP. XLVIII.
A particular way whereby the pain of the gout is soon eased and prevented.
TAke minium the yolk of an egg, oil of tartar, oil of roses, as much of each
as you think sufficient, and with a little saffron make it in form of a
plaster, and lay it on cold. There was a Gentleman grievously ve^ed with the
gout, who was in this sort soon eased. First when he supposed that the pain
would come, he took a dose of Aromatico Leonardo: then the next day unto those
^rieved parts, he applied this plaster. Take a pickle ^erring, and cut forth
the bone, stamp it very small with ^ little Bolealmoniack, and rose water, and
apply it cold to the grief from place to place as it goes. Many men, after
they have been well purged, have had great ease by anointing the place three or
four nights together with aqua balsami Fioravante. Also oleum cerae, is very
profitable in that case.

Another for the same.
Take two quarts of pure live honey, and two pound of Sage-flowers and distill
them in a rose water Still with a soft fire, and drink every morning ten or
twelve spoonfuls fasting, and fast an hour after, and it will marvellously
abate the humor, and give ease unto the party grieved.

Another for the Gout.
Take a red woollen cloth, lay pitch upon it, and melt it against the fire and
make ^ Plaster of it, and lay it to the place as hot as you can suffer it, and
when that has lain all night, make another plaster as aforesaid and lay to
the place.

CHAP. XLIX.
The cure of gouts, and all other aches coming of heat, by L. F.
FIrst the party is to be purged with Aromatico, then this plaster appllied,
which is attractive, resiecative, resolutive, as being intentions far better
fitting that purpose then any other. Take the marrow of the bones of a calf now
killed ^ pound vit^ioll in manner rubified, I pound and a half, Gantarides in
fine powder, I ounce the ashes of the vine, 6 ounces, mix them all on a small
fire, until they be incorporated, then with oil of w(...) make it in a liquid
ointment, and spread it on a cloth and lay it on cold. And when it waxes dry,
chafe it till the pain be ceased: this has eased many in a short time.

CHAP. L.
The remedy against the Scorbute or Scurvy* and the gout, by W. T.
A Young man of 26 years of age, mightily troubled with the gout and scurvy,
was after this sort cured. First he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo. Then he
used the purging drink every morning, that he might have each day three or four
stools. At night he took two ounces of the distilled water of lignum vitae,
with I ounce of the sirrup of Couslips. Also he used to eat these c^^serves
following mixed together. Take conserve of Couslips 4 ounces, of sage, of
rosemary flowers, of each ^ ounces, of red roses* 1 ounce; the quantity which
he took at once was as much as a walnut. Also he anointed the grieved parts
with this unguent. Take auxungiae humanae distilled two ounces, oil of
Turpentine two ounces, of wax half a dram mix them together. Also in his
usual drink which he drank with his meat, was mixed Chamepiteos, Sage,
Rosemary, Betony: this was the purging drink, take the strong decoction of
lignum virae, put therein of the leaves of seva, four ounces, Epithimum, two
ounces, Hermodactiles, four ounces, Turbith, one ounce Coloquintida, half an
ounce, let them stand in warm sand 24 hours and strain it, this he drank in the
morning fasting.

CHAP. LI.
Tumors in all parts of the body taken away by R. A.
THis medicine has been so well approved, that it were infinite to recite the
number of those that have found comfort by it. The party must first be purged
twice with Aromatico Leonardo, then give unto him two ounces of Quintaessence
solutive, with one ounce of syrrup of roses, four or five mornings together:
and after i^ drink a little good broth made sweet with sugar: that done, drink
this water following. Take Herbegrace, Sathernwood, Mugwort, Wormwood, of each
one handful, Junipor-berries, three or four handfulls, cut the herbs and
bruise the berries, and infuse them in a gallon of white wine vinegar, 24 hours
in a warm place. Then distill it with a gentle fire: this done, take that
distilled vinegar, and infuse therein fresh herbs and berries, and distill it
again as before. At the last infusion, you shall put therein four ounces of
good Mitridate, or Triacle, and distill them together, and keep them close for
your use. Thereof the patients took at four a clock in the morning four ounces
very warm, whereupon they laid them down and sweat, two or three hours, always
wiping it away with warm clothes. Every sweating time they changed their
shirts. When this medicine was ministered to a woman, she took but two ounces
thereof. In this sort ar^ cured not only Tumors, but sores pustules, fevers,
jaundies, gripings, emrods, Piles, etc. and suffers no gross kind of humor
to remain in any part of the body, making the skin also clear, soft, and smooth.

CHAP. LII.
Swelling of the cods mitigated and dissolved by R. A.
A Man riding on a trotting horse, had his stones swollen as big as ones fist,
who was thus ^^lpe^. First he was purged once or twice with Panchimagogon, then
this Cataplasin was applied warm unto the part, twice or thrice a day. Take the
(...)s of brown brea^, bean-flowr, of each as much as is sufficient, boil them
with new wort; when it is almost boiled put there^^^ little Commin-^eed, and a
dish of fresh butter, and so apply it warm.

Another for the same.
Take a pint of pure honey, as much bean flowr, and two spoonfuls of vinegar,
of Commin-^eed 2 ounces, mix them well together, and spread it on a cloth,
and warm it a little against the fire, and apply it.

CHAP. LIII.
The cure of a painful Ischiatica, by I. H.
A Man that was grievously troubled with the Ischiatica, was healed in this
manner. First he was purged with Aromatico, then he took for five or six
mornings together, two drams of Quintaessence ^olutive, with syrup of roses,
and after the taking thereof he drank a little sweet broth. That done, he drew
a blister with Cantarides, and when it had run enough, he anointed the place
with oleum de terebinthinae and cera, and in short time he was helped: since
which time many have also been helped of that grief by anointing the grieved
parts with Aqua balsami Fioravante.

Another for the same.
Take an ounce of Deers-suet, and two ounces of the best resin, and put it in a
pipkin with the Deer ^uet, and let them melt and boil together a quarter of an
hour and more, stirring it sometimes in the boiling, and then take it off the
fire, and pour it into a basin of conduit water, or river water, and let it
remain, till it be almost cold, then work it up into little roles with your
hands, and let it lie again in the water, til it be thoroughly cold, after which
lay it up for your use: and when you have need to use it, spread it upon
white-leather, and warm it before you lay it to the sore, dressing it evening
and morning, this will also heal any green wound, without suffering any proud
flesh to grow in it.

CHAP. LIVE.
An excellent remedy against the cramp proved often by R. G.
THey that were infected therewith, did upon their bare skin and places
grieved, wear the root of common flag. Also the skins of twenty silver e^ls,
new ^lean, and chopped small, boiled in two pound of May butter, and four
handfuls of Rue, scum it well, and anoint the place and it will work the same
effect. A worshipful Gentleman, that had diverse times proved the same, desired
for the great comfort he found by it, that it might be made public.

CHAP. LV.
Contraction or shrinking of sinews, with consumption of the party, helped by
W. H.
A Man 2^ years old, having a sore and grievous ulcerated leg, fell into the
hands of inexpert Surgeous, who with their corrosives shru^k up his sinews, y^
he could neither go nor stand, but in short time after, he was cured in this
manner. He was once purged with Aromatico, then he took Quintaessence solutive
two or three days together, in syrrup of roses, and drank thereupon a little
broth. Then did he use the bath diverse times, and anointed him with sublime
ointment, or the green ointment, which you will find toward the latter end of
this book. Another man having his hand shrunk together, upon the like occasion,
was healed in the same order. This is the description of the bath. Take two or
three young whelps that cannot see, boil them in water with Mallows, Hollihock,
Mellilot, Walwort. Camomill, of each a handful, voil the whelps, till the
flesh fall from the bones, that done strain it, and use to bath therewith very
warm.

CHAP. LVI.
The cure of one whose neck was drawn awry, by W. T.
A Child had her neck drawn awry, with a kind of convulsion or cramp called
Tetanus, and was thus cured. First she drank every morning and evening a little
aqua balsami Fioravante, then was her neck anointed with some of the said water
mixed with magno licore Fioravante, and in ten days she was cured.

Another of thesa^me, by W. T.
TAke oleum de lateribus, one ounce, oleum Terebinthinae half an ounce, of
Juniper berries two ounces, of Cloves one ounce Nutmegs, Maces, of each half a
dram, mix them with oleum cera, so much as will make it in form of a liniment,
and therewith anoint the parts,

CHAP. LVII.
The Squinancy cured, by I. P.
THis medicine following, did help one that was so swollen and grievously pained,
that he could scarcely eat or drink. Take olei philosophorum de lateribus I
ounce olei lini, six drams, olei cera, one ounce, mix them warm, and anoint the
place infected oftentimes in the day. Also one dram of the tooth of a wild
bore, being drunk with three ounces of the oil of Line-seed, does help it
presently.

Also another man was forthwith cured thereof, which drank one spoonful of
Aqua balsami, and wetting a cloth therein applied it to his throat.

CHAP. LVIII.
The cure of Alopecia, by I. P.
MAgno licore Fiorauante, being anointed on the head causes the hairs to grow
again abundantly, which are fallen away, and to wax black. Balsamum sulfuris
also does the same.

CHAP. LIX.
A gargarism to purge the head, by I. S.
TAke Spiknard, Alizander-seed, of each I ounce, beat them into powder and boil
them in vinegar till half be consumed. Then strain it, and put thereto half a
pound of mustard, and four ounces of rose water, boil it a little, keep it
close for thy use, and when you will, you may take a spoonful warm in the
morning, and gargle therewith.

Another gargarism to purge the head and brain, by Dr. Deodate,
Take six spoonfuls of wine vinegar, and twelve spoonfulls of water, and two
spoonfuls of honey, clarify th^^ together and add thereto one spoonful of
mustard, a^^ gargle therewith.

CHAP. LX.
The Pin, and Web, cured by M. R.
HE took a handful of Centumpedes, or sows, stamped and strained them with
ale, and gave the patient to drink thereof three or four mornings, and willed
the patient to stop his nose and mouth, and to hang down his head, and
therewith he was healed, as I was credible certified.

CHAP. LXI.
A water for sore eyes, proved by, M. E.
^ Gentlewoman with this water, has cured a very ^reat number of sore eyes. She
took an egg hard ^odden, cut in the midst, and took forth the yolk, and pot
thereto as much white Coporas as a nut. Then she closed it together, and
wrapped it in red Fennel, and laid it to steep four and twenty hours in Rose
water then she strained it hard through a cloth, and dropped it into the eyes
morning and evening, it was held (...) a great secret.

Another manner or way to heal the Pin and Web in the eyes.
Take nine of the Worms called Centumpedes, or Sow^, stamp and strain them with
the juice of Woodbine, or Betony, for three or four mornings together warm:
which being drunk will consume the web in the eye.

Another way to cure a Web or Pearl in the eye.
Take the white of a new laid egg beaten to an oil, and the juice of Deasy
roots and leaves, and of the juice of the leaves and roots of brown Fennel, and
of the juice of the leaves and the roots of white hony-suckle with the three
leaves and the figure of an eye in the leaf, take of these juyces two good
spoonfuls, and put to the white of the eg, and a little spoonful of pure honey,
and a spoonful of woman's milk and one spoonful of Rose Water, and a half
pennyworth of Sperma city, as much white Sugar Candy beaten, and as much white
Coporas as a good Nutines made into fine powder, work them all together with a
silver spoon, and scum off the foam, and put it into a glass close stopped,
and lying on your back with a feather drop 2 or 3 drops at a time into your
eye, using it so three times a day till it is well.

CHAP. LXII.
The staying of the bleeding at the nose, done by M. R.
TAke burnt Lome two handfuls, sharp vinegar half a p(...) mix them well, and
lay it between a linen cloth: and bind it to the forehead cold, and in short
space it will stint.

Another for the same, by I. H.
A man of fifty years of age, had a great flux of blood at the nosethrill,
which had continued a long time, and could find noremedy, till he used this
order and medicine following. First, his ring finger was bound h^d with a
thread, then was the cataplasm following applied to his forehead and temples.

Lake burnt lome made in powder, strong vinegar, as much as will suffice to make
it in form of a cataplasm to be applied cold, thus in few hours the blood
stinted. Nevertheless he took morning and evening the fame of Succinum album,
at the mouth and nose: which stayed the flux and comforted the vital and
animal spirits. His diet was cold and drying, his drink was water, or red
wine, wherein was put Crocus martis.

Another kind of curing the same, performed by D. B.
One bleeding at the nose a day and a night, was thus helped: he made a tent of
lint, and dipped it in Ink, and put it into his nosethrils, and laid a
defensative over his eyes and nose, made with Sanguis draconis, Bolealmoniack,
and a little vinegar.

Another way.
Many have been cured, by applying unto their privities, a linen cloth wet in
vinegar.

Another.
Some have had the bleading stinched, by applying the harb Peruinca unto the
nose.

Other ways to do the same.
Carduus Benedictus bruised, and put up into the nosethrills, Qinteth the
bleeading at the nose. The same it performs in a wound. Note


The herb Geranium, which has a red stalk, being put into the nosethrils or
wound, does the same: very often proved.

In like manner, and to the same effect, works Crocus martis.

Also the blood of a man dried, works after the same order: both for the
staying of blood at the nose, and in a wound.

CHAP. LXIII.
Spatting of blood, stayed by I. H.
A Certain woman spat blood three or four days in great quantity, who was cured
by drinking the decoction of mints in vinegar.

Another for the same.
Also five or six drops of oleum Machich, drunk in Cina^non-water, staieth the
spatting of blood.

CHAP. LXIIII.
The falling down of Vuula, and the inflammation of the Almonds, in such sort,
that they could not swallow their meat, nor fetch their breath well, cured by
W. T.
TAke white Amber grossly beaten I ounce, and with a funnel take the sum
thereof, cast on a few coals morning, noon, and night. Then take one ounce of
old leaven, and spread it plaisterwise on a cloth, strew thereon a little
Comminseed, and the powder of white Ambar, and apply it half an hand breath to
the crown of the head the space of a whole day, then at night lay on another,
and in short time it will take away the swelling, often proved.

CHAP. LXV.
The cure of the hicket, by W. B.
ONe that was diverse times grievously troubled with the Hicquet, was cured by
applying a brown fa^^ warm to his stomach: the tossed was steeped in Eriacle and
Aquavitae.

Another.
Diverse have been cured by taking there of four or five grains of Laudanum
nostrum, in wine or Malmsey.

CHAP. LXVI.
The falling sickness cured, by W. H.
A Certain woman, being a Barbers wife in Bedfordshire, which was grieved
therewith every change of the Moon, was preserved, by taking each day three
drops of olcum Heracles, with the extrad of Pione.

Another performed by I. H.
FIrst you shall purge them with the extract of Helleborus niger: the dose
whereof is from eight grains to twelve, being before well corrected, and then
drunk in some convenient liquor or potion. That done, he gave them morning and
evening of this composition: the which the longer that they use, the better it
will be for them. Lake essenciae Peoniae, conserve of Rosemary flowers, of
Betony, of each so much as is sufficient, mix them together inform of an
eleduary: then add thereto for every ounce of that composition, of oleum
cranij humani, one scruple, and half a scruple of oil of Kosemary flowers, and
twelve ounces, of oleum vitrioli. Hereof let them take half an ounce at a time,
either by it self, or with some convenient liquor, broth, or potion. Also the
nuke of the neck must be anointed with oleum castorei: when they do fall you
shall anoint their nosethrils with oieum succinum for that will in short time
recover them again. It will also be very expedient to use those things that
comfort the brain and heart.

CHAP. LXVII.
The cure of the Iaundies, by I. P.
A Young maiden much infected with them, was in this sort cured, she was twice
purged with Aromatico, and as often with Panchimagogon. This done, she felt her
self very much eased, save only in her yellow color, which was thus also
taken away. She took three or four mornings three ounces of the decoction of
Goose-dung, two scruples of the extract of Centory which she drank warm, and so
was cured.

Another for the same, by W. H.
A Woman that had the yellow Jaundies above two years together was thus cured:
first the took one ounce of Balsamum artisiciale, with a spoonful of white
Wine in the morning, which caused her the next day, to be as yellow as Saffron,
all her body over, yea her hair of her head, and the nails of her hands and
seet, very strange so behold. The third day, she took the same again, and in
three times she was perfectly cured. This was at Carleton, five or six miles
from Bedford. Certain practitioners, have found a great secret in the salt
called Lapilli urinae, or Paracelsus his Rebisola, against the Jaundles and all
obstructions.

Another way by the same person W. H,
TAke Nucis Cupresfi, Cassiae ligni, of each one ounce, extract Centaurij, two
scruples, mix them, and drink it in while wine warm: and they shall after the
receipt thereof, evacuate in their urine, great store of yellowish choler, but
by taking this medicine twice or thrice, it will vade quite away as has been
often proved Remember that before you take this medicine (that it may work with
better effect) you receive a dose or two of Aromatico.

The cure of the Iaundies, with obstruction of the menstrues, performed by W. H.
A young Gentlewoman eighteen years old was greatly grieved with the Jaundies
and suppression of her natural sickness, but was in this sort cured.

Take water of Madder roots, Sage, and Betony, of each four ounces, Spiritus
Tartan two ounces, oleum vitrioli two scruples mix them and drink thereof
morning and evening two or three ounces warm. Also you shall note, that she was
purged once (before she took the drink) with Aromatico Leonardo, and so was
perfectly cured, and had her courses again, which before she wanted seven
months and more.

CHAP. LXVIII.
The healing and cure of great windiness in the stomach, by I. H.
A Certain Gentleman, was so afflicted with a windiness in the stomach, that
many times, with extreme ^ain he fell into a sound. In this misery he continued
three years and more, but in this manner he was helped. First he took Aromat.
Leon. which evacuated upward and downward, the gross and viscous cause of this
wind. After that he had used this potion following forty days together. He took
every morning and evening Spiritus Tartari, corrected with his Christaline salt
half a spoonful, Aqua preservans as much This withdrew the cause, opened all
obstructions in the body, so that in a month he remained perfectly cured.

CHAP. LXIX.
Cough of the lungs, cured by W. T. after this manner.
TAke Aquae Marrubij six ounces, sirrup of Juiubes three ounces mix them, and
make thereof a Julepe: whereof the patient took four spoonfuls* with one dram
of Balsamum sulfuris, every four hours till he was well.

Another cured by W. T. which had also a sore stitch in the side.
FIrst he took Aromatico Leonardo, and then took this potion following for
certain days. Take Carduus Benedictus, Hypericon, Folefoole, a little Enula
campana, make thereof a decu^ction with Ale, and he drank every morning one
scruple of Bassamum sulfuris, and a spoonful of Aqua balsami Fioravante,
morning and evening till he was cured.

CHAP. LXX.
Shortness of breath with a cough, remedied by M. R.
FIrst he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo, then he used this diet, with hot
and drying meats, roast or sodden, Enula campana, Hysoy and Liquorice, were
infused in his wine. Also he used every morning to drink or eat in a rere egg,
half a scruple of balsamum sulfuris, and thereby was safely and quickly cured.

Another remedy for shortness of breath.
The Worms called Centumpedes or Sows, are of great virtue to discharge the
lungs that are stuffed with fleam.

CHAP. LXXI.
An approved way to stay vomiting, by M. R.
A Man of thirty years old, was troubled a long time with sore vomiting,
throwing up presently whatsoever he eat or drank and was thus relieved. Take
Malmsey six ounces, oleum vitrioli, six drops or more, mix them together, and
take thereof every morning fasting* one ounce, or thereabout, and in short time
it will stay the vomit.

To stay vomiting of blood.
Take five or six drops of oil of Mastick, and drink it in Cinnamon water.

To stay vomiting another way.
A Pultus thus made as follows, and applied to the stomach staieth vomiting.
Take Rye leaven, and mix it with the juice of mints, and a little vinegar over
the fire, in form of a pultus, when you do apply it to the stomach, strew
thereon the powder of Cloves, and so often as it cools apply it warm. Also a
Rye toste steeped in vinegar, is profitable for the stomach.

The oil of Wormwood that comes by distillation) being drunk with convenient
liquors, or potions, and the same compounded with other convenient things, and
applied to the stomach, does work a notable effect this way, and is good
against many other maladies.

CHAP. LXXII.
Vomiting of blood, with a cruel flux of the belly, by M. R.
A Man forty five years old that had congealed blood in his body, did vomit
abundance of blood, and avoided downward a certain black matter like unto
pitch. He had a great stich in his side without a fever: and always when he
vomited it was thought he would have died, this man was by Gods help thus
cured. First he took this potion. Take the water of nettis roots eight ounces,
oleum vitrioli, as much as will make it tart He drank thereof cold, which
pr^^ently mitigated both the fluxes. Then unto the stomach and throat, was
applied this pultus warm, both morning and evening which wrought an excellent
effect. Take the crumbs of Riebread, Red-wine or Aligant, and boil them to the
form of a pultus. Then he took at the mouth and nose, the sum of Succinum or
Amber, which strengthened the vital and animal spirits. His side was anointed
with this ointment, which took away the pricking and pain. Take Unguent de
Althea, four ounces, amigdalarum dulcium a^^ ounce, mix them, and therewith
anoint the side, morning and evening. His diet was this, all his meat was
boiled in red wine, or Smiths-water his drink was the decoction of Nettle-roots
or Red-wine, wherein Steel had been quenched diverse times.

Vomiting joined with a fever.
A Gentleman afflicted with these griefs, was in this manner comforted. Take
Aquae balsami one ounce, aquae preserv. two ounces, oleum piperis* six grains,
mix them well with a good spoonful of the sirrup of Quinces, and so she drunk
it at the beginning of the heat.

CHAP. LXXIII.
Plurisie, with spatting of blood, cured by M. R.
FIrst there was made this purging preparative. Take Senae six drams, Carduus
Benedictus half a handful* Sugar half an ounce, Ginger half an ounce, lay them
to infuse one night in warm whay, made of Goats milk, one pound and a half,
whereof ye shall give morning and evening four ounces warm: this purges
gently, and causes to spat easily. Then three days after, they must bleed well
on the liver vein, and their drink at meals, was the decoction of hysop,
violets, liquorice, and raisins with sugar.

A great and sore Plurisie, cured by M. R.
A Certain man of twenty four years old was vexed with a most grievous
plurisie, with pricking and shooting, and a cough, with a continual fever and
inflammation of the tongue. First there was good store of blood taken from the
liver vein, on that side where the pain was. Then were these syrrups that do
deco^^ and and purge) ministered unto him Take Sirupi de liquericia, de Hysopo,
acetole, of each one ounce, Ox^mmellitis squillitici, acetisquillitici of each
three ounces, make thereof a loch, whereof in the morning he licked with a
liquorice stick, which caused him to spat easily, and took away the heat or
burning of the tongue, being used with this decoction. Take French Barley three
ounces, Carduus Benedictus one handful, Roses, Violets, of each one pound,
Liquorice scraped three drams, Figs three. Raisins of the sun stoned, one ounce
and a half, Sugar Candy two ounces, boil them in sixteen pound of water, till
two pound be wasted and so drink it cold. Also his diet was light and thin,
as broth and drink, etc.

Plurisie with inflammation of the tongue, and costiveness of the body, cured by
M. R.
First they were purged with Aromatico, and then used this gargarism. Take
Sempervive or Howsleek two handfulls, boil them in a quart of water till a
third be wasted. Then strain it, and put thereto two ounces of wine vinegar*
wherewith they gargarised warm oftentimes. Then they used Mel-rosarum, which
took away the blackness of the tongue. Their diet was moist and cooling as
follows. Take French Barley half an ounce, Figs seven, Raisins of the sun
stoned, four ounces, boil and strain them, and put thereto oleum vitrioli so
much as will make it tart, and so drink thereof.

Plurisie in a woman, cured.
First she was purged with Aromatico Leonardo, then unto her side there was
applied this unguent^ seven or eight times a day, which took away her pain.
Take unguenti de Althen two ounces, oil of sweet Almonds half an ounce, mix
them together: the next morning she was let blood in the basilike ^ein, on that
side where her pain was. Her diet was the same that was spoken of before. After
meat she used a Lochsanum before prescribed for this purpose, and so in short
time she was cured.

Another woman cured of the same disease, by M. R.
First there was ministered unto her this potion. Take the water of Carduus
benedictus half a pound, oleum vitrioli, enough to make it tart like a
Pomegranate. The next day she was let blood in manner aforesaid about ten
ounces. After she had bled, she took this potion folllowing, five days together
morning and evening, which caused her to sweat well, and there upon she was
quickly cured.

The Diaphoreticall decoction.
Take Cardui benedicti two handful. Liquorice scraped three ounces* Figs five,
Raisins two ounces Sugar candy one ounce and a half, voil them in a sufficient
quantity of water, and strain them to drink.

A Plurisie broken with a potion.
For the breaking of his Aposteme, there was ministered unto him Aromatico Leon.
with honied water. The next day the basilick vein, on the Pleuriticall side was
opened. His drink at dinner and supper was this decoction. Take Isop dried one
small handful, violets two handfuls, six Figs, Liquorice scraped half an
ounce, Raisins four ounces, boil them in nine pound of water till one pound be
wasted, then strain this pectoral decoction, and use it.

Another cured in this manner.
First he took Aromatico Leonardo* and thereupon drank the water of Carduus
Benedictus. The next day they let him blood on the same side where the pain
was. His diet was moist and cooling, and he drank Barley-water mixed with syrup
of Roses, and oleum vitrioli, and shortly after was cured.

CHAP. LXXIV.
An inward impostume or bastard Plurisie, cured by M. R.
A Man having an Impostume in his side, which would have turned to the
Plurisie, was thus cured. Take a good sweet Apple, and cut off the crown, take
out the core, and fill it with powder of Olibanum, bind on the crown again, and
roast it under the embers till it be soft. Then mix with it three or four drops
of oleum vitrioli, and let the patient eat it, and sweat thereon.

Also with the same medicine, at the same time, there was a boy helped, that
had a plague sore on his neck.

Pain in the side, with a cough, cured by W. T. after this manner.
Take Floris Sulphuris two drams, the extract of Enula Campana one dram. Ireos,
and Liquorice, of each one ounce, Honey so much as will make it in form of an
slectuary. Before it be made up, put thereto half a scruple of Oleum sulfuris,
and use it morning and evening.

CHAP. LXXV.
Pain, and wind in the body, cured by I. H.
A Certain woman twenty eight years of age, being often troubled with a griping
pain, and wind in her body, was presently eased, by taking four or five grains
of Laudanum nostrum in Malmsey, with two or three drops of oil of Aniseeds.
After this manner diverse persons have been cured. Provided always that the body
be loose, else must it be moved, either with some gentle glister or suppositary.

The expelling of wind out of the body, by L. F.
THis course following, has been diverse times proved most effectual, against
the wind in the stomach, and other parts of the body. First let them take a
dose of Aromatico Leonardo. Then let them take morning and evening, half a
dram of this composition, three or four days together, either in potions or
pills.

Take the essence of Gentian, three drams, the essence of Ginger, oil of
Aniseed, Fennellseed, of each half a scruple, make thereof a mass, and keep it
to your use.

CHAP. LXXVI.
An excellent Electuary to expel wind revive the spirits, it also purges
melancholy and choler, and comfort the stomach: with a most excellent and
sovereign Plaster to be made by the Apothecary, and applied outwardly to the
stomach Administered and Applied, by D. E.
TAke Aq. melis. menth. of each six drams, theriacal. still. cap. ceru. of
each three drams, e se. aurant. two Dropsy, Diasco. half a dram, conf. de
hyamith. one scruple, fyr veton rubr. half an ounce, cubi Paei, two drams,
clyss. cit^i. one scruple, fiat Electar.

The Plaster.
Admovaet regirin ventriculi, Emplast. Stomachicum.

CHAP. LXXVII.
The Signs and Tokens, whereby you may know whether you have a Dropsy or nor.
THere be these three symptoms or signs of a confirmed Dropsy. First, the
tongue is white and cold. 2. The yard is shrunk into the belly. 3. The veins on
the belly are apparent, and visibly to be seen. And where these things are
found, they are infallible declarations of a grounded Dropsy.

CHAP. LXXVIII.
The cure of the Dropsy, performed by W. T.
A Man of three and forty years old, troubled with the Dropsy, was in this
manner cured. Take the roofs of blew Flower de Luce sliced, and steeped in
vinegar three or four hours, and then dried half an ounce, of the bark of
Laurel root so prepared, as much; the leaves of Sena in powder one spoonful
Aniseed and Ginger, of each one dram, mix them, and take of that powder every
morning, from the weight of four pence, till it give you four stools a day
continue herein so long as you shall think it good.

CHAP. LXXIX.
The killing and expelling of Worms in the stomach, by I: H.
AN infinite number of people, both young and old, have been cured thereof,
with this composition following. Take the seed of Carduus Sanctus, Wormseed,
Dittany, Semen Caulium, cornucerui us^i, corralline, vermium terrestrium, of
each half a dram, mix them in five powder, and give thereof half a dram either
with honey or sweet milk in the morning and evening Anoint also the stomach and
belly downward, with this unguent following, and apply a little unto the
navill, with brown paper and no doubt of it within two or three days, the
patient shall be cured. For it does not only kill the worms, but causes them
to come forth by siege, making the belly soluble, so that they shall have two
or three stools in a day. The cataplasm or unguent is this. Take Farinae
lupinorum, Aloes, centauriae, myrrha, theriacae opt^mae, of each half an ounce,
beat them into fine powder, and make thereof an unguent, with the juice of
peach leaves, and keep it to your use. Also two or three drops of oleum
vitrioli, being drunk with water of gramen, or such like, for three or four
days, kills worms. Also two drams of Quinta essencia solutivo Phioravante,
drunk with one ounce of syrrup of Roses, kills the worms, and expels them
by siege.

CHAP. LXXX.
A Quartain of long continuance, cured by L. F.
FIrst he was purged with twelve grains of Lapetra Philosophale Leonardo
Fiorayante, mixed with half a dram of good Mithridate, the next day he took of
this decoction warm six ounces, and so continued fourteen days morning and
evening. Take Chamepiteos one pound, white wine eight pound, white honey one
pound, distill them with a gentle fire, till five pound be come forth. Then let
it cool and filter that which remained in the Vessel, and mix it with that
which was distilled before, keep it in a glass close stopped, and use it. Also
the reins of the back, was anointed every night with Balsamum artificiale
Leonardo Phiorayante, and so he was well cured.

CHAP. LXXXI.
An approved remedy against the Pestilence, Plurisie, and Quartain.
Diverse people have been cured of these foresaid diseases, by taking a dose of
Turpetum Diaphoreticum, Paraceli, either with Amuletum Palmarij, or with some
excellent good Mithridate, in the morning fasting, and sweating thereupon.
Sometime it is given with other potions or compositions, according to the
disease*

CHAP. LXXXII*
The swelling of the spleen in a melanchollick perion cured by W. T.
A Certain melancholy man, was much grieved in his milt, heart, and head: but
he was thus cured. First he was purged with one scruple of Panchimagogon and
one scruple of the extract of Sena, mixed with syrrup of Roses, and two or
three drops of oil of vitrioll. That done, he took a quart of posset ale, made
of white Wine and Burnet, and drank there of morning, noon and night a good
draught, with half a spoonful of Aqua Balsami Fioravante. Also now and then he
took morning and evening a tossed of white bread, steeped in Aquam Preservans,
and within ten days after, he purged again, and so remained in good health.

CHAP. LXXXIII.
Frantic fevers for want of sleep, often cured by I. P.
MAny that were so grieb^usly vexed, with a burning fever that they could not
sleep, and were in manner frantic, have taken five or six grains of Laudanum,
with conserve of succory flowers, and therewith were speedily delivered out of
their extremities.

Pestilent fevers with great thirst, cured by I. H.
First they were purged once or twice with Aromatico Leonardo: then was the
stomach comforted with some pectorall petion. That being done, there was
Barleywater made with raisins liquorice and cool herbs. Then strain it clean,
and put therein as much oleum vitrioli, as will make it tart like a Pomgranate,
Drink thereof when you are a dry for it comfort nature, asswageth heat and
thirst, wonderfully* opens al obstructions, and defends the body from
putrified fevers. If they be grieved with the headache you shall cause them to
be let blond under the tongue* cutting those veins overthwart, and they shall
presently be cured.

CHAP. LXXXV.
Against Poison, or the Pestilence, a diaphoreticall potion, by W. T.
TAke Mirrhae* croci, of each two ounces* Amuleti Palmatij, one ounce, Spiritus
Vini one pound* oleum piperis, oleum Ging^beris, of eace one dram, mir them in
a glass, and give thereof half an ounce in old Sack at once, against the
pestilence or poison.

CHAP. LXXXVI.
Signs of death in the Plague, by W. K.
TAke a live Frog, and lay it next the sore: if the party will escape the Frog
will burst in a quarter of an hour. Then lay on another, and this you shall do,
till no more do burst for they draw forth the venom. I have been told that a
dried toad, will in better sort do the same. If none of the Frogs do burst, the
party will not escape, this has been often proved.

CHAP. LXXXVII.
Antidotes, and preservatives against infectious air^ on the water or land, by
W. T.
You shall use to chew or hold in your mouth, a little of Essencia Angelicae*
Also it would be very profitable to drink three or four drops of the same
fasting. Also Oleum Camphorae, being drunk effects the same. In like manner
Aqua Balsami Fioravante, if it be drunk in the morning with wine, or Allome,
preserves a man from ull poison and pestilent airs: and is a most singular
remedy against surfeits or the pestilence. Also, if you be in any infected ship
or house, it were necessary to wear a bag of Saffron under your arme-pits to
defend the heart.

Also it were very necessary to drink two or three drops of the essence of
Saffron, for the same purpose.

Amuletum Palmarij is also very excellent, being taken in the morning fasting.

Dissolved Pearl, eaten or drunk, defends the heart, purifieth the blood, and
reviveth the spirits above all other things. You may make it in lozings or
drink it in any cordial, what quantity you please.

CHAP. LXXXVIII.
An inveterate Gonorrhea, either in man or woman, oftentimes cured by W. T.
MAny have been cured of this, and such like infirmities, with this composition
following. Among the rest, a Gentleman in Buckinghamshire, who was vexed
therewith above seven years continually.

A gentlewoman also, was so grievously afflicted with the flux, that she waxed
lame, and went with a staff, these were both cured in twelve days. But one
thing must be remembered that if it come ex lue venerea, it were necessary first
to be purged and then to use these pills.

Take magisterij perlarum, one dram. Gum Tragaganth, half a dram* fine
Bolearmoniack, terrae sigilla^ae verae, of each one dram, Laudanum nostrum one
scruple, (...) an hard mass with Turpentine, and take thereof half a dram when
you go to bed, until this quantity be spent: in the mean time also, you shall
anoint the reins of the back with this unguent.

Take unguentum album camphora tum, two ounces, saccarum Saturni two drams, and
make thereof an ointment.

Another for the same, by W. T.
First purge them with Aromatico Leonardo, once or twice, then let them tak
morning and evening, half a dram of the pills following: and anoint the reins
of the back, with the foresaid unguent.

Take Symphiti crassulae of each two drams, magisterj perlarum, dissolved
coral of each one dram, Laudani I scruple, nucis moschatae, numero 2, Bole
Armon. terre sigillitae verae tem. paupau. albi Tragacanth, of each two drams,
make them up in a mass with Turpentine, and use them in manner aforesaid.

An Electuary against Gonorrhea, by W. T.
A certain man being troubled with a stinking Gonorrhea, was in this order
cured. First he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo: the next day, he took a
pill or two of Uenice Turpentine, washed in plant in water. That done he used
to eat morning and evening, the quantity of a hazel nut of this electuaey,
until he was helped which was not long after.

Take the Kernels of Hazell nuts blanched, four ^un^^^, migisteri^ perlarium,
laudani nostri, of each one scruple, terrae sigillitae, boli* very, sanguinis
draconis in grain, of each two scruple, Seminis Plantaginis, ras^nae ^bo^^^. of
each one scruple, nucis moschatae. 3 or 4, (...), ^n^ dram, Saccari three
ounces, mix then well together and use it. Also in the mean time, he anointed
the reins with the foresaid unguent.

CHAP. LXXXIX.
The immoderate flux, menstruall, suppressed or stayed, by W. T.
A Certain woman being grievously weakened with that disease and having great
heat and pain in her body, was thus cured. Take the roots of Orpine and Comfery
thin sliced, Clarey a good quantity, boil them with a chicken, and with that
broth make Almond milk, and to every handful of Almonds, ad one scruple of
Laudanum nostrum, grind them well together, and drink thereof morning and
evening. Also you shall anoint the reins, and other grieved parts with the
unguent mentioned in the Chapter aforesaid.

Another against the same.
I was informed that the powder of a land frog, bound about the woman's neck,
does stay the foresaid flux.

CHAP. XC.
A Flux stopped, by G. F.
DIssolve Bay salt in Malmsey, and therewith wash the soles of your feet, and
in three or four days it will stay the Flux. Diverse Soldiers in the Wars have
been cured thereof, by setting their fundament in warm Horse-dung. Also the
powder of red Roses, drunk in Red-Wine, is very profitable for the st^pping of
the Fl^r.

Bloody Flux of long continuance, cured by W. T.
Take conserve of red ^^^es, Marmilet of Duinces, elect^a^y of Suluhur, of each
two ounces, Amuletum Palmarij half an ounce, essencia c^oci, L^^^danum nostrum,
of each half a scruple, aquae pre(...)it is half an ounce, oleum vitrioh, and
(...)uris of each half a scruple mix them, and take thereof one dram, morning
and evening.

CHAP. XCI.
The cure of the Hemerrhoids or Piles, performed, by I. H. and many others.
TAke Mullen, and fry it with Butter, and therewith anoint the part diverse
times.

The oil of Eggs is a notable remedy to withdraw the said infirmity.

Balsamum sulfuris anointed upon them, does with great speed and good success,
cure them: this also has been oftentimes proved very excellent.

If they be anointed with oleum Tartari faetens if dries them up in short
time: but first, it were necessary to purge the body of the melanchollick
original of that disease, both by vomit and siege.

Some use to make them away, by applying a caustic unto them.

The cure of Ficus, in ano, alias Hemerhoids ex lue venerea, performed by I. P.
MAny have been sore troubled with warts or blathers in the fundament, which
have in very short time been cured by anointing them with balsamum Tartari
^aetens. Among other men there was a strong lusty fellow fifty years old, of
complexion melancholy, about whose fundament there remained 12 or 14 growing,
whereof some were so big as a little fig, all of them did run or yield a
loathsome yellow sanies or matter. This man was cured with balsamum Tartari
^aetens: without any pain to him and the warts were so dried that they were
pulled off with a pair of mullets: after which he remained whole; this man was
healed in Bedford ^hire.

CHAP. XCII.
The provoking of menstrues, by I. H.
BY this composition following, many more then it is here requisite to speak of
have had their menstrues provoked and many other obstructions opened:
especially if it be given with broths, liquors, or medicaments, appropriate
thereunto.

Take extractionem Camomillae, Calenduiae, Gentianae, Brioniae, Chamepiteos,
Paeon^ae Centaurij, Juniperi, Genisiae, Sabini, Spicanardi Ru^ae, Melistae,
Chelidoniae, Philipenduiae, Matricariae of each one dram, Essentiae Zedoariae,
Croci, of each half a dram, Mirabolanotum, Castorei of each half an ounce mix
them and keep it close The dose is from one scruple, to one dram, upon
extremity either in pills or convenient electuaries. It must be ministered four
or five days before the new Moon, and as many after with the infusion of Sena,
or in sirrup of Roses, for the inte^^ above named.

To provoke menstrues in melanchollick people, by W. H.
Take of the extract of Helleborus niger, five grains. Panchimagogon fifteen
grains, make it into three small pills, and anoint the pills with oleum anisi,
and thereof take once or twice. After that take this composition following.

Take of the essence of Gentian, Sabina, Angelica, of each one dram, Essencia
Croci one scruple, Castorei half a scruple, mix them and make them up in form
of pills, and take thereof each night when you go to bed one scruple, either in
pills or dissolved in some convenient liquor, about the foresaid time of the
Moon. A very melancholic maiden, was cured in this manner.

CHAP. XCIII.
Suffocation and pains of the Matrix, with retentation of menstrues, cured by*
I. P.
TAke extract. Drionae, one dram and a half, the leaves of Sena half an ounce,
Ginger one scruple, Cinnamon, one dram; Sugar one ounce, lay them to infuse one
night in a pint of warm whey, made of Goats milk. Then strein it, and drink
thereof three mornings warm, about the new Moon, keeping a warm and drying
diet, your wine must be infused with Rosemary flowers.

Another that has cured the rising of the mother by R. C.
Take the flowers or buds of a Walnut tree in May, give the patients as much
thereof to drink as will lie on a great, and with two or three doses they shall
be cured.

Also if you give one scruple of oleum succinum album, in wine, it will
presently cure the same disease, a thing oftentimes proved with good success.

CHAP. XCIIII.
To provoke urine, and to cause the Jaundies to flow, W. K.
THe powder of earth worms, drunk with white wine provokes urine, and cures
the Jaundies and T^^^ians.

Also gray Soap two ounces, Bay Salt finely beaten, one ounce, mix them, and
therewith anoint the navill, and belly.

Also Castile Soap being drunk with warm wine, provokes urine.

Also if you shall apply quick earthworms upon a whit blow called Pavaricium
(of some Paviricies) they will cure the same.

CHAP. XCV.
To provoke Urine, and to heal other obstructions, a most excellent and proved
receipt, by I. H. and many other.
THis composition of artificial salts breaks (and after a sort) consumes
all tartarous diseases, as has been very often and truly experimented by
diverse and sundry persons: yea it prevails much against the gout, taken with
potions, electuaries and sirrups appropriate unto the particular ministrations.

Take the salt of radish, of Eringos, Bean-stalks, Broom Alizanders, Auniper,
Ash, Ani^eed, Fennel, Camomil, Wormwood, Vervine, Tartar Christaline, of each
alike quantity, mix the^ in a warm mortar, and keep it close, and in a dry
place, for in the air and moisture it will quickly resolve. The dose hereof, is
from half a scruple to a whole ^^^uple and may be very safely administered,
without peril, to any age or sex: upon good occasions, and at times
convenient, after that the body is prepared for the same purpose.

I shall now proceed in order to speak of several other griefs and diseases,
incident to man's body, and show you the cure thereof, according to the rules
and practice of the most excellent expert Philosophical Physicians and
Chyrurgians, beginning first with the head.
Of the pain in the head.
AL or the most of Physicians in the world do hold this position, that pain in
the head is no other thing then vapors arising from the stomach, and ascend
unto the head, which do offend membrana, whereupon ensues pain. And besides
this there be several other causes. The first cause, is putrified blood in
Leonichie. The second is, the vapors that ascend from the stomach, and offend
the head. The third is, the humidity or moisture between the skin and the
flesh. So that the causes are three, and the remedies as many, to dissolve the
antecedent causes. I have now showed thee the original and root of the pain in
the head, about which thou shall never more need to beat thy head. or break thy
brains, either in seeking the Aphoris^s of Hypocrates, the Commentary of
Gallen, or the Authority of Avicen: for in these four or five words, I have
said all. Now of the cure of this disease, as it has been experimented, an
infinite number of times: which way soever the cause comes, work thou after
this manner, and thou shall never want credit, in giving others ease and curing
thy self.

When the pain in the head is confirmed, and that thou ^anst find no help by
common Theorick or Pra(...)ick, do these things following. First let them blood
on Leoniehie, cutting it overthwart, and let the patient spat as much as he
can. Then the next morning* let them take Aromatico fasting. The next day let
the head be shaven, and lay thereon an attractive plaster, to draw out the
humidity. In the end cause them to neese, and hereby all the pain in the head
will cease.

CHAP. XCVI.
Of the Catarrhe, the rhume in the head, the Cough and Tysick.
THe Catarrhe is a moist vapor, which assaulteth the head, and afterward
falls down again into the stomach where it ingrosseth and corrupts. This
moisture has his beginning of the moisture of the lungs, and until such time
as the lungs be discharged thereof, the Catarrhe will continue in his force.
This infirmity reigns more in phlegmatic and melancholy bodies then in any of
other constitutions. Such as are troubled with it are not long lived, because
their lungs are consumed by little and little and thereupon they are troubled
with the Tysick: and consequently they perish, if they be not quickly releeved.
I will now show thee a rare secret to cure the same.

Take Pulmonaria and Sena that is fresh and new; infuse them in* wine and
water, over a small and gentle fire till the wine have drawn out the virtue.
Then strein it and put thereunto Quintaessence solutive, and keep it close in a
glass, let the patient drink thereof* every morning ^ ^un^es luke warm, for
twenty days together: let him eat good nourishing meats, for they agree well
with his disease. If the patient he not too far spent, you shall ^e^ your cure
performed in short time: in the mean time, if the patient he weak, you shall
give him new laid eggs (...) white wine. If the (...) ^e perceived not to be
qui^e expelled and (...), then give him Aromatico: afterward comfort him again,
with rest^rati^es and cor(...) him strong, and no doubt by the help of God he
shall be cured. This method, of curing this infirmity, differs from the
common course that Physicians take which would cure it with diet, and
mollifying liniments, and causing them to spat and such like which are means
rather to augment the Catarrhe then to diminish the same.

The second course, to cure the descention that comes from the head to the
stomach.
USe these five things, if y^ will cure this disease first Electuario Angelica*
^ Quintaessence solutive, 3 p^^lulae pro de^censo 4 Unguents for the stomach
and head* 5 Quintaessence vegetable. The electuary cleanses the head and
stomach the Quintaessence solutive evacuateth the body, the pills take away the
cause of the descension, the unguents dry, and the vegetable Quintaessence
preserves the body from all ill and noisome infirmities. The electuary must be
taken first in the morning: of the Quintaessence solutive, you must take a
spoonful in the morning in a little broth and sugar, keeping a reasonable good
diet: and do this, four or six days. Then take the pills in the evening, and in
the mean time, anoint the head and stomach with oleum cerae, and drink every
morning a little Quintaessence solutive, which if you do use continually) by
the blessing of God upon it) there is no doubt, but the body shall be free from
many troublesome maladies.

There was a certain woman, of the age of 58 years, who ^eing greatly troubled
with a Catarrhe: was cured by the use of aqua preservans, morning and evening,
and by anointing the stomach with balsamo.

One that was afflicted with a Catarrhe, and a stitch in the side was thus
cured. He took Aromatico twice. Then he took every morning a spoonful of
Quintaessence solutive, with the broth of a Capon for seven or eight days
together, and every night when he went to bed, he anointed his stomach, with
oleum incompostobile, and thereby was soon after cured.

A woman that had great pain in her head and stomach and had her menstrues
stopped; with loss of her appetite was thus helped.

First she took two doses of Pillulae Angelica, that done she took every
morning, a spoonful of Quintaessencia solutivo, with broth and sugar; for five
or six mornings together. After that, she took every morning one spoonful of
Aqua preservans: whereupon in short time after she was cured.

CHAP. XCVII.
A Contusion in the head.
A Certain man* had a great fall from an horse, where* with he bruised his head
most grievously, who was cured in four days; by anointing the place, with oleum
benedictum.

CHAP. XCVIII.
The taking away, or healing of the white scall.
THis noisome malady, is perfectly cured, by purging the patients with
Aromatico, and anointing the head with oleum philosophorum.

Also the Artificial balsome does the like, and oleum benedictum, effects
the same.

CHAP. XCIX.
Pain in the eyes, with great dimnesse of fight.
A Certain man that had great pain in his eyes, and was almost blind, recovered
his fight by lettingbloud, under the tongue. The next day he took Aromatico
once: after that he used Quintaessence solutive, seven or eight days together,
and every night he anointed his stomach with oleum cerae rectified: then was
dropped into his eyes, the water hereafter set down for the dimnesse of sight,
and thereby was he well curedi

CHAP. C.
Anunguent or ointment for sore eyes.
TAke Rose Water, Fennel and Eufrage-water, of each alike quantity, put therein
a small quantity of Uerdi grease, and boil it a little on the fire. Then let it
settle, till it be clear, and pour it off. With this water, see that you wash
Auxungia porcina seven or eight times: and of that* put a little into the eye,
when you go to bed.

CHAP. CI.
To cure or stay the spatting of blood.
ONe that spat blood, was cured in ten days, by drinking the liquor of honey,
morning and evening. An other was healed by drinking the decoction of min^ in
vinegar, another by drinking of Crocus martis.

CHAP. CII.
The description and manifold cures, of the disease called Scrophulae, or
forunculi, which some do call waxing kernels, but rather the Kings Evil.
THe Scrophulae or waxing kernels (so called of some) which use to come in the
thr^^t, or other parts of the bodies of young children do arise and are caused
of great quantity of melancholy humors* because that does for the most part
r^ign in persons that are weak of comple^^on. For you may easily see that such
as are vexed with that infirmity: are not very qui^k spirited. These
Scrophulae, are a long time, ere they will ^ome to suppuration: and before they
^reak and when they are broken, they cause excessive pain, and are hard to be
cured. For all infirmities that come of melancholy, are troublesome to cure or
resolve, as you may see in the quartain and such like. But here I will show thee
a secret to cure ye Scroph^lae, First you must remove the cause, and then work
the effect: for otherwise it were impossible to cure them with outward
medicines. This melancholy is purged, with the drink following against
melancholy, which you must use three weeks or a month. That done, give them
Aromatico, which cleanses the head and stomach, purifieth the blood. As
touching local medicines* lay to the place a plaster of wax and butter, and
anoint it with magno licore* until the escare be fallen out: and when it is
m^ndi^ied, apply thereon the (...) of Gualtifredo di M(...), and use no other
medicine, for it will in, carnate, (...) without scare.

Another remedy against the Kings Evil.
One W. R. dwelling in Cheap* side London, at eighteen years old* had the
Kings* Evil in a very great measure, and was thoroughly cured by this medicine
following after he had been twice touched by the late King, and spent very much
money on Doctors, and found not any help.

Take the roots of Scrophilari(...), otherwise called Brown-worts, the roots of
Orphin, the roots of Pileworth, of each clean washed and picked two ounces, of
the leaves of Brown-worts, of herb Robert, of Egrimony of each three
handfulls, of Mugwort, and Smalage of each two handfulls, of Scurvy-grasse,
four handfulls, of Water cresses, and Horse* Radish*leaves, of each two
handfulls, of the roots of Horse* Radish, one ^unce and a half, of
Caraway-seeds, and Fennel-seeds, of each an ounce, shred the herbs and roots
small, then tu^ to all this (being put into a large boulter bag) four or five
gallons of new-drink of a reasonable strength, ready to work, having wrought
stop it up close, being six or seven days old, then drink of this continually
for a whole year or more, and let it be your continual drink, and purge once a
week with pulvis saema montagin. two drams, and Cremor Tartarij, two true
scruples for a dose, in a draught of Mace-ale boiled with currance, let your
herbs and roots be gathered in Summer to dry cleanly, and keep them for all
the year dry, keep to the place a discentent or dissolving plaster, and
observe a good diet.

Another cure for the Kings-Evill.
A Certain young boy of 14 years, of complexion chollerick and melanchollick,
who had Scrophulae in his throat, on both the sides, was thus cured. The first
medicine that he took was the infusion of Rhabarb, with the trochisks of
Agarick, and acctum squilliticum, and water of maidenhair, mixed together,
which he used by the space of ten days. Then was laid upon the Scrophulae a
plaist^^ of cerotum magistrale with Cantarides, which drew forth the malignity
of the ulcer, and great store of Sanies being applied for fifteen days
together. This done, I gave him the decection of Salsaparilla, with a good
diet, for twenty days together. Then I applied unto the sore ac^rote of
Gualtifredo di Medi, which in a short time cured him, that had been vexed with
them four years before.

Another for the same.
Another which was a maid of thirteen years of age was vexed with Scrophulae
in her throat, which was also in this manner cured. First I gave her the
extract of Elleborus niger, with Mel rosarum; which does very effectually purge
the mela^choly humor. That done I gave her our sirrup against the melancholy
humor, for eight (...) ten days together: and applied unto the sores, an
unguent of Lytarge, boiled with the powder of Scrophularia: th^^ was she in
short time cured*

Another for the same.
Take Uerdigrease, Pelitory of Spain Dock* root the suice of leeks, of the herb
Scrophularia, of each alike quantity, mix them, and lay on lint, and apply it
unto the Scrophulae, but take some care thereof.

CHAP. CIII.
Of Pavaricium, or Pavaricies, called the whit-blow.
THis grievous and intolerable malady (as thoss know well that have felt them)
comes on the end of the singer; and is an infirmity bred in the liver, whereof
nature being-willing to discharge her self, sends it to the extreme parts of
the fingers: and most commonly it comes to the finger next the thumb, but
seldom in the other. The reason or cause whereof is hidden, save that we may
conjecture (as we have said before) an accident in the liver, which nature
sends forth unto those parts to ease herself. When it comes to the end of
the finger, that it can go no further; it causes a sharp and excessive pain:
and the accident coming unto that place, not having passage, is so hot, that in
short time it putrifieth the sinews, muscles, and cartilages, and in the end
rotteth both flesh and bone. The secret of this grief is not commonly known of
the most Surgeons: who with all their learning, cannot devise to cure it, as it
ought to be cured. The most part of such as have that infirmity, loose their
finger: but if thou will quickly help them follow this method.

First let them bleed on the liver vein: then let them be well purged.
Afterward dress the finger with oleum sulfuris: which will cause some pain,
nevertheless (to have some ease) you must abide it. The next day dress it
with magno licore, until it be whole, which will be in short time, as I have
often proved.

CHAP. CIIII.
Of grievous Ulcers in women's breasts.
FIrst they must be touched with oleum sulfuris: then make this unguent. Take
of the yolks of eggs, two ounces, Turpentine, Butter, Barley, flower, Honey of
Roses, of each half an ounce; incorporate them all in a mortar, and therewith
dress them until they be whole. But if they come of any kind or spice of the
foul disease, this unguent will be to very small purpose. But then shall you
dress them with Vnguento magno: which is appropriate unto the disease, and
look that you purge them with Aromatico.

CHAP. CV.
Of the disease called Asthma, or Tysick, and the cure thereof.
THis disease, which is called the Tysick, is a certain infirmity, contained in
the lungs, which does harden and dry them in such manner, that such as are
troubled therewith, cannot fetch their breath. It proceeds of adustion of the
blood, that cannot run in the veins: and so the lungs lacking sustenance,
works that effect. This disease is cured four manner of ways. First you shall
let them blood under the tongue, cutting those veins overthwart, and suck them
as much as they can: for it evacuateth and opens the opilation of the blood,
and eases the lungs of all that evil matter which offends. Secondly, you
shall give them a dose of Aromatico, which evacuateth the stomach, of all evil
qualities that offend the lungs. The third is, to let them eat for a month
together, every morning one ounce of Electuario de Althea. The fourth, to
anoint the stomach, every night with magno licore. But every ten days, you must
take a dose of Electuario Angelica, whereby thou shall help them quickly. You
must also keep a sober diet: refraining Fish, Pork, slimie things, Spice, baked
meats, Cheese, and such like, which nourish grossly, and do infect the blood.

CHAP. CVI.
An excellent remedy, against the Worms.
YOu shall give the patient two ounces of unguento magno, to drink with Mel
rosarum, three mornings together, anoint the nosethrils therewith, and in three
days they will be expelled, were they never so many.

For the Worms of all sorts.
Take of the powder of Centuary leaves one ounce, powder of Sena of Alex. half
an ounce. Wormseed finely beaten one ounce: then take of good Malmsey, a
quarter of a pint or better, of the best Honey two ounces, dissolve the Honey
in the Wine with a gentle heat, and then put in all the powders, and stir it
well together, which done put it into a clean bladder; knit it close and hang
it in the Chimney until it be an hard tump, you may use it asthe Wormseed
alone is commonly used, give a child the weight of a great at a time, to the
elder sort more, as you think good: it kills the worms, and causes them to
void.

CHAP. CVII.
Of the hardness of the milt, and the cure thereof.
THe spleen or milt is hardened by reason of supersluous humidity that it
takes from the liver and lungs. Therefore, if you will help this infirmity, it
were necessary, to use medicines a bstersive, and drying, which thou shall do
thus. First give them Aromatico, then let them use this Electuary, which is of
mavelous virtue in that operation. Take Crocus Martis, Scolopendria, of each
one ounce, Spikenard, lapis lazuli, of each two scruples, Cinnamon half an
ounce, mix them, and make an Electuary thereof with purified honey, and take
thereof every morning one spoonful, and every night (two hours before supper)
an other spoonful, and anoint the outward part, where the grief is with
balsamo artific. and in short time, the disease shall be cured.

Another remedy very effectual for the former disease.
Let them blood on the two veins, under the tongue. That done, mix mustard
seed with the urine of a boy, and lay it between two clothes, and lay it to the
part afflicted one night, and then (if thou feel not good ease) use it again
till the disease be gone. Also the decoction of oak helps the swelling of the
milt.

CHAP. CVIII.
The cure of the Gonorrhea, or running of the reins, the forerunner of the soul
disease.
FIrst you shall give them Aromatico once in white Wine. Then morning and
evening, for seven or eight days, use this potion following: anointing also the
reins, and those parts, with Aquae fae^ida, being cold and in short time they
shall be healed.

Take the whites of four or five new laid Eggs, two ounces of fine Sugar,
three ounces of Rose water, mix them well, and drink it morning and evening.
This is a rare secret, and often proved: the drink must be drunk cold.

CHAP. CIX.
Of the Hemerrhoids, and their cure*
THe Hemerhoids, are an alteration in the Hemerhoidal veins, caused of a
corrupt and putrified humor, whereof nature being willing to discharge her
self, sends forth by those veins unto the extreme or outward parts, where it
cannot pass through, and causes the alteration and inflation that is called
the Hemerrhoids. This corruption and putrefaction, is caused of the evil
quality of the liver, which corrupts the blood, and is the cause of all this
inconvenience. Now for the cure, it were necessary to help the liver, to
purify the blood, to alter the Hemerrhoids, and to discharge nature of that
imp^d^ment. First therefore, give them Electuario Angelica, the next day they
shall take Sirupo solutivo, whereof they shall take five or six doses. Then let
them anoint the Hemerrhoids, with Caustic* once or twice, and they shall soon
after be cured.

Of the diverse sorts, and diverse effects of the Hemerrhoids and their cure.
By reason of this disease, that comes always at the end of Intestino, or
Longanon, some have mavelous pain about the fundament, some burn wonderfully,
and others do scald: which comes because of the good or bad qualities in some,
more than in other some, as experience shows. For (as I said) some have such
a burning that they can take no rest, some have such pain, as they cannot fit,
some have it scalding hot that it is intolerable. Though this infirmity is
more hurtful in one complexion than in another, and the cure harder: yet you
shall cure them in this manner. First give them Aromatico, then purge the body
five or six times with Sirupo solutivo. Then give him fume at the lower parts,
with frankincense, and storax sitting on a close-stool three or four times, and
then anoint the parts with Balsamo artific. for that will dry and take away the
pain altogether, and the patient shall be surely healed.

There are diverse kinds of Hemerrhoids but two in principal. The one sort is
in the fundament, and causes great pain when they go to stool. The other so^^
comes forth of the fundament, and are not so painful as the first. To cure
those within the fundament you shall give the patient eight or ten days
together, Sirupo magistrale warm, let them take Aromatico once, and use
Glisters, wherein is put half an ounce of Aqua reale Phioravante at a time, and
so thou shall help them. The best way for those that are come forth, is to make
incision, or to make a little hole in them that the blood (which is putrified)
may come forth, and so by evacuation thou shall help them. Also you shall
understand, that vomiting is very necessary in the rure of both sorts, because
it opens the veins. Also Oleum Ovorum, does ease the pain of the Hemerrhoids
very greatly: so does the oil of fig^, if you anoint them therewith. The Tooth
of an Horsefish, being worn in a ring on the finger after the body is purged,
takes them away by a secret and hidden quality, a thing proved more then an
hundred times.

CHAP. CX.
Of the cure of such as are troubled with suffocation of the Matrix.
A Certain woman afflicted therewith having much pain and grief in her stomach,
was cured by taking a dose of Electuario Angelica. Then she used our sirrup
against pains of the mother, eight or ten days, and anointed her stomach, with
Magno licore every night.

A certain young woman afflicted in manner aforesaid, wanted also her natural
sickness, and began to loose her natural heat: so that nature could not
digest the superfluous matter in her body, was thus helped. First she took
Electuario Angelica, and every night anointed her stomach, nosethrills, and
pulses, with magno licore, and every morning drank of Quintaessence solutive,
and so was cured.

CHAP. CXI.
To cure a rupture or bursting in the beginning.
IN every ten days once give them Aromatico, and every morning fasting, give
them one ounce of white Tartar, in water or wine, and two hours before supper
you shall take the like: let your bread be dry, also you must wear a trusse fit
for that purpose and use this remedy following. Take of the spirit of wine
twelve ounces, frankincense, Olibanum, mastich sarcocolla, of each half an
ounce, infuse them in Aqua vitae, and therewith wash the rupture twice a day,
then cast thereon the powder of Bislingua, and the herb Balsamina, and lay
thereon a cloth wet in the said water, and bind on the trusse so hard, as he
may possibly abide it; and hereby shall thou heal any great rupture, in an
hundred days, but see that you keep diet accordingly.

Another for the same.
Take very stiff and thick paper well gummed, chew it in the mouth till it be
soft: then lay it upon the rupture, and lay thereon a trusse fit for the
purpose.

Some use to steep the paper in lie, and wring the same out till it be dry, and
apply it to the rupture, changing it once in 24 hours.

A most excellent medicine for bursting.
Take Knotgrasse Co^fery, Ribwort, Shepherds-pouch, of each alike quantity wash
them and dry the^, then set them in an oven to dry, then beat them to powder
and searce the^, to that powder take a like quantity of Aniseeds, beat it with
the powder and herbs, searce them again, and when y^ will use this powder take
as much of it as will lie upon a six pence, for ten mornings together, drink it
with a little Malmsey fasting: then take of the foresaid herbs being first
sodden in fair water till they be tender, wring the water clean from them and
apply it to the place not too hot; let not the trusse be too strait for it will
make the place rent further, gather the herbs to make this powder in May, when
the chief strength is in them, put a little oil of Spike to the hear bs after
they be boiled, and the water clean drawn from them, anoint the place with oil
of Spike, before you lay the herbs to it. This has been often proved to be
good upon children that have been born so, and upon old folks, that have been
many years broken.

CHAP. CXII.
Of retention of Urine, and the cure thereof.
THe retention of urine arises of many causes, one is gravel, that stops
the conduits where it should pass, an other is the want or weakness of the
virtue expulsive; so that nature cannot expel; an other is a carnosity, which
is an alteration caused of corrupt and putrified humors, which do so restrain
the powers, and urine, that it cannot pass. There is another, and that is
viscosity of the reins, so gross, that it hinder^th the urine from passing.
Another cause, which is too too common, is the Gonorrhea, when it changes into
Stranguria, that it is a stopping or choking of the cenduits, that carry the
urine to the bladder. All these foresaid causes, proceed of one original, even
of the distemperature of nature, whereof if you ask the reason you shall
understand that it arises of that filthy beginning, which brings the soul
disease. That which moves me to believe it, is the observation thereof diverse
and sundry times, for many have been cured, that were infected with the pocks
which were troubled (with carnosity before spoken of) some with gravel, some
with debility of the virtue expulside, some with Gonorrhea; all which when they
were cured of the pocks, the other distemperatures were therewith also cured.
For that disease is the cause of twenty mischiefs, and the reason why many
Physicians make a long cure of the former distemperatures, is for that they
know not the main and principal cause of them. But now I will show thee a true
and excellent manner of curing the retention of urine, which way soever it
comes.

First give them a dose of Aromatico, then give unto them Sirupo solurivo,
eight or ten days, but in any wise keep no strait diet, but a good government
as you do most commonly use: and eat such meat as pleases thy stomach best:
cause them also to sweat* and in short time thou shall thoroughly cure them.

CHAP. CXIII.
A most excellent remedy to cure the difficulty of Urine.
THe difficulty, or retention of urine, caused diverse ways, as of gravel
viscosity, exulceration, etc. i^ in this sort very well and safely cured. When
the cause of this difficulty of urine is in the reins or kidneys, so that it be
not a stone in the kidneys, or some great store of gravel see that you work
thus.

Take the lungs and pissel of an hare, boil it in good wine, when it is well
boiled* stamp it small, and pass it thorough a strainer with the said liquor
wherein it was boiled. Remember that when you boil it there must not remain
much liquor in the vessel. Then take the said matter that you strained, and put
thereto as much purified honey, and boil it on a soft fire, until it come to
the form of an Electuary. When it is boiled put thereto for every pound of that
Electuarythese things following made into fine powder, of Lignumaloes, of
Cinnamon, of each Iscruple Cloves Saffron, of each one scruple Musk four grains,
Aquae rosarum one ounce, Quintaessence solutive one ounce and a half.
Incorporate these well together, while it is warm and keep it in a glass close
stopped. And when you will use it, you must first take a dose of Electuario
Angelica, and while you use the Electuary, remember to anoint the reins with
Aqua faetida, when you go to bed. Of the Electuary you must take one ounce in
the morning, and fast thereon four hours, and use some exercise and in short
time, th^n shall see a mavelous good work performed. For the reins will be
strengtheued, the viscosity will be resolved, the por^^ will be opened, and the
urine will be expelled, and cleansed, all which are effects necessary for him
to regard, that will with henesty and credit, help the former malady.

Another often proved.
If thou will presently help one that cannot make water, by reason of wind
viscosity, or other grievous cause, vering the party; anoint the reins, and the
privy parts with Balsamo Artificiato, and keep them very warm, and forthwith
they shall make water, to their great satisfaction.

CHAP. CXIIII.
Retention of the Urine, with a stitch in the side.
ONe was in very short time cured of these infirmities, after he had taken
Aromatico: and anointed him in manner above specified, with the Balsamo
Artificiato, which you shall find under the title of Balsome, etc.

CHAP. CXV.
The swelling of the leg, and foot, cured in manner following.
FIrst the patient took one dose of Aromatico, then he used Quintaessence
solutive, three or four mornings together in a little broth That d^^e* he drunk
every morning a little Qu^intaessence vegetable fasting, and every night, he
anointed his leg, with Oleum Philosophorum nostrum. Also now and then he took a
dose of Pillulae Angelica, to keep the body soluble, he kept a reasonable good
diet, he used not m^uch walking, so that very shortly after, he was well cured.

CHAP. CXVI.
Of Chilblains, and their cures.
YOu shall understand that Chilblains (as we t^rm them) are caused of no other
thing then of humors dried, and restrained in the body. For in winter when it
is cold, the pores do shut so close together, that the humor cannot pass or
come forth, neither by sweat, nor other exhalation or expiration. For that
cause, the humors in a young man (who is hot of complexion) may not be kept
in; for then nature (which would ease her self) sends that exhalation, unto
the extreme parts of the body, that is, unto the hands and feet; where
remaining there is caused that alteration; and in process of time the skin
does open, and the humor goes forth; but cannot heal till the spring, when
warm weather comes in. Howbeit, there is found out a secret to cure them
quickly, and with great ease. First let them blood, then give them a dose of
Electuario Angelica: after that let them take Sirupo solutivo, six or seven
days together, not keeping any straight diet or rule. After this anoint them
with Oleum philosophorum de cera and terebinthina, at night when they go to
bed: and do thus one week at the lea^t, and then no doubt thou shall cure them,
as I have often proved. Also the oil and water of frankincense, will do the
like.

CHAP. CXVII.
Of Corns on the feet and the manner to take them away.
THe Corns that come on the feet, are a kind of hard tumor, or thick
excressence caused of corrupt and putrisied humors, whereof nature being
willing to discharge her self, sends them to the lower part of the fect
whereout because they cannot pass, there do they make residence, ingendring
that kind of tough excresse nce, which is grievous and painful. Many times the
cause hereof arises of that noisome disease Morbus Gallicus, as some write,
and then must it be remedied with medicaments appropriate thereunto. But if
they come otherwise, then to take them away follow this order. When they are in
their greatest state, and cause most pain, cut them until they bleed, then
anoint them with Balsamo Artificiato applying it so hot as you may suffer it;
thereupon go to bed. Then touch them once or twice mith Oleum sulfuris, and
anoint them with Olenm philosophorum de teribinthina and cera, until they be
whole.

Some take the juice of Semperuivum, and anoint the eyes therewith. Then they
take Wormwood, and lay it upon an hot tile stone, and sprinkle it with strong
vinegar, and being hot bind it upon the Corns, and in three or four times so
doing (as I have been credibly informed) the Corns will be taken away. Also the
red plaster or sear-cloth before set down cures the same.

CHAP. CXVIII.
Of an infirmity that comes on the fingers ends, and in the feet, under the
nails, and the cure thereof.
MAny men are greatly troubled herewith, and in such manner, as thereby they
are made altogether unfit to go. It comes on the great toe under the nail or
the side of the nail for the most part and a man would think that the nail grew
in the fle^h, but it is not so, for the flesh grows upon the nail though this
infirmity appear not, to be a thing of great importance (whereof the ancient
writers have made little mention) yet i^ it a thing greatly to be regarded. For
many great personages that li^e easily, and are tormented with the gout, have
also this grief in those parts: but the order to cure them is this. First you
shall cut the nail on that part where it most grieveth them; then take it away,
which you may do easily without any great pain to the patient; for the nail is
already separated from the grieved place. Thus when the nail is taken away,
touch it with our Caustic whereof mention is made in our treatise of the
plague. Let it so remain three days together: then dress it every day with
Magno licore, until it be whole, which will be in a very short time,

CHAP. CXIX.
Of Eri^ipcla, or tumor in the face, or any other part of the body, and the
cure thereof.
THis disease (as experience shows) is caused of an hot and fiery moisture,
arising in the face, arms and legs, for where it is, the pores are stopped, y^
the said moisture, cannot have expiration, whereupon comes tumor: as also a
shutting and closing up of those pores, by means of the ordinary anointing
them, with fats, oils, etc. or other cold things: a common course of common
Chyrurgians. Against this there cannot be found a more present remedy, then the
spirit of wine or Aqua ardens, or bathing it with hot water: and if you wash
the parts afflicted with our Quintaessence, the pores will be opened, and it
penetrateth and assubtilateth that humidity, causing it to come forth.

Also you shall find that by drinking our Quintaessence and anointing the
stomach with oleum cerae, diverse are cured of a certain heat retained in the
stomach.

CHAP. CXX.
The cure of Warts.
THere is an herb called Herba di vento: in the juice whereof, if you wet a
cloth, and bind it upon the warts, they will wear away in short time after.

CHAP. CXXI.
For giddiness in the head.
TAke the juice of Prim-rose leaves, or the flowers in the Summer, or of the
juice of roots in Winter, and put into your ear, and stop it with black Wool,
and lie down upon it.

CHAP. CXXII.
To help one that is deaf.
TAke the inner bark of an elder bough, stamp it and strain it, and put the
juice into your Ears, stop your Ears with Wool, and keep you warm with it.

CHAP. CXXIII.
For Ears that run, and are full of water.
TAke two parts of the Gall of a barrow hog, half as much of the best honey,
boil these together in thick glasses, in hot ashes till half be consumed and so
use it, prescribed by Dr. Nicholas for Henry Medlex.

CHAP. CXXIIII.
For sore Ears.
TAke the juice of Knot grass, and sees it with honey and wine, and pour a
quantity thereof into the patients ear, and stop the ear with cotton, and lie
down on the contrary side.

In the next place I shall show you many rare and hidden secrets, for the
making and, use of our Balsamo Artificiato, or the Artificial Balsome (often
mentioned before) and several other excellent Balsomes, Oils, and Ointments,
with the rare effects thereof.
CHAP. CXXV.
The making of Balsamo Artificiato, or the Artificial Balsome, with a
declaration of the effects and virtues thereof.
TAke of Uenice Turpentine, one pound, of perfect oil of Bays four ounces, oil
Galbanum, three ounces, of Gum Arabeck four ounces, of Lignum aloes, Galingal,
Cloves, Consolida major. Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Zedoana, Ginger, Diptanum album of
each one ounce, of Olibanum, Mirrha elected Gum Hedera of each three drams, of
the best Musk and Amber of each one dram of rectified Aqua vitae sir pound; put
all these in a new earthen pot and let them stand seven days, close stopped
that no air goesin, then distill them in a glass retortive in sand. And the
first water that comes is white mingled with oil after you have drawn a
sufficient quantity of this increase your fire, and there will come a black oil
and water, which you are to take in another Receiver, increasing your fire
according to Art, til it drop no more; then separate the oils from the waters
and the black oil is the Artificial Balsame.

The inventor of this Balsom will never want praise so long as Letters are
printed, and men's bodies subject to griefs and infirmities for (besides the
many great and rare virtues you find it has in the various applying thereof
according to the rules set down in the several places of this Book.) The first
water is excellent good to clear the eyes, and preserves the sight the face
also being washed therewith, it makes it fresh, smooth and young. The white oil
breaks and dissolveth the stone or gravel in the kidneys, it being drunk, it
provokes urine, cures all kind of wounds, Sciatica's, pains and aches in the
joints. The black water is called the mother of Balsame and cures scabs,
botches, scurffs, and all sorts of Ulcers, in any part of the body, in a very
short time. There is an Artificial Balsomsold by the Apothecaries very good for
most of the things before specified.

CHAP. CXXVI.
Another most excellent Balsom, which cures all wounds in a very short time,
it is good for all pains and aches, for the Cramp stiff members, shrunk sinews,
etc.
TAke of sweet oil Olive ten pound, white Wine one pound, boil these together
till the wine be consumed, let it cool, and put it into a stone pot, then add
unto it, of the flowers of rosemary one pound and a half, of Lignum aloes three
ounces of Olibanum, of Bdellinum, of each five ounces, then stop your pot well
with cork, pitch, and bladders, and bury it in the earth about the beginning of
August, and there let it remain about half a year, then take it out, and put in
these following things. Take of Sage Rosemary, Betony, Rue, Yarrow, of the
roots of Consolida major, of leaves of Vi^icella otherwise called Balsamina, of
the flowers of Tapsus Barbatus, of each three handfuls, of Galingal, Cloves
Nutmegs spica nardi Saffron, of each half an ounce of Sarcocolla, fanguis
draconis, Mastick, of each one ounce, of Aloes Epatica, rosin of the Pins of
each four ounces, of Colophoina half a pound, of the tops with the seeds of
Hypericon, of musk half a dram of yellow war, of Hogs grease, of each nine
ounces of oil of wax and man's grease, of each three ounces. The hear^^ y^ shall
cut small, and stamp the rest of the things to powder, and put them all into the
oil, mingle them well and set them all the Summer in the Sun, then boil them
till the herbs be dry, then strain the oil, and put in some of the
Apothecaries Artificial Balsame, the quantity of ten ounces, and in the month
of September, put in of the fruit of Balsamina, when it is red one pound, then
keep it close stopped. In defect of Balsamina, you may take y^ tops of the
Madelin with the flowers, it is not amiss to add to your Balsame Gum Elemin.
or the oil of Gum Elemin. distilled, if the gums, it must be put in with the
other Gume, about four ounces; if oil put it in with the Artificial Balsame
about two ounces, this Gum is most precious.

CHAP. CXXVII.
An excellent Balsome to cure deep wounds and punctures, made by some narrow
sharp pointed weapon, which Balsam does bring up the flesh from the bottom very
speedily, and also heals simple cuts in the flesh, according to the first
intention, (that is) to glue or soder the lips of the wounds together, not
procuring matter or corruption, as is commonly seen in healing of wounds.
TAke oil of roses, oil of Saint John Wort, of either one pint, the leaves of
Tobaco stamped small in a stone mortar two pound: boil them together, to the
consumption of the juice, strain it and put it to the fire again, adding
thereto of Uenice. Turpentine two ounces: of Olibanum and Mastick, of either
half an ounce, in most fine and subtle powder, the which you may at all times
make into an unguent or salbe, by putting thereto War and R^^^ to give it a
stiff body: which works well in malign and virulent ulcers, as in wounds
and punctures.

CHAP. CXXVIII.
To make the Italians Belsam to heal a green wound pre^ently; It is that which
they which are called Mountebanks use when they heal them whom they would and
stab upon Stages. It conglutinates and cements very suddenly any green wound by
cut or thrust, though never so deep in the flesh, if it be not ranckled and
festered.
TAke a pint of Sallet-oil, and three ounces of Barrel-pitch, two ounces of
yellow Wax, an ounce and an half of Rosin, and sees them about half an hour
upon a soft fire, and mingle them very well upon the fire, and then take them
off, and put them into little pots for your use; and warm a little in a saw^er,
and put it not very hot into the wound, but little more than blood warm, and
take also a soft linen cloth and put it into the Balsame and lay it over the
wound, and use it fresh and new morning or evening, and it cures presently.

CHAP. CXXIX.
To make a Balsome of St. John's wort,
TAke White Wind two pints, Oil Olive four pounds Oil of Turpentine two
pounds, the leaves flowers and leeds of St. John's Wort, of each two great
handfuls gently bruised. Put them all together into a great double glass, and
set it in the Sun eight or ten days, then boil them in the same glass in a
kattle of water with some straw in the bottom, wherein the glass must stand to
boil; which done, strain the liquor from the herbs, and do as you did before,
putting in the like quantity of herbs, flowers, and seeds, but not any more
Wine.

Dioscorides says, that the seed drunk for forty days together, cures the
Sciatica, and all aches that happen in the hips.

The same Author says that being drunk with Wine it takes away Tertian and
Quartan Agues.

CHAP. CXXX.
To make Oil of Exceter good for all manner of aches or bruises.
TAke a pound of the flowers of Cowslips in May, steep them in oil Olive, in as
much quantity as they may easily be laid in, then take Calamint, herb John,
Red. Sage, Wild-Sage, Sugar, Sotherwood Wormwood, Penyroyoll, Lavender,
Pelitory, Camomill, Pelitory of Spain, Bays, Howes, flowers of Lillies, of
either of the aforesaid herbs one handful, and these herbs must be gathered in
June, grind them in a Mortar as small as green sauce, when it is so done, take
the flowers of Couslips out of the oil, with clean hands, and put them in white
Wine a night and a day, and take as much Wine as they may easily steep in, then
take the herbs with the Wine, and boil them together with the oil Olive, that
the Couslips were steeped in and let it boil so long over a fast fire, until
the Wine and the Water be wasted away. When it is boiled enough, take it off
the fire and wring it through a strong linen cloth, then put it in a Vessel
of Tyn of Glass, for no other Vessel will hold it. This ointment will last 3
years, and it must be made in the month of June, it is good for all manner of
aches and bruises.

CHAP. CXXXI.
To make Oil of Roses the best way.
TAke half a pound of red-rose* leaves and stamp them very small, and then take
a pound of oil Olive, and mingle with your roses, and put them in a glass well
stopped, and sees them in a Vessel with water, the space of six hours, and
then strain them through a clean cloth, and keep it in a glass, and by this
proportion you may make as much and as little as you will.

CHAP. CXXXII.
Another way of making Oil of Roses.
TAke Roses and oil Olive of each alike quantity in weight, shred them and put
them in a Vessel of glass stop it well, and hang it in a vessel of water, upto
the neck two months, and every day stir it o^c^, uns^^p it again and strain it
through a Canvas* and put away the grounds, so keep it in a vessel of glass
well stopped, f^^ this is a colder kind then the other.

CHAP. CXXXIII.
To make Oil o^ Lillies.
TAke S^lle^ oil* and put into it a good qu^^tity of the flowers of white
Lillies, then set it in a pot of (...) water, and let your oil and your Lillies
boil a good while, then wring out your Lillies, and put in more Lillies, and
set them in the Sun, and let them stand so long as you think convenient, then
take them out, and put in more Lillies, so change them once or twice more as
you think good; for want of flowers, you may take the root and stamp it and
boil it as aforesaid.

CHAP. CXXXIIII.
To make Oil of Balm.
TAke oil Benedict one pound, gum of Ivy, seed of Balm, then take chosen Hows
Turpentine four ounces, mingle them together on a little fire, three or four
times, till it has a little color and shining, and till it come to thickness
of honey or Turpentine, then keep it pretiously. This oil is good for all
aching of ^n^ws, coming of cold, it keeps dead bodies from rotting and
corruption. It is good for all other things, for the Palsy* and the falling
sickness. and the stone in the reins, and in the bladder, and to cure all
cor^ednesse of limbs.

CHAP. CXXXV.
To make Oil of Worms for an ach.
TAke a pint of Sallet oil, and a pint of red Worms, a handful of Rosemary,
and a handful of Comph^ry, then take these, and ch^p them together very small,
th^n put them into the oil, and let them boil till they (...) enough, then
strain them through a linen cloth, and so keep them close covered, the older
it is the better, when it is boiled enough, then it will s^mber softly, if it
boil too much it will flame away.

CHAP. XXXVI.
To make Oil of St. John's Wort.
TAke the leaves, flowers and seeds of St. John's Wort stamped, and put them
into a glass with Oil Olive, and set it in the hot Sun for certain Weeks
together, and then strained it from those herbs, and the like qua^tify put in,
and sunned in like manner, does make an Oil of the color of blood, which is a
most precious remedy for deep wounds, and those that are thrust through the
body, for sinews that are pricked, or any wound made with an invenomed weapon.

CHAP. XXXVII.
To make Oil of Broom.
TAke a quart of May Butter clarified in the Sun, put thereto three pints of
Broom-flowers clean picked from the stalks, let it stand in a B^son till you
can have Elder-flowers, wherereof put in ^ pint and an half, clean picked also;
let them stand together a month, put it into the Oven after bread, or in some
other place where it may have a continual warmth, and stir it sometimes: strain
it through a thin cloth, and set it in the Oven again to cleanse it.

This Oil of Broom is very good to take out the fire of a burning or scalding,
for the toothache that comes of rhume, to anoint the cheeks and gums, being
kept bound; it is also good, taken in posset drink, for any infections disease,
and sweat upon it, it is good for a bruise in a ^^mans breast, or swelled with
milk, it will mollify a green wound, it is good to drink for any inward
bruise; it helps any new ach or pain in the joint or bone, and for the
Spleen; mingled with yellow Wax, and plaistred upon linen cloth, it is good
for sore heels, and for many other things.

CHAP. CXXXVIII.
To make Oil of Hemp Seed, which causes a comely face, and makes the person
merry which uses it.
TAke one pound of Hemp Seed, and beat it very fine, then sprinkle and wet it
with a little wine, and put it into a new earthen pot or pan well glased, and
set it over the fire, heat it so long, till you cannot suffer your hand in it;
then put the same substance, into square bags, which you must press hard, and
an Oil will come forth, whereof if any drink the quanof one ounce at a time, it
makes him pleasant and merry; and if a Soldier drink it, it will make him
both fierce and hardy to fight without any fear or doubt of his enemy. In this
manner you may draw out any Oil out of all seeds.

CHAP. CXXXIX.
To make a Green Ointment.
TAke of Sage and Rue of each a pound, of Bayleaves and Wormwood of each half
a pound, of Mellilot, herb or flower of Camomil, of the flowers of Spike, of
Rosemary, of Rose-leaves, of St. John's Wort* and of Dill, of each one handful,
of Marshmallows two handfuls: All these herbs chop as small as may be, and
stamp them, and weigh and put thereto the like weight of Sheeps-suet, chop it
as fine as may be, and mince your herbs and it together, and stamp them in a
stone mortar to one substance, that there be no suet seen, but all green: then
put it into some fair earthen pot, then put thereto sweet Oil Olive a pottle
and pint: work these altogether in a pan with your hand to one substance, and
cover it close with past, that no air go in or out* so let it stand seven days,
then take it forth, and put it into a pan, and set it on a soft fire till the
leaves begin to wax parched hard, and then strain it into some clean pan, then
have ready these oils following: oil of Roses, of Spike, of Camomile, of white
Lillies, and of Violets, of each one ounce, stirring them well together and
reserve it in glasses or galley pots to your use, if you will have it more
pleasant of smell, and more nourishing, add thereto the Gums Labbamium one
ounce and a half, beaten to fine powder, Storax calaminted three quarters of an
ounce, bruised fine to powder, mingle this with your other stuff as before and
so keep it to your use.

This ointment is good for stitches for bruises, for the palsy, for the
shrinking of sinews, gouts, and sciaticaes, for the ach of the back, lamenesse,
plurisies, for the cough, the soles of the feet being anointed therewith, for
extreme pain in the head by cold, making a cap for the crown with linen
cloth, and lap it in wool plucked from the flanks of a live sheep, make it
clean from the filth and motes, and cartle it, then wet it in the ointment, and
so paste it and lay it somewhat warm to your head, it is good also for the
colic and the spleen, and the cold dropsy of the Liver.

CHAP. CXL.
An Ointment for any Ach or Crick*
TAke 12 pound of butter in the month of May, one pound of Broom-flowers, and
stamp them, then boil them in the butter a good while, then strain it and put
it into a Glass, and let it stand a while in the Sun to clarify, when you
use it, take one spoonful of the ointment, and three spoonfuls of Sack, and
boil them together, then bath the place therewith as hot as you can suffer it,
and dip a cloth therein, and apply it hot to the place.

CHAP. CXLI.
Another excellent Ointment for any bruise strain or pain in the joints.
TAke two handfulls of Rosemary, two handfulls of Hysop, half a handful of
Adders-tongue, half a handful of Egrimony, and boil them together with
Hog's Grease, and a little Rosin to a reasonable thickness and apply it.

CHAP. CXLII.
An excellent Ointment for the Reins of the back or other part of the body that
has pain or Crick.
TAke a good quantity of Neats-foot Oil, and put thereto a sufficient quantity
of Aqua vitae, mingle them well together, and anoint therewith for it has been
often proved excellent.

CHAP. CXLIII.
An Ointment for all manner of stitches and akings, in what place soever it be
in man's body.
TAke a peck of flowers of Broom, and two ounces of Galls, and put them in an
earthen pot and fill the pot full of Urine, and stop the pot fast, and put it
in the earth at the door of the house, and let it be there twelve months, and
then take that oil that is in the pot and strain it, and put it in a vessel to
keep, and anoint therewith the place grieved, and it will help, when all other
medicines fail.

CHAP. CXLIIII.
An Ointment for Ears that run and are full of water.
TAke two parts of the Gall of a Barrow-hog, half as much of the best honey,
boil these together in a thick glass in hot ashes till half be consumed, and
so use it, Dr. Nicholas for Henry Medlex.

CHAP. CXLV.
An Ointment for an impostume in the Ears.
TAke two spoonfuls of oil of Roses, and as much virgin war as a Nutmeg, melt
it together, and make it very warm, then put to it a little saffron finely
pounded, then take it off the fire, and stir it till it be almost cold, then
put to it a quarter of the yolk of an egg, and stir it, and when it shall be
like an ointment, take the bigness of a hazel-nut, and melt a drop of it into
the ear, and so continue four or five drops, and anoint the Ears round about,
and stuff it with unwashed wool round about, and keep it warm, this will ripen
the Impostume.

CHAP. CXLVI.
A singular medicine for any stopping at the stomach.
TAke four ounces of Lynseed, and boil it in a quart of milk, till it come to a
pint, and anoint the breast therewith, then take a piece of scarlet, and wet
(...) thoroughly in the milk and when it is wet, lay it on your breast without
warming.

CHAP. CXLVII.
An Ointment to clear the Lungs.
TAke the pap of roasted apples, as much oblibanum as a bean, twice as much
Sugar candy as oblibanum, mingle them together being beaten to powder* if the
patient be far goue, put to it a little oil of sweet Almon. and anoint the
breast outwardly with oil of Almonds.

CHAP. CXLVIII
An Ointment for deafness.
TAke an English Onion of the greatest you can get, and cut of the tip of it,
then take out some of the meat and fill it up with the best Sallet-oyl, then
wrap it up in a brown paper, and roast it in the ^mbers; when i^ is roasted you
must peel it, and then strain it through a fair cloth, this you may drop with
a feather into your ears lukewarm morning and evening, and your head must be
kept very warm.

CHAP. CXLIX.
An Ointment to break a sore.
TAke two drams of Cantarides, a quarter of an ounce of Pepper* and so much
vinegar as will make it a perfect ointment, lay this upon a brown paper, and
apply it.

CHAP. CL.
An excellent ointment for scalding or burning by Mr. John Burghesse, which
will do more in six weeks, then another in three months.
TAke Bacon that is very fat, cut of the sward, and cut it into Collops very
thin, and fry it till be black, then pour the liquor into water, take it out of
the water and put it in the pan, and fry it again till it be black, then pour
it into the water again, then take it out of the water and put it into the pan,
and fry it till it be black, then pour it forth again, and beat it with a
little water till it be white; put your water clean from it, and put your
liquor into a posnet, take a reasonable quantity of Onions, pilled and chopped
small, put them to the liquor, and boil them together, and strain it through a
cloth, and keep it to your use: this cured a man that was scalded in a Brewers
vessel.

CHAP. CLI.
For a burning or scalding.
SAlt dissolved in water, or brine; presently takes away the pain, and heat of
any burning or scalding, if it be anointed therewith, and especially if it be
bathed with linen cloths dipped therein, and to heal it that it be not seen.
Take sheeps suet and sheeps dung, the inner rine of elder, and boil them
through a course cloth, and when you use it warm it, and lay it on the burnt
or scalded place with a feather.

CHAP. CLII.
An Ointment to take away a Wen.
MAke powder of unslackt lime, and mire it with black Soap, and anoint the Wen
with it, and the Wen will fall away, and when the root is come forth, anoint it
with oil of balm and it will heal it perfectly.

CHAP. CLIII.
An ointment for the Shingles.
TAke Adders-tongue in the month of May one pound and three quarters of a
pound of fresh clarified Hogs, grease, and stamp the Adders-tongue very small
in a Mortar, then boil them together, and stir them till they become a salve,
then put it into an earthen pot, and anoint the Shingles, and spread some of it
upon a cloth, and lay it upon the Shingles so far as they go, this is good
against any biting or stinging of a Serpent or ^adde Dog, by anointing the
place very hot.

CHAP. CLIIII.
An Ointment for the cold Sciatica, or Benummednesle in the thighs or legs.
TAke a pint of Aqua vitae, a pint of Wine Vinegar, a quarter of a pound of oil
of Bays, the juice of four or five handfulls of Sage, a sawcer full of good
Mustard, the Gall of an Ore, and chase them in the bladder an hour or more,
that the oil may be well mingled with the rest, and anoint the place therewith
against a good fire, and let him go warm into his bed and sweat.

Probatum est.
CHAP. CLV.
An Ointment for the Gout, and to comfort the joints.
TAke a Fox, put the guts and skin away, and cut him in small pieces, and
take ^ gallon of Sallet-Oyl, sees them together with a soft fire, and put
therein a handful of Mugwort shred small, two onnces of Dill in powder, sees
it again in a pound of oil Olive, and a pound of fresh butter, sees it till
all the water be consumed, then strain it, and anoint the joints therewith.

CHAP. CLVI.
An Ointment against the Palsy.
TAke Ivy-berries, and Capons grease three ounces, and the roots of Celendine,
a handful of Sage, of oil of Bays two ounces, of oil Olive half a pound, beat
the herbs and roots small sees all these together upon a small fire, so
strain it and anoint the place grieved this is very precious.

There is Flos Vnguentorum or the flower of Ointments sold by the Apothecary,
which has very rare effects, for the curing of all old Fistulaes and festred
sores of long continuance, it draws any broken bone. splinter, or thorn out
of the flesh. It cures aches or pains in the joints or bones and (being
rightly made) is above all others the most precious unguent as experience daily
teaches. I have already showed you many hidden secrets or rare experiments in
Physic and Chyrurgery; which thou must needs acknowledge to have produced
wonderful great effects; yet are they nothing in comparison of these that are
behind, the reading and right use whereof, will render thee a true imitator of
him who by his unparallelled wisdom and moral Philosophy, knew the virtues
and use of all herbs and vegetables, from the tall Caedar of Libanon, to the
Hysop that grows upon the Wall. And for as much as there is none that can
(with assurance of good success) undertake any cure in Physic, without
observing certain Rules (as has been already proved unto you in the practiso
of Chyrurgery,)

Before I speak of Purges, Vomits, Waters, Drinks, and Herbs in general, I
shall recommend some particulars which I always observe in the ministering of
Physic.
CHAP. CLVII.
Certain Rules to be observed by the learned and expert Physician.
A Skillful Physician is a continual Votary or serbant of nature; for the
right ministering and applying such ^it and proper remedies as may help, defend,
and sustein nature; and wast or destroy the malady or disease, which that thou
may effectually perform, search diligently to know the cause from whence the
distemperature or disease arises, whether of Phleghm, Choler, Blood, or
Melancholy, and whether it be seated in the Stomach, Head, etc. or from a hot
or cold cause, by which means thou art in a good measure enabled to find out
the grief or disease, and apt to prescribe a proper remedy against i^. If thou
find it convenient and profitable for the Patient to be let blood thou must
have resp^ct to the time of the year, the age of the party, the sign that
governs, the strength of the Patient, and the disease.

In purging also thou art to take notice and consider what humor is to be
purged, and how far it abounds, and have as special regard to suit the
medicine to the humor that thou would purge as to the time, and the
quantity thou give thereof. But chiefly and above all I hold it necessary (in
all sicknesses or diseases) you should observe the time when the Patient
falls ill, and what Planet governs, and what the aspects are, for by that you
may judge whether it be a convenient time to minister Physic, as for example.

R. H. finds himself ill this present day, being the first of April, 1651,
and seeks unto me for remedy, I find at this time Saturn in opposition with
the Moon, and Mars with a quartille 12 degrees, a sextile with Venus 6 degrees,
by which I adjudge if not a good time to minister Physic, and the next day
like unto it, therefore unless I perceive the Patient to be in great
necessity. I persuade him not to take his Physic until the third day, which I
find favored with better aspects.

These kind of observations are of great antiquity, and were in high esteem
among the most learned Philosophers, the practice whereof is of that singular
use in these times that some in London and other places, which soar with the
highest on the wings of same, give judgments this way, rather then by the
urine, and therefore I suppose thou will not think it loss of time, if I am
the more large on this point.

If thou will therefore be expert in this art thou must be thoroughly informed
concerning the course of the heavens and the celestial bodies, and what the
signs and aspects be, which thou have more lively represented by this Figure.



An Aspect of any of the Planets is a certain distance between the centers of
two Planets, wherein they notably help or hinder, prosper or afflict; for by
good aspects, as the Sextile, and Trine they assist and prosper, but by a
Quartile and opposition, they vex hinder and aflict: so that by this thou
may perceive the conjunction is good with good and evil with bad.

By a Trine you are to understand a third part of the Air, a Quaril^ is the
fourth part of the air, a Sextile a sixth part of the air. An opposition is
when one Planet is right against another, the half part of the air, and a
conjunction is when they meet. But that which is of the chiefest use in matter
of thy study and practiseis, the knowledge of the twelve houses, which
Astronomically are deciphered thus.



In each house thou find characterized one of the 12 Signs, yet note that
they do alter and change according to the Quotidian and course of motions.
Three of these signs be of the nature of fire, three of air, three of water,
and three of earth. The three fiery Signs are Aries, Leo, Sagitarius; the three
of the air be Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius; the three of the water, are Cancer,
Scorpio, and Pi^ces, and those of the earth are Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus,
And when 2 Planets are in one sign, and one degree of the Zodiac there is a
conjunction.

Therefore as it is necessary that theu should know what the sign is, when
thy Patient falls sick, so must thou likewise know what Planet is Lord of the
house, then observe what the Aspects are (described in the first Globe or
Sphere) and it will not a little direct thy judgment both concerning the
disease, the remedy, and the time of continuance or abatement thereof.

Also the knowledge of the Planets is the more desirable, for that it is the
judgment of the wise Philosophers, that they have not only influence upon the
bodies of men, etc. but also upon all Herbs, Plants, and Vegetables; for the
Sun has a special influence on the Bay Tree, and other trees of that nature*
and we find by good experience the effects answerable (of which more in the
virtues of herbs,) the study whereof will very much enable thee in the right
ministering and applying such things as in thy practice thou shall find
requisite to be made use of: for A^comes the Philosopher chose to make his
powders, (whereof he gives such large commendation,) when the Sun entered
the first degree of Aries.

I shall now therefors proceed to set down certain general remedies by way of
Purgations, Vomits, Glisters, Drinks, and Waters, with diverse other hidden
secrets for the curing of any disease or malady of the body either internal or
external.

CHAP. CLVIII.
An excellent Purge.
TAke Diacatholiacon one ounce, Confection of Hameck one ounce, mix them very
well together, and put them into half a pint of Whitewine and drink it.

CHAP. CLIX.
Pills to purge Melancholy and Choler.
TAke half an ounce of Aloes Sackatrina, and beat it to powder very small, then
take a dram of Rubarb, and slice it very thin, and dry it in a sancer upon
embers, then beat it to a fine powder, and of powder of Steel half as much in
measure as the Rubarb, and with a little Claret Wine temper them together till
they be like past, and then make them into pills, whereof take one every night
2 hours after supper, and in the morning drink some broth.

CHAP. CLX.
To purge the head of gross Choler and Phlegm.
TAke Pillule Masticka Fermely, I dram and a half of oil Teijme Chymicall seven
drops, of the spices of Aromatica seven grains, mix these well, and make them
into ten pills, an hour before dinner and an hour before supper, and use them
as you have need.

CHAP. CLXI.
A Special powder for the Memory, and to purge the Brain.
TAke three ounces of Senae leaves, Sednarij, Commi^, Parsley, and Dill seed,
of each an ounce. Ginger one ounce and a half, Cloves, Nutmegs, Calimus,
Galingal, Pimpernill Roots, Sage, Rue, Valerian, Annis-seeds, of each one
quarter of an ounce, Sagar three ounces, pound all these small and temper them
together, and take thereof morning and evening one dram at one time.

CHAP. CLXII.
Another excellent Purgation.
Take the flowers of the Peach-tree, infused in warm water for the space of
ten or twelve hours, then strain them and put thereto more of the flowers and
put to the said liquor to infuse after the same manner six or seven times; then
put thereto as much Sugar as it will require, and boil it to the thicknes of a
sirrup, whereof take two spoonfuls in the morning, and it purges the belly
better then Rubarb or Agrick, for it works exceedingly upon moist and
waterish humors without pain or gripings.

CHAP. CLXIII.
To make, Pills of Liquoris to be taken after an extreme cold, or the falling
of the Rhume from the head.
TAke choice Liquoris, and bea^ it to fine powder, and put thereto so much
Hisop water (...) will make it like paste with a little Gum-dragon, and make
pills thereof and let them dissolve in your mouth.

Another gentle purge.
TAke a new-laid-egge, and put the yolk from the white, then put the yolk again
into the shell and sup it off, then drink four spoonfulls of Aqua vitae after
it, and walk a while upon it.

CHAP. CLXIIII.
A Glister for the Emrods.
TAke a Glister made of a quart of milk boiled to a pint, with two handfuls of
Mallows, and a handful of Mereury. Then take Frankincense, Storax, and
Benjamin, and powder them, and take the fume thereof in a close-stool, and
anoint the place with Vnguentum album Camphoreum.

CHAP. CLXV.
Another Glister.
TAke a pint and a half of strong ale, an ounce of Fennell-seeds, and five or
six ounces of course Sugar, four or five spoonfuls of sirrup of Roses, or of
sirrup of blew Violets, your Fennel-seeds must be beaten and boiled in your
ale, it must boil half a pint away, then strain it, and put in your Sugar, and
which of these sirrups you will, and give it warm.

CHAP. CLXVI.
An excellent Vomit.
TAke Antemony prepared, beaten small, one pennyworth, and infuse it in a
penny-pot of White Wind, take Sinamon bruised, strain it, and as you use it
warm it, and one hour after, if it work not, drink warm posset-ale; and if the
water proceeding be tough and thick, put into the posset drink a little
sweet-butter, but be sure the sign be not in the upper parts, by reason the
matter will not six and operate, the quantity you give may not be above two or
three spoonfulls, according to the strength of the patient, four fpoonfulls
will be enough for any strong body.

A vomit for an Ague.
TAke the powder of Stubin. according to the strength of the Patient four,
five, six, or seven grains, and give it to the party fasting in any convenient
sign, and drink posset drink between whiles. It purges both ways without
danger.

CHAP. CLXVII.
Dr. Giffords purging drink,
TAke of the roots of Parsley, Red-Fennell, Sparagus, Madder, of each two
ounces, of Red-Dock roots two ounces, of Setrach, Maidenhair, Watercresses,
Scabius, of each two handfuls, of Burrage, Buglas and Violet-flowers, of each
half a handful, of Sena three ounces, of Polipodium of the Oak two ounces, of
Epithemum one handful and a half, of white Turbish, of Gum Mexican of each two
ounces, of Sax afrage, of Ashen-tree bark, of Capper-roots, of each one ounce,
of Annis-seeds, Caraway-seeds, Coiliander^ seeds, of each two drams, let the
herbs and the roots be a little dried and cut that which is to be cut, and
bruise the rest and make a grosse-powder, put it into a linen bag, and put
into a firkin of four gallons of six shillings Beer, when it is cleansed put
into it, a pint and a half of the juice of Scurvy-grasse clarified, put aside
the settling from the dregs in the bottom, and drink a good draught of this
every morning fasting, and at four of the clock in afternoon.

CHAP. CLXVIII.
A Purging drink for a tough Phlegm.
TAke Salsaparilla, Hermadactiles picked, Sena (...) Alexandria, Liquorice, of
each three ounces well bruised, the filling of Guajacum four ounces, the bark
of Guajacum two ounces pounded, Bay Berries, the husks taken off and bruised,
one ounce and a half, Cinnamon pounded half an ounce, two good Nutmegs bruised,
put all these into two gallons of new tunned ale, and three days being ended,
the next morning at six of the clock, drink half a wine pint if you can of the
ale, and as much at three of the clock in the afternoon make a spare dinner at
ten of the clock, and the like supper at six, or else drink one draught at six
and another at ten lest it make you rise in the night.

CHAP. CLXIX.
An excelent drink for the yellow Jaundies.
TAke tops of green Broom a reasonable quantity, shred them small, then put to
them half a pennyworth of Saffron, stamp them well together, put to them of
strong Ale or Beer, two good spoonfulls so let them steep all night, in the
morning strain it with a little more beer to make a small draught, let it be
drunk be times and fast three hours, and use to swing the arms much, receive it
three or four mornings making it fresh every morning.

CHAP. CLXX.
A drink for spitting of Blood.
TAke the juice of Betony, and temper it with Goats milk, and give it the
patient to drink three days, or take Smallage, Mints, Rue, and Betony, and
sees them well in good milk, and sup it off warm.

CHAP. CLXXI.
A drink for a surfeit.
TAke three quarts of strong ale, steep therein a quarter of a pound of
Liquorice, and half a quarter of Anniseeds twelve hours, then still it in a
Limbock, and take a quart of the first water for the surfeit drink.

To a quart of this Aqua vitae, put a dram of Hierapicra made into fine powder,
as small as dust, and so put it into Aqua vitae, and shake it half an hour
together, then put it into a Stove or Cuboard near the fire where it may have a
continual warmth like the heat of the Sun forten days, for that time shake it
once a day very well, after these ten days it must stand a week to settle that
it may be clean put from the bottom, when you pour it out; the Uses are, it
may be safely given in surfeits of all sorts, one, two, or three spoonfulls at
several times to some complexions it will give some few stools, it must no way
be given to a woman with child unless she be in hard travel near delivery, in
show of danger nothing is better to speed delivery.

CHAP. CLXXII.
Another for the same.
THe distilled water of Mallows sliced in small pieces when they be ripe, and
drink once in a day three or 4 ounces for a month together and it does greatly
help the Stone, causes the Urine, and purges the kidneys and allayeth all
inward heats, and not unnaturally, cools the liver and cease thirst.

CHAP. CLXXIII.
A restoring Drink for any decay of the inward parts.
TAke live honey, and put thereto tops of Balm, Couslip-blossomes,
Rosemary-flowers, Burrage-flowers Buglas, flowers, the flowers of
red-Cornations, let these remain in the honey a month, the^ stop the pot very
close that no air go in or out, and let it stand all the while in some warm
place either in the Sun or by a continu^all fire, then distill it in a glass
still and drink thereof every morning a good draught.

CHAP. CLXXIIII.
A drink for a woman with child in danger to miscarry.
IF any woman great with child shall take this drink every other day in the
morning, three hours before ^he eat any meat, beginning the same about ten days
or a fortnight before the time of the birth it shall not only be made more
easy, but also she shall bring forth her child without pain. Take of the great
Treacle one sccuple, which is the weight of twenty four barley corns, the
powder of Liquorice, and the powder of Sinamon of either three grains, of good
white wine one ounce and a half mixed altogether, and make thereof a drink, and
let it be given to the woman with child, in such manner as is before said.

CHAP. CLXXV.
An excellent Drink to purge Melancholy and choler, to cleanse the blood and
to comfort the heart.
TAke of Salsaparilla four ounces, of Sena munda four ounces, of China roots
two ounces, of Rubarb three drams, of Epithamum half an ounce, of Polipodium
roots three ounces, of Madder roots one handful of red-Dock roots the pith
taken out and sliced one handful, of sweet Fennell-roots and Annis-seeds, of
each half an ounce, of Sinamon, Mace and Nutmegs, of each three drams, of
Scabius, and Egrimony, of each one handful. Then take your Salsaparilla;
China, Rubarb, Polipodium, and Madder, and scrape and slice them, and beat them
into gross powder, and powder the Fennel and Annisseeds, Nutmegs, Mace, and
Sinamon. And put the Epithamum, Dock-roots, Sena, Egrimony, and Scabions whole
into a bag of course Boulter, or Loomwork, incompassing the powder in the
herbs; in putting them into the bay. And put the bag into an empty barrel, and
after put six gallons of Beer to it, but let not the barrel be full lest it
work over, and stop it close, and after it has stood seven days, drink
thereof every morning a wine pint, and the like quantity about four of the
clock in the afternoon. But put the bag first empty into the empty barrel, and
after put in the ingredients thereto.

CHAP. CLXXVI.
Doctor Deodats Scurbubical Drink.
TAke Cardus Benedictus, Roman-wormwood, Brooklime, Scurvey-grass,
Watercresses, Water Trefoil, of each one handful: of Doder, Cetrach,
Scolopendria, Burrage, Bugalos, Sorrel, Speedwel, of each one handful, of
Elicompain roots one ounce; to these herbs clean picked and washed, put three
ounces of Reasons of the sun stoned, fifteen slices of Lemons, and as many of
Drenges. Boil all these in as much white wind as will well boil the herbs, and
let it boil till it comes to a pint and a half.

A Scurbutical Sirrup to take with the former Drink.
TAake juice of Scurvey grass, Watercresses and Brooklime, of each six ounces,
of the juice of Dranges and Lemons, of each four ounces. First clarify the
juices, then put to it a pound and three quarters of Sugar, let it boil to a
sirrup; then take two spoonfuls of it in four spoonfuls of the Drink at the
hours of six in the morning and four in the afternoon.

CHAP. CLXXVII.
A Diet-Drinke for any disease that is curable prescribed by three Dutch
Doctors.
TAke of Hermodacti^is two ounces, of Salsaperilla four ounces, of Seen
Alexandr. four ounces, of Saxafras wood, two ounces, of Liquorice one ounce, of
Annis-seeds one ounce, of long Pepper half an ounce, of the leaves of Scabius
one handful, of Egrimony half a handful of Watercresses and Brook-lime, of
each one great handful, of Sea Scurvey-grasse, two great handfuls, of good
Nutmegs one ounce, let all the woods be slit and cut small, and the herbs
shred and put into a bag and hang it in a barrel with six gallons of new ale,
and let it stand and settle eight days, then drink continually of it and no
other drink while it lasts and eat bakers bread with Cor^ander-seeds, and
keep a good diet; use this six weeks.

CHAP. CLXXVIII.
A Purging Ale.
TAke of the juice of Scurvey-grasse four pound, of Watercresses two pound, of
Brooklime one pound of Water mints half a pound, of the herb of dry Wormwood
four handfulls, of the roots of Madder four ounces, the roots of Muncks Rubarb
three ounces, Roots of Horseradish one ounce and a half, the roots of Saxafras
one ounce, of Sena four ounces, Juniper Berries half an ounce, of Anni-seeds,
Earni-seeds, and Ginger of each six drams.

Another.
To a pint of the whay of Goats-milk put of Sena half an ounce, of Ginger clean
scraped and thin sliced, of Anni-seeds, and sweet Fennel-seeds well dusted and
lightly bruised, of each the weight of four pence, let them stand so an hour,
or an hour and a half, on warm embers, in infusing; the next morning to a
draught hereof put a spoonful of sirrup of Roses, and as this agrees with
you, take it two or three days together, or every other day.

CHAP. CLXXIX.
An excellent Diet-drink.
TAke the roots of Monks Rubarb, and red Madder, of each half a pound, Sena
four ounces, Anni-seed, and Liquorice of each two ounces, Scabius and Egrimony
of each one handful, slice the roots of the Rubarb, bruise the Anni-seed and
Liquorice, break the herbs with your hand, and put them into a stone pot called
a stean, with four gallons of strong ale to steep or infuse the space of three
days, and then drink this liquor as your ordinary drink for three weeks
together at the least though the longer you take it the better: providing in a
readiness another stean, so prepared, that you may have one under another,
being always careful to keep a good diet. It cures the dropsy the yellow
Jaundies, all manner of itches, scabs or breakings out of whole bodies, it
purifieth the blood from all corruption, prevails against the green sickness
very greatly, and all obstructions or stopping, it makes young maids to look
fresh and fair, and helps the stoppage of their monthly sickness.

CHAP. CLXXX.
The making of a very precious water.
TAke a gallon of good gascoin wine, the roots of Galingal, Nutmegs, Grains,
Cloves, Anni-seeds, Fennell-seeds, Caraway-seeds, of each a dram then take
Sage, Mint, red-Roses, garden Time, Pellicory, Rosemary, Wild-time, Camomil,
Pennyroyal, Margerome, then beat the spices small, and beat the herbs and put
all into the Wine, and let it stand for twelve hours stirring it diverse times,
the^ distill it in a limbeck and keep the first water by it self for it is the
best, then keep the second water, for it is very good, but not so good as the
first.

The virtues of this Water.
It comfort the spirits, or vital parts; it heals any inward disease that
comes of cold; it is good against the shaking Palsy; and cures the
contraction of sinews; and helps the conception of women that be barren; it
kills worms in children or elder persons; it helps the cold gout; it cures
the cold Dropsy; it helps the stone in the bladder, and in the reins of the
back and whosoever uses this water now and then and not too often, it
preserves him in good liking, and shall make him look exceeding young and
youthful.

CHAP. CLXXXI.
A most excellent water for the Stomach, and for a Surfe^.
TAke of the best and purest Aqua-vitae you can get, and put thereto three
dozen of Reasons of the sun stoned, three Figs sliced, two Dates quartered, and
the white taken out; a quarter of an ounce of Cloves, a quarter of an ounce of
Mace, and as much Sinamon; two races of Ginger sliced, two ounces of
Annis-seeds, picked and rubbed, of Angelica-seeds two Drams, and of Cardus-seed
two Drams, of Turnsole one ounce and of fine Sugar a quarter of an ounce: Steep
all these in the Aqua-vitae for the space of sixteen days, shaking of it twice
every day, then take an Hipocras bagg, and let it run through, and so put it up
for your use, and put thereto an ounce of Annis-seed Comfits, and an ounce of
Amber Comfits, an ounce of Manus-Christi, and one grain of Musk, and take four
spoonfuls thereof fasting, or at night when you go to bed.

CHAP. CLXXXII.
For heat and pricking in the eyes.
FIll an Egg-shell newly emptied with the juice of Seengreen, and set it in hot
embers, take off the green scum that rises to the top, then it will be a
water, strain it and keep it in a glass, and put some of it into the hot eyes
four or five nights together, and it will ease the pricking and burning.

CHAP. CLXXXIII.
An excellent Water.
THe water of Marigolds does help all diseases of the eyes, and takes away all
pains of the eyes, and takes away all pains of the head, and the juice of
Bay Leaves, dropped into the ears takes away deafness or other strange sounds.

CHAP. CLXXXIIII.
To break the Stone.
TAke Hawth^rn flowers, or for lack of them Haws, and distill them, the flowers
in May and the berries when they be ripe, take of this water three spoonfulls,
with three spoonfulls of Malmsey, a quantity of Ginger, and drink it warm.

CHAP. CLXXXV.
A Water to be made when Couslips are in their prime.
TAke six handfuls of Couslip flowers, one handful of Rosemary-flowers, half a
pound of Reasons of the sun stoned, half a pound of Liquorice bruised, a
quarter of a pound of Aniseeds grossly beaten, put all these into three
gallons of good ale or lees of Wine over night, the next morning distill them in
a limbeck, and when you have a quart of water keep it by it self, two or three
spoonfuls of this water is good for an ill stomach that is weak of digestion,
and for the spleen and other infirmities of the stomach.

CHAP. CLXXXVI.
To make Barley-water for a Fever, or an Ague^
TAke a little handful of Barley, and steep it in a porrenger of fair running
water, the space of two or three hours, then pour away the water from the
Barley, and take a pottle of the like water, and boil the Barley in it; then
take it from the fire, and put the water from the Barley, then put the Barley
in three pints of fresh water, with a Parsley root, and a Fennel root the pith
taken out; then being boiled to a pint, strain it, and use it thus. Take three
or four spoonfulls thereof, mixed with two spoonfulls of sirrup of Vinegar, and
use to drink thereof every five hours upon your good day and keep your body
soluble with a suppositary once a day, if nature do not this office. Drink also
of it in your sick days, also the day after your fit at six of the clock in the
morning. Take half an ounce of Liquorice, and a good handful of Annis-seeds
grossly bruised and boiled with a wine pint of the broth of a Chicken, let it
lie so till it come to a full good draught then strain it hard out, and make it
sweet, and so bloud-warm let him drink it up at one draught, and neither eat,
sleep, nor sweat five or six hours after, and so the Fever will away.

CHAP. CLXXXVII.
A most excellent Water for the Stone.
IN the month of May, ^hen Oxen go to grass, take of their Dung, neither too
new nor too dry, then distill it fair and softly into some vessel or glass of
which you shall have a water without any ill savor, which will take out any
spot or blemish in the face, if you wash therewith daily. Keep the same Water
in a vial or glass close stopped, then take three or four Radish-roots, cut
them in pieces, and fill the vial with good Muskadel, they being put into it:
let it stand so in the sun one day and a night, then take one part of the Wine,
two parts of the Water of the Dung, a pint of Strawberry-water, three or four
drops of the juice of Lemons or Citrons, and let there be of these waters
distilled, and preportioned together, half a glass full, or somewhat more,
into the which you shall put a piece of Sugar, or a little Honey, and so give
it the Patient to drink, and you shall see a wonderful effect, and present
remedy.

Probatum est.
CHAP. CLXXXVIII.
This Water is very precious for frantic and madmen, very often proved.
TAke of the flowers of Rosemary, of Burrage, and of the roots of Fuglesse, of
each half a pound, of Saffron two drams, of Quinces four ounces, of the best
White Wind two pints, mix them altogether, and let them stand so for the space
of a natural day, after that bury the glass wherein all the same is, in Horse
dung for fifteen days, and then take it out and distill a water thereof
according to Art, two or three times over: keep this Water as the apple of your
eye, for it is very piecious, and well proved in all melancholy sicknesses very
effectually, and the pain and trembling of the heart: The quantity to be given
at one time, is a dram, which is the weight of seventy two Barley-corns, if you
will prove it you will praise it. And this in the new Jewel of Health, with
many more excellent things.

CHAP. CLXXXIX.
An excellent approved water for the Stone.
TAke a gallon of new-milk from a red Cow, and put thereto one handful of
Pelitory of the Wall, one handful of wild-Time, one handful of Saxafrage, one
handful of Parsley, and two or three Radish roots sliced steep all these in
the milk one night, the next morning distill the milk with the herbs, with a
moderate fire, the best time to distill this water is in the end of May or
beginning of June, use it in this manner, take of the water eight spoonfulls,
and of Rhe^ish or White Wind five or six spoonfuls, a little Sugar, Nutmeg
sliced, make it lukewarm, and drink it fasting, and fast three hours after it
using temperate exercise; take this two mornings and two nights together to
bedward, every fourteen days at the full of the Moon, and at the decrease, or
as often as need requires.

CHAP. CXC.
A Water for the falling sickness.
TAke the water of garden Lillies, and give a child to drink a spoonful
thereof at the appearing of the sickness, and when it is therewith visited,
but to an older person three or four spoonfuls.

Probatum est,
CHAP. CXCI.
An excellent water good for the stomach and head.
TAke a pottle of White Wind, a handful of Balm, a handful of Bittony, a
handful of Couslip-flowers, and a handful of Rosemary flowers clean picked,
put all these into an earthen dessell with the wine close covered. let it stand
six days, stir it twice every day, so done put them into a still* with two
ounces of the best Mitridate, half an ounce of Cinnamon, half an ounce of Cloves
both bruised, paste your Still close, and so let it work with a soft fire, and
not open it till you find it all spent, and when you spend it, put into every
pint four ounces of white sugar Candy, and keep the first stilling longest,
because it will be stronger then the latter.

CHAP. CXCII.
A Water to cure the Tooth. ach.
TAke of Claret Wine one pint, Cloves one spoonful, of Rosemary, Bittony, and
Bramble-leaves, of each half a handful, boil all these over a soft fire,
until half be consumed. Then reserve it for your use in pots close covered.

CHAP. CXCIII.
To make a Water cordially good against any infectious disc^se, as the small
Pox, Measels, or Pestilent burning Fevers, and to divert any offensive or
venomous matter from the stomach, or to be used after a surfeit or in passions
of the Mother, or for children in Fits of Convulsions, and is generally good to
comfort and strengthen nature in all cold diseases.
TAke of Sage, Celendine, Rosemary, Rue, Rosa solas Wormwood, Mugwort,
Pimpernill Dragons, Scabius, Egrimony, Balm Bittony-flowers, and leaves,
Centary-tops and flowers, Marigolds tops and leaves of each of these a good
handful: then take your roots of Tormentil, Angelica, Elecampane, Pioney,
Liquorice; all clean scraped, of each of these half an ounce, let all the
herbs be washed, and taken in a linen cloth until they be well dried, then
shred all together, and let your roots be sliced thin and mixed with the
herbs, then put them all into a gallant pot of White Wind, and let them all
steep together in a large gally pot, or earthen pot that is well leaded, and so
let them remain close covered two days and two nights, stirring them once in a
day, then distill all together in an ordinary Rose-Still, and not in a limbeck
with a soft fire, receiving a pot or a pint of the first water by it self for
your strongest, also a quart of the second running water by it self, and of
your last a weaker fort by it self, in several glasses close stopped with corks
fast tied with leather. The strongest water when one is infected is to be taken
by a spoonful at a time every morning fasting, if they cast it up they must
take it again.

CHAP. CXCIIII.
An excellent water for any Sore either old or new.
TAke a quart of pure running water, a pint of white wine, three or four
spoonfuls of Lavender seeds, two spoonfuls of live honey, a little piece of of
Roch Allom, boil them together, till the one half be consumed, then wash the
sore therewith.

CHAP. CXCV.
A precious water against the Plague, Pestillence, and Poison.
TAke the distilled water of Diptanum, Pimpernel Tormentil and Scabius, of each
a like quantity, and mix them together and drink thereof. Philosophers do
report that it were impossible for any man to dye of poison or pestillence, if
he use often to drink these waters next his heart. It is called water Imperial,
and all great States among the Sarasins use to drink thereof.

CHAP. CXCVI.
A precious Water.
TAke Galingal, Cloves, Quibes, Ginger, Mellilot, Cardemons, Mace, Nutmegs, of
each an ounce, and mingle all the foresaid with the same juice, and a pint of
Aqua vitae, and three pints of White Wind put all these together, into a
Stillatory of glass, and let it stand so all night, and on the morrow distill
it, this water is of secret nature, and helps the lungs without any
grievance, and mightily heals and comfort the^ if wounded and perished, it
suffers not the blood to putrify but multiplieth it in great quantity, yea,
he that uses it shall not often need to be let blood, it is good against
heart-burning, and resists Melancholy and Phlegm to puff up or have
domination above nature, it expels Rheum mightily, and profits the stomach
marvellously it conserveth youth in the fresh estate, and makes a good color,
it keeps and preserves the Orphage and memory, and destroys the palsy of the
lims and of the tongue, and keeps one from palsies, further, if a spoonful of
this water be given to man or woman laboring toward death it will releeve
them. Finally of all Artificial Waters there is none better. In Summer once a
week use the quantity of a spoonful fasting, and in winter the quantity of two
spoonfuls.

CHAP. CXCVII.
A Water to drink with Wine to cool choler,
TAke Burrage-roots, and Succory-roots, two of each sort, wash them and scrape
them clean and take out the pith, then take a fair earthen pot of two gallons,
and distill it with fair Spring Water, and set it on a fire, with Charcoal, and
put the roots thereto, and eight pennyworth of Cinnamon, and when it begins
to sees put in four ounces of Sugar, and let it sees half an hour, and so
take it off and let it cool, and afterward drink it with wine or without at
your pleasure.

CHAP. CXCVIII.
An excellent Water for the weakness of the back and pricking of the Urine.
TAke a pottle of Mulmsey, a handful of Bettony five Parsley-roots, five
Fennell-roots, clean scraped, and the pith taken out, a nutmeg minced, sees
all these together unto a quart, and clarify it, and put thereto an ounce of
white Sugar Candy, drink this water evening and morning, as hot as you can
suffer it.

CHAP. CXCIX.
The making of the Fistula water.
TAke Bolearmonack four ounces, Camphire one ounce, white Coporas four ounces,
boil your Coporas and Camphire in a little black earthen pot, until they
become thin, stirring them together until they become hard in seething, then
beat them in a stone Mortar to powder, and beat your Belearmonack by it self to
to powder, and then mingle them together, and keep your powder in a bladder,
till you need to use them, then take a pottle of running water and set it on
the fire, till it begin to sees, then take it off from the fire, and put in
three good spoonfulls of the powder into the sodden water whilst it is hot,
and after put therewith the powder into a glass stirring the water twice a day
for a fortnight, which will make the water stronger, but before you use it let
it be well settled, and apply it as hot as the party can well endure it and lay
a clean linen cloth four double to the sore wet in the same water, and bind
it fast with a rowler, to keep it warm, do this moring and evening till it be
whole; this water must be put in an Oyster-shell, and not in a sawcer, when you
dress the sore, otherways the sawcer will soak it up: remember to take three
great spoonfuls, when you put them in the water: take heed you let none drink
this water, put it not into any vessel you use after, if you please to make
the water stronger, take an ounce of Allome well beaten to powder, and mingle
it well with the other powders before you put them to the water, this water
cures all old sores, principally Fistulaes, Tetters, Boils, Canckers in the
mouth, scabs, or scalls in the head, green wounds or any thing else in this
kind.

CHAP. CC.
To draw a Quintaessence of man's blood.
TAke the blood of a young sanguine man and chollerick man at the Barbers shops
as thou may have it, and namely of such men as use good wines, then put away
the water after it has stood, and paste and bake it with ten parts of Common
salt, prepared to the use and medicine of man, then put it in a glass vessel,
and put it in horse dung til it be rotted and putrified all the blood into
water, and that may be within ten days, sometimes more* and sometimes less.
Then put it in a limbeck and distill it by a good fire, and take thereof the
water as much as thou may, and grind the dregs that it leaves on a marble
stone, and put all the water thereto and grind it again together, and then
distill it, and so continue grinding and distilling as before many times until
thou have a noble water of blood, of the which Quintaessence may be drawn thus.
Take the same water and put it in the Stillatory of circulation, and let it
ascend and descend till it be brought to the great sweetness, and mavelous
odor, and smelling as Aqua vitae, as is taught in the book of Quintaessence,
and this is a mavelous and miraculou^ Quintaessence, as thou shall well know
and find by making use thereof.

CHAP. CCI.
To draw a Quintaessence from all Fruits, Leaves, Roots, and Herbs.
GRind all Fruits, Leaves, Roots, and Herbs, with the tenth part of prepared
salt, then purify it and distill it circumspectly, till it have the odor as
is before said.

CHAP. CCII.
To draw a Quintaessence of every of the four Elements by it self.
TAke thin grounds with ten parts of prepared Salt, and put it to putrify, and
thereof draw a Water as is before rehearsed by blood and other things, take
that Water and distill it in Balneo till there arise no more water, and then
have thou one pure Element in the glass. Then put the said ^ater thus drawn,
upon the effects in the glass in Balneo, somewhat warm that the effects and
the Water may mingle well together; during right or ten days: the glass well
stopped that no air may go out. And then take it up and shake it well together,
and put it in a Furnace with asho^, and make a good fire under it, and thou
shall distill a Water in form of oil, red as Gold* then have thou two Elements
Water and Fire, and to separate Water and Fire, distill that red Water in
Balneo, and the Element of Water will arise* and the Fire will remain in the
very bottom of the Stillatory, a red Oil.

Then to part fire from earth take seven parts of the Element of Water, and put
it upon one part of the effects, as you did before by the space of eight or ten
days, and do as thou did in separating the two first Elements. But thou
must make a stronger fire, and there shall ascend a red water, which is the
Element of the fire and water together, separate them in balneo as you did
before, and in the Stillatory shall remain the Element of fire. And the Element
of earth, is that black Water that thou leavest when the fire is drawn by
virtue of the Element of water, as all others are before. Thus have thou every
Element by himself, now may thou bring every of these Elements, by himself
into an ointment by the vessel of circulation, or else distill every of them
seven times. But the black-water must first be vapoured, and in a furnace of
Reverberation during twenty four or thirty days according to Art. The use and
effects of this Quintecence is sufficiently declared in the foregoing Chapters
of this book.

CHAP. CCIII.
Here I shall show you how to draw a Quintaessence of all minerals, by example
of Gold.
BRing thy Sol into a Calx in this manner; ^each thy Sol with quicksilver, and
then vapor away thy quicksilver, and in the vapouring away stir it all the
while with a stick, and the Sol will be a subtle powder, the which calx put in
a glass and put thereto wine vinegar, distilled, or old Urine distilled three
fingers breadth above the calx of Sol, and set it in the hot Sun, and thou shall
see a froth of Sol gathered like unto a scum, upon the vinegar: gather that off
with a feather, and have by thee another vessel of glass with fair water, and
wash the froth from off the feather in that water, and then gather more: and
thus do as long as any scum will arise upon the vinegar. Then vapor away the
water with fire, and there will remain the Oil of Sol, which is called Oleum in
combustibule, which is the very Quintaessence of Gold. And if thou use this
Quintaessence according to Art, it shall restore Nature, and bring again Youth,
and preserve man's life unto the day that God has prefixed for him, which day
shall no man pass. Also Quintaessence of Gold has great sweetness and virtue
to assuage aches, and maladies of wounds and to heal wounds and ^otches, and
many other infirmities.

I have already given you many secrets and rare experiments concerning
Chyrurgery, Physic, and Chemistry. There remains some other things most
worthy of observation, and as necessary to be understood, as any thing which
has hitherto been communicated* I have proceeded to Plasters, Distillations,
Extractions, Quintaessences, Purges, Incisions, Minerals, and other things very
admirable, the effects whereof have been sufficiently approved. Yet there
remains some other things concerning the virtues and effects of Plants,
Herbs, and Gums, without the knowledge whereof, no Artist can effectually
undertake any cure; therefore I shall proceed to that which follows.
CHAP. CCIIII.
The Virtues of Sage.
SAge is hot and dry in the third degree: It is singular good for the head and
brain* it q^ickeneth the senses and memory, strengthens the sinews, restores
health to those that have a pal^ie that comes of moisture, it takes away
shaking or trembling of the members. The juice of Sage taken with honey, is
good for those that spet blood, it expels wind, dries the drop^^^, and
purges the blood. The leaves of Sage boiled with Woodbine, Plantan, Rosemary,
Honey, Allome, and a little white. Wine makes an excellent water for a Canker,
Soremouth, etc. Sage makes an excellent and very wholesome Ale, if you add
thereto Bittony, Egrimony. Scabius, a little Spike and Fennel.

The distilled water of Sage, of Couslips, and of Primrose are good against the
Palsy being drank and to wash and bath therewith.

A conserve made of the flowers of Sage, and Couslip-flowers, is exceeding good
against Palsies, Convulsions, Cramps, etc.

The virtues of Clary.
THe seeds of Clary made into fine powder and mixed with Honey takes away the
dimness of the eyes and cleereth the sight and taken inwardly is very good for
the back also the herb infused in warm water and applied plaster, wise
dissolveth all kind of swillings esp^ially in the joints. But it is the more
effectual if you a^ thereto Mallows and Smallage.

The virtues of Pellitory of Spain.
THis heab is good against the Megrim, the Vertigo, or the giddiness of the
head, the Apoplexy* the Faling sickness, the Palsy, and is singular good for
all cold infirmities of the head and sinews.

The virtues of of Tobacco.
TObacco is of singular use both in Physic and Chiurgery. Oil of Tobacco is
good to anoint the Stomach and for many other griefs of the body, it heals
all manner of wounds and sores, if you make a salve thereof thus Take oil of
Roses, oil of St John's Wort, of each one pint, the leaves of Tobacco beaten
small in a stone mortar, two pound: boil then together to the consumption of
the juice, strain it and put it to the fire again, adding thereto of venis
Turpentine two ounces, of Oblibanum and Mastick of each half an ounce in fine
powder, and put thereto so much wax and Rosin as will make it into a Salve.
Tobacco is also the ^est medicin that is for deafnes if you use it in this
manner. Take a quart of running water, and put if into a new pi^kin, and put
thereto 3. ounces of Varinus Tobacco opened into the leaf, and boil it to a
pint, then strain it hard, and keep it a glass vial for your use. When you go
to bed warm a little of this water blood warm, then soak therein a little
black wool and put it into both your ears, do thus every morning and evening
as you find occasion. This cured a Lady that was deaf sixteen years.

Of the use and virtue of Ebulus or Dane-wort.
TAke the buds of this vegetable, when they are young and green, perboil them
in water, and make thereof a sallad, and give unto those that have costive
bodies and it will provoke them to stool. It is an herb very profitable for the
sinews, it comfort the weak parts and preserves such as are weak in the
joints from many accidents: it purges phlegm which (for the most part) causes
debility of the nerves. Whosoever uses to drink of a sirrup, made of the
berries thereof, shall not be troubled with ye Gout nor any disease, in the
articular parts. The seed dried is profitable against all infirmities caused of
humidity.

The use and virtue of black Ellebore.
THe root of black Ellebore being dried and kept two years may be safely used
without other preparation, and may be ministered against any infirmity, that
has his original of a melancholy cause. Therefore it is most appropriate
against the fever, quartain, and lunatic persons vexed with mela^choly.

The use and virtues of the herb called Gratia Dei, a kind of Geranium, in
English blew Storks-bill,
TAke of Gratia Dei, dried in the shadow and beaten into fine powder one ounce,
Cinamen ^ dram, Cloves one scruple, Wheat Flour one pound, Orenges-condite one
ounce, make thereof a paste with honey, and bake it in the Oven with bread: but
take great heed that it burn not. Of this you shall give one ounce to purge
against many infirmities: but above the rest against Scrophulae, against scabs,
and the white scall. For it evacuateth only the superfluous humidity of the
body, it dries, and is appropriate for such kind of infirmities. Howbeit you
must note that all soluble medicines are not fit, for one disease or
complexion: sor chiefly and properly Rubarb purges choler, black Elebore
avoideth melancholy, Danewort dispossesseth the body of phlegm and this herb
cleanses the blood. Therefore every one has his peculiar property: though
sometime either of them may work upon more causes than one, yet not so properly
or simply, but by accident, and in regard of circumstances.

Two drams of the powder of this herb, drunk in wine or broth, provokes
vomit and siege, and is very good for such as are lunatic. It helps or at
the least delayeth the extremity of the fever: it is good against griefs in
the stomach and wind in the belly.

A decoction thereof made with lie, helps putrified ulcers if they be washed
therewith; for as it purges the stomach, so it cleanses the sore, and heals
it quickly, if you wet a cloth in the said lie and apply it thereunto,

The virtues of Rubarb.
THe herb called in ye Italian tongue, Lappacia maggiore, or Rombice
domestiee, is a kind of Rubarb, which among the learned Herbarists, is termed
by the name Rha recentiorum: whereof one dram when it is new, will lose the
body, evacuate choler, as the Rhabarbarum does. It is very good against the
^ppilations: it purges the blood, and takes away scabs.

You shall have a most precious medicine thereof: if you mix the green root
with Honey, Cinnamon, Saffron, Ginger, and the powder of Roses.

If you roast the root in the embers, and mix it with condifed Sugar it breaks
the Scrophulae, and mundifieth them, and heals them in short time. Some do
mix it with the gum called Ammoniacum, and so do bring it into the form of an
unguent, and apply it unto the parts affected with the Scrophulae.

The virtues of Tithymale.
GAther the herb Tithymale (called Spurge) in the month of May: take forth
the juice and mix it with Sugar-roset or Sugar-violet in fine powder: the^ make
of the^ both a moist past, and keep it in a glass close stopped.

When you purpose to use it, minister two scruples thereof in broth or any
other convenient sirrup. It purges without pain, helps all fevers that come
of heat: working not only by ye stool but provoking of sweat also.

It resolves all continual and quotidian fevers, when the parties affected
therewith be hot, and their sweat cold, yea though they be brought very low, it
will by Gods help deliver them of their troublesome adversary.

Laurcola does also move the body, by vomit and siege, but it may not be used
in any continual fever or quotidian; because it will inflame too much.

The virtues of Soldanella.
THis herb grows in Sandy and salt ground, and is hot and dry. It purges
vomit and siege, and is excellent against the dropsy, all windiness and
unwholesome moisture in the body. Being taken in lozinges, with Aromatico, the
quantity of one dram, it sends forth all the noisome waterinesse, out of the
body, drying and heating those parts in an excellent manner.

The virtues of Cyperus.
THe herb Cyperus called in English Galingal, being put into new wine, gives
it an excellent good taste and smell, prevailing against inward passions caused
of wind. It is good for such as are bursten, for it resolves the wind, if you
take the powder thereof being stamped very small, and make a plaster thereof
with other things appropriate thereunto, applying the same to the rupture, and
changing it once every day. Also if the patient do once a day eat of the root,
he shall in short space be helpen of that disease.

The virtues of Elder.
TAke the roots of Elder, wash them clean, and scrape them till you come to the
wood, stamp that sul stance, and take the juice and strain it, boil it, and
scum it well; and for every ounce of the juice, take one ounce of Mel rosarum,
and drink it for it will cool the stomach, help hot fevers quickly, and purge
the blood.

The virtues of sweet Margerome.
TAke sweet Margerome, and stamp it, and take of the juice one ounce, oil of
bitter almonds one dram, and one scruple of Mastich, and snuff it up at the
nose, three or four mornings together: and anoint the head with oil of eggs.
This purges the head of all pains, dissolveth tumorsrquickeneth the sight and
provokes sleep.

The use and virtues of Persicaria.
YOu shall understand, that this herb, does work (in a manner) against all
infirmities, most strangely to behold. For if you take the powder thereof, and
put it upon Copper molten, it will in the projection become like gold, and will
draw if to a small quantity, and make it malleable, and soft like gold, except
the color.

Also if you make a strong lie of the ashes of Perficaria, and therein boil
yellow brunstone, it will draw out of it quicksilver, which is the
Philosophers Mercury. This herb does also most notably preserve a man from many
infirmities, if one part thereof be taken whiles it is dry, and one other part
of Specia venetiane; being both of them well incorporate together, and used in
your meats.

Of man and the Medicines that are made of him.
MAn is a rational or reasonable creature, whereof we have written at large in
our book called Phifica del Fioravante. But here we will only write of certain
medicines, that may be made or derived from him: which are for the ease, help
and remedy of diverse infirmities which are in men and women. The reason whereof
is very good, for every like rejoiceth with, and helps his like, and
therefore man serves for man. The fat of a man is (as every man knows) hot
and penetrative, and mollifying if you anoint the parts therewith, (where the
sinews be hard) and drawn together, or contracted, therefore it will quickl
resolve them. I have made the Quintaessence of man's blood, rectified and
circulated, with the which I have done most wonderful cures, for if you give
thereof one dram it will ^estore those that lie at the point of death.

It is most profitable, against the infirmities that are in the blood; for it
corrects the malignity of the blood, and preserves it as well as the spirit
of wine. If you put a little of it into an hogs head of Wine it will purify
it, and preserve it along time more then any other thing whatsoever. So that
this Quintaessence works more effects, for the cure of great and dangerous
infirmities then any other.

Also from the liver of a man will be drawn by distillation a water and an oil.
If the water be drunk every morning together, by the space of a month, in the
quantity of one dram, with two ounces of Liver-wort, it will recover such as
are half ^otten through diseases of the liver, and has diverse other
properties, whereof I will not speak at this time.

From the flesh of man distilled, there will come forth a stinking water and an
oil, which is most excellent to anoint wounds withal, when they are badly
healed, and that there remain any hurt in these parts, that they are not so
sensible and pliant, (as they were wont to be before) this dissolveth them. And
it mollifieth and softeneth all hardness of tumor, of what original soever it
shall come.

From the forepart of a man's scull there is drawn by distillation, a water, an
oil, and a salt, which is most profitably used against the falling* sickness.

Of Bees and their medicinal use.
BEes are of nature hot and moist, having a generative property. For it they be
given to any barren creature, they shall conceive in short time after.

Also if you lay dead Bees in a dry place to putrify, wetting them sometime with
wine, they will revive again though not as they were before, but they will be
much bigger and of another form.

These Bees if you bring into powder with as much Cantarides; boil them a
little with oil of Camomil and anoint any part where the hair is fallen away,
and it shall quickly come again and in a short space; a most strange thing to
behold.

The use of Frogs.
THe skins of Frogs being boiled and made into the form of a plaster with wax
and frankincense, is very profitable for such as have any malign or
troublesome accident about their legs through heat.

The fat of Frogs is a wonderful medicine against Fueco sacro, or St.
Anthonies fire, a disease happening unto children and others through the great
he^t that is in their blood.

The use and vettues of the resine or gum called Tacca Mahacca.
TAke thereof as much as you will, distill it in a re^ort of glass, and from it
there will come both oil and water. Of which I have seen diverse medicines made
against sundry diseases. Anoint the belly with this oil cold, when you go to
bed: and it helps against the crudity of the Matrix.

If the genitel part of the man be anointed therewith before the act of
generation, the woman shall be the more fit for conception: for by this means
some kind of sterility is taken away.

It helps and eases pain in the head, proceeding of a cold stomach.

It helps digestion and resolves pain throughout the body, in what part
soever they shall come, especially, when they have their beginning of cold.

The water hereof dissolveth wind in the stomach helps digestion, provokes
urine, mitigateth all fevers that come of cold.

The virtues of the gum Caranna, and the medicinal properties of it.
TAke it and distill it in a retort with the yolks and whites of eggs, and
there will come forth oil and water, the oil whereof will be black, and the
water red.

The water of Carrana helps Chilblains, and all chopps or clifts in the lips
arising of cold in the winter.

It is a great ease for the sore breasts of women, that give suck.

The oil works wonderful effects, in wounds of the head, arm or legs,

Anoint a simple wound therewith once or twice: and it will very speedily be
healed.

Take a quantity of this gum, and mix it with as much of the seed of
Watercresses, and the white of an egg, and make thereof a cerot, to apply
unto a rupture: wherewith it will in*short time be healed, all other
circumstances being also observed.

Of liquid Amber and the medicinal virtues thereof.
TAke liquid Amber and distill it in a retort: and from thence there will come
a red oil.

This oil is used against all indispositions of cold, and moisture or wind.

The same heals scabs, and is good for wounds.

If you anoint the stomach therewith, it will exceedingly comfort the same: for
it is a thing uncorruptible, and like unto Balsamum.

The virtues of Oak-Apples.
THe Oak-apples are good against all Flures of blend and lasks* in what manner
soever it be taken, but she best way into boil them in red-wine, and so
prepared it is good against the excessive moisture and swillings of the Jaws,
and almonds or kernels in the threat.

The decoction of Oak-apples stays women's sickness, and causes the mother
that is fallen down* to return again to his natural place, if they do sit over
the said decoction being very hot.

The same steeped in strong White Wind vinegar, with a little powder of
brimstone, and the roots of Frocus mingled together, and set in the sun by the
space of a month makes the hair black, consumes proud and superfluous flesh
it takes away any sun-burning, freckles, spots, the morphew, and all
deformities of the face being washed therewith.

The virtues of Crabs.
THe juice of Crabs takes away the heat of burning or scalding and all
inflammation, and being laid on in short time after it is scalded, it keeps it
from blisstring.

The juice or verjuyce is astringent or binding, and has withal an abstersive
quality, being mixed with hard yeest of Ale or Beer, and applied in manner of a
cold ointment, that is spread upon a cloathfirst wet in verjuyce and wrung out
and then laid to: takes away the heat of St. Anthonies fire* allinflamations
whatsoever, it heals scabbed legs, burning and scalding whatsoever it be.

The virtues of Adders-tongue.
THe leaves of Adders-tongue, stamped in a stone mortar, and boiled in oil of
Ovide unto the consumption of the juice, until the herbs be dry and parched,
then strained, will yield a most excellent green oil: or rather a Baisome for
green wounds, comparable unto oil of St. John's Wort, if not far surpassing it
by many degrees, whose beauty is such that very many Artists have thought the
same to have been mixed with Uerdigrease.

To make Salt of any Plant or Herb.
TAke a good quantity of what Plant you please that is full of juice, beat it
in a Stone mortar, and put running-water thereto, then boil it to the
consumption of the one half, strain it very hard, and boil this decoction to
the thickness of a sirrup, and set it in a glass eight days, and on the top
you will find a kind of Salt like Sal Gem, take that and wash it in the water
of the herb whereof it was made and dry it. In this manner you may make Salt of
Wormwood, Balm, etc.

The virtues of Sow-bread.
THe root makes the skin fair and clear, and cures all scabs and scurffs, and
the falling of the hair, and takes away the marks and spots that remain after
the small pocks and meazels, and all other blemishes of the face; the root
hanged upon women in travel causes them to be delivered incontinently.

The virtues of Saxifrage.
THe root of Sa^afrage drunk with Wine and Vinegar cures the Pestilence,
holden in the mouth preserves a man from the said disease, and purifieth the
corrupt air, the same being chewed in the mouth makes one to avoid much
phiegm, draws from the brain all gross and clammy superfluities, asswageth
Toothache, and brings speech again to them that are taken with the Apoplexy,
the juice of the leaves does take and cleanse away all spots, and freckles, and
beautifieth the face, and leaves a good color, it is of excellent use against
the Stone.

The virtue of Maiden hair.
Maidenhair being green, and stamped and laid upon a place that wants hair
causes it to grow.

The virtue of the Ash-tree.
THe Ash-tree for such as are too fat or gross men use to take daily three or
four ashen-leaves to drink in wine to the intent to make them lean.

The virtues of Violets.
VIolets stamped and laid to the head alone, or mingled with oil; removes the
extreme heat asswageth headache, provokes sleep and moisteneth the brain, it
is good therefore against the dryness of the head, against melancholy and
dullness or heaviness of spirit.

The virtues of Hysop.
HYsop sod in vinegar, and holden in the mouth asswageth toothache, the
decoction thereof does scatter congealed and clotted blood, and all black marks
that come of stripes or beating, and also cures the itch, scratch, and foul
manginesse if it be washed therewithal. Gillow-stowers, or Wall-flowers, the
juice thereof dropped into the eye, does wast and scatter all dimnesse in the
same.

The virtues of Oak-leaves.
OAk-leaves stamped very small do heal and close up green wounds, and does stop
the blood being laid thereupon.

The virtues of Hoar hound.
HOar-hound boiled in water cleanses the breast and lungs, helps the pain in
the side, is good against the Tysick, and the ulceration of the lungs.

Of the Barbil and to what use she serves in medicine.
IN the month of May the Barbil has eggs, which are of a soluble quality, and
of some those eggs be eaten; they shall be provoked to vomit.

They have a quality contrary to other purgers, they must be dried in the sun
mixed with a little Sena, and then ministered in wine or water that is sodden.
When it has well wrought, the patients must eat good meat to nourish them, and
may drink wine, and when they are disposed thereto, suffer them to sleep.

Of Centumpedees called in English Sows.
IF you minister the powder of these creatures in-wine, it has many excellent
properties, but chiefly it has been experienced greatly to prevail againss the
stitch in the side for it will help that grief presently.

If you burn the little creeking creature called a cricket, and minister the
power thereof in some Diuretic liquor, it provokes urine.

Mallows. Alkakengi, Centum nodi, Centum grava, and the roots of Rapes: are of
like property, being handled and used according to art.

There are oftentimes found in standing pools, and putrified waters, certain
small creatures which are round like a cherry, having a tail and two feet,
which are in Lombardy called Comazzi. Take these, and distill thereof a water
or liquor, wherewith you may very soon consume or break iron: a very great
secret observed in nature.

How to make a Plaster for the Rheum.
TAke of Dears-Suet, Uirgin-War, Rosen, per^-osen, a quarter of a pound of
each, Obliganum, Benjamin Mastick, take of each a quarter of an ounce, two
drams* of Camphire, beat these small, take three pennyworth of Turpentine, boil
all these together in a pint of White Wind except the Turpentine which must be
put in after it is taken off the fire, and stir it till it be cold; then temper
it in your hands, and so role it up in roles, and keep it close from fire.

CHAP. CCV.
The natures and temperatures of Herbs in general.
THese herbs be of their own nature hot and very cordial and comfortable for
the heart, and good against melancholy, viz.

Angelica. Balm. The flowers of Rosemary. Cardus Benedictus* Roman Wormwood.
Margerom. Mints. Winter Savory.
These herbs be in like manner hot, but of a contrary quality that is, they
tend to the comsorting of the stomach and to help digestion.

Common Wormwood. Lavender. Camomilll. Basell.
These herbs be in like manner hot but tend to the opening of the lungs.

Isop. Elecampane roots* Fennel. Hoar-hound.
These herbs be in like manner hot, but tends to the comforting of the brain,
and drying up of Rheum.

Bittony. Penny^riall. Germander. Time. Sage. Costmary. Valerian.
These herbs be also hot and they be good for the obstructions of the liver,
and spleea and good against the Gout.

Camapitus. Saxafrage. Parsley. Mugwort. Motherwort. Mother of Time. Fennel.
Sallandine.
They are to be used in broth or to be distilled.
These be also hot, and tend to the expelling of wind.

Alexanders. Smallage. Rue. Maudline. Fetherfew. Saint John's Wort. Ladies
Mantel. Lavender Cotton.
These roots be also hot and comfortable, and likewise good to strengthen
nature.

Sateions. Orenges. Parsnep.
These herbs of their own nature be hot, and of a mean temperature good to
cause solublenesse.

Mercury. Beets. Violet-leaves. Mallows. Dill. Holly-hock. Dandelion.
These herbs be of mean temperature as the rest but good for to strengthen the
back.

Comfery. Knot-grasse. Shepheards-pouch. Plantain. Archangel.
These be of a mean temperature and good against the Stone.

Saxafrage. Pellitory on the wall. Watercresses. Cammock-roots. Wake Robin.
These are of a mean temperature, good against all obstructions of the liver,

Centory. Hops. Cowslips. Mugwort. Hart's-tongue. Scabius. Avens. Doder.
Dandelion. Liverwort. Spoon-wort.
These be as the rest good to cleanse the throat.

Wood-bines. Collombines. Sinkfoyl.
These be of the same nature but tends to the opening of the lungs.

Coltsfoot. Setrack. Maidenhair.
These be of a cold property and tends altogether to the cooling of the
blood, and quallifiing of the heat of the stomach.

Garden-sorrell. Wood Sorrel. Endiffe. Succory.
These be in like manner cold of their own nature, and to be used inwardly,
they provoke rest.

Lettice. Purslay. Field-Poppy.
These are as the rest but rather colder, and are to be applied outwardly and
not inwardly.

Nightshade. Hen-bane. Man-drake. Penny-wort. Great-Poppies.
These herbs and oil of Roses is good to be applied with cloths to the temples
of the head.

FINIS.

