THE PRINCIPLES OF RELIGION.

Come ye Children, and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
PSALM. 34.11.

I seek not mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. 1.
COR. 10.33.

By EDWARD BOVGHEN.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield Printer to the University. 1646.

THE PRINCIPLES of Religion.
Q. WHat is your name?

Ans. N. or M.

Q. Is this your Christian name, or Surname?

A. My Christian name.

Q. Why do you answer by that name, and not by your other?

A. Because it is my better name; it puts me in mind of my better being, of my
second Birth, when this name was given me.

Q. When was it given thee?

A. At my Baptism.

Q. Why then?

A. Because at that time I became a new creature, being S Io. 3.5. In Baptism
we receive new names* in token that by Baptism we are made new Creatures.
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 62.
borne anew of water and of the Holy Ghost, that so I might be a member of
Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. This then is
my name, which I receive from Christ in the Church, and serves at all times to
put me in mind of God my Father, and the Church my Mother.

Q. What conceive you to be the reason, why the Church has provided, that this
name should be given us rather at this time, then at any other?

A. First, because it is our new birth; and a new name well befitteth a new
birth. 2. Because Baptism was enjoined in stead of Circumcision: and at
Circumcision names were imposed upon the seed of Abraham.

Q. How does that appear?

A. By the Baptist, and our Savior. S. Luc. 1.59, 63.
The Baptist at Circumcision was called John, and S. Luc. 2.21.
our Savior, Jesus.

Q. Who gave you this name?

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers.

Q. Why they, rather then your own Parents?

A. Because this name, like the new birth, is not fleshly, but spiritual,
therefore I receive a name from God, and not from man. A new birth, new
Parents, and a new name, because I am adopted into a new family. Hence is it,
that with us they are named Godfathers, Fathers from God, or in Gods stead.

Q. Do they give you a name only?

A. No, they undertake to the Church in my behalf, these three things. First,
that I should forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I
should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, that I
should keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the
days of my life.

Q. Why do they promise this for you, and not you for your self?

A. I make this promise by them. First, because at that time I am not able to
make it by my self. 2ly, Because we are Baptized in our infancy, since
Baptism is of such necessity, partly by reason of our natural corruption, and
partly by reason of our Saviors instirution, that S. Io. 3.3.5.
unless we be borne again of Water and of the Holy Ghost, we cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. At that time therefore we undertake this by others,
but confess now, that we are bound to perform them in our own Persons.

Q. You are resolved then, I hope, to believe, and to do, as they have
promised for you.

A. Yes verily, and by Gods help so I will. And I beseech God to give me his
grace, that I may continue constant in this resolution and practice unto my
lives end.

Q. You have promised to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith: which
are they?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, etc.

Q. Are all Christians bound to believe all this?

A. Yes; for Athan. Creed.
this is the Catholic Faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved.

Q. Why call you it Catholic?

A. Catholic signifies universal; this is therefore called the Catholic
Faith, because all Christians universally are bound to believe it. Besides, it
contains all things, which are of necessity to be believed unto salvation.

Q. How ancient is this Creed?

A. As ancient as the Apostles times; ancienter then some, if not then all the
writings of the Apostles. For Calvin. in Heb. 6.1.
Calvin acknowledges, that the Apostles Creed was in use, before the Epistle
to the Hebrews was written.

Q. Was it composed by the Apostles?

A. It seems so; for we learn from Antiquity, that S. Mat. 28.19.
the Apostles being by our Saviors command to go and teach all Nations, and
yet Act. 1.4.8.
not to depart from Jerusalem, till according to his promise they were
furnished with abilities for so great an employment: Discessuri ab invicem,
norma^ prius futurae praedicationis instituunt. Rufin. in Sym. n. 10.
before they parted to undergo this great task, they agreed upon this Creed,
which was to be Hanc ^redentibus danda^ esse regulam statuunt. Ib.
the rule of Faith, according to which they were to frame their discourses; and
contrary to which no man might teach, or believe.

Q. What benefit received Converts by embracing this Creed?

A. By this they were fitted for Baptism: Symbolu^ Apostolicum, primus quasi
ingressus erat in Ecclesiam ijs, qui Christo nomen dabant. Calvin. in Heb. 6.1.
by this they found ingresse into the Church: and Iren. l. 3. c. 4.
by confession and belief of this Creed many were saved, before any part of
the New Testament was brought unto them.

Q. Was this written, think you, before the New Testament?

A. Not written, but delivered; Russin in Symb. n 12. Chrysol. Ser. 57.60, 61
Hieron. Epist. 69. Aug. de Symb. l. 1. c. 1.
not suffered to be written for three hundred years at least, after our
Saviors ascension: hence is it usually called by the Ancients, Iren. l. 3. c.
4.
the tradition of the Church, and by St Paul, Romans 6.17.
that FORM of doctrine which was DELIVERED you.

Q. How are we to understand this Creed?

A. In the same sense it is delivered; that is, in the Literal, Grammatical,
and usual sense of the words, wherein I am taught: He that has commanded me
to believe, has also taught me, what to believe.

Q. May we not take some part of this Creed in a figurative sense?

A. No. As I am taught, so I believe. As it was provided for the good of all,
so is it made for the understanding of all. Had it been composed of dark and
figurative words or phrases, the learned only could have understood it: indeed
it would rather have raised controversies, then settled one unalterable faith.

Q. You say right.

A. Besides, the Apostles had failed of one maine intent, for which it was
provided. Istud unanimitatis and fidei suae indicium Apostoli posuere. Ruffin.
in Symb n. 13.
Framed it was for this purpose, that it might be the token of their unanimity
and faith: and that Per quod agnosceretur is, qui Christum vere secu^dum
Apostolicas regulas praedicaret. Ib. n. 11.
thereby it might evidently be seen, who preached Christ truly according to the
Apostles rules, and who not. It had been also contrary to the Apostles open
profession, who affirm, that 1. Cor. 2.1.
they came not with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, but that Romans 6.19.
they spoke after the manner and custom of men.

Q. You take then the words of this Creed in the literal and plain sense.

A. I do so; for 1. Cor. 3.1.
we are not taught at first as spiritual, but as carnal men, as babes in
Christ, because Ib. v. 2.
we are not able to bear strong meat, we must be fed with milk. And I have
learned, that Hooker. Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 59.
in Scripture, where a literal construction will stand, the furthest from the
letter is commonly the worst.

Q That then we may fully discern, whether it may be taken in the usual and
ordinary sense, let us take it asunder, and weigh the particular words in the
several Articles. How many Articles are there in this Creed?

A. Twelve.

Q. Which is the first?

A. I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth.

Q. How understand you these words?

A. Accordingly as I utter them; namely, that God the Father is the God of all
might and power: and that Act. 14 15.
he made, or created Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and all things that are
therein; all these of nothing.

Q. Which is the second Article?

A. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.

Q. Is he also God?

A. The Son of the same substance and nature with the Father. Nicene Creed.
God of God; very God of very God; Athan. Creed.
Coeternall to the Father, and coequall: and our Lord with the Father.

Q. Is he also Almighty?

A. Without question he is: Col. 1.16.
for by him were all things created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth,
visible and invisible; and Ib. v. 17
by him all things consist.

Q. The third Article.

A. Who was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

Q. What is the meaning of this Article?

A. That Gal. 4 4.
in the fullness of time Nicene Creed.
he was incarnate, or made flesh of the Virgin Mary, by the holy Ghost.

Q. Was he, who is above, and Col. 1.17.
before all things, made flesh?

A. He, that from all eternity is God with the Father, in time was made man;
Athan. Creed.
God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the worlds; and man of the
substance of his mother, borne in the world. Perfect God, and perfect man of a
reasonable soul, and humane flesh subsisting.

Q. Is not the holy Ghost his Father also?

A. No: for in his Incarnation he took nothing of the Holy Ghost. Only the Holy
Ghost took the Seed of the Virgin Mary, and made it flesh, without the help of
man, or sense of the woman. Which flesh, united to the soul, the second person
in the Trinity assumed into his own person, and became Ib.
one Christ. One (I say) not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh, but by
taking of the manhood into God.

Q. Is he not one, as he is the Son of God, and another, as he is the Son of
man?

A. No; though he consist of two natures, he is but one person. Ib.
For, as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man, so God and man is one
Christ.

Q. May then the Virgin Mary be said to be the Mother of God?

A. She may; because she is mother of that man, who is God; Ib.
not by confusion of substance, but by unity of person. As Abraham is the
Father of Isaac, though not the Father of his soul; so is she the mother of
the second person in the Trinity, though not the mother of his Godhead.

Q. Which is the fourth Article?

A. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried; he, that
very person, that is the son of God, and was borne of the Virgin Mary.

Q. Why did he suffer all this?

A. Nicene Creed.
For us men and for our salvation; for 1. S. Pet. 2.24.
he bare our sins in his own body, that we being dead unto sin, should
live unto righteousness, by whose stripes we are healed. He suffered here,
that we might not suffer hereafter; he endured the cursed death, that we might
escape the curse of the Law: he dyed for a time, that we might live for ever;
he was buried, that he might sanctify the grave, and make it a place of rest
for us.

Q. Did the second person in the Trinity suffer?

A. His person suffered, though not each nature in his person. As man, but not
as God; for God cannot suffer.

Q. Who did he suffer for?

A. For all the sons of Adam. He took not therefore upon him the person, but
the nature of man, that so he might perfect this great work of Redemption, for
all that are of the same nature with him.

Q. Are you sure of this?

A. The Scriptures have taught me so. S. John 8.16.
So God loved the World (says our blessed Savior) that he gave his only
begotten Son, to the end, that ALL THAT BELIEVE IN HIM should not perish, but
have life everlasting. And St John; 1. S. Joh. 2.1, 2.
If ANY MAN sin, WE have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. And Saint Paul assures us, that
Heb. 2.9.
Christ tasted death for EVERY MAN. What would we more?

Q. This is comfortable doctrine.

A. It is so; and to this agrees the doctrine of my mother the Church of
England; who has taught me Artic. 17.
to receive Gods promises in such wise, as they are GENERALLY set forth to us
in holy Scripture: assuring me, that our Savior Prayer before the Communion.
upon the Cross made a full, PERFECT, and sufficient sacrisice, oblation, and
SATISFACTION FOR THE SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD; yea, Artic. 31.
FOR ALL THE SINS OF THE WHOLE WORLD, both original and actual.

Q. How comes it then to pass, that so many are damned?

A. Either for want of Faith, or for want of obedience and repentance: for S.
John. 1.12.
to as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God.

Q. Which is the fifth Article?

A. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.

Q. How understand you this Article?

A. Literally, as I do the rest.

Q. Did Christ go down into hell?

A. He did so; otherwise my Creed has taught me something, that is not to be
believed.

Q. Some are of opinion, that it is a Metaphorical speech, and signifies, that
he was truly dead.

A. I know, there are some of that opinion: but I see no reason, why I should
assent thereto.

Q. Why so?

A. For these five reasons. First, because S. Luc. 16 23. Ne ipsos quidem
inferos uspiam Scripturarum locis in bono appellatos potui reperire. Aug. Ep.
99. de Genesis ad lit. l. 12. c. 33.
Hell does not signify the place of the dead, but the place of the damned, as
in the case of Dives.

Secondly, our Saviors death was sufficiently expressed before, in that it is
said, he was dead: and not only so, but he was buried. And we bury not the
living, but the dead.

Thirdly, Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 16.. 8.
Calvin says, it is a battalogy, or needless repetition; and not probable,
that such vanity should be admitted into so compendious a brief of our faith.

Fourthly, it is contrary to the course of order, after burial to return to
his death; as if he had suffered death a second time. But it is methodicall and
orderly', after they had done with his body, to acquaint us, what became of his
soul, when he was dead, and to tell us, that it descended, or went down into
hell.

Fifthly, by the primitive Church, his descent into hell, is not accounted any
part of his humiliation, but the first degree of his exaltation.

Q. Where learn you this doctrine?

A. In Dr Nowels Catechism; where I find, that D. Nowels Cate. upon this
Article.
by his descending into hell is meant, that as Christ in his body descended
into the bowels of the earth, so IN HIS SOVLE SEVERED FROM THE BODY, HE
DESCENDED INTO HELL.

Q. Js not this D. Nowels private opinion?

A. No, it is the resolution of those blessed Reformers under King Edward VI.
For they tell us, that Art. 3.
in the three days of Christ's death, His Body was in the Grave, HIS SOUL IN
HELL, and his Deity every where.

Q. Was not this cast off as an erroneous opinion in Q. Elizabeth's days?

A. No certainly, for their Scholars in the Articles of 1562. say thus, Art. 3.
As Christ died for us, and was buried, SO ALSO IS IT TO BE BELIEVED, THAT HE
DESCENDED INTO HELL. But Art. 2.
we believe, that Christ truly died, and was buried: it is therefore to be
believed, that he truly descended into Hell. But to say, as we believe, that
Christ truly died, so do we believe, that he was truly dead, were a most
absurd inference, and would be hissed out of the Schools.

Q. This manifests their resolution; but is this agreeable to the Ancient
Church?

A. There is not one Council, or probable Father in the first 500 years, but
is of this opinion. And S. Austine is so resolute for this Article, that he
says, Quis, nisi infidelis, negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum. Aug. ep.
99.
Whosoever denies Christ's descent into Hell, is no Christian. And Athanasius in
his Creed, puts it in among those Articles, whereof he says, Athan. Creed.
which faith except every one do keep WHOLE AND UNDEFILED, without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly.

Q. Where is this Hell, that he went into?

A. Ephesians. 4 9.
In the lower parts of the earth, then which nothing is lower. So S. Paul. And
Christum in cord terrae triduum mortis logimus expunctum, id est, in recessu
intimo and interno, and in ipsa terra operto, and infra ipsam cavato, and
inferioribus adhuc abyssis superstructo. Tertul. de anima. c. 55. Christus ad
solvendos inferni dolores descendit. Aug. ep. 99.
Tertullian makes his expression so full for the bowels of the earth, that no
man can doubt of his opinion.

Q. What went he thither for?

A. To triumph over Hell, and to fulfill that of the Prophet, Hos. 13.14. 1.
Cor. 15.55.
O death where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy Victory? To this opinion
assents D. Nowell in his Catechism.

Q. Are all of this opinion?

A. No truly, some conceive, that he sufferd the torments of hell in his Soul:
which cannot be. For Vel peccato, vel damnatione, mors animae intelligi potest.
Aug ep. 99.
first, the pains of Hell are the death of the soul: and in that sense it is
said, Ezekiel. 18.4.
that soul, which sins, shall surely dye. But Christ's soul never sinned:
and for 1. S. Pet. 2.24.
our sins he bare them in his Body.

2ly The Scriptures teach us, that 1. S. Pet. 4.1.
Christ suffered for us in the flesh, and that 1. S. Pet. 3.18.
he was put to death in the flesh; not in the soul, no such thing in Scripture.

3ly That soul, which is united to the Deity, is not capable of Hell
torments. That were to make the soul of God subject to the Devil, which
cannot be imagined without blasphemy.

4ly Act. 2. 30, 31.
David being a Prophet said of the Resurrection of Christ, that Ps. 16.11. Act.
13.37.
his Soul was not left in Hell, neither did his flesh see corruption. If then
this was spoken of his Resurrection, it was not spoken either of his Death or
Passion. As then his body was in the place of corruption, but saw, but suffered
no corruption, so his soul was in Hell, the place of torments, but suffered no
torment.

Q. How understand you these two sayings of his, S. Mat. 26.38.
My Soul is heavy even unto death: and S. Mat. 27.46.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

A. The former he spoke as he was man, foreseeing his death at hand, showing
that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, as ours are, to be parted from the
body; The other he spoke, because the Deity for a time had withdrawn her
comfortable vision from the soul, that so it might endure, what sorrow it was
any way capable of. For if there were an exceeding sorrow in the soul to be
parted a while from the body; what excess of sorrow was in it, think you, when
the sight of God was subtracted from it? since the vision of God is the highest
comfort of the soul: for Ps. 16.12.
in his presence is the fullness of joy.

Q. What think you of his Resurrection?

A. After Christ's soul had for three days triumphed over Hell, and all the
powers thereof, it was reunited to the body, which arose from the grave without
corruption: and both were Act. 2.28.
filled with the joy of his countenance. And to assure us of this his
Resurrection, Act. 1.3.
in his flesh, he was conversant with his Apostles and Disciples forty days.

Q. Which is the sixth Article?

A. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.

Q. What do thou believe in this Article?

A. That the body and soul of Christ ascended together into Heaven, the
highest place of bliss, where they never were before: and Te Deum.
at that time he opened the Kingdom of Heaven to all believers.

Q. Do thou understand these words in the litterall sense?

A. I do so.

Q. Can we say according to the Letter, that God has a right hand?

A. No, we cannot. But both Scripture and Creed, in this phrase or manner of
speech, stoop to the capacity of man, and express unto us hereby that height
of glory, which is otherwise unexpressible to our understanding. For it is that
glory, which no other eye has seen, nor care has heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive. And how can the tongue utter, what
the heart has not conceived? what is unconceivable is unutterable.

Q. Thou believe then, that he is ascended into the highest place of glory?

A. I do so; and that not only in place but in power: for S. Mat. 28.18.
to him is all power given, both in Heaven and in Earth. And yet in this height
of glory he is in himself so humble, and to us so gracious, that To. 8.34.
he makes continual intercession for us.

Q. What is the seventh Article?

A. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

Q. Is this certain?

A. As certain as he is God. And herein is a main comfort for us, that he who
suffered for us, and died for us, and continually prays for us, shall be our
Judge.

Q. Shall he judge us as he is man?

A. He shall; for S. Io. 5.27.
the Father has given him Power and Authority to execute judgment. BECAUSE HE
IS THE SON OF MAN. And as man Heb. 4.15.
he is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 5.2.
that so he may have compassion upon us weak, wandering, silly men, and apt to
be deceived. For Heb. 4.15, 16.
in all points he was tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need.

Q. The eight Article.

A. I believe in the Holy Ghost, Nic. Creed.
the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who
with the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified; who spoke
by the Prophets. These are three Persons, and but one God. Thus Athan. Creed.
we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity; neither confounding the
Persons, nor dividing the Substance.

Q. We may not indeed say, there be three Gods; but may we not say, there are
three Lords?

A. We may not: for though Ib.
we be compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge every Person by
himself to be God and Lord: yet we are forbidden by the Catholic Religion, to
say there be three Gods, or three Lords.

Q. Why so?

A. Because, Lord in respect of the three persons is a name of substance, not
of relation, or property. And in God there is but one Substance, though
threerelations.

Q. What meanest thou by relations?

A. God is called Father with relation to his Son; or because he has a
Son. The second person is called the Son, because he has a Father. And the
Holy Ghost is called so, with relation to them both, because he is the Spirit
both of the Father and the Son: for he proceeds from both.

Q. We have now the three Persons in the Trinity, do we not ascribe to every
one of these a several work concerning man?

A. We do so; to the Father we ascribe our Creation, to the Son our
redemption, and to the Holy Ghost our Sanctification. As the Father created
all, so the Son redeemed all: and the Holy Ghost sanctified me, and all the
elect people of God.

Q. Why to the Father is ascribed the Creation?

A. Because, though the other two persons did jointly and equally create with
the Father, yet the original of that power is in and from him. And yet Athan.
Creed.
none is before or after other, none is greater or less then another.

Q. Why to the Son our Redemption?

A. Because by his blood we are redeemed from death and Hell.

Q. Why to the Holy Ghost our sanctification?

A. Because it is his special work to 1. S. Pet. 1.2.
Sanctify us by his gifts and graces. Hence is it, that we call him the holy
Spirit, because he is the Spirit that makes us holy,

Q. We acknowledge, that the Son of God redeemed all mankind: why do we not
also confess, that the Holy Ghost Sanctifies all mankind, but the elect people
of God?

A. Because Christ redeemes all, that they may be sanctified; but the Holy
Ghost Sanctifies only those, that believe in Christ, or are baptized into
Christ, that so they may be his elect. For we are 1. S. Pet. 1.2.
elect, according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus Christ. So both these works must concur to our election.

Q. Which is the ninth Article?

A. I believe the Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints. Or Nic. Creed.
I believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church: Catholic for time and place,
Apostolic for faith and government.

Q. Why call you this Church a Communion of Saints?

A. Because it is a society of men, that are Sanctified in Baptism, by Faith
in Christ, through the operation of the Spirit.

Q. What is a Church?

A. Art. 19.
The visible Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful men, in the which
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things, that of necessity are
requisite to the same.

Q. What do thou collect from hence?

A. These three things. 1. That the Church consists of Faithful men; that is,
of such who profess the Christian faith. 2. The word of God must be sincerely
Preached. And thirdly, The Sacraments must be duly ministered to the
Congregation, according to Christ's Ordinance.

Q. Js it lawful for every Christian, that will, to preach the word, and
administer the Sacraments?

A. No, Art. 23.
it is not lawful for any man to do so, unless he be lawfully called and sent
to execute the same.

Q. Whom judge you to be lawfully called and sent?

A. All those, Ibid.
who be chosen and called to this work by men, who have public authority given
unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords
Vineyard.

Q. Who have public authority given them, to call and send Ministers into the
Lords Vineyard?

A. Only Bishops in the Church of England: as is to be seen Article 36. and in
the Book of Ordination.

Q. Why does this Church allow no other but Bishops to give orders?

A. Because she finds no mere men allowed to do it in the New Testament, but
only the Apostles and Bishops their Successors. And she keeps close to
Scripture.

Q. Have Bishops this Power of Ordination conferred upon them in Scripture?

A. It is evident they have. At the end of the second Ep. to Timothy.
Timothy was the first Bishop of the Church of the Ephesians. And upon him S.
Paul lays this charge, 1. Tim. 5.22.
Lay hands suddenly on no man. At the end of the Ep. to Titus.
Titus was the first Bishop of the Church of the Cretians; And to him the same
Apostle speaks thus; Tit. 1.5.
For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should, est ordain Presbyters,
or Elders in every City.

Q. Is not this power given to Presbyters?

A. Not any where in the New Testament.

Q. Why do you say, I believe the Catholic Church, and not, J believe in the
Catholic Church?

A. Because it is a part of my Creed to believe that there is one Catholic
Church: but it is no part of my Creed, to believe in, or to put my confidence
in the Church; since the Church is a Congregation of reasonable Christian
Creatures: and Hac praepositionis syllaba IN Creator a Creaturis socernitur,
and divina seperantur abhumanis. Rufin in Symb. n. (...).
this is a peculiar which belongs only to the Creator, God blessed for ever.
And I will believe the Church, so long as she contradicts not God in his word.
But if she do, I shall forbear to credit her in such things. I will believe
God, who is truth it self; and believe in that God, who is able to undeceive
her, and to lead her into the way of all truth. I will only believe in him, who
cannot deceive or be deceived; who cannot be overtopped or crossed.

Q. Why say you, one Catholic Church?

A. Because Vniversa Ecclesia ex multis constat Ecclesiis, sicut universa terra
ex multis terris. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 13. c. 12.
though there be many particular Churches, yet there is but one Catholic or
universal Church, which is not bounded but with Psalm. 2.8.
the uttermost parts of the earth, and all these are but one in faith and
Government; as our Saviors Body, though consisting of many Members, is but
one, knit together by sinews, and quickened with the same Soul.

Q. The tenth Article?

A. I believe the forgiveness of sins.

Q. Why does this Article follow immediately after mention of the Church?

A. Because it is a blessing, which God bestows only in the Church, and upon
the Members of the Church.

Q. Is Salvation to be hoped for in the Church only?

A. It is so, by the joint consent both of the Ancient and Modern writers.

Q. What Is the reason?

A. Because Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
The Church is the Body of Christ. As therefore no Member, that is separated
from the body, receives life by or with the body; neither does any Christian
partake of the life of grace, or forgiveness of sins, that is divided, or
cut off from the Church, which is Christ's Body. Observe, the body receives life
from the head, and distributes it to all the members that it has. Ib. and Col.
1.18.
Christ is the head of the Church; from him the Church receives life and
comfort, and conveies them to every particular member, that so they may live,
and discharge their several duties. But divided from the body, the members can
receive no life or comfort from the head.

Q. Is this remission of sins to be found in all Churches?

A. Yes, without question in all such Churches, wherein Art. 19.
the pure word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly ministered,
according to Christ's ordinance; but in no other.

Q. To whom is this forgiveness promised?

A. To all those, Absolution.
that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his holy Gospel. S. Mat. 11.28.
He calls to all, he is merciful to all: he has given us a taste of his
goodness in pardoning the greatest and fowlest sins. Not that we might
imitate or practice them; but that we might understand, that our gracious God
is ready to pardon the greatest sinner, if so he turn unto the Lord humbly
with unfeigned sorrow and repentance, and bring forth fruits worthy of
amendment of life.

Q. May the sin against the holy Ghost be pardoned?

A. This sin is raised to the full height, it is made up by final
impenitence. Take away final impenitence, and the sin is pardonable. S. Mat.
4.17.
Repent (says the Scripture) and the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: but S.
Luc. 13.3.5.
unless you repent, ye shall all perish.

Q. This is comfortable doctrine: but what reason have you for it?

A. My faith rests upon Gods goodness, and gracious promises. De remissione
peccatoru^ sufficere deberet sota credulitas. Quis enim cansas aut rationem re
quirat, ubi indulgentia principalis est? Rufin. in Symb. n. 171.
When God has spoke the word, reason must submit.

Q. Which is the eleventh Article?

A. J believe the Resurrection of the body; namely, that this very body, in
which I live, and move, shall be raised out of the dust in the last day.

Q. What, this very body?

A. Certainly this self same body. For does not Job say; Job. 19.26, 27.
I shall see God in my flesh, and not with other, but with THESE EYES shall I
behold him. And S. Paul, THIS CORRVPTIBLE shall put on incorruption, and THIS
MORTAL, 1. Cor. 15.53.
shall put on immortality. This and no other. Rufin. in Symb. n. 182.
In the Church of Aquileia therefore, at the rehearsal of the Creed, every man
when he came to this Article, signed his forhead with the sign of the Cross,
and said, I believe the Resurrection of THIS FLESH, this very flesh, that he
touched with his finger.

Q. Js not this a wonderful thing?

A. It is so, and so are the rest of the Articles, if strictly scanned; all
above the eye of Reason. 1. Cor. 15.36. etc.
S. Paul gives us a simily of a grain of Wheat, how it is buried, and dies, and
rots, and then rises again far more fresh, then it was cast into the earth.
Were this but rarely seen, it would seem most wonderful.

Q. What if the body be burned to ashes?

A. Clem. ep. 1. ad Cor. p. 34, 35.
S. Clement, Phil. 4.3.
(of whom S. Paul makes mention, Phil. 4.3.) in that Epistle, which in the
primitive times was usually read in all Churches, to prevent this question,
gives us the example of the Phoenix, which every 500 years is burnt to Ashes;
and out of those Asnes arises the same Phoenix again, young, fresh, and
vigorous.

Q. Have we no such example in Scripture?

A. We have Ezekiel. 37.1. where the dead, dry, scattered bones come together,
bone to his bone, and sinews and flesh came upon them, and flesh upon the
skin, and breath entered into them, and they stood up an exceeding great army.

Q. When shall this Resurrection be?

A. 1. Cor. 15.24.
At the last and great day of Doom.

Q. What becomes of the Soul all this while? does that also dye?

A. No.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Mat. 22.32.
God calls himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but God is not the God
of the dead, but of the living. Though then they be dead in body, in soul they
live. Luc. 16.22.
We find Lazaru's soul alive in a place of bliss, Ib v. 24.
and Dive's soul in a place of torment, Ib. v. 28.
while his brethren were living here on earth. And our savior promised the
penitent Theif, that Luc. 23.43.
he should be that day with him in Paradise. Which was spoke of his soul; for
Io 19.31, 32.
his body was that day buried in the grave. To these may be added Rev. 6.9.
the souls of the Martyrs, which lie under the Altar.

Q. By whose power shall they be raised?

A. By the power of Christ. For Ioh. 5.28, 29.
all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of THE SON OF MAN: And
shall come forth they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of life; and
they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of damnation. If then we
should not have these our own very bodies at the resurrection, God should deal
unjustly to torment those bodies in hell fire, which had never done amiss.

Q The last Article.

A. The life everlasting. For they that have done good Dan. 12.3.
shall shine as the stars for ever and ever: Mat. 25.41.
and they that have done evil, shall be cursed into everlasting fire. Athan.
Creed.
This is the Catholic Faith, which execept a man believe faithfully, he
cannot be saved.

Q. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did also promise for you, that
you should keep God's Commandments. Tell me, how many there be?

A. Ten.

Q. Which be they?

A. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am
the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage. This is the preface; wherein he shows, who it is that speaks
unto them, and lays this obligation upon them, to harken to his words.

Q. Which is the first Commandment?

A. Thou shall have none other Gods but me. None but this God, who by a strong
hand and stretched out arm delivered them out of the hands of Pharao, and from
all his Host; and brought them as safely as miraculously through the red Sea.

Q. What God is this?

A. The same God, whom in our Creed we confess to be the Father Almighty,
maker of Heaven and earth.

Q. Why then does he not tell them so?

A. Because they were eyewitnesses of this his miraculous power; wherein he
manifested his Omnipotency, Ex. 14.21.
in commanding the Winds, and the Sea; Ex. 13.21.14.20.
in making the day as night to the Egyptians, and the night as day to the
Israelites, by the Cloud and Fiery Pillar: Ib. v. 24.25. etc.
In routing and destroying the mighty, and delivering the naked from the peril
of the sword. Number. 20.11. Ps. 114.8.
In causing the rock of flint to yield a spring of water, Ex. 16.13.15.
and the heavens to shower down Manna and Quails for their food. This his
late kindness bound them to harken to him.

Q. Which is the second Commandment?

A. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the likeness, etc.

Q. Is it not lawful to make a Graven Image?

A. It is: otherwise 1. Kings. 6.23.
Solomon would not have made 1. Kings. 6.23.
those two Cherubims, much less have Heb. 9.5.
placed them in the Holy of Holies, over the mercy seat: and these are they (as
I take it) which are called the Cherubims of Image-worke, 2. Chron. 3.10.
Neither would he have made the 1. Kings 6.29.
carved Cherubims, and Palmtrees upon the walls Ib. v. 32.35.
and upon the doors both of the Temple and Oracle. nor 2. Chron. 4.3.
the molten Oxen, or 1. Kings. 7.36.
graven Lions. Ib. v. 51.
All which he caused to be set in the house of the Lord.

Q. Where Is the fault then?

A. In making them to thy self, to be thy God; in bowing down to them, and
worshipping them. Elsewhere therefore it is said, Lev. 26.1.
Ye shall not set up any Image of stone in your Land, TO BOW DOWN UNTO IT. And
Deuteronomy. 17.15. Ps. 97.7.
the curse is laid upon those that worship carved or molten Images, not upon
those that make them; unless they make them for that or the like use.

Q. Why so?

A. Because this is God's honor, and he will not part with it to any other,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and HIM ONLY SHALL THOU SERVE. Deuteronomy. 13.4.
So the Law, S. Mat. 4.10.
so the Gospel. As then they offend that give God's worship to Idols; so do
they sin against his Commandments, that do not bow down to God, and worship
him. As the former are Jdolaters, the latter are little better then Atheists;
for Tit. 1.16.
in their works, in their Church duties, they deny him to be their God.

Q. Has not God himself given a reason for this.

A. He has in the very next words, For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God.
And the condition of jealousy is, that as it cannot endure to have that, which
is our due given to another, neither can we digest to have it denied to our
selves. For it is all one to me, to have that, which is mine, denied me, or
given to another.

Q. What follows upon this?

A. That God is equally angry with them, that do not bow down to him, and with
those, that bow dow down to Idols: he counts them equally haters of himsefe,
and will equally Visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation, of them that sin against him either way.

Q. But how does he esteem of them, that detest Idolatry, and give him his due
worship, that bow down to him, and worship him?

A. He reckons them among his lovers and friends; they love me says he, and
keep my Commandments. And as they love him, so does he love them; for in them
he will show mercy unto thousands of their generation. And surely this is
reason sufficient to move every Christian Ps. 95.6.
to worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our God.

Q. The third Commandment.

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Q. What is the meaning of this Commandment?

A. Ye shall not swear. by my Name falsely; neither shall thou profane the
Name of thy God. Lev. 19.12.
That we do not rashly, and upon slight occasions take his Name or word into
our mouths; much less profane or blaspheme it. That we swear not rashly, or
vainly, or falsely.

Q. Is it lawful to swear at all?

A. It is; otherwise the Psalmist would never have said, that Psalm. 63.12.
All they, that swear by God, shall be commended. Indeed Heb. 6.16. Exodus
22.11.
some Controversies cannot well be ended without an oath. But Ier. 4.2.
it must be taken in justice, and judgment, and truth: that is, as is
confessed on all hands, we may swear only to do such things, as are lawful,
and honest; and make oath of such things only, as are certainly known unto us.

Q. It is not good then to swear, but upon just and necessary occasion.

A. It is not; for our Saviors command is, S. Mat. 5.34.
Swear not at all. But let your Communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay: For
whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. Either of evil in thy self,
or in others. Of evil in thy self, when thou have got a naughty custom of
swearing; or have behaved thy self so ill, that no man will believe thee
without an oath. Of evil in others, when they are so mistrustfull, that they
will not believe any man without an oath. Or when by reason of injuries, or
controversies between Neighbors, thou art brought upon thy oath.

Q. Who sin against this Commandment?

A. All common and usual swearers, all blasphemers and prophaners of Gods name
or word; all perjured persons; all that swear, before they are resolved of the
point in question; all that swear, what they know not, though never so true:
all they that enforce, or entice, or occasion any person to swear that, which
is contrary to Gods word, or honor, or the truth, or what is doubtful unto
himself.

Q. What Is the reason for this?

A. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.
Though it be not so great a sin as Idolatry, or as the contempt or neglect of
Gods worship; though he threatens not to punish them in so deep a measure, yet
he will not hold them guiltless; he will punish them according to the measure
of their sin; though not so severely as unto the third and fourth generation.

Q. Which is the fourth Commandment?

A. Remember, that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
etc.

Q. This precept begins not like the rest. What conceive you to be the reason
of this?

A. It begins with a Memento, for these reasons. I. Because it is not moral
and perpetual, as the rest are. II. Because it was but now newly given. III.
Because the Jews were a people much given to the world, much set upon their
profit; and so they might make a gain, they spared neither man nor beast.

Q. Was not this precept observed before this time?

A. Truly no; we read indeed, that Genesis 2.2.
on the seventh day God ended his work, and rested on the seventh day from all
his work which he had made. And that Ib. v. 3.
God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because that in it he had
rested from all his work. But we find not any command given to man for keeping
the seventh day; or that any of those good men before Moses, kept it holy.
Neither is any mention at all made of the Sabbath, from Genesis 2. to Exodus 16.

Q. What meet you with there?

A. There I find, that when God had delivered the Children of Israel out of the
hand of Pharao, and all his host, when he had brought them thorough the red Sea
into the wilderness, when he had fed them with Manna and Quails from Heaven,
that Exodus 16.27.
he ceased to rain down this heavenly food on the seventh day, Ib. v. 25, 26.
that the people might take notice of the Sabbath. There indeed the Lord
commanded, that Ib. v. 29.
no man go out of his place on the seventh day. And Ib. v. 30.
the people accordingly rested on the seventh day: but it was only from
gathering Manna and Quails, for ought can be thence collected.

Q. Is this all?

A. Yes. For though God intimated unto them several ways, that he had made
this a day of rest, yet he commands it not to be kept holy, or to be set apart
for his service, till Exodus 20.

Q. What reason is there for this rest?

A. 1. That they might have a day to meditate upon the Creation, and so to be
put in mind of this their Creator. 2. That they might learn to be holy as God
is holy, by making the seventh day an holy day to serve the Lord in. 3. That
they might learn of God to be merciful, and to give their servants rest, as
he had given them rest from their bondage. For so says the Lord, Deuteronomy. 5.14.
That thy manservant and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou. Where he
adds a second memento to this Commandment: Deuteronomy. 5.15.
And REMEMBER, says he, that thou wast a servant in the Land of Egypt. and
that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, through a mighty hand, and by a
stretched out arm: THEREFORE the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the
Sabbath day. So the same God, that created the world, brought them out of
Egypt.

Q. Do we keep the same day holy?

A. No, we keep the first day of the week holy; that day, whereon Christ arose
from the dead.

Q. Did Christ arise from the grave on the first day of the week?

A. Scripture manifests it. For we read, that when Jesus was risen early, the
first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalen. St Mark. 16.9.

Q. Is this agreeable to Gods command?

A. Though it be not agreeable to the letter, it fails not of the meaning.
Though we keep not the seventh day, we keep one of the seven, which imitates
Gods rest after our six days labor. And an hard matter it is to prove, that
God gave over sending Manna upon the seventh day of the week: and yet that day
the people rested.

Q. From that time, when God commanded the seventh day; is it lawful for man
to alter the day?

A. A less blessing gives way to the greater, Creation to Redemption. Besides,
we know, that shadows and figures were to vanish, when Christ came. But the
Sabbath was a shadow, Col. 2.16, 17. it was therefore to vanish, when our
Savior had actually accomplished, what was prefigured by the Sabbath. The
Apostles therefore after our Saviors Resurrection, made the first day of the
week the day of rest; as appears S. Joh. 20.26. 1. Cor. 16.2. Apoc. 1.10.

Q. Did the Apostles command us to keep this day?

A. No; but we 1. Cor. 11.1.
according to Saint Paul's rule imitate the Apostles; knowing, that they were
guided by the Spirit of God. The Apostles began to keep this day, the first day
of the week; and the Church of God has done so ever since. The practice of the
Apostles is a sufficient warrant.

Q. Is it lawful to do no manner of work on this day?

A. Not the works of our trade or vocation, to make a gain thereby. But upon
that day we may do works of necessity, and works of charity.

Q. How prove you this?

A. By our Saviors Doctrine and practice. 1. By his doctrine; for S. Mat.
12.1. and 3. etc.
he justified by Scripture, that it was lawful for his Disciples on the
Sabbath day, to gather ears of Corn, and eat them. And that it is as S. Luc.
14.5.
lawful for us, to pull our ox or ass out of a ditch on the Sabbath day.
This for works of necessity. And for works of charity, or mercy, he justifies
them by his own practice. S. Mat. 12.13.
On the Sabbath day he healed the withered hand; as also S. Luc. 14.4.
the man sick of the Palsy. S. Ioh. 9.14.
On this day he opened the eyes of the blind. And not only so, but he gives us
directions for the future, assuring us, that S. Marc. 2.27.
The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.

Q. Which is the fifth Commandment?

A. Honor thy father and mother, etc.

Q. Who are meant by Father and Mother?

A. I. Our natural Parents. II. The King and his Ministers: that is, all such
as are placed in authority by the King. III. All my governors, teachers,
spiritual Pastors and Masters. And in the last place, all my betters.

Q. Of natural Parents there is no question; but is the King my Father?

A. The Kings style has ever been Pater Patriae.
the Father of his Country; to put us in mind of our filial duty, and him of
the Fatherly and tender affection, he ought to bare to his Subjects. And are
not Es. 49.23.
Kings and Queens called, the nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers of the
Church? To signify to us, who are the Sons of the Church, what they are to
us, and how we ought to behave our selves toward them.

Q. How ought we to honor the King?

A. As Gods substitute and immediare Vicegerent: for 2. Chron 9.8.
on the Lords throne he sits, to be King for the Lord thy God. So then he is
next to God, and less then God only.

Q. Wherein does this honor consist?

A. Pro. 2^.(...) v. 24.21.
In fearing to displease him; 1. S. Pet. 2.13.
in obeying him, in reverencing and loving him; Romans 13.6, 7.
in giving him, what ever is due to him by the Law of nature, the Law of God,
and the Law of the Land.

Q. How far forth must we obey the King?

A. So far forth, as he commands nothing that is contrary to the Law of
nature, or the Law of God.

Q. May the King command, what is evil?

A. He ought not. If he do, Act. 5.29.
we must obey God, and not man. But though he may not command us to do that,
which in it self is evil, or unlawful, yet he may prohibit some things,
that in themselves are lawful and honest; though they seem necessary for the
preservation of a Commonwealth. And this prohibition we are bound to obey.

Q. How prove you this?

A. Jer. 35.6, 7.
Jonadab commanded the Rechabites his sons, that neither they, nor their
Children should 1. drink wine for ever. And that they should neither 2. build
house, nor 3. sow seed, nor 4. plant Vineyard, nor 5. have any. We know, that
in themselves all these things are lawful and honest; and yet Ib. v. 8.
they obeyed the voice of their Father Jonadab, in forbearing these. And God
commends them and rewards them for it: for his promise to them is this, Ib. v.
19.20.
Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your Father, and kept all
his precepts, and done according to all, that he has commanded you, Jonadab
the Son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever. And the
King has an higher power over us, then our Parents have.

Q. Are you sure of this?

A. This is learned by daily experience. If my Father command me one way, and
the Kings Officer another, I must obey the Kings Officer, and not my Father.
The reason is, because as I am subject to my Father, so is my Father subject to
the King. The King therefore may punish my Father for his countermand, and me
for obeying it. Indeed my Father is but the Father of a Family, but the King is
the Father of all his Country; that is, of all the Families in His Dominions:
He has therefore Power both over me and my Father. Besides, To. 13.4.
the King has the Power of the Sword, of life and death: which a Father has
not. For if my Father kill me, the King ought to question him, and to execute
Justice upon him for this wicked Fact.

Q. May no man control, or forbid, what the King commands?

A. Surely no: for 1. S. Pet. 2.13.
the King is Supreme, the highest power under God. All other Civil powers are
to be obeyed so far forth, Ib. v. 14.
as they are sent by the King, as they have Authority from him, and no further.
To be otherwise taught, is but to be trained up to Rebellion. For the King is
not only the Fountain of Honor, but the Fountain of all Civil power, within
his own Dominions; as the Apostles justify, Romans 13.1. S. Pet. 2.14.

Q. But suppose the King command that, which is utterly unlawful, and contrary
to Gods word, may we disobey?

A. Disobey him we may, to obey God. That is; we must prefer Gods command,
before the Kings. And this cannot justly be called disobedience, but obedience;
since we To. 13.1.
obey the higher Powers, namely God, from whom he has this Power.

Q. And may we resist in this, or such like cases?

A. We may not; since that God, who has charged obedience upon us, Ib. v. 2.
Non resistit, quod subiectum est Aug. de vera Relig. c. 35.
has forbidden resistance upon pain of damnation.

Q. What is to be done in these streights?

A. When we may not submit to the command enjoined, we must submit to the
penalty inflicted. Thus did the Apostles of Christ; and thus must we.

Q. What if the King be a Tyrant, or Persecuter of the Orthodoxe Faith?

A. Magistratibus ex animo deferendus est honor, etiam tyrannis. Beza in Act.
23.5.
Yet we must submit, as is prescribed. After this manner the Apostles and their
Scholars, submitted to Nero, Domitian, Julian, etc.

Q. What is due to the King by the Law of God?

A. To. 13.1.
Subjection, Reverence, Ib. v. 6, 7.
Tribute, Custom, Prove. 24.21.
Fear and 1. S. Pet. 2.17.
Honor. And no humane Law can take these, or any of these from him, since the
divine Law is the Supreme Law: and every Law is void, as soon as made, that is
contrary to this Law. And hence it is, that we are commanded to obey Princes 1.
S. Pet. 2.13.
for the Lords sake, To. 13.5.
for Conscience sake, and Ib. v. 2.
upon pain of damnation.

Q. Why is God so careful of Kings?

A. 1. Because 2. Chron. 9.8.
they are his Substitutes, and represent his Majesty. 2. Because Lamen. 4.20.
they are Gods Anointed. 3. Because 1. S Pet. 2.14.
in disposing Favors, and dispensing Justice, they cannot but draw much envy
upon themselves. 4. Because 2. Sam. 18.3.
the King is worth ten thousand of the best of us. And yet when the people
spoke this of David, there were brave men among them, viz. Ib. v. 2.
Ittai the Gittite, and Joab, and Abishai, 1. Chro. 2.16.
David's own Sistars sons; men of great birth and power, eminent for virtue,
and 2. Sam. 18.2.
the chief Commanders of his host.

Q. How ought we to honor our Parents?

A. By loving, reverencing, and succouring them in their necessities, since
under God they are the Authors of our being, and breeding, and preservation.
Not because we have need of them, but because they are our Parents. Honor THY
FATHER, not because he is great, or rich; but because he is thine. Thus 1.
Kings. 2.19.
Solomon, though a mighty Monarch, 1. rose up to meet Bathsheba his mother, and
2. bowed himself unto her. and 3. caused a seat to be set for her, and 4.
placed her on his right hand. St Paul's advice therefore is, that 1. Tim. 5.4.
we learn to show piety at home, and to requite our Parents: and his charge
is, that Col. 3.20.
Children obey their Parents in all things. And reason good, Ib. and 1. Tim.
5.4.
for these duties are well pleasing unto the Lord.

Q. How ought we to honor our Masters?

A. Col. 3.22.
By obeying them in all things; not with eye-service, as men pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God.

Q. The Scriptures are very mindful of the duty of Children and Servants, but
are they silent of Parents and Masters?

A. They are not. Of Parents and Masters in general they say thus; 1. Tim. 5.8.
He that provides not for his own, is worse then an Infidel. And in
particular to each of them thus: Ephesians. 6.4.
Ye Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath; but bring them up in the
nourture and admonition of the Lord. Col. 4.1.
Ye Masters, give unto your Servants, that which is just and equal, knowing
that ye also have a Master in Heaven.

Q. What says the Scripture concerning spiritual Pastors and Masters?

A. It calls them S. Mat. 5.13.
the Salt of the earth, Ib. v. 14.
the light of the world; Mal. 2.7.
the Angels of God; 1. Cor. 4.1.
the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God; Ib. v. 15.
Fathers in Christ; and 1. Cor. 3.9.
Laborers together with God. And Ib.
the People are Gods husbandry, whereon they are to spend their labor.

Q. What requital are we to make them for these their pains?

A. Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him that teaches, in all
good things. For 1. Cor. 9.13.
AS THEY THAT WAIT UPON THE ALTAR, are partakers with the Altar; EVEN SO HAS
THE LORD also ORDAINED, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel. Besides, Saint Paul commands us to Heb. 13.7.
Remember our guides, who have spoken unto us the word of God, whose faith he
enjoynes us to follow: as also to Ib. v. 17.
Obey them, and submit our selves unto them, for they watch for our souls. And
again; 1. Tim. 5.17.
Let those Presbyters, or Elders, that rule well, be counted worthy of double
honor; especially they, who labor in the word and doctrine.

Q. What says the Scripture generally of our betters?

A. Levit. 19.32.
We must reverence them, and rise up to the hoarie headed. 1. Tim. 5.1, 2.
We must entreat the elder men as Fathers, the elder Women as Mothers; and Ib.
v. 3.
Honor Widows, that are Widows indeed. We have Moses for an example, Ex.
18.7.
who did obeisance to Jethro his wives Father.

Q. How comes it to pass, that Father and Mother are named, but not the King,
nor any of the rest?

A. Because in the Father and Mother i^ 1. Age, 2. Place, and 3. Wisdom to
instruct, and 4. Power to command and control. In them God at first settled
all that power, which since is derived from them to our Governors, according
to their several places and degrees.

Q. Which is the sixth Commandment?

A. Thou shall do no murder. Wherein not only actual murder, but the
resolution or desire to do it, is condemned. Yea all causeless and unbrideled
anger is forbidden: for our Savior says, that S Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever is angry with his brother without cause, shall be in danger of
judgment. And S. John, 1. S Joh. 3, 15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a Murderer. The unjust judge also is in the
same predicament; for Deuteronomy. 27.25.
Cursed is he that takes a reward, or bribe, to slay an innocent Person.

Q. The seventh Commandment?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery. In which words not only the act, but all
inordinate affections and desires, or any thing tending thereto, is forbidden.
For S. Paul forbids Romans 13.13.
Chambering and Wantonness. And our Savior professes, that S. Mat. 5.28.
whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with
her already in his heart.

Q. The eight Commandment?

A. Thou shall not steal wherein not only theft, but Lev. 25.39.46.
oppression, 1. Cor. 6.10.
extortion, and 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
cousenage are forbidden. And to this commandment, I conceive, belongs that
curse, Deuteronomy. 27.17. Cursed is he, that removes away the mark of his
neighbors lands, either by Meerestones, Evidences, Records, or the like; for
this is cousenage at the least.

Q. The ninth Commandment?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. In judgment we
may not, without question. Indeed in our ordinary communication it is dangerous
for any man to scandalize, or slander his neighbor. They that do so, shall
have no place in the Kingdom of God. 1. Cor. 6.10. Neither may we lie; since
Psalm. 5.6.
the Lord will destroy him, that does so. To this command belong those two
imprecations; Deuteronomy. 27.19.
Cursed is he that lets in judgment the right of the stranger, of the
Fatherless and Widow. And Ib. v. 24.
Cursed is he, that smites his neighbor secretly.

Q. Who is my Neighbor?

A. Not only those, that are of our Kindred, or such as are near us by
acquaintance, or habitation, or Country: but even those, that are of another
Nation, and Religion: as our Savior manifests in his Parable of the Jew and
Samaritane. S. Luc. 10.30. etc.

Q. We are now come to the last: tell me that?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. This last takes away all
evasion from those, who conceive only actual adultery, and actual theft to be
sin. For if sin be a breach of Gods Law; then is it sin to covet, or lust
after that, which is none of mine. Thus this precept teaches us to resist all
evil motions, and to root out all lusts and covetous desires, that so they may
never break forth into Rebellion against God, and bring the second death upon
us.

Q. Art thou able to keep these Consmandements?

A. Of my self I am not, but Phil. 4.23.
I can do all things in God that strengthens me. We are taught therefore at
the end of each Commandment, to call upon the Lord by Prayer, Lord have mercy
upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. And after the last
Commandment, Lord have mercy upon us, and write all those thy Laws in our
hearts, we beseech thee. And I am taught, C^^ech. in Common Prayer Book.
at all times to call for his special grace by diligent Prayer, that I may
walk in his Commandments.

Q. What Prayer do thou chiefly use?

A. The Lords Prayer.

Q. Why is it called so?

A. Because our Lord Jesus Christ made it, and commanded his Disciples to make
use of it, in these words, S. Luc. 11.2.
When ye pray, say, OUR FATHER etc. Our Church therefore When, as often as we
pray in ^^blique, commands to use this prayer. And we do so Praemiss^ legitima
and ordinaria oratione quasi fundamento, accideraium i^^ est de fideriorum
Testul. de D^al. (...)
in the beginning, of our first and second Service; that so laying this for a
foundation, we may justly proceed to our ensuing requests.

Q. Why so?

A. 1. In obedience to our Saviors injunction. 2. Because it is so absolute a
Prayer, that it comprehends briefly, what we may or ought to pray for. 3.
Because, Hooker. Eccles Pol l 5.. 35.
it fully perfecteth whatsoever may be defective in the rest. And 4. It is
observed, that Ib.
Tertullian and S. Austine term it Orationem legitimam, the prayer, which
Christ's own Law has tied his Church to use in the same prescript form of
words, wherewith he himself did deliver it.

Besides, it is called Tertul de Orat. c. 9.
the ordinary, or usual prayer, because it is used in all the Churches of the
Saints. And The Lords prayer is called quotidiana oration fide lium
Aug-Enthirid. c. 71.
our daily prayer, because Christ has taught us to use it every day, by
commanding us to pray for our daily Bread this day: that so praying but for
this day, we might be bound to make use of this prayer every day.

Q. Repeat the whole Prayer?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. This Prayer consists of a Preface,
Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 35. Septem petitiones continere Dominica videtur
oration. Aug. Enchirid. c. 115. and de Ser dom. in Monte. l. 2.
seven Petitions, and the reason why we beg these things at his hands.

Q. Which call you the Preface?

A. Our Father which art in Heaven: Herein we manifest, whom we pray to; viz.
to that holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost. As these three Persons are but one God, and one Lord, so they are in
respect of us, but one Father: each person has an equal interest in our
Creation, preservation, and Regeneration. Hence is it, that as we are created
by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, so are we Baptized in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. As we are Baptized, so we believe, and
as we believe, so we pray; in whom we believe, to them we pray.

Q. Is not God every where, that we say, which art in Heaven?

A. Every where he is without question, by his Essence; since Act. 17.28.
In him we live, we moove, and have our being: but in the souls of the
faithful he is by his Grace, and in Heaven by his Glory. Hence is the Is. 66.1.
earth called his Footstool, and Heaven his Throne. We confine him not to
Heaven, but we name Heaven, as the place where his Glory is most eminent, where
our Savior is said to sit at his right hand, the Angels to attend him and the
souls of the Saints departed, have the fruition of Joy and Glory.

Q. Why begin we our Prayers so?

A. 1. To put us in mind, that our Pedigree is from Heaven. 2. That we may take
care to behave our selves as the Children of such a Father, And 3. That the
inheritance we hope for, is in Heaven. We are not therefore to set our minds
upon earthly, but heavenly things.

Q. Who may pray thus?

A. None but those that are Baptized. In the primitive Church Quomodo dicunt,
Pater noster, qui nondu^ nati sunt (sciticet per Baptismu^?) Aug. de Symbolo ad
Catechum. l. 1. c. 6. and quinquag. homil. 42. Consule Gab. Alvaspin Observat.
l. 1. c. 19.
the Catechumeni, such as were prepared for Baptism, learned it for an
Instruction, or preparation; but they might not use it as a prayer, till they
were Baptized. Immediately after Baptism they did, and so do we.

The Heathen cannot say Our Father; Our Creator, Our Lord they may. The Jews,
as Jews, were never taught to say, Our Father: this prayer is peculiar to
Christians; Our Father he is by grace, and we his sons by the same grace. God
make us sons in glory.

Q. Which is the first Petition?

A. Hallowed be thy name: wherein we desire not, that his Name may be made
Holy: we know Ps. 99.3.
it is so, and it cannot be otherwise. But our prayer is, that his Name, and
his word, may be used and mentioned by us holily; that in all our actions we
may honor Our Father, and the stock we come off, and that we may ever seek
his honor and glory, and not our own. That as we bear his Name, so we may
behave our selves as beseemes his Name, and good Christians; not only by
worshipping him at the Church, but by our daily and hourly conversation in all
places.

Q. The second Petition.

A. Thy Kingdom come: his Kingdom of grace, and his Kingdom of glory. That
his Kingdom of grace, which is his Church, may so spread over the face of the
whole earth, that his word may be preached, and believed, and obeyed in all
Nations whatsoever. That his word may bear such sway in our hearts, that the
Kingdom of sin and Satan being vanquished, we may behave our selves as the
sincere Subjects of such a King, that so his Kingdom of glory may be
replenished in due season.

Q. The third Petition.

A. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. That with our Savior each
Christians prayer may be, S. Luc. 22.42.
Not my will, but thy will be done; not only in Peace, plenty, and prosperity,
but in War, in wants, and persecution. His revealed will is the rule, whereby
all our actions must be guided. Our prayer is therefore, that we his Servants
may be diligent to perform this his will on earth, as the Angels are diligent
to do it in heaven. That we may listen to him, and be obsequious to his will,
as they are. That there may not be any dissension between our earthly and
heavenly parts; but that the flesh being subject to the spirit, both may
sincerely submit to his will, and do it to the utmost of their power. This is
the direct way to his Kingdom of glory.

Q. The fourth Petition.

A. Give us this day our daily bread. In this petition Catech. in Common prayer
Book.
we pray unto God, that he will send us all things, that be needful both for
our souls and bodies. Hieron. in Mat. 6.
This (as the learned observe) is intimated unto us, by this word (...); which
signifies not only daily, but supersubstantiall; that Spiritaliter potius
intelligamus. Christus enim panis noster est, etc. Tertul. de Orat. c. 6.
so we might not only remember our bodily food, but that we might have a
special eye upon the food of our souls, that bread of life, the blessed
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which was Eucharistiam, quotidie ad cibum
salutis accipimus. Cypr. de Orat. domin. n. 48. Aug. de Ser. Dom. in Monte. l.
2.
daily received in the primitive Church, by the first Christians.

Q. The fifth Petition.

A. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. Herein we make confession, that we have trespassed against God and his
word; we entreat him therefore, against whom we sin, to forgive us our sins.

Q. Can God only forgive sin?

A. God only powerfully, but the Priest ministerially. God has power in
himself and of himself to forgive sins: but the Priest has only a
delegated power, neither in, nor of himself, but from God, who gave this
Commission to his Apostles, and in them to their successors; S. John. 20.23.
Receive (says he) the Holy Ghost; whosoever sins ye forgive, they are
forgiven, etc. Christ gave them the Holy Ghost, that by his power they might
remit, and retain sins.

Q. Do Priests forgive sins absolutely?

A. No; but conditionally, as God does; if the person confessing Absolution in
the Common Prayer Book.
truly repent, and unfainedly believe the holy Gospel. God, you see, forgives
but upon condition; we beg pardon but upon condition, that God would deal with
us, as we deal with our Neighbors; that he would forgive us, as we forgive
them, that trespass against us.

Q. Must we then expect no pardon, but upon this condition?

A. We may not, our Savior says so; S. Mat. 18.35.
unless ye FORGIVE ONE ANOTHER FROM THE HEART, your heavenly Father will not
forgive you. That is, Aug. Enchirid. c. 73.74.
unless ye be ready to forgive your trespassers, when they crave pardon of
you, look for no pardon at my Fathers hands, when ye beg forgiveness of him:
S. Luc. 6.38.
For the same measure ye mere, it shall be measured to you again.

Q. The sixth Petition.

A. And iead us not into temptation.

Q. Can God rempt us?

A. He cannot; the Scripture is plain. S. James. 1.13.14.
Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God cannot be
tempted with evil, NEITHER TEMPTS HE ANY MAN. But every man is tempted, when
he is drawn away of his own lust, and entised.

Q. Cannot God be the author of sin?

A. He cannot: for Ps. 5.4.
He has no pleasure in wickedness: but Ps. 11.6. Deus mali aliquid non potest
velle. Aug. Ep. 180.
the ungodly, and him, that delights in wickedness, does his soul abhor.
It is therefore Illo sacrilegio, quo statuitur Deum esse mali authorem, mihi
detestabilius nihil occurrit. Aug. de Ord. l. 2. c. 7.
accounted most detestable sacrilege, to make God the author of sin.

Q. What pray we against in this Petition?

A. Against Gods heavy wrath and censure; namely, that he would not punish one
sin with another: For the later sin is often times a punishment of the
former: as Judas his murdering himself, was a punishment of his treason. We
beseech God therefore, Et ne nos patiaris induci, etc. Cypr. de Orat, Domin. n.
69. Ne nos inducas, etc. id est, Ne patiaris nos induci Tertul. de Orat. c. 8.
Aug. de Ser. Dom. in Monre. l. 2.
as our Forefathers had wont to speak, not to suffer us to be led into
temptation, much less to be overcome thereby. Since the withdrawing of his
grace, is, as it were, a leading, or letting us into temptation: so prone we
are to sin, if God withhold us not.

Q. Which is the last Petition?

A. But deliver us from evil. In the two former Petitions we entreated for
pardon for our former sins, and to be preserved from future sins: but here
we beseech God to deliver us from the evil of punishment, both in this life,
and in the life to come; as also from that fierce executioner of Gods vengeance
the Devil.

Q. Why do we beg all this at Gods hands?

A. I. Because he is Our Father: most fit therefore, that we repair to him for
help and succor. II. Because he is all-sufficient, Almighty: or, as it is
added in St Matthew, S. Mat. 6.13.
for thine is the Kingdom, power, and glory, for ever and ever. His Kingdom
is unlimited, his power absolute; God give us grace to seek his glory; For he
will be glorified either by us, or upon us; either by us, in the performance of
his Commandments; or upon us, in the demonstration of his justice.

Q. Why add we, Amen?

A. Because we desire, all this may be done; for so this word signifies.
Sciendum est, Amen and Halleluja, quae nec Latino, nec Barbaro licet in suam
lingua^ transserre, Hebraeo cunctas gentes vocabulo decantare. Aug. Ep. 178.
It is an Hebrew word, which we translate not into any language, but preserve
it, as our Savior gave it. We end our Prayers and Creed with it, to manifest
the assent and consent of all Christians in matters of the highest moment.

Q. How ought we to behave our selves in Prayer?

A. With all devotion and reverence inward and outward, meekly kneeling upon
our knees.

Q. Why must we kneel at our Prayers?

A. I. Because it is a gesture best beseeming humble Petitioners. II. It
Proprium est orationis officiu^, Dei veneratio. Tertul. de Orat c. 1.
is a duty proper to Prayer. III. The Church our Mother commands us to kneel
at Prayers. IV. In oration ne ex more ge^ua fleximus, arque incubuimus terrae.
Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 8.
It is agreeable to the custom of the ancient Church. V. It is agreeable to
the practice of our Savior and his Apostles, S. Mat. 26.39. S. Luc. 22.41. Act
7.60 c. 9. 40. c. 20.36.
who always kneel, or fall flat upon the ground at their prayers. VI. It is
Gods due; in the second Commandment. And our Savior says, S. Mat. 4.10.
Thou shall WORSHIP the Lord thy God. And Vox adorare idem significat. quod
prosternere se, iucurvare, a^geniculari. Pet. Picherel. de Imag. p. 225.
to worship God, is to kneel down, or fall down before him. These reasons, I
hope, will bring us all upon our knees.

Q. I pray God, they may. Thou have given me good satisfaction in the Creed,
the ten Commandments, and the Lords Prayer: now tell me, how many Sacraments
there be.

A. Two only; instituted by our blessed Savior as necessary for the salvation
of all men; to wit, 1. Baptism, and 2. the Lords Supper.

Q. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?

A. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself as a means, whereby we receive the same,
and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Q. A little plainer if you can.

Q. A Sacrament is an outward and visible sign, or element, ordained by Christ
to be given or bestowed upon us, as a means, whereby we may receive an inward
and spiritual grace. This he gives us as a pledge, to assure us, that as often
as we receive this Sacrament, or element, according to Christ's ordinance, so
often we receive this grace, which is always conveyed unto us by this Sacrament.

Q. How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

A. Two, the outward and the inward.

Q. What is the outward part?

A. The matter and form appointed and determined by Christ himself.

Q. What meanest thou by the matter?

A. The element or creature, designed by Christ for this or that Sacrament.

Q. What meanest thou by the form?

A. The words appropriated by Christ to this or that Sacrament.

Q. What is the element, or matter appropriated to Baptism?

A. S. John. 3.5.
Water, the pure element of water, without art or mixture.

Q. What the form, or words?

A. S. Mat. 28 19.
I Baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.

Q. May no Person be baptized with other matter or words?

A. No: for Christ, who is the author of grace, disposes of his graces, and
the means, whereby he conveyeth them unto us. And it is in the power of no
Person or Persons, to alter these means, unless it be also in his, or their
power, to give grace at pleasure.

Q. These two then make this a perfect Sacrament.

A. They do so, namely Acceldat verbum ad elementum, and fiet Sacramentum. Aug.
these words of Christ added to this element, or matter prescribed by Christ.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual grace in Baptism?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness. Qui baptizatur,
ascendit liberatus a servitute corruptionis and peccato, factus filius Dei, and
haeres ejus gratie, coh^res autem Christi, indutus ipsum Christum. Council. Nic.
Diatyp. 5.
For being by nature borne in sin; and the children of wrath, we are hereby
made the children of grace.

Q. Thou conceivest then, that all sins are forgiven us in Baptism.

A. I do so; so that we hinder not this grace by infidelity or impenitence.

Q. Why are you of this mind?

A. 1. Because I am taught by the Nicene Creed, to believe one Baptism for the
remission of sins. 2. This Church has resolved it for Rubricke immediately
before the Catechism
a known truth, that it is certain by Gods word, that Children being baptized,
have all things necessary for their salvation, and be undoubtedly saved. 3. The
Scripture assures us, that 1. S. Pet. 3.21.
Baptism does now save us, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and that Ephesians.
5.26.
we are saved with the washing of water by the Word. 4. That Gal. 3.27
as many of us, as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: that is,
as the Council of Nice expounds it, Council. Nic. Diatyp. 5.
we descend foul and unclean into the Laver of Regeneration; but we come forth
unspotted, and without sin.

Q. What is required of persons to be Baptized?

A. 1. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, and 2. Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

A. Yes they do perform them by their sureties, who promise and vow them both
in their names, which when they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Q. Is this agreeable to reason?

A. It is so. It is no more then guardians do for their wards. When Wards are
under age, their guardians undertake for them, what those wards when they come
to age, are bound to perform. Besides, we sinned in others words and actions;
it may well therefore stand with reason, that we be cleansed from this sin, by
other men's words and actions.

Q. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

A. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ, and
the benefits which we receive thereby.

Q. What is the outward part, or sign of the Lords supper?

A. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Q. This the matter, which the form?

A. S. Mat. 26.26. 1. Cor. 11.23. etc.
The Lord Jesus in the same night, that he was betrayed, etc.

Q. What is the inward part or thing signified?

A. The Body and blood of Christ, Concludo realiter* hoc est, vere nobis in
coena dari Christi corpus, ut fit animis nostris in cibum salutarem. Calvin, in
1. Cor. 11.24.
which are verily and indeed taken and received of the faithful in the Lords
Supper.

Q. What body?

A. Christus nobis offer^ corpus ip sum, in quo passus est, ac resurrexit.
Calvin. Ib.
That body which was borne of the Virgin Mary, and suffered upon the Cross.

Q. Do we receive it after a Corporal manner?

A. No, but after a spiritual manner. That we receive it, we believe, but the
manner we know not, we enquire not after; no more then we enquire after the
manner, how Christ's humanity was knit to his Deity.

Q. Is the bread transubstantiated into the Body of Christ?

A. It is not, 1. Cor. 11.23.
Bread it is before consecration; Ib. v. 24.
bread at the time of Consecration, and Ib. v. 26, 27, 28.
bread after Consecration: but it is Ib. v. 24, 25. 29.
the body and blood of Christ, only after Consecration.

Q. After what manner do we receive the Body of Christ in this Sacrament?

A. By faith: as the food is Spiritual, so is the manner spiritual.

Q. What are the benefits, whereof we are partakers thereby?

A. Intelligo substantia corporis pasci animas nostras, ut vere unum efficiamur
cum eo. Calvin. in 1. Cor. 11.24.
The strengthening and refreshing of our Souls, by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the Bread and Wine. We are sensible of the one,
let us believe the other. For as verily as our faint and hungry Bodies are
strengthened, and refreshed, and comforted with bread and wine, so verily is
every penitent and faithful Soul strengthened, and refreshed, and comforted
with the body and blood of Christ.

Q. What is required of them, which come to the Lords Supper?

A. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life: to have a lively faith in Gods
mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death, and be in
charity with all men.

Q. This for the inward preparation; what for the outward reverence?

A. All outward and inward reverence is little enough, when we come to receive
the price of Heaven and Earth. By some therefore it is called a dreadful
mystery; because he that rightly considers of it, will not approach to this
Table without dread and trembling.

Q. Why so?

A. Because there we receive this holy Sacrament either to our salvation, or
damnation. 1. Cor. 11.29.
If unworthily, we eat and drink damnation to our selves. Whereas Ib. v. 32.
if we would judge our selves, we could not but see our own unworthiness; and
then we would certainly endeavor to humble our selves, as we ought, both
before and at our approach. Thus if we do, we shall not be judged unworthy of
the Lord; but receive it to the comfort and salvation of our souls.

Q. Is not inward reverence sufficient?

A. He that has commanded us at all times to 1. Cor. 6.20.
glorify God in our bodies, and in our spirits, will have us more efpecially
at this time to glorify him in both. Where both may be had, he will have both.
The Church our Mother conceives kneeling, not only decent, but necessary at
this time: she therefore has made this Injunction, that Rubricke immediately
before the delivering.
The Minister shall deliver the Communion in both kinds to the PEOPLE KNEELING.
The people therefore are to kneel.

Q. Is this agreeable to the usage of the ancient Church?

A. It is so: for S. Austine tells us, that Nemo illam carnem manducat, nisi
prius adoraverit. Aug. in Ps. 98.
in his time no man received, but first he kneeled. And Chemnicius a learned
Protestant speaking of due reverence to be used at this time, professes, that
Chemnic. Exam. Concii. Trid. part. 2. c. 5.
we ought to kneel; adding, that external irreverence in this action is the
token of a profane mind.

Q. Some abstain for fear of Idolatry:

A. I see not, how there can be any such danger. We worship not bread, but the
God of Heaven: neither worship we God by the Bread; but by or with that blessed
Bread and Wine we receive the body and blood of Christ, The words at the
delivering.
which preserve us body and soul to eternal life. And can any man be too good
to receive such a blessing upon his knees?

Besides, we acknowledge that Christ is present at this his supper, after a
more special and peculiar manner then at other times. Si haec vere and ex
animo credimus, fieri nec potest, nec debet, quin fider Christum in illa
action praesentem veneretur and adoret. Chemnic. Ib.
If this we believe truly and sincerely, it cannot, it may not be, but faith
will reverence and adore our Savior present in this action.

Q. Is there then no danger in kneeling?

A. Certainly none. The danger is in not kneeling; for I have learned of
Chemnicius, that there is no true faith in that Communicant Non vera suisset
fides, si non secuta fuis set invocatio, scu adoratio. lb.
where adoration is wanting. And Saint Ambrose, and Saint Austine are resolute,
that Ambros. and Aug. in Psalm. 98.
it is so far from being a sin to kneel at receiving this Sacrament, that
it is a sin not to kneel.

Q. We have done with the ordinary course of Cathechising; and yet there
remain two points of Heb. 6.1. Hicrespexit ad usitatam Catechismi formulam.
Calvin. in Heb. 6.1.
Saint Paul's Care. chisme, namely 1. Repentance from dead works, and 2.
Imposition, or laying on of hands. That we may orderly proceed in these, tell
me first, what these dead works are.

A. Dead works are such, as by the Catechists of those times were done, before
they believed in Christ. Which being done without faith, and the least relation
to Gods glory, tended to death. Since Heb. 11.6.
without faith it is impossible to please God; and without pleasing God no
life. Aug. de Fide and Oper. c. 20.
These works then are to be repented of by the Elder sort, before they repair
to Baptism.

Q. What is Repentance?

A. It is an hearty sorrow for our sins past, accompanied with a change of
mind from evil to good, with a resolution by Gods grace to continue in good
courses. If thus we S. Mat. 4 17.
repent, the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Q. What mean you by Imposition of hands?

A. It is a sign, or Ceremony, by which and Prayer, God conveyes his holy
Spirit upon those, that heretofore were baptized.

Q. Have not Persons baptized the Holy Ghost before Confirmation?

A. Yes; but not in that measure, nor for the same end.

Q. In what measure, and for what end is the Holy Ghost bestowed upon us in
Baptism?

A. To wash and cleanse us from sin, from all sin, that is in us; that so
we may be clean, and pure as Adam was, when he came first out of Gods fingers;
and that we may be the members of Christ.

Q. Why is he given us in Confirmation?

A. That Rubrick^ before the Catechism.
we may receive strength and defense against all temptations to sin, and
against the assaults of the world and the Devil. At Baptism we promised, not
to follow any of these, nor to be led by them; and in Confirmation, God
strengthens us by his Spirit, that we may make good this promise.

Q. Is it not enough to receive the Holy Ghost once?

A. No; S. Joh. 3.34. Ephesians 4.7.1. Cor. 12.11.
for God gives his Spirit, and his graces according to measure; some at one
time, and some at another; some by one means, and some by another: as is to be
seen in Baptism, Confirmation, the Lords Supper, and Orders.

Q. Did the Apostles receive the Holy Ghost more then once?

A. It is evident they did. That the Apostles were baptized, no man, I hope,
questions. And that they received the Holy Ghost in Orders and Confirmation, is
manifest in Scripture. In Orders, S. Joh. 20.22, 23. In Confirmation, Act. 2.4.
And at each time they received a several measure, or grace of the Holy Ghost,
and for a several end.

Q. Did the Apostles make use of this Rite or Ceremony?

A. They did; as is to be seen, Act. 8. and Act. 19. In the one place Act. 8.17.
S. Peter and S. John, laid their hands on the baptized Samaritans, and they
received the Holy Ghost. In the other Act. 19.6.
S. Paul laid his hands upon the baptized Ephesians, and the Holy Ghost came on
them. Prayer in Confirmation.
This then is done by our Bishops, after the example of the holy Apostles: and
Hic unus locus abunde testatur huius Ceremoniae originem fluxtsse ab Apostolis.
Calvin. in Heb 6.2.
is the same with that Heb. 6.2.

Q. Is this Rite necessarily to be continued in the Church of Christ?

A. Not of necessity to salvation, but of necessity for the obtaining of
certain gifts of the Spirit, Act. 19.2.6.
which cannot ordinarily be acquired but by this means.

Q. Why is not more care taken, that it be continued?

A. Our Church has taken order, that Rubricke in public Baptism, and after
the Catechism.
Children, so soon as they can say the Articles of the Faith, the Lords Prayer,
and the ten Commandments, and be further instructed in the Catechism set
forth for that purpose, be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed of him. Ib.
And the Bishop shall confirm them.

Besides, it is ordered, that Rubricke after Confirmation.
None SHALL be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he be
confirmed. Our Church conceives it to be necessary, at least by way of
preparation, for all such as repair to the Lords Table.

Q. Who are the Ministers of this blessing?

A. Bishops, and only Bishops. The reason is, because the Apostles only did it
in their time; and Bishops are the only successors of the Apostles.

Q. Was it not an extraordinary act?

A. No; but such a blessing as is to be retained in the Church of God for the
good of his people; that so we may increase in his holy Spirit more and more,
until we come to his everlasting Kingdom,

AMEN.
Haec non praecipiendi authoritate, sed proficiendi exercitatione scribuntur a
nobis. Aug. Cont. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. A praesenti saeculo maligno salvi fieri
non possumus, nisi and nos ad salutem proximorum nitentes, etiam ore
profiteamur fidem, quam cord gestamus: quae fides ne fraudulentis
calliditatibus haereticorum possit in nobis aliqua ex part violari, pia
cautaque vigilantia providendum est. Aug. de fide and Symbolo. c. 1. Tractatio
fidei ad muniendum Symbolum valet: non ut ipsa pro Symbolo gratiam Dei
consequentibus memoriae mandanda and reddenda tradatur; sed ut illa, quae in
Symbolo retinentur, contra haereticorum insidias authoritate Catholica and
munitiore defensione custodiat. Ibid.
FINIS.

