GODS GOODNESS IN Crowning THE KING. Declared in a SERMON In the Church of
Kingston upon Hull, on the happy day of the Coronation of His Sacred Majesty
CHARLES the SECOND. April the 23d. 1661.

By EDWARD BOTELER, sometimes fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in
Cambridge, and now Rector of Wintringham in the County of LINCOLN.

Horat. Carm. li. 4. Od. 5. Sic desideriis icta fidelibus
Quaerit patria Caesarem.
LONDON, Printed for G. Bed^l and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle Temple-Gate in Fleet street. 1662.

To the Right Honorable, JOHN LORD BELLASSYSE Baron of Worlaby, Lord
Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of His MAJESTY'S
Garrison and Forts of Kingston upon Hull.
My Lord,
THESE Notes were taken in your Lordships Garrison, and threatened to be brought
before you, in case I would not promise they should be forthcoming, and engage
for their appearance. I did so, and I here humbly present them for their trial.
If upon their examination your Lordship shall find them guilty of any thing
like Heterodox, or Disloyal: let them be committed to Vulcan, who allows papers
no Bail; But if their integrity shall appear, I humbly beg your Lordships pass,
that they may go abroad under your honorable name. For now every one is talking
of their preferments, I would gladly the world should know mine, which is to be,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and most devoted servant, E. BOTELER.

To the Right Worshipful CHRISTOPHER RICHARDSON, Esquire; MAYOR Of the Town of
Kingston super HVLL: AND To the Aldermen his Brethren, who continued faithful
during the late Defection. AND To the Officers, Burghers, and Freemen, that
fear God, and honor the King in that Corporation.
SIRS,
WE read in that Reign, Speed's Hist B. 9. chapter 18. p. 705.
and no Reign, of Edward the fifth, of a juggling Divine called John Shaw: a
man of more fame than learning, (says the story) and of less conscience, than
either; that he preached away his credit with the people, and lost his honesty,
by decrying the Title of his lawful Prince, and magnifying the pretense of
Richard the then Protector. Foecunda culpae Secula. -- Hor. Car. l. 3. Od. 6.
But our Times, big with mischief, have brought forth a whole generation of
such Changlings; Creatures, that would cry up Richard Protector, and Oliver
Protector, and any Protector, that would protect them in other men's Livings,
and their own Sorceries and Seditions; Things, sitter for Steeples than
Churches, as serving only to show which way the wind stands: having Ephemeram
Religionem, (as Beza says of Baldwinus) every day a new Religion. It is all I
shall say for this poor piece, that it is honest. Psalm. 45 1.
My heart indicted a good matter, when I spoke of the things which I made
touching the King, the Anointed of the Lord, the rightful King, declared so by
the joint suffrages of Heaven and Earth. And my comfort is, I never spoke for
any other, never worshipped any Calf of the peoples making, never bowed to any
golden image, never played the Advocate for ill-gotten greatness, nor durst
misplace the royal and renowned names of David and Solomon upon any proud and
inglorious Usurper. So that you need not shame to share in the Patronge of this
Sermon; it is made Public at your command, let it be made passable by your
encouragement. Some of the male-contented Faction have been as unhansome as
they durst in their discourses of it: it is no more than I looked for, Psalm, 45
5.
Gods arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies, and no wonder then if
their madness make them run over at mouth. You were pleased to treat it more
ingenuously, and have got this requital, that in your candid reception of it,
you have spoken your own Loyalty. And, give me leave to tell you to your honor;
those acclamations, and those expressions of joy which came from your hearts,
and sat upon your countenances on that day, have given the world such an
occount of you: that you have secured your credit with the Ages to come, and
sweetened the name of your Town, which before was ill-sented all the Nation
over. May this opening your hearts (in some good measure) compound for the
shutting your gates! May your Town, a long while (alas!) torn in pieces by
Pulpit-Granado's, now at length be as Jerusalem, Psa. 122 3 Verse. 6, 7.
a City that is at unity in it self! Let them prosper that love you! Let peace
be within your Walls, and plenteousness within your borders! Psalm. 144.12.
That your sons may grow up as young plants: and that your daughters may be as
the polished corners of the Temple. Verse. 13.
That your Garners may be full, affording all manner of store. Verse. 14.
That there be no decay, no leading into captivity, and no complaining in your
streets. Isa. 23 8.
That your Merchants may be Princes, and your Trafiquers the honorable of the
Earth. Ezekiel. 27.25.
That the Ships may sing of you, and you may be made very glorious in the midst
of the Seas. May your happiness out-measure your hopes, and your welfare exceed
all possible votes of,

Your most obliged servant, E. BOTELER.

In Concionem politissimam, ad Excellentissimum Authorem Dominum Edoardum
Botelerium.
NOn pius e Rostris furor hic denunciat arma,
Clamat and intrepide Sit maledicta Meros.
Non hic Stentorea celebratur voce Farellus,
Alcarona tibi nullus habetur honos.
Christiadum namque arma Preces; fruitur patiendo,
Non vi, non armis sacra serenda fides.
I, fuge ferrata Bellonae casside tecta
Relligio; tantis prodigiosa malis.
At tandem nostris tu gratior advenis oris,
Pax redit auspiciis dum, Botelere, tuis.
Secula dum renovas, depingens aurea rursus
Tempora; foelicis flumine Rhetorices.
Dum Caauciferi sic polles art, loquentem
Ut te Battus amet, nec sua verba crepet.
Scilicet haud melius cithara divinior Orpheus
Advocat in Thebas saxa animata suas;
Quam tua divinae revocat facundia linguae
Errantem; eloquio ferrea corda domas.
Reddis and Angligenis Regem; redduntur and ipsi
Regi, dum clarum dat diadema Deus.
Ex Ariadneo regum nam ducta corona
Sydere, grande Jovis, non leve plebis opus.
Reddita and Hullae sibi tandem, dum Rostra perornas
Quaeque Rebellis erat, Regia rursus erit.
Amicissimo and meritissimo viro accinebat H. CORBET. M.D.

In concionem Die Regio Kingstoniae super Hull Reverendo Viro D. Edoardo
Botelerio Rectore Wintringhamiensi habitam.
ANglica Regales visunt Capitolia pompae
Atque triumpham is vox sonat alma Ducis:
Sceptra tenet, mollitque animos Rex Carolus, iras
Temperat: hunc laetum dicite secla diem.
Ad restim nestrae redeunt cum res; fera tellus
In Chaos antiquum jam ruitura, viget;
Discordes animos concordi pace ligavit
Amnestia boni Regis: and ira fugit.
Nulla manet frontis unbecula, nulla minarum
Vox: hec placato quis miser esse potest?
Nuncius ut Regis, gratus Caducifer alti
Praeco Dei n^bis en Botelerus adest!
Tu facunde tua formasti voce Rebels;
Hinc parere placet, dispicet inde nefas.
Et nos suppliciter prosternimur (ecce) Leoni
Pugna suum sinem (procidit hostis) habet.
Non nostri juris suimus Kingstonia; and inde
A^^^tu Regis, Regia Villa sumus.
Edicto astautes arrectis auribus, atque
Tangamus proni regia sceptra manu
Carolus Ille Deus nobis haec otia fecit;
Rex vivat! vivat! secula laeta ferat.
Ingeniose lyria perge incantare rebels
Artibus ingenuis ingeniose lyrae.
JO. SHORE Regiae Scholae apud Hullenses Hyperdidascalus.

Ad virum spectatissimum Dominum Edoardum Botelerium de Concione ejus in
Inauguratione Serenissimi Regis Caroli secundi Kingstoniae super Hull habita
Mensis Aprilis die 23. 1661.
MAgnum vade liber Monumentum parve diei,
Quem nos Miramur, fecit and ipse Deus:
Cujus tu pompam seclis Memorato futuris,
Vivus, dum pereunt caetera, testis eris.
Rege Coronato Nostri Spectacla triumphi
Te sine tot vacua and signa caduca forent.
Sed tu perpetuas solennia nostra trophaea,
Kingstoniaeque palam gaudia plena refers.
Splendida succincte magnalia Regis adumbras,
Plurima sic cives and facienda doces.
Furca scelus capiat malesanum, resteque dignum,
Quem tua non reducem pagina compta dabit.
Aurea subjectis sis semper regula fidis,
Qua tuto possint vivere, quaque mori.
Tu simul Hulla fidem, quam debes Regia, Regi
Praestare hinc disce, and nominis esto memor.
JOHANNES CATLYN Scholae publ. Hullensis Hypodidascalus.

To my dear Friend Mr EDWARD BOTELER, Upon his Excellent SERMON.
SIR,
YOU have redeemed our Pulpit from the Crimes,
Faction, and Treason, in those worser times,
Had stained it with; and let them clearly see,
The difference betwixt that, and Loyalty.
Enforced by such good Language, and just Right,
The rigid Presbyter's your Proselyte.
Gained by this powerful Sermon, all confess,
They never saw beauteous Truth in richer Dress.
Give us more Sermons then; and we shall own,
Though we Keep Guards; yet you will take tho Town.
F. W. An Officer in the Garrison of Hull.

GODS GOODNESS IN Crowning THE KING.
PSALM. 21.3. For thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou
set a Crown of pure gold on his head.


WE seem this day to be in a condition, much like that of the Disciples, at the
same time posed with, and possessed of, that incredible kind of truth of the
Resurrection: of whom it is said, That they believed not for joy, Luke 24.41.
and wondered. We have lived to see a Day, would have puzzeled an active faith
to look for, and considered in all its circumstances, do not yet, without some
pleasing kind of difficulty, believe it, though we see it.

A matchless day: second to none, unless that which the Scripture says knew no
equal: Josh 10.12, 13, 14.
when Joshuah, commanding in Heaven and Earth both at once, gave check to the
Sun, and put that Giant to a stand in the face of the amazed World.

We may say, this day, as the four Lepers, surprised with joy, at the sudden
vanishing and disappearance of the Syrians Army. 2 King. 7.9.
This day is a day of good tidings, Luke 19.40.
and we should not do well to hold our peace. Should we hold our peace (as our
Lord said to the Pharisees troubled at the triumphing of the Disciples) the
stones would immediately cry out. Stones, and timber and all would cry out upon
us, for our great ingratitude. Some of that Leaven we have still, (it is to be
feared) or worse, some that are scarcely pleased with the pomp and splendour,
the joys and acclamations of this day. Since there have been Kings, there have
been such. At Readiness inauguration, when the people shouted, and said, God save
the King; the men whose hearts God had touched, 1 Samuel 10.24, 26, 27.
went with him; but the children of Belial despised him. 2 Samuel 18.32.
Let such enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise against him to do him
hurt, be as that young man Absalom. But, Go forth, Cant. 3.11.
O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith his
Mother Crowned him in the day of his Espousals, and in the day of the gladness
of his heart. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord: V. 1. hujus Ps.
and in thy salvation how greatly shall he rejoice. Thou have given him his
hearts desire, and have not withheld the request of his lips. For thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness: thou set a Crown of pure
gold upon his head.

Before we come to the Text, Method commands me to disingage it from some
connection. And that must be done by casting a glance (it shall be but a glance)
on the foregoing Psalm. It is spent in prayer for the King, was penned by David,
and by him committed to the Prefect of his Music, as a Form to solicit God
with, for his preservation and deliverance in troublous times, and days of
danger. This is evident to any that reads the Psalm, whose close is (for we
cannot spare time to look further) Save Lord, let the King hear us when we
call. Or as the Seventy two Interpreters; (...). With which agree the Arabic,
Ethiopick, and Apollinarius: and is conceived, by the Learned Doctor Hamond,
Paraphr. on the Ps. p. 118.
of invaluable memory, to be the place whence that petition in our Liturgy with
the (...), were taken, O Lord, save the King, and mercifully hear us when we
call upon thee.

And removing your eye from that Psalm to this, you will find this to stand as a
Taley to the former, containing a Form of praise in return of the mercies there
prayed for. What the Church begged of God in the foregoing, they bless him for
the receipt of in this Psalm. They are none of those Orators whom affliction
only makes so; that never cry but under the lash, nor lift up their hands to
God, but when he lays his hand upon them. Such as the Prophet tells us of,
Lord, Isa. 26.16.
in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy
chastening was upon them. But even now when God has remembered them, they will
not forget him. Now they are past danger, they are not past duty. Now they are
set (as it were) out of Gunshot, they set their hearts, and tune their spirits
to thanksgiving. To beg of God when we are empty, may speak faith in the heart;
but to bless him when we are full, is the breathing of a most excellent spirit.

Our Text then, is part of that (...), or Triumphant Song, sung by the Jews in
acknowledgement of God's goodness to David their King, and in him to the whole
Kingdom, Polity, or Commonwealth of Israel.

See here how Loyalty will concern it self in their Princes mercies. His
preservation is their praise, and they reckon themselves safe in his
deliverance. They seek not his ruin, but rejoice in his happiness. They pursue
not his Death, but celebrate his incolumity. It can be no pleasure, else I
might here recognize the contrary actings of a generation worse than Jews among
us, who have attained such a height of Villainy, that sober Posterity will blush
at it, if they can believe it. The remembrance of it, puts the poor Protestant
Church, at this day, to that sad expostulation of Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.13. 2 Samuel
1.19, 20.
I, whither shall I cause my shame to go? The Beauty of Israel was slain upon
the high place. O, tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of
Askelon: lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of
the uncircumcised triumph. Well fare the memory of this loyal people here, that
thus complicate their King's interest with their own. Faithful Subjects will
look on it as their duty, to pray, and praise God for their Princes welfare:
and think the best way to secure themselves, is to imbarque all their concerns
in the same bottom with him. Such a Subject was Ittai the Gittite: 2 Samuel 15.21.
As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King lives, surely in what place my
Lord the King shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy
servant be. Such Subjects were the men of Judah, who, with their beloved
Josiah, Lam. 4.20. Chapter 5.15, 16.
lost the very breath of their nostrils. The joy of their hearts. And the crown
from their heads. Such the men of Israel in this Text and Psalm, whose concern
and welfare is so convolved, so one with their Kings: that they stand, and
fall: they pray and praise together: they suffer in his distress, and his
flourishing Crown, is their Crown of rejoicing: For thou preventest him with
the blessings of goodness: thou set a Crown of pure gold on his head.

In the Text we have the great and happy Argument of the day. The Conservation,
and Coronation of the King.

1. The King's Conservation: Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness.

2. The King's Coronation: Thou set a Crown of pure gold on his head. Them
two. For I would not mince the Text, but divide it.

We'll begin where the happiness of this day began, at his Conservation, Thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness.

And here are three expressions which set up and extol the mercy, every one
carrying it higher than other.

1. They are blessings.

2. Those blessings are of goodness.

3. That goodness is preventing: Thou preventest him with the blessings of
goodness.

1. They are blessings. In benedictionibus. The word has a peculiar
signification when it referres to God. In its own strictness, it imports no
more than to praise, or wish, or speak well. Men's blessings are with the tongue
only. But Dei been dicere est been facere, says A Lapide. Comm. in Deuteronomy. p.
1012.
Gods blessings come from his heart by his hand: for him to speak, is to give,
and make good a blessing.

Blessings, in God's sense, denote, Reality, Plenty.

1. Lorinus in Loc.
Reality. They are blessings indeed. Non rem fucatam donat. He gives not gaudy
nothings. They are not apparitions, Mat. 4.9.
such as Satan proffered our Savior. They are not umbrages, but substances: not
seeming, but sure mercies. We may say, Number. 22.6.
as Balak to Balaam, I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed; and add what
Isaac said of his son Jacob, Yea, and he shall be blessed. Genesis 27.33.
Such are the Kings blessings in the Text, of the surer sort, blessings in
truth, and in being. All are not blessings that seem so. Men may be full of
enjoyments, and yet empty of blessings. Mal. 2.2. Hos. 13.11
God can even curse blessings. Dedi Regem in furore: I gave them a King in my
wrath. I, and a Parliament in his wrath. And an Army in his wrath. And we may
have peace in wrath, and plenty in wrath, and health, and life, and all in
wrath, and to do us hurt. Judas his money was no blessing. Dives his pomp and
delicacies was no blessing. Achitophel's wisdom was no blessing. Readiness Kingdom
was no blessing. But even the troubles, the sufferings, the dangers of the
King, shall become blessings to him; Prove. 1.32
whilst the prosperity of fools shall destroy them. Reality; that first.

2. Lorinus in Loc. A Lap. Com. in Number. p. 788. Genesis 27.28.
Plenty. God's blessings make God's plenty (as we use to speak) Benedictio
copiosam bonorum largitionem significat. Blessings speak abundance, all things
in one word: The fatness of the Earth, and the dew of Heaven. The treasures of
both worlds are laid up in it. When God said, Genesis 17.16.
I will bless Sarah, it immediately follows, she shall be a Mother of Nations,
Kings of people shall be of her. Blessings is a word with a womb, the fruit of
it stocks the world.

Let us ascend the Heavens, and take such a scantling of them, as mortality is
capable of: and we shall find Blessings to be the sole ornament, and furniture
of those Mansions of peace and immortality. The store of the New Jerusalem is
all blessings: Rev. 22.1, 2.
with this water runs that pure river, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the
Throne of God; this is the fruit of the tree of life. There Is no need of Sun,
or Moon, or Light, or Temple, for Blessing is all these. There, the place is
Blessings: the company Blessings: the employment Blessings. The glorious
Inhabitants thereof hear no other voice, see no other vision, speak no other
language, but, Blessing, honor, glory, Chapter 5.13.
and power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for
ever and ever.

Let us look below, and what takes up these sublunary regions, but a crowd of
blessings as thick as they can stand, ranged into orders, and succession, to
serve man, and speak the glory of the great Creator? Psalm. 104.24.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all; the
Earth is full of thy riches

Blessings speak plenty. That Is a second. But that is not all.

There are some particular blessings of the King, which the people desire here
to commemorate, and make recognition of with thankfulness. Among many, these
three.

Victory. Vivacity. Safety.

1. Victory. Many victories; for David entered the Camp betimes, 1 Samuel 17.33.
was A man of war from his youth; baffled, and slew him that was called so.
He had Victricem dextram, a conquering hand; which did so enrich his repute,
and heighten his name, that he became the very Mirth and Music of Israel; The
women dancing and singing, and ecchoing one to another, Chapter 18.7.
Saul bath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. Particularly the
Victory which this, and the foregoing Psalm refer to, and which is the
blessing celebrated: was that of David's Armies against the forces of the
children of Ammon, with the Auxiliaries of Syria under the command of their
Captain General Shobach. Of which you have a full account, 2 Samuel 10. and of
which more afterward.

2. Vivacity. Length of days. Of which, Verse. 4. He asked life of thee, and
thou gave it him, even length of days for ever and ever. Some victories cost
dear, are bought with the life of a King, or General, and are little less than
the undoing of the Conquerors, they lose by winning. God sometimes takes his
people from the possession of blessings, even when they are entering upon them.
He did so with his servant Moses, whom he cut off in the very confines of
Canaan, Deuteronomy. 34.4
I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over
thither. He did so with the illustrious, hopeful, and most lamented, the late
Duke of GLOUCESTER, that immortal blossom, not to be mentioned without a
preface of sadness: who saw, but enjoyed little of the happiness, of his royal
Brothers, His most excellent Majesty's Restoration. But the King's blessings
are lengthened with his life. He has victory, and life to use and improve it.
1 King. 3.11.
God has given him the life of his enemies, and his own life too. Which are
two of the four most eligible blessings, so accounted by God himself, who best
knows the worth of his own blessings, in his comprobation of Solomon's choice, 1
Kings 3.11. Life is that blessing in Wisdom's right hand, which takes place of
riches and honor. It is the greatest of earthly blessings. Facito debilem pede,
facito debilem manu, vita dum superest been est. Men will hold it upon hard
terms, they are loath to part with it even when the days are come, they have no
pleasure in them. Eccl. 12.1.
All look on it as their All, Kings most of all. They are most commonly at a
height of outward glory, full of blessings: and they desire nothing so much as
life to enjoy them. We read of but one life lengthened in Scripture; and it was
a Kings. 2 King. 20 6. Dan. 2.4. Chapter 3.9.
And the Caldeans looked on it as the best piece of Courtship that they could
use to Nebuchadnezzar, O King, live for ever! There is nothing so much a
blessing to a King on this side the Kingdom of Heaven, as his life.

And have not we cause to remember, to remember with eternal thankfulness, how
God gave our most Dread Sovereign his life, gave it him at Worcester, even then
when a thousand deaths looked him in the face to take it away? When the proud
waters were ready to go over his soul. Psalm. 124.5.
When the insulting enemy said, God has forsaken him: Psalm. 71.11.
persecute him, take him, for there is none to deliver him; even then did his
mighty hand, and stretched-out arm, take Rebellion rampant by the throat, Psalm.
22.20.
and delivered his soul from the sword: his darling (his only one, according to
the Hebrew) from the power of the dog. Psalm. 113 8.
That he might set him with Princes: even with the Princes of his people. Isa.
55.3.
That he might give him those sure mercies of David. His Throne shall be as the
Sun before me. Psalm. 89.36, 37.
It shall be established for ever as the Moon: and as a faithful witness in
Heaven. But of that more anon. Vivacity, that is the second of those blessings
the people here own with thankfulness for their King.

3. Safety. Ver. 5. His glory is great in thy salvation. And in thy salvation
how greatly shall he rejoice, Ver. 1. God charge his providence in a more
peculiar manner with Kings. Touch not mine Anointed. It is a great blessing, to
have our blessings secured to us. Fear of losing, lessens a blessing. How low
ran the rate of earthly blessings among us, during the late times of trouble;
when men knew not how to secure them from the hands of Rapine, nor free them
from those artificial and finer kinds of violence which were in use among us?
It is the blessing of our blessings when they are made safe to us: And we are
then happy, when we are fortified by the strength of God, and made impregnable
by the power of the most high. There Is no security like Omnipotency, and those
Walls must needs be inexpugnable which are made up of his Salvation. That Is the
King's condition here, Lord, thou have sospitated his person, and established
his Throne, and secured his Kingdom. Psalm. 5 11, 12.
His glory is great in thy salvation. And therefore, Let all those that put
their trust in thee, rejoice: let them ever shout for joy, because thou
defendest them: let them also that love thy name, be joyful in thee. For thou,
Lord, wilt bless the righteous, with favor will thou compass him as with a
shield.

Be that enough for the first expression, which here heightens the mercy of the
Kings Conservation, In benedictionibus. With blessings.

2. Those blessings are of goodness. The blessings of goodness. In
benedictionibus dulcedinis, the vulgar Latin renders it. With the blessings of
sweetness and delight. Blessings that will gratify the desires of his soul,
and go down with a relish. Psalm. 34.8.
He shall taste and see how good the Lord is. He shall not only have blessings
of defense, but delight: mercies, not only for necessity, but complacency. God
shall gild his deliverance with the light of his countenance, and sweeten his
enjoyments with the experiences of his love. Thou preventest him with the
sweetest of blessings.

In benedictionibus bonitatis: in St. Hierom's words: with the blessings of
goodness. And that goodness seems to have a double reference, either to the
cause, or kind of blessings.

1. To the cause. Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness. That is,
Thy goodness is the cause, and ground: the fountain, and foundation of all his
blessings. (...), the word which the Seventy two Interpreters use in this
place, speaks benignity, and blessings of goodwill. Lord, all the Kings
blessings are the out-lets of thy goodness. That is, the living and
inexhaustible fountain, from whence do flow all those streams which make glad
the people of God. The spring of Love is in God's own self. His bowels made the
first motion of good to us, Thou art good, Psalm. 119.68.
and do good. The goodness derived to us, is from a primitive goodness in
himself. It is merely and solely from his goodness, that we have any good.
Alas! had we no goods, but what the purchase of our own merits brought in, Chapter
3.17.
we should be but like that conceited, Phanatick Church in the Revelations,
say, (it may be) We are rich, and increased in goods, and have need of nothing:
when indeed we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Tua
sunt omnia, says King David, (when he and his Princes contributed so liberally
to carry on the work of the Temple) All are thine. And the same King in the
Text, has nothing but what Goodness gives him. Goodness is Founder and
Benefactor and all. They are the blessings of goodness so as to their cause.

2. Of goodness, so as to their kind. In benedictionibus bonis: after the
Caldee. With good blessings. Not as if any blessings were other than good: but
because some blessings are better than other. God has choice of blessings.
Some are of the greater, and some of the lesser print. Now the King's blessings
are like himself, of the better sort. Achsah's portion: Judge. 1.15
Irriguum superius, and inferius. The upper springs, as well as the nether
springs. Genesis 44.12.
Joseph's Brethren may have every man his money in his Sack: but the Cup is
found with Benjamin.

The King shall not be put off with coarse and common mercies: but he shall
have, Adipem frumenti, the fattest, or finest of the wheat; and shall be
satisfied with the very honey out of the rock of mercy. Ps. 81.16.
Eum egregiis affecisti beneficiis, is the apposite, and expressive rendering of
Castellio. Thou have bestowed most eminent favors on him. D. H. Par. in Loc.
Musc. in Loc.
Whom the incomparable Doctor Hamond, mentions and follows, paraphrasing it,
All sorts of the most valuable mercies. In benedictionibus optimis, says
another. With the chief and choycest blessings. Such as are mentioned, Ver. 6.
Thou have made him exceeding glad with thy countenance. And that certainly is
the best of blessings, the one thing needful, the life of all the rest. For, as
if the Sun were away, it would be night for all the stars: So, if the face of
God do not shine upon us, all the glimmerings, and scintillations of creatures,
cannot yield us the least spark of true comfort.

That I may leave this then: Let me bespeak you in St. Paul's language. (...).
1 Cor. 12.31.
Having such choice of blessings, covet earnestly the best gifts. Think it not
enough to have a portion in this life. Take not up with the Blanks of the
world, when the prize of spiritual blessings, and the riches of grace are set
before you. Stoop not so low as earth; remember your souls came from Heaven. It
is a bassle put upon those immortal substances, to take up in any thing less
than Divine. You are the best of sublunary Beings, and therefore 'bate nothing
of supercelestial blessings. Never bless your selves in any but the blessings
of goodness.

And that I may both speak and speed; let me commend their goodness to you
under three valuable considerations.

1. They stay the soul: giving it the fill, and making up all the desires of
it. How craving does every thing else leave the soul, but these blessings of
goodness? Job says of gold and silver, Job 3.15.
that Princes filled their houses with it: but who can say they filled their
hearts There is an insufficiency and scantness in all these poor and pitiful
goods of the lower world. Take them in their greatest extents and latitudes,
they are incommensurate, and disproportioned to a capacious, and comprehensive
soul. Even where they are most, and in greatest abundance, Corn. a Lap. Com. in
Isa. 55.
they leave many cantons, and corners unfilled. Ludibrium sunt oculorum, non
pabulum animi. They fool the eyes, but fill not the heart. They make a great
show, but give little satisfaction. No, satisfaction comes from another
quarter. O satisfy us early with thy mercy! Psalm. 90.14.
There is a satisfying sweetness that goes along with divine goodness, and with
that alone. For he satisfies the longing soul, Psalm. 107.9.
and fills the hungry soul with goodness. These blessings of goodness stay
the soul's appetite and longing. That Is the first.

2. They stay with the soul. They have some last in them, they are durable
blessings. They Will stand when the stars shall fall; and when the Heavens shall
shrink up like a scroll, they will hold out measure with eternity. It abates
the worth of all the good things of this life: that they are making haste into
nothing, and shall shortly disappear. Riches (says he that had so much of them
that he was able to buy out all the Kings of his time) make themselves wings,
Prove. 23.5.
and stie away as an Eagle toward Heaven. Whilst we are making them fast with
wax, with bills, and bonds: and think to make them sure with bolts and bars,
and locks and chests; even then are they making wings to sly away. Friends the
nearest of earthly comforts, that will stick by us to the last; even they meet
with their non ultra, and when affection has commanded them to their last
Office, and led them to the grave-side to drop a tear over our dust; then
hither shall thou go, and no further. But the blessings of goodness, go through
the very valley of the shadow of death, Psalm. 23.4.
survive our funerals, step over our graves, and meet us in our glory. They
attend us in this life. Psalm. 23.6.
Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life. And they
expect us in the life to come. Psalm. 31.19.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
They keep us company in both worlds. Thus the blessings of goodness stay with
the soul, which is the second piece of their goodness.

3. They stall not the soul. The sweetness of grace dulls not the appetite
after more; and it is impossible the weight of glory should be a burden. These
blessings of goodness are like Manna to the gatherers of it. Exodus 16.18.
He that gathered much, had nothing over. They both fill, and fit the cravings
of the soul, and they satiate without a surfeit. All our other goods (as we call
them) may sometime, or other, be evil to us. There may be, there have been
cases, in which men have had too much, of what we are apt to think we can never
have enough. Chapter 1.5.
The Mariners, in Jonah, cast their Wares overboard. They are fraught with
their own fears, and lost if they cast not away their gains. Is there any thing
of more value? Light. A great comfort. A beam of the invisible brightness. The
firstborn of the Creation of God. Yet Job has a quarrel to it, Chapter 3.20.
Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery? Is there any thing yet
dearer? Life. The breath of the Creator, and being of creatures. And yet
Rebecca finds her self aggrieved with it, I am weary of my life, Gen 27.46.
because of the daughters of Heth. Thus we nauseate the sweetest of earthly
blessings, and they sour in the very enjoyment, like Tamar in the arms of
Amnon. But were these blessings of goodness ever out of date? were they ever
impaired by any time of evil? was ever condition so sad, as to work them out of
credit? It is impossible to put a case in which they are not good for us, and
the worse we, the better they are, and the more desirable. When it is not in
the united strength, and combined power of creatures to help us, or do us good:
then comes in their Qu, then we look at them as most besteading. When we are
beset with evils, as destitute as our Psalmist, I looked on my right hand,
Psalm. 142.4.
and beheld, but there was no man that would know me, refuge failed me: no man
cared for my soul; then, then especially do we seek out and sue for them as
most seasonable. Then, why is not the light of God's countenance given to him
that is in misery? Then, I am weary of my life for want of the face of God; if
I have not his favor, what good shall my life do me? Earthly blessings are
commonly either so little they keep us in want, or so much they make us
nauseat: but to be so filled, that we neither lack nor loath, is the sole and
singular effect of the blessings of goodness; and nothing can do it, but what is
of kin to Heaven. They complete, but clogg not: they stay, but stall not the
desires of the soul. That Is the third commendation of their goodness.

And be that enough for the second expression, heightening the mercy of the
King's Conservation; His blessings are of the best. In benedictionibus.
Dulcedinis. Bonis. Optimis. With the blessings of goodness.

The third follows. That goodness is preventing: Thou preventest him with the
blessings of goodness.

And here a little variety in reading makes both pleasure, and plenty of
observation.

Quoniam praevenisti. So the vulgar Latin. Forasmuch as thou have prevented him.

Quin praevenis, Am^sius in loc.
I meet with in some Expositors. For thou do prevent.

Quinetiam praevenies. Which our other Translation seems to follow. Yea,
moreover, thou shall prevent him.

Thou have prevented. Psalm. 44 7.
For thou have saved us from our enemies, and have put them to shame that hated
us.

Thou do prevent. Psalm. 46.1.
For God is our refuge and strength: a very present help in trouble.

Thou shall prevent. Psalm. 48.14.
For this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto
death. So that we may conjugate the King's deliverance through the several
Tenses of providence, (as Saint Paul sometimes did his) Who delivered him from
so great a death, 2 Cor. 1.10.
and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver him.

And, these Tenses may teach us, (what we are not over-apt to learn) that the
times of mercy are in God's own power, and at his sole appointing, and he will
not be prescribed by us. We thought long for deliverance, groaning (it is well
if some did not murmr) under our pressures: the arbitrary and lawless
impositions of Pharaoh, and his worse than Egyptian Taskmasters, upon our
Persons, Estates, and (which cut deepest) our Consciences also; and being
impatient of delays, would needs be setting God a time, and limiting the holy
one of Israel, to ways and means for our rescue; but God, who best knows to
time his own mercies, gave check to our presumptions, and has taught us the
Religious manners of holy waiting, and to know that all our times are in his
hand, Psa. 31.15.
and of his setting, and when that is come, he will appear, Psalm. 102.13.
and not before. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to
favor her, yea the set time is come. One time or other, the King shall be
prevented with the blessings of goodness. Here Is Nullum Tempus occurrit Regi;
either, thou have, thou do, or thou shall prevent him with the blessings of
goodness.

Preventest. But how, and what is that? To prevent, is in strictness of
signification, to come before. God is ever beforehand in mercies, with the
King, with his people. Com. in Ps. o. 282. l. 6.
Nemo est quem non praeveniat gratia, quia prior diligit, eligit, vocat,
proeoccupat Deus, says Lorinus. There is none whom grace preventeth not,
because God is first in loving, choosing, calling, and possessing of his
creatures. Romans 11.35.
Who has first given to him (says St. Paul, putting a question which defies
all answers) and it shall be recompensed to him again? And St. Augustine's
blood's up against all that derogate from preventing goodness. Coa. de. ^i^t.
Pela^^ c 6.
Avertat Deus hanc dementiam, ut in donis ejus nos priores faciamus,
posteriorem ipsum. God keep us all from that madness of making our selves
first, and God to come after, in any gift which we receive at his hands. Nay,
it were well if we would come after in any reasonable distance. How has God
run us out of distance with mercy? How has he gone far enough before them in
goodness, that never yet took one step to follow him in thankfulness? Has he
not done us good long since, and waits for the returns of it to this very day?
How may the best of us be ashamed of our arrears? What a way are we behind in
praises and thanksgiving with him who sometime delighted to way-lay our King
with mercy and loving kindness, and yet preventeth him, and us in him, with the
blessings of goodness.

If you would see further into this preventing goodness, take the help of two
particulars only.

Thou preventest him, both in his Petition, and Expectation.

1. Thou preventest him in his Petition. Give him before, and more than he
asks. And this seems to be the import of the words. In the verse before the
Text, we read, Thou have given him his hearts desire, thou have not withholden
the request of his lips. Or, as some elegantly render it, D. H. Par. in Loc.
The espousals of his lips. That is, That which he has set his soul upon, and
his heart and affections are so carried out after, as most desirable. Cant 3.11
(In which sense, Solomon's Coronation-day, is called the day of his espousals,
Concessit Regi quae pitiit: illit etiam ^un conulivit quae non. p^tiit. Ames.
in Loc.
and the day of the gladness of his heart.) And now, says the Text, Thou have
outdone his desires, and thy goodness exceeds all possible requests. Thou do
not only give him Totum quod cupit; but Totum quod non cupit, (as St. Augustine
speaking of the joys of Heaven) All that he desires, but all that he does not
desire. He cannot ask, what thou can, and do give. Thy favors come so
thick upon him, they leave no room for prayer. Thou anticipatest his very
requests in their conceptions. Thy mercies meet him, meet him more than
halfway: nay, they are upon him before his prayer can set out. Thus thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness. This may English that admiring
Eulogie of the Father, Sr. Bern.
who knew not how to speak good enough of the name of that God, Qui non
petentibus solum, sed impaenitentibus: non invocantibus sed provocantibus bonum
largitur. And this runs a parallel with that promise of the Evangelical Prophet:
Isa. 65.24.
And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and whiles
they are yet speaking, I will hear. And this calls for that return of the
Apostle, Unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think, Ephesians 3.20, 211
unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end. Amen.

Thou preventest the King in his Petition, that is one.

2. Lorinus in Loc.
Thou preventest him in his Expectation. Et vo^a vincit and cogitationes. He
exceeds not only prayer, but thoughts. This is (...), indeed, exceeding,
abundantly above all; when goodness is above both votes and hopes: and
imagination it self could not reach our mercies. And certainly, if ever God
prevented the thoughts and expectation of King or people, we are they. Ps.
126.1.
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion: we were like them that
dream; (...). So the Seventy two Interpreters. With whom the vulgar Latin
consents, Sicut consolati: as men comforted. We are dead men revived. Like men
given for gone, and restored. As sick, desperately sick persons, strangely,
unexpectedly recovered from the confines of death, and the grave, to a
pancratick habit, and soundness of body. Which best Interpreters conceive to be
the meaning of that place. Let us look back again (for we can never look too
often, and with admiration enough) on that memorable engagement at WORCESTER.
There the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, 2 Samuel 1.21
the shield of the King, as if he was not anointed with oil. There innumerable
evils compassed him about. There the wrath of the enemy was great; Deuteronomy. 32.27.
and the adversary behaved himself strangely, and said, Our hand is high,
behold we do prevail. The enemy said, Exodus 15.9
I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my lust shall be
satisfied upon him; my hand shall destroy him, I will make his remembrance to
cease from among men. Deuteronomy. 3^.26. Lam. 4 19
His persecutors were swifter than the Eagles of the Heaven: they pursued him
upon the Mountains, they laid wait for him in the Wilderness. And we thought
nothing else, Verse. 20. Exodus 14.13. Psalm. 57.2.
but that The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord had been taken
in their pits. But see the salvation of the Lord which he showed to him that
day. He cried unto God most high: unto God that performs all things for him.
And lo! besides, beyond, above all expectation; Verse. 2. Ps. 124.7.
He sends from Heaven, and saves him from the reproach of him that would
swallow him up. His soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the Fowlers:
the snare is broken, and he is escaped. Preventing goodness secured him against
circumventing wickedness; and he is alive as at this day. Verse. 6.
Blessed be the Lord: who has not given him as a prey to their teeth. Psa. 18
46
The Lord lives, and blessed be his rock: and let the God of his salvation be
exalted. Add to this his constancy in Religion, from which neither (as his own
royal pen gives it us) could ever move him; though he might complain as David,
1 Samuel ^6.19.
They have driven me out this day from abiding in the inheritance of the Lord,
saying, Go serve other Gods. And add to this his return hither in safety upon
the wings of his peoples votes, and prayers: after the government was unhinged,
and the old foundations so far out of course, and the New Modellers so
strengthened in their wickedness, as to dare to attempt the abjuration of his
royal Person, Isa. 58.12.
and Family: To build the old wast places: and to raise up the foundations of
many generations: and be called, The Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of
paths to dwell in. And we must needs confess, that God has eminently prevented
all expectations with the blessings of goodness.

Let us learn then, whether we owe, and to whom to ascribe, the peace, the
plenty, the liberty, the life, the joy of this Day! even to preventing goodness
all. Had it not been for that, neither we, nor possibly this place, especially
in this decorum, and luster, had been standing here this day. This was our
wings, and feathers: our rock, and refuge; our walls, and bullwarks; our
shield, and buckler: our strength, and stay: our light, and our salvation: This
is that Tower of David builded for an Armory, Cant. 4.4.
whereon there hang a thousand Bucklers, all shields of mighty men. This is
every thing to the King, and to us in him, Thou preventest him with the
blessings of goodness.

That Zion's stones have been pitied, Ps. 102.14
and any have favored the dust thereof: so that she did not sink down into
eternal, and irrecoverable ruins.

That the beauteous Church of England, scratched and torn by her own undutiful
sons; is not sitting solitary, like that Widow in the Lamentations, bemoaning
her miseries, and begging pity of Passengers, Lam. 1.12
Is it nothing to you, all you that pass by? behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger!

That we are not filled with the noise of the Warrior, Isa. 9 5.
and Garments rolled in blood. Ps. 144.14
That we have no leading into captivity, no complaining in our streets; but our
eyes see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken
down.

That the plots, and conspiracies of unreasonable men, (if it be not
unreasonable to call them men) are discovered, their purposes disappointed, and
their arm broken.

That we are not filled with bitterness, Lam. 3 15.
and made drunk with wormwood. Fed with the bread of Affliction, Isa. 30.20.
and the water of Affliction, and our Teachers removed into corners.

That we are not compassed with gall and travel; Lam. 3.5, 7.
hedged about, and our chain made heavy.

That our necks are not under persecution, Chapter 5.5, 8.
and we laboring without rest; Servants ruling over us, whiles there is none
to deliver us out of their hands.

In short. That we are not incomparably wretched: as miserable, as war and
wickedness: as faction, and folly: as error, and ambition: as malice, and
madness: can make us, is solely from this preventing of the Text, Thou
preventest him with the blessings of goodness.

And therefore, (that I may close this) How much is it our concern, to address
often, and earnestly to Heaven: to importune the God of all grace, that he will
continue to prevent the King, and his liege people, with the blessings of
goodness still. 1 Samuel 2.10.
That his Adversaries may be broken in pieces, and that he will thunder out of
Heaven upon them. That he will give strength to the King, and exalt the horn of
his anointed; that so the King may yet joy in his strength, Psalm 84.9^
and greatly rejoice in his salvation. Behold, O God our shield, and look upon
the face of thine anointed. The children of Edom are waiting for another day of
Jerusalem: and as smooth as they look, and speak, with Jael's butter and milk,
Judge. 4.18.
and a Turn in my Lord, turn in to us, and fear not; it is to be feared, they
have a nail for those temples, which God of his preventing goodness keep out of
their hands. Let my Lord the King live, and this fear be to his enemies.

And so I shall have done with the first general part of the Text, The
Conservation of the King. Thou preventest him with the blessings of goodness.

Come we now to the Second: that which we are come with this great, and unusual
pomp, to solemnize, The Coronation of the King. Thou set a crown of pure
gold on his head.

And here, that we may make this second part match, and run a parallel with the
first: we shall take notice of three expressions, which heighten the mercy of
his Coronation, as those other did of his Conservation.

1. The King's head crowned.

2. The crown upon that head, gold, pure gold.

3. The hand of God setting that crown of gold upon that head. Thou set a
crown of pure gold on his head.

1. Upon his head. Not upon any one member, no nor upon any five members
neither, no nor yet upon the whole body. For by the undoubted fundamental Laws
of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of the Realm, nor the Commons, nor both
together in Parliament: nor the people collectively, or representatively, nor
any other persons whatsoever, ever had, has, or ought to have any coercive
power over the persons of the Kings of this Realm. Dated J^^. 25. 1660.
As the Royal pen informs us in a late Proclamation, and has enacted it also
at the request of the late Parliament: that our heels may no more stand where
our head should be.

Upon his head, as fittest for Vision, Provision.

1. The head is fittest for Vision. Eccles 2.14.
A wise man's eyes are in his head. And well had it been for us if ours had
been believed to be there when time was; probably we had not seen the miseries,
and direful effects of the late Wars. We were so sagacious, and
quick-sighted, we could see things before they were in their causes: our
members would needs see more than our head, and so we ran blind-folded into
confusion. The eyes of a people are in their King as in their head: and they
that are without him (witness our late selves) are but like Sampson without his
eyes, fit for nothing but to make the Philistines sport. Judge. 16.25.
It is a sign their brains are scarce in their heads, that think their eyes
would do well any where else. Upon his head for Vision.

2. Upon his head for Provision. The head is Providore, and Purveyor for the
whole body. The welfare of the body depends mostly upon the Wisdom, and
Council, upon the dictates and directions of the head. The body supports the
head by its strength, and the head supplies the body by its providence. A
Church, or State without this head, is like an Orphan, or fatherless Infants.
So that promise intimates, Erunt Reges nutricij hij. And Kings shall be thy
Nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23.
and their Queens thy Nursing Mothers. Oeconomi tui (as some render it) making
the Church and Commonwealth the Family of the Prince, upon whom lies the whole
care, and governance of it, to order it, and provide for it. Upon his head as
fittest for provision. That Is a second.

Upon his head. This being (...), and (...): both for Order, and for honor's
sake. Or if you please,

Upon his head, Imports, The height of his place, and The weight of his
employment.

1. The height of his place. Head denotes chiefdom, and pre-eminence. The
chief of their Tribes, and Families, which the Vulgar Latin all along calls,
Principes; our Translation renders, Heads. Princes are Heads. Mic. 3.1.
Hear O Heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of Israel. It may be said
of Saul in his place, as well as his person, that he is, Altior universo populo
ab humero, and sursum. Higher by the head than all the people. Rex omnibus
major, Deo solo minor: was good divinity in Tertullian's days: (though the
iniquity of ours had almost dashed it out of countenance with that ridiculous
Maxim of our new Statists, Confuted by Bodin^s de Repub. l. 1. cap. 8.
Major singulis, minor universis.) The King is above all, and under God only.
He is Homo Deo secundus, in the same Father's phrase. A man second to God. Nay,
be it spoken with reverence! He is a God of the second sort. 1 Timothy 1.17. Psalm.
82.6.
Deus est immortalis Rex, Rex mortalis Deus. God is an immortal King, and the
King is a mortal God. This is Scripture language, and I hope we may speak it
without suspicion of flattery. The height of the King's place, that is the first
import of his head.

2. The weight of his employment. The trouble of Government lies most in the
head. Others may have their hands, but the King commonly has his head, full.
This made Antigonus say to his son, Regnum nostrumest servitus splendida. A
Kingdom is but a glorious servitude. A finer kind of trouble. No wonder if Saul
hid himself among the stuff; 1 Samuel 10.2^.
and chose rather to obscure his head among the baggage, than offer it to the
Crown of Israel: if he foresaw the burden of business, and encumbrance, which
he was like to put on with it. Indeed could that Bellua multorum capitum, be
tamed, and all Wood made Mercury; Would the Rout be refined, and ingenuity be
found among the Rabble; Were there hopes to meet with a Nation as tractable, as
David found his countrymen of Judah: Whose hearts he bowed, 2 Samuel 19.14.
even as the heart of one man. Then, Facile est imperium in bones: Pla^t.
as the Comedian. Good men are easily governed. But the depravity of nature,
the pride, avarice, and ambition of men, has made them so mutinous, and
unruly: that government is become a weight, big enough for head, and shoulders
and all. Isa. 9.6.
Therefore that Principatus super humerum, in the Prophet: The Government shall
be upon his shoulder: does not only allude to the Scepter, and Sword, and other
symbols of Authority, Praeto^ibus a^te ibant ^^c^ores cum f^scibas. Cic.
carried upon the shoulder, (as the Roman Fasces were) before the Magistrate;
but speaks government it self to be a weight requiring more than an ordinary
strength to undergo it. A lap. in Isa. p. 156.
Therefore the learned in the Hebrew observe, that the word Nasi, signifies
both Prince, and Bearer. A Prince is Bajulus reipublicae, The supporter of his
people. So Moses made account, Deuteronomy 1.12. 2 King 13.14.
when he complained that, He could not bear them alone. He is Currus and
Auriga, the Chariot and Horseman to his people, whom he carries about with him
continually. He stands under such a weight, that he is the very Atlas of the
lower world. In short. The cares of Princes sit closer to their heads than
their Crowns, and they that wear them both, never want weight. Matters of
import, and weight of employment, that also is signified by the head.

And now I should have done with this particular: but finding the words also
eminently applied to the Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 1.18.
who is head of the body, the Church; I could not pass them over, without
taking notice, that it is no such impropriety, to say two heads, as our
Refusers of the Oath of Supremacy would insinuate. For Subordinata non pugnant.
To make the King head, is not to behead Christ Christ is head, and the King is
subordinate head too. Two heads, and yet no Monstrosity.

Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. Toparchs, and under-Kings are not
inconsistent with an Empire: no more are Terrestrial Kingdoms, and Headships
with the paramount power of the Lord of Glory. It is ridiculous to think, more
to object, that the King would invade the Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ, by
being head of the Church in the same height, and latitude with him: or that
Christ should not look upon it as equal robbery for any to call himself King,
as head in his Church; which yet these Recusants are willing to allow. If men
will be sober, they cannot but see the King lays claim to nothing which Christ
has reserved to himself as his peculiar. He stands not Rival with him for
command. He pleads not Peerage with God. He says not, says not in his heart,
Isa. 14.13, 14.
I will exalt my Throne above the stars of God. I will ascend above the
heights of the clouds; Ero similis altissimo. I will be like the most high.
That was Lucifer's Language: and one as proud as Lucifer, takes to it, or else
he has wrong done him, Dominus Deus noster Papa. Our Lord God the Pope. I wish
they would not give the Pope that which they deny the King. Let them but
remember the style of some aspiring Emperors, and the King's title will appear
modest enough. Numen nostrum. Nostra Aeternitas. And what Dio the Historian
tells us of some Marbles, and Statua's that they were inscribed with Devoti
Numini. Titles, which any thing but Marbles would blush at. But a Sub-supremacy
(as I may call it) to be Supreme under Christ, suits both with the reason of a
man, and the sobriety of a Christian. There can be no just pretense to deny the
King his Supremacy, whilst in all humility he confesses Christ's. The truth
is, the cavil is so idle, and impertinent, that those which make it, give cause
enough to suspect, that as they now grudge him his head, so they would not
stick to take off his head, had they power and opportunity in their hands.

If wise, and good men be not mistaken, This is that submission Saint Peter
calls for, 2 Pet. 2.13
(...), To the King as Supreme. Yes, say these worst sort of Recusants again,
To the King as Supreme in Temporals. I grant that the exposition of Pope
Innocent the third; P. 226 l A. Col. 1.
for so Lorinus the Jesuit tells us in his Comment upon St. Peter. And, I
wish, they be not as little friends to the Protestant Churches as he, that
follow that Exposition. Sit Petrus in clave: is a phrase used at the Coronation
of the Kings of this Realm. And if there be any Scholars among the dissenters,
let them construe me that.

Mr. Bisield, a person looked on as no great admirer of conformity, urges this
place to evince the King's Supremacy, and the Oath to it, as any may see that
will consult his Commentary upon it. I shall only add. Let Protestants remember
it was an Apostle; and the Pontificians consider it was Saint Peter that
asserted the King's Supremacy: and then methinks neither should have much to
say, why he should not be owned as head, upon whose head the Crown is now to be
set. Which is the next particular; both the day, and the time, and the Text,
lead us to it.

The Crown upon the Kings head is gold, pure gold. A Crown of pure gold on his
head.

A Crown. But what Crown? there is the question; and it is not Tanti, not worth
the while to resolve it. Some conceive the Text to intend a particular Crown.
Among these, Trevetus, Vatablus, and Genebrard, determine it, the Crown of the
King of Ammon taken at Rabbah: of which mention is made, 2 Samuel 12.30. But
whether the King's own Crown, or the Crown of Melchom, alias Molech, the
celebrated Idol of that people; has been disputed more than enough. Not of the
King, says one party; because of the excessive weight of it, 2 Samuel 12.30.
Sixty pound weight. Iu^^us.
a Talent of gold, a Talent being one hundred, twenty, and five pounds; and so
the Crown was insupportable either by the head of David, or of the King of
Ammon himself, though of a larger breed. Nec sufferre queat majoris pondera
Gemmae. Iuven. Sat. 1.
To evade which. Not usually worn, but a Crown Estate. Willet. Ha^m. in 2 Samuel
p. 78.
It was supported by the hands of others, says Lyranus. It was contrived to be
pendent, so Abulensis, from the Hebrews. Or, which is the fancy of Bruno the
Carthusian: Conslavit, and in aliam redegit. It was melted, and reduced to a
less, and more suitable sise. Nor was it the Idol's crown, says the other
party. Both upon a religious account, because it was inconvertible to David's
use; and upon a civil score, because it was below him to wear the reversions of
an Idol, who was Solo Deo vero minor, majorque falsis, below the true God only,
Abulensis. Lyranus. Hugo Cardinalis. Carthusianus.
better and greater than all factitious, fictitious ones. The Learned have
troubled themselves more than needs to salve all these difficulties. It would
be besides our business, to engage with any of them in renewing a quarrel about
a Crown long since laid in the dust. There are some also (whom we shall but
mention) for another Crown: 2 Samuel 1.10.
the Crown of Israel, which Saul wore, and the young Amalckite took from his
head, as also the bracelet from his arm, and brought them to David, and lost
his life for his pains.

Whatsoever Crown it was, it was Insigne Regni, in the Orator's expression, An
Ensign of Sovereignty, and one of the chief among the Regalia. Such a Crown it
was, that Interpreters strive, as if they could not embelish, and set it out
with terms significative enough. Posuisti in capite ejus Coronam de lapide
pretioso. Thou set a Crown of precious stones on his head: so the Vulgar
Latin. And Bruno the Carthusian, from Josephus, tells us, Cicero. In Psalm.
it was Corona cum Sardonyche in medio gemmarum. A Crown that had a Sardonyx
set in it, in the midst of other Jewels. The Sardonyx signifies Zeal for the
Faith, and a readiness to die for it. A stone that would stand well in the
Diadem of this Realm, as well becoming him who is Defender of the Faith: and
renewing the precious memory of that Royal Martyr, K. Charles 1.
who sealed his love to it with his blood, Rev. 12.11.
and loved not his life unto the death. I am not so much a Lapidary, as to give
you in all these Crown-Jewels, and their Tropological imports. I shall only
tell you the Topaz was one; that Lapis auri aemulus so called for the golden
color of it: Corn. ^ap. Com. n^^od p. 554. l D.
signifying, Animum caelestem and ad omnia infractum, a gallant soul, one that
dares invite danger, and shrinks in at no apprehensions of fear. And to this
also the Head to be Crowned this day has a good title, as his actions both at
home, and abroad can witness. But time is more precious than these stones, and
therefore I shall spend no more of it upon them. Enough of that reading. A
Crown of precious stones on his head.

Saint Hierom reads it, Ex obryzo, of tried gold. Auri purgatissimi. Optimi.
Those are other readings speaking the same sense of the Text; and therefore I
shall keep to that. A Crown of pure gold.

I shall not digress into a discourse of the several acceptations of the word
Crown, in Scripture.

Sometimes speaking excellence: Prev. 12.4
A virtuous woman is the Crown of her husband. Sometimes, abundance: Ps. 65.11.
Thou crownest the year with thy goodness: and thy clouds drop fatness.
Sometimes, recompense: Rev. 3.11.
Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. I shall make
quicker work, if I only observe to you, That, Crown speaks Majesty. Gold,
perpetuity. Pure, simplicity.

1. Crown, There Is Majesty. Live.
The Historian calls this Insigne Regium, this especially; it is the first,
highest, greatest, and most inseparable. 2 King. 11.12. Esth. ^.17
When Joash was made King, Jehoiada put the Crown upon him, And when Esther was
made Queen, the Crown of the Kingdom was set upon her head. In familiar
discourse Crown speaks as much as Kingdom. A Crown is so expressive of Majesty,
that it gives us in some, and those the sublimest apprehensions of the life to
come, and all those glorious retributions of the Saints. It was the highest
notion under which St. Paul could conceive of the bliss of Heaven. Henceforth
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day. A Crown, There Is Majesty.

2. Gold. There Is perpetuity. Let the Isthmian Gamesters wear their Garlands,
whose names were as fading as their flowers; Gold that immortal metal is only
fit for his head, who is immortal; and that Rex nunquam moritur, makes the King
so. And so does that, In pactum salis, 2 Chronicles. 13.5.
of Abijah. The Lord has given the Kingdom over Israel to David for ever, even
to him and to his sons, by a Covenant of Salt. And so does that promise made to
David in faithfulness, Ps. 89.29.
His seed will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven. Nulla te terris rapiet vetustas, Senec.

Tu comes Phoebo, comes ibis astris.
Gold, there is perpetuity. I willingly omit some other designations of Gold.
Prudence, it notes wisdom, as Lead does hebetude and folly. Opulence, it is the
riches of a people, Genesis 2.11.
Havilah is commended because there is gold. Supremacy, it is the first of
Metals; and the King first of men. Tranquillity, Times of peace, before War
and Bloodshed broke into the world, are by the Poets called the Golden Age.

Mollia securae peragebant otia gentes. Ovid.


3. Pure. There Is simplicity. It speaks the King simple in opposition to
mixture.

1. In his rule. It is not a Miscellany an every-thing-nothing, a mingled, a
Mungrel Government. It is not sophisticated with any Plebeian ingredients, not
an Aristocratical composition, much less an Anarchical confusion: but it is the
pure gold of Monarchy.

2. In his Title. Which is clear, Like him who would devise the pedigree of O.
Williams alias Cromwell from Ow^
and fair; he needs no mercenary pen to lead him a new way into antiquity. He
does not cut out his way to it with the sword, swim to it through a Sea of
innocent blood, break into it through repealed Oaths, and Obligations. He does
not tread down Law and Right, stride over honor and honesty, prostitute
conscience and whatever the civilized world calls Sacred. Briefly. He does not
weave a Cloak of Religion to steal a Crown withal: but his right is indubitate,
his Title clear; it is a Crown of pure gold.

This Crown of pure gold, commends the King's dignity: commands our duty.

1. Commends the King's dignity. Not as if he needed any mutuatitious worth, or
had little but what he was beholden to his Crown for: I think enemies
themselves (if so gracious a Prince can have any) must needs say that he is
even with his Crown, and brings as much luster to his Crown, as his Crown to
him: but because the Crown upon the right head, though he should be otherwise
unworthy, makes a Dignity. Which made it a pardonable and no unhandsome piece
of Zeal in a noble person of this Nation: Thomas Earl of Surrey to Hen 7.
that if the Crown were set upon a stake, he would fight for it. It is a truth,
that Nero as King is exalted as much above the common rate of men, and has as
much right to obedience from his Subjects, as Augustus: Domitian, as Vespasian:
Julian as Constantine. And if they that dote so upon Mr. Calvin's Discipline,
will but allow of his Doctrine, he tells us, Calv. in To. 13.
Etiamsi non raro degenerant, qui Principatum tenent, nihilominus deferenda est
eis obedientia, quae Principibus debetur. Though Princes should not be good
men, yet they have the right of good Princes, to the subjection of their
people. Nulla ergo Tyrannis esse potest, Ibidem.
(says the same Calvin, and I instance in it on purpose because he says so)
quae non aliqua ex part subsidio sit ad tuendam hominum societatem. No Tyranny
can be, which may not in some measure tend to advance the Wealpublick. Pet.
Mart. in To. 13.
And Peter Martyr speaking of Nero, says that, Cum ipse imperio suo opprimeret
Orbem terrarum, tamenjus dicebatur. Tyranny then in more sober times, was never
an exemption from obedience. Nay, the Canonists go further. Excommunicatio
Domini non liberat vassalum a Sacramento. Ministers may excommunicate Princes.
Buchanan. de jur. Reg. p. 70.
The Excommunication of a King, (if such could be, and it is too well known
whose fingers itch to have such a power in their hands) does not free a Subject
from his Oath, and obedience. It matters not what Sanders a ranting Romanist,
asserts: An heretical King is no King. Nor do we value that venomous, Quacunque
art, of Mariana: it is lawful, says he, but it is but he that says it, by
any artifice, trick, or cunning to remove Kings that stand in the way. Compare
Knox and Buchan. with Card. Bell. Emon. Sa. Petra Sancta and other Jesuits.
And I know not whether our Schismatiques come in as seconds, or do not rather
outdo all in their damnable positions; witness Muncer that notorious, and
incomparable Impostor: who pretended to a conference with God, and a Commission
from him, to kill Kings, destroy the wicked, (such as his sense makes so) and
begin a new world of Saints. Ephesians. 4.20.
But we have not so learned Christ. An unchristian'd Greek was better taught
than so, who calls a King, (...): the lively image of God, the Preserver of all
things. And Tertullian says so much for the very Gentiles, Caesarem majori
formidine observatum a Gentilibus, quam ipsum de Olympo Jovem. They looked on
Caesar with greater reverence than Jupiter. To shorten this. Our histories tell
us, that Eleutherius wrote to King Lucius, (by whose means the heavenly light
and brightness of Christianity first shone upon this Island, Camd. Brit p. 67.
as says our Antiquary) Vos estis Dei Vicarius You are God's Vicegerent in
your Kingdom. Kings are all so. They are his Representatives here below* He
communicates his own name and style to them: that men may know they are
anointed with the Oil of gladness above their fellows, and learn to look on
Majesty as a very transcript of Divinity. This Crown of pure gold, commends the
King's Dignity. That Is first.

2. It commands the Subjects Duty. The Crown lays claim to our obedience. And
though the Donatists of old, (whom, a peevish, Can, in his V^trom the Temple,
that Vox and praeterea nihil.
and impertinent Trifle of the late mad world, was not ashamed to call honest)
and our Donatists under new names, would fain find out some subterfuges, and
plead an exemption: yet they run full upon the mouth of that Canon of the
Apostle, (...), Romans 13.1
Let every soul be subject: E^^ad E^^sc. Senond.
Every soul without exception. Qui tentat excipere tentat decipere. So Saint
Bernard concludes. He that would except, would deceive. He, that with the sons
of Belial, dares ask, 1 Samuel 10.
What is Saul that he should reign over us? will not stick, in time, Job 21.15.
to question with the Atheist in Job, What is the Almighty that we should serve
him? Our own late experiences evince this abundantly, and are a sad proof of
it. These are those (...), The blots and blemishes, the Scab and scandal to all
Religion. Such unruly principles, and practices have made Christianity suffer,
opening the mouths of Julian, and Porphyrie, and such like scoffers, to declaim
against it, as an enemy to all order and government. It was the commendation of
the Christians, good subjects to Antonine no very good Emperor, that they did
Inservire laeti, they did him cheerful service; how much more then shall the
best of Kings command ready obedience, even from the worst of Subjects?

I hope I may save the labor of an exhortation in this place, K. Charles the
first before the Gates of Hull on St. George's day. 1642.
if I do but call to your remembrance, who it was which this day nineteen years
stood before your gates. Much good may the meditation do you; thoughts of it
had need make you more than penitents. Nor will I draw Arguments of obedience
to you from the King, or his Crown: the name of your Town dedicates you to him,
Kingston super Hull.
and the very Arms of your Corporation are Monitors of your loyalty: where,
lest one should not serve, you have no less than three Crowns to put you in
mind of your duty. The Crown commands duty.

And be that enough for the second particular, in this latter general part of
the Text. The Crown on the King's head of pure gold.

Come we now to the third and last. The hand of God setting that Crown of pure
gold, upon the head of the King. Thou set a Crown of pure gold on his head.

Thou. Dan. 5.21.
And who could do it but he? He is the most high, and rules in the kingdom of
men, Chapter 2.37
and appoints over it whomsoever he will. The God of Heaven has given thee a
kingdom, power, and strength, and glory: says Daniel, who was Privy-Counsellor
to two Monarchies, and Principal Secretary to four Kings: and so had the
advantage to observe their successions, alterations, and disposals. God is the
great Moderator of Heaven and Earth: the Original of Dominion is in him: he is
the only arbitrary, and indisputable disposer of all the Diadems of the world.
He sets on the Crown, By me Kings reign, Prove. 8.15. Psalm. 89.39.
and Princes decree justice. He takes off the Crown. Thou have profaned his
Crown by casting it to the ground.

Thou set it on: by thy Commissive, and Ordinative; he sets it not on
himself, by thy permissive Will. He takes it fairly from thy hand: does not
seize it by any hand of craft, or cruelty. It is the happiness of a people when
their King has a Crown of God's setting on: Usurpers are their grievance, make
them complain as the Romans of Pompey the great. Miseria nostra Magnus est.

Thou set it on. And who has such cause to say so as we? Men and Brethren,
let me speak freely unto you; if ever Crown was set on by the immediate hand of
God, it is that upon the King's head this day. Isa. 52.10.
Never did the Lord so make bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the Nation:
never did this end of the earth see such salvation of our God. I appeal to his
most inveterate Oppugners, who were wont to argue the righteousness of their
cause from the Topic of their success, and victories; Deuteronomy. 32.31. Chapter 4.32.
whether their Rock be as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.
For ask now of the days that are past, which were before us, since the day
that God created man upon the earth, and ask from one side of Heaven unto the
other, whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is, or has
been heard like i^? When they were as numerous, and as haughty as Senacherib,
vaunting that they were enough with the soles of their feet to dry up all the
rivers of besieged places: Isa 38.24, 25.
and said, By the multitude of my Chariots am I come up, to the height of the
Mountain, to the sides of Lebanon: and I will enter into the height of his
border, and the forest of his Carmel; then did God but hiss for the fly (as
it is in the Prophet) call up from Scotland a small, Isa. 7.18.
inconsiderable, and despised number, and with them wrought this great
Salvation. Exodus 15.3, 6.
The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is his name. Thy right hand, O Lord, is
become glorious in power; thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the
enemy. And though there were several loyal attempts made before, and some of
them probable enough, to effect deliverance for us: yet did the all-wise God
suffer them to be all broken, and frustrated; happily, that he might fool
earthly wisdom, and by staining the beauty of all creature-excellency, take the
whole glory of our deliverance to himself, that he might give us cause with
admiration, and amazement, to say, Thon set a Crown of pure gold on his
head.

A word of Inference, and I have done.

1. If God set the Crown on the King's head: then what wretched impudence is it
in any, to dare to think, much more to attempt, the taking it off? It is the
very acting of that fancy of the Poets, of the Giants fighting against Heaven.
Nothing but Hell is ill enough to own such an audacious presumption, a most
detestable, and monstrous impiety.

2. If God set the Crown on the King's head: let us set our hearts on the King.
As Samuel said to Saul: 1 Samuel 9.20.
On whom is all the desire of Israel? is it not on thee, and on all thy fathers
house? Prize him as the loyal men of Judah did their King David: Thou art worth
ten thousand of us. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar 's. Geneva Bibles
wrong the King.
Give, did I say? it is not so proper, (though some like that Translation
better,) (...), is the word, render, pay, it is his due. Romans 13.7.
Render him his due Tribute (as the Apostle calls it) the Tribute of our
persons, our purses, our tongues, our hands, our hearts, Make honorable
mention of him when we speak of him. Bern.
I, and we must Sentire sublimiter too, saves the Father, think highly of him.
Do not take up any unworthy reports, nor entertain any unhansome suspicion of
him. Do but remember how dear we have paid for our jealousies, and I Will say no
more of that.

To draw to a conclusion. Nothing now remains, but Prayers, and Praises.

1. Prayers, to him that sets the Crown of pure gold on the King's head,
that he will please there to fix, Psalm. 89.20, 21, 22.
and keep it. That as he has found David his servant, and anointed him with
his holy oil: so he will establish his hand with him, and let his arm
strengthen him: that the enemy may not exact upon him, nor the son of
wickedness hurt him. That God, who watched over him, Psalm. 105.13, 15.
and charged his providence with him, when he went from one Nation to another,
from one Kingdom to another people, Psas. 140.12.
and suffered no man to touch his Anointed: will still deliver him from the
evil man, and preserve him from the violent man, which imagine mischief in
their heart, Psalm. 18.47, 48.
and continually are gathering together for War. That he will subdue the people
under him, and lift him up above those that rise up against him. V. 6.7. hujus
Ps.
That he will make him exceeding glad with his countenance, and the King
trusting in God, through the mercy of the most high, Psalm. 7^.9. Psalm. 132.18.
he may not miscarry. That his enemies may lick the dust, and be clothed with
shame: but upon himself his Crown may flourish. And blessed be God our prayers
for him may come out of our Closets again, and be put up in the Congregation.
It is sad to think how he was persecuted out of the very prayers of his people.
And these Prodigious Reformers would needs have our duty, to be our crime. A
duty we owe to all, to Kings most of all; and was never forbidden by any, but
where They, and Satan had command. How well their interdiction to pray for the
King can consist with that Apostolical injunction, 1 Timothy 2 1.
to pray for Kings, and for all that are in authority, let the world judge,
unless these New Modellers can pretend to a power of regulating the Rule it
self, and to deal with the Royal Law, as they sometime did with the Laws of the
Kingdom. But we shall leave them to him who has (...), the sharp Sword with
two edges, to avenge the affronts, and injuries done to his own truth.

2. Praises. Let us end with them. Praise is the great duty of this day. Psalm.
44 8.
In God let us boast all the day long, and praise his name for ever. Exodus
15.1, 2, 7.
Sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously. The Lord is our strength
and song, and he is become our salvation. In the greatness of thine excellency
thou have overthrown them that rose up against thee. Psalm. 148.13.
And therefore, Let us praise the name of the Lord: for his name alone is
excellent, his glory is above the Earth, Psalm. 150.1.
and Heaven. Praise God in his Sanctuary; praise him in the firmament of his
power.

You of the Magistracy; Praise him in the heighths; Verse. 2.
praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

You of the Soldiery; Psalm. 149.6.
Let the high praises of God be in your mouths, and a two-edged sword in your
hands.

You of the Commonalty; Psalm. 29 1. 2, 9.
Give unto the Lord glory and strength: give unto the Lord the glory due unto
his Name: in his Temple let every man speak of his honor; for the Lord takes
pleasure in his people, Psalm. 149.4. Psalm. 29.11. Psalm. 64.9.
he will beautify the meek with salvation: The Lord will give strength unto
his people: the Lord will bless his people with peace. Let all men fear, and
declare the work of God: and wisely consider of his doings.

Let us all praise him, till Earth emulates Heaven where they are all praises.
Let them shout for joy, and be glad, Psalm. 35.27.
that favor our Righteous Cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord
be magnified, which takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants. Because
thou have been our help; Psalm. 63.4.7.
therefore in the shadow of thy wings will we rejoice. Thus will we bless thee
while we live, and lift up our hands in thy Name. And when men's tongues cannot
reach it, let us borrow of Angels, Luke 2.13.14.
and join with the heavenly Host, praising God and saying, Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

And that our praises may come in a good place, and our thankfulness follow our
mercies nearer than ordinary: Let them be Mental, and Monumental.

1. Mental. Keep in mind the works of God. Let not that complaint of Nehemiah
come in against us. Neh. 9.16, 17.
That we dealt proudly, and hardened our necks, and hearkened not to his
commandments. And refused to obey, neither were mindful of the wonders that he
did among us. Let not that of the Psalmist be charged upon us, That we sang his
praise, Psalm. 106.12, 13, 21.
and soon forgot his works. That we forgot God our Savior who had done great
things for us. To remember mercies is but a cheap piece of thankfulness.

2. Monumental. Erect Trophies, and set up Memorials of our deliverance. Psalm.
45.4, 5, 6, 7.
Let one generation praise his works to another, and declare his mighty acts.
Let them speak of the glorious honor of his Majesty, and of his wondrous
works. Let men speak of the might of his terrible acts: and declare his
greatness. Let them abundantly utter the memory of his great goodness, and sing
of his righteousness. Propagate our deliverance to infinite posterity. Hide it
not from our children, Psalm. 78.4.
and let them show the generations to come the praises of the Lord: and his
strength, and his wonderful works that he has done. Number. 23.23.
According to this time it shall he said of Jacob, and of Israel, what has God
wrought? Exodus 12.14, 17.
Let this day be repeated annually: it is a day to be unto us for a memorial:
to keep it a feast unto the Lord throughout our generations: to observe it in
our generations by an Ordinance for ever. Psalm. 102.18.
Let it be written for the generations to come: that the people which shall be
created, may praise the Lord: Psalm. 111.4.
That merciful and gracious Lord, who has so done his mavelous works, that
they ought to be had in remembrance. Psalm. 136.23.
Who remembered us in our low estate: brought back his banished: and has all
his life prevented him with the blessings of goodness, and this day set a Crown
of pure gold on his head.

Now unto the King eternal, 1 Timothy 1.17.
immortal, invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

