A NEW TREATISE, PROVING A Multiplicity OF WORLDS.

That the Planets are Regions Inhabited, and the Earth a Star, and that it is
out of the Center of the World in the third Heaven, and turns round before the
Sun which is fixed. And other most Rare and Curious Things.

By PETER BORELL, Counselor and Physician to the King of France.

London, Printed by John Streater* 1658.

TO The Virtuous, AND Most Renowned Gentleman, Mr. Frederick Clodius, Doctor in
Physic, His truly honored Friend.
Worthy SIR,
THree considerations have induced me to offer these rude and unpolished lines
to your Patronage and favorable acceptance. The first is, the Learning and
fame of the Author of this Treatise, who carries the same Title as Your Self.
The second is, the worthiness and great esteem and acuity of spirit of that
Person of Honor, Sir Kenelm Digby, to whom it was offered by the Author. The
third is, the worthiness, wisdom and deep Learning wherewith You are endued and
adorned, which that Noble Knight well knowing, for an acknowledgment thereof,
has presented this Book to your view, as a piece of great novelty. I shall not
presume to implore your Protection for the subject, but only for this my rash
attempt in the translating of it; which if it may auspiciously be admitted into
Your friendly estimation, doubtless 'twill find an universal acceptance
amongst Persons of greatest Eminency; All I humbly crave for the present is, my
boldness might be favorably excused, since 'twas my lawful Ambition thereby
to avoid Ingratitude; However this Work be esteemed, may your deserved good
name and honor increase more and more; which is and shall be the constant Vote
of, Sir,

Your humbly devoted Servant, D. Sashott.

A NEW TREATISE, PROVING A Multiplicity OF WORLDS.
CHAP. I.
Of the Plurality of Worlds in general, being as a Preface to the following
Chapters.

WE may truly say, that Preoccupation is an horrid Monster, which makes a
strange havoc in the spirits of Men, hinders the progress of Sciences, and
causes Men to droop in a constant ignorance; for they who by it are once
prepossessed, can judge of nothing by themselves, censure the best opinions
that are, assert those of their Masters, whether good or bad; and having
conceived a distaste of whatsoever checks what is contrary to their belief,
though gross and ignorant, bring forth nothing but contempts and blames
against those who endeavor to open their eyes, and root them out of the
darkness of their ignorance, to draw them to the enjoyment of the true light
and knowledge of things.

The which is more particularly practiced now in this Age wherein we live,
wherein Men live but by imitation, wherein learned Men are despised, wherein
they who have some particular and rare notions upon subject matters of great
moment and concernment to men's knowledge, are esteemed extravagant and
ridiculous, wherein no new proposition can be admitted.

But alas, what may I hope, seeing this evil is like a gangrene, and has
taken so deep root, that it has robbed men of their senses and feeling, who by
it are infected, Considering, that those who are most possessed with it, do not
think so themselves to be; What then may I expect, who am going to propose some
Novelties, not of things that are in the Earth, but even in the Heavens; and
not only in the Heavens, but also in the bodies of the Stars.

As soon as the Title of this Discourse shall appear to the eyes of Men, they
will condemn me before they hear me; neither will they so much as read my
Reasons, and will rather live in ignorance, then change their opinion; and be
as beasts in the World, than know the secrets thereof.

Most men think it a shame to confess, that they are ignorant of some thing,
and that they are in the wrong; for on the contrary, it is the way to find out
the truth, considering, that new reasons are always sought for what we esteem
our selves ignorant of.

Men's ignorance is so great, that the holy Scriptures have declared Men's
knowledge to be nothing else but vanity; and if we do not flatter our selves, we
shall find, that we know nothing but is or may be controverted. Divinity it
self is not exempted from it; and as for the other Sciences and Arts, those
great and many Volumes that we have of them, sufficiently testify the same.
And this has moved the Pyrrhonians and Scepticks, to doubt and question all
things, and has brought forth several Books of the vanity of Sciences, the
Astrology, the Medicine, the Jurisprudence, and the natural Physic are daily
moved and shaken, and see their foundations totter; Ramus did overthrow
Aristotle's Philosophy; Copernicus, Ptolomey's Astrology; Paracelsus, Galen's
Physic; So that every one has followers and disciples, and all appearing
plausible. We have much ado whom to believe, and thereby are constrained to
confess, that what we know, is much less then what we know not.

I greatly esteem Michael Mountanus's Judgment, who is the honor of our Age
upon this point; for it is consonant to reason, and my opinion hereupon is for
the most part agreeing with his; and especially with that is the subject matter
of this Treatise: Amongst a thousand rare thoughts that he has upon it, he
alleges a most exquisite similitude, by which he compares learned persons to
the ears of corn, which being well filled, do bow down their heads; for after
they have learned all Sciences, and have consumed themselves in them, they are
constrained to confess, that they know nothing by the acknowledgment of that
great Philosopher, in these words; Hoc unum scio, quod nihil scio, I know this
one thing, that I know nothing.

If then we be ignorant of all things, may we not yield, that we can be
ignorant of heavenly things especially, and that they are praiseworthy, who
have endeavored to raise their contemplations and meditations up into Heaven;
and having, as it were, loosened their Souls from their bodies, have made it to
wander and run through the Vaults and concavities of Heaven, there to observe
those things which were above our reach? Our understanding being heavenly, and
our Soul full of knowledge and perfection, is not ignorant of these things; but
the lump and corpulency of the body, which is its prison, hinders it freely to
perform its functions; it would willingly rise up, and at every moment lenche
it self up toward the place of its original; but the weight of its body keeps
it low and under, and the mixture of the Elements wherewith the body is
composed, makes its agility dull and heavy.

If, before the Invention of Artillery, of Printing, of Prospect-glasses, and
of infinite number of other Inventions, that in these times are practiced,
their effects had been told to us, we had never believed them; for if it had
been asserted, That with the powder, without stirring, we might kill beasts
distant from us; and not only the beasts on the earth, but also the fowls and
birds flying high through the air, throw down walls of Cities, and batter and
thunder down the strongest places; and that in a moment those instruments
should execute our will: That by printing, and the letters, we might
communicate our thoughts to another, and write in a short time a number
infinite of books, and even write a thousand times faster then we speak,
transmit and leave to our posterity our exquisite conceptions, and get an
immortal name; And that by the prospective glasses, we might approach to
objects far distant, strengthen our sight, and make us distinctly to see things
sar remote; If these things (I say) had been proposed to us in a time, wherein
farther speech and enquire had never more been made of it, who had believed
them? but rather who had not laughed at them, and derided the first motioner of
them? and yet experience daily shows the effects of these Inventions to be
true.

So the former Ages did condemn as heretics, those who believed the*
Antipodes; and this belief was a long time held for a false and ridiculous
opinion; Christophorus Columbus was rejected of diverse Kings, when he proposed
to them the discovery of the West Indies; and yet his propositions have been
found very true, and have immortalised their Author.

So likewise do I hope, that time will bring forth the truth of this my
opinion, which I do not produce to the light, without many strong Reasons, and
the authority of the most learned men, the holy Scripture it self is not
repugnant and contradictory to it, but rather leans much toward my opinion:
And as touching those Philosophers, who grant it not, some deny not, but that
this may be; others dare not contradict it; and others have so ridiculous
reasons, that I cannot imagine weaker can be found; and considering all they,
no more then I, have ascended into Heaven, and therefore who ever has the best
Reasons, ought to be believed; which being doubtless on my side, my opinion
ought not at all to be esteemed ridiculous.

Democritus, King of the Abderitanes, constantly smiled, because the World
could not apprehend the multiplicity of Worlds; I, like him, have also
sufficient occasion to smile, and laugh at those, who are ignorant of the
plurality of the Worlds, and even to compare them to bruit beasts, which eat
the fruits of the Earth, without considering whence they come to them: for Man
is lodged in this World, to contemplate in it the wonders that God exposes to
the sight of his eyes, and to which end he has given him a face looking
upward, for to look up to Heaven; but he will not make use of his gifts, nor
enquire after the place of their habitation.

Why open ye not your eyes, O ye learned and wise Men? and why awake ye not out
of your slumber, and deep sleep? Awake up the eyes of your Understanding and
Reason toward the Heavens, contemplating the wonderful things thereof;
despise the earthly things; and as true Philosophers, consider the rest of Men
in a dunghill, having their thoughts low, and Earthly Souls, which not being
able to stretch themselves beyond the limit of their weak activity, dare even
accuse those who by noble projects desire to lend them their hands, for to draw
them out of their ignorance.

Having then so many, and so good Reasons and authority on my behalf, I shall
not longer fear those, who scarce can find any for the confirmation of their
opinion, or what they have is so weak, that the building, that the edifice is
upon, tottereth and leans on every side; therefore will I not fear those
backbiting tongues which envy another good repute and fame, which I already
foresee in great number opened against me; but I shall justly say, that they
accuse God and Nature of weakness and insufficiency, and their own proper
reason of incapacity; Can it be possible, that so many rare and great persons,
who in former Ages did believe it, and whose memory is by us honored and
reverenced, had erroneous opinions? and that so many pertinent reasons should
have no solid ground? Could it be possible, that you would not willingly
hearken to those who desire to free you from your mistakes? nor suffer your
eyes to be unfolded, when they be folded with the vail of Preoccupation? No, I
hope, that some of the most reasonable at least will be found, who will adhere
to me, and take my part against the assaults of the ignorants, who endeavor to
discredit me, thinking to obtain great glory, for the endeavoring the
overthrow of so great a project; for that is their ordinary scope;

Alta petit livor, praestant altissima venti,
Alta petunt dextra fulmina miss a Jovis.
That is,
Envy, nothing but high things emulates,
As by the whirlwinds shaken are high States;
And the thunders of great Jupiter the god of gods,
Fall upon the Steeples, and not upon the Valleys.
But I shall smile at them in my heart, and applaud my self, if none can be
found to second me, hoping that the Ages to come will produce men more
reasonable; and who, better esteeming my conceptions, will accuse this present
Age of great ingratitude.

Chap. II.
Proving the plurality of the Worlds, by a reason taken from the place wherein
are engendered the Comets.

PRoclus, Cardanus, Telessius, and others have observed, That most of the
Comets are formed not only out of the Region of the Meteors, but even far
above the Moon; and Tycho Brabe, that great Astrologian, who by his exquisite
and rare Observations, has gotten an everlasting name, discoursing of it, has
asserted, That all the Comets are formed above the Moon, even according to
Kepler, as high as the Sun. Now it is Impossible for the vapors to pierce and
penetrate into the fiery Region, there to be changed into Comets even far above
it, considering, that according to all the Philosophers Judgment, the fiery
Region is under the concavity of the Moon, and so these Comets are formed out
of the exhalations of other Lands which are the Stars; it is so clear and
perspicuous, that I cannot believe that any Man is so void of Reason as to deny
it. If it be objected, That it cannot positively and certainly be known, that
the Comets are above the region of the Moon; I shall send them to the School of
Astrology, which teaches by true Rules and Demonstrations, the way to measure
all the bodies, and their far distances from the earth; the which Galileus, a
Person of great fame and renown in this our Age, has confirmed by such like
Observations.

Chap. III.
Proving the same, by another Argument taken from the bigness and continuancy
of the Comets.

THE same Astrologers have observed, That some Comets have so vaste and great
bodies, that it is impossible to believe, that the exhalations of this Earth
could furnish them sufficiently with matter; but I shall dare to go beyond, and
shall say, That though all the Earth should be dissolved into vapors and
exhalations, yet it could not form so great Comets, and of such long
continuancy, as those which sometimes have been seen, although it should all be
burned; insomuch, that it is needful to say, That the other Stars, whose body is
so great in comparison of this our little Globe, did furnish it with matter.

Chap. IV.
Proving the multiplicity of the Worlds, by a reason drawn from the conformity
of the Moon with the Earth.

ALL Philosophers and Astrologers are agreed, That the Earth and Moon have this
commune between them, that they both are thick, gross, dark, and solid bodies,
able to receive and refresh the light of the Sun; this being granted, What is
easier than to conclude, That the Earth reverberating the beams of the Sun,
would appear lightsome to them who should be raised high toward Heaven? that
it would seem so little and small by its far distance from us, that it would be
almost like the Moon, both in light and bigness; and that it would even have
its spots, because of the waters which bury and smother the Sun beams; and do
not reverberate them. We might discover in it by prospective glasses some of
the chiefest Mountains, whereby we might soon be persuaded to believe, that
those Seas and Mountains are inhabited and filled with living Creatures.

And if we turn what we have said of the Earth, to the Moon, shall we not say
the same of it? Wherein we discover those spots, that by Galileus's
prospective-glasses helps us so naisty to distinguish, that we see in it, as in
a Table and Mapp, some Seas, some straights, some Lakes, some Rivers, and some
Islands, some Rocks and Mountains, that are perceived to swell out, especially
at the new Moon.

And if it be true of the Moon, can it not be true also of the other Stars? but
their far distance stealing from our eyes their spots, we must judge of it by
the Moon, which though lesser, is nearer to us, and appears greater to our
eyes; and that we may not think, that the same things that are seen in the
Moon, cannot appear in the other Stars, the Telescope shows us a Mountain in
Mars, some spots in other Stars, and that Venus increases and diminishes even
as the Moon.

Chap. V.
Wherein is proved, this Opinion of diverse Worlds, in that the Earth is a
Star, as the others.

THe foregoing Chapter declaring to us, how the Earth would appear lightsome to
us, if we were once high raised up from it, because it reflects the beams of
the Sun, which according to the diverse places by it enlightened, would cause it
to increase and decrease; considering also, that Mountains seen from far are
bright and shining; and that, as Milchius says, the fields adjacent to mount
Hesperides, shine at night as the Stars; and seeing also that the Earth is
moveable, as hereafter we shall prove it, that it is situated in the Air, and
weighed and counterpois'd in its proper weight, and that the Air is the
Heavens, as the Holy Scriptures do sufficiently prove it, when at every moment
they confound the Air with the Heavens, Shall we not then say, That the Earth
is a Star situated in Heaven, as well as the other Stars? That this at the
first sight will amuse the Readers, but they shall be pleased to yield, That
the yolk of an egg is in its shell, neither can they deny, that the Earth is in
Heaven, which wraps and compasses it on every side as an egg-shell; and that
the infinite spaces of the Aires, which are the Heavens, do not contain diverse
bodies far distant one from the other, and so consequently the earth seeming
from on high little and lightsome, may be a Star inhabited.

But if the Earth be a Star inhabited, the others may be Earths inhabited,
being they, as well as the Earth, seem and appear to be great and lightsome
bodies to those who are far remote from them.

And that no Man may object, that the Heaven is a place colored, solid and
separated from their air, I beseech him to consider, that things far remote
from us, appear as the Sky, even the Mountains and Seas seen from far, seem
bluish; so that this skie-colour'd Heaven that we see, is not a solid and
real thing, but the limit of our sight in a certain place of the infinite
spaces of the Air, which are the common place, wherein are lodged an infinite
number of great globes of diverse natures, or inhabited by several living
creatures, which the Sun being in the middle, equally inlightens; as a great
Torch set in the midst of a Chamber, shines in every corner of it, with the
brightness of its light.

Chap. VI.
Proving the same, by the great number of the Stars, and by their nobleness.

THose who imagine, that the infinite number of the heavenly bodies are created
for the globe of the earth, and for the advantage of its Inhabitants, are much
mistaken: for natural reason does sufficiently dissuade us to believe, that the
greater things serve the lesser; and that those that are the noblest, serve the
vilest, and that are of less consequence and moment; Is it not very like, that
every Globe makes a World, or a particular Earth? and that this great number is
suspended in the Air, whereof the vast space conjoyns them all as so many
dependances from the everlasting and divine Empire: the greatness and bigness
of the whole World is composed of diverse creatures, which though far remote and
differing one from the other, as well by their nature, as by their place, do
notwithstanding so well agree in a mutual love, that they compose and make up a
perfect harmony in the World, where the Heaven or the Air is their common
space, and the Sea, whereof the Earths or Stars are the Islands, which does so
join and separate them, and therefore is this Air purest, near the perfectest
bodies; nevertheless, this spiritual body of the Air equally receives the
influences and operations of every Globe, and communicates with great speed to
every one those of all the others.

Chap. VII.
Wherein the same is proved, by a reason drawn from the bigness of the Stars.

PYthagoras did often call the Earth a Moon; and, all well considered, What
hinders, that the Earth be not as well reckoned in the number of the Stars, as
the Moon, seeing that (as we have said) the body of both of them is of a thick,
dark, and heavy matter, that both do borrow their light from the Sun, that they
are both solid, and reverberate the beams of this light of the World, that both
produce virtues and spirits of themselves, and that both are heng'd and
suspended each in its air or heaven, and upon its center: and having all these
things common together, may not the Moon, and so consequently the other Stars,
infinitely bigger then it self, have Inhabitants? And indeed this exceeds all
belief, that so great bodies as the Stars, which many times over exceed the
Earth in bigness, should be so idle and barren, that no creature should dwell
in them, and that their motions, labors, and actions, should only redound to
the advantage of this Terrestrial Globe alone, which is the least and meanest
of all.

Chap. VIII.
Proving the same, by the Creation, multitude, and society of things.

God (with respect be it spoken) finding himself weary of solitariness, did in
a manner go out of himself, by the Creation, and poured himself, as if it were
wholly, into Creatures, and commanded them to multiply; and is it not also more
meet and convenient to his goodness and Divine glory, to have made one whole
world alone, as an Empire adorned with varieties of worlds, as with Provinces
and Cities; and that these diverse worlds be the habitations of so many Citizens
and numberless Inhabitants of diverse kinds, and that all these things be
created for the praise and everlasting glory of their Maker, and that the Sun
be in the midst of them, to inlighten them all equally.

Chap. IX.
Confirming the Plurality of the Worlds, by the privation of Men's Sciences and
Knowledge after Adam's Sin.

THis Doctrine of many Worlds or Globes inhabited, is not repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, which do only discover to us the Creation of that which we
inhabit; of which they even speak what they mention, in a discourse more
mystical then clear; only briefly mentioning the other creatures of the world,
for to yield greater occasion of admiration, then of knowledge to men's weak
spirits, of old fallen from the knowledge of Sciences; this obscurity of the
truth, and these darknesses of Men's understanding have been part of the pains
and miseries that Adams sin drew upon us, by reason whereof Man was excluded
from the delights of Paradise, from the satisfaction that is in the knowledge of
Sciences, from the true knowledge of the nature of heavenly things, that he who
had raised himself up to the wicked desire and appetite of forbidden things,
might justly be deprived of the knowledge that had been granted him.

Chap. X.
Containing a Reason drawn from this, That the Earth is not the Center of the
World, but the Sun; With a description of Copernicus his Sphere.

THeophrastes writes, That Plato in his old age repented, to have placed the
Earth in the Center of the World; and St. Chrysostom says, That the seat and
situation of the earth is not known: and after him Nicolas Copernicus, that
great Astrologer, who after long study in Astrology, has thereof known the
falsehood, did so well confirm this opinion, and unto this day has rendered it
approved by the best and rarest spirits of these Ages, that I doubt not, but
that the Reason I thence intend to draw, will be sufficient and pertinent
enough: he has grounded his opinion upon admirable demonstrations which have
overthrown the ancient Astrology; yet without overturning the Science; but he
did only find the truth, and the same predictions, aspects, and other needful
things with his new Maxims, which have established this Science: with much
more perspicuity and certainty, he settles the Sun in the Center of the World,
where it is immovable as a great Torch in the middle of the world, as a great
King upon his Throne, whence he rules all the heavenly Globes, which are
nothing but Earths, like unto that we inhabit; and round the earth he causes
the Moon to move alone; and round about the Sun, Venus and Mercury; then Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn, and the other Spheres wrap all that in; and so the Earth
is found to be distant from the Center of the World, and in the third Heaven;
so that being distant from the Center, it may easily be said, That the other
Globes of equal, or even, of more vaste extension, that are in equal distance
from the center of the World, which is the Sun; may be Globes inhabited with
Creatures, whose true descriptions we know not: the Figure of this may be seen
in Campanella, Gassendi, and other Authors.

Chap. XI.
Proving the same thing, by the motion of the Earth.

THe same Copernicus, who after Philolaus, Crotoniatus, E^phantes, Ponticus,
Heraclides, Nicetas, Syracusius, Democritus, Timeus, Aristarchus, and Seleucus,
has confirmed and renewed the opinion concerning the motion of the Earth: and
the immobility of the Sun, gives us by this motion yet one means to prove our
opinion; for if the Earth be moved in the Air, and does its course as the
Stars far distant from the Center of the World, what hinders, that it be not
put in the number of the Stars? and contrariwise, that the Stars which have
such a motion, be not earths; and if they be Lands, to what purpose, if they be
not inhabited; and that we may say nothing without proof, the next following
Chapter shall prove the motion of the Earth.

Chap. XII.
Proving the Motion of the Earth.

We have here above promised to prove, that the Earth moves, because we have
hence drawn an argument to confirm our Opinion; though most men of
understanding now adays believe this motion of the Earth as better clearing
the course of the Stars, the order of the Heavens, and the ebbing and flowing
of the Sea, yet I shall speak something of it.

The Heavens and the Stars had cheaten three thousand years, all the World did
so believe it; until that Cleanthes the Samian, or, as Theophrastes says,
Nicetas of Syracuse, was resolved, that the Earth moved upon its prop. And in
our Age, Copernicus has so well grounded this doctrine, that he makes use of
it for a rule to the consequences of Astrology, and freeth our spirit from
those impossibilities, that the Astrologians of old would make us believe; for,
according to their judgment, the first mobile should run in one minute 706640
miles and a half, and that one and the same body had contrary motions; Is it
not more probable, that the Earth turns round in 24. hours from the West to the
East, as in former Ages, Timeus Locrenfis, Philolaus, Aristarchus, Franciscus
Marius, and others, did believe it?

Keplerus, Longomonus, Origanus, Campanella, and others of our Age have
acknowledged this truth; Galileus also seems to be of the same opinion, when he
says, That if the Earth did not move and turn, the Sea could not have its flux
and reflux.

We are as those who are in floating Islands, or in a Ship, who think that they
move not, but that, on the contrary, Sea-banks seem to fly from them; for we
cannot perceive the motion of the Earth, as well because of its bigness, as
because that we are not loosed from it.

But if in opposition to this, be alleged those Texts of the Word of God,
which say, that the Sun is moveable, and the Earth fixed; may it not suffice to
answer, That God speaks according to men's belief, as he has done upon a
thousand of other subject matters; as when he calls the Moon the great light,
though an infinite number of others are greater. As for the Argument that is
alleged from a stone cast down from high far from us, if the Earth turn; I
answer, That the Air roles and turns with the Earth, and that a ponderous body
falls down in so short a time, that the Earth cannot by its motion in 24.
hours be alienated from it.

It Is also objected, That the Towers would fall, and that the Clouds and Rivers
would all follow the course of the Earth. But I answer, That the Clouds are
agitated by the winds, and therefore cannot follow the course of the earth; and
as for the Towers, they cannot fall, considering that the Earth's motion is not
violent, and that the Towers, by reason of their ponderosity, bend still
toward the Center of the earth, and are not removed from their situation; And
as touching the Rivers, the earth being as a gall-nut, a River may run toward
the East, by the bending of its Seats toward the center of the earth, although
the Earth tends toward the West; which may easily be apprehended, if we
conceive, that a man walking in a Ship, directs his steps toward the East,
whilst that the Ship sails to the West.

Many several other Reasons are objected, which are but weak; but because
there are diverse Discourses touching the Earth's motion, which resolve them,
and reconcile the places of the holy Scripture upon this subject matter,
amongst whom are Foscarinus, and Barantzanus; I shall desire the curious
Readers to read them, and shall content my self with what I have said.

Chap. XIII.
Proving the Plurality of the Worlds, by the variety of all natural things:

NAture is various in all its operations* and God has put such variety in all
his Works, that we can find nothing uniform in this world; all things in it are
various and different: and this great diversity causes us the more to admire
the Creator of this whole Fabric. If it be so concerning the earth, which is
near-upon the smallest of all the Globes, what will it not be of the heavenly,
which are incomparably greater? For this cause did Campanella say, That though
God and Nature do nothing in vain, yet such a great number of Stars, greater
then the earth, would be in vain, if there was not in them diverse
demonstrations of the Idea's of God; It Is then consonant to reason, that not
only the four Elements be in every one of the Stars, but also that Men,
Bsasts and Plants, and all whatsoever is seen amongst us, be in them. And thus
did this famous Person of our time speak.

Chap. XIV.
Of the measures and dimensions of the Stars, and their distance from the
Earth, and proportions with it; with an argument taken from those distances,
for to prove the multiplicity of Worlds.

BUt because we have often mentioned the bigness of the Stars, and how they
exceed the Earth in extension, and also spoken of their infinite distances; It
will not be out of purpose, and beyond our present Discourse, to insert them in
this Chapter. These distances are somewhat variously given by diverse Authors;
but the difference being but small, is not of great concernment to us: Charles
Rapineus gives these distances in his book, called Nucleus Philosophiae.

The Moon is lesser then the Earth 39 times; and according to Cardan, thirty
nine times and a half.

Mercury is lesser then the Earth by 1100 times. Venus by 37 times. The Sun is
greater then the Earth, by 166 times. Mars by 1 time. Jupiter by 95 times.
Saturn by 91 times.
The fixed Stars are innumerable, but those that are observed by the
Astrologians, are 1022, and are of proportions of bigness:

Those of the first magnitude, are 15 in number, and are bigger then the Earth
by 117 times.

Those of the second magnitude are 45, and are bigger then the Earth by 90
times.

Those of the third, are 208, and are bigger then the earth by 70 times.

Those of the fourth, are 472, and are bigger then the Earth, by 54 times.

Those of the fifth, are 17, and are bigger then the Earth, by 37 times.

Those of the sixth, are 49, and 5 dark, and 9 bright ones, and are all bigger
then the Earth by 18 times.

The concavity of the Moon is distant from the Center of the Earth 14291
leagues, which are 28541 miles.

From the Center of the Earth to Venus, there is 542749 miles.

To the Sun, 3640000 miles. To Mars, 3965000 miles. To Jupiter, 28845000 miles.
To Saturn, 46816250 miles. To the Concavity of the Firmament, 65357500 miles.
The thickness of the Moons round, is of 99504 miles. Mercury's round is of
334208 miles. That of Venus, of 3097251 miles. That of the Sun, 32500 miles.
That of Mars, 248820000 miles. That of Jupiter, 17969250 miles. That of Saturn,
18541250 miles. That of the Firmament, 55357500 miles. The diameter of the
Earth is of ten thousand and eight hundred miles; But Cardanus says, of 10000
miles. Its circumference is of 32400 miles; and according to Cardanus, of 31000
miles and a half. Its semidiameter, or half diameter, is of 5000 miles.
These things being thus, is it not very like, that so huge and vaste bodies,
so distant one from the other, should hide and contain in themselves something,
as well as the Earth? at least those that move, and are Planets, as It is; and
that turn round the bright body of the Sun, which communicates his light to
them all?

Chap. XV.
Wherein the plurality of Worlds is proved, by a Reason drawn from the color
of the Stars.

IF we see, and punctually discern, not only with Jacob's staff, but also
with our own sight, without the help of any instrument, a great diversity in
the Stars in their bigness, color, light, and other circumstances; Shall we
not say, That those various colors do testify their various nature, and their
bodily mixtures; and that they may consequently be bodies, as well as the Earth?

Chap. XVI.
Proving the same, because that there is nothing empty nor vain in nature.

WE cannot remark any thing empty in the whole Nature; this passes for a sure
Maxim: therefore did Hermes in his Asclepe say, That all the parts of the World
are very full, the whole World is full of Globes or Stars; these Stars, and
especially the Earth which we inhabit, is filled with Seas, Rivers, four-footed
Beasts, Men, Birds, Minerals; the waters are filled with Fishes; these things
have yet in themselves, and unto their very Center, so great a variety, that
their anatomy draws us to admiration: In a word, we may lose our selves in the
subdividing of them; And why may not the Stars be so too, seeing that, as it
has already been proved in the foregoing Chapter, we may see and observe in
them some certain variety? especially in the Moon, where Mountains and Waters
evidently appear, and may very well be discerned with a good Prospective
glass, with which Instrument is a notable Mountain discerned in Mars.

Chap. XVII.
Proving the plurality of Worlds, by the plurality of Men, and because things
above, are as things below.

GReat Mercurius Trismegistus, who for his eximious Learning, has obtained the
name of Thrice most Great, has left us this notable Aphorism, That things
below, are as things above; and, vice versa, those above, as them below; the
meaning is, That this World is an example to us, without any need to go out of
it, for to know those things that role over our head; and God has even
bestowed upon us sufficient capacity to draw reason from every thing; If we
consider our own selves, we shall see by a general approbation, that Man is a
little World; so that Men being infinite in number, who are Microcosms;
likewise ought the Macrocosms or great Worlds, to be many, after whose Idea's
and images he is built; as may appear by the conformity of one with the other:
But here might we speak of this conformity, had it not been fully described by
many Philosophers of note; therefore omitting it, we shall proceed.

Chap. XVIII.
Wherein the same is proved, by some Reasons taken from God's Power, from Man's
Reason, from hence, That there is nothing only one, and such other
considerations.

I Shall not fear to say, That those who deny this exquisite Opinion, seem to
be offended against themselves, to accuse God of impotency, and their own
Reason of falsehood: and that I may bring them to pass sentence of condemnation
by another mouth then mine, I would have them to hearken to great Michael
Montanus, who is esteemed one of the wisest, and reasonablest Men of his Age;
he has these words in his Apology for Raymond of Sebone;

Thy Reason has in nothing else more likely truth and foundation, then in
that, wherein it persuades thee of the plurality of Worlds.

Terramque et Solemn Lunamque et caetera quae sunt
Non esse unica sed numero magis innumerabilia.
That is to say, The Earth, the Sun, and the Moon, are not one alone, but many
in number.

The ratest spirits of former Ages did believe, yea, even some of our Age,
constrained to it by humane reason, because that in this building and fabric
that we see, there is nothing alone and one.

Cun, in summa, res nulla sit una, Vnica quae gignatur, et unica solaque
crescat. That is to say,

Being there is nothing that is only one in this World, that is engendered
alone, nor in the Sea, nor in the Earth.

And every species is multiplied in some reasonable number; whence it appears,
that it is not likely that God has formed this work alone, without some more,
and that all the matter of this form was spent in this Individual alone.

Quare etiam atque etiam tales fate are necesse est,
Esse alios alibi congressus materiai:
Qualis hic est avido complexu quem tenet ether.
Wherefore it must be confessed, that some where else there are heaps of
matter, as that which is wrapped up in this our Air.

Especially, if it be a living creature, as by its motions we may be persuaded
it is, as Plato asserts it; and many of the Learned of our time either do
confirm it, or dare not deny it.

Now if there be many Worlds, as Democritus, and almost all the Philosophers
did judge, what do we know, whether the principles and rules of this do concern
particularly the others? perhaps they may have another face and policy; but
being all things are diverse in this, yea in a small distance, we may believe,
that the other worlds ought to be diverse and various; For why should God, who
is Almighty, have limited and restrained his power and virtue?

Chap. XIX.
By what reason, the World may be proved to have a Soul.

Whereas Montanus has here above spoken of the Soul of the World, It will be
meet for our present subject, to demonstrate those Arguments by which this
Opinion may be proved, that he may not be judged to have incongruously spoken
of it, it being also advantageous for our Discourse.

If the World is a reasonable Creature, as diverse Learned Persons have proved,
It may not be strange and ridiculous to believe. That the Earth has a motion,
nor consequently that it is a moving Star or Planet inhabited, and that so
likewise all the others may be inhabited: Now if the Earth turns and moves; is
it not also needful to grant, that that whereby it is moved, is as it were,
its soul moving it, as our soul moves our body? Some have thought, that God is
the soul of the World, and that he is in the World, as the soul in man's body;
that is to say, all in all, and all in each part; and that therefore the World
might have a soul, and be called a living creature, great and round, and as
Montanus says, Is it not more likely, that this great body by us called the
World, is a thing quite contrary then we esteem? The Pythagorians, Xenophon,
Plato, and all his Scholars, have taught and believed this opinion; and since
them Marsilius Ficinus, and Hierome Fracaster, most renowned Doctors of
Physic; and in our Age Campanella, who alleges Seneca, Origenes, Eusebius,
and Gregorius Nazianzenus, as witnesses of it.

But if any one should say, That the World cannot be a living creature, seeing
it has nor feet, nor eyes, nor hands, nor any such member as living creatures
have; I beseech him to consider, that its not requisite it should have some
feets, being it treads not upon the other living creatures; nor eyes, nor ears,
because it can neither see nor hear any thing out of it self; but the hands of
this living Creature, as those that in it are contained, and we have, are its
beams and virtues; its eyes, the Stars; its blood, the Waters; and so has
other things besides, consonant and correspondent to our members, without
having need of the same as we have; Are there not strange and monstrous beasts
in respect of us, and yet live well, and are perfect in their kind, doing well
enough without such members as we have, though they have not the same situation
with us. How many Fishes is there, that have their mouth in the belly, the eyes
and other members in extravagant places? Some Creatures have the gall in their
head, and some in their tail; yea, there are some Men, whose head is in their
bosom; some likewise may be formed, so as we cannot comprehend nor know how.
Its motion sets forth its life; and the flux and reflux of the waters its
breath and respiration. There are diverse such Reasons to prove the same: but I
shall desire the curious Reader to peruse Plato, Sextus, Empiricus, Ficus,
Macrobius, Campanella, and others, to avoid tediousness.

Chap. XX.
Proving the multiplicity of Worlds, by a Reason drawn from infinite number of
causes, and by the spots of the Moon.

THe spots in the Moon, touching which Plutarch has made a whole Discourse,
whereof we might here allege diverse Observations; are to us a sufficient
testimony, that the Moon is as the Earth, filled with Rivers and Seas,
Mountains, Valleys, Plains, and other such things; for its Spots are not the
shadow of the Earth, as some have thought; considering, that they never change
their shape, as they would do, according unto the diverse parts of the Earth, to
whom the Moon by its motion would answer, and having no conformity at all with
the Earth, nor with the Sea; and lastly, because that our sight helped by the
Prospective-glasses, observes in it some Seas, and the tops of diverse
Mountains, and such like remarkable things, whereof the Maps and figures may be
seen in Hevelius, Argolius, and several others, and in our Book de Telescopio.

These Spots show, that the Moon is partaker of the Elementary and Terrestrial
nature, and consequently of the rest of the Elements. This did move Plato to
say, That the Stars are composed of fire and earth, by reason of their
splendor, and of their great and lumpish body.

This plurality of Worlds may again be proved by the variety of the causes that
compose it, and by the diverse combinations that may thence be made; which is
the argument used by Morodorus in Plutarch, in his book of the Philosophers
opinion, wherein it is said, That where the causes are, there the effects ought
to be also; and the causes of the World being a great many, so also ought the
Worlds to be many; the causes of the world are the four Elements, and others
that may yet be unknown to us, or the infinite number of Democritus Atoms;
unless we had rather say, That its God, who being infinite, so likewise has
created an infinite not only of Worlds, but of all things: And indeed, as the
same Philosopher says, it would be a sad spectacle, if there were but an ear
of corn in a great field; the same would it be of Heaven, if it were true, that
there is no more Earth but one.

Chap. XXI.
Wherein is the same proved, by certain Reasons drawn from Galileus's
Observations, and others; as of the Stars of Jupiter, and of the Spots in the
Sun.

THat great Galileus, who seemed only to be in the World for to resolve the
doubts in Astrology, has discovered with his admirable invention of
Prospectiveglasses, which immortalize his name, by the discovery of what is
contained in the Stars; he is the first who has directed his Telescopes or
Prospective-glasses toward Heaven, and by help of them, that the milky line
were small Stars, which by reason of their proximity and great number, do
confound their light: he also has discovered the Moons superficies, not
smooth, but rugged, and full of risings of Hills, and hollownesse of Valleys.

He also has observed, that the Star Venus does imitate the course of the
Moon, being now full, then half, then in the first quarter as a sith; and has
observed the perspicuons change of bigness in Venus and Mars's diameters;
things of great concernment and note, for the theories of Copernicus and Tycho
Brahe.

He has ashamed the Sun, discovering in him those Spots, which for so many
Ages he had buried and hid in his bright obscurity, and has discerned, that
those Spots were not fixed, and always lasting, as those in the Moon, but that
they disappear and appear again, turning round the Sun: he has also discovered
four new Planets, that had not yet bin observed by some of the ancient
Astrologers, which he has called the Planets of Medicis, in favor of his
Prince; these Planets move only round about Jupiter, which has induced some
to believe, that Jupiter was another world, or another Sun, round about which
other Planets do run, as round about that which in lightens us.

He has farther observed, that the Planet Saturn has three bodies, having two
more at his sides; and that the Planet Jupiter is be spotted with girdles or
Zones that do girth it; the which may plainly and perspicuously be seen by
those Telescopes or Prospectives, admirably well made by Torricelli the
Florentine. These are those rare Observations of that illustrious Person, who
though but little in body, yet so great in ingenuity, and acuity of spirit,
that all the World has suffered by the loss of him; He became blind, by
reason of his too great propensity and labor in these Observations; and he who
had in these things given light to all this world, could not enjoy the light,
nor his Invention.

Foscarius adds to all these Observations, that Venus has been seen with three
bodies, as well as Saturn, and that Jupiter has 4. bodies; But Gassendus
Fontana, Neapolitan, has now the excellentest Telescope in the world, with
which he has seen the four Planets which are adjacent to Jupiter as four
Moons; two about Saturn, which make a figure of a pot handle at each side of
it. In the midst of Mars, a little Globe, at his brimmes a darkish circle, and
about Venus two Moons or Stars.

Chap. XXII.
Proving the Plurality of Worlds, by a Reason taken from the Clouds, and the
waters above in Heaven.

WIth the Prospectiveglasse we may see some Clouds flying round about the Sun,
which can arise but from the Moon, from other Stars, or from the Sun it self,
because they be beyond the Region of the Meteors: Now if the Stars engender
clouds, they have water within themselves; but if the Element of water is in
them, the Element of earth and the rest have as great privilege to be in them,
as it. Now that there is water in them, the first Chapter of Genesis proves it
clearly, when he says, Then God said, Let there be a Firmament in the midst of
the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters; And God made the
Firmament, and divided the waters which were under the Firmament, from the
waters which were above the Firmament; and he called the Firmament, Heaven, and
the waters under the Firmament, Seas. Esdras in Chap. 6. of his second Book,
says the same, in these terms, Thou made the spirit of the Firmament, and
commandedst it to part asunder, and to make a division betwixt the waters, that
the one part might go up, and the other remain beneath. Where are these waters
above, I beseech you, if they are not in the Stars? For it is a very weak Reason
to say, That they are in the Clouds; because that, besides that they could not
contain the Seas, Its said in the second Chapter of Genesis, that God had not
caused it to rain upon the Earth, but there went up a mist from the Earth, and
watered the whole face of the Earth; and so consequently there was no vapor
raised up to form them: and what should have raised them, seeing there was yet
no Sun created to light the World?

Let us then lift up our eyes to Heaven, and, as the new Gymnosophists, who
daily contemplated the Sun, let us observe in them those new Worlds, wherewith
it is wonderfully enriched, which are diverse and various in bigness, light,
and other qualities; let us not be as poor simple Country fellows, who having
seen no farther then the corner of their own chimney, cannot apprehend, that
there can be any Town or City bigger then their Village; but let us raise our
spirits to the contemplation of the remotest and highest things that are;
thereby ennobling our selves, though it be a very high attempt. O how happy is
that man, who when he pleases, can spiritually loosen his Soul, and by his
exquisite Meditations rise up to the meditation and contemplation of these
Worlds! When once we are well acquainted with it, and freed from all
Preoccupation, nothing can be found sweeter, pleasanter, and more consonant to
truth.

What Patents and particular privileges have they, who believe the contrary,
that we should adhere to them; and our belief should be ruled by them, as if it
were under their commands? Men feign and forge to us five Zones in Heaven, and
seen other things, that are nothing but dreams and foolish fancies, as if they
had been there above to see it. We may say the same to them, as Diogenes said
to such other creatures, How long is it since thou came from Heaven? It Is
then as lawful for us to establish new Maxims, as for them; and to believe in
the strength of our reason, what we here have attempted, and what others say
with reason, or appearance of truth. O that Nature would once open us her
bosom, and plainly show us the direction and Government of its motion, with
what is contained in those great and vaste bodies, which sparkle and glister in
Heaven; What abuses and gross mistakes should we find in all Sciences?

Chap. XXIII.
Wherein the same is proved, by an Argument taken from the place where the
Clouds stay without going farther.

WE have here above spoken of the Clouds, and thence have drawn an Argument to
assert this our opinion; we may yet draw this from them, viz. that the Clouds
and vapors being light should ascend without limitation, until that they were
lost from our sight, if there were not some other terrestrial Globes in Heaven,
nor any other attraction then that of the Center of the Earth; but we may
observe even in the hottest of Summer, that the Clouds do not ascend above 3.
miles, and the strongest vapors that are, not above 30 miles; whence we must
infer, that they ascend unto the limit of the activity and attraction of the
center of the Earth, not being able to go beyond, because it would be to bend
downward, viz. toward the Center of some other terrestrial Globe. But, that I
may better be understood, it is to be observed, that as the Loadstone has a
certain inward virtue to draw iron, or to move the Needle of the Sea-compasse
unto such a distance, and no farther; so likewise the Earth, which by the
opinion of some, is a great Loadstone, whose circumference and activity is
extended toward the Moon, unto such a certain height; and the other Stars
also have such like circumference, whereunto their virtue and attraction may
reach; Insomuch, that the Clouds having attained unto that distance which makes
a middle between us and the Moon, there they are stayed, not being suffered to
go beyond it, because then they would descend toward the Moon, or some other
Stars, which would be contrary to their nature, which is to rise upward still;
so that if a ponderous body as a stone being cast up, could go beyond the
Earth's attractive point, it would not fall back upon the Earth, but upon that
Star, whose attractive Center should reach unto that place whither the stone
was cast; therefore has Bacon said in his Book de progressu Scientiarum, that
Gilbert did not doubt incongruously, That the bodies of weight and ponderosity,
being at a far distance from the Earth, would by little and little forsake
their motion toward things below.

Chap. XXIV.
Containing a Reason, drawn from the Bird of Paradise.

THe new World discovered by our Fathers amongst those infinite riches and rare
things it communicates to us, makes us partakers of a Bird, called by the
Indians, Manucodiata, that is to say, the Bird of God, or of Paradise; This
Bird is so beautiful, that no one in the Earth is to be compared to it; its
figure is of so rare a form, and so extraordinary, that never the like has
been found; for it has neither feet nor wings, but is clothed with a skin of
feathers, made otherwise then that of other birds; it is not found but dead
either upon the Earth, or in the Sea, no body ever saw its eggs, nor its nest;
and it is asserted, that it lives by the Air; this Bird never being found upon
Earth, is it not confonant to Reason, that it may come from some other Star,
where it lives and breeds, and that having flown higher, and beyond the
attractive Center of that earth or Star where he lived; he dies by changing
his Air, unto that which is not proper and natural, and dying, falls upon this
Earth. Now if birds be found in the Stars, there also may other living
Creatures be, having all the same right of habitation. And grant, that what
some object, be true, that it has feet, but that they are very short, or that
its feet are cut, that it may appear the rarer, yet it hinders not the
consequence drawn from it; provided, that the other circumstances of its nature
be true; for if it has feet, it must be understood of some of its species
only; for Aldrovandus mentions five or six sorts of them, whereof some have
feet, and some none.

Chap. XXV.
Wherein is alleged, an Argument taken from the Eclipses.

BEfore the Creation of this whole Fabric, God did inlighten himself, and
contemplate himself, he was a sealed Book, which at length is opened, and has
set forth to the view, that which remained in Himself; wherefore the whole
World is nothing else, then an evident image, an Idea of his hidden Godhead,
he is through it all, as our soul is throughout all our body, and by his will,
encompasses all the motions of the spheres, having spread through them all the
Aires, as a scrowl; which folding it self away at the last day, shall be
reduced to its former Silence, or rather to Nothing.

This wonderful order, thus by him established, may be seen in the constant and
unchangeable course of the Planets, upon which the Astrologians make some
certain Almanacks for many years together, and foretell the eclipses of Ages to
come, without missing a moment of time.

These Stars being all of one and the same nature, do eclipse one another; the
Earth eclipses the Moon, the Moon the Sun, and so all the rest, if their small
body is not overcome by the bigness of those they intend to darken, as its
testified by Averroe's Observation, who has seen Mercury in the center of the
Sun, which seemed to grow in it; its light, if it has any, being covered and
put out.

Now from these Eclipses, or want of light in the Stars, we may draw this
strong Reason for the assertion of our Position, for it shows and verifieth,
that they are of an earthly nature, and that their light is borrowed; the Moon
appears black, when the Earth hinders it to receive light from the Sun: and
diverse Philosophers have believed, that all the Stars do borrow their light of
the Sun; they are then obscure, and thick of their own nature, and consequently
earthy, and may have such variety and diversity as the Earth, viz. Men, Beasts,
Plants, and whatsoever is seen here amongst us, and the Pythagorians did
believe, and to which Copernicus agrees.

Chap. XXVI.
Proving the same, because otherwise it were to make God to act by necessity.

IF there were not many Worlds in this whole Fabric, God could not act so
powerfully and freely, but that by some certain necessity and constraint; which
would be a great impiety and blasphemy even to imagine it: for God could
assuredly, not only have made other Worlds, but also much more perfect then
this; for his power is neither shortened, nor exhausted, neither the matter,
which he could create of nothing, as well as that of this our Earth; therefore
as he has created this World, could he not also have created others?

Chap. XXVII.
How could we see the Earth, if we were far distant from it?

SOme may ask, If the Planets are so many Earths, and the Earth a Planet, how
could we see the Earth, if we were far remote from it? Clavius in his
Commentary upon Sacroboscus, has endeavored some suppositions upon this
question, and has found, that if any one were in the Globe of the Moon, and
should look toward the Earth, it would appear to him three times bigger then
the Moon appears to us, and somewhat more; and if a man were in the Globe of
the Sun, it would appear to him twice bigger then Venus seems to us; and in the
Globe of Mars, thence it would appear lightsome, and would seem to be of the
bigness of one of the Stars of the sixth proportion; and if he were in the
highest heavens, he could not see it at all; And this is (says he) the
Astrologers common opinion.

Chap. XXVIII.
Of the number of the Worlds.

IT may also be asked, What number of Worlds there is? but though it is a thing
not certainly known, considering the infinite number of Stars to us
perspicuous, besides those that we cannot see by reason of our eyes weakness.

Yet I shall here allege the Judgment of some Authors upon this question;
Baruck the Philosopher, and Clemens a disciple of the Apostles, as Origin
says, do mention seven; perhaps meaning the seven Planets. An ancient Author,
according to Plutarch in his book, touching the ceasing of miracles, did
believe, that there were an hundred and eighty nine Worlds disposed in a
triangle, every side containing sixty three. Petro of Sicily thought the same
thing touching the plurality of Worlds. But the Thalmudists going beyond, say,
that there are nineteen thousand; and Democritus did believe, that they were
infinite, and innumerable.

Chap. XXIX.
Touching diverse ancient Philosophers, who have believed the plurality of
Worlds.

Pythagoras, who first called this Fabric, Worlds, is also one of the
chiefest, who believed the plurality of them, and has had many disciples and
Citators, who have continued to establish and maintain this assertion; for
Socrates has publicly asserted the Worlds to be infinite; so did also his
disciple Archelaus, who persuaded it also to Xenophanes the Colophian, who also
did assert, That there are many Moons and Suns in the world.

This same Axiom was believed by Melisseus of Samia, Parmenides's disciple; as
also by his School-fellow Zeno of Elis, and his disciple Lucippus of Elis also.
Item, by Democritus of Miletum, Pythagoras's hearer, who says, That in these
Worlds the Stars are more beautiful and bright, which I think may be according
to their proximity. By reason of which opinion, that King of the Abderitanes
was esteemed by his ignorant people, to be out of his wits, and thereupon they
sent for Hippocrates to cure him of his disease; but Hippocrates found him very
well in his mind, and said nothing against his opinion; which moved Democritus
perpetually to laugh at them who were ignorant of the same. Joubertus, who has
composed a book concerning laughter, in it has set down Hippocrates's letter
upon this subject.

Diogenes of Apollonia, Anaximenes's disciple, together with Seleucus, has
also pronounced their assertion touching the plurality of the worlds.

Orpheus, Origines, and Baruck the Philosopher, Anaxagoras, and many Stoics
more, do a vouch the same; Plinius also seems to have been of this opinion; but
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Epicureus, and others, following Francis I. Picus
Mirandulanus, have fully asserted it.

Mahomet, who though an Infidel, wanted not wit and knowledge to establish his
belief, did believe the same thing, and in his Alcoran mentions several Earths
and Seas to be in Heaven and the four Elements; and all that is amongst us to
be in every one of the Stars.

Epicureus did say, That these Worlds were some of them without Sun or Moon,
and some had greater then those that lighten us; and that others had diverse
Suns, and that some of them were without living creatures in them, without
Plants, and without all moisture, and that at the same that things are thus in
our worlds as we see them, so also are they in diverse other worlds; but had he
seen how the Indians and we agree in several things, he would questionless
have believed it more constantly.

Icetes the Pythagorian, together with Philolaus, did believe there were two
Earths opposite one to the other; and Picus Mirandula was forced to say, That
he thought that the Moon was an Earth like unto ours; herein conforming himself
to those Pythagorians, who sometimes did call our Earth, Moon; and the Moon,
Earth. Francastor, Physician at Zerona (following Eudoxus and Calispus's
Judgment) together with diverse others, whom for brevity sake I shall omit, did
also believe the same.

But whereas so many Philosophers have asserted the Position of this opinion;
it will be answered, That I am not the first author of (...)* To this I answer,
That it is sufficient for me to renew it, and plainly profess it, the which
hitherto was not yet publicly practiced.

Chap. XXX.
Of those things that are in the Moon, and other Planets.

THough the Ancients had not the help of Prospective-glasses, as we have,
wherewith we see as new Linxes, the Seas, the Mountains, and other things which
are in the Moon; yet they did inquire and speak of things more particular that
are in the Stars; as the Pythagorians and Orpheus, who did believe that the
Moon was not only of the color of the Earth, but that it contained Men,
Beasts, and Trees, 15 times bigger then we, or 50 times bigger, as Herodotus,
who also asserts, that in it are Towns and Cities. Xenophanes did also think,
that there are men within the body of the Moon; Anaxagoras and Democritus have
also said, That in it are contained Mountains, Valleys, and Fields.

Lucianus in his book of true history, and Aristoteles, have both mentioned
some particularities of what is in the Moon; but we shall not take notice what
the first says, because he relates it as a fable; though for the composing of
his work, he has made use of a great deal of those ancient Philosophers
opinions.

Plutarch in his discourse of the Moon, reasons pro and con, whether the Moon
is inhabited? and whether it is an Earth as ours, and inclines sometimes to
one, sometimes to the other; but at length it seems that he did believe it,
because he answers to diverse objections that might be alleged against this
opinion.

Bacon desires us seriously to cast our eyes upon the opinions of Pythagoras,
Philolaus, Xenophanes, Anaxagoras, Parmenides, Lucippus, and of other ancient
Philosophers, indicating to us the truth thereof, and wishes, that some body
would compose a book of their opinions; this present discourse is part of it;
and therefore do we in some measure satisfy the desire of so rare a Person.

Lucretius, whom we have here above quoted, did confidently believe the same,
and has testified it in diverse places of his works, and especially in these
Verses, besides those already alleged in the 18. Chapter.

Esse alios alibi terrarum in partibus orbs,
Et varias hominum gentes et saecla ferarum,
Huc accedit, uti in summa res nulla sit una,
Unica quae gignatur et unica solaque crescat.
That is to say,

There are other new Worlds, wherein is variety of Men and Beasts, and of all
other living creatures, because that there is nothing grows single and alone
in this World, nor in the earth, nor in the Sea. And in another place,

Praeterea cun materies est multa parata,
Cun loci est praeslo, nec res nec causa moratur
Ulla, geri debet nimirum et confitier res.
Whereas there is store of matter, and that the causes and the places do
suffice, this therefore ought to be declared, and men must needs grant it so to
be.

Paracelsus has said, That there are in Heaven some certain men called
Tortelii and Penates, for whom Christ did not die, of whom some are without
Soul, and some not composed of the four Elements; he yet names others, never
mentioned but by him.

Some of the Stoics were of opinion, not only that there are people in the
Moon, but also in the body of the Sun; And Campanella says, That those lively
and bright habitations may have Inhabitants, perhaps more wise and learned then
we, and better informed in those things that to us are incomprehensible.

But Galileus, who in our Age has perspicuously seen into the Moon, has
observed, That it may be inhabited, seeing that there are Mountains in it, etc.
for those parts in it that are the Plains and Valleys are obscure and dark, and
the Mountains are bright and clear. For this cause have some said, That the
Stars do not shine, but by reason of their irregularity, asserting, That we
could not see them, if they had not Mountains for to reflect and reverberate
the light of the Sun.

Chap. XXXI.
Containing the Solution of some Objections that may be made against this
Paradox of the World's Plurality.

BUt some may say, There cannot be such Men as we, in the Stars; for they
could not live there, because men are diverse, even after the diversity of
Countries; and those who ascend that high Mount Piracaca in the Indies, dye
there by reason of the too subtle air of the place. To which I answer, That
those men must needs be different from us, or endued with more robust and
strong bodies then we; or so well proportioned in the mixture of the Elements,
that that Air cannot be obnoxious and hurtful to them; but that God has so
formed them, that they may well live where he has placed them, but no where
else.

And if we had never seen or heard of the Sea, we could not be persuaded, that
Fishes could live in salt water, and that therein they could breed and grow for
our food; nor that those Countries of the burning and frozen Zones, could be
inhabited: So must we believe, that God has by prevention of inconvenience,
ordered all things for the best.

Here also might be objected, the Incommodities and incongruences that might
befall the Inhabitants of the Moon, viz. the Meteors as the Clouds, and other
which would offend them, and would hinder Plants to grow therein.

We answer to this, That those Meteors are far enough from it, and that rather
they are less molested by them then we; for Galileus did see with the
telescope, that it does not rain upon the Earth of the Moon.

But it may be replied, How then do the plants grow?

To which I answer, That they may grow in it, not only by reason of the Moon's
natural humidity and moisture, but also by the inundations of its Rivers; as in
Egypt, where likewise no rain is seen; I say farther, That those Inhabitants of
the Moon have no more ground to allege these Objections, being that when they
look upon the Earth, through the mists and clouds that incompass it, they might
doubt whether any creatures could be contained in it.

But hitherto we have answered none but weak objections. Now come we to that
with which our Opponents do arm themselves chiefly, which is that of the Prince
of the Aristotelists, who as the Otthomans aimed to slay all his brothers, that
he might reign more securely, viz. to beat down and suppress all opinions
contrary to his; now this is his argument;

If there were many worlds, the earth of those worlds would move toward our
Earth; or ours toward that of the other Worlds; and so the other Elements of
the other worlds would reach ours, and so there would be nothing but a great
tumult and Chaos.

This Argument is so weak, that Magirus is constrained to speak in these terms
when he alleges it, not being himself able to find others, because he
maintains not the truth; All these Reasons, (says he) and such like
Philosophic Arguments, cannot perspicuously demonstrate, that there is but one
World; and Charles Rapineus speaks thus, That it can but weakly be so persuaded.

Aristoteles could not comprehend what we have above said, viz. That each world
has its center, whereunto tend those heavy bodies that are in its sphere; But
he arguments upon a false foundation, making the Earth to be the Center of all
the worlds, and allotting but one center for all; his Argument would be good,
if his ground were good: for what he says was true, it would be requisite that
all heavy and ponderous things should tend toward our Center; but there being
many, they also go into diverse Centers; for each Star has its center that
upholds it, and though it be of a ponderous nature, yet is it light, in itself.
Having thus answered, and so plainly and fully resolved the Objection of
Aristoteles, the grand Prince of Philosophers, what may they expect who have
not such pregnant Objections as his.

Chap. XXXII.
Continuing the Solution of diverse Philosophers Objections against the
Plurality of Worlds.

THese following Arguments are yet objected; First, That whereas there is but
one principle and first Mover, or but one God and first cause, and that the
world ought to answer in likeness to its Architype, there also ought to be but
one World. But we have here above showed the contrary, because that God is
infinite, so also ought the Worlds to be infinite.

For a second Argument, it is objected, That if there were more then one World,
the Divine Scriptures would have communicated it to us; but speaking but of one
only, it is not likely there should be any more.

To this I answer, That the holy Scripture speaks clearly of none but of ours;
though yet in several places it agrees in the plurality of Worlds, as we
shall hereafter demonstrate; and that it speaks after the manner of men, of all
heavenly things, condescending to our weakness, and to the common opinion; as
when it says, That the Sun and Moon are the great Lights, and yet the Moon is
one of the smallest Stars; and there are some others that are as bigg as the
Sun, as Canopus Star, and others, and an infinite number bigger then the
Moon: Likewise the Scripture says, That God is angry, and does repent, though
he is immutable and unchangeable; and therefore might the Scripture do the like
concerning the motion of the Earth, and the plurality of Worlds.

For a third Argument, Plato speaks thus; The matter requisite for the
composition of the world is but one, and heaped up together into one lump or
body alone, and the Heaven contains within it self all the simple bodies, so
that no part of the matter can remain, for therewith to compose and frame other
Worlds.

To this I answer, That it is not necessary that all the matter be exhausted and
spent in the Creation of this our Earth alone, yea rather in the Creation of
the whole Fabric; but and if it had been all spent at the creation alone of
this our Earth, God could yet create some new: And last of all, concedo totum,
I grant the whole Argument, it proving nothing against my assertion; for I
comprehend all the Worlds or Earths to be in Heaven.

Plato says farther against this opinion, That the World would be imperfect,
if it should not contain all; and secondly, would not be like its pattern, if
it were not single and only one, and that it would not be incorruptible, if
there was any thing out of it.

But we have already answered the Objection touching Unity; where we have
discovered, That God being infinite, there must also be infinite Worlds: for as
Sextus Empiricus says, There is nothing one alone of all whatsoever is numbered
in the World. And as for the last, Plutarch answers it, saying thus, That it
hinders not the World's perfection, that there are other Worlds besides; for
man is perfect, and yet contains not every thing. And to this answer I add,
That by this word World, Plato did understand the whole Fabric of all these
Earths or Worlds which make up but one whole world; his Arguments cannot at all
overthrow my Position.

Timplerus forms yet this Argument, If there were diverse Worlds, they would
have been made in vain, and to no purpose, because no use of them can be
showed. This his Reason is so weak, that it will suffice to say, for to confute
it, That though we may not know for what use they are made, yet they are not
made for nothing; for by this same reason, the Indies, from whence we receive
great advantage and profit, and the Northern Countries that yet are unknown to
us, would also have been created in vain.

Again, there are some who object, That if the Stars were inhabited, they would
have need of the influence of other Stars and Heavens, usque ad infinitum,
without number.

To this I answer, That I am not much persuaded, that the Stars are
advantageous to us, the Sun and Moon excepted; it is not possible, that the
Stars communicate and serve one another mutually, and therefore there is no
need of an infinite number of Heavens.

Last of all, Zabarella arguments thus, If there were other Worlds, what in
them should be contained, would be either like to what is in this our World, or
differing from it; if it were like it, in vain would individuals be multiplied;
if differing, it could not be found out how it is disposed.

To this Objection I answer, That men and other things in the Indies, would
also have been created in vain, if his Reason was valid; and that though we
knew not what was in those new Lands and Countries, yet it was in them
notwithstanding; so likewise though we be ignorant of what is in the other
Worlds, yet this our ignorance excludes not their being.

Chap. XXXIII.
Answering Pacius's Argument against this Assertion:

IN this whole Fabric* considered at large, may be observed diverse Worlds
contained within it; as the individuals under the species; but Pacius labors
to oppose this Position thus; That the World, such as it is, comprehends all,
and that all the matter was spent in the composition of it, and that therefore
there can be no other bodies out of it; for if there were any, they would be
either simple, or composed; if simple, it would be the Heaven or the Elements:
But they cannot be the Heaven, considering it changes not fully its place, but
turns round upon it self: Nor likewise can it be an Element, because it would
be beyond nature; nor also a mixed body, because that if there be not some
simple bodies, there can be no mixed ones.

To which I answer, That, as I have already said, by Worlds, is to be
understood Earths only; and by the general word of World, or whole Fabric,
are by me understood, All the things of the whole Fabric, in the frame and
composition of which, I yield, that all the matter was spent and employed, and
that out of them there is no other Universe or general World.

Chap. XXXIV.
Answering Melancthon's Objections, together with others, who say, That this
Doctrine tends to Introduce new Maxims against Religion.

BUt there may yet some stand up, and say with Melancthon, That God ceased from
creating, and rested himself; but Moses in the second of Genesis speaks, and
means only the Creation of this our World: and truly it is more consonant,
that some end, and others be created of new; as Empedocles did believe it,
together with Democritus; God has limited his power, and he is still the same
for to create again, as he was before: and as it is said in the Book of Wisdom,
chapter 11. v. 18. he wants not means to create of new unknown wild beasts:
Therefore both this and the other Arguments alleged by Melancthon, are weak
against this our Position, which he himself being forced to confess, he says
in his natural Physics, that though his arguments do not fully conclude, yet
they must be considered and weighed, lest that if we believe that there are
other worlds, we also should believe other Religions, and other natures of Men.
For my part, I see no necessity, that because there are more Worlds, there must
also be more Religions; the increase of this World, through the discovery of
the Indies, has not caused any new Religion; and it is very unlike from being
capable of introducing Heresy and Atheism; I confidently believe, that this
admirable order of the World, which disperses the confusisions and chaos, which
by reason of men's ignorance do yet reign, will even make the greatest Atheists
of this world to confess, That they cannot have their original but from God
alone, who is the Sovereign Creator of all things.

Melancthon says farther, That if there were diverse Worlds, it would be
requisite, that Jesus Christ should suffer death several times for to save them
all: but what do we know, whether those Men in the Stars are better then those
that are in this world, whereof Satan is called the Prince, and where he
abides; for which cause St. John says in Chap. 12. and v. 12. of the
Revelations, Therefore rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them; woe to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you.

And though we should certainly know, that those men in the Stars have need
of salvation, God has so many means and ways, to us unknown, for to save
them, and to satisfy his Justice, that we need not inform our selves about
these things, but believe them in faith, captivating our understandings; as an
ancient Father of the Church has well spoken.

But some may object, Who is he that will believe it?

To whom I shall reply with Plato, No wicked man shall ever know it; but he
only who shall be found worthy of it. Let then those who are unworthy of so
high and sublime knowledge, withdraw hence, their gross spirit cannot apprehend
the subtilty of it; and as Spiders do turn the best food into venom and
poison, they call that which is the true way to the knowledge of God, the
highway to Atheism.

Chap. XXXV.
Proving the Plurality of Worlds, by a Reason drawn from the place of Hell.

SOme scrupulous persons might say, That the Reason of this Chapter seems in
something to contradict the doctrine of the Church: But I shall answer him,
That if any one should endeavor to prove, that there is no Hell, his Opinion
should certainly be esteemed erroneous and pernicious; but to do nothing but to
establish and confirm it, as I do in this Chapter, and to remark the place
where it is, being that the Divines cannot certainly point out the place, I
find nothing in it repugnant to Christianity.

Now whereas our bodies are to rise from the dead, for to be rewarded according
to their deserts good or evil, and that the damned are in greater number then
the saved, the place of Hell must needs be very spacious and great to contain
them all, and solid and firm to uphold them; but it cannot be any where but in
one of the Stars, and so consequently the Stars may have Inhabitants in them;
for it is said, That the Center of the Earth, because it is the center of the
World, and the farthest place from Heaven; but that I cannot find it needful to
place it in the Center of the World, considering that God is equally every
where, and that men cannot alienate themselves from him; and also because it is
very easy to prove the contrary, not only in that it could not be sufficient
to contain in it self all the damned that have been since the Creation, and
shall be unto the end, nor can be penetrated through by their lumpish bodies;
and also because the Earth it self at the day of Judgment must be consumed and
done away, as Esdras says in 4th Chapter, and 42 verse of his second book; but
also in this, that not the earth, but the Sun is the Center of the worlds; the
Sun then by reason of its far distance from the highest Heavens, says
Foscarinus, is the true place of Hell, even as its siery nature required; for
the internal habitations seems to persuade it: but I cannot admit this
opinion, though that I hold, that Hell must be in one of the Stars; but to seat
it in so beautiful a Star as the Sun is, I cannot consent to it; seeing that
the damned Souls cannot merit so good and advantageous an habitation.

But on the contrary, It may seem more plausible and consonant to truth, to
seat the Paradise of God in the Sun, according to that Text in the Psalms, In
S^le posuit tabernaculum suum, God has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun.

But to prove more certainly, that Hell is not within the Earth, let us but
observe, that it was created before the Earth, seeing that the wicked Angels
were banished into it before the Creation of the Earth; to which agrees the
first Chapter, and 14 verse of the Wisdom of Solomon, saying, The Kingdom of
death is not upon the Earth.

Chap. XXXVI.
Proving the plurality of Worlds, by an Argument drawn from the Seat of
Paradise both Celestial, and Terrestrial.

IT may likewise be proved, That Paradise is no where else but in the Stars:
Now it is most clear and certain, that it is not this Earth, but a new Earth,
wherein is the heavenly Jerusalem, which must needs be a solid place, as well
as our Earth, that it may hold us up, wherein all joy and happiness shall be;
and out of which shall all miseries and torments be banished; this place is
prepared of old for men, and what do we know but that we shall be dispersed
into several Stars; does not our Lord Christ Jesus assure us, That in his
Fathers house are many Mansions: and Esdras, in the 4. chap. and 7. ver. of his
second Book, tells us, How many Springs are above the Firmament, and which are
the outgoings of Paradise. It may be that after we have inhabited this Earth
of misery and sorrow, wherein death and infirmity are the wages of our sins, we
shall be introduced into those high Globes wherein we shall live for ever, in
fullness of happiness and joy. Is it not said in Rev. 2. ver. 28. To him that
overcomes, will I give the morning Star? And Job, in the 38. and 7. v. does see
through Faith, the Morning Stars singing together, and all the Sons of Men
shouting for joy. This his Vision shall be accomplished, when we shall trample
upon these moving wonders, and if by reason of those glorious objects we may
remember the things of this Earth, we shall from those vast habitations of
glory, look with great contempt and disdain upon this lump of Earth, so highly
esteemed of men, and by them divided into so many Regions, and Countries; and
upon that drop of water, by them divided into so many Seas.

May it not also be that the Earthly Paradise, or Garden of Eden, out of which
Adam was driven, was the same place whereunto we shall return; he was driven
out of it for his sins, without which he had not tasted death. And now that
Jesus Christ by his satisfaction to the Father's Justice, has blotted them
out, we shall be therein introduced. Munster faith, that many ancient
Philosophers did imagine it situated in a high place, encompassed with fire,
adjoining the Circle of the Moon, and that there are Elias and Enoch, those
Ancients were not far from my opinion, seeing the inconveniences that would
follow, if we did seat it in this our World: for if to believe that this
Paradise was upon this Earth, it is a very hard thing; for it is of no moment to
rely upon the names of the Rivers, and Countries, that are named in the
translation of the Holy Scripture, considering that the Hebrew names in it are
not conform; and that the Translators do yield, that they have Interpreted
them but by conjecture, and as nigh as they could guess.

Again, this Paradise can no more be found on the Earth; nor those Rivers, that
are said to be those whom Moses, does mention, do not issue from one and the
same Spring, as it is recorded of those of Paradise. And lastly, it would be a
ridiculous thing, to believe that God has driven his people from that place,
which he suffers the Turks, and other Infidels to enjoy, it being that whole
Country, apprehended to have been this Earthly Paradise of delight. Before I
conclude this Chapter, I will here allege two notable things.

The first is, that as there is no Book, though never so bad, but there is also
some good in it: Neither is there any Religion but has some good Maxims. The
Chineans, and the Turks, being persuaded by appearances do not at all doubt but
that after death, they go to inhabit the World of the Moon.

The second is, that there are already diverse bodies in Hell, and also in
Paradise. In Hell are those who have yielded up their bodies to the unclean
spirits, and Demons; but in Paradise are Elias and Enoch, which both places to
hold up those bodies, must needs be solid, which solidity cannot be but in some
Stars, or Star, where God does manifest himself more clearly and visibly, and
where are those Rocks of eternity, whereof it is spoken by Moses, whereunto we
must desire to go, and there to dwell, exchanging this Valley of misery to the
great advantage and comfort of our glorious bodies.

Chap. XXXVII.
Proving the Worlds plurality, by an Answer made by the Demons.

IF any Creature can know the pure and naked truth of things, and that may
decide and resolve this question to the full, certainly the evil spirits may;
but how may we enquire of them about it?

Thus it may be done; for it is very certain, that Pans, Sylvaines, and other
gods, who in former Ages did appear to men, were wicked spirits and Demons,
who required worship from men; but a certain Silenus, who was one of that
nature, suffering Marsias to take possession of him, told him, That there were
other Worlds, where men lived as old again as we, and were of higher and
greater shape and stature.

And in the History of Faustus the Magician, it is said, that his spirits did
walk him amongst the Stars, for the space of eight days, and that he was
carried 80000 miles high far from us; and that ascending up very high, he did
perceive from far off this Earth, the Cities and other things in it contained;
but this his relation is but in brief.

Chap. XXXVIII.
Proving the same, by a Reason drawn from the unprofitablenesse of the light of
the Sun, and others.

IF there were no Globes inhabited above the Sun, for what use would that light
be which the Sun casts above him? It would be altogether unprofitable and
useless, if it was lost in the Air; It is then cast upon those bodies that
have need of it, which cannot be any thing else but the Stars, which of their
nature are dark and obscure, and earthly, as the earth that we inhabit; for
otherwise they would have no need of the Sun's light.

Shall not so many Reasons suffice for to overcome that obstinacy and
Preoccupation? Great Alexander may break the Ice, and show us the way, who
having heard Anaxarch the Philosopher, discoursing upon this subject matter,
did believe him, and fell a weeping, because that there being other Worlds, he
had yet conquered but one.

Chap. XXXIX.
Proving the same, by the Suns mutual ravishments betwixt the Earth and the
Moon; and by their equal qualities, and by other notable Reasons.

WE may say, That the time spoken by Seneca in his Medea, is come now.

Quae Typhis novos deteget orbs. Wherein we may learn things unheard, viz. the
discovery of new Worlds.

Et tabula pictos ediscere mundos. We may say it with better ground then he,
seeing he only spoke of the Indies, and we speak of Worlds distinct and
separated, and prove it by so many Arguments, as if we could not come to an end
of them; for it may yet be proved, in that the Earth and the Moon deprive each
other mutually of the Sun; which deed does testify their conformity, and that
both may suffer Eclipses; also by their mutual communications, cold qualities,
solidity and roughness, that help us to see it; for many think, that we should
scarcc see it, were it not for its irregularities, which cause its light better
to reverberate the beams of the Sun.

I shall add to this, That if God, who could make many Worlds, had not made
them, his power might be said, in some respects, to have been idle,
unprofitable, and limited; for though it ayms not so much to the works, as to
the end of them, yet it being for his greater glory, though he does not
whatsoever he can, we cannot assert, That he was not willing to make many
Worlds; as we cannot deny, but he had the power to make them.

Thirdly, the common and general opinion grants, the four Elements to be in
Heaven; for it believed, that there is the Empyred Heaven, that is the Heaven
of fire, the crystal Heaven, that is of a waterish nature; the Heaven of the
Stars, which is solid, and by consequence of an earthly nature* and the Air is
apprehended to be amongst those Stars: the four Elements then are in Heaven,
and why may not there be also mixed and composed bodies? and why not the effects
as well as the causes, which compose them, are in it? and why could they not
act as well within themselves, as in things far remote?

Fourthly, the Creation of the world, or of many worlds, is a thing that wholly
depends from the free Will of God, neither can it be denied by any natural
reason; for God acts not outwardly by necessity, as to limit himself only to
this our World; but on the contrary, God wills whatsoever implies not
contradiction: But many worlds do not imply contradiction, neither from God,
nor from the thing created; and it seems requisite, that the object be the
measure of the power; but this World not being infinite as God is, there must
needs be an infinity of them.

Chap. XL.
Discoursing of those Stars discovered of late, and of the Spots of the Sun.

HAving above mentioned the Spots of the Sun, and some new Stars, and thence
having drawn some Arguments, it may not be out of our purpose to speak of them
now. As concerning the new Stars, Galileus relates, that in the years 1572,
and 1604, were seen some new Stars, that were higher then any one of the
Planets; whereof the first was in Cassiopeia, as Tycho Brahe, and Campanella
declare; so likewise did Hipparchus observe a new Star 100 years before
Christ's Birth.

And as touching the Spots of the Sun, I shall content my self to say, hat
Galileus asserts, That these Spots are bigger then all Asia and Africa; some
there are, who believe them to be only vapors, and some impressions of the
Air, because that their figures are irregular, and that they are seen in great
number disappearing, and again appearing; but they only hide themselves in the
Sun; or to say more congruously, they only disappear by reason of their too
nigh approach to the light of the Sun; and besides, they have a regulated
course, according to which they fail not to return at a certain time; and
therefore they are some Stars, touching which I send the Reader to Tardus's
book, who calls them the Stars of Bourbon, after the name of the King of
France, under whose reign these new Stars were first discovered.

Chap. XLI.
Containing diverse Reasons drawn from several places of Scripture.

AS it is said in diverse places of the holy Scripture, That the Earth is full
of corruption; or that it sings out the miracles of God by a figure of
Rhetoric, that puts the continent for the thing contained; several Texts of
the Scripture do also say, as in Job 25. v. 5, 6. that the Stars are not clean
before God, that they sing his praises, and are his Armies. These are things
that very hardly enter into the heart of Men, and very likely part of them that
Paul saw in his ecstasy; but being he says, that it never entered into the
heart of man, he might mean, unto his time no body had believed it, or at least
has not had the full and particular knowledge of them: wherefore Job says,
chap. 38. v. 37, 38. Who can number the clouds in wisdom? or who can stay the
bottles of Heaven. And Solomon in the book of Wisdom, chapter 9. v. 16. And hardly
do we guess aright at things that are upon Earth, and with labor do we find
the things that are before us; but the things that are in Heaven, who has
searched out? And Esdras in his second book, chap. 4. v. 21. They that dwell
upon the Earth, may understand nothing but that which is upon the Earth; and he
that dwells above the Heavens, may only understand the things that are above
the height of the Heavens.

It may be replied, That these Texts are to be understood of the Angels; But
the Texts alleged in the following Chapter will make it clear, that it is to be
understood of Men only; for Campanella has even observed, that Paul to the
Colossians, Chap. 1. verse 20. says, That by Jesus Christ's blood all things
are reconciled to God, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven;
and consequently it will follow, that there are men in Heaven, who have need of
Redemption as well as we.

Chap. XLII.
Containing the Reasons drawn from the Word of God.

IF then there be diverse Worlds, and that the Stars be inhabited, those worlds
may have been created some before the others, and so shall end at diverse times;
and perhaps some are ended already, and some are created of new: the believers
of those former Worlds seem to speak in Psalm. 90. ver. 1, 2. saying, Lord, thou
have been our dwelling place in all generations, before the Mountains were
brought forth, or ever thou had formed the Earth and the World.

And God seems to be angry against the men of those worlds, in 2. of Esdras, c.
9. v. 18, 19. because those who were before, were better in these terms. And
now when I prepared the World which was not yet made, even for them to dwell in
that now live, no man spoke against me, for then every one obeyed, but now the
manners of them which are created in this World; that is made, are corrupted by
a perpetual seed, but there is yet one Text more pregnant for to prove that
there were other Worlds before this, that are ended, and have been judged as we
shall be one day, he speaks in these terms in the 2. Book of Esdras, c. 7. v.
34. And the World shall be turned into the old silence 7. days, like as in the
former Judgments, so that no man shall remain: And if it be thus, might we not
say that those great Comets that remain so long above the Region of the meteor,
are the burnings and consummations of some Stars that are ending, and which we
had not perceived by reason of their far distance: For as in former ages, new
ones have often been seen, yea, even in this our own; so likewise may some
others end: and to all this, we may add that of the Revelations, viz. that the
Stars shall fall, that is to say, shall end. Many ancient Authors were of this
Judgment, believing not only that there are diverse Worlds at one and the same
time, but that there had already been some before. Origenes was of this belief,
and that ours shall last seven thousand years, and that many of the others
shall last forty nine thousand years. Campanella differs not much from this
judgment, the Wisdom of God speaking in the Proverbs, says, chapter 8. v. 23.
31. Before the Earth was, I was with God, rejoicing in the habitable part of
his Earth, and my delights were with the Sons of Men. And in the 26. v. While
as yet he had not made the Earth, nor the Fields, nor the highest part of the
dust of the World.

Chap. XLIII.
which is a sequel of the Texts of the Holy Scripture.

THough we have divided these places of Scripture into two chapters for to
confirm this opinion; yet I will not omit some few others, which may in some
respects sit this same subject.

Paul to the Ephesians, c. 1. v. 10. speaking of Christ Jesus, says, That in
the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might gather together in one,
all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in
him. And to the Colos. 1. v. 20. God having made peace through the blood of
Christ's Cross, reconciled all things to himself, whether they be things in
Earth or things in Heaven.

How may these two Texts be expounded if we do not understand them of these men
who are in the Heavens or Stars, whom God has gathered to himself, and
redeemed? For if it be said that they are those that died before Christ; It
cannot stand with reason, because their Souls were already in Paradise, or in
Hell: but where the Soul is, thither also shall the body go after the
Resurrection.

David speaks thus in the Psalm. 112. v. 6. God humbles himself to behold the
things that are in Heaven and in Earth, for he dwells on high; This Text
indicates that God is beyond the Heavens, and that in the Heavens whereunto he
humbles himself, there are Inhabitants as well as in the Earth.

And in the Ps. 148. he bids the Angels, Stars, and Earth, etc. to praise him:
That is to say, he spoke thus to the Inhabitants thereof by a figure; which
takes the continent for the thing contained.

Ecclesiasticus, says in his 16. chap. and 18, 19, 20, 21. verses, Behold the
Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, the deep, and the Earth, and all that
therein is shall be moved, and the Foundations of the Earth shall be shaken
with trembling, when he shall visit them, and who can conceive his ways, for
the most part of his works are hid. And in the chap. 43. ver. 32. says, that
There are yet hid greater things then these be, for we have seen but a few of
his works. By these two places it plainly appears that those things which we
have not seen, and are greater then any that we know, are somewhere else then
in this Earth, viz. in the Heavens, and that consequently there is more then
one World.

I might yet allege diverse other Scriptures, as that of the 2. chap. to the
Phillip. verse 10. and Psalm 89. verse 7. But that I may not be too tedious, I
shall not make farther mention of others.

Chap. XLIV.
How the naked truth of the plurality of Worlds may be discovered; and
especially what is in the Moon.

BUt being we have neither the wings of birds, nor the eyes of Eagles or
Lynxes, nor can heap up Mountains one upon another as Giants, how can we see
perspicuously the things that are in the Moon, and in the other etherial bodies?

To this I answer, That those ancient Ages have showed us the way, by the Tower
of Babel, by Pyramides and Phares, from the top of which, scarce could men be
discovered and perceived; and from those tops were discovered Countries of far
distance, immortalizing the memory of their Authors. It would be requisite,
that a King or great Prince, desirous by emulation to immortalize his name,
would set poor prisoners, with other Workmen, to the Work, that from it (being
high elevated up into the Air) we might more distinctly behold by the help of
the Prospective-glasses, what is within the Stars, and chiefly in the Moon; no
doubt such a Tower would serve much, being built upon a very high Hill.

But if it be objected, That there are very high Mountains, from which
nevertheless no new thing can be seen.

I answer, That besides that, no body went to try it with a Prospect-glasse,
those Mountains, though high, by reason of their crookedness, are not very
high, if we consider them perpendicularly; and yet it has been observed, that
from the highest Hill of Mount Pyreneus, the Sun appears more majesticall then
ordinarily, which cannot proceed but from the height of that Mountain. And
though nothing could be discovered from such a Tower, which I cannot believe,
yet it would be a work of immortal name to that Prince who would do it.

And that it may be out of doubt, that from a high Mountain, or some such place
high elevated, something may be seen and observed in the Stars, Bethancour in
his Travels asserts, That from the top of Tenerisa, a very high Mountain in the
Canaries, the Sun may be seen to turn round upon himself, without the help of
any Prospective-glasses.

Secondly, it is most certain, That if the Prospectiveglasses can be brought to
a full perfection, that many things will be discovered new in the Stars, and at
the first time that they were invented, diverse things have already been
discovered; for Galileus and Descartes declare, that there may be made
Prospective-glasses, that shall multiply the object a thousand times in his
bigness: If it be so, what is there in the Firmament that may not
perspicuously be seen?

Lastly, some have imagined, that as Man has imitated the Fishes in swimming,
that he may also find out the Art of flying, and that by such an artifice, he
may without any other help see the truth of this question; the Histories relate
to us some Examples of men that have flown. Many Philosophers think it
feasible, and amongst others Roger Bacon; I might here relate all those
Examples, and diverse Reasons for it; yea, some instruments and engines for that
effect: but I shall show these things in my Book of Natural Magic; and in my
discourse, de art volandi; because though one could attain the Art of flying,
yet it would avail him but little for this purpose, because that besides, by
reason of his weight he could not rise very high, he could not remain fixed to
behold Heaven, or to make use of Prospective-glasses, but would wholly bend his
mind to the guiding of his Engine.

Chap. XLV.
Of Scipio's Dream; with some new Reason upon this subjectmatter.

WE read in several Authors, that Scipio dreamed a very notable dream, wherein
he thought that he was carried up high, and that he saw other Worlds in the
Stars, whence he perceived the Roman Empire; and seeing it from very far,
found, that it took so little room in this our Terrestrial Globe, that upon
that he conceived an exceeding great contempt of those, who despising their
life, did venture it, for to get a famous name (though but vain) in that little
corner of the Earth. Both Cicero and Macrobius have composed Books concerning
this Dream, and have doubted under what sort of dreams this was to be entered.
For my part, I think that it must be called a Vision, being he saw things that
are real, viz. the airy Lands, and the Stary and Planeticall people. Or it may
be, that having such a belief, he was desirous to propose it, as many others in
such like case have done, thereby to see how it would be received: And truly,
if this was his scope, he has had no bad success; for it has been embraced
by many illustrious Persons, who have found it consonant to Reason.

Besides all this, Is it not beyond all reason and appearance, that so many
huge and vaste bodies as the Stars are, should remain barren and fruitless. I
think, that if I should discourse orderly, and gradually with the most
opinionative man that is, that I should obtain of him, that those bodies,
whereof some are three hundred times bigger then the Earth, do at least bear
some plants; and if this were granted, how could these plants be there, if they
were not for the use of some living Creatures: and if it could be granted, that
there be some creatures, may it not also be granted, that there are Men for to
make use of them, being they are made for them? And lastly, is it not lawful
and equal, that there be men whither soever their dominion reaches; but Man
rules the Stars, as well as the Earth and Sea, the whole World is made for him;
and consequently there must needs be some Inhabitants in the Stars.

Chap. XLVI.
Answering the Objection of those, who believe, that the Spots of the Moon are
the figure of the Earth.

BEfore I conclude this Discourse, I think it yet convenient to answer them,
who think that they have hit right on the head of the nayl, when they say, that
the Spots in the Moon are nothing else but the figure of the Earth's shadow,
which communicate themselves in the Moon, as in a Lookingglasse; but they do
not consider, that there is no analogy nor resemblance between those Spots, and
those of our general Mapp; nor that in dark nights this figure can be
communicated to the Moon; or could it be said, That those Mountains in the
Moon, are nothing but some flat and low obscurities; But I answer, That the
shadow of those Mountains appears and turns as the Needle of a Sea-Compasse,
proportionably as the Sun inlightens them diversely, which could not be, were
they not bodies high elevated; for they would be without shadow, and Monsieur
Gassandus did sometimes say, That he had mathematically measured the height of
some Mountains and valleys in the Moon by means of their shadows; and that he
had found the height of the Mountains in the Moon to be much more remarkable,
then of those of the Earth.

Chap. XLVII.
Containing an Argument drawn from those mountains that are in the Moon.

WE must observe that the Moon being half full, more or less out of it are
seen many little spots, as drops of Water, or Orient Pearls very bright. Now
they are the tops of the Mountains, that are lighted by the splendor of the
Sun, because they ascend as high as that part of the Moon which is enlightened;
but because the Mountains are broad at the foot, and are dark at the bottom,
those drops appear to be somewhat scattered one from the other, and so seem
loosed from the Moon, though they be not. So likewise if one should contemplate
from above the Mount Pireneus, or the Alps, he would only see their top in the
form of so many Pearls, because the top of them would reverberate the splendor
of the Sun, and their Snows would increase the light of it.

Observe also that Paul in his 1. to the Cor. c. 15. v. 40. asserts that the
Glory of the celestial bodies, is diverse from that of the terrestrial, and that
there is one glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory
of the Stars. But if they differ in glory, they do so by reason of the variety
of creatures that are in them; in the 47. verse, the Apostle seems to indicate
that there are heavenly men, and also earthly men.

The Courteous Reader is entreated to consider that this is only a fragment of
the Volume intended by the Author, for to set forth the life and Philosophy of
Democritus, who asserted this opinion: So that I say only what he himself
would have said to confirm his position. But if it seems in any particulars to
oppose and contradict the Principles of Religion, and that my Arguments do not
give full satisfaction, I shall freely retract and uncloath my self of this
opinion, if it be any ways noxious to Religion: if it be recited and blamed by
ignorant persons, who are not able, nor sit to answer to the Objections, and
cannot or will not weigh them by reason, I have what I expect. But if learned
and wise persons can show me the contrary with sound proofs, and strong
reasons, they shall find me ready to yield up this my opinion to their
censures. Though above fifty Authors of this same opinion, going before me,
have not yet been contradicted. I hope that I give no more occasion of distaste
then they.

FINIS.

