OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS AT WESTMINSTER.

After advice had with their Assembly of DIVINES, for the Ordination of
Ministers pro Tempore, according to their DIRECTORY for ORDINATION, and Rules
for Examination therein expressed.

Die Mercurij. 2. October. 1644.

The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the
Law, Heb. 7.12. Si qui cum Episcopo non sint, in Ecclesia non sunt. Cypr.
Epist. 69. n. 31. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the
University. 1645.

OBSERVATIONS UPON THE ORDINANCE, etc. 2. October. 1644.
1. I Will not quarrel with the Ordinance or Authors thereof, because it
arises from them, who have neither skill nor authority to provide for
Ordination. This were something an high charge. And yet Ordination is confessed
Ord. p. 2.
to be a spiritual act, which may only be performed by spiritual persons. It
ought therefore to be provided for by spiritual Persons. Whereas this
Ordinance goes backward: it is sent from the Lords and Commons to the Assembly
of Divines; not to be devised, or framed by them, but to take care of the
Printing thereof. That Is all they have to do in the publishing of this
Ordinance: Witness H. Elsynge. It seems, they are esteemed fit men to oversee
the Press.

2. Whereas Cod. Afric. Can. 103.
Public Prayers, and Forms of Ordination, had wont to be collected and
Ordered by Divines, indeed, by Bishops assembled in a Synod, or free Council;
though afterward confirmed and authorized by Princes and Acts of State, for
the quiet performance of the same, and full conformity thereto.

3. Thus was it in the days of K. Edward the sixth, of Q. Elizabeth, and K.
James. Indeed were not Corporal and penal Laws made, which are not in the
power of the Church, some light Spirits, and unquiet dispositions would
dissolve the bonds of unity, and subvert the frame of uniformity, while they
like of nothing, but what is suitable to their own giddy brains and
distempered fancies; nor of that long.

4. This Ordinance of the Lords and Commons, is no long lived Ordinance; it is
not like Dan. 68.
the Laws of the Medes and Persians, lasting and unalterable; it is but pro
tempore, for the time of their Sovereignty. And the tide, with Gods blessing,
may turn before October next. If not, Provided, that this Ordinance shall
stand in force for twelve Months, and no longer. Ord p 15.
Ordination, we see, is with them as changeable as an Ordinance, And this
manifests, that this their Ordination is no divine Institution.

5. But this Ordinance was made after advice had with the Assembly of Divines.
The Advice is theirs, the Ordinance yours. They are the Counselors to advise,
but ye the State, that Ordaines and enacts. Whereas they ought not 25 H^n.
VIII. c. 19.
by the Laws of this Kingdom to have met in any such Assembly, without the
Kings summons: Ib.
neither ought any Ordinance at all to be made without His Royal assent. 1.
Elis c. 1.
All such Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is annexed to the Crown
of this Realm; and to no other. And 1. Elis. c. 2.
the King, by the advice of the Metropolitan of this Realm, or of His
Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, may Ordain, or publish Rites and
Ceremonies. But I read of no other, that have Legal power in this Realm of
England, without the Kings Commission to do thus.

6. But you take advice with the Assembly of Divines, your Commissioners. An
Assembly of Divines? so you call it. But is it so? consists it only of Divines?
It seems so by the title of your Ordinance: but how then come Ordin. Jun. 12.
1643 p. 2.
the Earls of Northumberland, and Manchester, Viscount Sea and Seal, Francis
Rows, Sir Henry Vane, and John White, into the Assembly? Are these Divines?
Statesmen, and Lawyers, and Swordmen, Lords and Knights, all Divines. I
perceive then, we may have Lord-Divines, though not Lord-Bishops. Statesmen
may meddle with Divinity; though not Divines with the State? Now I have lived
to see 1. Sam. 19.23.
Saul among the Prophets; Act. 2.17.
your Sons and Daughters of all Professions, Prophesy, or Dream Dreams,
some upon Wool packs, others in Pulpits or Tubbs; no matter where, so it be
for the good of the State.

7. Here then must needs be an advised, a Divine Ordinance. But though it be
made after advice, ye tell us not, that it was made according to their Divine
advice. If it be, I hope some of them will be able to justify it, by the Laws
both of God and this Realm. But the plain truth is, this project was resolved
upon, before any advice had with them. This will clearly appear, if we cast an
eye back upon An Ordinance for the calling of an Assembly of Learned Divines.
Iun^^ 12. 1643.

8. Wherein first, before discussing of the question by your Learned Divines,
ye Ord. June 12. 1643. p. 1.
declare and resolve (first declare, and then resolve; note that) that the
present Church Government, by Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is evil, and justly
offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom, a great impediment to Reformation
and growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the State and Government of
this Kingdom: and that therefore you are resolved, that the same shall be taken
away. And in the Solemn League and Covenant, ye vow the extirpation thereof.

9. So the Assembly have their Lesson before hand, Episcopal Government must
down; it may not be admitted into consideration, be the Assembly never so
desirous. It is Declared and Resolved by their infallible Masters, that it is
evil, and View of the Covenant. p. 34.
the View of the Covenant calls it Antichristian. Justly offensive it is to the
Kingdom, and very prejudicial to the state; and so are the Kings Revenues,
and diverse Noble men's, and Gentlemen's goods and Lands; you have therefore
taken them away, and some of them ye have given, some sold away. Indeed the
Bishops Lands are justly offensive, and their government prejudicial to the
State, ye stand in. For had they followed St Paul's directions, 2. Tim. 3.4, 5.
I know in what state ye had been long since. In truth had not their Lands been
evil in your eye, the Government would never have been offensive. This
Kingdom has flourished more years with this Government, then it can days
with your unvoted, undevised platform. What a furtherance it has been to
Reformation and growth of Religion, the Enemies to the Catholic Religion have
been sensible, and the most eminent men in the Reformed Churches bare us
witness. I shall name one yet living, who will not, I presume revoke, or
retract, what he has written. Peter Moulin is the man; and his words are
these. Pet. Molin. ad Episc. Winton. Ep. 3.. Hic mihi.
Scio instaurationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and eversionem Papismi, post Deum
and Reges, deberipraecipue, EPISCOPORUM DOCTRINAE ET INDUSTRIAE. I know (says
he) that the Reformation of the Church of England, and the subversion of
Popery, next after God and the Sovereigns of this Kingdom, are chiefly due to
the LEARNING AND INDUSTRY OF THEIR BISHOPS.

10. Let other men be of what opinion they please, ye are resolved, down they
shall. Ordin. June. 12. 1643. p. 1.
For the settling therefore of a NEW GOVERNMENT, and for the vindicating and
clearing of the Doctrine of the Church of England, from all false calumnies and
aspersions it is thought fit and necessary to call an Assembly of Learned,
Godly, and Judicious Divines, to consult and advise with. Ib. p. 2.
The first of these is, Algernon Earl of Northumberland, and with him nine
Lords, and twenty Knights and Burgesses. After these come in the rest of the
Learned Divines, called Ministers.

11. And that ye may be sure to have the whole work go forward, according to
your own hearts desire, you order very warily and discreetly, that Ib. p. 4.
such other Person and Persons, as shall be nominated and appointed by both
Houses of Parliament, shall meet and assemble, for the purposes before
mentioned. And if you like them not, you will air them, and Ib.
from time to time remove them from place to place. And if that will not
qualify their heat, and pull down their stubborn stomachs, then Ib.
shall they be dissolved in such manner, as by both Houses of Parliament shall
be directed. Complain no longer, that Trent was no free Council, declame not
against their shifts and devices; your selves have outstripped them; for never
men made surer work.

12. Well, meet they shall, and that they may answer the expectation of Men and
Angels, Ib.
the said Persons, being at least of the number of Forty, shall have power and
authority. To do what? even to confer and Treat amongst themselves of such
matters and things touching and concerning the Liturgy, Discipline, and
Government of the Church of England. A large Commission indeed.

13. Observe, I pray you; Forty of these may confer and Treat. Forty; whereof
there are Ten Lords, Twenty Members of the House of Commons, and to these they
may add such other Persons, for number and affection, as it shall please both
Houses to nominate and appoint. So there may be Ten Divines, or no Divines in
the Assembly, as it shall please the Houses. And yet it shall be called an
Assembly of Divines, because ye have Voted them to be so. But they must no
further Ib. p. 5.
advise, or deliver their opinions, then shall be required by both or either of
the Houses. Neither may they meddle with these, or any other things, but Ib.
as they shall be proposed unto them by one or both Houses. But how if the
Houses will not propose? Then must these be mute. Neither may they Ib.
divulge by Printing, Writing, or otherwise, their opinions and advices,
without the consent of both, or either House of Parliament. What are these then
but Iourney-men to the Houses? Ib.
If any difference in opinion arise among these Divines, it is to be
represented to one, or both of the Houses; and from thence they shall receive
such directions, as shall be requisite. The Houses then are to moderate and
determine, the Assembly only to Treat and Advise. Thus I have briefly
presented unto you, the full Power and Authority of the Assembly.

14. Well, advised, it seems, they have, and an Ordinance for Ordination you
have given us: but you tell us not, that this Ordinance is framed according to
their advice, but according to the Directory for Ordination, and Rules for
Examination, therein expressed. These words caused me heretofore to dream of a
more full Directory. But I see by your Directory for public Prayers, that we
are like to have no other, Ord. p. 15.
till the Twelve Months be over; for so long this Ordinance stands in force,
and no longer. So say you; and so say I, by Gods grace. Thus far I have gone
with your Title Page: and now I shall make bold with the frame of your
Ordinance, and see upon what Foundation it is settled.

15. The old Crambe, is laid for the Corner stone. But if this totter and
fail, farewell frame, the Directory and Ordinance are at an end, they will
hardly hold out the Twelve Months they were provided for. And they end October
the second next ensuing. You follow your grand Champion Mounseir Smectymnuns;
and by him you are misled. He says, that Smect. Answ. p. 21. and 26.
the word Presbyter, and the word Bishop, do in the Scriptures signify one
and the same Function; and Ord. p. 1.
you justify it. As if the difference were about a bare Title, or Word, and
not about an Order, or Function of the highest moment in spiritualls. Which
failing, the two other Orders, and both the Sacraments will suddenly sink. As
shall, with Gods blessing, be fully manifested, when it shall please him to
afford us a Press and Paper.

16. In the mean space, I could tell you of the Bishop of Norwich, and some
others, that have often foiled your Champion, and send you to review their
Works. But I shall not boast of other men's strength, nor rely upon their
Weapons, though they be keen enough for that purpose. I shall join with you
upon a shorter issue. Briefly then thus.

17. I yield it to be true, setting by the Postscripts to Timothy and Titus,
that the word Presbyter, and the word Bishop, do in Scripture intend and
signify one and the same Function. And yet these your inferences are most
false; namely first, that Ib.
the Title of Bishop, has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one. 2. That
Ib. p. 2.
this Title has been by him assumed, as in other things, so in Ordination. 3.
That Ib.
this Ordination is performed by him (the Bishop being) a Presbyter. 4. That Ib.
Presbyters so ordained may ordain other Presbyters. 5. That Ib.
Ordination by preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ. These are your
own Propositions; and with these, by Gods grace, I shall deal severally, as
they lie in your own words.

The first Proposition.
The Title of Bishop has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one.
18. THis Proposition is false; it was no corrupt custom, but incorrupt
discretion, that appropriated the Title of Bishop to one, in every several
Diocese. It was done by those, who detested corruption with a perfect hatred.
But this Title was not so appropriated to one, as to his person, that might be
laid down at the years end, as the Title of Major in a Corporation; but it
was appropriated to his Office or Order; and not given him, till he were of a
several Order from Presbyter; which Order and Title can never be laid aside,
or taken from him.

19. Give me leave therefore to tell you, that the state of the question is
mistaken by too many. For it is not, whether the word Bishop and the word
Presbyter do in Scriptures signify one and the same Function? not yet,
whether a Bishop and a Presbyter be of one and the same Order in Scripture? But
the question rightly stated, is this; Whether there be an Order in Scripture
distinct from the Order of Presbyter, and Superior to that Order?

20. To quarrel about names and words had not wont to be the custom of the
Church of Christ: for plain it is, that we speak not always, as the Scripture
speaks. The Scripture calls Sacramentum hoc magnum e^^. So S. Hierom reads,
Ephesians. 5.32.
Matrimony a Sacrament; if we believe S, Hierom and the Latin Fathers, from
whom we borrow the word Sacrament; and yet we call it not so. The Scripture
never calls Baptism, or the Lords Supper, a Sacrament, and yet we call them
both so, and custom has appropriated that name to them; and yet no corrupt
custom, I hope. The reason is, because we define a Sacrament to be, an outward
and visible sign, of an inward and spiritual grace, given unto us, ordained
by Christ himself, (...) ^ron. in (...). 7.
as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.
Now Baptism and the Lords Supper make good this definition, which Matrimouy
does not.

21. Neither does the same word in Scripture signify alwares the same Office
and Order; no, not in the same place and verse. If question be made, whether
there were but one High Priest at one time in the Jewish Church; we answer
positively, but one. That is, but one strictly, and properly so called. And yet
we find many Highpriests at the same time. S. Mar. 14.1. S. Luc. 22.2. S. Ioh.
11.47. But we say not, that all these were Highpriests strictly and properly
so called, not Pontifices simpliciter, but secundum quid, in respect of their
brethren, who were under their charge. And these are called the chief or
principal Fathers of the Priests. 1. Chron. 24.6. and 31.

22. Not in the same place and verse. For S. Mat. 26.3. we find many
Highpriests, and one High Priest. Many Highpriests assemble together unto the
Palace of Caiphas the High Priest. S. Mat. 26.3.
(...). And yet but one of these was (...), properly the High Priest; Heb. 9.7.
no other but he, but that one, might go into the Sancta Sanctorum, the holiest
of all. Number. 8.^. Lyra in Number. 8.5.
None of them, but he only, could Ordain or Consecrate a Priest: and 1.
Chron. 24.18.
none of them, but he, had jurisdiction over all the Sons of Levi.

23. Thus we find one Bishop and many Bishops in Asia and Creet. Titus is the
Bishop of Creet, and yet in that City there were many Bishops. For he that is
called a Presbyter, v. 5. is called a Bishop. v. 7. Thus was it in Asia. But
the title of Bishop, even in those times was appropriated to Timothy and Titus,
as is evident in the Postscripts to those Epistles, wherein the former is
called Bishop of the Asians, and Titus Bishop of the Cretians. These are they,
that were truly and properly named Bishops of those Churches. In Scripture we
find them termed so; it cannot be denied. Beza is my witness, who met with no
Manuscript, without these Postscripts. And, I hope, Beza is no abettor of
corruptions in Scripture.

24. Timothy and Titus were ordained by St Paul; and by him, for ought any man
can say, they were called Bishops. I am certain, they are called so by the
Spirit of God; or Beza has abused us. And these, that are thus called so in
those places, were for their time, the only Bishops of those Churches. These
had Jurisdiction spiritual over all Persons in those several Churches; not
only over Laymen and Deacons, but over the Presbyter-Bishops also; even to
convent, censure, silence, and to cast them out of the Church. These Bishops
also had the right and power of Ordination, which the Presbyter Bishops never
had.

25. What? were they in those times distinguished only by right and power, and
not by titles? No such matter. Those whom we now call Bishops, were at the
first named Apostles. But those, whom we now call Presbyters, or Priests, were
then indifferently styled Bishops or Presbyters. If I prove not this, I deserve
blame: but if I shall make this Assertion good, I shall do the truth and you
service; and I hope, ye will do the truth, and your selves that honor, as to
lay the censure, where the fault is, even upon those, that have misled you.

26. My first witness shall be Theodoret; who certifies us, that Theodorer. in
Philip. 1.1.
while St Paul's Epistles were writing, the same Persons were called both
Presbyters and Bishops; but those, who are now named BISHOPS, were then called
APOSTLES. But in process of time, the Title of APOSTLE was left to those, who
were (...), APOSTLES properly and truly so called. And the name of BISHOP was
appropriated to those, who heretofore were called APOSTLES. With Theodoret
accords St Hierome, who testifies, that Hieron. in Gal. 1.19.
The Apostles ordained Apostles. Calvin says as much upon 1. Cor. 4.9. So here
are more Apostles then twelve, or thirteen.

27. Would you know, who are the Apostles, that these speak of? The Scriptures
tell us of Gal. 1.19.
St James, of Philip. 2.25.
Epaphroditus, an 1. Cor. 49.
Apollo; who in their several places are expressly galled Apostles. Witness
the Greek Text, the original Lancuage of those Epistles. And St Hierome
justifies, that Hieron. C^tal c. 4.
this St James was Bishop of Jerusalem; but none of the Twelve, as too many
ignorantly conceive; but Hieron. in Es. 17.
decimus tertius Apostolorum, the thirteenth Apostle. None of those, that were
immediately ordained by Christ himself; he was Hieron. in Catal. c. 4.
ab ipsis Apostolis ordainatus, ordained by the Apostles suddenly after our
Saviors Passion. Theodoret. in Phil 2:25.
Epaphroditus likewise was Bishop of Philippi, and Hieron. in Tit. 3.^3
Apollo, Bishop of Corinth. Apostles in Scripture Language, but Bishops in the
Church Language. None of these were ordained by our Savior, but by his
Apostles; yet Walo Messal. p. 43.44.244.
these were of the same Order and Power with their Ordainers, and clearly of a
different Order from Presbyters. You shall hear, what your dear friend Wale
Messalinus speaks. Apostolorum tempore Apostolos ipsos veros juisse
Ecclesiarum Episcopos. Episcopos autem. qui tunc fic nominaba^tur, in
Presbyterorum ordine stetisse, quales nunc Episcopis subditi sunt. Walo Messal.
p. 355.
In the time of the Apostles, the APOSTLES themselves were the TRUE BISHOPS of
those Churches. But they, who in those times were called BISHOPS, were of the
same Order with PRESBYTERS, such as now are SUBJECT TO BISHOPS. This he
confesses to be the common opinion of the Greek Fathers: and surely they were
as well skilled in Scriptures and Church History, as any Elders in your divine
Assembly.

28. The reason, why the Church of God so universally altered this Title of
Apostle into Bishop, is given by Theodoret; and this it is. Theodoret. in 1.
Tim. 3.1.
That the name APOSTLE might be reserved to those, who were (...), APOSTLES
verily and indeed, to those, that were ordained by Christ himself. Well, the
end of this appropriation was, that the Church might settle and continue that
necessary distinction between the Apostles ordained by Christ, the Apostles
ordained by man, and Presbyters.

29. If this distinction had not been settled in time, how should we have been
able to know an Apostle properly so called from an Apostle improperly so
called? What a strange confusion would have overspread the face of the Church,
if Epaphroditus, Timothy, and Titus, had still been called Apostles; Ib.
as Theodoret justifies, they were in the Primitive times. If all of that Order
had retained the same Title, how should we have been able to distinguish Saint
Peter from Peter the Apostle of Alexandria; St Paul from Paul the Apostle of
Antioch; and St John from John of Jerusalem? Thus we should have had not only
2. Cor. 11.13.
false Apostles, but Heretical and Atheistical Apostles; which would have
brought that Holy and Reverend name into contempt. How should we have known by
whom the Canonical Epistles had been written? For the Titles run thus; The
Epistle of Paul the Apostle; The Epistle of Peter the Apostle; of John the
Apostle, etc. So then if this distinction had not been provided, corruption
upon corruption must have followed: for Epistles have been written by more
Paul's then one, and those Paul's, Apostles too.

30. The distinction then was necessary; and though the Title were alterd, the
Order was not, nor yet the Office. The Fathers conceived not, that they offered
the least affront or derogation to St James, in calling him Bishop, whom the
Scripture had honored with the Title of Apostle. If they had deemed so, either
they would not have given him that appellation, or they would never have called
his Episcopacy, Rusin. histi l. 2. c. 1.
Primatus gloriam, the glory of the Primacie, and Eusebius. hist. l. 2. c. 1.
an honor of no mean esteem. Neither had Timothy and Titus the less honor
or power, because they were called Bishops. What the Apostles could do, which
was of ordinary Jurisdiction and power, and necessary for the preservation of
the Church, that could they. Walo Messalinus, shows much ingenuity in this
acknowledgement. Walo Messal. p. 62.
EPISCOPI SUMMUM in Ecclesiastico ordine GRADUM obtinent, ut olim tennere, qui
APOSTOLI vocabantur. BISHOPS hold the CHIEF DEGREE in the Ecclesiastical
order, as heretofore they did, who were called APOSTLES. But Apostles and
Presbyters were never reckoned to be of the same Order. The distinction is
plain, Act. 15.6.23. Where it is said, that Act. 15.6.
The Apostles and Presbyters came together to consider of this matter. And, Ib.
v. 23.
The Apostles and Presbyters send greeting. This is readily acknowledged by St
Hierome and Walo Messalinus; as is manifested,. 71.

31. Agreed upon it is, that Apostles and Presbyters are not the same: if then
Bishops properly and strictly so called, be of the same Order with the
Apostles, it follows necessarily, that our Bishops and Presbyters are not of
one and the same Order or Function. Neither has corrupt custom, but Scripture
it self made this distinction.

The second Proposition.
That the Title of Bishop has been by him (by this one) assumed, as in other
things, so in the matter of Ordination.
32. FIrst appropriated and ascribed, and then assumed. Not first assumed, and
then appropriated. If then any fault be, fall it must upon the times, wherein
that custom prevailed, or upon the Persons, that ascribed this Title to that
one; not upon the Bishops; for they assumed it not; it was first appropriated
to them, by your own confession. But it was appropriated and ascribed unto
them in corrupt times; truly no less then 1600 years since, and assumed, or
rather retained, to this day. And lawful it is for me to assume (as you please
to speak) that, what ever it be, which has, See. 23, 24. etc.
upon so just grounds, been appropriated to me, as this Title was to the Order
Apostolic. For it was done either by the Apostles themselves, or by their
Orthodox Scholars. How can ye say then, that Ordin. p. 2.
it was not meet?

33. But before I pass further, I cannot but take notice, that you, who have
so highly cried out upon Et Caetera, have slipped into the same error: for In
other things, is neither better nor worse, but a plain etc. which ought to
have been avoided by such wise men, as have condemned it with so much
detestation. Secondly, you say, in the matter of Ordination. Herein had you
consulted with your Assembly men, certainly you would have struck out matter;
for the Greek, and our Reformed Churches use no matter, or element in
Ordination. We use a Form of words, and Imposition of hands only: such
Learned men cannot but know this. Matter was either ignorantly, or
superfluously put in.

34. But why has the Title of Bishop been assumed in Ordination? Does the
Title Ordain? Is that sufficiem? a Phrase not easily construed; it needs a
Commentary from some of your Divines. In the mean time I shall guess at your
meaning, which I conceive to be this: He, to whom custom has appropriated the
title of Bishop, has assumed Ordination to himself. This being your meaning,
I shall make bold to say, that this assertion is not true.

35. The Bishops assumed not, they took not this power of Ordination to
themselves; it was conferred upon them with their Orders. It is so innate, so
inherent to that Order, which we now call Episcopacy, that no other Order may
Ordain. Not Deacons; so you say: not Presbyters; so Epiphan. haer. 75.
Epiphanius, and Hieron. ad Evagr. Ep. 85.
S. Hierom; and with them all Antiquity. In the New Testament this power is
only given to the Apostles, or Bishops, strictly so called; and executed by
them only. It was given to the Apostles, in S. Mat. 10.8.
Gratis accepistis, gratis date, freely ye have received, freely give, so
Ambros. de dignit. Sacerdot. cap. 5.
S. Ambrose, so Hieron. in loc.
S. Hierome, so Apud Balsam p. 1085.
Gennadius Patriarch of Constantinople, with the whole Synod of his
Patriarchate, to Bishop Titus, Tit. 1.5. to Bishop Timothy, 1. Tim. 5.22. and
to Bishop Epaphroditus, by Walo Messalinus confession. p. 58.

36. Practiced it was only by Apostles, or Bishops properly so called: in
Scripture, Act. 14.23.
by S. Paul and S. Barnabas, 1. Tim. 5.22.
by Timothy, and Tit. 1.5.
Titus. The Hieron. Catal. c. 16.
two former are known to be Apostles; the two latter are acknowledged by all
antiquity to be Bishops strictly so called; which are the very same with
Apostles. Though you will not believe me, I presume, ye will not mistrust Walo
Messalinus his fidelity to your cause. His very words are these; Walo Messal.
p. 44.
Titus and Timotheus Apostoli tunc nominabantur; and REVERA ERANT EPISCOPI,
JVRE EODEM ET ORDINE, quo hodie habertur, qui Ecclesiam regunt, and Presbyteris
praesunt. Titus and Tymothy were named APOSTLES, and IN VERY TRVTH WERE
BISHOPS, BY THE SAME RIGHT, AND OF THE SAME ORDER, that these are at this day,
who govern the Church, and have command over Presbyters. So your own dearest
friend.

37. But there can be no surer Commentary of our Saviors words, then the
Apostles daily practice. And meet it is for us in these things to do as they
did. And ought not Bishops to preserve, as much as in them lies, that power,
which God in his word has committed to them. 1. Tim. 6.20.
Depositum custodi, is a full command, and of a large extent: that charge which
S. Paul has committed to Timothie's and every Vincent. Lyrin. c. 27.
Bishop's trust, is not to be waved on any hand; carefully preserved it must
be. For does not S. Paul charge Timothy to 2. Tim. 3.14.
continue in those things, which he has both learned, and been assured of; and
to Ib. c. 4. v. 5.
fulfill his Ministry; (...), his own Ministry, Ib. c. 1. v. 6.
which was given unto him by the imposition of S. Paul's hands. Surely we ought
to do so; and I hope, God will so enable our Bishops, that they shall
discharge their duties, though it be with hazard of their lives. And a main
part of their duty it is, to Ordain Presbyters and Deacons. For to them, and
to them only, this power belongs; as shall be proved. 51.52.

The third Proposition.
That Ordination performed by him (by the Bishop, being) a Presbyter joined
with other Presbyters is, in your judgment, for substance valid, and not to be
disclaimed by any, that have received it.
38. THe Bishops are so much beholding to you, as to ackowledge them to be
Presbyters, and their Ordinations valid, notwithstanding their assumings and
encroachings. Ye, take order therefore, that Ord. p. 13.
a Presbyter so ordained shall be admitted to a charge, WITHOUT ANY NEW
ORDINATION.

39. Notwithstanding this your Magisteriall definition, I must tell you, that
this your Proposition is partly true, partly false. True, in that an Ordination
performed by a Bishop, is valid. But false, that it is performed by him as a
Presbyter. He ordaines not as a presbyter, but as a Bishop; or if you will, is
an Apostle Bishop. Not by virtue of the Order of Presbyter, but by virtue of
his Episcopal or Apostolical Order. Epiphan. haer. 75.
Presbyterorum enim Ordo non est potens generare patres; for this Order, the
Order of Presbyters, is not able to beget Fathers, or Presbyters, but Children
for the Church. And so no validity in their Ordaining: as shall be more fully
manifested in the Confutation of your next Proposition.

40. False like wise it is, That the Ordination is only so far forth valid,
as it is performed by a Bishop soyned with Presbyters. Bishops you pull down,
as low as ye can; no Ordination good by a Bishop without assisting Presbyters;
but a Minister is highly in your favor, he may, if you Authorize, Ordain
alone: for do not you say, The Minister, that ordains? p. 13. But as you are
out in affirming, that one, or many Presbyters may Ordain; so are you as wide
from truth, in resolving, that a Bishop cannot Ordain without presbyters
joined with him. For this is certain, that the assisting Presbyters are not of
the essence of Ordination; for then were there no Ordination in the Greek
Church, since therein Presbyters lay on no hands at all in Ordination. As Pet.
Arcud. de Concord. l. 6. c. 4.. Igitur in.
Petrus Aroudius manifests. Neither is there so much as mention made of
Presbyters assisting, or laying on their hands by, or with, or near the
Bishops hands at Ordination, in all the Greek Canons, or the Euchologue; but
only of the Bishop ordaining a Presbyter. They had an eye upon Scripture
wherein they find S. Paul alone, and Titus alone, and Timothy alone, ordaining
without assistants. Ye are careful to preserve the credit of some late
reformed Churches beyond the Seas: give us leave to be tender of those many and
famous Churches in the East, the first, the learned churches of the world; from
whom we received the Scriptures, and (if the Learned be not mistaken) the best
expositions thereof; even our Faith and Orders; though not immediately.

41. I must confess, that in the Latin Churches Council. Carthag. IIII. Can. 3.
Presbyters at the Ordination of a Priest, and of a Priest only, laid on their
hands by the Bishops hand. But these were for attestation, not for Ordination.
The African Fathers therefore, that enjoyne this very Act of the Presbyters,
ascribe Ordination wholly and only to the Bishop: as is to be seen Co^. Afric.
Can. 31.55, 80 etc. A Bishop therefore may Ordain without the assistance of
Presbyters, and the Ordination shall be good, though not Legal with us;
because the Bishop may be justly questioned and censured, for transgressing the
Canons of our Church.

The fourth Proposition.
Presbyters so ordained, being lawfully thereunto appointed and authorized, may
ordain other Presbyters.
42. IT seems hereby, that Ordination is one thing, and lawful authorizing
another. That is, if I mistake not your meaning, when a Presbyter is ordained,
he receives no such power, till he be afterward lawfully authorized by you, or
such as you are. And yet immediately after, ye make Ord. p. 2.
lawful calling and Ordaining to be one and the same. A Lawfulness then there
is in Ordination, without your concurrence or approbation. Yea, your own words
are, that Ph. p. 15.
Presbyters ORDAINED according to this Directory, shall be for ever reputed and
taken to ALL INTENTS AND PURPOSES, for LAWFUL and SUFFICIENTLY AUTHORIZED
Ministers of the Church of England, and capable of any Ministerial,
employment. If that be not home enough, observe. I beseech you, how you
resolve, that every Minister, by imposition of hands i^ Ib. p. 22.
set a part to fulfill the work of his Ministry IN ALL THINGS. Having then so
full a Commission given them in Ordination, how comes it to pass, that before
they may Lawfully Ordain, they must first be appointed and authorized by you.

43. Is it a Ministerial Employment to Ordain? If it be so, then is every
Minister by his Orders sufficiently authorized to ordain, by your own
confession. Is it no Ministerial employment? Then may Laymen confer Orders.
But if you say so, you contradict your selves in terminis: for your own words
are, that Ib. p. 2.
It is manifest by the word of God, that Ordination by PREACHING PRESBYTERS, is
an Ordinance of Christ. But Ib.
No man ought to take upon him the office of a Minister, until he be Lawfully
called and Ordained. Ordination therefore belongs not to Laymen, but to
Ministers only, that is evident.

44. But Ordaining; it seems by you, is one thing, and authorizing another,
Ordination you yield to the Presbyters, but authorizing you reserve to your
selves. And therein you deal evenly: for you have as much power to authorize,
as they to Ordain. You give them power to Ordain, and they you power to
Authorize: but neither of these is the grant, or ordinance of Christ. This then
being a Ministerial act, and these being before sufficiently authorized
Ministers in all things, how can it be, that they must be authorized by you
Laymen, before they may lawfully Ordain? But so you have ordained, and so it
must be. Your Ordinance is your reason.

45. You Authorize, and they Ordain. First ye Authorize, then they Ordain;
and without your Authorizing they may not Ordain; least their Ordinations be
dangerous, if not invalid. For Ordained it is by you, that such and such
Persons in your Ordinance set down, or any seven of them, may Ordain
Presbyters for twelve Months, and no longer. Then your Ordinance and their
delegated authority expire, and others shall be set up, and authorized for this
great work. And so it shall be with you, as in Tertullian's time it was with
some of your Brethren, Tertul d^ Praescrip. c. 41.
Alius hodie Episcopus, eras alius; A Bishop to day, none to morrow; others
must step up, while these sneake down. Ordainers to day, none to morrow;
Ordinance-makers this day, none the next. Thus you put them in the same skale
and condition with your selves.

46. Presbyters so Ordained. I take to be those, who in the former Proposition
are said to be Ordained by a Presbyter-Bishop joined with other Presbyters,
being lawfully thereunto appointed and authorized. But he is lawfully appointed
and authorized, that is, appointed and authorized by the Supreme Legislator,
and according to the Law by him prescribed. We must therefore to the Law of
Christ to learn, who is lawfully appointed and authorized to ordain. For Heb.
5.4.
as no man takes this honor of Priesthood to himself, but he that is called
of God, as Aaron was; so no man takes the honor or power of Ordination to
himself, but he that is called of God to this Office, as Aaron was. For Ib. v.
1.
every High Priest taken from among men, is Ordained for men in things
pertaining to God. By Ordination then, which is Christ's own Institution, and
not from your, or any humane Ordinance, does the Priest, or (if you please)
Minister, receive power in those things, which pertain to God. Witness the
Church of England, which in her Articles confirmed by Parliament teaches us,
that Art. 23.
WE OUGHT to judge those LAWFULLY CALLED and sent, who are chosen and called to
this work by men, WHO HAVE PUBLIC AUTHORITY GIVEN UNTO THEM in the
Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard. And your own
words are, that Ord p. 12.
in Ordination every Minister is set apart to fulfill this work. What have
they to do then with your authorizing?

47. True it is, by humane Laws Bishops and Presbyters, have freedom granted
to discharge their Offices in such and such places without molestation or
control, to gather their Tithes, as also their Revenues, and other profits
settled upon them by the grace of Princes. But this is not to be lawfully
authorized with an intrinsecall, but with an extrinsecall power; that is, to
have free Liberty to exercise that ministerial power, which by Imposition of
hands they had received before, in several Cures allotted to them. And in what
City or Town they are not received to this freedom, they are commanded to ^.
Mat. 10.14.
shake off the dust of their feet against it. But there follows an heavier
doom in the next verse; which God of his great goodness avert from those
Cities and Parishes, which have had an hand in the ruin, or removal of their
Bishops or Presbyters. This seemed so impious an act to the Emperor Justinian,
that he enacted this Law, Justinian. l. 35. c. de Episc. and Cler.
si quis audeat civitatem suo privare Episcopatu, infamis redditur; if any man
dare deprive a City of her Bishopric, he becomes an infamous person. O, my
great Masters, in what state are they, that rob whole Kingdoms of their
Bishoprics, and have made a Covenant with Hell to extirpate the office?

48. But by the way, I cannot but take notice, that he, who has been ordained,
according to our book of Ordination, by a Bishop assisted with Presbyters, is
lawfully ordained. For your own, words are, that Ord. p. 2.
you hold his Ordination for substance valid, and not to be disclaimed by any,
that have received it after this manner. But I shall manifest, that one or many
Presbyters, as Presbyters, may not ordain: neither may Presbyters be
authorized to ordain.

49. That one or many Presbyters quatenus, as Presbyters, may not Ordain, or
confer any Spiritual Order, I prove first from your own grant: for you
resolve, that Ib.
It is manifest by the word of God, that no man ought to take upon him the
office of a Minister, until he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto; unto
that Office or Ministry. That must be the meaning; and that is most true, and
agreed upon by the whole Church of God. For the lawfulness thereof we appeal
to the Law of Christ.

50. Three Orders of Ministers we find in the New Testament, which are often
mentioned by the most Ancient Fathers, and have always been continued in the
Catholic Church; first Apostles, or Bishops strictly so called; secondly
Presbyters, and thirdly Deacons. Confessed it is on all hands, that a Deacon
may neither consecrate the Lords Supper; nor absolve, much less ordain one to
perform those offices. The reason is, because it belongs not to his Office or
Ministry. And I presume, it will prove to be as firm a truth, that a
Presbyter may not Ordain, because it belongs not to his Office or Ministry.
For though a Presbyter by his Ordere receive power to Consecrate the Eucharist,
and absolve a Penitent, he receives no power to ordain. Being then not
lawfully called and ordained thereunto, he ought not to take upon him this
Office, by your own confession.

51 My issue is this. They only have power to Ordain, who have this power
given them by Christ, and the word of Christ. But to the Apostles only, or
Bishops strictly so called, is this power given by Christ and his word.
Therefore Apostles only, or Bishops strictly so called, have power to ordain.
The Major is firm, and agreed upon. The Minor only is doubted of: I shall
address my self therefore to justify the Minor.

52. That the power of Ordination is neither given to, nor executed by any
mere creature in the New Testament, but only to and by, Apostles or Bishops
strictly so called (who are of the same Order with Apostles) is evident by our
Savior's Commission immediately issuing from himself, and explained by Saint
Paul.

53. Our Savior's Commission to his Apostles was this, S. Mat. 10.8.
(...); A gift ye have received, give this gift, so the Greeks: but we,
freely ye have received, freely give, what ye have received. That is, says
Gennadius Patriarch of Constantinople, Apud Balsam. p. 1085.
(...), of me, you have received this dignity of Priesthood; freely ye have
received it, freely give it. Neither is this the sense of Gennadius alone, but
of 73 Bishops more, that concur with him in this Exposition. If these be not
enough, I can tell you of Ambros. de dignit. Sacerd. c. 5.
Saint Ambrose, Hieron. in Mat. 10.8.
Saint Hierome, and others, that concur with him in the same opinion.

54. This Commission was given to the Apostles; them only he called, v. 1. and
those only at that time he sent with that Commission, v. 5. But given it was
not to the Seventie: and hence it is, that not only their number, but their
names also are precisely set down, v. 2, 3, 4. that so there might be no
mistake at all in the Commission. And as it was given to the Apostles only, so
was it executed by them, and others of their rank: but not by the Seventie,
not by the Disciples or Presbyters. This is evident by Scripture and
Church-historie. By Scripture; St Paul and St Barnabas were Apostles, and they
Ordain Presbyters in every Church, Act. 14.23. And Saint Paul ordaines
Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.6. By Church-historie; Hieron. Catal. c. 4.
The Apostles ordained S. James Bishop of Jerusalem. Theodoret Dial. 1.
S. Peter ordained Ignatius Bishop of Antioch: and Eusebius hist. l. 3. c. 17.
S. John ordained many Bishops in Asia. I make bold with Church History,
because you allow thereof, and ordain, Ord. p 6.
that they, who are desirous of Orders, shall have trial made of their skill
in Ecclesiastical History.

55. Titus and Timothy were Apostles also; if we give credit to Ignat. ad
Ephesians. p. 226.
Ignatius and Theodoret. in 1. Tim. 3.1.
Theodoret; to them the same power of Order is committed, which was to those 2.
Cor. 11.^.
chief Apostles. To Titus; Tit. 1.5.
For this cause left I thee at Creet, that THOU SHOULD ORDAIN PRESBYTERS,
or Elders, (...), as I have appointed thee: not as it shall please an Ordinance
of Laymen to appoint thee. The same power is acknowledged to be in Timothy, 1.
Tim. 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on no man. And in Epaphroditus, by a good friend
of yours; who ingenuously confesses, that Ad Philippenses Epaphreditu^
miserat; ad Ecclesiam eorum consirma^dam, and constituendos in ea Presbyteros
and Episcopos, Walo Messal, p. 58.
Saint Paul sent Epaphroditus to the Philippians, to Ordain Presbyters in that
Church.

56. Can you show in Scripture, or Ecclesiastical History, that the power of
Ordination was given to, or acknowledged to be in one, or many Presbyters? Can
you prove, that ever this power was exercised by one, or many Presbyters, and
not censured for a nullity, not disclaimed as never done?

57. I question not, but you will presently turn me to your old and often
answered Argument, 1. Tim. 4.14. Neglect not the gift, that is in thee, which
was given thee by prophecye, with the LAYING ON OF THE HANDS OF THE PRESBYTERY.
Therefore Timothy was ordained by Presbyters: and if Timothy, then may others
also. This is the Crambe, the old burre, with which you hope at length to choke
us.

58. First, I cannot but acknowledge, that Timothies Ordination was orderly and
legal. Secondly, I yield readily, that others may be ordained legally and
commendably as he was. But withal I must tell you, that Timothy was ordained
either by S. Paul alone, or by S. Paul with other of the Presbytery. That he
was ordained by S. Paul alone, is the opinion of your great Master Calvin, and
he has Scripture to justify it. Calvin's resolution is plain and full;
Calvin. Instat. l. 4. (...). 16.
Paulus ipse SE, NON ALIOS COMPLVRES, Timotheo manus imposnisse commemorat:
Saint Paul himself acquaints us, that HIMSELF, NOT ANY MORE, or other with
him, laid hands upon Timothy. Exclusively, himself, not any other; mark that.

59. The text which confirms this, is cited by Calvin in the same place; and
this it is. 2. Tim. ^.6.
Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee, by the PUTTING ON OF MY HANDS.
Evident it is, that this was done by Saint Paul. The truth is, (...). Ignat. ad
Philadelph (...) 14.
the Apostles in those days were called the Presbytery. Witness Ignatius,
Hieron. Catal. ^.27.
who lived in those times; and your present friend Walo Messalinus in these
words, Walo Messal. p. 21.
Apostoli Presbyterium Hierosolymitanae Ecclesiae constituunt; the Apostles
were (in those times) the Presbytery of the Church at Jerusalem. And what the
Apostles were then and there, they were also in other Churches, where they
came; no question to be made of that. And what power was in all the Apostles
together, in respect of any Ministerial duty, was in every one of them in
particular, and by himself. Otherwise, how could every single Apostle, when
their College was dissolved, and they dispersed into several Countries for
the work of the Gospel, perform his Office validly and effectually?

60. But suppose the most, that can be supposed, either you must give S. Paul
the lie, or else you must confess, that Saint Paul was one of those, that
ordained Timothy. So then, to keep close to this president; an Apostle, or one
of the same Order with an Apostle, must have a chief hand in Ordination. This
serves to justify the course of our Church; but it condemns your new
Ordinance, which authorizeth Presbyters alone, without a Bishop or Apostle to
ordain.

61. Timothy was ordained by an Apostle, though perchance not by an Apostle
alone: and as Timothy, so were all other ordained by Apostles, or by such, as
were of the same Order with the Apostles, and succeeded them in their Office.
Hieron cont. Montani insan. Ep. 54.
Et apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi; in S. Hieromes time, the
Bishops held the Apostles room; and so they do at this day. In his time
Bishops only had the power of Ordination; but not Presbyters; and so is it
with us at this present. Bishops have power to ordain Presbyters in every
City. Hieron. in Tit. 1.5.
EPISCOPI HABENT constituendi Presbyteros per urbes singulas POTESTATEM. But
Presbyters have no such power. Hieron. ad Evag. Ep. 85.
Quid facit EXCEPT A ORDINATIONE Episcopus, quod Presbyter non facit? SET BY
ORDINATION, and what does a Bishop, that a Presbyter does not! Saint Hierome
distinguishes plainly between the power of a Bishop, and the power of a
Presbyter. Which extorted this confession from Walo Messalinus, that Walo.
Messal p. 288.
in St Hieromes time, a Bishop was distinguished from a Presbyter, jure
ordinand^rum Clericorum, by the right of Ordination. In S. Hieromes days, a
Presbyter might not Ordain, no nor yet in the days of Athanasius, as is
evident by that of Coluthus and Ischyras. Athan. Apol. 2.
Coluthus a Presbyter, took upon him to be a Bishop, as some of the Assembly
do now, and presumed to Ordain one Ischyras a Presbyter. But for this
presumption, he was censured by Athanasius and all the Bishops of that
Patriarchate, and (...). Ib.
this Imposition of hands sentenced to be no Ordination. And this censure was
shortly after justified by four Counsels more, of no small note. As is to be
seen in the same Apology.

62. If you say, that this was adjudged a nullity, because one, and not many
Presbyters did it, Epiphanius tells you, that Epiphan. haer. 75.
Presbyterorum Ordo, the whole Order of Presbyters is not able to ordain a
Presbyter. How then can Ord p. 3.
seven Presbyters be lawfully appointed and authorized to Ordain? Can you
authorize a Woman to Preach, or Baptize? Or a Deacon to Consecrate the Supper
of Christ? when you prove this, I shall incline to the other. But if Presbyters
may ordain, why did St Paul, I pray you, send Epaphroditus an Apostle to
Philippi, to ordain Presbyters, where many Presbyters already were? That there
were at Philippi diverse Presbyters, is too plain to be denied; for S. Paul
writes Philip. 1.1.
to the Bishops and Deacons in that City. And those Bishops were but
Presbyters; as is agreed on all hands. And yet that S. Paul sent Epaphroditus
thither to ordain Presbyters, is acknowledged by Walo Messal. p. 58. Thus at
Ephesus were many Presbyters, Act. 20.17. and yet S. Paul manifests, that the
power of Ordination, as also of conventing and censuring Presbyters within that
Diocese, was in Timothy, and in Timothy only.

63. No man, or Ordinance of man, can authorize me to do any Ministerial act,
which God has not given me power to perform; that is, while I am in this
condition; no more then you can authorize me, to fly in the air. No man can
give Authority to a Deacon, while a Deacon, to consecrate the Lords Supper, or
to absolve a Penitent. Neither can any authority give a Presbyter, while a
Presbyter only, the power of Ordination. The reason is, because the God of all
Power and Order has assigned and appropriated this power to an higher Order;
as has been already demonstrated.

64. And yet, mauger Gods Ordinance, Ord. p. 3.
ye appoint and authorize Doctor Cornelius Burges, Doctor William Gouge, and
one and twenty more, or any seven of them to Ordain Presbyters. But I beseech
you by what authority do you make this Ordinance? For matters merely
spiritual, the old appeal had wont to be Act. 24.14
to the Law and the Prophets. Show me in the Old or New Testament, that ever
this power was in Laymen, or given by Laymen. The New Testament is so full,
so plain against you, that Calvines assertion is, that Calvin. Instit. l. 4.
c. 3.. 16.
not the People, but the PASTORS ONLY, did lay hands upon their Ministers. And
your resolution accords with his, viz. that it is an Ordinance of Christ, that
Persons be set apart for the Office of the Ministry by PREACHING PRESBYTERS.

65. But in your language, I perceive, it is one thing to ordain, another
thing to authorize others to ordain. Whereas to speak truth, Nemo potest plus
juris confer in a^iu^, quam ipse habet.
no man can confer that spiritual power upon another, which he has not in
himself. You assume not indeed to your selves the power to Ordain; but how
much do you abate of it, when ye authorize others to ordain? Make the best
of it, it will return to this issue, That either these Presbyters, before your
Ordinance was Voted, had power to ordain, or else it was not in your power to
authorize them to ordain.

66. True it is, that a Prince, or State, may give leave, or not leave, to a
Bishop to ordain, and to a Presbyter to exercise his Priestly Office within
their several Dominions. But this is only the power of License; it gives them
liberty, but not authority to ordain, or Preach. Suppose a Bishop assisted
with Presbyters, should ordain without your License in the associated Counties,
were there a nullity in the Ordination? I believe, your blessed Assembly will
not say so. If they do, they gainsay your third Proposition; and the Scripture
gainsayes them. For though the Governors of Jerusalem had charged the
Apostles, that Act. 4.18.
they should not Preach in the Name of Jesus; yet they profess, that Ib. v. 20.
they cannot but speak the things, which they have seen and heard: and that
Act. 5.29.
they ought to obey God, rather then man. God, that had given them the power
and charge, rather then man, that had discharged them.

67. If you think the case is otherwise in Preaching then Ordaining, you shall
see, that Act. 13.50. and cap. 14.5, 19.
when S. Paul and S. Barnabas had been persecuted at Antioch, and Iconium, and
Lystra; though the Rulers had used them despightfully, and Act. 13.50.
the chief men had expelled them out of their Coasts, yet for all this Act.
14.21.
from Derbe they returned again to Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antioch, and
Ib. v. 23.
ordained them Presbyters in every Church. And those Ordinations, I hope, were
valid, though they were against the sense of the State.

68. If to authorize, be to give freedom, then may the Turk authorize, as
well as you; and your authorizing is no more then his. And yet, I think, no
Christian will deny, but that those Bishops and Priests within the Turks
Territories ought to perform the duties of their several Orders, though the
Grand Senior himself inhibite them. But this must be done, not in contempt,
but in obedience to authority; for Romans 13.1.
we must be subject to the higher powers. But God is higher then all earthly
powers; we must therefore obey God. Thus far then we yield obedience to God
and his word.

69. But St Peter commands us to 1. S. Per. 2.13.
submit to every Ordinance of man. He does indeed, and so we must, either by
doing or suffering. We must either do, what is enjoined, if so it may be done
without offense to God: otherwise, if it may not be done, we must patiently
suffer, what shall be inflicted: as God knows a multitude of us have, since
these times of trial. And herein the Turk reads to you a Lecture of justice:
for he permits Christians to enjoy their Religion according to the terms
agreed upon: but without any horrid abjuration of their Faith, or Liturgy, or
Canonical obedience; as also without any such unchristian Covenant to
extirpate Episcopacy. A course unheard of among the Heathen; and savors
strongly of Antichrist But a part it is of your Religion, to enforce men to
forswear their Religion and Allegiance. And herein you outstrip Julian the
Apostata, in his most barbarous subtilties.

70. Your next Proposition is most consonant to verity and Scripture; viz.
Ord. p. 2.
That it is manifest by the word of God, that no man ought to take upon him the
Office of a Minister, until he be lawfully called and ordained thereunto. And
I have already showed, who are lawfully called and ordained. This being true,
it may not be listed in the number of your false Propositions, which I intend
to confute. It shall therefore pass untouched, while I hasten to the following
Proposition, which deserves a just censure.

The fifth Proposition.
The work of Ordination, that is to say, An outward solemn setting apart of
Persons for the Office of the Ministry in the Church, by Preaching
Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ.
71. NOt so (my great Masters) by Presbyters it is not; but by Bishops strictly
so called, or (if you will) by Apostles, it is Christ's own Ordinance. The
Seventy were Presbyters, they ordained not, we find no such Commission given
them. The Apostles did; because upon them and their Successors only in that
Sacred Office and Order, our Savior conferred this power.

72. That the Seventie were not of equal rank or order with the Apostles,
cannot be denied. If S. Hierome bear any sway, he tells us, that Hieron. Ep.
127. Man's. 6.
the seventy were, secundi ordinis, and minoris gradus, of a second Order; and
of a lower degree then the Twelve were of. And Walo Messalinus himself
professes, that Walo. Messal p. 26.27.
the Greek interpreters observe, that the Apostles were of an higher dignity
then Presbyters. And with them he resolves, that Ib. p. 269.
they are of several Orders. And withal he fairly acknowledges, that Vbi
distingui ordines and gradus caeptisunt, atque Episcopus major extitit
Presbytero, tum Ordinatio non potuit utriusque esse communis. Ib. p. 229.
from the time these Orders were distinguished, and that a Bishop became
greater then a Presbyter, ORDINATION COVLD NOT BE COMMON TO THEM BOTH. But
these Orders were distinguished in the Apostles times; as appears by Theodoret,
and Beza's several Editions of the New Testament. From the Apostles times
therefore both these could not Ordain. Besides two Orders they are; therefore
not one and the same.

73. Yea, they were distinct, while the Apostles lived here on earth. If Walo
Messal. say not so, believe me not. Ib. p. 62.
Episcopi SVMMVM in Ecclesiastico Ordine GRADVM obtinent, ut oli^ tenuere, qui
APOSTOLI vocabantur: Bishops hold the highest degree in the Ecclesiastical
Order, as heretofore those did, who were called Apostles. But Ib. p. 269.
then it was said of the Counsels molded up of Both Orders, Act. 15.22.
It pleased the Apostles and Presbyters. Take his own words, and weigh them
well. Tunc dicebatur in Conciliis ex utroque Ordine compositis, and
congregatis, (...). Two Orders they were then, and two Orders they are now;
though it has pleased the Church to change a title. And that the lower of
these two did never warrantably Ordain, is sufficiently manifested in the
observations upon the third and fourth Propositions. Say you then what you
will, frame what Ordinances you please, the Ordinations made by Mr Edmund
Calamy, and Mr Henry Robrough, and by the whole Assembly of Assessors and
Scribes, will be as good as nothing, mere nullities. And your new Presbyters
shall be, what they were before, shopmen, or worse, and branded to all
posterity with Ischyras.

74. Now, I hope, every reasonable eye sees, that it is more then time for you
to provide, that Ord. p. 3.
a Government of the Church be formed up to the full power, and work of it;
and that the whole course of Ordination of Ministers in an Ordinary way, be set
up and settled for all the three Kingdoms. For this your frame is not built
upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Christ Jesus being the head
corner stone; but upon the whimsies of your own brain.

75. Hitherto, by your own confession, ye have gone in no ordinary, no settled
way: and therefore not in the way of Christ and his Apostles. Neither is the
whole course of your intended Ordination yet set up; your Wisdoms have not
yet found it; no nor yet the Kirk of Scotland, from whom you take your
pattern. Geneva and Amsterdam come short of your great intended Master piece.
None of these have formed up a Government of the Church to the full power and
work of it; their platformes work low, and their power is empty; but your
brains fly high, and we shall have a work of wonder next October.

76. The whole course, you promise fairly; as yet, God knows, ye have
provided only for part of Ordination; unless ye make Presbyters and Deacons
the same, as you have already shufled Bishops properly so called, and
Presbyters into one Order: clean contrary to the ancient Church, and to the
book of God. Thus you have pulled down the ordinary way; God give you grace to
see your error, that you may in time endeavor to set up the old, the ordinary
way.

77. For Examination, provision is made; but especially, Ord. p 4.
or first of all, That he, that is to be Ordained, must bring with him a
testimonial of his taking the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, framed by a
Rebellious combination, against the word of God, and the Laws of this
Kingdom; but according to the directions of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil. A testimonial worthy of such an Ordinance, such Ordainers, and such
Orders. Of this he must be sure to bring a Testimonial. And without this
neither Learning nor holiness of life will serve the turn.

78. His age is to be twenty four years, at the least, Ord. p. 4
For age they agree with our Canons. Touching The Ministers appointed to
ordain, shall proceed to enquire touching the grace of God in him. Ib.
grace will be an hard matter to enquire; Ib. p. 8.
an examination of two several days, or of two several years will hardly
serve the turn. Judas had attended upon our Savior three years and upwards;
and yet when our Savior told his Apostles, that S. Joh. 6.70, 71.
one of them was a Devil, and would betray him, Judas was little mistrusted by
his fellow Apostles: for the text says plainly, that S. Jo. 13 22.
they looked one upon another, doubting of whom he spoke. Indeed by
righteousness and holiness of life, you and we may judge of grace. We may
also make trial of his Ord. p. 4.
Learning and sufficiency in some good measure, by examination. But if we take
sufficiency in a strict sense, 2. Cor. 2.16.
(...), who is sufficient for these things? The man is hardly to be found in S.
Paul's judgment: 1. Tim. 3.2.
for he ought to be vigilant, apt to teach; and Tit. 1.9.
able by sound Doctrine to convince the gainsayers. The Independents give you
daily occasion to show your abilities.

79. Ord. p. 4.
Touching the evidence of his calling to the holy Ministry, will be a curious
point to enquire. The only way we know, is by enquiring of the Party to be
ordained, whether he conceive and believe, that he is inwardly called to this
Sacred Function: and by his answer to judge. So in this particular, belief is
necessary on both sides: for Heb. 11.1.
faith is the evidence of things not seen. And neither he, nor I, can see his
inward calling.

80. The Rules for examination are not much amiss; only I would gladly know
of you, Trial shall be made of his knowledge in the chief grounds of
Religion, and of his ability to defend the Orthodoxe doctrine contained in
them, against all unsound and erroneous opinions. Ord. p. 6.
what is the Religion, he is to be examined in; where the chief grounds
thereof are to be found. Which is the Orthodoxe Doctrine he is to defend: and
which the unsound and erroneous opinions, he is to confute. Whether Of his
skill in cases of Conscience Ib.
in case of Conscience it be upon some occasions lawful to To. 13 1, 2.
resist the higher, 1. S. Pet. 2.13.
the Supreme Powers, the King? Clean contrary to the Doctrine of those two
great Apostles, S. Peter, and S. Paul, who command us to submit, to be subject
to these powers Romans 13.^.
for Conscience sake. Whether in case of Conscience, it be lawful to rob men
of their Wives, Mothers of their Children, and all these of their means; when
they have neither offended against the Law of God, nor the established Laws of
the Land? Whereas the Law of God is, to Ib. v. 7.
give every man his own, his due; and Jer. 22.3.
to wrong no man.

81. It is required also, that Ord. p. 7.
before his Ordination he Preach, and dispute. Preach before some judicious
Corporation; and maintain a Dispute, as your Learned men did at Vxbridge. But
I pray you, where do you find it lawful to Preach before Ordination? S. Paul
is of another mind. Romans 10.15.
How shall they Preach, (says he) except they be sent? Much about the same
time, that they v. 14.
believe in him of whom they have not heard. Indeed the Art. 23.
Church of England, and Confess August. Art. 14.
the Confession of Auspurge, submit to S. Paul, and profess, that it is not
lawful for any man to PREACH PUBLICLY, before he be lawfully called and sent.
And who are lawfully called and sent, is dec^ared,. 56, 57. etc.

82. But lawful calling and sending are grown out of date, and though the
People are not competent Ordainers, yet are they hold by you to be competent
Judges of the worth and abilities of those that are desirous to take Orders.
They must He is to be sent to the Church, or other place, where he is to serve,
there to Preach three several days, and to converse with the People, etc.
Ord. p. 8.
have trial of their gifts for their edification. And after every ones trial,
Ib. p. 9.
in the last of his three days Preaching before a strange and unknown Parish,
an Instrument in writing is to be affixed to the Church door, and at the day
appointed, any member of that Congregation may with all Christian discretion
and patience, put in exceptions against him. What a frivolous thing is this?
What a babble to please the People with, that they are to try his gifts by
three Lectures, which may be none of his own; and by a fortnights or three
weeks conversation, which may be easily dissembled? I shall not give you mine
own conjectures, least they be misconstrued: but I shall acquaint you with two
observations of S. Hierome. The first shall be concerning the Peoples ability
to judge of Sermons. Hieron. ad Nepotian. Ep. 2.
Nihil tam facile, quam vilem plebeculam, and indoctam concionem Linguae
volubilitate decipere. Nothing so easy, as to cheat the rude People, and an
unlearned Congregation with a voluble tongue. The second is this; Hieron.
advers. Iovin. l. 1. c. 19.
In Sacerdotibus comprobandis unusquisque moribus suis favet, ut non tam bonum,
quam SVI SIMILEM quaerat. When the choice of the Priest is in the People; every
man so favors his own manners, that he looks not so much after a good man,
as a man after his own palate. We are likely then to see goodly Ministers
swarm among us, if your Ordinance may prevail.

83. Well, Ord. p. 9.
upon the Ordination day, a Solemn Fast is to be kept by the Congregation in
that Church, where he is to serve, that they may more earnestly join in Prayer
to God for a blessing upon the Person, and labors of this his servant. How
much better had it been, to have trod in the Ancient steps of the Church, and
to have the Ordination upon the Sundaies after the Ember weeks; when the whole
Church of God Fasts and Prays for this very purpose, that it would please God,
to power down his Spirit upon the Persons to be ordained the Sunday following;
and to furnish them with such gifts and graces as are fit for so high a
calling. For no question, but the Devotions of the whole Church of God
together, are more acceptable to God, and more availeable with him, then the
Fastings and Prayers of any one petty Parish.

84 Ib. p. 10.
The person to be ordained, is to be demanded in the face of the Congregation
concerning his faith in Christ Jesus. A question not unseasonable for the
times; for a friend of mine was questioned by M. Corbet for teaching, that the
mother of Jesus Christ was the mother of God. The Minister which has Preached,
shall demand of him, who is to be ord^in'd, concerning his persuasion of the
truth of the Refo^med Religion, according to the Scriptures. Ib.
He is also to be examined, concerning his persuasion of the truth of the
reformed Religion; which few men know where to find. Where may we see the
Articles of your Religion, or the rule you will be tried by? Is the Reformed
Religion contained in out 39 Articles? In the Apostles, Nicene, or Athanasius
Creed? None of these are in your new Directory. It may be it is in the Harmony
of Confessions. I would to God you would tell us, which it is. Be it what it
will, it is according to the Scriptures. Is this enough? Will not the Brownist
and the Anabaptist, the Papist and the Antitrinitarian, yea and the Socinian,
say as much? And some of these will put the best of your Elders shroadly to it
to prove the contrary.

85. But why have we not a Directory for faith, as well as for Prayers? That so
we may know, what your new reformed faith is. I think as your Prayers are
unformed, so your faith is unfound; it is yet to be agreed on. A wonder it is,
you are so long in voting it. But your wisdoms know, that it is impossible to
vote a Religion, which might please all the adherents to this Rebellion. As
therefore ye leave every man at liberty to the spirit of prayer, so have ye
left every man free to choose his Religion, so it be not destructive to your
Platformes. This you esteem to be that liberty of Conscience, which stints not
the Spirit, and is the only curb to Popery.

86. But you have a great care of He is to be demanded of his Zeal and
Faithfulness in maintaining the Unity of the Church, against Error and
Schism. Ib.
the Churches unity against Error and Schism; he is therefore to be examined
concerning his Zeal and Faithfulness in the maintenance of this unity. But
have we not read of some, whose Faith is said to be Faction, whose Religion,
Rebellion; and Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 42.
whose Unity, Schism? But how shall they maintain Unity, that have dissolved
the bonds of charity? Tha^ have raised such and so many Schisms, as the Church
has hardly been acquainted with from her foundation? That have hatched and
clucked up so many Errors and Heresies, that men and Angels stand amazed at?
And yet a pretense of Unity, and a pretense of Reformation, may work much upon
the weak People, as many other pretenses have. Good Lord, how like the Devil
we affect to be, to make show to be, what we are least; and to endeavor that,
we seek to overthrow. The rest of your Interrogatories are borrowed from our
Book of Ordination, and from our Canons: as every thing else is, that is good
in this Directorie.

87. In the Ordination I observe, that you call the Ministry Ord. p 11.
a great work, an (...) 12.
holy Service: and suddenly after he is to be exhorted to Ib
consider the greatness of his Office. I am glad, you have so good an opinion
of the calling. If then it be such a work, such an Office as ye speak of,
why have you thrust such illiterate mean Persons into our Cures, as
Blacke-Smiths, Tailors, Felt-makers, and the like, with unwashed hands to
meddle with this holy Service? Are these men fit to undertake so great a work?
Is it probable, that such as these should Ib.
both save themselves, and the People by you committed to their Charge? It is
rather to be feared, that as Levit. 10.1. Number. 3.^.
with Nadab and Abihu they offer strange fire, so with them they will perish in
this fire, and draw the people into the same destruction.

88. Well, he is (...) p. 32.
set apart by Imposition of hands (that ancient Ceremony of Ordination) to
fulfill the work of his Ministry in all things. What Ministry is this? Here
is none named in particular. And yet there are more Orders of Ministers then
one, witness your servant Smectymnuus, who Smect. Ans. p. 63.
acknowledges Presbyters and Deacons to be of two distinct Orders. But the
Church of England, agreeably to the whole Church of God for 1500 years
together, tells us, that Preface to the Book of Ordination.
from the Apostles times there have been these Orders of Ministers in Christ's
Church BISHOPS, PRIESTS, and DEACONS.

89. His Ministry? Has it no special, or particular name to be known by?
Alas Ministry and Minister are words of a large extent, general names that
reach to all Orders, and perchance further. Minister is the Genus, which has
these species under it, Bishop, Priest, and Deacon; and each of these is a
Minister. But before we can tell, which of these is meant, there must be added
a specificall difference: as there must be to a Creature, before we can
conceive, what manner of Creature, or of living Creature is intended. What
though, In all things, be added; yet all these things will reach no further,
then to those things, which are within the compass or power of that his
Ministry, to which he is ordained. And so for all this we are to seek, to what
Ministry he is set apart. Whereas in our Book of Ordination, in the
Pontificals, and Enchologe, every person in his Ordination is by name assigned
to his particular Order.

90. Indeed I must confess, your Minister is expressed to be a Presbyter;
before Ordination, page 4. as also after Ordination, page 15. but at Ordination,
Minister. As if Presbyter and Minister were convertible terms, names of the
self same signification. True it is, that every Presbyter is a Minister, but
every Minister is not a Presbyter; no more then every living Creature is a man,
though every man be a living Creature. I should rather conceive a Minister to
be a Deacon then a Presbyter in our language; because we usually translate,
(...) and (...), Ministry, and Minister, 2. Cor. 13.23. 2. Tim. 4.5. etc. But
you must enjoy your own words, and your own meaning, though they be contrary
to the sense and custom of the Church.

91. Order also is taken, that Ord p. 12.
one of the Ordainers exhort and charge the People in the name of God,
willingly to receive and acknowledge him as the Minister of Christ; and to
maintain, encourage, and assist him in all the parts of his Office. No
question to be made of their willingness to receive and acknowledge a new
Minister. Novelties are pleasing, and the People 2. Tim 4.3.
having itching cares, will heap to themselves Teachers after their own lusts
and fancies. But when it comes to maintenance, ye shall find, that an
Exhortation or Charge will not serve the turn. For though Jer. 5.31.
their Prophets prophecy falsely, and the People love to have it so, yet
experience has taught you, that maintenance comes hardly from them, till your
Orders and Ordinances constrain them to pay. You have been therefore, and will
be enforced to take a more strict course for the maintenance of your Ministers.

92. But when it comes to assistance, they will be forward enough: for your
Ordinance is, that Ord. p. 12.
the People be charged to assist the Minister in all the parts of his Office.
What? Are all Presbyters? Are all Ministers? Are all Teachers? Haereticorum qui
^am Larc^ sacerdotalia munera injungunt. Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 41.
By your Ordinance, not only some, but all the People are turned Prophets. The
People must assist the Minister in Baptizing, in Preaching, in administering the
Lords Supper: for all these belong to his Office. If this be not your meaning,
you should have done well, to have expressed your selves in plainer terms,
that we might understand your meaning. For this is certain, that no man can
assist a Presbyter in all the parts of his Office, that is not of the same
Office. For though a Deacon may assist the Presbyter in the administration, he
cannot assist him in the Consecration of the Lords Supper. And your selves will
say, that a Deacon may not assist him in Imposition of hands. How then may the
People assist him in all the parts of his Office? Surely either the meaning, or
the expression is not good; that is plain.

93. I have done with your Directorie, I have discharged my Conscience: and I
would to God, I could Ord. p. 12.
dismiss you with a Blessing. With a Prayer I may, beseeching God so
abundantly to bless you with his grace, that you may see your foul Impieties,
and Repent, and in time, while it is called to day, discharge your Consciences,
knowing assuredly, that you must appear, and give a strict account for all
your Ordinances and Actions before the impartial Bar of that unerring Judge
Christ Jesus. And Heb. 10.31.
a dreadful thing it is to fall into the Hands of the Everliving God. Then an
Ordinance of Parliament, or the Protection of both Houses shall stand you, and
your Divine Assembly in small stead. In that day your Ordinances, and Actions,
and Intentions, shall be thoroughly sifted, and laid open before your faces.
Then S. Ioh. 5.29.
they, that have done good, shall go into the Resurrection of Life, and they
that have done evil, into the Resurrection of Damnation. God give every one of
us grace to lay this to heart, that so we may avoid the wrath to come.

AMEN.
FINIS.

