AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CATHOLIC CHURCH IN THE POINTS OF
CONTROVERSY with those of the Pretended Reformation.

By JAMES BENIGNVS BOSSUET, Counselor in the King's Counsels, Bishop and Lord
of Condom, Tutor to his Royal Highness the Dolphin of France.

Translated into English by W. M.

PRINTED AT PARIS, By VINCENT DU MOUTIER Mont S. Hilaire, at the sign of the
Looking glass. M.DC.LXXII.

With Approbation and Permission.

APPROBATION
Of my Lord Archbishop and Duke of Reimes, the first Peer of France; and of
other Lords Bishops.
WE have read the Treatise entitled, An Exposition of the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church in points of Controversy, composed by JAMES BENIGNVS BOSSUET
Bishop and Lord of Condom, Tutor to his Royal Hyghesse the Dolphin, and after
having examined it with as much application as the importance of the matter
required, we have judged the Doctrine conformable to the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Faith* Which moves us to propose it under that notion to
the persons God has committed to our charge; and as we assure our selves that
those of the Catholic Communion will be edified by it, so we may hope that
those of the Pretended-Reformed Religion, who shall peruse this work with
attention, may receive from it clearings and disabuses very conducing to guide
them into the way of Salvation.

CHARLES MAVRICE LE TELLIER, Archbishop and Duke of Reimes. CHARLES DE
ROSMADEC, Archbishop of Tours. FELIX, Bishop and Earl of Chalons. DE GRIGNAN,
Bishop of Vsez. D. DE LIGNY, Bishop of Meaux. NICOLAS, Bishop of Luson.
GABRIEL, Bishop of Autun. MARC, Bishop of Tarbe. ARMAND JOHN, Bishop of
Beziers. STEPHEN, Bishop and Prince of Grenoble. JULIUS, Bishop of Tule.
TO MY DEAR COVNTRYMEN OF ENGLAND.
Cognoscetis Veritatem, and Veritas liberabit vos Jo. 8. v. 32.
Ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall set you free.
TRVTH is so much the Center of the Spirit of Man, as it pretends to move
toward it, even in all the digressions and Deuiations it makes from it. For
even most of our Errors and Delusions pass themselves upon us under the notion
of Truth. The Spirit of Falsity disguiseth himself into the Appare^ce of an
Angel of Light to have the easier access. Did not Pilate himself seem
desirous to know Truth, when he inquired of our Savior what Truth was? Io. 18.
v. 38.
But most inquier like him; as soon as menaced with this terror, if you
receive it, you are no friend to Caesar, Io: 19. v. 12.
you incur the displeasure of the State, and the Penalty of the Laws, they
decline the further persute of Truth, and shrink into that weakness, which our
Savior reproached to his timorous inquirers; Io. 12. v. 43.
they loved the Glory before Men, more then the Glory before God.

Others there are, who seem frighted, as the children of Israel were, with the
misreports of the inhahitants of the land of Chanaan, which were falsely
represented to them as Giants and Monsters; for so their Pretending Explorators
disguise to them the Roman-Catholique Religion under the Forged figures of
Idolatry, or Superstition, to divert an inquiry into the true state and
constitution of it. But as when Iosuah showed the children of Israel a true and
sensible parcel of the fruits of that earth, they were disabused, and inflamed
with a desire to partake of the blessed fertility of the land of promise: so,
Godbe praised, there are many, who upon an equal and ingenuous view of the true
and natural state of Catholic Doctrine, are disabused, and protest against
the false reporters, as the Psalmist did in reiection of vain inventions of
the Heathens; Ps. 118. v, 85 and 86.
Narrauerunt mihi iniqui Fabulationes; sed non vt lex tua. Omnia mandata tua
Veritas. Unjust men make their own storys; but what they say is not like thy
law. All thy commandments are Truth.

Here is therefore a true and natural parcel of the fruits of that land of
promise, (the Church of CHRIST) to which this blessed promise was made, that it
should be led into all Truth, Io. 16. 13.
and that CHRIST JESUS the founder of it would remain with it unto the end
Mat. 28. v, 20.
of the world. This promise can not be verified in any Church, which has had a
notorious deficiency and interruption for many ages, which mark of
inconformity to CHRIST'S figure and description of the True Church, is evident
in all the Pretended-Reformations.

But the design of this Author was, only a short and easy exposure of such
Catholic Doctrines as the belief thereof is fully sufficient to render the
professor an entire and Orthodox Catholic; so that this short Treatise may be
called rather a Factum of the case, then Pleading of the cause, since it does
but singly expose the matter of Fact in all our Beleefs, whithout any Arguing
against the opposite Opinions.

Whereupon I may not improperly say this is a true picture, by the life, of
Catholic Religion, which designeth only a just and natural representation of
it, not a character that raises and beautifyeth the figure it exposes.

And in conformity to this profession, the pious and prudent Author declares
in the close of this discourse, that it was designed only for a Faithful
Manifest in the name of the Catholic Church; the vtility whereof was expected
in the disabusing all ingenuous Readers in those misreported Doctrines, which
are wrongfully imputed to her. And God has blessed this pious proposal so, as
to recommend it very notoriously by the satisfaction, which is professed to
have bin received by one of the most considerable persons of this age, for the
honor of his Birth, and eminency of all sorts of Merit: he has acknowleged
much of his clear and full information of the Catholic Doctrines, as received
from this excellent discourse.

And surely I have not seen any edition of this nature, as may be more aptly
called a Mapp of Catholic Religion; for all the lesser Controversies are
marked out in very small points and touches; but the two Capital seats are
distinguished by some larger marks, which represent them; so you will find the
Real Presence of CHRIST in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice
of the Mass, as being the Capital seats of our Controversies, extended in a
much larger figure, then the other questions; and the drawing these two
figures, at their full length, and with their true features, was the most
requisite application, by reason they are the most aspersed and disfigured by
the Maligners of the Church.

And these two Articles rightly understood, as they are professed and explained
in this Treatise, may promise the remove of the greatest difficultyes, which
most frequently auert many ingenuous and candid Protestants from entering into
an equal and impartial inquiry, concerning the seeming difficultyes of these
two points, namely this of the Real Presence of CHRIST'S Body and Blood in the
Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, as pretending its not being clearly
explained; and likewise the Controversy about the Sacrifice of the Mass, as
not appearing evidently specified in holy Scripture.

Me thinks these two may not be improperly resembled to the two great pillars
of brass, called Booz and Iachin, supporting the gates of the Temple of
Solomon; wherefore these two points are set at their full length, solidly
founded, and fairly polished by a clear smoothing, and explication of the
seeming hardenes of those proposalls, which were taken as a hard saying coming
even out of CHRIST'S own mouth, Jo* 6. v. 61.
but if rightly understood, following this Author's fair exposition, they will
be acknowleged, as our Savior himself attested of them, Jo. 6. v. 64
Verba quae ego locutus sum vobis Spiritus and vita sunt. The words that I have
spoke unto you, they are Spirit and they are life.

And can there be imagined a greater Blessing, next to the Beatifical Vision,
then the Real Participation of the Body and Blood of our Divine Savior
JESUS CHRIST? Me thinks that which would have bin the wish of all zealous
Christians, if it had not bin the free gift and gratification of God, is this
Real Partaking, even in this life of this blessed communication, by which we
may glory with S. Peter, 2. Pet. 1. v. 4.
that by this precious promise we are made partakers of the Divine Nature.

And surely I have not seen any work upon this design wherein these two
cornerstones of the Catholic Church have a more solid foundation, or that
affords a more easy comprehension of these two sublime mysteries.

By this motive I have bin persuaded to pass into my Country this foreign
commodity, which like a delicate wine of the same place, may loose somewhat of
the natural Spirit and quicknes by the transport, yet I may presume that it
retains all these healthful and cordial qualities it had in the native
production.

And having heretofore presented my Country in their several seasons
Spring-Flowers, and other Summer-Fruits, as the Parfumes of Poesy, and the
Reflection of Morality, now in this winter of my age I transport to my nation
this Riper and more wholesome fruit, the feeding whereon (contrary to the
effect denounced against the forbidden fruit) may produce life everlasting.

Upon which hope I may summon my Country in that call of our Lord JESUS,
commanded to be written by S. John, He that has ears to hear, Apoc. 2.
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches*; for that (with grief I
say it) the reproach of the Prophet Esaias may be so truly applied to our Nation,
Esaias. 50* v 11.
Behold you kindle a fire, and compass your selves about with sparks, and
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that you have kindled. The
strange diversity of Sects, and Several professions of Religion does too
evidently appropriate this reproach of the Prophet; wherefor the rest of my
life shall be assigned to solicit God for the blessing of the Primitive
Christians upon our so divided Country to be Cor Vnum, and Via Vna One Heart and
One Way. Act. 4. Y. 32.
This Unity was the most fervent prayer we find that our Savior ever made to
his Father for his Church left upon earth, Io. 17. 11. and 21.
that they may be One, as we are One. In order to some contribution to this
Blessed Union I have made this present to my Country, and with great sense of
Heart; for whose Good and Happiness the Syncerity of my zeal is such, that I
persuade my self I may express it in S. Paul's offer for his Conuerts, 2. Cor.
12. v. 15.
Ego autem libentissime impendam, and Superimpendar ipse pro animabus vestris.
I most gladly will bestow, and will my self moreover be bestowed for your
souls.

And now give me leave to closevp this address to my Country in the words of
our Lord JESUS, Apoc. 2. 5.
which S. John heard directed to the Bishop of Ephesus, Remember from whence
thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works. For which blessed
resipiscence shall be zealously offered all the days of my life the best of all
the Religious offices, and private devotions of

DEAR COVNTREYMEN Your most humbly devoted servant W A. MONTAGV*
Permis d' imprimer, fait ce 12. Auril 1672. DE LA REYNIE.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE CATHOLIQVE CHVRCH.
UPON THE POINTS OF Controversy.
AFTER more then Design of this Treatise
the matters, upon which they have grounded their breach, may be conceived
sufficiently explayned, and their minds disposed to a right understanding of
the Catholic Church's Persuasions: so that it seems we can do nothing
better then propose them sincerely, and distinguish them from those, which have
bin wrongfully imputed; for in effect, I have observed in diverse occurrencyes,
that the auersion those persons express for the most part, of our Doctrines,
is derived from the false ideas that they have figured of our tenants, and most
commonly drawn from certain expressions, which offend them so much, as resting
at first sight upon them, they never pass forward to the enquiry of the
grounds of the matter. Whereupon I have conceived nothing could be more useful
then to explain to them what the Church has defined in the Council of Trent
touching those points which remove them the most from our Communion, I will not
therefore stay upon what they commonly object to our private Doctors, or upon
those matters which are neither enjoined, nor universally accepted, since all
parties agree and Mr Daille him'self, Apol. c. 6.
that it is unreasonable to impute the persuasions of particular persons unto a
whole body; and he goes further, confessing that one ought not to make a
separation, but upon Articles Authentically established, and whereof all sorts
of persons are obliged unto the Belief and observation. I will not therefore
fix upon any, but the decrees of the Council of Trent, since it is there the
Church speaks Decisiuely of the matters in question and what I shall offer to
facilitate the right understanding of those Decisions, is approved by the same
Church, and shall appear manifestly conformable to the Doctrine of that holy
Council.

This explication of Doctrine will produce two good effects: the first, that
diverse disputes will entierly vanish, by reason they will be discerned, as
grounded merely upon wrong explications of our Belief; the second, the
disputes remaining will not appear (even according to the principles of the
Pretended-Reformers) so capital, as they at first sight have sought to qualify
them; and that, even by their own principles, they contein nothing that
offends the grounds of Faith.

And to begin with these Those of the Pretended-Reformed Religion confess that
the Catholic Church professes all the Fundamental Articles of Christian
Religion.
the Pretended-Reformes must needs confess that they are believed and professed
in the Catholic Church.

If they state them in the belief of adoring one single God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost; and the confiding in God only by his son incarnate,
crucified, and raised from the dead for us, they are convinced by their own
conscience, that we protest the same Doctrine: and if they will add the other
Articles contained in the Apostles Creed, they doubt as little of our
professing them intierly, without exception; and do not question our having a
pure and right understanding of them.

Monsr Daille has writ a treatise entitled Faith grounded upon the scripture,
wherein after having exposed all the articles of Faith professed by the
Pretended-Reformed Church, he Says that They are without contest; the Church
of Rome professes the belief of them, and, true it is, that they hold not all
our opinions, but that we hold all their beleefs,

Wherefore this Minister cannot deny our believing all the principal articles
of Christian Religion, unless he will destroy his own Faith.

But had not Monsr Daille granted this, the matter proves it self, since all
the world knows that we profess the belief of all those articles, which the
Caluinists call Fundamentalls, so that an ingenuous syncerity would allow us
without dispute this Assertion, that we have not waued or declined any of the
Essential persuasions.

The Pretended-Reformers discerning the advantages we may draw from this
concession, seek to disapoint us by alleging that we destroy those articles,
by asserting others which are inconsistent with them. This is what they labor
to euince by consequences they infer from our doctrines: but the same Mr
Daille whom I produce to them (not so much to conui^ce them by the testimony
of one of their most learned Ministers as) in regard that what he says being
evident in it self, teaches them what they ought to believe of those sorts of
consequences, supposing that ill ones might be derived from our Doctrine. This
is what he says in his letter to Monsr de Monglat upon the occasion of his
Apology; Although the opinion of the Lutherans in point of the Eucharist,
inferres, according to us, as well as that of Rome the destru^ction of the
humanity of CHRIST JESUS, yet that consequence, cannot be objected to them
without calumny, considering that they do formally reject it.

There is nothing more Essential to Christian Religion then the verity of the
Humane Nature of JESVS-CHRIST; and yet (notwithstanding the Lutherans hold a
doctrine from which is inferred a destruction of this Essential verity by
consequences, the Pretended-Reformers account evident) they have not scrupuled
to offer them their communion, in respect that their opinion has no poison in
it, as Mr Daille attesteth in his Apology: and their National Synod held at
Charenton in 1631 admits the Lutherans to their Communion upon this ground,
that they agree in the principles and fundamental points of their Religion. It
is therefore a maxim constantly established amongst them, that we ought not in
this matter to consider the consequences which may be drawn from a Doctrine,
but simply what the party maintains, and what he stateth who professes it.

So that when by consequences they pretend to deduct from our Doctrine, that we
can not sufficiently acknowledge the souueraine glory due to God, nor the
quality of Savior and Mediator in CHRIST JESUS, nor the infinite dignity of
Sacrifice, nor the superaboundant plenitude of his merits; we may easily
defeat those consequences by this short answer, which Mr Daille himself
furnishes us with, by saying, that the Catholic Church disclaiming them, they
can not be imputed to us without calumny.

But I will undertake further, and clear to the Pretended-Reformers by the
single explication of our Doctrine, that so far it is from overthrowing the
Fundamental articles of Faith either directly, or by any just consequence,
that quite contrary our Doctrine has established them in a manner so solid
and so evident, that without palpable injustice the advantage of a right
understanding them can not admit a question.

All Religious worship ends in God alone.
the Catholic Church teaches that it consists principally in beleiuing that
he is the Creator and Lord of all things, and in adhering to him with all the
powers of our soul by faith, hope, and love, as to him who alone can conferr
our Eternal happiness by com^unication of the infinite Good, which is himself.

This interior adoration which we render to G'od in spirit and in truth, has
its exterior marks, of which the principal is Sacrifice, which can not be
offered but to God alone, by reason the homage of Sacrifice is established in
order to a public confession, and a solemn protestation of the soueraingnity
of God, and of our absolute dependence on him.

The same Church teaches that Religions Worship ought to terminate in God, as
being the necessary end and object thereof; and if the honor she renders to
the Blessed Virgin and the Saints may be termed an Act of Religion, it is upon
the ground that it relates necessarily unto God.

Before I explain further in what this honor consists, it will be useful
to observe, that the Pretended-Reformers being pressed by the power of evident
truth, begin to acknowledge that the practice of praying to Saints, and honoring
their relics, was established in the Church even in the fourth Century. M.
Daille making this acknowledgment in the book he writ against the Latin
Church touching the object of Religious Worship, accuses S. Basile, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. John Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and diverse other great
lights of Antiquity which did shine in that age; and above all the rest S.
Gregory Nazianzen who is styled the Divine as a note of his excellency: he
taxes all these with having changed in this point the doctrine of the
preceding ages. But surely it will seem very improbable that M. Daille should
have better understood the sentiments of the three first ages, then those who
did as it were inherit their doctrine, immediately upon their death; and it is
by so much the less to be believed, by reason that the fathers of the fourth
age were so far from perceauing any introduction of new doctrines in this Act
of Religion, that this Minister himself cites express texts by which they
show clearly, that they pretended, in praying to Saints, to follow the example
of their Predecessors. But not to examine any longer the judgments of three
primitive ages, I rest satisfied with the grant of M. Daille who yealds to us
so many eminent Doctors who did instruct and discipline the Church in the
fourth Age. For though it is an easy matter twelve hundred years after their
death to taint them by way of scorn with the title of a Sect, calling them
Reliquarists, as persons who honored Relics, I will hope that those of his
Communion will bear more respect to those eminent personages: they will not
presume at least to object that their praying to Saints, and honoring their
Relics rendered them guilty of Idolatry, or that they overthrew the confidence
that Christians are to have in JESUS CHRIST: and we may hope that hence forward
they will forbear those reproaches when they consider they can not apply them
to us without laying the same imputation upon so many excellent persons, whose
Doctrine and Sanctity they profess to reverence. But since it is my work to
exhibit here our Belief, rather then produce the Mantainers of it, we must
pursue the explication of it.

The Catholic Church Invocation of Saints. Romans Catech. p. 3. tit. de cultu*
and Inuoc. sanct.
advises us to pray in the same spirit of charity, and according to that order
of fraternall society, which moves us to request the succors of our brethren
living upon the earth; and the Catechism of the Council of Trent concludes of
this doctrine that if the quality of Mediator which the holy Scripture
attributes to CHRIST JESUS did receive any prejudice by the intercession of
Saints who reign with God almighty, that it would have the same diminution by
the offices and mediations of the faithful who are living with us.

This Catechism informs us clearly of the extreme difference between the
manner of our imploring the succor of God, p. 4. tit. quis sit orandus.
and that of our soliciting the contributions of the Saints, for thus it says:
We pray to God either to give us good things, or to deliver us from ill; but by
reason the Saints are more acceptable to him then we our selfs, we request of
them their protection, and sue to them they would obteyn for us these things we
stand in need of. And hence it is that we use two kinds of prayer very
different; since when we address to God, the proper style is, HAVE PITY ON US
and BEPLEASED TO HARKEN TO US: but we account it sufficient when we recurr to
Saints, to beseech them to PRAY FOR US. Whereby we must understand, that in
what terms soever the prayers we offer to Saints are styled, the intention of
the Church, and of the Supplicants reduces them always unto this form, as
the same Catechism confirms in the process of that discourse.

But it will not be amiss to consider the words themselfs of the Council which
intending to prescribe to the Bishops in what manner they should speak of the
inuocacation of Saints, obliges them to teach that the Saints who reign with
CHRIST JESUS offer to God their prayers for men; Sess. 25. dec. de Inuoc. etc.
that it is good and useful to inuoke them by way of supplication, and to have
recourse to their succors and assistances to obtain of God his benefits
through his Son our Lord CHRIST JESUS who alone is our Savior and Redeemer.
And in order to this declaration, the Council condemns those who teach a
contrary doctrine; whereby it is evident that to inuoke the Saints according to
the intent of this Council, is to resort to their prayers, for the obteyning
the blessings and benefits of God by CHRIST JESUS. And in truth what we obtain
by the interuention of Saints, we acquire only by CHRIST JESUS, and in his
name; since the Saintsthemselfs intercede but by CHRIST JESUS, and obtain
their graunts but in his name. This is the Faith of the Catholic Church whch
the Council of Trent has clearly explained in few words: after which evidence
we cannot conceive how it can be objected, that we depart, and remove our selfs
from CHRIST JESUS, when we supplicate his members, which are also ours; his
children who are our brothers; and his Saints who are our first fruits, to
join their prayers to ours, offering them both to our common Master, in the
name of our common Mediator.

The same Council explaines clearly in few words the meaning of the Church,
when it offers to God the holy sacrifice, to honor the memory of the Saints.
That honor we render them in the act of Sacrifice consists in mentioning their
names, as of the faithful servants of God, in the prayers we address to him,
thankes-giuings, and praises for the victories they have obtained, and in
humbly moving his condescending in our favor by their Intercessions, Lib. 8. de
Ciu. c. 27.
S. Augustine has declared 1200 years past that none ought to conceive the
Sacrifice as offered to the holy Martyrs, although by the custom in practice
even in those times universally by the Church, the Sacrifice was offered upon
their holy bodies, and unto their memories, that is to be understood, before
the places wherein their precious Relics were conserved; and the same father
says further, that commemoration was made of the Martyrs at the holy table at
the celebration of the Sacrifice, Tract. 28. in Joan. sermon. 27. de verbis
Apostoli.
not intending to pray for them as we do for other dead, but rather in order
to their praying for us. I allege the persuasion of this holy Bishop by reason
the Council of Trent uses almost the same words to instruct the faithful,
Co^c. Trid. sess. 22. c. 3.
that the Church offers not the Sacrifice unto the Saints, but to God alone,
who has crowned them: and that the Priest does not adresse himself to S. Peter
or S. Paul saying: I OFFER UNTO YOU THIS SACRIFICE, but praising God for their
victories, he implores their assistance, to the end that they, whose
Commemoration we celebrate upon Earth, may be moved to pray for us in Heaven.
This is the manner wherein we honor the Saints, to obtain graces and benefits
from God by their Mediation, and the chiefest of those favors we hope to
procure is that of being enabled for their imitation, to which we are excited
by contemplation of their admirable precedents, and by the honor we pay in the
presence of God to their blessed memories.

Whosoever shall rightly consider the doctrine we have proposed, will be forced
to auowe, that as we substract from God none of the perfections peculiar to his
infinite essence, so we do not ascribe to Creatures any of those properties or
operations the which can not sort but with God alone: which does so absolutely
distinguish us from Idolaters, that we can not conceive upon what ground they
lay that imputation.

And when the Pretended Reformers object, that in our addressing our prayer to
Saints, and in honoring them as if they were present all over the earth, we
attribute to them a kind of Immensity, or at least the knowledge of the secret
of hearts, which appears reserved singly to God by so many testimonies of the
Scripture; in this objection they do not apprehend our doctrine right: for in
fine abstracting from the ground we may have to attribute to the Saints some
certain degree of knowledge of such occurrencies as pass amongst us, or even
of our secret thoughts, it is evident, that it is no elevation of the creature
transcending its condition, to affirm that it has some notion of things by
the light which God infuseth by his communication. The example of the Prophets
attests this clearly, God having vouchsafed to discover to them future events,
although they seem to be reserved, much more specially, to the Omniscience of
God.

But besides this, never any Catholic conceived that the Saints by themselves
did discern our wants, nor even the desires for which we address particular
prayers. The Church is content to teach, concurrently with all Antiquity, that
such prayers are very beneficial to those who practice them, whether the
Saints apprehend them by the ministry and commerce of Angels, which, according
to the profession of the Church, know what passes amongst us (as being
appointed by God's order as ministering spirits to concur in the work of our
Salvation) or be it that God himself acquainteth them with our desires by a
special revelation; or be it that God reueileth to them that secret in his
divine essence, wherein all truths are comprehended: so that the Church upon
these different manners has not determined by which of them God is pleased to
make this communication to his Saints.

But by what means soever this knowledge is imparted, it is very certain that
it is far from ascribing to the creature any of the divine perfections, as the
Idolaters did, since it does not permit our attributing even to the greatest
Saints any degree of excellence, which is not derived from God, nor
acceptablenesse in his eyes, but as derived from their virtues, nor any virtue
but what is the free gift of Grace, nor any information of humane passages but
such as God is pleased to communicate, nor any capacity to assist us, but only
by their prayers, nor in fine any felicity, but by a perfect submission and
conformity to the divine pleasure.

It is therefore most certain that upon penetration into our interior
sentiments directed to the Saints, it will be evident that we do not raise
them above the condition of Creatures, and from this ground one ought to be
possessed of the true nature of that honor and reverence which is intended by
our exterior demonstrations, the apparent religious offices being appointed to
testify the interior sentiments of our minds.

But by reason that the honor which the Church offers to Saints appears most
notoriously before their Images, and their holy Relics, it is requisite to
explain the Churches sincere doctrine in this Religious Act.

Images and Relics.
expressly to believe any Divinity Conc. Trid. sess. 25. decr. de Inuoc. etc.
or power in them, for which we ought to reverence them, or to sue for any
favor, or to place any confidence in them: and ordains that all the honor
should relate to the Originalls they represent.

All these words of the Council are so many characters which serve to
distinguish us from Idolaters, since we are so far from believing with them
any Divinity residing in the Images as we attribute no virtue to them, but
this, of exciting in us the remembrance of their originalls.

Upon this it is that the honor we render to Images is grounded: for example,
can one deny that the figure of JESUS CHRIST crucified, when we behold it, does
not excite a more lively remembrance of him who loved us so as to deliver
himself up to death for us? Gal. 2.
As long as the present Image possessing our eyes entertains so precious a
notion in our minds, we are moved to express by some exterior marks, the
feruor and extent of our gratitude, and we declare by our humiliation before
the Image how profound our submission is respective to the Original. Wherefore
speaking strictly according to the style of the Church, when we render any
honor to the Image of an Apostle or Martyr our aim is not so much to honor
the Image, as the Apostle or Martyr in presence of the Image. To this purpose
the Roman Pontifical declares, Pontific. Romans de Benedict. Imag.
and the Council of Trent expresses the same intent, when it says, that the
honor we render to Images, Co^c. Trid. Sess. 25. dec. de Inuoc. etc.
is so referred to the Originalls, that by the means of the Images we kiss,
and before which we kneel, we adore CHRIST JESUS, and honor those Saints
which they represent to us.

In fine we clearly discern in what Spirit the Church honors Images, by the
honor it renders the holy Cross, or the book of the Gospel. All the world
sees clearly that before the Cross the Church adoreth him who did bear our
sinn's upon that wood; 1. Pet. 2.
and that when her children bow their heads before the books of the Gospel,
when they stand up in respect at their passing by them, and kiss them
reverently, all this honor terminateth in the Eternal Verity which is exposed
to us by that Instrument.

There must then be very little equity in calling Idolatry that Religious
sentiment, which moves us to uncover and bow our heads before the Images of
the Cross, in reflection upon him, who was crucyfi'd for our sakes; and one
must be stark blind, not to discern the extreme difference between those
who confided in Idols, upon this opinion, that some Divinity or some virtue was
at is were fastened unto them: and them who profess, as we do, that they
intend not to make any use of Images, but simply to raise their spirit up to
heaven with the intent of honoring CHRIST JESUS, or his Saints, and in them
God himself who is the author of all grace and Sanctification.

Under the same notion, the honor we pay to Relics is to be apprehended,
following the stepps of the primitive Ages; and if our Adversaries did reflect,
that we consider the bodies of Saints as having bin victimes to God either by
Martyrdom, or Penance, they would not conceive that the honor we render
them, upon this motive, can depart or remove us from that we owe to God himself.

And we may say in general, that if they would comprehend in what manner the
affection we bear to some one body extends (without dividing it self) to his
children, to his friends, and successively by degrees to all that represents
that person, to all that remains of him, or any thing that receives the memory
of him; if they did comprehend that our honoring makes such a progress, since
in effect our honoring is nothing else but love mixed with fear and respect;
in fine if they did comprehend that, all the exterior worship of the Catholic
Church rises, and springs in God himself, and that it reuerts thither, they
would never suspect that those Religious acts (which God alone does animate)
could provoke his iealousy. They would perceive the quite contrary, and find
that if God, as jealous as he is of the love of men, does not account that we
divide between him and the Creature when we love our Neighbor for his sake:
the same God, as jealous as he is of the duties of his servants, does not
conceive them to share or part the worship which they owe to him alone, when
from the motive of the dutys they owe him, they honor those who have bin
honored by himself.

Yet true it is that as the sensible marks of reverence are not all of
absolute necessity, the Church, without any alteration in the Doctrine, may
have extended more or less those exterior practices, suting to the diversity
of times, places, and other occurrencies, not intending that her children
should be seruilly subjected to visible matters, but only that they might be
excited, and as it were advertised by their means to apply themselfs to God, to
offer him in spirit and truth that reasonable and due service he expects from
his creatures.

It may easily be discerned by this Doctrine with how much truth I have
asserted, that a great part of our Controversies would vanish by an only right
understanding of terms, if these were discussed with Charity; and if our
Adversaries did consider calmely the precedent explications, which comprehend
the express Doctrine of the Council of Trent; they would forbear to object to
us that we injure the Mediation of CHRIST JESUS, and that we inuoke Saints,
adore Images in a manner peculiar to God himself. It is granted by reason that
in some sense Invocation, Adoration, and the name of Mediator are competent
only to God and CHRIST JESUS, that it is easy by a perverse use of those
terms, to traduce our Doctrine and render it odious; but if they are
ingenuously received in that sense we have exhibited, these objections loose
all their force; and if there remain in the minds of the Pretended Reformers
any less important difficultyes, natural equity and syncerity will oblige
them to auowe themselves satisfied in the principal exceptions.

Besides this, there is nothing more unjust then to charge the Church with the
stating of all piety in this devotion to Saints, since as we have already
euinced, the Council of Trent judges it sufficient to inform and teach
Catholics that this practice is Good and Useful without advancing it
further, so that the Churches intent is, to condemn such as reject this
practice either by Contempt or Misconstruction: and the Church is obliged to
condemn them by reason that she ought not to endure the condemning of salutary
and useful practices, nor that a Doctrine, which all Antiquity has
authorized, should be rejected by the Nouellists Doctors.

The matter of justification Justification.


Those who are never so little acquainted with the history of the Pretended
Reformation can not be ignorant, that those who were the first Authors of it,
did propose this Article to all the world as the principal, and as it were the
most essential ground of their separation; so that this seems the most
necessary point to be rightly understood.

First we believe that our sins are forgiven freely by the divine mercy for
JESVS-CHRIST'S sake: Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. cap. 9.
these are the express terms of the Council of Trent, which adds further
that we are said to be justified freely, ibid. c. 8.
because none of those things which precede our justification, either our faith
or our works, can merit this grace.

And by reason the holy scripture explains to us the remission of our sins
expressing it some times, by saying that God couers them; and others, that he
takes them quite away and effaceth them by the grace of the holy Ghost, which
renders us new creatures, we conceive that we are to combine all these
expressions to form a complete Idea or notion of the justification of a
sinner; we do therefore believe that our sins are not only covered, but
entirely effaced by the blood of CHRIST JESUS, and by the grace by which we are
regenerated: and this persuasion is so far from detracting from that image we
ought to frame of the merit of that blood, as quite contrary it indeareth and
eleuateth the value of it; for by this means the righteousness of Christ is not
simply imputed, but actually imparted to the faithful, by the operation of the
holy Ghost, in so much as they are not only imputed, but even rendered
righteous by the grace of Christ.

If our righteousness were only in the sight of man, it would not be the
operation of the holy Ghost: it must then be justice even before God, since it
is God himself who produces it in us by an effusion of his charity upon our
hearts.

It is notwithstanding but too true that the flesh lusts against the spirit,
Gal. ^. 17.
and the spirit, against the flesh: Iac. 3. 2.
and we all offend in many things. Wherefore albeit our righteousness be a true
one, by the infusion of Charity, yet is it no perfect one by reason of the
combat between it and our concupiscence: so that the sighing and sorrowing of a
soul repenting her sins, performs the most necessary duty of Christian
righteousness, which obliges us to confess with S. Augustine that our
righteousness in this life consists rather in the remission of our sins, then
in the perfection of our virtues.

Wherefore as to the point Merits of good works.
imputed to our works, Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 16.
the Catholic Church teaches that Eternal life ought to be proposed to the
children of God, both as a Grace mercifully promised by the means of our
Savior JESUS CHRIST, and as a Reward which is faithfully rendered to their good
works, and to their deserts in virtue of that promise: these are the express
terms of the Council of Trent; but least the pride of humane nature should be
flattered by the opinion of a persuming Merit, the same Council determines,
that all the worth and value of Christian good works is derived from that
sanctifying grace, which is freely conferred upon us in the name of CHRIST
JESUS, and that is an effect of the continual influence of that divine head
upon his depending members.

True it is indeed that the exhortations, the promises, the menaces, and
reproaches of the Gospel do declare sufficiently, that we are to work our
salvation by the motion and actings of our own wills, concurring with the Grace
of God which assists us, but it is a fixed principle that free will can perform
nothing in order to Eternal beatitude, but by the same degrees it is moved and
elevated by the holy Ghost.

Whereupon the Church knowing that it is the holy spirit which works in us by
his Grace all the good we do, she ought to rest persuaded that the good works
of the faithful are very acceptable to God, and of great estimation in his
sight, and she does rightfully use the term of Merit concurrently with all
Christian Antiquity, chiefly to signify the value and dignity of our works,
which we perform by the motion of his Grace. But by reason all their sanctity
is derived from God, who works them in us, the same Church has received from
the Council of Trent, as the Doctrine of the Catholic Faith, this saying of
S. August. that God crowns his own Gifts when he crowns the Merits of his
servants.

We entreat all such as love truth and peace to be pleased to read the whole
context of the Council of Trent's words, that they once be disabused, and
delivered from those wrong impressions, which are suggested to them, of our
Docctrine. Notwithstanding we discern clearly ( say the fathers of that
Council) that the holy scriptures esteem so much Good woorks, Co^c. Trid.
sess. 6. c. 16.
that JESUS CHRIST himself promises, that a cupp of cold water given a poor
body, shall not want its reward: and that the Apostle declares, that a moment
of light pain suffered in this world, shall produce an Eternal weight of
glory; yet God forbid that a Christian should trust and glory in himself, and
not in our Lord, whose goodness toward Man is so abundant, that he allows
his own Gifts to them to be accounted their Merits.

This Doctrine is spread through the whole Council which teaches in an other
session, Sess. 14. c. 8.
that we who are not sufficient to do any thing alone by our selves, can do
every thing by him who inableth us; so that Man has nothing wherein he can
glorify himself, nor any cause to confide in himself, but that all his
confidence and his glorying is in CHRIST JESUS, in whom we live, and in whom we
merit, in whom we satisfy bearing worthy fruits of repentance, which derive
their power from him, and by him are offered to God the Father, and in him are
accepted by the Father. So that we prefer all our suites, place all our hopes,
render all our thanks by our Lord JESUS CHRIST. We proclaim in a loud voice
that we are acceptable to God only in him and by him; and we can hardly
conceive how any other intent or application can be imputed to us. We fix in
him alone so entirely all the hope of our salvation, as we present to God every
day those words in the Sacrifice: Vouchsafe o God to grant unto us sinners,
your servants, who hope in the multitude of your Mercys, some part and
fellowship with your blessed Apostles and Martyrs... into which we humbly beg
to be admitted, not considering our Merit, but forgiving us by your Mercy, for
our Sauiour's sake CHRIST JESUS.

Shall the Church never be able to persuade her children, now become her
ennemies, neither by the explication of her Faith, nor the decisions of her
Counsels, nor by her most solemn prayers presented in her Sacrifices, that she
does not own any life, nor conceive any hope, but in the merits of
JESUS CHRIST alone; and this hope is so powerful, that it imprints in the
children of God, who walk faithfully in his ways, Phil. 4. 7.
that peace which passes all understanding, as the Apostle assures us. But yet
although this hope be stronger then the promises or menaces of the world, and
be sufficient to calm the terror of our conscience, yet does it not suppress
entirely our fear, by reason that, though we are assured that of himself he
never does abandon us, we can never be certain that we shall not depart from
him by our own faylings in rejecting his inspirations: and God has bin pleased
to temper and allay by this saving fear, that confidence he inspireth into his
children: for as S. Augustine says, such is our weakness in this seat of
perils and temptations, that an entire assurance would produce in us
slacknesse and presumption; whereas this fear, which in the Apostle's mind
makes us work our salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12.
renders us more vigilant, and moves us to fasten our selves by an humble
dependence on him who works in us by his grace the will, ibid. 13.
and the acting according to his good pleasure as the same S. Paul declares
unto us.

This is what is most necessary to be held and practiced in the Doctrine of
justification, and our Adversaries must be very unreasonable, and perverse not
to confess that this Doctrine is sufficient to instruct Christians in their
duty of attributing to God by CHRIST JESUS all the glory of their salvation.

If the Pretending-Reformers after this exposition fly unto nice and subtle
questions, it is not amiss to advise them that, it is not now proper to raise,
or insist upon needless difficultys, reflecting upon what they have
condesce^ded unto, toward an union with the Lutherans, and what they have
granted to their own fraternity in the points of Grace and Predestination.
That proceeding ought to have instructed them to restrain and confine their
inquiries, in this matter, to that singly which is of absolute necessity to
establish the foundation of Christian piety.

And if they could once resolve to bound themselves within those limits they
would quickly be satisfied, and soon would desist from their obiecting to us
our nullifying the Grace of God by our ascribing all to good works: since we
have euindenced to them in so clear terms of the Council of Trent these three
points so decisive in this matter, viz. That our sins are pardoned by pure
mercy for CHRIST JESUS his sake. That we owe unto a free and gracious
liberality the righteousness infused into us by the holy Spirit. And that as
many good works as we perform, are so many free gifts of grace.

And we cannot but confess that the most Learned of their party do not now
contend so much in this point as they did at the beginning of the Schism, and
there are few that will not auowe, that a Separation ought not to have bin made
upon this Controversy. But if this so important difficulty, in the point of
Justification, of which their first Authors raised their strongest fort, is no
longer accounted so capital by the most intelligent and sufficient persons of
their party, we desire them to reflect, what judgment ought to be made of their
Separation, and how much we might hope a Reconciliation, if they would raise
their minds from under all prepossession, and renounce the spirit of Contention.

Satisfactions, Purgatory, and Indulgences.
in order to the leaving no doubt or scruple in this matter.

The Catholics do unanimously profess and teach that CHRIST JESUS only, God
and Man united, was sufficiently qualifyed, by the infinite dignity of his
person, to make satisfaction for our sins; but having superaboundantly
satisfied, he had power to apply unto us an entire abolition, without reserving
any punishment: or by commutation of a greater into a lesser penalty; that is,
exchanging an Eternal pain into Temporal sufferances: and by reason that
this first sort of mercy is the most complete, and most suting to his
goodness, he has taken that course in our Baptism: but we maintain that he
uses the second manner in the remission he grants to those, who after
Baptism relapse into sin, being in a manner forced to it by the ingratitude of
those who have abused his gifts: so that such offenders are condemned to some
temporal pains, although the Eternal punishment be remitted.

But from hence it ought not to be inferred that JESUS CHRIST has not fully
satisfied for us, but rather the contrary, viz, that he having purchased an
absolute right and title of propriety in us, by the infinite price of his blood
paid for our salvation, he grants our pardon with what condition, and under
what law and reservation he pleases to impose.

We should be very ungrateful and injurious to our Savior, should we presume
to question the infiniteness of his merit by this pretext, that having
pardoned us the sin of Adam, he did not deliver and free us at the same time
from all the consequences of it, leaving us still subject to death, and to so
many corporal and spiritual infirmities, unto which that sin has sentenced us.
It is surely grace enough that JESUS CHRIST has once paid the price for which
we shall one day be delivered from all the miseries which oppress us; it is
our part to receive with humility and gratitude every part of his benefit,
considering the motion whereby he is pleased to carry on our deliverance in
that order his wisdom has designed for our happiness, and for a more
evident manifestation of his own Justice and Mercy.

And for the like reason we ought not to marvel if he who has given us so
easy a delivery by Baptism becomes more severe to us after we have violated
our holy promises, made upon that remission; and it is not only just, but even
beneficial to us, that God forgiving us the sin, and remitting the Eternal
punishment we have incurred, should impose some temporal penalty to reteyn us
within our duties, least we being delivered too soon from the bonds of his
justice, we should abandon our selves unto a temerarious confidence, abusing
the facility of his Indulgence.

It is therefore in order to our discharging that obligation that we are
subjected to some works of Penance, which we are bound to perfome in the
spirit of humility and repentance; and the necessity of these satisfactory
works, was the motive that induced the primitive Church to impose upon
Penitents those pennances called Canonical.

So that when the Church inflicteth upon sinners paynfull and laborious
injunctions, and they undergo them with humility, that act we call
Satisfaction: and when either in regard of the zeal and feruor of the
Penitent, or other good works performed, which the Church has prescribed, she
releaseth some part of the Penance, which was owing, this remission is called
Indulgence.

The Council of Trent proposes no more to our Faith Sess. 25. decr. de Indulg,
then this in point of Indulgences, that the power of granting them has bin
given the Church by CHRIST JESUS, and that the use of them is very beneficial;
whereunto the Council adds; that the grant of them ought to be dispensed with
caution, least the Ecclesiastical discipline should be weakened, and eneruated
by an excessive facility, which advice declares that the manner of disposing
of Indulgences appertains to Church Discipline.

Such as depart out of this world in Grace and Charity, but yet owing those
sufferances, which the Divine Justice has reserved, discharge them in the next
life, and this persuasion has obliged all the Christian Antiquity to offer
prayers, alms, and sacrifices for the faithful departed in the peace and
communion of the Church, with an assured faith that such sufferers may be eased
by these applications: this is what the Council of Trent proposes to be
believed concerning the souls deteyned in Purgatory, without determining the
special manner of their pains, or declaring any thing upon many the like
debates, upon which the holy Council advises a great referuednes, blaming such
as expose what is not only uncertain, but may be unfound.

This is the holy and the harmless Doctrine of the Catholic Church in point
of Satisfactions: from the mis-construction whereof so many wrongful
imputations have bin cast upon her; and if after this explanation the
Pretended-Reformers do object to us the detracting from the satisfaction made
by JESUS CHRIST, they must needs have forgot what we have professed to them,
that our Savior has paid the entire price of our Redemption, and that there
is nothing wanting in the value, since it is in it self infinite, and that the
reservation of those payns, we have asserted, proceeds not from any
disproportion in this payment, but from a certain order Christ has designed,
to restrain us by just apprehensio^s, and healthful discipline.

And in cafe they should yet object to us the belief that we are sufficient of
our selves to satisfy for some part of the pain due to our sins, we may reply
with great assurance, that the contrary is manifested by those maxims we have
established, since they proclaim clearly that our whole Salvation is but a
work of Grace and Mercy: that what we act by the Grace of God is no less to
be ascribed to him then what he effects singly by his absolute pleasure:
Parum me mouent quae in veterum scriptis de Satisfactione passim occurrunt;
video quidem eorum nonnullos (dicam simpliciter, omnes fere quorum libriextant)
aut in hac part lapsos esse, aut nimis aspere ac dure locutos. Calu. Inst. l.
3. cap. 4.
and in fine whatsoever we present him, belongs no less to him then what he
freely bestows upon us: to which we must adioyne (in conformity to the whole
ancient Church) this profession; that what we term Satisfaction is but in
effect an application of the infinite Satisfaction paid by CHRIST JESUS.

This same consideration ought to appease those who seem offended when we
affirm that fraternal charity, and the Communion of Saints is so acceptable to
God, that he does often receive even the Satisfactions we offer one for
another. It seems these Pretending Reformers do not conceive how entirely,
whatsoever we are, belongs to God, nor how much all those regards which his
goodness produces in favor of the faithful, who are members of CHRIST JESUS
are necessarily relating to that Divine head. But surely such as have read and
considered that God himself inspired into his servants the zeal of afflicting
themselves, by fastings, and other mortifications, not only for their own
sins, but for those also of the whole land where they lived, will not wonder if
we affirm, that God being moved by the pleasure he takes, to gratify those he
vouchsafes to call his friends, does mercifully accept the humble Sacrifice of
their voluntary mortifications for an abatement of those punishments he had
designed for his criminal poeple: which declares, that being satisfied by one
part, he will be softened and sweetened to the other, honoring by this means his
son CHRIST JESUS in the communion of his members, and in the holy society of
his mystical body.

The Sacraments.
by which the merits of our Savior CHRIST are applied unto us. And since the
disputes we have in relation to them (excepting that of the Eucharist or
Communion) are not persued with much heat, we will in the first place clear
in few words the principal difficulties which are objected concerning the other
Sacraments; reserving that of the Blessed Sacrament for the last, as the most
important.

The Sacraments of the new Alliance are not simply holy signs, which do but
signify the Grace of CHRIST, nor only seals which confirm it, but also
instuments of the holy spirit, which serve to apply it unto us, and which
confer Grace by the virtue of the words pronounced, and the exterior action
applied unto us, in case we interpose no impediment by our own indisposition.

When God annexeth so great a Grace unto exterior signs, which in their own
nature hold no proportion with so admirable effects, he signifies to us
clearly, that besides what we can confer to it by our interior contribution,
there is required a special intervention of the holy spirit to effect our
sanctification, and a singular application of our Sauiour's merits, which are
imparted to us by the Sacraments. So that this Doctrine can not be rejected
without iniuring the Merits of CHRIST JESUS, and detracting from the efficacy
of the divine power in our Regeneration.

We acknowledge seven signs, or sacred ceremonies established by CHRIST JESUS,
as the ordinary means and instruments of sanctification and perfection of the
new man. Their divine institution is extant in the holy scripture, either by
the express words of CHRIST, who established them; or by that Grace, which, by
testimony of the same scripture, is annexed unto them, and infers
necessarily God's ordayning them.

By reason that infants can not supply their own want of Baptism, Baptism.
by the acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, nor by their vows and desire of
receiving this Sacrament, we believe that if they do not actually receive it,
they have no part of communication of the Grace of our Redemption, and
consequently dying in Adam, they have no part in JESVS-CHRIST.

It is fit to observe here, that the Lutherans concur with the Catholic
Church in holding the absolute necessity of Baptism for Infants, and withal
wonder that any one has presumed to deny a truth, which no one before Calvin
had ever dared to call in question, so deeply was it imprinted in the minds of
all the faithful.

Notwithstanding this, the Pretended-Reformers make no scruple wilfully to
let their children dye, as the Infidels do, without bearing any mark of
Christianity, and deprived of all the grace that belongs to it, if the death of
the child happen before the day of their Congregation.

The imposition of hands practiced by the Apostles (in order to the confirming
Confirmation.
and fortifying the faithful against persecutions, Act. 8. 15. 17.
deriuing the principal efficacy from the internal descent of the holy Ghost
and the infusion of his gifts) ought not to have bin rejected by our
Adversaries, upon this pretext, that the holy spirit does no longer descend
visibly upon us, no more then it is by all the Christian Churches, who have
religiously continued it ever since the Apostles, and make use also of the holy
Chrisme, to demonstrate the virtue of that Sacrament by a more express and
sensible representation of the interior Unction of the holy spirit.

We believe CHRIST JESUS has bin pleased to ordain that those who have
subjected themselves to the Authority of the Chruch by their Baptism, Penance
and Sacramental Confession.
and after this engagement have transgressed the laws of the Gospel, should be
bound to undergo the judgment of the same Church at the tribunal of Penance,
where she does exercise the power conferred upon her to remitt, or to reteyn
sins. Math. 18. 18.
The terms of the commission granted to the Churches Ministers to absolve
sins are so large and general, Io. 20. 23.
that without great temerity the power can not be restreyned only unto public
and notorious offenses: and when they pronounce Absolution in the name of
CHRIST JESUS, since they do but follow the express terms of their
commission, the sentence is reputed as given by CHRIST himself, in whose place
they are appointed as Judges. It is this invisible High Priest who absolueth
interiourly the Penitent, whilst the Priest exercises the exterior ministry.

This Penitential judicature being so necessary a curb for our
licentiousness, so abundant a spring of pious and prudent aduises, so
sensible a consolation to souls afflicted for their sins, when Absolution is
not only declared to them in general terms (as the Protestant Ministers do
practice) but given them in particular, and the Penitent effectualy absolved by
the commission of CHRIST JESUS, upon a perfect examination, and a right
understanding of the case, we can not possibly believe that our Adversaries can
contemplate so many good consequences, without resenting their loss, and
feeling some shame of such an abusiue Reformation, which has abrogated so
holy, and so beneficial a practice.

The holy Ghost having annexed unto Extreame-Vnction, Extreame-Vnction.
by the testimony of S. James, Iac. 5. 14. 15.
an express promise of remission of sins, and ease unto the sick party, there
is nothing wanting unto this most holy ceremony, toward the co^stituting it a
true Sacrament. We must only observe that, according to the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent, Sess. 14. c. 2 de sac. Extr. Vnct.
the sick are more relieved in respect of their souls then their bodies; and
the spiritual benefit is always the principal aim and object of the new law;
it is that also we ought absolutely to expect from this holy Unction, supposing
we are rightly disposed for it; whereas our corporal eases and releifs in our
infirmitys are afforded us, only as relating to our eternal health, according
to the secret and hidden dispositions of Divine Providence, and the several
degrees of preparation and faith, which are already acting in the souls of the
faithful.

When we shall seriously consider, that JESUS CHRIST has induced a new form
into the state of Marriage, Marriage
reducing this holy society unto two persons immutably and indissolubly united;
Math. 19. 5.
when we shall reflect that this inseparable conjunction is made the sign of
his Eternal union with his Church, ^ph. 5. 32.
we shall find little difficulty to comprehend that the Marriage of the
faithful is accompanied with the Grace of the holy Spirit, and we will easily
praise the Divine goodness, which has bin pleased to sanctify in this manner
the spring and deriuation of our birth.

The imposition of hands which the Ministers of holy matters receive, Holy
Orders
being accompanied with so present and actual a virtue of the holy Ghost, 1.
Tim. 4.
and so entire an infusion of Grace, 2. Tim. 1.
is duly reckoned in the number of the Sacraments, and we must confess that
our Adversaries do not absolutely exclude the Consecration of Ministers, but
they reject it only from the number of the Sacraments, Cor. faitl 35.
which are common to the whole Church.

We are now at last come Doctrine the Church touching the real presence of the
Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament; and the manner wherein
the Church understands these words, this is my Body.
or Blessed Sacrament; wherein it will be requisite to explain more amply our
Doctrine, and yet not passing far beyond the bounds, which we have prescribed
to our selves.

The real presence of the Body and Blood of our Lord in this Sacrament is
solidy established by the words of the institution, which we understand
literally; and there is no more reason to ask us why we tie our selves to the
proper and litterall sense, then to question a traveler why he follows the
great highway. It is their part that resort to figurative senses, and choose
such bypaths, to show a reason of this their deuiation. As for us who perceive
nothing in the words which CHRIST JESUS used for the institution of this
Mystery that obliges us to take them in a figurative sense, we conceive this
reason sufficient to settle and determine our receiving them in their proper
and litterall signification. But we find our selves yet more strictly tied unto
it, when we considerately examine the intention of the son of God in this
mystery, which I will explain in the cleerest, and easiest terms I can
possibly, and by such principles as I conceive our Adversaries can not disagree
in.

I say then that these words of our Savior Take, Math. 26.
and eat, this is my Body given for you, Luke 22.
show us, that as the ancient Jews did not simply unite themselves in spirit
unto the immolation or killing of the victimes which were offered for them, but
did effectually eat of the Sacrificed flesh, which was a sign of the part
they had in that oblation: so CHRIST JESUS, having made himself our Offering,
did intend we should really eat the flesh of this Sacrifice, to the end this
actual communication of that adorable flesh should remain a perpetual
testimony to every one of us in particular, that it was for our sakes he
assumed, and for us he sacrificed his mortal flesh and blood.

God had forbiden the Jews to eat of the Sacrifice (...)uit. 6. 30
which was a Sin-Offering, with intent to teach them that true expiation of
crimes was not obtained in the Law, nor by the blood of beasts. All the poeple
stood as it were interdicted by this restraint, not being capable to partake
actually of the remission of sins. Now, for the quite contrary reason, it was
requisite that the Body of our Savior, the true Host offered up for sin, should
be eaten by the faithful, in order to the teaching them by this true eating
that the forgiveness of sins was accomplished in the New Testament.

God did likewise forbid the people of the Jews the eating of blood; and one of
the reasons of this restraynt was, that the blood is given for the expiation of
our souls. Leuit. 17. 11
Quite contrary our Savior proposes the drinking of his Blood, Math. 26. 28.
because it is shed for the remission of sins. So that the eating of the Flesh
and drinking the Blood of the Son of God at the holy table is as Real, as
Grace, the expiation of sins, and the participation of the Sacrifice of CHRIST
JESUS is actual and effectiue in the New Alliance:

Notwithstanding which truth, by reason he intended to exercise our Faith in
this Mystery, and at the same time to deliver us from the horror of eating his
Flesh, and drinking his Blood in their own kinds, it was fit and convenient to
exhibit them unto us covered under an other species. But if these
considerations did oblige him to ordain our eating the Flesh of our Offering in
a different manner from that of the Jews, yet he ought not in that respect to
deprive us of the Reality and the Substance of it.

It is apparent therefore that to accomplish the figures of the old Law, and to
putt us in actual possession of that Victime offered for our sins, CHRIST JESUS
did design the giving us Realy and truly his Body and Blood; which point is so
evident, that our Adversaries themselves desire we should be persuaded, they
have the same belief as we profess, since they do continually press and
urge to us, their not denying the true and Real participation of the Body and
Blood of CHRIST in the Eucharist; which pretense of theirs we will examine in
the sequent discourse where we conceave it will be proper to expose their
sentiments, after having fully explicated the belief of the Church. In the
mean time we may conclude, that if the fair and natural signification of the
words, used by the son of God compels them to grant that his express
intention was to give Really his Flesh when he said, This is my body, they
ought not to wonder, that we can not consent to the understanding these words
as spoken merely in a figurative sense.

And surely the son of God who was so careful to explain to his Apostles
what he taught under the vailes of parables and figures, having said nothing in
this point to explain himself further, seems clearly to have left these words
in their natural signification. I know that our Adversaries pretend, that the
matter it self explains sufficiently the meaning, because, say they, it is
clear that what he exposes, is but Bread and Wine; but the cloud of this
argument vanishes, when we reflect that he who speaks is of an Authority
which ought to ouerrule our senses, and has an Omnipote^ce transcending all
nature. It is no harder for the son of God to effect his body's presence in
the Eucharist, saying, This is my body, then to cure a woman of her infirmity
by saying, Luke 13. 12.
Woman thou art freed from thy infirmity; or to preserve the Centurion's son
by saying, Io. 4. 50.
Thy son lives; or in fine to effect the forgiveness of the sins of the
bedridden paralytique by uttering only, Math. 9. 2.
Thy sins are forgiven thee.

We having therefore no reason to trouble our selves how CHRIST will effect
what he says, we fix our belief precisely on his words. He who makes
whatsoever he wills, by his words, effects whatsoever he says; and it was
much easier for the son of God to force the laws of nature to verify his
word, then it is for us to conform our understandings unto such violent and
strayn'd interpretations, as destroy all the laws of discourse.

The laws of language and discourse tell us that the sign which naturally
represents, does very often take the name of the thing it self, because it is
natural to it to recall the idea or image of it into the mind. The same hapens
to signs by institution; but then it is upon condition that they be received
and acknowledged for signs, and that the parties be accustomed to them. But
that in instituting a sign, which of it self has no rapport to the thing, (as
for example a piece of bread to signify the body of a man) one should give it
that name without explaining of it, and before agreement made concerning it, as
JESVS-CHRIST our Lord did in the last supper, is a thing vnhear'd of, and
whereof we find no example in holy scripture, and I might say, none in humane
language.

Whereupon the Pretending Reformers themselves do not so fix upon the
figurative sense which they ascribe to the words of CHRIST JESUS, as not to
acknowledge at the same time, that when he uttered those words, he intended to
give us Truly his Body and his Blood.

After having proposed the Explication of the words, do this in remembrance of
me.
touching these words, This is my body, it is fit to exhibit her persuasion
concerning the words which CHRIST did adioyne unto them, Do this in
remembrance of me. Luke. 22. 19.
It is evident that the intention of the son of God was, 1. Cor. 11. 24
to oblige us by these words, unto a retention and remembrance of the death he
had suffered for our redemption; and S. Paul concludes out of these very
words, that we announce the death of our Lord in this mystery: 1. Cor. 11. 26.
we must not then persuade our selves, that this remembrance of the death of
our Lord excludes the Real presence of his Body, but quite contrary, if we
consider rightly what we have here explicated, we shall discern clearly that
this Commemoration is grounded upon the Real presence; for in the same manner
as the Jews eating of the Peace Offerings did reflect that they had bin offered
up for them, so we eating the Flesh of CHRIST JESUS our Victime, are bound to
remember, that he suffered death for us. It is therefore the very same Flesh
eaten by the faithful, which not only reuiueth in us the memory of his
immolation, but does besides confirm to us that verity. And we are so far
from having reason to say that this solemn Com^emoration JESUS CHRIST has
ordained us to make, does exclude the Real presence of his Flesh, that the
contrary is evident, that this tender reflection he would have us make at the
holy table on him, as offered up for us, is grounded upon his Flesh's being
Really received, since in effect it is not possible for us to forget, that he
has given his Body up in sacrifice for us, when we find that he continues
still to give us daily that victime for our orall manducation.

Shall Christians upon pretense of celebrating in the Supper the Memory of our
Sauiour's Passion, retrench from this pious Commemoration that part which is
the most affectiue and most efficacious therein? Ought they not consider, that
CHRIST JESUS does not command that we should barely remember him, but that we
should remember him by feeding on his Flesh and Blood? Let us reflect upon the
consequence, and powerfulnes of the words: Christ says not simply, as the
Pretending Reformers seem to understand him, that the Bread and the Wine of
the Eucharist should be a Memorial of his Body and Blood: but the tells us
that in doing what he prescribed, that is, in taking his Body and his Blood we
should be Mindful of him. And can there be any thing in effect more powerful to
produce in us the remembrance of it? If children reflect so tenderly upon their
father and his kindenes when they approach the tomb where his body is
enclosed; how powerfully ought our love and memory to be excited and indeared,
when we possess under those sacred couerings, and under that mystical tomb,
the Flesh it self of our Savior immolated for us, that living and life-giuing
Flesh, and this Blood still warm by the feruor of his love, and full of spirit
and grace. If our Adversaries persist to allege, that he who commands us to
remember him, does not give us his proper Substance; we may desire them to
agree amongst themselves. They profess not to deny the Real communication of
the proper Substance of the son of God in the Blessed Sacrament; if their
profession be serious, if their Doctrine be not a mere delusion, they must
needs auowe with us, that Remembrance does not exclude all manner of Presence,
but only that which moves the senses, and so their answer is the same with
ours, since when we affirm that JESUS CHRIST is present, we accord at the same
time that he is not existing in a sensible manner.

And if we are asked, the reason (we believing, as we do, that there is
nothing to satisfy our senses in this mystery) why we do not grant, that it is
sufficient CHRIST JESUS should be present in it by our Faith; we may very
easily answer, and clear this equivocal demand. It is one thing to say that
the son^e of God is present to us by Faith; and an other to say, that we know
by Faith that he is present. The first manner of speaking imports only a Moral
presence, the second does signify a very Real one, because our Faith is most
certain, and this Real presence, known by our Faith, suffices to work in
the just who lives by Faith all the effects which I have specified. Habac. 2.
4.


But to defeat at once all Exposition of the Caluinists doctrine about the
Reallity.
under which the Caluinists cover their opinions in this point, and to discover
at the same time how near they approach to us, although I have undertaken only
to deliver and explicate the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, it will not be
amiss here to insert theirs.

Their Doctrine is divided into two partys or sects: the one speaks only of the
Figure of the Body and Blood: the other of nothing but the Reality of them
both; we shall examine in their due orders each one of these different parties.

In the first place they allege that this great miracle of the Real presence,
which we admit, is no way needful: that it suffices for our salvation, that
JESUS CHRIST dyed for us, that this Sacrifice is sufficiently applied by our
Faith; and this application is fully certified by the word of God: they and
further, that if this word ought to be clothed with sensible signs, the
giving us simple and bare Symboles, such as water in Baptism, would have bin
sufficient, without the necessity of drawing down from heaven the Body and
Blood of CHRIST JESUS.

Nothing seems more easy then after this manner to explicate the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, and yet our Adversaries themselves have not judged that they
ought to rest and acquiesce in this exposition. They know that the like
imaginations have drawn the Socinians to deny the miracle of the Incarnation.
Those Heretics allege that God could have saved us without going so far
about; he had nothing to do but forgive our sins; he could have instructed us
sufficiently both in point of Doctrine and Manners, by the Words, and by the
Example of a man filled with the holy Ghost, without being obliged for that
effect to make a God of him. But the Caluinists, as well as we, have discerned
the weakness of this argument, which is evident; first, by reason that it is
not our part to deny or assure the mysteries of Religion according to our own
judgment of their being useful or unnecessary for our salvation. God alone is
possessed of the secret, and our part is the rendering them profitable and
beneficial to us, by believing them such as God promises them, and in
receiving his graces and favors in the same manner as he bestows them.
Secondly, without entering into this question, whether it was possible for God
to save us by any other means then the Incarnation and Death of his son, and
embroyling us in that vselesse dispute (which the Pretending Reformers debate
so teadiously in their schools) it suffices to have learnt by the holy
scriptures, that the son of God has bin pleased to demonstrate his love by
effects, which to us are incomprehensible. This love was the motive of that so
Real union, by which he made himself Man. This love persuaded him to immolate
and offer up for us his body as Really as he assumed it. All these designs are
consequent to one an other, and this infinite love holds the same height
throughout all the strayns and motions thereof. So that when he shall be
pleased to bring each single child of his (by uniting himself to him
particularly) to taste and partake the goodness, which he has expressed to all
in general, he will find means to accomplish his will by things as powerful
and efficacious as those which he has already fulfilled for our salvation. We
ought not therefore to wonder at his giving unto every one of us the Real
Substance of his Flesh and Blood. He intends by it to imprint in our hearts this
verity, that it was for our sakes that he assumed them, and offered them up in
Sacrifice. This preceding goodness renders all the sequence easy to be believed;
the order of his mysteries disposes us to credit all this, and his express
word does not allow us any doubt of it.

Our Adversaries did well discern that simple figures and bare signs of the
Body and Blood would not satisfy Christians used and accustomed to the Grace
and Goodness of a God, who gives himself so Really to us. So that upon this
ground they seek to decline the being taxed with their denying a Substantial
and Real participation of JESUS CHRIST in the Communion. They affirm with us,
that he makes us partakers of his proper Substance. Cat. Dim. 53.
They say that he feeds us with the Substance of his Body and his Blood:
Conf. of faith. art. 36.
and conceauing that his showing us by some sign that we did partake of his
Sacrifice would not be sufficient, they declare expressly, that the Body of
our Savior, Cat. Dim. 52.
which is given us in the Communion, does ascertaine us of it. These words are
so important, as we will presently examine them.

Now then we see the Body and Blood of CHRIST present in our Mysteries, by the
grant of the Caluinists: for what is communicated according to the proper
Substance of it, must needs be Really present. True it is that they explain
this Communication, saying it is effected by the Spirit and by Faith; but it is
also certain that they will have it to be Real: and because it is not possible
to render this intelligible, that a Body communicated to us only in Spirit and
by Faith, should be imparted to us Really and in its proper Substance, they
have not bin able to remain fixed in both parts of a Doctrine of such a
Contradiction; and so they have bin forced to grant two things, which the
Catholic Church teaches. The first is, that CHRIST JESUS is given us in the
Eucharist in such a manner as does not suit either with Baptism, or Preaching
the Gospel, but is peculiarly proper to this Mystery. We shall discern
presently the consequence of this principle, but let us first consider, how it
is allowed and granted by the Pretended-Reformers.

And in this point I will not allege the testimony of any particular Author,
but the very words of the Catechism in that place, where it explicateh what
relates to the Lord's Supper. It pronounces in express terms not only that
CHRIST JESUS is given us Really and truly in the Sacrament, Dim. 53.
and in his own Substance but being asked the question, what advantage we have
by the communication in the Supper, above that in Baptism or Preaching, they
answer; Dim. 52.
although he be truly communicated to us by Baptism, and by the Gospel, yet in
them it is but Partly, and not Entirely. From whence it follows, that in the
Lord's Supper they teach he is not given us Partly but Completely.

There is an extreme difference between receiving in Part, and receiving
Plenarily. So that if we partake of JESVS-CHRIST in all other com^unications of
him, but in Part, and that in the Lord's Supper singly, we receive him
Entirely, it follows even by the Confession of our Adversaries, that we must
seek in the Communion a participation special and peculiar to this mystery,
which can not appertain to Baptism or Preaching: and at the same time it
follows also that this partaking is not annexed unto Faith, since our Faith
spreading and extending it self through all the acts of Christianity does exist
and operate in the Preaching of the word, and in Baptism as well as the
Lord's Supper. And indeed it is to be observed, that notwithstanding all the
earnestness the Pretending-Reformers have expressed to render Baptism and
Preaching equal to the Eucharist, upon this account; that CHRIST JESUS is truly
com^unicated to us by them, they never durst venture to assert in their
Catechismes, that CHRIST was given us in his proper Substance either in
Baptism, or in Preaching of the Gospel, as they have affirmed it of the
Eucharist. So that they have bin convinced they could not decline the ascribing
to the Lord's Supper such a manner of possessing CHRIST, as is peculiar to this
Sacrament, and that our Faith, which is common to all the actions of a
Christian, could not be that distinct and singular manner. Now this singular
manner of possessing CHRIST JESUS in the Eucharist must needs be Real, since
it gives to the believer the very Substance of the Body and Blood of our
Savior, which is not done by Faith, and this is what the Catholic Church
holds and teaches.

The second point granted by the Pretending Reformers is drawn from the Article
following immediately what I have already cited out of their Catechism, which
is this, that the Body of our Savior, Dim. 52.
in regard it was once offered in Sacrifice to reconcile us unto God, is now
given us to assure us that we partake of that reconciliation.

If these words have any meaning in them, if they are not an empty sound only,
and a mere vain amusement, they must needs suggest to our understanding that
CHRIST JESUS does not give us a simple sign or symbol, but his proper Body,
to assure us that we partake of his Sacrifice, and the Reconciliation of
Mankind. If then the receiving of the Body of our Savior assures us of our
participation of the fruit of his Death, it follows of necessity that this
partaking of the fruit must be a distinct thing, from the receiving of his
Body, because the one is the pledge and security for the other; from which
supposal advancing further, I say that if our Adversaries are forced to
distinguish in the Lord's Supper the partaking of the Body of our Savior, from
the having part in the fruit and grace of his Sacrifice, they ought likewise
to distinguish the participation of that Divine Body from all that
participation thereof, which is conferred Spiritually and by Faith; for this
last partaking (namely by Faith) will never afford them two distinct actions,
by one of which they receive the Body of our Savior, and by the other the
fruit of his Sacrifice; no body being able to conceive what difference there
is between partaking, by Faith, of the Body of our Savior, and partaking, by
Faith, of the fruit of his Death. They must therefore yeald that besides the
Communion by which we partake Spiritually of the Body of our Savior, and of
his spirit coniointly in the receiving the fruit of his Death, there is yet an
other Real Comunion of the Body of the same Savior, which is a secure pledge
to us that the other (namely the benefit of his death) is assured to us, if we
do not frustrate the effects of so great a grace, by our own opposite
dispositions. This consequence is necessarily included in the principles to
which they agree; nor can they ever be able to explicate this verity in any
solid way, unless they return to the sense of the Catholic Church.

Who can choose but admire in this point the power of Truth? All that is
consequent to the principles granted by our Adversaries is clearly understood
in the sense of the Church: even the least instructed Catholics easily
conceive that in the Eucharist there is a Com^unio^ with CHRIST JESUS, which is
not to be found any where else. It is easy for them to understand that his Body
is given us, to assure us that we partake in his Sacrifice, and in his Death.
They distinguish clearly these two manners necessary to unite us to CHRIST
JESUS; the one is by taking his proper Flesh; the other by receiving his
Spirit: the first thereof is granted us as a pledge and security of the second:
but by reason things can not be explicated in the opinions held by our
Adversaries, though on the other side they can not disauowe them, we can not
choose but conclude that their Error has cast them into a manifest
Contradiction.

I have often wondered why they did not deliver and explain their Doctrine in a
more familiar and simple manner. Why have they not persisted in saying (without
so many artifices) that CHRIST JESUS having shed his blood for us, had
represented to us this effusion, by giving us two distinct signs of his Body
and his Blood; and that he had bin pleased to give to these two signs the
names of the thing it self; and that these sacred Symbols were pledges and
securities of our partaking the fruit of his death; and that we were nourished
spiritually by the virtue of his Body and Blood: after having strayned so hard
to prove that the signs receive the name of the thing it self, and that for
this reason the sign of the Body may be called the Body, the whole frame of
this Doctrine did oblige them naturally to settle and rest there. And to render
these signs efficatious, it would serve sufficiently to have the grace of our
Redemption annexed to them; or rather, according to their principles, that it
were confirmed to us in them. They needed not to have troubled themselves so
much, as they have done, to get us to conceive that we receive the very Body
of our Savior, to this end only, viz, to assure us that we partake of the
Grace of his Death. These Pretended-Reformers did content themselves with
having in the water of Baptism a sign of the Blood which cleanses us, and
they never thought of saying, that we receive the Substance it self of our
Sauiour's Blood, to ascertaine us that the virtue thereof is therein diffused
upon us. If they had argued, and concluded so in the matter of the Eucharist,
their Doctrine would have bin easier and less incombered with Contradictions.
But they who invent and innouate can not say all they have a mind to: they
encounter apparent verities, and established maxims, which disapoint them, and
oblige them to restrain their own conceptions. The Arians would have wished,
not to have bin obliged to qualify our Savior with the name of God and his
only Son. The Nestorians did admit but with great constraint a kind of Unity
of Persons in CHRIST JESUS, which we find in their writings. The Pelagians who
denied Original sin, would as willingly have rejected the ministering the
Sacrament of Baptism to Infants in order to the remission of sin, by which
means they would have bin delivered from that argument the Catholics drew
from this practice, to prove Original sin. But, as I come from observing, they
who find a thing firmly established have not the boldness, or rather
impudence, to overthrow all at once. Let the Caluinists auowe ingenuously the
truth; they would have bin very willing to have acknowleged in the Eucharist
the Body of JESUS CHRIST merely Figuratively, and the partaking only of his
spirit. in effect, setting a side those big words of partaking of his proper
Substance, and many others, which import a Real Presence, and do but
intricate and perplexe them. It would have suited better to their minds, not to
have confessed any other Communion with CHRIST JESUS in the Lord's Supper, then
such an one as is imparted in Preaching the Word, and in Baptism, without
telling us, as they do, that in the Eucharist CHRIST is received Intierly and
elsewhere only in Part. But though this was their wish and inclination, yet the
powerfulnes of the terms resisted their profession of it, our Savior having
affirmed so positiuely of the Eucharist, This is my Body; This is my Blood;
which he never said of any other thing, nor in any other occasion. And what
appearence of rendering that common to all the actions of a Christian, which his
express word has annexed specially to one particular Sacrament? Besides, the
whole order of the divine counsels, the connection of the holy mysteries, of the
doctrine and intention of CHRIST JESUS in his last supper, the words themselves
which he used, and the impression they naturally make in the minds of the
faithful; all these suggest nothing but images and notions of Reality: and for
this reason our Adversaries have bin feign to find out some words, the sound
whereof, at least, might raise some confused idea of this Reality. When a man
fastens himself either entirely unto Faith, as the Catholics do, or
absolutely rest on humane Reason, as the Infidels do, one may establish firm
consequences, and make, as it were, an uniform draught or design of Doctrine:
but when one will frame a compound of them both together, one is driven to say
somewhat more then he would willingly do, and in the persuite, to fall into
opinions, the apparent Contradictions whereof manifestly discover their
Falsities.

This is the case of the Pretended-Reformers, and God has permitted their
deluding themselves in this manner, to facilitate their return to the Unity of
the Catholic doctrine. For since their own experience conuinceth them that
they must speak as we do, to speak the language of truth, ought they not to
judge they must think as we do to understand it right? If they observe in
their own belief some things that can have no sense but in ours, is not this
sufficient to convince them, that the Truth is not entire and complete but in
our Church? And those loose parts of Catholic doctrine which are scattered
here and there in their Catechism (but would, as one may say, feign be
reunited to their whole body) ought not they persuade them to seek in the
Com^union of the Church the full and entire explication of the Mystery of the
Eucharist? They would certainly be brought to it, did not humane reasonings
trouble and perplex their Faith, which is too much adhering to their senses.
But now after having represented to them what benefit they may draw from the
exposition of their Doctrine, let us proceed and end the explaining of our own.

Since it was convenient (as Of Transubstannation, and Adoration; and in what
sense the Eucharist is said to be a Sign.
it was requisite there should be no alteration, as to their object, in the
Bread and Wine of the Eucharist. Whereupon by reason that the same species
continue as our object, and we feel the same effects in the Sacrament, as were
sensible before the Consecration, we ought not to wonder if some times, and in
some certain sense, it is expressed by the same name. Nevertheless our Faith
being attentive to his word, who effects what ever he pleases in heaven and
on earth, does acknowledge in this case no other Substance remaining, but that
which is designed by the same word, viz the proper Body and Blood of CHRIST
JESUS into which the Bread and the Wine are changed, which is what we term
TRANSVBSTANTIATION.

And notwithstanding this, yet the Reality which the Eucharist contains, in
regard of the interior part, is no impediment to the being a Sign in respect
of what it retains of exterior and sensible: but yet a Sign of such a nature
as is so far from excluding a Reality, as it carries it of necessity along
with it, since in effect this speech This is my Body being pronounced upon the
matter CHRIST JESUS has chosen, is an assured sign, that he is Present, and
although the matters seem to our senses to remain the same, yet our spirit
judges otherwise of them then it would do, if a superior Authority did not
interuene: so that although those species, and a certain sequence of natural
impressions, which are made on our bodies, are used to suggest to us the
Substance of Bread and Wine, yet in this case his Authority, whom we believe
entirely, preuailes so much upon us, that the same species begin to design to
us an other Substance; for we believe CHRIST who says, that which we take, and
that which we eat is his Body; and such is the efficacy of his word, as it
keeps us from ascribing to the Substance of Bread these exterior appearances,
and moves us to referr them to the Body of CHRIST being present under them, so
that the presence of so Adorable an object being once ascertained to us by this
sign, we make no question of offering to it our Adorations.

I do not enter into the point of Adoration, by reason that the most learned
and sober of our Adversaries have long since granted us, that the presence of
CHRIST JESUS in the Eucharist ought to impose Adoration upon those who are of
that persuasion.

In fine being once convinced that the omnipotent words of the son of God
effect whatsoever they pronounce, we believe upon good grounds that in the last
Supper they produced their effect as soon as they were uttered, and upon a
necessary consequence we acknowledge the Real presence of the Body before our
receiving it.

These preceding points Sacrifice of the Mass.
the Sacrifice, which we assert and maintain in the Eucharist, retayns no
longer any particular difficulty.

We have observed two actions in this Mystery, which cease not to be distinct,
although the one relates to the other: the first is the Consecration, by which
the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and Blood: the second is the
Eating, by which we communicate and partake of them.

In the Consecration the Body and Blood are mystically separated by reason that
CHRIST JESUS said severally, This is my Body, This is my Blood; the which
includes a lively and effectual representation of the violent death he
suffered.

And so the son of God is set upon the holy table, by virtue of those words,
covered with signs that represent his death* This is what is effected by
Consecration, and this Religious act carries with it, the protestation of the
Soueragnity of God, by reason that CHRIST JESUS being present renews, and in
some sort perpetuates the memory of his obedience, even to the death of the
Cross; so that indeed there is nothing wanting here, toward the rendering it a
True Sacrifice.

Without all question this Religious act, as it is distinct from that of the
Communion, must needs be of it self acceptable to God, and must inuit him to
look upon us with a more favorable and propitious eye, by reason it presents
to his sight the voluntary death which his wellbeloued son has suffered for
sinners, or rather replaceth before his eyes even his own son, under the
signs of that death, whereby he has bin appeased, and reconciled to Man.

All Christians confess that the single presence of CHRIST JESUS is a most
powerful manner of Intercession before God for all mankind, according to this
saying of the Apostle, CHRIST JESUS presents himself and appears for us
before the face of God: Hebr. 9. 24
and thereupon we believe that CHRIST JESUS being present upon the holy table
in this figure of death intercedeth for us, and represents continually to his
Father the death he has suffered for his Church.

It is in this sense we affirm, that JESUS CHRIST offers himself for us to
God in the Eucharist; and in this manner it is we conceive that this Oblation
inuiteth God to become more favorable and propitious to us, and for this reason
we call it Propitiatory.

When we reflect upon what CHRIST JESUS works in this mystery, and when we
look upon him, by our Faith, as actually present upon the holy table with the
signs of death, we join our selves to him in that estate, and we present him
to God as our only Victime, and as our sole Propitiator by the merit of his
Blood, protesting that we have nothing to offer unto God but JESUS CHRIST, and
the infinite merit of his death. We consecrate all our prayers by this Divine
Oblation, and by our presenting CHRIST JESUS to God, we are taught to offer up
our selves at the same time to the Divine Majesty, in him, and by him, as
living Sacrifices.

Such is the Sacrifice of Christians, and infinitely differing from that which
was practiced in the Law, being a Spiritual Sacrifice, and worthy of the New
Covenant, wherein the presence of the Victime is not perceived but by Faith;
where the word of God is the instrument that separateth Mystically the Body and
the Blood, and consequently where the Blood is shed but Mystically, and where
death interueneth but by Representation; and yet a most Real and True
Sacrifice for this reason that CHRIST JESUS is truly contained, and presented
to God in it, under this figure of death, and therefore a Sacrifice also of
Commemoration; which is so far (though objected) from parting and loosening
us from our application to the Sacrifice of the Cross, as it fixes us the
faster, by all its circumstances, unto it, since it does not only relate
entirely unto it, but in effect it has neither being nor subsistence but by
this relation, from whence it deriueth all the virtue it contains.

This is the express Doctrine of the Catholic Church in the Council of
Trent, which teaches, that this Sacrifice is instituted only to the intent of
representing that, Sess. 22. c. 1.
which was once perfected upon the Cross; and to preserve the Memory of it
unto the end of all ages, and apply unto us that saving virtue for the
forgiveness of sins which we daily commit. Wherefore so far we are from
believing that somewhat is wanting to the Sacrifice of the Cross, as quite
contrary, the Church holds, that it was so perfect, and so fully sufficient, as
all which follows it, is but ordained in order to the celebrating the Memory,
and applying the Virtue of that Oblation.

Whereby the same Church professes, that all the merit of the Redemption of
mankind is annexed to the Death of the son^e of God; and certainly by all that
has bin already said, it ought to have bin understood, that when we say to God
in the celebration of the divine Mysteries, We offer you this holy host, we do
not pretend by this oblation to make, or present to God a new payement of the
price of our Salvation, but to employ toward him the merits of JESUS CHRIST
there present, and the infinite price he has at once paid for our Redemption
upon the Cross.

The Professors of the Pretended-Reformed Religion do not believe that they
offend CHRIST JESUS in offering him to God, as present by their Faith: as in
case they did believe he were truly and Really present, what repugnance could
they have to offer him as being Effectually present? So that to argue
ingenuously, the dispute in fair dealing ought to be reduced singly to his
being Present.

This supposed, all the false images and conceptions, the Pretended-Reformers
frame to themselves about the Sacrifice we offer, ought to be effaced; they
should in justice acknowledge fairly, that the Catholics pretend not to
frame for themselves a new Propitiation to appease God again, as if he were
not sufficiently reconciled by the Sacrifice of the Cross, or in order to make
some new supplement to the price of our Salvation, as if it were imperfect. All
these imaginations have no admission into our Doctrine, by reason that all this
is intended by way of Intercession, and Application in that manner I come from
delivering and explaining.

After this clear explication, The Epistle to the Hebrews.
which our Adversaries seek to enforce so much against us, will appear weak,
and unreasonable; and that it is in vain they strain themselves to prove, by
the meaning of the Apostle, that we nullify the Sacrifice of the Cross; but as
the most certain proof that can be had that two Doctrines are not opposite to
one an other is to discover, in the expounding them, that no proposition of the
one is Contradictory to the proposalls of the other, I conceive my self invited
in this occasion to expose, in short, the Doctrine of the Epistle to the
Hebrews.

The Apostle designed in this Epistle the teaching us, that a sinner could not
escape from death other ways, then by subrogating in his place one that should
die for him: that while men did supply, in their stead, but the Bloodshed of
Beasts, their Sacrifices had no other operation, but the making a public
profession, that they had deserved to die; and that by reason the divine Justice
could not be satisfied with so disproportionate an exchange, those Bloody
Victimes were every day offered and repeated, which was a certain proof of the
insufficiency of that exchange and subrogation: but that since CHRIST JESUS had
bin pleased to die for sinners, God being fully satisfied by the voluntary
substitution of so worthy a person, could no more require the price of our
ransom; from whence the Apostle concludes, that we ought not only to cease
from offering any other Victime after CHRIST JESUS, but that CHRIST himself was
to be offered up to death but one single time.

Let the Reader then, who is sollicitous of his Salvation, and is a friend to
truth, recolect seriously what we have delivered of the manner wherein CHRIST
JESUS offers himself to God for us in the Eucharist, and I am confident he
will not find in it any propositions contrary to those of the Apostle, which I
come from delivering, or any that infirm his proofs, so the most can be urged
against us is his Silence. But such as will consider the wise distributions God
makes of his secrets in the many and several books of his Scripture, would
not surely restrain us to receive from the single Epistle to the Hebrews all
our instruction concerning a matter, which did not necessarily relate to the
subject of that Epistle; since the Apostle intends in it to explain the
perfection of the Sacrifice of the Cross, and not the different means God
has given us to apply it unto our selves.

And to prevent all Equivocal sense, if we take the word offer, as it is
understood in this Epistle, in that sense which implies the Actual death of
the Victime, we confess aloud, that JESUS CHRIST is no longer offered so,
neither in the Eucharist, nor any where else. But as this same word has a
larger signification in other places of Scripture, where it is often said, that
one Offers to God, what one presents before him, the Church, which does not
frame her language and her doctrine by the single Epistle to the Hebrews, but
by the whole body of the Scriptures, does not scruple to affirm that CHRIST
JESUS offers himself to God in all places where he appears for our sakes
before him, and consequently that he offers himself up in the Eucharist,
according to the expression of the holy Fathers of the Church.

Now to conceive that this man^er, wherein CHRIST JESUS presents himself to
God, can at all detract from the Sacrifice of the Cross, is what can not
possibly be inferred; unless one will overthrow the whole Scripture, and
especially that Epistle which they seek so much to strain against us. For by
the same reason we ought to conclude, that when CHRIST JESUS vowed himself to
God, entering into the world, Hebr. 10. 5*
to substitute himself instead of those Victimes, which were not pleasing to
him, that he injured the action by which he deuow'd himself upon the Cross;
and so, Hebr. 9. 24
when he continues to appear for us before God, he detracteth from the
Oblation, in which he appeared once by the Immolation of himself; Hebr. 9. 26.
and that, not ceasing to intercede for us, Hebr. 7. 25.
he accuses that Intercession of Insufficiency, which he made at his Death
with so many tears, Heb. 5. 7.
and so great cries.

Would not all these inferences be ridiculous? We must therefore understand,
that CHRIST JESUS, who did offer up himself once, to become the humble Victime
of the Divine justice, does continue still offering himself for us: that the
infinite perfection of the Sacrifice of the Cross consists in this, that
whatsoever preceded it, as well as what follows it, are entirely relating unto
it: that as what preceded, was its Preparation; so what does follow, is its
Consummation, and Application: that true it is, the payment of the price of our
ransom is not reiterated, by reason it was fully discharged the first time,
but what Applies that Redemption, is incessantly continued and repeated; and
in fine we must know to distinguish those acts, which are reiterated, as being
imperfect, from such as are perpetuated as being perfect and necessary.

We conjure the followers of the Pretended-Reformed Reflection upon the
preceding doctrine.
to make some little reflection upon what I have said concerning the Eucharist.

The doctrine of the Real Presence has bin the necessary foundation thereof.
This groundwork is impugn'd by the Caluinists; there is no point that is
evidently more important in our Controversies, since the question is of the
Real presence of CHRIST himself; there is nothing our Adversaries find more
difficult to believe; and there is no Co^trouersy which setts us more directly
Opposite.

In most of our other disputes, when they reflect calmely upon them, they find
difficulties grow much euener, and that very often they are more offended with
the terms, then with the matters: but quite contrary in this subject we agree
best in the manner of speaking, because on both sides we hear the same terms
of Real Participation, and other such like words; but the more exactly we
enter into the examination, the further we find our selves distant from one an
other, by reason that our Adversaries do not admit the consequences of those
verities they have acknowleged, being, as I have already said, discouraged and
auerted by the difficulties which occurr to their senses and humane reason in
those consequences.

This is therefore, to speak truly, the most important and most difficult of
all our Controversies, and wherein we are in effect most removed from one an
other.

Nevertheless God, has bin pleased to suffer that the Lutherans should
remain as firmly adhering to the belief of the Reality as we, and has
permitted also that the Caluinists should auowe, that this Doctrine has no
venom in it, that it does not subvert the Foundation of saving Faith, and that
it ought not to break the Communion of Christian fraternity.

Let me request the followers of the Pretended-Reformed Religion, who apply
themselves seriously to their salvation, to reflect attentively upon what
course the Divine Providence takes to draw them imperceptibly nearer us, and
the truth: one may either entirely dissipate all the other grounds of their
complaints, or at least reduce them to very inconsiderable differences by a
mere expounding them: and in this particular, which we could not expect to
overcome by this way, they have of themselves voyded the principal difficulty,
by declaring that this doctrine is not incompetent with our Salvation, nor
inco^sistent with the Foundamentalls of Religion.

True it is that the Lutherans, albeit they concur with us in the maine point
of the Reality, do not embrace all the consequences thereof: they join the
Bread to the Body of CHRIST JESUS: some of them reject the Adoration; and they
seem to confess the Presence only in the act of receiving it. But no art or
subtility of their Ministers can ever persuade solid and understanding
co^siderers that accepting the Reality (which is the most important, and most
difficult point) they ought not assent unto the rest of our proposalls.

Besides, the same Providence, which works covertly to draw us nearer, and
lays the foundations of peace and reconciliation in the midst of all our
sharpnesses and dissentions, has further permitted the Caluinists should
allow, that supposing these words, This is my Body, are to be taken literally,
the Catholics argue and conclude more consequently then the Lutherans.

If I do not repeat the passages that have bin so frequently cited in this
subject, I shall easily be excused, since all such as are not very obstinate,
will easily grant us, that the Reality supposed, our doctrine is that which
follows by the best consequence.

This is therefore an established Truth, that our Doctrine in this point
contains nothing but the Reality rightly understood. But we must not be
content with this; we further entreat the Pretending Reformers to consider,
that we do not employ any thing to explicate the Sacrifice of the Eucharist,
but what necessarily is included in the Real Presence.

If upon this a question then be putt to us, how the Lutherans, who believe the
Reality, come notwithstanding to reject the Sacrifice, which, according to our
Doctrine, is a consequence of the first; we answer in a word, that we must put
this Doctrine amongst the other consequences of the Real Presence, which those
Lutherans have not understood, and which we have penetrated much better then
they, by the confession of the Calvinists themselves.

If our explications persuade these last, that our Doctrine about the Sacrifice
is included in that of the Reality, they ought to discern clearly, that this
Controversy of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which fills so many volumes, and
has occasioned so many inuectiues, should hence forward be retrenched from the
body of their Controversies, since this point retains no longer any peculiar
difficulty, and (which is more important) since this Sacrifice, against which
they express so much repugnance, is but a necessary sequence, and a natural
explanation of a Doctrine, which, by their own concession, has no Venom in
it. Let them then examine themselves now, and after that try in the presence of
God whether they have as much reason on their side, as they imagine, to depart
from the Altars, where their fathers have bin nourished with the bread of life.

Communion under both kinds.
which is, that CHRIST JESUS being Really present in this Sacrament, the Grace
and the blessing is not annexed to the Sensible Species, but to the propre
Substance of his Flesh, which is living, and inlivening, by reason of the
conjunction of the Divinity: upon which ground those who believe the Reality,
ought to have no pain to communicate singly in one Species; by reason they
receive all that is essential to that Sacrament, in a fullness and entiernes
by so much the more assured, by as much as the separation of the Body and the
Blood not being Real (as has bin said) one receaueth intierly and without
division him, who alone is capable to satisfy and replenish us.

This is the solid foundation, upon which the Church, interpreting the precept
of the holy Communion, has declared that we may receive all the Sanctification
this Sacrament conferreth, under one single Species; and if the Church has
reduced her children to this one Species, it was not out of disesteeme of the
other, since it proceeded from a quite contrary motive, which was to prevent
the irreuerences, and indecencies, the confusion and negligences of the people
had occasioned in the latter times, the Church reserving the reestablishment of
the Communion in both kinds, according as it should become useful for the
peace and union of her children.

Catholic Divines have made appear to those of the Pretended-Reformed
Religion, that they themselves have made use of diverse interpretations like
this, in what belongs to the use of the Sacraments. But most especially they
had reason to remarke this, which is taken out of the 12. chap. of their
Discipline. tit. of the Lord's Supper. art. 7. Where these words are written;
The bread of the Lord's Supper ought to be administered to such as can not
drink wine, upon their protesting, that it is not out of contempt, but
endeavoring all they can, and even putting the Cupp to their mouth as closse as
they are able, to prevent all scandal. They have concluded by this regulation,
that both kinds were not essential to the Communion by the institution of
CHRIST; for otherwise they would have bin bound, absolutely to refuse the
Sacrament to such as were not able to receive it complete, and not to give it
them in a manner contrary to that CHRIST JESUS had commanded; and in that case
their disability would have sufficiently excused them. But our Adversaries have
conceived that such a rigor would be excessive, if they did not allow at least
one of the Species to such as were not capable to receive the other; and since
this condescendence has no ground in the Scripture, they must needs confess
with us, that the words whereby CHRIST JESUS has proposed to us the two
Species are liable to some interpretation, and that the right understanding of
them ought to be declared by the Authority of the Church.

But it might seem that this Article of their Discipline, which is of the
Synod of Poytiers held 1560, had bin reformed by the Synod of Vertueil
assembled in the year 1567, where it is said, that the company is not of
opinion the Bread should be given to those who would not receive the Cupp.
These two Synodes nevertheless are not at all opposite to one another; that of
Vertueil speaks of those, who Will not receive the Cupp, and that of Poytiers
of such, as Can not take it. And indeed, notwithstanding the Synod of
Vertueil, that Article remains in their Discipline, nay more, has bin
approved by a Synod later then that of Vertueil, namely by the Synod of
Rochelle in 1571, where the Article was renewed, and putt into that state which
it now remains in.

But supposing the Synodes of the Pretended-Reformers had differr'd and varied
in their opinions, that would serve only to manifest, that the matter in
question is not a point of Faith, but of that kind which the Church may order
and dispose of, according to their own principles.

The written and unwritten Word.
and concerning the Authority of the Church.

CHRIST JESUS having laid the foundation of his Church upon the Preaching of
his Disciples, the Unwritten Word was the first guide and rule of Christianity,
and when the writings of the New Testament were adjoined to them, the former
Word did not for all that loose its Authority, which causes us to accept with
the same veneration all that was taught by the Apostles, be it by writing, or
by word of mouth, according to what S. Paul himself has expressly enjoined. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 14.
And the certain proof that a Doctrine comes from the Apostles, is, its being
accepted and embraced by all Christian Churches whilst its beginning can not be
pointed and marked out. We can not choose but receive all that is established
in this manner with the submission due to the Divine Authority; and we are
confident that such persons of the Pretended-Reformed Religion, as are not very
obstinate, have the same persuasion in the bottom of their hearts, it being
impossible to believe that a Doctrine settled and received from the beginning of
the Church, can flow from any other spring then that of the Apostles. Wherefore
our Adversaries ought not to wonder, that we, being zealously careful to
inherit all that our Fathers have left us, do conserve the Deposite of
Tradition, as well as that of the Scriptures.

The Church's Authority.
and of Tradition, we receive from her hands the Canonical Scriptures, and we
believe (whateuer our Adversaries say) that it is principally the Church's
Authority that determines us to reverence as Divine writ, the song of
Solomon, which has so few sensible marks of Prophetical inspiration; and
likewise the Epistle of S. James, which Luther rejected; and that of S. Jude,
which might be suspected, by reason of some Apocriphall books cited in it: in
fine there can be no motive, but that Authority, to persuade the receiving the
whole body of the holy Scriptures, which Christians accept as Divine, even
before the reading has wrougt any feeling of the Spirit of God in those books.

Being then inseparably bound, as we are, to the Authority of the Church, by
means of the Scriptures, which we receive from her hand, we are taught also by
her Tradition, and by the help of Tradition the true sense of the Scriptures.
So that the Church professes to say nothing, merely of her self; and likewise
that she inventeth nothing new in her Doctrine; that she does but follow and
declare the Divine Revelation by the interior direction of the holy spirit,
which is given her for her Teacher.

That the holy Ghost expresses himself by the Church, the dispute raised about
the Ceremonies of the Law, even in the time of the Apostles, does evidence; and
their Acts have directed all succeeding ages (by the manner that first contest
was decided) by what Authority all following differences are to be determined:
so that whenever any dispute happens to divide the faithful, the Church will
interpose her Authority, and the Pastors assembled will say after the
Apostles, Act. 15. 2^:
It has seemed good to the Holy Spirit and us. And when the Church has
pronounced and determined, her children will be taught not to examine a new the
Articles resolved upon, but that they are bound to accept with all submission
the Church's Decisions. And in this method we follow S. Paul and Silas, who
delivered to the faithful the first judgment of the Apostles; and were so far
from allowing a new discussion of what had bin decided, as they trauell'd
through the towns teaching to observe the ordinances of the Apostles. Act. 16.
4.


In this manner the children of God acquiesce in the judgment of the Church,
believing that by her mouth they hear the Oracle of the Holy Ghost, and it is
upon the ground of this persuasion, that after having professed in the Creed, I
believe in the Holy Ghost we join next to it, The Holy Catholic Church, by
which protestation we oblige our selves to acknowledge an Infallible and
Perpetual Verity in the Catholic Church; since the same Church, which we
believe perseuering throughout all ages, would cease to be a Church, if it left
to teach the Truth revealed by God: so that such as apprehend least she should
abuse her power by introducing Falsities, have little Faith in him, by whose
hand she is held and conducted.

And if our Adversaries would consider and discuss these matters in a fairer
and more humane manner, they would be forced to auowe that the Catholic
Church is so far from affecting to render herself Mistress of her Faith (as
her Adversaries charge her) that quite contrary she has labored with all her
power to bind her self, and to exclude all means of In^ouation, since she does
not only submitt to the holy Scriptures, but, to banish for ever all Arbitrary
interpretatio^s, (which would make the conceits of men pass for Scripture)
declares herself obliged to understand them, Co^c. Trid. seff. 4.
in what relates to Faith or Manners, conformably to the sense of the holy
Fathers; from which she professes never to depart, declaring by all her
Counsels, and by all her Professions of Faith, already published, that she
admits no point of Doctrine, which is not conformable to the Tradition of
all preceding ages.

Moreover, if our Adversaries will examine their Consciences, they will
discern, that the name of the Church has more authority over their minds,
then they dare auowe in their disputes: and I am persuaded there is not any one
prudent and judicious man amongst them, who finding himself alone in his
persuasion, (how evident soever it might seem to him) that would not be
frightened with that Singularity; so manifest it is, that men have need in these
matters to be supported in their opinions by the Authority of some Society,
that is of the same judgment. And for this reason God, who has created us, and
knows what is most proper for us, has ordained for our benefit, that all
particular subjects should render obedience to his Church, the Authority
whereof, is of all others undoubtedly the best established, not only by the
testimony which God himself renders in proof of it in the holy Scriptures, but
likewise by the euidencies of his Divine protection, which is manifested no
less in the most inviolable and perpetual subsistence, then it was in the
miraculous establishment thereof.

The opinion of those of the Pretended Reformed Religion concernig the
Authority of the church.
of the Church is so necessary to regulate the differences which arise upon
points of Faith, and the right understanding of the Scripture, that our
Adversaries themselves, after having discredited and decryed it, as an
insupportable Tyranny, have bin at last necessitated to authorize and establish
it amongst themselves.

When those, who are called Independants, maintained openly, that every
individual of the faithful ought to follow the light of his conscience,
without being obliged to submitt his judgment to any body, or Ecclesiastical
assembly, and that upon this ground they refused to subject themselves to
Synodes; that of Charenton held 1644. censured this Doctrine upon the same
reasons, and in regard of the same inconveniences, which moved us to reject it.
That Synod observes in the first place, that the Error of the Independants
consists in their holding, that, every single Church ought to govern it self
by her own laws, without dependence upon any person, in Ecclesiastical
affairs, and without any obligation to conform to the Authority of
Conferences, and Synodes, in point of their conduct and regulation. And in
order thereunto the same Synod determines that this Sect is as prejudicial
to the State as to the Church; that it sets open a door to all sorts of
irregularities and extrauagancies; that it cutts off all means of applying any
remedy; and if it took place, there might be as many Religions invented, as
there are particular parishes or assemblies. These last words show clearly that
it was principally in point of Faith that this Synod intended to establish a
Dependence, since the great est inconvenience, it observes the faithful would
be liable to, by this independency, is, that there might be as many Religions
formed and professed as there are parishes. It follows then of necessity, by
the Doctrine of this Synod, that every particular Church (and much more every
private person) ought to Depend (in what belongs to Faith) upon a Superior
Authority, which resides in some Assembly, or Body of men, to which Authority
all the Faithful subject their private judgments; for the independants do not
refuse to submit unto the Word of God, in that sense they conceive they ought
to understand it, nor to accept the Decision of Synodes, when, after they have
examined them, they conclude them reasonable, and fit to be observed: what
they refuse to yeald unto, is, to resign up their private judgment unto that
of an Assembly, upon this ground, which our Adversaries have laid for them,
viz, that all Assemblies even that of the Universal Church, is a company of
Men subject to Error, unto which consequently a Christian ought not to subject
his judgment, since he owes his resignation but to God alone. It is from this
pretension of the Independants, that all those inconveniences are inferred,
which the Synod of Charenton has so well observed: for what profession soever
be made to submit unto the Word of God, if every one thinks he has right to
understand it according to his own judgment, though it be contrary to the sense
of the Church declared in a Final decree, this pretension will open the way to
all sorts of extrauagancies, and exclude all means of applying any remedy,
since the Decision of the Church is no restraint to such, as do not conceive
themselves bound to submit unto it; and in fine it will open the way to frame
as many Religions not only as there are parishes, but even as there are private
heads.

For precaution against these inco^ueniencies, from whence would ensue the
ruin of Christian Religion, the Synod of Charenton is forced to constitute a
Dependence in Ecclesiastical matters, and even in points of Faith. But this
their designed Deference will never retrench those pernicious consequences,
they have proposed to themselves the preventing, unless they settle,
conformably to us, this maxim, that every particular Church, and much more
each single person, ought to believe himself obliged to submit his private
judgment unto the Authority of the Church.

And so we see likewise in the fifth chapter of the Discipline of the
Pretended-Reformed Religion, tit. of Consistories. art. 31. that desiring to
prescribe an expedient to determine the debates which might arise upon any
point of Doctrine or Discipline, they decreed first, that the Consistory shall
endeavor to appease all without noise, and with all the sweetness of the Word of
God: and after having set, and ranked the Consistory, the Conference, and the
Provincial Synod, as so many distinct degrees of Jurisdiction, coming at last
to the National Synod (above which there is no Authority amongst them) they
speak of it in these terms; There it is that the Entier and Final resolution
shall be taken, according to the Word of God; to which if they refuse to
acquiesce in every point, and with a direct renouncing of their Errors, they
shall be cut off from the Church. Is it not then evident that the
Pretended-Reformers do not attribute the Authority of this Final judgment to
the Word of God taken alone by it self, and without dependence on the Authority
of the Church; since the Word having bin employed and consulted in the first
conclusions they have made upon it, they do nevertheless admit an Apeale from
it? It is the Word, as interpreted by the Sovereign tribunal of the Church,
that frames this last and Final resolution, unto which whosoever refuses to
acquiesce from point to point, though he boasts his being authorized by the
Word of God, is no longer reputed but as a profane abuser and Corrupter thereof.

But the form of those Letters of deputation which were drawn up, and agreed
upon at the Synod of Vitre in the year 1617. to be observed by the Provinces,
when they were to send deputies to the National Synod, is yet more positive:
it runns in these terms. We promise before God, to submit to all that shall be
concluded and resolved in your holy Assembly, and to obey and execute it with
all our power, being persuaded, as we are, that God will preside in it, and
conduct you by his holy Spirit into all truth and equity by the rule of his
Word. Here the point is not the receau^ng of the resolution of a Synod after
having discerned, that it has ordained according to the Scripture, but here is
a submission made unto it even before the assembling of it; and this is done by
reason they are persuaded that the holy spirit will preside in it. If this
persuasion be grounded upon a humane presumption, can one in conscience promise
before God to submitt to all which shall be resolved and concluded; and to obey
and execute it to the utmost of ones power? And if this persuasion be grounded
upon an assured belief of that assistance the holy Ghost affords the Church
in her Final ordinances, the Catholics themselves require no more of them.

Thus the proceedings of our Aduersariers do manifest, that they concur with
us in the necessity of a Supreme Authority, without which there can never be a
Final decision of any doubt in Religion: and although, when they cast of the
yoke of Obedience, they denied that the faithful were obliged to resign their
judgment up to that of the Church, yet the necessity of settling some order
among themselves has forced them, in process of time, to acknowledge, what
their first engagement had moved them to contradict.

Nay they have gone much farther in the National Synod held at Saint Foy in
the year 1578. There was some ouerture made of a reconcilement with the
Lutherans by means of a form of profession of Faith general and common to all
the Churches, which was proposed to be concerted and drawn up. The Churches of
this Kingdom were invited to depute unto an Assembly, to be held for that
purpose, virtuous persons, approved, and authorized by all the forenamed
Churches with an ample Procuration TO TREAT, AGREE UPON, AND DECIDE ALL POINTS
OF DOCTRINE, and other matters concerning the union. Upon this proposition, the
resolution of the Synod of Saint Foy was agreed upon in these terms. The
National Synod of this Kingdom, after having given God thanks for such an
ouerture, and commended the care, and diligence, as well as the good counsels
of the forementioned persons conuoked, APPROVING THE REMEDIES THEY HAVE
SVGGESTED, viz principally that of framing a new Confession of Faith, and
giving power to some certain persons to compose it, has ordained that in case
the copy of that aboue-named Confession of Faith shall be sent time enough, it
shall be examined in every Provincial Synod, or after some other manner,
according to the conueniency of each Province; and in the mean time has
deputed four Ministers, the best experienced in affairs of that nature, to
whom express order has bin given to render themselves upon the places, and
at the day, with letters and ample Procurations of all the Ministers, and
ancient Deputies of the Provinces of this Kingdom, together with those of the
Viscount of Turene, to do all things above mentioned; and even, in case that
MEANS COVLD NOT BE FOUND TO EXAMINE THE SAID CONFESSION BY ALL THE PROVINCES,
it is referred to their prudence and sound judgment to agree and CONCLVDE all
the points which shall be brought into deliberation, as well FOR THE DOCTRINE,
as for any other matter, concerning the benefit, union, and quiet of all the
Churches. This in fine is the result of that feigned tenderness of Conscience
in the Ministers of the Pretended-Reformed Religion. How often have they
reproached to us, as a weakness, that Submission we profess to the judgment,
and Decrees of the Church, which is, say they, but a company of men subject to
Error? and yet they, being assembled themselves in a Body at a National
Synod, which represented all the Pretended-Reformed Churches of France, have
nor scrupuled to leave their Faith to the Arbitration of four persons, with so
Absolute a Resignation of their Judgments, that they transferred upon them a
full power to change the very Confession it self, which they propose, even to
this day, to all Christian people as a Confession of Faith, which contains
nothing but the pure Word of God; and for which (in presenting it to our Kings)
they have said, that an infinite number of people were ready to shed their
blood. I leave the prudent Reader to make his reflections upon the Decree of
this Synod, and will conclude in few words my explication of the persuasions
and, tenants of the Catholic Church.

The son of God having bin pleased that his Church should remain one, and be
solidly built upon this Unity, has instituted and founded the The Authority of
the holy see of Rome, and of Episcopacy*
to maintain and cement it: whereupo^we acknowledgethe same Primacy in the
Successors of the Prince of the Apostles, unto whom upon that title we owe
that Submission and Obedience, which the holy Counsels and Fathers have
taught, and inioyn'd the faithful.

As for those points, which are so usually disputed in the Schools, although
the Ministers do continually allege them, to asperse, and render that
Authority odious, it is to little purpose to mention them in this discourse,
since they are not points of Catholic Faith. It is sufficient here to
confess a Head established by God: which will freely be accorded by all such
as affect Union and Concord of Christian Fraternity, and Ecclesiastical
Unanimity.

And certain it is, that if the Founders of the Pretended Reformation had
loved Unity in the Church, they would never have abolished Episcopal
Government, which we find established by JESUS CHRIST himself, and which we
see empowered and authorized even in the days of the Apostles; nor would they
have despised the Authority of S. Peter's seat, which has so solid a
foundation in the Ghospel, and so evident a continuation in Ecclesiastical
Tradition: they would rather have zealously maintained Episcopal Jurisdiction,
which setleth and preserves Union in particular Churches, and the Primacy of
S. Peter's Chair, which is the common center of all Catholic Vnio^.

This is the exposition of the Catholic Doctrine, Conclusion of the Treatise.
to tie my self to what is most important in it, I have declined some
questions, which the Pretended-Reformers themselves do not account a
legitimate motive for a Breach, or Separation: and I may hope that those of
their Communion, who shall examine fairly and with Christian equity all the
parts and consequences of this Treatise, will by the reading thereof, be better
disposed to accept, and acquiescevnto those proofs, upon which the Faith of the
Church is established, and will at least auowe that many of our Controversies
may be decided by a sincere explication of our persuasions, and that our
Doctrine is Holy; and that, even by their own principles, none of the Articles
of our Belief overthrow the Foundations of our Eternal Beatitude.

If any one shall conceive it requisite to reply to this Treatise, I must
desire him to consider, that to advance any thing toward his intent, he must
not attempt to refute the Doctrine it contains, since my design was to
Propose it only, without Supporting it by any Proofs; and if in some passages I
have touched part of the grounds, and reasons which establish it, the reason
was because the knowledge of the principal grounds of a Doctrine, does often
bear a part necessary for its explication.

It would be also a great digression from the design of this Treatise to
dicusse the different ways, methodes, motives, and arguments which the
Catholic Divines make use of to establish, or illustrate the Doctrine of the
Council of Trent; and the various consequences particular Doctors have deduced
from them. To urge any thing solid against this Treatise, and that comes home
to the point, it must either be proved by some acts, which the Church has
engaged herself to receive, that her Faith is not here faithfully delivered;
or be showed, that this explanation leaves all the Adversaries Objections in
their full force; or in fine it must be exposed directly wherein this Doctrine
subuerteth the Grounds and Foundation of Faith.

FINIS.

