The humble PETITION OF Captain William Booth of Killingholme, in the County of
Lincoln.

With His Majesty's Answer thereunto.

York, 30 June, 1642.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty;
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of Captain William Booth of Killingholme in the County of
Lincoln.
Shows,
THat whereas upon Wednesday, the 8 day of June instant, the Trained Bands of
the Division of Caister Sessions, were summoned by Francis Lord Willoughby of
Parham and the Commit, to appear at Caister before them, contrary to your
Majesty's Proclamation; Your Petitioner being there, was informed against by
one Francis Fields and John Barnard for reading Your Majesty's said
Proclamation, and sent for and delivered to a Messenger, and disarmed to his
great disgrace in the presence of his own Soldiers, and to the great
disheartning of the Country from Your Majesty's service; which said
Proclamation was slighted, and termed a seditious Pamphlet by Sir Christopher
Wray, who called himself Captain of the said Company which your Petitioner
commands under Your Majesty; and told the Soldiers he would live and dye with
them, and would gladly know who durst oppose their proceedings: further saying,
That he heard that the Earl of Lindsey was to be there that day, whom he would
be glad to see, for they had a Messenger ready to receive him. All that Your
Petitioner was then charged with was, that He had said the day before, That
there was a brave appearance of the Trained Bands at Lincoln of some fifteen
or sixteen; which was interpreted to be an affront to their proceedings, and
was threatened to be further charged at Lowth the next day with business of a
high Nature, and to have witnesses produced against him face to face; which
said witnesses never appeared, your Petitioner being all this while under
commitment contrary to Law, which being offered to be argued in point of Law by
Sir Gervase Scroop in the behalf of your Petitioner; It was answered by Sir
Christopher Wray, That they came thither, neither to dispute the Law, nor to
be taught the Law, nor did value the Law, but must observe the Orders of the
House; sufficient Bail being offered was utterly refused, your Petitioner
being still under commitment and commanded to wait their further pleasures at
Horn Castle the next day; where, being able to prove nothing against him, they
released him.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly desires, That Your Majesty would be
graciously pleased to call these men to answer their contempt against Your
Majesty, and to make satisfaction to your Petitioner for the injury and
public disgrace, they have put upon him.

And your Petitioner will daily pray, etc.
York, 30 June, 1642. His Majesty has expressly commanded me, to give this His
Answer to this Petition.
THat it is not at all strange to Him, That those persons who have ventured to
assume a command over the Militia (a Right of His never before separated from
the Crown) by direction from those who pretend to this power by the
Fundamental Laws, and yet vouchsafe not to show any one Clause of any one
Statute, or any one president of any time, which might seem, with the least
color, to give them that Authority, though He has often pressed them to it,
and as little vouchsafe any Answer to the Statutes, or to those multiplied and
perpetual presidents, which clearly and palpably declare that Authority, to be
in Him, should use that Authority with as much injustice as they have assumed
it; And not only term His legal Proclamation a seditious Pamphlet (since it
is most certain, that if that be not, then they are most seditious,) but
contrary to the Law of the Land, both ancient and modern, both to Magna Charta,
and to the Petition of Right, vex and imprison His good subjects for a legal
obedience to His legal commands, or a legal disobedience or disrespect to
their illegal Orders and Actions; since He often before foretold, that their
Contempt of His Regal Rights and Prerogatives, which are the guard of His
Subjects Liberties, would in short time encourage them to destroy those too,
when that which should guard them were our destroyed. And as little does His
Majesty wonder that the Insolence of thus violating ancient and known Laws
should encourage them to that of using words proportionable to their actions,
and professing (with great truth and ingenuity) that they value not the Law.
His Majesty nevertheless (not following the example of other men in
concluding any thing before examination) is resolved to have the truth of these
allegations legally examined, and if (as is very probable by the annexed
Affidavit) they be found true, to provide by all legal ways, That both His
Majesty and the Petitioner may receive full satisfaction for the injuries done
to both, and to the Law of the Land; His Majesty professing it the principal
reason of His desire to have justice in the like matters done to Him, that (His
just Authority being no longer scorned and vilified) He may be enabled to see
it done to others, and that His good Subjects, who are wisely careful to
defend the Law (which is their common Birthright, and to which only they owe
all they have besides) may not (by unjust and intolerable oppressions) be made
Martyrs for it.

Edw. Nicholas.

CAptain William Booth of Killingholm, and William Scroop of Little Coats, in
the County of Lincoln Gentlemen make Oath, That the Petition delivered by the
said William Booth unto his Majesty, concerning the imprisonment he suffered,
by the Command of Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham, and the rest of the
Committees of Parliament for the County aforesaid, and all the Actions and
Passages therein expressed are most true, in that manner and form therein is
declared.

Jurat. coram me in Cancellaria Magistro, Decimo Octavo die Junii, Anno Domini.
1642. W. Wentworth.

FINIS.

