A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF MARY TERESE of Austria, INFANTA of SPAIN,
QUEEN OF France and Navarre. At St. DENIS, Sept. 1. 1683.

By Monsieur James Benign Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux, Counselor to the King in
his Council: Late Preceptor to the Dauphin, And Chief Almoner to Madam the
Dauphiness.

Printed at Paris by the King's special Command

Reprinted at London, by J. C. and F C. for H. I and sold by Samuel Crouch, in
Cornhil. MDCLXXXIV.

CHAP. 14 Revelat. v. 5. For they are without fault before the Throne of God.
My Lord,
WHat an Assembly does the Apostle St. John show us! This great Prophet opens
Heaven to us, and our Faith discovers on the Holy Mountain of Sion, in the
highest part of the blessed Jerusalem, the Lamb which takes away the Sins of
the World, attended by a company worthy of him. They are those of whom it is
Written in the beginning of the Revelations, Thou have a few names even in
Sardis; Rev. 3.4.
which have not defiled their Garments: those rich Vestments wherewith Baptism
furnished them, Vestments which are nothing less than Jesus Christ himself,
according to that of the Apostle: Gal. 3.27.
For as many of you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. This
little number beloved of God for its innocence, and remarkable for the rarity
of so exquisit a gift, has known how to preserve this precious Vestment, and
the Grace of Baptism. And what shall be the recompense of so rare a Fidelity?
Hear what the Just and Holy one says, Rev. 3.4.
They shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy; worthy through their
Innocence to carry into Eternity the Livery of the Lamb who is without Spot,
and walk always with him, seeing they have never left him, since he took them
into his company: pure and innocent Souls, Virgins as St. John calls them, Rev.
14.4. 2. Cor. 11.2.
in the same sense as St. Paul says to the faithful of Corinthia, I have
espoused you to one Husband, even Christ. The true chastity of the Soul, the
true Christian pudor is to blush at Sin, to have no eyes nor love but for our
Savior Christ, and to keep our Senses free from the corruptions of the World.
It is in this Innocent and Chaste company wherein the Queen is placed; her dread
of Sin has purchased her this Honor. Faith which pierces even the Heavens, now
shows us her placed in this happy Company. Methinks I see that Modesty, that
Peaceable temper of Soul, that humble Gesture of Body before the Altar, which
inspired the beholders with Devotion to God, and respect for her: God retribute
these holy dispositions with the transports of Celestial joys. Death has only
changed a mortal and fading Beauty for an Immortal one. That delicate
whiteness, the Symbol of her Innocence and Candor of her Soul, has only, if a
man may so speak, withdrawn it self to appear more illustrated by a Divine
light: Rev. 3.4.
she walks with the Lamb, for she is worthy. The uprightness of her Heart
without dissimulation, ranks her in the number of those of whom St. John speaks
the words which precede those of my Text, ibid. 14.5.
that Lying is not found in their Mouth, nor any disguise in their
Conversation: and therefore are they without Spot before the Throne of God. In
effect, she is without reproach before God and Men. Calumny could not attack
any part of her Life, from her Childhood to her Death; and an Honor so
unspotted, is a precious perfume which recreates both Heaven and Earth.

My Lord, Behold this great spectacle: can I better comfort you and the Princes
which attend you, than by showing you in the midst of this resplendent company,
and in this glorious state a Mother so beloved and regretted? Lewis himself,
whose constancy cannot vanquish his just grief, will find it more appeasable by
this consideration. But that which ought to be your only comfort, ought, My
Lord, likewise to be your Example; and ravished with the Immortal Splendour of so
regular and irreprochable a life, it is your duty to transmit the Excellency of
it into your own.

How rare is it, Christians, how it is rare, again I say, to find this Purity
amongst men, but especially amongst the great ones? Revel. 7.13, 14.
Those whom you see clothed with a white garment those, says St. John, came
from great affliction, to inform us, that this Divine whiteness is commonly
formed under the Cross, and seldom under the tempting state of worldly
greatness.

And yet, Gentlemen, it is true, that God by his miraculous Grace has been
pleased to choose these innocent Souls amongst Kings. Such was St. Lewis, ever
pure and holy from his Childhood; and Mary Terese his Daughter has received
this excellent-inheritance from him.

Let us enter, Gentlemen, into the Designs of Providence, and admire the bounty
of God, bestowed on us and all people in the election of this Princess. God has
raised her up on the pinnacle of worldly greatness, to make the purity and
regularity of her Life the more conspicuous and exemplary. Thus her Life and
Death equally full of Grace and Holiness, become an instruction to all Mankind.
Our age cannot expect a more perfect example, for there cannot be the like
Purity in so high an estate. Here Is in short what I have to say of the most
Pious of Queens; she had nothing but what was August in her Person, nothing but
what was Pure in her Life. Come hither all ye people of the earth, come and
behold in the chiefest rank, the rare and Majestic Beauty of a Virtue ever
constant. In so regular a life, it mattered not the Princess where death
struck; there appeared no weak part whereby she might fear a surprise, always
watchful, always attentive on God and her Salvation; her so sudden and
mournful death to us, had nothing dangerous in respect of her. So that her high
state will serve only to show the Universe this important truth, That there is
nothing solid or truly great, among men, but to avoid sin; and that the only
precaution against the attacks of death, is innocence of life. This is,
Gentlemen, the admonition, which the most High, most Excellent, most Mighty,
and most Christian Princess, Mary Terese of Austria, Infanta of Spain, Queen of
France and Navarre, offers us in this Tomb, or rather from the highest Heaven.

I need not tell you, that great Birth, Alliance and Posterity are from God:
Genesis 17.6. 2 Kings 7.2. Acts 17.24.26.
'twas he that told Abraham, Kings shall come out of you, and made his Prophet
tell David, The Lord will make you a house. God who of one man formed all
Mankind, as speaks St. Paul, and from this common spring fills the whole earth,
has foreseen and predestined from all Eternity both Allyances and Divisions,
marking the time, adds he, and setting bounds to the habitations of the world.

'Twas God then who exalted the Queen by her great Birth to an August Alliance,
that we might behold her honored above all women in her age, for having been
beloved, esteemed, and alas too soon lamented by the greatest of Mortals.

I cannot but slight those Philosophers Judgments, who measuring the Councils
of God by their own thoughts, make him only Author of a certain general Order;
as if, like us, he had only general and confused views of things, and the
Sovereign intelligence could not comprehend in its designs, particular matters,
which alone do truly subsist. Doubt not Christians, but God has prepared in his
Eternal Councils the first Families which are the Source of Nations; and in all
Nations dominant Qualities, whereon depend their Fortune. He has likewise
ordained in Nations particular Families whereof they consist, but especially
those that must govern these Nations, and particularly in these Families all
men by which they must rise or fall.

The two puissant Families whence the Queen came, that of France and Austria,
is an Effect of these Divine Decrees, which balance humane affairs, to what
degree and time, God knows, not we.

It Is observable in Scripture, that God gives to Royal Families certain proper
Characters; as that which the Syrians, although Enemies to the Kings of Israel,
3 King. 20.31.
attributed to them, in these words: We are informed that the Kings of the
House of Israel are merciful.

I shall not consider now the particular Characters given to the Houses of
France and Austria, nor mention that the Counsels of the House of Austria were
more feared; and that there always appeared something more vigorous in the Arms
and Courage of that of France. Now that by a particular Grace these two
Characters are apparently united in our favor, I shall only observe that
which was the Queens Glory, which was, that God had given to these two Houses
whence she came, Piety for their Inheritance: 1 Cor. 8.14. 2 Timothy 1.3.
so that she could say with the Apostle S. Paul, God whom my Family has always
served, and to whom I am dedicated by my Ancestors.

Now should we speak particularly of the House of Austria, what was ever more
Illustrious? which for four hundred years has furnished the World with such a
stock of Emperors, and Kings, and Noble Princes, that it has been a great
while ago foreseen it would be overcharged.

Why should we say any thing of the most Christian House of France, which by
its noble Constitution is incapable of submitting to any strange Family? Ever
Supreme in its Head, which alone in the World, and in all Ages, sees herself,
after seven hundred years Regal Establishment, (not to take notice what the
Grandeur of so high an Original represents to the curious Observators of
Antiquity) still in her full Strength and Flower, still in possession of the
most Illustrious Kingdom under the Sun, before God and men; before God, in an
unalterable purity of Faith; and before men, of so great Dignity, that it could
part with the Empire, without diminishing its Glory and Authority.

The Queen has had her share of this Greatness, not only by the rich and
valiant House of Burgundy, but also by Isabel of France, her Mother; a Daughter
worthy of Henry the Great, and the acknowledgment of Spain, the best Queen, and
the most lamented she ever saw on the Throne. She was scarcely forty years old
when Spain bewailed her; and to our grief, the Life of Mary Terese has not run
a longer course. But the wise, the courageous, and pious Isabella owed one part
of her Renown to the Misfortunes of Spain; for which we know she found a
Remedy, by a Diligence and Advice, which reduced both great and small, and if
we may so speak, the King himself to his Duty. Let us not complain, Christians,
that the Queen her Daughter, in a more tranquil condition, offers likewise a
less lively Subject to our Discourse; let it suffice us, that in as unhappy
occasions, from which God has preserved us, we might have found in her the same
Remedy.

With what care and tenderness did Philip the Fourth, her Father, educate her!
She was regarded in Spain, not only as an Infanta, but as a Child: for so is
the Princess there called, who is Heiress of so many Kingdoms. And therefore
whatsoever Virtues and able Examples Spain afforded, were continually set
before her. No marvel then that this Princess shined with more excellent
Qualities from her Childhood, than she could expect Crowns. Philip thus brings
her up for his Country; God, who favors us, designs her for Lewis.

Give over, Princes and Potentates, to trouble by your Pretensions the Project
of this Marriage; seeing the God of Love, which seems likewise to trouble it,
does himself yield to it. Love can disturb the hearts of this Worlds Hero's,
raise Tempests therein, and stir up such Passions as will make Politicians
tremble, and afford Hope to those that despair. But there are Souls of an Order
superior to these Laws, into whom he cannot inspire Sentiments unworthy their
Rank. There are Measures taken in Heaven which he cannot break; and the
Infanta, not only by her august Birth, but also by her Virtue and Reputation,
is alone worthy of Lewis.

She is the prudent Wife who is from the Lord, Prove. 19.14.
as the Wise man speaks. And why from the Lord, seeing it is he that gives every
thing? And what is this marvelous advantage which deserves to be attributed in
so particular a manner to the Divine Bounty? To understand this, we need only
consider what the Prudence of a virtuous Wife can do in Families, to uphold and
calm them.

Pacifick Island, wherein was to be determined the Differences of two great
Empires, to which thou servest for Bounds. Isle everlastingly famous by the
Conferences of two great Ministers; wherein one might see laid open all the
Addresses and Secrets of so different a Polity; where one made himself valued
for his Gravity, and the other got the Ascendant by his Quickness. Happy day,
wherein two valiant Nations, so long Enemies, and then reconciled by Mary
Terese, advanced on their Confines, their Kings at their head, not any more to
fight, but to embrace one another; wherein these two Kings, with their Court,
of a Grandeur, Policy, and Magnificency, as well as of a Conduct so different,
were to each other, and to all the World, so great a Spectacle: Sacred
Festivals, fortunate Marriage, Nuptial Va^l, Benediction, Sacrifice; may I at
this time mingle your Ceremonies and your Pomps with these Funeral-Solemnities?
Then Spain lost what we gained: now we both lose, and Mary Terese is lost to
all the Earth. Spain lamented alone; now France and Spain mingle their Tears,
and shed Torrents; who can stop them? But if Spain lamented her Infanta, when
ascending a Throne the most Glorious on Earth; what must our Groans be at the
sight of this Tomb, wherein we all see nothing but the miserable decay of all
Humane Greatness? Cease lamenting; it is not Tears I would draw from your eyes,
but a willingness in your hearts to receive Instruction. The vanity of all
worldly things requires not my Voice; this Scepter, so soon alas fallen from
the Royal Hand, so soon from so great a Majesty, speaks enough.

A Queen enriched with so many Titles of Honor, became every day more enriched
by our Monarch's heroic Exploits, and by the continual accessions of his
Glory. France under him has learnt to understand her self: She has discovered
Forces which the precedent Ages knew not of; Order and Military Discipline
increase with the Armies. If the French can do all things, it is because their
King is everywhere their Leader; and having chosen the chief place, which he
is to animate by his Valor, he operates everywhere by the impression of his
Virtue.

Never was War made with a more inevitable Force, seeing that in despising the
Seasons, he has bereaved his Enemies of defense. The courageous and
well-disciplin'd Soldiery march with assurance under his Standarts; no River
can stop 'um, no Fortress dismay 'um. It Is known, how Lewis's Thunder strikes
the Cities before he besieges 'um, and how every thing gives way to his Prowess.

Politicians pretend not to dive into his designs. When he marches, all parts
believe themselves in like danger. A tranquil Voyage becomes immediately a
formidable Expedition to his Enemies. Gaunt falls, before 'twas thought of to
fortify it. Lewis comes thither by long Circuits; and the Queen, who
accompanies him in the midst of Winter, adds to the pleasure of accompanying
him, that of serving secretly his designs.

Through the care of so great a Prince, all France is no more, if a man may so
speak, than one Fortress, which shows on all sides a formidable front. Sheltred
on all sides, she is able to keep Peace with surety in her own bosom; and also
to carry War everywhere requisite, and to strike near or far with an equal
Force. Our Enemies can tell us this, and our Allies have felt, at greatest
distance, what Assistance the hand of Lewis can yield.

Before him, France, almost without Shipping, held two Seas in vain: Now we see
'um covered from one end to the other with our victorious Fleets; and the
French Valor carries everywhere the dreadful name of Lewis. Thou shall yield
or fall under this Conqueror, Algier, who art rich with the Spoils of
Christendom. Thou said in thy covetous heart, I give Laws to the Sea, and
the Nations are my Prey. The lightness of thy Vessels gave thee considence; but
thou shall find thy self set upon even within thy Walls, as a ravenous Bird,
sought amongst Rocks and in her nest, wherein she shares her Prey to her Young.
Thou restorest already thy Slaves. Lewis has already broke the Irons wherewith
thou loadest his Subjects, who are born to be free under his glorious Empire.
Thy Houses are now but an heap of Stones. In thy brutish Fury thou turnest thy
self against thy self, knowing not how to satisfy thy feeble rage; but we
shall see the end of thy thefts. The surprised Mariner does already cry out,
Ezece. 27.32.
What City is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea! and
Navigation will be secure by the Arms of Lewis.

Eloquence will be exhausted in praising the wisdom of his Laws, and the good
management of his Exchequer. What shall we say of his Resolution, whereunto we
see the fury of Duels give place? The severe Justice of Lewis, makes France in
love with the Authority under which she lives Happy and Victorious. He that
would understand how greatly Reason presides in the Councils of this Prince,
need only give ear when he pleases to explain the motives of it. I might here
call in for Witnesses the sage Ministers of Foreign Courts, who find him as
convincing in Discourse, as he is dreadful in Arms. The nobleness of his
expressions comes from that of his Sentiments, and his precise words are the
image of that exactness which reigns in his thoughts. Whilst he speaks with
such efficacy, a surprising sweetness, opens to him all hearts, and gives I
know not what kind of Splendor to his Reasonings.

Let us not forget what was the Queens greatest rejoicing. Lewis is the Bulwark
of Religion; it is that whereunto he makes his Arms subservient. But let us
withal know, that he establishes that everywhere without, because he feels it
reigning within his Heart. It Is there he vanquishes Enemies more terrible, than
those which so many powers jealous of his greatness, and all Europe can arm
against him. Our true Enemies are within our selves, and Lewis Combats those
more than the rest. You see everywhere the Temples of Heresy beat down; that
which he overthrows within, is a Sacrifice far more pleasing; and the work of a
Christian, is to destroy those passions which would make our hearts a Temple of
Idols. What would it signify Lewis to extend his Renown throughout the
habitable Universe? It Is nothing to be a man whom other people admire: he will
be with David, the man after Gods own heart. And therefore God blesses him. All
Mankind are agreed, there is nothing greater than what he does, unless we will
reckon to be greater whatsoever he will not do, and the bounds he has given his
own power. Adore then, O great King, him that makes you Reign, who makes you
vanquish, and gives you in the heats of victory, notwithstanding the warmth it
inspires, so moderate sentiments. Would Christendom open its eyes, and
acknowledge the Revenger which God has sent her. Yet O horrid, O shameful, O
just punishment of our crimes, whilst she is ransackt by Infidels, who pierce
even into her very bowels; why does she not remember the Succors of Candia,
the Famous Battle of Raab, where Lewis renewed in the heart of the Infidels,
the ancient opinion which they had of the French Prowess, fatal to their
Tyranny, and by unheard of Exploits, becomes the defense of Austria, of which
he had been the terror?

Open then your eyes, Christians, and regard this Hero, of whom we may say,
what St. Paulin said of the great Theodosius, that we see in Lewis, not a King,
Paul. Ep. 9. ad Sev.
but a servant of Jesus Christ, and a Prince who exalts himself more by his
Faith than by his Crown.

Whilst this great King made the Queen the most Illustrious of all Women, you
made her, my Lord, the most Illustrious of all Mothers. Your respects have
comforted her in the loss of her other Children. You have restored them to her:
she has seen her self spring up again in this Prince, who makes your delight
and ours; and sound a Daughter worthy of her in this August Princess, who by
her rare Merit, as well as the ties of Sacred Wedlock, makes with you but one
and the same heart. If we admired her as soon as ever she appeared, the King
has confirmed our judgment, and being now become, contrary to her desires, the
chief ornament of a Court, of which so great a King is the support, she is
become the consolation of all France.

Thus our Queen, happy by her Birth, which made Piety as well as Greatness
hereditary to her, by her holy Education, by her Marriage, by the renown and
love of so great a King, by the Merits and respects of her Children, and the
veneration of all the people, could see nothing on earth but what was beneath
her. Raise up now, O Lord, my thoughts and voice, that I may represent to this
August Assembly, the incomparable beauty of a Soul, wherein you have always
dwelt, which has never grieved your holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. Heb. 6.4.
which never lost the taste of the Heavenly gift; that we may begin, miserable
sinners as we are, to shed a torrent of tears: being ravished with the pure
charms of innocence, we may never cease bewailing the loss of it.

In truth, Christians, when we behold in the Gospel the lost sheep preferred by
the good shepherd above all the rest of the flock, Luke 15.4.20.
and also that happy return of the lost Prodigal, and that transport of a
tender Father, which sets all the Family in rejoicing; a man is almost tempted
to think, that Repentance is better than Innocence, and the Prodigal returned
receives more favor than his elder Brother, who never left his Fathers house.
Yet is he the eldest, and two words which his Father tells him, makes him
understand that he has not lost any of his advantages: Ibid. 30.
My Son, says he to him, you are always with me, and all that I have is yours.
This Theme, Gentlemen, is seldom handled in the Pulpits, because this
inviolable saithfulness is seldom sound now in the world. Yet let us insist on
it, seeing our subject leads us to it, and has a perfect agreement with our
Text. St. Thomas explains the full meaning of it. God shows more love to the
just, who has always been so; he also shows more to the reconciled sinner, but
in two different manners. One will appear more favored, if we regard what he
is; and the other, if we observe whence he came. God keeps for the just a
greater gift; he draws the sinner out of a greater mischief: the just will seem
more advantaged, if we weigh his merit; and the sinner more beloved, if we
consider his ununworthiness. The Father of the Prodigal Son explains it himself
Son, you are always with me, Luke 15.31. Ibid. 32.
and all that I have is thine, you ought to rejoice because your brother was
dead and is now alive. Thus does he speak of him whom he has drawn out of the
greatest abyss of misery. Thus are men's hearts seized with a sudden joy by the
unexpected sight of a sun-shining day in winter, which after rainy and gloomy
weather, immediately chears the face of the whole world; but yet we prefer
before it the constant serenity of a more gentle season: and if we expound our
Saviors sentiments by those of men, he concerns himself more sensibly in
converted sinners, which are his new Conquest, but reserves a more sweet
familiarity for the just, who are his ancient and constant friends: seeing that
he says, speaking of the Prodigal, Bring forth the best robe and put it on him,
Ibid. 22.
but yet does not say, You are always with me; or as St. John repeats it in the
Revelations, They are always with the Lamb, Revel. 14.4, 5.
and appear without spot before his Throne. Sine macula sunt ante Thronum Dei.

How this purity is kept in this seat of temptations and illusions of worldly
greatness, the Queen will instruct you; she is one of those of whom the Son of
God has pronounced in the Revelations: Revel. 3.12.
He that overcomes will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, faciam illum
columnam in Templo Dei mei. He shall be the ornament of it, he shall be its
prop by his example; he shall stand high, he shall stand sure. Here we have
already some description of our Queen. He shall go no more out, for as non
egredietur amplius. Unmovable as a pillar, he shall have his abode fixed in the
Lords house, and never go out of it by the commission of any crime. I will make
him, says the Lord, for its the work of my grace. But how will he fasten this
pillar? hear the Mystery, and will write upon him, adds he. I will set up this
pillar, but at the same time write on it a memorable inscription. What is that,
O Lord? three names only, to the end the inscription may be as short as it is
magnificent. I will write thereon, says he, the Name of my God, and the Name of
the City of my God, the new Jerusalem, and my new Name. These names, as the
sequel will show, signify a lively faith within, the outward practices of
Piety in the observations of Holy Church, and frequent receiving of the blessed
Communion, three means of keeping innocence, and the epitomy of our Princesses
holy life, which is what you will see written on her pillar; and you will read
in her inscription the causes of her Constancy: and I will write, says he, the
Name of my God, by inspiring her with a lively faith. It Is, Gentlemen, by such
a Faith that the Name of God is deeply engraven in our hearts. A lively Faith
is the foundation of the stability which we admire: for whence happen our
inconstancies, but from our wavering Faith? This foundation being not firmly
laid, we are afraid to build thereon, and we walk doubtfully in the ways of
Virtue. It Is Faith alone that can fix the wavering Spirit: for observe the
qualities St. Heb. 11.1.
Paul attributes to it, Fides sperandarum substantia rerum Faith, says he, is a
substance, a solid foundation, a firm prop. But of what? of what is seen in the
world? Why attribute a consistence, or to speak with St. Paul, a substance, and
a body to this fugitive shadow.

Faith then is a Prop, but of things which we must hope for. And how again?
Argumentum non apparentium, is a plain conviction of that which does not
appear. Faith must have in it a Conviction. You have it not, you will say. I
know the reason, because you are afraid of having it, instead of begging it of
God, who freely gives it. And therefore all falls to ruin in your hearts, and
your determinate senses carry away your uncertain and unsettled Reason. And what
means this Conviction of which the Apostle speaks of, but only what he says
elsewhere, 2 Cor. 10.5.
a bringing into captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ?

Behold the pious Queen prostrate before the Altar! observe how she is possessed
with the divine presence! It Is not by her Train that she is known, it is by her
Attention, and that devout setledness which would not suffer her Eyes to
wander. The adorable Sacrament approaches: Ah, the Faith of the Centurion
admired by our Savior himself, was not more lively; and he did not say with
more humility, I am not worthy. Mat. 8.8.10.
See how she smites her innocent Breast, how she reproaches her self for the
smallest sins, how she bows down that Royal Head, before which the Universe
bows it self! The Earth, from whence she sprang, and to which she is now
returning, is not yet low enough to receive her; she would even wholly vanish
before the Majesty of the King of Kings. God by a lively Faith engraves on the
bottom of her heart what Isaiah said, Enter into the rock, Isai. 2.10.
and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his
majesty.

Wonder not then, if she appeared so humble before the Throne. O wonderful
sight! and which ravishes both Heaven and Earth with admiration. You may behold
a Queen, who after the example of David, attacks on every side her own
Greatness, and all the temptations to Pride which it offers. You will see in
the words of this great King, the lively Image of this great Queen: Domine,
Psalm. 130.
non est exaltatum cor meum; O Lord, I am not high minded: Neque elati sunt
oculi mei; I have no proud looks. O Lord, I was never disdainful, nor said in
my heart, Isai. 11.7.
I am alone on the earth. How far was the pious Queen from those haughty looks!
and in so high a State, who ever saw in this Princess the least spark of Pride,
or air of Scorn? David goes on: Neque ambulavi in magnis, neque in mirabilibus
super me; I walk not in vain thoughts, nor deal in wonders which are too hard
for me. He opposes here the Excesses whereinto great People do naturally fall.
Pride, which always ascends, when having extended its pretensions to what
humane Greatness has most solid, or rather less ruinous, pushes forward its
designs even to Extravagancy, and rushes madly upon senseless Projects; as
that proud King did (a true Figure of the Rebellious Angel) when he said in his
heart, I will lift my self up above the clouds: Isai. 14.14.
I will place my throne above the stars, and will be like the most High I
suffer not my self, says David, to wander into such Excesses. But having beat
it down thus in all the several parts where it seemed to raise it self, David
gives it its fatal blow by these words: If I have not had humble thoughts, but
exalted my self; Si non humiliter sentiebam, sed exaltavi animam meam: or as
St. Jerome renders it, Si non silere feci animam meam; If I have not made my
soul silent. If I have not quieted those slattering thoughts which continually
offer themselves to puff us up. And in fine, he thus concludes this excellent
Psalm: Sicut ablactatus ad matrem suam sic ablactata est anima mea; My soul,
says he, has been like a weaned child; I have snatched my self from those Sweets
which are unwholsom, to betake my self to better Nourishment. Thus an excellent
Soul governs this Worldly Grandeur, and casts it wholly forth from exercising
any Supremacy. David never fought a better fight than this. The defeated
Philistines, and the Bears torn with his own hands, are nothing in comparison
with vanquishing himself. But the holy Princess, whose Funeral we solemnize,
has equalled him in both, in his Attempts and Successes.

Yet she knew how to show her self to the World, with all that Grandeur her
State required. Kings owe that resplendent show to the World, like the Sun, for
the solace and satisfaction of their Subjects; they ought to expose a Majesty
which is only a Ray of that of God. 'Twas easy for the Queen to display a
Greatness which was natural to her. She was born in a Court where Majesty
delights to set it self forth with all its Circumstances, and of a Father that
knew how to keep, with a kind of jealous circumspection, what they call in
Spain the Ceremonies of State, and the Decorums of the Palace. But she chose
rather to temperate Majesty, and abase it before God, than to dazzle the eyes of
men with it. How often have we seen her therefore hasten to the Altars, to
taste there, with David, an humble Repose; and retire into her Oratory, where
mauger the Tumult of the Court, she found a Mount Carmel, the Desert of S.
John, and the Mount so often a Witness of our Savior's Sighs and Tears!

I have learnt from St. Augustine, that the attentive Soul makes to it self a
Solitude: Gignit enim sibi ipsa mentis intentio Solitudinem. But, my Brethren,
let us not slatter our selves; we must find time to be alone, if we will keep
Religion alive in our Souls. It Is herein that we must admire the inviolable
Fidelity which the Queen observed toward God. Neither the diversions nor the
fatigues of a Voyage, nor any other occasion, could deprive her of those
particular hours which she designed for Meditation and Prayer. Could she thus
persevere, did she not taste in these Exercises that hidden Manna, of which
none knows the sweetness but those that taste? Rev. 3.17.
Manna absconditum quod nemo scit, nisi qui accipit. On this account she used
to say with David, 2 Kings 7.27.
O Lord, thy servant has found her heart to make to thee this Prayer: Invenit
servus tuus cor suum, ut oraret te oratione hac. Where run your hearts
estranged from God? Even in time of Prayer, you let your vagabond-hearts take
their wild course. O could you say with our pious Queen, whom we deservedly
honor; O Lord, thy servant has found his heart! I have reduced this Fugitive,
and here he is entire before thy face.

Holy Angel, that presides over the Orizon of this blessed Princess, and
carries this Incense above the Clouds to burn on that Altar which St. John saw
in Heaven, relate to us the Ardours of this Heart wounded with the Divine Love:
show us those Rivers of Tears which the Queen poured out before God for her
sins. How, do innocent Souls weep? do they undergo the sorrows of Penance? Yea
certainly, seeing it is written, that nothing is pure on earth, Job 15.15. John
1.
and he that says he has no sin, deceives himself. But they are small sins;
light in comparison, I confess, light in themselves. The Queen knew none of
this nature. And this is the sense too of every good Soul. The least spot shows
it self on those Garments which have never been soyl'd. I find Christians too
knowing in this matter; thou know too well the distinction of venial sins
from mortal ones. What, will not the general name of sin be sufficient to deter
thee from committing any? Know thou not that those sins which seem small,
become great by their multitude, and by the dreadful effects they work in the
Soul? And this is no more than what all the holy Doctors do teach by a joint
consent. Know thou not that those sins which are venial by their Object, may
become mortal by excessive prosecution of them? Innocent Pleasures become such,
according to the Doctrine of the Saints; and those alone could damn the rich
man in the Gospel, for having been too much indulged in. And who knows the
degree whereunto they must amount, to make this deadly poison? And is not this
one of the reasons which makes David cry out, Delicta quis intelligit, who
knows his sins? Let me abhor then thy vain science and wicked subtilty,
daring Wretch, that so boldly pronounces. This sin which I commit without fear,
is venial. The innocent Soul knows no such distinctions. Two things will show
you the eminent degree of the Queens Virtue. She has often been heard to say,
with that blessed simplicity of Soul which was common to all the Saints, That
she could not comprehend how one could wilfully commit one only sin, how
little soever it were. She did not say then, It is venial: She said, It is a
sin; and her innocent heart rose against it. If there happened any ill Accident
to her Person, to her Family, to the State, she alone accused her self of it.
But what Misfortunes you will say could happen in this raised Condition, and in
so long a course of Prosperity? You believe then that Vexations hide not
themselves under Purple, or that a Kingdom is an universal Remedy to all Evils;
a Balm that heals 'um, a Charm that enchants them. Whereas that by a Council of
Divine Providence, which can give a counterpoise to the highest conditions,
this Grandeur which we admire so much at a distance as if ^t were something
above man, less pleases when one is born to it, or confounds it self in its
abundance. All Humane Greatness has this Evil peculiar to it self, that its
disappointments are more vexatious than those which are met with in a low
condition; the blow being so much the more intolerable, for a man's being less
prepared for it.

It Is certain, men do not so much perceive this unhappy tenderness in virtuous
Souls. We believe 'em insensible, because that not only they know how to be
silent, but also to sacrifice their secret Troubles. But the heavenly Father
delights to behold them in secret; and as he knows how to prepare them their
Crosses, so he deals out to 'um also their Rewards. Do you believe the Queen
could be at case in those famous Champaigns which furnished us daily with such
surprising Accidents? No, Gentlemen, she was always in fear, because she saw
always that precious Life on which her own depended, too desperately hazarded.
You have beheld her Fears; shall I mention her Losses, the death of her dear
Children? They have all of 'um rent her heart. Remember we that young Prince
whom the very Graces themselves seemed to have fashioned with their own hands.
Pardon me these Expressions: Methinks I see still that Flower falling. Being
then a sorrowful Messenger of so dismal an Event, I was also the Witness, in
seeing the King and Queen afflicted beyond measure. But I saw likewise their
Faith equally victorious; I beheld the agreeable Sacrifice of an humbled Soul
under the hand of God, and two Royal Victims offer, by joyn^ consent, their own
heart.

May I now look back on the terrible threatening of provoked Heaven, when it
seemed for so long time to strike the Dauphin, our precious Hope? Pardon me,
Gentlemen pray pardon me, if I renew your Fears; we ought to do it though we
are unwilling, seeing we cannot without such a remembrance consider the
constancy of the Queen. We saw then in this Princess, in the midst of the
Alarms of a Mother, the Faith of a Christian; we saw an Abraham ready to offer
up an Isaac, and some resemblances o^ a Mary when she offered her Son Christ.
Let us not be afraid to say it, seeing that a God became man, to give Examples
to all Conditions. The Queen full of Faith, proposed not to her self a less
Example than Mary. God restores her also her only Son, which she offers him
with a mournful heart, but submissive, and will have us owe to her the
restoration of so great a Benefit.

We are not mistaken, Christians, when we attribute all things to Prayer: God
which puts it into our hearts, can refuse it nothing. A King, says David, Psalm.
32.16.
cannot save himself by his host, nor the mighty by his valor. Neither must we
attribute fortunate Successes to Humane Prudence. There arises, Prove. 19.21.
says the Wise man several thoughts in the heart of man. Here we have the
agitation and uncertain determinations of Humane Counsels: But adds he, the
counsel of the Lord stands firm; and whilst men deliberate, they execute only
what he resolves upon. The terrible the Almighty, which takes away the
judgments of Princes, leaves them sometimes to follow the imagination of their
own hearts, to confound them the more, and to take them in their own
craftiness. For there is no prudence, there is no wisdom, there is no counsel,
Job 5.15. 1 Cor. 3.19. Prove. 23.30. 2 Match. 15.25.
against the Lord. The Machabees were valiant men, and yet it is written, they
fought more by their Prayers than by their Arms; Per orationes congressi sunt:
made confident by the Example of Moses, whose hands lifted up to God, overcame
more than those that struck. When every thing yielded to Lewis, and that we
thought the time of Miracles again was come, wherein the Walls fell at the
found of a True mpet; All people cast their eyes on the Queen, and thought they
saw coming out from her Oratory, the Tempest which overthrew so many Cities.

If God grants to Prayers temporal Prosperity, how much more does he give to
'um the true Goods, that is to say, spiritual Benefits? They are the natural
Fruit of a Soul united to God by Prayer. Prayer which obtains Virtues for us,
learns us to practice them, not only as necessary, James 1.17.
but also as received from the Father of lights, whence comes every good and
perfect gift. And this is the pitch of Perfection, because it is the foundation
of Humility. Thus did Mary Terese draw down by her Prayers all manner of
Virtues into her Soul. In her tender years she was in the Traverses of a Court
then turbulent enough, the Consolation and only Stay of the infirm age of the
King her Father. The Queen her Mother-in-Law, notwithstanding that odious name,
found in her not only a respect, but also a tenderness, which neither time nor
distance of place could alter. Therefore does she weep beyond measure, and will
not be comforted. What Affection, what Respect, what Deference has she not
yielded at all times to the King? always alive to this great Prince, ever
jealous of his Glory, always sollicitous for the interest of his State,
indefatigable in her Voyages, and ever happy, provided she was in his company.
A Wife, in short, in whom St. Paul might have seen the Church of Jesus Christ,
united wholly to his Will by an ever-during Complacencie. If we might ask this
great Prince, who here so piously pays his last Duty, what a Mother he has
lost, he would answer by his Groans: and I will tell you for him, what I have
seen with joy, that the inexpressible tendernesses of Mary Terese, tended all
of 'um to inspire into him Faith, Piety, the Fear of God, an inviolable
Intention on the Kings Service, Bowels of Compassion for the Miserable, a firm
perseverance in all Duties, and whatsoever we praise in the Conduct of this
Prince. Shall I mention the Bounties of the Queen so often experienced by her
Domestics? And shall I again renew the Cries of her desolate Family before
these Altars? And you who are the Poor of Jesus Christ, for whose sake she
could not endure to hear her Treasures were exhausted; first, you poor
Voluntaries, Victims of Jesus Christ, Religious, Sacred Virgins, pure Souls, of
whom the World is not worthy; and you Poor whatsoever name you bear, poor
known, poor who are ashamed, sick, impotent, maimed, Dregs of mankind, to speak
with St. Gregory Nazianzen: Orat. 16.
for the Queen respected in you all the Characters of Jesus Christ. You then
whom she assisted with so much Joy, whom she visited with such tender
Expressions, whom she served with so much Faith, happy in putting off a lent
Majesty, and in adoring in your meanness the glorious Poverty of Jesus
Christ; what an admirable Panegyric would you utter by your Groans to the
glory of this great Princess, were it permitted me to introduce you into this
august Assembly! Receive, Father Abraham, into your Bosom this Heiress of your
Faith: Like you, a Servant of the Poor, and worthy to find in them no more
Angels, but Jesus Christ himself. What shall I say more? Hear all in a word:
Daughter, Wife, Mother, Mistress, Queen, such as our Wishes could make, but
above all, excellent Christian; she answers all respects without presumption,
and was humble not only in the midst of all her Greatness, but amidst all her
Virtues.

I shall explain in a few words the other names which we saw written on the
mysterious Pillar of the Revelation, and in the heart of the Queen. By the name
of the holy city of God, the new Jerusalem, you know is meant the name of the
holy Catholic Church, holy City, all the Prayers of which are efficacious; of
which City Jesus Christ is the foundation, Rev. 3.12.
which descended from Heaven with him, because she is included in him as in the
Head, from whence all the Members receive their life; a City dispersed over the
whole Earth, and whose top reaches to Heaven to place there its Citizens. At
the only name of the Church, all the Faith of the Queen was awakened: A true
Daughter of the Church, not content to believe the holy Doctrines of it, but to
practice them in her Life and Conversation.

The Church inspired of God, and instructed by his holy Apostles, has so
disposed the year, that we find with the life, Mystery, with the Preaching and
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, the real fruit of all these things in the admirable
virtues of his servants, and examples of his Saints, and in fine, a mysterious
abridgment of the Old and New Testament, and all the Ecclesiastical History. By
which means every season is fruitful for the Christians, every part of the year
full of Jesus Christ, who is always admirable, Is. 9.6. Ps. 67.36. Luke 10.42.
according to the Prophet, not only in himself, but likewise in his Saints. In
this variety which drives wholly toward holy unity, so much recommended by
Jesus Christ, the innocent and pious Soul finds with heavenly pleasures a solid
nourishment, and a perpetual renovation of its fervors. Fasts are therein mixed
at convenient times, that the Soul, always subject to temptation and sin, may
settle and purify it self by repentance. All these pious observances had their
happy effect in the Queen, which the Church required: she renewed her self in
all the Festivals, she sacrificed her self in all the Fasts and Abstinencies.
Spain has on this occasion such Customs, which France does not follow; but the
Queen soon reduced her self on the side of obedience: Habit could do nothing
with her against Rule; and the extreme exactness of this Princess, showed the
tenderness of her Conscience. What other has better profited of this saying,
Luke 10.16.
he that hears you hears me? In which words our Savior teaches us this
excellent Doctrine of proceeding in the way of God under the particular
guidance of his servants, who exercise his authority in the Church. The Queens
Confessors could do all things wherein the exercise of their Ministry lay, and
there was no virtue whereunto she could not be brought by her obedience. What
respect did she not show the Sovereign Prelat Vicar of Jesus Christ, and all
the Ecclesiastical Order! But ab ove all, who can count the number of tears she
shed for those lasting divisions, whose end cannot be sought for with too many
sighs! The very name and shadow of division filled the Queen with horror, as it
does every Pious Soul. But let us not be mistaken; the Holy See can never
forget France, nor France be wanting to the Holy See. And those who for their
particular interests, concealed, according to the Maxims of their Policy, with
the pretense of Piety, and seem to irritate the Holy See against a Kingdom
which has always been the principal bulwark of it, should consider, that a Seat
so eminent, to whom Jesus Christ has given so much, will not be flattered by
men, but honored according to rule with profound submission; that she is set
up to draw all the world to her unity, and at length to reduce all Heretics;
and that whatsoever is excessive, is so far from being attractive, that it is
neither solid nor durable.

With the holy Name of God, and Name of the holy City Jerusalem, I see,
Gentlemen, in the heart of our Pious Queen, the Name of our Savior. What is,
Lord, thy new Name, but that which thou explainest, where thou say, I am the
bread of life, Joh. 6.48. Matthew. 56.26.
and my flesh is flesh indeed; and take, eat, this is my body? This new Name of
our Savior is that of the Eucharist, a Name made up of grace and sweetness,
which shows us in this adorable Sacrament, a source of mercy, a miracle of
love, a memorial and abridgment of all Excellencies, and the Word it self
changed entire into grace and goodness for the faithful. Every thing is new in
this Mystery: this is the New Testament of our Savior, and we begin to drink
this new wine with which the Heavenly Jerusalem is refreshed. Mat. 26.
But to drink it in this valley of temptation and sin, we must prepare our
selves for it by repentance. The Queen frequented these two Sacraments with a
fervor always new. This humble Princess felt her self in her natural state,
when she was as it were a sinner at the feet of a Priest, there expecting
mercy, and the sentence of Jesus Christ. But the Eucharist was her solace.
Every hungry after this bread of life, and ever trembling in receiving it;
although she could not communicate often enough to her desire, yet she ceased
not to complain humbly and modestly of frequent Communions which were enjoined
her. But who could refuse the Eucharist to innocence it self, and Jesus Christ
to so lively and pure a Faith! The rule which St. Augustine gives, is to
moderate the use of the Communion, when it is frequent reception abates the
excellency of its taste. In her we saw always a new zeal and devotion spring up,
and this excellent custom of searching in the Communion the best preparation,
as being the most perfect action of thankfulness for the Communion it self. By
these admirable practices this Princess arrived to her last hour, without
needing any other preparation than that of her holy Life; and men who are
always bold to judge of others, without sparing their Sovereigns, (for people
are wont to spare only themselves in their censures) I say, persons of all
conditions, have seen the Queen carried away with such precipitation, in the
vigor of her age, without the least doubts of, and inquietude for her
Salvation. Learn then, Christians, and especially you who cannot accustom your
selves to think of death, learn to disarm it in another manner than by
forgetting it, and let your holy Life be your armor against the fear of it.

France has seen within a few years two Queens, more united by their Piety than
by their Blood, whose deaths equally precious before God, although with
different circumstances, has been of singular edification to the Church. You
know I mean Anne of Austria's, and that of her dear Niece, or rather of her
dear Daughter Mary Terese. Anne in an age well advanced, and Mary Terese in her
prime; but both of 'um so happy a constitution, that it seemed to promise us
the enjoyment of 'um a long time: but they are taken away from us contrary to
our hopes, one by a long sickness, and the other by an unforeseen stroke. Anne
warned long ago by a Distemper as cruel as remediless, beheld death advancing
toward her with slow paces, and under the figure which always appeared to her
most dismal. Mary Terese no sooner struck, but you was seen in the arms of
death alive, as it were, and entire, without so much as seeing him first. At
this fatal warning, Anne, full of Faith, gathers all her strength which the
full exercise of Piety had acquired her, and beholds without any trouble all
the approaches of death. Humbled under the hand of God, she gives him thanks
for this his warning; she doubles her Charity, which was always great; she
increases her Devotions, which were always assiduous; she more solicitously
enquires into the state of her Conscience: with what newness of Faith and zeal
did we see her receive the holy viaticum! In like actions, Mary Terese needed
only her ordinary fervor; not needing death to stir up her Piety, her Piety
excited enough it self, and gained by its own force a continual increase. What
shall we say, Christians, of these two Queens! by one God teaches us how we
must profit by the time, and the other has showed us, that the true Christian
life has no need of it? It Is below a Christian spirit to arm it self against
Death, just only at that moment wherein he comes to attack us. A good Soul is
ever ready to fight her passions, for such a one does with the Apostle dye
daily: 1 Cor. 15.31.
Quotidie morior. A true Christian is here alive on Earth, because he is always
in a State of Mortification. Do we live, Christians, do we live? This Age which
we reckon upon, and wherein all the Reckoning does not belong to us, is this a
Life? and can we not perceive what we continually lose with the years? Are not
Rest and Nourishment weak Remedies against the perpetual Sickness which grows
upon us? And that which we call the Last, what is it else but, but a
Reduplication, and as it were the last access of evil which we bring into the
World with us?

What Health can secure us from the Death which the Queen carried in her
bosom! How quickly was the threatening followed by the Blow! And where had that
Queen been, with all that Majesty which on all sides shone about her, had she
been otherwise prepared? Immediately we saw happen that fatal hour, wherein the
Earth had nothing for her but Tears. What could so many faithful Domestics do
about her? The King himself, what could he do? He, Gentlemen, that gave place
himself to sorrow, for all his Power and Courage? All that came about this
Prince, increased his trouble. Monsieur and Madam came to share with him in his
Grief, and augmented it by their own. And you, my Lord, what could you do, but
pierce his heart with your sighs? He had it pierced enough by the tender
remembrance of a Kindness, which he found still the same, after twenty three
years usage. We sigh, we groan; and this is all we can do for a Queen so
beloved. I am mistaken, we have also Prayers; we have this holy Sacrifice,
refreshment to our Pains, and an expiation of our Ignorances. But let us know
that this Sacrifice of an infinite value, wherein all the Cross of Jesus is
included, this Sacrifice would be useless to the Queen, had she not merited by
her good life, that the effect of it might redound to her: Otherwise, says St.
Austin, what does such a Sacrifice signify? No Help to the Dead; a feeble
Consolation for the Living. So that all our safety comes from this life, whose
hast^^ ^light always deceives us. I come, Rev. 3.3.16.15.
says Jesus Christ, as a thief. He has done according to his Word: he came and
surprised the Queen in a time when we thought her the most healthful, in a time
wherein she saw herself most happy. But it is thus he acts; he finds for us so
many Temptations, and such a malignitie in all Pleasures, that he comes and
troubles the most innocent in his Elect. But he comes, says he, as a thief,
always unawares, and undiscernible in his steps. And he does himself glory in
this, in all that the Scripture speaks. Like a thief! you will say, an unworthie
Comparison: It Is no matter if it be so, provided it has its due effect on us,
that it frights us, and in affrighting save us. Let us tremble then,
Christians, let us tremble before him every moment: for who can shun him where
he appears, or discover him when he hides himself? They eat, says he, they
drank, they bought, they planted, Luke 17.26.
they built, they married in the days of Noab, and those of Lot, and a sudden
Ruin came and overwhelmed them.

They eat, they drank, they married. These were innocent Occupations. What
shall we say, when in satisfying our lustful Desires, in gratifying our Revenge
and secret Jealousies, in heaping up treasures of Iniquity in our Cossers,
without caring to separate our own from that of others, deceived by our
Pleasures, by our Sports, by our Health, by the prosperous success of our
Affairs, by our Flatteries, amongst which we must reckon treacherous Guides
whom we have our selves chosen to mislead us, and in fine, by our false
Penitencies, which are followed by nothing of our Manners; he shall come upon
us on a sudden at the last day? The Sentence shall come from above, The end is
come, the end is come; Finis venit, Ezekiel. 7.2.
venit finis: The end is come upon us; Nunc finis super te: Every thing will be
at an end as to you, in that moment. Ezekiel. 7.23.
Cut down, make an end, fac conclusionem. Strike the unfruitful Tree which is
good for nothing but the fire: Dan. 4.11.
Cut down the tree, pluck off its branches, shake off its leaves, beat down its
fruit. Then shall arise deadly fears and gnashings of teeth, Preludes of those
of Hell. Ah, Brethren, let us not tarry till this terrible Blow comes! The
Sword which has cut off the days of the Queen, is still lifted up over our
heads; our sins have sharpened the fatal edge of it. Ezekiel. 21.9, 10
The sword which I hold in my hand, says the Lord our God, is sharpened and
polished: it is sharpened, that it may pierce; it is filed and polished, that
it may glister. All the Universe sees the dazzling brightness of it. Sword of
the Lord, what a stroke do you now come from giving! all the Earth is astonished
at it. But what signifies this shining which astonishes us, if we prevent not
the Stroke which cuts? Let us prevent it, Christians, by Repentance. Who cannot
be moved at this Spectacle! But these Emotions of a day, what do they effect? a
final Hardness? Are we affected with the Miseries of Hungary and Austria? Their
Inhabitants are put to the Sword; and these are happy in comparison of others,
whom Captivity draws into miseries in relation to both Soul and Body. These
desolate Inhabitants, are they not Christians, are they not Catholics, our
Brethren, our own Members, Children of the same Family the Church, and fed at
the same Table with the Bread of Life? God is as good as his Word: Judgment,
begins at his house, 1 Pet. 4.17.
and the rest of the House does not tremble. Christians, let your selves be
moved to repent, appease God by your Tears. Hear the pious Queen, who speaks
louder than all the Preachers in the World; hear ner, Princes; hear her,
People; hear her, my Lord, ^^^ecially; she tells you by my Mouth, and by a
Voice which you are used to, That Greatness is a Dream, Joy a Folly, Youth a
Flower which soon sades, and Health a deceitful Nothing. Treasure up then such
Riches as cannot be taken away. Hearken to the grave discourse which S. Gregory
of Nazianzen offered to Princes, and to the then Royal Family: Look, said he,
upon your Purple, Orat. 23.
look upon your Power which comes from God, and employ it only for good.
Consider what you have been entrusted with, and the great Mystery which God
accomplishes in you. He reserves alone to himself the things above he shares
with you the things which are below. Show your selves Gods to the people under
you, in imitating the Divine Bounty and Munificencie. And this, my Lord, is
what the crowding and perpetual Acclamations and Looks of the People which
follow you, require. Ask of God, with Solomon, Wisdom, which will make you
worthy of the Peoples Love, and of the Throne of your Ancestors. And when you
retire to think of your Duty, fail not to consider whereunto the immortal
Actions of Lewis the Great, and the incomparable Piety of Mary Terese, do
oblige you.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Britannia Languens: or, a Discourse of Trade: Showing the Grounds and Reasons
of the Increase and decay of Land-Rents, National Wealth and Strength. With
Application to the late and present State and Condition of England, France, and
the United Provinces. Printed for Sam. Crouch in Popes-head-Alley near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil.


