A Testimony for Truth AGAINST ALL Hireling-Priests and Deceivers: With a Cry
to the Inhabitants of this Nation, to turn to the Lord, before his dreadful
Judgments overtake them.

Also a Testimony against all Observers of Times and Days.

O Ye Priests and Bishops of this Nation, the Lord God that made Heaven and
Earth is a Witness for me this day, I have no evil in my heart to any of you,
but in Love to your Souls; and in the Bowels of tender compassion am I
constrained to cry out against your Ungodly Gains; for Gods day is come, and
Woe to all the Workers of Iniquity.

O ye Bishops and Priests of this Nation, ye have for a long time covered your
selves with the name of Christ's Ministers, but now your Covering is too
narrow, and your Profession will not hide you; for the Light of Christ is
risen, and with it you are judged and condemned, and seen to be Enemies to the
the Cross of Christ, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise; being in Cains
way, who slew his Brother about Religion; Genesis 4. 8.
and in Balaams way, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, Number. 22.
Therefore I say, leave off your Deceit, and keep the People no longer in your
dark Forms; Jer. 31, verse 31. 32, 33, 34.
but let them have Liberty to Worship God in Spirit and Truth; For the time is
come, that every man need not teach his Neighbor or his Brother, saying, Know
the Lord; for every one must know him from the least to the greatest. Yea, Gods
second Covenant of Light and Glory is made manifest, I will forgive their Sins,
and remember their Iniquities no more; I Will be to them a God, and they shall be
my People: O ye Blind Guides, Will ye seek to dissannul this? Will ye seek to
stop the Lords Work in this the Day of his Power? Ye are but as Briars and
Thorns, who are setting your selves together against him, who is a consuming
Fire, and is risen to consume you, and all your false Doctrine (if ye repent
not.) Therefore I say again and again, Leave off your Deceit, and come to the
Teaching of Gods Witness in your own perticulars: For this is the day that God
is pouring forth of his Spirit, and his Sons and his Daughters do Prophecy;
Jo. 2. 28.
for there is no more room for Deceit. Why take ye Christ's Words in your
Mouths, and hate to be reformed? Why talk ye of the Scriptures, and are erred
from the Spirit that gave them forth? Ye are gone from the Practice of Christ,
and of the Apostle: Did ever Peter, Paul, James, John, or any of Christ's
Ministers, keep Curates to get money? did they ever Sue any man for Lambs,
Piggs, Hens, or Geese? Did they ever hale any to the Courts, and to Prison?
Nay, Was not this the Testimony of him that was called to the Ministry, Cor. 9.
16. (says he) A Necessity is laid upon me to Preach the Gospel, and Woe be unto
me if I Preach it not; I have coveted no man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel;
but have Labored with these hands, Day and Night, that I should not be
chargeable to any Man? And was not this Christ's Doctrine, Do Good to them that
Hate you, Bless them that Curse you; if any Sue thee at the Law, and take away
thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also; he that smites thee on the one side,
turn to him the other? Matthew 5. 39. 40. Oh! Blush for shame, and t^ade no
more with the Scriptures; for they testify against you, to your Condemnation,
ye Hireling-Shepherds: Have you brought any Lambs to Christ's Fold? Have ye
brought any of your Hearers into the pleasant Valleys, where the Springs of
Life are to be felt? Nay: Are they not wandering in the Imaginations of their
own Hearts, and many of them dissatisfied, thirsting after the Bread of Life,
but know not where to find it, while you are eating the Fat, and clothing your
selves with the Fleece; and putting the Day of the Lord far from you, when many
of Gods faithful Servants, whom he has called to labor in his Vineyard, are
exercised with strong Cries to the God that made Heaven and Earth, that he may
turn away his Judgments, and revoak his destroying Angel, and spare this
Nation, which otherwise will feel an heavy Stroke of Gods Hand* if they repent
not. And though you live in Pride and Excess, spending your precious time in
Vanity and Pleasure, eating and drinking with the Drunken, and say in your
hearts, The Lord delays his coming; but know, that for all these things ye must
come to Judgment: For of a truth, ye Priests and People of this Nation, The
Lord will turn your Feasting into Fasting, and your Mirth into Lamentation; he
will fill you with Terror, and Amazement: Though you have had Plenty and
Fullness, your Barns and Storehouses must become empty; because of these things
I Weep, Sorrow has filled mine heart, and mine Eyes run down with Water: What
shall I say to prevail with thee, O England? Must thou needs be left Desolate?
Where are thy Wise and Prudent? Where are thy Divines (so called?) There is a
Seed raised, and a Birth brought forth, which will confound them all; the
promised Seed is come, Christ is risen, and unto him must the gathering of the
People be: For though the World cry out, No Perfection (and the
Hireling-shepherds, No Redemption on this side the Grave) yet I say, There is a
Birth brought forth, which will naturally do the Will of God, as ever man did
his own will. But O ye People of this Nation, are ye willing to receive him?
Are not your hearts filled with Pleasures and Delights? Are they not filled
with Cares and Encumbrances of this present Life, while there is no room for
your Christ: O Man and Woman, Is not every thing in thine Heart, and Christ in
the Stable: O ye Inhabitants of this Nation, its hard for ye to kick against
that which pricks you; for in the dread of God Almighty do I declare it,
There Is not another way, in which God will be Worshipped, but by the Light which
shines in your inward parts; neither is there another Gospel to be Preach but
this; Gods Power made manifest in the Heart. O ye Professors, my heart is a
little enlarged to you, I being once with you in the same dark Profession: O
how does my soul breath for you in secret, that you may all come to the
Substance, the one thing that is needful, and witness the Redemption of your
souls, to serve the living God no longer in the oldness of the Letter, but in
the newness of the Spirit; for you have a Form, but the Life and Power is
wanting; you are crying up Scriptures, and crying up Ordinances, you are crying
up Baptism and the Lord's Supper, while you know nothing of the Faith which
works by Love; And because of these things, says the Apostle, many are sick
and weak among you, and many are fallen asleep, not discerning the Lords Body, 1
Cor. 11. 30. for you discern not the Body of whom Christ Jesus is the Head, nor
the Gospel which is the Power of God unto Salvation; you discern not the
Glad-tidings of Life and Salvation, which is freely tendered without Money or
Price; Let every one that thirsts come to the Waters, and he that has no
Money, let him come buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price, Isa. 55.
1, 3, 4. Why do you spend your Money for that which is not Bread, and your
Labor for that which satisfies not? Learn of me, says Christ, heark^n
diligently and your souls shall live; and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure Mercies of David. O England, thy Teachers have deceived
thee; they have spoken Lies unto thee, and the Divinatien of their own Brains,
but not one word from the Mouth of the Lord; they have cried Peace, peace, when
sudden destruction was ready to enter into thy Bowels: Mic 3. 21. Thy Priests
preach for Hire, thy Heads judge for Reward, thy Prophets divine for Money, and
the People love to have it so, but what will ye do in the end thereof? Consider
your ways and your doings, and turn spedily unto the Lord by a true and
unfeigned Repentance, before the Decree be sealed, which must never be revoked
again; Rev. 22. 11. He that is filthy, let him be filthy still, he that is
holy, let him be holy still; And behold I come, says Christ Jesus, to render
unto every man according to his Works.

O Land though fruitful thou have been,
thy Glory must decay;
The thing thy Heart takes pleasure in,
must wither like the Hay.
O England, will thou still forget,
God's Kindness unto thee?
A little time is left thee yet,
that happy thou may be.
But if perversely thou go on,
then mark what I do say;
I do thee tell ere it be long,
the Lord will bring a day,
Of bitter Howling unto thee,
of Anguish, and of Smart;
In which the Deceit thou shall see,
that lodges in thine Heart.
A Testimony for Truth against all Observers of Times and Days.
OYe that live in Pleasures and Vanities, and spend your precious time in Sin
and Transgression, as Carding and Dicing, Drunkening and Feasting, in pretense
of keeping Christs-Day: O my Friends consider where you are, and what you are a
doing: Are you indeed come to Christs-day? or are you not rather in the Night,
wherein gross Darkness surrounds you about? You are making provision for the
flesh to satisfy the Lusts thereof: O starved souls, lean, dry, and barren!
you are making provision for the flesh whilst your Souls lie in Death and
Darkness, unredeemed to God: Alas my Friends! to what purpose is your
Feastings, to what purpose is your Observations of Days and Times, so long as
the Babe lies in the Manger, and the Seed of Life is unredeemed to God? Ah
Friends, If ever you would be Witnesses of Christ's Day, and of his Glory, which
he is now revealing, ye must all come to the Light, which you are enlightened
by, as the Apostle said, We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, unto which you
do well to take heed, as unto a Light which shines in a dark place, until the
Day-dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts, Pet. 2. 19. Now Friends, if
the Day Star were risen in you, there would be no need of observing Days and
Times, there would be no keeping a day in Twelve Months, but every day would
be a holy Day, so that Gods Glory would fill his Temple: But if the Day Star be
not risen in you, then ye are in the Night and in Darkness, and he that walks
in Darkness knows not whether he goes: and thus the Parable comes to be
opened, and the Mystery which has been hid from Ages and Generations, comes to
be revealed, even by him who was found worthy to open the Book which was sealed
with seven Seals, Reve. 5. 5. who is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, whose
Everlasting Day is dawned, and his Glory is risen; he has filled our hearts
with Praise and Thanksgiving, Glory, Honor, Everlasting Praise, says my Soul,
be unto him forever.

Judith Boulbie.

THE END.

