A TREATISE OF THE REASON OF Muscular Motion: Or the Efficient Causes of the
Contraction of a Muscle.

WHEREIN Most of the Phenomenon about Muscular Motion are explained.

By RICHARD BOVLTON, of the City of Chester, Medicin. Proficiens.

(...).

LONDON, Printed by A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
1697.

TRactatum hunc cui Titulus (A Treatise of the Reason of Muscular Motion, etc.)
dignum Censemus, qui Imprimatur.

Samuel Collins, Praeses. Thomas Burwell, Sen. Richard Torless, William Dawes,
Thomas Gill, Censor.

Datum in Comitiis Censoriis ex Aedibus Collegii nostri. Sept. 11. 1696.

TO THE MOST LEARNED AND EVER HONORED Dr. Collins, President: Dr. Thomas
Burwell, Dr. Richard Torlesse, Dr. William Dawes, Dr. Thomas Gill.


CENSORS OF THE College of Physicians; This Treatise is Humbly Dedicated

By Your Most Faithful And Obedient Servant R. BOULTON.

TO THE READER.
I Have examined this Treatise with the strictest Reason that I am Master of;
and it appears to me Reasonable, in every Particular.

But I am altogether desirous of Truth, and would not out of any fond Opinion
of my own Hypothesis, receive it sooner than another Man's. I am most inclined
to suspect whatever is a Faetus of my own Brain.

If it may be any ways servicable to others, I have my Desire.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Usefulness of Muscular Motion as it tends to the Maintenance of Life.
Page, 1 -- With respect to the Soul and the Animal Functions. p. 3 Dr. Willis's
Opinion examined. p. 7 Mr. Cowper's Opinion examined. p. 20 Dr. Ridley's
Opinion examined. p. 30 The Structure of a Muscle. p. 40 The Formal Cause of
the Contraction of a Muscle. p. 41 Vessels implanted into a Muscle. p. 42 Their
Distributions. p. 43 And Terminations in Small Glandules. p. 45 What a Gland
is. p. 47 The Use of the Nerves. p. 52 -- And Arteries inserted in the Glands.
p. 53 -- To prepare a Subtle Liquor. ibid. The Use of it. p. 54 The Reason of
Tonick Motion. p. 59 -- Of Local Motion. p. 60 The Use of the Lymphaeducts, p.
68 The Nature of the Liquor, and the Manner of its Preparation. p. 69 -- By
Fermentation. p. 70 -- Proved. p. 72 The Reason of Involuntary Motion. p. 82
Why the Systole of the Heart is interrupted with frequent Diastoles. p. 86 Why
the Muscles serving to Respiration are in some Measure Subject to our Appetite.
p. 90 Some Phenomenon about Muscular Motion Explained. p. 93 The Reason of
Convulsions. p. 103 -- of the Palpitation of the Heart. p. 109 -- of the Cramp.
p. 111 -- Of the Subsultus Tendinum in Fevers. p. 113 -- Of Spasmus Lynicus. p.
114
OF THE REASON OF Muscular Motion: OR, The Efficient Causes of the Contraction
of a Muscle, etc.
IF we consider the Usefulness of Muscular Motion, The Usefulness of Muscular
Motion, as it tends to the maintenance of life.
with respect to an Individual; and that, either as it tends to the
maintenance of Life, or the perfection of Man, that is, with respect to the
Soul, and the Animal Functions; it is the very spring upon which all our
Actions, both Natural, Vital and Animal wholly depend. By the Assistance of
Muscular Motion, all the parts of our Body perform their particular Offices:
Our Food is prepared by Mastication, and conveyed to the Stomach; the concocted
Chymus is thence expelled into the Intestines, where the purest Chyle is
separated from the impurer Faeces; every peculiar Liquor circulates through its
distinct and proper Vessels The Chyle through its Lacteals and the Lympha
through its Ducts; and the Mass of Blood is disributed through the Arteries,
that all the Parts of the Body, both Principal and Subsubservient, Noble and
Ignoble, may receive their proper Liquors: In a word, it is by this very Action
of Muscular Motion, that (...).

If we respect the Animal Functions, With respect to the Soul and its Functions.
they so much depend upon Muscular Motion, that when the Heart cease to move,
all the Faculties of the Soul are presently extinguished. The Faculties of the
Soul are not only dependent on Involuntary, but also Voluntary Motion; without
which, both our Eyes and Ears would be unfit to receive external Objects; and
Man would be endowed with a Sensitive and Rational Soul to no purpose. Our
outward Senses would in vain receive external Objects, unless we had an
Intelligent Faculty; in vain should we Understand, unless we had Reason to
distinguish good from evil, that we might desire the one, and contemn the
other: In vain also would be the Dictates of our Reason, if we had not a
Loco-Motive Faculty, to pursue those things we desire, and to flee from those
things which we are willing to avoid. But by Muscular Motion, the Dictates of
our Reason, accordingly as they are biased by our Appetites, are put into
Action, and the intimate results of all our Faculties are brought to light.
Muscular Motion is the very Index Animi, by which the Temper and Disposition of
the Animal Faculties are made evident; it is the Ultimate Result of our most
secret Thoughts and of our Will; so that if we weigh but the mutual dependence
of all the Parts of a Man's Body, A Muscle is a Noble part.
there is no Reason, that a Muscle should be termed an Ignoble part; since by
the loss of a single one, either the Natural, Vital, or Animal Faculties are in
some measure vitiated.

The Stomach, the Liver, the Spleen, the Lungs, etc. are all subordinate and
subservient to the Principle Faculties of the Soul; in as much as they by their
mutual Symbolums, prepare the Pabulum of the Animal Spirits. But the Muscles
designed for Motion, especially Voluntary (in as much as the most perfect and
refined Actions of the Soul, are performed and expressed by Muscular Motion,)
are of a more noble use, the perfection of Man consisting more immediately on
the energy and execution of the Principal Faculties of the Soul, than in the
subordinate and subservient Faculties, both Natural and Vital.

For as much as the Life and Perfection of Man, so much depend on Muscular
Motion, I shall enquire into the Efficient Causes of it: But before I propose
my own Hypothesis, it is necessary that I first confute what has hitherto been
said on this subject; nevertheless, because it would be too tedious to examine
the Opinions of so many Authors, I will only show the Errors of Two or Three of
the latest and most considerable.

The most Learned and Famous Dr. Willis Conjectures, Dr. Willis's Opinion
examined.
that the Spirits are conveyed to the Tendons of a Muscle, and are there
plentifully laid up as in a convenient Storehouse; which Spirits being of an
Agile and Elastick Nature, as far as they are able, and are permitted, always
endeavor to expand themselves; and that when an Instinct to perform Muscular
Motion, is carried from the Brain or Cerebell, to this common Storehouse, they
presently leap out of the Tendinous, into the fleshy Fibers, where they meet
with active Principles of another Nature, supplied by the Mass of Blood; which
two strongly and mutually fermenting, stuff up and tumifie the Fleshy Fibers;
whence proceeds the Contraction of a Muscle. When the Contraction cease, he
thinks that most of the purest Spirits that remain, return into the Tendons,
the other more impure Particles remaining amongst the Fleshy Fibers; he
fancies, that the Fibers of the outward Membrane contracting, promote the
Retrocession of the Spirits into the Tendons; and that for a continual supply
of these Liquors, the one is always stored up in the Tendons, through the
Nerves; and the other in the Carnous Fibers, from the Mass of Blood.

This Conjecture as it seems ingenious, No Elastick Spirits laid up in the
Tendons.
and at the first view very mysterious, yet upon a more strict Examination, it
appears altogether as improbable. For to suppose that these Elastick Spirits
are laid up, and stored in the Tendinous Fibers, is contradictory to Reason, as
well as the Laws of Circulation; for since in every Systole of the Brain, a
fresh supply of Animal Spirits is sent into all the Branches of the Nerves,
those Animal Spirits in the Tendinous Fibers, must needs by a succession of new
matter, be pressed forwards into the Fleshy Fibers; and consequently Accidental
Contractions must follow: for as much as there are no Valves to hinder their
immediate Passage. And that there are no Valves, nor any thing else to stop the
continual Passage of these Spirits, may be argued hence; because whatever would
stop the protrusion of these Spirits, when pressed by the Systole of the Brain,
would also hinder 'em from rushing out of their Storehouse, though stirred up
by an Instinct, and so the Muscle would be deprived of Motion.

But supposing that it were possible for these Elastick Spirits, to be stored
up in the Tendinous Fibers, and that neither their agility, and continual
Endeavors to explosion, nor the force of succeeding Spirits would drive 'em
out; yet when a Muscle cease from Motion, perhaps a Day or Two; the Tendon
would be so filled and stuffed up, that being no longer capable of receiving
more Spirits, either they must be forced forth into the Carnous Fibers, and
cause violent and Involuntary Contractions; or regurgitating and flowing back
upon the Brain, would there cause a Vertigo, or some other more fatal Disease;
and besides the Spirits by stagnating so long, would be chilled and coagulated,
and thereby rendered unapt for Motion.

It is not only absurd to imagine, Nor instinct sent from the Brain, because
that the Tendons, are Storehouses for Spirits; but also that they, the
Instinct being given, should cush out of the Carnous Fibers; one might as well
think, that the Contents of the Stomach, the Gall in the Vesica Bilaria, or the
Urine in the Bladder, might be excluded by instinct, merely without the help of
Muscular Coats; or that the Circulation of the Blood might be carried on,
without the Systole and Diastole of the Heart.

Moreover, Either it implies, that the Spirits are Intelligent,
to allow, that those Elastick Spirits do after this manner rush into the
Carnous Fibers, when the Instinct is given from the Brain, or to speak more
properly, ad imperium animae, either implies, that those Spirits, which Dr.
Willis calls Materiam subtilem, are intelligent Matter; that they are able to
understand the Dictates and Commands of the Soul; and to put them in Execution,
proprio motu; or that some Spirits of a Different Nature, Or that Spirits of a
Different Nature are sent from it.
are at the command of the Soul, sent from the Brain, which cause the Spirits
in the Tendons to be uneasy, and by exagitation to expand themselves more
powerfully, and consequently to leap forth. But if neither the texture of those
Spirits, which as Dr. Willis says, give the Instinct, be changed, and different
from those in the Tendons, nor the Subtle Matter be Intelligent, there would
be no Explosion, or leaping forth of the Spirits out of the Tendons, either by
instinct, or the accession of new Matter from the Nerves; except, as I noted
before, the Spirits which filled the Tendinous Fibers, were driven, and
successively forced out by a fresh supply of Spirits, sent in by every Systole
of the Brain; and so, Muscular Motion would not be Voluntary, but Accidental.

That this Matter is not Intelligent, is proved sufficiently; The Matter is not
Intelligent.
because to allow that this acts as it receives Instinct from the Brain, is to
allow a subordinate Soul which acts propria facultate in every Tendon; which is
false; for an Intelligent Faculty in a Tendon, which must act according to the
Dictates of the Principal Soul, cannot be supposed to be a Faculty of that
Soul, no more than the Soul of a Disciple, Juratus in Verba Magistri, and who
exactly follows the Dictates of his Master, can be said to be a part or faculty
of his Master's Soul.

That no Spirits of a different Nature from those he supposes to be in the
Tendons, No Spirits of a different Nature are sent from the Brain.
can be transmitted from the Brain, is evident. For since the same Spirits are
distributed through all the Nevervous Channels, from the same Fountains, the
Brain, or the Spinal Marrow, whatever causes the Spirits to leap out of one
Tendon, would cause the same Effects in all, and all the Muscles must be
contracted at the same Instinct.

Having thus confuted the Grounds and Foundation of his Hypothesis, it is not
irrational to expect, that the whole Superstructure should fall: I shall only
further take notice,

First, No active Principles heaped up in the Fleshy Fibers.
That if Active Principles of another Nature were heaped up in the Fleshy
Fibers, by degrees they would be so stuffed and swelled up, that there would be
no room for the entrance of Elastick Spirits from the Tendons; but they
themselves would rather, by reason of their quantity, be forced into the
Tendinous Fibers.

Secondly, That it would be absurd to imagine, Nor retrocession of subtle
Matter into the Tendons.
how these Two Spirits after so intimate a commixture, as would be produced by
a strong Fermentation, can be so easily separated, that the one should suddenly
run back into the Tendons, leaving the other behind in the Fleshy Fibers: For
when Two Liquors of a different Nature, and whose Minute and Subtle Particles
have a different Motion, are mixed together; by a mutual Fermentation is
produced so intimate a mixture, that it is impossible to separate the one from
the other sincere; because by a mutual collision of different Particles, both
must needs in some measure be altered, and degenerate from their Pristine
State, so that if the purest part of these Spirits remaining should run back
into the Tendons, they would be disagreeable to, and different from those purer
Spirits sent from the Brain; and would infect the Storehouses with such a
fermentative taint, that as new supplys were laid down by the Nerves, fresh
Explosions and Contractions of the Muscles must follow.

Thirdly, To help the Retrocession of these Spirits into the Tendinous Fibers;
Dr. Willis would have the Fibers of the investing Membrance to contract: But I
should rather think, that they would contract at the same time with the Muscle,
if the Instinct were carried through the same Nervous Channels with the
Spirits; because, as he says, they are first laid down in the Membrane, and
thence conveyed to the Tendon?

Mr. Cowper, in the Introduction to his Myotomia Reformata, Mr. Cowper's
opinion examined.
suspects; that the Blood is a Pondus, by which the action of a Muscle is
performed: The grounds of this suspicion are chiefly taken from two
Experiments: The first is a Ligature on the descending ttunk of the Aorta,
whereby all the inferior Parts, became destitute of Motion, which they
recovered again when that Ligature was loosed: The second, is to be taken for a
more surprising Argument, because after a cessation of Motion, the Muscles of
the Legs renewed their Contractions, by an Injection of Water into the Crural
Artery.

But that there is no Reason to assert, that the Blood acts as a Pondus from
these Experiments, will hereafter sufficiently appear, by giving other Reasons
for these Phenomena.

In the mean time to evince, The Blood does not act as a Pondus.
that the Blood as a Pondus does in no wise help the Contraction of a Muscle,
but does on the contrary, much interrupt and resist the Intumescence of the
Musculous Fibers, The First Argument.
by which the Contraction of a Muscle is performed, let any one hold his hands
before a Fire, with his Arms perpendicular, continuing 'em in that posture till
he feels the Musculous Parts well filled with Blood; then lifting up both his
Hands, let him hold 'em up as high as he can, till the Pondus of the Blood be
drained, and the Veins which before were full and tumid become flaccid and
empty, and he will move his Fingers much more easily and swifter, when the Muscles
are eased of the Pondus of Blood, than he did whilst his Hands were dependent;
yet certainly there was a greater Pondus of Blood upon the Muscles in the
former posture, whilst they were tumid, than in the latter when emptied of
superfluous blood.

Another Argument to prove, A Second.
That the Pondus of the Blood does not at all promote the Contraction of a
Muscle; may be taken from the Observation of Cacochymick Bodies, who are far
more dull and unapt for Motion than healthful people, whose Veins and Arteries
are moderately filled with Blood, which is not so thick and heavy; for in
Cacochymick Bodies, there is a greater Pondus of Blood, but because it does not
yield matter for to swell the Carnous Fibers, as plentifully as blood of a more
healthful constitution, Motion is not so brisk and strong; whereas if the
Pondus of the Blood did any ways contribute to the performance of Muscular
Motion, they would be far more strong; for the thicker the Blood is, the
greater is the Pondus.

In the Muscles of the Legs and Thighs there is always, A Third.
when the Body is erect, a greater weight of Blood, than on the Muscles
belonging to the Hands and Arms; and yet the latter, are far more agile and
nimble in Motion.

Again, if we but make a Ligature two or three fingers breadth above the Cubit,
so as to hinder the Reflux, but not the Influx of the Blood; when the
Sanguiferous Vessels are swelled, and the Muscles well filled, they are
rendered much more unapt for Motion: Which evidently shows that the more the
Sanguiferous Vessels are distended, the more the Motion of a Muscle is
hindered; because when the Vessels are dilated they resist the Intumescence of
the Carnous Fibers, and consequently the Contraction of a Muscle.

Furthermore, That the Contraction of a Muscle is not performed by the Pondus
of the Blood, is apparently evident in the following Experiment: A Fifth.
Viz. Make a Ligature two or three fingers breadth above the Cubit, so strong
as to stop the Circulation of the Blood; then open the largest Vein with the
common Instrument, and the Blood which more than usually swelled up the
Sanguiferous Vessels will leap forth; but presently for want of subsequent
Matter, and due Circulation, the Vein falls and the Blood ceases to run; yet by
a Contraction of the Muscles to which that Vein leads, forthwith part of the
Blood, which lay in the Muscle, is forced out: which plainly shows there is
less Blood in a contracted Muscle, than before Contraction.

The same appears also in Running, A Sixth.
or any other violent Exercise, in which most of the Muscles are Contracted;
for presently the Blood flows more than usually upon the tender Lungs, and
causes an Intolerable shortness of Breath: Because by an Intumescence of the
fleshy Fibers, the Muscles are not only made incapable of receiving so much
Arterial Blood as before Contraction; but also, because the Blood which lay in
the Veinous Ducts is driven out more forcibly upon the Heart, and the Heart
being overwhelmed, drives it out upon the Lungs. Whence proceeds that
Palpiration of the Heart upon violent Motion, not directly as Dr. Croone
supposes, because an Instinct is sent from the Brain to raise stronger
Pulsations, that the Blood may forcibly be driven into the Muscles, and thereby
cause Contractions; for then why does it not at the first instinct thus oppress
the Lungs with its quantaty? but this strong Palpitation is Accidental; for
when the Blood is more than usually driven upon the Heart, and not so
plentifully received by the Muscles; by degrees it oppresses the Heart with
it is quantity, and the Animal powers being sensible of the oppression, raise
stronger Systoles to drive it out which presently is received and heaped up in
the Lungs as a Part less able to resist its violent Incursion. Nay many times,
when the Vessels are well filled with Blood, by violent and frequent
Exagitations, betwixt the Contraction of the Heart and of the Muscles, its
texture is so loosened; that it ferments and boyles up so that the Lungs are
not only swelled up and almost stifled, being rendered incapable of receiving
Air, but it is also more strongly and forcibly driven into the Muscles
themselves, and there distending the Sanguiferous Vessels hinders the
Intumescence of the Fibers, and thereby the Contractions of the Muscles So that
I have not once, trying this Experiment, found such an Oppression on my whole
Thorax; and such contrary and in some measure painful endeavors, betwixt the
Sanguiferous Vessels tumified and the Carnous Fibers striving to swell; that I
was forced to lay me down, to the end that the Carnous Fibers being flaccid
might give way to the incourse of the Blood; and by receiving it more
plentifully might case both my Thorax of its Oppressions; and that the Carnous
Fibers yiedling to the Sanguiferous Vessels might put an end to that uneasy
contention. Thus much I think is sufficient to prove, that the Blood as a
Pondus hinders the Contraction of a Muscle.

Dr. Ridley supposes, Dr. Ridley's Opinion examined.
That the Nervous and Carnous Fibers are only a Congeries of Fluids contained
in certain Vessels; and that by Reason of a Plenitude in the aforesaid Vessels,
the whole Machine is in a constant AEquilibrium, so that it will follow, upon
the common Postulatum, viz. That the Sensitive or Rational Soul can command the
Animal Spirits into a primus impetus; and that part of that Liquor, whenever a
Muscle is Contracted, is transmitted through the Vessels from the Brain to its
Carnous Fibers, and causes the Intumescence of a Muscle; the same Liquor at the
same time being driven back with an equal speed from the Antagonist Muscle,
into the room of the former, which was transmitted from the Brain to the
Contracted Muscle, to avoid a Vacuum.

That the Nervous Ducts as well as Carnous Fibers are always Watered with a
Fluid; The common Postulatum is not to be allowed.
and that the Nervous Liquor equally flows into the Branches of all the Nerves,
according to their Proportion, is beyond Contradiction; but if we allow the
common Postulatum, we must also conclude, That the Animal Fluid is Intelligent,
and there will follow the same Difficulties as were before mentioned, about the
leaping forth of Spirits out of Dr. Willis his Tendinous Receptacles; where I
have given sufficient Reasons to reject this Postulatum as Impossible.

Moreover if it were Possible, There is no Retrocession of a Fluid from the
Autagonist.
for so much of this Animal Fluid as is requisite to distend the Carnous
Fibers, to be conveiged in so short a time as Muscular Motion follows our
Appetite through the small Branches of the Nerves; yet it would be altogether
unconceivable, how it should flow back from the Antagonist, thus contrary to
the Course of Circulation; but the Reason he gives is partly this, to avoid a
Vacuum: This is a most Stupendous sort of a Motion; at the same time that the
Liquid is forced into the one Muscle, it runs directly opposite from the
Antagonist; which is very irregular and unlikely.

Besides, I cannot understand how it comes to pass, Nor is it forced out so as
to cause a Vacuum.
that the Animal Fluid is so much forced out of the Branches of the Nerves
leading, to the Muscles to be contracted as to leave a Vacuum for the Reception
of Liquids from the Antagonist; but if an Emptiness or Vacuum could be so made,
the Fluids would as soon be drawn back again, out of the Muscles into which our
Appetite directed them, to fill that empty Space, as out of the Antagonist.

To prevent an Objection against his Supposition, that the fluid runs back
again from the Antagonist, he thinks he has answered it already, but very
insufficiently: He says, if it be said, that the Reflux is opposed by the
constant direct Motion, it is easy to reply, that it is slow direct Motion, is
easily repelled, by the violent impulse of the forcibly relaxed Muscle. I must
confess, it is no piece of difficulty to make such an Answer; but the Reply
seems not so easily to give satisfaction; I would fain know how the Antagonist
comes to be so forcibly relaxed, as by a violent impulse to overpower the
direct Motion: For the direct Motion cannot be so weak, as to be easily
overcome; and since the Animal Fluid, as he calls it, is continually driven by
the Pulsation of the Heart, through the Brain or Spinal Marrow into the Nerves,
whatever repells the direct Motion, must be of equal, if not greater, force
than the Systole of the Heart.

He begs leave to ask, how when another bends his Arm against his Will, the
Muscles become tumid, as when voluntary contracted. This Question does not at
all confirm his Hypothesis, but on the contrary pleads against it. It does not
confirm it, because he does not account for the Phenomenon, nor give a Reason
agreeable to his Opinion, but leaves the thing barely without explanation; it
pleads against him, because according to his Opinion, the Muscle instead of
growing tumid, ought violently to relax, at least to endeavor a relaxation,
and not contrary to the Appetite, to run into a Muscle against our Will: For he
says at the same time, that the Muscles to be contracted, grow tumid; the
Antagonists by a violent relaxation, drive out the fluid contained in them: So
that it will follow, that at the same time we endeavor to keep our Arm unbent,
by striving to keep the one Muscle contracted, at the same time we ought to
endeavor a relaxation of the Antagonist; and though that force which bends our
Arm, does resist the Voluntary Contraction of the Muscle, yet there would
nothing hinder the voluntary Relaxation of that Muscle, which is the
Antagonist, but the slow direct Motion, as he calls it.

But here I humbly take leave to ask, whether there is not a great deal of
difference, betwixt a Muscle that is thus tumid, and one that is Contracted?
For although a Muscle cannot but be tumid, when contracted, yet it may be tumid
though not contracted: I mean, as it is in Muscular motion. I have indeed often
taken notice, that when my Arm has been bent against my Will, the Muscles
become tumid, but not as in Muscular Motion; for when a Muscle is Voluntarily
contracted, it is hard and tumid; but when my Arm is bent against my Will, it is
far more soft; and though tumid, yet very little contracted. Since the Reason
why the Muscles grow thus tumid, cannot be accounted for by this Hypothesis, I
shall explain it hereafter.

Having thus examined, and I hope confuted the aforementioned Opinions, I shall
in the next place briefly consider the Fabric of a Muscle, the immediate
Instrument of Motion.

Anatomists, describing the Fabric of the Muscles of the Body, divide 'em into
Simple, Compound, and more Compound; as also every Muscle into Three Parts, the
Head, the Belly, and the Tail; they acquaint you how the Belly is composed of
several Fasciculi of Fleshy Fibers, which lie parallel to each other, etc. of
which enough may be seen, with a full Description of each sort of Muscles in
the Original Authors: I shall omit the Repetition here, and only take Notice of
it is Fabric, as far as relates to my Hypothesis.

Every Muscle is endowed with opposite Tendons, Of the Structure of a Muscle.
which are composed of several Fasciculi of Fibers, lying parallel to each
other.

These Fibers being strictly joined together, compose a strong, tenacious and
firm Tendon; but being separated one from another, are more fragile, and
subject to be easily broke, and pulled in pieces; they are continued from each
Tendon to it is opposite.

The Interstices of the Fibers thus separated, are filled with the Branches and
Extremities of Vessels, the major part of which are Sanguiferous; so that the
Fibers continued through the Belly of a Muscle, being obscured by the color of
the Blood, seem to degenerate from the Tendinous Fibers, and therefore are
called Fleshy.

These Fibers as they are continued from each opposite Tendon, so also there is
a continued Cavity from one end of Every Fiber to the other; which being
partitioned by several transverse and perforated Membranes, every Fiber,
according to Dr. Croone, resembles a continued Series of Bladders opening one
into another.

By an Intumescence of these Fibers, they are contracted in length; The formal
cause of the contraction of a Muscle.
and by a Contraction of their Longitude, each Tendon is drawn nearer to its
opposite; which is the formal cause of Muscular Motion, as far as can be made
evident by Autopsie: This is so unanimously assented to, and so apparent to the
naked Eye, that it requires no further proof.

As for the Efficient Causes of Muscular Motion; before they can be
sufficiently shown, we must enquire how many sorts of Vessels are implanted
into each Muscle, which according to Anatomists are Four, Nerves, Arteries,
Veins and Lymphaeducts; Vessels implanted into a Muscle.
the Nerves and Arteries furnish the Muscles with Spirits and Blood; the Veins
and Lymphaeducts, carry back the superfluity of Blood and Lympha.

The Branches of all these Vessels are minutely distributed through the whole
Muscle, Their distribution.
and by an intermixture and texture of the most Minute and Subtle Branches of
the same, is formed that Substance, which fills up the Interstices of the
Fibers, and which denominates the whole Belly of a Muscle Fleshy. The color of
these Vessels, as of all others, is without doubt White, but by the Contents of
the Sanguiferous Vessels, the whole Belly of a Muscle is colored Red.

The Terminations of these Vessels are so minute and small, so brittle, and
subject to be broke, that it is as difficult to trace, and find their
Terminations, and Insertions, as to divide a Hair into an Hundred Parts; and
though many things are made visible by the help of Microscopes, which are
otherwise too subtle to be discerned and discovered by the naked Eye; yet I am
not without Reason persuaded, that the terminations of these Vessels, cannot be
perceived by the help of a Microscope.

Some indeed, whatever they think is probable, lest it should not be credited,
presently strenuously affirm, they saw it with their Microscopes; and so easily
impose on those that less inquire after truth themselves, but take it on trust
from others; and perhaps prevent those not so exquisitely skilled in
Microscopes, from making any further search after truth. I shall not here say,
that what I propose concerning the Terminations of these Vessels, was seen with
any Microscope, but shall declare my Opinion in this Matter, too subtle for
any Microscope but Reason.

It being impossible for any one to understand the true Reason of Muscular
Motion, And terminations in small Glands.
unless first acquainted with the distribution of these Vessels, and their
Contents; first, I conceive, that as the Nerves, Arteries and Veins, are all
distributed through a Muscle, so it is but Reasonable to conclude, that their
minute and subtle twigs are all, before they terminate, interwoven and mixed
with one another: And if so, it will not be absurd to imagine, that they all
end, as it were, in small and Diminutive Glands: And if the ends of the Vessels
be so small, that their terminations cannot be perceived by a Microscope, these
Glandules composed of the Invisible ends of the aforesaid Vessels, must needs
be very small and fine, and consequently may not be perceived by the help of
extraordinary Microscopes.

From these Glandules thus formed, are derived short Ducts or Passages, for the
conveyance of a subtle Liquor, out of the aforesaid Glandules, into the
Cavities of the Carnous Fibers. This Passage very likely, may be composed of
the external Arterial Coat. Into the Cavity of the Carnous Fibers, besides
these Ducts, the twigs of the Lymphaeducts are also inserted, to carry back a
superfluous Lympha.

If any one thinks it improper or absurd to assert, Proved.
that these Vessels do thus terminate, as if it were in small Glandules; let
him but consider what a Gland is, and how it is composed, and he will not think
the Conclusion irrational.

For a Gland is nothing else, What a Gland is.
but a Composition of an Infinite Number of small and diminutive Vessels,
several, and most of which, have Communication one with another; which Gland so
composed, is as a Storehouse to receive and contain a certain Liquor, till
necessity requires, or its quantity causes an exclusion of it: And this seems
plainly to be favored by Dr. Ridley, when he says, that the whole Body is a
continuity of Vessels, ad infinitum. Now, if a Gland consists of an infinite
Number of small Vessels; and if the Branches of Nerves, Veins and Arteries be
divided before they terminate, into an innumerable number of most invisible
twigs, as is most certain; when from one twig of each sort, is derived a vast
number, and all these so derived, are mixed and interwoven one with another;
why may we not say, at least Metaphorically, since they in their Distributions
imitate the Composition of Glands, that they terminate in small Glandules.

Some perhaps will ask, how must we discover these Glands Malpigius has
observed the Liver to be composed of Clusters of Glands, hanging at the
Extremities of the larger Vessels, like so many Bunches of Grapes; and the
Glands in other parts are apparent; but in a Muscle we can discern no such
things; for it, especially when boiled, parts into distinct Carnous Fibers.

To which I Answer, Why they cannot be discerned.
That those Glands are nothing else but a Composition of the ends of importing
and exporting Vessels; and the Reason why we cannot discern the same in a
Muscle is this, because the Extremities of the Vessels are so fine, and
consequently so brittle, and are contained in the Interstices of so strong and
firm Fibers; that whenever we endeavor a separation of the Fibers, the
Glandules are torn away from the Vessels from which they are derived; whereas
the Fibers which run transverse the Liver easily crumble away, being much more
weak and less Numerous.

The Reason why the Muscular Fibers are so much stronger, than those that run
through the Liver, is apparent enough, Viz. because the former are the
Instruments of Motion, and consequently there lies a greater stress of them,
than on the latter, which serve to make the Part a little more compact, and to
keep the outward Coat from being loose upon it is Circumference.

Now because it is impossible to separate and remove these Muscular Fibers, so
as to leave the Sanguiferous Vessels as entire as would be requisite for the
exact and certain discovery of their Terminations; and because it is certain,
that these Vessels are divided, and subdivided ad minimum; that they are
interwoven one with another, and that a Gland is nothing else, but a
Composition of Vessels; we may rationally conclude they all Terminate in
Diminutive Glands.

The Nerves, Veins and Arteries, composing and ending in these Glands; I shall
next Enquire, to what end they do all thus meet together.

The Use of the Nerves in these is the same as in other Parts, The Use of the
Nerves.
Viz. to conveigh a Spirituo-saline Liquor from the Brain: Which Spirits being
Volatile and apt to Ferment, when mixed with a Liquor of a contrary Nature, are
continually sent by the Systole of the Brain into all the Muscles of the Body,
and being laid down forcibly in the aforesaid Diminutive Glands, And Arteries
inserted in the Glands.
do there meet with Arterious Blood driven in by every Contraction of the
Heart: Which two Liquors strongly fermenting together, the Animal Spirits do by
an Attrition Subtilise, Attenuate, and Rarifie those Particles of the Succus
Nutritious supplied from the Mass of Blood; by which Means their own are much
dulled, and become less Active for the future; and by a Mixture of these Animal
Spirits, with the rarefied Succus Nutritious, results a Liquor Different from,
To prepare a Liquor different from the Spirits or Succus.
and of a middle State betwixt, the Animal Spirits, and the said unfermented
Succus Nutritious; which Liquor thus compounded and prepared, is driven by a
Succession of Matter through its proper Passages, into the Cavities of the
Fibrous Cells, the remaining and more crude Part of the Succus Nutritious being
received together with the Blood, and carried back to the Heart.

This Liquor after this manner conveyed to the Cavities of the Fibers, The
Use of it.
does as it passes, and is thrust through according to the continual Laws of
Circulation, give nourishment to the Parts, and is thence received by the
Lymphaeducts.

Thus I conceive it is continually prepared in the Glandules, and Circulates
through the Carnous Fibers of all the parts of the Body, whilst Motion cease
in a moderate quantity; so that the Lymphaeducts are capable of receiving it,
and thereby prevent the Praeternatural Repletion of the Fibers.

To prove what I have hitherto said, besides the Verisimilitude the thing
carries with it, I could bring many Arguments to illustrate, and to make it
appear more Plausible and Evident; but for Brevities sake, and to prevent
unnecessary Repetition, I shall omit 'em here, because they are to be Mentioned
hereafter.

I have given a brief Account of the Structure of a Muscle, as far as relates
to my Hypothesis, and the Use of the Parts, as they serve to Nutrition. I now
proceed to the Efficient Causes of Muscular Motion, both Voluntary, and
Involuntary; and first of the Reason of Voluntary Motion.

That Voluntary Motion does depend upon the Dictates of the Soul, and is the
Result of it is Faculties, but more immediately of our Appetite, is sufficiently
Evinced; because it is instantly performed according to our Will. Where the Soul
is lodged; how, and after what Manner, it Operates; and what it is) is most
difficult to determine and is not designed for our present enquiry: But as it
comes under the Consideration of the Brain, and it is appendages; I shall defer
my Thoughts of that, till I have a further Opportunity.

In the mean time, That neither the Soul, nor any of it is Faculties are the
immediate Causes of Muscular Motion, but Operate by the Mediation of the Animal
Spirits, will appear from what follows concerning the Reason of Voluntary
Motion: And that the Office of the Will, is only to open and shut the Pores of
the Brain, by an Organical Motion, as necessity requires, what this Motion is,
and how it is performed, and after what manner the Dictates of the Soul and of
its Faculties are put in Action, is reserved for its proper Seat.

After what manner soever the Soul exerts it is Faculties, and directs that
Subtle Matter the Animal Spirits (which is sent through the Branches of the
Nerves, in greater or less quatities according to our Appetite) to this or that
Part: it is allowed, that when our Body cease from Motion, and all our
Voluntary Faculties are at quiet, the Pores and Passages of the Brain leading
to the Instruments of Voluntary Motion are locked or closed up: And then I
suppose, that the Spirits moderately flowing into each Muscle, do prepare so
much of the Subtle Liquor aforementioned as is sufficient to Nourish the Parts
as it passes through 'em.

But when the Pores of the Brain are opened, The Reason of Tonick Motion
and unlocked, the Animals Spirits forced by a continual Succession of Matter,
flow into all the Branches of the Nerves more plentifully, and being laid down
in the Glandules, raise a stronger Fermentation; by which means a greater
quantity of the Subtle Liquor is prepared, and forced into the fleshy Fibers
more copiously and rather faster that it can be received and evacuated by the
Lymphaeducts; so that the Fibers being all equally swelled with its quantity,
consequently Contract the Muscles; which is the Cause of a Tonick Motion.

When these Animal Spirits, are by a pressure and Systole of the Brain and
succeeding Spirits, sent yet more plentifully into the Nervous Channels leading
to the Muscles to be Contracted, than into those which are in Motu Tonico, or
into the Antagonists (the Passages and Pores leading to those Nerves being yet
more expanded and opened) there is a greater quantity of the Subtle Liquor
prepared in the Glandules, and thrust out into the Carnous Fibers; and their
Cells being more swelled and dilated, consequently there follows stronger and
more violent Contractions of the Muscles; whence proceeds Local Motion.

By the Systole of the Brain I don't mean any other Motion than what proceeds
from the Pulsation of the Arteries distributed through that Part. That this
motion only proceeds from the Pulsation of the Arteries implies, that it is
stronger, and drives the Spirits through the Brain into the Nerves with greater
force than if it were really the Motion of the Brain it self; the Heart from
whence the Pulsation of the Arteries proceeds, being a stronger and more
compact Part as to its Substance, than the Brain.

If it be asked, why this Subtle Liquor is not more easily forced into the
Venous Ducts, than into those that lead to the Fibrous Cells, because the
former are larger?

I Answer, That the Venous Ducts are so proportioned, that they might not be
capable of receiving all that is laid down by the Nerves and Arteries; on
purpose, that some Subtle Parts might be continually driven into the Fibrous
Cells; and when by a more copious Influx of Animal Spirits, a stronger
Fermention is raised in the Glandules; presently the Contents swell up and are
expanded; so that the Veins being not able to receive them as before, more of
that Liquor is not only subtilized, but forced into the Fibers.

As soon as, according to our Appetite, the Pores of the Brain, which conveigh
Spirits to the Nerves leading to the Contracted Muscles, are shut more closely
up again, and leave of to be dilated; the Animal Spirits cease to flow more
into the Musculous Glandules, than are required to Subtilize, and prepare a
sufficient quantity of Nourishment for the Fibers (as in the Antagonist,) then
presently the Contraction cease to be carried on, and the Superfluous Liquor
heaped up in the Fibers, is evacuated by the Lymphaeducts.

Here perhaps, because I said in the foregoing Paragraph; Objections Answered.
the Liquor heaped up in the Fibers is Evacuated by the Lymphaeducts; it may be
a Question whether this Liquor does all the time a Muscle is Contracted,
constantly flow through these Cells into the Lymphaeducts; or whether it
remains in the Cells till Motion is to cease, and is not evacuated by the said
Ducts till then.

I say it does continually run of by the Lymphaeducts, constantly all the time
a Muscle is Contracted: Otherwise since as long as Spirits are directed, in a
competent quantity, to the Contracted Muscles, to keep up the Dilation of the
Fibers; they would presently be incapable of receiving it, and it must needs
Regurgitate as it was prepared, and in a great Measure disturb Circulation. But
to prevent many absurd Consequences, if it should remain in the Cells so long;
I affirm, that it is constantly forced forward, by a Succession of Matter; and
as it is forced into, and Circulates through, these Cells, in greater or less
quantities, so Contractions are stronger or weaker or not at all, the Fibrous
Cells being accordingly Distended, Dilated and Contracted in Longitude; and
when according to our Appetite, this Liquor cease to flow into the Fibers in
so great a quantity as to Contract the Muscle; that matter which before dilated
the Fibers, is Evacuated, as being Superfluous Nourishment, so that for the
future it runs through in a moderate quantity as before Contraction, till their
Repletion is again renewed to Reiterate Motion.

If it be asked, why this Liquor is not as easily forced backwards out of the
Fibrous Cells into the Glandules from whence it came, as into the Lymphaeducts;
and so think there would be no need for Lymphaeducts.

I answer, That if there be no Valve at the inward Orifice of every Duct, to
hinder its reflux; (which would be no absurdity to conclude; for we see always
upon the like occasion, Nature has furnished such Places with Valves;) yet I
say, if there were none, the direct Motion of subsequent Matter from the
Glandules, would sufficiently hinder the reflux of it; and since its reflux is
opposed, by new matter forced successively after it; and since according to the
course of Circulation, the Matter driven into the Lymphaeducts before it, will
give way for its expulsion, it would be more reasonable to imagine, that the
matter contained in the Fibers is evacuated qua datur porta, rather than qua
non datur; for when we design the Relaxation of a Muscle, though the Liquor
successively sent from the Glands, does not press forwards altogether as
forcibly, and in as great Quantities, as whilst Contraction is continued; yet
it follows moderately, so as to oppose the Retrocession of any thing; I mean
moderately, as to its quantity; for the continual violent concourse of the
Animal Spirits, and Arterial Blood, drive it then into the Fibers, almost as
violently as when the Muscle is contracted.

That these Lymphaeducts do thus receive this Subtle Liquor; The Use of the
Lymphaeducts.
and that for that end they are inserted into the Fibrous Cells, I am
persuaded; because it cannot otherwise be understood, how the Matter that
stuffs them up, and causes Contraction, could be drawn out again, without a
Retrocession through the same Channels by which it was brought in: And though
the most Learned and Famous Dr. Willis, Dr. Ridley and others, do allow a
Retrocession, yet since it contradicts the course of Circulation, we must
either deny Circulation, or reject their Opinions.

Besides, I cannot conceive, what other occasion there is for Lymphaeducts in a
Muscle; since whatever is brought by the Arteries, might as well be returned by
the Veins, as by two sorts of Vessels: But for as much as Nature has made
nothing in vain, and since there is so great necessity, that they should be
inserted into the Cells, I think it not irrational nor absurd, to conclude they
were designed for the aforementioned end.

That we may understand a little better the Nature of this Liquor, The Nature
of the Liquor considered, and the manner of its preparation.
which we have so often mentioned; let us consider a little more fully, how
that Fermentation is carried on in the said Glandules. It Is commonly known,
that when a Ferment is put to a Mass, whether Liquid, or of a solid
consistence, whatever is the nature of the Ferment, it, according to its power,
always endeavors to render whatever comes within the Sphaere of its Activity,
as like it as possible. By Fermentation.
So in these Glandules, the Animal Spirits fermenting with the Arterial Juice,
and the Nature of 'em being, according to Dr. Willis and Diemerbroeck,
Spirituo-Saline, composed of Volitile Salt and Sulphur, they by Reason of their
absolute Quality, more readily mix with the crude Sulphureo-saline Particles of
the Nutricious Arterial Juice; and as they are more or less in quantity, so
they exalt and carry forth into a Flux, more or less of that Crude
Sulphureo-saline Mass; which, being by Fermentation subtilized, is diluted with
a sufficient quantity of Lympha, or the watery part of the Serum of the Blood,
and the Liquor resulting from that Composition, is thrust out into the Fibrous
Cells.

That this Lympha might be thin enough to dilute the said Liquor sufficiently,
it is much attenuated in that Fermentation.

That there is such a Fermentation, Proved.
that the Nerves are inserted into the Glandules, and lay down Animal Spirits,
as the Principal Cause of that Fermentation; that the Arteries lay down Blood
together, with the aforementioned Juice, and that in those Glands, a subtle
Liquor is prepared, being composed of Animal Spirits, and the most? rarefied
parts of the said Succus; that neither the Arterial Juice, nor the Animal
Spirits simply can cause the Contraction of a Muscle; but furthermore, that it
is necessary that this Subtle Liquor should be so prepared and composed, as
being capable to enter into the Fibers, and to contract the Muscle, is
sufficiently apparent from what has been said, and will more clearly be
evinced by what follows.

And first, if there be a Communication of these Vessels, as certainly there
is; then it must needs follow, that there is a commixture of their Contents; if
there be a commixture of their Contents, then there is a Fermentation, and in
that Fermentation it must needs follow, that the Animal Spirits will according
to their Energie and Activity Subtilize and Attenuate the Crudest Parts of the
Arterial juice: By a mutual Fermentation there must needs be employed an
intimate Commixture, and the Result of that Commixture must needs be different
from the Animal Spirits, or Arterial juice simply before they are mixed; so
that the Liquor, resulting from the Mixture of 'em, may be properly called a
Subtle Liquor: And accordingly as the Animal Spirits are more or less in
quantity, to mix with the Arterial juice, more or less will be prepared and
thrust out into the Fibrous Cells, and consequently the Fibrous Cells must be
more or less Tumified, and the Muscle Contracted, as more or less Spirits are
laid down in the Glandules. So that all I have to Prove is, That neither the
Arterial juice, nor the Animal Spirits can cause the Contraction of a Muscle,
and then it will follow consequently, that there is a Communication of these
Vessels, and for that end, in the aforesaid Glandules.

It has often been found, that an Atrophea of the Parts will follow the
Relaxation; The Arterial juice simply cannot cause the Contraction of a Muscle.
and a Palsy the Abscission, or Ligature of the Nerves leading to those Parts:
Which sufficiently shows, that the Arterial juice it self, cannot cause the
Contraction of a Muscle, without the assistance of the Animal Spirits; because
when the Animal Spirits cease to flow into the Glandules, for want of a dew
Fermentation, to Subtilize and Prepare a sufficient quantity of the Arterial
juice, the Carnous Fibers are not only deprived of necessary Recruits, and
Alimental refreshment, so that they must needs waste away and grow Languid, but
also for want of a sufficient quantity of the Subtle Liquor, to distend the
Fibrous Cells, they become destitute of Motion.

That the Animal Spirits simply, Nor the Animal Spirits.
cannot cause the Contraction of a Muscle is proved; because by a Ligature on
the Descending Trunk of the Aorta, the Inferior Parts become destitute of
Motion: For though the Influx of the Animal Spirits, be not hindered; yet for
want of Arterial juice, the matter requisite for the Composition of this
Subtle Liquor, is not laid down in the Glandules; and the Muscles, the
Instruments of Motion, cannot Contract without an Efficient cause.

From what is contained in these two Paragraphs, it appears; that neither the
Animal Spirits, nor the Arterial juice, simply can cause the Contraction of a
Muscle; because when the Animal Spirits are hindered to flow into the
Glandules, to Subtilize and prepare the Arterial juice, it is not thin enough
to be driven out into the Fibers: And though when the Influx of the Arterial
juice is hindered, the Spirits are permitted to flow in; yet by Reason of the
small quantity of 'em, they run through the Fibers without distending 'em.

That this Arterial juice ought not, Because the Arterial juice cannot pass
into the Fibers till prepared by the Spirits.
nay cannot, pass into the Fibrous Cells, till subtilized and prepared by the
Fermentation in the Glandules, is Plain; because if it could, they would be
stuffed up with the quantity of it, driven in by the continual course of
Circulation, so as to Contract the Muscle against our Will; which is otherwise.

Now since the Arterial juice cannot pass into the Fibers till Subtilized; and
since the Animal Spirits are not enough in quantity; moreover since neither of
'em, simply are capable of Contracting the Fibers, and if either be obstructed
the Action is abolished; I say since it is an Action, that depends upon the
mutual Assistance of each; it is apparent. That it must be performed by a
Liquor resulting from a Mixture of both.

And then we must of Necessity allow a Communication of these Vessels; else
there could be no mixture of their contents; and the Arterial juice must be
prepared before it can be forced into the Fibers, for the Reasons
beforementioned: to which end it will be necessary that the Vessels terminate
in the Glandules, That their Contents may be mixed, and that this Subtle
Liquor (resulting from a Mutual conflict of the Animal Spirits subtilizing the
cruder Arterial juice by Fermentation, in greater or less quantities
accordingly as the Spirits are laid down by the Nerves) may be prepared and
made ready to be driven into the Fibers.

To promote the Fermentation, and the Preparation of this Subtle Liquor, the
forcible influx of the Animal Spirits, and of the Arterial Blood much conduce:
For be the Temper of the Arterial juice and of the Animal Spirits never so
good, unless they are driven violently one against another, there would be
required a longer time before they could be so mixed and, fermented as they
ought, but the succession of new Matter admitting no long delay, it is
requisite that they should be thus forcibly driven in together; to the end that
the Spirits might be diffused through the whole Mass sooner, and that their
Minute Particles, striking more violently against the fixed and compacted
Particles of the Blood, might more immediately break and separate the strict
Union of its Parts; and by a violent Fermentation, sufficiently dissolve and
volatilize 'em, in so short a time as the Continual Pulsations of succeeding
Humors admit.

The violent concourse of the Blood and Spirits, do not only promote this
Fermentation, and the separation of the Subtle Liquor, but also successively
force the Matter prepared and separated into the fleshy Fibers: This is so
highly Probable, that it needs no Arguments to make it more Evident; it being
the unavoidable consequence of a continual Circulation.

Now I have given the Reasons of Voluntary Motion, and the Efficient Causes of
the Contraction of a Muscle; it will be easy to unfould the Reason of
Involuntary Motion. That Voluntary Motion depends upon the Will is manifest;
and that Involuntary Motion is not at all Subject to it, but is performed not
only without the Dictates of our Appetite but against 'em, is so evident, that
it would be superfluous and useless to dispute it: I shall only show how it is
performed, which is indeed a little more obscure.

As Voluntary Motion is performed, The Reason of Involuntary Motion.
for as much as the Pores of the Brain are dilated according to our Appetite,
so that the Animal Spirits flow more plentifully into the Glandules, and
prepare a sufficient quantity of the Subtle Liquor to distend the Fibers as it
passes through 'em; so those Pores, which lead to the Nerves serving to
Involuntary Motion, are proportioned in such a manner, that they continually
conveigh Animal Spirits in a sufficient quantity to cause a perpetual Motion.

These Pores being so proportioned, there is no need that they should have such
an Organick Motion as those serving to the Instruments of Voluntary Motion;
because since they are proportioned so, as to carry Spirits in a competent
quantity, there is no necessity that they should be either Dilated or
Contracted.

To Prove that these Pores do lay down a competent Quantity of Spirits to be
carried to the Glands, Proved.
I need not bring many Arguments; for its plain and evident to all
Practitioners in Physic, that when the Spirits are too much carried forth, and
exalted, as in a Diary Fever, the Pulse is strong and vehement, and by a too
great exagitation of them, it becomes more quick and frequent; it is also
Evident, that when the Animal Spirits are depressed, the Pulse is Weak, Slow
and Rare, as most commonly in Women, subject to Hysteric Fits; and when the
Spirits by an Acute or Cronick Distemper are worn out, and almost spent, the
Pulse is either Vermiculans, Formicans or Tremens; which are signs that Nature
is almost spent, and ready to yield to the Distemper. I say this is evident
enough; it is then beyond Contradiction, that a healthful Pulse depends upon a
moderate Quantity of Animal Spirits, and that they continually flow into those
Nerves leading to the Instruments of Involuntary Motion; and as their Quantity
varies, so more or less of the Subtle Liquor is prepared to distend the Fibers
of those Muscles.

When the Spirits are weak, or almost spent, there must needs flow a less
quantity into the Glandules; and when they are exalted, a greater; and if
Extremes either frustrate Natural, or cause Preternatural Effects, we may not
only conclude, that Natural Actions are performed by a moderate Quantity, but
from hence we may bring good Arguments for a further proof and confirmation of
my Hypothesis about Voluntary Motion.

Since I have said, that the Spirits, How it comes to pass, that the Systole of
the Heart, is interrupted with such frequent Diastoles.
by Reason of a particular Proportion of the Pores, flow continually in a just
Quantity; and that these Pores are not subject to be Dilated or Contracted
according to our Appetite; it remains, that I should show how it comes to pass,
that the Systole of the Heart is interrupted with such constant Diastoles;
whereas, when the Pores serving to Voluntary Contractions are open, so as to
convey a sufficient quantity of Spirits, the Motion is continual and without
Intermission.

The Reason of the Difference will easily appear, if we do but take Notice, how
when a Vein is opened, the Blood runs out continually, without ceasing or
intermission; but if an Artery be opened, it gushes out with Intermissions
answerable to the Diastoles of the Heart: because the Veins are always as a
common Cistern, distended with Blood; and before they can be emptied with a
small Orifice, they are filled by the Extremities; but the Blood being
continually received by the Extremities of the Veins, and those Extremities
being furnished with Valves, to hinder it from Regurgitation; the Arteries are
always kept more lank and empty, and are not as the Veins distended with
Superfluous Blood: So that it only flows out of them, when they are distended
upon violent Systoles of the Heart.

In like manner, that part of the Brain that furnishes the Nerves serving to
Voluntary Motion with Spirits, is like a common Cistern full of Spirits; and
when Vent is given (the Pores being opened according to our Appetite,) the
Spirits are thrust forth in one constant course: But the Muscles serving to
Involuntary Motion, being in continual Action, do so drain their Storehouse,
as to keep it more flaccid and empty; so that the Animal Spirits, as they are
prepared, are continually waved through their proper Pores; and as one Wave
follows another, so one Contraction perpetually succeeds, the Subtle Liquor
being according to the same Rules prepared in the Glands, and thrust out
through the Fibers.

Some of the Muscles designed for Involuntary Motion, are, in some measure,
subject to our Will, so that it lies in our power to retardate or quicken the
succession of their Contractions, but not totally to obstruct or hinder them;
as the Muscles serving to Respiration: The Reason of which is this.

The Pores of the Brain leading to the Nerves, which convey Spirits to these
Muscles, Why the Muscles serving to Respiration, are subject in some measure to
our Appetite.
are so framed, that they carry Spirits to them, as to the other Muscles
serving to Involuntary Motion, in a competent Quantity; but these Pores differ
from those, for as much as these have such an Organick Motion, as to contract
or dilate according to our Appetite, we can by a constriction close up these,
so as to deny a Passage for Animal Spirits, sufficient to prepare a quantity of
the Subtle Liquor to cause due Contractions of the Muscles; till by degrees
they increase to such a great Quantity, and distend their Receptacles so long,
that those are no longer capable of receiving more; till that force which
drives them violently into the Receptacles overcomes the constrictive Faculty
of the Pores; and then the Spirits, against our Will, break forth, and flow
violently into the Musculous Glands.

It is easily noted, that after we have holden our Breath a long time, the
first Contractions are as if Two or Three were joined together without
intermission: I mean so long continued; which is sufficient to prove what I
have said of the Muscles serving to Respiration.

For when by a Constriction of the Pores, the Spirits which ought to flow out,
are kept in, and heaped up in their Receptacle, and Two or Three Contractions
are by that means hindered, that Receptacle becomes like a common Cistern; and
as soon as the Pores are forced open, the Spirits running out, cause long
continued Contractions, till that store is spent, and then they wave through,
as before the Interruption.

What I have hitherto said, might be sufficient to prove my Hypothesis
reasonable; but to illustrate it a little more, I shall explain some of the
Phenomenon about Muscular Motion, and give sufficient Reasons for them
agreeable to my Hypothesis.

Common Experience tells us, that Old People, Why old People are subject to a
trembling of their Head or Hands.
whose Spirits are flat and weak, are most usually subject to a Trembling of
their Head or Hands; the Reason of which is this: The Fermentation in the
Glandules is too low and weak, and does not subtilize a sufficient Quantity of
the said Liquor, to keep the Muscles in a constant Motion: The Reason why a
sufficient Quantity of Liquor is not prepared, is plain; for though their
Appetite and Desire is strong enough, and endeavors to open and dilate the
Pores of the Brain; yet when the Spirits are weak, it is a sign few are
separated from the Blood; and if few be separated, they cannot flow plentifully
into the Nerves, be the Pores never so wide.

This confirms the Reason I have given, why the Systole of the Heart is
interrupted with constant Diastoles: For the Storehouse which supplies it, is
always kept empty, by reason of the constant efflux of Spirits; and in Old
People, the Storehouse which furnishes the Nerves serving to Voluntary Motion
with Spirits, is kept empty; because few Spirits are separated from the Blood;
and as they are separated, they are continually spent by a constant
distribution of them, to prepare Nourishment in the Musculous Glands: So that
when the Pores are opened wider for Voluntary Motion, for want of a sufficient
Stock, they cannot flow out in a constant and equal proportion, but as they are
separated, they wave through those Pores that are most ready to receive them.
The Motion indeed is not interrupted with such perfect Intermissions, because
this Storehouse is not so clearly drein'd; but there is a perfect Remission,
because the Stock is not so copious as in Young and Lusty People to yield
constant Supplies.

Moreover, when the Spirits are weak, its a sign that the Blood is much
depauperated, and declines from its Natural state; and then there is more need
for strong Spirits to raise the Fermentation in the Glands, and to subtilize
the Liquor: Upon which account, when the Spirits are weak, the Disadvantage
must needs be the greater.

Hence may be deduced a Reason, why when our Spirits are low, and almost spent,
though our Appetite be strong, we cannot perform strong Actions.

From hence it may be proved; that there is something prepared in these Glands
by the Animal Spirits, which is incapable of entering into the Fibers till
prepared: For whether the Spirits be weak or strong, there is a sufficient
quantity of Arterial juice laid down in the Glands, though its not made capable
of passing into the Fibers, but as it is prepared, accordingly as the Spirits
are more or less in quantity, stronger or weaker.

I have known Women, who seemed healthful, Another Phenomenon Explained.
and of a Sanguine Complexion, whose Hands would, when they were about any
Moderate Exercise, Tremble as if Paralytick: For the Mass of Blood being a
little more than usually depraved, and degenerated from its Balsamic and
Sulphurous, into a more crude and Phlegmatic State, was unapt for
Fermentation; so that the Animal Spirits being not able easily to prepare a
sufficient quantity of the aforesaid Subtle Liquor, to keep the Muscle in a
constant Motion, were forced to do it by an unequal Influx: just as an Horse,
set to draw too great a Burden, is forced by many reiterated draughts to get
it forwards.

Mr. Cowper Mentions an Experiment, A Third.
how by an Injection of Water into the Crural Artery, the Muscles of the Legs
renew their Contractions. From this he would infer, that Muscular Motion is
performed by the Blood as a Pondus; but though his Myotomia Argues, it came from
an Inquisitive Author, yet I rather an fully persuaded, that the Blood does not
Act as a Pondus, because this Experiment pleads against it; but to avoid a long
dispute, I shall only give the Reason of the Phenomenon.

Before the injection of this Water, the Branches of the Arteries are full of
Blood, and Arterial juice; and when by the mixture of the Water with this
juice, it is attenuated and driven into the Glands, faster than it can be
received by the Venous Channels, the most Subtle Part is by the force of
injection, strained into the Fibers and distends 'em so as to Contract the
Muscle.

Perhaps here it will be objected that if the Water can thus pass through into
the Fibers, what need is there that the Nerves should lay down their contents
in the Glandules.

I answer, that the Water is thin and apter to pass through those Ducts than
the Arterial juice, which is thick and viscid; wherefore it is necessary, that
the Nerves should lay down their contents there, to Attenuate and Rarisie this
Thick juice.

I have seen People inclining to a Dropsy, A Fourth.
whose Blood and Serum was much diluted, could move much more nimbly, though more
seebly, than some of a healthful Constitution, whose Blood and this Arterial
juice was thicker and not so much diluted; which does plainly show, that the
thinner the Blood is, and the more diluted the Nutritious juice, the less
quantity of Spirits is required to subtilize it, and make it capable of passing
into the Fibers.

It may easily be observed, that those People whose Spirits are strong, A Fifth.
and their Arterial juice very thin, are Nimble; but the Contractions of their
Muscles are not so durable, as of those, whose Serum is of a thicker
Consistence: For though in the former more of the Subtle Liquor is prepared, yet
by Reason of its Tenuity it is sooner received, and carried off by the
Lymphaeducts; which makes the Contraction shorter, Those whose Blood abounds
with fixed Salts and Phlegmatic Humors, A Sixth.
which too much dull and resist the Activity of the Animal Spirits, are always
slow and unapt for Motion; whereas, if the Blood Acted as a Pondus, they must
be more nimble and strong; because the thicker the Blood is the heavier would
be the Pondus.

As Muscular Motion is many ways vitiated, by the fault of the Arterial juice,
or of the Spirits, and consequently by the Distemperature of this subtle
Liquor; so it is very often depraved, and accordingly as the Mass of Blood
degenerates from its genuine and proper Nature, are produced various Diseases
or Symptoms of Diseases: viz. Cramps, Convulsions, Palpitation of the Heart,
Leaping of the Tendons in Fevers, etc. for a farther illustration of my
Hypothesis, before I conclude, I will give the Reasons of these Phonomaena.

When by an Abuse of Non-Naturals, the Ferments of the Viscera are perverted;
The Reasons of Convulsions.
and by the faults of the Pancreatick juice and of the Spleen, an Acid or
Austere Salt is carried forth into a flux; presently the Mass of Blood is
vitiated. The Animal Spirits meeting with this vicious Salt, and fermenting in
the Glands, do there cause irregular Explosions of matter, into the Carnous
Fibers, subtilized in that Fermentation; whence follow irregular Contractions
of the Muscles.

Why Convulsive Paroxysms come at uncertain times, will easily appear, if we do
but consider the Procatartick Causes; amongst which I shall only mention two,
viz. The Quantity of Morbisick matter irritating Nature to an Expulsion of it;
and sudden Passions of the Mind.

The Quantity of Morbisick matter is far greater in some Bodies than in others,
before the Spirits are able to recover themselves, and to endeavor an
Expulsion of it: In the former Case, Convulsions are Universal and seize the
whole Body; in the Latter Particular, the Morbisick matter being accidentally
driven more on one Part than another. Again in some Bodies it is sooner heaped
up, being generated in greater quantities.

The Matter heaped up, at the first is very crude and thick, and although it be
cast forth into, and Circulates through, the Musculous parts, and continually
Ferments with the Spirits in the Glandules; yet because it is not sufficiently
attenuated to be driven forth into the fleshy Fibers, till by frequent
Circulations and Fermentations, it is exalted from it is state of sixedness to a
more Volatile, no Convulsions succeed. Moreover as long as it continues in its
state of Crudity, the Animal Spirits are much dulled and their Activity quashed
by mixing with it, but it being at the length subtilized and rarefied by
frequent Circulations, the Animal Spirits recovering 'em selves, and violently
Fermenting with it in the Glands carry this Vicious juice explosively into the
Fibers. The Reason why this Motion is Involuntary, is, be cause it is not
produced by a greater quantity of Spirits flowing from the Brain, accordingly
as the Pores are dilated by our Appetite, but by a mixture of Morbifick and
Fermentitious Particles, which cause Preternatural Fermentations and Expulsions
of Matter Attenuated thereby.

Convulsive sits are sometimes brought on, before the Morbifick matter
gradually arrives at this state of tenuity, when upon sudden Passions of the
Mind, the Animal Faculties quit their Stations, and being overpowered by
external Objects can no longer moderate the Emanations of the Animal Spirits.
The Formal Cause of the Irregular Emanations of the Spirits in these
Convulsions is this; the Pores of the Brain being shut up, to keep out external
Objects, heap up the Spirits, till by Reason of their quantity, the Pores can
no longer retain them; and then the Spirits rush out qua datur porta in a
greater quantity, and violently setting upon the Crude juice, which they meet
with in the Glandules, strongly Ferment Attenuate and carry it forth into the
Fibers, of the Muscles wherein the Spirits are thus accidentally laid down: The
Brain being thus emptied, the Pores are shut up again, till the quantity of
Spirits make way again; and so successively follow Convulsive Motions, in this
or that Part wherever the Spirits set upon the Crude Morbisick Matter.

The (...) of the Heart, as the (...)ed Dr. (...) has noted, (...) proceeds
(...). Convulsive Motion: The Reason why the Morbifick Matter only shows it
self in this part, and at the same time in no other parts of the Body in this,
The Mass of Blood (...)nated with a Morbifick (...) and whatever is the Nature
of it, since it is (...) the whole Body, (...) Rationally expect Universal
Convulsions as well as (...): But this Morbifick Matter being as yet Crude, and
not of a sufficient Quantity (...) Nature in all the Parts of the Body; these
Effects are only produced in this Part, where a large Quantity of Spirits is
continually laid down to serment with it; by which means it is Subdued in this
part, before it arrives at such a State of Activity of such a Quantity, as to
cause irregular Fermentations and Contractions in other Parts.

In a (...), The Muscles continue constantly contracted against our Appetite;
(...).
these Distempers seize People, whose Blood is rather of a Vitriolick Tenacious
Nature, and impregnated with more Fermentative Spirits; so that by reason of
the Viscidity of the Matter violently forced into the Fibers, either the
Lymphaeducts are obstructed, or by reason of a continual Fermentation, Matter
gradually succeeds.

In the Cramp, the Fermentation is different from that which is Natural, Of the
Cramp.
or in other Convulsive Motions; that which is Natural, being caused by the
Animal Spirits preparing a Subtle and Homogenious Liquor: In other Convulsions
the Animal Spirits ferment with, and endeavor to subdue a Morbisick Humor
brought and laid down by the Arteries, and the Matter thus attenuated, is
accidentally forced into the Fibers: But these are caused by the continual
Conflict of the Volatile Animal Spirits, strongly fermenting with Fermentative
and Elastick Particles of another Nature, supplied by the Mass of Blood; where
both striving to subdue each other, the Elastick Particles of the Blood, more
strongly oppose the Motion of the Spirits, and the Spirits them, by a contrary
agitation and intestine Motion of their Particles; and these Two being
violently exploded, and impetuously leaping into, and fermenting in the Fibers,
cause most strong and painful Contractions.

The Subsultus Tendinum in Fevers are caused, Of the Subsultus Tendinum in
Fevers.
when the Spirits being too much exalted, leap irregularly out of the Brain,
and raise the Fermentation in the Glands so high, as to prepare and carry too
much of the Subtle Liquor into the Fibers; which because it is so very thin,
easily slips into the Lymphaeducts, and makes the Contraction short.

I shall add the Reason only of one other Phenomenon, Of a Spasmus Cynicus.
which seems more evidently to prove, that Muscular Motion depends on the
greater influx of Animal Spirits, viz. Why the Contraction of one Muscle
follows, when the Antagonist becomes Paralytick, as in Spasmus Cynicus: The
Branches of the Nerves being derived from the Brain, when the Influx of the
Spirits into the Muscles of the one side are hindered, they regurgitate, and
are driven presently in a greater quantity into the Antagonist; as by the Loss
of one Eye, the other, by a greater Influx of Spirits, becomes more Acute: This
is evident, and needs no further proof.

Thus I have laid down my Hypothesis of the Formal and Efficient Causes of
Muscular Motion, and how it is vitiated or depraved; which I the more willingly
commit to the Judgment of Learned and Competent Judges, with due Submission;
because it seems to me to answer Natural Ends, and to account for the several
Phenomenon, without the Difficulties, Enormous Motions and Impossibilities,
which usually attend Hypotheses on this Subject; not doubting, but it will give
satisfaction, till one more probable and plausible shall succeed.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for, and Sold by A. and J. Churchill, at the Black Swan
in Paternoster Row.
A View of Universal History, from the Creation, to the Year of Christ 1695.
wherein the most memorable Persons and Things in the known Kingdoms and
Countries of the World, are set down in several Columns by way of Synchronism,
according to their proper Centuries and Years: By Francis Tallents, sometime
Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge, Cambridge. The whole graven in 16 Copper Plates,
each 15 Inches deep, and 22 broad; bound up into Books, the Sheets lined. A
Work of great Exactness and Curiosity. Price 16 s.

A Complete Journal of the Votes, Speeches, and Debates, both of the House of
Lords and Houses of Commons, throughout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
Collected by Sir Simonds Dewes, Baronet, and Published by Paul Bows, of the
Middle Temple, Esquire; The 2d. Edition. Fol.

The Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavel, Citizen and Secretary of Florence.
Written Originally in Italian, and from thence faithfully Translated into
English. Fol.

Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Humane Understanding. The Third Edition, with
large Additions. Fol.

-- His Thoughts of Education. Octavo.

The Fables of Aesop and other Mithologists; made English by Sir. Roger
L'Estrange, Knight. Fol.

Two Treatises of Government: the first an Answer to Filmer's Patriarch. The
latter an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent, and end of Civil
Government. Oct.

Notitia Monastica: Or, A short History of the Religious Houses in England and
Wales, etc. By Thomas Tanner, A. B. Octavo.

The Resurrection of the (same) Body, asserted from the Tradition of the
Heathens, the Ancient Jews, and the Primitive Church: With an Answer to the
Objections brought against. By Humphry Hody, D. D.

Bishop Wilkins of Prayer and Preaching; Enlarged by the Bishop of Norwich, and
Dr. Williams. Octavo.

Sir William Temple' s History of the Netherlands. Octavo. -- Miscellanea.
Octavo.

Dr. Patrick's New Version of all the Psalms of David in Meter. Twelves.

Two Treatises of Natural Religion. Octavo.

Gentleman's Religion, with, the Grounds and Reasons of it. In which the Truth
of Christianity in general is vindicated; its Simplicity asserted; and some
Introductory Rules for the discovering of its particular Doctrines and
Precepts, are proposed. By a Private Gentleman.

Sermons Preached by Dr. R. Leigh^on, late A.Bp. of Glasgow Published at the
Desire of his Friends after his death, (...) his Papers written with his own
Hand. The Second Edition. (...)

The End.

