Examen Legum Angliae: OR, THE LAWS OF ENGLAND EXAMINED, By Scripture,
Antiquity, and Reason.

Cujus Author Anagrammats est, nmo bo bar.

MALACHI 4.4. Remember ye the Law of Moses my Servant, which I commanded unto
him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the S^atutes and Judgments.

LONDON: Printed by James Cottrel, 1656.

To the Reader.
READER,
I Expect upon the very first view of the Title Page of this Treatise, to be
Censured by three sorts of men: The first are, some superstitious Antiquaries
of this Age, who are better skilled in Geoffrey of Monmouth, and other idle
Stories of the British Kings (before the Romans entered Britain) and in the
Grants and Laws of the Saxon and Danish Kings of England, made for exalting the
Pope's Power, Erection of Monasteries, and other Superstitions, (and reverence
them more) then the holy Scriptures: And as they believe the Name of a King to
be Jure Divino, and indeed little less then a God; and that no man may Rule,
who has not that Title, because that Plow. Com. fo. 177. b. and 129. b.

Bodin. Repub. l. 1. p. 112.


Name must never dye: so they think, That the Laws which they and others call
the Coke tit. Cawdreys case, l. 5. par. 1. fo. 1.
Kings Laws, are (as the Town Clerk told the Ephesians Acts 19.35.
concerning their Idol Diana) the Image which fell down from Jupiter, and of so
Lex illa Sanctio specialiter dicitur. Cowel Instit. Jur. Angl. l. 2. Tit. 1.
sect. 10. Impr. Anno 1630.
sacred and divine Authority, that they can admit of no alteration, without
breach of the divine Law. To these I Will say only thus; Government, and so are
Laws, the Romans 13.1, 2.
Ordinances of God: but what kind of Government, or how the Supreme Magistrate
should be called, or why Humane Laws may not be altered or amended, I find
nothing in Scripture Aristotle in his second and fourth Books of Politics,
proves this at large; where he shows the kinds of Government, and Titles of
the Governors in his time.
. Government, in reference to the kind, is called by the Apostle PETER, 1 Pet.
2.13
(...), A Humane Creature: and whether the Government be Monarchical,
Aristocratical, or Democratical; or whether the supreme Magistrate be called
Nasi, Prince, as the Jews called Moses; or Leader, See the several Titles given
to the Supreme Magistrate of several Nations anciently and lately, p. 121. n.
18. ^equ.
Governor, or Bodin. Repub. l. 1. p. 83. Hen. 2. King of France called
Protector, 1552. Adherbal King of Numidia, termed himself, The Steward of the
People, p. 121.
Protector, (...) or (...), that i^, King, as the Greeks called their Chief
Justice at Athens; Dictator or Chief Captain, p. 157.
Imperator, as the Romans called their Chief Magisrate; or as the Venetians
call theirs Doge or Duke, there is nothing in Gods Word against it. But this is
necessary, that the Supreme Magistrate should have Pasor Lex. p. 206. b. Bodin.
Repub. l. 1. p. 110. Confer. concerning Power of Parliaments, p. 4, 5, 6.
(...) and (...), Power and Authority, which are to be upheld by good and
wholesome laws, founded upon the Divine laws of God, the only law giver, who
can save and destroy; and secured and defended with the Power, Estates, and
strength of the People, who are to look upon the Authority which God has set
over them, and Ezra 7.25, 26. Romans 13.1, 6, 7.
submit themselves ther^ unto for the Lord's sake; and not to dispute about
Change of Government, which sometimes is both Exodus 18.13, 21. Numb. 11.16, 17.
Deuteronomy. 1.13, 14, 15. Acts 13.20, 21, 22.
lawful and necessary.

It seems clear, That all Government was Originally in Families, where the
Master or Father of the Family was the Prince or Chief Magistrate; Haynes view
Holy Scriptures, p. 81. Ral. Histor. l. 1. c. 9. sect. 1, 2.
the Obedience to whom was called Piety: But afterward, when the World grew
better stored with People, men began to associate themselves into Villages,
then into Cities, and lastly into Commonwealths, and Nations; and these betook
themselves to Paraeus in Genesis c. 10. Hawk. Right of Dominion, l. 2. c. 4. p. 35
Arist. Polit. l. 1.
a Governor, whom at first they called Genesis 50.7. Exo. 3.18 and 24.14. Pro.
31.23.
Elder; which was not only a name of age and gravity, but also of superiority,
and Magistracy, and continued until Monarchical Government was Erected, which
it seems at first was a Government at Bodin. Repub. lib. 3. cap. 3. page 293.
l. 4. c. 1. p. 412. Jun. Brut. Vind. contra Tyran. p. 95. Ex Herod. l. 2.
the Will of him that ruled, and grew into Tyranny for want of Laws.

Exo. 3.10, 16, 18. and 18.13. Willet Hex. in Exo. 18. v. 15, 19. qu. 16, 18.
But it pleased God in favor to mankind, and for the good of his people, to
establish supreme power in one person, limited and bounded with wholesome Laws:
And as an affliction and Punishment to suffer Tyranny to be exercised in the
Bod. de Rep. l. 1. p. 47. and l. 2. p. 200. out of Philo Judaeus and Josephus.
world, and sometimes toward his own people, as may be seen in the government
of the Babylonians, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and other heathen nations.

Grot. Pol. Max. Par. 2. c. 8. Genesis 14.1. and 40.1.
The chief Pattern which can be expected, and of most certain Antiquity, both for
government and laws, is that of the Israelites; (with whom God was most
eminently present) Albeit, there were many other Kings, long before Moses
brought the Israelites out of Egypt, as those mentioned in the Book of Genesis;
besides the Kings of Egypt, Babylon and Assyria, of which Ral. Hist. l. 1. c.
10. sec. 1. Haynes View Holy Scripture, p. 125. Hawk. Right of dominion, l. 2.
c. 7. p. 45 Ex Chrysostom. and Muscul.
Nimrod was the first: of these it is not necessary to say any thing.

But concerning the Israelites, their state, laws, and government, we have most
exactly recorded by Moses Coke. l. 7. fo. 12. Calvin's case.
(the best and most ancient Writer of Laws) in the Book of Exodus, which
contains Willet Hex. in Exodus p. 1, 2.
their deliverance out of Egypt, with the concomitants and circumstances
thereof, in the first part of that Book, to the end of the seventeenth Chapter:
Then their constitution and settlement in the Land of Canaan by wholesome and
just laws, Exo. 21.1
which were delivered unto them from God by the hand of Moses.

Now to return, after this digression: If Almighty God gave Political laws to
his own people, no man dare say, but that those laws must needs be most just
and equal, Cock Engl. Law, p. 4.
and most profitable for the people. And upon this ground it is to be
maintained, That Lex vera, Lex bona est and aeterna, and mutationis prorsus
nescia immo and eadem ubique si modo vera: nam que ingeniorum afflatu subinde
locis temporibsque, interpolatu distinguitur and Protei modo formam evariat,
neutique Lex dicenda est: Veteres legum latores earum inventiones esse divini
muneris Arbitrati, Coel. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 18. c. 19. p. 697.
all laws, by whomsoever instituted, repugnant to those holy laws of Almighty
God, are to be rejected, (although they bear the Image of reverend Antiquity)
because they have not the stamp of the chief Lawgiver upon them.

The second sort of men, from whom I expect a Censorious Vote, are the greatest
number of Officers, Clerks, and Practisers of the Law, (who indeed by their
superstructures, alterations, innovations, additions, and other devices, have
subverted the practice of the Law, and set another face upon it:) These will
tell me, That by this Craft we have our wealth, as Demetrius told his fellows,
when DIANA, as he thought, was in danger. They are come into the rooms and
places of the Popish Clergy, as they were called, who anciently were the
Clerks and Officers in the Courts at Westminster These Clerks used to make all
Conveyances, and wrote the Legice-books. 14 H. 8. 8.
: And in such sacred Orders, that the chief of them, the six Clerks in
Chancery, had no liberty to marry, until they had license by the Statute of 14
Hen. 8. cap. 8. And these are sworn, and resolved to all their old courses,
tending to their profit: And therefore, if they consult about this matter, they
will conclude, That many things may be amended; as they found at their last
Meeting in Staple-Inne-hall: but heed must be taken, that nothing be excepted
against, which tends to the Practisers or Clerks profit. And I shall very
likely hear them say of me, as I heard some of them speak of one of the most
considerable of the late Reformers of the Law, that he was like the Fox in the
Fable, which would have all other Foxes Tails cut off, because he had none of
his own. But to such of these as are resolved still to make silver-shrines for
DIANA, and to prefer these our laws, before the Laws of God; I Will say no more
but this: Rev. 22.11.
He that is unjust, let him be unjust; and, He that is filthy, let him be
filthy.

To the rest of them, of whom I have more hope, that they have something of the
knowledge of God and Religion, I shall only commend that Motto, which I once
saw set up in a Lawyers Study, Non quid, sed Quomodo: If this were well
considered, that a little well gotten, with the Blessing of God upon it, would
be better then great treasures of Iniquity; and that the good of the Nation, is
to be preferred before private profit: This, I say, would make men willing to
have a happy reformation; which cannot be had, until we be fit for it.

For that which may be cast upon my self, I do aver, Most men are like Tiberius
the Roman Emperor, who said, that his time was no time for Reformation. Tac.
Annal. l. 2. c. 8. p. 43
That I have had my share of advantage by the laws, equal to most of my
condition in the Country where I live: But I do profess that now, after almost
thirty years practice, I find the laws in diverse particulars of Common Right,
and Punishment of some Offenses, more uncertain, unequal, perplexed, and
repugnant to the Laws of God, and burdensome to the people, then any Laws
either of Heathens or Christians, that ever I read or heard of; and these make
these Laws cry out for Amendment.

The third sort whose Censure I must look to undergo, are the great Props and
Supporters of this Law, who will tell the world, with Sir Edward Coke, That no
one yet ever censured or controlled Littleton (the Common Law) but he that
understood him not.

To this I answer, That I do not censure Littleton, more then Gods Word
censures him: There is one that accuses (him and) you, even Joh. 5.45.
Moses, for that ye are departed from the Law of God, and have followed
Littleton, and other Papists and heathenish Politicians. The holy Ghost sends
us to the Isa. 8.20.
Law and to the Testimony; and Christ sends us to Luke 16.29
Moses and the Prophets: If Littleton, or any other Oracle, speak not according
to these, whether their Laws concern faith or manners, it is because there is
no light in them. But I have much hope of many of the Judges and great men of
the land, that they will lay their hands to the Work of Reformation, to the
honor of God (who has honored them) and for the good and benefit of the
people; forasmuch as they cannot but be very sensible of the great evils which
attend the Laws, as now they stand, being repugnant to the Laws of God, as many
Judges Sir George Crook, Sergeant Parker, Justice Ask, about Manslaughter, at
W. and Co. Sir George Crook about Witchcraft exercised, where death followed
not, at Cov.
have hinted upon the Bench in several Cases. And this is all I shall say in
answer to mine accusers.

One thing more I do affirm, That, to my knowledge, I have not in this Treatise
willingly charged any thing as a fault upon the Law, either in the excess or
defect, in the Theory or Practice, but what I have found therein, and proved
the same to be repugnant to the Rules and Consequences of the holy Scriptures,
contained in the Old and New Testament: And for such things as are any whit
questionable, whether the law be so or no, I have usually there quoted the
Authorities of the law for proof thereof, and put down the Scriptures as their
Opposites, for their correction, and in confirmation of mine own Assertions:
But where (in matters of daily practice, every Clerk or Attorney can be my
witness) I have alleged any thing, (as about suing to the Exigent, Trial of
Prisoners, Returns of Writs, and the like) and have not cited any Books or
Rolls for proof thereof, I did it purposely, because I held it needless, being
constantly and commonly done every Term.

Now to draw to an end, lest the Gate should prove too big for the Building, I
do profess, that I am not so confidently ignorant, as to imagine, that all that
I have herein written, ought to pass for current without control (having to
deal upon such an uncertain subject as the law, wherein Sir Edward Coke himself
is censured for gross Mistakes) but rather, that through ignorance and other
infirmities, I may err and wander in many things, having gone an untrodden
way, without a Guide, or any one to go before me; there being not one Book, to
my knowledge, extant of this kind. If what I have done, shall but prevail so
far, as to stir up any more wise and learned to take this matter in hand, and
show us a more excellent way, I have my reward. And I do profess with him that
wrote the History of the 2 Mac. 15.39.
Jews in the vacancy of the Prophets, during the Government of Judas
Macchabeus, and his Fellows, that if I have done well, and as the matter
requires, it is that I desired; but if I have spoken slenderly and barely, it
is that I could.

Farewell.
The Contents of this Treatise.
Chap. 1. OF the supposed Excellency, Certainty and Antiquity of the Laws of
England, and what is to be thought thereof in general. Page 1. Chap. 2. That
the Law of God contained in the holy Scriptures, ought to be the Foundation of
all Laws used or practiced amongst Christians. p. 4. Chap. 3. That the Law of
England, as it is now in use and practice, is a departing from the Law of God,
and a taking of a Law from Heathens and Idolaters. p. 9 Chap. 4. That Magna
Charta, and Charta Forestae, do not appear to be any Acts of Parliament
(although they be so called) that therein was chiefly intended the advancement
of the Romish Power in a Tyrannical Government. p. 13 Chap. 5. That the
Statutes of Marlbridge, Westminster. 1. and the rest of the old Statutes, said to be
declaratory of the Common Law, savor of the Power of Antichrist, and contain
in them manifold Impieties and Superstitions. p. 17 Chap. 6. That diverse of the
old Statutes, as well such as are said to be in affirmance of the Common Law,
as others Introductory of new Laws, contain in them great Oppressions of the
People. p. 20 Chap. 7. That several Acts of Parliament made since Magna Charta,
having the force of New Laws, contain in them many Idolatrous and Superstitious
Rites and Customs against the Law of God. p. 25 Chap. 8. That the Common Law
has been altered and changed since Edw. 4. his time, when Littleton wrote, in
an hundred particulars, most of them of great Importance. p. 29 Chap. 9. That
there ought not to be a Court of Law or Justice, and another of Equity (such as
are now in England) maintained or used in any Nation prosessing the Gospel. p.
39 Chap. 10. That all such cases as chiefly require a remedy in a Court of
Equity, might easily be determined by the Judges of Law, if the Law were
amended as it ought to be: And therein, that which is usually said for the
upholding of Courts of Equity, is answered. p. 46 Chap. 11. That the Theory of
the Common Law, and some of the Statutes now in force, contain in them very
many Impieties, and other things repugnant to the Law of God. p. 53 Chap. 12.
That the practick part of the Law, as it is now in use, is in many particulars
sinful, and repugnant to the Law of God, and an oppression of the people. p. 87
Chap. 13. That the general execution of the Law, as it is now seated and
practiced at Westminster, is a common Oppression to the whole Nation. p. 105
Chap. 14. That the Body of the Law is wanting and defective, there being
neither Common Law nor Statute Law for remedy in many cases, nor any punishment
considerable for sundry great Offenses. p. 114 Chap. 15. A digressive Discourse
about the Preaching of the Gospel, the Ordination and Appointment of Pastors
and Teachers, and of their Office and Maintenance. p. 137 Chap. 16. A Corollary
or Conclusion, wherein the Laws of England are compared with the Laws of the
Jews, Graecians, Romans, and other Nations. p. 144 A Postscript, containing
certain Positions founded upon the holy Scriptures, serving for principal
grounds of Laws amongst Christians.
Examen Legum Angliae: OR, The Laws of England Examined by Scripture, Antiquity
and Reason.
CHAP. I. Of the supposed Excellency and Antiquity of the Common Laws of
England; and what is to be thought thereof in general.
IT may well be accounted a matter of Admiration to the Vulgar and more
Unlearned of the People of this Nation; and the wiser sort may well stagger in
their Judgments, to consider what high Encomiums, or rather Hyperbolical
Elogies, are given to the Laws of the Land, generally by all the Practicers and
Professors thereof: And yet what abundance of Pains and Labor has been taken,
in order to the Amendment and Reformation of the same, without any considerable
benefit or satisfaction to the People.

Coke Preface to the 8th Report.
It is Hyperbolically, yet confidently, affirmed by one of the Chief Champions
of the Law, (whose Reports go for Law generally without control) That there is
no Humane Law within the Circuit of the whole World, Note this Gradual
Hyperbole.
by Infinite Degrees, so apt and profitable, for the honorable, peaceable, and
prosperous Government of this Nation, as the Common Law is; which he endeavors
to prove to be most just and ancient; and says, That the same is contained in
the old Statutes, Magna Charta, Charta Forestae, Merton, Marlebridge,
Westminster, De Bigamis, Gloucester, Westminster 2, Articuli super Chartas,
Articuli Cleri, Statut' Ebor', and Praerogativa Regis, 25 Edw. 3. and in the
Original Writs in the Register, and the Indictments of Judgments thereupon, as
the very Text it self: And that all the subsequent Year-books and Records for
four hundred years, are but Commentaries and Expositions thereof. And in
another place the same Author speaking of Littleton's Book, says, That Coke
Preface to his Com. upon Littleton
Littleton is not only the name of a Lawyer, but of the Law it self: Which
Book he affirms to be the most absolute and perfect Work, that ever was written
in any Humane Science. And afterward reckons up Coke Com. upon Littleton Lib.
1. page 11.
Fifteen sorts of Laws, which, he says, are in force in England: Concerning
many of which, it does not appear, that Littleton wrote any thing. I will not
say, That these Testimonies are repugnant: But this may well be said, That if
the Ass^rtions be true (considering also the huge multitude of Statutes now in
force) then is the Law such an Individuum vagum, as no man living knows what it
is, in respect of the variance and alteration thereof, from what it was in
former times, both before and since Edw. the 4th his Reign when Littleton
wrote. And hence it is, that the Judges themselves (who are said to be the
speaking Law) in many cases See Brooks Abridgment and Dyers Reports, and other
the Year-Bookes, which in many cases conclude with Quaeres and uncertainties.
are divided, and Truth it self is oft-times set upon the Tenters, for want of
a standing Rule, and because the Law lies merely in Opinion, without other
Foundation: which appears sufficiently every Term, by the Arguments of the
Judges; and may be gathered by view of the many Quaere's affixed to the Reports
of former and latter times. And these Differences are not about Niceties or
Trivial things, but about that which is called, The Foundation of Law, and, The
Propriety or Liberty of the Subject.

Arguments of Crook and Hutton in Hampdens Case, Excheq. Chamber, Ann. 1638.
As in the Case of Ship Money, where the Judges were divided, and the major part
adjudged that to be Law, which by the Parliament and Judges since has been
declared to be Votes in Parliament, 7 December. 1640 7 Febr. 1640.
against Law. But it may yet be questioned, What the Law is in that case: And
surely, if the Law were so perfect as is pretended, what folly may be imputed
to the wise men of the Nation, who in the several Parliaments have corrected
and controlled Littleton and the Common Law, in near an hundred particulars, by
Acts of Parliament since he wrote? And yet all these Alterations are said to be
Amendments, for the benefit and profit of the People. And if the Theory be thus
necessarily altered, and another face put upon it, and the Practick part more
changed and corrupted (as shall appear in this Treatise) then must it be
concluded, that the Law which now we have in use, is not the ancient Law of the
land; nor that the same Law neither was nor is so perfect and certain, as it
has been commonly affirmed to be: But that the Law, as now it stands in use
and practice, is a new pompous Edifice, erected upon some old Foundation, and
become an Engine to draw wealth to the great Officers, Professors and
Practicers thereof, to the impoverishing of the residue of the Subjects; not
having any Foundation either in the Law of Nature, or on the Positive Laws of
God, sufficient to bear up the same; and therefore can deserve no such
commendation, or be held so sacred, as that it ought not, or may not, upon good
ground, be altered and amended, and the Prolixities, Uncertainties,
Difficulties and Extravagancies thereof reformed. It is observed by a G^otius
Pol. Maxims, Part. 1. cap. 4. page 34, 35. Legem oportet esse brevem, quo
facilius ab imperitis tene^tur velut ^missa divinitus vox. Jubeat non disputet
nihil frigidius, nil ineptius quam lex cum Prol^gomenis. Co^l. Rhod. l. 18.
cap. 19. page 699.
great Statesman, That those Laws are best, which are short, easy, few,
accommodated to the Manners of the People, and for Public good. Those are to
be accounted Tyrannical Laws, which are many, obscure, difficult, like so many
Snares to the People, and not tending to the advantage of the Public: But
whether our Laws are of the first or later sort, let the Reader judge. Cowels
Instit. l 1. tit. 1. sect. 2. page 21.
A learned Civilian has this saying, which he cites out of Bracton, Juris
Pracepta sunt haec; Ex Bracton, l. 1. cap. 4. n. 6.
Honest vivere, Neminem laedere, Jus suum cuique Tribuere; i.e. The Precepts
of the Law (or Right) are these; 1. To live honestly; 2. To hurt none; 3. To
give to every one his Right. Whether these three Precepts comprehend all that
men are bound to do in reference to the Law, I will not determine; but this I
deliver positively, and doubt not but it is sufficiently proved in forty
Particulars in this Treatise, (which the Reader, if he please, may observe)
That the Laws of England, both in their Redundancy and Excess, as likewise in
their Want and Defect, are intolerably faulty; not holding forth Justice or
Righteousness, in reference, or according to any one of those three Precepts.
And the clear Reason and Cause of this Extravagancy, Gal. 6.16. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
is, The rejecting of the Holy Scriptures, which are the Only Rule of
Righteousness.

CHAP. II. That the Law of God contained in the Holy Scriptures, ought to be
the Foundation of all Laws used or practiced amongst Christians.
Willet Hex. in Exodus c. 21. qu. 1. p. 458.
THat the Holy Scriptures are the Foundation of all just Laws, is a Truth
undeniable, and evident to every one who has any competent knowledge therein;
comprehending in them as well the Dictates of the Law of Nature and right
Reason, Isidore calls Law, A Constitution written agreeing with Religion,
fittest for Government and Common Profit. Humane Law is a righteous Decree,
agreeing with the Law Natural and Eternal, Raleigh Hist. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 15.

Omne id quod ratione consistit. Greg. de Val. Ex Tho. Aquin. qu. 91. art. 3.


as all other things necessary for the Ruling, Guiding, and Ordering all the
affairs of this life, whether Political, Oeconomicai, or Personal: which
appears by this, That the Law of God Psalm. 19.7.
is perfect; 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
That the Holy Scriptures are able to make a man of God (not only the
Minister, but every other man) perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good work.
God has spoken but once in the Holy Scriptures so fully to all doubts and
cases, and to all good works, that he needs speak no more. Whites way, Sect.
11. page 57. If any thing be needful either to be known or done, the Scriptures
teach it, etc. Idem ex Espencaeo, Com. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16.
And upon this ground is that Maxim founded, That no Act of Parliament or Law,
repugnant to the law of God, is of any force. This is agreed amongst the
Lawyers, and it is cited out of Augustine, by one of the most Learned for Arts
and Tongues of that Profession, That Finch (...), l. 1. p. 3. Ex August. l. 3.
de Civit. Dei.
Omnium Legum est inanis Censura, nisi Divinae Legis imaginem gerat. Conference
about the Power Parliament. Speech 3. p. 64. A^freds Laws. Powels Court Leet,
page 6. and 12, and 13. Fox Acts and Mo. V. 1 p. 185
That Renowned King Alfred, who reigned Anno Christi 872, began his Laws thus:
Locutus est Dominus ad Mosem hos sermones, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus; and so
recites the Decalogue, and then proceeds to mention the most material Laws set
down in the 20, 21, 22, and 23 Chapters of Exodus, which he affirms to be the
most apt and compatible for the Government of his Kingdom: and according to
his Laws, his Government was blessed with universal Peace and Quiet, above
other Kings of this Nation: Fournier Georgra. Orbis notitia, l. 5. pa. 1. c.
10. p. 220.
There being neither Thieves nor Robbers to molest the People.

Cok. Engl. Law, page 107, 108, 109. Cok. Essay, p. 168. Bod. de Rep. l. 1. p.
44. What Law can there be more just, more strong and indifferent, or better,
then the Laws of Gods?
Now not only the Decalogue, but also the Judi^ial Laws of Moses, are an
eminent Foundation of Politic Laws, holding forth plainly the Reason of
Commanding and Prohibiting. Of these Judicial Laws, some belonged to the Jews
properly, as being appendent to the Ceremonial Law, Willet in Exo. gen: obser.
qu. 4. upon the whole book, p. 3.
as the punishment of him that touched a dead body: Others concerned the Jews
Commonwealth in their own Land, as that concerning the year of Jubilee, etc.
And in c. 22. qu. 3. Com. 8. p. 492.
The rest are Laws of Common Justice and Equity, belonging to the Moral Law, as
Expositions thereof, as the punishment of Exodus 21.12.
Murder, and Lev. 20.10.
Adultery, etc. with death. These, and many others, (which shall be touched in
their proper places) were given to the Jews as men, and did not only bind the
Consciences of the Jews, but also of the Gentiles: And as the Moral Law is
Willet in Exodus c. 21. qu. 1. and 2. p. 458.
principally grounded upon the Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. p. 46. Reason and the Law
of God should always take place, and every where, not being shut up within the
bounds of Palestine.
Law of Nature; so these Judicial Laws (called by Moses Judgments) flowed from
the same Fountain, and necessarily declared the punishments for the breach of
the Moral Law, which are not therein expressed. Mat. 15.4. Mark. 7.10. comapred
with Exodus 21.17.
And this use our Lord Jesus makes of the Judicial Laws.

Now a Judicial Law may be known to be a Law of Common Equity, from other
Judicial Laws, which did only bind the Jews in the Land of Canaan;

Perkins 1 Vol Treatise of Conscience, p. 320, 321.
First, if wise men of other Nations, as well the Jews, judged it to be equal
and just, by Natural Reason and Conscience.

Secondly, if such Law did serve to confirm any of the Ten Precepts of the
Decalogue, or to uphold any of the three Estates of Men, viz. Family,
Commonwealth, or Church: and upon this ground is it, that Moses (the Coke l.
7. fo. 12. Calvin's case
first Reporter and Writer of Laws) in his Exhortation to the Jews, requires
them to observe Deuteronomy. 4.6, 7, 8.
the Statutes and Judgments which he had taught them from God; which
Judgments are the Judicial Laws. And this he tells them should be their
wisdom and understanding in the sight of the Nations, saying, What Nation has
God so nigh unto them, and that has Statutes and Judgments so righteous? And
for this cause it is, that the Godly, Learned, Bodin. Rep. l. 1. p. 104. What
apparent reason can there be devised, for which we ought to break the Laws of
God? That it may be done in any case, the same Author there concludes most
absurd.
and wise Statesmen, have judged, That for the Civil Magistrate to alter this
Law at his pleasure, as shall be thought fit for the time or manner of the
Country, is to make himself to be thought to Willet in Exodus gen: Observe. qu.
4. p. 3.
be wiser then God, that only wife James 4.12.
Lawgiver, who can save and destroy. 1 Cor. 1.25.
The foolishness of God is wiser then men.

The Heathen Gentiles had a high esteem of Moses for a wise Lawgiver: Let one
speak for many: Longinus, of whom Moses is named, Longinus (...), pa. Philo
Judeus calls Moses, A most wise Lawgiver. Brod. Rep. l. 2. p. 211.
(...), The most Glorious Lawgiver of the Jews. And although the Heathen were
Idolaters, and regarded not the First Table of the Decalogue, accompting the
Divine Worship of God a Acts 25.19. Broughton in Daniel Conclus. Suet. Tranq.
vita Claud. Caesaris, sect. 16. Tac. Annal. l. 2. c. 19. page 61.
Barbarous and Mischievous Superstition; yet they received those Judicial Laws,
which were Laws of Common Equity. Jer. 29.22, 23.
Nebuchadnezzar, a heathenish Idolater, had learned to punish Adultery with
Death. And Perkin 1 Vol. Treatise of Conscience, p. 320.

Suet. Tranq. in vita Jul. Caesaris, sect. 48. and in vita August. Caesaris,
sect. 34. Anotat. b.


other wise Lawgivers of the Heathen Gentiles, as some of the Egyptians,
Graecians, as Draco, Numa; and Romans as Julius Caesar, Augustus, etc. made
Laws to punish Tit. Live. l. 39. p. 1032, and p. 1034. K. and l. 33. p. 804. R.
and 841. B.
Murder, and Adultery, and Sodomy, with death, according to those Judicial
Laws, Exodus 21.12. and Deuteronomy. 22.22. Levit. 20.13.

It may be observed, That all Dominions (except Impious Machiavel's) have
confessed, That Humane Prudence has not power sufficient to foresee good and
evil (so as to prevent the evil) and therefore did all Nations fly to God, some
by a straight, others by a crooked way; and hence their Grot. Pol. Maxims, Par.
2. c. 8. p. 68, 69. and Cor. in fine. Bodin. de Rep. l. 1. p. 58. Tit. Livius
l. 3. p. 110. H.
Laws were pretended to come from God. Upon all which I conclude, That all the
Laws of England ought to have their Foundation upon the Laws of God: and yet
this is no Judaizing, or departing from the Gospel, as some have vainly
imagined; for that it appears clearly, Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6. Exodus 20.2. Luke 10 27, 28
Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 39. Gal. 3.19.
That Moses Law was given upon Gospel grounds; and that the New Testament,
especially the Doctrinal part thereof, (as well as the Prophet's) is a plain
Mat. 5.21, 27, 33, 38. James 2.11. Heb. 4 2, 6, 7.
Commentary upon Moses: and to this purpose it is not improper to apply that of
our Savior, Mat. 6.17, 18
I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

And as to the matter in hand, that of the Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 5.9, 10, 11.
to Timothy puts it out of all doubt; the Law (namely, the Moral and Judicial)
is made for the lawless and disobedient; for the ungodly, and for sinners; for
unholy adnd profane: for Murderers of fathers, and Murderer of mothers; for
man-slayers, for Whoremongers, and them that defile themselves with Mankind;
for Men-stealers, for Liars, for Perjured persons; and if there be any other
thing, that is contrary to sound Doctrine, according to the glorious Gospel of
the blessed God. The The Law and the Gospel agree in substance and end,
differing in circumstance of time, place, persons, dignity, and effects. The
end of the Judicial Law, is to teach Natural Equity, Ral. Hist. l. 2. c. 4
sect. 9, 10, 11.
Law was made for the good, to guide them; and for the evil, to correct and
punish them. And that these Laws were not punctually put in execution under the
Gospel in the Primitive times, was not, because they were not in force against
evildoers, but because the Magistrates were Heathens, and received them not as
the Laws of God, although they observed many of the Judicials, as before is
said. Now the chief end and scope of all Laws, ought to be Justice and
Righteousness. Bodin. Rep. l. 6. c. 6. p. 755.
Justice is the right distribution or division of Rewards and Punishments, and
of that which by Right belongs to every man. And where shall this Justice be
found, but in the Holy Scriptures, which is that perfect Rule and Law of
Justice and Righteousness? Without this Guide, men have no more then that
glimmering Light of Nature to lead them, which although it retain general
Principles of Idem Bod. Rep. l. 6. c. 6. p. 761. Tac. Annal. l. 1. c. p. 2.
Right and Wrong (as one may so speak) since the depravation thereof by the
fall of Man; yet we see by Experience, That the most wise Lawgivers, who had
the best endowments of Nature, elevated and much perfected by Humane Learning
and Knowledge, (without the knowledge of the Divine Law, contained in the Holy
Scriptures) erred and wandered far and wide in many things, as men blinde-folded
and led aside by their lusts and passions, and chiefly for want of this Golden
Rule to walk by. And if no more could be said of this subject, this were
sufficient to satisfy any rational man, That there is an absolute necessity to
compare Vis Magistratus est, ut praefit praescribatque quae recta and utilia,
and conjuncta cum legibus; ut enim populo praesunt Magistratus, ita
Magistratibus leges: Lex simul cum mente divina orta Creditur. -- Itaque vera
Lex and Princeps apta ad Jubendum votandumque, ratio est recta summi Dei, Coel.
Rhodig. Lect. Antiq. l. 8. c. 1. p. 279.
all Laws with the Laws of God, and to frame and square these our Laws
according to that Pattern: For that nothing can be, or be truly accounted Right,
which is not agreeable thereunto. And therefore Bodin. Rep. l. 6. c. 6. p. 759.
the Jews called their Book of the Law, The Book of Right; or, as it is observed
the Caldaean Interpreter has it, The Book of Rightness, having no crookedness
or error in it, nor suffering such as walk by it, to turn out of the way.

CHAP. III. That the Law of England, as now it is in use, is a departing from
the Law of God, and a taking of a Law from H^abe^s and Idolaters.
IT is not to be doubted, but as these Judicial Laws were the Foundation of the
Imperial or Civil Law; so were they of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans Laws;
amongst which, many particulars of those Judicial Laws are found extant, as
amongst the Laws of this Nation, which herein in their fit p^aces shall be made
appear. But the Roman Clergy, or rather Idolatrous Priests, being Chancellors,
Judges, Reporters, Scribes and Compilers of our Laws; to these Laws of Common
Equity, added many Heathenish, Impious, Superstitious, and wicked Customs, and
imposed the same upon the poor conquered and enslaved People, for Laws: Which
things when we consider, and what is reported by Sir Edward Coke, Coke Com.
Littleton, l. 3. c. 9. sect. 535. and his Preface 8 Reports.
That in the time of William the Conqueror, and long after his time, the
Chancellor, Treasurer, and Judges, were for the most part Bishops, Monks, and
men of the Church, (as he calls them) of whom he names very many expert in the
Common Laws, and such as wrote the same; We may easily judge what Laws we were
like to have from such men; surely such as their Religion then was, in the very
darkest night of of Popery, which must needs produce nothing so much as Idol
try, and the Oppression and Persecution of the Saints; like the Mic 6.16. 1
King 22 26. 1 Kin. 16.25 27
Statutes of Omri and Ahab, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 74.^0
The dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty.

Upon these grounds it may be cleared, That we are much departed from the Law
of God, and have received a Law from Antichrist: and it will further appear in
the particulars following, That many wicked and profane Encroachments are made
by our Laws upon the honor of God, in abuse of his Holy Name and Worship; and
thereby also great Iniquities, Injustice, Wrongs, Oppressions, Deceits, and
Falsehoods, practiced, maintained and acted continually toward all sorts of
men, as well by color of diverse Statutes, as the Common Law now in use and
practice.

But for the present, let it be observed, That the whole Body of Popery is (in
a manner) comprehended, See Coke upon Littleton under these Titles; Absuration,
Exile, Appeal, Advowson, Bishops, Appropriation, Clergy, Divorce,
Excommunication, Heresy, Frank Almoigne, Marriage, Parson, Patron,
Presentation, Profession, Quare impedit, Tithes, and upon the old Statutes.
in Littleton's Book (which is so much commended by Sir Edward Coke) and that
the old Statutes made in affirmance of the Common Law, and the Books and
Entries whereof he makes mention, are stuffed with all manner of Superstitions,
and Idolatrous Rights and Customs.

And if any man shall be offended, that I do not lick the sores of Justice
Littleton, and Sir Edward Coke, the two great Idols of the Law: It suffices me
to know, That the first did Littleton was a Judge in the Reign of King Edw. 4.
according to the Religion then in use, and it may be according to the Dictates
of his own Conscience; and in many things has judiciously taught the
succeeding Ages: but therefore has not deserved to be accounted an Oracle. And
for the other, I think of him according to Scrinia Sacra. Cabal. p. 61, 62, 63.
the Character given him by that Incomparable Learned Sir Francis Bacon, in a
Letter to him after his disgrace.

And something more I could say, That he was a man of a bitter spirit against
the dear Servants of God: and if he should be judged according to the Judgment
he gave of the most sincere Professors of Christ's Gospel, the Coke l. 5. Part.
1. Cawdreys case, f. 25.
followers of John Wickliff, abusively called Lollards; and his Coke in the
Title-Pages of his Books of Reports, being 11.
judgment of Queen Elizabeth and Kings James, whom he blasphemously calls, The
Fountain of all Piety and The Law of the 12 Tables is called by the Roman
Historian, The Fountain of all Justice, Tit. Live. l. 3. p. 112. H. and out of
this Heathen, Sir Edw. Coke learned this Blasphemy.
Justice, and the life of the Law: A rational man, endued with any knowledge of
God, would think such a man too ignorant of the ways of God, to be accounted
an Oracle, or termed, The speaking Law (as every Judge is) or, A Promulgator
thereof.

Now if it shall be cleared, without doubt, whence our Laws came, and that they
contain such Impieties and Injustice as are before touched; (I say) when that
shall plainly appear, every Christian, whose heart God shall open to see the
truth, will assuredly be satisfied in his Conscience, That this Law ought to be
changed, or greatly amended; seeing that Christians ought to be so far from
receiving the Rev. 14.9.
Mark of the Beast, by taking Laws from Idolaters, that they ought to root out
their Idols, and all Deuteronomy. 12.3 Exodus 23.13. and 34.13. 2 King. 18.4. Hos.
2.17. Zech. 13.2.
their Superstitions from under heaven: For that whilst things stand as now
they are, we cannot expect the comfortable Presence of God so effectual for our
good and protection, as if they were removed; according to that Psa. 94.20
of the Holy Ghost by the Prophet, Shall the Throne of Iniquity have fellowship
with thee, which frames mischief Such Laws as are contrary to the Laws of God
and Nature, the Prince may abrogate at his pleasure, Bodin. Rep. l. 1. p. 105.
by a Law? And if we consider, that these Popish Laws coming from Idolaters,
branded this Nation with the Mark of the Beast, which all those Kingdoms and
Commonwealths received, who were under the Power of Antichrist, (as this was)
until King Henry 8. his time, who (although he cast out the Pope's Supremacy,
yet retained Popery) we may justly fear, that (without serious Repentance,
which cannot be testified but by Reformation) the Maintainers and Countenancers
of these Superstitions Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.
shall taste of the wine of the wrath of God, and be tormented with fire and
brimstone for ever. But our God will save his people from their sins, and
deliver them from his wrath.

Howbeit, it concerns us to know, That (although God Acts 17.30
winked at the former times of Ignorance) yet now he commands all men
everywhere to repent; and, although we have hitherto failed of our expected
Reformation, and that all the labor and pains taken in order thereunto, has
been lost and frustrate, because a Pattern from Gods Word was not sought for,
which may be imputed to be the true cause thereof; yet at last it may be found,
that the Moral and Judicial Laws of Moses, and other Rules and Consequences
from Scripture, are a sufficient standing Rule in all cases, not only for
Godliness, but also for Righteousness, Justice, and Sobriety; according to that
of the 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
Apostle to Timothy, herein before recited. And it is to be hoped upon very
good grounds* That the nearer we come to perfect Reformation, the more we shall
taste of Justice and Righteousness in the Isa. 60.17.
execution of holy and just Laws, under such Judges and Magistrates as were in
the beginning; which is to be earnestly prayed for; knowing, That good Laws are
more security to the People, then good Magistrates: But when Almighty God
gives both together, that is an eminent sign of his special favor. Isa. 1.26.
And this is promised to the People of God in the later times, and now began to
be fulfilled in this Nation, in as much as the blessed Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the People of God in the Profession thereof, have more freedom and
encouragement to Worship God according to his Divine Will, then ever England
enjoyed in any former Age, either before or since the last Reformation. But
it is much to be lamented, that many who within this Age suffered Persecution
under the tyranny of the Bishops and Archbishops, upon pretense of breach of
these our Laws, in not conforming to Order and Discipline; They themselves,
under the same pretense of Order and Church Government (as they call it) are
now as ready to persecute their Brethren, whose Consciences are not just of
their Size (if they could get Power into their hands, to execute their Canons
and other Popish Injunctions) as ever the Bishops were since Queen Mary's
days. For although they, with the Scots, are glad to be rid of the Bishops;
yet they (at least many of them) have the Scotch Presbyters Spirit in them,
Simson Church-Hist. in the Life of Anastatius, Cent. 6. p. 88.
who in his Church History commends the People of Antiochia, that they were
very friendly to their Pastor Flavianus; and that they finding a great Number
of Monks, savouring, as he says, of Eutyches Error; and having an intent to
compel their said Pastor or Bishop to accurse or abjure the Council of
Chalcedon, (but how their purpose was manifested, does not appear in the
Story:) The People set upon the Monks (as not long after, the honest Monks of
Bangor were set upon) slew a number of them, others leaped into the River
Orontes, where (as the Scotch Presbyter faith) they found a meet burial for
Seditious Monks. There is no means under Heaven certain to preserve the People
of God from Persecution, but the abolishing of all Popish Laws, and to Conform
our selves to the holy Laws of God. And that is the scope of this Treatise.

CHAP. IV. That Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, do not appear to be any Ac^s
of Parliament (although they be so called:) That chiefly therein was intended,
the adva^cement of the Romish Power in a Tyra^nical Government.
FIrst, it is to be considered, That upon the Norman Conquest by Duke William,
Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. page 221, 222. Ex Henrico Huntingdon, l. 6.
the bulk of all the Lands in England (some few excepted, Wales being then a
Kingdom of it self) were divided to such Noblemen, Commanders, and Gentlemen,
as joined with him in the Conquest; the design not being carried on by himself
alone, but by the forces, helps and purses of many others, who were to share
with the Conqueror therein: who besides what he reserved in Demesne, he divided
the rest to his Friends and Assistants, to be holden of him by such Tenures,
Rents, and Services, as he thought fit; ( The Romans subdu^d the Britains to be
Subjects, but not to be Slaves: They were willing to pay all Levies of Men and
Money, if Insolences were fo^bo^n: Tacit. in vita Jul. Agricolae, p. 188.
as the Romans had done a thousand years before.)

Cambdens Britannia, p. 94. Cowels Interp. word Doomsday. Lamberts Exposition
of Saxon words, Jus Dacorum.
This occasioned the great Survey of England to be taken, called Dooms-day-Book;
wherein were set down, all the Lands in England, and in whose possession they
were. Upon this Division, the Natives Stow Annal. p. 10. Life of King William
the Conqueror. Cok English Law, p. 24, 25.
were horribly oppressed, and rigorously dealt with; insomuch, that it was
afterward a Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 222. col. 2.
shame to be accounted an Englishman: which caused very many to remove into
Wales, and other Countries, rather then to abide the Tyranny of the Normans;
and the rest were left to the mercy of the Conqueror, and the Strangers who
came with him; who Stat' Ebor' 12. Ed. 2. in Preface. Plowd. Com. fo. 129. B.
Fourn. Geogr. Orbis Notitia, l. 5. part. 1. c. 11. page 224.
thereupon altered, or rather abrogated the Laws of England, and put upon them
the Customs of Normandy, written in the French Tongue: and for ought appears,
the Nation had no considerable settlement by Laws, until Hen. 3. his time, when
these Grants and Customs were procured and confirmed. And it appears clearly,
upon perusal of the Statute called Magna Charta, That the same was but only
the Grant of King Hen. 3. and the confirmation of King Edw. 1. and some of his
Successors; and the end and scope of it, is, the upholding of Tyrannical
Government, and the advancement of the Power of Antichrist. And although by
some particulars in the said Charter, Tyranny seemed somewhat to be eclipsed,
or bound up, by the Kings own Consent; yet in other particulars it is as much
enlarged and confirmed: which appears, upon view of the Second, Third, Fifth,
Seventh, Eight and twentieth, One and thirtieth, and Two and thirtieth Chapters
of the said Charter; wherein provision is made according to the Law of the
Normans, See the Customs of Normandy upon these subjects in the several Titles.
to settle Tenures by Knights Service, and Capite; and all the Slavery and
Oppression which that Tenure drew with it, to wit, Wardship of the Body, Primer
Seisin, Mesne Rates, Marriage, Relief, Suing Livery, or Ouster le Main, and all
suchlike Miseries, as were the Badges of a Conquered and Enslaved Nation: All
which Laws are (as it is hoped) taken away, with their Rack or
Inquisition-house, the late Court of Wards.

And besides this, the Laws imposed upon the People were then written either in
French or Latin, which the Vulgar of the English understood not, and yet they
were bounden to obey, under severe Penalties. And although some of those Laws
have been since translated, yet many of the old Statutes, and the bulk of that
which is called, The Common Law, do yet remain in the Latin and French
Tongues, untranslated, to the shame of the Nation; as if we were resolved for
ever to wear the Tokens of our former Captivity.

That this Charter, called Magna Charta, chiefly intended the advancement of
the Power of Antichrist, there is nothing more evident, and needs no other
proof, but what is therein contained.

Preface to Magna Charta
First, in the preface of King Hen. 3. to the said Charter, it is mentioned to be
granted for advancement of holy Church; that is, the Church of Rome: and the
same is done in the Confirmations of the same Charter, Stat' 25 Ed. 1. c. 1. 1
and 2 Ed. 3. 1 R. 2.
by diverse of the succeeding Kings. And the Grants to all the Coke Inst. 2.
part. Pa. 1. In Charters of Creation of Dignities, the directions have always
been Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, etc. and his restibus in the end, as
Magna Charta has, which is a Badge of the Kings Grant, and no Act of
Parliament.
Archbishops and Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and all those Popish Orders, clear
what was intended by the said Charter.

In the beginning whereof, the King grants to God, that is, either to the
Pope or the Priest; for so it is to be understood in the Law, where a Mortuary
or Tithes are paid, they are said to be given to God, but they go to the
Priest. So a Deodand, whatsoever moves to the death of any man accidentally
slain, is said to be given to God; but it was used to be disposed of by the
Kings Almoner, who was some Bishop.

Ans. 5 Rep. Coke, Caudreys Case. Instances in all the Kings from the Conquest
until Ed. 6. c. 7. p. 155, 156, 160, 168, to the end of the Book.
Then in the first Chapter the King grants, That the Church of England shall be
free (not from Rome, for the Pope rode the whole State, both Ecclesiastical (as
they called it) and Civil, from the Conquerors time, until King Fournier Orbis
Notitia, part. 1. l. 5. c. 12. p. 225. Preface to Magna Charta, etc. 5. 14.
Hen. 8. but) from the Secular Power; that is, Antichrist shall so far prevail
and be exalted, that all his Vassals, Priests and Clerks, shall be free from
the Temporal Laws, and Civil Power or Authority: Insomuch, that if the Ordinary
would acknowledge any man for a Clerk, he should be taken from Judgment, and
be discharged of all his Crimes and Offenses, be they never so heinous.

And the Privileges granted to the Popish Clergy, in the 5th and 14th
Chapters of the said Charter, do further confirm, what the Kings intention was
in making the said Grant or Charter, nothing more then the advancement of the
Popes Power.

And as concerning the Charter of the Forest, a Charta Forestae, c. 6, 9, 10.11.
considerable part thereof contains matters trivial, and of mean concernment:
And that part of it which bears the most weight, was in it self a great
Oppression to the People: And the best which can be said of both the said
Char^ers, is, That they were Magna Charta est liber seu Codex Constitutionum
quas Hen. 3. ad utilitatem subditorum suorum promulgabat, etc. Cowel. Instit.
Index Exposit. Lit. M.
the Badges of a Popish Kings Favor, and are said to be granted for the
Salvation of his Soul, and the Souls of his Progenitors and Successor^. And we
may remember, how by color of the said Charter of the ^orest, the Justices in
Air tyrannized over the People living in or near the Forests (not long since,
the most considerable part of the Nation, Cok. Engl. Law, p. 48.
being like to have been brought within the compass of the Forests, and subject
to these Forest-Laws:) And what vast sums of Money have been exa^^ed for Fines
imposed, for building, hedging, incroaching, and other advan^ages taken against
them in the said Forests; And what Wrongs and Oppressions have been done to the
said Inhabitants, by the co^our of the said Laws, it is too well known: And Cok.
Engl. Law, p. 25.
how many Towns have been destroyed to make a Forest, and yet the poor People
might not kill the Deer, although they did eat up and spoil their Corn, what
price soever it beared.

But it is to be hoped, That the Lord Protector will put these Forests to some
better use, then formerly they have been put unto; the An ancient Manu^^.
Expos. Forest Law, fo. 1, 3.
Original of them being for Coverts for wilde-beasts and wilde-fowl.

And lastly, these Charters, although happily they do contain some things which
were the Laws and Customs of England before that time; yet they have also the
Laws and Customs of Normandy thereunto added; having no show or color of an
Act of Parliament, in which the People were interested as parties to the m^king
thereof; both the said Charters being called, The Grants of King Hen. 3. and
the Confirmation of K. Edw. 1. See the conclusion of Magna Charta. The Statute
de Bigamis is said by Shard Justice to be no Act of Parliament upon this
ground, Coke Instit. 2 part. p. 267.
And in conclusion termed, The Kings Letters Patents, as all other the Kings
Grants are; and the Witnesses Names subjoyned in Testimony thereof: which are
improper for Acts of Parliament.

Coke Instit. 2 part. Proem. p. 2, 3. Hubert who lived when Magna Charta was
made, and was a witness to it, knew the nature of it better then any one in
these days, who know but by Tradition or Conjecture K. John granted such a
Charter, which was impeached by his Successors, because it was made when he was
in Dures; and the same is laid aside, and not regarded.
And we find it Recorded, That the Charter of King John was avoided, as a
voidable Grant: And that King Ed. 1. (after the Confirming of the said Charters
of Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae) by the Advice of Hubert de Burgo, Chief
Justice of England, (the principal Oracle of the Laws in those times) cancelled
the said Charters; and declared, That he was not bounden to observe them, in
regard he was under age when he granted or confirmed the same. And this is said
to be done by Advice of his Council at Oxford: which is a sufficient proof,
that the same were no Acts of Parliament; for that although Nonage may make
men's Grants voidable, yet the minority of the King cannot prejudice any Act of
Parliament, Because such Acts are the Agreements of the People, to which the
King gives but his Assent. And this may suffice to be spoken touching the said
Charters.

CHAP. V. That the Statutes of Marlebridge, Westminster 1. and the rest of the
old Statutes, said to be Declaratiry of the Common Law, savor of the Power of
Antichrist, and contain in them manifold Impieties and Superstitions.
THe said Statute of Marlebridge (in Chap. 12. concerning Derrain Presentiments,
and Quare Impedits; Marl. c. 12. and 28.
and Chap. 28. concerning the provisions for Successors of Bishops) contains
matters Superstitious, and tending only to uphold Popery, and are lately in
effect all abolished, by the abrogating of the Archbishops and Bishops: which
shows the uselesness of those Statutes. Coke Instit. 2. part. in the preface,
p. 79. etc. 6. p. 90.
And the same may be said of the Statute of Merton, a great part whereof
concerns the like Superstitions, which are abolished. The Statute of Westminster.
1. was made likewise with reference to the advancement of the State of
Antichrist, Westminster. 1. c. 2.
as appears by the Preface to the said Statute. And in the said Statute is
likewise set forth, as warranted by Law, the Champions Oath in a Writ of Right;
which is many ways sinful, as shall appear where this Champions Oath, and
Trial by Combat are particularly handled: and the provision made in the said
Statute for upholding of Bishoprics and Superstitious Houses, and the ordering
of a Clerk convict for Felony, who notwithstanding his Conviction, shall be
delivered to the Ordinary, and so escape; which is said to be according to the
privilege of holy Church. These Laws are Superstitious and Unlawful.

Stat. de Bigamis, c. 5. 25 Ed. 3. c. 4.
The Statute de Bigamis, and a Statute made 25 Edw. 3. which Ordain, That such
Clerks as shall be twice married, (being attaint of Felony) shall not be
delivered to the Prelates as Clerks, but that Justice shall be executed upon
them as upon other Lay People: This is a foolish Law, that being twice married
should be accounted an offense: and the same Law is altered by a Statute made 1
Edw. 6. Chap. 12. In Chap. 5. of the Statute de Bigamis, Coke Instit. 2 part.
pa. 273. Pope Boniface the 8 his Council at Lions in France.
care is taken to preserve the Constitution of the Bishop of Rome (concerning
the Privilege of Clerks) which Bishop is there called, Dominus Papa.

By the Statute of Gloucester, Chap. 8. it is Ordained, That none shall have
Writs of Trespas^ for Goods taken, unless he swear by his Faith, That the ^oods
taken were worth forty shillings; and if he complain of beating, he shall swear
by his Faith, That his plaint is true. The intention and scope of the Law is
good; but the making an Idol of a man's Faith, and putting it into the place of
God, the great Judge, is wicked Profaneness, and a breach of Gods Law.

The Statute of Westminster. 2. Chap. 5. concerning Darrein Presentiments, Quare
Impedits, and Advowsons of Churches, is Superstitious, and serves for nothing
else, but the setting up of Humane Presumptions, in opposition of the
Ordinances of Christ in his Church. And the same Statute, Chap. 34. appointing,
That he that carries a Nun away from her house, although she consent, shall
have three years Imprisonment, and be Fined, is a Superstitious Law, and tends
to uphold the Antichristian Power of Rome. And the same Statute, Chap. 35.
Enacting, That he that takes away a Ward, and marries her (after years of
consent) shall abjure the Realm, is a profane Law, and against the lawful use
of an Oath.

The Preface to the Statute called, The Award between the King and his Commons
at Kenelworth, and the Curse thereto annexed, contains matters Impious, if
not Blasphemous, and not fit to be preserved, being a Monument of Idolatry.

The Statute concerning Consultations, 24 Edw. 1. mentioning Ecclesiastical
Judges, served to uphold The Spiritual-Court, or Court-Christian (as it is
called.) The Statute of 25 Edw. 1. Chap. 4. giving power to the Prelates to
Excommunicate the breakers of the Great Charter; and another Statute of Edw. 1.
put next-before the Statute of Ireland, giving the Prelates Power to pronounce
Accursed, all those that do any thing willingly against the Charters, Chap. 6.
These are Superstitious Laws, and an abuse of the Church Censures, and the
Power of Christ in his Church. In that Law called, Articuli Cleri, 35 Edw. 1.
the Churchyard is said to be Dedicated: which Dedication is Superstitious; no
place under the Gospel being more holy or dedicated then another.

The Statutes made 9 Edw. 2. concerning Prohibitions, Tithes, Clerks convict,
P^^lates, Spiritual-Court, Excommunication, Abjuration, Power of the Ordinary,
Fee of the Church, Superstitious Houses, Monasteries, Parsons, Parsonages,
containing sixteen Chapters, are nothing else but Popery, and the advancement
thereof.

The like may be said of the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3. Chap. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9.
concerning Lapses of Benefices, Clerks convict, Ordinary, Counterpleading of
Title to a Church: All which savor of nothing but Superstition.

The Statute of the 13 Rich. 2. 2. appointing the King to present to Churches:
The Statute of Provisors of Benefices, whereby the King and his Lords are to
present to Churches; showing, That the Pope did use to present to Bishoprics,
Religious-Houses (as they are called) and Churches. The Statute of 25 Edw. 3.
whereby the Pope di^annulled the Statute of 18 Edw. 3. concerning the
Arraignment of a Clerk; and many other old Statutes of the same nature,
wherewith the Lawyers have been so much pleased, and whereof they have so much
boasted, are nothing else but the Badges and Characters of Antichrist.

All these Laws are repugnant to those Laws of God, which forbid False Worship,
Superstitious and Humane Inventions in the Worship of God; being condemned as
Will Worship, and things that are merely Idolatrous in State, serving for
nothing but to uphold the Religion of the false Church of Rome, and are not to
be used by Christians, Lev 20.23. Hos. 14.8. 2 Cor. 6.16. Deuteronomy. 12.3.

CHAP. VI. That diverse of the old Statutes, as well such ^s are said to be made
in Affirmance of the Common Law, as o^^^rs Introductory of New Laws, co^tain i^
them g^^at Oppressions and Wrongs to the People, a^^ o^ght to be amended.
Articuli super Chartas. 3 Ed. 1. c. 7, 31. 28 Ed. 1. c. 2. 10 Ed. 3. c. 1, 4.
14 Ed. 3. c. 19. 25 Ed. 3. c. 1, 15, 21. 34 Ed. 3. c. 2.
THe Statutes concerning Purveyance for the Kings Household, where the Officers
might take in a manner what they would at their pleasure: This was afterward
changed into Money, 36 Edw. 3.2. At the best, it was a heavy Oppression to the
People.

The like may be said of all those Laws concerning Villains, whereby they were
accounted the Goods of the Lord, and might be bought and sold, cum tota
s^quela; which is said to comprehend their Wives, Children, and Posterity. And
if any Lord pretended a man to be his Villain, the Lord might seize him as his
Villain, although he had his Writ de Liberate probanda depending against the
Lord, 9 R. 2. 9 R. 2. c.


By the Statute of 34 Edw. 3. Chap. 22. He that finds a Hawk, and does not
restore the same, shall have two years Imprisonment, and pay for the Hawk; and
if he have not wherewith to pay, he shall continue longer in Prison. 37 Ed. 3.
c. 19.
And by another Statute, He that steals a Hawk, or detains her being found,
shall be used as he that steals a Horse. And by another Statute, He that steals
a Hound, shall have a years Inprisonment. Here a great man's Hawk or Hound is of
as great a price, as a poor man's Liberty or Life. Grotius Pol. Maxims, par. 2.
c. 12. p. 129.
A learned Statesman observes, That a Commonwealth is often destroyed by such
kind of Laws, as are made to the advantage of great ones, and the pr^ss^re of
the Common People.

The Statu^e of 13 R. 2. Chap. 1. appoints the price of a Pardon for Murder to
a common person, 200 Marks. This was in part Repealed 16 R. 2. Chap. 6. but the
Power to Pardon Murder, was left in the King. These are wicked Laws, repugnant
to the Law of God, as shall appear in their proper places.

In Actions brought for the Kings Debts in others men's Names, unto whom they
were bounden: although the Suits pass for the Defendants, the Plaintiffs should
pay no Costs, 24 H. 8. Chap. 8.

Appeals to Rome in cases Testamentary, and concerning Matrimony, Divorces,
Tithes, Oblations, Churches, etc. which is seems were allowed at the Common
Law, were a great Oppression. See the Statute 24 H. 8. Chap. 12.

The like Statute is made 25 H. 8. Chap. 19. whereby Appeals to Rome are
prohibited; but there is power given to the Clergy (as they are called) to
m^ke Canons, which are Laws to bind and ensnare men's Consciences: which Law
being Repealed 1 and 2 Philip and Mary, Chap. 8. was Revived 1 Eliz. 1. By
color whereof, a great persecution arose against the Non-conformists, which
has continued until these times, to the great Oppression of the Godly of the
Land: And some were put to death, and others pined and starved by hard and long
Imprisonment, by color of these wicked Laws and Canons.

The Commissions of Sewers, grounded upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. Chap. 6. and
13 Eliz. 9. are over-chargeable and tedious, and used as a great Oppression to
the People in the County of Lincoln, and parts adjacent.

The Commission grounded upon the Statute of 13 Eliz. Chap. 7. and other
subsequent Statutes made against Bankrupts, is grown a mere cheat of the
People, very troublesome and chargeable, and concluding nothing, but what is
questionable again, either at Common Law, or in Chancery; and for the most
part, whereas the Law intended a division of the Bankrupts Estate to all his
Creditors, it is either spent in Suits, or upon mercenary Commissioners, or
concealed to the Bankrupts use.

The proceedings upon the Commission grounded upon the Statute of the 5 Eliz.
4. concerning Lands, Tenements, and Moneys given to Pious or Charitable Uses,
is a circular and expensive way, chargeable in Execution, expensive in drawing
up the Inquisition and Decree, and procuring a Writ of Execution of the same in
the Petty Bag: and when all this is done, upon Exceptions put into the Decree
of the Commissioners, the Execution thereof is stayed upon a Motion in
Chancery; and the Parties come then to begin the Suit again, putting in Answer
to the Except^ons, as the Answer to a Bill: And thereupon the Parties go again
to Examination of Witnesses, and a new Hearing in Chancery; and either a
Confirmation of the former Decree, or a Reversal thereof: however, if the
matter be under Three hundred pounds, it is commonly all spent in Suit, either
for or against the Charitable Uses. This is a great Oppression, and cannot be
avoided, whilst things stand as now they are.

The Statute in the 25 H. 8. 11. appointing a whole years Imprisonment, for
taking the Eggs of a Wilde-fowl, is a hard and severe Law.

The Statute of Intailing the Crown of England in the Posterity of King Henry
8. may be a cause of great trouble, 25 H. 8. Chap. 22.

The Statute of 32 H. 8.2. limiting the Prescription of a Writ of Right,
Assize, Cosenage, Ayle, etc. to no less then threescore years; and in a Writ of
Entry sur Disseisin, to fifty years: this Statute does more harm then good.

That a man's Hand should he struck off for striking in the Kings Palace, and
the party to have perpetual Imprisonment; a severe Law, 31 H. 8. 12.

That none may Pardon Felony or Murder but the King; and that he may pardon
Murder, is an Impious Law, 27 H. 8. Chap. 24.

That it should be Treason for a Popish Priest to be found remaining in
England, giving no offense, nor making any disturbance in the Commonwealth, is
a hard Law, 27 Eliz. 2.

The Statute concerning Reformation of Disorders in Ministers, a Superstitious
Law, 13 Eliz. 12.

Diverse Offices exposed to sale by an Act of the 5 and 6 Ed. 6.16. is a cause
of Bribery and Extortion.

Intailed Lands forfeited for Treason, seems to be an unjust Law, as now things
stand; because sometimes such Intails were made for valuable considerations:
when Estates were all Fee-simple, it might happily be more just that there should
be such Forfeitures.

The Law concerning Wreck of the Sea, which is, that if a Ship be cast away,
and the Goods float to Land, and neither Man, Woman, Dog nor Cat escape alive,
the Owner shall lose all the Goods: This is a wicked and unjust Law.

The Statute of the 21 Edw. 1. If a Forester or Warrener find any Trespasser
wandering within his Liberty, intending to do damage therein, and do fly away,
after Hue and Cry (that is, a Noise) made after him; the Forester or Warrener
may kill him that so flies away, and he shall suffer nothing: This is a wicked
Law, and against the Royal Law of God.

3 Jac. 1. c.
The Statute, That an Attorney or Solicitor laying out Moneys for his Clyent or
Master, shall not demand or recover his Money, unless he can produce a Ticket
under every man's Hand to whom he paid it; which is a thing impossible to be
done: for that no Lawyer, Sergeant, Judge, or his Servant, will give any such
Ticket. It seems regularly, that Statute pleaded, is no Bar for a man's Fees;
for those are due where he lays out no Money, if the Attorney take pains: nor
is it allowed in Bar of the Money laid out, if a just Bill be delivered under
the Attorneys Hand: yet some Judges have allowed this, to hinder a man from
Recovering a just Debt. This Law is a hard Law, and ought to be amended.

21 Jac. c.
The like may be said of the Statute concerning Limitation of Personal Actions;
which was Ordained to a good end, that Debts might not be twice paid: but now
it is constantly used by Knaves, who owing Debts without Specialty, will drill
men on, until the six years are up, and then will impudently plead the Statute,
although they have never denied the Debt: But it may be Witnesses are dead, or
the Debtor or Creditor dead, or out of the Country, in the time of the late
Wars, and so no Suit has been brought within six years. This Statute has
undone many Tradesmen in London and elsewhere. It were fit this Statute were
amended, and something put in to help the Creditor, where the Debt appears to
be due, notwithstanding the Suit was not brought within six years next after
the cause of Action.

All these Laws are oppressive to the Subjects: And although some of those
last-mentioned, had some ground of Reason for the promulgation thereof; yet we
see by experience, That those, as well as the former mentioned under this Head,
are grown to be prejudicial to all such whom they concern, and are all against
those Laws of God which condemn Oppression, Ezekiel. 18.18. Zech. 7.10. Proverbs
14.31. and 22.16. 1 Thessal. 4.6. Isaiah 33.15.

CHAP. VII. That several Acts of Parliament made since Magna Charta, and having
the force of New Laws, contain in them many Idolatrous and Superstitious Rights
and Customs against the Law of God.
ALl those Laws which concern Presentations to Churches (as they are called)
taking from the People that Liberty of choice of the Minister, which they
originally had in the Primitive Times, as shall appear in it is proper place;
and the imposing a Priest or Minister upon them against their wills, are
Superstitiou^, and tend to corrupt the Worship of God, and to subvert the Order
which Christ has appointed in his Church; of which sort of Laws, are 13 R. 2.
Chap. 2. and 31 Eliz. 16.

The Statutes disallowing Clergy in many cases, that is, hanging a man because
he cannot read, are both Superstitious and cruel Laws, 23 Hen. 8. 1. 25 H. 8.
1. All in holy Orders (as they are called) shall have 4 H. 7. c. 13 4 H. 8. c.
2.
Benefit of Clergy; but afterward they and all other men are ousted of
Clergy in many cases, 28 H. 8. 1. 26 H. 8. 12. 32 H. 8. 3. 4 and 5 Phil. and
Mar. 4.2. and 3 Edw. 6. 20. and 33. 5 and 6 Edw. 6. Chap. 9, and 10. 18 Eliz.
7. 39 Eliz. 9. But it is observable, That Manslaughter, which is the killing of
a man wilfully in hot blood, for which the Offender ought to die, was never
ousted of Clergy. All these are Superstitious and wicked Laws.

The Statute of the 25 Hen. 8. 16. authorizing Judges and great men to have
Chaplains, who may have a Benefice with Cure of Souls, and not be resident upon
the same, implies two great Enormities:

1. That some Ministers may have a Benefice or Church-living, without Cure or
Charge of Souls.

2. 28 H. 8. c. 13.
That such Ministers may be absent from such Church or People, and yet take the
Tithes.

The Statute of the 25 Hen. 8. Chap. 20. about Consecration of Bishops, with
all the Ceremonies thereabouts, is Superstitious.

The Statute of the 25 Hen. 8.20. appropriating to King Hen. 8. to be Supreme
Head of the Church on Earth, Impious, if not Blasphemous. This was Repealed the
1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. her Successor was called, Supreme Governor, etc.

The Statute concerning First Fruits and Tenths payable to the King, as they
were formerly paid to the Pope, in imitation of the Jews paying to the
High Priest; all of them are Superstitious Laws, 25 H. 8. 20. 26 H. 8. 3. 28 H.
8. 11.

The like Superstitious are all those Laws, which concern 5 H. 4. c. 11
Tithes, Oblations, and Church-duties (as they are called) 27 H. 8. 20. 32 H.
8. 7. 37 H. 8. 12. 2 Edw. 6. 13.

A Sta^^te was made 34 and 35 H. 8. 1. prohibiting the Reading* or having
Scriptures in English; commanding, That Religion should be as the King should
appoint: he that should Preach or Teach contrary to the Kings Injunctions,
should Recant his first Offense; abjure the Realm for the second Offense; and
for the third Offense should be burned to Ashes: This wicked and accursed Law
was Repealed 1 Edw. 6. 12. Presently upon the making of this accursed impious
Law, 34 and 35 H. 8. 17. five new Bishoprics were erected by the King;
whereupon, King H. 8. in that Statute is highly extolled for his Piety. He cast
out the Pope, and made himself Pope, and retained Popery.

The Statute of the 37 H. 8. 17. appoints Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions to be
executed by Doctors of the Civil Law: whereas all Ecclesiastical Power is in
the Church.

All those Statutes which concern Uniting of Churches, Election of Bishops,
Advowsons of Churches, Jus Patronatus, Quare Impedit, are Superstitious, and
tend only to the advancement of Antichrists Power, 37 H. 2. 21. 1 Edw. 6. 1. 1
M. 5.

The Statutes against eating Flesh in Lent, and at other times, little better
then the Doctrine of Devils, 2 and 3 Ed. 6. 19.

The Statute 1 M. 3. forbidding to disturb a Priest or Minister in saying Mass
or Divine-Service, or the breaking any Altar, Cross, or Crucifix; the Offender
shall suffer Imprisonment, and be otherwise punished: This is a severe Law.

The Statutes appointing and setting up the Bishops above the Lords in
Parliament, next to the King -- his Vicegerent, 31 H. 8. and all the old
Statutes, and those of later times also, whereby the Lords Spiritual (as they
are called) are placed before the Lords Temporal, as they are generally in all
Acts of Parliament: this savours strongly of the Power of Antichrist.

The Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning the Oath of Supremacy, now out of use, and
ought to be Repealed.

The Act for Reforming of Disorders in Ministers, a superstitious Law, 13 Eliz.
12.

The Statute of the 5 Eliz. 23. whereupon the Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo is
grounded, is an impious wicked Law, as the Excommunication it self is a
horrible Profanation of the Ordinance of Christ in his Church.

The Statutes of 35 Eliz. 1, 2. appointing grievous punishments for not coming
to hear Divine-Service (as it is called) and for Meeting in Private-houses for
to Pray or Worship God: This is a wicked Law, and was an occasion of great
Persecution for many years. Those Laws which create Apocryphal Saints, as
Thomas Becket, called, Thomas the Martyr, 2 H. 5. 4.

The Statute of 25 H. 6. Chap. 5. equalling superstitious and Idolatrous days
with the Lord's Day; Holy-Rood-day, called, Corpus Christi, Assumption of Mary,
Good Friday, All Saints, put all together with the Lord's Day, called there
Sunday: These are profane Laws.

The S^atutes of 21 H. 8. 6. and 26 H. 8. 15. appointing the payment of
Mortuaries, which are pretended to be given to God for the purging of the Souls
guilt of the deceased, which he contracted by non-payment of Tithes: Thy is a
superstitious Law, and a derogation from the All-sufficient Merits of Christ's
sufferings.

The Statute of the 3 Hen. 5. 4. contains in it Prayer for the Dead; a thing
unlawful and superstitious.

There are diverse Laws made against the Followers of John Wickliff, called
Lollards, who in the Statutes are said to be Heretics, who intended to subvert
the Christian Faith, The Law of God, The Church, and the Realm, 2 H. 5. 7. and
5 Rich. 2. 5. 2 H. 4. 15. 25 H. 8. 14. These were the most sincere Professors
of the Gospel. A Law was made 1 Edw. 6. 12. to Repeal the Laws against the
Lollards: yet long after that, the High-Sheriffs were yearly sworn to extirpate
these Heretics, as they were called; and that clause was continued in the
Sheriffs Oath, until the late Wars. Sir Edward Coke calls them Heretics: we
may see what Times have been, and how the bent of the Laws have been to root
out the Gospel, and to Establish Popery.

The Statute of the 4 H. 4. 18. That an Attorney playing the Knave, shall
forswear the Court; This is an abuse of an Oath, and profaning the Name of God.

These Laws are all of the same kind with those beforementioned in the 5th
Chapter, where the Statute of Marlbridge, and other old Statutes, made in
affirmance of the Common Law, are recited; and are Repugnant to those Laws of
God contained in the Holy Scripture, which are there expressed; as further
appears in this Treatise, where most of these Laws are more particularly
handled.

CHAP. VIII. That the Common Law has been altered and changed since Edw. 4.
his time, when Littleton wrote, in an hundred particulars; most of them of
great Importance.
BY the Statutes made since Littleton wrote, 37 H. 8. c. 9. 13 El c. 8. Coke
Rep. l. 5. fo. 7.
Assurances of Lands, and all Statutes and Obligations made upon Usurious
Contracts against those Laws, are avoidable, and the Law therein altered since
Littleton wrote.

2. By a Statute concerning the inrollment of Deeds, 27 H. 8. c. 16. Coke Rep.
l. 2. fo. 36. l. 4. fo. 70. l. 5. fo. 1. l. 7. fo. 41. l. 8. fo. 93.
the Purchaser has many Privileges, which he had not at the Common Law in
force before that Statute; as, the Estate in Lease, or a Reversion, passes
without Attornment, and the Purchaser may distrain for Rent. And if it be the
Inheritance of the Wife, the Husband having Issue by her, shall be Tenant by
Courtesy, and an Estate passes without Livery.

3. There were several Statutes made since Littleton wrote, 32 H. 8. c. 2. 34
H. 8. c. 5. 27 H. 8. c. 10.
enabling men to devise their Fee-simple-Lands by Will in writing; which
regularly a man could not do by the Common Law, unless by Custom; which was but
in some Boroughs, and some few other places. If the Lands were holden in
Knights Service, the Owner might devise two third parts; if in Soccage, he
might devise all: And since of later times, the Tenures in Knight Service and
Capite are abolished.

4. At the Common Law, 13 Ed. 3. det. 135, 139.
an Heir might have had an Action of Debt upon an Obligation made payable to
his Ancestors and his Heirs: But the Law is now altered, and only Executors
and Administrators can recover upon such an Obligation. This is plain by the
Probate of every Will, and is so in daily practice; for all the Goods and
Chattels are Assets, and shall pay Debts to the Creditors, their Executors or
Administrators.

Coke Com. Littl. Dower, l. 1. c. 5. sect. 53. and 55.
5. At the Common Law a Woman should have lost her Dower by the Felony of her
Husband, that Dower which was Ex assensu patris ad ostium Ecclesiae, and her
Dower by Custom: But now it is otherwise by several Statutes; and these two
former sorts of Dower are now out of use.

27 H. 8. c. 9. Coke Rep. l. 5. fo. 27.
6. By the Statute of 27 H. 8. Chap. 9. A Jointure before Marriage made to a
woman, is a Bar to a Writ of Dower, to be brought by the woman for the Third
part of the Lands, whereof her Husband was seized during the Coverture: which
was otherwise at the Common Law when Littleton wrote.

Westminster. 2. c. 1.
7. By the Statute of Westminster. 2. Chap. 1. If a man seized of Land in general Tail
had taken a wife, and afterward been attainted of Felony; 1 Ed. 6. c. Coke
Com. Littleton, l. 1. c. 5. sect. 53.
before the Statute of the 1 Edw. 6. the Issue should have inherited, although
the wife should not have been endowed: But now she shall be endowed, and yet
the Issue in such case shall not inherit the Lands which the Father had in
Fee-simple.

32 H. 8. c. 28. 13 El. c. 10. 18 El. c. 20. Coke Rep. l. 6. fo. 37. l. 11. fo.
67.
8. By virtue of several Statutes made since Littleton wrote, Bishops, Deans and
Chapters, Halls and Colleges, Parsons, Vicars, and Governors of Hospitals,
are disabled to make long Leases, or Conveyances of their Lands, belonging to
them in right of their Corporations: And they may avoid such Leases as they
shall make of such Lands, contrary to those Statutes; which they could not do
when Littleton wrote: and the Law i^ altered in those Points by the said
Statutes; and they are now restrained.

13 El. c. 20. 3 Jac. c. 4. 32 H. 8. c. 28.
9. Also by virtue of the same, and some other Statutes, Ecclesiastical persons
may make Leases of their Bene^^ces, so they be not non-resident, or absent
fourscore days: and Tenant in Fee-simple in Right of his Church, Tenant in
Tail, and a man and his wife seized in Fee or Fee-tail in Right of the wife,
may make Leases of such Lands for three lives; which they could not do when
Littleton wrote.

37 H. 8. c. 10.
10. Before the Statute of the 27 H. 8. If Cesty que use had dyed, his Heir
within age, the Lord should have had the Wardship of the Heir. 4 H. 7. c. 41.
If the Feoffee had dyed, his Heir within age, the Lord should have had the
Wardship of his Heir also; so there should have been two Wardships for the same
Lands. But this is altered by the same Statute.

11. The Court of Wards, 33 H. 8. c. 22. 32 H. 8. c. 46.
erected by virtue of the Statutes made since Littleton wrote, altered very
many things in the Law, as may be seen by the Statutes: And particularly, he
that was poss^ssed of a term for 100 years or more, was judged to dye seized,
Repugnant to the Common Law.

12. 32 H. 8. c. 24. 27 H. 8. c. 27. 1 Ed. 6. c. 14. 31 H. 8. c. 13. 37 H. 8.
c. 4.
The whole Rabble of those Ecclesiastical persons (as they are called) Regular,
and many of those called Secular, are dissolved by several Acts of Parliament;
and so the many Laws concerning them, are thereupon out of use: And all the
Privileges granted to the Cestercians, Hospitallers, or Priors of S. John's of
Jerusalem, and other Superstitious Houses, to be freed from Taxes, Toll, and
other Secular Servi^es (except non-payment of Tithes) are altered and changed;
and now those Lands are usually charged to all payments, as others are.

13. The Statute appointing, 21 H. 8. c. 4.
That such a man's Executors as prove his Will, and take upon them
Administration thereof, may sell a man's Land devised to Executors for payment
of Debts or Legacies, although others named Executors do refuse to intermeddle,
or to join in the Sale, and the Sale is good: That Statu^e was made since
Littleton wrote, which is contrary to the Common Law.

14. The Statute of the 21 H. 8. Chap. 19. 21 H. 8. c. 19. Coke Com. Lit. l. 3.
s^ct 444 and 447.
gives the Lord power to avow upon the Land for Rent, or Services, or Damage
faisans, without naming his Tenant, because there are sometimes secret
Conveyances made to strangers, to cosen the Lord of his Servi^es: and this an
Alteration of the Common Law.

15. All the Laws and Customs concerning Villains, Cok. Com. Litt. T^t.
Villenage, l. 2. c. 11. sect. 172, 175, 176, 177, 189, etc.
mentioned by Littleton, That the Lord might kill them, sell them, or use them,
are in a manner abrogated or worn out of use, by reason that most of the
Villains, and such as held in Villainage, are Copy-holder^, and by some act
either in Deed or in Law, are Manumitted: which alters the Law in many
particulars since Littleton wrote.

16. The Trial of men for Treasons and Felony, 22 H 8. c. 1. 1 and 2 Phil. and
Mar. c. 10. 33 H. 8. c. 20. and 23.
and other Trials between and Party and Party in Personal Actions, have been in
several particulars altered by Acts of Parliament, 27 El. c. 6, and 7. 4 and 5
Ph. M. c. 7.
and the Forms changed, and new Pleadings and Proceedings introduced since
Littleton wrote.

17. There are several Acts of Parliament made since Littleton wrote, 31 H. 8.
c. 1. 32 H. 8. c. 32. Litt. l. 3. sect. 290.
by virtue whereof partition may be made by Joynt-tenants, and Tenants in
Common; which is otherwise at the Common Law, and is an alteration thereof.

18. There was an Act made in the 31 H. 8. That the Manors, 31 H. 8. c. 3.
Lands and Tenements of Thoma^ Lord Cromwell, and many others (to the number of
34 persons) lying in Kent, and being Gavel-kind-lands, should descend as other
Lands at Common Law: This an alteration since Littletons time.

19. There are, by Statutes since Littleton wrote, diverse Conditions annexed to
Offices, 5 and 6 Ed. 6. 16
which may forfeit the same; and were not so at the Common Law.

20. Before the Statute of the 32 H. 8. Chap. 34. no Grantee or Assignee of a
Reversion, 32 H. 8. c. 34.
by the Common Law, could take advantage of a re-entry by force of any
Condition: but by that Statute the Grantees or Assignees of any Reversion, etc.
of any Lands, etc. shall have advantage by entry for Rent, or doing of waste,
as the Lessors or Grantors themselves might have had.

21. There were at the Common Law two sorts of Divorces: 1. A Mensa, and Thoro:
2. A Vinculo Matrimonii; and many ridiculous causes of Divorce (of which
Adultery is not reckoned to be one) against the Law of God; 32 H. 8. c. 38. 2
Ed. 6. 23. 1 El. c. 1.
as, pre-contract without Consummation, Consanguinity, or Affinity in Cousin
Germans, and so to the fourth Degree, The marrying or carnal knowledge of any
person of Kin, to the second Marriage-kindred within those Degrees: Diverse of
which are remedied by Acts since Littleton wrote, and the rest are antiquated,
and for shame disused; and now all men may marry any person not prohibited by
Gods Law; and regularly, nothing is a cause of Divorce, but Adultery: and yet
Causa frigid^tatis sive Impotentia, has been allowed by the Bawdy Bishops.

32 H. 8. c. 33. Coke Com Lit. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 385.
22. At the Common Law, if a Disseissor, Abator or Intruder, had dyed seized,
soon after the wrong done, the Disseissee and his Heirs had been barred of
Entry, without any time limited by Law: But by a Statute made since Littleton
wrote, such Disseisees nor their heirs are not barred, except the Disseisor
has been in quiet possession five years, without Entry or continual Claim.

23. So likewise if the Disseisor had been longer possession, Littleton, l. 3.
c. 6. sect. 385.
by the Common Law the Disseisee could not have entered upon him; nor could the
Disseisee have entered upon the Feoffee of the Disseisor, if he had continued a
year and a day in quiet possession: But now the Law is altered, and only a
dying seized is a Bar in some cases.

24. By the Common Law, after a Fine levied, Littleton, l. 3. c. sect. 441. 4
H. 7. c. 24. 32 H. 8 c. 36.
he that had right, had but a years time to enter, after which he was barred:
But by the Statutes made since Littleton wrote, he that has right has five
years allowed to him to enter, after the Fine perfected.

25. By several Statutes since Littleton wrote, 2 and 3 E. 6. c. 24 34 and 35
H. 8. c. 14. 3. H. 7. c. 1. 1 Ed 6. c. 7. 33 H 8. c. 9. Coke Com. Lit. l. 3.
sect. 442. 27. H. 8. c. 10. Coke Com. Lit. l. 3. sect. 463, and 464.
diverse powers and authorities are given to Justices of Assize, which they had
not at the Common Law, nor by any Statute, before those Statutes were made.

26. By the Common Law, if a man's Land had been granted or settled to another,
to the use of the Grantor, and to the Issue in Tail, the Land in Law had been
the parties to whom it was conveyed; and (Cesty que use) he for whom the use
was, had nothing but Equity to recover the Profits: But now since Littleton
wrote, all possession is transferred to the use, and the Law changed, Plow.
Com. 349. 6.

27. By a Statute made 2 H. 5. all such Jurors as were to be returned for Trial
of Issues joined in any the Courts at Westminster, or before Justices of
Assize, 2 H. 5. c. 3. second Parliam. 11 H. 7. c. 21.
were to have 40 s. by the year in Lands and Tenements, etc. By the Statute of
the 27 Eliz. it is enacted, 27 El. c. 6.
That such Jurors shall have 4 l. by the year at least, and so it is to be
expressed in the Venire facias; which is an alteration since Littleton wrote.

28. All those special pleadings discussed by occasion of Littletons Text, 23 H
8. c. 5. 7 Jac. c. 5. and 12 Act 23 October. 1650. 21 Jac. c. 14.
l. 3. sect. 485. are taken away by several Acts of Parliament: And by the last
Act of the 23 October. 1650. liberty is given in all cases to plead the general
Issue; which is a great ease in most cases; although in a Replevin, the Law is
rather worse then it was, as is showed in its proper place.

29. By several Statutes since Littleton wrote, the times for commencing of
real, and possessory, and personal Actions are limited: 32 H. 8. c. 2. 21 Jac.
c. 16.
First, by the Statute of the 32 H. 8. and afterward by the Statute of 21 Jac.
By which Statute (it is said) the Kings Right is concluded, as well as all other
persons; and barred after twenty years in all real Actions: These are
abridgements of the Law since Littletons time.

27 H. 8. c. 4. 1 Ed. 6. c. 14.
30. All those Laws mentioned by Littleton, concerning Free Chapels and
Chantries, and the cases thereupon depending, are at an end by those Statutes
since Littleton wrote.

31. By several Statutes made since Littletons time, the petty Errors in
Pleadings, 32 H. 8. c. 30. 18 El. c. 14.
Mispleadings, and Jeofailes, are helped and amended, in real, mixed, and
personal Actions; insomuch, as where at Common Law every mistake of a Letter,
Word, want of Warrant of Attorney, or Misreturn of any Writ, or any other petty
inconsiderable Error or Mistake, 21 Jac. c. 13.
was sufficient to destroy any Action, or to arrest or reverse Judgment. Act
1652.
Now no Error before Appearance, nor any Error but what is matter of Substance,
and of the Essence of the Action, can prejudice the Suit: This is an amendment
of the Common Law.

32. The Law concerning ordinary Jurisdiction, and Spiritual Law (as they
called it) which is discussed by Littleton, Littleton, l. 3. sect. 648.
Lib. 3. Sect. 648. has been since altered by the Statute of the 25 H. 8.
which restrains the Ecclesiastical Laws, 25 H. 8. c. 19.
that they be not repugnant to the Common Law, nor the Statutes and Customs of
the Realm: and since, the same Law concerning ordinary Jurisdiction and
Ecclesiastical Laws, are abolished with the Hierarchy of Bishops, etc. and
their Courts.

33. Since Littleton wrote, there were two Statutes made to preserve Remainders
and Reversions in Lands and Tenement expectant upon Estates for Life; 32 H. 8.
c. 31.
which (it seems) by the Common Law might be barred by a Common Recovery, or
thereby the Entry of him in Reversion or Remainder taken away: But by those
Laws, such Recoveries by Tenant for life are void, and the Entry saved by the
last Statute of the 14 Eliz. 14 El. c. 8.
which is contrary to the Law in force when Littleton lived, although the first
Statute be Repealed by that last mentioned.

34. The like Law was concerning Tenant in Dower; Coke Com. Lit. l. 3. sect.
697. 11 H. 7. c. 20.
If she had aliened in Fee with Warranty, and dyed, that Warranty had bound the
Heir: But now, if Tenant for Life or in Dower alien, it is a forfeiture, and
the heir may enter. This is a good amendment of the Common Law.

35. If Tenant in Tail be in possession, 26 H. 8. c. 13. 33 H. 8. c. 20.
or that has Right of Entry, be attainted of High Treason, the Estate Tail is
barred, and the Land forfeited: But this Attainder was no Bar at the Common
Law, nor when Littleton wrote.

36. If Tenant in Tail levy a Fine, with Proclamations, 4 H. 7. c. 24. Coke
Com. Lit. l. 3. sect. 708.
according to the Statute; this a Bar to the Estate Tail, but not to him in
Reversion or Remainder, if he makes his Claim, or pursues his Action within
five years after the Estate Tail spent: But the Law was otherwise when
Littleton wrote.

37. When Littleton wrote, if the Kings Donee in Tail, the Remainder in the
King, had suffered a Common Recovery, the Estate Tail had been barred, but not
the Reversion or Remainder in the King; and if such Donee had levied a Fine,
with Proclamations, 4 H. 7. c. 24. 34 H. 8. c. 20. Coke Com. Lit. l. 3. sect.
708.
after the Statute of the 4 H. 7. this had barred the Estate Tail, although the
Reversion were in the King: But since, by the Statute of the 34 H. 8. a Common
Recovery had against the Tenant in Tail of the Kings Gift, or such a Fine
levied by him, (the Reversion continuing in the King) is no Bar to the Estate
Tail, wherein the Law has been changed since Littleton wrote.

38. By several Statutes made since Littleton wrote, the wife of a man
attainted of Misprision of Treason, 1 Ed. 6. c. 13. 5 Ed. 6. c. 11. 5 El. c. 1.
and 11. 18 El. c. 1.
Murder, or Felony, is Dowable; which was not so favored at the Common Law.

39. By the Statute of Westminster. 1. No Sheriff or Minister of the Kings, was to
take any thing for execution of his Office, 23 H. 6. c. 10. 19 H 7. c. 8. 29
El. c.
but what the King allowed to him; and is was so by the Common Law. But by
Statutes afterward (of which two are since Littleton wrote) Fees are allowed
to be taken by such Officers.

32 H. 8. c 32.
40. By the Common Law, no Executor or Administrator of Tenants in Fee-simple or
Fee-tail, had any means to recover Arrerages of Rents and Services due in the
lifetime of such Tenant. Now the Law is altered, and such Executors and
Administrators are by Statute enabled to sue for, and recover the same.

27 H. 8. c. 10. Coke Com. Lit. l. 3. c. 5. sect. 384.
41. By the Statute of 27 H. 8. If a man seized in Fee-Covenant, upon good
Consideration, to stand seized to himself for life, and to the use of his
eldest Son in Tail, with the Remainder to his second Son in Tail, with
Remainders over, etc. and to this annexed a Proviso, That it shall be lawful
for the Covenanter, at any time during his life, to revoke any of those Uses:
This is good in Law, the Proviso being coupled with an Use. But at Common Law,
if a Feoffment or other Conveyance had been made with such Proviso, the Proviso
had been repugnant, and void.

42. By the Common Law, all men were at liberty, and might use what Trades they
would, without being bounden Apprentice: 5 El. c. 4. 11 El. c. 11. 1 Jac. c.
16. 1 Jac. c. 17.
But by the Statute of the 5 Eliz. Chap. 4 the whole business of Servants and
Apprentices is settled, and all men who use any Trade, Art, or Occupation, which
was a Trade at the making of that Act, are bound to serve as Apprentices seven
years; and in some cases by other Statutes, restraint is laid upon some
Tradesmen, from keeping too many Servants: which is contrary to the Common Law.

43. By the Common Law, no Costs were given to a Defendant; which was a great
Oppression: but that is amended since Littleton wrote, 8 El. c. 8.
by several Acts of Parliament; and now the Plaintiff shall pay Costs in almost
all cases, in personal, real, and mixed Actions (unless upon Demurrers) and in
Popular Actions, where the Informer discontinues, he shall pay Costs.

44. The Law concerning Interest of Money since Littleton wrote, 13 El. c. 8.
21 Jac. c. 17. 3 Car. c. 4. 20 H. 3. c. 5. 3 H. 7. c. 5, 6. 11 H. 7. c. 8.
has been altered several times by Acts of Parliament. By the Common Law, and
some old Statutes, lending of Money for Usury (as it is called) was unlawful,
and the one half forfeited so lent. Afterward it was permitted to take ten in
the Hundred for Loan or Interest, by the Statute 37 H. 8. then the Statute of
the 21 Jac. 37 H. 8. c. Coke l. 5. Rep. Claytons Case.
brought it to Eight in the Hundred; and now it is reduced to Six in the
Hundred: which is a great alteration of the Common Law.

45. In the old Law Books, there are few or no Actions upon the Case for Words:
now of late there is nothing more common: and this seems to be a great
alteration since Littleton wrote. The pleadings are clean altered; they are
said to be brought into form in Edw. 3. his time, but very short, which are now
grown excessive long; and that which was usually disputed by the Lawyers, seems
now to be put into the pleadings in writing in many Cases.

46. The Writ called, a Clausum fregit, Upon this Writ the Plaintiff may
declare in any Personal Action, as if the special matter had been in the Writ.
is a late Invention (I mean, to the purpose it is now used) serving in stead of
a Latitat, and is of very great use; insomuch as it serves to expedite men's
Suits; and saves them from abatements, and so from losing their Suits, and
enforcing them to begin again, in case where there wants good Instructions, or
any thing mistaken in the Original. This is a change of the Law since Littleton
wrote, in point of Practice.

47. By the Common Law, M.F. ordered to pay 5 l. for serving an honorable
person with a Subpoena, about Easter-Term, 1634.
a Nobleman could not be Arrested, nor his person imprisoned upon Mesne
Process in any Personal Action; neither could a Subpoena be made forth against
him. In the first Case, there was only Cowel Inst. Jur. Angl. l. 4. Tit. 2.
sect. 5. p. 291.
a Summons, and thereupon a Distress; and so Issues returned, until the
Defendant appeared: and in the later Case, the Lords Commissioners, then Lord
Keeper or Lord Chancellor, use to write his or their Letters to such Nobleman,
to give him notice of the Suit, desiring him to appear and Answer. Now,
Noblemen are used as others are; Their Privilege of Peerage being not allowed
to them. This is an Alteration of the Law in point of Practice.

Now upon Consideration of all this, it is evident, That Littleton, and the
Common Law, has been altered in so many particulars, which are not thing:
trivial, but points most material, and of general Concernment to all sorts of
People; and especially, there being as I take it) very few Particulars
enumerated, but what appear by Sir Edward Coke his own Writing (to which I most
confine my self) to have been altered and changed as aforesaid: besides many
more Alterations of the Common Law, which have been made in some things of High
Concernment, as appertaining to Religion; and other things more Trivial, and of
less Concernment, and yet worthy to be taken notice of; but here omitted, as
being besides the Scope of the Matter in hand, because Littleton has written
nothing of the same. And although I have referred all these Alterations to
Forty seven particular Heads; yet upon perusal thereof, the Reader may find
in some one of those Heads, many Particulars comprehended; and very few of them
mentioned, but contain more then one Particular. I say, That every man who will
but observe what is here set down, will agree with me, That Littleton has been
altered in more then an hundred Particulars; besides what Alterations are made
in other parts of the Common Law, of which Littleton has not written: And
therefore, That sure L^ttleton, or the Common Law, was not so Perfect and
Complete, nor so Profitable to the People, as the world has judged it to be;
it having had need of so many Alterations and Amendments.

CHAP. IX. That there ought not to be a Court of Law or Justice, and another of
Equity (such as now are in England) maintained or suffered in any Nation
professing the Gospel.
THis Position is so clear, that the contrary has no manner of Foundation of
Truth, either in the Law of Nature, Right Reason, or the Word of God: For that
Justice is but one, as Truth is but one, and simply one; and Justice and
Injustice are opposites. I speak of distributive Justice, not of Essential
Justice in God; from whom some Arguments might be brought, to confirm the point
in hand; but that appertains to another Consideration: nor have I here to do
with Commutative Justice, concerning the various management of Affairs in
Commerce between man and man, for rectifying the Abuses, Frauds, Oppressions,
Wrongs, and other Enormities therein: It pleased Almighty God to set up this
Light, and to Ordain Powers and Authorities to distribute No Act of Parliament
either printed or not printed, in former or later times, gives the L.
Chancellor power to hold any Court of Equity, Coke Inst. 2 part. Art. super
Chart. p. 553. All Courts of Law at Westminster said to be Courts of Equity in
the time of Ed. 3. Coke Instit. 2 part. Art. super Chart. p. 552.
Justice and Equity amongst men, for the upholding of Society, Political and
Oeconomical, and the preserving of Sobriety and Temperance, and for
encouragement of men in well-doing. Cock. Essay, p. 139. The Law of the 12
Tables, is said to be the end of Law and Equity, Tac. 1. Annal. l 3 c. 5. p. 71.
Nature holds forth but one Light to men, and God gives but one Law to
Christians. This is the end of Magistracy, The Execution of Justice: which in
their hands, whether Supreme or Subordinate, is that Virtue which is commonly
called, Distributive Justice, and comprehends in it Equity is the Law of
Nature, to which all men are bound. That is honest, which is agreeable to the
Equity of Nature, Bod. Rep. l. 1. p. ^05.
Equity; and the same likewise is called Righteousness. Now that Justice and
Equity are the same thing, there is nothing more clear: as Aequum and Justum,
are Termini convertibiles; so are Justice and Equity. Weems. M. L. Com. 8.
Exerc. 8. p. 225, 230. Godw. Antiq. Romans l. 3. sect. 4. c. 1. Isa. 59.13, 14,
15 Prove. 17.26.
And these are indifferently taken one for the other in the Holy Scriptures,
Isa. 59.14. Justice stands afar off, and Equity cannot enter: By these two
words, is elegantly set forth the Injustice of the Magistrates, who had to do
in execution of Justice and Judgment, as is there expressed. The same appears
in that place of the Proverbs, To punish the just is not good, nor to strike
Princes for Equity: It is an evil and wicked thing to punish men for doing that
which is just, or to abuse Magistrates for executing Justice. Coloss. 4.1. Col.
4.1.
Masters, give unto your Servants that which is just and equal: The two words
there used, are (...) and (...), which are indifferently taken one for the
other, and either of them signify just or equal, Phil. 1.7. Phil. 1.7.
(...). Arias Montanus translates it, Sicut est justum. Pasor Lex. p. 187. a. 2
Cor. 8.14.
Pasor in his Lexicon renders it, Prout -- aequitas postulat. 2 Cor. 8.14.
(...); this is Englished, That there may be equality. The same word, (...), is
translated by the Pasor Lex. p. 343. a.
Learned, Aequalitas, aequitas, justitia; and so it is indifferently used for
either Equity or Justce, which are the same thing, being referred to the act of
the Magistrate in distribution of Law or Right: Psalm. 98.9. 1 John 3.7.
And Almighty God is said to Judge the World with Righteousness, and the People
with Equity. The like appears in many other Texts of Scripture. And in the
same sense these words, Justice and Equity, are indifferently used by Profane
Authors, to signify the same thing; and they are only distinguished thus:
Franc. Sylvii, Com. Orat. Cicero, pro Murena, Tom. 1. p. 771.
Aequitas est ratio Legis, Jus vero sententia ipsa; so that Equity and Right
are not administered as several things The Law without Equity, is as the Body
without the Soul. The least Judges have power to judge and give sentence
according to the equity of the cause, Bodin. Repub. l. 6. c. 6. p 763, 764.
, but the one is in the mind of the Judge, the other more perspicuous; and
both made up the act of Justice. And the same Author charge it as a fault,
that Usu saepe venit, ut inter se pugnent Juus and Aequitas. In this sense the
Lawyers themselves have used Lex for Jus and Aequitas, or the one for the
other: (...), Finch, c. 1. f. 1. Consuet. Norm. tit. de Jure, fo. 125. and tit.
de Justit. cod. Cust. Norm. tit. Justice, page 7. B. Arist. Eth. l. 5. c. 41.
Lex dicitur (...), a distribuendo que ceo distribute droit a Chesc': Because
it gives Right to every one: The very same words are used in opposition of that
Law of the Romans, called, Lex Eubul. Din. Scho. in Orat. Cicer. de Lege
Agraria. tom. 1. p. 710. This Law was for Division of Lands amongst the poor
Commons, being sound in the possession of private persons, Tit. Live. l. 2. p.
71. c.
Agraria, where the Commmentator in his Scholia's upon Cicero's Oration against
that Law, says, Lex suum cuique tribuit; and thence reasons, and concludes
Logically thus: Maj. The Law gives to every one Right: Min. This Law does not
give to every one Right: Concl. Ergo, haec Lex Justitia non est. Let our Law
and Equity be laid to this Rule, and see how any man living can defend both.

A poor man, for Example, is bounden in a Bond of Twenty pounds; conditioned
for payment of Ten pounds, with Interest: which Bond is forfeited, because the
Money was not paid at the day, although it was paid two or three years after,
and nothing unpaid but Interest: The Creditor puts this Bond in Suit, it may be
either out of mere covetousness, or to hook in some other pretended Debt or
Duty: The Defendant pleads Condition performed; or upon the general Issue,
gives in Evidence the payment of the Principal three years after the day
limited in the Condition. The Judge, in such case, must give direction for Law,
That the Jury must find for the Plaintiff; for that the Defendant Justitia
legalis stricte sumpta, quatenus opponitur aequitati, est iniquitas, etc.
Amesii, l. 5. de Conscient^a, c. 2. p. 269. Finis Legis est Justitia, Coed.
Rhod. l. 13. c. 19. p. 697.
must have his Remedy in Equity: and accordingly, a Verdict is given for the
Plaintiff. And the Defendant prefers his Bill into the Chancery; and therein
alleges all that is true, and somewhat more, to make his Bill hold: and if
the Plaintiff at Law get Judgment entered, before the Bill come in, (which may
be had the first week in the next Term after the Trial) there is an end of the
Suit; the poor man has had Justice, Summum Jus, that is, the extremity of the
Law, which is Summa Injuria; and his Adversary has Execution against him for
the Twenty pounds Penalty, and Eight pounds for Costs, which is given in nature
of damages: This he Defendant must pay, or lie in Goal; and the Law, as it is
Justice (in conceit) cannot relieve him. Well, the poor man has (it may be)
got a Reprive, upon preferring his Bill; the Plaintiff at Law is either in
Contempt, or prays a Dedimus Potestatem, to answer in the Country; or it may
be in his Answer, confesses part of the Money paid, or else that the Bond is
ancient. Hereupon, the Complaint in Chancery obtains an Injunction, and in
short goes to Commission, and brings the Cause to Hearing, and has a Decree,
That the Plaintiff paying the Interest (which may be some thirty shillings) and
Costs (which may be five Marks) besides the aforesaid Eight pounds, the
Defendant, who was Plaintiff at Law, shall acknowledge satisfaction of the
Judgment, and deliver up the Bond. The Decree is enrolled, and the Defendant
served with a Writ of Execution of it, and obeys it: and this is the best that
can be expected. And then the parties fall to cast up their Accounts; and it is
found, That the Plaintiff at Law spent Eight pounds, and the Defendant four
pounds: The Plaintiff in Chancery spent Twenty pounds, and the Defendant Twenty
Marks: Lay all this together, and in conclusion, the Debtor has spent 24 l.
and paid 11 l. 6 s. 8 d. and the Creditor has spent 21 l. 6 s. 8 d. and
received for his Debt and Costs 11 l. 6 s. 8 d. So the Creditor loses his
Debt, and Ten pounds out of his purse; and the Debtor has spent and paid 35 l.
6 s. 8 d. where the first Debt was but Ten pounds, and the Remainder was but
thirty shillings. O famous Law and Equity! I could show many of these Cases:
And indeed, this has been the common practice with most Judges, to send men to
Equity: and they ought to do so, whilst the Law stands as it does. Now apply
this to the Rule and Argument abovementioned: The Law could not relieve the
Debtor, but Equity does relieve him; Which of these two has done him Right?
The Law did him none; for if it had done him Right, then the Chancery ought not
to have done the contrary; which it has done: for, to charge a man, and to
discharge him, are clean contrary. And the Chancery has not relieved him; for
in effect, he has paid and spent more then treble the principal Debt and
Interest: So upon the point, he is relieved nowhere: And yet every man will
say, He is no just man, who refuses to deliver up a Bond when it is fully paid.
How does this Law (put all together) give every man Right? and if it do not,
then is it an unjust Law. I do confidently affirm, That no Nation professing
the Gospel, ought to have or maintain any Law so severe or rigid, that it needs
any Court of Equity to moderate it. If it were needful or convenient in any
case, to have relief in Equity, it must needs be in case of Life and Death,
which is a business of higher Concernment then a little Money, and more
favored in Law. But no man ever heard of a Bill preferred into any Court of
Equity, to save one from the Gallows; and therefore it is to be presumed, there
is no need of any such Court, if the Law were Just and Equal.

But because it may be every man will not be satisfied, that in the Case
abovementioned, there was a direct Repugnancy in the Judgments of these two
Courts; because, The Chancery did give relief in Tanto, though not in Toto:
I Will only put one short Case more, to put the matter out of question.

A man indebted upon a single Bill, pays the Money upon the day in the Bill
appointed, and has Witness of the payment; but the Bill cannot be found: This
Bill comes after to be put in Suit; the Defendant cannot be admitted to plead
payment at the day, nor has he any other Plea sufficient in Law to discharge
himself; nor can be relieved at Law, unless he have a Release, although he
prove the Debt paid; but Judgment must needs pass against him, either by
Default, or Confession, or upon a Verdict, after Issue joined upon some false
Plea, which the Defendant thinks most easy, and after which he shall have most
color of Equity. Well, Judgment is passed, and the Defendant must expect
Execution, without relief at Law. But for fear of the worst, the Defendant has
before Judgment his Bill preferred into the Chancery, to which the Defendant,
Plaintiff at Law, answers, and the Cause comes to hearing; where it appears,
the Debt to be paid: thereupon, the Court decrees the Bill to be delivered up.
Here is a just Contradiction, and diametrical Opposition: The Law condemns the
Debtor, or at least will not relieve him; and the Chancery does discharge him
of the debt, and so relieves him. Upon this consideration, some honest Judges
of late days, have used in some Cases, to order the Plaintiff (upon the
Defendants payment of the principal Debt, with Interest, and Costs, or what
shall appear to be unpaid) to deliver up the Specialty, and discontinue the
Suit, or stay the same. This is a short and equal way (which is Justice, and no
more) to give every one his Right, according to that of the wise Heathen,
Plutarch in Laco. Apoph. Stob. ser. 7. Ex Agesil.
Nihil praeter aequum faciendum esse, etc. Justitiam semper oportet esse
Clementiam temperatam: Yet this is contrary to the Law, and no Record is made
of any such Judgment. But other Judges have usually said in such Cases, The
Defendant must seek relief in Equity; they must do Justice, that is, show
Extremity.

These two Courts can no more consist with Justice, then two Weights or
Measures of different bigness or length. I use this familiar Comparison,
because it pleases the Holy Ghost to make use thereof to this very purpose,
Prove. 20.10. Prove. 20.10.
Diverse weights and diverse measures, are both alike abomination to the Lord.
These words, Diverse weights and diverse measures, D. J. Burgis in hunc loc.
word for word out of the Original, are, a stone and a stone, that is,
different Weights and Measures, of several sizes, one bigger, another less: and
this is expounded by that in Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14.
Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse Weights, a great and a small: Thou
shall not have in thy house diverse Measures, a great and a small. These words
by a Synecdoche speciei, Note, The difference between L. Chancellor Egerton,
and L. Chief Justice Coke, about the Power of the Chancery after a Judgment at
Law, Wilson Hist. Great Britain, page 95.

Bodinus the learned Civilian observes, That Contention between great
Magistrates or Courts, about their Power or Jurisdiction, is always hurtful to
the poor Subjects, Bodin. Repub. l. 3. c. 6. p. 356.


forbid all unjust and unequal dealing and commerce amongst men, and all
Injustice and Iniquity, and the instruments, tools, and means thereof: and
implicitly, the same Law commands, all Justice and Equity; and directly
forbids two Courts, having contrary Powers and Jurisdictions, and executing
things Repugnant and contrary one to another: If the one proceed justly, the
other must needs be unjust. Neither do the Scriptures any-where mention Justice
and Equity as two several things, to be distributed in one Case; as if that
might be done by the one, which might not be done by the other; nor that ever
any good Judges gave any such Judgments: but rather, when they are said to do
Justice, it is intended, That they did justly and equally. It Is true, that the
Exodus 21.1
Judicial Laws are called Judgments, and the execution of the Moral Law, is
called Justice. And so 2 Samuel 8.15
David is said, to execute Judgment and Justice; that is, to judge justly and
righteously, both in respect of the Moral and Judicial Laws. As for the
Ceremonial Law, that was not properly belonging to distributive Justice, but
concerned every particular man, as the immediate service of God.

To conclude this point; If the Law were just and equal, as it ought to be,
there were no need of any Court of Equity: And the Law, as now it is, having
need of such Courts of Equity as these are, is an Oppression of the People, and
so clearly against the Isa. 10.1.
Law of God.

The Court of Wards, was a Court mixed of Law and Equity; and there, he that was
but a Termer or Sewals case Court Wards, Carol. 7.
Tenant of Lands, holden in Capite or Knights-Service, for any long time, as
100 years or above, was adjudged in the Kings Case to dye seized, because that
he had the Land, and the Reversion was worth little or nothing. And these long
Leases were made to defraud the Lord of his Wards. So if a man's Lands were in
the hands of Trustees at the time of his death, they decreed the Land to
descend to his Heir, as to some purposes.

The Court of Exchequer is likewise a mixed Court, insomuch, that if a man's Land
were extended for Debt due to the King, or a Judgment against him upon a
Recognizance, the Court might, and usually did moderate the rigor, by
installing the Debt; and sometimes discharged it, upon matter pleaded: And this
is agreeable to Law, that such Debts should not be levied to the great
grievance of the Subject. Here Equity and Law are brought together; which I
remember, not to commend the Court of Wards (which was a heavy Burden, nor yet
the Exchequer in every thing) but to show, That Law and Equity have been, and
may be both dispensed in one Court, as is herein before set forth. And what
has been said upon the Bench by the Sir John Smith L. Keeper his Speech in
Chancery.
Lord Keeper or Lord Chancellor, in my hearing; viz. That the Lord Chancellor
in that Court, was trusted with the Kings Conscience; but he could not delegate
it to another; as if the King, in respect of his Sovereignty, had power to
dispense with the Law (which the Judges might not do without delegacy from him
The Judge as well as the Prince may judge according to conscience; and what is
right in the one, is right in the other; and that which is wrong in on^, why
should it not be wrong in the other? It Is lawful for no man in judgment to
swerve from Equity and Conscience, Bod. Rep. lib. 6. cap. 6. page 768.
. This is an unreasonable Conceit, to think that any Authority or Power on
Earth, can give any liberty to swerve from the Rule of Gods Word and Right
Reason: It were to put that upon the Supreme Magistrate, as was said of one of
the Popes, That he was Nec homo, nec Deus, sed inter utrumque. And so much in
general of this matter.

CHAP. X. That all such as chiefly require a remedy in a Court of Equity, may
easily be determined by the Judges in Courts of Law, if the Law were amended as
it ought to be: And herein, that which is usually said for the upholding of
Courts of Equity, is answered.
THat which in the former Chapter is said, concerning a Debtor having relief
only in Equity, against the Penalty of a Bond, or in an Action brought upon a
single Bill, which is paid (being things most common in every man's practice) I
have therein sufficiently answered, and cleared it, That the Judges of Law
might easily determine all such Causes without a Court of Equity, The Court of
Chancery was anciently Officina Justitiae, and the Lord Chancellor used to sit
as Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; and no mention made of a Court of Equity,
until the Reign of H 6. and Ed. 4. Coke Inst. 2 part. p. 552
by ordering the Plaintiff to take and accept what is due upon the Bond, or any
Specialty wherein there is a Penalty; and by admitting the Defendant to plead
payment at the day to a single Bill. And where Money is not paid at the day, to
allow Damages for the time, according to the Plaintiffs loss: So joining Law
and Equity together, to make up perfect Justice; and that is all which needs in
such cases.

Those things which are most stood upon, for upholding of these two Courts, or
Distinct Powers and Jurisdictions, are such as these following.

Object. 1. First, it is said, That in cases of Mortgages forfeited, there is no
remedy at the Common Law, This is against Gods Law, and the Law of Charity, 1
Cor. 6.8, 9. 1 Thessalonians 4.6. Matthew. 7.12. Luke 6.31.
but the Mortgager must lose his Land, fot how little soever it be Mortgaged,
without any relief elsewhere, but in Equity: And therefore this being a matter
of great Concernment, ought to be remedied in a Court of Equity.

Answ. 1. If it be remembered what is said before concerning Bonds, and other
Specialties with Penalties, that partly answers this Objection: for in an
Action of Trespass and Ejectment, if the Defendant might have liberty upon the
general Issue pleaded, to give in Evidence what the original Debt was, for
which the Lands were Mortgaged, and what Profits have been taken by the
Mortgagees; the Debt and Damages for the Money may suddenly be computed or
found by a Jury. And if the Judges in such case, as in case of a forfeited
Bond, enforce the Mortgagee (or his Heir, in case he bring the Action) to
accept the same principal Debt and Damages, with reasonable Costs (if he did
not formerly refuse it) without more ado, and release or assign the Mortgage;
which might be easily done, with a little Amendment of the Law: What use were
there of a Court of Equity?

Obj. 2. The like may be said concerning Covenants or Conditions broken in
other cases: where a man Covenants to pay Rent or make repairs, or has an
Estate with a Proviso, or subject to a Condition of Re-entry for non-payment of
Money; This extremity of rigor is the worst Oppression in the Commonwealth and
a transgression of Gods Law, Isa. 58.6. Ezekiel. 18.7. Eccles. 5.8. 1 Samuel 12.3.
and for performance of Covenants, enters into a Bond of a great Penalty; or
shall lose some considerable Estate, for some petty neglect, or non-payment of
some some small sum of Money (as I have known a Lease worth Five hundred pounds
at least, lost for non-payment of Five pounds.)

Answ. In these cases, the course abovementioned is a sufficient Remedy to
find out the Damage sustained by the nonperformance of the Covenant: which
may be as well done, with a little Alteration, in an Action of Debt upon the
Bond, as upon an Action of Covenant, which is ordinarily in use; and in case of
a Condition broken, to ascertain the Damages, and appoint the Plaintiff to
accept thereof, as aforesaid.

This is remedied partly by the late Ordinance for Regulation of the Chancery,
Romans 13.7.
Obj. 4. Legacies cannot be Sued for at Law, and therefore of Necessity there
needs a Court of Equity. This ought to be amended, that every one may have
their due.

Ans. This Case grows remediless, partly by the dissolution of the Bishops or
Ecclesiastical Courts (as they are called) and may easily be remedied, if the
Law were a little altered: For what reason can be given, that an Action of Debt
may not as well lie for a Legacy, as for any other Duty payable as Executor or
Administrator? It Is true, that at the Common Law, generally men's Personal
Estates were at the mercy of the Bishops or Priests, to dispose the same for
the health and salvation of men's Souls, as was pretended: but now we are freed
from that thraldom, it were fit, that every man's Estate should perform his
Will, according to the Executors Oath, by paying Legacies (as well as Debts) in
the second place, as far as the Testators Estate will extend; and that an
Action of Debt lay for it as aforesaid: for that if a man sue in Equity for a
Legacy of Twenty pounds, or under, he shall spend it every penny in Suit, if he
have not a very easy Adversary.

Obj. 4. The greatest questions are about performances of Neh. 5.11, 12, 13. 2
Cor. 8.11, 12. All honest Agreements where the party is not deceived, are to be
performed, being in our power, Ames. l. 5. de Consc.
Covenants and Agreements, and of Trusts: Concerning which, it is truly said of
the first, That for breach of Covenants or Agreements, a man may in an Action
of Covenant recover Damages for the Covenant broken; but there is no means at
Law to enforce any man to perform his Covenant: and therefore there is need of
a Court of Equity.

Ans. This is a fault in the Law, that a man can have no means to enforce one
to perform his Covenant: But this might easily be amended, either by putting
the Covenant in Issue upon a Traverse, or by devising an Issue, as is usually
done by Order of the Chancery; and if it be found, that the Defendant
Covenanted or Agreed under his Hand and Seal, as the Plaintiff alleges, Why
might not the Judgment be, That the Defendant shall perform his Agreement, and
pay Damages, etc. as well as in a Replevin, that the Cattle shall be returned,
etc. or in an Action of Debt, that a man shall pay Money, or render Corn, or
the like.

And touching Agreements made nnder men's Hands, they amount but to Josh. 9.21.
compared with 2 Samuel 21.1, 5 Just promises are to be performed, and the
contrary punished by the Magistrate, etc.
Promises: upon which, at Law, the Plaintiff may recover Damages: but there is
neither Law nor Equity to enforce a man to perform such an Agreement; which, I
conccive, ought to be amended in the Law; for that sometimes such Agreements
are made upon as valuable Considerations, and as solemnly, as those which are
put under men's Hands and Seals.

Obj. 5. And concerning Trusts, especially concerning Lands and Tenements, the
Common Law can afford no help against such as refuse to perform the Trusts. If
a man be indebted, but not upon Record, as Statutes or Judgments, etc. or in
consideration of Marriage, conveyeth his Lands to some friends, and their
Heirs, upon Trust and Confidence (either expr^ssed or implied) that the
Trustees, etc. shall permit the Grantor, and the Heirs of his body, or his Wife
or Children, to take the Profits, It is true of Trusts, as of Uses; Fear and
Fraud were the Inventers of them. Fear, in time of Civil wars, to save
Inheritances from forfeiture: Fraud, to defeat lawful Actions, due Debts, etc.
Coke l. 1. sChudleys Case, fol. 121. a, b. The Judicial Law directs a remedy in
case of trusts, Exodus 22.10, 11.
The Trustees (having a mind to choose him that happily intended to cozen others)
refuse to let cesty que use, the parties for whom they are trusted to take the
profits, etc. The Grantor has no remedy at Law, but must sue in a Court of
Equity.

Answ. This is true, as things now stand: but this might and ought to be
amended, by putting cesty que trust into the condition of Cesty que use; and
let the possession be transferred to the trust, and then the Grantor and his
Heirs and Assigns may recover the possession and profits without the help of a
Court of Equity. And it might be wished that all such Trusts might be
destroyed; serving generally for little else but to deceive Creditors and
Purchasers. See a Case recited by Charles George Cock, Essay p. 123.

Object. 6. The last and main thing upholding these Courts of Equity, is, That
commonly Frauds and Deceipts can never be discovered, nor Private Contracts
proved, but by the Defendants Oaths; which are not elsewhere to be taken in
such cases: and this enforces so many Bills of Discovery to be exhibited into
those Courts every Term.

Answ. This Objection does in it self, in foro Conscientiae, clearly overthrow
the practice of these Courts. For the very exacting this Oath is Ames. l. 4. de
Consc. c. 22. f. 222. This question about exacting Oaths against a man's self,
is handled, and the Objections and the Scriptures answered, which seem to
countenance the sam^. See the Book called A Treatise of Oaths, written by the
Nonconformists p. 13, 15, 52, 57.
against the Law of Nature, whose dictates are the same with those of the Law
of God written; from which are derived undeniable Maxims and Principles,
whereof this is one: Nemo tenetur accusare seipsum: This Maxim is agreed by
all men; and the Lawyers allow it. The reason of it is, (although it need none
to confirm it; for it is also a Maxim, Contra Negantem Principia non est
disputandum) because every man is nearest to himself; and it is against Nature,
for him to be a means of his own punishment: a man ought to preserve himself,
although to the hurt of another: it were better to kill another, then to kill
himself, or to suffer himself to be killed; if of necessity the one must needs
be. Therefore, to exact this Inquisitory Oath against a man's ownself, is
against the Law of Nature, and so against the Law of God. This is the very same
Oath which was brought into England by Pope Martin the fifth, for extirpation
of the followers of John Wickliff, called Lollards, about the Reign of King
Hen. 4. and was taken up by the Ecclesiastical Courts (as they were called) I
suppose, long before it was used in any English Court; and afterward, it was
most famously used in the Star Chamber, and in the High Commission, called The
Oath Ex Officio; the Defendants being, besides their answer, examined upon
Interrogatories; as sometimes they are in other Courts. And it is reported,
(which I had from good hands) that one Mr. Fuller of Grays Inn having this
Oath tendered to him, (as all Non-conformists had, who came into the
High Commission) refused to take it, saying, he was not bounden to accuse
himself; but said, he would swear, and answer upon his Oath to what they should
ask him, so far as he was bounden by Law. He was answered, There was no more
desired of him. Thereupon, the honest Gentleman (although a Lawyer) was deluded
and cozened with this word Law; which was equivocal, either referring to the
Common Law, or to their Popish Tyrannical Canon or Ecclesiastical Law: and
taking his Oath, had Questions demanded of him, of things which entrenched upon
his Estate and Liberty, (for which he might be fined and imprisoned) if not his
life. To these he answered, That he was not bounden by Law to answer to them,
being against himself; according to that Rule of Right Reason above mentioned:
No man is bound to accuse himself. This they declared Perjury; and for that
they fined him 300 l. What difference is there between these proceedings, and
the proceedings in Courts of Equity, especially when Answers are made to
Exceptions, or when the party is examined upon Interrogatories against himself?
The best that can be made of it, is, That it is a profaning the holy Name of
God, and the abuse of an Oath; as being here, not Heb. 6.16.
the end, but the beginning, or rather occasion of strife: and if this Oath
were taken away, men would be sure to have Witnesses present to all their
Contracts and Agreements. And it may be observed, that there is no manner of
credit given to the Defendants Answer: for the Practisers in Chancery use to
say, It Is no matter if the Defendant swear the Crow is white, if the Plaintiff
can prove she is black. And upon this ground all wise men proceed, in reference
to Suits in Courts of Equity; not to prefer their Bill, unless they can prove
it, or at least the material points thereof. I have observed, That in almost
thirty years practice, I never found one Defendant, who wanted conscience to
pay a just Debt, (where it could not be proved by Witnesses) that would ever
confess it in an Answer upon his Oath; but rather use the help of some skilful
man, to draw his Answer so equivocal, or cautelously, that it might not
prejudice his Cause. This has been, and is a heavy temptation and provocation
to Perjury, and so a breach of the Law of God: which causes the Land to mourn,
and therefore ought to be abolished.

Object. 7. And where it is alleged, That although in Criminal Causes, which
are popular, men are rot bounden to accuse themselves; This is the abuse of an
Oath, as before is proved. Heb. 6.16. and is a sin against the law of Nature,
no man being bounden to accuse himself.
yet for discovery of Fraud and Deceit in Cases Personal, they are bounden by
Law to declare the truth upon their Oaths in their Answers:

Answ. It may be answered, first, That all Frauds and Deceipts are things
criminal in foro Conscientiae, and for which in most Cases a man may be
indicted at Common Law; and, in some Cases, by virtue of several Statutes; as,
for fraudulent Conveyances, and for some deceipts in Bargaining, and for
cozenage in selling of Wares, and in many other Cases. And if a man in any case
were to be enforced to confess the truth against himself, there is most reason
it should be done in Criminal Causes most capital; as, when Treason, Adultery,
Murder, or some great Felony is committed, and several men accused, Were it not
a fair pretense, that every man, to clear himself, and to the end to find out
the Truth, should be examined upon his Oath? And yet this is not allowed in the
Law, nor ought to be done, for the reason aforesaid; unless the Defendant will
Exo. 22.11
voluntarily offer his Oath: which may be admitted by the Law of God, otherwise
Joshua Josh. 7.19, 22.
would not have done it in the case of Achan: although he exhorted him to
confess the truth, and give glory to God; yet he did not enforce him to swear,
but searched his tent for the wedge of gold and the Babylonish garment: neither
did our Lord Jesus Christ urge the woman taken in adultery to accuse her self,
but asked where her accusers were; Joh. 8.10, 11.
and when he saw that no witnesses accused her, he said, No more do I; and bid
her go her ways, and sin no more.

Now in those Cases which are not criminal, as about Trusts, and Estates in
Land in Extent, and suchlike, which may usually be proved by Witnesses, where
men are forced to answer upon Oath; these do many times entrench more upon men's
Liberty and Estates, in respect of consequence, then an hundred trivial Frauds
or Thefts: and therefore this will not warrant their answering upon Oath. All
the Arguments which have been brought against the Oath Ex Officio, (if I
mistake not) make directly against this Oath; And it is no more lawful then
that Popish Oath (with Compurgators) which was used to be administered in the
Spiritual, or rather Bawdy Courts, to purge men of Incontinencie or
Fornication. And this is all which I shall say in this place, of these Courts
of Equity.

CHAP. XI. That the Theory of the Common Law, and some of the Statutes now in
force, c^ntain matters repugnant to the Law of God.
TRrial by Plow. Com. fol 366. B. and 261 B. Assize 1 Ed. 3. f. 1. Coke l. 8.
f. 46 and l. 9. f. 31 Rast. Entr. Ap. Mort. f. 50. B and Droit. f. 223. A.
Cust. No^m. tit. Suit o^ Murdre, f. 70, 71. Cow. Instit. Index Exposit. lit. P.
Combat, in an Appeal of Death, or a Writ of Right, when men by themselves or
their Champions decide matters in controversy by the death one of another, in
a Duel: This is a wicked Law taken from the Heathen Lombards and Saxons, and
directly against the Word of God, Number. 35.16, 17, 18. Matthew. 19.18. Cock Essay,
p. 178. Rotaris, one of the Kings of the Lombards, had taken away this Law,
protesting that it was inhumane and naught. Lewis 9. King of France, is
commended for this Edict: Nous defendons battailles par tout en nostre Domaine,
en toutes querelles: i. e. We forbid Combats in all Quarrels, thorowout all our
Dominions.

2. Myr. Just. c. 3. ^. 24, 25. Dyer, f. 301. n. 41, 42. Westminster. 1. c. 40.
Stamf. pl. Coro. l. 3. c. 14
The Combatants and Champions Oaths in an Appeal of Death or other Felony, or
in a Writ of Right, is likewise a profaning of the Name of God, an abuse of an
Oath, (which is a part of Gods Worship) and a Bond of Iniquity. Jer. 4.2. Act.
23.21. Heb. 6.16.

3. Cowel ^nst. l. 4. T. 18. ^. 17. p 324. Westminster. 1. c. 2. Stamf. pl. Coro l.
1. c. 9. Art. Cl^r. 9 E. 2 c. 16.
The Law concerning Man-slaug^ter, at the Common Law, when a man kills
another wilfully, (being done suddenly, or in hot blood) he shall not suffer
death, if he can read: This is likewise against the Law of God, Numb. 35.33.
Lev. 24.21. Genesis 9.5, 6. Rev. 13.10. Bod. Rep. l. 4. c. 7. p. 542.
To prevent Manslaughter, some wise States have prohibited the wearing of
Weapons in time of Peace, for that armed men are more insolent and ready to
kill, then other men disarmed.

4. Doct. and St. c. 8. fol. 17. B. Fitz. Coro. 404, and 415. Poult. pax Reg.
and Regni, Larceny, f. 129. A. 18 Eliz. c. 4. The Romans judged it a notable
example of public clemency, to spare life, where other punishments are
sufficient. Tac. Annal. l. 14. c. 13. p. 215.
That a man's life should be in danger for any Theft, or trivial Felony, above
the value of Twelvepence, is a Law against the Law of God, who has ordained
Restitution and other Compensations as the Case shall be, (where things stolen
are living or dead.) It Is a Rule without Exception, given by the Learned, That
no humane Law can ju^tly take away the life of a man for any offense, without a
general or particular warrant from God's Word; because man's life is only at
God's disposing. Willet Hex. in Exodus 22.1. Qu. 3. Exodus 22.1, 3, 4. 2 Samuel
12.6, 19. Luke 8. It may be observed, That where the Laws are most severe
against Stealing, as amongst the Arabs, there are most Thieves, through the
just judgment of Almighty God.

5. Poult. pax Reg. and R^gni, Judgment, Treason. f. 244 6 El. Dyer, 230 Cowel
inter verb Treason. Cowel Instit. Jur. Angl. l. 4. Tit. 18. S. 8. p. 317.

Anciently amongst the Romans, these facts were Treason: 1. Betraying the
Army. 2. Stirring up the people to Rebellion. 3. Bad managing the affairs of
the Commonwealth. 4. Impairing the Government and Majectie of the People of
Rome. Tacit. Annal. l. 1. c. 15. p. 29.


The Judgment in Treason is a barbarous and inhumane Judgment, viz. That the
Offender shall be drawn upon an Hurdle to the place of Execution, there to be
hanged by the neck; then cut down alive, his Intrails and Privy Members cut
from his body, and burned in his sight; then his head struck off, and his body
divided into four quarters, etc. This is an act of Cruelty, and too much
insulting over a poor fellow creature in misery. No such kind of death was
amongst the Jews, Greeks, or Romans: the nearest, were those Torments devised
by the Heathens for the Macchabees, and those used in the first Ten
Persecutions after Christ's time; which were devised rather by devils incarnate,
then men. All such Cruelty is condemned, Amos 1.3, 4, 5, 11, 12, 13, 14. and
Chap. 2.1. Jer. 6.23. Heb. 12.35, 36, 37. Jam. 2.13.

6. Magna Chart. cap. 1. Coke l 4. f. 46. a 9 Ed. 2. c. 16. 8 El. c. 4. 84 El.
c. 5 Wingate Law, c. 46. p. 85. n. 11, 12. Cowel Inst. l. 4. Ti. 18. sect. 17.
p. 325.
The use of Clergy, as it was at the Common Law, is a great offense; when he
that could read, was not subject to be tried for Murder, and other great
Offenses; but being claimed by the Ordinary (for a Clerk) should be taken from
Judgment. This is said to be the Privilege of Holy Church, ( viz. of Rome)
which is the exalting of the Romish Antichristian Power, above the Law and Word
of God, who has appointed Magistracy for the punishment of evildoers, without
respect of persons in Judgment, Romans 13.4. All the Statutes made in affirmance
or alteration of the Common Law in this Point of Clergy, are unlawful; as to
save life in case of Manslaughter, if the Offender can read; or to take away
life for Theft above Twelve pence; and in other cases where men ought not to
suffer death, Ezekiel. 13.19. Jam. 4.12.

7. Custom Norm. tit. Forfeitures, f. 24. b. Exp. For. Laws a Manuse. f. 40.
Coke Entr. p. 1. tit. Abjuration. Stamf. Pl. Cor. l. 2. c. 39. f. 119, 120. 35
El. c. 1.
The Oath of Abjuration of such as took Sanctuary, and then abjure the Realm;
the same used of late times to acquit Sorcerers and Conjurers, and to punish
such as offend against Forest-Laws: This is a horrible profanation of the holy
Name of God, and the abuse of an Oath, which is a part of Gods solemn Worship,
Exodus 20.7. Heb. 6.16. Jer. 4.2. The Heathen Romans appointed Sanctuaries,
whither every lewd fellow escaping, if he could but lay hold on Caesar's Image,
he was free both from Debts and Punishments. This was accounted a Grievance,
and condemned by the Heathen Historian, Tacit. Annal. l. 3. c. p. 75. and c.
13. p. 83. and l. 4. c. 3. p. 94. etc. 10. p. 104.

8. Art. C^^^. 9 Edw. 2. 16. Chapters about these Superstitions. See the books
of Canons, and of Consecrat. of Priests and Deacons. Shepherds office of Church
Ministers, c. 8. n 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and Office Churchwardens, c. 9. n. 1, 2, 3.
Donus or Domus Bishop of Rome, about the year 661. first divided the Romish
Clergy into Ranges and Orders of Bishops, Priests, etc.
The whole Body of the Law, called, The Law of Holy Church, and the Canon Law,
concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, in Bishops, Archbishops, Archdeacons,
Deans, Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Suffragans, Canons, Spiritual
Courts, or Court-Christian, Dispensations for Non-Residence, Restraint of
Marriage at certain times, as Ember and Rogation-week, Oath Ex Officio,
Compurgators, Sanctuaries, Penance, Commutation of Penance, Excommunications,
Absolutions, Consecrations, Prayers for the Dead, Masses, Dirges, Pompous and
Idolatrous Ceremonies; and in conclusion, the whole Body of Popery, upheld and
set forth in the old Statutes and Law Books, which are said to be in affirmance
of the Common Law, and in other Statutes, many of which are not Repealed: All
these are unlawful, having no foundation in Gods Word, and were the Inventions
of men, tending to corrupt the Worship of God, Psalm. 19.7, 8. Exodus 40.16. Isa.
1.12. Mat. 15.6. Mar. 7.7, 9, 13. Tac. Annal. l. 3. c. 7. p. 75. and l. 3. c
15. p 86. Tit. Live. l. 25. p. 5^5. D. E. l. 43. p. 1163. f. l. 1. p. 32. G. l.
39. p. 1032. and p. 357. a. and l. 23. p. 495. a. and Tacit. Histor. l. 4. cap.
20. page 165.
Many of these Superstitions were taken from the Heathen Romans, only called
by other Names, and used by the Papists, as is proved in the particular places
where these things are discussed.

9. Pault. Pax Reg. and Regni, stand Mute, fo. 222. Westminster. 1. c. 12 Fitz. Cor.
233, 283, 359. Stams. Pl. Cor. l. 2. f. 149, 150. This Judgment is set down at
large, Cowel Instit. l. 4. Tit. 18. sect. 35. p. 334.
The Judgment of Pain fort and dure, (when a man charged with Felony, or
other Capital Crime, either stands mute, or refuses to plead to an Issue to be
tried by a Jury) it is, That the party Indicted or Arraigned upon an
Inquisition, for his refusal to plead, shall be laid upon his back with a Stone
under it, and have weight laid upon him, as much as he can bear, and shall have
one day three bits of Bread, and the next day Gutter-water given to him; and so
every day, until he dye with pain. The practice is somewhat altered in the
execution; for the Condemned is Pressed to death presently; and every one that
will, is his Executioner. This is a wicked Law, and contains three Offenses: 1.
The Punishment is barbarous, for that there is no Offense in this world against
men, but a man's life taken away, is a sufficient satisfaction, without any
such lingering death. 2. The party being Guilty, is not bounden to accuse
himself upon his Trial; much less ought he to be enforced to tell a Lie, and
say he is Not guilty. 3. The great Offense is, That he is Condemned without
Proof, 2 Cor. 13 1. Heb. 10.28. Deuteronomy. 17.6. Numb. 35.30. Joh. 7.51. To this may
be added, Setting men upon the Rack, In sime of Popery this was frequent, and
has been since used for discovery of Treason
Examining them by Torture: a Devilish Invention, not long since practiced,
and warranted by our Law.

10. The Laws concerning Parishes, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Deacons,
Churchwardens, Advowsons, Presentations to Churches, Jure Patronatus, Non
Admisit, Quare Impedit, Quare Incumbravit, Darrein Presentment, Restitutione
Temporalium, Conge Desleir, Admittances, Institutions, Inductions, Ne Admittas,
Vi Laica Removenda, Excom: Deliberando cautione Admittenda, Dedimus Potestatem
ad Elegendum Abbatum, Lincences to Preach, Suspensions, Ecclesiastical Censures
in Ecclesiastical Courts: These all are unlawful, as being the Inventions of
men, to thrust out the Officers and Order which Christ has left in his Church.
Godw. Ant. Romans l. 3. c. 2. p. 135. etc. 3. p. 142, 143. Fuller Holy State, l.
2. c. 12. p. 87. Ex Conc. Toled. 589. can. 9. An. Coke Rep. l. 5. Cawdreyes
Case, c. 3. p. 48, 49. c. 4. p. 72, 73. etc. 7. p. 169. and thence to p. 356.
The Parishes are the Hearch which keep in all these Superstitions; and they
were taken up by the Church of Rome, from the Heathen Romans; as likewise were
their Pope, or Fontifex Maximus, their Orders of Priests, Deductions,
Consecrations, and many other Paganish and Idolatrous Superstitions: And from
Rome were hither sent, and continued here all along by the Popes Power, until
the Reign of King Hen. 8. when he took upon him the Popes Office, 25 H. 8. c.
20. Wingate Law, c. 38. p. 62. n. 20, 21, 28.
to be the pretended Head of his pretended Church of England, Lev. 20, 23.
Ezekiel. 11.12. Hos. 14.8. 2 Cor. 6.16. Deuteronomy. 12.3. Cock English Law, p. 16 and 22.

11. Fitz. N. B. 269. b. Coke l. 5. fo. 25. 2 H. 4. c. 5, 15. 2 H. 5. c. 7.
The Law for Trial and Conviction of Heretics, delivering them to the Secular
Power to be burned; the Writ Haeretico Comburendo put in execution against the
faithful Servants of God, called by a Nickname Lollards, about the time of
Rich. 2. and Hen. 5. and afterward, whom the Lord Chief Justice Coke concludes
to be Heretics; and deriving their Name from Lolium, as the Papists did,
rehearses that impertinent Verse of Virgil, Infoelix Lolium, and steriles
dominantur avenae. They were the followers of Rast. Entr. Haeres. 1. White Way
true Church, sect. 50. p. 393. Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 608, 657, 659, 846.
John Wickliff, whose Opinions we may find in Fox his Acts and Monuments, and
Symson his Church History. These, and those afterward, by virtue of the
Statute of the Six Articles, were put to death only for matters of Faith and
Opinion, without any disturbance to the State. Dalt. offic. Vice. Juram. Vice.
fo. 4.
All High-Sheriffs were Sworn (even to the time of the beginning of these late
Wars) to extirpate these Servants of God; and the Anabaptists, which only
Swinb. Treat. Wills, par. 2. sect. 14. and par. 5. sec. 2.
deny Infant-Bapitism, are reckoned amongst Heretics. By this we may judge,
what our Lawgivers were, and what was a principal end of the Law, viz. The
destroying of the true Faith, and the rooting out of the sincere Professors of
the Gospel; which is a principal Mark of Antichrists Power. These are Impious
Laws, and the execution most abominable, Rev. 16.6. and 17.6. and 18.24. and
12.13. Genesis 4.10. Luke 11.50, 51. Gal. 4.29. These Customs taken from the
Romans, Tac. Annal. l. 12. c. 11. p. 171.


12. Litt. l. 2. tit. Villenage, sect. 172 Coke Com. Litt. l. 2. sect. 177. and
sect. 189. Wingate Law, c. 9. p. 17. n. 3. n. 5. Poulton Pax Reg. and Regni,
tit. Appeal, fo. 159. a, b. Littleton tit. Villenage, l. 2. sect. 190.
The Laws and Customs concerning Villains and Villainage, mentioned by
Littleton and others, observed by Coke in his Comment upon Littleton, and
plentifully discoursed of in the Old Books, are Heathenish and wicked Customs;
That the Villain is as the Lords Goods, and at the Lords absolute Disposal, and
so are his Wife and Children, Those whom we call Villains and Niess, the Romans
called Adscriprivos Glebae: they plowed and labored, and might be sold.
as the Romans Slaves; That the Lord may enter upon him, and take his Lands,
Tenements, Rents, and Chi^dren: And although he that is pretended to be a
Villain, bring his Wri^ to prove himself free, the Lord may seize him as his
Vil^ain Appius Claud^us s^ised Virginia upon this pretense, Tit. Live. l. 3. p.
117. b.
Pendente Lite; and if the Lord rob the Villain, he shall have no Appea^
against him. And it hat been said, That if the Lord ravish his Nief (that is,
his She-Villain) she could at Common Law have no Appeal of Rape against him:
but Littleton says the contrary If the Lo^d marry his Nief (or she villain)
and die seized of Land in Fee, this wife shall not be endowed because she was
his Villain, Jo: Perk. tit. Dower sect. 314.
. These Laws abovementioned are too bad for Turks, much more to be abhorred and
rejected of Christians, as being against all those Laws of God, which condemn
unmercifulness and injustice toward inferiors, Exodus 1.13, 14. Lev. 25.42,
43, 46, 53. Ephesians. 6.9. Col. 4.1. Prove. 12.10. Luke 6.36. 1 Kin. 9.22. There was
nothing more regarded in the foundation of Christian Commonwealths, then the
discharging of Slaves and Villains; and such Commonwealths were free from
Slaves ever since the year 1250, as a Bod. Rep. l. 1. c. 5. p. 39, 40. and p.
45. Those Slaves are at large described, as above is said. Cowel Instit. lib.
1. Ti. 3. sect. 3, 4, 5.
Learned Lawyer has observed, who taxes England and Scotland for continuing
such Customs and Services upon their Tenants: And likewise says the Law of the
Twelve Tables, still in force in West Indies and Africa, as too rigorous
toward Debtors and Servants.

Rast. Entr. tit. Appeal, fo. 51. b. 27 H. 8. c. 24. Poul. Pax Reg. and Regni,
tit. Pardon, f. 218. b. and 219. a. 2 Ed. 3. c. 2. 4 Ed. 3. c. 13.
13. By the Common Law, the King had Power to Pardon Murder: and it has been
commonly used in former Ages, whereby the Land has been defiled with Blood.
This is an Impious Privilege or Custom, and clearly against the holy Law of
God; and seems likewise to be contrary to the Kings Oath, although by a
Statute of Edw. 3. Chap. 2. it appears, such Pardons were very common, and ate
available in Law against an Act of Parliament, being made with a Non obstante,
etc. Prove. 28.17. Jam. 4.12. Exodus 21.12. Weems. M. L. Com. 6. Decal. Exercit.
9. p. 131. Sueton: Tranq. in vita Julii Caesaris, sect. 89. in fine.
It Is written, That of all the Senate who murdered Julius Caesar, there was
scarce one that either survived him three years, or dyed a natural death. The
Historian says, They were all Condemned: and it does not appear, that any one
of them had a Pardon. Bodin. Rep. l. 1. p. 174. and p. 175.
No Sovereign Prince, or any Man living, can pardon the Punishment due to the
Offense, which is death by the Law of God, no more then he can dispense with
the Law of God, whereunto he is himself subject.

14. Custom Norm. tit. Tenure par. Homage, fo. 27. b. Kitchen Court Baron.
Cowel Inst. l. 2. tit. 3. f. 3. p. 115 S. 15. p. 119. Wingate Law, c. 7. p. 13.
n. 29.
The Oaths of Homage and Fealty to Lords of Manors, are Snares upon men's
Consciences, and savor of Tyranny and Oppression: The Oath of Homage (besides
that which is mentioned in the old Books, the substance whereof was, That the
Tenant would be the Lords Trueman) has many trivial additions to it, which are
not of concernment enough to be the cause of an Oath, and other things not fit
to be sworn unto; and all are against that Law, Thou shall swear in
Righteousness and Judgment, Jer. 4.2. Exodus 20.7. Jam. 5.12.

15. Finch (...), l. 2. f. 20. b. fo. 21. a.
The Attributes of God in the Law given and ascribed to the Kings of England,
are too high (if not Blasphemous) viz. Majesty, Sovereignty, Most Sacred
Majesty, Infinity, etc. Ubiquity, Immortality, Perfection, Verity, Absolute
Justice, etc. Co. Tit. Pa. to his 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 Rep. Plowd. Com. fo.
234. a. and 177. a, b.
And by Sir Edw. Coke, seven times King James is called, Le Fountain de tout
Piety and Justice, and la vie de la ley, The Fountain of all Piety and Justice,
and the life of the Law. O fearful Blasphemy! Although it must be conceived,
that these Attributes are but Analogical Expressions, yet it may be observed,
That such Arrogance (especially when by this temptation it is taken to himself,
of whom it is spoken) Such Emperors and Princes who have taken that Honor to
themselves, which is due to God alone, as did Caligula, Domitian, Commodus,
Antiochus, etc. have all and always miserably perished, Jun. Brut. vind.
contr. Tyrann. p. 14.
is a certain sign of Ruin, as was seen in Herod; when the people cried, The
voice of God, and not of man, then was he smitten, etc. Acts 12.22, 23. He that
said, Mine honor will I not give to another, will endure no such pride. Gualdo
Priorato, Bell. Germ. p. 125. Battle Lu^z^n, p. 19, 20.

Diverse of the Roman Emperors would not suffer themselves to be called ^o^l,
Jun. Brut. vind. contra Tyrann. p. 51.


That famous worthy Gustavus, King of Sweden, foretold his own death upon this
very ground; and (although he protested against the impious Acclamations of the
people) was slain within two days after they were given to him. We condemn
such Hyperbolical Titles in the Turkish Emperor and the Pope; and by such
means the Heathen Babylonians, Coel. Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 8. c. 2. p. 281.
Persians, and R^mans, came to Deifie their KINGS and EMPERORS. But Suet.
Tran. in vita Augusti Caesaris, sect. 53
Augustus Caesar abhorred such Flattery, and refused so much as to be called
Gracious Lord, Corn. Tacit. Prooem. l. 1. Annal. p. 1. and l. 2. c. 19. p. 61.
but was called Prince; and it may be observed, That Almighty God, to prevent
such arrogance, when he says, I have said, Ye are (Elohim) Gods; or, as the
word signifies, Mighty Judges, presently adds, that Ye shall dye like men.
All must remember this, Psalm. 89.6. 1 Samuel 2.30. Isa. 42.8. and 48.11. Dan.
4.30, 36. Acts 12.22. A very Learned man has set it down, Bodin. Repub. l. p.
181.
That for a Sovereign Prince to arrogate to himself the Titles of Most
Excellent and Sacred Majesty, is absurd; the one being a point of Lightness,
and the other of Impiety: For (says he) what more can we give to the most
Mighty and Immortal God, if we take from him that which is proper to himself?
And he censureth the Princes of Germany, for that in a Letter to the King of
France, there were V. S. M. which is Vestra Sacra Majestas, which he calls, An
addition proper unto God.

16. That a Disseiser, taking a man's Land from him by Littleton, l. 3. c. 6.
sec. 385. Coke Com. Lit. upon the same place, fo. 238. a, b. Coke l. 2. fo. 56.
Doct. and Stud. c. 8. fo. 16.
force, after a Descent, he that has Right, and is the true Owner of the Land,
cannot enter upon the Heir of the Disseiser: This is an unjust Law, and a
ridiculous thing, That he that has Right may not enter. This was a Custom
used in favor of such whose Ancestors had entered upon other men's Lands in the
time of Wars, and put out the Owners: Then the Conqueror or Prevailing Party
allowed this Privilege to such of his Party who had so entered. Here a man by
doing Wrong gets a Right, and the Magistrate ought to remedy it, Isa. 58.6.
Ezekiel. 45.9. Psalm. 7.16. Luke 3.14. Mich. 2.2.

Charta Forestae cap. Manwood Forest Laws, par. 2. n. 1. par. 1. p. 139. 21 Ed.
1. c. Cowel Instit. verbo Forest.
17. The Laws concerning Chases, Parks, and Warrens, are a great Oppression to
the Commonwealth, as now things stand, as it is partly declared before, where
the Charter of the Forest is spoken of. It Is true, King William the Conqueror
had a Title which he got by his Sword and by his Bow, and had the more reason
to dispose of those Lands as he pleased, and of the Lands adjacent as men would
hold of him: But now time, and (it may be) lawful Purchasees, have made men
Owners of such Lands; and to make them subject to the Forest-Laws, is a great
Oppression, and contrary to all those Laws of God which forbid Oppression. It
is to be hoped, these waste grounds will be put to better use, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.
Isa. 1.17. Prove. 22.16. Ezekiel. 18.7.

18. Coke Com. Litt. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 5. and 381. Coke l. 6. fo. 37. l. 10.
fo. 38. Occupancy is only where there is no proper Owner, Gessend. de Philos.
Ep. c. 1756.
The Law concerning Occupancy: when a man has a Lease of Lands for one or more
other men's lives granted to him, without the word Heirs; the Grantee dies: now
whosoever after his death first enters and claims the Land, shall have it
during the Lease, without any other Title: whereas if it cannot go to the Heir,
it should come to the Executor. This is an unjust Law, and serves for nothing
but to cozen simple men of their Right, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Lev. 19.13. Exodus 20.17.
Mic. 2.2. Romans 13.9. Before Dominion was settled, the first Possessor had a
Property which Pliny calls, Proprium habentes; and Grotius, Jus occupantis: but
this is at an end, because every thing has an Owner.

19. 40 Ed. 3. 34. b. 2 R. 3. 15. Finch (...), fo. 12.
That a man being Outlawed, and his wife waved in a Personal Action, and the
wife taken upon the Utlawry, she cannot reverse the Utlawry, nor get out of
Prison by the Law, unless her husband will join with her in a Writ of Error to
reverse the Utlawry; when it may be the Utlawry, was sued by the consent or
practice of the wicked husband, (I have known the like done.) This Law tends to
overthrow Economy, or Houshold-Government: Upon such an occasion it is said,
the Judges gave this Rule, That it was a Trick to be rid of a Shrew. But this
clearly against the 5th and 6th Precepts of the Decalogue, and many other parts
of holy Scripture, Genesis 2.24. Exodus 21.10. 2 Samuel 12.3. Mat. 19.6. Mar. 10.9.

20. Westminster. 1. c. 4. Cok l. 6. f. 107. a. Cust. Norm. tit. ^^ ^eek, c. 17 New
Term law verb. Wreck. Plow. Com. fo. 243. b.
The Law concerning Wrecks of the Sea: If a Merchant fraught a Ship, hire a
Master, and all Officers and Mariners, and send his Son to Sea in it; all these
suffer Shipwreck through the hand of God, by Tempest or other Disaster, and the
Ship is lost, and no living creature, Man, Dog, or Cat comes alive to shore,
but many of the Goods float, and are driven to land: In this case the Owner
shall by the Law have none of these Goods, but they belonged to the King, or to
the Lord of the Manor, who if he had a Grant of such Wrecks, shall have the
Goods. This is an unjust and cruel Law, and adds affliction to the afflicted,
and causes the wicked people who live by the Seaside, to wish and wait for
such Disasters, that they may get the Goods, calling the Goods so gotten, Gods
good, Zeph. 1.15. Amos 15.15. Obad. 13. Phil. 2.16. Jam. 1.27. Bodin. Repub. l.
1. 179.
It is a thing (says a Learned Statesman) truly most barbarous, and not
anciently used by Sovereign Princes, shamefully to suffer the Relics of the
Goods and Fortunes of such as have by Shipwreck miserably perished (and whom we
ought with some part ot our own to relieve, being cast upon our Coasts, and
which ought to be restored) to be shamefully spoiled.

21. The like unjust Law is this: If Goods be taken from the Wingate Law, c.
11. p. 19. n. 23.
Owner by an Enemy, the Property is changed, and the Owner shall not have them
restored, unless he recover them before the Sun go down, although he find them
afterward. Godw. Ant. Romans l. 3. sect. 4. c. 16.
The Romans had a more just Law in this point, viz. That by Theft no man should
gain a Property in Goods, but the Interest should always remain with the
Owner, to take them whenever he could find them: So is Gods Law, Lev. 19.13.
Luke 19.8. Tac. Hist. l. 4. c. 17. p. 159
Certain persons were appointed amongst the Romans, to see Restitution made of
those things which had been by force taken away in time of War. And the Law of
the Twelve Tables seems to warrant this.

22. The Law concerning Gavil-kinde Lands, where all the Kitchen, fo. 102.
Camd. Brit. p. 239.
Sons shall inherit as Coheirs; and such Tenures where all the Children shall
inherit together; This is against the Law of God, who has appointed the eldest
Son to the place of his Father, as Prince of the Family, and to have a double
Portion of his Goods, if he do not forfeit it by some notorious Crime, as
Reuben did: Therefore Judah had the Kingdom, Joseph the Double Portion, and
Levi the Priesthood, Deuteronomy. 21.17. 1 Chronicles. 5.1, 2. Genesis 49.3. Gal. 4.1. Heb.
12.16. Bodin. Rep. l. 5. c. 2. p. 571
Bodinus in his Republique, would have a double portion of Lands and Goods
assigned to the elder, and the rest an equal share.

23. The like may be said of the Tenures in Borough Cust. Norm. tit. Tenure par
Burgaye, fol. 135. b. Kitch. fo. 132.
English, and Copyhold-Estates, where the youngest Son shall inherit, contrary
to the Law of God and Nature: which Custom grew, as some (pretending to know
much of such Customs) have said, That these Lands, or many of them, being held
in Villainage (although now purchased by Freemen, who are not, nor can thereby
be made Villains) the Lord did usually lie with the Tenants wife the first
night after the Marriage, and therefore they obtained this Custom, lest the
Lords Bastard (not being a Bastard in our Law) should inherit, as possibly it
might be. This I will not positively affirm to be the ground of the Custom;
though I have seen a very ancient, authentic Evidence, testifying such a power
in the Lord: And I dare say it is easy to make appear, That diverse Manors and
Lands in England, were anciently granted to hold upon such terms, and upon
other suchlike wicked Covenants, if not Customs, not fit to be inserted, in
regard of the baseness and filthiness thereof. Littleton says, The youngest Son
should inherit, in regard he is least able to Littleton tit. Villenage, l. 2.
sect. 211.
help himself; which is no reason: for if Littleton mean, that he is less able
in respect of ability of body to fight or defend himself, or to work;
Experience shows, That the younger is many times more able, and the eldest less
fit, and more indisposed to labor, in respect of his Primogeniture: And if it
be meant in respect of Estate; if the Customary Tenant have two Sons, and
nothing else but the Land so holden, and that go to the youngest Son, what
ability has the elder to himself, more then the younger would have had, being
in his condition? Poult. Pax Reg. and Regni, tit. Appeal, fo. 157. b.
The youngest in this case shall not have an Appeal for the death of his
Father. This Custom is clearly against the Law of God and Nature, Deuteronomy. 21.17.
1 Kings 2.15. Weemse M.L. Com. 5. Exercit 7. p. 41.

24. Stat. 51 H. 3. Days in Real Actions: and 51 H. 3. Days in Dower.

Preface to the book of Common Prayer. 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 3. 2 H. 5. cap 4.


The Returns of Writs upon the Days dedicated to Saints, and Angels, and
Apocryphal Saints; and upon Popish Holy Days, such as S. The true Michael is
Christ, who is like God, as the Name signifies, Dan. 12.1. But this is some
counterf^it Michael.
Michael, S. Hilary. S. Martin, All Souls, All Saints, The Purification, at the
best are Superstitious: and it is determined by the Learned, That the Dedication
of Days to Saints, is part of the Idolatry of the last times: much worse are
some of those Days mentioned in the Statutes, dedicated to Idols; as the Rood,
Corpus Christi, the day when the Idol, or false Christ, was carried in
Procession, and worshipped, being the third of May; S. Thomas the Martyr, that
is, Thomas a Becket, mentioned in the Statute, who was adored and worshipped
blasphemously, thus: Tu per Thomae sanguinem, quem pro te effudit, fac nos
Christ scandere quo Thomas ascendit. Verst. Rest. decayed, Intel. p. 54, 55,
to 64.
The days of the Week dedicated to the Sun, Moon, Tuysco, Waden, Thor, Friga,
and Seater, being old Saxon Idols. The like may be said of the Months
dedicated to Janus, Mars, Maia, Suet. Tran. Sup. Jul. Caes. p. 2. and in vita
August. Caesar. sect. 31. Syms. Church History, in the Life of Commodus, p. 27.
Ex Euscb.
Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, etc. These are taken notice of, and used in
the Law upon all occasions, and cannot be changed, without change of the Law;
but they ought all to be abolished, according to those Laws, Psalm. 16.4. Deuteronomy.
12.3, 4. Exodus 22.20. and 23.13. Perk. Idol last Times, 1 Vol. p. 683. Col. 1.
August. de Civit. Dei, l. 12. cap. 10. 1 Corin. 10.12. The Tit. Live. l. 29. p.
719. f. Tac. Annal. l. 2. c. 7. p. 42.
Heathen had such Holy Days, dedicated to Idols; in imitation of whom, the
Papists appointed such days as are first mentioned.

25. The Oath, as it is administered in all Courts, smells of Stamf. Pl. Coro.
tit. Trial per Battle, l. 3. c. 14. f. 177.
Idolatry. Willet in Exo. Hex. in Com. 3. Decal.
The Jews swear upon their Thorah, which is the Pentateuch, or five Books of
Moses. This Custom is condemned as Superstitious: our Laying the Right Hand
upon the Gospel or New Testament, and kissing the same, is no better. Although
some Superstitious persons account these very profitable and significant
Ceremonies; They ought the rather to be rejected, for that such a kind of Oath
has no resemblance to any Oath in holy Scripture: But rather the lifting up of
the Hand Laws Geneva, page 12. These Ceremonies of Laying the hand upon, and
kissing the Book, are condemned by the most Learned. See the Treatise of
Oaths, p. 57. written by the Nonconformists. Horn. Mirror Justice, c. 3. sec.
24, 25. Expos. Forest-Laws, fo. 40. an Old Manuscript.
is to be approved, and the significancy of the Ceremonies abovesaid (an Oath
being a Solemn part of Gods Worship) makes them utterly unlawful; for that it
is the Office of Christ in his Word, to appoint Teaching Ceremonies in his
Worship. And the truth is, by the Common Law, the party Swearing makes Idols of
the Saints, and sometimes of the Book; the words are, So help me God, and all
Idem Cowel Instit. l. 2. Tit. 3. sect. 8. p. 115. and sect. 15. p. 119. and p.
287.
Saints; and sometimes, The Contents of this Book, Genesis 14.22. Deuteronomy. 32.40.
Rev. 10.6. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Mat. 5.34, 35. Some Lawyers hold, and amongst the
Civilians it has been constantly used, That the Guardian may swear upon the
Soul of his Minor or Pupil: The very words of the Law are these, which I find
in a Cowel Inst. Jur. Angl. l. 1. Tit. 21. sect. 4. p. 70. Ex Fitz. N. B. f.
118.
Body of the Law, set forth by the late Kings Professor of Law in Cambridge,
Custos in Animam minoris Jurare potest: and so the Proctor or Attorney may
swear upon the Soul of his Master. This is the same with Jurare in verba
Magistri.

26. Kitch. Felo. fo. 26. 23 H. 8. c. 1. 1 Ed. 6. c. 12. 5 Ed. 6. c. 9. 10. 8
El. c. 4. 39 El. c. 15. Doct. and Stud. c. 8. fo. 17. b.
The Law against Felonies in many Cases, as the Stealing of Goods worth five
shillings out of a house, or from a Stall in a Fair or Market, or any small sum
of Money from a Man's Person secretly, and some greater Felonies, for which the
party convicted shall have Judgment of Death, without any mercy or moderation
of Justice, as it is called; when more heinous Offenders have favor showed
them, by means of that foolish Usage, The Clergy: This severity is clearly
against the Law of God. Willet Hex. in Exo. Genesis Observe. p. 4. Rawl. Hist. l.
2. c. 4. sect. 16. for the Magistrate to show more rigor then Moses, becomes
not the Gospel.
It Is a Rule amongst the best Learned, That it is not lawful for any
Magistrate, to inflict a greater Punishment for any Offense, then is appointed
by Moses Judicials, (although it is held, there may be a mitigation,
Circumstances being considered, in some cases not Capital) nor to adjudge any
man to death, where the Sentence of Death is not given by Moses. Willet Hex. in
Exo. General Observat. p. 4. Godw. Ant. Romans l. 3. sect. 3. c. 9. Cock Essay,
p. 166.
This severity may better be turned to servitude and labor (where Restitution
cannot be had) in the House of Correction, like the Romans Pistrinum, or
Metallum, or Mine-works; or the Greeks (...). This would be a greater terror to
the Atheists of this Age, then Death it self; (it being a professed Maxim
amongst such, That a short life and sweet, is better then a long life and
sorrowful) and the same is more agreeable to Gods Law, Ephesians. 4.28. Exodus 22.1,
3, 4, 7. 2 Samuel 12.6. Tac. Annal. l. 14. c. 13. p. 215.
Where other Punishments are by Laws inflicted (without note of Severity) for
Crimes not Capital, which make men's lives miserable, There is no use of the
Executioner or Halter.

27. 15 H. 7. c. 8. Finch (...), f. 145. b Rast. Entr. tit. Quare Impedit, fo.
473. a, b. 474. a. 465. b. Coke Entr. tit. Quare Impedit, fo. 469. a. 489. a
That Law, That he that has the perpetual Advowson of a Church (as it is
called) may sell the next Presentation when the Church is full, so the
Incumbent be not Languidus in Extremis; it being a Lay-Hereditament: This is an
Impious Law, and the Merchandise of Rome; whose Merchandises are (amongst other
things) said to be the souls and (...) bodies of men (not Slaves, as it is
usually read; for that properly appertains to the Turk.) And this Prophecy can
be no other way fulfilled, but by selling the souls and bodies of men in this
manner, Rev. 18.13. Mal. 3.11. 2 Cor. 2. last ver. Paraeus upon Rev. 14.16, 17.

28. The Law concerning payment of 21 H. 8. c. 6 13 Ed. 1. Stat. dict.
Circumspecte agatis. New Terms Law, verb. Mortuary. Cowels Interp. verb.
Mortuary.
Mortuaries, that is, the best good (as a Heiriot is to the Lord) or Money, as
the Custom has been; or rather, a certain Rate settled by the Statute of King
Hen. 8. It was originally a thing given to God, to purge the guilt of the party
deceased, which he contracted by omission or non-payment of Tithes; but has
been always claimed and received by the Priests in Time of Popery, and since
by their Successors, the Parsons and Vicars: The Law is Superstitious, and the
payment unlawful, being a Conformity to Idolaters, and a derogation from the
All-sufficient Merit of Christ's Sufferings, 1 Cor. 6.14. Levit. 20.23. Isa.
1.12. Ezekiel. 43.8.

29. The Laws concerning payment of Tithes, is taken Heb. 7. 5, 12. Furius
Camillus upon the taking of Vij, gave the Tenth of the spoil to Apollo at
Delphos, Tit. Live. l. 5.
from the Levitical Service, where the payment was a mere Ceremony, and
employed for the Maintenance of that Levitical Service, and was by the Law of
God disposed of to the Levites, the Priests, and the Poor, etc. and afterward
this payment of Tithes was taken up by the Heathen, Rous Attic. Ant. l. 2. c.
9. p. 59 and 96. Godw. Antiq. Romans l. 3. sect. 4. c. 11.
both Greeks and Romans, who paid their Tithes in a manner as the Jews did. The
Greeks first used it, and then Godw. Ant. Jud. M. A. l. 6. c. 3. p. 250, 251,
253. Fox Act. Mon. Vol. 1. p 336. Col. 1.
the Romans, (who took many of their Laws and Customs from the Graecians, as
the Law of the Twelve Tables, and other Laws of Athens) also received this
Custom. Then, when the State of Rome under the Papacy was advanced, at the
breaking of the Roman Empire, were those things received; and by little and
little, a Body of Religion, falsely so called, was patched up together,
consisting partly of Jewish, and partly of Heathenish Customs, imposed upon
England, as well as other Countries, as may be showed at large. It only
suffices for the matter in hand, to know, That these Tithes were Levitical and
Ceremonial, Pareaus in Apoc. c. 13, 16. Weemse Cer. Law, Com. 1. Exercit. 1. p.
3. and Com. 2. Exercit. 16. p. Bellarm. Contr. lib. de Cler. p. 316, 317, 318.
and so are reckoned by the Learned, and are abolished with the Temple, and
were not received into the Christian Churches in The Money called Smokepeny,
was granted to the Pope by Ine King of England, An. 740. and augmented by
Etelpe, which they called Peter Pence, Bodin. Repub. l. 1. p. 116.
some places, until Fox Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 336. Col. 1. Ex Chrysostom. and
Augustino. Bellar. Contr. l. 8. de Cler. p. 315.
many Hundred years after Christ; and the Ministers may as well fall to
Circumcising and Sacrificing, as to Demand Tithes as due by any Divine Law. But
it may very well be conceived, That the Devil endeavors to keep up these
Tithes, on purpose to hinder the efficacious progress of the Gospel, which
seldom does any good, where there is jangling and wrangling about payment of
Tithes, as there is commonly in every Parish where they are held to be due Jure
Divino, Levit. 29.30, 32. Deuteronomy. 18.4. Numb. 18.24, 26. Nehem. 10.37, 38. Cock
Engl. Law, p. 22. The Priesthood (which received Tithes) is changed, then must
there of necessity be a change of the Law, Heb. 7.5, 12.

30. The like may be said of the Laws concerning payment of First Fruits and
Tenths, whether those which were paid to the King, or such as were paid to the
Pope, being all one: The First Fruits are one years Profits; the Tenths are a
Tithe anciently paid to the Cowel Int. verb. Tenths.
Pope, until in the time of King Edw. 2. Pope Urban granted them to that King,
to have his assistance against the French. The Pope received them, in Imitation
of the High Priest, as Head of the Church, and Chief of the Clergy; and
sometimes the Kings of England had them after Edw. 2. and sometimes the Pope
received them. 26 H. 8. c. 3. 1 Eliz. cap. 4. These payments ceased to be paid
to the Pope, when King H. 8. revolted from the Pope, Ann. 1534. until then,
England was the Popes Vassal, Bod. Repub. l. p. 116.
But King Hen. 8. when he Cashiered the Pope, declared Himself Supreme Head of
the Church of England: And from that time he received thele First Fruits and
Tenths, and Erected a Court called, The Court of First Fruits, being now part
of the Exchequer, where the same were received; and there they are paid until
this day. Rous Attic. Ant. lib. 2. cap. 9.
These are likewise in the same condition with Tithes, and were paid toward
the upholding of the Levitical Service, and therefore with the Temple are
Abolished, Exodus 22.29. Deuteronomy. 18.4. Lev. 2.12. and 27.30, 32. Exodus 23.19. Heb.
7.12.

31. The Law concerning Wing. Law, c 19. p. 30. 1^ 27.
Deodands, which is by Law declared to be something given (or as it were
forfeited) to God, for Coke comp. Copyholder, sect. 27. p. 9. Stamf. Pl. Cor.
l. 1. c. 2. Cowel Interp. verb Deodand. Si equus, etc. hominem occiderit quasi
sacrum fit: (nisi ad Regem spectet) nescio an veteri consuetudine comburi
soleat, Cowel Instit. l. 4. Tit. 8. s. 1.
pacification of his wrath, in case of misadventure, where any Christian Soul
comes to a violent end, without the fault of any reasonable Creature. These
are the words of the Book: It is that which moves to the death of any man, is
a Deodand: Quicquid movet ad mortem hominis, Deodandum est. This is a
Superstitious Imitation of the Papists, and derogatory to the All-sufficient
Satisfaction of Christ, Heb. 9.22. Psalm. 49.7. Mic. 6.7.

32. That a man pretending Right to a house next to him, watches an
opportunity, Stat. 5 R. 2. c.
and finding no one in the house, gets in peaceably, mures up the door, and
lays it to his own house, and so holds it without force: This is said by some
to be no forcible Entry against any Law; and I have heard it so delivered upon
the Bench: Poult. Pax Reg. and Regni, tit. Forcible Entry, fo. 39.
neither can the party put out, have restitution of possession, or any way get
in again, but by an Action at Law, although he lie out of doors in the mean
while. This is a Law, whereby Hundreds of poor men may be made destitute of
houses. The same is said of Tenants in Common, or Joynt-Tenants; if one cast
out the other by force, and so keep him out by force, he cannot be restored to
the possession, by the Statute 5 R. 2. So if a Disseissor or Abator of the
Ancestor, be in possession before the Heir (his Ancestor being dead) and
holding him out by force, he cannot have restitution, Mic. 2.2. Exodus 20.17.
and 21.28. Romans 7.7.

33. The Common Law establishes an Idolatrous Service to be done by Popish
Priests (in stead of the true Service of God, Coke Com. Lit. l. 2. c. 6. sect.
134, 135. Found. Colleg. Wigorn' by H. 8. Can. 14. and 58.
performed by a lawful Ministry) whose chief work was the Offering up the
unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass; which with their Blasphemous Prayers to Saints,
and foolish Petitions for the Dead; their Crossings, and pompous Ceremonies,
and suchlike bodily Exercises, is called Officiating the Cure (a word still
retained:) they are also to see Holy Days observed. Sheph. Office of Chapter
Minist. p. 262, 272, 273. 5 and 6 E. 6. c, 3.
Now at the best, the Statutes favor a reading-Ministery to do Divine-Service,
as it is called, and to read Homilies; and I know no ancient Law, to enforce
any man to do more. And accordingly, most of the Parsons and Vicars of the last
Edition, do after this manner; for they have no gift of Preaching, nor are they
in any sort apt to teach, but can only read a written Sermon out of a book,
which is but a Childe's work, and therefore are not to be accounted any
Ministers of the Gospel. This will never be amended, so long as the Parishes
stand as they do: some of these Parsons or Vicars have said, They have not
Curam Animarum; there is the Land to pay them their Tithes, they will do what
they are bounden to do, and no more. However, this is a great Profaneness and
Impiety, and contrary to the Duty of a faithful Minister, Neh. 8.4, 8. 2 Timothy
4.2. Acts 13.16. 1 Timothy 4.13.

34. The Garments of the Sergeants and Judges, especially at the Sergeants
being called to that Degree, when they come to the Chancery-Bar to have their
Charge, are Superstitious, inasmuch as they are accom^ted significant
Ceremonies. The Robe, the Coyf, the Hood, and all the rest, all very Lord Finch
his speech in Chancery to the Serjean^s called when he was Lord Keeper.

It is said, that the Ensigns belonging to the Doctors lately created in
Ireland, were by the Dr. of the Chair all Expounded and made significant, etc.


Theologically, or rather Superstitiously expounded by my Lord Finch, when he
was Lord Keeper, which I heard with my own ears. These things were never
ordained to teach men's duty to God; but, such Garments serve for Civil
Ornaments, and distinction of the Degrees of Men; as the Sword, the Cap, and
the Mace, etc. are Ensigns of Magistracy fit to be used: But we must not learn
our duties to God, by the Traditions of Men; we are sent To the Law, and to the
Testimony: Christ is the Teacher of his Church, Mat. 17.5. Isa. 8.20. Joh.
14.26.

35. That Canon 67, 68.
Marriage, Canon 72.
Burying the Dead, Funer^l Orations used amongst the Heathen Romans, Tac.
Annal. l. 3. c. 15. p 88.

So Marriage was used with Confarreation with a Cake of Wheat, as a R^ligious
Ceremony.

Godwin Antiq. l. 4. c. 5. page, 94, 95.


and Funeral-Orations or Sermons, are by the Law belonging to the Ministerial
Function: Whereas Marriage is a Civil thing, common to all Nations, and is to
be Celebrated by the Magistrate, Cock Essay, p. 152. and it was never used
otherwise, until the Church of Rome thought it profitable to be made a
Sacrament. At New England Marriages are solemnized and done by the Magistrates,
and not by the Ministers, Lechford News, p. 39.

At Burials nothing is read, nor any Funeral-Sermon or Oration, Idem ut supra.


And for Burying the Dead, it is no more then a work of Civility and Charity:
Devout men carried Steven to his Burial, and made lamentation for him, as
Israel did for good Josiah, and the Egyptians and Joseph did for Jacob; and,
The dead may bury their dead. And for their Funeral-Sermons, or rather
Orations, they were used by the Heathen, and taken up by the Papists; the first
Praised the Dead, the last Pray for the Dead. But I do not find, that
anciently the Minister had any more to do in these things, then any private
man; and the use of them is Superstitious, and contrary to the practice of
Scripture-Saints; and the last tends much to harden men in a course of sin,
generally all men being praised when they are dead, although they were never so
wicked, if but any thing of good, either in word or action, was wringed from
them in their sickness, or in their lifetime: as Fuller holy State, l. 2. p.
104
who is so bad, but something which is good may be gotten from, or observed in
him? Deuteronomy. 25.9. Ruth 4.2, 8, 9. Joh. 2. Genesis 50.7, 10. Acts 8.2. Marriage is
enrolled as a Civil Contract by the Magistrate at Geneva Laws Geneva, p. 27.
.

36. The Law enforcing all persons of age of discretion, how profane soever,
Bishop Neals Injunctions in Lich. Dio: grounded upon the Canons.
to communicate at the holy Table of the Lord three times in the year; whereof
one to be at Easter. And although sometime Ministers have seemed to purge their
Parishes, by calling them to a kind of Auricular Confession, (which is a way
of Antichrist) yet is there no restraint, nor is it any offense against our
Law, to admit all to the Table; contrary to the Word of God, 1 Cor. 11.28. Heb.
10.29.

37. 7 H. 4. c. 15 8 H. 6. c. 4. Plowd. Com. fo. 126. a. Rast. Entr. tit.
Parliam. f. 410.
The Choosing of Knights of the Shire in such a Popular way, the Voices being
made always by Imbracery, Terror, or Friendship, is a Wrong and Oppression.
The course used in Choosing Officers amongst the Romans and Graecians, and the
choice of the Duke of Venice by Billets, is a more excellent way, where no
exception can be taken: but most impartial and agreeable to the Word of God, is
casting of Lots, Godw. Ant. l. 3. c. 2. p. 135. used at Geneva: See the Laws of
Geneva, p. 12. At Genoa, Bodin. l. 2. p. 232. At Venice: So the Senate is
Chosen at Bern, Basil, Zurich, and generally in all Commonwealths.

38. 1 El. c. 2. 35 El. c. 1. Coke Entr. Indictment, 352, 353.
A Form of Prayer for Public Worship, the Book of Common Prayer, and since the
Directory for Worship, in this respect the same, are unlawful; for that a
certain number of men, as if they were the Representative Body of the Church,
conceive a Form, and all men are enjoined to use the same, or the like in
effect. This is a Humane Invention put upon the Ministers and People, without
warrant from the Word: and (as a wise Viscount Say his speech in Parliament,
concerning form of Prayer.
Statesman once said) Because some men who want Legs must use Crutches,
therefore all men must use Crutches, although they have Legs, Isa. 1.12. Col.
3.22, 23. Exo. 40.23, 25, 27, 29. It Is said, That the Version of the Psalms in
Meeter, lately set out by (...) Barton, is endeavored to be enforced by a Law
upon the Congregations: This will make them unlawful to be used in the Worship
of God, being a Humane Ordinance, and a Will Worship.

39. If a man of weak capacity (and yet not mad, nor out of his wits) being
abused by some subtle or cunning fellow (who taking advantage of some
distempered passion, or necessity of such weak man, or by affirming things that
are false) be drawn to agree under his Hand and Seal, to give away all he has,
to be kept during his life, (as I know several persons did of late) and others
for some small inconsiderable consideration, to grant away their Estates of
good value, as I could instance in many particulars: This was at Coton in
Warwickshire, which was proved before the Justice.
one of which, sold and conveyed an Estate of Inheritance in a Tenement, worth
40 l. for two shillings and six pence, and a few fair words. Case of Hoo and
Hoo in Chancery.
Another being troubled in Conscience for sin, and in deep despair, was
persuaded by his Brother to trust him with his Estate, worth about 700 l. (lest
the Owner should make away himself, and so forfeit it) which he did pass away
to his Brother, without any Declaration or Witness of the Trust. These people
coming to themselves, upon better consideration, finding themselves
over-wrought, desire to undo what they have done; but there is no remedy:
Finc^. (...), l. 1. c. 3. f. 8.
A man shall not be admitted to stultifie himself: And the Answer of the Judges
in this case has been, They sit not to remedy foolish Bargains; but if a man
will give his Bond to pay money for Egge-shels, or sell all he has for
nothing, it is nothing to them; the Law affords no help. But Judges must know,
That their Office is chiefly to ease the oppressed: and the contrary practice
abovementioned, is against the Royal Law of God, the only Lawgiver, 1 Thessalonians.
4.6. Weemse M.L. Com. 8. Exercit. 4. p. 202, 203. Ezekiel. 45.20. Romans 16.17, 18.
Cock Essay, p. 177.

40. Coke Instit. 2 par. page 617. Cust. Norm: de Testib. f. 142. a. Doct. and
Stud. c. 6. fo. 11. Finch (...), l. 1. c. 3. fo. 8. Wingate Law, c. 40. p. 66.
n. 19, 20.
Excommunication, such as was pronounced by the Bishop, Chancellor, or Official
cum Soc' is at Common Law a sufficient matter to plead in Abatement, or in Bar
of any Action in Disability of a man's person: This is a Popish and
Superstitious Law: the Scots have such a kind of Curb upon a man; if he disobey
the Presbytery, he shall have no Proceedings in Suits: But this is contrary to
that Law, which requires Justice to be done alike to all men, Exodus 23.3, 6.
Jer. 5.28. Prove. 20.10. Sir Coke Instit. 2 par. page 617. Cust. Norm: de
Testib. f. 142. a. Doct. and Stud. c. 6. fo. 11. Finch (...), l. 1. c. 3. fo.
8. Wingate Law, c. 40. p. 66. n. 19, 20.
Edw. Coke would have this Popish Curse used, to enforce men to Obedience, as
in Times of Popery.

41. That Law, prohibiting Conventicles or Unlawful 35 El. c. 1. Doct. and
Stud. c. 6. f. 11. a, b. Poul. Pax Reg. and Regni. Cowel Instit. Index Exp.
lit. A. Assemblata illicita.
Assemblies, as it has been expounded in this last Age, is a wicked Law. It
seems it was intended chiefly against the Papists; and the Common Law
prohibites men to assemble together to pluck down a House, or the Head of a
Pool; or to claim Common, by cutting down the Fences, or suchlike: But the edge
of this Law was turned against the People of God; who, if they had met together
in a private house, to seek God by Prayer, or to hear a Nonconformist Preach,
or Repeat a Sermon; This was a The Romans called the Night-meetings of the
Bacchanale (which from Superstition grew to all manner of filthiness) by the
Name of Conventicles, more properly then the term has been used in this last
Age, Tit. Live. l. 39. p. 1032. and p. 1034. k.
Conventicle, or Unlawful Assembly: for this they were hurried to Prison,
Fined, Excommunicated, and enjoined Popish Penance, and sometimes starved in
Prison. And the wicked Judges and Justices of the Peace, were but the Bishops
Beadles, receiving the Canons which they made, for Law: and it may be so again
with the People of God (though, thanks be to God, it be not to be feared at the
present) if wicked men shall hereafter get Power and Authority into their
hands: Therefore such Laws as this, ought either to be abrogated or amended and
expounded, Acts 18.29. and 2.46. and 5.42. Acts 20.7, 8, 9. Joh. 20.19.

42. The like may be said of that Law, whereupon John Pe^ry was Indicted,
Arraigned, Condemned, and put to Death: What Law it was, no man living can
tell; it is said in the Book, That the Indictments are grounded upon the Statute
of 1 Eliz. Chap. 2. Coke Entr. tit. Indictment, f. 352, 353. 1 Eliz. c. 2.
And the Title of the first is, An Indictment for Felony, in publishing
Scandalous Writings against the Orders of the Church: But they are no more like
the Statute, then an Egg is like an Oyster: his Offense was, That he dealt too
plainly with the Queen, in a Book which he had written; wherein he blamed her,
That her Subjects were not admitted to serve God according to the Dictates of
their Consciences, informed by the Word of God; and that they were inthralled
by Humane Presumptions, and tyrannized over by the Bishops: The honest man was
a Nonconformist; for which that Hierarchy became his Enemies, and procured
these Indictments, and never rested till they had his Blood; and the Judges
were their Beadles and Executioners: Rous Attic. Ant. l. 3. c. 3. p. 120.
He had no more Justice, then Socrates had, when the Judges at Athens condemned
him to be poisoned, Because that he maintained, There is but one God, against
their Polytheism: They would not hear Plato argue on his behalf. Their blood,
as likewise the blood of many others, cries to Heaven for Vengeance. In the
mean while, it is to be considered, That if Sir Edw. Coke, who Reports the
Indictments, were alive, or any like him come in place, such things would be
judged Offenses at Common Law; for the Indictments charge Penry, That he
published his Book, with an intent to raise Sedition and Rebellion, etc. And
upon that point, any faithful Preacher, who speaks but half as much as Jeremy
or Nathan did, may not only be imprisoned as Jeremy was, but may be hanged:
Therefore such Laws as these had need to be Expounded, or Declared void, 2 Thessalonians. 3.1, 2. Isa. 29.21. Jer. 26.6, 7, 11. and 18.19. 2 Samuel 12.7, 13.

43. That an Heir, having Lands Descending in Fee-simple, shall not be subject
to the Debt of his Ancestor, from whom the Lands descend, if he sell the Land
Custom. Norm. tit. querel. de debt. fol. 87. Cook Entr. a. fol. 126. b.
before the Action brought. This is an unjust Law; for that there is as much
(nay more) reason to charge such an heir after the Alienation as before, for
then it is ascertained what the value is, as well as in case of an Executor,
and what benefit it is to him without hazard, 2 Kings 4.1, 7. Romans 13.8.

44. That Lands taken in extent, or seized upon an Utlawry at the suite of a
private man for debt, the issues and profits thereof should go to the King, and
so to the Lord Protector, is a senseless and unjust Law, seeing the Creditor
sues for his just debt, and is at all the charge. New Term. Law. verb. Vtlaw^y.
Coke l 6. fol. 80. and l. 7. f. 3. and l. 3. f. 2, 3, 4, 35. 22 Ed. 3. l. Ass.
Pl. 33. 29 Ed. 3. l. Ass. Cowel Inter. verb. Vtlawry. Wing at Law, cap. 37. pa.
59. N. 19.
The like may be said of all Utlawries, where men are utlawed in foreign
Counties, and seldom or never hear of the suite; the Proclamation grounded
upon the satute of 31 Eliz. being never duly proclaimed, but returned of
course; yet the party utlawed, by the Common Law forfeits all his goods and
Chattels, and likewise the profit of his Lands, until the Utlawry be reversed:
this is a harsh Law, and used to ensnare men, and might well be amended, Jer.
5.26. Levit. 25.43, 46, 53. Isai. 58.6. Job 35.9.

45. Clerks Proposals, second Paper, 1650. N. 9. Justice Hutton in a cause
heard before him. C. B.
That a man indebted upon a single bill without a penalty, pays the money at
the day, and can prove it by witnesses, but has not the bill delivered up, as
it falls out many times, nor any release from the Creditor under his hand and
seal: An Action is brought upon this bill by the Creditor, or his Executor, or
Administrator: The Defendant cannot be admitted to plead that he paid the money
at the day, nor can make any defense at Law, unless he have a release: this is
an unjust Law, and a wrong to the Debtor, and so unlawful, Job 16.17. Jer.
21.12. Ezekiel. 18.7. Prove. 22.22.

46. 26 Ed. 3. l. Ass. Pl. 41. 12 Ed. 3. l. Ass. Pl. 20. 29 Ed. 3. l. Ass. Pl.
68. 40 Ed. 3. l. Ass. Pl. 22. Kitchen. fol. 162. a.
That a Wife having right to be endowed, and nothing to be said against it,
shortly after her Husbands death shall be a trespasser to her own Child, or any
other, who is heir to her Husband, and shall have nothing until she have
recovered it by a writ of Dower, which is a tedious way, and the proceeding and
Execution thereof chargeable: This is an uncharitable Law, and contrary to that
Law of Equity, that a Wife should partake in all her Husbands estate, according
to his degree and ability; and Dower is one of those three things which are
said to be favored in Law; but this is small favor, 1 Samuel 1.5. Exodus 2110.
Mal. 2.14. Ephesians. 5.33. 1 Timothy 5.4.

47. Custom. Norm. tit. Murder. f. 75. a Rast. Entr. Imp. 1574. Barn. in Appel
8. fol. 43. and in mort. fol. 46. 47, 48, 52. a.
That in an Appeal of Murder, the Wife or heir of him that is slain, bringing
an Appeal against the Murderer, may compound for money, and give a release of
the suite, and so consequently of the death of the party slain: this is an
impious Law, against the Law of God, Genesis 9.6. Exodus 21.12, 14. Numb. 35.30,
31. Rev. 16.6.

48. That a Priest, or one in holy orders (as he is said to be) should have
Coke Inst. 2 part, page 4. Orig. Reg. fol. 147. Capias si Laicus, sur stat. de
Acton, Burnet. See the statute, 23 H. 8. c. 6. and 37 H. 8. c. 9. Cons. Norm.
tit. Cler. fol. 146. a. Cowel Instit. lib. 3. Tit. 2. Sect. 5. page 225.
an Exemption and freedom from arrest upon a Capias si Laicus, upon a
statute-Merchant; and that all other men called Laics should be charged,
although the Priest were the principal Debtor, and never was any Preacher, but
some Chorister or such like fellow: this Law is both unjust and superstitious,
as being one of the privileges of the Romish Church, Prove. 20.16. and 27.13.
and 22.26, 27.

49. That a poor man taken in Execution for debt, and having nothing to pay, by
Law cannot be discharged, nor Coke Entr. Audita Querela, fol. 85, 86, 87. Coke
l. 3. fol. 44.
enlarged for an hour (without loss of the debt for ever,) but must starve and
dye in prison; whereas in some Countries, Rous At. Ant. l. 3. c. 1. page 96.
Tit. Live. l. 8. p. 301. D, F. This Historian says, that the Law was, 1. That
none should be kept in fetters, but he that was to suffer for some heinous
offense. 2. That for lent money, the goods of the debtor should be obliged. 3.
That no man should be imprisoned for debt.
the goods of the Debtor go to pay his debt, and his body not to be Imprisoned:
but if you will keep a man in prison that has nothing to pay, you must
maintain him; or else let him go out, and by that means men going to the
Indies, or following their profitable employments, many times become able to
pay their debts, and leave estates for posterity. The Law has been lately
moderated by several dispensations or pardons; but there is yet no certain Law
in force in the point, providing equal Justice and equity both for Creditor and
Debtor, Matthew. 18.26, 29, 33. Isa. 58.3. Luke 7.42. Coke estay, page 166.
Tacit. Annal. l. 11. c 4. page 145.
Pomponius made a Law to restrain the cruelty of Creditors, and forbidding them
to lend money at Interest to young men, to be paid after their parents death,
lest they should be deceived or ruined by such borrowing.

50. 5 Eliz. 23. Regist. f. 65, 66 67, 70. Cowel Interp. verb. Excom. Capiendo.
N. Term Law, verb. Excom. Wingat Law, c. 38. p. 62. n. 19, 20.
The Writ de Excommunicato capiendo, being in nature of an Execution against
him that is Accursed, that is, Excommunicated forty days; from which no Money
will redeem a man, nor any thing else, but the sacrificing of his Conscience,
in doing what the Ordinary will have him do; which is called, being justified
by his Ordinary: This is a wicked Law; and many have been Imprisoned, and
others enforced to leave their Country, for fear of this Execution; this being
the worst thing the Bishops could do, or procure, without the help of the
Judges: 1 Cor. 8.12. Joh. 16.2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.19. Jer. 38.6.

51. The Law concerning Heriot-Service, where Heriots multiply, insomuch that
if a Tenement be divided into twenty parts, he that has but a Foot of Land
shall pay a Heriot, Kitch. f. 134 44 Ed. 3. Fitz. 1 Custom Corley Com' Wai'
Case between L. Brook and Sewal. Cowel Inst. l. 2. Ti. 3. S. 31. p. 129.
that is, his best good or beast, or the second, as the Custom is: The Lord
does usually till on the Tenants, and takes 5 s. or 10 s. for a Heriot, where a
man pays Five or Six: but if the Tenant cross the Lord, he can take the utmost,
according to the Rule abovesaid. This is a great Oppression: Isa. 33.15. Exodus
1.13, 14. Levit. 25.46. Bodin Rep. l. 2. p. 202,
This Tenure was first created and payable by Soldiers who had Lands given
them by the Conquerours in England and many other Countries, long since; and is
worthy to be abrogated.

52. That great 25 H. 8. c. 22. Cock Engl. Law, p. 4. Jun. Brut. vind. p. 49.
Laws Geneva, p. 12.

Claiming Offices by Descent, is condemned and rejected by the French, and
several Decrees made against it. In the Records of that Court, one solemn
Decree appears, Anno 1272.

Bod. Rep. l. 3. c. 5. p. 331.

The Israelites, before they had a King, in time of War chose them a
Chi^ftain, (such a one as God had stirred up to save them) and to him they gave
Regal power.

Idem, l. 3. c. 7. p. 363.


Offices of Rule and Trust, requiring great abilities, and especial graces,
for the execution thereof, should be Hereditary, or by Succession, seems to be
against the current of Scripture. Moses sons ruled not, but Joshua succeeded;
for that such as have been special Instruments to save or deliver the people,
as Moses, Joshua, some of the Judges, David, and others, were especially
designed of Almighty God for Government; and others were appointed and elected
by the People; who were to be such as are described, Exodus 18.21. Psalm. 89.20.
1 Samuel 10.12, 13, 21, 24. 1 King. 19.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 17.15, It Is said of Augustus
Caesar, That he never commended his sons to the People for Government, but with
this Clause added thereto: If they shall deserve: Suet. Tranq. in vita August.
Caesar. Grot. Pol. Max. part. 1. cap. 3. page 20. Godw. M. A. lib. 5. cap. 5.
Willet Hexa. in Exodus 18.21, 22. Qu. 21. Hos. 1.11. Idem l. 4. c. 1. p. 412.
Hank Right dom. l 2 c. 6. p. 37.
This Succession is judged to be the cause why there are so few good Rulers and
Magistrates.

53. Trial by a Jury is no Scripture-way; and, as now things are generally
practiced, As a man is friended, his Cause is ended. In ordinary Cases, the
Jurors are of the meanest of Freeholders, both in Understanding, Credit, and
Estate; and, for the most part, such as will give the Bailiffs nothing to
excuse them. Anciently, they were to have 8 H. 6. c. 9. 1 H. 8. c. 8. 23 H. 8.
c. 13. 35 H. 8. c. 6.
40 s. per an. of Freehold: afterward, that 40 s. was raised to 27 Eliz. c. 6
Four pounds yearly. Now in cases of Titles, and other business of any
considerable importance, the Jurors are privately dealt withal: and although no
more can be proved, but that Cock Eng. Law, p. 45.
such a man desired them to appear and do their conscience, which is
justifiable; yet many times the Jury know the matter in question beforehand
sufficiently; and one side or other is confident of the Jury, if such and such
leading men appear: and they know who will give them the best reward, or are
like to prove their best friends. If the Judges were such as the Scripture
holds forth, That they should be able men, men of truth, fearing God, and
hating Covetousness, there were no need of such poor-con^ition'd fellows, as
many times they are, to be Judges, as these are, in all matters of Fact between
Cause and Cause; which I take to be an offense against God, Cock Essay, p. 138.
(the Jurors wanting the qualifications of Judges) that the Judges, and those
which ought to be Judges, delegate their power to others, and do not judge all
Causes themselves. Plow. Com. f. 231 a.
Anciently, there were a Jury of Judges in the Upper Bench and Common Pleas,
that is, Six in each Court, who used to meet together to declare the Law. It is
the pride of man, to judge only matters of Finch (...), l. 3. c. 1. f. 58 a,
b. 9 H. 6. 38. 14 Eliz. 410.
Law, and to let matters of Fact to be tried, that is, judged by the Jury; who
may also try the matter of Law, if they will.

The Jews had a righteous Law from GOD, which was, That the Nasi, or (as the
Grecians call him) (...), Prince or King, (for so Moses was called) should
judge all Augustus and Tiberius did observe this Course. Hawk. Right of
Dominion, page 55. Ex. Bodin. and Sueto. Tranq.
the hard causes, and the Judges should judge the rest, without any Juries. The
Jews had the great Court of the seventy Judges, or Sanhedrim, This fulfilled
that prophecy, Genesis 49.10.

Godw. W. A. L. cap. 1. page 4. and lib. 5. cap. 5. p. 213. Number. 11.16.


continued from Moses until Christ's time, when they were put down by Herod the
Askalonite: they had also two other Courts for trial of smaller matters: the
Sanhedrim although they usually sat at Jerusalem; Yet many times they divided
themselves, and did sit in five several places, for the ease of the people,
(although all the Land of Canaan which the Jews had on this side Jordan was not
above 100 miles in length, and 36 miles in breadth.) The next Godw. M. A. L. 5.
c. 4. page 210. 111. 212.
Court consisted of 23 Judges which sat in the Gates of the several Cities,
every City having such a Court. The third Court consisted of three Judges,
which judged the smaller matters in every Village.

Godw. An. Romans lib. 3. Sect. 4. cap. 20.
The Graecians and Romans had their proceedings in causes criminal, and civil,
and personal, much like unto the Jews; and in case of life and death, the whole
Court of Judges sat; who were more in number then the Jews Sanhedrim: and the
Judges Rous At. Ant. page 110, 112, 118, 125, 126.
were sworn, where there was a Law, to Judge according to that Law; and where
there was none, to Judge according to equity and conscience. The Chief Justice
or President amongst the Graecians, was called Basileus, in Imitation of Moses,
who was the first chief of the Sanhedrim. And if the heathen by the light of
nature, thought good to receive these laudable Customs and Laws from the
people of God, why should we depart from them, being none of those Ceremonial
or temporal Laws, which now being abrogated are unlawful to be used? Exodus
18.13, 21, 22. Numb. 27.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 17.6, 10, 11. Ezra 7.25, 26. Acts 25.9, 10.

54. That no man can be punished upon Indictment, for breach of any penal Law,
be the matter never so plain (except in some few cases lately provided for,)
Finch (...), l. 3. c. 2. fo. 69. The bill found by the Grand Jury is but an
Accusation.
until the matter be found by two Juries, unless the offender will confess
the fact; which causes few or none to be punished for wilful breach of the
best Laws in force, by reason that the Prosecutor is forced to be at so great a
charge to promote the execution of Justice; and every petty Error is
sufficient to overthrow the Indictment; being but a mistake of a word or
syllable, it is fatal, being helped by no statute of Jeofails: Thus such as are
Indicted creep out by one means or other, the Prosecutor or Informer being
never favored in any Court: and seldom any Common Jury will find for the
Prosecutor; it being a common saying amongst such Jurors, that if they find
for the plaintiff, they shall have nothing for their labors. By this means
most of the penal Laws stand as so many scar-Crows effecting nothing. An
ineffectual Law, is quasi Campana sine Pestillo, A bell without a clapper.
Danaeus. Hawk. Right of Dominion, l. 2. c. 9. p. 65.
This course in proceedings is faulty three ways.

1. It Is too Tedious and chargeable to the Prosecutor. 2. It puts the Jury into
the place of the Judge, as before is said. 3. It Is an encouragement to
Offenders: and in all these, against the Law of God, Acts 24.22, 26. Exodus
18.22. Eccl. 8.11.
55. Purgation by Ordael or Ordaeals, when such as were accused of Crimes, were
put to their trial by Glanvil, l. 14. c. 1, 2. Cow. Interp. verb. Ordael.
Combat, by fire, by hot water, or cold water; and so according as they came
off, they were pronounced guilty or not guilty. Concerning the first, I have
herein formerly spoken. That which was performed by fire, Verstegan. Rest.
decayed Intell. Pa. 50. 51, 52, 53.
was either by taking red-hot Irons into their bare-hands, or walking barefoot
over red-hot plowshares blindfold. That by hot water, was by thrusting the
parties Arms a^cused, into boiling water to the Elbows. That by cold water,
was by casting the party accused into a deep pit, with a cord under his or her
Arms.

In these cases, if the accused parties go over seven plowshares (being laid a
little distance one from the other,) and either tread besides them, (being
blindfolded) or treading upon them with their bare feet, or taking the hot
Irons in their bare hands, have no hurt: and so if the parties putting their
Arms into the hot water, be not scalded; or he or she that is cast into a
Pool do sink, and then come up again without hurt, they are pronounced
innocent and not guilty: but if they are burned by the hot Irons, or scalded by
the hot water, or cannot sink in the cold water; as likewise he that is slain
or vanquished in the combat, in such cases they are pronounced guilty.

Of these Sorceries (for they are no better) invented by Pagan Conjurers, the
old Law Books speak largely, that the same were used before and after the
Conquest, and the At Hampton in Arden, Com. War. A Woman suspected for a Witch,
was so tried by the rude people, for which they were indicted, 1653. Its said
some of these Trials are taken away by a statute of H. 3. but seems to be very
obscure and doubtful.
rude people use to try Witches by cold water, as above is said, until this
day. And although these Ordaeals be not commonly used, yet they may be, there
being no Law (as I take it) against them; but only a decree of Pope Stephen II.
which is no binding Law. These superstitions were never ordained to try or
acquit guilty persons, or such as are que^^ioned for their lives; they ought to
be tried by the testimony of witnesses, Deuteronomy. 17.6. Numb. 35.30. Heb. 10.28.

56. Coke l. 7. Calvin's case. fol. 2.19, 28.
That the King heretofore should have had to his own use, all such Lands as any
stranger (borne of parents out of the Kings Allegiance) purchased in England,
is an unjust Law, and contrary to that which was used of old times, and
mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; where men were admitted to purchase Land
amongst the heathen, and to enjoy the same: Abraham bought a Field of Ephron
the Hittite, and enjoyed it; and Isaac and Jacob had it after him, as appears,
Genesis 23.17, 18. compared with Genesis 49.30, 31, 32.

57. Swinburn Tract. Wills, par. 2. sect. 14, 15. and Part. 5. sect. 3.
That Anabaptists, such as deny the Baptism of Infants, are accounted in our
Law Apostata's, and are not capable to make any will, to be Executors, or to
receive Legacies; this was not only held to be Law in times of popery, but has
been since so determined: the same is a wicked and unjust Law; for if it should
be granted, that these men hold an Error about Infants Baptism, (which may be
questioned) yet it cannot be thought to be an Error in the foundation, or a
rejecting Christ and the Gospel, nor so bad as to hold that all Infants
(although the Children of Pagans, unbelievers and excommunicate persons) ought
to be or may be Baptized; because this is contrary to these men's own principle,
grounded upon that, Acts 2.39. Acts 2.
The promise is made to you and to your children, and to all that are afar off,
even as many By this Scripture, only the Children of believers, or such as are
called, have right to the promise.
as the Lord our God shall call. But howsoever, this opinion cannot take away
the civil right or property of any man, to the things of this life, to which
the most wicked man living may have The King has Power and Sovereignty, The
property and possession of every man's things, yet reserved to himself, Bodin.
Republ. lib. 1. page 110. 111.
a civil right. This therefore is an unjust Law, Genesis 14.23. Numb. 22.30, 32.
Acts 5.4.

58. The like Law is concerning Coke, l. 5. fol. 25.
Heretics, (who are such in our Law, as deny any Article of the Creed, if it
be but the local descention of Christ into Hell,) or such whose opinions have
been condemned by a General Council, as the Papists will tell us the Protestant
reformed Religion has been by the Council of Trent, 2 H. 5. cap. 7.
and other Popish Conventicles; and that the Doctrines of our Religion have
been condemned by several Acts of Parliament, Swinburn. Treat. Wills, pa. 2.
Sect. 14. and pa. 5. Sect. 2 Doct. and Stud. f. 115. b. c. 29.
under the name of Lollardries, the Professors whereof Sr Edw. Cook accounts
Heretics: these are likewise incapable to make any will, to be Executours, or
receive any legacy. The best of the people of God in England are of this
Religion, holding the same faith with the followers of John Wickliff, who were
a busively called White way to the true Church. Sect. 50. page 393.
Lollards. By this we may see, what lets, but that the faithful servants of
God might be wasted and destroyed as in former times? not our Laws, but our
Magistrates, for whom we are to bless God: in the mean while, this is a wicked
and cruel Law, both against Religion and Common right, 1 Samuel 25.2, 8, 11. Romans
13.7. Genesis 14.23. Numb. 22.30, 32. Romans 13.7.

59. Tenure in Plow. com. Sharringtons Case, f. 305. b. 7 and 8 Eliz. Littleton
Fran. Almoig. fol. 30, 32. Wingat. Law, cap. 7. pa. 13. N. 18.
free Alms, when Lands are granted to men for to say prayers, Masses, and
other Divine Services (as Littleton calls them,) for the Souls of the Donors,
and for the Souls of their Fathers Children, or Ancestors: these grants usually
were made to Monasteries and Hospitalls, and also to Deanes and Chapters, and
to the parsons of Churches. But this Tenure is Impious and Superstitious; and
yet the same is both favorably spoken of, Coke com. Littleton. l. 2. cap. 6.
Sect. 134, 135. A learned Civilian says of such Tenants, who hold in free
Alms, that pro donatoris and suorum, tam vivorum quam mortuorum Animis apud
Deum orationibus, and Divinis Officiis Intercedant. The King might, and the
Lord Protector may make such a grant at this time. Westminster. 3. Cowel Inst. l. 2.
T. 2. S. 24. p. 125. Impr. 1630.
and commended by the Lawyers in our Law Books, since Queen Maryes time, that
Popery was abolished in some measure. It ought to be taken away as Idolatrous
and Superstitious; the rather, for that the minds of men are too prone and
ready to be led aside to such Superstitious Vanities, and Will Worship,
repugnant to the Law of God. Sir Edward Coke in countenance of such
Superstitious Grants, has this passage: Nu^ quam res humanae prospere
succedunt, ubi Divinae negliguntur: But this poisoned Divinity ought to be
condemned, and some Law provided against such Superstitions, Isaiah. 1.12. Romans
14.23. and 10.8. Matthew. 15.3, 6. Coloss. 2.8.

60. That where Lands come to the Lord of the Fee, by Attainder of a Traitor or
Felon, the King has Coke Comment. Littleton, Relief, l. 3. sect. 514. fol. 294.

Wingate Law, c. 19. p. 30. n. 13.

Cowel Instit. l. 4. Tit. 18. sect. 10. page 319. Idem Index Expos. Litera a,
u. and l. 4. Tit. 18. sect. 45. p. 341.


Annum diem and vastum: The Law in this case is, That the King shall utterly
waste the Inheritance, by plucking down Houses, cutting down Trees, Ploughing
up Meadows, etc. and at Common Law, such was the Judgment in an Attaint upon a
false Verdict. This is ridiculous Law, and a prejudice to the Commonwealth;
contrary to that frugality which our Savior enjoined, touching the very
Fragments which remained, after he had fed four thousand, and five thousand
persons with meat which cost nothing, and yet he would have nothing lost or
spoiled, Joh. 6.10, 11, 12. Mar. 8.8, 9. Mat. 15.37, 38.

61. That there should be no Littleton, l. 3. c. 12. sect. 691.

Coke Com. Littleton, Remitter, fol. 362. b.

Wingate Law, c. 22. p. 33. n. 11.

Cowel Instit. Jur. Angl. Index Expos. litera R. Recordum.


Averment against a Record, is a hard Law, and may at some times prove unjust;
considering what men of mean Credit, and less Conscience, many times have the
keeping of them. It is necessary general Credit should be given to Records; but
yet where just causes of Suspicion and Corruption may appear, it is necessary
the validity of such Records be put to Trial: The contrary is a means to
countenance Perjury and Forgery; and therefore this Rule of Law would be
Expounded and Amended, for Preservation of Truth and Justice, Isaiah 8.1, 2. 2
Cor, 13.1. Ezra 4.15, 16. compared with Ezra 6.1, 2, 3. Exodus 23.7.

62. That the Widow of the Kings Tenant of Lands, to which the King is entitled
by Office held of him in Chief, before she could have her Dower assigned by a
Writ de Dote assignanda, should take her Oath in Chancery, Not to Wingate Law,
c. 38. p. 60. n. 4. n. 6.
Marry without the Kings License: This is an Unreasonable Law, and was one of
those Badges of Slavery attending Knight Service-Tenure, which was brought in
by William the Conqueror; and is contrary to that Law of God which gives
liberty to all persons to marry (only in the Lord) at their own will and
pleasure, 1 Cor. 7.2, 9, 28, 29. Genesis 2.24. 1 Timothy 4.1, 3.

63. The Heathen Romans ordained Sanctuaries, and were a grievance to the
State, Tac. Annal. l. 3. c. 7. p. 75.
The King might (notwithstanding the Statute taking away Sanctuaries) appoint
any place to be Wingate Law, c. 48. p. 68. n. 48. etc. 40. p. 70. n. 69. n. 70.
a Sanctuary or Safeguard for any Offenders flying thither, (although they had
committed Murder) and such Offenders once getting to such a Sanctuary, shall
not be enforced to answer any Indictment or Accusation for the fact, but may
confess the fault to the Coroner, and abjure the Realm. This is an impious
Privilege, and the Oath unlawful, as has been before said, and ought to be
altered, for that all men ought to be punished for great Offenses, 1 Kings
20.42. Prove. 28.17. Numb. 35.16, 19, 31. Romans 13.4. Symson Church-Hist. Cen. 7.
p. 364.
These Sanctuaries were ordained by Pope Boniface the Fifth, Res Sacrae sunt,
quae rite and per Pontifices Deo consecratae sunt, veluti aedes sacrae, dona,
quae administerium Dei dedicatae sunt; ut Calices, Cruces and thuribula: Item
loca sacra sunt Ecclesiae, Capello, coemiteria, etc. Cowel Inst. l. 2. Tit. 1.
sect. 8. p. 81. Impr. Anno 1630.
and are still available, if the Lord Protector please; and in our Law, things
made Holy or Sacred, are not to be violated.

64. That an Utlawry should be Wingate Law, c. 46. p. 86. n. 21.
Judgment in it self for Felony, is a hard and unjust Law, because a man may
be Indicted and Utlawed, and never hear of it. It is a worse Law then the
Heathen Romans had, which was, That no man was to be Condemned nor Judged,
until the Accuser and Accused came face to face: and it is contrary to those
Laws of God, which require all persons accused to be judged upon the Testimony
of Witnesses, 2 Cor. 13.1. Acts 25.16. Numb. 35.30. Deuteronomy. 17.6, 7. Joh. 7.51.

65. The like may be said of that Law, where a man may be judged to be branded,
dismembered, and his life in danger, for a few unadvised or rash words; The
Romans punished words very slightly, Tacit. Annal lib. 1. cap. 15. page 29. And
capital Punishment for words is charged as a fault, Tacit. Annal. lib. 2. cap.
12. page 50.
as he that said merrily, He would make his Son Heir of the Crown, meaning his
House, which had that Sign. The like rash words (used by one Burdet, a great
Gentleman of Warwickshire) were said to be the cause of his Death. This
Severity is against Gods Word.

66. The greatness of the body and bulk of the Law in force, in the next place,
is a great Grievance to the Commonwealth: Grotius Pol. Max. par. 1. c. p. 34,
35.
The Laws ought to be short, easy, and few. This I touched in the first
Chapter; where is recited, wherein Sir Ed: Coke says the Text of the Common
Law is contained: whereunto I refer the Reader; desiring it may be further
considered, what an uncertain thing it is to know the extent thereof. I set it
down positively, That no man by reading those Statutes and Books which Sir
Edward Coke speaks of (as containing the Text of the Law) can tell what the Law
is in an hundred particulars, wherein there have been Judgments and Opinions
given for Law, of which hardly any thing can be found, in those old Statutes,
and Books. That this is so, there needs no other proof, but the Statutes made
within the last 120 years, and Sir Edward Coke's own R^ports: Insomuch that
it is certainly believed, That a man may know more of the Law, by reading the
Statutes and Reports of this last Age, then by reading all the old Books, which
comprehend many Volumes.

67. The more Laws there be, the more suits there are about the Interpretation
thereof. France was said to have more Laws and Customs, then all the
Neighbor-Nations, and so also more Suits then all Europe besides; which grew
through the heaps of written Laws. Bodin. Rep. l 6. c. 6. p. 766. See the Book
called Consuerud. Normand.
The whole Law (I mean the Statutes, Old Books, Entries, Registers, and
Year-books) cannot be read over under three or four years with any
deliberation, the Books being so many, that they at an ordinary rate come to
above twenty pounds price; whereas the Text of the Laws of Normandy, are
contained in about forty leaves of Paper, in folio. The Laws of Athens were no
more then might be read over in one day: and every year upon the (...), Rous
At. Ant. l 3. c. 1. p. 101.
Eleventh day of their Month called Hecatombaeon, which is July, their Laws
were read over in the public Assembly; which being done, Proclamation was
made, and then it was demanded, If those were Laws enough for the Senate and
the Commonwealth: and no new Law was easily received by the Senate or the
People. Amongst the Romans, ten men were appointed to Collect the best out of
their own and the Laws of other Countries; and out of them they composed the 12
Tables. The Historian condemns the multitude of Laws, and charge it as a
corruption, that Laws upon Laws were multiplied; and says, That persons were
chosen to salve the intricate Quirks of the Laws. Tac. Annal. l. 3. c. 5. p.
71, 72.
The Romans Laws were likewise but few; Tit. Live. l. 3. p. 108. g. 109. a. 112.
h.

Raleigh Hist. l. 2. c. 4. sect. 15.


the chief was, the Law of the Twelve Tables, which they had from Greece: and
their proceedings in promulgation of Laws, were much like theirs of Athens. And
to mention no more, the Willet Hex. in Exo.
whole Body of the Jews Laws, both Moral and Judicial, which only concerned
Distributive Justice, are comprehended in three Chapters and eight Verses of
the Book of Exodus, except a very few dispersed in the three last Books of
Moses, which were added upon special occasions. Cock Essay, p. 111, 134, 136
These Laws the Jews knew most exactly; but we know not our Laws (as one has
lately written) by reason they are not set down in a Body, nor determined
plainly, but left doubtful, and inshrined in the breasts of the Judges; and
few but they, may take upon them to expound them. This I account a great
Oppression, Exodus 20. and 21. and 22. and 23. to the 9 verse. The Laws of
Geneva are contained in about five sheets of Paper: See the Book printed in
English.

68. The Magna Charta, c. 1.

Coke Instit. par. 2. in Westminster. 2 c. 33. p. 431, 432.

See the Grants to the Templers Cestercians and Hospitallers.

Council. Vienna dissolved the Templers, Anno 1311, and their Lands given to the
Hospitallers, 17 Ed. 2. Coke ut supra.

The Clergy as they are called, still claim to be free from payment of
Constables Levies; and some of the Judges and Justices allow it. At W. Sess.
Mich. 1655.


great distinction between the Clergy and the Layty (as they are called) in
Conformity to the Popes Laws and Constitutions, is a thing superstition,
oppressi^e to the Nation, and tends to the advancement of the Roman Power,
merely Antichristian. Hence the Archbishops and Bishops (being set above the
Dukes, Earls, Baron, etc.) with their Attendants, inferior Priests and
Deacons, and other Ecclesias^ical Orders, made (as it were) another
Commonwealth, free from Secular Services, The Privileges granted to the four
great Orders of Monks in England, are largely discoursed of, and their
particular Charters and Immunities rehearsed in the new book called Monasticon
Anglicanum: which is to be sent to Rome by J. A. and cannot but be there highly
esteemed. It is a famous Monument of Idolatry.
Taxes and Payments, and served chiefly to maintain a Faction against the
Commonwealth of the Layty, by upholding the State of Antichrist against the
Temporal Power. Now under the Gospel, all men are in one condition; and the
Lords Lot (Clergy) are his People in every calling, without respect of
persons, Isa. 61.6. 1 Pet. 2.9. Rev. 5.10. William Laud, late Cardinal of
Canterbury, had a design on foot, to make a perfect distinction between these
two Commonwealths: and to the better strengthening of his Party, he had an
improbable Project, to erect again the Old Monasteries, at least such as there
could be any colorable pretense to seize into the Kings hands: And several
persons (whom I could name) were employed to find out, and report the
Foundations and Privileges of these Monasteries. But blessed be God, who has
prevented these Superstitions. The Law had need to be changed in this point of
Distinction.

CHAP. XII. That the Practick part of the Law, as it is now in use, is in many
particulars sinful, and repugnant to the Law of God, and an oppression to the
people.
1.
COmmon Recoveries for assurance of Lands, (being truly called Doct. and Stud.
c. 32. dial. 1. fol. 56. a. Cowel Inter. verb. Recovery. Cowel Instit. Index
Expositor. Litera R.
Fined recoveries) are nothing else, but a pack of lies: And a colloquie at the
Bar, and the entry accordingly, of persons acting, and things done, but nothing
really (except the parties coming to the Bar, to do they know not what:) This
is merely a device or fiction to deceive (and scrue morny from) the people: the
very fees come to almost four pounds; besides the fine upon the Alienation,
which is according to the value of the Land taxed by the Commissioners: if
above 40 shillings by the year, it may be from 6 shill. 8 pence to 20 pounds,
less or more: All which might be saved, if all men's estates were made
fee-simple, and the Statute de Donis Conditionalibus replealed; or that the
making of a Feoffment, which is done by livery or the Inrolment of a Deed,
might discontinue the intail, and Bar the Remainders. In the mean while, this
Common recovery, in regard of the expense, is an oppression; and the formality,
or rather subject matter of it, being nothing but lies, (whether Jocosa,
officiosa, or perniciosa) is against the Law of God, Col. 3.9. Levit. 19.11.
Rev. 21.8. Rev. 22.15.

2.
That Errors in Judgments and proceedings in the Upper-bench, (the Action
being brought by Original,) should not be heard and determined but before the
Wingat Law, cap. 47. page 89. N. 10.
King, or Lord Protector, and Lords in Parliament, seems to be a hard Law, and
at best is a Tedious and expensive way, and so an oppression to the people, and
against the Law of God, Ezekiel. 18.8. 1 These. 4.6. Isai. 33.15. Prove. 22.16.

3.
Westminster. 2. c. 1. Stat. de Donis Condit. 27 H. 8. c. 10. Statute of Uses,
Ch^dlyes Case. Coke l. 1. fol. 121.
Intails upon the heirs males of a man's body, with remainders over to brothers,
and after to strangers of the name, to the disinherising of ones own Daughter,
having no Son, is sinful, and against the Judgment of Almighty God, immediately
given in the case of Zelopheads Daughter, declared with an emphatical addition,
That this shall be a Law of Judgment, etc. That if a man have no Son, his
inheritance shall go to his Daughter. There is a Custom in Ireland, that all
Lands which have not come to the Kings hands, (by surrender, escheate,
Attainder or forfeiture) The eldest Son of the house shall enjoy the same
during his Life, and then the second, and third, (if there be so many Brothers)
before the heir in Lineal descent. This is called the Custom of Tanestrie; and
the same grew by reason of their Civil wars, not only the greatest against
the greatest; but even every Baron and Gentleman one against another. Therefore
they left their Successors of Age to defend their territories. Davis Report.
case Tanest. Ra. Histor. lib. 2. cap. 4. S. 15.
And the same is a Law of Common equity (not one of those Judicials, which only
did bind the Jews in their own Land, but) dictated to every man by the Law of
nature, which teaches that a man's own child, being part of himself, is more
dear and near to him then a stranger: and hitherto is that to be referred; He
that provides not for his own, and those of his own House; first his own Wife,
then his own Children, and then his Servants, as the rest of the househould;
such a one has denied the faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Then are many
of the Nobility and Gentry worse then Infidels, whose inheritances (upon such
an Atheistical or Heathenish opinion, as the builders of Babel had, to get them
a name least they should be scattered) are turned from their Daughters (to
strangers) and little or nothing left for them: upon consideration of which, a
wise and Religious Judge once said, I would surely make such mine heir, whom
God makes mine heir; the contrary practice is against the Law of God and
nature, Numb. 27.7, 8. 1 Timothy 5.8.

4.
In a Replevin, no man living knows what is the general issue to be pleaded
by virtue of the last Statute, and in some cases there can be no This is agreed
by the Protonotaries of the Common Pleas, and the practice is accordingly.
Finch (...), lib. 1. fol. 14.
Judgment to have the Cattle returned: and when such Judgment has been given,
and the Cattle taken upon a re^urn habend. he that took them, and obtained the
Jud^ment, can neither use them as his own, nor sell them; nor can the former
owner have them again, but either the Taker mu^^ keep them at his own charge,
until the owner will redeem them, or they must dye in the Pynfold: and then the
Avowant, who first distreyned, may distrayn again, and go to suite afresh, and
so be put to a circuit of Action, which the Law, in other cases does disallow.
This is a foolish and ridiculous Law and against Common right, and so against
the Law of God: every one ought to have recompense in his suite, where the Law
passes for him, Lam. 3.36, 59. Amos 5.24. 1 Kings 10.9. Isai. 59.14.

5.
The practice in real and mixed actions, occasioning Stat. 51. H. 3. concern.
day^s in Real. Act. and Stat. 51. H. 3. concerning days in Dower.
many Delays, by Essoynes, Adjournments, Veiw, Counterpleading, Color, and
Dilatory pleas, is a great oppression, by reason of the delay, and unreasonable
expense, besides the nicety, and thereby uncertainty in the proceedings, where
by mistake of a word, syllable, or dash with a pen, or coming to adjourn an
hour too late, the Cause may be lost: this is an oppression, and a mere Trap to
catch men, and an occasion of much injustice: for who will yield to any man his
right, where he has hope to foil his adversary by any such trick, or weary
him at Law? Job 22.10. Luke 18.4. Isai. 59.14.

6.
Trials by Nisi prius in personal Actions, begun in the Courts at Westminster. where
the plaintiff to have amends for a trespass or battery, for which five
shilling would satisfy him, This is Common in ev^ry man's Practice, and needs
no Proof.
must spend before he can have Judgment near eight pounds, and the Defendent
about half as much, although to his ruin; and he must pay the plaintiffs
charges and damages, (which is all in nature of Damages) or lie in Gaol: this
is a grievous Law, and not to be suffered; but rather such Courts of Record are
to be Cherished, where a cause may be tried for 30 or 40 shillings: this were
more for ease of the people, and more agreeable to the Law of God, 1 Samuel 12.4.
Isai. 58.6. Isai. 5.7. and 33.15. Zeph. 3.1.

7.
The like and much more may be said concerning trials at the Bar, Common
Experience shows this to be live.
which cannot be tried, (if the Jurors come but two days Journey) under an
hundred marks, and commonly there is much more spent. This is a horrible
oppression; and such courses make poor men afraid to sue for their right, and
great men to Trample upon the poor; the same is a crying offense against God,
Psalm. 73.8. Ezekiel. 18.8. 1 These. 4.6. Prove. 22.16. Isai. 33.15. Psalm. 12.3.

8.
That a man being after some slight manner assaulted with a small stick,
(which it may be the party assaulted, waiting for such an advantage by
provocation, did procure) falls upon him that assaulted him, and beats him so
sore, that he puts him in danger of death: the party so beaten brings an Action
of assault and battery, etc. the Defendant either pleads Son assault Demesne,
or pleads the general issue, and by power of the last Act gives this special
Justification in Evidence. Then the only Coke Entr. fol. 644. a.
question is, who began the affray: and if it be proved that the plaintiff who
was so grievously beaten, gave the first assault, then he loses his suite, and
must pay the Defendants Costs. In point of Conscience, it ought to be
considered, as well who had the hurt and loss, as who began. This is an
encouragement of private revenge, Lord Bacon Essays, Title Revenge.
which is termed by that learned St. Francis Bacon, a kind of wild Justice,
which is to be weeded up, Romans 12.19. Prove. 2O.22.

9.
The same may be said of that Law, (as it is now in practice. This is likewise
the Common Practice.
) If upon a slight occasion first offered, one man kill another; The Jury
usually find such a man guilty of Manslaughter in his own defense. I confess
the Ancient Law has been, that no man could be said to kill another in his own
defense, i^ he could have escaped from the party: and in^^ances of ^uch
ine^itable necessity are showed, where a man is pursued to a River or a Wall,
or as far as he can go, and then must eith^r defend himself by offending his
adversary, or yei^d to be slain: In such a case it is better to kill then be
killed, and Justifiable by all just Laws whatsoever; but the practice is after
another fashion, as above said, and against the Law of God: there is a
difference to be put between him qui infert Injuriam, and him qui propulsat
Injuriam. Weemse, M. L. Com. 6. Exercit 7. page 115. 2 Kings 6.23. Romans 12.19.

10.
The practice of suing a man to the Exigent, This is every Terms Practice, and
observed both by the officers and practisers.
where there are four Writs, viz. the Original, Capias, Alias, and Pluries;
which should every of them have fifteen days at the least, between the Test
and Return, and were anciently returned by the Sheriff, from whom regularly the
Defendant might hear of the suite. But now as the practice is, in the first
week of a Term, these four Writs may all be sued forth, filed, and the Exigent
and Proclamation taken out in a day, or an hour: And in this case, if a poor
man be sued for a debt of forty shillings, or any petty trespass, he shall
never hear of it until the plaintiff has spent 15. shillings 7 pence: and if
so soon as the Defendant hears of it, he pay the debt; or agree the trespass,
it must cost him that 15 shillings and 5 pence, and 5 shillings more to
withdraw the suite. But if the Defendant never hear of the suite, (as it
oftentimes falls out) until he be Utlawed, the Reversal of the Utlawry costs
him above thirty shillings: and if he be taken (upon the new Orders) he must
procure a Supersedeas, and reverse the Utlawry by a writ of Error, which will
cost him above 40 shillings: and all this is said to be for the benefit of the
Court, that is, the enriching of the Offi^ers. A Summons with a penalty in
Terrorem, like a Subpoena, were a more equal just way; for that experience
shows, that where one of forty fails to appear upon a Subpoena, there is not
one of five, who appears upon common Process. This ought to be amended, as an
oppression of the people, Isai. 33.15. 1 These. 4.6.

11.
The Law imposing the forfeiture of a man's goods and Chattles, for flying for
felony, Every Jury which passes upon a felon, has this in ch^rg^: al^hough
they find him not guilty, yet they are to enquire and present, whether the
f^lon did fly for it; and then what goods and chattels he had, etc.
as it is now in use, is an unjust Law. Suppose a simple man being questioned,
or suspected of felony; or if such a thing be pretended, and the poor man
unwilling to fall into his Enemies hands, fearing their power or malice, or
being fearful of Imprisonment, foolishly runs away and absents himself; some
short time afterward yields himself (being better advised) and upon his trial
is acquitted; but upon the evidence he is found to fly for it: in this case he
loses all his goods. There is no reason that a poor man in such a case should
lose all his goods and Chattles, if he be not guilty of the felony: his flight
was but to save himself; and every creature naturally seeks its own
preservation: if the poor man had resisted the Officer, or those who pursued,
there had been some color to punish him; and so if he had been guilty of the
felony, he must have suffered the Law: But the loss of all a man's goods and
Chattles, (if he had five-fold as much as was stolen) might be too great a
punishment, if he should be found guilty; much less should he lose all for
flying, when he is not guilty, 2 Samuel 15.11. Romans 15.1.

12.
This is likewise admitted in all Courts. If the Jury will believe the witness,
a single witness is sufficient. Cons. Norm. Tit. Privil. Crucis. fol. 139. a.
That any person charged with any offense touching his life or member, should be
convict upon the Testimony of a single witness, is an offense against the Law
of God, and contrary to all Rules of Scripture. The civil Law is in this point
more agreeable to the Law of God, and so likewise was the Law of Normandy,
which determine the Testimony of one single witness insufficient to charge any
man in the cases aforesaid. And the like may be said of a single evidence in
personal Actions, (where there are not other circumstantial proofs, evidencing
the matter in question,) that no Judgment is to be grounded thereupon, Deuteronomy.
17.6. 2 Cor. 13.1. John 8.17. Matthew. 18.16. Heb. 10.28. Numb. 35.30.

13.
The like may be said of the trial of men charged with felony or other such
like Crimes: the Prisoner has not liberty either to have witnesses sworn for
his defense, to clear him; nor admitted to have any Counsel, Wingat Law, cap.
40. p. 70. N. 64.
if he deny the fact, although there be a Lawyer as Eloquent as Tertullus
against him; unless he come in upon his traverse, that is, if after the By l
found, and presented by the Grand Jury, the Prisoner can provide three pounds
or more, to pay the fees of the traverse, he shall be allowed Counsel for his
money; but if he be a poor Thief, and has no money, he shall have no Counsel;
however, the Judge will hear his witnesses without oath: But all the witnesses
who are to give evidence for the Commonwealth are sworn: and if it fall out
(as sometimes it does) that a witness sworn, speaks any thing material to clear
the Prisoner, especially if he do any whit contradict the Testimony of any
other brought against the Prisoner, then the Court uses to be in an This I
observed to be very usually practiced by the Judges, as a piece of high
injustice: but since the late Wars the Judges are more just and indiff^rent,
and moderate in this point.
heat, and great inquiry is made how such a witness came to be sworn: and if
it appear, he was brought in by any Solicitor or friend of the Prisoners, then
such a man is checked, or threatened most commonly; and the Prisoner must endure
all this Injus^ice, (for it is no better,) nor can any man defend it in foro
Conscientiae, for every man ought to have as much favor, and means allowed him
to clear himself, as his Accuser has to charge him; and somewhat more,
according to the rules of Scripture. The contrary was used against our Lord
Christ, Mark 14.59, 63. Luke 22.71. John 3.11. Job 29.16.

14.
The payment of fines upon Writs of Sr Edward Coke says, that the reason of
these fines, was because the King lost the benefit of the Amerciaments, which
he should have had upon the judgment or nonsuite. Coke Inst. 2 part. in Stat.
mod. Levand. fines. 18 Ed. 1. page 511. So that fines were then the Conclusion
of suits; but now they are used to prevent suits, and to settle estates, about
which then was no controversy. And for other original Writs, they are the
beginnings of suits, and therefore ought to be had without fine, there being no
Amerciaments lost thereby. The fine upon the Writ of Covenant, prolic^ntia
concordandi, is said by Sir Edward Coke to be the Kings silver: which is a
gross mistake, for that is paid, besides the fine and post-fine upon the same
Writ. Coke Inst. 2 part. page 511.
Covenant, (as well as other fines upon Original Writs,) are an oppression, and
a late exaction, and seem to be contrary to Magna Charta, Doct. and Stud. Chap.
8. fol. 18. 6. Fines ought to be paid for Off^nces, as a Mulct or Punishment:
but it is in no sort any Offense, to leavy or sue forth a Fine for Assurance of
Lands purchased, nor to seek for remedy against wrongs by Suit in Law: These
Fines were all taken away by a Law (as I take it to be) but Fines upon Writs of
Entry and Writs of Covenant, are since set up again, upon a mere pretense, That
the Fines themselves may be erroneous, for want of payment of the Money,
called, The Kings Silver; to which, the Fine upon the Alienation has no
affinity or relation, that Silver being anciently but Ten-pence, but this is at
least Six shillings eight pence, if the Lands be above Forty shillings by the
year; and it may be twenty shillings or twenty pounds, being regularly the
Tenth part of the yearly value, as the Lands Conveyed are rated by the
Commissioners; and the post-Fine is half as much more. The like may be said of
Damna Clericorum, which is the Tenth part of the Damages clear recovered in any
Action; and was anciently paid to the Priests, who were Clerks in all Courts;
but since was allowed to the Protonotors, and their Clerks: This being a kind
of Tything, had a Superstitious beginning; but is lately discharged, as all
other Fines are, but those upon Writs of Entry and Covenant, which yet remain
as an oppression. If it be said, That this is necessary, as part of the Lord
Protectors Revenue: It is to be considered, That the want of that, is to be
supplied by payment of Tit. Live. l. 39. p. 1051. f. and 1052. G. Those taxes
are most necessary, which are imposed upon curiosities and dainties; as rich
Perfumes, clo^h of gold and silver, Silks, Cyp^ess, Laces, rich Colors,
Pea^ls, Diamonds, and other Precious Stones; all kind of works of Gold,
silver, and enameled Coaches and Chariots, etc. Bodin. Repub. l. 6. c. 2. p.
670, 671. Hawk. Dom. l. 2. p 111.
Taxes, Toll, Romans 13.6. Taxes are as proper for upholding of Sovereignty, as
the Law it self, Bod. Rep l. 1. c. 10. p. 177. Jun. Brut. vind. cont. Tyra. p.
85, 86.
Tribute or Custom, allowed by our Savior and the Apostle to be paid to the
Roman Heathen Emperors, Mat. 22.21. Romans 13.6, 7. Luke 20.25. that is, an
indifferent payment, by just proportion of Taxing: But this now used by way of
such Fines, is a mere Oppression or Punishment of particular men for no
Offense, Ezekiel. 45.8. Amos 4.1. and 5.12. Jam. 2.6. Isa. 52.45.

15.
All manner of Pleadings and Proceedings both in Law and Equity, are stuffed
with falsehood and lies; This is evident in every man's practice, and needs no
proof.
and of necessity must be so, whilst the Law continues as it now is. In the
Upper Bench, all the Pleadings are said to be before the Lord Protector
himself; and so were said to be before the King himself, although he never came
into the Court. The Defendant is always said to be in the Custody of the
Marshal of the Marshalsey, although he never came there; but John Do and
Richard Roo were (in conceit) his Manucaptors. In an Action at Law of Trespass
for Assault and Battery, brought for a box on the Ear; the Plaintiff declares,
That the Defendant with Force and Arms, viz. with Swords, Staves and Knives,
did make an assault upon him, and did him beat, wound, and evilly entreat, so
that it was despaired of his life. In an Action of Trespass, for driving Sheep
over a plowed Land; the Plaintiff declares, That the Defendant with Force and
Arms, his Close, etc. did break, and his Grass to the value of Forty shillings
there late growing, with his feet in walking did tread down and consume; And
his other Grass there late growing, to the value of Forty shillings, with his
Cattle, that is to say, Horses, Oxen, Cowes, Hogs, and Sheep, then and there
lately feeding, did eat up, tread down, and consume. In all cases, where the
Plaintiffs by Law were to put in Pledges, and where the Defendant put in Common
Bail, or where the Defendant is to be summoned, John Do and Richard Roo, John
Den and Richard Fen, and the like devised Names, are said to be the men. The
Returns of most Writs are false, That the Defendant is not found, when he was
never looked for, nor the Writ in the County whither it is directed; but
purposely so returned, that the Plaintiff may have an Alias, and so a Pluries,
to the Exigent. Upon a Habeas Corpus to remove a Prisoner being in the Goal;
Ki^th. Return. Brev. fo. 259.
if the Plaintiff will not pay the Sheriff for removing the Prisoner, what he
demands, the Sheriff returns, That the Writ came too late; or that the
Defendant languisheth in Prison, so that he cannot have his Body at
Westminster, at the day of the Return of the Writ, without danger of death. So
if a Prisoner be bailed, and a Bond given for Appearance; if the Bond be
^uffi^ient, the Sheriff will return, That he has taken the Body of the
Defendant, and has it ready at the day: and sometimes when the Defendant is
Arrested, and at liberty, the Sheriff will return, That he has the Defendants
body in Prison, and that he languisheth; when he goes abroad, but is not minded
to appear to answer the Suit. The Common Bar, and the story about Black-acre
and White-acre, and such things as are invented, when men give to others color
of Title, as an inducement to some other matter: All which things are repugnant
to Honesty and Simplicity. The like may be said of Proceedings in Courts of
Equity: If a man sue for Lands, to which he pretends an Equitable Right, as a
ground of Equity; to make his Bill hold, he usually alleges, That the
Plaintiff has lost his Evidences; That they are come to the Defendants hands;
That the Plaintiff can maintain no Action at Law for them, because he knows not
the Dates nor Contents of them, nor whether they be in Boxes, Bags, or Chests;
and diverse other such other false surmises: when the Plaintiff has the
Evidences in his own Custody. In a Bi^l, where a man sues to have an Agreement
performed, it is usually alleged, That the Witnesses to prove the Agreement,
are dead, beyond the Seas, or in remote places unknown; or so impotent, that
they cannot be produced at any Trial: West. Symb. 2 part. Tit. Fines, sec. 112.
Old Natura Brevium, fo. 20
and many suchlike. So likewise, in a Commission to take the Cognizance of a
Fine, it is alleged, That the Cognizors are so impotent, that they cannot
travel to a Westminster, without danger of death; when they are in perfect
health. These, and many more lies and falsehoods, are made, and entered of Record
every Term, which are clearly sinful, and ought to be reformed, Job 13.4. Acts
5.3, 4. Coloss. 3.9. Revel. 21.27. and 22.15. Luke 19.8.

16.
The uncertainty of the Law for want of a standing Rule, (the Law it self being
but mere Opinion, is a matter of great prejudice, and causes an excessive
charge many times to the Suitors: The Judges (being Bodin. Repub. l. 3. c. 5.
p. 325. The Magistrate is a living or breathing Law.

There has been a Judgment upon a Writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber,
given by all the Judges, That no Information will lie in any Court at
Westminster, but in the proper County, before the Justices; and yet such
Informations are constantly brought and prosecuted every Term, contrary to that
Judgment grounded upon the Statute of 21 Jac. c. 4.


called the Speaking Law) very frequently differing in their Opinions; and
sometimes the same Judges, when Lawyers have given that under their hands for
Law, which when they have come to be Judges, upon second thoughts they have
judged otherwise: although such Judges have been known and reputed to be men of
Integrity and clear Judgment. And this uncertainty is not only about the
highest Apexes of the Law, but in things of ordinary concernment: As about
Waste; abundance of Money has been spent, to know what power is given to a
Termer by these words, To hold, etc. Coke lib. 4. fol. 62, 63. Herlackendens
Case, compared with Jews Boles his Case.

Coke lib. 11. fol. 81, 82, 83. See the many Cases there cited.


without Impeachment of Waste: whether he be only discharged of unvoluntary
Waste; or whether the Termer may take down fixed Wainscot, or suchlike, which
he set up; or whether he may not cut down Timber Trees, and pluck down houses:
and further, whether he may not take all the Materials to his own use. If I
mistake not, all these things have been judged Negatively and Affirmatively:
And the last Solemn Judgment was, That in such a case, a Termer might commit
wilful Waste, and take all the Materials to his own use; which is Repugnant to
all former. Judgments: and yet all the Judges are not now of the same Opinion
in some of the Cases abovementioned. It were an easy matter to set down
twenty such Cases, where the Judges have been divided; and in diverse Cases,
where one Court has agreed, the other Judges (upon a Writ of Error) being the
greater number, in the Exchequer Chamber, have reversed their Judgments. The
like uncertainty is found in every man's practice in There are many
Controversies concerning Actions upon the Case for words; and many times, words
of high concernment are adjudged not to bear Action; and for others of less
concernment, judgment has been given. Corn. Tacitus observes, That the Romans
Laws were swayed hither and thither by Might, Ambition, and Corruption; and all
was for want of a standing Rule. Tacit. Annal. lib. 1. cap. 1. page 2.
ordinary things; as, whether in an Indebitatus Assumpsit for Wares and
Merchandise, upon a Non assumpsit pleaded, the Plaintiff shall not be put to
prove, That the Money demanded grew due for such things as are mentioned in the
Declaration; or whether he may give in Evidence, That it grew due for Rent, or
other things not mentioned: Whether upon a Lease by Paroll, an Action upon the
Case will lie for Arrears of Rent: Whether a man to an Action of Trespass, o^
Assault, Battery, and Wounding, may plead to the wounding, Son assault Demesne.
Within Thirty years it was commonly held for Law, That if a man strike me with
a Stick, I might not cut him with a Sword: but now of late, the common use is,
to justify the whole Battery, both Beating and Wounding. If a man were minded,
he might fill a Book with such Uncertainties. And this is that which caused
King James to tell Wilson Histor. Great Brit. p. 96.
Sir Edward Coke, That he had inserted into his Books, many extravagant
Opinions for good Law, which were not Law; and therefore commanded him, To
Review and Correct them, and bring them to him to be perused. And the same
Judge is also charged, That he could turn the Edge of the Law any way, and
strike with that weapon whom he pleased; That Law, which like the Lesbian Rule,
is so pliant, that it may be turned every way, loses the force of a Law, and
becomes like a Nose of Wax; and so the Judge, who is but the Minister of the
Law, becomes the Master of the Law, Bodin. lib. 6. cap. 6. page 760.
answerable to what a Learned Chancellor said once upon the Bench, Such a Lord
Chancellor was of that Opinion, and I am of this Opinion. If there were nothing
in the Law faulty besides this, it were worthy to be perused and amended: for,
the Judges being the Speaking Law, the Law is nothing but their Cock Essay, p.
111.
(Opinions; contrary to that Truth which ought to be in all Laws: But the
Judicial Law of Moses shall never be found defective, Matthew 5.27, 28, 38, 39.
Daniel 7.25. Nehem. 9.13, 14. Esth. 1.19. Ezekiel. 20.24, 25. Esth. 3.8.

17.
The matter concerning special Verdicts is a business needless, Every man's
purse, who has a special verdict, witnesses this.

I have known two hunderd pounds spent, to know* when a lease should Commence:
which seems plain to every Ordinary Capacity; but the wits of men made the
matter doubtful and uncertain. Special vedict between Sowtham and Clerk in the
upper-Bench and now in the Common pleas.

Let all who have contract^d at these places, say whether this be not true: and
if they deny it, the Author will either by Instances prove the truth of it, or
put it out of the next Impression, and acknowledge his offense.


and of unsuff^rab^e charge; which might be prevented, if the Jud^e in his
^irc^it, where he took the verdict, would but report the matter in a few words
to his fellows; or if all the ^u^ges at the Bench would determine what the Law
is, when they hear the trial; for that their Judgment then would be as
effectual, as when it is given upon a special verdict; for that, if either
party dislike the Judgment, he may bring a Writ of Error as well in one case,
as in the other, where a verdict is given by the Jury. There are few of these
verdicts, if they be upon Titles, but they cost an hundred marks one both
sides, Drawing, Engrossing, Copying and Entering, sometimes much more; and
generally serve for nothing, but the oppressi^n of the people, and enriching of
some few Officers, contrary to the directions of the Holy Scriptures, Job
29.16. Amos 5.7. Isa. 2.6.

18.
To these oppressions and evils in the practice of the Law, I may well add
the practice of new Law, at Drury-house, Worcester-house, Gurney-house, and
other places, for sale and Contracts of Lands confiscated. These Cloister up
themselves, and usually a man may wait a week before he can have an an^wer, and
spend four times as much upon Doorkeepers as the Fees o the order come to: and
he that has the best skill to do his own business, is enforced to entertain
one of their Offi^ers to do it; because another cannot be admitted. The p^ssing
of an assurance here costs three times as much as the passing of a Grant under
the Great-Seal: there you shall have a Clerk get more money in three years, then
an honest man can u^ua^ly save in thirty years practice of the Law. This
Cloystering up themselves, is against the Lau^able Customs of the Jews, and
other Nations, recorded in the book of God; whose Judges sat in the Gates: and
the same is the cause of much bribery, extortion, and oppression. If they
consulted ab ut State-aff^irs, it were fit they should be private; but Matters
of Contract and purchases, and other things of that nature, ought to be open
and public, Job 31.21. Prove. 21.23. Esth. 2.19. and 3.1, 2. and 5.13. Dan.
2.4. Jer. 38.7. and 39.3.

19.
The constant practice of retaining Counsel or Advocates This is so common,
that he is many times made to pay Costs, that has no Counsel, as if he did it
for delay. Holt against Matthew in Chancery.
in all causes, (as it is now used) is Exodus 23.2. Deuteronomy. 27.19, 11.
a high provocation of Almighty God, and without Gods great mercy, a ruin to
the Souls of the practisers. These men for fees must stretch their Consciences,
and set Truth upon the Tenters, or Imprison it in unrighteousness, (which is a
mark of a Reprobate-minde) in as much as there is not one cause of a thousand,
which is pleaded, but one side or other endeavors to suppress the truth: and
he that with an Impudent Face, and the strength of his Wits, (being blinded
with the gift) cannot set a fair Color upon a bad cause, is accounted but a
simple fellow, and not to deserve his fee: this is to call evil good, and good
evil; and the practice like that of Tertullus his railing against Paul; and the
fee, or reward, is no better then Balaam's wages of Iniquity, and against all
Scripture-practise: The only remedy hereof is, that the Lawyers or Advocates,
should be (r) sworn as Amici Curiae, At New England, the parties in all causes
speak themselves, and if need be, the Magistrates, where the cause requires
(...), do the parts of Advocates, with^u^ fee or reward. Lechford News, page 28.
or assistants to the Judges, to endeavor to discover the truth without
partiality; and for this to have their reward from the State, Acts 24.5. Exodus
23.2. Lam. 3.35, 36. Number. 22.7, 17. 2 Pet. 2.15. Judges 19.30. and 20.7, 8.
Romans 1.18. We read in the Church-Historie, that Eusebius. l. 6. c. 21.
Bassianus the Emperor (Son of Severus) having stain Geta his Brother, would
have had Papinianus a Lawyer to have pleaded his defense of that Fact before
the people of Rome; But the Lawyer Refused therein to be an Advocate for the
Emperor, saying, Sin might more easily be comm^tted then defended. Symson
Church Histor. life of Bassianus, page 31.
And for this worthy fact he suffered death: but God suffered not this murder
to go unpunished, for this Bassianus was shortly after murdered by Macrinus his
Successor in the Empire. Let this Lawyer be an Example to all Lawyers, lest he
rise up in Judgment against them at the last day, and Condemn them, for being
more blind and unjust then the heathen.

Wall. on 1 Corin. 2.2. Intit. None but Christ. The Romans allowed no money or
gift to pleaders. Piso the Roman Praetor, condemned this kind of pleading,
calling it cruelly in Advocates.

Tacit Annal. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 43. and l. 11. c. 1. p. 142.


Plato esteemed these hired Orators, but as Calumniators and Sycophants (hinc
innocens ut nocens damnatur, and contra) making the Guiltless Guilty, and the
Guilty Guiltless. Cato refused to allow such pleading, quia orationis facundia
facile possent aequa and iniqua persuadere; Because by Eloquence of words they
could easily persuade to right or wrong. Demosthenes boasted that he could
change the Sentences of the Judges at his pleasure. And Cicero was called Rex,
oratione sua omnia regens: Playing R^x with his Oratory, thereby ruled all
things at his pleasure. This is both an offense against God, and a wrong to the
people, especially to the poorer sort.

20.
That Ridiculous, or rather Profane form of Prayer used by the Clerk upon the
arraignment of a Prisoner, upon his Trial, when the Prisoner being demanded,
whether he be Guilty or not Guilty? answers, Not Guilty, Then the Clerk to
make up the Issue, Replies, Cul. Prist: That is, Thou art Guilty, and I am
ready to prove it. Then is the Issue joined: Such forms in all cases, are
accounted as the Common Law, and sometimes the proceedings are naught without
such formalities, the Common Law being chiefly old customs, and nothing else,
besides the Judges opinions.
Now comes out that Common Prayer or Conjuration, which is repeated twenty or
forty times at one Jail-delivery, if there be so many Prisoners arraigned; God
send thee a good deliverance.

Perk. on the 2. Com. vol. 1. page 38. col. 1.
This formality, or rather superstitious profaneness in Prayer (wherein the Holy
name of God is used so lightly, and accustomarily, being pattred over, as the
Papists patter over their Pater Nosters, Ave Mary's, and such like upon their
beads (without either fear or wit:) In Imitation of whom, we have this and all
other forms of Prayer devised by man. This is against the Holy Laws of God,
which forbid, 1. Profane using the name of God. 2. Superstition in so applying
this form of Prayer. 3. Vain Tantalogies, as if the very repetition of it were
effectual for some good purpose, being used without reverence or devotion,
Matthew. 6.7. Romans 12.11, 12. James 5.16. Jer. 12.2. Isa. 29.13, 14.

21.
That Law (accounted amongst the Laws of Merchants) that Accounts made up
between Merchants or other Tradesmen, Barker against Nayler, and Townsend in
Chancery, Anno 1654.
and signed under their hands, and allowed (Errors Excepted) as the form is,
should not again be examined, although there be palpable or Errors wilful
mistakes, seems to be a hard Law. It Is true, that suits upon Trivial supposed
mistakes are not to be encouraged; but where Errors are of great concernment
to men's estates, and clearly proceeding from injustice, such Accounts ought in
Equity to be examined. Although now in such case, the wronged party has no
remedy either in Law or Equit^. It were fit some honest able men were appointed
to Determine Accounts in such cases, to avoid wrong and oppression amongst
Merchants and Tradesmen Isa. 58.6. Isa. 1.17. Job 29.15, 16. Lam. 3.35, 36.
That Golden Rule of our Savior over-ruleth all things of this nature:
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, the same do ye to them, Matthew.
7.12.

CHAP. XIII. That the general Execution of the Law, as it is now seated and
practiced at Westminster, is a Common oppression to the whole Nation.
First it is to be premised which cannot be denied that by the Ancient Law of
the Land, no Action could be brought at Westminster, out of the proper County
(I do not mean in respect of the Ven. or place for trial, but in respect of
the beginning, continuance, and end of the suite, all being done at home)
except the matter in question were of the value of forty shillings or more.

By the Statute of Gloucester 6 Ed. 1. cap 8. anno 12^8.

Cook Inst. 2. part. p. 311. and 312. Ex. Briton. c. 28. fol 61.


(which is taken for granted to be in affirmance of the Common Law) It is
ordained that no man shall have a Writ of trespass for goods taken, unless he
swear that the goods taken away were worth forty shillings, and all such causes
where the Powels Cou r Leet, fol. 12. 13.
matter in demand was under forty shillings, were anciently determined in the
County Court, Hundred Court, or Court Baron of the Manor, where the cause of
Action grew, then were not the Courts at Westminster stuffed with such a world
of frivilous and trivial suites, as they have been in this last Century,
especially the last fifty years, for then (I mean an hundred years since) began
those Courts to fill and ever since have swelled, and the Courts of Record, (as
well as those Court Barons abovenamed) in the Counties and Cities have
decayed, and in many places grown out of use. It Is written that in King Hen. 8.
his Reign (who died but 110. years since) there were some days in the Term,
when there was not one cause heard, or so much as any motion in some one Court
at Westminster. And that about the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth, there was but
one Sarjeant, namely Sarjeant Bendloes at the Common Pleas Bar, which is a
strong presumption that the business was little, or else there would surely
have been more Sarjeants created, before the residue had died.

2. And if it be considered what proportion forty shillings in money, in King
Edw. 1. his time, (when the Statute of Gloucester was made) bears with many in
these days, no one will wonder that there were few causes in Westminster Hall,
when all under that value were dispatched in the Country: I take it to be
clear, that forty shillings then was as much in value (in respect of the use
and benefit of) as forty pounds have been since, and that forty shillings would
then have bought as much Lands, goods, or Commodities of the growth of this
Nation, take one Commodity with another, as forty pounds would have bought
fourteen years ago, which does appear thus: Cook Compl. Copieholder. Sect.
25. p. 36.
twenty pounds by the year was in the days first above mentioned held Cook
Com Littleton. L. 2. Sect. 95. fol 69. Camdens Britan. p. 136. Westminster. 1.
Compared with Fitz. N. B. fol. 6^. Lowes Case. l. 9. fol. 123.
sufficient to maintain a Knight, and that is a Knights fee, they that account
it by the quantity, say that it contains eight hundred Ac^es, all conclude it
to be between six hundred and four-score, and eight hundred Acres, whose
account is the least; so it has been lately reputed within thirty miles of the
middle of England, where commonly Lands are valued at ten shillings the Acre,
by the year (being neither Forest, Heath, Waste, nor course arrable ground)
and as much above that rate as under.

According to this account twenty pounds by the year, at twenty years purchase,
comes to 400. l. and eight hundred Acres, at ten shillings the Acre, comes to
400. l. per annum, which at twenty years purchase comes to 8000. l. which is
for every twenty shillings, twenty pounds; then add to this, that money it self
is raised Cook Inst. 2. part. p. 311.
from twenty pence to five shillings the ownce, and above, and the native
Commodities of the Country are raised as much as Land: It Is Reported by Stowe
Stowe Annal. in the life of. H. 2. page 154.
in his Chronology, out of the black book in the Exchequer, that Anno 1175. a
measure of Wheat to make bread for one hundred men, was valued at one shilling,
the carcass of a fat Ox, at one shilling, a fat Sheep, at four pence,
Provender for twenty Horses, at four pence, and I find in an old Manuscript of
good credit, that Anno 1372. a quarter of Wheat was at two shillings, and a fat
Ox, at six shillings eight pence, and if credit may be given to such as have
died in this age, such a beast as twenty years since was worth five pounds,
might have been (within an hundred years Its proved by many instances that
within one hundred and seventy years past, Lands have been raised in France and
the Countries adjacent, twenty times dearer than they were, and Fruits and
Victuals raised near the same proportion. Bodm. Republ. l. 6. cap. 2. page 666,
667.
before) bought for thirteen shillings four pence. Something may be also
gathered by the computation of the Rent-Corn reserved upon the Colledge-lease,
made in pursuit of the Statute of the 18th. of Eliz. where the third part
reserved in Corn, (if I mistake not) does much exceed the other two thirds in
money. Lay all this together, and it must needs be granted that forty
shillings, when the Statute of Gloucester was made, was as much in value as
forty pounds was fourteen years since. I do not speak of the values, as things
now are, because Corn and Cattle are fallen half in half from their usual
prices; (but Almighty God can alter those things in an ordinary course of
providence, when he pleases) in the mean while we are to bless God for our
plenty, which never was conceived to be a Plague, or a Judgment, but a token
of great prosperity, and must needs be so at this day, if Money and Lands were
rated answerably. Now then, if all Actions under forty pounds, were determined
in the Counties and Cities where the Actions grew, there would hardly be ten of
an hundred commenced at Westminster, which would be an exceeding benefit, and
advantage to the whole Nation.

3. The contrary practice now in use, that every trivial, All Nations except
the Commm-wealth have their Laws executed in every City.

See Corollarie. p. 142.

The Romans observed this course to have Justice done in every City.

Tac. Annal. l. 1. c. 3. page 5.


idle impertinent suit, of three pence value should be brought at Westminster,
whereby all sorts of men from Michaels-Mount in Cornwall to Berwick in the
North, and other places far and near, should be hurried up to London and
Westminster, (the poor although they beg as it is usual, because no one will
follow their Suites without money, and the rich, the better to over-see their
Suites, or taking such an occasion, it may be for curiosity to learn and see
fashions, or for more vicious and wicked ends, many times to the ruin of them,
and their families, all occasioned by the Laws residence at Westminster
(whether they must go) this I set down to be one of the greatest oppressions
and burdens, which the Nation groans under, and not to be paralleled in any
Kingdom, or Commonwealth in the whole world, most like to the Turks traveling
to Mecca, to visit Mahomets Tomb, this in general.

Now out of this grand mischief, many other evils grow, and are nourished
thereby.

1. Expenses occasioned by Suites at Westminster are six times more than they
need be, whereof the greater part is usually spent in Hors-meat and Mans-meat.

2. Traveling to London constantly occasioned by these Suites from Term to
Term, much wears out men's spirits, and weakneth their bodies, especially if
the journey be long and tedious, besides the loss of time, which might be
spent more profitably at home.

3. The destruction of Horses, which have pined started, and spoiled in and
about London, is by estimation as much loss and charge yearly to the
Commonwealth, as the payment of a Subsidy in former times, which was above one
hundred thousand pounds, that is above ten pounds for every Parish, one with
another.

4. The concourse of people of all sorts, from all parts to London, causes a
great increase of wickedness, and is the Nurse of all Rebellion and Commotion,
by reason that London being as a Wood to shelter all men, as well such as
having run out of their Estates live there unknown, as all others, who live by
their wits, or have committed any villainies, or have any design to plot, or
contrive mischief, usually resort thither; where by reason of the multitude,
and so many strangers unknown, no account can be taken of their Actions, or
manner of living, the common pretense being their attendance upon one Court, or
other, which occasioneth Impunity, and lets loose the Rains to all Iniquity.

5. This hurrying up to London, especially by the Nobility and Gentry, causes
nothing but profuseness, and ill husbandry, where for the most part they learn
nothing, but drinking, drabbing, and fantastical fashions, and in the mean
while their houses in the Countries stand vacant, as a Lodge whom none inhabits
but a single keeper, and their poor Tenants want work and relief.

6. Upon this occasion the whole considerable trade of the Nation (except of
some few Sea-Towns) is carried up to London, and generally all other Cities and
Towns are decayed, and almost ruined and impoverished. This causes those two
plagues of a Commonwealth, Riches and Poverty, when some have too much and
others too ltitle, which makes the Rich tyranize over the poor, and more to
regard their pleasure and excess in diet and Apparel than virtue and
godliness. And the poor because they see themselves miserable and trodden under
foot, to envy the rich, and become desperate. Bodm. Republ. l. 5. cap. 2. page
569. Ex Platone.
And this must needs be that Generatio unius est Corruption alterius, as when
the head is nourished to an unusual greatness (as in case of the Rickets) then
all the body grows lean, although the over-growing of the head is but a
corrupt, or excrementions increase. And it is to be believed that the
ballasting of the trade of the Nation would much tend to the health, and good
of the whole. For if London (which now furnishes all the Nobility, Gentry, and
people of Estates and quality, through all England, and a great part of
Scotland and Ireland, with their Apparel, Linens, Spices, and all necessaries,
and curiosities) sold the same to the Tradesmen and Chapmen in the Countries,
this would enrich the whole Nation; and London, for the better part of it,
would rather get than lose by it, for then they would have a certain trade,
with such as (having trading in the Country answerable to the stock they keep
in Trade) would grow rich, and be able to pay their Credidors at London,
whereas now hardly one Tradesman in a Market Town, and very few in Cities and
great places get any Estates, and many when they dye leave not sufficient to
pay their debts: And on the other side, the most part of the Retaylers in
London deal in the Countries with the Gentry and others, and the Tailors, who
commonly run the greatest hazard, because he that will gain greatly must
adventure desperately, by reason of long payment, and loss of debts, become
ruined and destroyed in their Estates, by trusting of strangers far and near,
whereas if the Trade were more mediate, and went through the hands of the
Tradesmen in the Country, as it would be more certain to the Londoner, so the
Country Tradesman would be better able to furnish himself; and by this means
less loss would be in debts, when the Countryman trusts his neighbors with
that he knows men are able to pay, and the Commodity sold might be afforded at
the second hand as cheap as it is sold in London, in regard of the Charge, Rent,
and housekeeping, which admits a great abatement in the Country of what is
spent and paid in London.

7. The last thing which shall be mentioned touching this matter, and which is
most suitable to the propounded end of the discourse in hand, is, that this
carrying of all causes to Westminster makes in a manner all the Courts of
Record, in all other Cities and Towns Corporate, with the County Courts,
Hundred Courts, and the Courts of the Mannours, and all other Court Barons to
be disused and in a manner destroyed, to the prejudice both of Lords and
Tenants, who are much impoverished with Suites at Westminster upon every
trivial occasion, and in the mean while there is much disorder at home for want
of Courts to redress petty wrongs, and so to keep and preserve quietness.

8. These things are enumerated as evils occasioned by the general Residence of
the Laws at Westminster, without reference to the particular Courts; now
something shall be spoken of in relation to the several Courts, which are
necessitously oppressive to the Suitors, in regard of the multitudes of Suites:
The chief grievance in this kind is, the crowding of all causes of Equity into
Court of Chancery (except a very few in some cases in the Exchequer) in which
Court there have been said to be ten thousand causes entered into the six Clarks
books, some of which are seven, eight, or ten years old, and without doubt
there are as many more upon Sub-poena's, and Bills not filled, of all these
there cannot be less than one thousand always ready for hearing (besides such
as stand to be heard upon Reviews, Pleas, Demurrers, Exceptions and Reports.)
And in one Term there is not time usually to determine one third part of them
(besides hearing of motions, which necessarily arise in most cases) the rest
being put ^ff, insomuch that many times you shall find above twenty cau^s in
the paper for one day, whereas within thirty years last past ere were usually
appointed not above four, or five causes to be ^eard every day in Court, and
not many more at the Rolls: But since the abolishing and disuse of the Court
of Wards, Court of Requests, high Commission, Star Chamber, Ecclesiastical
Courts (as they were called) Queens Court, and Duchy Court, every of which (as
might be easily showed) especially the Court of Requests, poured something into
this Ocean the Chancery, the same is grown so full that it is impossible that
the causes there should be dispatched without an excessive charge and long
attendance. Cook English Law. page 45, 46.
And this Court as it now stands is the next great oppression of the Nation,
and tends chiefly to the enriching some few Officers and Practicers, and the
impoverishing of the Commonwealth, where, in most causes (unless they be
agreed by Compromise) the remedy is worse than the disease.

9. The next thing (to which I take exception) occasioned by the general
practice of the Laws at Westminster, which may be accounted a grievance is;
That almost all the Suites in Law, of the whole Nation, are brought in the
Courts of the Upper Bench, and Common Pleas, which are more tedious and
chargeable than they need to be* for whereas a man arraigned for his life, has
but a day; nay, it may be, but an hours warning, to make his defense, only he
knows before hand when the Jail-delivery will be, here regularly a man cannot
begin and end his Suit, be it never so trivial, under three Terms, (unless the
Defendant will confess the Action) especially in the upper Bench, where after
the Arrest, or appearance, which sometinies is hard to get done, the first Term
the Plaintiff declares, and the Defendant imparles, the second Term the
Defendant pleads to issue, and the Plaintiff carries down the cause to trial
to the Assizes, where if the cause be tried, Judgment is given thereupon in
the next Term following, and this takes up about At new England the Defendant
has warning a covenient time before the Causse be heard, and most Causes are
ended upon the hearing at the same Court. Lechfords News page 29.
seven months time, but if the Defendant be wilful and liberal, he may keep
the Plaintiff in Suit a far longer Term, whereas in some Courts of Record in
the Country, such a cause may be ended in six weeks, and might be done in half
the time if the Law were amended, and made like the proceedings in Wales, which
are better and shorter than at Westminster.

10. To these may be added, as an evil growing out of the general Execution of
the Laws at Westminster, the greatness of Offices, both in respect of work and
revenue, which for the most part are executed by Clarks and Deputies, and
nothing done by the Master of the Office, but only to take the Accounts, and
receive the Fees, at the end of the Term, allowing little or nothing to such as
do the work, but what comes by sharking, and the late-born Miscreant, called
Expedition, and indeed the great Officer (who stands like an Andiron in a great
Room, only to make a show) sets the Clarks to all the labor, and to abide the
heat of the business. And this must needs be so, for these Officers formerly
used to pay seven years purchase for their Offices; Is it not a shame that one
man should pay for an Office, first and lust, forty thousand pounds, as it is
generally said one paid for the Upper Bench Office? That a Prothonotor of the
Common Pleas should pay nine thousand pounds for his Office: That a six Clark
in Chancery should pay seven thousand pounds for his Office: And not
Aphilozers, The Romans used not to s^ll Offices, the Q^^sto^ship was granted
according to the worth of the Suitors, unt^ll by Dolabella's advice it was put
to Salt, which is blamed by the Heathen Historian as a fault. Tacit. Annal.
lib. 11. cap 7. page 148. The Senators were chosen by voices, and if they proved
infamous, they gave up their places to save their Credits. Idem l. 11. c. 8. p.
150.
Exigenters, Clark of the Warrants, Essoines, Curciters, or hardly any other
Office to the very Crier and Bag-bearer, but all exposed to Sale in this last
Age, and many times sold to such, as were only fit to be entertained, because
they gave the most money for them: And then as a necessary consequence, he that
bought dear must sell dear, insomuch that I have heard it credibly reported,
that a Soldier becoming a Courtier, was by King James made a Master of the
Chancery, (the man I knew well) this Master being taxed, that he expected too
much money in some businesses before him, in an angry manner said, that the
King promised him that the place should be worth five hundred pounds by the
year to him and he would make it so, if he could; Alexander Severus at his
coming to the Empire after that pro^use beast Heliogacalus; although he found
the State much in debt, refused to make Sale of any Offi^e, saying Non Pa^i^r
mercatores Potestatum, and a learn^d man, who reports this, says; that no
merchandise is more base than the Sale of Offices. Bodm. Republ. l. 5. c. 4. p.
592. and l. 6. c. 2. p. 661.
In the mean while here is great extortion and oppression, done to the people
by the greatness of these Offices, which is the cause that men are put into
them more for their wealth than for their wit, learning, or honesty, and the
business is done accordingly, to the wrong and prejudice of the whole Nation.

11. The proving of Will, and granting Administrations being now only done at
London, is likewise an oppression; and so is it an oppression, that all causes
Testamentary, and such as concern Administrations and Legacies, of how little
concernment soever, are heard there, and nothing determined in the Country.
This is worse than the course taken in the Bishops time, when all men's Wills
who had not bona notabilia, viz. (five pounds in goods out of the Diocese)
might be proved in the Country, for less than half the Fees which are now
paid, and all matters of instance touching such men's Estates, were heard and
determined there, although the proceedings where there was any opposition were
exceeding tedious, and the Appeals intolerable, the course now held ought
nevertheless to be amended.

12. The matter of passing accounts in the Exchequer, is an exceeding burden,
and the cause of much bribery and extortion in the Country, The Romans had
great Care to bridle the coveteousnesse of Offi^ers and ^^^^^ers of the
public Revenue. Tacit. Annal. l. 13. cap. 12. p. 196.
the account of a Sheriff of any ordinary County will cost one hundred Marks
to pass the same, and of some Counties, one, two, or three hundred pounds,
there being so many Offices to pass through, and some of the Officers taking
excessive Fees, forty shillings for an Attorneys Fee, and the Secondary as
much, this causes the under Sheriff to take two shillings a name, and in some
Counties more, for his Warrant, where there is but four pence due, and all the
pretense is the great charge of passing their accounts. There is no use of any
more Offices in the Echequer, but the Receiver to take the money, the Auditor
to make up the accounts, and to see that the Receiver neither cozen the Lord
Protector nor the Country, and the Controller to see that no deceit be done by
the Auditor, this I conceive to have been the ancient course, when Stowe Annal.
life o^ King Edwd. 1. p. 209. anno 1304.
the Exchequer was at York in the time of Edw. 1. and after it was removed to
London, and was in effect the same which was appointed by the Ordinance 21
September. 1643.

Anno 1556. Out of the Province of Langueduke.

Bodin. Republ. l. 6. cap. 2. p. 685.

The same learned Author reports it an excellent remedy of inequality; that
all the Territories of a Commonwealth were surveyed (as he says the Roman
Territories were) that every man's Land and Possession might be known and
certain that the Taxes and Imposts might be equal. Bodin. l. 6. c. 1. p. 641.
Ex Cassiodoro. England was so surveyed in the Time of the Norman Conqueror.
This appears thy Doomsday Book, which contains the very original survay.
Cowel. Interp. verb. Doomsday.


Ordinance of Parliament, Anno 1643. for receiving of the Revenue of the late
King, Queen, and Prince, and might be so appointed again, if that the State did
see cause, and the same would ease the Commonwealth of much bribery and
extortion: besides this, the public treasure must needs decrease passing
through so many hands; It was proved in France that a third part of all
Receipts went to Officers; it were well if ours were compared with it. The cure
of all these miseries is that which the Ancients sought much after, Hawk. Right
Dominion l. 2. cap 1. page 21. and Doct. and stud. lib. 1. c. 2.
an Equality, I do not mean the equal division of all the Subjects Lands, or
Goods, for that in a manner would destroy Bodin. Republ. lib. 5. c. 2. page 569.
property and ownership of the things of this life, which would both cut off
the endeavors of men to increase their Estates by labor, industry, and trade
in Lawful callings, which the Law of God enjoyneth; And also prompt men to
idleness, and bring confusion in the end. But I mean the ballasting, the
trade, and business of the Nation, that it may be divided into all the parts
of the Lands for the good of the whole, which might easily be effected, if the
Law were settled in the several Counties. And the Rivers in the Mediterranean
parts made Navigable, which might be done (as I suppose) with the expense of
one months Tax of 100000. l. upon the whole Nation. This would be the Nurse of
Peace, and of love betwixt Subjects. The contrary, The Wise and Learned have
accounted that amongst all the causes of some Seditions, and changes of
Commonwealths there is none greater, than the excessive wealth of few
Subjects, and the extreme poverty of the greatest part, who readily use to
embrace any occasion to spoil the rich: Tit. Live. l. 32. p. 832. L. M. p. 833.
A.
But it was an unjust and foolish Law published by Nabis the Macedonian Tyrant,
(when Philip King of Macedon had trusted him with the City of Argos) that
after he had plundered and abused the Citizens, he commanded all Debt Books and
Bonds to be Cancelled: And the Lands to be divided amongst the people by the
poll. Two firebrarnds (says the Historian) enough to set all the Nobles and
Commons on fire: And so to destroy one another.

CHAP. XIV. That the body of the Law is wanting and defective, there being
neither Common Law nor Statute-^aw for remedy in many cases, nor any punishment
considerable for sundry great offenses.
The Jews governed by Felix by punishments being exasperated fell into
Rebellion and wars. Tacit. Annal. l. 11 c. 11. p. 17 a.
THe first thing which shall here be insisted upon (as being an universal,
sinful defect, and the cause of much persecution of the one side, and impiety
and profaneness of the other side) is, That it is not declared by the State
nor any known Law, how far the Civil Magistrate is Custos utriusque tabulae, my
meaning is, that it is not set down, or determined, (that it may be known to the
people) Weemse. Exp^. M. L. Ex. ^ 1. p. 8.
how far the Civil power has to do in matters appertaining to Religion, and
what those iniquities are, which (as J^b 31.11.28.
Job says) are to be punished by the Judges, and then wherein the consciences
of men are free, and not to be trampled upon by the Temporal power: G^otius
Pol. Max. par. 1. cap. 2. page 12. and Carol. in fine.
Strifes about Religion are there most pernicious and destructive, where
provision it not made for dissentors: Princes must carefully distinguish their
jurisdiction from that of Gods. Those which Confess that they hold their lives
and souls of God, ought to acknowledge, they have no right to impose any
Tribute upon souls. God principally exacts his right from the Soul. Jun.
Brut. Vind. contra Tyran. p. 12. Confer. between W. P. late Chaplain to K. C.
And A. B. The Emperors Trajan Adrian, Antonine, finished their days in Peace,
for that although they knew not the True God: yet they permitted the Christians
the exercise of their Religion. Jun. Brut. ut supra. p. 14. Faith and Religion
cannot be enforced, God has only power over men's hearts and consciences.
Hawk. Right Dom. l. 3. cap. 2. page 125, 126, 127. and cap 3. page 129, 130.
It was an Impious opinion of the Court Parasites of this last age, that the
Laws of men in indifferent things, did simply bind the conscience, and that
every breach of such Law leaves a stain in the Soul. This I found to be a
Common principle amongst such as were very learned, serving to uphold the
Bishops Tyrannical Cannons, and Injunctions, and likewise pretended as
necessary to uphold the Supreme power in Magistracy: But this Doctrine clearly
makes the Laws of men heavier than the Laws of God, because the Laws of men are
more in number, uncertain, and sometimes repugnant, and then men were bounden
to study them as much as the Laws of God, because the ignorance thereof was
sin: This opinion was endeavored to be upheld, or rather sweetened with
another, as Ridiculous, viz. that where an offense is committed, if the
pecuniary mulct, or Fine imposed by such Law be paid, this is a satisfaction
for the breach of the Law, and takes away the guilt. If this be true, then may
the conscience be purged by something else, ( viz. by money) besides the blood
of Christ, which is as Impious an opinion as the former: It is therefore I
conceive safe to hold that the Laws of men do not simply bind the conscience,
but in reference to the Laws of God, and in case of scandal and contempt, and
yet that the powers set over men by the Almighty God are to be obeyed for
conscience sake, Cock. Essay. page 141.
but that the spiritual power, should be helped out by the Civil sword, is a
gross vanity.

A Bodin. Republ. l. 4. cap. page 537. Religionem imperare non possumus, quia
nemo cogitur ut credat invitus. Ex Epistola. Theodorici. Reg. Gotho. p. 539.
great Learned man, and wise Politician has observed, that force is not to be
used for reducing of Subjects from Sects and factions, because punishments make
the minds of men more stubburn and froward, and the greatest punishments do
the least good, the way to reduce straying Subjects is the devout profession of
the true Religion. Theodosius Thelder (although he abhorred the opinion of the
Arrians) by his toleration of them drew them from their error more than if he
had persecuted them.

2 That there is not a strict Law for true printing the holy Scriptures, and to
punish the abuse of false printing of them is a sinful defect, there are some
Editions, which I believe have near one thousand faults in them, and the
Parliament once had it in hand to do something in reformation thereof, and some
Godly men were employed to observe the mistakes, about such time as John Bill
was the then Kings Printer, at which time amongst other great faults, this was
observed to be one, that where it was read the Lord will deliver his people, it
was printed the Lord will destroy his people, and many other great mistakes I
could instance: the Parliament did nothing then to amend it, and since the
Translation is grown far worse: Insomuch that there is not any Play book, See
the Guilt Bibles commonly fould, and the little Bilbles.
Romance, or idle story printed so falsely as the holy Bible: if the Jews had
dealt with us, as we deal with the Ages to come, we had not been certain of a
foundation for our faith, nor could have cleared the Text from corruption, and
if corrupted in one place, it may as well be corrupted in an hundred and a
thousand, which had stroke at the very foundation of our faith, but through the
good providence of God, the Jews in the time of Ezra: Weemse Ex po. M. L. Ex.
12. p. 110.

Hayn view Scripture. page 71. 165.

Ex Hugone Broughton.

August. de Civitate dei Trea. Of the Hebrew Text. Bellar. l. 2. c. 2. De verbo
dei.


(who were reputed the Chief of the Masorites, and afterward even since
Christ, had so much care of the Oracles of God, that they numbered all the
words; yea, Syllables and Letters of the Old Testament, and observed how many
times every Letter was repeated, and by this they examined every written Copy,
and if a Copy had but a word, or one Letter mistaken, it was never allowed as
an Authentic Copy to be read in their Synagogues, but was only allowed for
children to learn by. O admirable providence of Almighty God! this care of the
Jews is to be imitated by Christians.

The holy Scriptures had need to be reviewed, and the Translation amended,
especially where they are observed by the Learned to be falsely translated, Genesis
44.5. 2 Kings 5.18. Judge. 11.40. Act. 14.23. Phil. 1.21.

Genesis 44.5, 15.
That place of Genesis, where it is spoken of Joseph's Cup, the Learned observe
that it should not be Translated whereby he Divineth, for this were to make
Joseph a Sorcerer, or little better then a Conjurer: but the words are to be
read B^oughton on this place Ground of holy Story. page 10. so M. E. upon the
place.
for which he would make search. And then the sense is. That Joseph using to
drink in that Cup, when he went to meat would search (or enquire) for it, and
so would presently miss it. And this is agreeable to the Scope of the Context.
The intent being to convince Joseph's brethren of their supposed indiscretion in
stealing that Cup, but the true cause was: That there might be occasion to
bring them back again, that Joseph might make himself known to them.

That place in the second of Kings, 2 Kings. 5.18.
concerning Naaman the Syrian being rendered in the sense of the future tence:
When my Master goes (or shall go) into the house of Rimmon, etc. And I bow my
self in the house Rimmon: The Lord Pardon thy servant in this thing, etc. It is
observed that the sense of the future and Preterperfect Tenses, Ven. on these
words.
among the Hebrews are sometimes used one for the other, and so Translated, and
so it is in this place: And then the sense in the Preterperfect tence, is, when
my Master went (or has gone) into the house of Rimmon, and I bowed my self in
the house of Rimmon: The Lord Pardon thy servant in this thing.

This Translation is observed to be justified by that in the Titles of the 51
and 52 Psalms. And well agrees with the Scope of the story: which was to show
that Naaman, by the Miracle of healing with the word applied by the Prophet,
was converted from Paganism to worship the true God, and the same well suits
with the Prophets answer to Naamans Petition, go in peace. Calvin. Institut. l.
3. cap. 2. f. 32.
Calvin considers Naaman as a new Convert, and one that had some knowledge of
Christ. The common reading makes Naaman a gross Hypocrite, praying to be
dispensed with in his beloved sin: and it seems to charge the Prophet with
unfaithfulness, in not reproving Naaman for this reservation (which could not
have stood with true repentance) but rather encouraging him: Saying, go in
peace: which inconveniences are all taken away by rendering the words in the
sense of the Preterperfect tence.

That in Judges 11. concerning Jephthah his vow, Judges 11.30.39.40.
and concerning his daughter. The last Translation seems to countenance such
horrible Murder as was committed by the Heathen Gentiles, and sometimes by the
Idolatrous Israelites in sacrificing their Children to Devils. The word in the
last verse Translated lament the daughter of Jephthah, being rendered according
to the Marginal reading; To confer, or talk with the daughter of Jephthah,
sufficiently clears the matter: Piscator. on the Place.
And lets us know that she was not murdered, or offered for a burnt-offering:
But that she was redeemed as God had appointed in the Lev. 27.2, 3. Number. 18.15.
Exodus 34.20.
Law, but was dedicated to be a servant in the house of God, as Samuel was.
This reading agrees with that verse. 38. she bewailed her Virginity, not her
death. This Act of Jephthah is judged to be an Act of his faith, for which he
is commended, Heb. 11.32. If he had murdered his daughter he would have been
reproved for it, which he is not. Therefore we must conceive that Jephthah's
vow was Conditonal, Verse 31.
that if that which had met him coming out of the doors of his house, had been
a thing which might have been offered (for a Dog, or a Swine might have met
him, which might not be offered in Sacrifice) he would have offered it to the
Lord: If otherwise, it were a thing not to be offered, and might be redeemed,
he would redeem it, and offer something in lieu thereof. As Abraham did the
Lamb, instead of his Son.

There are diverse things in the New Testament, which ought to be cleared in
point of Translation. That Acts 14.23. Acts 14.23.
Translated when they had ordained them Elders in every Church. The Text being
(...), is Pasor Lex. page 609. A. Quun que ipsis per suffragia creassent
Presbyteros. 2 Corint. 8.19
truly read, they Created them Elders by suffrages, which in the Geneva
Translation is rendered, they ordained them Elders by Election. But this word
Election, signified by extending, or lifting up the hands of the people, the
late Translators Holyoke, Belcanqual, and their fellows, (being Episcopal men)
made shift to thrust out of the Text: That they might preserve the Bishops
power of ordination, as our Presbyters do now, who tell us that the Church,
Math. 18.17. is but the Presbytery, or representative Church: which exposition
is justified by no Scripture, for the word Church is either taken for the Acts
15.3, 4, 22, 23. and 13.1.
Members (without the Officers) called brethren, or else for the Officers and
Members together.

That in Phil. 1.21. Phil. 1.21.
(...). The new Translation reads Grammatically out of the Vulgar Latin: For
to me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain; which is perfect nonsense. The
two infinitive Moods without wronging the Text may be either translated
substantively, or as participles, and then the sense is: for Christ is to me in
life and death (or living and dying gain (or advantage) which is according to
the Geneva Translation, and suits with the sense of the foregoing verse.
Christ shall be magnified in my body whether it be by life, or by death.

For these and many other causes, which might be showed, it were fit, a more
perfect Translation of the holy Scriptures were had and published.

3 In the next place I set it down as a sinful defect, that there is no Law
against swearing by Creatures, as the Sun, Light, Jerem. 5.7. Perk. on the
Decal. Com. 3. vol. 1. page 42. col. 2.
the Bread, the Drink, the Money, and such like, which Oaths are very common
amongst the profane and ignorant multitude, and are as bad, if not worse, than
profane swearing by the holy name of God, Math. 5.34, 35. Exodus 23.13. Isa.
65.16. Amos 8.14.

4. The like may be said of swearing by Idols, as the Cross, the Mass, the
Rood, or by Saints, as Saint Mary, by our Lady, That place Matthew. 23.22.
Condemns such swearing Perk. on the Decal. Com. 3. vol. 1. page 42. col. 2.
by Imaginary Saints, as Saint George, by Faith, and Troth, etc. the like may
be said of wicked cursing against our selves, or others, as Pox, Plague, the
Devil rot thee, and the like, etc. these are all unlawful, and yet we have no
Law against them, their unlawfulnes appears by these Scriptures, Ier. 4.2. and
5.7. Psalm. 109.17. and Psalm. 115 8. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Willet. Hex. in Exodus chap. 20.
page 347.

5. The use of Lots in sport is a sinful thing (and no Law against it) as The
use of Cards dice and the very Sale of them are prohibited by the Laws of
Geneva. Laws Geneva. page 30. 36.
Carding, Dicing, Playing at such Games, as wherein is no use, or exercise of
skill, or memory,) but mere chance (as it is called) these are a sporting with
the Divine providence of God, which is not to be meddled with, but with great
reverence, and Lots are to be used only in weighty matters, for that therein
Almighty God is immediately appealed unto, as Judge and determiner of the
controversy: So they may be used in choosing of Officers, or Governors (where
God has not declared his will) or in division of inheritances, and such like.
The use of these Lots in other cases is unwarrantable, Prove. 16.16.33. Levit.
16.9. Perkins on the third commandment, vol. 1. page 43. Acts 13.19.

6. The like may be said of Gaming and playing for great sums of money, the
same is a horrible sin, and the cause of many other sins, there is unlawful
getting, and unlawful spending, with unnecessary expense of precious time,
every Lawful means of getting is sanctified by the word of God and prayer,
Gaming for money is not sanctified by the word of God and prayer: Ergo, Gaming
for money is no Lawful means of getting. The Major of this Proposition is the
Scripture it self, all things, i. e. all Lawful things are sanctified by the
word of God and prayer, the Minor is undeniable, there being no word of God to
vvarrant such a course of getting, and what man upon any ground of Scripture,
or word of faith, can, or dare go to God, and pray that he may win: Now
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, therefore the cons quence is clear, that
such Gaming for money is unlawful.

2. Secondly, besides every Lawful means of getting may be made a trade, or
profession to live by, but no man will be so impudent as to say that Gaming may
be made a trade to live by, all that can be said, is, that it is but
recreation, and no man living can justify to spend all his life in play,
recreation, for God has ordained that men should have Lawful callings, and
continue in them, and therein exercise themselves with pains and diligence,
that every man should eat his bread in the sweat of his face, which by a
Metonymis of the Adjunct, (or rather of the effect) signifies that he should
labor in some Lawful calling: Adam in Paradise was not exempted from this,
and upon this ground the lives of all Vagrants, and such as follow no Lawful
calling are condemned.

3. And further, God never ordained Gaming to be a means to transfer Estates
from one to another, but has ordained, buying, selling, giving, exchanging,
earning by labor, merchandise, searching into the secrets of nature, for
improving of the Creatures and such like, to, and for that use and end, to the
upholding of humane society and commerce, that men in a Commonwealth might be
helpful one to another: But where men either get, or loose by such
unwarrantable courses which God never ordained, they may expect the curse of
God, and not his blessing.

4. Lastly, there are as many mischiefs, and abominations follow this course of
Gaming, and the issue is commonly as accursed, as of any wickedness which men
commit, what cursing, swearing, quarreling, fighting, cheating, thieving, and
murders are occasioned by this practice, especially when men loose their
moneys: The conclusion and Catastrophe, for the most part to all great
Gamesters, is beggary, the Goal, or the Gallows, their Wives, Children, and
Families ruined, and destroyed by this means, and yet no Law against it, being
used in private houses.

And if one of a thousand get an Estate by this course of life, being a kind
of theft, I will not say (as it is of affirmd, King James said in this case) he
that wins, wins Hell and he that loses, loses Heaven; but this I Will say, that
usually that which is gotten by play, is but Aurum Tholosanum, such Gold as
corrupts and eats out all the rest of a man's Estate, and procures that curse,
which is spoken of in the Prophecy of Zachary, which utterly destroys and
consumes men's houses, with all their increase, and without repentance and
restitution, where there is ability, the Estates of men's Souls are thereby
endangered. There ought to be a provision made against this Canker of the
Commonwealth by some just and severe Law, Genesis 3.19. 2 These. 3.11. Boltons
Direct. page 155. Balington upon the 8th. Com. Perkins on the 8th. Com. 1. vol.
page 62. 63. By Laws Geneva. page 30.
the Laws of Geneva, no man may play at any Game for Gold, Silver, Money, or
money-worth, upon pain of three days imprisonment.

7. Next unto Gaming, as things unlawful before God, and yet not condemned by
our Law; are Bear-bating, Bull-bating, Cock-fighting, Hors-racing, and Bolton
Direct. page 154, 155, 156.
the like cruel abuses of the Creatures; the three first being nothing else,
but mere jesting and sporting in sin, and the cursed effect of sin, viz. the
Antipathy of the Creatures, which grew through the fall of man, and at the
best, such as use, and delight in these cruel sports (as they are termed) show
themselves to be Pro. 12.10.
unrighteous men, of hard hearts, bloody and cruel minds, having no mercy, nor
sense of sin, or the effects, or evils, which attend and follow this unlawful
abuse of the Creatures. Exo. 23.19. Deuteronomy. 14.21. and 22.6, 7. Math. 5.7. Luke
6.36.
The Jews had many Laws prohibiting cruelty to the Creatures, and instructing
them in mercy, and compassion toward them* Rous At. Ante. l. 3. c. page 129.
Quintilian reports, that the Athenians condemned a Boy to death for putting
out the eyes of Quails, because it was a sign of a cruel mind, and that he
was like to prove a pernicious instrument; to this may be added, the Horselike
racing, and laqueing of boys and men after their Masters, being too great an
oppression to be used toward our fellow creatures. There ought to be a Law to
restrain such Barbarous cruelty, and to preserve the poor innocent sensitive
Creatures, which Almighty God has made, and given for better use, and likewise
to guard and save rational men from such slavery. 2 Samuel 15.1.
Absolon is said to have 50 men to run before him, as a praeludium to his
Rebellion, 1 Kings 1.5.
and in like manner Adoniah; Princes and great men may, and must have their
attendance, both for necessity and state, but it is against the Law of God and
reason to enforce men to run as fast as horses.

8. The like may be said of all that Rabble, or scum of the people, who,
(besides the Gentry, which for the most part are the occasion of such meetings)
as fit attendants upon those wicked sports, are This was used in Rome, as the
Historian says, so appeasing the heavenly Ire in time of Plague, which the
same Historian, b^ing a Heathen calls superstition. Hence, we have our mad
sports, much like the Romans Bacchanalia. Tit. Livius. l. 7. p. 250. K. Tac. 1.
Annal. l. 1. cap. 16. page 31. Seneca declaims against these Cael. Rhod l. 8. c
7. page 289. A Senator might not enter into a Playhouse. Tit. Live. l. 9. page
335. E. The wandering Quakers may be reckoned among the number of idle persons,
and are also like the Bacchanales at Rome, whose Religion was to hold lawful
all manner of filthiness, yet they had a Chapel and Priests. They used to
shake and wagg their bodies as if they were distracted and then to divine and
pretend to fore tell things to come, as the Quakers do. Tit. Live. lib. 30. page
10^1. A. they ought to be restained.
Stage Players, Jesters, a Company of these idle fellows being fled from Rome
to Tibur, the Tiburtines finding them all drunk, lodged them in several Carts,
as in Beds, and so conveyed them to Rome again, before they knew where they
were; a fair riddance of them; Fiddlers, Rymers, Bag-pipers, Juglers, Tumblers,
Vaunters, Dancers upon the Rope, Bear-wards, Ape-carriers, Puppet-players,
Ballad-singers, and such like idle fellows, who live in no Aristotle, Seneca,
and Solon, disallowed of Sta^-playes.
lawful calling, these (unless they be taken wandering abroad out of their
Parishes as Rogues) are not punishable, there is no Law against them, simply
for living by such unlawful means, without any profitable labor, of being of
any use in the Commonwealth. These serve chiefly (as experience showed in the
last wars) to do what mischief they can in the Commonwealth, as occasion is
offered. And although these Miscreants do wander abroad, and so justly incur
the danger of the Laws made against Rogues and Vagrants, yet their sports are
so suitable to the lusts of men, that hardly any man will, or dare apprehend
them. There ought to be a Law to enforce these to work and labor, and leave
their idle courses, Hosea. 7.3. Ephesians. 4.28. 1 These. 3.10. 2 These. 3.9. At Geneva
there is a Law that idle persons losing their time shall be punished, and so
enforced to work, and follow some Lawful calling. Laws Geneva, page 30.37.
Bodinus thus censures Stage Players and Comoedians, Bodin. Republ. l. 6. cap.
1. page 645.
Stage Players were prohibited by the civilized Heathen, and the Comoedians
stage is concluded by the vvisest Politicians to be the Apprentiship of all
impudence, looseness, whoredom, cozenage, deceit, and wickedness.

9. In the next place, as adjuncts also of these meetings I set down as
unlawful, and against which we have no humane Law, singing of baudy songs,
Ribaldry, and rotten Communication, which tend to the corrupting of good
manners, and ought to be obviated by some wholesome Law, Ephesians. 4.29. 1. Cor. 15.
All this filthiness is prohibited by Law at Geneva, upon pain of three days
imprisonment, with bread and water, Laws Geneva. page 32. 36, 37. Geneva has a
Law against this profaneness. Laws. Genes. p. 32. 36, 37.


10. The like may be said of railing, mocking, reviling, opprobrious language,
taunting, and such like abuses, The late ordinance for prohibiting of Duells,
and Provocations there unto does extend only to provoking words and carriage,
tending to Challenges.

King James in his book of Liberty, prefers the Papists before the Puritans.

This is Charged as a great wickedness in the Heathen; That when they abused
the Christians in the Primitive times, upon complaint to the Emperor, he
answered them with this scoff, you are to suffer injuries patiently, for so
they are commanded by your God. Perk. on the 3. Com. vol. 1 page 44. col. 2. Ex
Tripart. Hist. cap. 39. l. 6.


against which there is no Law, except it be for women's scoulding, and where
the words are actionable; although there abuses are prohibited by Laws in other
Countries, Laws Geneva. page 32. 37. And the same are condemned by the Law of
God, 1 Cor. 6.10. 2 Samuel 16.7. and 6.20. Isa. 58.22. Genesis 37.19. Neh. 4.3.

In all Nations generally, they that are most zealous and imminent in the
profession of that Religion used, and professed amongst them, are always most
honored and esteemed. And yet in England heretofore nothing has been more in
disgrace, than to be accounted a Zealot, or forward in Religion.

11. No more is there any Law against profane jesting with the holy
Scriptures, (unless it be in Plays, and Interludes) nor for speaking
contemptuously, or vilifying the same holy word of God, or the Divine Authority
thereof, this ought the more to be cared for, for in regard the Devil has sent
abroad so many in this age to cast aspertions, and contempt upon the word of
God, contained in the holy Scriptures, which God has magnified above all his
Name, or whatsoever he is made known by, Exodus 20.7. Deuteronomy. 5.11. Psalm. 111.9.
Isa. 66.2.

12. There is no competent Law against Men-stealers, They were amongst the
Romans such as (like the Banditi in Naples, the Tories in Ireland, and the
Mosse-Troopers in the North) snapt'd up Travelers, and such as they could
catch, they either kept them to work as slaves, or made them away: These were
severely punished, who were found guilty of such vilanies, as Tit. Live. and
Suetonius both report.
which are now more common in England, than in former times, when the Judges
were undiscovered, these wretched Creatures are called spirits, and are either
men, or women, well known to such as entertain them, or set them on work; the
men entice and steal away Men, or Boys, upon pretense of profitable employment,
or service under men of quality, the Women steal away Children with Apples, and
such like toys, or bigger wenches, or Boys upon other false pretenses, and
when they have gotten them into houses near the waterside, they keep them
there until they can have opportunity to ship them away to the Indies against
their wills. This is an horrible offense against God, and such Thieves should
be punished with death, and their confederates by some severe punishment made
examples, Exodus 21.16. Deuteronomy. 24.7. 1 Cor. 6.6.

The Laws of New England are coll^cted into a body, and endeavored to be made
agreeable to the Jews, Law moral and juditiall. Lechford News. page 26, 27. The
Romans Collected their Laws into a body which they accounted the end of Law and
equity. Tac. Annal. cap. 5. page 71.
13. That there is not a body of Law extant, declaring in short what the Law is,
and how men should obey it, is to be accounted a great defect, and ought to be
supplied with some Treatise to be agreed upon by the Legislative power,
comprehending the heads to which all cases are to be referred, which are to be
agreeble to Scripture rules: Sr. Henry Finch, has writ a book wherein he
intended such a thing, which is lately abridged by E. W. Esquire; and may be
perused: This K. Edward. the Confessor out of an indigested Raphodii of the
Laws of the Romans, English and Danes, selected the best, and compiled them
into a compendious systeme. Hawk right of Domi. l. 2. page 67. Ex Cook. 3. Rep.
Ep. ad Lect.
course has been held I suppose by all States, and Nations which are
civilized, most precisely by the Grecians and The Godly Emperor Theodosius the
second, Collected the Laws of Kings and Princes into a short volume, he was
invited by Justiman, whose book is famous amongst the Civilians, and is much in
conformity with Moses Juditials, sympson, Chu. Histor. Life Theo. 2. page 81.
See the Laws of Geneva printed. Rawleighs Hist. l. 2. cap. 4.. 15. Bodin.
Republ. l. 6. c. 6. page 766.
Romans, and likewise the Custom of Normandy seems to be the body of their
Law; It Is said to be agreeable to the Laws of England, but comprehends, as ours
do, the whole body of Popery (in a manner) and many other sinful Customs. The
whole body of the Jews Political and Moral Laws; are all recorded in the holy
Scriptures (as before is said) and are comprehended in a very little Compass.
The Laws of Geneva may be read over in two, or three hours. The want of such a
body of Law in France, makes their proceedings over-tedious, and uncertain, and
is the cause of many Suits, following partly the course of the Civil Law, and
partly the Laws of Normandy, and other Customs: Insomuch that John Bodin, that
famous Lawyer, and States man complained that there were more Suites in France,
than in all Europe besides.

14. In the next place I presume to set it down as a most material want, and
sinful defect in the Law, that Cook Essa. page 172.
there are no wise men appointed to take up controversies to prevent Suites,
before men begin to destroy, and undo one another: By the rules of Scripture we
should seek peace, and pursue it, reconcile our selves to our adversaries, much
more to our brethren; the contrary practice of many men in these days (who
when they are offered satisfaction for debts forgotton, or unknown, or
unvoluntary trespasses after the Suit began, if they would declare what they
demand, will be ready to answer, Weemse Expo. Iudit. laws. Exer. 43. p. 166.
you shall know my demand when you see my Declaration) is And Weemse. Exp. M.
L. Com. 3. Exer. 8. de Jur. Mic into p. 172, 173.
worse than God would have his people deal with the Canaanites, to whom they
are commanded to offer peace: Godw. At. Ant. l. 3. c. 3. Sect. 4. The Grecians
Dram was 1. s. ob. the Romans. 7. s. ob. Tac. Explicat. Polib. p. 224.
Now the Grecians at Athens had certain Citizens, who where designed to
compromit differences, and to take up matters in controversy, and there was no
cause came into any Court, exceeding the value of ten Drachmes, which had not
first past these men's hands, Godw. Romans Ant. l. 3. sect. 1. c. 9.
and the Romans had an Officer, whose Office was to over-see men's demands, and
to allow of their Bills, (as is now used and practiced at Venice) that men
might not by exactions devour, and eat upon another, or bring themselves into
Suites, and trouble without cause, Law should be the last refuge, and used as
Phisicians use desperate Medicines, in case of necessity. Perk. vol. 1: page
66. on the 8. Com. col. 1.
the rules for ordering this matter are clearly set down in holy Scripture, 1
Cor. 6.5, 6. Math. 5.25. Deuteronomy. 20.10, Numb. 21.22.

15. There is no considerable Law against a rebellious son, a son of Belial, or
Willet Hexa, in Exo. 21.15. Moral Obser. Gouge. on the 6. Ephesians. Treat. 5. page
251. Col. 2. Tit. 1.6.
without Yoke, who despises, curses, or revileth his Parents, and will live
in no order, or calling, such a one can hardly by the Law be bound to his good
behavior, because it is not a public offense, but besides that, we have no
Law, to punish him, whereas such a one should be put to death, Levit. 20.9.
Mar. 7.10. Prove. 15.20. Exo. 21.17. 1 Pet. 1.14. Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Disobedient
Children are reckoned amongst the worst of sinners and wicked men; 2 Timothy 3.2.

Cowel. Instit. l. 1. tit. 10. sect. 3: p. 43.
16. Neither is there any Law against The Heathen observed this, to have consent
of Parents in Ma^riages. Shechem. Genesis 34.3.
Marriage without Parents consent, nor against Marriage of young Children,
unless the parties be Heirs, or Inheritrixes, nor against Calvin. Inst. l. 4.
c. 19. s^ct. 37. Gouge. on Ephesians. 6. Treat. 5. p. 254. Col 2. and p. 252. Col.
2. and 255. Col. 1. Erasm. Collo. de Matrimo.
choosing callings without Parents consent, which things (being merely civil)
ought to be provided for by the Civil Magistrate; to the end, that Parents may,
not lose their Authority in their own houses, Genesis 27.46. Hest. 1.22. 1 Samuel
16.11, 19. 1 Samuel 17.17. Jer. 35.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 7.3. The learned have determined
that Marriage without, or against Parents consent, (unless it be for exceeding
weighty reasons) to be of no force.

17. There is no Law against Marriage with 2 Corint. 6.14. Gouge on Ephesians. 6.
Treat. 2. p. 112. col. 1. Chrisost. M. 1 Corint. 7. hom. 19. Idiota a
nativitate non recipitur, vel ad agendum, vel ad defendendum in aliqua causa,
per custodem vel proximum propinquum sed sequentur, quod ipse semper praesens
sit in propria persona. Cowel. Instit. l. 1. tit. 23. sect. 6. p. 74. By this
Law, more is required of an Idoit, or Fool, than of a wise man, and so the Law
is fit for none but Fools. Consuet. Norm. Tit. de furiousis. 14.17.
Infidels, or Idolaters, which is against the Law of God, and the old world
are taxed for it, and the offspring of these Marriages were these Giants, and
Monsters of men, who filled the world with oppression and violence, and were
an especial procuring cause of the general deluge, Genesis 6.1. Mal. 2.11. Ezra
9.14. 1 Kings 11.1, 2.

18. There is no considerable Law, nor certain rule for ordering the Estates of
Lunaticks, Madmen, and Idiots, the late disposing of them by the Court of
Wards was a costly way, and somewhat uncertain, and inconvenient, because the
Committees of such men, (being not known to the Court) did many times oppress
and abuse such as were committed to them, and rather endeavored to keep them
mad and foolish that they might have their Estates, than to take any care to
cure them: there was an ancient Law found, and recorded among the (i) Normans
Laws, for ordering the Estates of such as they termed furiosi, or Madmen, but
it is out of use. There ought to be some certain rules, and directions given to
godly men to supply this defect, and it were best if it were so done in every
County, Cook Essay. page 170. the Supreme Magistrate is as the father of the
Commonwealth, and therefore to care for all the Members thereof, Isa. 49.23.

Homer call's Agamemnon David was the Pastor, or Feeder of Gods people, and he
did it skilfully and carefully, Psalm. 78.71, 72. The King of England called
Sponsus Regni. Cook. Hawk. R. Dominion. p. 102.
(...) the Pastor of the people. Abimel^ch is Pater Meus. The Roman Emperors,
Patres Patriae. Seneca calls Kings, Tutores status Publici. The Graecians
(...), quod sint Balis Populus: These names show the duty of the Supreme
Magistrate.

19. Amongst the ranges of Madmen and Idiots, I presume to place notorious
unthrifts (as Godw. Ant. Rom l. 3. sect. 4. c 24. Erasmus Colloq. (...). p.
383. Equis sive ^q^o.
the Romans did) of which there are many in this age, such Knights and Esquires
of whom Erasmus speaks to one scoffingly; Nisis bonus Aleator, probus
Chartarius Scortator improbus, Potator strenuus, Profusor audax, Decoctor and
Conflator aeris alieni, Scabiae Galico denique ornatus, vix quisquam te credet
equitem, such men's Estates ought to be Prodigals estates are by Authority of
Justice to be committed to suffer their estates to be ordered and disposed of
by others.

Jun. Brut. vind. contra Tyrann. p 88.

The Romans punished such Revelling, calling them Conventicles. Tit. Live. l.
39. Augustus Caesar, was a pattern of sobriety and temperance. Sueton. in
August. Perk. on the Decal. Com. 7. vol. 1. p. 61. col. 2.


committed to wiser men, and to be preserved for posterity, and to the end
their wives and children may be provided for, and that such as cannot tell how
to govern themselves, may be put to their allowance: If this course were taken
it would secure inheritances, far better than those unjust Intails upon the
Heirs Male, and would prevent abundance of sinful expense, and other
transgression, and therefore I think it an offense that there is no Law in this
kind, 1 Timothy 5.8. Isa 49.23.

20. The Law has not put any restraint upon such as keep Riotous houses, and
account it a point of honor, and great house keeping, which they think tends
much to their credit, to spend their wine and Beer, that their servants and
attendants may make men drunk, who come to their houses, and that is accounted
free and bountiful entertainment: In the mean while this is a great offense
against God, and ought to be prevented by some good Law, Isa. 5.11, 22. 2 Samuel
11.13. 1 Kings 16.9. Luke 21.34. Prove. 23.19.

21 There is no Cowel. Inst. Jur. Angl. l. 4. tit. ult. sect. 53. p. 346.
Adulteri maxima pro part poenitentia Canonica purgatur.
considerable Law in force against Adultery, or Fornication, except the Act of
the 10. of May, Anno 1650. The former Statutes provided, that the Adulterer, or
Fornicator should keep the Bastard, and nothing else considerable imposed upon
him. The last Act is so penned, that few, or none will ever be convicted upon
it: Insomuch, that it has been thought that that Statute was made only, or
chiefly for guarding of women's credits, that lewd persons might not dare to
boast of their own filthiness, The Romans punished Adultery with death and so
they did Sodomie and murder. Tit. Live. l. 39. p 1032. and p. 1. 34. K. And its
cited out of Plato. l. 9. de legibus, that the Adulterer was to suffer death,
and might have been slain by the Husband of the woman, if he escaped the Law,
Coel. Rhodig. L^ct. Antiqu. l. 29. c. 18. p. 1131.
to the discredit of women's persons, whether clear, or guilty, whereby it is
come, to pass that this horrible sin of whoredom is much increased since that
Act was made (as may be seen in many places) which Act is so cautiously penned,
that a man shall not be (in strictness of Law) in danger of death, unless it
appear there was Res in Re, and that the Adulterer knew the whore to be a
Married woman, which none can tell, but such as were present at the Marriage,
and besides, one of the parties cannot be a witness against the other, as
being particeps Criminis. This Law ought to be amended, for that by the Law of
God, and Florus in l. 14. Tit. Live. p. 389. E.
most wise Lawgivers, the Adulterer, and Adulteress ought to suffer death,
Deuteronomy. 22.12, 23, 24. Jer. 29.22, 23. Lev. 20.10. M. L. 20. p. 391. E. Tacit.
Annal. l. 11. c 1. p 141. and c. 2. p. 142. and c. 11. p. 153.
The Priests daughter among the Jews was to suffer death for Fornication
committed in her fathers house, Lev. 21.9. So the Romans punished their vestal
Nuns with death, if they were sound to play the whore, in imitation of the
Jews, and according to the Judicial Law above mentioned.

Such filthiness condemned as formication Perk. on the D^cal. vol. 1. p. 59.
col. 2. and p. 60. col. 1. Tacit. Annal. l. 2. c. 9. p. 74.
22. No more is there any Law against lascivious Gestures, wanton and filthy
dalliance, and familiarity, insomuch as if two lewd persons be found in bed
together, they can be but Carted, that not being sufficient to convict them
upon the last Statute, unless they confess the very filthy Act, Gal. 5.19.
Prove. 6.29. Ephesians. 5.3, 4. The Heathen Romans had Laws against Lasciviousness,
and in Tyberus his Reign, women, who were observed to live soberly and chastely
with one husband, were had in great Honor; and it was ordained that the
Captains and Governors of Provinces should have their wives with them. This
accounted a breach of the 7th. Commandment Perk. on the Decal. vol. 1. p. 60.
col. 1.


23. Next to this I add that there is no law against whorish attire, whereof
the Scripture takes notice, and the Learned have observed some parts of that
Attire, amongst which may be accounted strange fashions, naked breasts, bare
shoulders, powdering, spotting, painting the face, curling and shering of
women's hair, the place of the Canticles, seeing to countenance such Locks, is
translated thus by learned Iunius, Cant. 4.1. Weemse. Exp. M. Law. Exer. 6.
com. 7. p. 161.
thy hair is bound up as the modest matrons; these with lascivious mixed
dancings and other such like bellows of lust, and Pandora of filthiness are
condemned by the word of God, as occasions of Adultery, and Declarations of the
Vanity of the mind, contrary to Christian sobriety, Zeph. 1.8. Pro 7.10. Gal. 5
9. 1 Pet. 3.3. 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Cor. 11.6. Isa. 3.18, 20. Iunius upon Cant. 4.1.
The Tacit. Hist. Discript. Germa. c. 2. p. 263.
German women when they were Heathens, used to wear their Clothes little,
differing from men's Apparel, and they used to go naked, or bare with their
arms, and their breasts uncovered, as it is now used.

24. There is no Law to enforce a man to live in any calling, Idleness
destroys all people, the French did thereby make shipwreck of manhood and
liberty.
if he will but pretend he has an Estate, or means to maintain himself, then
he may live as he list, especially about London, and that is the cause there
are so many Thieves and Robbers, and so many Villainies committed, because men
live idly without a calling wherewith to maintain them, Tacit. (vita Agric.
l. p. 188. Laws Geneva. p. 30. 37. Grotius Pol. Max. par. 1. c. 3. p. 24, 25.
all Nations have judged it reasonable, that every one should have some
calling, or occupation, and this the Court at Athens called Rous A^^. Ant. l.
3. c. 1. 95, 96. and l 2. p. 125. The Romans likewise had Laws for incoragement
to labor, and for suppressing of idleness. Tacit. Annal. l. 2. cap. 10. p. 49.
Areopagus diligently inquired after: and he that was found to live by unjust
gain, fell into danger of his life by their Law, Jonah 1.8. 2 These. 3.10.11 1.
Cor. 7.20. Bodin. Republ. l. 3. cap. 8. p. 401. and l. 6. cap: 2. page 678.
Solon inflicted great punishments upon idle persons.
A wise Statesman says, that there are many idle persons in every City, whom
it is needful, either to banish, or to keep them in public works, because they
can be placed amongst no degrees of men: And says that Amasis King of Egypt
used to put such kind of men to death, who had no callings, as Thieves and
Robbers; commending the custom at Paris, enforcing the strong, and lusty to
work, and feeding and curing the sick and aged.

25. Neither is there any Law against Sword-players, players of Prizes;
although it may be a device to cheat the people, and this is the chief end to
get company together, yet sometimes it comes to pass, that they slash, cut,
and wound one another in a fearful manner, this is a wicked custom taken from
the Heathen, and against Gods Law, and some Law ought to be provided against
it. Some of the Godw. Ant. Romans l. 2. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 9^, 99, 100.
Heathen have restrained this wickedness, and Sympson. Chu. History Life of
Constantine. p. 61.
Constantine the first Christian Emperor utterly put down, and prohibited the
same. It was Abner, the General of that wicked rebellious Absalom, who first,
set up this cruelty under the pretense of play, or sport, 2 Samuel 2.14.16.

26. There is no Law against Idolatrous Pictures and Images, of which the
Picture of Christ (as is pretended) is the most common, this and such like
Pictures are unlawful, as being teachers of lies. Willet, in Exodus 20. 2 Com
contr. Ex Uysino.
Vrsinus condemns them upon this ground, because Christ being both God and
man, the Image must needs be a lying Image, because it cannot represent the God
head, whom no man has seen nor can see, 1 John 4.12. Deuteronomy. 4.15.

Li. Assisse. 19. pl. 2. 32. H. 8. cap. 38. 2 Ed. 6. 23.
27. Neither is there any course settled about divorce, which is to be done by
the Magistrate, nor is it declared for what cause there may be a divorce, at
the Common Law there were many ridiculous causes of divorce, which were taken
away by the Statute of 32. H. 8. formerly spoken of; Cook. Comm. Littleton. Li.
3. Sect. 380. p. 235. Cook. l. 6. fol. 66. and li. 5. for. 98. b.
and diverse unjust causes of divorce yet remains since that Statute. The power
of divorce was then left in the Bishops, and their Courts: Wison. Histor.
Britan. page 68, 69.

Adultery by our Law does not dissolve Ma^iage, A vinculo Ma^rimonii, but only
a Mensa and Thoro. but these de causa. 1. Praecontractus. 2. Metus. 3.
Impotentiae sive frigiditatis. 4. Affinitatis seu consanguinitatis, are still
causes of divorce and dissolve the v^ry bond of Marriage. Cook. Ut sup. Junius.
in Deutr. 24.1, 3. Matthew. 19.9. Amesius. l. 5. de conscientia. cap. 38. fol.
371.


The baudy Bishops allowed causam frigiditatis, to be a sufficient cause of
divorce, in the case of the Noble Earl of Essex, and declared his Marriage a
nullity upon that ground. There ought to be some other settlement, that place
seeming to give liberty for divorces, Deuteronomy. 24.1, 2, 3. is not to be read
positively, let him give her a Bill of divorce, but hypothetically. If he give
her a Bill of divorce, that is cleared by our Lord Christ, Math. 5.32. Luke
16.18.

28. That there is no Law against lying, except it be for telling false news of
Counselors of State, and great men: Insomuch that I have known when a fellow
has been the only material witness in a cause, and by his means the Suite
has been prosecuted, having affirmed, he would testify thus, and thus, when
the cause came to Trial, this witness swears the clean contrary, The Law of
the Romans, called Talio, (that such a witness should pay what the Plaintiff
by means of his falsehood, is adjuged to pay) might justly be inflicted upon
such a witness, and the same is agreeable to the Law of God, Exodus 21.24. Lev.
24.20. Bodin. Republ. l. 40. p. 470.
and being asked at the Bar, if he did not say such and such words, contrary to
that he swears; he has impudently answered, or the Counsel has answered for
him, that he did formerly but discourse with the party to please him, because
he was earnest with him, but now he is upon his Oath, he must, and does speak
the truth: And yet no punishment was ever inflicted upon such a knave for his
lies, Levit. 19.16. Prove. 18.21. Iam. 3.8. Raising of lies, and false rumors
are prohibited by the Laws of Geneva, page 32, 37.

29. There wants a Law to suppr^sse the Rudiments of unlawful Perkins 1. vol.
com. p 43. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 3. and 18.10.11.
Magic, and Tit. Livius. l. 8. page 294. and lib. 39. p. 1033. C. Wizards and
fortune tellers sev^rall times banished by the Romans, and their books burned,
se^ the place last above mentioned. Tac. Annal. l. 2. c. 8. p. 43. and H^st.
Tac. lib. 1. c. 4. p. 16.
observation of Heathenish customs, and for surppressing of books of Magic,
Conjuring, and Judicial Astrology, and many other Devilish Arts, and usages,
now very common in England, which prepare men for consultation with the Devil,
and bring them within the compass of Wich-craft before they be aware, I could
name many of these Tricks and Devices, and tell the Authors who discover them,
some to good ends and some to bad ends, that I suppose they are too well known
already, and it were well such things were wholly concealed, and the books
burned, as the same kind were by the converts, Acts 19.19. Although they were
prized at 50000. pieces of silver, which is of our money, at least eight
hundred pounds; and surely they would never have been burned if they had been
of any use, or might have been lawfully kept. It suffices to know that they
are against the Law of God, and invented by the Devil and his Agents, to drive
a man from belief of Moses and the Prophets, and to turn men from God: Now
Astrology Judicial is in great credit, almost as much as it was amongst the
Heathen Babylonians, Graecians, and Romans, but in many things has neither The
Heat^en Romans had then good days and dismal days, as the Astrologers have,
without any ground, or reason at all, two of the most famous days were the 16.
and 18. of July. Tit. Live. l. 6. p. 217. A. B.
foundation in nature, or reason, much less in the Law of God, but these
Astrologers judgments are mere conjectures, grounded upon the opinions and
sayings of Sorcerers, Conjurers, and other men like themselves, the whole
Judicial part of Astrology being condemned by the Learned as the K. Ja.
Daemonol. l. 1. c. 4. p. 13, 14. Perkins ut sup. p. 44. Furius Scribonianus was
banished for consulting which wizards and Calculators of Nativities. Tac.
Annal. l. 12. cap. 11. page 171.
Root of many Devilish Arts, and has been prohibited by some of the Sueton.
Trang. in vita Augusti. Caesaris. Sect. 31. Idem in vita Tiberii. Sect. 56. and
in vita Auli Vitelii Sect. 14.
Heathen Roman Emperors, and their books likewise burned, and Astrologers: And
these Astrologers are reckoned with the Southsayers, and Conjurers in the holy
Scripture, Dan. 2.2. Jer. 10.2. Isa. 8.19, 20. 1 Jam. 4.14. Wall. on 1 Corint.
2.2. Ex. Pico. Mirand.
The Astrologers attribute those things to the Stars, which belongs to God
alone. To Conjecture of men's fortunes, ends, virtues, vices, etc. by the Stars,
is impious; and who sees not but that these deceivers are ignorant of what
shall befall themselves every day, Bodin. Republ. l. 4. c^p. 2. p. 441.
all their Conjectures are uncertain.

30. Perjury in an answer in Chancery, or Exchequer, is not punishable by any
penal Law, The ordinance for Reformation of the Court of Chancery, appoints
Legacies to be sued for at Law; and excludes them the Chancery, but does not
dir^ct what account shall be brought. 5 Eliz. c. 15.
or Act of Parliament, only it is said that it may be punished upon a Bill for
Perjury in the Court where it was committed, this is a long way further than a
man will be willing to go at his own charge, and I never yet knew any man
punished there for any such Perjury, and it was punishable in some cases, in
the Star Chamber, however it is sinful perjury before God, John 8.44. Zach.
5.4. Ier. 5.2.

31. There was no Law to recover Legacies, but in a Court of Equity (before the
last Ordinance) and there is yet no Law settled for recovery thereof, if the
Legacy exceed not twenty pounds, the charge of the Suit in Equity, if it come
to a Decree, will be as much as the Legacy, it may be much more, if the
Defendant be wilful, or liberal, nor is there any Law to acquit executors upon
payment of Legacies to Infants, although it be done to their great preferment,
this is a defect, Romans 13.7. Heb. 9.17.

32. There wants a Law for punishment of Witchcraft, where murder is not
committed, setting a Witch upon the Pillory, and imprisonment for exercising
her Devilish malice upon Cattle, The defect of this Law was complained of by
St. George Crook, upon the trial of a Wit^h convicted of Witchcraft, but not
of Murder, about the year 1627. at Coventry.
or men, when death follows not, is not sufficient, such Witches as likewise
Magicians ought to be put to death, Exodus 22.18. K. Iam. Daemonol. lib. 3. cap.
6. page 76. An Action upon the Case will not lie for calling one Witch, and
this reason is given in the book, because Witchcraft is but Art, and the word
does not imply any Act, or exercise of it. But Gods word teaches us not to
consult with the Devil, or his evil instruments; Tacit. Annal. l. 2. cap. 8. p.
43. Pituanius a Magician was cast down headlong from the T^^pe^u Rock.
The Romans banished such as consulted with Wizards, and sometimes put the
Magicians and Wizards to death, according to Gods law. Thou shall not suffer a
witch to live.

33. There wants a Law directing, how men's personal Estates shall be divided by
Administrators, when a man dies in Estate; Magna-charta. c. 18. Fitz. N. ^.
122. l. Wingat Law cap. 11. p. 19. numb. 13.
It was anciently at the discretion of the ordinary, who used to dispose of
part of men's Estates, or what he pleased, in pias causas, or for the health of
the Soul of the deceased (as it was said) but now the Superstition is removed,
it is necessary it should be declared what proportion the Wife and Children, or
Kindred should have, it seems anciently a Wife was to have a third part of her
Husbands clear personal Estate, and Children unpreferred another third part,
Cook, English Law, page 47. but this is not observed. All men who have any
estate ought to make Wills to preserve peace after their deaths, and to divide
their estates amongst their Children. Gouge. on Epes. 6. Tract. 6 page 321.
The remedy of th^s is to have all men's estates enrolled in the Counties where
they are; As the Jews had their estates with their Pedegrees inroll^d, Ezra.
2.6^. Jer. 32.11. John. 14. and 15. and 16.


34. The like want is found, where a man seized in Fee-simple of Lands, having
no personal Estate, and many Children, dies in Estate, the Land descends to
his Heir, and the younger Children can claim nothing, this is a hard case. And
far worse is it, where a man has an Estate in Tail, and nothing else to
prefer younger Children: In the first case he may by Will in vvriting charge
his Lands, in this he cannot dispose of his Lands by Will, charge them with any
thing to raise portions for younger Children, this would be amended by some
profitable Law, and Lands for this cause would be made Fee-simple, Genesis 25.6.
Luke 15.12. Josh. cap. 14. and 15.16, 17.

35. There wants a Law to secure purchasers from being cheated by old Intails,
sleeping Morgages, Judgments, and Statutes; In so much, as I heard a Learned
man say once, there is no fence against a Knave, some public Register in every
County should be settled, and a Law made that whatsoever Estate should not be
there entered, should be void, as against purchasers, and such as some in for
valuable considerations, there are many men cozened, and undone in such cases,
and no remedy, if the Encumbrances were for any valuable consideration at the
first, although of long continuance. This ought to be amended, see this case
recited by Charles, Geo. Cook. Essay, page 123.

36. That Copy-houlders of Inheritance should not have liberty to set, or let
their Lands, Bodin. de Republica. Tit. 1 p. 39. Cook. complete Copie-houlder.
sect. 9. p. 8. sect. 12. page 14, 15.
unless for a year, or three years is a hard Custom, and to Fine at the Will
of the Lord is worse, the pretense of Ease in Chancery, or Exchequer is a mere
gullery, the first ought to be amended, and the last assertained by some good
Law, Cook English Law, page 48, 49.

37. That there should be no means to recover Debts upon It Is made a note of a
wicked man to borrow and not to repay, Psalm. 37.21. Therefore there those
should be a Law to enforce men to pay just debts, and not to suffer men to
cheat men by such niceties. Gouge. on Ephesians. 6. Tract. 5. page 271. col. a. b.
simple contracts against Executors, nor to recover from the Executor of him
that was Bayliffe, or receiver of moneys, as it falls out in some cases, is a
great defect, the reason of it is, because the Testator might in his lifetime
have waged his Law. But in some cases it is impossible, that he should in
reason by such gager discharge himself, as when the money is an Infants, and
when there are witnesses to prove the contract: This ought to be amended, being
but a Law of common right to enforce a man's Estate to pay Debts, which are
justly due, 2 Kings 4.7. Exodus 22.26, 27. Luke 6.35. and 7.42.

38. There wants a Law for restraint of excess, and oversumptuousnesse in diet
and house-furniture, the excess wherein does ordinarily undo, and cause to
go to ruin, the Estates of very many, especially Coel. Rhodig. Lect. Antiq.
lib. 9. c. 13. p. 330.
Citizens, and is the worst Thief in the Commonwealth, (except gaming and
suretyship) the Romans had Laws for restraint in this kind, and therein In
villaticis pastionibus sunt, qui pro guloso accipiunt. Aegyptio Regi
discumbenti inserebatur, nil praeter vitulum and Anserem: bibendi ad
praescriptum lege juncta.
Augustus Caesar was a notable pattern, of whom it is reported that he used to
make his supper of three dishes of meat, and when he would fare most highly
(with invited Guests) he had but six dishes at the most, but as he entertained
his friends in no exceeding sumptuous manner, so he welcomed them with all the
kindness and courtesy that might be: This example may shame many professing
themselves Christians, who dig their graves with their teeths, and bury their
Lands in their bellies, by their katering for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts
thereof, contrary to the Apostes rule. And for over-costlinesse in
house-furniture, that likewise was restrained by several Laws of the Roman
Emperors, who would not admit the people to have silver plate, and costly
furniture, either of Bedding, or other Household stuff, neither did the
Emperors exceed themselves, but some of them seemed to be too frugal, and
their lodgings too mean for such Princes and Emperors. It were well there were
a Law appointing a moderation in these things, and for punishment of the
excess. Sueton. in vita Augusti. Caesar. sect. 34. Idem in vita Julii
Caesaris. sect. 43.
It was that wicked fool Nabal, of whom it is said that he made a feast like a
King, and that he was very drunken, and it is charged upon Vita Tibetii Sect.
34. Tacit. Annal. lib. 2. cap. 8. page 43. and lib. 3. cap. 11. p. 80. and cap.
12. page. 81.
Belshazzar, that to furnish his drunken feast, he must needs have the vessels
1 Samuel 25.36, 37.
Dan. 5.1, 2, 3.
of silver and gold, which were taken out of the house of God, but both he and
Nabal suddenly ended their feasting and jollity, and died, for ought appears,
without repentance, Heliogabalus, that gluttonous Emperor was slain by the
Soldiers, Eusebius. l. 1. c. 21. S^mpson ch^^^h. Histo. page 31.
and his body dragged through the City of Rome, and cast into the River Tyber.
By the Laws of Geneva no man may have above twelve Dishes of meat at any feast,
besides fruits. Laws of Geneva, page 34.

39. There is no Law but what is 24 H. 8. cap. 13. Rast^l Entr. Tit. Apparet.
obsolete and disused concerning apparel, otherwise States have had sumptuary
Laws of this kind, which were strictly observed: I do not herein approve or
comprehend those Superstitious significant Garments used by the Popish Clergy,
and heretofore used in England, because we are now eased Laws Geneva. page 31.
of that Superstition: But I speak of the civil use of Apparel, which ought to
serve as well to distinguish men in their ranges and degrees, as to difference
the Sexes. The Psalm. 26.4.
meaner sort of the Jews went in black, or obscure Garments, the Gen 37.32. 2 Samuel 13.18.
Princes Children wore white, or purely colored, Psa. 45.13.
the Queen wore imbroidered, or wrought Garments, Luke 7.25.
those in great houses wore silks, or soft raiment, and also purple and
scarlet, and so did the Judges and their families, Prove. 31.21. and 23. It was
a laudable custom amongst our forefathers that servants were known by their
Habits, Liveries, and Badges, even from the Kings to the ordinary Gentleman's;
they usually wore Coats, such color as their Lords, or Masters bore, Gules,
Azure, Sable, or the like, with their Masters Coat, Armor, or Crest, or what
Liveries their Masters pleased to give them: This was a notable distinction;
and let not him that is a servant be ashamed of his Livery and employment,
seeing he lives by it. The six Clarks in Chancery attended the Master of the
Rolls, in a known habit. The Judges servants did wear such habits, I have seen
Sir Edward Cooks followers in the Circuit in blew Coats, and I could name a
Knight who attended an Earl in the same habit. The order, or rather disorder
now used, the servant is not known and sometimes mistaken for the Master, and
that Jone is as good as my Lady is a thing intolerable, and ought to be
restrained, Perkins. vol. 1. p. 60. col. 1. Cook Essai. page 176.
as likewise the wearing of so much silver and gold by the ordinary sort of
people, and no Law against it, therefore I account it a defect that there is no
Law ordering matter of Attire and Apparel. Bodin. Republ. l. 6. cap. p 770. we
may see there what apparel was prohibited to the French Nation.

The Romans had the like Laws. Tacit. Annal. l. 2. c. 8. p. 43.


The French had a Law made in the reign of Charles the ninth, concerning
Apparel, to which there was annexed a Fine of a thousand Crowns, imposed upon
every one who should much, or less transgress the same, which Law is supposed
to be too severe: but yet it shows what care other States and, people have had
to bridle this exorbitance, and excess in Apparel, and there are several Acts
of Parliament in England touching this matter, but they are all out of use and
serve for nothing.

39. It would be of great use if there were a bank of money in every County,
consisting of such men's money as are known to be well furnished, to be lent out
at such rate as the Law shall permit to such as could employ it profitably. And
when the Coffers of the Commonwealth are well stored, it might be convenient
to be so employed. By this means all persons who are fit to be trusted might be
furnished; and that cursed trade of brokage and cheating amongst Scriveners
cashiered. This course has been used anciently, and is used at this day in
many Commonwealths. The Chamber of London was formerly of excellent use, but
now it is reported by some of their own Members, that since they parted with the
last money to the late King (I take it, that it was 80000. l.) they were never
able to pay their debts, unless they should pay them out of their own Estates.
Tit. Livi. page 263. ^. F.

Those who had the Charge of this bank were called. Mensarii. Tiberius in time
of want of money, lent forth great sumes out of the Public Bank freely. Tacit.
Annal. l. 6. c. 4. p. 127.


The Romans had such a course amongst them, which was a great ease to the
people.

40. There wants a Law (as I conceive) for more effectual dispatch of payment
of public debts, then yet it provided. The debts upon public faith
especially, although the promised interest were abated, or moderated, it would
much repair the credit of the Commonwealth, which is much broken by
none-payment, and would be an inestimable prejudice, if ever there should be
occasion to borrow again: Tit. Live. l. 29. p. 720. M. and page 721. A.
The state of Rome under the Counsels was once in a worse condition than
England, they had contracted a huge debt upon Loan to defray the charge of the
Punick war. But before that was paid the Macedonian war grew on, whereupon the
people began to account their debts desperate, saying that their moneys which
they lent upon courtesy and benevolence, was like to fall to the common Chest
of the City, seeing that one war followed upon the neck of another. To
satisfy these debts (which was but the third part of the whole) and the last
payment: Tit. Live. l. 31. p. 781. A. B.
All the Common Lands within 50 miles of Rome round about, were conveyed to the
Citizens in Fee-farm, reserving three farthings by the year upon an Acre, to
testify that they were the Cities Lands, and to be redeemed when the State
should have money. This Land was called Trientius and Tributus, because it was
granted in lieu of the third part of the Loan money. And as another means to
enable the Romans to discharge great debts, they Idem, Tit. Live. lib. 7. p.
267. D. Tacit. Annal. lib. 6. cap. 4. p. 126, 127.
used in time of necessity to bring interest of money to one in the hundred,
and sometimes to half one in the hundred, I suppose this were enough for money
lent upon the public faith, if it were well considered, seeing almost every
Creditor has received more benefit than the interest of money, having his
share in the blessing of Peace with the freedom of the Gospel, and his Estate
secured and quiet. It is to be wished that after our late wars before the
public debts be paid, we do not hastily run into other wars, without just
inforcement, lest we bring our selves into the Romans conditions, being far
less able to raise money, or to give satisfaction than they were.

CHAP. XV. A digressive discourse about the preaching of the Gospel, the
ordination and appointment of Pastors and Teachers, and of their Office and
maintenance.
IT shall in this discourse (as my private opinion) be premised (wherein I
crave pardon if I differ from other men) that the The distinction of Clergy
and Laity grounded upon Magna Charta, and other popish Laws, is still stisly
maintained, and upon that ground the Ministers claim to be discharged of
Constables, Leavies and other secular services, (as they are called) And the
Lawyers are very earnest to uphold this superstition. Although all Gods people
being alike his Lotor Clergy, are called a Kingdom of Priests, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Isa. 61.6. Revel. 5.10. Deuteronomy. 32.9. each. 2.12.
great distinction of the Tribe of Levi from the rest of the people, with all
their Sacrifices, Circumcisions, Services at the Altar, their portion of the
Tithes and Fruits, their restraint from having any Lot of Land amongst their
brethren in the Land of Canaan, (except that which was allotted and set out to
them) their purifications, significant Garments, with all other their Levitical
and Ceremonial service, are all finished by the death of Christ, who fastened
all those to his Cross, and took away this distinction, and the burden of
these Ordinances: And that they were dead and not binding after Christ's death;
That they had an honorable burial, and were perfectly abolished, at the
demolishing, and plucking down of the Temple, the place of the residence
thereof, forty two years after Christ's death. And that as at the first these
things were necessary, being the Commandments of God, and attending his service
and worship, so after Christ they were dead, and at the most, things
indifferent, and rather suffered for the weakness of the Gentiles, and in
compliance with the Jews, to the furtherance of the Gospel, than for any
necessary use thereof; nay, and in case of scandal, and where they were much
stood upon as matters appertaining to religion, they became unlawful, and to
be esteemed as beggarly rudiments, Circumcision it self, being a rejecting of
Christ: But after the destruction of the Temple, when that Levitical and
Ceremonial worship, with all the appurtenances were destroyed, dead, and
buried, the use thereof became utterly abominable: And therefore it is an
unlawful accursed thing to raise them out of their Craves again, and to use
the same in derogation and opposition of Christ, and the sufficiency of his
sufferings, and upon this ground I conceive it unlawful for the Ministers of
the Gospel to Judaize in point of claiming by Divine right, or receiving of
Tithes, as much (in respect of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of the thing)
as if they should again fall to circumcising and to sacrificing, as the Papists
pretend to do in their idol of the Mass. And it may be judged that the
Ministers are blinded with the profits of the Tithes, more than they were with
their significant Garments and ceremonies, because they receive more worldly
advantage by them than by the rest, which being unprofitable they have more
willingly parted withal: And especially their Parishes which the Church of
Rome received from the Heathen (the City of Rome it self being, before the
Suburbs were built, or the City sacked by the Goaths and Vandals) divided into
two and thirty Parishes, and so came into the hands of the Pope, who succeeded
the Pontifex Maximus of the Heathen, with payment of Tithes, like those of the
Jews, as before is herein set forth; and thence came all this trash into
England with the Hierarchy of Bishops and Archbishops, in the room of the
Flamins and Arch-Flamins of the Heathen, and to the shame of Christianity and
scorn of the Gospel, are not yet all cast out as unclean things. O England,
will thou not be made clean! when will it once be?

This being premised I presume to enquire what Ministry there ought to be, in
the times of the Gospel, Before Churches were gathered an^ settled, Kings and
^mperours had the ordering of the affairs of the Church as well as the
Commonwealth, and had the nomination of Bishops, until the Pope usurped that
power. Hawk. right of Dom. l. 3. c. 5. page 136, 138. 140.
what is the nature of their function, and who has the appointment thereof,
and how the Ministers shall be maintained, and so the public worship of God
upheld. And herein I suppose we ought neither to imitate the Jews, in what they
did by virtue, or authority of the Levitical, or Ceremonial Law, nor the
idolatrous Heathen, who borrowed many of the Jews Rights and Customs, nor yet
the idolatrous and Superstitious Papists, who retained both the Ceremonies of
the Jews and Pagans. But that in, and concerning the things before mentioned,
we look for a pattern, or vvarrant from the holy word of God, sufficient to
instruct us in this point, and which may be a standing rule not to be changed,
or altered, as the Levitical and Ceremonial Laws were. And herein I affirm that
a About Ann. 320. Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor sent
forth preachers of the Gospel, Sympson. Hist. of the Church, lib. 1. page 6^.
ex Sozom. l. 2. cap. 6.
great part of the work lies upon the hands of the ^he Pontisex maximus or
chief Priest amongst the Romans was chosen by the Emperor. Tac. 1. Annal. l.
1. cap. 1. page 2.
Civil Supreme Magistrate, who in this respect as well as others is, Romans 13.4.
(...), the Minister of God, and ought by good Laws to appoint the Ministers
their employment, and see that they do their work, for proof hereof I will not
much insist upon the practice of 2 Chro. 8.14.
Solomon in building the Temple, nor upon Solomon, 2 Chro. 20.21.
Jehosaphat, and 2 Chro. 31.2. 1 Kings 2.27, 35.
Hezechiah their facts in appointing the Levites their Offices and courses,
lest that should seem to comply overmuch with the Levitical service, although
something, by way of Analogy, may be proved from thence, and much more might be
said of Solomon his putting the High Priest from his Office, and appointing
another in his room, 1 King. 2.27.35. and of Asa 2 Chro. 14.4.
and converted 2 Chro. 33.16. 2 Chro. 17.7, 8, 9.
Manasses, their commanding Judah to serve the Lord. But the fact of Iehosaphat,
2 Chr. 17.7, 8, 9. seems to me a good Testimony in this matter, and undeniable.
It Is said that he (that is, Iehosaphat) It Is said Nehem. 6.7. that Nehemiah
appointed the Prophets to preach at Jerusalem.
in the thirteenth year of his reign, sent to his Princes, Benhail, Obadiah,
etc. to teach in the Cities of Judah, and with them he sent Levites, Shemaiah,
Nathaniah, etc. and with them Elishama, and Jehoram Priests: And they taught in
the Cities of Juda, and had the Law of God with them, and went about throughout
all the Cities of Juda, and taught the people. Five things I conclude from this
context. 1. That these Princes, Priests, and Levites, were appointed to the
work of teaching by the King. 2. That the Princes as well as the Priests and
Levites taught the people. 3. Laws of Geneva, p. 2, 3. 1. The Ministers are
first approved of by the Council. 2. Th^n received by common consent into the
Company of the faithful. 3. Then sworn before the Signiorie to serve God
faithfully in the work of the Ministry. This is called the Ministers
Induction. page 3.
That the Kings command was the ground of their Commission to teach the people.
4. That some Teachers are not tied to particular Congregations. 5. That this
reaching was no Ceremonial or Levitical service, nor performed in the Temple,
this preaching was in the City out Juda out of Jerusalem, and they had the book
of the Law of God with them, and out of this they taught the people: This book
of the Law was that, which the King was commanded to read, and contained the
moral as well as the judicial, and ceremonial Law, which being read to Josiah,
melted his heart; and that which with the Prophets, (as commentaries
thereupon,) was read in the Synagogues of the Jews every Sabbath Day: Acts
15.21. Acts 13.15.
If we should consult the Papists and rigid Presbyters in this matter: The
Papists tell us that all authority to teach, or preach (for it is all one) is to
be derived from the head of the Church on earth, that is the Pope, and that the
Bishop, as the Popes Substitute with a Presbyter, are to ordain the teaching
Priests, and so they did in England in the Bishops time. The rigid Presbyters
of this age tell us that the Presbytery are to ordain those, who are to teach,
or preach, and such as teach, or preach without their ordination, which is done
by the imposition of hands of other Presbyters, or Preachers, do greatly sin
against God, but I think it will not be denied, that whosoever may offer up
public prayer, may also publicly teach or expound the holy Scriptures, King
Solomon did the one, 1 Kings 8. And I see no reason, but that he, or any other
in his condition may do the other, if he be apt to teach, and able to divide the
word of truth aright, we cannot in the New Testament expect the civil
Magistrares to put forth, or execute such a power as Jehosaphat did, for that
was contrary to their principles, to further the preaching of the Gospel, or
the religion of Christians, which those Pagan Emperors, and Kings accounted
Acts 25.19. Sueton. in vita Claudii Caesaris. Sect. 16. Broughton in Daniel.
Conclus. in fine.
a barbarous Superstition; therefore the Lord of the Harvest sent forth
laborers in^o his Harvest, the Apostles and Evangelists, with larger
Comm^ssion than to teach in the Cities of Juda. First to the lost shee^ of the
house of Israel, and the Apostle Paul was immediately sent to the Gentiles, and
then the Commission was to preach the Gospel to every Creature. These were not
tied to any pa^ticular Congregation.

But besides these, there were Pastors and Teachers sent, Rege^volsc. Hist.
Eccle^. Slavoni. Provin. l. 1. cap. 3. page 12. Pectus Valdus a rich Mercant of
Lions, was chos^n Pastor of the Church their, Anno 1160. Act. 1.23. and 5, 6.
Calvin. Instit. lib 4. cap. 19. Sect. 31. and c. 14. Sect. 31. Fuller Holy
state l. 2. c. 12. page 87. M^gd. Cent. 2. c. 7. Cent. cap. 7.
and r^ised up for edifying, and building up the Church of God, and until
Churches, or particular Congregations were settled, the preaching was at large,
but when the number of believers was increased and multiplied, then were they
divided into particular Congregations, and had their Pastors, and Officers by
Acts 9.30. Acts 11.22, 26. and 13.8.15.2, 3.
suffrage, or Simpson Church. Hist. lib. 2. Cent. 12. page 429, 430.
Election, and those Congregations of believers, called also the Church, as
occasion was The manner of the Election of Pastors in the Slavonian Churches,
Anno 1467. You may see at large, in Regenvolscii Historia. Eccl. Slavon.
Provin. lib. 1. c. 1. p. 30, 31, 32.
sent forth others to preach the Gospel, to such places where there was need,
and where the Gospel was like to be received, to gather men to Christ, and this
was done in defect of the work of the Supreme Magistrate, Const^ntine the Great
and Theodosius, before the reign of Antichrist, and afterward, Otho and Henry
the fifth Emperors, and others nominated and appointed Bishops, and others
nominated and appointed Bishops, and others to preach, Simpson Church Hist.
lib. 1. page 6. Whites way to the true Church. Sect. 50. p. 389, 390. Petrus
Valdus, and the Brethren of that society, who were raised up about the year,
1160. in that and the next century, and afterward John Wickliffe, his
followers (by their public preaching) gathered more Churches, and converted
more souls to Christ than all the Bishops and Presbyters had done in 600. years
before. Many of which Churches remain to this day.
(whose Office it is to appoint the Gospel to be preached to the world) and the
Lord did from time to time in every age, as might easily be showed, when there
wanted a Christian Magestrate, and also during the Tyranny of Antichrist, stir
up men, whom we may well say were sent of God to preach the Gospel, although
they were not ordained by any Presbytery, unless it were by the Presbytery, or
priesthood of the Church of Rome, which upon their conversion they utterly
renounced; and I doubt not to say, but that those who are apt to teach, and
able to divide the word of truth aright, and are willing for conscience sake,
and the glory of God, in the conversion of Souls to spend themselves in
teaching the word of God to the world, may have a sufficient call and Warrant
thereunto from God, without the laying on of the hands of any Presbytery, which
ceremony I take to have been annexed to miraculous and extraordinary gifts of
the Holy Ghost bestowed on men, in the first setting out of the Gospel, and not
to be used where such extraordinary gifts of tongues, Prophecy, and miracles,
are ceased no more than that ceremony of anointing the sick with Oil, being
also used in those days, and accompanying the gift of healing, they are now
used with us, Calvin. Institut. l. 4. cap. 19. page 72^, 724.
as they have been, and are used in the Church of Rome; the one called the
Sacrament of Orders, and the other of extreme Unction, and both these ceremonies
of imposition of hands, and anointing, were used likewise by the Papists in
their Sacrament of confirmation, and I doubt not but all of them are promoted
by the Jesuits, and Romish Priests at this day amongst us. It cannot be showed
that either Petrus Valdus, or his followers, called Waldenses and Albigenses,
of whom there Regenvolsc. Hist. Eccl. Slavon. l. 1. cap 3. p. 12. 30, 31, 32.
Sympson Church. Hist. lib. 2. cent. 12. p. 429, 430. page 321. Whites way true
Church. sect. 44. numb. 1. Ex Ramerio in Biblioth. Patr. Tom. 4. Par. 2. 1
Corint. 9.7, 9.11, 12.14. Gall. 6.6. Luke 10.7.
were forty Churches, Anno 1254. received these ceremonies, where it also
appears that the brethren (for so the Church Members were called) did send out
many of the Members to preach the Gospel in other places, in Greece and
Thracia, etc. and they were encouraged by the Kings Letters Patents, page 35.
36.

Now for the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, according to their
several functions, or rather difference of employments, generally, they are to
have (t) liberal maintenance, according to that of the Apostle, God has
ordained that he that preaches the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

The first sort, that is, those that preach to the world, are to be maintained
by the world, and because the wicked world having weak eyes, think nothing a
greater torment than the light, the Civil Magistrate is to see to the
maintenance of these Ministers, and may lawfully raise it upon the world,
although against their wills, as the Magistrate does provide for such mad men
and Idiots, as cannot guide their own Estates, and dispose thereof for their
necessary use and benefit: Tim. 5.17, 18. Math. 10.9, 10.
And for the other sort of Ministers they ought to be provided for by the
Churches, according to their abilities, and none of these to be maintained by
Tithes, for the reasons herein before alleged: Now although I affirm that the
work to appoint Pastors and Teachers, lies chiefly in the power of the
temporal Magistrates, yet I conceive it necessary that godly learned men be
consulted with, who may satisfy the Magistrate, touching the learning, and
ability of such who are to preach the Gospel, as is used in some reformed
Churches, where Tithes are abolished.

But that which will be said against this kind of maintenance of Ministers,
not by Tithes, is that which is usually objected, viz. That no way can be found
out so certain, equal, and indifferent, for maintenance of the Ministry, as by
Tithes, which are settled by so many Laws. For answer hereunto, I will not at
large handl^ that controversy, which requires a volume larger than what this
Treatise can permit (having writ something elsewhere, touching the same.) I
shall only propound a clear remedy, for cure of the many junglings, and
wranglings, which are daily between the Ministers and people, about payment of
Tithes, which both hinder the study of the one, and discourage the labor of
the other, and continually disquiet them both, hindering the preaching of the
word of God, and obstructing the good effect thereof. The remedy I humbly
propound is this: Provision for Ministers of the Gospel without Payment of
Tithes.
Let there be a survey of all spiritual promotions (as they are called) such as
that in Edw. 2. his time, and then let all gleab Lands, Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, and other profits claimed, and by Law belonging to the Parsonages,
Donatives and Vicars be sold, to the owners of the Land and estates, out of
which they arise, (or to others if they refuse to buy the same) at sixteen
years, and two thirds of one years purchase, and that will raise just so much
money, being disposed of at six in the hundred, as is now due, or payable to
the Persons and Vicars. For example, that Parsonage which is found to be
threescore pound by the year, Communibus annis, shall at this rate be sold for
1000. l. which yields threescore pounds by the year, and if this rate be a
little too dear for the tithes, the Gleab-lands will make amends, which for the
most part are the best Lands, in every Town, and without doubt the Owners of
the Lands charged with Tithes were better to give twenty years purchase for the
Tithes, than to pay them constantly, being an exceeding curb and oppression,
both to the Tenant and Owner of the Land, and this is the remedy I propound:
And if the same were done, then might the money raised thereby be allowed to
such as are able, faithful, and willing to preach the Gospel, and then such
as are ignorant, insufficient, scandalous, and profane, may be kept out of
this service, for that, although the Luke 4.34.
Devil, and wicked men may preach Christ in some sort Math. 10.4, 5, 7.
(as some say Judas did) yet it does not appear, not is to be believed, (there
being no word of faith to warrant it) that ever any man, not walking in the
ways of God, or not being converted, ever Jerem. 23, 21, 22. Luke 22.32.
Daniel. 12.3. Mal. 2.6, 7, 8.
turned any one from his unrightousnesse, that being one of the most glorious
works of God, which he does not use to act by wicked men, which appears
clearly by many Testimonies of holy Scripture. Dr. Brian. in Mal. 3. Dr. Grew.
in Ephesians. 2.1, 2. Acts 9.4, 5, 6.15, 16.
It is a point commonly insisted upon that God does no great work by any man,
but he first humbles him. And this is all I shall say, touching this matter,
being so long a digression, only as appertaining to the matter in hand, I set
it down as a defect in our Law, that there is no competent, or sufficient
means of maintenance settled for a Gospel Ministry, but only that which was
ordained, and continued by that Antichrist of Rome, and his Vassals, and ought
not to be upheld, or made use of by the people of God, but with the Leviticall
and Ceremonial worship and the Temple to be abolished.

CHAP. XVI. A Corollarie, or Conclusion.
IN this discourse is clearly evinced the manifold impieties, superstitions,
profaneness, oppressions, falsehoods, uncertainties, ambiguities, prolixities,
and other enormities, as well in the Theory as in the Practick-part of the Laws
of England; as they are now in use and practice, some few of which evils were
sufficient cause to decry, and abolish any humane Law under heaven; Insomuch
that the civilized Heathens and Pagans, in many things appertaining to
distributive Justice, both in their Laws, and in the practice, and execution
thereof, have showed more impartiality, reason and judgment, than many of our
Laws can admit, and therefore it is to be hoped that the great Patrons thereof
will be silent, whilst other men seek to God, and supplicate, the supreme
Magistrate, and Legislative power of the Land, for a more perfect pattern and
foundation, whereupon may be built a more glorious structure.

Know the world will say, that this Law is a sacred spark some excellent gift
from above (as Grotius. Pol. Max. part. 2. c. 8. p. 68, 69. and Corol. in fine.
Bodin. Republ. lib. 1. p. 58. Tit. Live. lib 3. p. 110. H.
all the Heathen generally held their Laws to be) the very Records having
gained the name scrinia sacra, and the professors and practicers of it having
found it as profitable, as Diana was to Demetrius, and the rest of his craft,
and therefore that it needs no alteration; and it may be others will say, its
an easy matter to find fault with the Law, but its not so easy to amend it:
to all these I shall say this, which I formerly hinted; That the written word
of God contained in the Old and New Testaments, manifesting the mind of God,
by Exodus 20.8, 12.
commands, Exodus 20.4, 13.
prohibitions, Deuteronomy. 6.3, 4, 5.
exhortations, Romans 12.2, 19.
dehortations, Psa. 41.1, 2.
promises, Rev. 22.18, 19.
threatenings, Jude 6.7, 11.
judgments, Mich. 6.9, 13
afflictions, Acts 13.10, 11.
objurgations, Jerem. 13.23, 27.
expostulations, Genesis ^.2^.
sarcasmes, and Amos 4.4, 5.
bitter taunts, Ironical, Ezech. 28.3, 4.
affirmations and negations, Math. 23.15, 16.
reproofs, Math. 11.28, 29.
invitations, Hebr. 13.5, 6.
encouragements, Acts 12.7, 11.
signal deliverances, Isa. 5.2, 4, 7.
especial favors, 2 King. 7.4, 6, 15.
and leading providence, commended to us in holy Scripture to teach us, and
sundry Cant. 5.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 4.14. Ephesians. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.
Tropical and Apoc. 19.11, 12, 13.
figurative expressions of his will to our capacities, with necessary Math. 22
31, 32. Mal. 4.4.
consequences from the word, are sufficient to overruled all cases, instruct
all Magistrates and Judges, and to teach all duties toward God and man, and
that there need no other Laws, but what are founded upon this ground, and built
upon the same foundation.

And by these were the Israelites happily governed without any other policy:
And this is all the Directory which the Lord by the Prophet Malachi, left to
his people, to be their guide, in that 400 years, from his time until John
Baptist, wherein there were to be no more Prophets. Remember the Law of Moses
my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb, for all Israel, with the
statutes and judgments, Mal. 4.4. And where its commonly said that many sins
are invented, and faults found out since the Scriptures were written, which
cannot be obviated, or comprehended in Scripture Laws. It may be answered, that
there can be no offense, new or old, but its Psalm. 19.7. Psalm. 119.96.
condemned in the word of God, for example there are many Superstitions, new
Oaths, and much false worship lately invented, which no man will deny, to be
condemned by that word of God, which forbids, will worship, profaneness, and
humane inventions in Gods worship, and that word which This is agreed by
Perkins, Downam, Dod, Wolebius, and generally all Protestants who have
commented upon the Decalogue.
commands us to worship God according to his own will and appointment,
condemns all newly invented false worship; and that Law which commands us to
reverence the holy Name of God, or forbids the abuse of the same by profane,
or vain swearing, in one kind, forbids all other sins of the same kind, or
nature: And if it be so in respect of the first table, much more is it to be
granted, that the Law of God is sufficient to teach all things, concerning
righteousness and sobriety, being the duties of the second table, whereabouts
distributive Justice is chiefly conversant, for that by one kind of injustice
all other injustice is forbidden, as is herein before declared, and might here
be further insisted upon, if it were requisite. Bodin. Republ. lib. 4. cap. 3.
p. 471.
And it is to be considered that Law of man is so sacred (as its called) but
that upon urgent necessity it is to be changed. And Solon that wise Lawgiver
after he had published his Laws, caused the Athenians to swear to observe them
(only) for one hundred years. Laws must be perused, and some abroged, and
others established, being but humane Laws; For that there can be no setlement,
but upon the immutable Laws of God. The Bactrians, Egyptians, Persians,
Carthaginians, Athenians, Scithians pretended their Laws to come from God. And
Mahomet affirms, his Law was delivered from God by Gabriel. Plato, that his
Laws cam^ from Jupiter and Apollo. Cael. Rhodigi, l. 18. c. 19. p. 698.

2. The last thing which may be expected, as to the answer of the objection
before mentioned, that those that find fault with the Law, do not show how it
should be amended. I shall only set forth what course has been taken by wise
States and Commonwealths, both in respect of their Judicatures, and
proceedings, and humbly offer it to the wisdom of such as it concerns in this
Nation, and the Dominions thereunto belonging: To judge what is right, and may
be most agreeable to the constitution of the Government, and most conducing to
the support of the authority of the Civil Magistrate, both supreme and
subordinate, and to the good and happiness of the people, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all 1 Timothy 2.2. Tit. 2.11, 12.
godliness and honesty, and this is the end of all Laws and Government: First
therefore we will a little consider what the Jews, (who were the people of God)
and in the best times of their government, when their rulers had most communion
with God, and were best instructed) did in matters of Law, and Justice, in
these respects: 2. And then we will consider what the Gentiles did by the light
of nature and reason, or rather what they had gathered from the Laws of Moses,
not so much because they were the Laws of God, as because they were the Laws of
a wise Lawgiver, and of a wise people, for that the wise of the Heathen
Gentiles, (and the Philosophers and Poets, who were accounted their Prophets)
had knowledge of Moses, and his writings, there is nothing more clear by many
passages in their books, and the very Laws of the Heathen themselves in many
particulers suit with the Judicial Laws of Moses. Concerning the Jews I have
set it down before in this Treatise; that upon occasion of Jethro his wise
Counsel, their Exodus 18.21, 22.
first Judges and Rulers of all sorts were instituted, and afterward the Court
of Numb. 11.16, 17. W^ll^t Hexe. in Exodus c. 18. ver. 21, 22. qu^. 19.20, 21.
Deuteronomy. 1.15, 16, 17.
seventy, which was the (...), or Senate of the Jews, was appointed by Almighty
God: This was the great Court, or Judicatory of the Jews, and consisted of
threescore and Bodin. de Republ. lib. 1. page 57.
ten persons, most eminent in their Tribes, and the President which was Moses;
or as others say, threescore and twelve, that was six out of every Tribe
(however, they were called the seventy, as were the Interpreters of the Old
Testament, who translated it into Greek, bearing the name of the Septuagint,
although they were seventy two.) This Counsel of the Jews heard and determined
generally all controversies, according to the Laws of God, and if a cause were
too Exodus 18.22.
hard for them, by reason of the want of a particular positive Law, Numb. 27.1,
2, 5, 7, 8. Godw. M. A. l. 5. c. p. 209. Willet Hexa. in Exodus 18. ver. 22. qu.
21, 22.
as the Case of Zelopheads daughters, then they came unto Moses, Alfonsus the
tenth K. of Spain commanded his Judges to come unto the Prince himself as often
as there was nothing written in the Laws of their own Country concerning the
Matter in question. Bodin. Republ. l. 1. c. 8. p. 108.
who enquired of the Lord, and received direction from him, and according to
the mind of God the Case was Judged; instead whereof we have now the written
word of God complete: Besides this, the Jews had another Court, which dealt in
Criminal and pecuniary causes, consisting of three and twenty Judges, and this
Court was subordinate to the Sanhedrim: And thirdly, they had another Court
which consisted of three Judges, which was subordinate to the other two Courts.
The Sanhedrim sat commonly at Jerusalem, and was sometimes divided into five
parts, and sat in five several Cities. The Court of three and twenty sat in
the several Cities, and were a standing Court every The Romans had such a Court
in every City. Tac. Annal. li. 1. c. 3. p. 5.
City having such a Court, these the Jews called Councils, and of these our
Savior speaks, when he says, Math. 10.17.
They will deliver you up to the Councils. The third Court, or Court of three
was in every Town, or Village, and dealt in ordinary, and smaller matters. And
by this we see that the Jews were not forced to go far for Justice, but had it
near them at all times, and Market. Atlas. descript. Holy Land. page 839.
Jerusalem it self was not above fifty miles from the Confines of the Land of
Canaan in the length of it, and not above twenty miles from the Confines, in
the breadth thereof, and yet the Jews had not all that in possession. And in
the next place in imitation of the Jews, Rous. At. Ant. l. 3. c. 1. p. 108.

Bodin. Republ. l. 3. page 263.


the Grecians at Athens had a Senate, consisting of four, or (as some write)
five hundred persons, which was the great Council of the City and
Commonwealth, and upon weighty occasions, all these, or as many as would sat
in judgment. Idem. At. Anti. l. 3. c. 1. p. 125, 126.
There was another Court called Ariopagus, consisting of the number of
threescore of the wisest and most grave Citizens, of which the President, or
Chief Justice was called Basileus, that is King, and they had cognizance of
matters of life and death, and Criminal causes, and other things of great
concernment. Then they had also another Court, which heard and determined
matters by way of Idem. l. 3. cap. 3. Sect. 4.

Th^se were like the Jews Courts.

Godw. M.A. lib. 6. c. 10. page 294.

Willet Hexa. in Exodus c. 18. v. 25. q. 26, 27.


Compromise, and there was not any cause, if it exceeded in value ten
Drams, which is but fifteen pence of our money, (the Attick Dram being
but one penny half penny,) but it past these men's hands, before it might be
admitted into any Superior Court. In like manner the Romans, and likewise the
Lacedaemonians agreed with the Athenians for the most part in respect of their
Courts and Judicatories. The Romans had three Courts, Sueton. Tranq. in vita
Julii Caesaris. Sect. 41.
until the third was put down by Julius Caesar; and afterward Augustus, and
other Emperors appointed a privy Counsel of twenty of the chief of the Senate,
to treat of great affairs of State in private, like the privy Council of
England, which at first were but 15 Persons, instituted 450 years since.

1. Bodin. Republ. l. 3. page 262. and 267. Godw. Ant. lib. 3. sect. 4. cap. 20.
The Romans in their Suits proceeded in this manner: 1. They obtained a sum
of course.

2. They asked leave to enter their Plaint, or Action.

3. Then the Action was entered, if it were allowed of by the Court.

4. Which done, both parties put in pledges, either in money, or gave security,
the one to prosecute the Suite, and the other to abide the Judgment. The
proceeding at Geneva is much like the Romans, one Court or other sits almost
every day, and the causes judged in three weeks or a month usually. Laws
Geneva. p. 17, 18, 19, 20.
The third Court day regularly the Cause was heard, and Judged; if the Cause
were Criminal, the Praetor would not suffer the same to be entered, until the
Prosecutor had sworn, that he did not accuse the Defendant falsely, or
maliciously: And when any man had killed another, the Chief Justice, and the
whole Bench of Judges, sat upon the life and death of the Manslayer. Sueton.
Tra^q. in vita Flavii Vespasian. August. Sect. 10.
And when in the time of Flavius, Vespatianus, Augustus, the Courts were too
full of Causes, that whilst the old Actions hung still undecided, new quarrels
arose to increase them, he chose certain Commissioners by Lot, to Judge between
party and party, and to reduce the Causes to as small a number as might be;
such a Survey might do well in the Courts in these days, to the end that the
trivial, frivilous, and vexatious Suites, being spewed out (as Lord B^kon
Essays.
the surfets of all Courts) such as were of good use and concernment might have
time to be determined.

Sueton. Tranq. in vita Claudii N^ronis sect. 17.
It was a Law amongst the Romans, that no Clark, or Notary, who was to draw, or
write any other man's Will, should put down any Legacy for himself: Also that
impleading and deciding of controversies; all those causes, which aforetime
were debated, before the Masters of the Exchequer, or City Chamber should be
removed into the Common Hall, there to be tried, and that appeals from the
Judges should be made only to the Senate.

Bodin. Republ. l. 4. c 6. p. 500. 502. The Historian commends this practice

Sueton. Tranq. in vita Augusti. Caesaris. sect. 33.

Idem in vita Tiberii sect. 31. 33.


Augustus Caesar used to sit daily in Judgment to hear Causes in the Tribunal,
or if he had not health, then in his own house.

Idem in vita Flavii Domitiani. sect. 8.
Flavius Domitianus used also to sit in Judgment upon the Tribunal, and many
times reversed such Judgments as were given for favor, or obtained by
flattery, he warned the Judges not to give ear to persuasions, and Rhetorical
assertions, and such Judges as were faulty, he used to tax publicly, and he
was so careful to chastize the Magistrates, that the Historian says, they
were never more temperate and just in their places than in his days.

Bodin. ut supra. p. 415.
Romulus left the ordinary Administration of Justice to the Judges, but
reserved the greatest matters to his own Judgment.

Godw. A^^i. Romans l. 3. S^ct. 4. c. 6.
The Romans had a Law, that no Senator should use any Trade, but those were
utterly forbidden the use of trading, for fear it should breed favor, or
corruption. And another Law of the Romans was, Idem. l. 3. Sect. 4. c. 17. Ex
Cicerone de Senectu^e.
that no Advocate, or Orator should receive any gift, or reward from his
Client, for pleading his Cause, for that they were paid by the Commonwealth,
which was a very Cook. Essai. page 185.
indifferent way for all people, Cock Essay, page 185.

Rous At. Ant. l. 3. c. 1. page 110. and page 111. 112.
The Graecians proceedings in their Courts, was like to the Romans, and if the
Defendant did not appear upon the Summons, he was taken by default, and if he
would have any ease against the Judgment, he must bring the Cause on to
hearing against himself within six weeks, or else the first Judgment to stand.
That Defendant which had not five of the Judges voices for him was to be fined,
and the Plaintiff that made not good his charge was to pay costs: And if the
Cause were Criminal, before the Suit was allowed to proceed the Prosecutor took
his Oath that his accusation should be just.

Cook English Law p. 103.
To conculde, good Laws are more security to the people, than good Magistrates,
our Laws have sufficient in them to bring in the whole body of Popery, (except
the Popes supremacy) and to destroy all the faithful people of the Land, and
therefore it is to be wished that the Laws were L^chfords New^ pa. 26.

In the great C^u^t at new England, held twice in ^he y^ar like our Assizes,
the Matters of the Charge to be inquired of; are reduced by the Governor, who
gives the Charge under the Heads of the Decalogue.


made agreeable to the Laws of God, and then if the proceeding and execution of
them, were either like the Jews, the Graecians, or the Romans, and that all
ordinary matters might be decited and determined in the proper Counties, it
would be found I doubt not, a great blessing and happiness to the people.

And I cannot imagine what can be said against this, but that which is called
reason of State (the very name whereof an honest Pope abhorred) This, Grotius
Pol. Max. par. 1. c. 4. p. 31. 32.
as one says, was anciently the same with Equity, but as now its used in the
world, is nothing else but a device, that carries the face of equity,
supposing it Lawful, not only to transgesse the Laws of men, Bodin. Republ.
l. 1. page 104. accounts this a thing most absurd. The three Temples belonged
to the Templ^rs, until. Ed. 2. his time, and thence to the Hospitallers until
the desolution in the time of H. 8.
but even the Laws of God for Politic ends? And since Machiavel played
Achitophel, this for shame is called reason of good government.

1. This policy will tell us, that thee hang of the Laws and the practice
thereof, will dishonor and demolish the most famous Universitie in all the
world (for our kind of learning) the Inns of Court and of Chancery.

2. It will Eclipse the glory of Westminster; and a great part of London, whose
inhabitants live by lodging and victualling.

3. That tediousness of Lawsuits, and the great expenses thereof, are to be
tolerated as a necessary evil, or punishment, which serves to keep men quiet,
and deter them from many unnecessary Suites, which otherwise would be
commenced, but that they fear the remedy may be worse than the disease.

4. That the Law is a Tyrants use to employ their Tributaries, in wars abroad,
or idle and needless Trophies, that they might want leisure to think of other
things. Jun. Brut. Vind. Con^r^ Tyran. p. 10^ Upon this ground stage plays and
Stews are suffered in some Countries.
necessary evil to keep men from contriving and practicing Worse mischief in
the Commonwealth, which they have no leisure to do, whilst they are wrangling
and jangling about Lawsuits.

5. That expense on Lawsuits is a good means to keep such men (who are of
restless and unquiet spirits) poor in the Commonwealth, whereby they are
disabled to make head against the Government: These, and such like props for
upholding this frame of building, appear upon the first view to be too weak and
unsound to prop up the same, being herein already answered, and are all
overthrown by that rule of Scripture, Romans 3 8.
We must not do evil (no, not the least) that good may come thereof.

Now seeing it has pleased the Lord, our God, to bring us not only out of
that iron furnance, and darkness of Egypt, the hard service and ignorance of
Popery, but also to give an end to our wilderness, miseries, and to settle us
in peace, after all our wars and distempers, and so to put us into a condition
(as the Israelites) to receive good and wholesome Laws; let us learn Gods end in
this, and know for our instruction what is recorded by the Holy Ghost, Psalm,
105. v. 43.44.45. he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness, etc. And gave them the Lands of the Heathen, and they inherited the
labor of the people, that they might observe his Statutes, and keep his Laws.

A POSTSCRIPT. Containing sundry Positions, founded upon the holy Scriptures,
serving for principal grounds of Laws amongst Christians.
1 FIrst that the holy Scriptures are of Divine Authority, the rule of life and
good manners, Isa. 8.20. Gal. 6.16. Eccles. 12.10. Luke 16.29, 31. 2 Timothy 3.16,
17.

2 That Christian religion reformed, contained in the holy Scriptures, is to be
held forth as the general, and public profession of the Nation, Math. 10.32.
Luke 12.8. Romans 10.9, 10.

3 The holy Scriptures are to be publicly, and constantly read in the
Congregations, Act. 13.15. and 15.21. Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. Neh. 8.18.

4 The worshipers of idols, or false Gods, and such as draw others to idolatry,
are not to be tolerated, but to be punished severely, Exodus 22.20. Deuteronomy. 13,
5.8, 9, 15. Job 31.26.27, 28. Exo. 32.27, 28.

5 Blasphemous cursing, and speaking reproachfully against God, is to be
punished with death, but not every error, or reputed Heretical opinion, or
which is accounted blasphemy, Lev. 24.11.14.15.16. 1 Samuel 17.43, 45. Job 2.9.
Dan. 3.29.

6 The conscience of the weak is to be persuaded, not to be enforced contrary
to the light thereof, especially in case of things indifferent, Romans 14.3.13,
23. Act, 15.24, 28. Gal. 5.1.

7 That the public worship of God is to be commanded, and provided for by the
Supreme Civil Magistrate, 2 Chronicles, 14.3, 4. and 30.6. and 31.2. 1 Kings 8.1.5,
15.

8 The Supreme Magistrate (if not known by evident Demonstration, that he is
designed of God to Government by conquest, or special deliverance wrought by
him) is to be chosen by the people, 2 Samuel 5.1, 3. 1 Chr. 11.1, 3. Psalm. 78.70.
Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15.

9 That there ought to be Government of several sorts and degrees, subordinate
from the Monarch, or Chief Magistrate, unto the number of ten in every Village,
and these to be appointed by the Supreme Magistrate, Exodus 18.21, 22. Numb.
11.16, 17. Romans 13.4.

10 That all matters of controversy wherein one man wrongs another are to be
judged by the Civil power in the hands of Magistrates and Judges, 1 Samuel 2.25.
Exodus 18.21, 22. 1 Peter. 2.13, 14.

11 That the Supreme Magistrate is Judge of all great and weighty Causes, and
the word of God ought to be his rule, Exo. 18.22, 26. Number. 27.5, 8. Deutr.
1.17. Lev. 24.11.

12 Many thing are to be Judged according to the discretion of the Judges with
reference to the Law of God, and such Judgments not to be accounted Arbitrary,
much less to savor of tyrannical Government, Exodus 21.22, 30, 35. Numb. 27.8.
1 Kings 2.44. and 3.16 25, 27.

13 No man ought to be a Judge or Magistrate, but he that has abilities of
nature and grace, that fears God and hates covetousness, ordinary Jurors
not to be allowed as competent Judges of matters of fact for want of
qualifications, Exo. 18 22, 26. Numb. 11.16.17. and 27, 18, 20 Acts 13, 22. 2 Samuel 23.3.

14 Magistracy is to be reverenced and the contempt thereof punished according
to the offense, Exo. 22.28. Acts 23.5. 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7. 1 Kings 2.44.

15 The power and Authority of the Supreme Magistrate is to be upheld and
maintained, and the Commonwealth defended, by the Estates and strength of the
people, Mark. 12.17. Math. 17.27. Romans 13.6, 7.

16 Disobedient Children sons of Belial, without Yoke, given up to
drunkenness, and excess of Riot, such as curse, strike, and abuse their
parents, are to be severely punished, and being found incorrigiable are to
suffer death, Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. Exodus 21.15, 17. Math. 15.4.

17 Every man ought to rule in his own house, the Magistrate upon complaint to
rectify abuses therein, Deutr. 21.19, 20. Hester. 1.20, 22. 1 Timothy 3.4. Exodus
20.10.

18 He that wilfully kills any person (although in hot blood, and upon some
petty provocation) ought to suffer death, Exodus 21.12. Rev. 13.10. Lev. 24.17,
21, 22.

19 He that hurts or strikes another, is to be punished according to the
hurt, to pay for the cure, and recompense the party hurt for his damage and
loss of his time, and if the hurt were done maliciously and presumptuously, he
is to pay eye for eye, tooth for tooth, 21. Exodus 18.19. Levit. 24.19, 20.
Deutr. 19.21.

20. Such as make uproares in the Commonwealth where death follows, or is
occasioned by such uproares, are to suffer death, Luke 23 19. 2 Chr. 23.14.15.
2 Samuel 20.21.22.

21. a All Adulterers, a Buggerers, ^ Witches, b Sodomit^s, b Ravishers, and
prof^ssed, or common ^ Whores, are to be put to death, and so are all such as
commit a Incest in the nearest degrees, truly so called, a John 8.5. Levit.
20.10. Jer. 29.22.23. a Exodus 22.19. Levit. 20.15.16, a Exodus 22.18. Levit.
20.6. b Levit. 20.13. and Lev. 18.22. b Deuteronomy. 22.25. 2 Samuel 13.14.29. a Genesis
38.15.24. b Levit. 20.11.12. and 18.6.7.

22. Fornicators are to be punished severely, and to make satisfaction to the
parties wronged by such uncleanesse, Exodus 22.16.17. Deuteronomy. 22.28.29. Jude 7.

23. All wantonness, laciviousnesse, and filthy acts of uncleanness, are to
be severely punished by the Civil Magistrate, Prove. 6.29. Jude 7. Deuteronomy.
25.11.12.

24. That for felonies of Goods, or Cattle stolen, the Thief not to suffer
death, but to make restitution, according to Gods Law, as the case shall be,
and be bounden to serve in case he cannot satisfy, Prove. 6.30.31. Exo. 22
1.7.4 7. Job 20.15.18. 2 Samuel 12.6. Luke 19.8.

25. That for public, and presumptuous theft, to the great prejudice of the
Common wealth, or where murder follows, the Thief shall suffer death, Josh.
7.11.25. 2 Samuel 12.5. Exodus 22.2.

26. That no man to be convicted in any case Capital, but by the Testimony of
two witnesses at least, Deuteronomy. 17.6. 2 Cor. 13.1. Heb. 10.28. Numb. 35.30.

27. That a single witness shall convict no man, in any case without other
proof, or evincing circumstances, Deuteronomy. 19.15.18. John 8.17. and 5.31. Math.
18.16. 1 Cor. 13.1.

28. That a perjured, or malicious false witness, shall suffer the same
punishment, or loss, which his false Testimony regularly should cause another
to suffer, and the suborner, of Perjury in like manner, Dan. 6.24. Deuteronomy.
19.18.19.21. Prove. 19.5.

29 That for all trespasses by ones self, or any other by his appointment, the
wrong-doer shall make satisfaction, both for damages losses, Genesis 31.39. Deuteronomy.
22.19. Exodus 21.28. Exo. 22.5.6.9.

30. That for all losses by breach of covenant, or promise, satisfaction to be
made by the wrong-doer, both damages and losses, Genesis 31.39.28. Exodus 22.10.12.
Levit. 19.13.

31. Where a man is over-wrought and deceived, in any contract, or covenant,
the deceived i^ to be relieved, and not to be bound by such agreement, 1 These.
4.6. Levit. 19.13. Isa. 1.17. and 58.6.

32. That where a man at liberty, and of aged discretion, swears to perform any
lawful contract, or agreement, he is to be enforced to perform it, although he
were deceived, 1 Kings 2.42.44.46. Josh. 9.14.15.18. Psalm. 15.4. Eccles. 8.2.
Heb. 6.16.

33. Such as curse, or abuse the Chief Magistrate, or Judges are to be severely
punished, Exo. 22.28. 1 Kings 2.44.46. 2 Samuel 16.5.6.7. Acts 23.5.

34. That tale-bearers contentious persons, and breakers of the public peace,
are to be suppressed, 1 Timothy 2.2.3. Cant. 2.15. Prove. 26.20. Hab. 1.3. Levit.
19 16.

35. That no man is to be his own Judge, or Avenger, and therefore all such as
enter forcibly, or take men's possessions from them without their consent, to be
punished, and the oppressed relieved, 1 Kings 21.19. Mich. 2.2. Romans 12.19.

36. That excess of riot in feasting and drunkenness, ought to be punished
and restrained, Hos. 7.5. 1 Timothy 1.9. Dan. 5.1.5.30. 1 Samuel 25 36.37. Isai
22.13.14.

37. All Estates of inheritance, are to be Estates in Fee-simple, and no
Intails upon the Heirs Males, Numb. 27.7.8. 1 Timothy 5.8. Genesis 23 11.17.20.

38. All Estates with the Owners Pedigree, are to be Enrolled in some
convenient known place, for avoiding strife and contention, Jer. 32.11.12.
Josh. 14.14.15. Josh. 15.89.19.20. Ezra 2.62.

39. All men's Estates to be disposed of, according to their Wills, whether by
writing, or word of mouth, Gal. 3.15. Genesis 48.22. Genesis 49.29. and 50.13. Heb.
9.16.17.

40. The eldest Son not being guilty of any Notorious offense, ought to have a
double portion, Deuteronomy. 21.17. 1 Kings 2.15. Genesis 25.33. and 48.22.

41. All younger children to have parts of their Parents Estates, according to
their deserts, and as the Estate will bear, Genesis 25.6. Luke 15.12. Josh. 14.15.
and 16.17.

42. The Preachers of the Gospel are to have liberal maintenance, that they may
not be encumbred with the world, 1 Cor. 9.7.8.9.11.12.14. Gal. 6.8. Luke 10.7.
1 Timothy 5.17.18.

43 Schools of learning are to be maintained, and godly learned men to be
countenanced and encouraged, Acts 19.9. 1 Kings 18.4. 1 Samuel 19.20.

44 Lunaticks, Madmen, Idiots, and Infants, are to be cared for by their
friends and overseen by the Magistrates, and the Estates of unthrifts to be
managed, and preserved by others for their Wives and Children, Isa. 49.23.
Psalm. 78.71, 72. 1 Timothy 5.8.

45 That such as run in Debt, shall have their estates sold, to pay their
Debts, he that has nothing to pay, not to be imprisoned for Debt, 2 Kings 4.7.
Exo. 22.26, 27. Luke 6.35. and 7.42. Math. 18.25, 27, 33, 34.

46 Every man is to be enforced brought to be up and to live in some lawful
calling, and he that refuses to labor, not having other sufficient
maintenance, to be kept to work in some workhouse like Bridewell, Jonah 1.8. 2
These. 3.10, 11. Genesis 3.17. 1 Cor. 7.20.

47 That all men's Demands and Complaints, concerning Estates, Debts, Duties, or
Trespasses, shall be made in plain Terms, as the truth of the Case is, Neh.
5.2, 3, 4, 6, 12. Numb. 27.1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9. Acts 24.5, 11, 12, 13. Josh. 7.19.

48 That the Defendants answer be plain and true, without nicety of pleading,
or obscuring the truth. Acts 26.4, 5, 6, 7. Acts 7. the whole Chapter, Joshua
7.19, 20, 21.

49 That all differences, and Demands be heard in the prehence of the parties
accusing, and accused, ad Judgemen^ given before their faces, if the parties be
able to appear, unless they wilfully refuse, Acts 23.35. and 24.8. and 25.16.
1 Kings 21.10. 1 Kings 3.17.22.27.

50 That no Counsel be retained for any Suitors, but that the Pleaders be
rewarded by the State, and be sworn as assistants to the Judges, as indifferent
men to endeavor to find out the truth, and not to obscure, or overthrow it,
Exo. 23.2 Lam. 3.35, 36. Judges 19.30 and Judges 20.7, 8. Numb 22.7, 17. 2 Pet.
2.15. Acts 24.5.

51 That no man be admitted to be a Judge, or Justice, who takes any Fees, or
uses any Trade, or dealing, whereby he may be engaged to any party, Exo. 23.8.
Pro. 29.4. and 15.27. Isa. 1.23. Deuteronomy. 16.19.

52 That in taking of Oaths, the holy name of God be invocated, with lifting up
of the hand without kissing the book, Genes. 14.22. Rev. 10.6. Jer. 4.2.

53 That the matter of Clergy be exploded, and instead thereof Judgment be
given according to the merits of the Cause, with reference to the Law of God,
Exo. 23.3, 6, 7, Mich. 6.8 Deuteronomy. 1.17.

54 That the circumstances and equity of every Cause be weighed, together with
the Justice, and matter of fact, and Judgment to be given accordingly, Isa.
59.13.14, 15. 2 Samuel 8.15. Josh. 7.11, 25.

55 That the poor be cared and provided for, according to their necessities,
and such as want houses, to be suffered to dwell by their rich Neighbors, if
they be able to provide for themselves, or otherwise to be provided for by the
inhabitants where they live, Amos 8.4, 6. Isa. 5.8. Psalm. 41.1, 2. Levit. 25.35.

56 That there be a Clark, or officer, who may constantly attend at every
Market and Fair, to see that there be no deceit in weights, measures, or other
deceits in Trading, or Manufactures, Pro. 20.10. Deuteronomy. 25.13, 14. Amos 8.5, 7.
Isa. 1.17.

57 That the Oaths of two, or more witnesses may be a sufficient conviction in
Law, without any Indictment, Deuteronomy. 17.6. and 19.15. Math. 18.16. 2 Cor. 13.1.

58 That no Bylaws, or Orders be made, or suffered in the Commonwealth, to
the oppression of the younger, or poorer sort of Tradesmen and others* as is
usually done in every Corporation, Amos 4.1, 2. Isa. 10.1, 2, 3. Zeph. 3.13.

59 That all Suits and controversies, although popular, or Criminal, be
determined, upon hearing witnesses sworn, and giving evidence on both parts as
well as for the party accused, as the Commonwealth, and in cases where there
are no witnesses, that the accused's own voluntary Oath be taken for his
discharge, Exodus 22.9.10, 11. 1 Kings 8.31. Job 29.16. Acts 26.5. Isa. 43.9, 10.

60 That there be Judicatories, and Courts established in every City and
County, where the Judges may sit constantly in open places to hear, and
determine all controversies, Exodus 18.13, 25, 26. Deuteronomy. 21.19. Prove. 31.23. and
25.7. Ruth. 4.1, 2, 9.

61 That before any Cause be entered in any Court, or come before the Judges,
peace be offered by the Plaintiff, and that wisemen be appointed to take up
controversies, 1 Cor. 6.5, 6. Math. 5.25. Deuteronomy. 20.10. Psalm. 34.15.

62 That he that misprints the holy Scriptures, or binds them up false, be
punished according to the greatness of the offense, especially where the Text,
or translation is falsified, or corrupted, Exo. 39.43. Gal. 3.15. Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Rev. 22.18, 19.

63 That such as swear by Idols, or Creatures, or profanely swear, or
un-reverently use the holy Name, attributes, or word of God, be severely
punished, Math. 5.34, 35. Jer. 4.2. and 5.7. Exodus 20.7. Amos 8.14.

64 That such as use Lots lightly, or profanely in sporting, or gaming be
punished, and also such as game for money, or money worth be prohibited and
restrained, Prove. 16.33. Levit. 16.9.

65 That Bull-baiting, Bear-baiting, Cock-fighting, and Horsraces, and all
other abuses, and cruelty toward the Creatures he prohibited under a severe
penalty, Prove. 12.10. Deuteronomy. 14.21. Exodus 23.19.

66 That Men-stealers be punished by loss of life, and as the greatest Felons
in the World Exodus 21.16. Deuteronomy. 24.7. 1 Cor. 6.6.

67 That Marriage of children without Parents consent be disanulled, and
Marriages with Infidels prohibited, Ezra 9.14. Genesis 27.46. Mal. 2.11. Hest.
1.22 Numb. 30.5.

68 That strange fashions, and Whorish attire be prohibited by Law, and all
persons ordered to wear Apparel fit for their degrees, and callings, Zeph. 1.8.
Isa. 3.18.19. Prove. 7.10. Gal. 5 9. Deuteronomy. 7.3.

69 That the matter of divorce be settled in the Magistrate, only in case of
Adultery, that Marriage likewise be solemnized in the presence of some public
Magistrate in an open place after due publication, Ruth. 4.9. Math. 19.9. Mark
10.12. Luke 16.18.

70 That unlawful Magic, and the Rudiments thereof, Judicial Astrology, and
all other such wicked Arts, be prohibited under severe punishments, Deuteronomy.
13.1.3. and 18.10.11. Ezech. 21.21.22.23. Dan. 2.2. Jer. 10.2.

71 That Heirs may be bound to pay the Debts of their Ancestors after the Lands
which descended be sold, as well as before so far as the Land extends, and that
an Action of Account, or Debt upon contract may lie against an Executor, or
Administrator for the Debt, or duty of the Testator, so far as he has assets,
2 Kings 4 7. Prove. 22.26.27. Romans 13.8.

72 That the Process in all Cases of Suite, be only a Summons, which being
duly served, if the Defendant refuse to appear, or show not sufficient cause
to the contrary, the Plaintiff may proceed to his proof, and so to hearing, or
trial, as if the Defendant had appeared, Numb. 16.11.14.28.32. Deuteronomy. 25.8.
Hest. 1.10.11.19.21.

73 That no man have final Judgment against him by default without proof in
any Case, be it never so small, unless the party accused do at the time of the
Judgment openly confess the fact, Numb. 35.30. Deuteronomy. 17.6. 1 Kings 8.31.

74 That common liars and Inventers of false news and slanders, may be
punished as disturbers of the peace, Psalm. 101.7. Prove. 26.20. Levit 19 16

75 That the Superstitious and Paganish names of the months and days, be
changed, and called by the names of first, socond, and third, etc. according to
the Scriptures, Levit. 20, 23. Exodus 12.2. Deuteronomy. 12 3.4. Genes. 7.11. Genes. 1
5. Ezech. 32.1. Psalm. 16.4. Exodus 23.13.

76 That the body of the Law may be collected into a volume, that it may be
known to the Supreme Magistrate, and to the Judges, and the people, 1 Samuel
10.25. Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. Exodus 20. from verse 3. to the 9. verse of Chap. 23.
Hester 1.19.

77 That all the Tithes, and Gleab Lands, with other things, called Church
dues, may be sold, and that a more fit and lawful maintenance be provided for
the Ministers of the Gospel, Hebr. 7.9.12. 1 Cor 9.7.8 9 12.14. Gal 6 8.

78 That no Monarch, or Supreme Magistrate, may usurp that Impious privilege,
to pardon murder, if ever any such pardon should be granted in any age
hereafter, the same may be declared void, Numb. 35.31. Levit. 24.17. Exodus
21.12. Jam. 4 12. Prove. 28.17.

79. That some course may be taken by a Law, for ballasting the Trade of the
Commonwealth, and for relief of the Inland Cities and Towns, of the Nation, 2
Cor. 8.13.14.15. Exo 16 18 Josh. 13.32.

80 That Godly learned men may be encouraged to labor the conversion of the
Jews, and to that end, to learn the Portugal's and Italian tongues, that they
may be able to preach to them, for that in most part of the World they
understand those Languages, Romans 11.25, 26. Isa. 43.6. and 59.20 and 60. whole
Chap. Rev.

81 That interest of money be not suffered to run, or be exacted upon poor
people, which borrow for their necessity, for food and clothing, or grow poor
by the hand of God, Neh. 5.10.11.12. Exodus 22 25, 26, 27. Levit. 25.35, 36.

82 That all Laws which upon examination shall be found repugnant to the Laws of
God, or oppressive to the people may be repealed, Mich. 6.16. Psalm. 94.20. Isa.
10.1, 2, 3.

83 That Guards of Soldiers and Arms, are necessary, and to be used for
safety of the Commonwealth, and of the Princes person, 1 King. 1.38. 2 Samuel
23.8. to the end. 2 Samuel 20.23. 2 Kings. 11.8. 2 Chro. 23.7, 10.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle, page 2. lin. 5. add he before little. lin. 13. for of, read
and. page 13. and page 16. in the Margents, for Cok. read Cock. page 49. lin.
19. for choose, read cheat. and lin. 20. for use, read trust. page 56. lin. last
save one, for deductions, read dedications. page 61. lin. 14. for hab^ntes,
read habentis. page 63. lin. 21. add help. page 87. lin. 2. for fined, read
feigned. page 106. lin. 2. for maney, read money. and lin. 6. add it. page 108.
no. 3. add been. and for started, read sterved. page 109. lin. 1. for
excrementious, read excrem^ntitious. page 114. lin. 4. add on. lin. 6. put out
some. page 116. lin. 18. for were, read was. page 117. lin. 8. add of. page
123. lin. last, for Judges, read Indi^s. page 121. lin. 12. for Balington, read
Babington. page 128. number. 22. for seeing, read seeming, page 131. number. 29. lin
9. add but. page 132. lin. 1. add punished. page 133. for in estate, read
int^stat^. ^ad. lin. 8. add nor. ead. number. 35. lin 6. for some, read come. page
135. number. 39. lin. 10. for pur^ly colou^ed, read pa^ty colored. page 139. number.
40. lin. 8. for counsels, read Consuls. page 140. lin. 14. for Ci^y, read
Citi^s. page 145. lin. 3. add l. page 146. lin. 16. add no^. page 148. number 1 fo.
Sum, read Summons Scripture-Groun. number. 46. to be, to be read before brought
up.


