Die Lunae 6 Junii, 1642. The Copy of a Letter sent from Sir Jo: Bourchier, to
Sir Thomas Barrington Knight and Baronet, from YORK.
SIR,
YEsterday being at Heworth-Moor, I observed one reading something, so as I
drew near to him, and by inquiry, I found that it was a Petition that was to be
presented presently to His Majesty; those that heard it read, approved of it:
meeting with a friend, I enquired of him if he had not the Petition, or a Copy
of it; which he told me he had: I entreated him that he would lend me it, which
accordingly he did; and having read part of it, my Lord Savill came with a
great company in a furious manner, and demanded what I did there, and told me
that I was reading some Pamphlet to the People, and that I was laboring to sow
some seeds of Sedition, to seduce the Kings Subjects: whereupon I told him it
was a Petition that I was reading privately to my self, which I upon his
approach put in my pocket. My Lord Savill in an imperious manner demanded of me
to deliver it to him, which I refused; then his Lordship laid his hand on the
belt of my sword, and almost pulled me off my horse, and forced me to deliver
the Petition to him, least otherwise some greater mischief might have come to
him; for his Lordship told me, If we loved fighting, we should have fighting
enough. I told his Lordship, I came this day to labor for peace. And
immediately before his Lordships departure, he told me that he knew me well
enough; then I told his Lordship, that I hoped he knew no ill by me: Many that
were with his Lordship held up their Canes in a terrifying manner; and one of
them said, Hold your prating, it were good to Cane you: and when his Lordship
and the rest were gone, one of them turned back, and bid me be quiet, or else I
should be Caned, and said that it were a good deed to put me in the Stocks.
Afterward there was one Captain Blague, who was one of my Lord Savills
company, came in an intruding manner into my company, and I being discoursing
with Sir Rich: Darley and some other; and telling them how I was affronted even
now by my Lord Savill, and formerly, having fire thrown into my Coach, and some
other affronts done unto me, which I have formerly told you on; this Captain
told me I did ill to lay aspersions upon persons of Honor: Whereupon I told
him I did not lay it upon my Lord, but that I was so abused and affronted; upon
due consideration, I verily believe he came to make some quarrel.

Sir, upon my parting from you, you desired to hear from me; here I thought
good to let you know thus much concerning my self. Thus, with my service to you
and my Lady, I rest

York, 4. June. 1642. Your affectionate Cozen to serve you, JO: BOVRCHIER.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter shall be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. June 7. 1642.


