A Gold Chain OF Directions, WITH Twenty Gold-Linkes of Love, to preserve Love
firm between Husband and Wife, during their Lives. Profitable for all, that are
already Married, or that intend to take the Honorable and Holy estate of
Marriage upon them hereafter. Advising for a Right Choice in Marriage, and how
to keep from those sad Consequences have fallen out in too many Families,
sometimes upon small dislike between Husband and Wife. That happiness may be
the Inheritance of Parents and Posterities, through the Grace of God in Christ
Jesus.

Let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself, and the
wife see that she reverence her husband, Ep. 5.33. By Immanuel Bourne, a
Minister of Christ Jesus, our blessed Lord and Savior.

London, Printed by J. Streater, for George Sawbridge, dwelling on Clerken-well
Green, 1669.

To the Right Honorable and Noble Lord John Lord Roos, the only Son and Heir;
And to the Right Noble young Ladies, the Lady Dorothy, Lady Elizabeth, Lady
Anne, and Lady Mary Manors, the eminently virtuous Daughters of the Right
Honorable and truly Noble Lord, John Earl of Rutland, and of the Right Noble
Lady the Lady Frances, the worthily honored Countess of Rutland, and my most
free and noble Patron and Patroness, and to the rest of their honorable
Family and Relations: All health and happiness, with true content and honor
unto you all, and to your Noble Parents, and their Posterity in this life, and
eternal glory and blessedness in and by the Lord Jesus Christ in the life to
come:
RIght Noble, and my much honored Lord, It is too apparent, that if this or
the like spiritual Gold Chain of Directions, for the happy Choice and enjoyment
of a virtuous good Wife and Husband, and the Declaration of their mutual Duties
to each other, had been better known unto and observed (after your Marriage) by
your late so nobly born Lady; and, no doubt, adorned with a noble and
honorable Education, by her honorable, and truly Noble Parents; in her
younger days, the too public, and to be lamented Breach between your Honors,
might by God's blessing have been saved. Now to prevent the like disagreement,
if God in his most wise Providence shall grant you a second Marriage-Union, I
have made bold, and thought good humbly to present these twenty heavenly
Gold-links of Love, as so many Scripture-Rules of Direction to your Honors and
your Noble Ladies Reading, Meditation, and Practice; Pray daily to God for your
future Happiness and Contentment, both in your Choice and Enjoyment to the end
of your life. And for you, ever to be honored Ladies, what can your desires be
more, or better for this present life, then to live happily in a single estate,
whilst the most wise God sees it best for you so to continue. And to live
joyfully, with honorable and truly Noble, faithful, kind, and loving Husbands,
when the same most gracious God shall call you to the high and honorable
estate of Marriage. The first God has blessed you with already, living with
your tender, loving, and ever to be honored Parents, providently taking care
for your noble and virtuous Education, with all things necessary for your
present Contentment. And for the second, that you may be blessed in your right
Choice, and happy enjoyment of truly Noble, Religious, Faithful and Loving kind
Husbands; I have exercised my spirit in Reading and Meditation, to find out in
the sacred Scriptures, and consider what Directions might be most available to
further your (or any others) so great a Happiness; and have judged best, and
resolved to bind together some easy Rules of Guidance, both for Choice, and
Life-lasting Possession, of such an unvaluable Treasure in the mode or term of
a rich Chain of Gold, with twenty spiritual Gold-links of Love, more precious
then Rubies, or sparkling glorious Diamonds, of high price and value, with the
noblest Lords and Ladies in the World. They are a kind of body apparrelled, not
in Courtly attire of silken Rhetorical Elegancies, or with Earpleasing words,
and delightful Expressions (like some feigned Pieces), but presented to your
Honors in a plain Country dress, as desiring they should more take the Hearts
with Divine spiritual Counsels in them; then the Ear with the sound of pleasing
words, filled with fancied matters, which often times prove but loss of
precious time, without any Soul-profit to the Readers. Now if you honored
Lord, and you noble Ladies, please to accept of this Gold Chain of Love, as the
Testimony of my hearty Desire of your true good, both Spiritual and Temporal,
and the best Gift I am now provided to present unto you; I shall esteem it a
noble Favor, and continue my daily Prayers to God, for his blessing upon my
ever honored Lord and Lady, your Honorable Parents; upon your Honors, and
all their Honorable Posterity and Relations, and Remain

From my Study in Waltham in Leichestershire, November. 2. 1668. Right Noble
Lord, and ever honored Ladies, Your aged Servant, ready to Honor and Serve
you, in and for the Lord Jesus Christ, Immanuel Bourne. Aged 78 years complete,
if I live until Dec. 27. next, preserved hitherto through Gods mercy, Lam. 3.
22, 23.

THE EPISTLE Dedicatory general. To all honored Christians, who have taken
upon them the honorable Estate of Matrimony, or that intend (if God so order
it) to be marrried hereafter; and desire a blessed Union and Communion in a
married condition, that they may live lovingly together as Heirs of the Grace
of Life here on Earth, and be happy in Heaven for ever.
Honored Christians, for so I cannot but style all that truly know and believe
in God, (thorough the Lord Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Savior) since he
has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and made us
spiritual Kings and Priests unto God his Father, ( Rev. 1.5.) Marriage is
honorable amongst all, and the Bed undefiled; but Whore-Mongers and Adulterers
God will judge, (Hebr. 13.4.) And Love is the bond of perfectness, (Col. 3.19.)
Now to preserve Love, and prevent dishonouring of this honorable Estate, I
have dedicated this Gold Chain of Directions, with twenty Gold-links of Love
unto you; I commend them to your serious Reading, Meditation, Application, and
Practice: the Phrase is but plain, without inticeing words of man's wisdom; 1
Cor. 2.4.
but the subject matter Divine, from grounds of sacred Scripture, that light to
our Feer, and lamp to our Paths, as the Holy Ghost by the mouth of King David
testifies, Acts 1.16. Holy men spoke as they were inspired by the Holy Ghost,
2 Pet. 1.21.
( Psalm. 119.105.) And if God give a blessing, and enable you to tread all your
lives in these pleasant Paths of Love; they may bring more Profit and comfort
to Husbands and Wives in the married estate, then rich Jewels of greatest
value, and high esteem amongst the Princes of this World, which that you may
find true by daily Experience, is the earnest Prayer of

Your most humble SERVANT, in and for Christ JESUS, Immanuel Bourne.
From my Study in Waltham, in the County of Leicester, October 20. 1668.
A COPY OF THE EPISTLE OF The very Learned and Godly Doctor Wilkinson,
Declaring his Judgment upon this Gold Chain of Directions, to preserve mutual
Love between Husband and Wife. Translated into English by a Friend.
To the Reverend and Learned my worthy Friend, Master Immanuel Bourne, Rector
of Waltham, these present.
Reverend Sir,
THe Book which, in your kind Respects, you delivered into my hands, I have
with most earnest desiring Eyes perused throughout; which most happy Work, as
well of your Heart as Head, more inwardly searching to understand, seems to
me to be a Gold-Chain indeed; (as much as I conceive and apprehend) like
another Iliade, enclosed in the shell of a Nut, comprehending very many things,
inservient for the public good; wherefore you are earnestly entreated by me,
that this Diatribe (Discourse or Argument) so very profitable and seasonable,
which now you have taken care to be perfected, you would take care to be
brought to the light; as fitted for the profit of the whole Common Wealth, both
the Married, and to be Married will owe very much unto you, as opportunely
admonishing every of them of their Proper Duties; That I may declare my Opinion
from the bottom of my Heart, I most willingly profess in this little Book (so
pithy and full of Juice) you have on each part, abundantly delivered your
Faith, truly worthy a Minister of the Gospel; Therefore let it be far from you,
that by any means on your behalf it should be hindered by any further delay from
being put to the Printer, that the work so prosperously by you finished, may
enjoy the public Light. Farewell most learned and pious SIR, to be honored for
your venerable gray Hairs, and embrace me with your accustomed Favor.

A most studious worthy Respecter of you, Hen. Wilkinson.
From Buckminster-Hall, Nov. 4. 1668.
Reverende Vir,
QUem mihi in manus pro candore tuo tradidisti Librum, oculis quam avidissimis
perlustravi. Quod ipsum Opus long felicissimum tam cordis tui quam cerebri,
videat mihi penitius exploranti intelligere, Auream esse revera catenam and (in
quantum sapiam and capiam) Iliadem alteram quam plurima bono publico
inservientia vel in nucis inclusam putamine, complectentem: Quocirca a me quam
maxim serio exorandus es, ut istam Diatribam apprime utilem and tempestivam
(quam jamjam lima curasti donandam) luce donandam e vestigio curares ut pote
totius reipublica utilitati attemperatam. Plurimum tibi debebunt tam Maritati,
quam Maritandi, cum eorum unumquemque proprii officii tempestive
commonefeceris. Quod ab imo pectore emanantem animi mei expromam sententiam,
haud illibenter profiteor in ista scriptiuncula ut and nervosa, et succi plena
fidem tuam omni ex part te abunde liberasse Ministro dignam vere Evangelico.
Absit itaque ut per te quovismodo steterit, vel ex tua part ulterior
Typographo iniiciatur Remora, quo minus opus istud a te feliciter concinnatum
luce frueretur. Vale (vir Doctissime juxta ae Pientissime and veneranda canitie
Honorande) neque (ut soles amore tuo complectitor).

Tui quam animitus cultorem studiosissimum, HEN. WILKINSON.
Dabam Aula-Buckminsteri, Nov. 4. 1668.
A Gold Chain OF DIRECTIONS, WITH Twenty Gold Linkes of Love, to preserve Love
between Husband and Wife.
FIrst, The first Direction, or gold link of Love.
To preserve Conjugal Love between Husband and Wife; the Spirit of God in
Sacred Scripture directs, That a special Care be taken in the choice of a Wife,
or of a Husband; Beza upon that place, Non ut Arabs interpres, etc. sed
religiose and cum Dei timore. So Mr. Calvin, Benedictus Aretius and Pareus.
according to the Rule of the blessed Apostle St. Paul, (1 Cor. 7.39.) That
they marry in the Lord; That is, not only a Christian by Profession, and not an
Infidel; as an Arabian Interpreter conceives (which Mr. Beza notes). But
religiously, and in the fear of God, as other godly and learned Divines judge.
That in their choice they respect a Religion; for thus Marriages are Contracted
more prosperously, and a blessing may be expected, when the married parties
both fear God. Such being pronounced blessed by the Holy Ghost, Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his
Commandments: His seed shall be mighty upon Earth, the Congregation of the
upright shall be blessed: Wealth and Riches shall be in his house, and his
righteousness endure for ever. And again, Psalm. 128. The same Prophet King
David speaks the same in effect, inspired by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways; for
thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, happy shall thou be, and it shall be
well with thee: Thy wife shall be as the fruitful Vine by the sides of thy
house; thy Children like the Olive plants, round about thy Table: Behold, that
thus shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord; the Lord shall bless thee
out of Zion, and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy
life; yea, thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel. Thus
an excellent blessing comes to them that fear God; But on the contrary part,
when the Man or Woman is an Idolater, Atheistical, Profane or Deboist; without
the fear of God, any way wicked by Education, Custom, or Condition, a Curse
may rather be expected then a Blessing, That Kingly Preacher, Eccles. 8.12, 13.
gives this evidence, That although a Sinner do evil an hundred times, and his
days be prolonged; yet I know it shall be well with them that fear God, which
reverence before him: But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall
he prolong his days, which are as a shadow; because he fears not before God.
It fell out thus with the old World, Genesis 6.1, 2, 3. etc.
when the Sons of God, the Children of religious Parents, Members of the Church
did see the Daughters of Men that they were fair; Gen 7.1, 3.
that is, the Posterities of Profane and that wicked Cain; and they that were,
or should have been Gods Children, made choice of these profane irreligious
Wives; they provoked God to anger, and he brought in the Flood upon the world
of the Ungodly, 2 Pet. 2.5.
to their Destruction; only religious Noah and his Family were saved alive in
the Ark. Genesis 7.23.
Again, profane Esau, Genesis 24.63.
the Son of religious Isaac, by the evil choice of his Wives, was a grief of
mind to his aged Parents Isaac and Rebecka; Genesis 26.34, 35.
and too many such like Marriages we read of in holy Scriptures, 1 King. 11.1,
2, 3.
to have been in the World; as you may find at full if you search the Sacred
Records. 2 Kings 8.26, 27.
And how odious such Marriages are to God, you may find declared by the Prophet
Mal. 2.11, 12. And yet how many such are in the World? Families, where scarce a
form of Religion is to be found; Strangers from prayers to God, nor Morning,
nor Evening Prayer to be heard; although God renews his Mercies every
Morning, Lamen. 3.22, 23.
and continues his goodness to the Night: Though he declare his most gracious
Prefence with us, Exodus 13.21.
as it were by a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, and a Pillar of Fire by Night;
although God has been a Defense to their Tabernacles, and they have dwelt
safely by his goodness; yet how many are there who little or nothing take
notice of these daily Mercies, or observe Gods goodness to glorify him. How
far unlike are these in this to blessed Daniel, Daniel 6.10.
or religious King David, Psalm. Psalm. 55.17.
55. who kept acquaintance with God three times a day; At morning, and evening,
and noon day will I pray, and that instantly, and he shall hear my voice, etc.
And therefore they are strangers from God, when they should stand in need of
his help, and want that good which they might enjoy by keeping acquaintance
with God, of which Eliphaz does witness, Job 22.21. That gracious practice of
secret Prayer which our Savior directs unto, Mat. 6.6. Thou, when thou prayest
enter into thy Closet, and shut to thy door, and pray to thy Father in secret;
and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. How many spend
so much time openly in vain, that they have no leisure for secret Devotions, to
read and meditate of heavenly things, which pertain to eternity, or to pour
out their Souls as Hannah did to God in Prayer. 1 Samuel 1.15.
Alas, if sins of omission were the only irreligiousness or profaneness in
some Families, it were less, although for these men shall be called to an
account at the Day of the last Judgment, witness what our Blessed Lord and
Savior declares, Mat. 25.41, 42. But their sins of Commission, common breach
of Gods Commandments, witness little fear of God to be before their eyes; What
common swearing, and taking of Gods name in vain, forgetting that God threatens
he will not hold such guitlesse that take his Name in vain, Exodus 20.7. or did
men remember that of the Lord, by the Prophet Jer. 5.7. How shall I Pardon thee
for this, thy Children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no Gods.
Men, yea Children, would not swear so commonly by those things which they
themselves will confess are no Gods: How difficult a thing is it to hire a
Servant from amongst the common sort of People, Read Romans 12.14. Psalm. 109.17,
18. And Mat. 5.34, 35, 36, 37. James 5.12.
but they are Swearers or Cursers, or both, and so Gods Name is dishonored.
Children learn of Parents to be irreligious, and this too often amongst the
Rich as well as Poor; I say but little of that common sin too often in greater
Families, enticing men to Drunkenness, by that specious pretense of pledging
Healths of Friends; pressing men in Drink, Read Hab: 2:2.15, 16. A dreadful Woe
to such.
contrary to that Law and Practice of that Moral Prince, King Ahasuerus, that
none should compel to Drink, Hester 2.8. But every one be free to drink what he
pleased: a shame to men that profess themselves Christians. I know in diverse
great Families, there is civility, if not a religious respect to avoid these
sins; But when these abound, and men, or women rashly unite themselves in
Marriage, what hope of constant happy Love to continue between Husband and Wife
during life?

I proceed to a second Gold-link of Love between Husband and Wife, The second
Gold-link of Love.
that in choice of a Wife or Husband, as respect is to be had for likeness and
agreement in Religion, so likewise to equality, or likeness of qualities, and
conditions as near as possible.

For as St. Paul advises not to be unequally yoaked with Unbelievers, so he
presses his Counsel with a good Argument: What fellowship (says he) has
righteousness with unrighteousness, and what Communion has Light with
Darkness, (2 Cor. 6.14.) So even right reason will instruct us, and daily
experience witness, that contrary Dispositions of nature, or too great
inequalities, seldom live comfortably together; as Fire and Water will not
agree, the one exsiccateth or quenches the other. But like rejoices, and
delights with the like. Observe this Rule then, for this is a second
Direction or Gold-link of Love, to preserve Love between Husband and Wife.

A third Direction, A third Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love follows: And this is, That some fit respect be had to
the age of the Parties to be married; for a young man of twenty to marry an old
woman man of above threescore, or for an old man of fourscore to marry a young
woman under twenty, is not agreeable; because one chief end of Marriage is in
danger to be frustrate, Genesis 1.27, 28.
which is Posterity to be brought up in the fear and admonition of the Lord, as
Sr. Paul intimates, ( Ephesians. 6.4.) Although it is more fit for a very old man
to marry a young woman in hope of Posterity, then for a very old woman past
childbearing, to marry a young man. Equality and convenience do best agree
together for the preservation of Conjugal Love between Husband and Wife; and
this is a third Gold-Link in this Gold Chain of Direction, to keep and bind
Love fast between Husband and Wife during their Lives.

The fourth Direction, A fourth Direction, or Gold-link of love.
or Gold-Link of Love in a marriage Union; there ought to be likeness and
agreement of affection, a mutual love and likeing of each others persons and
qualities, and a knitting and uniting of Hearts together, in a right ordered
and well grounded Love before the joining of Hands on the Wedding Day. For
where there is an Antipathy or contrariety of Natures, or dislike of Persons or
Conditions, there seldom is a continuance of sweet agreement and satisfaction
one to and with another, and so Marriage proves a Bondage; instead of a sweet
freedom in a happy enjoyment of each other in the Lord, as St. Paul desired to
enjoy, and have joy of Philemon in the Lord, St. Paul his Epistle to Philemon,
verse 20.
in whom what we enjoy is a blessing by Christ; whereas if the Hearts be truly
knit together, and united in Love, as the heart of Jonathan to David, 1 Samuel
18.1.
who loved him as his own Soul; the Love will be wonderful, as was Jonathans to
David, passing the love of Women. 2 Samuel 1.26.
Although the love of good women to their Husbands has been wonderful, as
Records of ancient Histories do witness at full. I mean not a light unconstant
passionate Love taken upon sight of Beauty or Riches, or some such uncertain
foundation, which is deceitful, and vain as King Solomon witnesses. First of
Riches, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thy Eyes upon that which is not, for Riches
certainly make themselves Wings and fly away as Eagles toward Heaven. They are
uncertain, 1 Timothy 6.17.
and not to be trusted in. And again, the like for Beauty, Favor is deceitful,
and Beauty is vanity; But a Woman that fears the Lord she shall be praised,
Prove. 31.30. When a right grounded love in the fear of the Lord (which is
praiseworthy) is permanent, and will endure for life: I know upon some
occasions, A prevention of Objection.
there may want time and opportunity of such a familiar Converse with each
other, which may be helpful to such a well grounded love as between great
Princes, who are constrained to Woo, and intercede sometimes by Ambassadors,
as Isaac, Genesis 24 1, 2, 63.
that religious Prince did by the religious Servant of his honorable Father
Abraham; I call Abraham honorable, for he is styled a mighty Prince: Genesis
23.6.
And this Ambassador went to intercede for a Wife for Isaac. This done by his
Masters Command, and no doubt with Isaac's consent, who was advised by his
Father in choice of his Wife; as Rebeckah was by her Parents, who willingly
sent her with Abraham's Servant, yet so as Rebeckah first was asked her consent
also, as you may read at large, Genesis 24.57, 58.
Genesis 24.

Thus religious Isaac walking out into the Fields at Eventide to meditate and
pray, Genesis 24.63.
espieth his Rebeckah coming, goes on to meet her, and brings her into his
Mothers Tent, and she became his Wife, and he loved her, Genesis 24.67. Thus a
good choice with love and Gods blessing made a happy Marriage to both their
joys, and no doubt to the joy of aged Abraham, that blessed Father of the
Faithful. And thus you have a fourth Gold-link in this Gold Chain of Love.

I will give you but one Preparative Gold link of Love more; A fifth Direction,
or Gold link of Love.
And this is, That not only Parents consent and blessing may be had (if
possible) (as no doubt Isaac and Rebeckah had) and their blessing. And she
blessed Rebeckah, and said, be thou the Mother of thousands of millions, Genesis
24.60.
and let thy Seed possess the Gate of those that hate thee. But that by their
Parents provision, or thy own wisdom, there be care taken that one or both have
an estate for convenience and comfortable maintenance, if not of great Riches;
yet to have what Agur prayed for, Prove. 30.8, 9. To be fed with food
convenient, least want of Necessaries occasion Complaint, and that breed
Differences, and Love receive a Dampe and an Abatement, and so marriage which
should be a Merry-Age, prove an Age of Sorrow, Sadness, and Discontent, (yea,
of Sin and wickedness sometimes) for although the Husband takes the Wife, and
the Wife the Husband for better or worse, for Richer or Poorer, yet if God of
his free Grace in Christ give not a contentedness of spirit, and humbleness
of mind, to submit to Divine Providence, and to know and learn as St. Paul
did, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
In every estate to be content. Both Souls and Bodies may repent such
Marriages, and wish they had been wiser, when it is too late. Before God made
Man and Woman, our first Parents, Adam and Eve, and married them together; He
first made the World, Genesis 1.27, 28.
and enriched them with Dominion over the Creatures, Genesis 2.23, 24.
for their comfortable living in a married estate; Genesis 1.1, 2, etc.
He gave them plentiful Provision for them and their Posterity, Genesis 9.1, 2, 3,
4.
as he did after to Noah. Thus should Parents take Care for their Children, or
Children for themselves, to preserve Love between Husband and Wife during
lives. Thus much for pre-considerations before Marriages.

Now a sixth Gold-link of Love, A sixth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
for a joyful happy life in a married estate, is that the married Parties ought
to labor for a daily increase of Graces, 1 Pet. 3.7. 2 Pet. 3.18.
and to get assurance that they are both of them married to Christ, Ephesians. 5.31,
32.
and have the Lord Jesus for their heavenly Husband, and so be married one to
another in Christ, as Christ is to his Spouse the Church, ( Hos. 2.19, 20.)
Happy is the Soul which is married to Christ, Isa. 9.6.
He is an everlasting Father to take care and provide for his Spouse the
Church. Rev. 1.18.
A heavenly Husband that never dies, but lives ever to provide for his
beloved Spouse, for every Soul that is united in marriage to him. Isa. 54.5.
He is a blessed Husband, whose Name is the Lord of Hosts, and our Redeemer;
Mat. 18.20. Mat. 28.20.
a Savior who has promised to be present with his Church, his Beloved, to the
end of the World. And to deliver in greatest danger, Isa. 43.1, 2, 3, 4.
in fiery Afflictions, it shall not burn them, in watery they shall not be
drowned: There is no better, yea, none so good a Husband as Christ, none to be
loved so much as our heavenly Huband the Lord Jesus. Therefore we ought to
labor daily for a blessed increase of our love to Christ, because he loved us
first, (1 John 4.19.) And as we ought to be enflamed every day more and more in
love to Christ. So ought Husbands and Wives to endeavor truly to cherish,
increase, and preserve mutual Love, to and with each other, as the Apostle St.
Paul prays for his Christian Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.
that Christ may dwell in their Hearts by Faith, that being rooted and grounded
in Love, they may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height of that love of God, which passes Knowledge;
they may be filled (and satisfied) with the fullness of God. So Husbands and
Wives being rooted and grounded in Love, may be satisfied with each others
Love, as that wise King Solomon advises: Prove. 5.18, 19.
I speak not of a mere carnal Love, which will not make their Souls happy; but
of a right Conjugal Love between Man and Wife well rooted, and rightly
cherished, which will make their Lives delightful, and has Gods blessing of
perseverance in true love united unto it with joy to the end, Cant. 2.3. Cant.
8.6, 7.
like the Love of Christ to his Church; A Tree new set or planted, may easily
be plucked up again. But if it has taken root, and be well grown, it will
abide both wind and weather; and a true fervent Love, many Waters cannot quench
it, as Solomon speaks of that Love between Christ and his Church, it will
endure during the Lives of the Lovers, to their Rejoycings, as being sealed
with Constancy, and settled in the Heart. This is a sixth Gold-link of Love.

A seventh Direction, A seventh Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, to enjoy happy contentment and continuance of Love
between Husband and Wife, is this, That there ought to be free Communication of
mutual kindness, and conjugal engagements one to and with another, that mutual
Benevolence, and Bond of Marriage-Love, at times convenient, according to the
Law of God and Nature; read the blessed Apostles Direction, (1 Cor. 7.2, 3, 4,
5, etc.) and that Law of God, Leviticus 18.19. and Leviticus 20.18. and Ezekiel
18.6. These Rules observed, This Marriage-kindness at fit times is one means to
cherish and preserve mutual conjugal Love between Husbands and Wives; when as
the denial of this loving kindness is a dangerous occasion of Breach and
Disquietnesse; yea, sometimes it may prove of separation, and an occasion of
Damnable sin (if God restrain not by his special Grace); yet a Bridle must be
to restrain Intemperance in all Delights, least excess destroy both Souls and
Bodies; That is a general Rule ( Phil. 4.5.) Let your moderation be known to
all men, the Lord is at hand. He is present to see all our Actions, and to
bless or punish, according to our Obedience or Disobedience to his
Commandments. Thus you have a seventh Gold-link of Love.

The eighth follows; The eighth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
And this is, That Husbands and Wives be careful of, and ready to show their
love to each others Souls, as well as to their Bodies or Estates: That Husbands
love their Wives as Christ loved his Spouse the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the
Word, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.
or any such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish.

Husbands ought to take care for the beauty of their Wives Souls as well as of
their Bodies; that they may be lovely to Christ their heavenly Husbands, as
well as to them, Cant. 4.7.
as the Spouse of Christ is to him: The Husband which takes no care for his
Wives soul, how can he expect that God should bless him with a good Wife? The
Husband should pray daily for his Wife, as St. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
Paul did for his Christian Thessalonians,, That her whole Spirit, Soul and
Body be preserved blameless to the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
The Soul is better then a whole World; Mat. 16.26.
What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his Soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? What says that great and blessed
Apostle, He that provideth not for his own, especially for them of his own
household; he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel, (1 Timothy 5.8.)
And if it be a Duty to provide for the Body of his Family or Household, then
much more for their most precious and immortal Souls (if it possible be in his
power), and most of all for his Wives Soul, which is his second Self, and is,
or ought to be most dear unto his Soul. That her Soul may prosper, as St. John
did testify of the Soul of his Beloved Gaius; 3 John 1.2.
That it may appear, he loves his Wife in Truth; and so God may bless her unto
him, for the good of his Soul, Body, and Estate. And so likewise Wives ought to
be studious and careful for the good of their Husbands Souls, as well as of the
health of their Bodies and Estates. This is a means by Gods blessing, for the
preservation of conjugal Love, and gracious affections for true joy of Husband
and Wife, by the Grace and Power of Christ. John 15.15. Phil. 4.13.
For Husbands and Wives ought to be helpers, and means in their places of each
others Salvation; this St. Paul intimates, (1 Cor. 7.16.) requiring
cohabitation and dwelling together; and he expresses a Reason, What know
thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband; and how know thou, O Man,
whether thou shall save thy Wife; That is, be an outward means of Salvation by
good Counsel, or otherwise by Gods Blessing, taking care of the means of
Salvation for each other to their powers. As the Wives may be a means to win
their Husbands by their good Conversations; 1 Pet. 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
As St. 1 Pet. 3.7.
Peter directs: So the Husbands may win their Wives, if they follow St. Peter's
Counsel; Live with their Wives as men of knowledge, giving honor to the Wife,
as the weaker Vessel, that their Prayers be not hindered. And this is the
greatest love which is showed to the Souls of each other, and a work of high
esteem, and unspeakable benefit. James 5.20.
Let him know, says St. James, That he which converts a Sinner from the error
of his way, shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins.
And thus may a Husband or Wife be helper, and means for their eternal mutual
happiness, if by loving and wise carriage and deportment each to other, they
can win and gain one or other, or both from any evil he or she is subject unto,
praying to God daily for a Blessing upon their good Endeavors. This is a most
precious Gold-link of Love, to preserve love and affection, and happy peace and
prosperity with Husbands and Wives during their lives.

Now I proceed to a ninth Gold-link, A ninth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
in this Golden Chain of Love. This is, that Husband be an example to the Wife
of Piety and Chastity, and Religious Love, with care of Cherishing his Wife, as
the weaker Vessel, especially in times of Sickness, Weakness, or other
Infirmities; as Christ was kind to his Disciples, when they were troubled at
the news of his Departure from them, John 14.1, 2, 3. Let not your Hearts be
troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in Me; in my Fathers House are many
Mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for
you. And as Christ has been to his Church; and Children in all Ages,
especially in any sad Dispensation; To speak comfortably, as the Lord answered
the Angel that spoke for Jerusalem, Zachar. 1.13. The Lord answered the Angel
that talked with me with good words, and comfortable words. Or as Elkanah did
to Hannah, when peevish and spiteful Peninnah vexed her, because she was
barren. And Elkanah said, Hannah, why weepest thou I and why eatest thou not I
am not I better to thee then ten Sons, I Sam. 1.8. And the wife ought to be
careful, not to provoke her husband by any unkind behavior toward him, but to
be ready to show her love to her husband in sickness and health, and both to
look to the example of Christ our heavenly husband. The husband to love his
wife as his own Body; for he that loves his wife, loves himself: For no man
yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, as the Lord
does the Church, Ephesians. 5.28, 29. Each follows Christ his Golden Rule, Mat.
7.12.
to do to each other as they would be done by. And if any unkindness has been,
not to rest quietly until there be a Reconciliation; Sleep not, until they
can sleep in Love, and loving Embracements of each other; say in any neglect of
Love, or in any occasion of Breach, would I have Christ, my Lord and spiritual
husband, so unkind to me, as I am to my wife; and may the wife say, would I
have Christ so unkind to me, to forsake my soul, or withdraw his love from me,
as I have done from my husband; and so may the husband say in respect of his
wife. This mutual care of kindness is a precious Gold link of Love, to bind
love fast during life. A tenth Direction, or Gold-link of love,


The tenth Direction, or Gold link of Love. Husbands and wives must take heed
their love be rightly qualified.

First, let Love be without Dissimulation. This is that Rule of the Holy Ghost,
recorded by the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 10.9.

Secondly, Let love be without Bitterness, so the same Apostle, Coloss. 3.19.
Husbands love your Wives; and be not bitter against them. Nor ought wives to be
such to their husbands: Love and Bitterness connes agree well together; Psalm.
64.3.
this is contrary to love, to shoot out Arrows, even bitterness, or bitter
actions instead of pleasant and lovely: Sinilitude.
This is to mingle Gall with Honey, or sour sharp Vinegar with sweet Wine, it
will make all distasteful; a husband must not be like unto a Crab, Orange, or
Lemon; fair on the outside to the show, and sour and bitter within; pleasing,
with sugared words abroad, Sweetheart before Company, and of a froward and
perverse Disposition at home; or in private, nor must the wife be so to the
husband; Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
but both walk in true Love, as Christ has loved us.

The eleventh Direction, The eleventh Direction, or Gold link of Love.
or Gold link of Love, to preserve mutual love between husband and wife is
mutually, fidelity and faithfulness each to other, according to the marriage
Covenant, they ought to forsake all other, and keep mutually only to
themselves so long as they both shall live. Yea, they ought to be very careful
to avoid all occasions of jealousies of or against each other, and to hate
jealousy as a most dangerous enemy, except there be evident and sure ground of
each others disloyalty, and sinful Breach of the marriage Covenant. The Jews
were a very jealous People, jealous of their wives upon slight occasions, and
often put their wives away with a Bill of Divorce, for slight occasions, and
causes which did not break the Bands of Matrimony, against which our Savior
speaks, Mat. 5.31, 32. Mat. 19.3, 4, 5, etc. The Jews were so jealous, That
upon small suspicion, they would forbid their wives to keep any Company in
secret with any of whom they were jealous, and if after the wife was thus
forbid before two witnesses (as the Jewish Doctors declare) if she was proved
to be in secret with such a Maymony in misn. com. 2. See Mr. Ainsworth, in
Numb. 5.
one. The husband brought her before the Magistrate, and she was to be put to
the Trial of seu honesti, by the bitter water of Jealousy, which if she were
guilty, would cause her Belly to swell, and her Thigh to rot, as you may read
in that Law for Trial of jealousy, Numb. 5.11.12. to the end. And ver. the
thirtieth, The Text says, That when the Man is free from Iniquity, M^ymo^y in
Jota^. cap. 2. sect. 8.
the Woman (guilty) bears her Iniquity. Therefore amongst the Israelites it
is said, See Mr. Ainsworth, in Number. 5.30.
That no man which had himself been guilty that way, could bring his wife to
this Trial, The guilty man could not bring his wife to this Trial of bitter
Water. Romans 2.1.
that is, by this bitter water, according to the Law of Jealousy before. But it
is most certain, That it is the duty both of the husband and wife, to be
careful by power from Christ, to avoid all occasions of jealousy in both,
according to that Rule of God's word, and Direction of the Holy Ghost by the
Apostle St. Paul, To abstain from all appearance of Evil, 2 Thessalonians. 5.22. And
that ancient Law of God, Levit. 19.14. Thou shall not put a stumbling block
before the blind; But thou shall fear thy God, I am the Lord. And pressed again
by the blessed Apostle, Romans 14.13. Let us not judge one another any more, but
judge thus rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in
his Brothers way. I must avoid occasion of sin my self, and I must not give
occasion of sin to another, nor of this sin of unjust jealousy to my husband,
or to my wife. For many are the miseries may follow to husband or wife;
jealousy is the rage of a man, therefore he will not spare in the day of
Vengeance: He will not regard any Ransom, neither will he rest content, though
thou give many Gifts; witness King Solomon, Pro. 6.34, 35. And jealousy is
cruel as the Grave, the Coals thereof are Coals of fire, which has a most
vehement flame, witness the spirit of God, Can. 8.6. This taking care to avoid
all occasion of jealousy, is a powerful means to preserve Conjugal Love between
husband and wife.

But much more the Grace of fidelity, and constant care of faithfulness each to
other, according to that sacred Bond of Marriage.

The husband ought to be careful, to be faithful to his wife, forsaking all
other, witness the spirit of God, Prove. 5.18, 19. Let thy, Fountain be
blessed, and rejoice with the Wife of thy youth: Let her be as the Loving Hind
and Pleasant Roe; Let her Breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou
ravished always with her Love. And the same Spirit of God speaks the same
again, Prove. 6.23.24, 25, etc. The Commandment is a Lamp, and the Law a
Light, and reproof of Instruction is the way of life to keep thee from the evil
Woman which flattereth with her Tongue, and from the flattery of the Tongue of
the strange woman: Lust not after her beauty in thy Heart, neither let her take
thee with her Eyelids: For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a
piece of Bread, and the Adulteress will hant for the precious life. Can a man
take Fire in his Bosom, and his Clothes not be burnt? Can one go upon hot
Coals, and his feet not be burnt? So he that goes into his Neighbors wife,
whosoever touches her shall not be innocent. This sin of Adultery or
Fornication, breaks the Command of the great God, ( Who is a consuming Fire,
Heb. 12.29.) The Law of that All-seeing every where present God, Jer. 23:23, 24.
before whose Eye, Prove. 5.21. Heb. 4.13. Mat. 12.36. Amos 4.13.
all things are open and naked; whatsoever we can speak, do or think, The
command of this Mighty God is, Thou shall not Commit Adultery, Ex. 20.14. The
Lord himself will be witness against such, Mal. 2.14. The Lord, says the
Prophet, has been a witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against
whom thou have dealt treacherously; yet she is thy Companion, and the wife of
thy Youth; yea, of thy Govenant, to keep thee only to her: And did not he make
one, says the Prophet, and yet had be residue of spirit; and wherefore one
(one man and one woman) that he might seek a godly feed; Therefore take heed to
your spirit (says he) and let none deal treacherously with the wife of his
youth, Mal. 2.15. And the same is the sin of the wife, and her wickedness, if
she break the Marriage-Covenant, as you may read, Prove. 2.16, 17, 18. To
deliver thee from the strange woman, which flattereth with her words, which
forsakes the guide of her Youth, and forgetieth the Covenant of her God; for
her House inclines to Death, and her Paths unto the Dead; none that go unto
her return again, neither take they hold of the Paths of Life. And Prove. 7.27.
Of the Adulterous woman, the wise wise man concludes, That her House is the
way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death: A Whore is a deep Ditch, and
a strange Woman a narrow Pit, Proverbs 23.27. Therefore to be avoided as
snares, and Pits prepared for thy Destruction: Both the Adulterer and
Adultoress they sin grievously, and their punishment will be terrible, except
God in time give them true Repentance; for by the Law of God they were both to
be stoned to death, Levit. 20.10. and Deuteronomy. 22.22. That sentence of the Apostle
is terrible, Hebr. 13.14. Marriage is Honorable amongst all, and the Bed
undefiled; But Whore-Mongers and Adulterers God will judge. In this life this
sin of Adultery and Fornication oftentimes is an occasion of Murder. As
Shechem's Fornication with Dinah, Jacob's Daughter, occasioned the Murder of
the Shechentites, Genesis 34.21, etc. And Ammon's Ravishing of Tamar, 2 Samuel
13.27, 28, etc. Besides it excludes such out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. And on Earth it is a cause of Divorce, as our Savior declares, Mat.
5.32. And thus you see how necessary mutual fidelity is to preserve Conjugall
Love between Husband and Wife, while they live.

The twelfth Direction, A twelfth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, is, That either of them, or both of them have a special
Care of their mutual Duties, to give right and due respect to each other.
First, the Wife to honor and reverence her Husband as her Head, and to obey
him in all things lawful and expedient in the Lord, as Sarah (that great Lady)
did honor and obey Abraham her Husband, calling him Lord, 1 Peter 3.6. I say,
Obey him in all things lawful and expedient in the Lord: For as this is the
rule of Childrens Obedience to their Parents, given by the Spirit of God,
Ephesians. 6.1. So it is the rule of all Inferiors to obey their Superiors in all
things lawful in the Lord; yea, expediently also it is to be respected. A
Husband may not prostitute his Wives Chastity or Honor, as he may not
prostitute his Daughter to be a Whore, as you may read, Leviticus 19.29. Nor
Husband nor Father can lawfully Command a Wife or Daughter to consent to such a
sin; nor is either Wife or Daughter bound to obey in such sinful Commands; no
Superior has power to command an Inferior to sin against Gods Command: The
Answer to such unlawful Commands of Men or Women is set down by the Holy Ghost,
Acts 5.20. It is better to obey God then Man. These unlawful Commands will stop
the current of Love between Husband and Wife. For as the Wife is to honor the
Husband as her Head, so the Husband is no way to dishonor, or seek to
dishonor his Wife, but to honor her as the weaker Vessel, as a Coheir with
him of the Grace of Life, as the Apostle directs, 1 Peter 3.7. This living
together as heirs of the Grace of Life, must be of the Husband to his Wife, as
to a Companion, and Fellow in the Bonds of Marriage, as may be intimated, Mal.
2.14, 15, 16. For when God made the Woman, as he did not take her out of the
Head of Adam, to be above him, so he did not take her out of Adams Feet, to be
trampled upon; but out of his Side, near to his Heart, Genesis 2.21, 22. to be
honored and loved as his Fellow Helper, and beloved Companion. And this kind
respect on both sides is an excellent means and help to preserve Love between
Husband and Wife to the end.

The thirteenth Direction, The thirteenth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, is, That both husband and wife be mutually careful in
their places for the preservation or increase of their Estate and Provision,
and Government of their Household or Family, and provide both for the present
and for the future. This care of the Husband, and his Duty, we may learn from
that great Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any man provide not for his own, especially
for those of his own Household, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an
Infidel. That was good Counsel of Solomon, Prove. 27.23, 24. Be thou diligent to
know the state of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds: For Riches are not
for ever, and does the Crown endure to every Generation? Providence is
requisite to preserve an Estate.

I remember it is above threescore years since when I was in Oxford, I did see
a little Book of good Counsel, writ by a noble Lord to his Son, in which he
advised his Son to divide his Estate into three parts. First, one part he might
spend in ordinary Expenses, Housekeeping, Apparel, and such like. A second
part lay aside for extraordinary occasions for himself and the Church and
Commonwealth. And a third part to lay up for increase of his Estate. If a man
spend beyond his Estate, or live at the highest rate of his Incomings, he will
be constrained to live of borrowing, and so of borrowing in the end, if in time
he labor not to prevent. And for the wife also, Solomon gives an excellent
Description of a virtuous woman, as Prove. 31.10, 11, 12. to the end of that
Chapter, read it at your leisure, Verses 27.28. He says a virtuous woman, She
looks well to the ways of her Household, and eats not the Bread of
idleness; her Children rise up and call her blessed, he Husband also, and he
praises her, etc. He concludes, Give her of the fruit of her Hands, and let
her own works praise her in the Gates. The good wife will consider her
husbands estate, and not press him to spend above power; She will do her
husband good, and not hurt all the days of her life, Prove. 31.12. Thus whon
there is a mutual providential care of husband and wife for themselves, Family
and Posterity. This is an especial Gold-link of Love, to bind love fast
between husband and wife.

The fourteenth Gold-link of Love follows; The fourteenth Direction, or Gold
link of Love.
There ought to be a mutual care of, and for Education of their Children which
God has graciously given unto them, as Jacob spoke to his Brother Esau, Genesis
33.5. That they be taught and instructed both in civil and spiritual Respects,
both in divine and humane Learning, according to the Honor and Dignity of
their Places and Calling. It is King Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 22.6. Teach a
Child in the way he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is old.
Especially, that they be seasoned with the Catechism, and first principles of
the Oracles of God, Heb. 5.12.
and the Knowledge of God's will in the Sacred Scriptures, as blessed Timothy
was, for which St. Paul gives that excellent Testimony, you may read, 2 Timothy
3.15. That from a Child he had known the holy Scriptures, which are able to
make us wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. This is
life eternal to know God, the only true God, and whom he has sent Jesus
Christ, John 17.3. For this care of instructing Children and Family, the Lord
himself commended faithful Abraham, and makes him of his secret Counsel; Shall
I hide from Abraham the thing that I do? And he gives this for one Reason, For
I know him (says the Lord) that he will Command his Children, and his Household
after him to keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him and his Posterity,
Genesis 18.19. Again, this was God's Command to his People Israel, That they
should teach their Children diligently the Law and Word of the Lord, and thou
shall talk of them when thou art in thy House, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou risest up, as it is recorded, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. and this no
doubt with holy reverence and devotion, as desirous to reveal God's mind to
their Children and Family. And Children are commanded to hearken to their
Parents instruction, Prove. 1.8. My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and
forget not the Law of thy Mother; And again, Prove. 31.1. you may find the words
of King Lemuel, the Prophecy which his Mother taught him. To conclude, the
Apostle St. Paul, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. presses the duty both of Children and
Parents. First, Children obey your Parents in all things, as it is fit in the
Lord; and honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first Commandment, with
promise, That it may be well with thee, and thou may live long in the Land:
And Fathers, provoke not your Children to wrath, that they be not discouraged,
but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Thus Children well
instructed in the knowledge of God's mind, may be a joy to Parents, and Parents
enjoy their Children as blessings from the Lord, and behold them as Olive
branches round about their Table to God's Glory, Psalm. 128.
and as the Pledges of their mutual Love to each other: And this is an
excellent Gold-link of Love, to preserve and keep mutual Conjugal Love between
Husband and Wife.

The fifteenth Direction, The fifteenth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, is, That the Husband and Wife, according to their duty,
do live together, and not separate the one from the other, except with consent
for a time, upon most necessary occasions, or that they may give themselves to
Fasting and Prayer, and come together again, that Satan tempt them not, as St.
Paul directs, 1 Cor. 7.5. That so living lovingly together, as heirs of the
Grace of life, they may be mutual Helpers to each other in these Conjugal
Duties. This Rule St. Peter gives, 1 Pet. 3.7. Husbands dwell with your Wives,
as men of Knowledge. And St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.13. If a woman that believes, has
a husband that believes not (or is not a Christian) yet if he please to dwell
with her, let her not leave him; but continue, that she may be a help to him
for his Soul, as well as for his Body and Estate: When God did make the woman,
The Lord God said, It is not good for man to be alone, I will make him a help
meet for him, Genesis 2, 18. And a good wife will be a Helper for good, not a
hinderance to her husband. God did make the woman to be a second-self, Mr.
Ainsworth in Genesis 2.
like him in nature, knit to him in Love, needful for Children helpful in all
Duties, present always with him, and so very mere and profitable as a joyful
Companion in all estates, in adversity, as well as in Prosperity, in Sickness
as well as in Health, in Poverty as well as in a rich Estate. This requires
cohabitation, That the wife leave not the husband, nor the husband forsake the
wife. Because this unjust and unchristian forsaking of husband or wife, for
light differences, for any thing less then that which is a sufficient ground
for a lawful Divorce by the Law of God. This gives occasion of sin, abateth
love, and cannot expect a blessing from God; yea, this too often does break off
Love betwixt Husband and Wife, when cohabitation does preserve Conjugal Love,
and will do (if they live in the fear of God, and follow his Directions) to the
end.

The sixteenth Direction, The sixteenth Direction, or or Goldlink of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, to bind love fast, and prevent sinful Breaches betwixt
husband and wife, is for both to learn that first lesson of a Christian, which
our Savior taught his Disciples, Math. 16.24. They must sometimes deny
themselves, that is, their own wills and desires, passions and affections,
bridle rash anger, and overruled their passions; yea, their right sometimes for
quietness sake, they must not be both self-willed, nor both angry at once, or
at the same time. King Solomon witnesses, That he that is stow to Anger is
better then the Mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, then he that takes a
City, Prove. 16.32. And a soft answer turns away wrath; but grievous words
stir up anger, Prove. 15.1. And again, that wise man, Prove. 19. Prove. 19.9, 19.
It is better to dwell in a Corner of the house top, then with a Brawling woman
in a wide House; And again, verse 19. It is better to dwell in the Wilderness,
then with a contentious and angry woman. And that Kingly Preacher again,
Eccles. 7.9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the
bosom of Fools. Simile.
It was a witty conceit of the Father, who gave two Caps to his new married Son
and Daughter, made fit for Solomon's angry Fools, with this Contract, that they
should never put them on both at once. But if the husband had put on his Cap,
the wife should let hers lie still, not take it by any means; and the same
direction to the wife: This is a means to enjoy peace. It was the moral man's
Observation, Heratius. Latius regres avidum domande spiritum, etc.
That a man should conquer more by ruling his spirit, then by conquering the
greatest Person in the World. And the Holy Spirit of God directs, that we
should forbear one another in love, Co. 3.13. and the same Apostle exhorts to
be long-suffering, this is our duty as Christian in general, and the same is
incumbent upon man and wife in particular, to yield sometimes to each other in
love.

That was an excellent example of Self-denial, Example.
which faithful Abraham gave, when his wife Sarah was angry with her Maid Hagar,
whom she her self had given to her Husband to get Children, because she her
self was barren, as you may read, Genesis 16.1, 2.

Abraham left her Maid at her Mistress dispose, and she by her hard usage made
her fly away. And this must needs be against Abraham's heart, that Hagar should
be so hardly used and constrained to fly away; whom he had gotten with Child by
his Wives consent, and no doubt had affection for her; yet Abraham condescends
to his wife, for Abraham said unto Sarah, Thy Maid is in thy hand, do to her as
it pleases thee. Again, when Sarah had brought forth Isaac, and Sarah did see
Ismael the Son of Hagar mocking of her Son Isaac; She calls to Abraham her
Husband, Put away the Bondwoman and her Son, for the Son of the Bondwoman
shall not be heir with my Son, even with Isaac, Genesis 21.10, 11. This thing was
very grievous in Abraham's sight, because of his Son Ismael, yet (as God
directs him) he yields to his wife; and puts away Hagar and Ismael out of
doors, and then all was at peace. Thus sometimes a sweet Condescen^sin in
things lawful, is a sweet well-pleasing means to preserve Love between Husband
and Wife; And as the Husband, so the Wife is to labor by the Power and Grace
of Christ to be of a self-denying, submitting, meek and quiet spirit, which in
the eyes of the Lord is a thing much set by, witness Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.4.

For a Wife to deny her self, Example.
and her own will, for the love of her Husband, is a means to preserve Love, and
prevent the danger of separation. Had Queen Vasti denied her self to please her
Husbands fancy of showing her Beauty to his Guests (as he desired) Hester 1.11,
12. she might have prevented his anger, and continued Queen to her death in all
likelihood. Thus you see the passing by of occasions of anger, and a loving
condescending to each others lawful desires, is an excellent Gold-link of Love,
and means to preserve Love between Husband and Wife during Lives.

The seventeenth Direction, The seventeenth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love now follows: This is to exercise spiritual wisdom, how
and when to speak one to another of any thing that is not well done, or said by
either party, or that they perceive is contrary to either of their minds or
affections, or not for their profit, safety or honor; A word fitly spoken in
due season, how good is it, says King Solomon? Prove. 15.23. And Prove. 25.11. A
word fitly spoken, is like Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. And the kingly
Preacher tells us, there is a time for all things, Eccles. 3.1. For that
which is spoken may be well taken at one time, which will not be so well
resented at another time.

For Example, Example.
when Churlish covetous Nabal had used David's young men unkindly, and brought
himself and Family in great danger, we see Abigail meeting David with a
Present, and pacifieth David, and prevents his shedding of Blood, as you may
read, 1 Samuel 25.26. and returning home, she finds her Husband keeping a Feast
like a King, and merry with Wine; for he was very Drunken, verse 36. wherefore
she told him nothing less or more, until the morning. But it came to pass in
the morning, when the Wine was gone out of Nabal, then she told him these
things, and then he was sensible of his folly to the full, 1 Samuel 25.37. 1 Samuel
25.37.
Thus when a Husband or Wife is in any Distemper, drunken with Wine or strong
drink, or with any passion or discontent; it is wisdom to forbear speaking,
and to observe a sit time, and in a loving manner to declare mildly and
peaceably what was a failing on either part, and that with meekness of spirit;
For a soft Answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up Anger, as we
noted before, Prove. 15.10. The Apostle St. James his direction is good, James
1.19, 20. Be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of Man
works not the righteousness of God. Thus spiritual policy, yea, even civil
wisdom is one special help to quench the fire of jars and unnecessary fallings
out, and to preserve Conjugal Love between Husband and Wife during their lives.

An eighteenth Direction, The eighteenth Direction, or Gold-link of Love.
or Gold-link of Love, in this Golden Chain of Love, is to be of a
well-pleasing quiet spirit toward each other, not seeking quarrels, but rather
seeking to please one another in Love in the Lord; this duty St. Paul
intimates, 1 Cor. 7.33, 34. The married man cares for the things of this
World, how he may please his wife, and the married woman how she may please her
Husband. The Apostle holds this out (I humbly conceive) not only as a
practice, but as a Christian duty also, to be careful both Husband and Wife, to
please one another in all things lawful and convenient in the Lord; for Romans
15.1, 2, 3. He gives this Rule for Christians in general, That the strong
ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, and not to please our selves; But
let every one please his Neighbor to Edification. Now if this be the duty of
all Christians to please one another for their good; Then much more of Husbands
and Wives to be well-pleasing to each other, not to be contentious or
quarrelsome, or cross for Trifles, or small Matters; but to be wise, and seek
to please, and give content to each other, according to their Duties and
Places. This is heavenly wisdom, says St. James, which is from above, and is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy,
and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, James 3.17, 18.
And this wisdom ought to be between Husband and Wife, to be peaceable, not
troublesome to each other. For as the wise man speaks, He that troubles his
own House, shall inherit the Wind, and the Fool shall be servant to the wise in
heart, Prove. 11.29. And Prove. 19.13, 11. A foolish Son is the calamity of his
Father, and the contentions of a Wife are a continual dropping; it will rot a
house in time. And again, Houses and Riches are the Inheritance of Fathers; But
a prudent Wife is from the Lord, Prove. 19.14. A contentious Wife will trouble a
Family, and bring disquietness to a quiet Husband. Therefore the Wife is to be
peaceable, and the same ought to be the care of the Husband, not to be captious
and chiding with his Wife for every small thing he sees amiss; But to follow
the Apostles Rule, 1 Thessalonians. 4.11. Study to be quiet, especially with his Wife.
This is a hopeful means to prevent disturbance in a Family, and to preserve
Conjugal Love between Husband and Wife. The nineteenth Direction, or Gold-link
of Love.


The nineteenth Direction, or Gold-link of Love, is to learn and act St. Paul
his practice, as it is recorded, Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. If a Man has married a
Wife, or a Woman a Husband, which proves not according to expectation. First,
it may be a cross or careless Husband, or one that is tyrannical over his Wife,
to make her his Slave, or his Servant, or otherwise; that is, a daily vexation
to his provident and pious good Wife; a common Tavern or Alehouse-Haunter, or a
desperate Gamester, a mispender of his precious time or estate in idle or evil
Company, neglecting his Calling and Household occasions; 1 Samuel 25.17, etc.
or a Nabal, a Churlish Clown, and ungrateful as Nabal was: Or that a Husband
has failed of his expectation, and has met with a riotous mispending Wife, or
one that is perverse, and unquiet, or contrary to the Apostles Rule, will usurp
authority over the Man, which she ought not, 1 Timothy 2.12. If she prove sickly
or diseased, weak, and unable to perform all Duties; yet if she be faithful to
him in the Marriage Covenant, to keep her only to him so long as they both
shall live. If God lay his Hand upon them with, or in Trials and Troubles,
Losses and Crosses in the World, they must both labor by the Power and Grace
of Christ, to submit to God's Providence, and to be content with their Lot and
Condition. It may be God did leave thee to thy self in the Choice of Wife, or
of thy Husband, for trial of thy Faith or Patience, or other Graces: Good
Patient Job had not the best Wife, that was so unkind to him in his great
Affliction, as you may read, Job 19.17. It may be God saw it best for thee to
have such a Wife, or such a Husband, to humble thee, or for other ends, and all
for thy good, which all things must be; If thou love God, and art called by
Christ to repent and believe on him, according to God's purpose, as St. Paul,
Romans 8.28. Therefore to study Piety and contentment shall be your great gain in
the end, as the Spirit of God witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.6. Labor then by Love to
amend what you find amiss in each other, and that by all fair means. This will
be a way to prevent worse evils, and to preserve Conjugal Love between Husbands
and Wives whilst they live.

The twentieth and last Direction, A twentieth Direction, or Gold-link of love.
or Gold link of Love, to preserve Love between Husbands and wives, which I
shall give at this time, is, to pray constantly and piously with Faith and
Fervency to God as reconciled in Christ, There is Grace, and Wisdom, and
strength in Christ to enable you to perform these and all other Duties required
of you. Read Joh. 1.16. Joh. 15.5. Col. 1.19. Col. 2.3. Phil. 4.11, 12, 13.
both for and with one another, not in private only in your Family, but in
secret in your Closets (if possibly it may be) That the most blessed God will
in and for the Merits of Christ, pardon all Sins, heal all Infirmities, and by
his free Grace in Christ supply all defects, and reform whatsoever is found
amiss either in Husband or Wife, and by the Power and Spirit and Grace of
Christ to enable them to perform all Duties; first to God, then to each other
with care and faithfulness; yea, to all other Superiors, Inferiors, or equally
so to live together as Heirs of the Grace of Life, that your Prayers be not
hindered. The Husband may say to the Wife, 1 Pet. 3.7.
and the Wife to her Husband, as Samuel said to the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12.23.
God forbid I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for you. Prayer is
a Duty incumbent upon all to practice daily: And the fervent Prayer of God's
Children is effectual, James 5.16, 17. If any be tempted to any Sin, pray as
St. Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
Isaac prayed for his Wife, and God heard him, and gave her Children, Genesis
25.21. Hannah she prayed for a Son, and God gave her the Request of her Soul, 1 Samuel 2.23. What should I tell you, That Monica, St. Augustins good Mother did
pray for her Son, and the Lord heard her; and fulfilled her desires. What
greater encouragement can be? or need to be to this duty, Pray till God answer.
Joh. 16.23.
then that gracious Promise of our Savior, That whatsoever we ask the Father
in his Name, he will give it us, Joh. 16.3. Oh then, my Beloved in Christ, Pray
as Jacob did. Genesis 32.26. Hosea 12.4.
be sure to practice this duty of Prayer, not only in public in the
Congregations, join with the public Prayers of the Church. But in private in
your Families, and in secret in your Closets daily. Persevere in prayer, until
God bless you, Romans 12.12.
And if you have not Prayer-Books to answer every Dispensation, and to direct
you in particular Petitions; according to your present Necessities (as who
has); Then learn and labor to be able your selves by the help of the Spirit
of Prayer and Supplication, promised to Gods Church and Children, Zach. 12.10.
To make your Request known unto God upon all occasions; Read Phil. 4.6, 7. The
peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus. Math. 7.7, 8.
Husbands for your Wives, and Wives for your Husbands; and both for your
Children; with the greatest reverence, and the best expressions you can as to
your heavenly Father, who bids Ask; and you shall have. Thus may you obtain
this great Blessing, That Love may continue firm and constant between Husband
and Wife, whilst you live to your comfort, and joy in Christ Jesus for ever;
which that it may be by Gods Blessing, and shall be my daily Prayer for you
all. And that all Honor and Glory may be given to God the Father, God the Son,
and God the blessed Spirit, now and for ever, Amen.

Some Divine Prayers for Husbands and Wives, That God will be pleased to give
them spiritual wisdom and strength in and by the Grace of Christ, for the
faithful performance of their mutual Duties, that a blessing may be from God
upon them, and their Posterities for ever. Drawn by the Author according to the
matter and end of this Gold Chain of Directions.
A Morning Prayer for the Husband or wife, or either of them, with their
Family; or any other fit Person to Pray when the husband is absent.
O Lord, Zach. 12.10.
prepare our hearts to Prayer, and so assist us with thy holy Spirit of Prayer
and Supplication, Romans 8.26, 27.
that our Prayers may be acceptable, Rev. 8.3, 4.
and we may receive a gracious Answer in and for the sweet Incense and Merits
of the Lord Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

O eternal, Deuteronomy. 32.27.
most gracious, merciful; everlasting, everliving, Exodus 34.6, 7. Jer. 10.11. 1 Timothy 1.17. Isaiah 46.9, 10. Romans 8.28. Romans 11.33, 34, 35, 36.
and only wise God, who orderest all things according to the Counsel of thy own
most just and holy Will, and disposest of all for thy own eternal Glory, and
the eternal good of thy Church and Children in Christ Jesus, of whom may we
seek for Protection, and safety of Soul or Body, or any other blessing, but of
thee our God and heavenly Father, in our Savior Christ; from whom comes every
good and perfect Gift, James 1.17.
with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. The last night we durst
not lay down our eyes to sleep, Psalm. 132.4.
nor suffer the temples of our head to take any rest, until we had begged thy
gracious Providence, for preservation of us and ours in particular, and of thy
whole Church in general. And thou, O blessed God, (who art the hearer of
Prayer) have in thine abundant goodness heard our Prayer, Psalm. 65.2. Psalm.
66.18, 19, 20.
and brought us to the light of this day, blessed be thy great and glorious
Name; thou might, O Lord, in thy Justice have consumed us [by Fire] to
ashes, Exodus 12.29, 30.
and made our Beds our Graves; One or more of us might have been stricken with
some terrible tormenting Sickness; we might have been found dead in our Beds
(as many have been); many other miseries might have befallen us; But in thy
great mercy thou have spared us, Lam. 3.22, 23.
and renewed thy mercies to us this Morning: What shall we render to thy
heavenly Majesty, for thy Favors? And now we dare not adventure into the
World, without entreating thy Protection and Blessing in and upon our just and
lawful Endeavors; We confess, O Lord, we are not worthy the least of all thy
mercies, Genesis 32.10.
and thy loving-kindnesses which from time to time thou have showed to thy
Servants; We acknowledge we have not been sensible of that original corruption
of our depraved Natures, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3.
and our proneness to Sin, drawn from our first Parents, corrupted by their
lamentable Fall; Genesis 3.6, 7. Genesis 6.5.
nor have we humbled our selves in sense of this our misery, as we should have
done; we have not kept our Hearts with all diligence, out of which are the
issues of death: Prove. 4.23
But our Hearts have followed our Eyes, beholding Vanity, Jer. 4.14. Psalm.
141.3.
and vain thoughts have too long lodged within us. We have not set a watch, O
Lord, before our Lips, and kept the doors of our Mouths, but many idle,
unprofitable, sinful words (for which we must answer at the Day of Judgment)
have been uttered by us, to thy dishonor, Mat. 12.36
and evil example of others; yea, Ephesians. 4.4, 29, 30.
too many times corrupt Communications, to the grief of thy holy Spirit: Psalm.
39.1. Psalm. 119.67.
We have not taken heed to our Feet, to walk in the right ways of thee, O
Lord, but gone aside from the Paths of thy Commandments, and so have been
guilty of many actual transgressions, both in thought, word and deed, breaking
thy most righteous Laws; We have failed in the Duties of our several
particular Relations, as Husband to Wife, and Wife to Husband, Parents to
Children, and Children to Parents, Masters or Dames to Servants, and Servants
to them; not performing our Duties in the fear of God, as we ought to have
done. We have not walked as becomes Christians toward others, nor done as we
would they should do to us (according to that Golden Rule of our blessed
Savior). Mat. 7.12.
Phil. 1.27.
So that by our good Conversation, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, others
might have been stirred up to glorify thee our heavenly Father: Mat. 5.16.
So that if thou should enter into judgment with us, O Lord, Psalm. 143.2.
how can we be justified by any our own righteousness in thy presence: Phil.
3.9, 10.
O then! behold us we humbly beseech thee in the face of thy Son Jesus Christ,
as washed clean by his Blood, and accepted by his Merits, Mat: 3.17.
He it is in whom thou art well pleased, Acts 5.31.
and him thou have exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to
Israel, and remission of Sins. Psalm. 19.12
Oh give us true Repentance for all the Errors of our Lives past for Christ's
sake, and grant that being delivered out of the hands of all our Enemies, Luke
1.74, 75.
we may serve thee without fear of them in righteousness and true holiness all
the days of our lives: Bless with us we pray thee all our Friends, Psalm. 35.11,
12, 13, 14. Mat. 5.11.
and change the Hearts of our Enemies, make them our Friends (if it be thy
will); be gracious to our Children and Servants, make our Children thy
Children, our Servants thy Servants, Isa. 41.8.
and our Friends thy Friends. Lev. 19.17.
Let us reprove, we pray thee, and not give evil example, Ephesians. 5.11.
nor suffer our Children or Servants to be profane Swearers or Cursers, Liars,
Drunkards, or unjust; Joh. 13.15. Psalm. 101.6, 7.
But grant that we may be good examples, and that they may be faithful in the
Land, such as thy servant David would have; make them religious, like faithful
Abraham's servant, praying when they are sent about our occasions, Lord send me
good speed this day, Genesis 24.12.
that we and they may be blessed. Bless with us thy universal Church scattered
thorough out the whole World; Be gracious we pray thee to the Nations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, pour down thy blessings upon the Kings most
excellent Majesty, with his Royal Consort the Queen, and all the Royal Family,
preserve Him and Them from all His, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
Their and our Enemies; Bless all the honorable Nobility, the Reverend
faithful Ministers of the Gospel in their several places, with all the
Magistrates, Gentry, and Commons of the Land, and enable us thy humble servants
rightly and justly to do our Duty to all our Superiors, 1 Pet. 2.17.
Inferiors and Equals; and to this end increase, we most humble entreat thy
Majesty, all necessary Graces in all our souls: Give us, we beseech thee, a
daily supply and increase of Divine Knowledge, and heavenly Wisdom. Lord
increase our Faith, Luke 17.5.
and give us such a Faith as purifieth the Heart, Acts 15.9.
and works by Loves Give us true Conversion from all our sins, Gal. 5.6.
2 Cor. 7.10.
and Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of. And adorn, we humbly pray
thee, Eccl. 12.7.
our immortal Souls with those excellent Graces of true Christian Charity, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Chastity, Sobriety, Temperance, and holy Moderation; with submissive
contentment unto and with thy Divine will and pleasure in every dispensation of
thy Divine Providence; 1 Peter 5.8.
1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. Phil. 4.5.
enable us to wait upon thee in Faith, Acts 21.14. Job 14.14.
with patience all the Days of our appointed time, until our change come. It is
in thy power, O Lord, to change Poverty into Riches, Enemies to Friends,
Sickness into Health, Death into Life; Thou can kill and make alive at thy
pleasure. 1 Samuel 2.7, 8. Psalm. 63.3, 4, 5.
O satisfy our souls with thy loving kindness in thy Ordinances, and living
Graces, and especially with a lively Hope of immortality by the Resurrection of
Christ from the Dead, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
and that Inheritance which fades not. O cause thy love to be shed abroad in
our Hearts by the holy Ghost; Romans 5.5.
give us that peace of God which passes all understanding, and let the Love of
Christ constrain us to live henceforth not to our selves, but to Him who died
for us, and rose again, That when He shall appear at the last day, Col. 3.4.
we may appear with Him in Glory. O most blessed God! strengthen us, we pray
thee, with thy special Grace, for the performance of our works in our
particular Family-Duty according to our Places and Callings in thy fear, and in
love one to another; Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants: Make, Lord, our Children thy
Children, our Servants thy Servants, our Friends thy Friends; and bless them
and us in all our, and their righteous Labors this day, and all the days of
our lives; especially those who have desired, or deserved our Prayers; requite
and return all their loving favors a thousand fold into their Bosom; succor,
we most humbly pray thee, all thy Children in any manner of Affliction. Let the
good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, dwell with them; Exodus 3.2. Deuteronomy.
33.16. Amos 4.12.
prepare us to meet thee in whatsoever trial thou shall prove our Faith, and
any other graces with, and give to us, and all thine a happy Deliverance out of
all in thy do time and season; and preserve us all in Bodies and Souls to thy
heavenly Kingdom: 2 Timothy 4.18.
We most humbly beg these, and whatsoever thou in thy Divine Wisdom know to
be needful for us, or any of thine, in the Name, and for the Merits of our
blessed Savior: And in that Prayer he has taught us, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

An Evening Prayer for Husband and Wife, and either of them, with their Family;
or any other fit Person in the Husbands absence.
O Most might and powerful Lord our God, who art the great Creator, and high
Possessor of Heaven and Earth, Genesis 14.19. Genesis 17.1.
the All-sufficient God, and gracious Ruler of the whole World, who art the
Lord God, glorious in holiness, dreadful in Praises, doing wonders: Exodus 15.11.
Thou art the Lord strong, merciful, and gracious, abundant in goodness and
truth, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; Exodus 34.6.7.
and who wilt not hold the wicked innocent: Thou even thou art to be feared,
and who may stand in thy sight when thou art angry? Psalm. 76.7
yet thou art gracious to thy Children, showing mercy unto thousands of them
that love thee, and are careful to keep thy Commandments. Thou preservest the
Feet of thy Saints, and have preserved us thy unworthy servants this day: 1 Samuel 2.9.
O let our Prayers come before thee as Incense, and the lifting up of our hands
be as an Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2.
a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for the mercies of this day, thou have
kept us safe at home and abroad, thou have blessed us in our just and honest
occasions and endeavors: If any thing now, Genesis 24.12, 27.
or at any time has fallen out cross to our desires, Psalm. 119.7.
thou, oh our good God, did see it good for us to be afflicted; that we
might be put in mind of our going wrong, and our too great ingratitude of
former days mercies: But we acknowledge thy goodness, thy mercies to us, and
thy people of old; and thy glorious Name, Neh. 9.5.
has been far above and beyond all our Thanksgiving and Praise; yea, that
unspeakable Gift of thy mercy; namely, John 3.16.
thy only begotten Son, who has made a gracious Promise, that whatsoever thy
servants shall ask of thee in his Name, John 16.23.
it shall be granted us. This emboldens us, blessed Father, humbly to
supplicate thee, who art so full of compassion, to pass by all our
Transgressions, Micah 7.18, 19.
and to subdue all our Iniquities, and pardon all our Sins of Ignorance and
Knowledge, of weakness and willfulness, of Omission and Commission; Take away
our iniquity, and receive us graciously in and for Christ, and we shall render
to thee the Calves of our Lips; Hosea 4.2.
yea, not of our Lips alone, but of our Hearts, and of our whole Souls and
Bodies, a holy, living and acceptable Sacrifice of Obedience in Christ Jesus.
Romans 12.1, 2.
Thou, O Lord, art the Fountain, Author and Giver of all Grace, increase thy
Graces in us, we most humbly beseech thee, that we may be better enabled to
perform our duties to thee our God, and to our Neighbors in general, and one
to another in our particular Callings and Relations, Husband to Wife, and Wife
to Husband, in true Conjugal love, Parents to Children; Exodus 20.12. Ephesians. 6.2,
3.
in and for the Lord; Children to Parents in due honor, that the blessing of
long and happy life may be their portion, according to thy promise: Masters to
Servants, Ephesians. 6.9
as knowing they have a Master in Heaven; and Servants to Masters in singleness
of heart, as unto Christ; not with Eye-service, as men-pleasers, Ephesians. 6.5, 6,
7, 8.
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart, with good
will doing service as to the Lord, and not to men, that of the Lord they may
receive the reward of Inheritance, Col. 3.24.
because in doing faithful service, according to God's will, they serve the
Lord Christ. Forgive, we pray thee our Enemies, and bless our Friends. Now
thou, O Lord, art the Keeper of Israel, who neither slumbrest nor sleep;
Except thou, O Lord, Psalm. 127.1, 2.
keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain: It is in vain to rise up
early, and late take rest, and eat the bread of carefulness, Psalm. 3.5: Psalm.
4.8.
except the Lord bless our Labors. Neither can we ly down and sleep, and take
our rest, except the Lord sustain us; except thou, O Lord, make us to dwell in
safety. Therefore now we come unto thee, O heavenly Father, most humbly
beseeching thee to embrace us in the everlasting Arms of thy Mercy, Deuteronomy.
33.27.
and to take us with all ours, and all thine, into thy holy Protection this
Night: Give us that comfortable sleep and quiet rest in our Beds, Psalm 4.8.
that we being refreshed by thy goodness, may be better enabled to do thee
faithful service in our several Places, Vocations and Callings; if it please
thee to continue, and preserve our Lives and Healths the next day to our
comforts, and the glory of thy Name. O our most blessed God, we beseech thee,
preserve with us thy Catholic Church all over the World, especially that part
of thy Church in these Nations: Keep from all dangers, we humble pray thee, our
most gracious King, Ezra 6.10.
give him a long life to thy glory; Bless his Royal Queen, and the whole Royal
Family, and preserve, we beseech thee, all the honorable Nobility, the
Reverend and faithful Ministry in their several places; the righteous Judges
and Magistrates, with all the Gentry and Commons of the Land: Give all Wisdom
and Power to honor thy Majesty in their Places and Orders in which thou have
set them, to do thee service. Bless we pray thee, the several Cities, Towns,
and Countries in the Kingdom, keep them and us out of the hand of all our
Enemies, That under his Sacred Majesty, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
Be gracious unto all thy Faithful Servants under any manner of affliction, by
Sea or by Land, at Liberty, or in Restraint; in Poverty, or in Riches; in
Sickness, or in Health; especially any that are known to us, or who have
desired our Prayers, Ephesians. 6 18, 19.
sanctify thy afflicting Hand unto them, that they may receive the peaceable
fruit of Righteousness, when they are sufficiently exercised thereby, Heb.
12.11
and in every temptation strengthen them to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13.
and in due time make a way for them to escape. Prepare us all for those
eternal Habitations, those blessed Mansions, which Christ our Savior has
prepared for us in Heaven. John 14.12.
Grant O Lord of glory, Ephesians. 1.17.
that we may be so prepared like wise Virgins, Mat. 25.1, 2, etc.
with Oil in our Lamps, that whenever the Lord Jesus, our heavenly
Bridegroom, with his glorious Angels shall come to Judgment, at Midnight, Mat.
25.6.
at Cock-Crowing, or in the Dawning; we may be admitted to enter in with him in
to that blessed heavenly Kingdom of eternal happiness. Thus by Prayer and
Supplication, with Thanksgiving, we have made our Request known unto thee, our
heavenly and most gracious Father. O let the peace of God, Phil. 4.6, 7.
which passes all understanding, keep our Hearts and Minds in the knowledge
and love of God, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom with thy
heavenly Majesty, and thy blessed Spirit, be ascribed all Glory and Honor,
Might, Sovereignty and Dominion, Victory and Salvation, this night and for
evermore. Amen.

Prove. 19.14. House and Riches are the Inheritance of Fathers; but a prudent
wife is from the Lord. Therefore I desire the Husband, that he will pray to the
Lord to bestow amongst other Graces, this Grace of heavenly prudence upon his
wife, and increase it in them both, that they may be happy. Again, I desire
that both Husband and Wife, will be careful to remember and practice (by the
Grace of Christ) that Counsel of that great Apostle St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.7.
Husbands dwell with your Wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the
Wife, as unto the weaker Vessel; and as being Heirs together of the grace of
Life, that your prayers be not hindered. (Your mutual prayers one for another);
for a virtuous wife will be a Helper to her Husband ( Genesis 2.18.) and will do
him good (by her prayers, as well as otherwise) and not evil all the days of
her life, as wise King Solomon witnesses, Pro. 31.12.

A special Closet, or secret, Prayer of a Husband, for himself, and his Wife,
and Children, and Family, that God will be pleased to enable them to perform
their mutual Duties to each other in the fear of God, and by God's blessing
live lovingly together during their lives, to be prayed together or asunder.
O Most blessed and gracious good God, 1 Timothy 1.11.
my most merciful and loving Father in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 6.14, 15, 16.
Genesis 1.1, 2.
who in thy appointed time did make the Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 136.5, 6.
and Creatures in the World, and in a special manner create our first Parents,
Adam and Eve, after thy own likeness, in Righteousness and true Holiness, Genesis
1.27.
and in the time of their innocence did Marry them together, Genesis 2.20, 21,
22, 23, 24.
and institute the holy estate of Marriage, which is a mystical representation
of that spiritual Marriage and Union between Christ and his Church; Hosea 2.19,
20.
Ephesians. 5.32.
thou, O our heavenly Father, in thy Divine Wisdom, and gracious Providence
have been pleased to bring me, thy unworthy servant, and my beloved wife, into
this high and honorable estate; I confess, O Lord, I am now fully informed,
that there are many duties required by thy holy Word incumbent upon me at a
Husband, John 15.^.
and upon her as a Wife, which by our own strength we are not able to perform
as we ought, 2 Cor. 3.5.
that thy Divine Majesty might have the glory, and we thy unworthy servants may
have the joy and comfort in our married estate; and although we are taught out
of thy Word, that in Christ, our blessed Savior, there is both Wisdom and
strength and grace, Col. 2.3. Phil. 4.13.
to be communicated to thy servants for the performance of every duty in any
condition: and that Christ our Redeemer has promised; That if we seek, we
shall find; if we knock, it shall be opened unto us: James 1.5, 6. James 5.16.
John 16.23.
If we pray with Faith and Fervency, and in his Name, our Petitions shall be
granted. Yet I thy humble servant confess, for my part, that I have not knocked
at Heaven doors for wisdom and strength for myself and my wife, that we might
be enabled rightly, and in the fear of God, and in true love to perform our
mutual duties to each other, as becomes thy Children. And I fear my dear wife
has failed in like manner, Isaiah 63.15, 16. Isaiah 64.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
at least that we have not sought this grace of thee, O heavenly Father, with
that sight and sense of our own weakness: And of that need of this wisdom and
power, and so not with that earnestness, or with those fervent groans and
sighs, Romans 8.26, 27.
or tears, in our prayers, nor with that wrestling like Jacob with God in
Christ for this mercy as we should have done, Genesis 32.24, 25, 26. Hosea 12.3,
4. 1 Samuel 1.15.
nor poured out our soul to God like Hannah; and therefore if any discomfort or
disagreement have fallen out between us, we may well thank our selves, that we
have not had wisdom and power to do better; 1 Chronicles. 15.13.
because we have not sought them at God's hand, James 4.2, 3.
or not in a right manner; for although thou God do freely promise Blessings
to his Church, yet he will be enquired of, Ezekiel. 36.37.
and prayed unto by his Children for his Graces, or any the like mercies. O
therefore most gracious Father, I most humbly entreat thee, give (...) me and
my wife truly humble and penitent and contrite hearts, Mic. 6.6. Isaiah 57.15,
16.
for this and all our former failings, and give us wisdom and strength of
grace for the time to come, rightly to perform our duties to thee our God, and
mutually one to another whilst we live, that so our Marriage may be a joyful
and Christian-like merry-age indeed, Prove. 5.18, 19, 20, 21.
to thy glory and our comfort, to the end of our lives. O then give us grace, I
most humbly beseech thee, to fly all occasions of discord or disagreement, that
there may never be any such breach between us thy Servants, as there has been
between too many Husbands and Wives in the World. Let it be far from us upon
any discontent, unkindly to separate one from another, 1 Cor. 7.5.
except it be with consent for a time, that we may give our selves to fasting
and prayer, and come together again willingly and joyfully, as we ought to do.
And if either of us have failed in our Choice, in not following the Apostles
Rule, to have been careful to marry in the Lord, or any other Scripture
Directions to have been considered better before hand, 1 Cor. 7.39.
for our comfortable Communion in Marriage; I most humbly beg pardon for that
which is past for the Merits sake of my dear Redeemer. And now, O blessed Lord,
give us thy heavenly Grace, that we may follow the Directions of thy most holy
word set before us, Psalm. 119.105.
and truly and religiously seek by all good means the eternal Salvation of both
our Souls, that we may be happy here and hereafter. O give us wisdom to
cherish love, and increase it in one toward and with the other. And let there
be no bitterness between us in word or deed, give us contentedness of mind with
our present Condition; 1 Timothy 6.6, 7, 8.
Keep us truly faithful to each other, according to our Marriage-Covenant, in
obedience to thy Command, and fear of thy heavenly Majesty, who art present in
all places, and before whose all-seeing-eyes all things are open and naked that
we have done or shall do all the days of our lives: Jer. 23.23.
Give us I most humbly entreat thee, Heb. 4.13. Prove. 6.34, 35. Cant. 8.6.
wisdom and power to avoid all occasions of jealousy, that our hearts may
truly trust one another in the Lord, Numb. 5.14.
that peace and happiness may be our portion all our days; help us by thy
spirits grace to pray one for another, and to seek thy blessing upon our
selves, and for our Children, which thou have or shall in thy goodness
graciously give thy Servants, Genesis 33.5.
enable us to bring them up in the fear and nurture and admonition of thee O
Lord, that they may fear and honor thee as their heavenly Father, Prove. 1.7.
Prove. 10.27.
and obey us as is fit in thee our Lord as their earthly Parents, that a
blessing may be upon us, and upon them and their Posterity to many Generations:
If it be thy blessed will, bless I pray thee our Servants, and our substance
which thou have or shall bestow upon us. It is thy blessing, Prove. 10.22.
O Lord, which makes rich, and adds no sorrow with it. Be gracious, I most
humbly beseech thee, to thy Church thorough the World: Bless these Nations,
and in them our most gracious King, and his Royal Queen, with his Royal Family,
and his Kingdoms, with all Estates and Orders of Men in Church and in Common
wealth: Grant, O Lord, that Truth and Peace, Zach. 8.19.
Righteousness and Love, with the Gospel of Peace, may be a blessing to these
Nations, to Us and Ours to the end of the World, if it be thy blessed will and
pleasure. Hear thy unworthy Servant, most merciful God, and grant that what I
have asked according to thy Will, and whatsoever else thou know necessary
for this life, or that happy life to come; I most humbly beg them further, in
that Prayer which Christ Jesus has taught us, Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

A special Closet, or secret Prayer for a Wife to seek the Lord for her Self
and her Husband and Family, that they may have grace and strength from God,
through Christ, to perform their mutual Duties to each other, live happily
together, and enjoy Gods blessing upon them and theirs for ever.
O Most loving God, Isa. 63.16.
and my most tender Father in Jesus Christ; Thou art Love, and thy holy Spirit
has witnessed, that he who dwells in Love, 1 John 4.16.
dwells in thee, O God, and thou in him; thou who did require by thy
blessed Son Jesus, Mat. 5.44.
That we should love our Enemies; Ephesians. 5.25.
and much more our Friends, Husbands their Wives, Titus 2.
and Wives their Husbands, and those that are near related unto them. Behold, 1 Samuel 1.11.
I thy unworthy Handmaid, a woman feeble in devotion, 1 Pet. 3.7.
the weaker Vessel, who stands in great need of thy strength, and the help of
thy spirit of grace, Romans 8.26.
to enable me to seek thy face, Psalm. 27.8.
which I should be fearful to do, but that thou have not said to the Seed of
Jacob, Isa. 45.19.
Seek my Face in vain; yea, thou have promised, they that seek thee early shall
find thee. O let me find thee gracious Lord this day, Prove. 8.17.
and find help from thee in time of need. Heb. 4.16.
Thou in thy most wise Providence have brought me into the Covenant-Bonds of
holy Marriage with my dearly beloved Husband; Mal. 2.14, 15.
we have taken one another for better or for worse, for richer or for poorer,
to love and to cherish one another in sickness and in health, and to keep us
faithful to each other until death separate us; I find by direction from thy
word, that there are many duties both proper to each, and common both to
Husband and Wife, which by experience we may find without strength of grace
from thee in thy Christ our Savior, we are not able to fulfill, our very
Natures are corrupt, Psalm. 53.1, 2, 3.
and we are subject sometimes to fretting passions, provocations, and vain
desires; 1 Samuel 1.6. Isa. 32.4.
yea, subject to rashness, and rash anger, peevish discontent, Act. 19.36. Pro.
21.19. Pro. 25.24.
contention and frowardness; yea, and many times (at least too often) and upon
light occasions, when we should be amiable, kind, and loving to each other, 2 Timothy 3.6. Pro. 11.20. Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
with content and quietness; and without thy special Grace, we cannot bridle
these unruly Distempers of our spirits: It is in great danger, (...). 12.3.
we did think better of our selves and of each other in our Choice, then we
find by proof to have fallen out since our Marriage-union, it is well if we had
right grounds of our Love to each other, and that it was not rather for
by-respects, then for the true ends of marriage; namely, that we might be true
and meet Helpers one to another for this and a better life. Genesis 2.20.
O Lord, I thy most humble Servant, most earnestly beg pardon, Isa. 55.7.
if either of us failed in any of these respects (as I fear we did). Now yet
there is mercy, O Lord, in thy Christ to encourage us boldly to come to thy
Throne of Grace: And therefore now, O Father, let the bowels of thy mercy be
moved toward us, Isa. 63.15.
and give us those necessary Graces, by which we may be enabled to walk toward
thee our God, and one toward an other as becomes the honorable estate of
marriage. I bless thy most holy Name, O Lord, that thou have kept and preserved
thy Servant (and I am well assured my dear Husband) from those dreadful Vices
which do so highly dishonor this honorable estate. Genesis 20.6.
In whatsoever we have failed, give pardon unto us, I most humbly entreat thee,
O Father, in Christ our blessed Advocate, 1 John 2.1, 2.
and heal our Natures, that we may henceforth truly evidence our sincere love
one to another, and keep, I beseech thee, that rash, impatient, unadvised,
immoderate anger, nor any other distemper may prove a root of bitterness sprung
up between us; Ephesians. 4.26.
Let not the Sun go down upon any such wrath, but that we may sleep quietly and
lovingly together: And preserve me, I beseech thee, with thy Grace, that I may
not by any unadvised words or deeds, provoke my Husband to do that which may
prove sorrow, discomfort and disprofit to us both. But give me wisdom at all
times, when any thing is said, 1 Samuel 25.25, 26, 27, to 38.
done, or doing, contrary to the Rules of Love between Husband and Wife, that I
may endeavor by all fair means, in love and by sweet allurements or
persuasions to prevent any evil, or further him in any good work whatsoever:
And, I beseech thee, my God, make me wise as Abigail, to know how and when to
speak to him for thy Glory, and the mutual good of us, and all ours; enable me
to give him that reverence and honor which is due to him, Ephesians. 5.33.
as my Lord and Husband; and give to him that gracious affection toward me,
that he may give me that loving respect and honor which is due to me as the
weaker Vessel; 1 Pet. 3.7.
that he may dwell with me as a man of knowledge, and we may live together as
Heirs of the Grace of Life, that our Prayers be not hindered. Give him, O Lord,
wisdom with thy blessing, and a faithful provident endeavor to provide for
his own, Rom: 12.17.
for them of his own house, as a Husband and a Christian ought to do. 1 Timothy
5.8.
And grant to me wisdom and grace to look well to the ways of my Household;
that I may do my Husband good and not hurt all the days of my life. Prove.
31.12, 27.
Bless, O Lord, the Children and the Family which thou have or shall of thy
goodness bestow upon us; Let our Children be as perpetual Pledges of Love
between us; make them thy Children, I most humbly pray thee: Lord, enable us
with care and conscience, to be provident for the pious and virtuous Education
of our Children, Prove. 31.28.
according to our Estate and Callings, that they may rise up and call us
blessed; I beseech thee bless our Estate, that we may provide for them a
comfortable Living in some honorable or honest Callings while we live; and
when thou shall take us from them, take them for thy Children, and give them in
thy due time that Inheritance, in which they shall be blessed and happy for
ever. And put thy holy fear into the Hearts of our Servants, that they may
first serve thee faithfully, and then they will serve us honestly and justly
all the time of their habitation with us. Be gracious to thy beloved Children
all over the Earth, Isa 63.9.
comfort the afflicted Members of Jesus Christ, wheresoever or howsoever
distressed amidst the Kingdoms of the World, Isa. 12.13.
exalt the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior; Bless our most gracious King, the
Queens Majesty, the Royal Family with all the Estates and Orders of Men in
Church and Commonwealth; preserve the Gospel of Peace, Ephesians. 6.15:
and the Peace of the Gospel, in these Nations, until Christ come to Judgment
if it be thy blessed will. Remember in mercy all our Relations, and especially
all such who ever have desired, or deserved our Prayers; Prepare us all for
Eternity, for Christ's sake, in whose name I thy unworthy Mandmaid beg these
and all needful Mercies, in that Prayer which our blessed Savior gave his
Disciples, Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

BEloved, if any Man or Woman's Devotion be so strict, as to think these Prayers
too long, let them search if any thing be begged of God, which neither they nor
any they ought to pray for want, they may pass over that Petition.

And if there want any Petition for any particular thing not prayed for, they
may add that Petition if they please, according to their present occasions. The
Lord hear, and give a blessing. All glory be to God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, now and for ever. Amen.

So prayers your Servant in Christ, Immanuel Bourne.

FINIS.

