Manifest Truth, OR AN INVERSION OF Truths Manifest.

Containing a NARRATION of the Proceedings of the Scottish Army, and a
Vindication of the Parliament and Kingdom of England from the false and
injurious aspersions cast on them by the Author of the said Manifest.

PROVE. 18. 17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Published by Authority.

LONDON Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton in Popes-head-Alley, and Giles
Calvert, at the Spread Eagle at West end of Paul's, 1646.

THE PREFACE.
THough all possible care shall be taken, that this ensuing Discourse may need
no Apology, yet the misconstruction it is liable to in this quarrelsome age,
may require a Preface; in which I shall not, as the Author of Truths Manifest,
go about to quicken the appetite of my Reader, by a self-commendation, but (if
I regarded the praise of men) should much rather choose to be commended by
another, in the end of my work, then by my self in the beginning. But out of
a great, and just tenderness of doing, or being thought to do any thing,
which might tend to any alienation betwixt these happily united Kingdoms, I
thought fit to declare, as follows.

First, that a hearty union betwixt the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
as it is most agreeable to Religion, and the solemn Covenant, so it is
eminently requisite to their mutual preservation, both from the illegal
intrenchments of their own King, and from the attempts of foreign Princes or
States; for by such an inviolate conjunction* they shall be kept from being
isntrumental to each others ruin, which has lately been designed upon both
successively by their own King, that he might become absolute Lord of them
both, to the prejudice, if not ruin, of Religion and Liberty. As also,
Strangers, especially the French, shall be prevented in their wonted design,
which has been to raise, and foment differences betwixt these Kingdoms, and
have been forward to assist Scotland against England, not for love to Scotland,
but hatred or fear of England, which they have looked upon as a dangerous
Neighbor. And let me add further, that the continuation and confirmation of
this Union, will not prove only an Ornament to the Protestant Religion, but a
great advantage to the propagating of it, and will also make us more capable of
righting our selves, Confederates, and Allies against any injuries or
usurpations, that are or shall be offered. And I hope these apprehensions shall
overawe my pen, that it walk very circumspectly in the ensuing discourse.

Secondly, give me leave to say, that this Union does not necessarily infer a
confusion or mixture: but may as well, and it may be better stand, with a full
reservation to each of their peculiar Laws, Privileges, Governments, and
possessions.

It is hard, if not impossible, to find two persons, that shall concur to an
universal compliance in their friendship, but are glad to find a
correspondence in some things, and content to yield a mutual sorbearance in
others. This is more difficult to be found in States, who have besides their
diversities of Laws and Government, more differences of general and
particular Interests, then private persons are capable of. And though through
Gods mercy, these two Kingdoms are more happy then other Confederates, who
like bodies exactly sphericall touch but in a point, as they have occasion, by
their Ambassadors, yet the nature of affairs, and men permits not they should
meet, as two bodies exactly plain in every point. For, though their Interests
be the same, sc* the conservation of their Liberties against Tyranny, and
Religion the choycest fruit of their Liberty, against any thing destructive to
it, yet the customs and constitutions of the Kingdoms, and the dispositions of
the people may be so different (besides other incident disadvantages) that an
universal close is rather to be desired then expected and something must be
left to time, and more to him, who alone challenges the Prerogative of
fashioning men's hearts alike.

And it may be added, that such an union is not only not possible, but not
necessary; for Conjunction, being but a means to some further end, is no
further requisite, then it conduces to that end of mutual preservation.

There is indeed, beside the benefit, a native beauty in unity: but to be
violent in pressing of it, is to scratch the face that it may be beautiful,
and when accomplishd (as it is thought) it will be found rather to be a paint,
then a natural complexion: I shall only take Liberty to add further, that
the pressing an exact uniformity in Church, or a union of mixture in State,
(the nature of persons and things not admitting it) may hinder a union of
conjunction in those things, which are possible and necessary: And I pray God,
it be not the Design of some under the pretense of union, in things presently
impossible, to promote a difference in that which is necessary.

Thirdly, as this discourse springs not from any principle of disaffection to
the Scottish Nation, so I hope none will force any such conclusions from it,
beyond my meaning, though without my guilt. For my part, I freely profess,
that I think it may in its own nature, as well as its intent, tend more to the
preservation of union, then the occasioning of distraction. Upon this ground,
we have patiently received and read two Manifests, to which the Questionist
from St. Andrews has added something, not a little reflecting upon the
Parliament, and Kingdom of England; the first untouched produced a second,
this second may bring forth, and in the close of it intimates a third, and
possibly a worse, till under pretense of justification of our brethren, the
charges against our selves may grow intolerable, and occasion greater
inconveniences.

Fourthly, I hope the distance of time intervening, betwixt the book and the
Answer, cannot afford an objection against it. First, I staid to see, if
somebody that was more able, or more concerned, would undertake it. Secondly,
it is a business of great tenderness and importance, and occasioned many
thoughts of heart, which did long delay it, but could not prevail against it.
For I am able truly to say, with the Author of Truths Manifest, that not so
much the love and honor of my own Nation, which yet I hope shall be always
dear to me, as Covenant, and conscience, and consideration of the good of both
Kingdoms, have put me upon this work, and carried me through it, for it is
found, that unequal complyances, especially with natures not so good, do but
make way for greater disadvantages, which cannot always be borne. And though
it be always better to suffer wrong then do it, and sometimes better to
receive wrong, then require right, yet the most beaten path to peace and
justice, which I think now it becomes me, and others to walk in, is neither to
do wrong, nor to suffer it. For though a man may part with his own Right for
public advantage, yet I know no Rule of parting with other men's right for my
own advantage. And therefore though not without sense, yet without fear of
any danger that may spring from men, impatient and mindful of oppositions, I
enter upon the work, in which I shall observe this method. First, to give a
true and short Narrative of the proceedings of the Scotch Army since they came
into England, wherein I shall endeavor to do them all possible right. And
secondly, make some Animadversions upon diverse passages in Truths Manifest,
wherein though something may be said against the Manifest, yet nothing against
the Truth, for we can do nothing against the Truth.

THE NARRATIVE.
AFter that the Parliament of England had conflicted for the space of a yeare'
with the dangers and difficulties of this unhappy War (God in his Wisdom and
Justice not seeing fit to direct us to the right improvement of our own
strength,) they dispatch Commissioners to the Kingdom of Scotland, to treat
with them about the raising, and bringing in an Army to their assistance
against the combination of Papists, Prelates, and Malignants, endeavoring to
subvert Religion and Liberty; The Commissioners being four Members of the
House of Commons, accompanied with two Reverend Divines of the Assembly, went
from London toward the latter end of July, 1643. and in the beginning of
August came to Edinburgh, where they were expected before they came, and when
they came, welcome.

The Commissioners upon their coming address themselves to the convention of
Estates then sitting, as also to the general Assembly, that they would
contribute their help so far as they were concerned; after few days a
Covenant was propounded, and agreed on by the Commissioners, and a Committee
appointed to consider of that business with them, which was sent immediately
into England for approbation, and received it with little or no material
alteration, and was returned to Scotland in a short time, and so was generally
taken in both Kingdoms; while this was in hand, a Treaty also was offered and
debated, about bringing an Army for the assistance of the Parliament of
England, which was also mutually agreed betwixt the Kingdoms, and is of late
published.

After this foundation laid, though the time of year was something unseasonable
for building upon it, being winter, the Estates of Scotland having received
50000 l. of the 100000 l. mentioned in the Treaty, bestowed their power and
diligence in levying men, so that about the middle of January, an Army well
clothed and armed was brought to the Borders of England, which they entered
about the twentieth of that month, at which time Lieutenant General Lesley
passed over Barwick bridge with some Troops of Horse; for the Town of
Barwick, by the care of the Commissioners of Parliament then in Scotland, who
sent one of their own number for that purpose, was happily made a Garrison for
the Parliament; and after that, by Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms, assigned to
the Scots for a Magazine, and retreat, while there should be use of their Army
in England.

A little after the entrance of those Horse and Foot, that came in by the way
of Barwick, the Lieutenant General of Foot, Baly, passed the water at Kelsey
by the advantage of a great Frost, which bore the Ordnance, and met the noble
General the Earl of Leven about Alnwick.

The Enemy commanded by Sir Thomas Glenham made no opposition in
Northumberland, but retreated from the borders to Alnwick, and so to Morpeth,
and then to New Castle; where the Earl of New Castle met him with more Forces;
so that the Scottish Army had a free passage to the works and walls of
New Castle, which they came to about the beginning of February. At their
approach after some slight Skirmishes of Horse, there was an attempt made upon
a strong Fort at the East Side of the Town, but without success; a little
after, it was thought fit to dispose the Army to some Quarters near the Town,
on the North-side of the River Tyne. During the time of their lying there
nothing of moment fell out, but the fight at Corbridge, where there was not
much hurt done, but the Scots had the worse, losing some Prisoners, and
retreating, yet not so hastily, but they took Colonel Brandling in their
return, who after that became a Proselyte; this was all that passed on the
North-side Tyne, saving that the Castle of Warkworth was surrendered to the
Marquess of Argyle, who marched by the way of the Sea with some Forces to the
Army, of which Castle he made one Captain Lysle Governor; after some time
spent on the North-side Trent, the lying of the Army there was found useless,
and inconvenient, and a resolution was taken toward the end of February to
pass the Tyne, leaving only some Forces at Bedlington, and Blythesnooke, to
secure that little Harbor being very convenient for Provisions.

The Enemy at the passing over Tyne made no opposition, but were so kind as to
let them march over Newbridge, a very inconvenient passage had it been
disputed, and so take possession of Sunderland, a place which proved full of
advantages to the Army afterward, in respect of provisions which were brought
thither in great plenty from London, and other places, and exchanged for Coal.
During the aboade of the Army about Sunderland, in the month of March, ending
the year 1643. they fortifyed Sunderland as well as the place was capable, and
took a strong Fort at Southshields over against Tynmouth Castle, at the second
attempt; In the mean time the Enemies head Quarter was at Durham, where were
the Earl of New Castle Lieutenant General King, sir Charles Lucas (lately
come from the South with a supply of Horse, and a very considerable Army;) they
came and faced the Scots Army twice within two miles of Sunderland, first on
the South side, then on the North-side the River Were. At first we heard of
nothing memorable, but very cold nights, in which the Scots Army had good
advantage of the Kings, and made good use of it, for by keeping close to them
many of the Enemies Horses were reported to be strayed, and their soldiers
courage cooled; which was found true at their next appearance. Shortly after,
when they drew up about Hilton and Bowdon, at which time also the Scottish Army
was drawn out against them, but no engagement of consequence, each Army kept
its advantage, only there was some slight skirmishing amongst the hedges,
where for ought I ever heard, the number of the slain was equal, or little
different; but at last the Kings Army drew off, and being discerned so to do
by the Scottish Army, they fell upon their Rear and took some Prisoners, but
killed very few, not the tenth part of the number mentioned in ( Truths
manifest) and so they parted. After this the Scottish Army not being well able
to endure their straitness of Quarters, took a resolution to march toward
the Enemy, and either fight with him, or enlarge their Quarters; about this my
Lord Fairefax who had been long confined to Hull, took the field again, and
with sir Thomas Fairfax (a Gentleman who must not be mentioned without Honor,
for God has honored him) and sir John Meldrum (whose faithfulness to this
cause and diligence in it was very eminent) made their first attempt upon
Selby, where God was pleased to give them great and seasonable success in
storming, and taking that Town, and in it a number equal to those that
assaulted, notwithstanding the many Horse that were in it, where also was the
Governor of York, Mr. John Bellasys, who was taken prisoner.

This business has hardly been parallelled since this War, save at
Wakefield, when General Goring was taken in like manner by sir Thomas Fairfax,
and his party rather then Army.

New Castle hearing this news, and fearing lest York also (the receptacle of
most of the Northern Papists, who were not in Arms, whom he had most reason
to respect) should be surprised or surrendered, thought best to move Southward
with his Army, and did accordingly, and getting start of the Scots Army, by a
sudden march came to York about the middle of April, and lodged the remainder
of his Foot there, (for his Northern expedition had lost him many men who were
wearied out with the hardiness of the Scots) and sent sir Charles Lucas away
Southward with his Horse, which were followed by some Scottish and Yorkshire
Horse, but not overtaken.

The Scottish Army followed Southward, and joined with the Forces under command
of my Lord Fairfax, betwixt Wetherby and Selby, where after consultation they
draw near to York, and if a sufficient strength could be made up by the
accession of the Earl of Manchesters Forces, which was desired and hoped, they
resolved to sit down before York, which was accordingly done; General Leven
pitching his Quarter at Midlethorp, my Lord Fairfax at Foulford, and my Lord
Manchester at Heslington, the Scots Quarters kept in the Town on the West Side
of the River, the Earl of Manchester and Lord Fairfax on the East Side; and to
my Lord Fairfax his assistance, was sent a very noble Gentleman and able
Commander, sir James Lunsdaine, with a Regiment or two of Foot, who lay at
Foulford; the Horse of all the Armies in the mean time were sent toward the
West of Yorkshire, which was the only way the Enemy had to come, and interrupt
the siege, the other ways by the advantage of Rivers, being impassable upon
opposition; this siege was carried on with very commendable unanimity, and
correspondency of Counsels on all sides, each acting their part. The Scots
took in a Fort on the South Side of the Town, attempted another near the
great Fort, but held it not, and had several skirmishes with the Enemies
Horse, in one of which they lost a gallant Gentleman, Leiutenant Colonel
Ballantine, who not content with a little honor, to gain more lost his life;
my Lord Manchesters men made their approaches very near at Bowden, and
Monk-barres, my Lord Fairfax his men at Wolmsgate, where they took a Church
and diverse prisoners in it, only Major General Crawfurd, a valiant and
forward man, made an unhappy attempt upon the Manor House, without due notice
to the other Forces, and was beaten out with the loss of many men. After this
siege had continued two months or thereabouts, toward the end of June Prince
Rupert comes to the relief of York, by the way of Lancashire, draining
Garrisons and raising men with all diligence and severity, and thereto added an
act of cruelty at Boulton. At this time upon the importunity of Lancashire, sir
John Meldrum (after that by his conduct, the Castle of Cawood, and the strong
Fort of Airesmouth were taken, which much advantaged our provisions from Hull
by water) was sent with a Party thither to do what service he had opportunity,
howsoever to secure, if possible, the Town of Manchester, which had been yet
inviolate for the Parliament, and accordingly did so. The Prince after he had
strengthened himself what he could, draws near to York by the way of
Burrowbridge, and comes upon the North-side of the River Owse, whereupon the
Armies resolve to join and fight him, and so the last of June, the siege was
raised, the Town in some measure relieved; but the Prince not satisfied with
that he had done, would needs draw over the River again, about three miles
from York to fight our Forces, upon that side the River; in which he made a
desperate attempt, and as I am informed, was so told by Lieutenant General
King, in regard our Army might fall upon him while he was passing the River.
But he was resolved and gave command to the Earl of New Castle, to draw his
men out of York to his assistance; which was done, though not so soon as was
expected, but soon enough to a bad bargain. Our united Armies were marching
off, thinking to prevent the Princes march Southward, and were going toward
Tadcaster on the day of the fight, thinking to cross some nearer way, and meet
him in his return: but he saved them that labor, and drew up in their Rear in
a place called Hessey-Moore, near Long-Marston, of which sir Thomas Fairfax
(having the Rear) gave speedy notice, and Orders were presently given to face
about to the Enemy, which was accordingly done; and the Princes Army being
drawn up in the Moore, our Armies drew up into the fields adjoining, and so
much of the heath as was left them; Sir Thomas Fairfax commanded the right
wing, consisting of his own Horse, and some from Lancashire, Lieutenant
General Cromwell the left wing; the Scots Horse were equally divided, three
Regiments on the right wing, and three on the left: on which wing also was
there then General Major David Lesley. My Lord Manchesters Foot were drawn
on the left Wing next the Horse, and the Scots Foot and my Lord Fairefaxes in
the body, and right wing; the Battle began about six or seven of the clock in
the evening, July the 2. The right Wing commanded by sir Thomas Fairfax was
disordered, for he had among other disadvantages these two especially; first,
the worst part of the ground being so full of Whinnes as that his Horse could
not march up, and was next the hedges possessed by the Enemy. Secondly, he had
also many new raised Horse which had never seen service, who did not play the
part of Reserves as became them, so that after his own Regiment and Colonel
Lamberts had charged, with valor and good success, for want of supplies that
wing was wholly routed, himself stayed in the field, where he received a mark
of Honor on his face; the Scots Horse also on that side quit the field, and
left the Earl of Lyndeseys Regiment of Foot standing bare, which yet acquitted
it self well, for sir Charles Lucas coming up with Horse to charge them, his
own Horse was shot in the head of his Regiment, and he was taken Prisoner.

But, whilst this was doing on the right, our friends on the left wing sped
very well (through Gods mercy) and wholly routed the Enemy, and came about to
the right, and at last cleared the field, became Masters of the Enemies
Carriages and Artillery, and left more dead bodies then has been at any
Battle since these wars began, and had slain more, but that the shelter of
night, and a near Garrison hindered pursuit. The lot of the body of Foot,
especially of Scots and my Lord Fairfaxes, was so promiscuous, some standing,
some flying, that I can give no perfect account of it. As for the Passage in
Truth its manifest concerning Lieutenant General Cromwell, and their
Lieutenant General Lesley, I should be loath to meddle in it, and wish the
Author of the Manifest had not; but something must be said in the
Animadversions.

Thus was God pleased to use the Scots Army in doing its part to the breaking
of the strong Army of the North, and the defeating of the Prince, who brought
into the field that day an Army very strong and well accomplished. Quem dies
vidit veniens superbum, Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. If any will make a
further enquiry, and say who did best, I could wish I might be put to no other
answer then (God did all;) which is the best way to decide Controversies of
this kind; for no man loses when He gains honor.

After this happy Victory, the discouraged Enemy take several courses, Prince
Rupert with his Retinue (for his Army was gone) marched on Northward to
Allerton, and so by Richmond back again the way that he came. The Earl of
Newcastle with his dear Confidents, Widrington and Carnaby, went to
Scarborough, and so beyond Sea; and with them Lieutenant General King. The
Government of York by this means was devolved upon Sir Thomas Glenham, who
still undertakes desperate cures.

Our own Forces, after the Generals had time to meet, and the confusion of
the fight (which lasts longer then the time of it) was over, and our wounded
men provided for, fall to work again, and the Fight being on Tuesday July 2.
on Thursday or Friday following a Party of Horse were sent under the Command of
Lesley and Cromwell to follow the Enemy, but they were first gotten into the
Dales, and became almost incapable of annoyance. The body of the Army returned
to the Siege of York, which about a fortnight after was surrendered to the
Parliament upon Treaty betwixt Commissioners on both parts. And thus was God
pleased to bless these united Forces with a Victory and City, in which the
Scots as they had their part of pains and hazard, so deserve their
proportionable share of thanks and honor.

After this my Lord Manchester marched away toward Lincoln, his Forces taking
some Castles in Yorkshire by the way, as Sheffield, and Tickhill. The Lord
Fairfax remained in York, and disposed his Forces to the blocking up of some
Castles in Yorkshire. The Scots Army marched Northward again.

And that I may not omit any thing concerning that Army, while General Leven
was employed in these services about York, the Northern parts, and that part
of the Scots Army left behind, passed some danger and hardship in
Northumberland. Morpeth Castle, held by Lieutenant Colonel Somervill, was
delivered up with the provisions and goods in it to Collonell Clavering. And
the Fort at South-Shields, though not gotten sine sanguine, was lost sine
sudore, upon a bare Summons from Montrosse and Clavering.

At this time also Sunderland was faced and outfaced by the mentioned
Cavaliers, who came to Bishops Wermouth, and plundered some of their victuals,
but the Town was preserved, where amongst others the English Seamen being
much concerned (for their ships were then in the harbor) well acquitted
themselves. But the Earl of Callander then coming into England with an
additionall Force; among whom the Lord Sinclare, Montgomery, and Levingston,
dispelled these mysts, and before the return of the Scots Army took in
Hartlepoole and Stockton upon surrender, and placed Garrisons in them as seemed
best to him; and a little before the return of the noble Earl of Leven from
Yorkshire, he had entered Gateshead, Town of the South Side of Newcastle, parted
from it only by the River, by which means the Town of Newcastle was wholly
blocked up on the South Side.

After the return of the General, a Bridge was made over the Tyne, and he
disposed his Army on the Northside, and approached close to the Town with his
Foot, the Horse being sent Westward toward Cumberland and Westmerland. During
this Siege, which continued above two Months, the Enemy made frequent and
sharp Sallies, and the General frequent and fair offers, to which the
upstart Knight Marlay returned very peremptory and sometimes abusive answers,
which were reckoned for at last; if they be not, they may be. But at length
after much diligence and patience, the General and the Commanders then
resident with the Army, resolved upon a Storm, and to that end prepared Mines
and Batteries, and upon October 19th fell on at several parts of the Town, at
the breach made by Cannon there was no entrance, and the most loss on the
Scots part was there, but the Mines taking well, especially one at White-Friers
Tower, they entered, and both to our and their benefit took that strong and
rich Town. Sir John Marly the Governor, with the Scottish Earl of Crasurd,
and others, retreated to the Castle, expecting thence to make their terms, but
could get none but those of mercy, which considering the persons, was too good
for them, though less could not be granted. After the entrance there was
little blood shed, but the common Soldier betook himself to what he could,
the Officer almost to what he would. For herein the Scots are more orderly then
the English. Among our Armies commonly the Soldier gets the greatest share of
the spoil, the Officers generally being not so earnest at the prey; and the
English Soldiers are not so easily commanded as the Scots in such a case. For
the Scots Soldiers will very orderly stand Sentinel at the door they are
appointed to, and for some small matter preserve a house with its appurtenances
for their Commanders, so that the Town was not (especially the best houses)
spoiled in specie, but only purged by a composition, which was fortuitous,
according as the nature of the Chapmen was, some good bargains, some ill. And
thus was Newcastle reduced, which (to speak as much truth as the Manifest) was
a very remarkable service, being the only thing of moment wherein that Army
has been engaged apart from other Forces in England these two years. And to
make this good success complete, that the Passage from the Coale-Indies might
be clear, Tynmouth Castle, Commanded by Sir Thomas Riddell, out of a sympathy
betwixt the Towne-Clerke and the Major of Newcastle, was surrendered upon
Articles, and Garrisons placed in both Town and Castle, by order of the Scots
Commanders and General.

After these places thus taken, and in this manner settled, and the business of
Fines and Compositions at Newcastle dispatched, it was time to dispose the
Scots Army (which had been most of the precedent Winter in the fields) to their
Winter Quarters. To that purpose two or three Regiments of Horse, and a
Regiment of Dragoones were allotted to abide in Cumberland, and Westmerland;
three Regiments of Horse sent into the North Riding of Yorkshire:
Northumberland and Bishopric of Durham, were appointed to the Foot, and some
odd Troops of Horse. The Horse in Cumberland had by this time made some
entrance upon the Siege of Carlisle; Sir Wilfrid Lawson, and others Cumberland*
men being joined with them, who had raised both Horse and Foot for that
service; of which more in the Animadversions.

After the Army thus was disposed of, the Committee also and the General
disposed themselves into Scotland, and left our English Commanders and the
Soldiers to dispute matters of Assessement and Provision, Impar Congressus.
During this time of Winter I have not heard any thing of service from that
Army, only that some Foot were sent to the assistance of Sir John Meldrum at
the Siege of Scarborough-Castle; and some also were sent to Pontfract, but had
not liberty to stay the end of these works, in regard of other employment. So
that we have free leave to pass on to the Spring; at which time the Scottish
Committee for the Army after the dispatch of their own affairs in Parliament
and Assembly returned. The General himself being come before into England
toward the end of January.

In the second years service, the first thing that offers it self was
Lieutenant General Lesleys going with a Party of Horse and Foot to the
assistance of Sir William Brereton, who was then besieging Beeston-Castle, and
intending Chester, but hearing that Prince Rupert was drawing toward him with
a considerable force, sent to the Committee of both Kingdoms at Westmorland
for aid, who desired that Lieutenant General Lesley might go with a Party of
Horse to his assistance; which accordingly was done. A Party of Yorkshire Horse
being also joined with him; but of that conjunction we had no further news or
fruit, but that the Enemy came not far enough to fight us; and our Forces stood
upon the defensive. Whereupon the Lieutenant General shortly after returned
into the West Riding of Yorkshire about Hallifax, where he remained for a space.

About this time the Parliament finding ground to newmould the several Armies
under the Command of the Earls of Essex and Manchester, and Sir William
Walter, (a course of equal hazard and necessity) which God has since blessed
with success to admiration, into one body, under the Command of the valiant
and victorious Sir Thomas Fairfax; by this means, and especially by the
forwardness and opposition of some, who made it their great business to
cross this work, (so little did they value the public good in respect of
their own conceits, wills, and interests) it came to pass that we lost some
ground in the start at the Spring, but through men's diligence, and Gods
blessing, it was quickly recovered. About this time (I say) the Parliament sent
to the Scots Army and their Committee, that they would hasten the advance of
that Army Southward with all possible speed, in regard that this change and
opposition had brought their affairs into some distraction; And to enable and
encourage them for their March, sent them 30000. li. And accordingly about the
time that Sir Thomas Fairfax, upon order from the Committee of both Kingdoms,
marched from Windsor westward with a piece of an Army, which was the first of
May; the Scots Army came to Rippon in Yorkshire, where there were several
debates betwixt their Committee and our Commanders, about matter of Provisions,
the English Commanders still pressing the necessity of Marching Southward (the
King having drawn his Army into the field) and promising all possible care for
accommodation; But in the midst of these disputes, the King drawing Northward,
and the Scots having intelligence out of Cheshire of the Kings intendment, to
send a flying Army over the Hills through Lancashire into Scotland: The debate
about marching Southwards, and making Provisions for it, was turned into a
dispute which was the best way into Lancashire; for the journey was resolved by
the Scots. The English Commissioners told them, if they must go, the nearest
way and passable enough, was the way that Prince Rupert marched from Lancashire
to the relief of York, which was by Skippon; but they chose rather to go
about by the way of Stainmore (commonly called in those parts, The Devils
Gallary, for the uncouthnesse of it) into Westmerland, which had a little
before resisted: some Scottish Officers requiring Contribution (as they say)
beyond their power, and beside the Parliaments authority. There they stayed
some time, but the flying Army being not to be found or heard of, the Scots
march back again the same way to Rippon about the beginning of June.

First, having sent some more commanded men to Carlisle, which was shortly
after reduced by the joined Forces, Scots and English, which I only mention
now left in the Narrative I should be thought fit to omit an action of moment,
but reserve the story of it to another place, at which time the Parliament sent
down two of their own Members, to wait on the Scots Army, and hasten their
march Southwards, who accompanied the Army to Nottingham, and from thence the
chief Officers of the Scots Army sent a Letter to the Parliament, which the
Author of Truth's manifest thinks fitter to print, though neither they that
writ it, nor they that received it, judged meet to do. Within two days after
the date of the Letter, it pleased God to honor the Army under the Command of
sir Thomas Fairfax, and bless these Kingdoms with an eminent, and seasonable
victory over the Royal Army at Nazeby, which was a happy foundation of the
recovery of Leicester within three days after, and many other successes,
wherewith God has followed their valor and diligence to this day. By this
means the heat of the War was over for that year, especially in these
parts, the King having no field Forces left, but those under the Command of
Goring in the West. After this the Scots Army with all readiness march
Southward through Warwickshire, Worstershire, and so toward Hereford, whither
some Commissioners were sent from Parliament to join Counsels and endeavors
with them; a field Enemy not appearing they resolve to besiege Hereford, the
reducing which place was thought very necessary for the prevention of the Kings
recruits commonly fetched from those parts. The siege went on hopefully, Mines
and Batteries were prepared, and the taking of the City (which never was
accounted very strong) continually expected: but in the mean time, it pleased
God to suffer Montrosse with his wicked crew to give our Brethren in Scotland a
sad overthrow (I am sure all good people had reason to account, it so) at
Kylsyth, where many good men were lost, and the Forces of that Kingdom almost
totally dissipated; which occasioned the recourse of many eminent persons to
Barwick, and discovered a more general malignancy in Scotland, then was
expected. The news of this coming to the Army, after some consultation had,
they raised their siege, to which they were induced, as by the condition of
their own Country, so by the report, of the Kings coming toward them with a
strength of Horse, which might endanger them, they having sent Lieutenant
general Lesley away toward the North, where he stayed with respect to
Scotland, as also to interrupt the Kings intentions Northward, whither he most
applied himself. When sir Thomas Fairfax was gone Westward with his Army, it
was expected, that the Party with Lieutenant General Lesley, and the English
with him should have pursued, or fallen upon the Enemy at that time, but the
King marching Southward toward Huntington, and the Scottish Horse being bound
Northward, it could not be.

At this time, the necessities of Scotland so requiring, the Lieutenant
General marched into Scotland, where suddenly after his arrival, he happily
falls upon Montrosse now divided from Kilketto, and not looking for him so
soon, and obtaines a happy victory over him, and seasonably (through Gods
mercy) alters the face of things in Scotland. This news meets the Scottish
Army (marching Northwards) in Yorkshire, and stays their journey further, and
gives them liberty to repose in the North and West ridings of that County,
which by the calamity of these Wars are now almost wasted, and will be
brought either to utter ruin, or some dangerous way of preventing it, unless
the Parliament afford timely relief. While the Army was quartering here, the
Lord Digby comes with a Party of Horse, as is said, for Scotland, he surprises
the English Foot, quartered at Sherburne, but by the seasonable pursuit of
Colonel Copley and Colonel Lilburne was defeated, lost his booty and his
baggage, with diverse Letters of moment into the bargain; and was forced to
take a hilly way to Cumberland, where sir John Brown got an advantage of him
as his remnant was passing over a water, where the tide hindered one part from
the relief of the other; and so he was forced to the Isle of Man, and thence
has betaken himself into Ireland, from whence we daily hear from him.

This passage concerning my Lord Digby (though his greatest blow was by the
Yorkshire Forces) I thought fit to insert that I might not omit that action of
sir John Brownes, which the Parliament was pleased to take notice of. After the
Scottish Army had lain sometime in Yorkshire, about November, at the desire of
the Parliament, and the Committee of both Kingdoms, they marched to block up
Newarke on the Northside, where they had possession given them of Muskham
Bridge (which the Enemy had intended to burn, but did it not) and the Fort in
the Island that commands it, which makes their work on the North-side Trent
very easy, in regard the Town, Forts, and Castle stand on the South Side the
River. Since their blocking up Newarke there has not been much of action;
once the Enemy by the advantage of the Ice fell into their Quarters, killed the
Adjutant General of Foot, but received as well as did hurts: since that the
Enemy made a sally upon the Scots, who were making a Fort in the Island, but
after some little loss on each part, were very well repelled and beaten in.
And let me not forget the readiness of the Lieutenant General, to send some
Foot to Colonel Poyntz, for the strengthening his Quarters at Stoake. And so
have we followed the Scots Army, consisting now of about seven or eight
thousand Horse and Foot, most Horse, (according to a Muster lately taken by
the English Commissioners) to the siege of Newarke, where also is a Committee
of Lords, and Commons from the Parliament, contributing their best assistance
to the carrying on the Service against Newarke, who have above these three
months expected a Committee from Scotland, to join with them according to the
Treaty, but they are not yet come; It is hoped (notwithstanding) that there
shall be such mutual care and concurrence betwixt the Forces, as that strong
Garrison shall in due time be reduced to the great advantage of the North, and
happiness of the whole Kingdom, which is very much concerned in the success
of it.

And thus have you a true Narrative of the entrance, and proceedings of the
Scottish Army since it came into England, where I have not willingly, nor (I
hope) negligently omitted any thing material; more circumstances might have
been brought in to attend the substance of this discourse, but many of them
being not acceptable, it was thought best to omit them, or at least refer
them to the second part, which contains Animadversions upon some passages of
the Manifest, and other Papers printed to the disadvantage of Truth, and
reflecting upon the Parliament of England.

THE Animadversions
FIRST, the whole Book and the printing of it, to me, deserves an
Animadversion. Who is this man that makes so bold an adventure, to intermeddle
in things of highest consequence, betwixt the two Kingdoms, their Parliaments
and Armies; which their Wisdom and tenderness made them forbear? Me thinks
their silence might have prompted reverence to the Author. He calls indeed his
book An Answer, page 4. and alleadges Scripture for it; but to whom is it An
Answer? none had put pen to paper in this business, it came not into the
thought of any wise man to meddle, and the very Diurnals which bespatter every
body, were very modest, as to the Scots and their Army. Therefore is the
Gentleman constrained for want of work to make himself an Adversary, which he
calls by the name of Sinisirous Reports in the second line of his Relation. Had
it not been better to have suffered these Reports to have vanished in the air,
then to give them the advantage of an Echo? I fear lest the work prove
unprofitable, as unnecessary works use to do; forward vindications sometimes
occason untoward Questions, and controverted things have sometimes more
advantage by silence then debate. But well meaning men (as they are styled)
must be undeceived; Let that be put to the issue whether so, or rather whether
those that have been before deceived by Reports, be not now cousned in Print.
If it be found so, it is a double fault, the falsehood in the Book is one,
Truth in the title another, -- Per amici fallere nomen
Tuta frequensque via est, sed via crimen habet.


But to the particulars

The first thing is his Animadversions upon the Commissioners of Scotland, for
not being so popular in their applications, and satisfactions to the multitude
as he thinks fit; In which, notice may be taken of his expressions and of his
charge; the expressions to me seem disproportionable to the honor, and
employment of so Honorable and worthy persons. He tells them, page 3, That he
cannot esteem their prudence in this. Page 4. You have mistaken the right way
sirs, ibid. you are hugely mistaken. Page 11. He charge them with being
mealy-mouthed, and with remissness, and concludes with his Magisteriall
hopes, page 13. that being freely admonished, they will mend this slip: and
adds a resolution, that till the Commissioners did the thing he advises, he
would take a Commission from himself to do it. To al which I say no more
then, indignus tu qui diceres tamen. For the charge I may add, neque hoc
opprobrio digni sunt. Men in trust and Authority should take care that the
People may rather have the advantage, then the knowledge of their proceedings.
Things that are to be done by them are necessarily to be made known to them,
and to satisfy them in their obedience, the ground of the command, or
something showing the Equity and necessity of it, is usually premitted, as is
done in the preamble of Acts, Ordinances and Declarations. But to make known
the debates, and those humane passions incident thereunto, it were sometimes to
discover nakedness where it ought not, to minister strifes, to make the people
Judges of them whom they have made so. I have heard that the custom of
Scotland is otherwise, where there is a diligent eye had to the Press (which
is not as here (which is one of our faults) prostitute to the lust of every
Pamphlet) and a reverend reservednesse kept upon their Counsels and actions:
only so far as the people are concerned in obeying, things are carefully
made known to them, and difficulties removed. And certainly, those that are
reserved at home, will not judge it meet to be very open elsewhere: for though
the Proverb is not strictly to be applied, yet it carries a general equity and
decency; In alien^m domum cum veneris mutus and surdus esto.

The Gentleman makes some Objections which he answers, he that hides can find,
but unawares ties some knots which he cannot easily undo. For instance his
second Objection, in the Answer to which he affirms, that the Commissioners of
Scotland do not sufficiently discharge their duty, in making known to the
Parliament and Assembly to the full, the truth of all things by their papers,
which he proves by an assertion, which for want of other strength he doubles,
that what is de facto concerning all, must be made known to all. The sounder
axiom were, what concerns all to know must be made known to all, for
otherwise who will deny, but the people are concerned in Counsels,
Deliberations, and conclusions of things to be done, they being the subject and
end of them, and yet this Author grants, that these things are to be made
known to the Trustees of State? But I have no mind to wrangle. Let us see the
strength of the Argument, which is this. The Trustees of the State and Church
are not Lords of them, but servants: therefore the Commissioners of the
Parliament of Scotland are to impart to the people of England their papers, and
proceedings. This conclusion seems to me larger then the Premises, and like
to have the lot of a building wider then the foundation; the true inference
from the Antecedent is rather this. Therefore the Commissioners of Scotland, as
good servants, should give an account to them, that entrust them so far, as
is expected or required. But show me where the people of England conferred that
trust upon the Commissioners from Scotland, or where they required any account;
Doubtless those Honorable Persons do give account, and satisfaction to them,
from whom they received their Commission and trust, and need not do it to any
other.

And though that expression of servants, as opposed to a Lordly usurpation, is
good as to the thing, yet the word seems to give too specious a ground for
such a corrupt inference as this; If the Rulers be servants, the people are
Masters; whereas the truth is, the Magistrate serves the good of the people
rather then the people, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 13. They are the
Ministers of God to the people for good. Ministers or servants of God, that
this their appellation, to the peoples good, that is their use. Thus the Angels
serve the Saints, who are yet lower then the Angels, and Pastors the people,
whom yet they rule over in the Lord. Me thinks those that hate Independency in
the Church, should not affect popularity in the State, but any thing for a
turn. But let me leave this Rule with my friends and Countrymen, that though
it be fit that all exorbitant usurpation, and arbitrary dominion of Rulers have
a seasonable stop, lest public Liberty suffer, yet must it be done without
debasing those in authority, whose honor and esteem with the people, is
necessary to the order and conservation of the whole; always provided, that
this tender regard need not be had to any of what place soever, that are in
open hostility against the people, who make no other use of their power and
Reputation, then to deceive, and destroy the people; of which our instance is
too near.

As for the freedom of John Knox, and George Bucanan mentioned page 12. I
could well consent it were revived, so it be rightly bestowed, as by them it
was, sc. against the Popery of the then Queen, and the self-interests of great
men in public works, and against tyranny in Princes: King Charles deserves a
severer Schoolmaster then ever King James had.

Secondly, after this expostulation with the Commissioners ending page 14. the
Narration begins, in which the Author lays open in the first place, the
carriage of things betwixt the Scots, and the King at their first entrance,
which I meddle not with, only give this note on the behalf of England, that
whatsoever was then done (as is alleged) contrary to justice and Faith, must
not be set in the least degree upon the account of this Kingdom, whose proper
Representative is the Parliament, who disclaimed the whole business, it was
the work of the King, not the Kingdom, of the Faction, not the Nation. But I
rest in the thoughts of the Act of pacification.

Thirdly, the next thing to be insisted on, is of more consequence, and will
require a full clearing, which is found at the 18. page sc. The Scots under
God, are the cause of assembling the Parliament, of the continuance of it, and
of the preservation of it from total destruction and ruin. And to this
purpose, there are diverse passages, which I think fittest to sum up together,
and give them some dilucidation rather then opposition. Another expression of
this kind is, page 94. The Scots were in a kind the only hinderers of the
Kings compassing his design. page 99. 100. For whom they have hazarded, and
many lost their lives, when they might all this while have sat at home
quietly. page 112. They make our quarrel theirs, have undergone the burden
for our sakes, to free us from it. They are become miserable to pull us out of
misery, a thing not to be paralleled. Page 114. They have crucified themselves
for their Brethren. Page 142. Who have ventured, yea, lost themselves in a
manner, with all that is dear unto men, for their sakes, to do them a double
good, to help them out of trouble, and settle a Reformation among them.

God forbid, that I should be one of those ingrate children, mentioned and
cried out on by this Author. It is far from my thought or purpose, to deny,
or to diminish the kindness of our brethren, whose help was desired and was
seasonable, but let us understand our selves, and how the matter stands betwixt
these two Kingdoms. We are indebted to Scotland, I wish an even reckning, and
long friendship, but I am not yet of opinion we owe our selves to them: and if
the Author of the Manifest be consulted, you shall find an intimation of some
other Obligations then mere kindness unto us. As for instance, page 24. It is
said, that the Scots (when they began to interesse themselves in this
business,) they could not in Conscience, and honesty sit quiet any longer, and
neither say nor do: but I take no advantage of this, we are beholding to men
for doing what in conscience and honesty they are bound, though they should
hurt themselves more in violating Conscience and honor, then in suffering us
to be violated. To this you shall find a more external ground added, page 28.
viz. Now the State of Scotland, seeing the common Enemy come to that height,
that nothing will satisfy him, but total subversion of Church and State,
inthese Dominions, only they perhaps, might be kept for the last, though in
intention they had been the first, judge it not enough for their interest in
the common cause, to keep an Army in Ireland, but to be upon their Guard at
home, and to help their Brethren in England with the Sword, since all other
means so often tried were disappointed by the malice of the Enemies: And this
resolution is said to have been taken, before Commissioners were sent from
England to desire their assistance, Page 30. So that you may observe the Enemy
was a common Enemy, the Cause a common Cause, the danger to these Dominions;
the Scots like to suffer as deep, though not so soon, if they had sat still.
But give me leave, paulo altius repetere, and to consider the ancient mutual
ties, and later friendships betwixt these Kingdoms, which may be a good means
to continue, and confirm their present correspondence.

So long as these Kingdoms were under diverse (especially popish) Princes,
their condition was like that of Israel, 2. Chron. 15. 3. when it was without a
true God, without a teaching Priest, and without Law. At which time, there was
no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations
were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, and Nation was destroyed of
Nation, and City of City. The mutual spoils and losses of these neighbor
Kingdoms, being well considered by that wise Prince Henry the seventh, he
lays a probable foundation of conjunction, in giving his eldest Daughter to
the King of Scots, whose posterity upon the failing of the issue of his Son,
Henry the eight, might inherit both Kingdoms, which has since come to pass.
In the time of Edward the sixth, it was thought fit by that Prince (whose
wisdom and virtue was beyond his years) and his Council, to make the
conjunction more sure, and therefore agreed with the Kingdom of Scotland for a
Match betwixt this young King, and the Daughter of James the fifth, afterward
Queen of France and Scotland. But the Politicians of those times in Scotland
chose rather to marry their young Princess to France then England; it may be,
forecasting, upon the fail of issue in Henry the eights children, that it
would be more for their advantage to have a Scottish-man or a Frenchman King
of England, then an Englishman of Scotland, though (if I may speak it without
offense) I think they might have had more comfort in that young Prince Edward
6. had God continued his life and reign, then England has had of the two
Kings they have had from Scotland; of whom Truths Manifest says; Page 23.
That there has been more Christian blood shed in these latter years, under
the end of King James his and King Charles his Reigns, by their Commissions,
Approbations, Connivences, and not forbidding what at home, and what abroad,
all which upon the matter, they might have stopped, if it had been their
pleasure, then were in the time of the ten Roman Persecutions.

But although the English had received some dis-ingagement by the
nonperformance of that Match, which was aggravated on both parts by a Fight at
Musselborough field; yet when the Scots were sore troubled, and their Religion
and Liberty endangered by the said Queen, returned from France into Scotland,
who called the French in to her assistance against her native Subjects; the
renowned Queen Elizabeth, and her prudent Council, though this Kingdom had
continual war with Spain, yet feared not to provoke the French, by
affording seasonable help to her distressed Neighbors, sending to their
relief 6000 men, which were maintained at the charge of the Kingdom of
England; Which was then thankfully and justly called to mind by the Kingdom
of Scotland when this last treaty was to be made. So that if we break off
here, the kindness rests not on our part. But I shall as gladly proceed to
repeat the good turns done to this Kingdom, as by it, and rejoice in the
mutual obligation. And that I may not break in too suddenly upon the late
affairs of these Kingdoms, give me leave as a manuduction thereto to give a
brief touch of the Method of Reformation in this Island, and but a word, for
the body of the Story may be had elsewhere. It pleased God at the bringing of
this Island out of Popery, to honor Scotland with a more full departure from
Romish Idolatry and Superstition, for though England wholly renounced their
Doctrine, yet some dregs of discipline and superstitious Ceremonies remained.

The Scots had indeed some advantages that we had not; Their Queen was
obnoxious, their young King in his nonage, they had some Nobles and Ministers
zealous and well affected, so that through Gods blessing they obtained a
Reformation in that point, though not with so little difficulty as should give
them ground to expect it should be done here on a sudden. But as for England,
in Queen Elizabeth's time, she had so much trouble for Holland, with Spain,
and in Ireland, that her Council thought not fit to adventure upon the trouble
of an alteration in this point, which they foresaw, and we find to be great.
And besides, many of our Reformers being Bishops, could not so well understand
the convenience of their own abolishment. In King James his time, though we
might have expected to have been better, in regard he came from a reformed
Kingdom, yet it was far worse with us, for he came with an innate bitterness
against Puritanes, which was fomented by our English Bishops, so that he became
a great Persecutor of unconformity; And according to the Proverb, Seldom comes
a better, since the Reign of this King, especially since the preferment of the
late Archbishop of Canterbury, it has been much worse with us, for in stead of
reforming, we were deforming, and, in stead of renouncing, returning to Rome
apace.

But all this while England wanted not its honor in the eyes of God and good
men; For God favored it with men eminent in learning, able and earnest
assertors of the Doctrine of the Gospel, against the Champions of Rome,
Bellarmine and his Fellows, such were Whitaker, Reynolds, Jewel, Fulke,
Perkings, etc. with more practical Preachers and Writers, and a greater
measure of the Power of Godliness, then other reformed Churches. Thus we see,
Non omnis fert omnia tellus. Scotland had its advantages, and so had England,
that neither they without us, nor we without them might be made perfect, but
that we might contribute to the reformation of each other, and both to our
neighbors.

You will pardon this digression, I return. After King James had outgrown his
tutors, hankered after Spain, and was come into England, He went about to pull
down what was built in Scotland for matter of discipline, and interrupted the
Liberty of the Assemblies, as at Perth more especially, though his nature was
to accomplish his designs rather by artifice then by violence; King Charles
succeeds him in his Crown and intention, but drives more furiously then his
Father, and ventures the overturning all; and so am I come to the late troubles
of Scotland, about the year 1638. At which time both Kingdoms had Bishops,
but Scotland first cast them off, to which they had these advantages. First,
their natural Antipathy against Episcopacy, which is generally remarkable in
that Nation. Secondly, the absence of the King, who was not there to
countenance them with his presence, and support them with his interest and
authority, as here. It is no small advantage to have an absent King. A King
prevents the Factions of an Aristocracy: His absence takes away the Enormities
of a Court, and the advantages to Tyranny. And as they had more advantage, so
had they more reason to begin; They had a Service Book put upon them against
Law, more corrupt then ours, which was established by a Law then in force.
Their work was but to assert their Rights against innovation, ours to enlarge
our Reformation, and add something de novo, which is a much harder and a more
questionable work. But however it was very happy for them and us, that they
had such an opportunity, and hearts to use it as they did, in standing in the
breach like to be made upon the Religion and Liberties of both Kingdoms. To
come yet nearer, This dispute betwixt the King and his Party on the one side,
the Lords and Ministers of Scotland on the other, grows to blows, and Armies
are prepared on each hand. How stood the affection of the Commonaltie of
England in this Cause? How backward were they to raise men, to pay money? the
Soldiers that were raised in many places fell to pulling down Altars,
breaking Images, as a work which pleased them better then to go against
Scotland in that Cause. And whilst some were preparing to fight against them,
many were actually stirring and wrestling with God for them in prayers; Such
was the affection they bore to that Cause and Kingdom.

And when the Parliament was called, to which God made the Scottish broils an
advantage, (though the affairs of England could not long have stood in that
temper they were in) how tender were they of contributing any thing to the
war against them, and chose rather to adventure their own dissolution then a
breach with them. And when they were the second time conveened, even to this
present Parliament, how readily did they gratify their brethren with a
competent sum called brotherly assistance, to be paid by this Kingdom for the
injuries done by a Faction in it? And this carriage of the Parliament is
acknowledged to be worthy, and obliging by the Convention of the Estates of
Scotland, in their Declaration premitted at their Entrance. So that hitherto
we were not behind-hand with them. It remains then that this great obligation
must arise from the present conjunction. But if we consider the grounds, the
terms, and issue, it may appear not to be extraordinary. As for the grounds,
if this Author in his 28. Page already mentioned, be not authenticke, let me
allege those that are; sc. the Convention in the short Declaration premitted
at their coming into this Kingdom in January 1643. Where beside and before
the Law of Love requiring us to bear each others burden, you may find a Law
of Nature mentioned, injoyning them to preserve themselves by preventing their
neighbors ruin. It is indeed a kindness for a man to help to quench a fire
in his neighbors house, though his own be next; but if his house had not been
so near, it may be the man had been further off. So that it was not a sole
respect to us that brought them, for that is no Fiction, though it be Poetry,
Tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. So much for the Ground. The terms
were as betwixt Strangers and Mercenaries, though we love and embrace the title
of brethren, as appears by the Treaty, wherein it is required and agreed that
England be at the whole charge of paying this Army, (the terms upon which they
serve France and Holland) and expected that this Kingdom be responsable for
incident charges and losses. What could be further asked? And look to the
issue, if God grant it, when this Kingdom will be found to have afforded all
the charge and most of the force for the preservation of England and Ireland
directly, and Scotland as really, though by consequence; for prius and
posterius makes no great difference, which was the case as this Author
acknowledges, Page 28.

And thus have I given account of the true state as near as I could learn it
of the Obligations betwixt these two Kingdoms, which afford this Result; That
we should love one another. As for the particular words which occasioned this
discourse, which are three times repeated in the Manifest, sc. that the Scots
were the cause of calling, continuing, preserving from ruin this present
Parliament, let me say thus much to them. As for the calling it, they were the
occasion, but not the cause. As for the continuance of it, this is the account,
We feeling the smart of broken Parliaments, as also our debts and necessities
calling for money, it could not be borrowed but upon public Faith, this was
not to be given but in Parliament; whereupon a noble Gentleman, Mr Pierrepont
by name, (who was not then much acquainted with the Scots) moved upon those
grounds for an act of continuance of this Parliament, and it passed. As for the
preservation of it from ruin, this Clause following immediately upon the
Authors discourse of the Scots refusing the Kings offers which he made them of
the four Northern Counties, etc. if they would lend their hand to the
Parliaments ruin, induces me to believe, he means that not destruction for
preservation. But do not the Publicanes so? Could they do less then forbear
the attempt of ruining that Parliament which had been so careful to hinder all
means of furthering the wrong or ruin of Scotland. I know not what kindness
it was not to do it, I am sure it had been barbarous cruelty and injustice to
have done it; but if the Gentleman mean they were the cause of our
preservation positively, by affording their seasonable help, it is
acknowledged upon the Grounds and Terms already mentioned, sc. their own
preservation as well as ours, and full satisfaction.

The Manifest proceeds in declaring the readiness of the Scots for the help
of Ireland: I will by no means extenuate the courtesy, but that also is
easily reducible to their own interest, which they had reason to regard, their
labor being bestowed in Ulster which lay near to Scotland, and would have
been a very ill Neighbor in the Rebels hands. As also it may be considered
that they had diverse Scottish Plantations in those parts, which it concerned
them to do their best to preserve for their love to their Countrymen, and to
keep off the burden of their coming over to themselves. But I deny not but
they have suffered something from Ireland, and done something for it, and
nodoubt with respect to Religion, and the common good of these Kingdoms. But I
being not so well acquainted with those affairs, forbear to speak more of
them; Let the British in Ulster speak.

After the narration of the Scots interposing with the King Page 29.
by Commissioners sent to Oxford, and their resolution upon the success of it
already mentioned, he proceeds to the Parliaments sending into Scotland for
assistance, and to aggravate the kindness of their coming, he reflects upon
the Parliament for not sending till their affairs were almost in despair,
adding the danger of not calling for help till things were too low. This low
condition is described by him in the same page, viz. The overrunning of the
North, the beating Sir William Waller at the Devizes, surrendering Bristoll and
Banbury Castle basely (as he calls it.) Toward the clearing of the truth in
this, the Author affords us some help, which I shall endeavor to make out as
far as truth will suffer; His words that I shall make use of are these; For
the Parliament to try if they could do the business themselves without
troubling the Scots was wisdom; for what need you call for aid, and trouble
your Neighbors, when you can do your business alone? Certainly, the hopes of
compassing our business without the help of an Army thence, was the ground of
their being no sooner called, though this Author alleges other mystical
grounds, page 30. But we staid too long; Not so long as the Gentleman
mentions, neither were our affairs so low as he expresses. We have good
reason to remember the time of our sending thither, which was in July 1643. But
whereas it is said, that Sir William Waller was ruined at the Vies, and
Bristoll taken, before our sending. The latter is absolutely denied, for our
Commissioners had not news of the loss of Bristoll till they were in
Scotland. As for Sir William Wallers Defeat, it is true he was scattered
before the Commissioners went from London, but the Commissioners were named,
and the Instructions preparing, and the journey fully resolved on before that
Defeat, even when Sir William Waller had utterly spoiled Hopto's Army with
continual fighting. And as for the subjection of the North to the Earl of
Newcastle, except Hull, it is not strictly true, for Wraisell-Castle likewise
held out, and was never taken by the Kings Forces. But I acknowledge that added
not much to the state of our affairs; I seek not advantages, I have too many
given me.

Page 31. as also page 56. Upon mention of the Covenant for settling of the
Church according to the Word of God, and conform to the best reformed
Churches, he adds, and by name to the Church of Scotland. This I take to be a
falsification of the Covenant, which when I took I understood to have no more
reference to one reformed Church then to another, no more to Scotland then
New England; though I believe Old England incapable of that Government is in
New. All that is particularized (with respect to Church Government) on the
behalf of Scotland, is that we joyno in preservation of it against the common
Enemy, supposed by all to be Pupists and Prelates; the plain intent of which
to me seems to be an endeavor to preserve Scotland from any relapse to the
corruptions they had escaped, and not to preclude it from any further
reformation, if need should be. I can hardly forbear urging you with that of
Job, cap. 13. ver. 7. Let us allege fair and argue accordingly, especially
since your Title is Truths Manifest, and mine Manifest Truths.

As for the Relation of their passing Northumberland with so little opposition,
yet so much want, you are referred partly to the Narrative, which is true; as
for the want spoken of, it was not so great as is pretended, neither was the
County of Northumberland so much then wasted (for it has endured very much
since) but that it afforded many sheep, which were killed by the Scots the
first or second night of their Entrance. If their want had been greater, the
fault had been partly their own, who undertook to bring in forty days
provision, which if it had been done would have given liberty for getting
Provisions beforehand.

Page 35. 36. He gives a Relation of the raising the Siege at York, and the
Battle at Marston Moore, where the fault is laid wholly upon the Yorkshire
Horse, which was not so, but I refer to the Narrative; Only, I must take
notice of his extolling the service of the Major General of the Scotch Horse,
who is certainly a very able Commander. But I must differ in that point, with
Truths Manifest. For the Scotch Horse which he commanded on the left Wing, were
none of them drawn up in the Front that day, nor yet the next Reserve, (as I
am informed) but as a Reserve to the Reserve, and being weaker Horse then my
Lord Manchesters, were designed rather to the Chase (if God should so bless
us) then to the Charge. What whole bodies they charged I know not, but have
made the best inquiry I can. As for the provocation which the Author had to
magnify the forenamed Gentleman, by the unseemly appellation of the Savior
of the three Kingdoms, (for so I believe he means, though it be printed the
Savor) given to Lieutenant General Cromwell, for ought I hear, it was
attributed to him by a Scottishman, Major General Craford by name, which he
could not help, and I hope, and think, I may say that he is angry at the
expression, his modesty and piety in that respect has been answerable to his
valor and success; and upon a strict examination, you will find that he was
in the field to the last, though his service might be a little hindered, after
the first charge by the shot, which though it was not very dangerous, being but
a rake in the neck, yet the Pistol being discharged so near, that the powder
hurt his face, and troubled his eyes, was a better excuse for withdrawing (if
he had done so, which yet he did not) then many a gay man had that day.

Page 37. It is said that the Scots upon the taking of New Castle carried
themselves with such moderation, that the Enemies who had been in Arms against
them, were constrained to speak well of them.

Their moderation is acknowledged as to violence, but as for the Testimony
fetched from the mouth of the Enemies, there was too much reason for it, in
regard that they, especially one of the principal of them, Sir Nicholas Cole,
a person excepted from pardon, in the Propositions of both Kingdoms sent to
the King at Oxford, was detained for some time from the Justice of the
Parliament of England (who sent a Warrant for him) by the General of the
Artillery (then commanding in Chief, in the absence of the noble General,)
who kept him company frequently, let him live in all freedom and jollity, and
would not part with him, till by an Order from the Parliament of Scotland,
procured by a Commissioner sent thither, he was constrained so to do: and for
other Enemies they sought and found protection in some Regiments of the
Scottish Army, which occasioned their speaking well: But I have no mind to
aggravate, but must add, that the excuse he makes of Military order in the
next page, satisfies not; for as I take it, our Military force serves for
nothing, but the establishment of Civil power and peace; I know no Military
Order could keep the party above named, from being disposed according to the
will of the Parliament, from the 20. of October, till the February after, and
till the Parliament of Scotland very justly, and honorably interposed their
Authority.

Page 38. and 39. He makes a digression to set forth the malignancy and poverty
of the North, thereby to prejudice many of their just complaints, and to make
the stirring of the Westmoreland-men the more inexcusable. I shall give you as
true an account as the Manifest of the North, both in general, and with
respect to the particular mentioned of the rising in Westmoreland. First, as
for the Malignancy of the North, it had three disadvantages, first, its
distance from the Parliament and City of London. Secondly, the want of good
Ministers, which I wish the Parliament and Assembly would heartily consider of,
there being not above four Ministers in the four Northern Counties capable of
persecution by the Enemy, when these Wars began. The people are destroyed for
want of knowledge; If some of that strength which has been spent at London in
endless Debares about Discipline, had been bestowed in Doctrine in the North,
and such like barren places, Heu quantum terrae potuit pelagique parari,
Hoc quem civiles, etc.


I wish Ministers were more of the temper of that holy Apostle, who labored
more abundantly then they all, who strived to preach the Gospel, not where
Christ was named, lest he should build on another man's foundation. But the
warmth Romans 15. 20.
and accommodations of the South, and Principles of self-love in men too
suitable to them, are fundi nostri calamitas. This has been the principal
means, how the Northern parts both of England and Scotland, have proved so
disadvantagious to this Cause. And lastly, the Nobility of these parts, who
were well affected, lived out of the Country, and the Gentry, (through the
want of the powerful preaching of the Gospel) were not so sound, which has
made the North in the condition it was: But yet give me leave to say, that for
ought I ever observed or heard, the Commonalty of these parts were never so ill
affected, but if due care had been taken to engage them, they had been as
serviceable to this Cause as any other, Northumberland, as Norfolk.

But more particularly for Cumberland and Westmoreland, they have showed
themselves the least disaffected of any other, For first, though they were
arrayed, by Sir Philip Musgrave, under the pretense of the defense of their
own Countries, yet they never would be persuaded to go out of them, to the
prejudice of the Parliament, (for ought I have heard) they were willing to
agree with Laneashire, and when they were in Arms, and might have resisted the
Scotch Horse, (sor they had that strength, which the Horse thought not fit to
force,) yet upon a Letter from Mr. Barwis, they gave way for the Scots to come
in among them. And the County of Cumberland raised 1800. Foot, and 400. Horse
at their own charge, under the Command of Sir Wilfred Lawson, for the reduction
of Carlisle. And these Counties were not so poor, but that in the space of six
months, or little more, the Scottish Horse and Dragoones had from thence about
the value of one hundred thousand pounds, in money and provisions, more then
ever the Earl of Newcastle had from them, which argues they were not so poor,
and spent, as that they were sensible of the least thing could be demanded. And
to speak more particularly of Westmoreland, where the resistance to the Scots
was, though I know no man justifies the action, for they should have addressed
to the Parliament, yet these things may be considered. First, they had expended
for the entertainment of the Scotch Army, 40000. l. or thereabouts: as much as
they could well endure without intermission, so that now indeed they began to
be sensible. Secondly, the General had so far resented their charge, that he
had under his hand forbidden his Soldiers levies of money. Thirdly, the
Parliament had also made an Ordinance for the entertainment of the Scottish
Army, dated February 20. laying the charge of it upon all parts of the
Kingdom, in their power, that the North might be eased, (which for ought the
Scottish Officers then knew, might be effectual for their pay.) Fourthly, the
Scottish Horse there quartered, had so full pay for the Winter, that the
necessities of the County were beyond the necessity of the Soldier. These
things considered, will make the Westmorland men's resistance, though (it may
be) not justifiable yet not wholly inexcusable, seeing their ground was
necessity, and their end the vindication, not only of the Authority of
Parliament, forbidding arbitrary Impositions by Armies, and ordering other
ways of provision for Soldiers: but of the Scottish General who had strictly
forbidden the continuance of the assessement.

There is added, page 39. a bitter, and I think unjust reflection upon the
Commissioners, employed by the Parliament in the North, who were Sir William
Armyne, Mr. Hatcher, Mr. Robert Goodwin, Mr. Barwis, Mr. Darley, Mr. Fenwick,
who put too much power in the hands of wicked Malignants, as Recusants,
Prelaticks, men lately in actual Rebellion, who spoil the Country, oppress
honest men, etc. A high Charge: but no proof except the Assertion, he says
indeed that men without exception (and that is strange, seeing Mr. Musgrave the
chief of them is a Sectary) are sent up to the Parliament, to acquaint the
Houses with the state of business. These mentioned Gentlemen were troubled,
that they had no more, or better choice to make Committees in the North, but
certainly, they did to their apprehension choose the best and most serviceable,
and they challenge you to name the professed Recusants. As for Prelaticks and
Common Prayer-Booke-men, in that Country where they knew no other Government,
or Service, it is no considerable exception: as for men that have been in
actual Rebellion against the State; it may be granted, that they employed men,
who according to Ordinance of Parliament had been Delinquents, though not
active against the Parliament, for want of other; and for this; besides their
necessity, they had such examples on both hands of them, in England, but
especially Scotland, for the employing of neutrall, and not so well affected
men, that it may be they passed over this rub with the less difficulty. And as
for the spoiling the Country and oppressing honest men, the Committee are
willing to join issue, whether they or the Scottish Army (for you put me to
it) have most spoiled the Country, and oppressed honest men. As for the men
deputed from Cumberland, to complain of Mr. Barwis and the rest; some of them
may be honest, as I hope Mr. Musgrave and his partner are, but certainly they
are inconsiderate in this point, they find faults, and it is easy so to do,
it is like, in that, and other Committees there are too many, as Covetousness
and Partiality (of which who ever are guilty, for their own sake and the
Kingdoms, let them amend it) but to go about to disgrace and displace men in
Authority, faithful for the maine (as they have showed it) and not to be able
to name men fit to succeed, is but to give advantage to the destruction of
their Country by the division of it, and to make a gap for some body else, who
it may be will less mind their good, to strike in. I much suspect the drift of
this Author, when he would go about to possess us, that all our affairs in
the North are in ill hands, but I will not insist upon suspicions. And that
Gentleman with some other wellaffected to the Public, viz,. have been too
forward in charging the proceedings of Parliament, and their Committees,
pleading Magna Charta, and the Liberty of the Subject: Alas, our Ancestors
never made provision for such times as these, and if all the Laws which are to
have free passage in times of peace, should now be urged, we could have no
Martial Law, no pressing men, fortifying other men's houses, cutting through
their grounds to make works, and so should lose our Liberty, whilst we are
defending known Laws (which was the Kings old snare) cannot serve for dangers
unknown, when the Laws were made: I hope the Parliament will be as careful
to countenance Law and Liberty as may be, but we must not expect, but that in
many cases it should be broken, and only that it may be preserved. As the case
stands with us, it may go for Malignancy or high indiscretion, to oppose and
quarrel with the proceedings of the Parliament; God has made them Instruments
of much good, and I hope will of much more. The Reader is desired to pardon
this digression, the discontents fomented by some against the Authority of the
Houses, is so dangerous, that it has enforced it.

From the 41. to 44. page The Author of the Manifest gives an account of the
advance of the Scottish Army Southward in the Spring, where he tells of their
march from Newcastle to Rippon, and from Rippon into Westmoreland, and so to
Rippon again, and then to Nottingham, and casts in the story of the printed
papers called the Manifest.

The excuse of the Scots, and the fault of the Countries is declared to be in
the slack providing of Draughts, and Provisions. But let us examine the true
state of the business, concerning their marching or not marching Southward,
that is, over the Trent, till the later end of June. The Parliament upon the
grounds mentioned in the Narrative, sent for their speedy advance Southward in
March, and sent them 30000. l. in money, their desired proportion of Arms and
Ammunition to fit them for service. The Manifest says, that the delay of the
march from Newcastle to the first of May, was from the unreadinesse of
Draughts. The losses and wants of the parts about Newcastle sustained in the
siege, and by assessements all the Winter, had made them, though not so able,
yet very willing to forward the advance of the Scots, knowing their ease by it;
and it will be proved, that in the midst of the complaints for Draughts, diverse
of their Officers, took money of those that brought them in, and released
them: But that is a small matter: They came to Rippon, or at least part of them
about the beginning of May, how comes the stop there? It Is alleged to be want
of Draughts and provisions. First, for Draughts, certainly the County of York
could not so little understand their own condition (of which their suffering
could not but make them sensible) if they had not had an apprehension of the
public Service, as not to afford them all possible Requisites to their march
Southwards: for as for the County, it did undergo ten times the charge by
their stay there; and as for my Lord Fairefax, and the Committee, they were so
apprehensive of the Inconveniences of their not marching, that they saw besides
the disappointment of the Parliament, their own forces in danger of ruin by
the quarter and assessements of the Scottish Army. Concerning Draughts, I add
this further. The not relieving Draughts by the way, and not restoring them
when they served their proportion, and exacting money for freeing them, makes
the people more backward then they should, or otherwise would be. For it is
certain, that the Heresordshire men were some of them at Northallerton in
Yorkshire seeking their Draughts this Winter, and the Yorkshire, Cumberland,
and Westmoreland men, were forced to give money for releasing their Draughts,
and some to sell their Oxen at under rates, and leave their Waynes behind them.
And truly I am not satisfied, how the Scottish Army should come by Draughts so
easily to march back into Westmoreland, as to be ready on a sudden, without
further trouble to the Committee to march thither, but could get no
accommodation for marching Southward. If they used the same rigor for Draughts
for Service (which is more reasonable) as they do for money for subsistence,
they would never want them long: Will you give me leave to say, that was not
the only reason, but that time was not the season of their marching. For when
our Commissioners came to a Randezvous at Bramham-moore, Lieutenant General
Lesley upon their appearance, came gallopping up with this expression, I have
it, I have it, and tells them he had received intelligence from Sir William
Brereton, that the King was sending a flying Army through Lancashire into
Scotland, but the Letters were not produced to our Commissioners, who therefore
moved for surer intelligence, before they marched toward Westmoreland, and went
away with that expectation: but the next news they heard was, the Scottish
Army marched early next morning, and were gone twenty four miles before they
heard of them: And thus went they back into VVestmoreland, where they were
when the King took Leicester. And since the Manifest adds, they had come
sooner from Westmoreland, but that they also were slow, and unwilling in
providing Draughts and Provisions: Give me leave to say this for truth; that
when they were to march back from Westmoreland, the Yorkshire Draughts which
brought them thither were not gone back, and thereupon Mr. Barwis and the
Committees there, (to spare the pains and hazard of their own Draughts) would
have agreed with the Yorkshire men for a sum of money, to let their Draughts
be employed back again, which was refused by the Scots under pretense of
trouble to the Yorkshire men. So that Westmorland Draughts must needs go, and
Warrants were granted for 75 by the Committee of Cumberland and Westmorland,
which came in so well that the General of the Artillery gave a very good
testimony to the readiness of the Committee and County, notwithstanding all
their pretended disaffection: And so much for the business of Draughts;
Unless I should add the story of that Officer who at the Siege of Newcastle
sent for Draughts to Barwick, and then sold the Oxen.

Now for Provisions, let me add something. First, it was expected that the
Scottish Army upon the Receipt of 30000. li. to enable them to advance, should
have made some provision of victuals to be carried along against a time of
necessity, for in their ordinary Marches not near an Enemy the Country would
afford it. Secondly, the Scottish General sent to the Committees of York
only to cause Provisions to be brought to the places where the Army should
lodge from night to night, and not the provision of a Magazine, which they
would have done rather then have occasioned their stay in Yorkshire, to the
prejudice of the Public and themselves. Thirdly, when they came and demanded
provisions, the Committee used all possible diligence to procure them, only
they desired a full resolution for their March Southward, before they delivered
them. And when the Army was marching into Westmorland, the provisions were
going toward Brambam-Moore, and those parts. Fourthly, Why could not they as
well march Southward toward Nottinghamshire, a very plentiful Country,
without such a stock of Provisions, as over Stainemoore, a most barren place,
and go into Westmorland, a Country which the Manifest says was so spent, that
they were sensible of the least Demands? And for Provisions when they came from
Westmorland, in a very short space, they had four or five days provision,
according to their demand of 18000 weight per diem, made ready for them, by the
special diligence of Mr Barwis, to whom I cannot but give the testimony of a
very honest and faithful man to the Public, and one who has deserved better
at some men's hands then he has found. And so about the beginning of June they
began their journey Southward again, and passed speedily through Yorkshire,
without any of those difficulties which hindered (as is said) their march
before. And in the mean time Lieutenant General Cromwell being a man not
acceptable to the Scots, and excepted against as one whom their Army would not
join in service with, was called back, and Colonel Vermuden sent with a Party
of Horse to strengthen their Army, but he not finding them, being gone into
Westmorland, he marched back, not without hazard, and came and resigned his
Regiment before Naseby fight. I have no more to add in reference to this part
of the Manifest, but to remark his observation on the Yorkshire Horse, which he
says were not a third part of the thousand armed. Give me leave to answer; the
Yorkshire-men had been better horsed and armed both, had it not been for the
very great burden upon that County, by reason of the Scottish Army, which was
one reason of the distraction of those Forces.

As for what he says about publishing the Papers delivered in to the Houses of
Parliament, by the Scottish Commissioners, under the title of the Scots
Manifest, by I know not whom. If the Commissioners hand was in the printing,
sure they would not have disclaimed it, as this Author says they did, if their
hand was not in it, it was printed underhand, contrary to the passage of play
underboard and clandestine dealing, Page 51. As also the Letter from
Nottingham, signed by the chief Officers of the Army, which was sent to the
Parliament and not to the people, and I think ought not to have been published
without the consent of them to whom they were written: I suppose them that
wrote it knew as little of the printing it as they that received it; but if
printing Letters be so convenient, you may soon have enough of that work.

In the 46. and 47. Page He adds a word or two about moneys received by the
Scottish Army, provisions made for, and the behavior of the Army. To which
first he gives an assurance in the name of the Scots (which I know not what
authorlty he has to use) that they desire an universal trial of all things,
it may be so, but his warrant is not sufficient.

To these he gives brief answers (scil.) short of money, scant of provisions,
of their carriage indifferent. Give me leave to add something more. First for
money, it cannot be denied, but that the proportion of money allotted them by
the Treaty was not paid monthly, neither does the Treaty undertake it shall
exactly, for (knowing the want, and distractions of the Kingdom) there is an
addition made of Public Faith, for the part unpaid; but I add these things.
First, that the Parliament has not been able to give them their expected pay,
for all the Counties of this Kingdom, except London, and the Association for
the maintenance of the English Army, have either wholly or in some part been
under the enemy, or been constrained to maintain a force for their defense; so
that they could not afford much (especially through the wast, and depopulation
following the war, the estates of Delinquents which was principally intended
for the way of their maintenance being made little of) and whether the
Parliament should so dispose the part left free, as not to have some
maintenance for an English Army, for the service of England, let reasonable men
judge. Secondly, though they have not had so much as might be expected in an
orderly way, yet some way or other, by their own unwarranted assessements and
otherwise they have had no small Sums: The particulars must rest till the
account: And they were so vigilant (let me not say violent) in making provision
for themselves, that it gave occasion to many to remit their care and endeavor
in providing for them. And lastly, although the foot Soldier does not abound,
for he is kept to his four pence a day in provision, yet the Officers and
Horsemen have not felt any want this long time, as appears by their very
liberal expenses in clothes and drinkings, which every Market-Towne near
their Quarters can witness. If the Parliament could have paid them duly, and
did not, they have been very ill husbands, for certainly it were far better
for this Kingdom they received money to disspend here, and pay their Quarters,
then to refer to the confused reckoning for Quarters, and sending money into
Scotland. I could wish that this Kingdom were not so forward in their promises
and undertakings, for no man looks at our willingness in promising, but
reflects upon our weakness in performing. As for their pay comparative to
other Armies, we can affirm that in other Armies there is as much want among
their foot, who sometimes have neither money nor provisions, and not so much
excess among the Horse: we know Forces in England, that have had as little
pay as this Author says this Army had, a month in seven, and yet never
assessed the Country without leave from the Parliament, nor used violence
toward the people, but were content with Free Quarter, who have yet done very
good service too. As for Provisions, the instance of Hereford shall be
satisfied in its place: As for other places I am sure there are many have been
very glad to give what they could, or had, and be glad if they might so escape;
and as for that foul imputation of some men's detaining Provisions, that so the
Army might be dis-inabled for service; certainly those men as they are no
friends to the Scots Army, so are they enemies to the Parliament and good of
the Kingdom; and this Author is bound to discover them by his Covenant; We
have had more need of their service, especially before Naseby, then to hinder
them from it: As for the disorders of the Army, the Author is in some measure
ingenuous, and confesses the necessity of some miscarriages which will be in
an Army, especially unpaid, but I may say safely I know Armies better ordered;
want of pay is some excuse for Free Quarter or Pillage, but for rapes,
murders, violence, swearing, drunkenness, I know none, neither do I believe
them to be punished, according to Ecclesiastical and military Law, as is
pretended. And take it not ill, that I say, if you love the Presbytery, reform
the Army, for it is very scandalous.

Page 51. He proceeds to the constitution of the Committee of both Kingdoms;
and Page 56. and 57. to the corruptions of some of the English of that
Committee, let us consider of both.

It Is true, the Parliament out of their earnest desire of a most arct union
with their Brethren, desired a conjunction not only of Forces, but of
Councels, which so long as both Kingdoms do earnestly and entirely promote
the common interest of both in the same way, has its advantages; but giveme
leave to say, that as the matter is ordered, the conjunction is not equal in
every point, for Scotland has besides their Committee joined with ours for the
regulating their Army in our service, Commanders interested in the knowledge of
our especial affairs, and the ordering of our English Forces, we have not so
in Scotland, but are mere strangers to the business, and Armies of that
Kingdom, notwithstanding the great dependence that our affairs have upon
theirs while we have a common enemy.

And further, they have Committees joined with ours for the raising and
receiving money, as at Goldsmiths Hall, and at Newcastle, where at first a lock
was set upon the Customehouse-dore by the appointment of the Scottish
Co^mittee, with an intent solely to administer the money-businesse there,
afterward they were content with a mutual key, of so ill credit are our
English Officers (I know not the reason) but we have no joined Muster-Master
nor Play Master of that Army to take account how the money is expended, but
these are things I have little to do with, yet they are manifest truths.

The constitution of the Committee, I know none disallowes when the Parliament
has consented to it: but let us look to the corruption where it is found,
that contrary to the Order of that Committee where the Scots have a negative
voice, and nothing is done, or at least ought to be done, without their
knowledge and consent, concerning Peace, or War, publicly or privately,
directly, or indirectly, etc. Two things have been foully carried on the
English Part. First, the naming and assembling a Sub-Committee without
knowledge of the Scots, this was in my Lord Savills case, who came with
overtures of getting Oxford delivered to the Parliament, and Gorings Horse
brought over to us, where it seems the Lord Say, Mr. Soliciter, and Mr. Crew
were appointed to speak with him, which they had like to have paid dear for,
in regard that a Minister of London, unadvisedly being set on by a Scottish
Minister, and Commissioner, went to the Exchange, and misreported the business,
that some men of special note in our Parliament, were treating with the Enemy
about delivering our Towns to them, to the amusement of the City, and the
danger of the Gentlemen. Let the Reader consider the time, and circumstances of
this accusation, and judge whether it were not a design fitted for the ruin
of the New-Model'd Army, and those who had been active in it. But they that
knew the Order and, practice of that Committee, affirm this was not unusual,
nor had been before excepted against, to appoint a Sub-committee all English
without a Scottish Commissioner. And the House of Commons after solemn hearing
the whole business, adjudged that the Sub-Committee had done their duty, and
ordered Mr. Cranford to acknowledge his fault, and pay 500. l. to each of them,
though I believe they regard no pecuniary benefit. As for the latter concerning
Pat: Napar, I am informed the case was this, the Lord Lauderdaile told the
Committee, there was a Scottish man had business to impart to them concerning
Oxford, a Sub-Committee was appointed (the Committee sitting) whereof the said
Lord was one to examine the man, and receive his information, which was
concerning the Forces and Provisions in Oxford: but his Information being only
coincident with intelligence formerly received, it was the less regarded: but
as for that secret of the easy place, it is easier to say then to prove it,
for the Gentlemen of that Sub-Committee knew of no such advantage, and
therefore could not disclose it, and therefore let Patricke lay his hand upon
his heart, etc. as is advised, page 57. But why will you give me so just, nay
so necessary occasion by the mention of these deviations (as you make them) of
the English Members of the Committee of both Kingdoms, from the Rule, to put
you, and others in mind of the carriage of things betwixt the Scots Committee,
joined with the English Commissioners in the North, for ordering the Scots
Army, where the English have been so far from having a negative in any thing,
that in many things they have had no vote at all? How often have those Forces
been disposed of, diminished, increased, removed from place to place, from
England to Scotland, and back again, without the knowledge and consent of our
Commissioners? How are some Garrisons put into English Towns and Castles,
without their consent required, others without their consent obtained? for
there is no Scottish Garrison in any English Town, or Castle, which has the
consent of the Parliament, except Barwicke, where a Governor was placed with
the approbation of the English Commissioners, to whom equally with the Scots,
the disposal of the Army is by Treaty committed, and this has been done, or
at least not altered, by the Scots Committee of themselves without sending to
the Parliament, or convention of Estates in Scotland, as we are constrained to
the Parliament of England, in case of the dissent of the Scots, so that there
we have no negative, or to no purpose, which is here so strictly expected; I am
sorry you have put me to this discourse.

Page 54. 55. as also 59. 60. you will pardon my going backwards and forwards,
I must follow my Leader; The Manifest gives an account of the diverse
correspondencies of the Scots Commissioners, sometimes with one sort of men,
sometimes with another: I suppose the Gentleman may be bolder with them then I:
they are men in public employment, and should not be bandied by a private pen,
I shall say nothing to their disadvantage, they notwithstanding any alteration
of their company have kept constant to their Principles, and Counsels, which
have been to set up the Presbyteriall Government in England (which is their
declared business) and that in full power and virtue, without connivence at
Sects, Schisms; this could not be done till the common Enemy was weakened, and
therefore both the Scots and Independents might well join, for they both had
hopes: but when the Scots saw the Sectaries not altered in opinions, but
expecting the Liberty of their own practice, the grow strange to each other,
as being bound several ways, and to supply their place another party strikes
in, partly out of concurrence with the Scots in Church Government, and partly
out of envy and opposition to the Independents, who as they thought had
supplanted them: but since those men who were most averse to the coming in of
the Scots, greatest strangers afterward, most forward to have them gone, are
so handsomely come about to an intimate conjunction with the Scots, quid non
speremus? the world may turn once again, and the old friendship may be
renewed, let us not be too much prejudiced. And the Author reduces this mistake
to the Church Government; as I do; only he speaks of a stipulation given from
the English Commissioners to the Scots when in Scotland, to go heartily along
with them in settling Church Government, I know no private stipulation, as for
the Covenant, which is the mutual public stipulation, I hope we shall all
stand to, to endeavor Reformation according to the word of God; but if my
observation fail me not, the distances (though I desire not to meddle with
them) have been also kept with men like affected with them, for the maine of
Church Government, and was occasioned also by the business of the new Model,
of which more by and by. Page 57. 58. There is mention made of the
unreasonablenesse of the Siege at Oxford, while the Enemy was ranging abroad,
and calling back the Party that followed the King, both being against the
advice of the Scots, and how fit it was, rather for Sir Tho: Fairfax his Army
to follow the King at that time, then the Scots, and herein refer to the
condition of each Army. And since we are called upon to try these things, and
not suffer them to be carried away in hugger mugger (as the word is) let it be
tried. First, for the siege at Oxford, of which I think this a true account,
it is well known how earnest endeavors there were almost on all parts, to
hinder the new moulding of the Armies, how when seven thousand Horse and Foot
were got together about Redding, and Windsor, they were dispatched into the
West, and when they had marched as fair as Blairford, which is about seventy
miles from Windsor, they were by Order from the Committee of both Kingdoms
divided, and Sir Thomas Fairfax with 3500. commanded back toward Oxford, where
the King had joined his Horse, and almost completed his Army for the Spring,
so that Sir Thomas Fairfax with his party could not march through Wiltshire,
but was constrained to go through Hamshire for safety; before his return the
King marched from Oxford, Lieutenant General Cromwell, and Major General
Brown followed him as near as they well might, with another part of the Army,
so that, that Army was already in three parts, far distant from each other;
the desires of the Parliament were sent down to the North, for the speedy
advance of the Scots Army, which was fitter for the field then Sir Thomas
Fairfaxes, for they had twelve or fourteen thousand men in a body, in
Yorkshire, and besides the Yorkshire Horse, a Party of the new Model (which
makes another division of the Army) was sent under Colonel Vermuden to join
with them, so that they wanted neither men, money; (for 30000. l. was sent them
in order to their advance) Arms, nor Ammunition, which also they had received
in good proportion: as for Draughts and Provisions we have said enough before:
but Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army, when joined with Cromwell, Rosseter, and when
Vermuden not finding the Scots Army, which was gone into Westmorland, was
returned, and when he had the accession of some Association, and Northampton
Horse, was but eleven hundred, or thereabouts, and therefore was it thought but
reasonable that his Army should have a little time to gather together; and that
the pretense of sitting still might not be made against it, it was appointed
rather to lie upon the Enemies Quarters about Oxford, then our own, that the
reduction, and recruiting of it might be perfected. As for the calling back the
Party following the King, they were too weak to follow him, because too weak
to fight him, for they were but equal (when joined with the other part of the
Army) at Naseby fight. And besides if they had advanced, it had been under the
Command of Lieutenant General Cromwell, with whom the Scots had no mind to
join, and so the Service might have been prejudiced. And so have you the story
of the Siege of Oxford, in which you think there is so much disadvantage to the
Public on our part.

Page 62. We have a story of the Treaty at Uxbridge, wherein this Author (as if
he meant division) is not content to extol the faithfulness, Resolution,
Prudence, knowledge of the Scottish Commissioners, which never was questioned:
but he reflects unworthily upon the English Commissioners in these words. The
Kings Commissioners feeling the Pulse of the Parliament Commissioners, did
promise unto themselves, upon what ground they know best, or at least should
know, that they could carry all things to their minds, if it were not for the
rude and stiffenecked Scots, (it is his own language) who were so firm to
their Principles, and resolved rather to follow on the work with honor and
Conscience, then to yield to a base agreement to the prejudice of Church and
State. Consider here, first the charge, that had it not been for the Scots,
distinct from the English Commissioners, the Court Commissioners had compassed
their ends, which were certainly very disadvantagious, if not destructive to
the Parliament and Kingdom, which without straining amounts to thus much; that
the Parliament sent Commissioners to the Treaty, that were either so unwise, or
so unfaithful, as that, had it not been for the Scottish assistants, the Cause
of the Parliament and Kingdom, had been through them prejudiced, if not
betrayed. And to this in opposition to the English, he makes an addition of the
firmness, honor, Conscience and resolution of the Scottish Commissioners. I
wonder at this in stead of answering it. Let us consider who were employed, men
we always had an honorable opinion of, and shall have, notwithstanding any
such unjust and unworthy suggestions, which have no proof nor can have, to
whom we must give this testimony, that in that, as in other our affairs, they
carried themselves with all diligence and faithfulness, so that the Treaty
ended without our prejudice, and there an end of it.

Page 63. The next thing in order is the new Model, wherein the Parliament is
a little beholding to him, for he justifies that action of the Parliament, by
the necessity of it, in regard of the faults of some who were employed in the
Armies, which the Parliament had attempted to amend in a fair way, but to
small purpose. To which let me add another reason, that by the reduction of
the Armies, the Officers were abated, especially the most costly ones, as
General Officers, and the charge lessened, that the Parliament might be the
better able to pay other Officers in their Service.

We are told of the interposition of the Scottish Commissioners in that
affair, advising the Parliament by their paper put in to that purpose, to
choose (as this Author says) men of ability and experience, and faithful to
the cause, which latter he expounds to be men, not inclined to Sects, and
Schisms; I remember that paper of the Scottish Commissioners, was then wondered
at, but now it is not; If their counsel were followed, as this Author
confesses in some degree it was, there is the less reason to complain, but
who ever complains, I thank God for the new Model.

And before we pass from the new Model, two exceptions must be cleared,
which this Author makes concerning it.

First, Concerning the Covenant, page 64. where he wonders and doubts, he
wonders it should admit any debate in the Parliament, whether the Armies should
be put to the oath; and then why the common Soldiers should not be put to it:
and then doubts that the order for the taking of it by the Commanders is not so
well observed. For the debates and orders of the Parliament, I do not use to
debate them over again, especially when satisfied in these two things, that a
common Soldier that has not taken the Covenant, may do very good service to
the Kingdom, and that there is not the same reason why it should be pressed
upon them as upon the enemies coming in, because we doubt them more then we do
these, and therefore offer them a discovery and engagement. But for the
Covenant I have taken it, and approve the taking of it, though I have neither
power nor will to compel it. As for the doubt that the Officers take it not, I
cannot satisfy it, but I am sure they do the things that it obliges to,
better then many that have taken it, and to me a Covenant not taken is much
better then a Covenant not kept.

To which I add, Novimus and quite, we can tell you when and where, the
Scottish Army has in articles of Treaty and surrender agreed to an article in
these words; That the National Covenant shall not be enforced, either upon
Officer, Soldier, Gentleman, or Clergyman, as in the Capitulation for
Tinmouth-Castle, and to the like purpose at Carlisle, though our Armies have
always (for ought I ever heard) refused to accept of any such article, as at
Bristoll; but require a subjection to all Ordinances of Parliament. So that
notwithstanding this exception, it seems our Commanders either love the
Covenant better then they, or Castles not so well.

As for the reason of some men's backwardness to the Covenant, which is
alleged to be their averseness to the Presbyterian government, I see no
reason why that should be a reason, because there is no mention of the
Presbyteriall government in the Covenant, nor (for ought I know) any intention
of it any further, then it is found agreeable to the word of God, which we all
profess a submission to. And it is well known that learned and godly men,
though not satisfied in the Presbyteriall government, have taken the Covenant,
as knowing that no particular government, but the word of God, is set up as the
rule of reformation.

It may be your interpretation of the Covenant to reach so far, and your
addition of the Church of Scotland, may discourage men from taking it, lest not
interpreting it as you, they should give you the scandal of Covenant Breaking.

Here comes in the ^^rned dispute of active and passive obedience, where it is
affirmed that passive obedience is a great absurdity; That is only an
absurdity in language, which is an absurdity in use, for use makes propriety;
but this expression being very common (and that among Scholars) is not absurd.
And therefore this Author gives so much respect to Divines, as not to except
against their use of this expression, with respect to Christ.

Obedience is taken either positively, for performance of the command; or
privatively, for not resistance or submission, as Phil. 2. 8. He became
obedient unto death; which is ordinarily called passive obedience. He says all
virtue consists in action, Moralists say so, but yet they allow silence and
patience to be virtues, which cannot be said to be actions, but rather
forbearances of action; though some intimate act of the mind belongs to them,
as also to this submission; It is accounted a great virtue or rather grace in
Christ, that being reviled, he reviled not again, yet there was no action. But
your principle makes well for the new Model, if all virtue consists in action,
Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army being active, must be concluded, virtuous,
notwithstanding Independency.

Before I come to the second exception about the new Model, scil. the leaving
out the Scottish Officers, notice must be taken of a loose discourse, Page 67,
68, 69. occasioned by a Speech uttered publicly, by one to this purpose, That
the maine quarrel the Parliament stood for at first, and thereafter, did take
up arms for, was not Religion, nor the reformation of the Church, but the
freedom and liberty of the Subject. Which saying he pleads to be injurious,
but handles it injuriously; for he makes the sense of that speech to be this;
The Parliament did not from the beginning intend a true reformation of
Religion, which it affords not, the Parliament may intend reformation, and yet
not fight for it. And without prejudice to the Parliament, let me declare my
opinion. The Parliament (I doubt not) did look at Religion as the foundation
and perfection of the Kingdoms happiness, and had it chiefly in their eye.
Some indeed have thought them more intent to Liberty, upon a mistake they could
not be earnest for Religion, unless they were for Liberty, (which is the fence
and preservative of the practice of it;) But yet if I were asked the ground of
the Parliaments taking up arms de facto, I should not answer the reformation
of Religion, (for I make some question whether Religion, especially the
reformation of it, be so proper a quarrel for the sword) but that seeing the
King instead of suffering Justice to be executed upon offenders, prepared
violence against the Parliament, and in it against our liberty, with all the
fruits of it, (of which the enjoyment of Religion was the choicest) they raised
an Army to defend us and themselves, that they might sit with freedom and
liberty to perform their trust, for the preservation and reformation of the
Kingdom, which they have attended as much as the difficulties and distractions
of the times would permit. And to that end called an Assembly of Divines, that
they might from them receive some light to direct them in the execution of
their power in matters of Religion.

He spends some further time in discussing that Position, Whether Liberty were
the maine quarrel.

I answer, They looked at Liberty, primo, but not primario^, Religion as the
furthest end, but Liberty as the next means: The infringement of liberty
gives advantage to corruption in Religion, as our Adversaries well know, when
they with equal pace brought on slavery and superstition. Here the Author
takes a needless ground to tell the people that which is not true, That they
are in a worse case in respect of Liberty then formerly, by paralleling
Committees with the Star Chamber, and Taxes with Ship Money. This sounds more
like sedition then truth; For howsoever Committees may be guilty of
partialities and miscarriages, yet their maine intent is our preservation, not
our burden, as the other Courts were. And we have now a better appeal from a
Committee to the Parliament, then we had from the Star Chamber to the King.
Injury may be done now as well as then, but not so professedly, or with so
little remedy.

And as for taxes heavier then Shipmoney, I wonder either at your face or at
your judgment. In the beginning of the 70 page you make a plaster of the
necessity of taxes, but it is not so wide as the wound: The wiser of the
people see and discover your fallacious dealing, and see a great deal of
difference betwixt the Kings destroying their right in Ship* money, and the
Parliaments preserving their right notwithstanding taxes, which I hope will not
last long.

I pass to the second exception against the new Model, page 72. 74. which is
led up by a story of the Kings courting the Scottish Officers, and his
success, which I meddle not with. The exception is, that at the making of the
New Model, were cashiered of the Scots in one day above two hundred brave
fellows. I answer, the Parliament were entering upon a way of good husbandry in
reducing their Armies, and it may be, they thought these brave fellows would
be too chargeable. But in earnest, you say two hundred of the Scots were
cashiered, you should have used a milder term, and said reduced. Cashiering
implies a fault, Reduction none. As two hundred Scots, so sour hundred English
were at that time put out of employment, and brave fellows too for ought I
know. It Is strange to me that the Parliament of England should not (without
exception) form an Army as seems best to them for their own desence and the
Kingdoms; Especially when the Scots had so great an Army in England, and
another in Ireland, where employment was to be had. But the Parliament to show
they had no national respect, named four Colonels of the new Model, and some
Captains, besides a Lieutenant Colonel, who is adjutant General of their
foot, a place of great trust; who all except the last refused to serve. The
grounds of their laying down are said to be three: First, because the rest of
their Countrymen were not employed; There was no use of them, if we had men of
our own Nation, they were, in reason, to be preferred, ^eteris paribus; and it
is not without its exception, that they will not serve unless so many
together. Secondly, They were nominated to inferior employments, that is a
question, they were but Major Generals to Major Generals, and Commanders of
parties, but I stand not upon that; Let the Earl of Manchester, and Sir
William Waller be Generals, yet those Gentlemen knew, that in the places they
came from beyond Sea, if they returned they must accept of such employments as
these, or lower, and I hope we shall not have a perpetual war in England.
Sudden risings from a Lieutenant Colonel to a Lieutenant General must have
fudden falls. Thirdly, Men unacquainted with war and averse to the Covenant,
should have been employed with them, from whom they could not expect true
sellowship or obedience to Orders. The men have consuted your Exception for
Military virtue, by their diligence and valor; And though there be in the Army
men that have taken the Covenant, and make conscience of it, yet if there be
any that have not, there is no discord, but all unanimously prosecute the ends
in the Covenant, so far as they are matter of War. As for your question,
Whether the Parliament in leaving out some, or the Officers not left out, in
laying down their Commissions were more in the Wrong? It Is answered, neither
of them in the Wrong. Me thinks he that considers how faithful and how
succesfull the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax has been, and reckons up Naseby,
Leicester, Langport, Bridgewater, Sherborne, Bristoll, Basing, Winchester,
Barkley, and other Honor which God has put upon that Army, should be well
content with the New Model. But an Objection follows; But God has blessed
the honesty and piety of some men extraordinarily in the new Army, so that
great things are done by it.

This is a sad objection: but you answered it by acknowledging the good done,
but no thanks to the profession of Holiness of this, or that man; they will
join with you, and say in the Apostles language, Acts 3. 12. neither their own
power or holiness, much less the profession of holiness has done any thing,
but the name of Christ, in which they have trodden down their Enemies. As for
the passage concerning the General, that he is little spoken of for doing
much; he sees the hook and neglects the bait; God and all good men love and
honor him.

He proceeds in this 76. page, to show how fit it is to employ fit men, lest
God be tempted; It Is granted, and was practiced; the Gentlemen employed were
fit men, they were many of them godly men: slight not that, Godliness is
profitable for all things. They were, and have approved themselves diligent
men. Another special requisite in a Soldier; they were, as has often
appeared, stout and valiant men: But what shall we do for experience? I
answer: some men gain more experience in two years, then others in ten,
because they are more advertent, and have better parts. And for our English
Wars, our English experience is as good as any, and we have had more
experimental Service in these three, or four years war in England, then
falls out in other parts in a far longer time. But we desired men of
foreign experience, and they refused, therefore we must take English.

Let me here add an advertisement to my Countryman (for I suppose I am taken
to be an Englishman;) It has been, as the usual disposition* so no small
fault of this Nation (contrary to the good example of their neighbors) to
depresse one another, admire and adore strangers for unknown virtues, which
has kept this Kingdom lower in its Reputation then it deserved: I shall not
doubt to deliver it for a Position, that you have at this time (especially for
our English affairs) Soldiers of your own Nation, so able and active in
Service, that if you go further, for ought I know, you may fare worse; and if
God give us but grace to embrace union instead of faction, we may do him a
great deal of Service, and ourselves and Neighbors right. A word more, Page
77. The Author accounts it a misery, why in the framing an Army, there should
be more regard had of the Piety and honesty of the Officers, then the
Soldiers. This mystery is very clear in Scripture, and Reason. First, God
looks more at Commanders then inferiors, Ier. 5. 4. 5. Lo, these are poor
tnd foolish, I will get me to the great men, if they break the bands, a Lion
out of the Forest comes in. Secondly, in reason; good Officers may reclaim and
restrain Soldiers by authority, and example, and so cannot good Soldiers ill
Officers. But I have done; a business of moment follows concerning Carlisle.

Page 77. The Author of the Manifest enters upon the business of the Siege and
reduction of Carlisle; and to make this business clear, since I omitted the
Relation of it in the Narrative, I must add it here. Carlisle was in the
possession of the Enemy, when the Scots entered. After York was taken (it being
thought a considerable place, to hold footing in the North) Sir Thomas Glenham
was sent thither to command the Town. In September, about the beginning of it,
the Commonalty of Cumberland and Westmorland, laying down their Arms, upon
the desire of Mr. Barwis, Sir Wilfrid Lawson, and others, the Scots Horse being
six Regiments, and one of Dragoones, commanded by Lieutenant General Lesley,
went into those parts, yet went not direct to Carlisle, but stayed at Penrith,
in which time Carlisle was further victualled; after that they draw near, and
with the assistance of Sir Wilfrid Lawson (who had raised some strength of
Horse and foot) blocked up the Town.

After this in the latter end of October, some Regiments of the Scots Horse
were removed, and only two and the Dragoones remaining, which with the Forces
of the County, were thought sufficient for the Service, and as many as the
Country could well bear; Thus was Carlisle straightened, in which Service the
English kept five and sometimes six Posts, and the Scots but two all that
Winter. Toward the beginning of April, those two Counties of Cumberland and
Westmorland, having lain under heavy burdens, amounting to 80000. l. or
thereabouts, which the Scots Horse had received (besides the charge of
maintaining their own Forces) began to grow impatient of their burden, and
after they saw that (notwithstanding the Ordinances of Parliament (forbidding
all Arbitrary assessements, and appointing a way of provision for the Scots
Army) and the order of the General, to forbid all taxes from the first of
March) their oppressions were still continued, the Westmorland men resisted the
collection of them, thereupon the Committee of both Kingdoms at Newcastle,
sent a letter to the Committees of those Counties, dated April 21. 1645.
subscribed Leven Callander, William Armine, declaring that, if those two
Counties would undertake to raise, and maintain sufficient Forces, to keep in
the Garrison of Carlisle, the Scots Horse should be removed; hereupon the
Committees of Cumberland, and Westmorland consulted, and agreed to undertake
the Service, and gave notice thereof to the Committee at Newcastle, and the
Scots General in a Lotter, dated April the 25. 1645. and provided three
thousand Foot and six hundred Horse, which with the advantage of the works,
they had made, were sufficient to the work: but in stead of removing the Scots
Horse, a Regiment of Foot were sent to Carlisle, with three pieces of
Ordnance, when the Scots marched Southward from Newcastle, and Sir John Brown
sent word to the Westmorland men, coming up according to agreement, to the
Service against Carlisle, that he would fight with them if they came on. After
this, the whole Army marches into Westmorland, and sends more commanded men to
Carlisle, and impose seven thousand pound a month upon these two Counties, for
the maintenance of their Force before Carlisle; (besides the maintenance of
their own) and that, after Declaration made under the hands of the Earl of
Leven, Calander and Armyne, dated April 25. 1645. that no Tax should be laid
upon them, but by Authority of Parliament. About this time the Lord Kirkbright,
who commanded the Scots Force therefore that present, sent orders to Lieutenant
Colonel Beecher, Sir Wilfrid Lawsons Lieutenant Colonel, to quit a Fort which
he had made at Bockerby Mount, and to resign it to three hundred commanded
Foot of the Scots Army; the Lieutenant Colonel refused unless his Colonel
gave consent; thereupon the noble Lord replied, he desired no better occasion
to cut them all in pieces, and said he would command my Lord Fairfax, if there,
and sent his Foot and some Horse to beleager the Sconce, instead of the Town,
which was not well.

After this (about the middle of June) when the time of Carlisles surrender
drew near, the English Commissioners, having received instructions from the
Parliament, concerning the place, and the Government of it when it should be
reduced, went thither, but no Scottish Commissioners to join with them, the
English and Scots were both desirous to be possessed of the Town, the English
thought it but reasonable, to be trusted with Carlisle on the Scots borders, as
well as the Scots with Barwick on the English, especially, they having
Garrisond Newcastle, and four other places besides: the English Commissioners
(no Scotch Committee being there to join with them) sent to Sir Tho: Glenham,
that if he would surrender the Town, they would propound him conditions, and
the security of the Parliament for performance. The Lord Kirkabright meets the
Drum, examines his business, and gives way to his going in; Sir Thomas Glenham
desires the security of a General, for the performance of Articles, and
thereupon, a Messenger of his own, one Captain Philipson is sent to my Lord
Fairfax and the Earl of Leven to know their pleasure, having a pass from the
English Commissioners, and the Lord Kirkabright, and being accompanied with an
English Captain from the Commissioners, and a Scotch Officer from the Lord
Kirkabright; he goes to my Lord Fairfax, but finding my Lord of Leven to be
gone out of Yorkshire, and the time for his return wellnigh expired, he durst
not adventure to go into Nottinghamshire, to the Earl of Leven, his Pass
being limited only to Yorkshire, and therefore he returned to Carlisle, and
my Lord Fairfax writes to the Earl of Leven about that business. David Lesley
in the mean time, was sent with all speed toward Carlisle, he comes thither
before the Messenger returns and forbids his going in, whereupon Sir Thomas
Glenham seeing his Messenger stopped by the Scots Commander, notwithstanding
the Pass of the English Commissioners, and the Lord Kirkabright, he supposes
they had most power, and falls to Treaty with him, which Lieutenant General
Lesley never acquainted our Commissioners with, but notwithstanding their
minding him of the Treaty, and Covenant, their Protestation against his
proceedings without them; he concludes the Treaty, set Guards of Horse upon the
English, enters the Town, and puts a Garrison in it, where it yet remains.
This is a true and brief account of the siege and taking of Carlisle. Some
Annotations must be made upon the Narrative in Truths Manifest.

First, he charge the English Soldiers, that lay there, of being false to
the Service, in shooting powder, suffering Provisions to go in, entering into
combination with the Enemy, to fall upon the Scots, and promising not to help
them. These accusations are as false, as foul; it is strange these things were
never questioned, nor complained of, till now the Town is taken. We can assure
that a Scottish Officer being desired to relieve Colonel Cholmleys men, when
the Enemy sallyed out, he refused to stir being at the next Post, and near
at hand, and suffered the men to be lost, show us such a carriage of the
English. If want of Orders be pretended as it was by him, either the Orders
were defective or the man. The English desire also to put it to the issue, who
let most provision go in, Captain Philipson indeed sallyed out with a Party
of Horse, on the Scottish Post, and fetched forty head of Cattle, or
thereabout, and two Pieces of Ordnance out of their Sconce; parallel that Act
also; As for the point of the treachery, they disclaim it and defy it; why
should you compel me to say that on the Scottish side, Sir James Lesley and
his Lady with her sister, who were both Papists, had ingresse, and regresse
into Carlisle, by their means, that Sir Timothy Fetherston was suffered to
come to Penrith, and there drank the Parliaments confusion, and yet was
afterward suffered to come forth again, at which time he broke his Paroll,
and went either to Ireland, or the King; that Denton and Carleton, notorious
Malignants, were suffered to go up and down, and disaffect the people, and
rail upon the Parliament; and when sent for by the English Commissioners, were
protected against their power and justice? The foulness of your imputations
has forced from me these things, which no slight occasion should, but by this
you may judge who favored Malignants most.

It is further charged, that those double minded Leaders enter into a private
Treaty with the Enemy, and offer him great conditions. This was a mistake or
worse, there was no Leaders meddled, but the English Commissioners who proceeded
no further, then the Narrative relates, and never offered any conditions at
all; As for the Scots offering reasonable conditions, less advantageous to the
Enemy then the English. You have heard the English offered no conditions; let
us see what the Scots offered, they were such as they would never impart,
neither to our Commissioners nor the Parliament: but a Copy was obtained which
they deny not, wherein was granted almost what was asked, as Liberty to go to
any Garrison they should name, to have a Convoy* as they had to Worcester,
above a hundred miles distant; the immunities of the Church and Churchmen,
freedom to take the Covenant or not, Liberty to go with what they would,
(except Town and Ordnance) whither they would, and to have free Quarter; in a
word, never so high Articles given to any Town, never any Town had less reason
to expect it, had things been fairly carried: for they were eating Dogs and
Horses, and could not subsist three days.

What follows is almost wholly false, that the Enemy took the Scots
Conditions, because he could not trust the English Officers.

The English Officers meddled not in the business, because a Committee was
present there of English; Scil. Sir William Armine, Mr. Darley, Mr. Barwis,
whom the General would not, much less should the Lieutenant General have
dealt so with, as not to acquaint them with the Treaty. And as for the
Commission given to Lieutenant General Lesley, to take in the Town, upon what
conditions he thought fit, he showed no such in writing; if he had, it had been
unjust, we having Commissioners upon the place: And he concludes this strange
story of Carlisle, with the pretended reasons, why the Scots put in a Garrison
into Carlisle, (scil.) Because they had found base, and wicked dealings, by
some of the chief men in the Northern Counties, and to keep it out of the
hands of Malignants; and especially, Sir Wilfrid Lawson, who under the name of
the chief Commander, is no better then railed on; consider the condtion of
this Gentleman, it is true, he cannot be justified throughout; he lived in an
ill air, and was infected with it, but never stirred out of the County, to do
any prejudice to the Parliament: but suffered imprisonment for his not ready
compliance with the Commissioners of Array. When it was to any purpose for him
to appear on the behalf of the Parliament, he raised a Regiment of Horse, and
another of Foot, for the Service of the Parliament, which he applied himself
to with all diligence, and can produce testimonies of his care and fidelity,
under the hands of those you say distrusted him; and was of very good
reputation with the Scots, till the time of the surrender drew near, and then
his appearing for an English Garrison, and refusing to quit his Fort, caused
all this bitterness. Is it possible that the Scots should distrust him, so
little guilty of Delinquency, in respect of them they have upon all occasions
embraced, as Major Craister, and procured to be employed, as Colonel Brandling
in Northumberland, and their own Urrey? and are not there now diverse whom they
trust in their Army, who have served against the Parliament?

So that it may appear, their enmity to Malignancy was not the cause; but what
need we seck further for a reason then the Letter of General Leven, dated at
Mansfield, June 20. 1645. wherein he informs our Commssioners, then upon the
place, That he had sent Lieutenant General Lesley, with full power and
instructions, in such things as concern the INTEREST of the Scots Nation, and
desires their compliance with him, which he never asked; The Interest is there
declared to be the business, a word that troubles all the world. And hereto I
might add a Letter from two Scottish Ministers, (one a Commissioner at London)
to our Commissioners (it seems the Kirk also is concerned in this Garrison)
in which are these words; We interpose our earnest desire to you, that there
may be a cheerful condescending to Lieutenant General Lesley, so far as that
the Town of Carlisle may be delivered into his custody, until the further
declaration of the Parliaments pleasure. Hereby as you shall preserve your
reputation of being good friends to our Nation, so we verily believe you shall
do good service to the Parliament and Kingdom, and shall never have cause to
repent it. These are the words of the Letter transcribed here from the
originalls; I was loath to trouble the Reader with the whole, the Treatise
being already grown into a bulk beyond intention; Only this; It is said that
the Forces there had starved, had not the General sent part of the money to
them which was sent to Newcastle, to enable the Scots to take field; because a
double use may be made of this, as not only in this place, but also to excuse
the Scots, being no better provided in their March, which caused them to stay
in Yorkshire for Provision, when they were expected Southwards; It is answered,
those two Counties of Cumberland, and Westmorland, had been so pressed, that
General Leven, the Earl of Callander, and the English Commissioners had under
their hands acquitted them of further burdens, and therefore offered them to
undertake their Siege at their own charge, with their own force. And if the
General had according to agreement recalled his men, he needed not to have
parted with the money to Carlisle: but enough of Carlisle, and more then enough.

Page 83. the Gentleman puts to Sea, and finds fault with the Parliaments Ships
not doing their duty, by reason of which diverse Ships of the well-affected
were taken, and the Coasts of Scotland not guarded, to their great prejudice;
and in the issue reduces this fault, not only to neglect, but secret
connivence, that is, unfaithfulness: For the imputation of unfaithfulness, let
those that were employed answer it, if this Author will plainly accuse them.

As for the mischances, we know we daily suffer at Land, the Sea is more
hazardous. But I observe men deal not so well with our Mariners, as they do
with Fortune Tellers, and Almanack-makers; for if they tell you but one thing
that falls out accordingly, you admire them, and almost adore them, but take
not notice of twenty lies; here on the contrary, let our Seamen doc many good
turns (as diverse of them have done) (let me name the Noble Earl of Warwick,
Vice Admiral Batten, Capt. Moulton, etc.) they are never thought of, but any
misfortune is sure to be set upon their score. As for the guarding the Coasts
of Scotland, I believe it has not been so well as was expected or intended,
the multiplicity and distraction of affairs with us has been such. But there
is no reason to lay the damage of Scotland upon the want of that Guard; for the
Irish were but very few hundreds, as this Author acknowledges, Page 90. that
came over, and the passage is so short, that notwithstanding Ships upon the
Coast, men might easily be transported from Ireland to Scotland, or the Isles,
as appears by diverse Ships, who have got into our English Harbors with arms
and ammunition, notwithstanding all our Guards.

Page 84. He proceeds, as he says, to another business, and such a one as if
he had not wanted business, he would have omitted, the business is to cast
all possible odium upon Independents, where for want of a good argument, he
loads them with ill words, calls them factious and fantastical headstrong
ones, men without love to the peace of the Church of God. Page 84. Seekers,
(scil.) such as seek themselves under the pretense of Truth, and set up their
own fancies, men that will not settle upon any thing, unless it be in
continuing in phreneticall fancies. And as if he were not content to weary men,
he provokes God also, and says, God knows they are destitute of all charity.
Sir, where is your charity the whiles? he that loves the smell, may have a
bundle of these flowers, Page 86. All the corn in this chafe, the charge in
this clamor, beside general invectives, is; That those men will not
absolutely and positively profess what they would be at, but they have
manifested the contrary, declaring the things wherein they would be forborne,
in their Paper at the Committee of Accommodation. I have nothing to say to
this, but that unless you give better words, or better arguments, you will by
such language and carriage make men Independents.

They are further charged with abominable lying, in persuading the people of
the rigidity of the Presbyterian Government, and the diminution of Christian
liberty thereby, and confutes him with the lenity of the Churches of Scotland
and France. I do not say that both are true, but both may. It is possible for
a Church to be too strict in their principles, and too loose in their practice.
But why should the man be so angry, since the business concerning
Church Government, as himself acknowledges Page 89. is concluded maugre
Independents?

In the same Page the Author goes on to mention and remove two rubs in the way
to a completing Presbyteriall Government: the first is that some will not
allow it to be of Divine right; the second, that some are willing to reserve
the power of excluding from the Sacrament to the Civil Magistrate.

These are so tender points, in which others of greater ability are engaged,
that I dare not meddle, though me thinks I could deal with this Author:
First, he says it is demonstrated to have its ground in Scripture so clearly
that it cannot be denied, and practiced by the Apostles, and their successors.
For the demonstrations, they are not so clear for all the parts of the
Government, but that they may be (as they are) denied. That of Lay Elders was
found in the Assembly a very difficult point, and the Superinduction, of
Provincial, National, Presbyteriall Assemblies, to Congregationall, though
for my part I approve of them, yet I believe they are not demonstrable in
Scripture with undeniable clearness. And as for the practice of the Apostles,
they cannot be adequately urged, because they were not Parochial Presbyters,
but had a general care, and superintendency over the Churches, and a greater
Authority then Ministers now adays. The Council at Jerusalem where they were
was occasionate, not menstruall, or annual: As for the successors of the
Apostles, it is doubtful what they did, antiquity is so fallible, but it is
not doubtful, that whilst the Apostles lived, the mystery of iniquity worked,
and preeminence was loved, so that all the practices of their times, much less
of their Successors cannot be urged. I am no Enemy to the Presbyteriall
Government, as it may be ordered. Appeals are natural, and necessary;
Aristocracy is the most even Government, if faction can be avoided: but I could
wish that all the people of God, especially the Ministers of Christ, who should
go before them, would tread in that more excellent way, charity mentioned by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. ult. and be more careful to advance the power of
godliness then their own; but manum de tabula; If we have the Government, as
we are like to have, let us not fall out for the title; I have known men spend
more about a title, then the Land has been worth.

For the second Impediment which is alleged to be the great stir about
admitting or keeping of people from the Table of the Lord. The case seems to
be thus, We have a multitude of people in this Kingdom ignorant and profane,
many who have a name to live, but are dead, as by their dead works appears,
these are to be formed into Churches by virtue of their external profession.
This is fundi nostri calamitas, and makes the matter so difficult, I believe
the abstention, unless in cases of great difficulty, lies in the particular
Congregation, though not without appeal, which if it were constituted and
ordered as it ought, the strife would cease.

But in this condition that we are, where many a good man is in danger to
strain his charity, why should there be so great and dangerous a stir, if
there be a recession from the rule, which is not so clear? I know as little
ground for the business of tryers for Election of Elders, which tells us
already, we must have Congregations not fit to choose their own Officers, but
we submit to it in regard of the difficulty of our condition: and better (if I
may so say) were it if the Ministers would exercise the power they have, which
they shall find will give them many troubles in this business, then to press
it with public prejudice, and (not to prejudge the Parliament) for the
Parliament to grant what is desired, were better then to run a greater
inconvenience. But I recall my self, and to make satisfaction for the
adventure I have made, I will pass by the discourse of the Author, in
straitning the bounds of power betwixt the Magistrate and the Minister, I am
afraid of meddling with power; Power especially in the Ministers of the Gospel
any further then absolutely necessary to the service and edification of the
Church, is very troublesome and dangerous, and so they will find it; the power
of the Word is great, the power of love is not little.

Page 89. Upon the mention of the Scots desire to the Parliament, that having
had so good success in their affairs of late, they would send to the King for
peace; He declares the equity, and yet improbabilitie of it, in regard, as he
says, the King is chief agent in the design of spiritual and temporal
slavery, in which he is upheld by Foreign Nations against his Subjects. The
Parliament has been careful to apply themselves to the King, for a safe and
well grounded peace upon all occasions; whether they are always bound to
strive with him, it is not for me to determine. But if he be the chief agent,
as this Author says, I would gladly understand why we court the chief agent,
and punish the accessory instruments. As for the Interest of particular Princes
in the Kings cause, I omit them, as also the Narrative of the Scottish
affairs, which I know little of the transaction of them, but heartily resent
their sufferings, I pray God give them a right use of them, and full
deliverance. As for calumnies and affronts, wherewith some are complained to
have repaid them, I dislike and detest them with this Author, if any such be.

Page 101. He passes on to another story of two several attempts of Cajeoling
upon the Parliaments party by the Court; the first, by Commissioners, Richmond
and Southampton; the second by Savill, as I suppose, wherein, he says, they
found their design upon the Scots to be the blowing of a cold coal, and with
this coal he smites the Independents, at least with some suspicions and
surmises, and referres to intercepted Letters and Papers. But if we regard
Papers, who will be without blot? You know here has been a great rumor about
the Scots Treating with the French, and it may be that Papers and Letters
mention it; but shall we believe it? No surely: I am confident they will not
stretch out their hands to a strange God; but consider rather the latter end of
44 Psalm. If ever that should come to pass, I would go into some Protestant
Monastery, and say, Miserere mei, for there were no conversing in this world
any more.

Page 103. The Author enters upon the march of the Scottish Army, from
Nottingham to Hereford; in the way he takes notice of the Committee of
Worcester there, who are charged with misguiding the Army: but I wonder not
that a Plot should be found out in Worcestershire Committee, whereas the
removing of the Scottish Commissioners from the City to the good air, and
accommodation of Worcestershire House, is also found guilty of a design. Page
52. which is said to be an endeavor, to make them strangers to the City, but I
believe, that distance has been made up with double diligence.

In this business of Hereford, there are two imputations laid: one more
general, that the Army for want of provisions were constrained to live upon
fruits; It is well that God made some provision when men failed: but we all
know, that unless Resolutions be timely made known, that endeavors may be
used proportionably; it is almost unavoydable, for an Army to undergo some
want, when they pitch before a Town, in regard that the ability of the
Quarters is overnumbred, and the Country cannot provide so soon as is wished,
or wanted. But it is said, page 105. that at last some provision came, but then
Ammunition wanted: that is hard, were it not necessary that there must be some
necessity, the thing may be true, but how it should come to pass, is out of my
reach; when the Army having received Ammunition in good proportion at
Newcastle, with a particular respect to their march, had no considerable
occasion to spend it, betwixt that and Hereford. The second charge is more
particular against some Members of the Committee of both Kingdoms, who
withdrew, that so for want of a full Committee, Order could not be given for
the dispose of some Horse, to strengthen the siege, which default occasioned
the raising of it: Sure that man who hindered the continuance of the siege (if
without greater disadvantage it might be done) was as little a friend to the
public Service, as to the Scottish Army, and it had been well he were named;
And did not I bar recrimination, I could tell you, when there has been no
Committee, for regulating the Scots Army for the space of three months, and
more, for want of Commissioners from Scotland: But, as for the possibility of
sending Horse from the siege at Bristoll; he that knows the very hard duty,
that Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Horse had there, and the great danger in regard of
the Enemy in the West; and withal, considers the great importance of that
service, both in regard of gaining the City, and preserving the Army; I
believe, will consent with the Truth rather then the Manifest.

But I will make a fair motion, that all the disputes concerning the carriage
of the business of Hereford, might be ended in that happy Act of oblivion,
which was done by the vigilance, and dexterity of Colonel Morgan, and Birch,
and the gallant adventure of the Lieutenant, who surprised the Guard; the City
is taken, and we have all reason to be satisfied. Page 111. Upon occasion of
the sad news from Scotland (which the Author acknowledges was heartily
resented, as by diverse well affected, so, especially by the Houses of
Parliament, (who appointed a public Fast on that behalf) some reproaches are
cast upon the Independents, who are also said to have leaped for joy of the
infortune of the Scots; It Is answered that revilings need no answer: As for
what is laid to the charge of Independents; because, sometimes the Army under
the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, goes under that notion, I must not conceal
how earnestly the chief Officers of that Army were affected with the ill
tidings from Scotland, and how heartily they expressed it in a most
affectionate Letter, sent from the General, Lieutenant General Crumwell, and
other Commanders, which I am confident they will make good in actions, if the
necessity of that Kingdom should ever so require, for they are not so void,
neither of charity nor gratitude, as this Author pretends. I know no Kingdom,
that England is behind hand with in real kindness, I hope they will not begin
with Scotland.

As for the objection made, page 112. concerning Lieutenant General Lefleyes
going into Scotland, upon notice of the ill condition of affairs there given
by the Chancellor, he can best answer it that made it. I think he wanted
respect to the good of both Nations, who expressed any unwillingnesse to the
relief of that Kingdom, in such necessity, but I cannot but take notice of
what is said, page 114. of the cold comfort yielded by this Kingdom to their
Neighbors, when things were made known. To which it is returned, that the
Parliament of England, waited only for the desires of Scotland, to be made
known to them in that behalf: but the Scots were far more shye in asking
help, then the English in affording it; We had Commissioners then at Barwick,
witnesses of their condition, to whom indeed, some Noblemen, and Gentlemen of
Scotland, made a Proposition for sending for Colonel Poyntz, and Rosseter, to
come to their relief, and that the Forces about Hereford might march for
supplying, and securing the Northern Counties, and opposing the attempts of
the Enemy there, which our Commissioners not having power in, speedily
represented to those that had, by a paper from the Scots Lords, as a memorial
of their desires therein (for the Scots were no Committees) and the next day
after upon receipt of Letters from David Lesley there at Bawtry; a Nobleman,
and a Gentleman of that Kingdom, and of the Committee, were sent to our
Commissioners, and in the name of the rest, receded from their desires in the
forementioned paper, which put our Commissioners upon a contradiction of their
former Intelligence, represented to the Parliament; and though it was
propounded by some of our Commissioners (in that time of so great necessity)
that a considerable number of Scottish Forces might be drawn out of the Towns,
and Castles in the North of England, (besides the Town of Barwick) which might
be able to make up a competent strength to oppose the Enemy; yet that advise
was not approved of by the Scots. So that it easily appears, where the ground
either of delays, or denyals of help were. As for the Parliament, they readily
yielded to the march of the Scots Army Northward, for the relief of their own
Kingdom, notwithstanding their engagements in the South, which was as much, as
was, or could be desired. So that I suppose the severe intermination, that the
setting the promise of a small help at the rate was then offered, will be
blamed by Posterity, when it shall be recorded what Scotland has done, and
undergone for their Brethren, and what thanks the Scots have for their pains,
might have been left out, notwithstanding the particulars which said to be
spared till another occasion.

Page 116. I find an unfitting parallel betwixt Cardinal Richelieu, and the
English Parliament, (for though the Parliament be not named, yet those who are
careful of the English Armies, are, which must needs be they) who are made to
agree in this point of Politic unjustice, to set men on work, and purposely
deny them necessaries, that through their miscarriage, others might be
advanced. Certainly, though that Cardinal must needs be acknowledged a man of
eminent parts and policy, of which he has left a monument that yet stands; yet
after that this Author had branded him, with pride, Ambition, Tyranny, and
Atheism, which are no Cardinal virtues; me thinks he might have used more
Brotherly kindness to the Parliament of England, then to make such an unworthy
reflection. But as for the wants of the Scottish Army, if enough have not been
already said, let me add this, the way not to want in England is to work, and
I am confident, that had they done the proportion of work, that other Armies
have done, they would have had the same proportion of wages, and if others had
done no more, they had got as little.

This page is closed with an injust, though not unusual bitterness; against
the once Governor of Bristoll, whose return to sit in Parliament, is said to
be matter of astonishment to the world.

The world is wide sir, and so are you. But why so angry? me thinks the taking
the City so considerable, might have softened your spirit. We use to grace
solemn* occasions with some Acts of favor: why not the taking of Bristoll,
with receiving Mr. Fiennes? especially the retaking of the Town, affording an
Argument a majore ad minus. What is the quarrel? the Gentleman had before
surrendered it, for which he was sentenced by a Council of War.

As for the Council of War, I believe they were guided by honor and
Conscience in what they did; And by virtue of the Article, obliging the
Governor of a Town, to hold out to extremity, condemned the Gentleman. The
General remitting the summum jus, concurred not for execution of the sentence:
the gentleman lives and does well, may he long do so; he has left the Camp, he
follows the Counsel, a work suitable to his parts acknowledged by this
Author, to be fit for a Senate. You complain of his friends, for putting him
upon an employment; of which (you say) he was not capable; but are you free
from blame to deny him an employment, for which you acknowledge him so well
fitted? he never was engaged neither in Counsel, nor in Arms against this
Cause, as some who are to be found in other Counsels or Armies: but parcius
ista, I add but this, the Gentleman has received some wrong by this charge,
but the Parliament more, it being an injust reflection upon their Wisdom, and
Privilege, that they should be taxed for dealing with their own Members, as
they think best for the public good of the Kingdom.

As for that passage, of Soldiers bawling in the fields, Cobblers prattling in
Tubs in stead of preaching, -- Ne saevi magne Saeerdos;
Quam scit uterque libens censebo exerceat artem.


Page 122. He proceeds to exagitation of a piece of a Letter, written from
Lieutenant General Cromwell, upon the taking of Bristoll: First, he wonders
the latter part of the Letter now published by him, was suppressed by that
Authority, that printed the other part. It is no wonder, that the Parliament
intending to recommend to the people matter of thanksgiving, should not
withold that part of the Letter, wherein there were some passages, tending
rather to doubtful disputation, then undoubted gratulation, which I conceive
was the reason of it; It is a greater wonder to me, that this Author should so
confidently print it, when the Parliament had forbid it.

As for the expressions of the Letter recited, and animadverted; I hold not my
self obliged to say any thing, I am no man's Champion but an Advocate to the
truth, and a servant (not as I am like to be taxed) a Parazite to the
Parlialiament: but if I were minded to call the Letter, and the Annotations
upon it to a review, it were easy to find as may irregularities in the notes,
as the Author of the Manifest does in the Text.

From hence the Manifest finds an easy passage to the Independents,
aggravating their ill, Page 127. extenuating their good service, Page 128. I am
loath to leave so ill a relish in the minds or mouths of the Readers, as to
repeat the imputations, but take them as they are; Men that serve themselves
into employment, engage the Pamphleteers to set forth lies and tales for them,
causers of disturbances, blasphemies, heresies, violation of the Covenant,
underminers, factious, guilty of a malicious plot, bringers of confusion into
the Church, and consequently, Anarchy into the State, men that do all for
by-ends, that join with others, as the Papists with Malignants for their own
Interests. Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? To this I answer in the words of
the Apostle James; My beloved Jam. 1. 19, 20.
brethren, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath, for
the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God. I cannot conceive how
they that are singly Independents, that is, men dissenting from other
Governments in the constitution, and ordering of a Congregation, should deserve
so much bitterness; First, they desire a liberty of collecting their members
from several Parishes, and would have an union of hearts rather then a
neighborhood of houses to make up a Congregation. It cannot be denied, but
that this would produce many inconveniences, which no doubt will be
remonstrated; but me thinks, if it be not tolerable for its consequents, it
should be pardonable for its grounds, arising from a desire of all possible
purity in an Assembly. We shall all be in this point Independent in our
desires and endeavors, and must be constrained to set up a Congregation within
a Parish, when we debar one half from the Sacrament, and admit the other,
which is like to be the case in many places. Secondly, they defire a liberty to
ordain their own Officers. This is the practice of Presbyterians also for all
Officers but Pastors: To their admission also the reasonable consent of the
people is allowed, and the approbation which gives life to the Ordination.
Thirdly, they desire a freedom from the Presbyteries, and Synods; An
association of Churches, me thinks they should not deny; a necessity of Synods
they allow, the difference is, whether the acts of such meetings should be by
way of advice, or authority, whether the meetings should be settled or
occasional: for reconciling these let us consider, the one would have
State-meetings, the other upon emergencies, both agree they should be as ost as
necessity is, and no oftener; in case it be oftener, it is as nothing to that
Congregation which has no reference thither. As for that of advice, and
authority, I have read a position in Voetius the Professor of Theology at
Utretcht, a very learned man and a Presbyterian, to this purpose, Potestas
Ecclesiae est directiva, non jurisdictiva, It is to be found in a disputation
de unione and regimine Ecclesiarum, wherein are many things that sound to
moderation; but this difference I believe will find more dispute in notion
then opposition in action, I should wave both the debates of jus divinum in
Presbyteries, and the authority of Assemblies, and remit things to the
practice. If the dictates, or rather directions of a Presbytery, or Synod be
agreeable to the Word of God, and public Peace, and edification, I should
embrace them, were the Authority of a Synod never so little, were they
repugnant to these rules, and ends, either in themselves, or my apprehension,
(which yet I should strive to get informed with all diligence and humility) I
must be spared, were their authority never so great.

The next, and indeed the last thing of moment is the London-Petition, which
this Author approves, and prints, and contests with the Parliament about the
receiving Petitions in general, and this in particular. But this Gentleman and
I are of so different tempers, that I shall not take so much liberty to dispute
on the behalf of the Parliaments Privilege and practice in this particular,
as he does against it; They best know their own Privileges, and how to
maintain them. This I know, that there is no better way to preserve the
peoples liberty, then by keeping inviolate the Parliaments Privilege. If there
be a necessity of Rulers, for the conservation of Liberty (as there is) there
is an equal necessity of preserving the authority of those Rulers, especially
employing their endeavors for public good, as the Parliament does.

The Petition was well framed for the substance of it, and is granted for the
maine, if the Parliament thought it too binding, and particular, and judged
better to grant the thing, then receive the Petition, who need find fault when
they that Petition are gainers, and they that grant are no losers?

As for the City of London, their deserts are such of this Cause, and
Kingdom, that I am confident, no reasonable thing, much less religious, will
be denied them, and I am as confident they will ask no other. They understand
the need and use the Parliament have had, and have of them, and they also
apprehend the near relation, and dependence, they have upon the Parliament,
and may easily foresee the fractions would arise in so great a multitude, did
not the countenance and Authority of Parliament restrain.

Their mutual advantage depends upon their agreement, which whosoever goes
about to interrupt, let them be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel*

For a close, let me take that passage of the Manifest concerning the endeavor
of the enemy to divide the Nations, and his own hopes, (to which I add mine)
that they shall not prevail. Certainly, our endeavor should be to prevent the
fulfilling of theirs, especially in a thing so important to Religion and the
good of these Kingdoms.

The scrupulous thoughts of offense made me sometimes to forbear this answer:
which yet I have endeavored so to order as not to give any offense; if it be
taken, I shall be sorry, yet glad that it is not given. It may possibly breed
me some disquiet, but why should I purchase my own peace, with the loss of
truth? If I have incurred one trouble, I am sure I have avoided another, which
was to me a great one, sc. to see the obligations of this Kingdom aggravated,
their ingratitude recorded, the Parliament affronted, the Commissioners abused,
the people deceived; these are things I have endeavored to right; forgive me
this wrong, I will trouble you no more, unless this Author continue in a
resolution of a fuller discourse (as he intimates in the end of his Manifest)
which I desire might be forborne; For if there be no remedy, we shall also find
a Reserve.

FINIS.
Postscript.
WHereas it may be said that this labor might have bin spared, in regard of
the Censure adjudged by Parliament to Truths Manifest; I answer, that there is
as much difference betwixt a Censure and an Answer, as betwixt the offense in
writing the Book, and the hurt done by spreading it. The Parliament have taken
just notice of the fault, but have not thereby prevented the mischief; for
since the Author was called in question, the book has been studiously
dispersed, and (as I believe) reprinted, and has found some Readers so
confident, as to say, that the book was censured, because it could not be
answered, the contrary of which does now appear.


