INNOCENCE CLEARED FROM LIES.

IN In answer or reply to some particular things: which them, who are
scornfully called Quakers, are charged with in a book entitled, Malice stripped
and whipped, etc.

Published by one, who calls himself Samuel Smith Minister of the Gospel, but
his practice and bitter spirit makes him manifest to be forth of the Doctrine
of Christ, and that he is not guided by the same spirit, which the Ministers of
Christ were, and are guided by, as hereafter may be made appear.

Thus says the Lord God, because you have spoken vanity and seen lies,
therefore behold I am against you, says the Lord God: because with lies ye
have made the heart of the righteous sad, whom I have not made sad, and
strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising him life, therefore ye shall see no more vanity: nor divine
divinations; for I will deliver my people out of your hand and ye shall know
that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 13.8.22, 23.

By one who desires that all men might come to do as they would be done unto.

I. B. London, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near
Aldersgate, 1658.

To the sober Reader.
THis book or paper coming to my hands, published by a pretended Minister of
the Gospel, wherein he pretends an examination of a late scandalous paper, as
he calls it, published by certain Quakers now in the Gaol of Salop, which paper
I have seen and do see, he accuses the aforesaid men falsely, as touching lies
and untruths, and of bidding open defiance to Magistracy and Ministry, to the
making their names odious amongst men, which they were worthy to bear: if it
were truth which he speaks, and therefore I shall try his book entitled,
Malice stripped and whipped, etc. in the things which most concern them, that so
thou who reads this, and all sober minded men, who hear it, may judge, whether
he be not a false accuser of them, and of a bitter spirit, yea or nay, for this
cause, and that he may be a shamed of his folly, these things following I write.

INNOCENCE CLEARED from Lies, etc.
IT has been commonly the practice of persecutors and enemies to the people of
God; but especially of the Priests, Psa. 37.12.
to take away the good name of those they did envy, and give unto them
reproachful names, as this blasphemer, sower of sedition, ringleader of
Sects, Heretics, Acts 16.19, 20.21. Acts 22.22, 23.
and the like, that so they might incense the Rulers and people against them to
take away their lives, which was the end they sought for: witness what they
called our Lord and Master Christ Jesus, read, Mark. 14, 63, 64. And also what
they said of Paul, see Acts 24.5, 6. and that the men in our generation, Io. 8:
48. Mat. 7.14.
who are enemies to the Lords people, may not come short, but as far as their
power reaches, show what spirit they are of: that men may know their nature,
let us see what this pretended Minister says concerning the book he examins.

Says not a book to be chained but let flying, full of falsehood, lies and
untruths, fit for the Devils patronage, and further he says, and that which is
more strange, in a time of Parliament sitting, bidding open defiance to
Magistracy and Ministry, etc.

If the Magistrates would take this man's word without examination, might not
they become guilty of innocent blood
he durst not have spoken these things, saying it is full of lies and untruths,
as though there were no truth in it, and to incense the Magistrates against
these men, which is the thing he ayms at, he says bidding open defiance to
Magistracy and Ministry; but I believe it is good for the Magistrates to take
heed, how they believe such men as this Smith, least they should punish the
innocent to satisfy his will, he has heapt up a deal of accusations, which
sober minded men will see turn to his own shame, for if he examine the book,
which he mentions, all the days of his life, he is not able out of it to prove
the things he has accused these men with, which if he cannot prove, must not
he then of necessity be a false accuser, and therefore if he take in hand to
examine books, it is best for him the next time to say no more than he is able
to prove.

Says in his book William Baret Constable, and Humfry Dale Churchwarden,
according to the Ministers directions, pulled down their speaker, charging some
to secure him, and others also of their company were secured, etc.

calls Quakers, as he says, they gave it out they intended to preach at
Cressag, etc. now this I say, if he had spoken against this people, Read: 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. verses. 2 Cor. 6.3, 4, 5, 6. And see how a servant of the
Lotdor Minister should be qualified.
as it is likely by his words he had then, it was but very equal and
reasonable when they came so near him, and that to preach too: if he had come
to them in the spirit of meekness, being he pretends to be a Minister of the
Gospel, to have seen if he could have convinced them of any error or damnable
tenent before the people, that so they might have been ashamed of it, but it
seems this he did not, but to his own shame, instead of doing so, he hearing of
their coming to preach at Gressag; sent for the Constables, and acquainted them
therewith, desiring them if they came to see the keeping of the peace, and this
was six weeks before: to which I say, the keeping of the peace is that which we
desire, and it is the office of Rulers to see the peace kept, and to punish
them that break the peace, but though he had made it so sure of his side, yet
he came not to them to disprove their doctrine, which had been a fit
opportunity for him to have tried, if he could have disproved them; seeing he
had spoken against them in his public Ministry, it may be behind their backs:
and so it had been but a reasonable thing to have maintained it to their faces,
but instead thereof contray to his first directions to the Constables to keep
the peace, he now gives directions to pull him down; which stood peaceably, it
is like for any thing he knew, preaching the word; these directions was
contrary to reason and the good Laws of this Nation, and I hope the officers
will learn more wisdom than to obey the directions of him, or any other; whose
directions is contrary to the Law to disturb peaceable men.

Is it not a shame for him to declare this.
The Minister in the afternoon durst not go to the Church, by which means the
Congregation, and other neighbour-Congregations, that depend much upon his
Ministry were disappointed of the word that day.

2 Timothy 1.7, 8. Genesis 4.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Psa. 53.5. Pro. 27.1.
was it not Cain that was afraid, whose sacrifice God accepted not, but it was
Abel that was slain whose sacrifice God accepted: its well known though the
Soldiers had their weapons about them, who were then in service for the
Commonwealth and present Government, that the patience of their spirits was
tried that day, when that by some of the people the Hilt of one of their Swords
was broken, the blade being in the Scabbard, and yet the rest did no violence;
but this which thou have done, and said is to the shame of thy self and thy
brethren: is it not the mark of an hireling to fly, and did not thou so when
thou ceased at the midst of thy Sermon as it seems, because a woman came into
thy Congregation, and yet said nothing, as far as I understand by thy relation,
so that to thy shame thou have related this: that men may see thou was the
cause of the disturbance, who gave the officers directions to pull him down
that stood peaceably, who might have come away in peace, for ought I know, if
thou had not been, thou also sufferedst thy servants, if thou did not set
them on, to beat a Kettle, and a Frying Pan purposely to disturb, so that to
thy shame thou may see what thou have done and repent, and some that have
depended upon thee and thy Ministry, I hope begins to see thee, and will buy
thy word no longer.

And when thou comes to the title of the book, thou examines, thou says this
title (Priest) is here used in scorn and derision to the Ministers of the
Gospel etc.

Ier. 5.30, 31.
but I shall prove Priests teach for hire, Micah 3.11. and does not thou so, or
thou takes tithes, if thou do, it was they who receive the office of
Priesthood, have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the
Law: and if thou be not a Priest, Heb. 7.5, 11.12.
thou does the people wrong to take tithes or hire from them: for we do not
read in the Sccipture of truth, that the Ministers of the Gospel were to
receive tithes of the people, but as they had received freely, so they were to
give, and having food and raiment, therewith to be content, 1. Tim. 6.8.

Take notice of the confession of his Faith.
Says, I have so much faith to believe the time will come that the very name
of a Quaker will be as odious in the Christian world, as any heretic ever was
since the days of Christ, etc.

Phil. 2.12, 13.
for it will never be Odious amongst Christians, but a wise man may easily see
what thy faith tends to: It was the practice of the Popish Bishops in the
reign of Q. Mary, to call the Martyrs heretics, and so burn them; I shall
assure thee this faith of thine will get thee no commendation amongst honest
men, and them that fear the Lord, seeing thou believes that will be odious,
which the Lord approves Isaiah 66, 2. saying to this man will I look, even to
him, that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word: if this
will be odious, what then will be commendable? Consider well of it, and let us
have a sober answer.

Says, but you must let fly at that reverent judge, he shall answer for
himself, and it is like he has seen, or will see this scandalous paper of
yours cast out against him and against authority it self, etc.

Psalm. 58.1. Ps. 2.10, 11. Acts 10.42.
What! Did they let fly against that reverend Judge? Did they let fly any thing
but the truth? And why might they not speak the truth, though to a Judge? We
know he shall answer for himself before the Judge of quick and dead, but if
authority would believe thee, thou would surely incense them against these
men; but it is wisdom for authority to know the truth of both sides, thou
accuses or lays to their charge great things, but as far as I see proves
nothing: but it is no marvel since thou would have their names to be so
odious, thou helps all thou can, and to little purpose, for thy work will turn
to thy own shame and confusion, if thou do not repent.

And then thou writes, or gives a short relation of theirs, which testifies of
thy persecution of them who published it, which because thou accuses them to be
liers, I shall briefly reply unto some particulars: In thy examining of the
narration where they are most concerned.

Chrisag.

Says, it seems these men are so full of the spirit that they have now learned
to teach the holy spirit of God to speak, and he alleges some Scriptures to
justify the very name of Church, to our Temples as he calls them, and further
he says, take heed henceforth that no such language come out of your mouths as
this steeple-house is, least you be found amongst the number of Stephens
persecutors.

slandering that thou cannot cease, Ps. 52.2, 3.
saying they have now learned to teach the holy spirit of God to speak, hear
thou have accused them, and that concerning the things of God, saying they have
now learned to teach the holy spirit, etc. may thou not be ashamed to give
such things under thy hand, surely if thou spoke what thou thought, 2 Pet. 3, 3.
I would have thee to prove it if thou can: otherwise if thou spoke what thou
thought not, art thou not found in the generation of scoffers, and for the
Scriptures thou alleges, them I do own, but they do not prove the
Steeple-house a Church, 1 Pet. 2.5.
neither the house of God, which likely is the end thou brings them for, but
the Scripture proves the Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1. And the Apostle Peter
says, ye also as living stones, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.
(mark that) are built up a spiritual house, and are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner
stone, in whom all the building fitly framed together grows up an holy Temple
in the Lord; know you not that your bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
which if thou had known? why did thou stumble at their calling of the place
builded of wood or stone, a Steeple-house, is not that the most fit name, for,
if it have a Steeple, where the Bell or Bells hang, if it have we may call it
so; and yet not be found in the number of Stevens persecutors, Mat. 10:16, 17,
18:
but rather thou will be found in that number, if thou seek to cast the
innocent into prison, and plead for the Temple which Steven witnessed against,
saying, the most high dwells not in Temples made with hands, which they that
then upheld the Temple put Steven to death, Acts 7.

etc.

Says must you have liberty to rayl, revile, scandalize, and disturb the
Ministers of Christ in doing their office; away Animals, away; if the Gaol of
Shrewsbury, be not a means to recover your madness, Bedlam is fittest for such
men.

Smith has done, we desire that they might show us in the spirit of meekness,
what these damnable tenants are, that we might forsake them; and if they accuse
us falsely, that they might repent: and this liberty is but reasonable, and not
contrary to the Law of the Nation; but it seems this Smith would have liberty
to say what he will, and none to say to him what do thou; but if they do he
will call them disturbers, and the means he will use to recover them, as it
seems is Shrewsbury Gaol or else Bedlam, which is a means the Ministers of
Christ never used, that ever I read of in the Scriptures of truth; but it has
been the custom of that Synagogue of Satan at Rome and their adherents, when
they could not, bring men into submission, to what they falsely called truth,
then under the name of Heretics or disturbers of the peace, those that would
not submit to them, they put to some cruel death, or else kept them in prison,
and shamefully entreated them, which is the way this Smith would take it seems,
to recover those which will not believe what he says to be true; but it is
good for the Rulers to take heed, that they do not consents least they should
become guilty of innocent blood, for by this he has made himself manifest to
all the children of light what spirit he is of.



Says be it known unto all men by these presents that the Quakers in
Shrewsbury Gaol are not perfect, nor without sin, unless their tenants be,
which I shall not wonder at, that lying is no sin, etc.

Shrewsbury Gaol, which is the means thou will use to recover them, or else
Bedlam, surely thy Brethren and the men of thy own generation will be ashamed
of this, Io. 8.44.
or else their merchandise will savor evil in the Nostrels of all honest men;
and for our tenants being such that, lying is no sin, I utterly deny, for lying
is of the Devil, he is the Father of it, and all unrighteousness is sin, so
they being clear of what thou accused them with, let him that's wise judge who
is fallen into the pit.

etc.

It is well you will sometime speak the truth, etc.



etc.

Where was that honor you owed as due to the Magistrate, when you came and
presented your selves in the face of the Court, and presence of the Judge, in
that rude uncivil and contemptuous manner, neither putting off the Hat, nor
bowing before him, which the fifth Commandment commands, etc.

Paul gave to Festus and King Agrippa, he called them by the titles which
belonged to them, and so did they him who was Magistrate therein, calling him
Judge, and the Court a Court of Justice, and honoring them in the Lord, which
is as much as the Scripture commands, saying, Children obey your Parents in the
Lord, but thou says, neither putting off the Hat, nor bowing before him, which
the fifth Commandment commands, to which I say, it is well if thou have not
belyed the Commandment, for I never could find any such command in the fifth
Commandment, as the putting off the Hat or bowing; but this I am sure is in
the second Commandment, thou shall not bow down thy self, and I do believe
there is no confusion in the Commandments; but rather it is in thee, as in
this thing, it does plainly appear; and then thou states a question, or an
objection which is in these words: But where do you find a command for
putting off the Hat; unto which I say, it had been wisdom for thee before thou
had stated this question to have considered whether thou could have given
a sufficient answer to this queston yea of nay; but it may be thou did not
so, but did even like a foolish man that begins to build, and considers not
whether he is able to finish or not, but to say something to it, being thou
have laid it down, thou says, what though we read not of a Hat, etc. and
herein thou has not proved there is any command for putting off the Hat; but
has showed thy ignorance of the Scripture, in saying, what though we read not
of a Hat, but thou may read of Hats in Dan. 3.21. then these men were bound in
their Coats, their Hosen, and their Hats, it might be that their Hats were not
taken off their heads, when they were before Nebuchadnezar the King, and the
most mighty men in his Army; seeing they were bound in them, and if they were
not taken off; do not they then that require them to be put off, and fine men
for keeping them on, in that thing exceed Nebuchadnezar,

does not he stand praying in the Synagogues, has he not the chief seat in the
assembly, does not he take hire, etc.

Here is a bundle of accusations bound up together, etc.

Ezekiel. 22, 25, 26.28:
whether these things be not so, but it seems if they had accused thee, it had
not been falsely: for thou says I am called a Master, and to defend thy self in
thy so doing, thou shifts with Backsters words, and thou calls him Master: but
it were more for thy credit and his too, to have gone to Christ's words, seeing
you pretend to be his Ministers; but this it seems you dare not do, knowing
full well that his words is against your practice, Mat. 23.10.
who says, neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master even Christ,
and so ye make the Scripture of none effect to keep your own traditions, as
standing praying and such like, to which Christ says, when thou prayest thou
shall not he as the hypocrites are, for they love to stand praying in the
Synaegogues, Mat. 6.5. and if you do not love it, why do you plead for it,
and for having the chiefest seat in the assembly, for which thing the strongest
argument that I see thee bring is this, for some body must have these places,
and some of those upper rooms and seats, which argument shows thy weakness and
ignorance, for if it were so that somebody must have them, does it therefore
follow that the Ministers of Christ must have them, seeing Christ said unto
them in his doctrine, beware of the Scribes which love to go in long
clothing, and love salutations in the market places, and the chief seats in
the Synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts, Mark. 12.38, 39. and why is
there so much pleading for these things, if they do not love them, is it not a
great sign that a man loves the thing he pleads for: unless he be a great
dissembler.



This is the great quarrel of all that they have against us, and further says,
to pull down the Ministry of the word, and this must needs take with the vulgar
sort of people, that know little of God and the ways of godliness, etc.

Isaiah, 56, 10, 11.
if hire be taken away, is that the foundation upon which it stands, the
Prophets of the Lord cried against such as sought for their gain from their
quarter, and teach for hire, read the third Chapter of Micha, and see what the
Lord says concerning the Priests that teach for hire, and Prophets that made
his people err, they bite with their teeth and cry peace, and he that puts
not into their mouths, they even prepare war against him, and yet I do believe
the Prophets of the Lord did not pull down the Ministry of the word, but it
seems by this argument, that if hire were taken away the Ministry will down,
which if it be so, Isaiah 55.2.
it makes it plainly appear you teach for hire; though you would make the
people believe otherwise, but if they keep their tithe or money from you, it is
possible you may prepare war against them, and then they may know your nature
to be as Christ says, inwardly ravening wolves, and whereas thou says, this
must needs take with the vulgar sort of people; who know little of God and the
ways of godliness; this may stand to the shame of thee and thy Brethren; do the
people know little of the ways of God and godliness; what have you taken hire
for nothing all this while, it is good for the people to consider of these
things, least they spend their money for that which is not Bread, and their
labor, for that which satisfies not, and thou speaking of them, thou calls
Quakers, says the same, and substance of their prating (as thou calls it) was
we preach unto you the word of the Lord freely; and this I believe was thy
greatest torment that any should preach the word of the Lord freely, as they
had received it: or else why speaks thou against it, and caused him to be
pulled down that preached, and for the Scriptures thou alleges them I do own,
and the maintenance they do allow Ministers; as that thou alleges in Mat.
10.10. which says, the workman is worthy of his meat, and I desire people to
read that Chapter for their further satisfaction.



This was answered to your shame before.



And whereas they say the fruits brought forth by thy people made thee manifest
to be no Minister of Christ, being they were mockers, scoffers, and swearers
and such like, etc.

And this thou calls great ignorance in them, but thou may see it is rather
thine to call it so, for the Lord says by Jeremiah the Prophet speaking
concerning the false Prophets, Ier. 23.22.
If they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words,
then they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of
their doings, now if this be an evil way before mentioned which thy people
lives in, yea even them which then dwelt in thy own house or were servants to
thee at the least: Ier. 23, 14, 15, 16, 32, verses.
for if thou gather such as these, it may well make thee manifest to be no
Minister of Christ, Mat. 7.20.
but if thou make account this will not serve, it is like thy own practice may
make thee manifest, thy lying and false accusing, and being out of the doctrine
of Christ, as thy own book will witness where thou says, I am called a Master,
and if all this which is brought forth by the people and by thee, be not
sufficient to make thee manifest to be no Minister of Christ, then thou may
let us hear some more marks and signs from thee, that thou may be the more
certainly known.



Unto which I say, if they had been fined for that they had done to thee, it
had been little wisdom in thee to report such a thing or boast of it, but
seeing they were fined for their Hats, as they are able to prove, and thou
reporting it was for that they did to thee, which thing thou have not denied in
thy book; and therefore that they said concerning thee was true, it was a
manifest lie for thee to report so: though thou was the cause of all their
trouble, and so let it rest upon thy head, till thou depart from it by
repentance.



Do you not rather cry out against the supreme power and Magistracy, because
it will not suffer such lawless spirits as our sottish Quakers are of, to do
what they would without check and controulment, to disturb Ministers in
preaching the word, and abusing the Lords Messengers, etc.

page 2. line 8. 9. thou says, who sees not the sad effects of this licentious
liberty and toleration to this Generation of men, who strikes at the very root
of all, etc. Who now is it that cries out against the supreme power, is it not
thy self rather, for who gives liberty but the supreme power and Magistracy,
they that are not blind will see who thou strikes at; but thou thinking to put
it off thy self, says do not you rather cry out against the supreme power,
etc. I say nay, we cry out against thy deceit, and that is it that makes the
effects sad to such as thee, and in as much as the Magistracy gives liberty to
tender consciences to speak against the deceit, which such as thou lives in, If
they that do not visit the members of Christ when they are in prison must
depart from him, then what can they expect who cast them into prison, and seek
to keep them in.
it is to the honor of the Lord God, though it be to thy torment, who would
say what thou likes, and if any contradict thee, it is like they must go to
Shrewsbury Gaol or else Bedlam with thy consent, which is the means thou will
use to recover them, which means is such as the Ministers of Christ never used
that ever I read of in the Scriptures of truth, neither have thou instanced any
command or example for thy practice, which no doubt thou would have done if
thou could, and for abusing of the Lords Messengers, none more like to be
guilty of that then thy self, who caused him to be pulled down which stood
peaceably, preaching freely to the people, for that which thou accuses them
with returns upon thy own head, and for that which the Magistracy has done in
releasing these men which was maliciously prosecuted against by thee, though
they had broken no known Law in this Nation as far as I can see, in as much as
the supreme power and Magistracy has released the oppressed, it is to their
honor, and in it they are a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that
do well, and these men who are released may give God the glory, who alone is
worthy for evermore.

Toward the latter end of their book it seems there was some Queries
propounded to Priest Smith or any of the Priests in Shrewsbury, to be answered
which he puts off himself saying, I thank you; that you call upon them as well
as my self to answer? Had it not been more wisdom for him to have answered the
queries, then to have spent his time in accusing men falsely.

1 Pet. 3.15. Calling such as formerly had been his hearers a Cage of unclean
Birds or nest of vipers, yea them which he formerly looked upon as a Church to
God, which if he did so, it may be his judgment was not right then, neither
right now, it may be he cried peace, while they put into his mouth, but now
prepares war against them, though it may be they are as upright in their hearts
unto the Lord as ever they were when he looked upon them, to be a Church to God.


But to be brief we have received no answer to them, neither from them nor him,
but it is the most to his shame, who begins a piece of work and does not finish
it, it may be there is some people that desires satisfaction concerning the
things which was propounded, seeing they are matters of weight and great
concernment; but it is like Smith does not matter for that: for if they
contradict him in what he says, or ask him a question, or come into his
Congregation, though it may be they say nothing, it is possible he may say,
they astonish or disturb the Congregation, witness his own book page 4, and 6,
and the means he will use to recover, such is Shrewsbury Gaol or Bedlam: but in
that he calls his conclusion, he says, I have done with them, etc. So that now
it is like we may not expect an answer from him to these Queries: unless he
make himself a public liar, which if he should do so, his answers would give
but little satisfaction to the people, if they know they come from the mouth of
a liar, so that now if these Queries they propounded be answered at all, it is
like it must be by some other, which may be will answer more wisely than Smith
has done in examining this book of theirs, which he called scandalous, which
was easy for him to say: but not so easy to prove.

And now these men are cleared of the things he accused them with, and also
them which he mentions in his book, have denied the things which is contrary to
the truth, and the truth of God is clear, and the filth he would have cast upon
these men who published the book he examines, is upon his own head returned,
though much more might be said in vindication of the truth, and the innocence
of these men in the things which he accuses them with, and against his practice
but at present, I shall say but a little more, for if he be not past shame,
this might suffice to make him cease boasting in his folly, which if it do
not, more may be said another time, at present I desire all people to consider
in the fear of the Lord God, how they stand and whom they uphold and believe,
least believing such as Smith, they be incensed against the innocent, and
receive a prejudice in their minds against the people which the Lord has
blessed, that so they cannot believe the truth of the Lord God, which he in
this his day of love has made known, to the gathering of his people together
from the Shepherds that do feed themselves, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4, 13, 14, 15.
and feed not the flock, but eat the fat, cloth with the wool, and kill them
that are fed; and may not this be fulfilled in such Shepherds as this is, with
whom I have dealt, who tells of Shrewsbury: Gaol to recover them or else
Bedlam, which is more like to destroy them: and so kill them that are fed, but
the Lord God of heaven and earth is arisen, and has heard the cry of the
oppressed, and will bring deliverance to his people, and no weapon formed
against him shall prosper, Isaiah 54.13, 14.17.
for he will bring them into a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of
Israel shall their fold be, and he alone shall teach his people, and they shall
be established in righteousness, 1 Pet: 2.12.
and praise him because of his salvation for evermore, and though they be
reproached for a season, and suffer for righteousness sake, being falsely called
evil doers and disturbers of the peace, Ezekiel. 21, 26, 27.
yet the Lord will arise to plead the cause of the poor and needy, and to
confound his enemies and overturne, overturne til the kingdom come to him to
whom it is right, even to the Lord Jesus Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever, and his Scepter is the Scepter of righteousness, and by holiness
shall his subjects be known fulfilling that royal Law, Iam. 2.8.
doing unto all men as they would that men should do unto them, speaking the
truth in love, bearing a testimony for the Lord God against deceit in their
Generation, and though some count it railing: yet this is the end of our
preaching and writing, that deceit may be made manifest, that people may
forsake it, this is the root we strike at: and this torments the Beast and the
false Prophet: but the stone cut out of the mountain strikes at the feet of the
Image, Dan. 2.34.44
which shall assuredly be broken to pieces, and the truth of the Lord God, which
is now made known in Christ Jesus shall be exalted, Mat. 25.26.30.
and his enemies shall be confounded, the faithful shall see this, and praise
the Lord for ever and ever; but the wicked and slothful servant shall be cast
into utter darkness, where there is pain and sorrow, weeping and wayling, and
gnashing of teeth for ever.

THE END.

