A FREE DISCOURSE AGAINST Customary Swearing. AND A DISSUASIVE FROM CURSING.

By the late Honorable ROBERT BOIL.

Published by John Williams, D. D.

LONDON: Printed by R. R. for Thomas Cockerill, Senr and Junr, at the Three
Legs in the Poultrey, over against Stocks-Market. MDCXCV.

portrait of Robert Boil

IMPRIMATUR.

April 13. 1695. Guil. Lancaster.

To the Right Honorable RICHARD Earl of Burlington and Cork, Lord High
Treasurer of Ireland. AND The HONORABLE Sir Henry Ashhurst, Baronet; Executors
to the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.
IT has been an Injury too often done to the Memory of Persons eminent for
Knowledge, Learning, and Virtue, to have after their Death such Works obtruded
upon the World for theirs, as have been deservedly suspected; or if theirs, yet
were never intended by them in that squalid, broken, and imperfect condition,
to have been published. But as for this Tract you were pleased to put into my
hands to peruse, it is not only certain that it was Wrote by the Honorable
Person whose Name it bears; but also that it was designed by him for the Press;
as some Passages in it do apparently show.

And if this Noble and Learned Author thought it seasonable for those Times
Anno 1647.
of Uncontrolled Liberty and Confusion in which it was wrote, it is as
seasonable, if not more, at the present; when that Vice against which it is
directed, has of late Years so far prevailed, to the great Dishonor of our
Nation, as well as our Religion, that the Patriots of our Country assembled in
Parliament, have been thereby justly provoked to prepare that late Bill (which
since has passed the Royal Assent) for the better and more effectual Punishment
and Suppression of it. A Design becoming so August an Assembly; and in the
Prosecution of which your Honors must be esteemed to have done considerable
Service, especially by the Publication of this Treatise, which has been so
happily recovered, and by a singular Providence reserved, as it were, for such
a special Season and Service.

I am, Most Honored, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, JOHN WILLIAMS.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THESE Two Tracts against Customary Swearing and Cursing, lately met with
amongst the Papers of a Person of Quality, and an intimate Acquaintance of the
Honorable Mr. Robert Boil, Transcribed by his own Hand; were found upon
Perusal, Perfect and Fitted for the Press; except the Close of a Dedicatory
Epistle to his Noble Sister, the Countess of Kildare, which (as far as appears
by the Copy) he had but just begun.

The Year inserted on the Title Page, as well as a passage or two in the former
of these, shows that it was Penned toward the latter end of the late Unhappy
Times, when he was about Twenty Years Old; by which time (if I am not mistaken)
this was the Third Treatise he had prepared for the Public; the other Two
being that of Seraphick Love, afterward Printed, and An Essay of Mistaken
Modesty, referred to in this.

I cannot say (though there is a sensible Conformity between the Style of these
and others of his Books) but that this Honorable Author, if he had been to
write* upon this Argument in his Riper Years, might have given it a finer Turn;
and added, out of his vast store of Learning and Thought, much to the weight
and force of it. But there is in the management of it, such a strain of Modesty
and unaffected Piety, such an affectionate Zeal for the Honor of Almighty God,
and such a passionate concernment for the Well-doing and Happiness of those of
his Acquaintance, for whose use this seems more especially designed; and in
fine, so much Truth, Reason, and Observation (as the Pleas and Excuses here
undertaken and answered show) that must above all recommend it to such as have
his Name in Remembrance and Veneration.

A Name, methinks, better than that of Sons and of Daughters, than that of
Blood and Descent; and that should provoke those of Eminent Extraction and
Station, to an Imitation of so Worthy and Glorious an Example.

What happy Instruments might they then be of Good to Mankind, by their wise
Conduct and their exemplary Virtues! What a restraint would this lay, above
that of Laws, on their Dependants and Inferiors! For how would such dare to
offend, that are sure to find no Countenance or Protection? And what Protection
or Countenance could they expect from their Superiors, whose Lives would be a
continual Reproof, and where they could find no more a President, than they do
a Law to encourage them in their wicked Oaths and Blasphemies. To bring these
Vices into disparagement, and to represent the Folly, as well as the Sin of
them to the better-bred part of Mankind, was the Generous and Pious Design of
this Learned Author; and of those Honorable Persons, that from their Relation
to him by Blood or Friendship, have been concerned in the Publication.

Toward the utter Extermination of which amongst us, there seems to be, as
human means, nothing more necessary than the Vigilance of our Magistrates, who
are now as well and fully Empowered, as obliged by the Law to see to the
Punishment of it; and for the due Execution of which, they will most certainly
have the good Wishes, Assistance, and Prayers of all Good men; and which is
more than all, the Blessing and Rewards of Heaven.

I have only this to add, That the Second Tract, or Letter, seems to proceed
from the same Hand with the First, being agreeable to it in the Style as well
as the Design of it; and so the Naming Mr. Boil in it, is but a decent Cover
for the Concealment of himself.

A DISCOURSE Against Customary SWEARING.
THOUGH I doubt not but that it is much more easy to make most Swearers
Proselytes than Converts, and a Task of less Difficulty to convince their
Judgments, than to reform their Practice; yet that they may not have any color
to father upon Ignorance what is usually the Child of some much guiltier
Parent, it will be (possibly) no less useful than necessary, briefly to direct
them to those Texts of Scripture, where all those that acknowledge God's Word,
may find the Condemnation of that Vice.

First then, the Third Commandment flatly forbids unnecessary Oaths, in terms
that are ratified by these words of our Redeemer, in St. Matthew's Gospel; Ye
have heard what has been said by Mat. 5. 33, 34.
them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the
Lord thy oaths: But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by heaven, for it
is God's throne, nor by the earth, etc. And a little under, But V. 37.
let your communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than
these comes of evil. The Sum of which Prohibition is thus repeated by St.
James, toward the close of his Catholic Epistle; But above all James 5. 12.
things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, neither by the earth,
neither by any other oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest you
fall into condemnation. And suitable to these clear Passages of both
Testaments, the Wiseman characters a Sinner by him that swears; and
paraphraseth Eccl. 9. 2.
a Righteous man by him that fears an oath. So in Hosea, Swearing has the Van
of the most crying and provoking Sins, in that same dismal passage; By
swearing, Hos. 4. 2, 3.
and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out,
and blood touches blood: Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that
dwells therein shall languish, with the beasts of the field, and with the
fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away. And in
another Prophet we find this Threat recorded; And every one that swears Zech.
5. 3.
shall be cut off. Which Passages might easily be reinforced with others of the
same nature, if I did not think these that are already alleged, abundantly
sufficient; where we pay not our Faith to the Number of the Texts, but to the
Authority of the Inditer.

But alas! how much more easy is it to make men condemn their Sins, than to
persuade them to forsake them? Certainly our Understandings are (usually) much
honester than our Wills; it being far easier to reconcile men's Judgments to the
Truth, than their Practice to their Judgment. Customary and unnecessary
Swearing (for that is the sole Enemy I undertake) is so confessedly unlawful,
that they are ashamed to defend it, that blush not to practice it; and even
they renounce it in their Opinions, that most cherish it in their Discourse.
But methinks this knowledge of the ill they act, should make them apprehend
that Menace of our Savior, which he threatens, He Luke 12. 47.
that knows his master's will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: For stumbles are more pardonable by Night than by day; and the
knowledge of what we do, whilst it lends us direction, robs us of excuse; and
if it do not impede, it aggravates our faults; since he that does what he
condemns, condemns what he does. Upon which score our Blessed Savior said,
That Tire and Sidon Matt. 11. 21, 22.
should feel a milder Torment at the day of judgment, than those ungrateful
Towns Chorazin and Bethsaida, where the light of his Doctrine had shone so
clearly, and the Miracles of his Life had been so familiar. And accordingly, we
may observe, That the Devils that had no Tempter to their Fall, have found no
Pardon for it; but having sinned against so clear a light, are hopelesly
reserved in chains of utter darkness, to endure hideous Torments unto all
Eternity.

SECT. I.
BUT that we may leave our Swearer as little Pretense as Reason for his
Obstinacy, let us singly and orderly examine his Allegations, and tear off
those Fig Leaves of Evasions and Excuses the Devil teaches him to sow together,
to hide his own Deformity from himself.

PLEA I.
Amongst these, the first Allegation we are to remove, is this, That Swearing
is indeed a Sin, but that (as Lot said of Zoar) Genesis 19. 20.
it is but a little one, for were it of the blacker Dye, in what a sad
condition were mankind, since the number of Swearers is not inferior to that of
Men.

Answer. But certainly he that seriously considers whom the least sin offends,
and what it merits; how Infinite a Justice, Majesty, and Goodness, it provokes,
and how intolerable and immortal a Punishment is due unto it, will easily
concede, That to believe any Sin otherwise than comparatively little, is in it
self an Error absolutely great; for the most dwarfish are to be called small,
but in the sense that the Astronomers call the Earth a Point; for so indeed it
is, compared to the Firmament; but in it self considered, it is so vast, that
the Spots and Shreds of it are both the Stage and the Subjects of the Ambition
of Conquerors, and the Jars of Monarchs. And truly, since the least
(unpardoned) Sin is sufficient to damn us, methinks we should as little slight
petty Faults, because there are fouler Crimes, as we do Pistols now there are
Cannons used. But granting this Assertion to be true in the general, it will
forfeit that Attribute in this Application; for this Sin is one of those that
are expressly and by Exodus 20. 7.
name forbidden in the Ten Commandments; where it is not only listed among, but
has the Precedence of Murder, Theft, and of Adultery; being the sole
Commandment (save one) that has a Threat annexed to the Law; which in this
passage is, For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in
vain. In which last words, the great Lawgiver foreseeing men would be very
remiss in the prosecution of a Fault, in which their want of Zealous Piety
makes them not to be concerned, declares that he himself will take the
Vindication of his Honor into his own hands, and inflict himself the
Punishment of a Crime, that fears it but from Him. And then if those Trespasses
be not severely dealt with, that are alone punishable by the Supreme
Magistrate, let all consider what a fearful thing it is to fall Heb. 10. 31.
into the hands of the living God. Which brings into my mind a pretty
Extravagancy that is reported of the Turkish Laws; which punish Blasphemy (as
they call it) against Mahomet with inevitable Death, but enact no Penalty upon
the like dishonor offered to God. Because Mahomet (say they) is not in a
condition to vindicate himself; but God is ever able to revenge his own
Affronts, and therefore they resign that care to Him. Who indeed many times has
(in such cases) done it so soundly, and so much to the purpose, that those
saucy Wretches have had cause to think it as poor a Privilege to have their
Oaths out of the cognizance of the Laws of men, as thieving Beggars do to be
exempted from the danger of the Beadle and the Stocks, because their Crimes are
reserved for the Gallows.

But to resume our Proofs of the Sinfulness of Swearing: Admit the Guilt of
Single Oaths were no less venial than is pretended; yet certainly, when in most
Swearers the frequency of swearing is so great, that one day may be guilty of
more than a Thousand Oaths; (these Sins not growing single, as Apples or
Cherries, but like Grapes by clusters; the Swearer's Devil having a title to
the name of the Gadarene Mark 5. 9.
Spirit, that, answering our Savior, called himself Legion) their Multitude
cannot but render them considerable: And he that remembers that a Thousand
Holes may as well sink a Ship, as some great Leaks, will conclude Oaths to be
extremely dangerous, at least for their Number, tho they were not so for their
Heinousness. Nor are they only ruinous to the Persons that use them, but have a
destructive Influence upon that State that suffers them. For whether or no what
the Prophet related once of Judah, Because of swearing, the land mourns, be
not a fulfilled Jer. 23. 10*
Prophecy of England, I wish it were rather Charity than Partiality to doubt.
For tho the multitude and variety of our Sins be so great, that it is a puzzling
Task to determine to what particular Crimes our Calamities are due, yet
certainly our Oaths are too considerable an accession to our sins, not to
infuse a suitable proportion of Gall and Wormwood into that bitter Cup (of
Affliction) these gasping Kingdoms drink so deeply of; and whatsoever
feathered, I am confident our Oaths have strangely pointed those fatal Arrows
that destroy these Nations.

As for the supposal this Mistake is built on (the Involvedness of all men in
the Guilt of Swearing) it is as weak as it is uncharitable; for (besides that to
allow no body an Innocence from swearing, is as much a Slander to mankind in
its present condition, as it would be its Crime if the accusation were true)
our Savior gives us the World's Example rather for a Caution, than for
Imitation: Where he tells us, That the Way to Hell is a Road, and thronged Mat.
7. 13.
with Numerous Travelers; but Heaven's Path is narrow, and the Gate that
inlets to those Mansions of Bliss, as unfrequented as it is strait. Even Mahomet
himself (in his discourse with the Jew Adia) having at the Last Day divided
Mankind into Threescore Troops, makes but Three of them Believers, and all the
rest Reprobates. But certainly he whose Command this is, Thou shall not follow
a multitude Exodus 23. 2.
to do evil, will hardly take the Practice of that Multitude for a just
dispensation of the Law of that God, who having commanded us to live by Good
Precepts, will scarce accept it for an Excuse, that we have erred by Bad
Examples. 'Twould be a strange absurdity in Physic, because a Pestilence is
more dispersed and epidemical, to think it therefore the less dangerous; or to
believe that the Multitude of stinking Carcasses can lessen the Noisomness of
the Stench. But as in Pious Duties the general Concurrence contributes to the
acceptance; so in Sins, the like Consent but hastens on Revenge: It being with
the guilty Kingdoms as with leaking Boats, where the Number of the Passengers
but makes them sink more nimbly. And accordingly we read, that the Universality
of the Sodomites Beastliness was so far Genesis 18. 32.
from justifying each single sinner, that they were all consumed with Fire from
Heaven, for the sole want of Ten Righteous Persons. It Is for them only that
think it no misery to burn in Hell with others, to fancy it no sin to swear
with Company: But for the rest of men, let them take this from me, that Sins
whose seeming Pettiness makes them less formidable, do oftentimes prove the
most dangerous; and he that dares esteem any Sin small, may soon be brought to
think none great.

PLEA II.
Well, but objects the Swearer, I do not swear so often, and my Conscience by
seldom accusing me of that Sin, assures me that I do but unfrequently commit it.

Answ. But sure in Vice, whose Essence consists in a repugnance to Mediocrity,
every little is too much; and he that swears fewest Oaths, swears yet too many
by the whole number that he swears. One Oath is too many by one, when one is
enough to damn. And who would swallow Poison, because obliged seldom to repeat
his draught? To pass over this, that the same Considerations that contract the
Number of your Oaths, do aggravate their Guilt, by arguing both a clearer
knowledge of the ill you act, and a more bridling power to restrain it. But
alas! how seldom does the silence of his Conscience make for the Swearer? We
know that Insensibility of Pain may as well proceed from the deadness and
stupifi'dness of the part, as from a perfect and unmolested Health. In
fighting, that is held a heavier blow, that (stunning) takes away the sense of
Pain, than that which pains the Sense. Beware your Tranquillity resemble you not
to the Toad, that feels not Poison, because he is all Poison; and resents no
alteration from it, because it is natural to him. There are Legions of Swearers,
in whose mouths Custom swears undiscernedly; and who being taxed with it, (and
believe what they speak too) swear that they are no Swearers, and thus commit
the fault they would wipe off the imputation of. But wise Physicians hold it a
fatal Symptom when Excrements are voided without the Patient's knowledge; and
it is a sign that the Thief has haunted long, when the Mastiff forbears to bark
at him. In such cases, Conscience, like oppressed Subjects under an armed
Tyrant, forbears Expostulations, not out of want of the causes of complaint,
but out of use of sufferings. But certainly this Lethargy of Security is much
more dangerous than the Fever of a restless Conscience; since in the one, the
smart soon drives us to the search of Physic, but the other is so far from
addressing us to Remedies, that it never lets us know we need them. In such
still Consciences, as in the Sea, the smoothest Seas, the smoothest Calms
forerun the rudest. Tempests: For Conscience, when long forced to play the
Mute, turns to a Scold at last; being like o'erladen Muskets, which whilst no
Fire comes near them, can scarce be known from them that are not charged; but
at the least Spark (of serious terror) that falls into the Touchhole, they will
be sure to fly about our ears.

PLEA III.
True; but (may you answer) there are others that swear as much as I, and
oftener; why then are not they more reprehended for more frequent Faults?

Answ. To this I may reply in the terms of the Apostle, Am I therefore your
enemy because I tell you Gal. 4. 16.
the truth? And add out of Solomon, That reproofs of instruction are the way
Prove. 6. 23. Prove. 13. 18.
of life. That poverty and shame shall be to the man that refuses instruction,
but he that regards reproof shall be honored. And lastly, That he that being
often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy, I know there are many Saul's, whose Choler flames against those
David's that endeavor their dispossession, tho they attempt the Cure even with
Music, I mean, the mildest and the gentlest way. But I must beg my Swearer to
consider, That it is an Inspired Writer that assures me, There is a generation
that are pure in Prove. 30. 12.
their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness. Your Excuse is
just as if in an Hospital a desperate Patient should say to his Physician, Why
I can need no Physic, for there are others here as sick, and many more
diseased than I.

To complain of being reprehended for Vice, is to complain that one is cared
for; like the favorite Child, that cries for having the Knife taken away from
him, when it is not from others, for whom we care not whether they cut
themselves or no: Which is as if our Eyes had right to quarrel with us, for not
enduring that dust there, we suffer in our Shoes. Certainly as we deserve not
Praise for other men's Virtues, so can we not decline Censure by the allegation
of their faults. Take heed there be not places hot enough in Hell, tho others
fry in more tormenting Flames; and remember, that as it is not Health to be not
altogether as sick as gasping people, so it is but a very sorry goodness not to
be as bad as the worst. How strangely are our Affections misplaced! In
transitory Goods, which he rates justliest that prizes least, we think we never
have enough, if any body else has more; but in the Goods of the Mind, which
cannot be overvalued, we think our selves sufficiently stored, if others enjoy
less. We are discontented at another's Wealth, and proud of his Vices; and
whereas his greater Poverty should exalt our Gratitude, and his greater Piety
create our Emulation, his Riches make us envious, and his Sinfulness secure.

PLEA IV.
Well, (may you reply) but I scorn to swear falsely; and what know to be true,
why may I not safely swear?

Answ. This weak Objection satisfies many Swearers, (so easily men believe what
they desire) but with as little Reason as they swear with need: For that not
False alone, but Rash and Unnecessary Oaths are forbidden, appears evidently by
the expression made use of in the Third Commandment; where Perjury is not alone
condemned, but it is flatly written, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord
thy God in vain. Which if needless and customary Swearing do not, 'twill be a
strange Riddle to me what the Commandment means to prohibit. But that this is
the genuine Sense and Design of those words, is cleared by these express ones
of our Savior, (cited before in St. Matthew's Gospel) Ye have Mat. 5. 33, 34,
etc.
heard that it has been said of old time, thou shall not forswear thy self,
but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths. But I say unto you, Swear not at
all, neither by heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by the earth, etc. And to
this sense the annexed affirmative Precept expounds the negative Law; the word
Communication in the former showing the Interdict to be chiefly meant of Oaths
employed in common Discourse and Conversation. Nay, God himself seems
manifestly to determine all the Controversy, by that clear distinction
expressed in a passage of Leviticus, whose words run thus, And ye shall not
swear by my name Lev. 19. 12.
falsely; neither shall thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord. And
certainly if we must answer at the Last Day, for every Idle Word, how much more
will that Account be exacted of us for every Idle Oath?

The Jews at this day, (as I learned whilst I lately conversed with them at
Amsterdam) have so profound a Reverence for that great Name of Jehovah
(commonly called Nomen Tetragrammaton, and Ineffable, so frequently recorded in
the Scriptures) that they hold it unlawful for Mortal Lips so much as to
pronounce it: But tho I esteem this fancy suitable enough to the rest of the
Extravagancies of their Modern Tenants, yet certainly their Superstition will
condemn our Irreverence. I remember an Expositor observes upon the 6th. of
Deuteronomy, and the 13th. verse, That the word there which signifies Swear, is
put in the Hebrew in the Passive Sense, to imply that our swearing ought to be
a kind of necessitated act. And a Father tells us of one Clinias a Pythagorean,
who being fined in a great Sum of Money which he might have escaped with an
Oath, chose rather to pay the Penalty imposed, than not to pay unto God the
Reverence that he thought due unto his Name. Besides, he that makes no
Conscience of swearing vainly, will soon make but little of swearing falsely:
For he that in a lower degree so voluntarily breaks God's Commandment for
nothing, may soon be drawn to break it in a little higher degree for his Profit.

And tho many of our Gallants (doubtless in a pure Complement to the Devil) are
pleased to condemn the breach of this Commandment, only when the sinner wants
the excuse of an advantage by it; yet certainly he that uses to toss God's
Sacred Name in his mouth without any Reverence, and employs it about every
trifle, will easily be tempted not to care much what he does with it, nor to
what use he puts it. And therefore holy David makes it a symptom of Hatred
against God, when in a Psalm he says, Thine Psalm. 139. 20.
enemies take thy name in vain. These Considerations may clearly teach us what
to think of those usual forms of speech, such as are, God forgive me, God help
you; and the like of those customary Exclamations, such as are, O God! O Jesus!
and those others that are usually employed to proclaim our wonders, or supply
the want of a Complement, with an excess of Irreverence: For tho these
unregarded Trespasses be in most persons faults venial enough, as the effects
rather of Ignorance and Heedlesness, than of Design; yet are they fashions of
speaking, which besides that they are always needless, and often scandalous, do
but inure our mouths to a very saucy slighting of that Awful Name, which
eternally to praise, shall be in Heaven both our Employment and our Happiness.

PLEA V.
Nor will it avail the Oathmonger to reply, But I do not take God's Name in
vain; for I swear not by God, or by Christ, or other Oaths of the like nature,
but only by the Creatures, as by this Light, by this Bread, by Heaven, and the
like; and the Creatures name I hope it is no sin to take in vain.

Answ. For sure if we will allow our Savior to be the best Interpreter of his
Father's Commandments, he will teach us a very differing Lesson, in those
(already Mat. 5. 34.
twice alleged) words of St. Matthew; for doubtless he that forbids to swear
by Heaven, the noblest, or by Earth, the meanest Ingredients of this vast
Fabric of the World, intended that Prohibition should reach all other
Creatures; which is as clear as light, in the ensuing words of the 37th. verse
of the same Chapter; where Christ's express Injunction is, But let your
communication be yea, yea; nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes
of evil.

Besides, either by the thing you swear by, you mean God, or no; if the former,
your Guilt is evident in the Breach of God's Commandment; and if the latter,
remember what the Spirit says in Jeremy, How shall I pardon thee for Jer. 5. 7.
this? Thy children have forsaken me, and sworn by them that are no gods. And
in effect, it is questionable in Divinity, whether be the greater Sin, to swear
falsely by the Creator, or with truth by the Creatures; for as the former is an
act of high Impiety, so is the latter of Idolatry: Because swearing by any
thing being a part of Divine Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and 10. 20. Isa. 65. 16. Josh. 23. 7.
Jer. 12. 16. Exodus 23. 13.
Worship, (as the Passages the Margin leads to, will evidence) implies in us an
acknowledgment of some Divinity in the thing we swear by; which without
Omniscience, is incapable to discern the inward Truth or Falsehood of our Oaths;
and without Omnipotence, unable to reward the one, or punish the other. A
consideration so prevalent with many of the Primitive Martyrs, that they chose
rather to expire in Torments, than swear by the Genius of the Emperor. Nor is
an Oath only an Act or Species of Divine Worship, Isa. 48. 1. and 45. 23. but
by a Synechdoche is taken for the whole Worship that men pay their Maker, in
the 63d. Psalm, and the last, and in Jer. 4. 2.

PLEA VI.
Allied to this Plea, is theirs that will not flatly swear by God, but by
certain fictitious terms and abbreviatures, as by Dod, etc. and by the like
disguizing of them believe to justify their Oaths; as if they cared not, so
(like Saul to 1 Samuel 28. 8.
the Witch of Endor) they may go masked to Satan.

Ans. To these I shall only answer with the Apostle, Be not deceived, Gal. 6. 7.
God is not mocked; since (as the same Apostle elsewhere says) He 1 Cor. 3. 19.
takes the wise in their own craftiness. Well may this childish Evasion cheat
our own Souls, but never him, who judges as well as he discerns Intents; and
regards not so much the precise signification of your words, as what they are
meant and understood for; which (in such cases) is usually an Oath, since the
same credit is both given and expected upon these mongrel Oaths, that is paid
to those they mean, but would not seem. These people bring into my mind the
Bloody Persecutors of our first Christians, who clothed them in the skins of
savage beasts, that it might seem no crime to worry them; for so these
Hypocrites disguise God's Name, to give themselves the license to dishonor it.

It Is a very pretty slight of these Gentlemen, to cozen the Devil to their own
advantage, and to find out By-ways to Damnation, and descend to Hell by a pair
of backstairs; and methinks argues a Cunning much about the size of his, that
pleaded he was innocent of falsifying the King's Coin, because he had displaced
some Letters in the Motto. But to Hell, as to Towns, these singular Bypath
(tho less frequented) may lead directlier than the broad Highways: And to these
Gentlemen, and those that rely upon the last answered Objection, I shall at
present only recommend the serious pondering of that passage of the Wiseman in
the Proverbs: All the Prove. 16. 2.
ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the Lord weighs the spirits.

PLEA VII.
It is a usual Excuse of some sort of Swearers, That they swear only some
peculiar Oath, and that one kind of Oath cannot amount to such a Crime as the
more scrupulous pretend.

Answ. An Apology equally excusing with the Thief's that should alledg, that he
commits all his Robberies upon the same Horse; and the Drunkard, that should
offer to justify his beastliness, by affirming, that he never foxes himself,
but with one sort of Wine, or in such a peculiar unaltered Bowl. Remember what
an Apostle somewhere says of sinning, Whosoever shall keep the whole James 2.
10.
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. Just as a man that
wounds a Buck in the Vitals, is truly and properly said to have killed the
Deer, although the Shaft reached but the Head or Heart, leaving the Legs and other
parts untouched. Thus in a Globe, tho there be numerous parts, yet he is guilty
of breaking the whole Globe, that breaks it but within the Arctick Circle, tho
near the Equator it have escaped that violence; for wheresoe'er you break it,
you break the Globe; its Essence consisting in the entireness that is ruined by
the fraction of any part. Sin, because natural to us, is so readily learnt by
us, that as in shooting, by practicing to hit Wrens and silly Sparrows, we
learn the art of killing Feldifares, Thrushes, and the other sort of Birds we
never aimed at; so by committing some small sin, we learn, tho insensibly (and
perhaps undesignedly) to commit other and grosser kinds of sins.

One act may make us do dispositively, what Moses is recorded to have done
literally (at the foot of Exodus 32. 19.
Mount Sinai) break all the Ten Commandments at once; for single disobediences,
if presumptuous, may have the power to exile that Fear of God, whose expulsion
comprises in it the whole trade of sin, which (Conscience once despised) is
known without being learnt. If a reverence to the Commandment were that which
did place limits to the variety of your Oaths, it would not permit you the use
of any one, but lay an equal restraint in relation to them all; since the
sinfulness of swearing does consist, not in the diversity of our Oaths, but in
their forbiddenness. But this Excuse it self is often wanting to many of our
Gallants, who not content with the received forms of dishonouring their Maker's
name, do as much affect Novelty in their Oaths, as in the Fashion; and if they
have a gift of singularity in swearing, are as proud of it, as of their
Mistress's favor: Such people are as Nice as Impious in their Oaths, they will
never use any till it be stale and threadbare, but (ever like their Clothes)
leave them off before they have been worn long enough to grow old. But whilst
they are thus industrious in the discovery of new ways of provoking their
Creator, it is much to be feared, that they do but (if I may so speak) find out
for themselves a Northwest Passage to Damnation.

PLEA VIII.
But, continues the Swearer, if I swear not, I shall not be believed.

Answ. But ('it is replied again) Belief is better wanted, than purchased at so
dear a rate as sin; since he that parts with Heaven, makes over a bad bargain,
tho Matthew. 16. 26.
the whole world were the accepted Price. But alas! unless men will construe
their disobediences for arguments of your obsequiousness, how unlikely is it,
that (by believing you speak truth, because you use to swear you do not lie)
they should take your readiness to transgress one of God's Commands, for a
proof that you dare not break another.

How ridiculous would men esteem that Merchant, that should be confident to
gain Credit amongst Lenders, by giving Bond for every trivial Sum, for which
others are trusted upon their bare word? For in Oaths (as in most other things)
too constant a frequency depreciates that authority which their rareness as
well as nature gives them: That not being held a sufficient Security for the
belief of a doubted or important truth, that is lavished to authorize every
trivial and impertinent assertion; nor thought a convincing attestation of a
questioned truth, that flows rather from a custom of sinning, than design of
confirming. No, no; he needs not many Oaths, that uses few; for to be known to
make a Conscience of an Oath, will gain your words more credit than the
swearing of a thousand; it being a visible and remarkable Judgment of the
offended. Deity upon Oaths, that their Number discredits that Truth it self
would persuade.

Since then it is your habitude of swearing needlessly, that alone engages you to
a necessity (as you call it) of swearing to be believed, let your
discontinuance remove that obligation Custom only has contracted; and believe
me, that the most persuading asseveration of all, is so to live as not to need
to swear. That sociableness which you allege to extenuate your fault, but
aggravates the heinousness of the crime; by confessing Customary Oaths to be
like jealous Tyrants, whom we cannot entertain, without giving admittance to
their Retinue and their Guard, since in this Vice you acknowledge the act an
engagement to a repetition; and Heb. 6. 16.
that Oaths which are the ultimate and highest Confirmations of Truth in their
nature, must yet (by this fine Policy) themselves derive an Authority from
their Multitude; which is very unnecessary where the Assertor is believed, and
usually does but create distrusts where the Veracity is not credited.

PLEA IX.
Of kin to this is their Apology who plead, That if they do not swear, their
words shall neither be feared nor obeyed by their very Servants; men's ears
being of late so accustomed unto Oaths, that they are necessary to make them
think we are in earnest. This is the usual Objection of the French, amongst
whom this Vice is grown so Epidemical (as of Blackness amongst the Ethiopians)
its commonness has removed all the deformities they would otherwise find in it.

Answ. But sure there are ways enough to make your servants obey your Commands,
without your breaking God's. Gravity and Severity, not using them to hear you
swear, are courses likelier far than Oaths to reach that end: Which if they yet
should fail of, they would turn this fancied inconvenience into an advantage of
necessitating you to the election of Religious Servants. Certainly, since the
sole universality of Vice has drawn upon us this supposed necessity, a general
and unanimous desertion of it must needs be the properest expedient for its
removal. And, believe me, it is but an extravagant way of teaching our Inferiors
to pay us their duties, to teach them to disobey the Commands of their
Superiors by our own example, and to lead them the way to despise the
Injunctions of the most Adored Powers, to whom we confess to owe an exquisite
Obedience, upon the highest Considerations.

But admitting (as the dispersedness of this Vice too often forces us) the
supposal of this Plea to be true, yet will the Inference prove consequent? For
by the same reason the Thief might justify the unreclaimedness in his
Robberies, by alleging if he forsake that Trade, his Purse must soon grow
empty: Or the Buona Roba excuse her Prostitutions, by saying, That unless she
continue her former Profession of Wantonness, she shall no more be presented
with New Gowns, and Linen richly laced, nor be able any longer to maintain her
wonted Riots; her Conversion (by forbidding her to be the Cherisher of her
Gallants loose Excesses) depriving her of the only fuel of her Bravery. Upon
how few could we with justice press Religious Duties, if such petty
Inconveniences attending their performance, were a warrantable dispensation or
disengagement from it? Surely he that requires that we should pull Mat. 5. 29,
3^.
out our right eyes, and cut off our right hands, if they oppose our entrance
in at the straight Gate, will scarce give them admittance, that will not
purchase it by the parting with such trivial Conveniences. It is much less
unreasonable that you should be neither believed nor obeyed with readiness,
than that God should either not be believed when he speaks, or not obeyed when
he commands. For take this for a Truth, to which Oracles are Fables, That never
any man commits a sin to shun an inconvenience, but one way or other, soon or
late, he plunges himself by that act into a far worse inconveniency, than that
he would decline.

PLEA X.
Others there are that use to represent, That they swear not but when they are
angry; and then (for all our Clamours and Exaggerations) they mean no harm at
all.

A. But would you take it for a justification of your Wife's Adulteries, if she
should tell you, That she never prostitutes her self, but when her Fits of Lust
tempt her to give that satisfaction to her appetite? Besides, this is but to
excuse one fault with another; and with no greater justice, than his that
should defend a Bastard's Crimes, by alleging that his Mother was a Whore;
since the Nature as well as the Duty of Virtue being the Moderation of our
Passions, it is evident that their excesses degenerate into sins; and therefore
how that can be a good excuse that needs one, and how that anger which in it
self is sinful, can impart an innocence to productions in their own nature
culpable, let those that are concerned determine.

For my part, when I consider the Apostle's Command, Be ye Ephesians. 4. 26.
angry, and sin not; I cannot but apprehend, that when our Passions swell into
excess, they are indeed contaminated by the Guiltiness of their Productions,
but confer not upon them a meritoriousness which themselves want. But why, I
pray, in every passionate mood, must you be transported to commit Sins that are
as unprofitable as impious; and to deserve your Crosses, by a saucy Provocation
of your God, whom you then endeavor to make your Enemy, when you most need his
favor to protect you from disquiets? Why must your Tongue fly in your Maker's
face, and vilify his Sacred Name, because your Dice turn up Size-ace rather
than Quatre-trey? For either he is the Guider of those seeming Chances, or
meddles not with their disposal: In, this last case you are palpably injurious,
to make God the Object of your Choler, when he is not the Cause of it; and in
the former case your folly is not inferior, instead of propitiating, to incense
that Deity, who is the sole Disposer of those Fortunes we either wish or fear.

But take heed he give you not too much pretense to be so, by displeasing you,
(as discreet Mothers whip their froward Children that cry without cause) and
punish in his anger these rash and culpable expressions of yours. As for the
other branch of the excuse, I mean the harmlessness of your intent; to that I
must reply, That our Actions may as well offend as our Intents, if they be
subsequent to our knowledge of God's aversion to what we do. And usually men
take it for a sufficient offense, to do what we are sure will disoblige them,
tho with a differing design. Nor do we think our selves less injured by Robbers
when they strip us, because they offer us that violence, not with intent to
anger us, but only to make a Booty of our Purses. It Is a received Maxim in
Divinity which Moralists prop with their full concurrence, That no Goodness
(much less bare Innocence) of the Intent can justify a formal sinful evil. If
then the committing of this sin against the knowledge of the ill you act, be
not crime enough to condemn you, you must not be denied my Absolution. But
withal, I must acquit most sinners in the world upon the self-same score; and
believe the threatened Flames of Hell as uninhabited as insupportable; since
certainly such sinners (if any such there be) must be prodigious no less for
their unequaled rarity, than devilish perverseness, that are such Monsters as
to offend their Maker, merely to offend him. For in Philosophy our Masters
teach us, That Ill under that notion cannot be the object of our choice; (that
being ever a real, or at least a seeming good); and tho in our misguided
elections we oftentimes embrace it, yet that is ever under a contrary notion,
and rather by mistake than by design.

But oh! how industrious are sinners to deceive themselves; and how strangely
does the Devil fascinate and blind deluded Mortals, when (by such silly and
impertinent Excuses) he persuades them rather to expose their judgments to a
certain discredit, than let their Souls be ransomed from an Ignoble Slavery,
into a Glorious Freedom; and rather suffer their Abilities to be believed weak,
than permit their Lives to be made virtuous. Certainly, such people would make
me as much astonished as themselves are faulty, if I did not consider this
gallant property, of rather making bad Apologies to defend their Sins, than
good Resolutions to forsake them, as entailed upon them by a kind of traduction
from our first Parents, who hoped with Fig-leave Aprons, and the faint Shade of
Trees, to hide both their Nakedness and their Disobedience from the Omniscient
Eye of God himself.

I will not waste Ink upon their successless and impudent defense, that make
their Drunkenness an Apology for their Swearing, and make that an excuse for
their sin, which is it self a sin above excuse; but with as little justice, as
the Keeper of the Lions in the Tower could excuse any particular Tragedy they
had acted, by alleging that he had voluntarily let them loose. But since the
Tempers that most dispose men to a flux of Oaths, are Drunkenness and Choler,
give me leave by the by, to take notice of the chief Midwives that are usually
assistant to the birth of Oaths; and to observe, That as the Thunder falls not,
but when Heaven is over-cast, so we are pronest to swear, when the Beastliness
of our Passions has either blinded or deposed our Reason.

PLEA XI.
It Is confessed, you may allege, that Swearing is a most heinous Sin, but I do
never swear my self, but only to repeat those Oaths of another (which are
therefore his Sins not mine) whose omission would spoil the Jest.

Answ. This brings into my mind the known Story of that merry Gentleman, who to
show the sullen Justice how the Mastiff he had killed, had first assaulted him
and overthrown him, runs full butt at the formal Sir's breast, and sends both
him and his Chair to salute the ground: For when a Sin cannot be imitated,
without being committed, then that you but repeat it only, is as sorry an
excuse, as his must be, who to illustrate the relation of a Murder, should
Pistol the first man he meets withal. Besides, when did Transgression by
President turn Innocence? and what was unlawful in the Act, become legitimate
in the Repetition? It is acknowledged, that the relating of another's Oaths may
sometimes be not only lawful but necessary; but then it must be either to
discover or convert the Swearer; or else when the Oath is some material
Circumstance of a serious Narrative. But here the very End adds guiltiness to
the Action, it being only to make another's Vice applauded, and render his Sin
both infectious and immortal. But how will you justify this introducing of
God's Name only (like a Fool in a Play) to make the Company laugh, and to bring
it into contempt, from the disobedience to the Prohibition of taking God's Name
in vain? Unless (perhaps) the consequents of your sin teach you a construction
that may resolve this difficulty; and the Judgments your swearing will provoke,
show you in what sense you have taken your Maker's Name in vain. Remember how
sad a Reckoning was presented to Belshazzar Dan. 5. 5.
by the Handwriting upon the Wall, for having turned the Vessels of the Temple
into Implements and Furtherers of Mirth, at his sumptuous Entertainment; and
consider betimes, that God may possibly less resent the making merry in his
Holy Cups, than the making merry with his most Holy Name.

To this may well be added, That in this sinning at the second hand, the Copied
Sin is held more criminal in the Transcript than in the Original; for besides
that this Swearer by Imitation acknowledges himself so delighted with the
other's sin, that he becomes the Devil's Mountebank (or his Zany) to have it
admired by all that hear him (and we know that Approbation is but an
after-Consent); besides this, I say, the Leading Swearer has the excuse of an
immediate Applause; whereas the Apish Repeater wrongs and discredits his own
Piety, only to celebrate and proclaim another's Wit; if that be not too
partially termed Wit, that appears such only to our Corruptions: Since when the
Oath must make the Jest, it is only the Devil in us that is pleased with it.
Handsome Replies are good without Oaths, and dull ones will not be made good by
them: To the one they are needless, to the other they are useless; that being
justly enough appliable to Oaths in Apothegms, which is usually believed in
painting of Faces, That Beauties need it not, and deformed Women look but
ridiculously for it.

Fools (says the Wiseman) make a mock of sin; they can take Prove. 14. 9.
pleasure to hear him affronted, in whose Communion consists happiness; and
make that the fuel of their jollity, that should be the object of their
detestation. For my part I do not like this doing in jest, what a man may be
damned for in earnest; and I much wonder that we frail Mortals, whose faults
are more numerous than the very minutes we have lived, should think our own
sins too few to condemn us, without adopting those of others too! and to our
crimes (too numerous already) adding these sins of Supererogation! But to
resume our Theme.

PLEA XII.
There remains yet a prejudice to remove, which though very rarely the pretense
of Swearers, is very often a prevalent motive to swearing, and is an evil by so
much the more obstructive to these sinners reclaiming, by how much the more
silently it opposes it. This is a foolish fancy that many Swearers cherish,
that their Oaths make them looked upon with a kind of admiration, as
Gentlemanlike sins; and witness in them so bold and daring a courage, that it
extends to a fearlessness of God himself.

Answ. But though their blushing to own so childish a pretense, be a sufficient
disproval of it; yet since, as in War, so in disputes, we consider not so much
the personal strength of the adversary we attempt, as the rank he holds among
those that employ him; 'twill not be amiss to remove an obstacle, made
considerable by being so great a Vice's motive, and so great a motive to that
Vice: Though of this sort of Swearers (as of some Savages that lurk in Rocks
and Woods) it be much more difficult to obtain a Battle, than to get a Victory;
and to draw them to the Field, than to give them a Defeat.

Doubtless these needy Gentlemen will never tempt the admiration of Wise men
upon any other score, than that of the greatness of their folly. They must be
thought strangely necessitous of meriting qualities that do so meanly by their
bad ones implore and court men's good opinion: And I know not whether be the
greater, their impudence to expect it for the recompense of vice, or their
profuseness that should squander it away on those who have no juster title to
our esteem, than that by which the miserablest of Beggars pretend to our
Charity, the multitude of their imperfections and wants. Wise men will make
these poor and empty projects, the objects solely of their scorn and laughter;
and only those that want esteem for themselves, will reward you with it; and
for such peoples praises, they will but discommend you: So that that empty
applause you are ambitious of, will either be impossible to be purchased, or
not deserve to be pursued. But what, your Oaths will make men take you for a
Gentleman! you are deceived, there is too little Epicurism and Chargeableness
in your vice, to be affected to that Quality. 'Twas still so cheap, and now
grown so common, that I wonder our Grandees, though they desist not for the
sins sake, renounce it not, at least, for the Company's. Must then Vices be
arguments of the possession of that dignity, that Virtue is the sole true means
to purchase? I Am sure it should not be so; but grant it were, Will you pretend
to Nobility, by that alone which is not the property, but the vice of
Gentlemen? and entitle your self to that illustrious Quality, by that which, in
God's Eye, makes them unworthy (if not divests them) of it? At that rate your
pretensions would parallel his mirth, who boasted a descent from the first
Caesar's, barely upon his being (like most of them) almost deformedly Hawk
Nosed; deriving his interest in their blood, only from his sympathy with their
defects.

For my part, I must confess, I am not ambitious of those badges of Gentility,
that Christianity delivers for the symptoms of Reprobation: Nor do I find men
desirous of the Gout, though the Proverb have appropriated that disease to Rich
men.

But then (you think) your courage will be unquestionable: And indeed it may
seem that you want not probability to prop up your hopes, since you desperately
hazard the incurring of Immortal Torments, for that, for which no Wise man
would venture the stretching of his little Finger. But since the kindred
betwixt virtues is not so remote, that the want of any one should conclude the
possession of any other, and your impiety convince us of your courage;
Experience teaches us, That no men more fear what they should contemn, than
those that contemn most what they should fear. And Martyrs have embraced those
Flames with joy, that impious persons durst not so much as think of without
horror.

That boldness that men personate against their Maker (were it real) would not
be the effect of their resolution, but either of their inconsiderateness, or
their unbelief. The wicked flee (says Solomon) Prove. 28. 1.
when no man pursues; but the righteous are bold as a Lion. And indeed it is
no great encouragement to despise this life, to want either hope, or at least
confidence of a better. Nor will all men so easily conclude, that he that fears
not to venture his Soul, dares freely venture his Body. For since it is not the
essential worth of things, but the proprietary's value of them, that their
dearness to us is to be measured by: That standard, and most men's actions, will
present us the soul and body in a very inverted order of precedence; the
greater part of men living for the Body as if they were all Body, and slighting
their Souls as if they had no Souls, or had them but to lose. It being but too
true of the very greatest of those people, that in themselves as in their
stables, the Employment of the Man is but to serve the Beast. And truly he that
considers that the neglect of the Soul proceeds from the former dotage on the
Body, will think that a very unlikely consequence, that infers a readiness to
hazard the latter, from the carelessness of what becomes of the former. He that
shakes off the emboldening Fear of God, betrays himself to as numerous
apprehensions, as did the weak-ey'd Frantic, who to be secured from the
offensiveness of the Sun's brighter Beams, by pulling out his eyes, exposed
himself to all those dangers and those horrors that attend on blindness.

PLEA XIII.
But, say some Swearers, if I renounce this Vice, my Repentance will procure me
a derision I shall be ashamed of.

Ans. Must then that Bashfulness which is both the Livery and Guard of Virtue,
oppose our addresses to it? Like Ditches when the Drawbridge is cut down;
which tho their use be to secure the Fortress from Enemies, forbid access to
them that once have salley'd, when they are meditating a Retreat. But yours is
an excuse as receivable as the Whores, who pretended Bashfulness for their
turning honest. I was much taken with an Italian Gentleman, who spying a Friend
of his peep out his head from behind the door of a Bordello, to see if he might
retire undiscovered; Come forth, come forth, cries he, you need not be ashamed
to leave that sluttish place; but you should have been ashamed to have entered
it.

Have Innocence and Vice then so changed natures, that he that did not blush to
commit sin, should blush to forsake it? And he that has once framed misshapen
Characters, be ashamed afterward to write a Neater Hand? The blushes that do
wait on our Repentance, proceed from an implicit confession it imports of some
former faultiness; and so if it have been shameful to have committed a fault,
how much more should we be ashamed to continue; and how little can it discredit
us to forsake it? And truly, he that thinks a fault a just engagement to a
relapse, lest his Conversion should make him laughed at, deserves the Censure
men would pass upon that fool, who having slipped one foot into a Quagmire,
should rather proceed to be entirely bogg'd, than by timely stepping back, to
confess a mischance that may provoke men's laughter. I had much rather men
should laugh at my retracting, than God frown upon my relapses; and care not so
much who smiles at any action that makes my Conscience do so, (not by way of
derision, but of applause.)

How contradicting are the desires of mortals! We are angry if we are not
thought virtuous, and yet we are ashamed to appear so, and think it a just
ground of quarrel, to be reported the contrary of what we blush to seem! Like
Ladies, who tho they long to live till they grow old, fret to appear what they
desire to be. The sinner that is overmuch concerned in bad men's opinions of
good men's actions, does as it were swear Allegiance to the Devil, and let him
bore his Ear Exodus 21. 6.
through with an Awl against the Door-Post, sealing an engagement to perpetual
bondage; for (as the same men that crucified our Savior, derided him) as long
as the greatest part of men are wicked enough to injure Piety, there will be
found men impudent enough to mock it.

For Sinners knowing that in the world's esteem, the extent of a Deformity
makes it vanish, and that the Generality of a Crime does so divest it of that
name, that every body's sins are thought no body's, are by the cheapness of the
expedient easily swayed to entrust the protection of their Reputation rather to
common Guilt than to a private Virtue; and to seek an innocence rather by
adding to the number of the wicked, by their Calumnies and Derision, than by
increasing the number of the godly by their Conversion. Thus being bribed by
their own interests to discredit such actions as they are tied to, and yet will
not practice; it is no wonder if by scoffingly condemning what closely condemns
them (tho therein their Consciences give their Tongues the lie) they cunningly
endeavor to father their faults, not upon their want of Piety, but store of
Wit, and to make their slavery to their Passions pass for the superiority of
their Judgments.

But sure he is very unfit to be Christ's Soldier, that blushes to wear his
Heavenly Leader's Colors, and wants the Courage to disobey Example. He that
will take the Canaan above by violence, must imitate the Conqueror of the
Canaan below, who professed to the world, If it seem evil unto you to Josh. 24.
15.
serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will serve, whether the gods, etc.
But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord. Our Savior (who for us
endured the cross, despising the shame) apportions Felicity to the being
reviled for his sake: And Mat. 5. 11.
congruously his Apostles being causlesly misused by the Chief-Priests,
departed from the presence of Acts 5 41.
the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to endure shame for his
name. Derision for Virtue is a grievance as old as Job; who in his time
complained, that the just Job 12. 4.
and upright man is laughed to scorn: And 'twas even Christ's own case; of whom
one of the Evangelists in some place records, That they laughed him to scorn.
But we may Mat 9. 23.
say of the Resolute Christian what the Wiseman says of his Maker, That he
scorneth the scorners: And Prove. 3. 34.
surely, since God is said to laugh diverse Transgressors of his Law to scorn,
it is not improbable that he will not fail to laugh them to scorn, that for his
Glory scorn not to be laughed at: Especially, since such persons are deeply
accessory to their own and Piety's Disgrace, by a sneakingness which so implies
a Guilt, that where it proceeds not from a fault, it is one: And themselves
highly countenance the discountenancers of the Profession of Religion, by being
ashamed to own it. Whereas the loss of the blind world's applause should prove
as little dissuasive in the point of Conversion, as its acquisition should be a
motive. The man that dares be good without a President, looks like the noblest
President of good: Tho to say truth, as Horses are not much prized, only for
not refusing to set forth unless others lead the way, and for not leaving the
track they once are in, because none but resty Horses are guilty of the
contrary faults; so is not the Gallantry of contemning the opinions and smiles
of sinners so meritorious as it is thought; since none but Children (and they
too laughed at for it) will let themselves be frighted from what they love, by
others making mouths and faces at it. Could singularity in goodness consist
with the innocence of others, a Gallant Spirit would look upon that Solitude
rather as a delight than a determent; since it is not a greater Affliction to
his Charity, than it is a Complement to his Generosity, by assuring his Devotion
of the highest extraction, and restraining the acts of it to the noblest ends.

He is the welcomest to Paradise who ventures tho alone, and comes unattended
thither: I mean, who by so resolute a Bravery, as setting forward to Heaven,
without staying for Company, gives so good Example, that he arrives there with
much difficulty. To all this I must add, That when once it is noted that the
apprehension of being derided for retracting, is the sole obstacle that stands
between your Reason and so important a change as your Conversion, they will
justly esteem your parvanimity so great, that you deserve derision for so
poorly fearing it; and so you will fall into that Contempt you would decline,
by your very shunning of it. If then Laughter in this case cannot absolutely on
both sides be avoided, sure it is much better to endure that of Fools at your
Repentance, than that of Wise Men at your Timerousness. Did not Martyrs,
thorough Frowns, Infamy, and Torments, force themselves a Passage to the same
Heaven you aim at, and will you with Smiles be frighted from your Happiness? I
am ashamed on it; and if you be not so of your self, Christ will be so of you:
For, Whosoever (says our Savior, who before Pontius Pilate Mark 8. 33.
witnessed a good confession) shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his father, with the holy Angels. And truly, for
my part, I had rather be laughed at by men on earth, than howl with the Devils
in Hell.

DIGRESSION.
[Nor need we be The Lines included within this Parenthesis [] may perhaps pass
for one, and appear somewhat foreign both to the Theme and Style of this
Discourse: I have yet ventured to insert* them here, to please a Person that I
much affect; leaving to the Reader a liberty to skip them if he please; but if
he chance to vouchsafe them* a perusal, I must beg for them his attention, not
that they deserve it, but because they need it. It ends p. 87.
(as even the best New Converts often are) so scrupulous to own Repentance for
fear of injuring Humility; since certainly if the latter be a Virtue, she
cannot enjoin a Vice so heinous as Ingratitude, by forbidding us even such a
Retribution as Acknowledgment; for sure it is the least return we owe to God for
his Gifts, to confess that we have received them. Who would not tax him of
Unthankfulness, that being loaded with a Prince's Presents, should disclaim
them, for fear of confessing himself to be rich. Although a Woman praised for her
Complexion, be bound in Modesty to gainsay those Praises, yet if the Fire have
given her a good Color, it is not thought Pride to refrain contradicting,
because the Effect being natural to the Fire, and requiring no excellent
Predispositions in the Object, to refer those ascriptions to their Cause, is
held to justify the not rejecting them: So tho there be an eye of Vanity in the
Publication of those Graces, whose near resemblance (or affinity) to Virtues
merely Moral, leaves their Extraction dubious; yet true Repentance is a Grace
so purely foreign, that being acted in us by a Principle not native or
acquired, but infused, to own the having received it, is not to boast our
Merits, but acknowledge our Debts; the vanity being rather on the other side,
who by pretending to disclaim so supernatural a Grace, imply that they esteem
it to be their own Inheritance or Purchase. God's Goodness being so free, that
it is the only Title to its self; and the motives of his Favors being taken
from himself and not from us, his Blessings argue indeed the Bounty of the
Benefactor, but infer not the Merit of the obliged; since the Spirit's
Irradiations into our Souls (like the Sun's shining upon Shrubs and Hemlock) is
due to the diffusiveness of his Goodness, not the attractiveness of ours. Moral
Virtues may perhaps be resembled to Great Men's Clothes, which supply those that
see them, with some conjectures of the Quality of those that wear them: But
inspired Graces (such as Repentance is) are like their Liveries, whose
Gawdiness evinces not the Footman's Deserts, but his Lord's Splendidness; and
in men's esteem entitles the Lacquey to nothing but a good Master. Those better
Qualities Blood may convey, or Industry acquire, like Honors conferred by
Princes, suppose the Party deserving; but Heavenly Donatives are like Alms,
which ever presume need; and where they are more liberally bestowed, stronglier
conclude the greatness of the Party's Wants than Merits.

Upon such Considerations, possibly, as these, the great Apostle (after a
recital of his first unworthiness) scruples not to write of himself in such
bold erms as these; By the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace which 1
Cor. 15. 10.
was bestowed on me was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly than they
all, (meaning the College of the Holy Apostles) yet not I, but the grace of God
which was with me. (I might produce many resembling In an Essay of mistaken
Modesty.
Passages of Scripture, had I not handled this Subject elsewhere.) But truly,
since you are commanded in the Gospel to let Mat. 5. 16.
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your father which is in heaven; you ought to consider whether or no your
expressing a serious dislike of others present, and your own former practice
(in point of Swearing) do not either proclaim your Repentance, or infer you a
Hypocrite. And if your Reason (as questionless it will) lead you to embrace the
affirmative, believe you are then further to be put in mind, that not only the
Confession of our Virtues is justifiable when it is necessary to your
Justification, but (tho in all other cases our actions should commend us, not
we our selves, Praise being a Debt which he that pays himself, acquits all
others of) even the mention of our own Praises is allowable, when they are
produced, not to extol, but barely to vindicate us, and finds a sufficient
defense in its being necessary unto ours.

The owning of Repentance has so much of Penance in it, that there is not any
Grace more indisposed to a perversion into Vanity; for still Repentance (like
the Pardon it endeavors to procure) does presuppose a Fault, having this
particular unhappiness above other Virtues, that men cannot arrive at it but
through Vice. And therefore in the return to the disinterestedness of action,
Virtue (who can scarce more reward our love to her, than by imparting unto us a
higher degree of it) commonly recompenceth so unselfish a Duty, by making it a
powerful engagement to perseverance against Relapses; and any affront or loss
sustained upon that score, turns to a Blessing, by producing in us toward
Religion, the usual property of Sufferers for a Cause, more Zeal and Passion
for the Party men have been Sufferers for. But admit you could not own
Repentance, without being fancied vain, must the fear of others sins continue
(those that are immediately) yours? Will you rather let others sin by imitation
of your bad actions, than in their misconstruction of your good ones? And will
you quench the Spirit, and refrain from being virtuous, lest men should think
you know your self to be so? Especially since our Ignorance in good
Performances, tho it criminate the act, degrades the Agent from the Title of
Virtuous: Virtue being a habitude elective, and election pre-requiring
knowledge. Which reason I might fortify, by asking to what end Preachers should
light us so many Candles, and give us so many Touchstones to discover and
examine Graces with, if our being conscious to our own Repentance were a fault
that deserved it? Undoubtedly, that were (and that were strange) to make it our
Duty to seek, what it were our Sin to find.

This last Reflection I must recruit, by adding, That since our improvement of,
and thankfulness for Grace, will be expected proportionable to our stock of it,
(as the Parable of the Talents, and our Savior's declaring, that where much is
given, there also much will be required, evinces) we cannot without the
knowledge of our Receipts, know what our Returns must be (of Gratitude and Duty)
to be answerable to them. The utmost that Modesty does exact of you, is the
declining of those Praises your actions do deserve, not the refraining actions
that deserve Praise, for fear of being suspected to affect it. But truly,
Bashfulness, tho in Maids thought a Virtue, in Virtue is a fault; for sure it
is one of the worst Complements you can put upon the Spirit, to lock him up in
a dungeon, for shame to own his Visits.

The union betwixt Virtues is too strict, and their assistances so reciprocal,
that That may be concluded to be no Virtue, that forbids the exercise of any,
and does not rather facilitate than obstruct it. Certainly it is better be
accused of Vanity, than guilty of Relapses; and if some Reputation must be
lost, it is fitter that you should be dishonored by other men's faults, than God
by yours; for he is good enough to recompense his servants, not only for being
good, but for their not being thought so for his sake; and to make one day
their Dishonor (not only the Foil, but) the Purchase of their Glory. I have
spent the more Ink to carry away this Obstruction, because I have observed it
to be a Block, at which the best natured Novices in Piety are the most prone to
stumble; the Devil, our subtle Antagonist, (more Serpent far than that he
tempted our First Parents in, when he insinuated himself into our credulous
Mother's easy Faith; in which sly winding Creature, he elected not a fitter
Instrument than Emblem) in the Scruple we have labored to remove, leaving his
own to assume the borrowed habit of an Angel of Light; in that Disguise to make
Virtue clash with Grace, and pervert Modesty into an Obstacle of Reformation.
Thus when Man was once fallen from Paradise, even Cherubims intercepted his
return unto the Tree of Life.] Genesis 3. 24.


The Last Excuse.
Lastly, (replies the Swearer) All this I confess to be very true; but what
would you have me to do? Long time and custom have so habituated me to this
Vice, that I find the Impossibility of my subduing it, as great as my
willingness to leave it.

Answ. Well, I am very glad we have brought you to this pass: It Is then
confessedly a sin, and a great one: The question therefore is, Whether it be
fitter for God to make it no sin, or you not to make it yours; and for him to
be reconciled to the evil of its nature, or for you to desist from its
practice? Your Apology is just as excusing as the Murderer's would be, who
should allege before his Judge, that since he had been a Murderer from his
Youth, he begs to be excused; but truly for his part he could not help it, and
he must needs continue the Trade of cutting of Throats, that he had so long
practiced. Is not yours a holy consequence, I have been wicked long, therefore
I will continue so still? Sure it is the Devil's Logic, from those sins that
evidence the Justice of our suddener Repentance, to infer the legitimateness of
our Relapses into Crimes. The Argument would have as much Reason, and more
Honesty, that concludes out of, I have been wicked but too long already; that,
Therefore I must be so no more; and from our former want of Piety, infers there
needs a greater measure now to make amends for past Omissions. You would judge
him uncharitable, that should tell you that you are scarce so much as desirous
to be forgiven: But (to show you how little you have for your opinion, besides
your wishes) consider who would think that Delinquent very ambitious of Pardon,
who refuses to accept it, unless he may have license to thieve again; and
declines to purchase it by an engagement against former Misdemeanors. Certainly,

Weak is the Excuse that is on Custom built;
For the Use of sinning lessens not the Guilt.
And Custom in Evil rather increases than contracts the fault; for that Custom
that now is the Parent, was first the Child of Sin, since the Evil of Custom
proceeds from the Custom of Evil; (like Ice, which tho it easily thaw into
Water, was first produced out of that Element's Congelation.) And therefore our
equitable and impartial Laws, that in Theft chastise the first faults only with
a Brand upon the Hand or Shoulder, punish Relapses with deserved Death.

Nor are the Obstacles that oppose your cure, so stubborn as you are pleased to
fancy them. We flatter our selves in augmenting the Difficulty of our
Repentance, that we may lessen the Guilt of our Neglects. The truth on it is,
our baseness adds dimensions to these difficulties, because we are really loath
to forsake our sins, and yet would fain cheat our Consciences into a belief,
that our refractoriness and impenitency do proceed, not from our unwillingness
to mend, but from our impotence. We do not, in this case, like many flourishing
Orators, who out of ostentation use to create Monsters, afterward to quell
them; but like Children in the dark, who fancy first horrid misshapen Bug-bears,
and then are frighted by them.

And yet when the slight Penalty of a Shilling is laid upon each Oath, and
strictly exacted, we may easily discern a visible abatement in the tale of your
sins, as long as you are true to your engagement; which were not most men too
soon weary of, would (probably) soon make them weary of Offenses of that nature.

It Is the opinion both of Pious and of Judicious Persons, that Swearing is
therefore, tho not the most unpardonable, at least the most inexcusable of
Vices; because that in it men have most power to refrain: And in effect, this
sin is so destitute both of Temptations, Advantages, and Apologies, that in
subduing the Custom of Swearing, we have scarce any thing but the Custom to
subdue. Try; it is less easy to surmount the belief of the difficulty, than the
difficulty it self, which nothing makes so much invincible, as our thinking
that it is so.

Here, a willingness to hoise Sail (to quit this ruinous Vice) serves for a
prosperous Gale. If therefore Christ by giving you a desire to shake off the
clogging Yoke of Sin, do call you to himself, give me leave to say to you, as
the people did to the blind man of Jericho, Be of good comfort, rise, Mark 10.
49.
he calls thee. And to complete that comfort, I must tell you, that the
Operation of Saving Grace upon the Sicknesses of the Soul, is like that of the
Pool of Bethesda upon the Infirmities of John 5. 2, 3, 4.
the Body, since without all regard either to the age or greatness of the
disease, so the remedy be but duly applied, the Cure is infallible.

I shall never despair of the recovery of any, that is but heartily desirous to
be reclaimed; since that which God was pleased to make me lately instrumental
to work upon a Gentleman, whose Nation being French, his Vice little younger
than himself, Humor extremely Choleric, and his apprehensions of the
Successlessness of his Endeavors very great, obliged him to vanquish
Indispositions numerous and great enough to make that concurrence very frequent
in one single person; and yet before one Fortnight was effluxt, he obtained so
visible a Conquest over this stubborn Vice, that he had afterward only as many
relics of it to suppress, as might keep him from growing proud of so sudden a
Recovery.

So easy is it after having vanquished the Imagination of the Difficulty, to
overcome the Difficulty it self; for in matter of uneasy Christian Duties, we
must not only consider the disproportion of our Weaknesses to the Obstacles we
must surmount, but allow the disproportion of those Obstacles, to the
Supernatural Assistances we ought to hope for. For God requires nothing at our
hands, which his own Favor (zealously implored by our addresses) will not
enable us to execute. And in this, the Commands of God, differ from those of
men, that the latter but lay on us an Obligation, the former invest us with a
Power to obey them. As when our Savior commanded the sick man (in the Gospel)
to take up his bed, and walk, Mark 2. 9, 12.
at the same instant he strengthens his Sinews to perform what he enjoined: And
in the first Creation, that powerful Command, Let there be light, gave that
bright Genesis 1. 3.
Creature an Existence, to make it capable of paying him an Obedience. Let not
then Tasks above the forces of our Nature, disanimate those that may expect
assistances from his Almightiness, who in the same Leaves where he commands us
to perform more than we are able, promises to do in us what he commands; since
difficulties are not essential properties of obstacles, but only disproportions
to the powers they are to resist. But admit that your habitude of swearing have
rendered your Conversion as difficult as you pretend; sure then, that which
Custom of sinning has confessedly made so uneasy, the continuance of that
Custom is very unlikely to facilitate: As probably may he, whom a Surfeit of
Melons has cast into a Fever, hope for a Cure by eating more again. No, no;
remember that bad Customs, like Consumptions, admit of Remedies in the
beginning, but grow still more incurable by delay; and Vices, like young Trees,
the longer they are let grow, the greater difficulty there is in felling of
them; each single sin being not bad only for the evil of the act, but the
propensity it gives to repetition.

SECT. II.
BUT because to show a sinner the danger of his Disease, without prescribing
him the Remedies that may contribute to his Recovery, would be but to give him
a perfecter knowledge of his wretchedness, and prove a Truth as uncomfortable
to him as an Ignis fatuus to the benighted Traveller that has lost his way,
whose horrid light serves not to guide, but to affright the Wanderer: I think
it not amiss in the ensuing Directions to cast the Swearer a few Cords, by
which (if they be carefully laid hold on) he may happily be drawn out of that
deep and dangerous Pit of Sin, into which his Negligence or his Corruptions may
have betrayed him. Nor let the courseness of these home spun Lines divert you
from making them Instruments of your Rescue; for Silk and Satin Ribbons, you
know, are not so proper to draw men out of Pits, as homely Hempen Cords: Nor
did the imprisoned Prophet refuse to be drawn up out of the Dungeon, tho by the
help of old cast Jer. 28. 11, 12, 13.
clouts and rags: Since in cases of this nature, it is not the Value nor the
Fineness of the Instrument, but their Fitness for our Purposes, that we ought
chiefly to regard. But to begin without more Circumstance.

DIRECT. I.
My first Advice shall be, Seriously to consider, that Swearing is a Sin, and
such a Sin too, as not its Nature, but its Commoness only, makes men count
little: For if we may judge of the greatness of the Crime, by that of the
Vengeance Heaven inflicteth on it, certainly God has diverse times so severely
punished obdurate and incorrigible Swearers, that were his Judgments on them as
divulged as they have been terrible, that crying Sin would (possibly) be almost
as unfrequent as it ought to be. Nor will the seeming harmlessness of that act
do more than make a parallel betwixt your fate, and that fond Wretches
(mentioned in the Book of Numbers) Numb. 15. 32.
that provoked stoning, for gathering a few sticks on the Sabbathday. For tho
Almighty God (whose Will is the exactest Rule of Good and Ill) should forbid
actions otherwise Innocent, yet his Prohibition divests them from that
property: And (as the preceding Verses of that Passage alleged of Numbers
intimate) makes you liable to a just Punishment, tho not for the act, yet for
the disobedience. And consonantly we find, that tho the killing of so horrid
and Parricidicial a Murderer as Cain, might seem an Genesis 4. 15.
Act of Justice, yet God by his prohibition having rendered it a sin, annexes a
Sevenfold Vengeance to the Breach of that Command.

Nay, tho the rebuilding of a ruined City be in it self not only innocent, but
highly conducing to the public good; yet God (to show the Independency of his
Justice) having forbidden the reedification Josh. 6. 26.
of Jericho's razed Walls, punished the Transgression of that 1 Kings 16. 34.
Prophetic Order, in the very Children of the Transgressor. An Example of
Severity very observable, being not, that I know of, to be paralleled. Consider
not therefore so much (in your Swearing) the little harm you do, as the great
God you offend. False Coinage is as well Felony in Farthings, as in Half
Crowns, or Twenty-Shilling-Pieces. And as careful Mothers soundlier whip their
Children for eating sour Crabs, and such Green Trash, than ripe and goodly
Fruit; so often are those sins most severely dealt with, which bring us least
advantage; nor is it a Prodigy, to see men get most stripes for those offenses
they get least by.

It is an easy matter in trivial things to transgress heinously. What Trifle
could appear slighter than the eating of an Apple? Yet this petty seeming
Peccadillo lost Adam Paradise, and us a Title to it: God's Interdict enabling
the Core of that Forbidden Fruit to choke his Immortality, and his Posterity's
hopes of it upon earth. But I purposely decline all Instances of this nature,
not only in pursuance of my intended Brevity, but because it is much nobler and
more handsome for you to owe your Repentance to your Reason, than to your
Apprehension.

DIRECT. II.
In the next place I shall prescribe, A Zealous and Incessant Solicitation at
the Throne of Grace, for Power to subdue this stubborn Vice. This Second Advice
St. James seems to suggest to James 4. 7, 8.
us in these words, Resist the devil, and he will flee from you; and he
immediately adds these, Draw nigh unto God, and he will draw nigh unto you. And
truly men presume too much, when they imagine those treacherous natural Forces
of their own, are able to redeem that Spiritual Liberty they were unable to
defend; and then they lose their best advantages, when their omissions of
applying themselves to their Maker, makes them neglect Supplies infallibly
victorious, which wait but the imploring, to advance to their rescue. Cease not
then with Moses to lift up your hands to Heaven, till you Exodus 13. 11, etc.
have thereby discomfited and destroyed these spiritual Amalekites, your Vices:
And believe it, Prayer (to use a Term of Physic) is a Specific Remedy against
this Disease, and deserves that among all the Weapons proper for this Warfare,
you should say that of it, that David said of huge Goliah's Sword, There is
none like 1 Samuel 21. 9.
that, give it me.

For Prayer performed with those due Rites its Object requires in it, gives us
such awful sentiments of God's Holy Name, that our Conscience will not in a
short while after permit us to dispense with the usurping it in vain. And thus
this sacred Duty does not only procure, but in a manner give us what we pray
for: As when some squeamish and disrelish'd person takes a long walk to the
Physician's Lodging to beg some remedy for his Inappetence, his very walking
thither does in some measure give him that good Stomach he hopes to regain by
the Medicines he shall get there.

But if in your first attempts this Sin meet with a success more answerable to
your fears than your desires, be not discouraged at it, but make of this delay
the use it is intended for, a Rise of greater eagerness and importunity in the
pursuit of your addresses. Nor think it strange, that God should make you wait
a while for the grant of your requests, that have been so tediously refractory
to the Motions of his Spirit, that summoned your obedience to his commands. But
lose not Patience, for the wished supply will infallibly arrive at last, and
all your expectation will but serve to endear it when received; for God will
not be wanting with his Power to assist what is undertaken only for his Glory.

Nor is it less our duty to trust in his Promises, than to obey his Commands;
and we may confidently expect from his Faithfulness to the one, what he will
enable our endeavors to perform the other. The great Apostle tells us, that
the same God will give us to will, that works in us to do: Phil. 2. 13.
And therefore you may be confident, that (as he elsewhere speaks) he which
has begun a good work in you, Phil. 1. 6.
will perform it unto the day of Jesus Christ. And on this score our Savior,
who entails happiness only to the godly, does yet pronounce them blessed, that
hunger and thirst Mat. 5. 6.
after righteousness, promising that they shall be satisfied. Thus he that
graciously accepts the will for the deed, counts good desires but Infant
Holiness, as things that differ from more perfect Graces, not in their Nature,
but their (Age and) Growth.

In the mean time, let this Consideration comfort you, That those sins
displease God least, that displease the Doer most: And that in this our Combats
against sins are differenced from our Battles amongst men; that in the former
the Victory depends not so much on our Success as our Resistance; since none
are there held vanquished, but submitters. And for your further comfort, you
may take each Victory Grace wins of your Corruptions, not only for a
Preparative to new ones, but an Earnest of more. For the Conquests of Saving
Grace in the Soul are not like those the Sea makes upon the Strand, when it
makes Acquisitions by the Flow, but to lose them again within few hours by the
Ebb: But the Expeditions of the Spirit against Vices, are like those of the
Crowned Rider of the White Horse in the Revelation, of whom it is said, Rev. 6.
2.
That he went forth conquering, and to conquer.

DIRECT. III.
In the next place, as far as convenience will permit, 'twere fit to fly the
Conversation, or at least the Familiarity of professed Swearers. This Advice of
declining Infectious Company, tho in a general Caution ever found prevalent
against all Vices, has a peculiar property against this: For there being very
small (if any) Temptation to it in our natures, it is principally imitated from
others, (as when one yawns, most of the Company, though otherwise uninclin'd to
that act, do usually yawn out of sympathy) and so subsists but as it is
cherished by Example and Custom, (its Motive and its Nurse). And therefore, a
very effectual Remedy against Swearing, is by conversing where it is
discountenanced; to starve it by discontinuance, forcing that shame of
singularity that first begot it, to make amends for the mischief it has
occasioned, by employing it to the ruin of its own Productions. As Physicians
make Scorpions their own Antidote by preparing out of them an Oil that is
Sovereign against their Stings. Lovers of the same Sin, may (methinks) be
resembled unto Firebrands, which being laid together, kindle each other by
their mutual heat; but being severed and kept so asunder, each single Brand,
after a little smoking, does of it self go out.

DIRECT. IV.
For the Fourth Remedy, I should advise the Swearer to oblige himself to pay or
suffer somewhat for every Oath he swears; those little Forfeitures serving both
as Monitors and as Penalties. But if the Bargain tie you to Pecuniary
Disbursements, be sure distressed Christians be (at least) Sharers in them. For
if (as Divines tell us) the Poor be God's Receivers, they seem to have a Title
as well by Justice as by Charity, to the Amerciaments that are estreated upon
Trespasses against their Lord. But have a care you turn not this Physic into
Poison, by imagining that when you have fined for your engagements, you have
done Penance for your sins; and by your Justice to your Compacts, cancelled
your Disobedience to your Maker. No, no, God requires not that you should part
with your Sixpences, but with your Sins; and the Repentance he accepts,
consists not in a paying for, but in forsaking your Transgressions. Esteem then
these inconsiderable Mulcts but as Remembrancers of your Faults, not
Satisfaction for them.

Allied to this Expedient is that useful one of procuring some discreet Friend,
by putting you in mind of every Oath, to force you to take notice of your
Faults; which this course will very much contribute to make you both weary and
ashamed of. Provided always, that these Reprehensions be as well seasonable as
just; for to correct men in the first violent transports of their Choler, is by
administering Physic in the extremity of the Fit, but to exasperate instead of
curing. Reason being to our Passions, as the Wind to the Fires; the same Puff
that will blow out the Flames of a Candle, will but kindle those that prey upon
a Faggot. Reprehensions may suppress Passions when they are weak, but do but
incense them whilst they are raging. It Is listed amongst the Miracles of
Christ, that he once chid a Storm into a Mat. 8. 26.
Calm.

DIRECT. V.
The Fifth thing that I must prescribe our Swearer, is to resolve at once to
renounce that Vice, by a Desertion not only sincere, but unsuspended and
entire. Were it but one of these mere Moral Failings, whose Unfitness or
Misbecomingness makes all the Guilt, I should possibly counsel you to wean
yourself of it by degrees, whose progress were scarce discernible before its
end; just as Physicians use to reclaim those that have been long accustomed to
unwholesome Diet. But as the same Physicians, when once a dangerous Surfeit is
contracted, restrain not by degrees, but totally and abruptly, those Excesses
that occasioned it, and whose continuance would prove fatal to the Patient; so
here, where that which is to be forsaken, is not so properly a Fault as a Sin,
we must refrain without the least Exception or Connivance; since else (the
thing prohibited being in it self a Sin) we allow our selves to offend God as
much as ever, tho not so often; by committing the same Sins in Quality, however
not in Multitude.

Indeed what is lessened by the Number of our Oaths in this partial
Reformation, is recompensed by the aggravated Heinousness of their nature;
those that seemed formerly but the slips of Infirmity, being now authorized by
Dispensation. This bare abatement of the Tale of our Sins is a good Refuge, but
a bad Design: Many times this diminution is the utmost our Endeavors can
arrive at; but then it ought to be practiced, and not to be intended; for true
Repentance, and a purpose of relapsing, are hugely inconsistent; the one not
being real, without a property destructive to the other; since he but very
lamely repents his Crimes, that resolves not against Relapses into the Crimes
that he repents. No, no, this faint desisting from some acts of Vice, does but
endear the rest that is unexil'd, and that importunately urge for the recalling
of their banished Companions. This mild remissness, if it do not prune a Vice,
at least it does but lop it; and that prohibits not its future growth; which
the only way infalliby to prevent, is to dig it up by the Roots, with the Spade
of an absolute and irrevocable Resolve, never to accord to our selves so much
as by connivance, the least License that may endanger a Relapse. In this case,
Extirpation is that alone which can secure our quiet; and the only way that
leads to an established safety, is a severity that its object secures from all
possibility of excesses. A Sinner's condition may be resembled to a Mouse in a
Pail of Water; if she can get out at one leap, well and good, otherwise her
toil will prove but fruitless, in attempting to get out by degrees.

DIRECT. VI.
Lastly, My concluding Precept is, To make frequent and serious Reflections
upon the Vanity and Foolishness of Swearers, who live as if they meant to
remove all our wonder from the Folly of our First Parents, that lost Paradise
for an Apple. Sure that these people are not quartered in Bedlam, (where far
less Frenzies have imprisoned many) proceeds rather from the Multitude of the
infatuated, than any want of Madness in their actions: But howsoever, wise men
build Cages for them in their opinions, and in their soberer Thoughts condemn
them to inhabit those Frantic Lodgings.

That usual expression of Scripture Genesis 34. 7. Josh. 7. 15. Judges 20. 6.
which sometimes puts the word Folly instead of the word Sin, seems chiefly
calculated for the Swearer's Vice, to which it does so eminently belong, and
which is so incapable of being wronged by the appellation.

But to what has been already delivered, to show how little shelter our
Swearers find from all their weak Apologies, (as certainly the Fruitlesness and
Inexcusableness of their Vice considered, almost no Sinners have more to answer
for, and less to answer) we must now add, That they want not only the
Temptation of an Excuse, but the very Excuse of a Temptation, (unless its being
forbidden, pass for one). For (First) this Mungrel Issue cannot (as other Vices
use to be) be said at Nature's door; we cannot father it upon Traduction, since
we inherit it not from our Parents; nor is it born with us, but learned by us;
so that here, before we can be Sinners, we must have been Disciples. But (then)
all other Vices have either Honor, (as Ambition), or Profit, (as Avarice), or
Delight, (as Uncleanness), to plead for their excuse; Swearing alone can plead
nothing but Guilty: So that if ever that expression of the Apostle, which
mentions Superfluity of Naughtiness, Jam. 1. 21.
belonged to any sin, it is certainly here to be appropriated.

The silly Indians, that part with Gold and Jewels, for Glasses, Whistles, and
such trifling Gugaws, are Solomon's to Swearers: Betwixt whose Madness, and the
famed folly of Lysimachus, who (parched with extreme Thirst) to get a little
drink, became a voluntary Prisoner to his (soon after vanquished) Enemies, I
find no disparity advantageous to Swearers; it being a less ill bargain, to
sell away ones Liberty for ones Belly-full of Water, than to sell away ones
Soul for a Mouth-full of Air. This Swearing is a Hook without a Bait: And when
Hell employed its spurious brood of Vices into the world to seduce mankind, it
furnished every one of them with a Dowry, either of Fame, of Pleasure, or
Advantage, to entice Lovers with; only poor Swearing was left Portionless; a
Mistress (only) for those generous and disinterested Sinners, that need no
Temptation; but loving Wickedness (as they ought to do Virtue) for its own sake
alone, aimed at nothing in the act of sin, beyond the satisfaction of having
committed it. To whom the Lord may justly say, as he did to the Israelites in
the Prophet, You have sold your selves Isa. 52. 3.
for naught. For whereas usually those Vices that rifle the Soul, do bribe the
Senses; in swearing the poor Soul is stripped of her Graces, and robbed of her
Joys, without the least Emolument (of Pleasure or Advantage) accruing to the
Senses. This swearing (in my opinion) is even as foolish as loving a cruel
Mistress; a man parts with his heart, and gets nothing in exchange for it. An
Oath is like the Powder that charges a Granado, its properties are to make a
momentary, displeasing noise, to offend those that are within the reach of it,
and to spoil that from which it parts. Nor is that criminal blast unlike the
Prophet's description of the Cankerworm; of which he gives this Character, That
it spoileth, Nahum 3. 16.
and flees away.

But the less advantages this Vice affords, the more culpable it is; the
Disobedience as well as Folly of a forbidden act being increased by the want of
its being beneficial; he that trespasses for least, transgresses most; for sure
it is rather an aggravation than an excuse of having injured any body, that you
get nothing by it. The Ambitious and the Incontinent, are like great Ladies,
that surfeit upon Apricocks, Nectarines, and Melons: Whereas the Swearer is but
too justly resembled to those Beggars, that kill themselves with Blackberries
and Slows, and such like Trash, the Excrements of Hedges; having Appetites as
ridiculously noxious, as those of some of our Green Sickness Girls, whose
Stomachs rise at Dainties, and long for Loam and Charcoal.

For my part, would I renounce my interest in Virtue, it should be for the
attaining of a Scepter, a Fame transcending Caesar's; and (in a word) where the
Happiness I forfeited should seem so recompensed by that I gained by losing it,
that wise men themselves should have occasion rather to compassionate my
frailty, than admire my weakness. For I confess it would extremely trouble me
to hang for my Thirteenpence-half-penny; and I am confident, that many of those
this senseless Vice has damned, do find a vast accession to the Pains of Hell
it self, in the consideration of the Cause of their enduring them.

Since then, Swearing is a Vice so ill qualified, that you want a Temptation to
it, you find no Pleasure in it, nor do derive any Advantage from it; O let not
your obstinacy to dote upon an empty fleeting sound, that has nothing in it of
a Sin, except the Guilt, hinder you from shunning Torments that will equal your
Wretchedness to your Folly, and from keeping up a Title unto Joys, whose very
Hope transcends all Earthly Happiness, by opposing all your past Unnecessary
Oaths, by one Inviolable Promisary One, Never to Swear Needlessly again.

Advertisement.
TO prevent all Mistakes that may arise from some apprehensions of mine, which
(seeming to censure Oaths without distinction) may possibly be stretched beyond
my meaning, I thought my self obliged to declare, That in no part of this
Discourse my intention was to justify that plausible Error of our Modern
Anabaptists, that indiscriminately condemn all Oaths as absolutely and
indispensibly prohibited and abolished by the Gospel: My Design being only to
restrain the Needless Abuse, not interdict the Necessary Use of Swearing. Whose
Criminousness if not in this Discourse I have represented in its most enlarged
dimensions, I may find an Excuse in the President and Practice of those
Painters, who being to draw upon the Concaves of the Roofs of Churches, make
their Pictures more Gigantick than the Originals they are to resemble; to
recompense by that advantage in the dimensions, what the eye loses by the
distance from the object. For every Sinner naturally beholding Vice upon which
he dotes, through the contracting Optic of Self-love, must have the Idea of
his Crime enlarged beyond its true proportions, to make him see it in its just
quantity. I might add, That it is scarce possible to paint this ugly Negro in
blacker Colors than his own; especially since now this Sin is grown so much in
fashion, that it expects not (as most other Vices) slow time or years to ripen
it; since in our very streets we hourly hear Children (who sure offer up Oaths
as the First Fruits to the Devil) swear, that can scarcely speak; and see them
perfect in their Father's Language, before they are old enough to speak their
Mother Tongue.

But tho in the heinous Properties of this Vice I might find cause enough to
justify more fierceness than I have expressed against it; yet should I be
extremely loath, with many (much better stored with Zeal than Charity) to doom
all those to Hell, that through frailty or temptation sometimes let slip an
Oath. For so severe a Sentence may perhaps concern too many, whose addictedness
to other, not to greater sins than ours, makes often all the difference of our
Guilts: And who in spite of all their slips and stumbles by the way, may by
Repentance arrive safely at the Heavenly Canaan: And therefore I shall conclude
what has been said of Swearing, with this sense of it, That it is a Sin too
Heinous to excuse Neglect, and too Venial (if I may so speak) justly to beget
Despair.

A DISSUASIVE FROM CURSING.

For Mr. W. D. to Sir G. L.

A DISSUASIVE FROM CURSING.
For Mr. W. D. to Sir G. L.
SIR,
I Have too much Passion for your Person, to have any Complaisance for your
Faults; and still have loved you at so high a rate, that I had rather hazard
the Loss of your Affection, than decline any Proofs of the Reality of mine.
It Is not that I am not as unwilling to employ Censure, as I am confident you
will be troubled to have necessitated it from me; but (all considered) I have
too much Friendship, to have Courtship enough to let slip so fair an
opportunity as your forced Conversation with Cleander, to show you in him the
Deformity of a Vice, from which I wish you were as free as from all other
Crimes.

Certainly, if Curses were as much the Badges of a Gentleman as he thinks them,
men would not guess him to be of a lower Order than that of Emperors: And if
the Devil were to fetch all those he bids him Take, his Water-Dog would not
have half so busy an Employment; Hell would have cause to praise his
Liberality; and were not Satan still the Father of Lies, he could not but
acknowledge, That none of the Seven Deadly Sins, (nor perhaps all together)
sent thither half so many. If I thought Cleander would take it for a
Dissuasion, that I proved Cursing to be a Sin, I could be as ready to bring
Prohibitions of it out of Scripture, as he is to transgress them. The Prophet
David (imitated by the Apostle Paul) makes it the Character of the wicked, That
his mouth Psalm. 10. 7. Romans 3. 14. Psalm. 62. 4.
is full of cursing. And in another place, That they curse inwardly. And
suitably to his own Doctrine, when Shimei (equalling 2 Samuel 16. 5. and 13.
his Curses to the Number of his steps) railed at him with as many Imprecations
as he deserved Blessings, he did not (to speak St. Peter's Language) render 1
Pet. 3. 9.
evil for evil, or railing for railing; but only answers, Let him curse, it may
be the Lord will 2 Samuel 16. 11, 12.
look upon mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite me good for his
cursing this day. Our Savior commands us to bless even those Mat. 5. 44.
that curse us; nay, bless them that persecute you. Bless (says St. Paul) Romans
12. 14.
and curse not. And to show you that it was not only his Precept but his
Practice, being reviled (says he) we bless; being persecuted 1 Cor. 4. 12, 13.
we suffer it; being defamed we entreat. Imagine then you hear the Apostle
saying, as in one place he does, Be ye followers 1 Cor. 11* 1.
of me, as I also am of Christ; who (says another Apostle) when 1 Pet. 2. 23.
he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously. And in effect, when upon the
Samaritan Clowns refusal to receive Christ, the two Fiery-spirited Disciples
desired Luke 9. 54, 55.
leave to call down Fire from Heaven (to consume those by the Fury of that
active Element, who refused Entertainment to him that created it) our Savior
answers, but with a Rebuke, and telling them, That they knew not what manner of
spirit they were of.

If then, in spite of Provocations we are enjoined to return Prayers for
Maledictions, sure we that are forbidden to retribute Curses, are much more
prohibited to lavish them. And if we will take the pains to shrive, and to look
back into their Pedigree, we may discern in them a Hereditary Guiltiness, and
shall find them sinful (if I may so speak) by Traduction, they being but the
Emanations and Sallies of a Temper extremely unconsonant to Christianity; of
which our Savior makes Love John 13. 35.
the distinguishing Signature: And St. Paul tells us, That the end of 1 Timothy 1.
5.
the commandment is charity. Of which in another place he gives this Character,
That Charity suffers 1 Cor. 13. 4, etc.
long, and is kind; does not behave it self unseemly, bears all things, is
not easily provoked; with many other properties of the same nature. Insomuch,
that St. John scruples not to affirm, that if a man say, I love God, and 1 John
4. 20.
hates his brother, he is a liar; (as concorporating things inconsistent, and
uniting things distanter than the two Poles of Heaven): And therefore when St.
James, speaking of the Tongue with a certain kind of wonder, in these terms,
Therewith bless we James 3. 9, 10.
God, even the father; and therewith curse we men that are made after the
similitude of God: Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing; he
adds, My brethren these things ought not so to be. And surely too, the Gospel
teaches us, that these Assassinates and Murders of the Heart, for being
Bloodless are not therefore Guiltless.

But granting the sin to be as venial as indeed it is heinous; (and that by
using Curses men did not merit them) yet certainly the Multitude of Cleander's
Faults would give them that Danger that is pretended to be wanting to their
Nature; and he that considers that those little drops of Rain, which single
seem but so many Liquid Atoms, do often (united by their Confluence) swell into
Torrents, nay, (sometimes) into Deluges, will easily believe that Curses cannot
but be extremely criminal in that Cleander, that curses as if Deuteronomy. 11. 29.
he were an Inhabitant of Mount Ebal; and who is so resolved not to keep the
Devil's Counsel by concealing any impious suggestions, that were but his
Prayers as frequent as his Curses, he would seem to obey literally 1 These. 5.
17.
that qualified Injunction of the Apostle, of praying without ceasing.

I might add, that in most of these Imprecations, God's Sacred Name being
clearly taken in vain, renders these Ebalites guilty of the breach as well of
the Second Commandment of the First, as of the great Commandment of the Second
Table; unless they will justify themselves from that Crime, by the owning of a
worse; I mean, demonstrate, That they d^d not employ God's Name to no purpose,
by confessing they employed it to a bad one.

And now this last Consideration leads me to that of the Unreasonableness of
Cursing; For it is not a fit thing, that upon every little Accident that
Cleander's vexed at, the Creatures of God must instantly change Masters, and
devolve to the Devil. Were it not very just, that God should be the Executioner
of all the rash Decrees his pettish Passion makes; and his Creator's Power
should have no other Employment, but to run on Errands (at the Moody
Gentleman's beck) often repugnant to his Justice, and ever to his Mercy?

Nay, how often has Cleander in his Passion wished things, whose Accomplishment
himself confesses would have made him miserable? And is it then either the part
of a Good Man to make Wishes that are unlawful, or for a Wise Man to frame
Desires of which he need repent the Grant? One Imprecation amongst the rest
Cleander's very ready in, which (with as little Caution as he commonly
observes) I would not have pronounced for as many Kingdoms as he has used it
times, and that is, The Devil take me. For should God (as we are sure he may,
and know not but that he will) give the Devil leave to take him at his word, in
what a case were he? And what Curb shall we henceforward think strong enough to
bridle his Corruption, when what to the wickedest is the greatest Terror, he
makes his wish?

There was some years since in Geneva, an Italian, (both by Extraction and
Humor) who riding a handsome Mare in a solitary Angle, was by the Devil
seduced to stallion her himself. The Fact once done, the Horror of a Crime that
made him more a Beast than that on which he acted it, transported him so far,
as to make him give himself to the Devil, if ever after he relapsed: But some
while after, forgetting both his Conscience, and the condition of his Vow, he
was fatally tempted to repeat his former Beastliness in the self-same place;
which he had scarce completed, before the Devil appearing to him visibly,
remembers him of his forgotten Promise, and claims the Forfeiture: The
trembling Wretch, to avoid the being hurried away instantly from the Hell he
felt, to that he feared, compounds with the Devil to resign him his Soul at the
expiration of a limited Reprieve: But before that time came to be effluxt, it
pleased God to visit both himself and the place of his Residence with the
Plague; which rowzing his seared and lethargick Conscience, forced him to
expressions of his Anguish unusual enough to make his Companions inquisitive
into the Cause; which having fully and circumstantially confessed, he was after
his Recovery, upon that Evidence, accused of having carnally abused a Beast,
and having made a Compact with the Devil; which latter, though upon a
Repentance suitable to his Sin, God's Mercy did disannul, yet the Justice of
the Magistrate did for the former Crime condemn him to a Death he richly had
deserved, and penitently endured. This Story I thought not impertinent to
instance in, to teach us how dangerous and unsafe it is to present that to the
Devil, for which Christ shed his Blood; and (with more wariness than Cleander
can pretend to) to offer that to one that is greedy to snatch (and therefore
surely willing to accept) that which the whole business of Religion is to
defend and rescue from his Attempts. The Story it self may teach us, that
though we are never to despair of God's Mercy, we are as seldom to provoke his
Justice. I have given it you in the very Words of our Friend Mr. Boil, who had
it upon the place from an excellent Divine of that Republic; to whom the
Delinquent himself confessed it, as to him that was assigned to comfort and
assist him at his Death. And the Instances are not unfrequent in the most
credited Authors, of those whose Imprecations God has punished by granting them.

But I had almost forgot to mention one opportunity to which the Devil is
indebted for a vast number of Cleander's Curses, and that is his Gaming; for the
least Frown of Chance upon him then, gives Fire to whole Volleys of Curses
against Fortune; if at least they deserve not a more heinous Title than barely
that of Curses, who in severer men's Opinions are guilty of an (at least)
Implicit Blaspheming; since Solomon Prove. 16. 33.
does discreetly affirm, That all these cross and happy Lucks at Play are not
rashly or designlesly shuffled by a blind Hazard, but are dispensed by an
All-ruling Providence.

I determine not here, Whether these Words of the Wise Man (according to the
received Opinion of Divines) may be extended to an absolute Sentence of
Condemnation against all Games of Hazard; but this I know, that (not to insist
on that Injunction of God to the Jews, Be circumspect, and make no mention of
the names of Exodus 23: 13.
other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth;) it is very unfit that
under the Sunshine of Christianity, we should build or repair the ruined Altars
of deposed Chance, and acknowledge a blind Deity; that under the abused name of
Fortune, Fools anciently were pleased to create a Goddess, and sinners now
dissemble to mistake for some such thing, that they may unreproved control and
censure those Heavenly Dispensations their proud and peevish natures are
displeased with. I know that many unforeseen Accidents, which the Ignorant
Vulgar do impute to Fortune, are by God in the Scriptures ascribed to
Providence: And therefore you must give me leave, both to take notice of, and
disapprove that ungrateful expression of our Language, wherein (to justify our
Unthankfulness for the Benefits we have received) we use to call God's Blessing
to a man in his outward Possessions, his Fortune; as if our Estates were Gifts
blindly cast on us by the rash Profuseness of that fond Deity, and not the
Emanations of God's Bounty, and Presents of his Providence. Genesis 33. 11, and 5.
Old Jacob's Gratitude speaks another strain, and will not mention his Wealth
(though never so justly the Wages of his prosper'd Industry) without
acknowledging it for the Gift of God.

But since this much-abused Name of Fortune has presented it self in my way, I
dare not take leave of it, till I have expressed a desire that men would be
more wary how they defame her, lest through the sides of Fortune they affront
Providence. If Fortune under the common Notion, had fee'd me to be her
Advocate, I should allege, That Gamesters of all others, have the least
Justice to complain of her Disfavours, since the Success of the one absolutely
depending upon the Losses of the other, they themselves reduce Fortune to a
Necessity of disobliging some of them, by rendering it impossible for her to
content them all. And I would add, That what we fondly call her Inconstancy,
when she sometimes forsakes those she once smiled on, is much more properly to
be ascribed to the Justice of her Goodness, and the Extensiveness of her
Affection to men; since seeing she is not able to make them all completely
happy at once, at least she endeavors to make them fortunate by turns, and for
some Intervals of time.

Nor is it her Fickleness, that in pursuance of this impartial Love she seems
to desert her former Favorites, when she confers her Favors on new Persons,
since she bereaves not the first possessors of them with intention, but only by
consequent; as being not able to lend her benefits to new Necessities, without
redemanding them of her former Debtors; whom, otherwise, she has as little
design to offend by this transplacing of her bounties, as the Sun has to
benight the Antipodes, when to bring Light into our Hemisphere he is
necessitated to leave them in darkness.

It Is not the malice or instability of Fortune, but our mistakes of the nature
of her Presents, that occasion our Complaints; for we mistaking those Benefits
for absolutely given to us, which are indeed but deposited in our hands, repine
and murmur at their restitution, instead of being thankful for their Loan, and
having had their use. And surely they that pretend to be so perfect in her
inconstancy, must be guilty of more madness in trusting her, than she can be of
treachery in deceiving them.

But were I to frame an Apology to vindicate Fortune under the notion of
Providence, I might represent, that what we attribute of her envious
partiality, when she does shower most Favors on those that least deserve them,
is but the effect of God's immenser Bounty, that gives even them a larger
portion of Pleasures in this life, to whom he reserves none at all in the next;
and withal casts a disesteem upon these glittering Goods, Fools overvalue, by
heaping them upon his very Enemies.

I might farther allege, That what our discontents, call Fortune's
Spitefulness, and her Injustice, when she seems to persecute those most, that
are most Virtuous, is in effect but God's Care of his Children, which by these
Afflictions both Exercises and improves their Piety, secures them from the
Allurements of Prosperity, endears his Assistances and his Recompenses by these
difficulties; which both add Luster to their Victories, and make their Virtues
more Exemplary and more Meritorious.

And (Lastly) I might say, That what we miscall Inconstancy in Fortune, when
her Changes invalidate the title of Prescription to her Favors, and make their
residence (when possessed) as uncertain as their wished stay is welcome; is
indeed but a merciful stratagem of Providence, to wean us from a dangerous
fondness of these transitory Goods; lest if the continuance of their fruition
were as certain as the contentments of it are great, we should by neglecting
forfeit all nobler joys, and lose far greater Pleasures reserved for us in
Heaven.

But we have too long wandered from our Theme; let us return to Cleander and
his Cursing; which over and above those other good qualities we have already
observed in it, has that of being a Sin as useless as it is Unchristian. All
other Vices have something to extenuate their Guilt; all other Sinners serve
Satan for his Pay; but the Curser, (as the Swearer) is the Devil's Volunteer,
valuing his Soul so cheaply, that some suspect, that the reason of its stay in
the Body, is, that the Devil scarce thinks it worth the fetching: And
certainly, Esau's Genesis 25. 33.
Bargain, who sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, becomes no more
absurd when paralleled to this; which makes those it Damns as much admired for
their folly, as tormented for their sins, and so casts upon them the imputation
of Madness, that it deprives them of the privilege of Madmen; for whereas
Frantic Persons (who innocently act all Crimes) may Kill men without Murder,
the Curser (on the other side) does Murder without Killing.

Cleander may indeed give himself to the Devil by his Curses, but never his
Enemy; for if Solomon's Authority be credited in this point, we shall believe
that, as Prove. 26. 2.
the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causless shall
not come. But the best on it is, that these Intentional Sins, for being
ineffectual against others, divest not the being criminal in themselves: For
the Curser is as uncharitable to himself as to his Enemies; he commits Murders
without acting them; and contracts the Guilt of his Neighbors Blood, without
shedding it; and incurs the Penalty, without once tasting the Sweetness of
Revenge. For it is not only in Good that God accepts the Will for the Deed; he
makes the same reception to our Endeavors and Designs of Ill. And justly may
God punish the Ill by us intended, tho by him prevented, since that
disappointment in which we think to find our justification, is not the effect
of our want of Malice, but our want of Power, and so does not excuse our Ill,
but magnifies God's Goodness. Let us therefore cease to wonder, that whilst we
curse one another, our Maker curses us; and that the Plague is so raging in our
Houses, so long as it is so rife in our Mouths: But rather let us tremble at
that dismal Fate, that David praying against his Enemies, Prophecies against
God's. As he loved Cursing (says he) so Psalm. 109. 17, 18.
let it come unto him: as he delighted not in Blessing, so let it be far from
him: As he Clothed himself with Cursing, like as with his Garment, So let it
come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones.

I might yet further allege, That Curses are of so culpable a Nature, that
their very Apology concludes them Guilty, by Pleading them to be Idle Words:
And I might add to all the past Matt. 12. 36.
Dissuasives, The Ill Repute that Curses gain a man, amongst the most
Scrupulous and Preciser sort of People, who judging of the greatness of the
Vice, by the smallness of the Advantage that is derivable from it, will hardly
believe him to be the owner of much Piety, that will Slight it upon so little a
Temptation. And those of our Divines that hold Curses to be the Dialect of the
Reprobates in Hell, will think it but an ominous Piece of Providence in
Cleander to imitate Travelers, who use to accustom themselves beforehand to
the Language of those Climes they design to Visit. But the last Consideration
that I shall employ to persuade you to divest, with the Practice of using
Curses, the means of Provoking them, and the Fears of suffering them; is that
of the scandal this vicious Custom gives to weaker Christians. And as the
former Considerations relate properly to Cleander, so this I must more
peculiarly address to You, whose Virtues have acquired you so high a Reverence,
that they have put it in your Power, not only to excuse, but almost to Canonize
the worst Actions by your Example; and therefore ought to make you so much the
more Wary and Strict in your Behavior: Since men believing it impossible to
fail in imitating you, your Exemplary Faults will contract a deeper Guilt by
being Presidents, than by being Sins.

But, Sir, lest I should give you too Just an occasion to increase the number
of your Curses, by bestowing some fresh ones upon my tediousness, I will now
put a Period to your trouble, by saying to you as once our Savior did to the
young man in the Gospel, (that so resembled you in the Possession of so many
Virtues) One thing thon lackest (yet); and that one thing in Mat. 10. 21.
you is but, by Sacrificing your Habitude of Cursing, to make your self capable
of as transcendent Blessings as constantly are implored for you, by

SIR, Your most Affectionate, most Faithful, and most Humble Servant, W. D.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 8. read Wise Man. P. 127. l. ult. r. Promissory.

THE CONTENTS.
VAIN Swearing, as well as Perjury, forbidden in Scripture. Page 2
SECT. I.
The usual Pleas and Excuses for Vain and Rash Swearing, considered. As, 1.
It Is a Venial Sin. 7 2. They swear but seldom. 16 3. Not so often as others. 19
4. They swear what is true. 22 5. They swear by the Creatures, and not by God.
28 6. They swear by fictitious terms. 31 7. They swear some peculiar Oath. 34
8. If they swear not, they shall not be believed. 38 9. If they swear not, they
shall not be feared, nor obeyed. 43 10. They swear not, but in Passion, or in
Drink. 46, 52. 11. They repeat but the Oaths of others. 53 12. By using Oaths
they are looked upon as Gentlemen. 59 13. If they renounce it, they shall be
derided for it. 66 A Digression about Repentance. 77 14. It Is impossible to
subdue it. 88
SECT. II.
Directions for the Cure of it. 99 1. Consider, it is not the Nature, but the
Commonness, makes Swearing thought a little Sin. 101 2. Be zealous and
incessant in Prayer. 3. Fly the Conversation and Familiarity of Professed
Swearers. 110 4. Let the Customary Swearer oblige himself to pay, or suffer
somewhat for every Oath. 112 Or procure some Friend to take notice of it. 113
5. To resolve at once to renounce it. 115 6. To reflect frequently upon the
folly of it. 119
A Discourse against Cursing. Page 1.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Cockerill.
HIstorical Collections, the Third Part, in Two Volumes, Never before Printed;
containing the Principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the
Parliament, November the 3d. 1640. to the end of the year 1644. wherein is a
particular account of the Rise and Progress of the Civil War to that Period;
Impartially related. Setting forth only Matter of Fact in Order of Time,
without Observation or Reflection. By John Rushworth. Fol.

Life, Reign, and Trial of Mary Q. of Scots. Stitched.

Speculum Theologiae in Christo; or a View of some Divine Truths. By Edward
Polhill of Burwash in Sussex, Esquire 4to.

Christus in Cord: Or the Mystical Union between Christ and Believers,
considered in its resemblances, bonds, seals, privileges, and marks. By Edward
Polhill, Esquire 8vo.

Precious Faith considered in its Nature, Working and Growth. By Edward
Polhill, Esquire 8vo.

A Discourse of Schism. By Edward Polhill, Esquire 8vo.

The Evidence of Things not seen; or diverse Spiritual and Philosophical
Discourses concerning the state of Holy Men after Death. By that eminently
Learned Divine, Moses Amyraldus. Translated out of the French Tongue by a
Minister of the Church of England, 8vo.

Geography Rectified; or a Description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Names,
Inhabitants, Scituations, Histories, Customs, Commodities, Government.
Illustrated with about 80 Maps. Third Edition. By Robert Morden. 4to.

Geography Anatomized; Or a complete Geographical Grammar; being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole Body of Modern Geography; after a new, plain, and
easy method; whereby any person may in a short time attain to the knowledge of
that most noble and useful Science, etc. To which is subjoined the present
state of the European Plantations in the East and West Indies; with a
reasonable Proposal for the Propagation of the blessed Gospel in all Pagan
Countries. Illustrated with diverse Maps. By Patrick Gordon, M. A.

Essays on Trade and Navigation. By Sir Francis Brewster, Knight, 8vo.

The Almost Christian discovered, in some Sermons on Acts 26. 28. With a Blow
at Profaneness. By the Right Reverend Ezekiel Hopkins, late Lord Bishop of
Londonderry.

The Possibility, Expediency, and Necessity of Divine Revelation. A Sermon
preached at St. Martins in the Fields* Jan. 7. 1695. at the beginning of the
Lecture for the ensuing Year, founded by the Honorable Robert Boil. By John
Williams, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

The Certainty of Divine Revelation. A Second Sermon by Dr. Williams, at the
same Lecture.

Advertisement.
WHereas Proposals have been formerly made for the Reprinting Mr. Matthew
Pool's, etc. Annotations on the Holy Bible, (to be Reviewed by Mr. Samuel
Clark, and Mr. Edward Veal) with the Addition of a Concordance and Large
Contents before each Chapter; This is to give Notice, That it is now in the
Press; and the Subscribers are desired to send in their Subscription by the
25th. of June next; after which Time the Undertakers will not be obliged to
make the Allowance of the Seventh Book.

The Undertakers are, Thomas Parkhurst, Brabazon Aylmer, Thomas Cockerill,
Jonathan Robinson, John Lawrence, and John Tailor.



