CHARACTERS OF THE Virtues and Vices OF THE AGE; OR, Moral Reflections, Maxims,
And Thoughts upon MEN and MANNERS.

Translated from the most refined French Wits, viz. Montagne, Pascal, La
Rochefoucaut, St. Evremont. La Bruiere, Boubours, etc. and Extracted from the
most celebrated English Writers, viz. Bacon, Cowley, Sprat, Temple, L'Estrange,
Dryden, etc. Digested Alphabetically under Proper Titles.

By A. Boyer. Gent.

Admonere voluimus, non Mordere;
Prodesse, non Laedere; Consulere
Moribus Hominum, non Officere.
Erasm. LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper, E. Wi^kinson, and Roger Clavell, over
against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street. 1695.

Licensed,

Octobr. 20. 1694. Edward Cook.

TO The Much Honored ALLEN BATHVRST, Esquire
SIR,
WHen I first designed to Print these Papers, I was prompted to dedicate them
to you upon two powerful Considerations; First, a desire I ever had of giving
you a public Assurance of the Love and Respect I have for you, and your noble
Family; and Secondly, the ageeableness of the Subject of this Book to the main
end of your Education. It signifies little for a Gentleman to learn French and
Latin, unless, at the same time, he furnish his Memory with some more
profitable knowledge; for Languages, if not accompanied with things, serve
generally to no better purpose, than to multiply natural Nonsense, and expose
Ignorance in many different shapes. As for Knowledge that, is undoubtedly most
useful and necessary wherein all Mankind is agreed: I mean, the searching of
our own selves toward the Regulation of our Manners, and the forming of an
Honorable and virtuous Life. And therefore I thought I could not do better,
than to recommend to your care and study, the following Characters of Virtues
and Vices; the first, as a Pattern, which you ought to propose to your
Imitation; and the others, as Sea-marks which may serve to teach you to avoid
those Rocks and Sands, against which so many suffer daily Shipwreck both in
their Fortunes and Reputation.

And now if I designed to follow the common drift of Dedications, I had a fair
Opportunity to expatiate in a Panegyrical Field: But I shall wave so nice a
Subject; for if I should say all that I am conscious you deserve, either upon
the score of your innate Virtues, or the early progress you have made in your
Studies, I fear it would be interpreted Flattery or Presumption, instead of
Justice, yet I cannot forbear telling the World, that I am the more encouraged
to make this Address, because I see that what I would advise, is, in a great
measure, accomplished, since it is most happily begun: For I find in you an
admirable goodness and tenderness of Nature, and the Seeds of all generous
Inclinations, which being fomented and kept up by the good Examples hereditary
in your Family, will ripen in due time into glorious Actions and Habits, to
qualify you for the Service and Ornament of your Country and the Honor and
comfort of your Noble Parents and Relations: which is the constant and sincere
Wish of,

SIR, Your most humble, faithful and affectionate Servant, A. Boyer.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER
THis Preface is merely to comply with that imperious Mistres, Custom: For, to
speak the truth, I have but little to say upon the common Theme of general
Dedications, I mean the Commendation or Vindication of this Book* Not but that
I could stuff five or six Pages with the Pageant of a Panegyric upon these
Reflections, and rifle both Art and Nature to adorn the matter with all the
gaudy Smiles of Pearls, Diamonds, Spirits, Cordials, Varieties of Dishes and I
know not what; but all this would be no more in the conclusion, than to enlarge
upon trivial and impertinent Formalities, as troublesome to me, as unprofitable
to the Reader. He may rest contented to know that he is here presented with an
Abstract of the most exquisite Thoughts upon Men and Manners, of those modern
Wits both French and English, whose bare Name (as you have it in the Title
Page) is sufficient to recommend them to any Man, that is not altogether a
Foreigner in the Commonwealth of Learning, and whose Authority is able to
protect them against the severest Critics.

But perhaps it will not be amiss here to speak something of that part of this
Composition which I may call my own, that is, the Translation of the French
Thoughts, and the Method I have followd in the Whole.

As for the first, it is superfluous to acquaint the Public, with all the
difficulties I have labored under in my Undertaking. The Authors, whose
Thoughts I have proposed to my self to translate, are so sublime and
penetrating, and their Language every where so close and comprehensive, and yet
so polite and unaffected, that it was no easy matter to make them speak
English. All that I can say for my self in this Particular, is, that as I made
this Collection principally for the Gentleman to whom it is dedicated, and my
own use, so I have spared neither Time nor Pains to render the meaning of my
Originals, if not so gracefully as it is in French, yet so as to be understood.

As for the Disposition of so many different Reflections, I have observed that,
which is undoubtedly the most helpful to one's Memory, that is, I have gathered
into one Chapter all those I have found belonging to the same subject; I have
distributed the several Chapters according to the Alphabetick Order; And to
distinguish the Thoughts of our English Authors from those of the French, I
have marked the former with an Asterism.

Now, if this Essay can have the good luck to be relished and approved by the
Understanding Few, it will be an Encouragement to me to go on with my Design,
which is, to collect all the most refined Thoughts of the Modern Moralists and
set them in Balance against the Characters, of Theophrastes and the Apophthems
of the Ancients; than to let skilful and impartial Judges pronounce which of
the two outweighs.

I shall conclude by obviating a Quarrel, which some malicious, snarling
People, (who are acquainted with my Circumstances) might pick with some of
these Thoughts, for being purposely written to gratify Private Resentments. I
therefore, not so much in satisfaction to any particular Person, as to
vindicate the Truth, do here solemly protest, that this Collection was made
before any Injuries were offered; and besides, that the principal Authors of
them are too Trifling and inconsiderable to deserve this Noble way of Revenge.
But if after this public Declaration, any Person shall find themselves touched
in the Moral of these Reflections upon the score of Malice, Detraction, Pride,
etc. Let them keep their own Council, and learn to be wiser hereafter, which is
all the Reparation I desire from a Christian Enemy.

AN ALPHABETICAL-TABLE OF THE CONTENTS.
A.
ADmiration, Page. 3 Advice, 1 Afflictions, 6 Ages of Life, 8 Ambition, 3
Avarice, 11 Authority. 56
B.
Bantering, 119* 176. Beauty, 15 Benefits. 17
C.
Chance, 77 Cheats, 22 Clemency, 24 Civility, 25 Children, 152 Confidence, 24
Constancy, 36, 37 Conversation, 25 Contradiction, 165 Counsel, 1 Countenance,
86 Courage, 33 Court, 29 Cowardice, 33 Crimes, 38 Cunning, 40 Custom. 40
D.
Death, 121 Defects, 67 Designs, 45 Detraction, 43 Devotion, 51 Dignities, 56
Dissimulation. 190
E.
Education, 64 Elevation, 56 Eloquence, 191 Envy, 64 Examples. 66
F.
Failings, 67 Families, 71 Favorites, 29 Fidelity, 72 Flattery, 73 Folly, 206
Fortune, 77 Friendship. 80
G.
Gentility, 163 Gesture, 86 Gratitude, 17 Goodnature, 24 Government. 116
H.
Happiness, 93 Harm, 38 Hatred, 87 Health, 89 Heart, 154 Heaviness, 89 Honor,
90 Hope, 92 Homeliness, 15 Humor, 91 Hypocrisy. 51
I.
Idleness, 96 Jealousy, 98 Ills, 38 Imitation, 66 Inconstancy, 36 Infidelity,
72 Ingratitude, 17 Interest, 99 Justice, Injustice, 100 Ignorance. 103
K.
Kings, 116 Knowledge. 103
L.
Laughter, 176 Learning, 103 Liberality, 123 Life, 120 Love. 145
M.
Marriage, or Matrimony, 152 Masters, 71 Memory, 154 Merit, 159 Mind, 134
Misfortunes, 93 Moderation. 158
N.
Nature, 161 Nobility. 163
O.
Obstinacy. 165
P.
Palate, 194 Passions, 166 Peace, 204 Penetration, 169 Philosophy, 170
Pleasures, 171 Praise, 72 Pride, 173 Princes, 116 Prodigality. 123
R.
Raillery, 176 Reason, 177 Religion, 51 Reputation, 180 Resolution, 37 Revenge,
87 Riches. 11
S.
Secrets, 24 Self-Love, 183 Servants, 71 Shifts, 40 To be silent, to Speak, 191
Skill, 206 Sincerity, 190 Sloth, 96 Slander, 43 Society, 25 Success. 45
T.
Tale-Bearers, 43 Taste, 194 Treachery. 40 Tricks, 40 Truth. 194
V.
Valor, 33 Vanity, 196 Virtue, Vice, 197 Understanding, 154 Undertakings, 45
Vulgar. 203
W.
War, 204 Weakness, 205 Wisdom, 206 Wit, 154 Women, 208 Wonders, 208 Worth. 159
CHARACTERS OF THE Virtues and Vices of the AGE.
Advice, Counsel.
I. MEN give nothing so liberally as Counsel.

II. Nothing in the World is so unsincere, as the asking and receiving of
Advice. He that asks it, seems to yield a respectful deference to the Opinion
of his Friend, and all the while only designs to have his own approved, and
shelter his own Actions under the Authority of another: On the other side, he
that gives it, returns, as one would think, the Confidence of others with an
ardent and impartial Zeal, and yet has generally no other aim, but his own
Honor or Interest.

III. There goes as much Wisdom and Ability in the improving of a Friend's
Advice, as in the advising and conducting one's self.

IV. It Is no difficult matter to give good Advice, but it is a hard one to make
a Man improve it.

V. It is harder to keep ones self from being managed, than to manage and
govern others.

VI. There is need of as much Discretion to give Advice, as Compliance to
follow it. Nothing is so dreadful as a Friend that takes the advantage of his
own Experience; that proposes all his Counsels as Laws, and with the Air of a
Master, that takes from us the privilege of examining what he says, and would
force the Mind by Authority, rather than win it by Discourse.

VII. Yet a great Weakness in receiving Advice, is no less blameable, than a
great Roughness in giving it: It is our Interest to surmount the one, and to
sweeten the other.

VIII. It is not proper always to reject evil Counsels, for fear of
disheartning those that are capable of administering good ones.

* IX. Some People are not to be dealt withal, but by a Train of Mystery and
Circumlocution; a downright Admonition looks liker the Reproach of an Enemy,
than the Advice of a Friend, or at best it is but the good Office of a Man that
has an ill Opinion of us; and we do not naturally love to be told of our
Faults, by the Witnesses of our Failings.

* X. It Is easy to give Counsel to another, which in the same Circumstances we
are far from practicing our selves; then we can be full of Wisdom and grave
Morals; but when it comes home, all our Philosophy vanishes; there remains
nothing to be seen, but a mere sensitive Animal, without Virtue or Patience.

Admiration.
I. WE love all those that Admire us, but very few of those we Admire.

II. Admiration betrays a narrow Wit; and your great Admirers are for the most
part very silly People.

* III. Excessive Commendations of any Art or Science whatsoever, as also of
the Learning of any particular Men or Nations, only prove that the Persons who
give such Characters, never heard of any Thing or Person, that was more
excellent in that way; and therefore Admiration may be as well supposed to
proceed from their own Ignorance, as from the real Excellency of the Persons or
Things, unless their respective Abilities are otherwise known.

Ambition.
I. WHen great Men suffer themselves to be cast down by the weight of their
Misfortunes, it plainly discovers it was not the Greatness of their Soul, but
of their Ambition, that kept up their Spirits so long; and that Vanity and
Pride excepted, an Hero is much like another Man.

II. An Ambitious Man does not appear to be so in the least, when he meets with
an impossibility of gaining his Ends.

III. Generosity is very often a disguised Ambition, that slights mean
Interests, only to pursue greater.

IV. Moderation can never have the honor of contending with Ambition, and
subduing it; because they never meet together: Moderation is the Weakness and
Sloth of the Soul, whereas Ambition is the Ardour and Activity of it.

V. Ambitious Men abuse themselves, when they pretend to limit their Ambition;
for their very Ends when they are gained, are but converted into means,
subservient to farther Pursuits.

VI. It seldom happens that a Man may say, I have been Ambitious; for he that
is once so, is so always.

VII. The Pursuits of Ambition, though not so general, yet are as endless as
those of Riches, and as extravagant too, since none ever yet thought he had
power or empire enough: For what Prince soever seems to be so great, as to live
and reign without any further Desires or Fea^s, falls into the Life of a
private Man, and enjoys but those Pleasures and Entertainments, which a great
many several degrees of private Fortune will allow, and as much indeed as
humane Nature is capable of enjoying.

VIII. Ambitious Men and Misers, seem to acquire their mighty stock of Glory
and Riches for no other end, than to make themselv^s more sensible of the
torment of being neither able to quit nor to keep them.

IX. All Passions tyrannize over us; yet Ambition suspends all the other
Passions, and gives us for a while the appearances of all the Virtues. This Man
who has all manner of Vices, I took him to be Sober, Chaste, Humble, Liberal and
even Devout; nay, undoubtedly he would be so still if he had not made his
Fortune.

* X. The Ambitious are content to pay so great a price as their own slavery,
to get the Dominion over others.

XI. Slaves have but one Master; but the Ambitious have as many as there are
Men that can be instrumental to their Fortune.

* XII. Ambition is like Choler, which is an Humor that makes Men Active,
Earnest, full of Alacrity and Stirring, if it be not stopped; but if it cannot
have its way, it becomes adult, and thereby malign and venomous: So Ambitious
Men, if they find their way open to their Rising, and still get forward, they
are rather busy than dangerous; but if they be checked in their Desires, they
become secretly discontent, and look upon Men and Masters with an evil Eye, and
are best pleased when Things go backward, which is the worst Property in a
Servant of a Prince or State. Therefore it is good for Princes, if they be
obliged to make use of Ambitious Men, to handle 'em so, as they be still
Progressive, and not Retrogade.

Afflictions.
I. UNder what disguise soever we conceal our Afflictions, they seldom proceed,
but either from Vanity or Interest.

II. There are in our Afflictions several kinds of Hypocrisy. Sometimes we weep
for our selves under color of Weeping for our Friends, we lament the loss of
the good Opinion they had of us; We bewail the diminution of our Advantages,
Pleasures and Credit. Thus the Dead have the honor of those Tears, which
indeed are shed for the Living. I call this a sort of Hypocrisy, because in
these Afflictions People impose upon themselves. There is another kind not so
harmless as this, because it imposes upon all the World; I mean, the Affliction
of those who have the vanity of valuing themselves upon a deep and desperate
Sorrow: When Time, the great Physician of Sorrows, has worn off their real
grief, they do not leave off being obstinate, in Crying, Sobbing, Groaning and
Lamenting; and with a mourn^ul and melancholy Countenance endeavor to make the
World believe, that nothing but Death will end their Affliction. This dismal
and troublesome Vanity is most prevailing with Ambitious Women; for their Sex
rendering them unable to advance themselves by eminent Virtues, they strive to
signalize their Reputation by the Pageantry of an inconsolable Sorrow. There is
still another sort of Tears, which flowing from shallow Springs, will run and
dry up very easily: Men weep sometimes to gain the Reputation of Goodnature
and Tenderness, sometimes to be pitied and lamented by others, and sometimes to
avoid the shame of being accounted insensible.

III. Some Men are more missed than lamented; and others again are very much
lamented, and very little missed.

IV. Our Affliction for a Dead Friend is great or small, not according to his
Merit, but the Opinion we think he had of our deserts.

V. A pretty House, a fine Horse, a Dog, a Watch, any thing that comes to our
share, is enough sometimes to soften a great Grief, and lessen the sense of a
great Loss.

VI. The Duties of Interment are called the last Duties; for beyond the
Funeral, all that is given to the Dead is taken away from the
Living-Lamentations that are too long, not only prejudice Nature, but Society
likewise; they render us incapable of the Duties of a Civil Life; and one may
say, that out of Complaisance to those Friends we have lost, they make us
wanting to those we still enjoy.

VII. A skilful Co^^orter must begin by the Aggravation of Evils, to obtain a
free admittance to the Mind of the Afflicted, and to surprise their Belief.

* VIII. To Mourn without measure is Folly; nor to Mourn at all Insensibility:
The best Temper is betwixt Piety and Reason; to be sensible* but neither to be
transported nor cast down.

* IX. Most People show in their Afflictions more Ambition than Piety; for when
any body is within hearing, what Groans and Outcries do they make? but when
they are alone and in private all is hush and quiet: So soon as any body comes
in, they are at it again, but their Sorrow goes off with the Company.

* X. The most desperate Mourners are they who care least for their Friends;
for they think to redeem their Credit for want of Kindness to the Living, by
extravagant Ravings after the Dead.

* XI. To weep excessively for the Dead, is a kind of an Affront to the Living.

Ages of Life.
I. OUr Life being nothing else but a perpetual Change and Revolution, we come
altogether fresh and raw into the several Periods of it, and want often
Experience instead of Gray-Hairs.

II. Young People change their Taste and Inclinations, by the Mettle and heat
of Blood; and Old ones keep to theirs by the Sullenness of Habit and Custom.

III. Youth is a perpetual Debauchery, and the very Fever of Reason.

IV. The Lukewarmness of Old Age is as great a Foil to a Man's Salvation, as
the Heat and Passions of Youth.

V. Young Men that come first upon the Stage of the World, ought to be either
very Modest or very Brisk; for a sober, grave and composed Temper commonly
turns to Impertinence.

VI. Old People love mightily to give good Advice, to comfort themselves of
their Incapacity of setting ill Examples.

VII. Both Wisdom and Folly grow still proportionably with Age.

VIII. Most Men show upon the turning of their Age, where their Mind and Body
will begin to decay.

IX. Nothing is more ridiculous in Old People that have been Handsome formerly,
than to forget that they are so no more.

X. It Is a hard Lesson to learn how to be Old.

XI. Old Age is a Tyrant, that forbids us all the Pleasures of Youth, upon the
severest Penalties.

XII. There is no part of our Life wherein we ought to study our own Humor
with more Application than in Old Age, for it is never so difficult to be
discovered as then. An impetuous Young Fellow has a hundred returns when he is
dissatisfied with his Extravagances; but Old People devote themselves to their
Humor, as if it were a Virtue, and take pleasure in their own Defects, because
they carry a false Resemblance of Commendable Qualities: They are perpetually
crying up the Time-past, and enviously condemning the Present: They rail at
Pleasures when they are past them, or censure Diversions, whose only Fault is
their own Incapacity: A serious Air passes with them for Judgment, Phlegm for
Wisdom, and hence proceeds that imperious Authority they allow themselves to
censure every thing.

XIII. We see nothing more ordinary for Old Men, than to desire a Retirement;
and nothing so rare with them, as not to repent of it when they are once
retired: Their Souls that are in too great a Subjection to their Humors, are
disgusted with the World for being tiresome; But scarce can they quit this
false Object of their Misfortune, but they are as angry with Solitude, as they
were with the World, disquieting themselves where nothing but themselves can
give them any disquiet.

XIV. Scarce do we begin to grow Old, but we begin to be displeased with some
distaste, which we secretly frame in our selves. Then our Soul free from Self
love, is easily filled with that which is suggested to us, and what would have
pleased us before but indifferently, charms us at present, and enslaves us to
our own Weakness. By this, Mistresses dispose of their old Lovers to their own
fancy, and Wives of their old Husbands.

* XV. It Is with our Lives as with our Estates, a good Husband makes a little
go a great way: Whereas let the Revenue of a Prince fall into the Hands of a
Prodigal, it is vanished in a Moment. So that the Time allotted us, if it were
well employed, were abundantly enough, to answer all the Ends and Purposes of
Mankind.

XVI. A neglected Dress in Old People, multiplies their Wrinkles, and exposes
their Infirmities: An affected Curiosity of Apparel has the same Effect.

Avarice, Riches.
I. WHat a Man squanders away, he takes away from his Heir; what he lays up by
sordid Avarice, he takes away from himself. The Medium is to do one's self
Justice, and others.

II. Children would, perhaps, be dearer to their Fathers, and again Fathers to
their Children, but for the name of Heir.

III. All Men by their several Places, Titles and Successions, look upon
themselves as Heirs one of another, and by that Interest entertain all along a
secret desire of their Neighbor's death. The most fortunate Man in each
particular Condition, is he that has most to lose, and leave to his Successor.

* IV. It is not for acquiring Wealth, but for misemploying it when he has
acquired it, that Man ought to be blamed.

* V. I cannot call Riches better than the Baggage of Virtue; for as the
Baggage is to an Army, so is Riches to Virtue.

* VI. Of great Riches there is no real Use, except it be in the Distribution;
the rest is but Conceit.

* VII. Covetousness is enough to make the Master of the World, as Poor as he
that has just nothing; for a Man may be brought to a Morsel of Bread, by
Griping as well as by Profuseness. It Is a madness for a Man that has enough
already, to hazard all for the getting of more, and then upon the Miscarriage
to leave himself nothing.

VIII. Avarice is in many Cases more opposite to a Man's Interest, than
Liberality.

IX. Some Men despise Money, but not one of a Thousand knows how to part with it.

X. Avarice is often the Cause of contrary Effects: There are a World of
People, that Sacrifice all their present Possessions to remote and uncertain
Hopes; and others again slight great Advantages to come, for some mean Interest
in present.

XI. Riches do by no means teach us to be less fond of Riches: The possessing
of abundance is very far from giving us the quiet that there is in not desiring
them.

XII. Nothing is so hard to persuade Men to, as the contempt of Riches, except
ones Arguments be drawn from the Stores of Christian Religion; and therefore
the Wise Men among the Ancients were in truth very foolish, who without any
light of Faith, or Expectation of a better State, despised Riches and
Pleasures: They endeavored to distinguish themselves by uncommon and unnatural
Notions, and so to triumph over the rest of Mankind, by an imaginary Elevation
of Soul. Those that were the Wisest among them were satisfied with talking of
these things in Public, but behaved themselves after another rate in Private.

XIII. It Is the Infatuation of Misers to take Gold and Silver for things really
good, whereas they are only some of the means by which good Things are procured.

XIV. A Covetous Man renders himself the most miserable of Men, wrongs many,
and obliges none but when he dies.

XV. The Condition of a Miser is so wretched, that the greatest Curses a Man
can give him, is, That he may Live long.

XVI. That Man is Rich who receives more than he lays out; and on the contrary,
that Man is to be accounted Poor whose Expense exceeds his Revenue.

XVII. Nothing maintains it self so long as a moderate Fortune; and nothing so
soon dwindles away as a great one.

XVIII. Great Riches are generally the nearest occasion of Poverty.

XIX. A Covetous Man lays up for Old Age when Young; and for Death when Old. A
Prodigal Heir makes him a fine Funeral, and devours the rest of his Wealth.

XX. The Covetous Man spends more in one Day when Dead, than he did in Ten
Years when Alive.

* XXI. There are two sorts of Avarice, a True and a Bastard. -- True
Covetousness is a restless and insatiable desire of Riches, not for any further
end or use, but only to hoard and preserve, and perpetually increase them. This
is the greatest Evidence of a base ungenerous Mind, and at the same time the
highest Injustice in the World. For what can be more unreasonable, than for a
Man to ingross to himself all that which is for the Common Support and
Convenience of Mankind; and to propagate his Crime by locking up his beloved
Treasures, and thereby robbing continually the Public, of what he has once
gotten from private Persons. -- The Bastard kind of Avarice is the rapacious
Appetite of Gain, not for the Mony's own sake, but for the pleasure of
Refunding it immediately through all the Channels of Pride and Luxury. That Man
who i^ guilty of this, is in a manner excusable, sinc^ by his Prosuseness he
makes a kind of Restitution.

* XXII. It Is said of a Virtuous and Wise Man, that having nothing, he had all;
when a Miser having all things, yet has nothing.

* XXIII. There is not a greater Argumen^ of a narrow wretched Soul, than to
dote upon Money; nothing more reasonable than to despise it when we have it not,
and nothing more honorable than to employ it generously, and do good with it
when we have it.

* XXIV. The Patriarchs before the Flood who lived Nine Hundred Years, scarcely
provided for a few Days; and we, who live but a few days, provide at least for
Nine Hundred Years.

* XXV. As Riches at first make a Gentleman, so the want of them degrades him.

* XXVI. As Riches go off from a Man, they expose to the World his Weakness,
that lay undiscovered before.

* XXVII. There is one kind of Affliction which never leaves us, and that is,
which proceeds from the loss of our Fortunes. Time, which softens and allays
all other Griefs, does but exasperate and increase this; and the Sense of it^
renews even as often as we feel the pinch o^ pre^^ing Necessities.

Beauty, Homeliness.
I. IF we consider Agreeableness distinct from Beauty, we may call it a sort of
Symmetry or Proportion, the Rules of which no body can positively define; or a
secret Relation and Affinity of the Features one to another, and of all these
together to the Complexion, Looks and Air of the Person.

II. Few Women's Worth out lives their Beauty.

III. Gracefulness is to the Body, what good Sense is to the Mind.

IV. There is nothing so natural to Persons of the Fair-Sex, as to take a
pleasure in their own Beauty. They please themselves as much as it is possible
for others to please them, and are the first that discover their own Charms,
and fall in Love with them.

V. A Beautiful Woman is more concerned to preserve her Beauty than her Lover,
and shows less Tenderness for a Heart already vanquished, than she expresses
Vanity and Ostentation in extending her Conquests: Not but that she may very
well be sensible for her Gallant, but in all probability she will sooner
resolve to suffer the loss of what she loves, than to lose what, causes her to
be beloved.

VI. As long as a Woman is in full Possession of her Beauty, no Misfortune can
befall her, which she cannot in some measure alleviate: But when once that
Blessing has left her, all the other advantages of Fortune will never be able
to give her any tolerable Satisfaction.

VII. The last Tears that Beautiful Eyes reserve, are spent in bewailing
themselves after they are defaced out of all Hearts. The only Person that still
laments a lost Beauty is the miserable Possessor.

VIII. It Is a great wonder to see how Women that are so mightily fond of their
Beauty, can use so much Art to anticipate its ruin.

* IX. Beauty is so necessary to the Young, that those who are without it, seem
to be to no other purpose, than to wait on the Triumph of the Fair.

* X. Some Women set up for Beauty, as much in spite of Nature, as some Men do
for Wit.

* XI. Ill favored Women are never so nauseous, as when they would be
Beauties; adding to their Natural Deformity, the Artificial Ugliness of
Affectation.

* XII. Homely Women are as malicious to the Fair, as Blockheads are to Witty
Men; for they look upon other Women's Accomplishments as the upbraiding of their
Deformities.

XIII. The Contempt of Beauty in the Illfavour'd, is as false as the Contempt
of Riches in some Philosophers.

XIV. Agreeableness is arbitrary, but Beauty is something more real and
independent upon the Palate and Opinion.

* XV. Whosoever has any thing contemptible in his Person, has also a perpetual
Spur upon him to rescue and deliver himself from Scorn. Therefore all Deformed
Persons are extreme bold, First, In their own defense, as being exposed to
Scorn; but in process of Time, by a general Habit. Besides, it stirs them up
to Industry, to watch and observe the Weakness of others, that they may have
somewhat to repay.

Benefits, Gratitude, Ingratitude.
I. SOme Men are not only apt to forget both kind Turns, and Injuries that have
been done them, but even to hate their very Benefactors, and to lay aside their
Resentments against their Perrfecutors. The Application of acquitting
Obligations and revenging of Wrongs, appears to them a kind of slavery, which
they are loath to undergo.

II. Gratitude in most Men is nothing else but a secret desire to hook in
greater Benefits.

III. The generality of Men take a delight to acquit small Obligations; a great
many pay their Acknowledgments for moderate ones; but there is scarce any Body
but is unthankful for such as are Extraordinary.

IV. It is with Gratitude among Friends, as with Honesty among Traders, it
keeps up Business and Commerce: Most Men don't quit Scores because it is just
to pay Debts, but to secure their Credit, and so be trusted again the easier.

V. The common Mistake in the Computations of Men, when they expect Returns for
Favors, proceeds from the Pride, both of the Giver and Receiver, which cannot
agree upon the Estimate of the Benefit.

VI. To be uneasy, and make too much haste to return an Obligation, is one
sort of Ingratitude.

VII. There is a sort of free and generous Gratitude, whereby a Man not only
acquits a past Obligation, but lays a new one still upon his Benefactor.

VIII. The Error of the Giver does oftentimes excuse the Ingratitude of the
Receiver.

IX. The good Turns that we have received from a Man, ought to make us
Reverence his Malice.

X. We meet with little or no Ingratitude, as long as we are able to oblige.

XI. We should not regard how much Good a Friend has done us, so much, as how
much he desired and endeavored to do us.

XII. Men are often more desirous to seem forward and busy to serve others,
than to be successful in it; and had rather have it in their power to upbraid
their Friends with an Obligation, than really to oblige them.

XIII. In the matter of Benefits Pride is unwilling to own the Obligation, and
Self-Love to acquit it.

XIV. It Is as great an Ingratitude to publish the Favors of a Mistress, as to
conceal those of a Friend.

XV. It Is a kind of Ingratitude for a Man to be too inquis^itive into the
Motives of a Benefit he receives.

XVI. The great Cautions of some People against Ingratitude, denote less of
Hatred for that, than Aversion for Generosity.

XVII. There are not so many Ungrateful Men, as there are thought to be;
because there are not so many Generous Men as we imagine. He that in silence
suppresses a Favor received, is an unthankful Fellow, that deserved it not:
But he that publishes one that he has done, turns it to an Injury, showing, to
your disgrace, the necessity you had of him.

XVIII. Court-Acknowledgements have not so much respect to the Past, as design
upon the Future. They acknowledge Obligations to all that are in any Post to
oblige, and by an affected Gratitude for Favors never done, insinuate
themselves into those in whose power it is to do 'em.

XIX. The great Ones in requital have a Trick as artificial to excuse
themselves from doing Kindnesses, as the Courtiers have to engage 'em to it.
They reproach Men with Services never done, and complain of Ingratitude, though
they have hardly obliged any one to draw from hence a specious Pretense to
oblige no body.

XX. It Is much better to expose one's self to Ingratitude, than be wanting to
the relief of the Needy.

XXI. There is not any thing where Excess may be more commendable than in
Gratitude.

* XXII. There Is no living in this World without an exchange of Civil Offices,
and the need we have one of another, goes a great way toward the making of us
love one another: Now this Amity and Communication is to be entertained by the
Commerce of Giving and Receiving; and without good Nature and Gratitude Men had
as good live in a Wilderness, as in a Civil Society.

* XXIII. Ingratitude is of all Crimes that which we account the most venial in
our selves, and the most unpardonable in others.

* XXIV. Good Offices depend much upon Construction; some take themselves to be
obliged when they are not, others will not believe it when they are; and some
again take Obligations and Injuries the one for the other.

* XXV. It is a Court Humor to keep People upon the Tenters; their Injuries
are quick and sudden, but their Benefits are flow. Great Ministers love to
wrack Men with attendance; and account it an Oftentation of their Power to hold
their Suitors in hand, and to have many Witnesses of their Interst.

* XXVI. He that gives to be seen, would never relieve a Man in the dark.

* XXVII. It Is a kind of encumbrance upon the freedom of a generous Mind, to be
in debt to an ill Man, even upon any score whatsoever, that does but carry the
face of Good Will, or Respect; for it is a Debt that a Man's both ashamed and
weary of till it is paid off. And there is something mo^e in it yet too, which is,
that when all common Scores are made even, the Morality of the Obligation still
remains; for there is no cancelling the Bonds of Honor and Justice. Kindnesses
are to be paid in Specie as well as Money, that is to say, there must be
Affection in the return as well as Justice. Now as there can be no true
Friendship betwixt a Good Man and a Wicked, there should be no intercourse
betwixt them that looks like Friendship, and therefore the less Commerce the
better.

* XXVIII. We have the Common Saying ready at our Tongues end, That it is the
Man only that we consider, and not the Estate: This is a handsome ^lourish; but
where is the Man yet that does not more willingly bestow his time and his pains
upon the Service of a powerful and wealththy Person, than in the Support and
Protection of the best Poor Man that ever was born? For we are naturally
inclined to lay out our Services, where we may reasonably hope for the
speediest and the most certain return.

* XXIX. It is customary for great Men to overvalue the Services they do their
King and Country; and for Princes, when they cannot duly reward an eminent
Performance, to turn their Gratitude into Hatred.

* XXX. Those you have obliged most, will certainly avoid you when you can
oblige them no longer; and they take your visits like so many Duns.

* XXXI. Mistresses, as well as Friends, are sometimes avoided for Obligations
past.

* XXXII. When ill Men take up a fit of Kindness all on a sudden, and appear to
be better natured than usual, it is good Discretion to suspect Fraud, and to lay
their Words and their Practices together; for there are no Snares so dangerous
as those that are laid for us under the name of Good Offices.

* XXXIII. Most People seek out their own Interest under color of obliging
others, and are kind to their Neighbors for their own sakes.

Cheats.
I. OUR own Distrust justifies the Cheating of other People.

II. It is as easy a matter to deceive a Man's self, and not be sensible of
it, as it is hard to impose upon others, and yet for them not to be sensible of
it.

III. An honest Intention of imposing upon no body, lays us open to the
Cheating of other People.

IV. The most effectual way to be bubbled, is to fancy one's self wiser than
one's Neighbors.

V. The being a Blockhead is sometimes the best security against being imposed
upon by a Man of Sense.

VI. He that fancies such a sufficiency in himself, that he can live without
all the World, is mightily mistaken; but he that imagines himself so necessary,
that other People cannot live without him, is so a great deal more.

VII. Affected Simplicity and Plainness, is but a nicer and more labored Cheat.

VIII. Men would never live so long together in Society and good
Correspondence, if they did not mutually make Fools of one another.

IX. The common way of some to do their Business, and rise in the World, is to
use all possible means of persuading People that their Business is done already.

X. We are so used to dissemble with others, that in time we come to deceive
and dissemble with our selves.

XI. It is sometimes of great Use for a Man to pretend he is deceived; for when
we let a subtle Fellow see that we are sensible of his Tricks, it gives him
occasion to be more refined.

XII. It is a hard task upon Knaves to be per petually employed in concealing
their own want of Sincerity, and making amends for the Breaches of their
Promise.

XIII. Honesty and Plain dealing puts Knaves out of their Byaf^s; it breaks all
their Measures by which they hoped to compass their Ends: for Knaves commonly
think that nothing can be done but by Tricks and Artifice.

* XIV. All Frauds are covered and gilded over with specious Pretenses and Men
are every jot as easily imposed upon, as Birds, Beasts or Fishes; while the
eagerness of our Appetites suspends the Exercise of our Reason. A Treat, a
Woman or a Bottle, is the same thing to us, that a Worm, a Gudgeon, a grain of
Corn, or a piece of Flesh is to those Animals: We snap at the Bait without ever
dreaming of the Hook, the Trap, or the Snare, that goes along with it.

XV. Men never can bear to be over-reached by their Enemies, or betrayed by
their Friends; and yet, they are often contented to be both cheated and
betrayed by their own selves.

XVI. He is an unhappy Man that lives in the World without being deceived.

XVII. The Pleasure of Deceit goes sometimes so far, that the greatest of your
Enemies makes himself agreeable when he imposes upon you; and the best of your
Friends seldom undeceives you, but you are offended at it.

Clemency, Goodnature.
I. THE Clemency of Princes is very often little else but a State Trick to gain
upon the Affection of their Subjects.

II. That Clemency which is so mightily cried up in the World for a Virtue, is
often practiced out of Pride; sometimes out of Sloth and Neglect, sometimes out
of Fear, and generally out of a Mixture of all these Motives to^ther.

* III. No Virtue is so often in fault, as Clemency.

* IV. Good Nature is a great Misfortune when it is not managed with Prudence.

* V. A bare Easiness of Pardoning has often the force of a Temptation to
offend again.

* VI. It Is a great Error to take Facility for Good Nature: Tenderness without
Discretion is no better than a more pardonable Folly.

Confidence, Secrets.
I. THE Confidence we have in our selves creates a great part of that Trust
which we have in others

II. The greatest part of our Confidences proceed from a desire either to be
pitied or admired.

III. Confidence goes farther in Company than Wit.

IV. We often dare not disclose our Hearts to our Friends, not so much out of
any distrust we have of them, as that we have of our selves.

V. There is seldom any thing but a Noble Birth, or good Education, that can
make a Man capable of being Secret.

VI. All manner of Confidence, which is not absolute and entire, is dangerous:
There are few occasions, but where a Man ought either say all, or conceal all;
and how little soever you have revealed your Secret to a Friend, you have
already said too much, if you think it not safe to make him privy to all the
Particulars.

* VII. It Is ill trusting a Reconciled Enemy: but it is worse yet, to proceed at
one step from Clemency and Tenderness, to Confidence; Especially where there
are so many Memorials in sight, for Hatred and Revenge to work upon.

* VIII. A Supine, Credulous Facility, exposes a Man to be both a Prey and a
Laughingstock at once; and the Imposture can hardly miscarry, where there is a
full Confidence on the one side, and a plausible Address and Disposition on the
other.

Conversation, Society, Civility.
I. CIvility is a desire to be civilly used, and to be commended for an
accomplished well-bred Man.

II. We are generally weary of those Men most, whom we ought never to be weary
of at all.

III. We can bear sometimes to be plagued with Impertinents, but we cannot
endure to be accounted so by others.

IV. One Reason why we find so very few Men of Sense and agreeable
Conversation, is, that almost every Bodies Mind is more intent upon what he
himself has a mind to say, than upon making Pertinent Replies to what the rest
of the Company say to him. The more Ingenious and Complaisant sort go no
farther than pretending to harken attentively, when at the same time a Man may
plainly see that both their Eyes and their Mind are roving from what is said to
them, and posting back again to what they long to be at themselves; not
considering that to seek one's own Pleasure so very passionately, can never be
the way either to please or persuade others; and that diligent Attention, and
proper Repartees are the two Perf^ctions, that accomplish a Man for Company.

V. In Conversation, he seldom pleases who is over-confident of Pleasing.

VI. The Art of Pleasing in Company, is, not to explain things to Particulars;
to express only one half and leave your Hearers to make out the rest: This
argues you have a good Opinion of the Persons you converse with; for nothing is
more agreeable to Men's love of themselves.

VII. It is very hard to hit a certain Temper and Mediocrity of Freedom with
Persons above us, so to be easy and plain with them, as to become an
Instrument of their Diversion and Entertainment, without being any way
offensive, or breaking in upon the Honor and Respect due to their Quality.

VIII. We often brag of never being weary of any Body's Company, and are so
vain as not to own, that we can ever meet with any bad.

IX. A Man is generally troublesome when he thinks most he cannot be so.

X. To fly from Company, is to act against the Intention of Nature; to live
always in Solitude, one must be something more than Man, or less than a Brute.

XI. Formal Civilities and Ceremonies are a kind of Tyranny, which render Men
unsociable, even in Society it self.

XII. It is with Men's Wit, as it is with Countries; for as the most fruitful
of these are not always the pleasantest to walk in, so the most fertile Wits
are not always the most agreeable to converse with.

XIII. It Is the part of a Blockhead to be troublesome; a Man of Wit and Sense is
sensible whether his Company is agreeable or no; and disappears a Moment before
the time, that his Visit might be accounted tedious.

XIV. The greatest Skill and Perfection in Conversation is not so much to show
a Man's own Wit, as to give other People the Opportunity of exerting theirs: He
that parts from you pleased and satisfied with himself, is perfectly so with
you. Men do not live to admire; they have a mind to please, and seek less to be
instructed or diverted, than relished and applauded.

XV. It Is a great Misfortune for a Man either to want Wit to speak well, or
Discretion to hold his Tongue. This is the Spring of all Impertinence.

XVI. The Pleasure of Society and Conversation betwixt Friends, is entertained
by a Similitude of Manners, and a little difference of Opinions in the Sciences
By this it is that a Man either confirms and pleases himself in his own
Sentiments; or exercises and instructs himself by the Dispute.

* XVII. We meet with many dangerous Civilities in the World, wherein it is a
hard matter for a Man to save both his Skin and his Credit. It Is a difficult
Point to hit the true Medium, betwixt Trusting too much and too little, for
fear of incurring a Danger on the one hand, or giving a Scandal on the other.
Complements are only words of Course; and though one external Civility may be
current Payment for another, yet a Man would be loath to venture his All upon a
Figure of Speech, where the meaning is so nicely divided betwixt Jest and
Earnest. It Is a base thing to suspect a Friend, or an Honest Man: Nay, it is a
base thing to suspect any man that looks like one, so as to wound him; that is,
either in Word or in Thought. But then it is Death perhaps to be imposed upon by
an Hypocrite under that Masque: So that the Character of a Wise Man lies at
stake upon matter of Judgment one way, and of a Good-natured Man the other. The
middle Course is to hide our Distrust where we are doubtful, and to be free and
open where we may be secure. There is no living without trusting some body or
other, in some Cases, or at some time or other; but then if People be not
Cautious whom, when or wherein they Trust, the Mistake may be Mortal; for there
must be somewhat of a Trust to make way for a Treachery, since no Man can be
betrayed, that does not either believe, or seem to believe.

Court-Favourites.
I. THE Contempt of Favorites is nothing else but the love of Favor: The
vexation we resent for our being excluded, is in some measure softened and
allayed, by undervaluing those that are in Possession. And we deny to pay them
our Respects, not being able to take that away from them, which makes them
respected by all the World besides.

II. The Court is the Imperial Seat of Ambition; all other Passions, even Love
it self, and all Laws truckle under her; and there are no sorts of Unions, but
she can both knit together or separate.

III. There are few Courtiers, but what suffer a Change in their Reputation
twice a Year, either by the sickleness and instability of other Men's Opinions,
or the diversity of their own Conduct.

IV. A Favorite will sooner find an Adorer, than a true Friend.

V. There are few Favorites, that keep in Favor to the last; either because
Princes grow weary of their Favorites when they have nothing more to bestow on
them: Or that Favorites themselves grow weary of the Court when they expect
nothing more from it.

VI. Courts would soon be turned into Deserts, and Kings left by themselves, if
Men were once rid of Vanity and Interest; but most People are contented to be
Slaves at Court, so they may domineer elsewhere.

VII. There is no other study, but how to please in the Court of Princes,
because there a Man makes his Fortune by rendering himself agreeable. Hence it
comes that Courtiers are so polisht: On the contrary, in Towns and Republics,
where Men manage their Affairs by Labor, the last of their Cares is to please,
and it is that which renders them so Clownish.

VIII. The Wheels, the Springs, the Movements, all is hidden in a Watch, and
nothing to be seen except the Needle, which insensibly goes round. This is the
Image of a Courtier, and so much the truer, that after many fair steps; he
often returns to the same point from whence he first set out.

VIII. If Favor places a Man above his Equals, his Fall places him below them.

IX. That Man that has seen the Court, has seen the fairest and beautifullest
part of the World; and if he can despise the Court after he has seen it, he can
as well despise all the World.

X. The Town makes a Man nauseate the Country; the Court creates a disgust for
the Town. The Court it self puts a Wise Man out of conceit with it, and gives
him a hankering after Privacy and Retirement.

XI. A Favorite has no Retinue; he is without Engagements, without Ties: He
may be surrounded with a crowd of Relations and Creatures, but he is contiguous
to nothing, he stands by himself.

XII. An old Courtier of good Sense and Memory, is a Treasure of an inestimable
value. He is full of Transactions and Maxims; in him we find the History of the
Times adorned with many curious Circumstances, not to be found any where else;
and of him we may learn Rules for the Conduct of our Affairs and Manners, which
are so much the surer, as they are grounded on Experience.

XIII. It is as hard to define the Court, as to give a true Name to changeable
Colors.

XIV. The Country is the Place from whence the Court, as in its true distance,
appears a thing full of Charms, and worth our Admiration. But if a Man come
near it, its Perfections decrease, just as those of a fine Landscape, when you
behold it at a close view.

XV. The Court does neither make a Man happy, nor suffer him to be so elsewhere.

XVI. As it is good for a Gentleman to Travel, so it is to see the C^urt. When
he first comes to it, he discovers there, as it were, a new World, where Vice
and Politeness have an equal sway, and where a Man advantageously improves both
good and bad Qualities.

XVII. The Court is like a stately Edi^ice of Marble, I mean, because those
that compose it are very hard, but very well polisht.

XVIII. Nothing so deforms certain Courtiers, as the Presence of the Prince; it
so alters their Air, and debases their Looks, that a Man can scarce know them
by their Faces. Proud infolent Men are the most disfigured, for they lose most
of their own; but a modest Man keeps his natural Countenance; he has nothing to
reform.

XIX. It is oftentimes as dangerous to make the first steps at Court, as it is
not to make them.

XX. You are a Good Man, you neither Court the Favor nor the Resentments of
Favorites: You mind your own Business, and wholly apply your self to your
Prince and Duty -- Mark my Prophecy, You are Undone.

XXI. As difficult as it is to get a considerable Place at Court, it is much
harder yet to make one's self worthy of it.

XXII. It is hard to determine which of the two is the greater shame, either to
be denied a Place we deserve, or granted one we deserve not.

* XXIII. Courtiers generally pay Services with Smoke and fair Words, and use a
world of unprofitable Ceremony to morti^ie an honest Man.

Courage, Valor, Cowardice.
I. THE Love of Honor and Glory, the Fear of Shame, the design of promoting an
Interest, the desire of making Life easy and comfortable, and the longing of
pulling down others, are oftentimes the causes of that Valor, so much extolled
in the World.

II. Valor in private Soldiers is a hazardous Trade, to which they have bound
themselves to get a Livelihood.

III. Perfect Valor and absolute Cowardice are Extremes that few Men fall
into. The vast middle space contains all the other kinds and degrees of
Courage, which differ no less from one another than Men's Faces or their
Humors. Some Men are Valiant even to Temerity, in the beginning of the Action,
that are easily disheartened and dejected, if it continue: Some satisfy
themselves with having done what was necessary to maintain their Honor and
Reputation, and will hardly be prevailed upon to do any thing besides: Some
have the command of their Fears, and Master them only by intervals: Others are
sometimes carried away by general Terrors: Others throw themselves into the
Action, not daring to maintain their own Post: The Courage of some has been
inured and hardened against great Dangers, by their habit and familiarity with
small ones: Some are Valiant with a Sword, that fear a M^^ket-Shot; and others
are unconcerned at the discharge of a Musket, and frighted at the sight of a
naked Sword. All these different sorts of Courage agree in this, that Night, as
it increases the Fear, so it conceals both brave and base Actions, and gives
every body opportunity of saving himself. There is still another more general
Tenderness of a Man's self, for you meet with no body, that does as much as he
would be capable to do, if he was but sure to come off safe: So that it is very
plain, that let a Man be never so Stout, yet the fear of Death does certainly
give some damp to his Courage.

IV. True Valor consists in doing without Witnesses, what a Man is capable to
do before all the World.

V. Intrepid^ty is an extraordinary Strength of Mind, which raises us above the
Troubles and Perturbations which the Prospect of Dangers is ^pt to produce: And
by this Strength it is, that Heroes remain undisturbed, and preserve the free
use of their Reason, amidst the most amazing and terrible Accidents.

VI. Intrepidity is requisite to buoy up the Mind in Plots and Conspiracies;
but Valor is alone sufficient to give a Man Constancy of Mind in honorable
Actions, and the hazards of War.

VII. Most Men expose themselves enough in an Engagement to secure their
Honor; but very few are willing to expose themselves so far, as the Design
they go upon requires, to render it successful.

VIII. Men are as ^ond of their Lives, as desirous of getting Honor; which is
the reason why Men of Gallantry use as many dextrous Shi^ts and Stratagems to
decline Death, as your Litigious Knaves do to secure their Estates.

IX. He cannot answer for his own Courage, who was never in any danger.

X. Cowardice is a dangerous Failing to tell those of, that we would reclaim
from.

XI. Valor was assigned to Men, and Chastity to Women, as their principal
Virtues, because they are the hardest to practice: When these Virtues are not
sustained and kept up, either by Constitution or Divine Grace, they soon grow
faint, and fall presently a Sacr^fice to the Love of Life and Pleasure.

XII. If a Man would define Victory, he must be tempted to call her with the
Poets, The Daughter of Heaven; since her O^iginal is not to be found upon
Earth: And indeed it is the effect of a thousand Actions, which instead of
aiming at it, have no other Prospect than the particular Interest of each
Combatant. For all those that make up an Army seeking their own Honor and
Preferment, procure so great and so universal a Good.

XIII. Cowards can never be ^it for great Undertakings; Their easy belief of
Dangers suppresses their best formed Designs, and so confounds their Judgments,
that imaginary Suspicions pass with them for real Obstacles.

XIV. Of all Enemies those of a Cowardly Temper are most to be feared; their
want of Courage makes them use private Revenges and Treacheries, when a Valiant
Man attacks you openly, and gives you warning that you may stand upon your
Guard.

XV. Cowards are of all Men the most distrustful, credulous and cruel* Their
fearful Constitution makes them apprehensive of imaginary Dangers, and Enemies;
and puts them upon revenging Plots and Conspiracies, which have oftentimes no
reality, but in there wounded Fancy.

* XVI. Courage, without the Softness of Humane Courtesy and Candor, is but a
savage and outrageous Brutality.

* XVII. Let the Numbers be what they will, that Army is ever beaten where the
fright first enters.

* XVIII. Natural Infirmities are well high insuperable; and Men that are
Cowards by Complexion, are hardly to be made Valiant by Discourse: But they are
conscious yet of the Scandal of that Weakness, and may make a shift, perhaps,
to reason themselves now and then into a kind of temporary Resolution, which
they have not the power afterward to go thorough with.

Constancy, Inconstancy.
I. COnstancy in Love is generally a perpetual Inconstancy, which ^ixes our
Hearts to all the Accomplishments of the Party beloved successively; sometime^
admiring one, sometime^ another: So that this Constancy is no better than a
^ickle Humor settled, if I may so speak, and con^in'd within the compass of one
Person.

II. Constancy in Love, is of two sorts: One proceeds from the discovery of new
Perfection in those we Love; the other from a point of Honor, and a taking a
pride in being Constant.

III. There is an Inconstancy that proceeds from an unsettled Judgment, a
natural Levity and Weakness that Espouses all Opinions as they come, and thinks
as other People think; and there is another much more excusable, that arises
from a dislike and disapproving of the things themselves.

IV. The Violence some Men use upon themselves to be Constant to what they
Love, is little better than Inconstancy.

V. There is no reason to reproach Inconstancy, as a great Crime; it is no more
in the power of certain Persons to love, or not to love, than to be in health
or out of order. All that one can reasonably demand from sickle Persons, is
ingenuously to acknowledge their Levity, and not to add Treachery to
Inconstancy.

VI. It is ordinary withsome to exclaim against Inconstancy, and to decry those
that desert them; when at the same time they are glad to have an Example of
Change: For it happens but too often, that the best established Friendships, the
most strict Confidences insensibly slacken; then we seek a Quarrel, we seem to
be angry, to the end of finding some Pretense to set our selves at liberty.

Constancy, Resolution.
I. THE Constancy of Philosophers is often nothing else but the knack of
concealing their secret Resentments and Perturbations.

II. We often fancy to be Constant and Patient in our Misfortunes, when we are
truly dejected and cast down: We suffer without daring to hold up our Heads,
just as Cowards let themselves be knocked of the Head, because they have not
Courage enough to strike again.

III. No Man can be truly good and sweet Natured without Constancy and
Resolution; They that seem to be so, have commonly an Easiness that quickly
turns pievish and sour.

IV. Constancy, or Resistance in Misfortunes, is only dwelling longer upon our
Miseries; it appears the most amiable Virtue to those who are under no
Afflictions, but is truly a new load to such as are.

Crimes, Ills, Harm.
I. SOme Crimes not only pass for innocent, but also get Honor and Renown by
being committed, with more ^omp by a greater Number, and in a higher degree of
Wickedness than others. Thus public Robberies and Plunderings are styled Noble
Achievements; and the Usurping whole Countries, is dignified with the glorious
Title of gaining Conquests.

II. We easily forget our Faults, when no body takes notice of them.

III. Some Men are so good, that one cannot fairly believe any thing ill of
them without the Demonstration of seeing it our selves: But never any were so
good, that we should be astonish^ when we do see it.

IV. Those that find no Disposition in themselves to be guilty of great Faults,
are not apt upon slight Grounds to suspect others of them.

V. Our Repentances are generally not so much a Concern and Remorse for the
ills we have done; as a dread of those we are in danger of suffering.

VI. Innocence does not ^ind near so much Protection as Guilt.

VII. The Ill we do never brings so much Hatred and Persecution upon us, as our
good Qualities.

VIII. Men frequently do good, only to get an opportunity of doing ill with
greater security.

IX. It is safer to do some Men Hurt, than to do them too much good.

X. No Man can be truly Good, but such as are in a Station that gives them the
Power of revenging the Wrongs that are done them.

* XI. Reason and Conscience are so Sacred, that the greatest Villainies are
still countenanced under that Cloak and Color.

XII. Quarrels would never last long, were the Wrong only of one side.

XIII. Some Heroes have been accounted so for being greatly Ill, no less than
others for being greatly Good.

XIV. We often forgive those that have injured us, but we can never pardon
those we have injured.

XV. There are but few Men wise enough to know all the Mischief they do.

XVI. The Violences we commit upon our selves, are oftentimes more painful,
than those which other People use toward us.

XVII. There are some mischievous Men in the World, that would not be able to
do half so much hurt, if they had no Goodness at all.

XVIII. Nothing more discredits the Violence of Wicked Men, than the Moderation
of the Good; and Perfecutors never become more odious, than by the Wisdom of
those whom they persecute.

* XIX. Innocence is no Protection against the Arbitrary Cruelty of a
Tyrannical Power; for, accusing is proving, where Malice and Force are joined
in the Prosecution: Arguments then are but foolish Things, nay the very Merits,
Virtues and good Offices of the Person accused, are improved to his
Condemnation.

Custom.
* I. CUstom is the Plague of Wise Men, and the Idol of Fools.

II. There is no Life so regular, where particular Actions don't sometimes
exceed the general habit and conduct.

* III. Men's Thoughts are much according to their Inclinations; their Discourse
and Speeches according to their Learning and in^used Opinions; but their Deeds
are after, as they have been accustomed.

Cunning, Tricks, Shifts, Treachery.
I. THe subtlest Fetch and Dissimulation, is to pretend being caught; for a Man
is never so easily over-reached, as when he is thinking to overreach others.

II. The most cunning Men pretend to blame Tricking; that they may use it with
more security themselves, upon some great Occasion or Interest.

III. Frequent Cunnings and Fetches, argue a shallow little Wit; and it
generally falls out, that he that conceals himself in one Instance, betrays
himself as much by it in another.

IV. Those that have been over-reached by some of our Tricks, do not seem near
so foolish and ridiculous to us, as we our selves are in our own Opinion, when
they have been too cunning for us.

V. It is very hard to determine whether an Universal Goodness, showed to all
the world, without distinction, be the effect of Goodnature, or great Cunning
and Address.

VI. Lies, Arti^ices and Tricks, are as sure Marks of a low and poor Spirit, as
false Money is of a poor and low Purse.

* VII. There is not a greater Pest in Humane Society, than a Perverse Craft,
under the Mask of Simplicity.

* VIII. The main Business of the World is nothing but Sharping and putting
Tricks upon one another by turns.

* IX. It Is a good Discretion, when a Body has to do with an Adversary, that is
either too crafty, or too strong for him, to turn him off to his Match; but it
would be a cleverer way yet, to encounter the Stratagem, and to defeat one Sham
with another.

X. It Is a fair step in Cunning and Subtilty, the possessing of other People
with the belief that we are but indifferently so.

XI. Cunning is neither a very good nor a very bad Quality; it floats, if I may
so speak, betwixt Virtue and Vice: And upon all occasions it may, nay perhaps
it ought to be improved by Prudence.

XII. Cunning is the near occasion of Cheat; from one to the other, there is
but one step, and a slippery one too, I mean a Lie; if a Man adds this to
Cunning, he makes it an Imposture.

XIII. With those, who out of Cunning hearken all, and speak l^ttle, the best
Method is either to speak little, or to speak very much, and say little.

* XIV. There is nothing looks sillier than a Craf^ty Knave outwitted, and
beaten at his own play.

* XV. There is no trusting to the fair Words of those that have both an
Interest and an Inclination to destroy us; especially when the Design is
carried on under the Mask of a friendly Office. It is but reasonable to oppose
Art to Art, and where we suspect false play, to encounter one Trick with
another; provided always that it be managed without breach of Faith, and within
the compass of Honor, Honesty and good Manners.

* XVI. Of all scandalous and lewd Offices, Treachery is certainly the ba^est;
it is a Sin against common Faith, Honor and Society; a Villainy in short, that is
never to be approved, how convenient soever it is in some Cases to be made use
of.

* XVII. All Traitors are Mercenaries; and whoever betrays one Master for
Advantage, will betray another for a better Price.

Detraction, Slander, Tale-Bearers.
I. It Is a pitiful sneaking sort of Life, that of a Back-biter; always to be
pecking at, and feeding upon the Imperfections of others.

II. Generally speaking, it were a good Bargain, to renounce all that good Men
can say of us, upon condition they would say no ill.

III. Too tender a Sense of what other People say ill of us, does but entertain
the Malice of the World, which desires no more than that it may disturb us.

IV. The absolute want of such a Sense, so as to be moved at nothing they say,
is a contrary Extreme, that produces the same effect. This is such a sort of
Contempt as the World is concerned to Revenge it self upon.

V. There is a middle State and Temper to be found between these two Extremes;
which inclines the World to make Allowances for some Actions in one Man, which
yet they condemn without any Mercy in others. This makes the mighty difference
between Ladies, that yet have taken the same liberties; so that some are ^un
down, and it is scandalous to be seen in their Company; and others are esteemed
as Chaste as Nuns, and no Reflections cast upon them.

VI. We speak ill of other People, generally not so much out of Malice as Pride.

VII. I hear so very ill a Character of such a Man, and I find him so very
good, that I am apt to think that he has some troublesome M^rit, that drowns
that of other People.

VIII. A Wise Man ought not to be concerned at what is said against him; for if
what they say of us be true, it is our business rather to correct our selves,
than for others to contain themselves. If what is said of us be false, so soon
as we shall show a concern at it, we make it suspected for Truth. The contempt
of such Discourses discredits them, and takes away the Pleasure from those that
make them.

* IX. There is hardly such another Pest in a Commonwealth, as a Consort of
Parasites, that feed Governors with false Representations and Reports of Men
and of Things: They first betray their Masters to Dishonor and Ruin, and then
when they find the Vessel sinking, save themselves in the Longboat.

* X. Busy Bodies and Intermedlers, are a dangerous sort of People to have to
do withal; for there is no Mischief that may not be wrought by the craft and
manage of a Double Tongue, with a foolish Credulity to work upon. There Is
hardly a greater Pest to Government, Conversation, the Peace of Societies,
Relations and Families, than officious Tale-bearers, Whisperers, and busy
Intermedlers: These Pick-thanks are enough to set Mankind together by the Ears;
they live upon Calumny and Slander, and cover themselves too under the Seal of
Secrecy and Friendship. The Sin of Traducing is Diabolical, according to the
very Letter; and if the Office be artificially managed, it is enough to put the
whole World into a Flame, and no body the wiser which way it came. The Mischief
may be promoted by Misrepresenting, Misunderstanding, or Misinterpreting our
Neighbors Thoughts, Words and Deeds; and no Wound so mortal as that where the
Poison works under a pretense of Kindness: Nay, there are ways of Commendation
and Insinuation, of Affection and Esteem, that kill a Man as sure as a Gun.
This Practice is the Bane of all Trust, and it is as frequent in the Intrigues
of Courts and States, as in the most ordinary Accidents of Life. It Is enough to
break the neck of all Honest Purposes, to suppress all generous and public
spirited Motions, and to stiste all honorable Inclinations in the very
Conception. But next to the Practice of these lewd Offices, deliver all Honest
Men from, lying at the Mercy of those that encourage and entertain them.

Designs, Undertakings, Success,
I. HE that minds and busies himself about small Interests, becomes usually
unfit for great Undertakings.

II. Though an Action appear never so bright and glorious in it self, it is not
to be accounted great, if it be not the effect of Wisdom and Design.

III. Great Men's Honor ought always to be rated by the Methods they employed
to carry on and accomplish their Designs.

IV. A Wise Man should order his Designs, and set all his Interests in their
proper Places. This Order is often disturbed by a foolish Greediness, which
while it puts us upon pursuing several things at once, makes us eager for
matters of less Consideration; and we let the Main go, while we grasp at the
Accessories.

V. There must be a true Proportion of the Actions, to the Designs, without
which it is impossible for a Man to gain his Ends.

VI. There are a World of Proceedings, that appear odd and ridiculous, which
yet are grounded upon secret Reasons, that are very solid and substantial.

VII. It is hard to determine, whether a clear, open and honorable Proceeding,
be the result of good Principles, or subtle Craft and Address.

VIII. It is with some Affairs, as it is with most Diseases; they are rather
sowr'd and exasperated, than allayed by untimely Remedies: And the height of
Skill and Wisdom, is to know when they can bear the handling.

IX. There are but very few things impossible in their own Nature; and we want
not Means; to conquer Difficulties, so much as Application and Resolution in
the use of Means.

X. The dislike we commonly have of Negotiators (or Arbitrators) arises from
their being generally apt to sacrifice all the Interest of their Friends, for
the advancing and bringing about their Negotiation, which they make their own
^nterest, by the Credit of having succeeded in their Undertakings.

XI. It is generally in Matters of no great moment, where we venture not to
believe Probabilities.

XII. We should desire very few things passionately, if we did but perfectly
know the Nature of the thing we desire.

XIII. In great Undertakings, the improving of Opportunities goes a greater way
than the starting of them.

XIV. No Commendations are thought too great for Prudence: And yet the highest
pitch of it cannot ensure a Man the most inconsiderable Event.

XV. We should often blush for our best Ac^ions, if the World did but see all
the Motives upon which they were grounded.

XVI. Good Success is often owing to want of Judgment; for a nice Discretion
keeps a Man from venturing upon several Attempts, which mere want of
Consideration makes frequently turn to good account.

XVII. Our Actions are like the last Syllables of Words, which every Man makes
Rhyme to what he thinks fit.

XVIII. We execute slo^ly, what we resolve upon unwillingly.

XIX. Any thing that is extraordinary looks great, if the Success be
favorable; as every thing that is great looks foolish, if the Success be
contrary.

XX. There is a critical Point in the (...) of all States, where their Ruin
would be unavoidable, if one knew how (...) it were to destroy them; but for
want of foresight clear enough, or a sufficient Courage, Men are content with
a little, when they might do more, making either the Meanness of Spirit, or the
want of Greatness in the Soul, pass for Prudence.

XXI. Whatever we undertake, we must propose to our Thoughts some great and
extraordinary aim, and even such as is above our reach: For we could hardly be
persuaded to begin our Journey, if we were sure to go no farther than we really
shall.

* XXII. There is not any thing so small, b^ there goes Art and Application
toward the acquiring of it.

* XXIII. It Is of mighty Use to Men in any great and daring Attempt, to have
their Followers and others think, there is Destiny in their behalf; that they
are God's Instruments, only accomplishing what he has long designed they
should; this renders them both most violent in their Motions, and incurable
either by any Admonitions, or even almost by any Unsuccessfulness or
Discouragements.

* XXIV. Any thing is a good Reason for a Way to him, who beforehand is
resolved to take it; he blames or commends, condemns or justifies, as a Corrupt
Party, not as an equal Iudge^ Self-Love s^eers all its Determinations; and
following all its Windings, it is never true to the reality of the thing, but
to its own conce^^ therein; which being differently affected by any ways, at
different Times, it accordingly either applauds or decrys them, and has a
Judgment of them when they are in our own Case, and another, when they are in
our Neighbor's.

* XXV. Experience makes many a Wise Man of a Fool; and Security makes many a
Fool of a Wise Man.

* XXVI. There Is no forcing Nature against her Biass, or inverting the Methods
of Providence. Irregular Desires and unreasonable Undertakings must expect to
meet with Disappointments: There is a proper Time for all Things, and nothing
succeeds well, but what is done in Season.

* XXVII. Hasty Resolutions are seldom Fortunate, and it is a piece of
necessary Prudence for a Man, before he resolves any thing, to consider what
may be the Consequences of it.

* XXVIII. It Is matter of Skill and Address, when a Man cannot honestly compass
what he would be at, to appear easy and indifferent upon all Repulses and
Disappointments. Beside, it improves all our Disappointments into Providence,
when we can let fall the vain desire of any thing, without feeling the loss of
it.

* XXIX. Improbability and Impossibility, are two frightful Words to weaker
Minds, but by diligent and wise Men, they are generally found to be only the
Excuses of Idleness and Ignorance. For the most part, they lie not in the
things themselves, but in Men's false Opinions concerning them; they are raised
by Opinions, but are soon abolisht by Works. Many things that were at first
improbable to the Minds of Men, are not so to their Eyes; many that seemed
unpracticable to their Thoughts, are quite otherwise to their Hands: Many that
are too difficult for their naked Hands, may be soon performed by the same
Hands if they are strengthened by Instruments, and guided by Methods: Many that
are unmanageable by a few Hands, and a few Instruments, are easy to the joint
Force of a Multitude: Many that fail in one Age, may succeed by the renewed
Endeavors of another* It is not therefore the conceit or ^ancy of Men alone,
that is of sufficient Authority to condemn the most unlikely things for
impossible; unless they have been tempted in vain, by many Eyes, many Hands,
many Instruments, and many Ages.

* XXX. The E^rors of Young Men are the ruin of Business; but the Errors of
Aged Men amount but to this, that more might have been done, or sooner. Young
Men, in the Conduct and Management of Affairs, embrace more than they can hold;
stir more than they can quier; ^ly to the end without Consideration of the
Means and Degrees; pursue some few Principles, which they have chanced upon
absurdly; care not to innovate, which draws unknown Inconveniences; Use extreme
Remedies at first, and that which doubles all Errors, will not acknowledge or
retract them. Men of Age object too much, consult too long, adventure too
little, repent too soon, and seldom drive Business home to the full period, but
content themselves with a Mediocrity of Success. Therefore it is good to
compound Employments of both; for that will be good for the Present, because
the Virtues of either Age may correct the Defects of both; and good for
Succession, that Young Men may be Learners, while Old Men are Actors.

Devotion, Religion, Hypocrisy.
I. THE Devotion of some Ladies, on the turning of their Years, is no better
than a kind of Decency taken up to shelter themselves from the Shame and the
Jest of an antiquate Beauty; and to secure in every Change something that may
sti^l recommend them to the World.

II. The Professors of strict Devotion, who without absolute Necessity engage
themselves in the Business and Commerce of the World, give us great cause to
suspect the reality of their Devotion.

III. All Devotion which is not grounded upon Christian Humility, and the Love
of one's Neighbor, is no better than Form and Pretense. It Is generally the
Pride and Pievishness of Philosophy; which thinks by despising the World, to
revenge it self upon all the Contempt and Dissatis^action Men have met with
from it.

IV. True Devotion is a Temper of Mind purely Spiritual, and de^ives it self
from God; consequently it is a very nice Thing, and ought to be observed very
narrowly, and with exceeding Caution, by those that would keep themselves from
being deceived in it.

V. The Doctrines of Christianity, which ought to be derived from the T^uths
contained in the Gospel, are generally delivered to us, according to the Temper
and Complexion of our Teacher^. Some, out of an exceeding Tende^ness and
Goodnature, and others from a sour and rugged Disposition, form and employ
differently the Mercy and Justice of God.

VI. There is always under the greatest Devotion, a Proportion of Self-Love;
great enough to set Bounds to our Charity.

VII. To consider purely the Repose of this Life, it would be well if Religion
had more or less influence upon Mankind. It compels, and does not subject
enough; like some Politics, that take away the Sweetness of Liberty, without
bringing the Advantages of Subjection.

VIII. Nothing can be more fickle than the Judgment of Men, as to the Religion
of others; they treat as impious Persons those who forsake the World for God's
sake; and those as weak and decayed in their Understanding, that sacrifice
Fortune to Religion.

IX. I question a little the Persuasion of those Preachers, who offering us the
Kingdom of Heaven in Public, Solicit in particular a small Benefice with the
utmost importunity.

* X. There Is no such Masque for the greatest of Impieties, as a Veil of
Religion.

* XI. Most People, Clergy as well as Laity, accommodate their Religion to
their Profit; and reckon that to be the best Church there is most to be got by.

* XII. Men talk as if they believed in God; but they Live as if they thought
there were none: For their very Prayers are often downright Mockeries, and
their Vows and Promises are no more than Words of Course, which they ^ever
intend to make good.

* XIII. It Is a fault which is very incident to Men of Devotion, to strive to
make themselves and their own Opinions adored, while they only seem zealous for
the Honor of God. For when they have once formed in themselves a perfect Model
of the Will of God, and have long confirmed their Minds by continual thinking
upon it, they are apt to contemn all others that agree not with them in some
Particulars.

* XIV. Presumption leads People to Infidelity in a Trice; and so by insensible
degrees to Atheism: For when Men have once cast off a Reverence for Religion,
they are come within one step of laughing at it.

* XV. There never was an Hypocrite so disguised, but he had some Mark or other
yet to be known by.

* XVI. A Religious Hypocrite is only a Devil dressed up with a Ray about him,
and transformed into an Angel of Light. Take him in the very Raptures of his
Devotions, and do but throw a parcel of Church Lands in his way, he shall leap
at the Sacrilege from the very Throne of his Glory, and Pick your Pocket, as a
French Poet says of a Jesuit, in the middle of his Paternoster.

* XVII. A Man that reposes and assures himself upon Divine Protection and
Favor, gathers a Force and Faith, which Humane Nature in it self could not
obtain. Therefore, as Atheism is in all respects hateful, so in this; that it
deprives Humane Nature of the means to exalt it self above Humane Frailty.

* XVIII. It were better to have no Opinion of God at all, than such an one as
is unworthy of him: For the one is Unbelief, and the other Contumely.

Education.
I. THE B^eeding we give Young People, is oftentimes but an additional
Self-Love, by which we make them have a better Conceit of themselves.

* II. Lessons and Precepts ought to be gilt and sweetened, as we do Pills and
Potions, so as to take off the disgust of the Remedy; for it holds both in
V^rtue and in Health, that we love to be instructed, as well as Phy^sick'd with
Pleasure.

* III. Nothing makes a deeper Impression upon the Minds of Children, or comes
more lively to their Understanding, than those instructive Notices, that are
conveyed to them by Glances, Insinuations and Surpize; and under the Cover of
some Allegory and Riddle; naked Lessons and Precepts have nothing the force
that Images and Parables have upon our Minds and Affections. Besi^e, that the
very study to unriddle a Mystery, fu^nishes the Memory with more Tokens to
remember it by.

* IV. The ^oundations of Knowledge and Virtue are laid in our Childhood, and
without an ea^ly Care and Attention* we are as good as lost in our very
Cradles; for the Principles that we imbibe in our Youth, we carry commonly to
our Graves; and it is the the Education that makes the Man. To speak all in a
few words, Children are but Blank Paper, ready indifferently for any
Impression, good or bad, (for they take all upon credit) and it is much in the
power of the first comer to write Saint or Devil upon it, which of the two he
pleases; so that one step out of the way in the I^stitution, is enough to
poison the Peace and the Reputation of a whole Life.

* V. All the Extravagances of the lewdest Life are nothing else but the more
consummated Follies and Disorders, of either a Mis^taught or a neglected Youth:
Nay, all the public Outrages of a destroying Tyranny and Oppression, are but
Childish Appetites let alone till they are ungovernable. Wherefore Children
should be molded while their Tempers are yet pliant and ductile; for it is
infinitely easier to prevent ill Habits, than to Master them; as the choking
of the Fountain is the surest way to cut off the Course of the River: It should
be considered too that we have the Seeds of Virtue in us, as well as of Vice;
and whenever we take a wrong Biass, it is not out of a moral Incapacity to do
better, but for want of a careful Manage and Discipline to set us right at
first.

* VI. It is not for every Twatling Gossip, or some empty Pedant to undertake
so difficult a Province as the Education of Youth; for it requires a critical
Nicety both of Wit and Judgment, to find out the Genius or the Pr^pensions of a
Child, and to divide so accurately betwixt the Good and the Evil, the Gracious
and Perverse, as to hit the precise Medium of encouraging the one, without
discouraging the other. And this Faculty of discerning is not enough neither,
without a watchful Assiduity of Application. The just Season of doing things
must be nicked, and all Accidents observed and improved; for weak Minds are to
be as narrowly attended as Sick Bodies. To say nothing of the infinite
Curiosity of the Operation, in the forming of our Lives and Manners; and that
not one Man of Ten Thousand is competently qualified for the Office. Upon the
whole Matter, there must be an Awe maintained on the one Hand, and at the same
time, a Love and Reverence preserved on the other. And all this must be ordered
too, with so gentile a Softness of Address, that we may not hazard, either the
stifling or the quenching of generous Inclinations, by bearing too hard upon
them, or the Licentiating of any thing that is Course and Vulgar, out of a
foolish Facility, or a mistaken Pity.

Elevation, Dignities, Authority.
I. THere is a kind of Elevation independent upon Fortune: It Is a certain Air
of Authority, that seems to lay us out for great Things; it is a value we
insensibly set upon our selves, an imperious Challenger of the Respects of
other People; and a prevailing Quality that raises us more above them, than
either Birth or Honors, or even Desert it self.

II. There is Worth sometimes without Elevation or Preferment; But very few Men
arrive to Honors and Dignities without some Merit or other.

III. Dignities and Honors set off Merit, as good Dressing does handsome
Persons.

IV. The generality of Men seem ^itter for those Employments they have not,
than for those they stand already possessed of.

V. When a Man leaps into a great Preferment, to which he is neither advanced
by degrees, nor raised before by his own Hopes; it is scarce possible for him
to maintain his Post with Honor, and make the World think he deserves his
Character.

VI. We may seem great in an Employment below our desert; but we generally look
very little in one above it.

VII. Good Fortune almost always alters the Proceedings and the Air of a Man,
and makes him quite another thing in all his Behavior and Conversation. This
is a great Weakness to trick and set one's self off with what is not our own.
If Virtue were esteemed above all other things, no Favor, no Advancement,
would be able to change Men either in their Temper or Countenance.

VIII. It is a common thing to imagine we love a Man of great Interest and
Fortune, with a very sincere Passion; But this is what we cannot be sure of
till he be stripped of all the Advantages of Power and Greatness. Then one
quickly discerns what it was that engaged our Affection; if Interest were at
the bottom of it, Honor may keep it up for some time, yet it quickly grows
weary, and lets it fall to the ground.

IX. False Greatness is wild and untractable; for knowing her own weak side,
she either hides her self, or never shows her self more than she thinks
necessary to impose upon the World, and prevent being taken for what she really
is, I mean, true Littlenes^. True Greatness, on the contrary, is free,
courteous, and popular; she is contented to be seen and handled, and loses
nothing by being examined at close view. The more a Man knows her, the more he
admires her: She bends out of Humanity to her Inferiors, and returns back to
her natural Size without straining her self; sometimes she neglects her self*
and re^its some of her Prerogatives, because, she knows, she can resume them
again at pleasure. She laughs, she plays, but still with Dignity. A Man
approaches her with no less freedom than Circumspection; her Character is to be
Noble and E^sy; she inspires Men with Respect and Confidence, and makes some
Princes appear great, without making us sensible that we are little.

X. Of all the Methods of making one's Fortune in the World, the readi^^t and
most effectua^, is to make other People find their Interest in doing us good.

XI. There are but two general Methods whereby Men raise themselves in the
World, that is, either by a Man's own Industry, or the Imbecility of others.

XII. We make a good Composition with our Friends, if being preferred to a
considerable Post, they will count us among their Acquaintance.

XIII. It is not so difficult to raise one's self to a Place of great Trust, as
to maintain one's self in it.

XIV. We see oftentimes Men fall from a high Fortune, by the same defaults that
had raised them to it.

* XV. To scorn the Pomp and Greatness of the World before a Man knows them,
does proceed rather from ill Manners, than Magnanimity.

* XVI. Might and Right are inseparable in the Opinion of the World; and he
that has the longer Sword, shall never want either Lawyers or Divines to defend
his Claim.

* XVII. People should have Care how they engage themselves in Partnerships
with Men, that are too mighty for them, whether it be in Money, Pleasure, or
Business; for in unequal Alliances, the Poor and the Weak lie at the Mercy of
the Rich and the Powerful, and no remedy but Patience and Resignation. Men in
Power plunge their Clients into the Mud, with a Ring about their Necks; so that
let them bring up what they will, nothing goes down with them that they shall
be ever the better for: And when they come in conclusion to cast up the Profit
and Loss of the Purchase, or the Project; what betwixt Force, Interest, and
good Manners, the Adventurer scapes well if he can but get off at last with his
Labor for his Pains.

* XVIII. There are some malicious spiteful People, that take so much Pleasure
in the design of hurting others, as not to feel and understand that they only
hurt themselves. This is the Case of those that will be trying Masteries with
their Superiors, and biting of that which is too hard for their Teeth; but
this is no better than downright Madness, to strike where we have no Power to
hurt, and to contend where we are sure to be worsted.

* XIX. Men in great Place are thrice Servants; Servants of the Sovereign or
State; Servants of Fame; and Servants of Business. So as they have no Freedom
either in their Persons, in their Actions, or in their Times.

XX. It is a strange desire to seek Power and to lose Liberty; or to seek Power
over others, and to lose Power over a Man's own self.

XXI. The Advantages of the Great Ones over other People are in some respects
extraordinary. I can yield them their Choice Dishes, their Rich Furniture,
their ^ine Liveries, their Dogs, Horses, Jesters and Flatterers; but I cannot
but envy their Happiness, of having in their Service those that are equal, nay
sometimes Superior to them in Wit and noble Inclinations.

XXII. It costs the Great Ones so little to be generous in Words; and their
Quality so much dispenses with them, for not performing what they Promise; that
I look upon it as a great piece of Modesty, their not being more free of their
Promises.

XXIII. We get a great deal more by forsaking the great Ones, than by
complaining of them.

XXIV. A Coldness in those that are above us, a neglect in not returning a
Civility, makes us perfectly hate them; but a Salute or a Smile, brings 'em
back to our Reconciliation.

XXV. There are a sort of haughty proud Men, that are humbl'd and tamed, If I
may use the Expression, by the Preferment of their Competitors. This Misfortune
sometimes prevails upon them so far, as to make them return you a Salute: But
Time, the great Waster of all Things, insensibly softens their Grief, and puts
them at last into their natural bias.

XXVI. It Is mere Hypocrisy for a Man in an Eminent Station, not to take at
first the place which is due to his Quality, and which no body disputes with
him: It is an easy matter for him to be Modest; for if he throws himself into
a Crowd, every body presently shrinks back to make way for him; or if he sits
below his Rank, all the r^st of the Company presently forces him to sit higher.
Modesty is of much harder digestion to Men of an inferior Condition; for if
they chance to be in a Crowd, they run the hazard of being squeezed to death;
or if they choose to sit in an uneasy Place, they are sure to be left to the
free Enjoyment of it.

XXVII. The Great Ones have no reason to love the First Times; they are not
favorable to them in the least: It Is a kind of Mortification for them to see
that we all come from Brothers and Sisters, and that all Men compose but one
Family, whose several Members only differ as to the degrees of Kindred.

XXVIII. If the Great Ones have the Opportunities of doing us good, they have
seldom the good will to do it; and if they have a mind to do us harm, they do
not always ^ind the Occasions; so that a Man may be extremely mistaken in the
kind and degree of Worship he pays them, upon the account of the good or ill he
expects from them: We ought to honor and respect them, because they are great
and we are little, and because there are others less than we that respect us.

XXIX. We ought to be very much reserved upon the Great Ones: There is
generally a great deal of Flattery in the Praises we give them; and it is as
dangerous to speak ill of them when they are alive, as it is base when they are
out of the way.

* XXX. It is a common thing for Men to hate the Authors of their Preferments,
as the Witnesses of their mean Original.

* XXXI. A Man that enters the World must be Industrious, but not affected in
disclosing his Abilities: The best way is to observe a Gradati on, for the
lowest steps to Greatness are the most secure; but swift Rises are often
attended with precipitate Falls; and what is soonest got, is generally short in
the Possession.

* XXXII. A Man raised to Grandeurs, that makes others find their Fortunes in
his, joins a great Merit to a great Happiness: He is not the more happy by the
Wealth which he enjoys, than by that which he knows how to give.

* XXXIII. It Is a Consolation for Inferior Persons to find their Infirmities
in those that have the Authority to govern them; and a great delight to those
that are distinguished by Power, to be made, like others, for Pleasures.

* XXXIV. He that is ashamed of a mean Condition, would be proud of a Splendid
one.

* XXXV. Great Men had need borrow other Men's Opinions, to think themselves
happy; for if they judge by their own Fee^ing, they cannot find it.

* XXXVI. In Place there is License to do Good and Evil, whereof the latter is
a Cur^e; for in Evil the best Condition is not to Will, the second not to Can;
but power to do good is the true and lawful end of Aspiring; for good Thoughts,
tho God accept them, yet toward Men are little better than good Dreams, except
they be put in use, and that cannot be without Power and Place.

* XXXVII. A Place shows the Man; some for the better, and some for the worse.

* XXXVIII. It is an assured sign of a worthy and generous Spirit, whom Honor
mends; for Honor is, or should be, the place of Virtue: And as in Nature
things move violently to their Place, and calmly in their Place: So Virtue in
Ambition is violent, in Authority settled and calm.

* XXXIX. Ostentation and Pride, upon the account of Honors and Preferments,
is much more offensive, than upon any personal Qualifications. It argues Men do
not deserve great Places, when they can value themselves upon them; if a Man
would be truly valued, the way to it is to be illustriously Good. For even the
greatest Men are more respected for the Eminence of their Parts and Virtue,
than for that of their Fortune.

* XL. Great Offices and great Honors are most truly said to be great Burdens;
the slavery of them is but so much the greater, because it concerns the Service
of the Public, who of all Masters is the hardest to be pleased.

XLI. It Is no small Misfortune for Great Men to have but few things to with or
hope for, and to have thousands to lose.

Envy.
I. MEN are often so foolish as to boast and value themselves upon their
Passions, even those that are most vicious. But Envy is so ungenerous and
shameful a Passion, that no body ever had the Confidence to own it.

II. There is something to be said for Jealousy, because it only designs the
Preservation of some good, which we either have, or think we have a right to.
But Envy is a raging Madness that cannot be satisfied with the good of any body.

III. The Applause we give to Men that are just setting up for Reputation in
the World, is often from a Spirit of Envy, and a secret way of detracting from
others, that have established a good Reputation to themselves already.

IV. Our Envy out lives generally the Prosperity of those we Envy.

V. There are fewer Men free from E^vy, than void of Interest.

VI. If we look nicely into the several Effects of Envy, it will be found to
carry a Man farther from his Duty, than Interest does.

VII. The surest sign of a great and noble Soul, is to be free from Envy.

VIII. Envy is less capable of Reconciliation, than Hatred.

IX. That Man that complains of being born to Misfortunes and Crosses, might in
a great measure become happy by the Prosperity of his Friends and Relations,
but Envy bereaves^ him of this last Shift.

X. Envy pretends to no other Happiness than what it derives from the Misery of
other People, and will rather eat nothing it self, than not starve those that
would. There is in this Malevolence somewhat of the Punishment, as well as the
Spite of the Damned: They take delight in other Peoples Miseries, and at the
same time are their own Tormentors.

* XI. A Man that has no Virtue in himself, ever envies Virtue in others. For
Men's Minds will either feed upon their own Good, or upon others Evil; and who
wants the one, will prey upon the other; and who is so out of hope to attain
to another Virtue, will seek to come at even hand by depressing another
Fortune.

* XII. Men of Noble Birth are noted to be Envious toward new Nobility when
they rise: For the distance is altered; and it is like a deceit of the Eye,
that when others come on, they think themselves go back.

* XIII. They that desire to excel in too many Matters, out of Levity and Vain
Glory, are ever Envious; for they cannot want work, it being impossible but
many in some one of those things should surpass them.

Examples, Imitation.
I. NOthing is of so infectious and pestilent a Nature as Example; and no Man
does any exceeding good, or very ill thing, but it produces others of the same
kind. We imitate the Good out of Emulation, and the bad out of our natural
Corruption and Malignity; which being confined and kept up close by Shame, is
unlockt and let loose by Example.

II. Imitation always succeeds ill; and whatever is counterfeit and affected,
grows nauseous and disgraceful, with those things, which when Natural, are most
graceful and charming.

III. We are better pleased with those that strive to imitate us, than with
those that endeavor to equal us. For Imitation argues Esteem; but a desire of
Equality argues Envy.

* IV. Authority in Sin is an incentive to it; and it is at least an Excuse, if
not a Warrant, to transgress after great Examples.

* V. It Is as much as a Man's Life, Fortune and Reputation are worth, to keep
good Company, (over and above the Contagion of lewd Examples) for as Birds of a
Feather will flock together; so if the good and the bad be taken together, they
must expect to go the way of all Flesh together.

* VI. People that live by Example should do well to look very narrowly into
the Force and Authority of the Precedent, without saying or doing things at a
venture; for that may become one Man, which would be absolutely intolerable in
another, under differing Circumstances.

* VII. He that follows Nature is never out of his way; and that which is best
for every Man, is fittest for him too: He does it with ease and success,
whereas all Imitation is putid and servile.

Failings, Defects.
I. EVery Man generally finds those Faults in others, which others find in him.

II. If we had no Failings of our own, we should not be half so much delighted,
as we are, at the discovery of those of other People.

III. Men are not so unacquainted with their own Failings, as we are apt to
imagine; for they are seldom in the wrong, when we hear them talk of their
Conduct. The same Self-Love that blinds them at other times, guides them on
these occasions, with so quick and penetrating a Light, as to make them either
suppress, or disguise the least matters that are liable to be condemned.

IV. Our bad Qualities generally take better in the intercourse of familiar
Conversation, than our good ones.

V. The defects of the Mind, like the Wrinkles and Blemishes of the Face, grow
still proportionably with Age.

VI. Men make themselves ridiculous, not so much by the Qualities they have, as
by the Affectation of those they have not.

VII. As some Men displease with Merit, so on the other hand, some are pleasant
and agreeable with Failings.

VIII. We confess our Faults by that Sincerity, to make amends for the injury
they have done us in the Esteem of others.

IX. It Is only for great Men, to have great Failings.

X. The Defects of the Mind are like Wounds in the Body; which never can be so
well healed up, but there remains still a Scar, which is in a continual Danger
to break out again.

XI. We own our small Failings, with a design, to make People believe that we
have no great ones.

XII. There are some Failings, which when ingeniously managed and improved,
make a brighter show than Virtue it self.

XIII. We have not the Confidence to say in general Terms, that our selves have
no ill Qualities, and that our Enemies have no good ones; but when we talk of
Particulars, we are pretty near thinking so.

XIV. The greatest part of our Faults are more excusable, than the Methods we
commonly use to conceal them.

XV. We value our selves and take a pride in the Faults most distant from our
own; when we are fickle and irresolute, we brag of being obstinate and
peremptory.

XVI. We easily forgive our Friends those Faults, that are not contrary to our
Interests.

XVII. Most Men attempt to vindicate and take a pride in those Faults they have
no design to mend.

XVIII. A great many Men, as if they had not Faults enough, are still
perpetually adding to the number of them, by the Affectation of some particular
Qualities, which they cherish and cultivate so carefully, that they come at
last to be natural, and past their power to mend, though they would.

XIX. Most Men are ashamed of their Selfconceit, when they come to know their
Failings.

XX. Gravity is a mysterious Behavior of the Body, to conceal the Defects of
the Mind.

XXI. Prosperous Persons seldom mend their Faults; they always think themselves
in the right, so long as Fortune Countenances their ill Conduct.

XXII. The Counterfeit Honest Man disguises his Faults to others and himself;
the true unaffected Honest Man knows his own Failings perfectly, and confesses
them ingenuously.

XXIII. The grace of Novelty, and the length of Custom, though never so
opposite to each other, yet do both alike disguise to us the Failings of our
Friends.

XXIV. There are no good Copies, except such as expose the Ridicule and Folly
of the Original.

XXV. Few Men fear to be despised, except those who really deserve to be so.

XXVI. It argues a great Mind, the free and sincere confessing both of our
Faults and Perfections.

XXVII. Did Men but take as much care to mend, as they do to conceal their
Failings; they would both spare themselves that trouble which Dissimulation
puts them to; and gain over and above the Commendations they aspire to by their
seeming Virtues.

* XXVIII. When a Man has any notable Defect or Infirmity about him, whether by
Nature or by Chance, it is the best of his play, to try the Humor, if he can
turn it into a Fashion.

XXIX. To deny our Faults when others are acquainted with them, serves but to
make us the more ridiculous, by adding Arrogance to our first Error.

XXX. We may learn as much by other People's Faults, as by their Instructions.

XXXI. It is an ordinary Failing with most Men, never to be contented with
their Fortune, or dissatisfied with their Wit.

XXXII. As Perfumes affect more strongly other People, than those that carry
'em; so the Failings of others offend us much sooner than our own. The
continual Commerce we have with our Inclinations, disguises them to us. Nothing
is new in our selves, but every thing appears so in others. Our Reason
contracts a kind of Familiarity and Friendship with our Defaults, when at the
same time it weighs, examines and condemns those of our Neighbors with the
utmost Severities.

XXXIII. There is never a Man so perfect and necessary to his Friends, but he
has some Defect or other, that Counterbalances in some measure his good
Qualities, and renders his loss less sensible to those that outlive him.

XXXIV. Men are not so much ashamed of their Crimes, as they are of their
Weakness and Vanity. He that is openly Unjust, Violent, Persidious and a
Slanderer, conceals his Love or his Ambition, with no other design, than to
conceal it only.

* XXXV. Men labor under many Imperfections, that no body would take notice
of, if themselves were not over-sollicitous to conceal them.

Families, Masters, Servants.
I. MOst Masters cry out upon all Servants, that they are Rogues, and the
Plagues of a Family; and if Servants ever come to be Masters, they will say
just the same thing. The Reason is, because generally it is not the Qualities,
but the Fortunes of Men, that make the difference between them.

II. Families are often inwardly torn and divided, by Distrusts, Jealousies and
Antipathies; while a contented, cheerful and smiling Out side imposes upon the
World, and makes us imagine, that there is nothing but Peace and Quietness
Within: There are few Houses that get any thing by being too nicely looked
into; and Visits generally suspend a Domestic Quarrel, which will begin afresh
as soon as the Company goes off.

* III. No Men are so strict Exacters of Modesty in a Servant, as those that
are most prodigal of their own.

* IV. Age is well-nigh sufficient to deface with some Masters every Letter and
Action in the History of a Meritorious Life; and old Services are generally
buried under the Ruins of an old Carcass.

* V. It Is a common thing for a Master to sacrifice a Servant to his own Ease
and Interest; but there is no meddling with Men of that Inhospitable Humor,
where the Domestics, how faithful soever, can never be secure.

* VI. It is a barbarous Inhumanity in Great Men to their Servants, to make
their small Failings to be a Crime, without allowing their past Services to
have been a Virtue; and this is found with Masters and Mistresses, as well in
Courts as in private Families; where one s^umble is oftentimes enough to deface
the Character of an honorable Life.

Fidelity, Insidelity.
I. SMall Infidelities, whereby our selves are Sufferers, lessen the Committers
of them in our Esteem, more than great ones committed against other People.

II. Fidelity in most Men, is nothing else but a Contrivance of Self-Love, to
make our selves trusted. It is a Trick to raise our selves above other People,
and get the most important Matters deposited in our hands.

Flattery, Praise.
I. FLattery is a False Coin, which our own Vanity has made Current.

II. Men never would enjoy much Pleasure, if they never flattered themselves.

III. If we did not flatter our selves, the Flatteries of others could never
hurt us.

IV. No body loves to be upon the Commending Strain; and indeed we seldom touch
upon it without some By-End. Praise is a more ingenious, concealed, and nicer
kind of a Flattery, which humors and affects severally, both the Giver and
Receiver; the one accepts it as a Reward due to his Merit; the other gives it,
that he may be looked upon as a just and discreet Person.

V. We extol and value the Excellencies of other People, rather out of the
Esteem of our own Opinions, than of their Worth; and when we pretend to commend
other Men's Virtues, it is but a Side-wind to put other Men upon commending ours.

VI. We often choose to make use of Commendations, that carry a Sting in the
Tail; and by taking Men at the rebound, as it were, lay open some Defects in
the Persons so commended, which we dare not venture to expose any other way.

VII. Few Men are so wife as to prefer useful Reproofs to treacherous Praise.

VIII. As there are commending Reproofs, so there are abusive Praises.

IX. He that declines Praise the first time it is offered, does it from a
desire of being praised over again.

X. The desire of being worthy the Commendations of the World, is a great
assistance and strengthening to our Virtues; and the extolling of Men's Wit,
Courage, or Beauty, goes a great way toward the increase of them.

XI. We generally pull down one Man's Reputation to set up another; and
sometimes Men would not enlarge so much upon the Praise of the Prince of Conde,
and Marshall Turenne, if it were not out of a design to lessen them both.

XII. We seldom commend any body in Goodness, except those as admire us.

XIII. To commend Princes for Virtues they have not, is no better than a safe
way to abuse them.

XIV. Nothing so much lessens the Merit of those that have deserved great
Praises, than the trouble they are eternally at, to make themselves valued by
Trifles.

XV. When we commend good and noble Actions, we make them in some measure our
own.

XVI. Nothing ought in Reason to mortify our Self-Satisfaction, more than our
applauding and crying up at one time, what we blame and run down at another.

XVII. Former Times are sometimes cried up, only to run down the present, and
we value what is now no more, that we may slight that which is.

XVIII. Men fancy sometimes they have an Aversion to Flattery, when it is only
to the manner of being flattered: And that Modesty that would seem to decline
Praise, is at the bottom only a desire of having it better expressed.

* XIX. There is a kind of Insinuation and Compliance, that is far from any
servile Baseness, or sordid Flattery, and may be termed Discretion rather than
Adulation.

* XX. Whosoever is vexed at a Reproach, would be Proud if he were commended.

* XXI. It Is difficult to write justly in any thing, but almost impossible in
Praise.

XXII. There are some Men greedy of Honor, that love Praise even from the
meanest sort, and are less satisfied to be commended by a few Judicious
Persons, than to be admired by an ignorant Multitude.

XXIII. To commend the Great Ones, is a nice Phrase in its Original, and
signifies undoubtedly, to commend one's Self, by publishing all the good a Man
raised in Honors has done us, or that he ever designed to do us.

XXIV. We generally commend the Great Ones, to acquaint others that we approach
them, and very seldom out of Esteem or Gratitude: Nay, sometimes we commend
those we never saw in our Lives; and which is yet more strange, there are
Occasions where our Vanity prevails against our Resentments, and makes us
commend those, of whom we have reason to complain.

XXV. All the Fortune of a Prince, is too little to recompense a base
Flatterer, if he designs to make him amends for what he forfeits of his own, (I
mean, his Honor and Reputation:) But on the other hand, all the Power of a
Prince is not too great to punish him, if he will make his Revenge
proportionable to the Wrong he suffers by being flattered.

XXVI. A Flatterer has neither good Opinion of himself, nor others.

XXVII. 'Twould be a kind of Fierceness and Brutality, for a Man to reject all
manner of Praises: We may be sensible to those of the Good, because they
commend in us nothing but what really deserves to be commended.

* XXVIII. There Is hardly any Man living, that may not be wrought upon more or
less, by Flattery: For we do all of us naturally over-wean in our own Favor;
but when it comes to be applied once to a vain Fool, it makes him forty times
an Arranter Sot, than he was before.

* XXIX. Flattery will never be out of Credit, so long as there are Knaves to
give it, and Fools to take it.

* XXX. Flattery is never more Pernicious, than in the Courts of Princes,
because a good deal of it looks like Duty; as in private Cases it carries a
face of Friendship. The way to rise, is to please, and whatsoever is gotten by
it, comes by Treachery.

* XXXI. The only benefit or good of Flattery is this; that by hearing what we
are not, we may be instructed what we ought to be.

Fortune, Chance.
I. HOw different soever Men's Fortunes seem to be, there is still in all a
Mixture of Ill and Good, that renders them much alike.

II. All the Advantages and ^ndowments of Nature, cannot make a Hero without
the help of Fortune.

III. Though Men are apt to flatter and value themselves upon their great
Actions and Achievements; yet these are seldom the Effects of Design and
Industry, but generally of a lucky Chance.

IV. Fortune turns and converts every thing to the advantage of her Darlings.

V. Our Happiness and Misery depends as much upon our own Humor, as upon
Fortune.

VI. Our Actions seem to be influenced by lucky and unlucky Stars, to which
they owe the greatest part of the Praise or Blame, which is given to the
Actions themselves.

VII. No Man can tell what he will do, except he can answer what Fortune he
shall have.

VIII. Fortune mends many Faults in us, which could not have been mended by
Reason and Judgment.

IX. In the midst of all the various and uncertain Accidents in the World;
there is still to be observed a secret Order and Concatenation of Things,
directed and overruled by Providence; which makes every one move in its Rank,
and follow the Course of its Appointment.

X. The making of a Great Man depends upon the improving all Accidents to some
Advantage.

XI. Opportunities make us known to others, but much more to our selves.

XII. Men appear Vicious or Honest, more or less, according to the Station they
are in; so that Fortune is to Virtues and Vices, what Light is to the Objects
of the Sight.

XIII. No body thinks Fortune so blind, as those she has been cross to.

XIV. We should manage our selves with our Fortune, as we do with our Health;
enjoy it when Good; bear it patiently, when Ill; and never use desperate
Remedies, but upon desperate Occasions.

XV. Fortune oftentimes makes a Man's Failings the means of his rise; and there
are some troublesome impertinent Coxcombs, who deserve to be rewarded so far, as
to have their Absence purchased by Preferment at a Distance.

XVI. Men's Merit is generally judged of by the Vogue of the Fortune they are
in.

XVII. There is an Excess both in good and ill Fortune, which is beyond our
Sensibility.

XVIII. Greater Virtues are required to bear a good, than ill Fortune.

XIX. Fortune has as great an Influence upon our Wisdom, as upon our
Possessions.

XX. The generality of Men are like Plants, whose Virtues and unheeded
Properties are sound out by Chance.

XXI. Fortune gives out the Parts Men are to play upon this Stage of the World
blindly, and just according to her unaccountable Humor; this is the reason why
there is so much ill Acting; because Men very seldom hit upon those Characters
that are fit for them. Or to speak in a more Christian Style, what we call
Fortune, is no other than the Providence of God, which permits these disorders,
for Reasons which we are not able to dive into.

XXII. Great Politicians, manage and command Fortune, as great Captains do
their Soldiers.

XXIII. As much as Men rail at Fortune upon the Account of her Blindness and
Whimsies, yet it must be confessed, that there is no Prudence like hers. Her
designs are so well contrived, and carried on with such a Dexterity, that it is
past our foresight to prevent them; and in spite of our own Conduct, she never
fails to bring about her Undertakings.

XXIV. Fortune makes Crimes pass for Frolicks in her Favorites; and Frolicks
for Crimes in those she is averse to.

XXV. The Caprices of Fortune are observable in Men's Opinions, as well as in
their Possessions. Some Years ago the Pope was Infallible at Paris no less than
at Rome: But now he is accounted liable to Errors in France, while he remains
still Infallible in Italy.

* XXVI. When things go ill, each Coxcomb sets up for a Statesman, and thinks
himself the wisest if he chances to be more happy than his Neighbors.

* XXVII. There are certain Moments of our Lives, wherein Fate delights to mock
our Wit and Prudence, to baf^le our strict Caution, and ridicule all our
Conduct, that we may learn the Lesson of Resignation, and not trust too much to
our selves.

* XXVIII. Fortune is like the Market, where many times, if you can stay a
little, the Price will fall. And again, it is sometimes like Sybilla's offer,
which at first offers the Commodity at full, then consumes part and part, and
still holds up the Price.

Friendship.
I. WHat we call Friendship is no more than an Intercourse of Society; it is
only a mutual Care and Management of Interests, and an exchange of good Turns
and Services. In a Word, it is only a sort of Traffic, in which Self-Love has
always Profit in Prospect.

II. That which makes Men so unsteady and fickle in Friendship, is both the
difficulty of knowing the Qualities and Dispositions of the Soul, and the
Facility of knowing those of the Wit.

III. It is impossible for Men to love any thing without some respect to their
private Interests: And we only follow our own Inclination and Pleasure, when we
prefer our Friends before our selves; and yet this Preference is the only thing
that can render Friendship perfect and sincere.

IV. The Reconciliation of Enemies, is commonly Men's desire to better their
Condition; a Weariness of Acts of Hostility, and a fear of some ill Accident,
which they are willing to prevent.

V. It Is more disgraceful for a Man to distrust his Friends, than to be cozened
by them.

VI. We oftentimes fancy that we love Persons in Authority, when it is nothing
but Interest that makes us fond of them. And all our Applications and
Attendances are not so much upon the account of any good we desire to do them,
as for what we expect and hope they may do us.

VII. It shows that our Affection is but small, when we are not sensible of our
Friends Coldness and Indifference.

VIII. Most Friends create a disgust for Friendship, and most Religious
Hypocrites for Religion.

IX. We often complain of our Friends Fickleness, only to justify beforehand
our own Inconstancy.

X. We are but little concerned for our Friends disgraces when they give as an
occasion of signalizing our ^enderness for them.

XI. When we proclaim and aggravate the Tenderness our Friends have for us;
it is not so much out of Gratitude, as from a desire to possess other People
with a good Opinion of our own Worth.

XII. It Is not an easy matter to love those, for whom we have not a real
Esteem; but it is much harder still to love those, that we think deserve a great
deal more than our selves.

XIII. No Man can continue long in the respect he owes to his Friends and
Benefactors, that allows himself the liberty to talk of their Faults.

XIV. We may sooner be brought to love those that hate us, than those that love
us more than we desire they should.

XV. The boldest Attempt of Friendship, is not to discover our Failings to a
Friend, but to show him his own.

XVI. The Deceitfulness of our Friends may justify our Indifference to the
Expressions of their Tenderness; but in no manner, our Insensibility to their
Misfortunes.

XVII. The Reason why most Ladies are so little affected by Friendship, is,
because it tastes very flat and insipid, after the Relishing of Love.

XVIII. In Friendship as well as Love, Ignorance very often contributes more to
our Happiness, than Knowledge.

XIX. There is a certain Relish in true Friendship, above the sensibility of
those that are meanly born.

XX. Time strengthens Friendships, and weakens Love.

XXI. As long as Love lasts, it subsists by it self; nay, sometimes by those
very things that seem to be most for its Destruction, as Caprices, Cruelties,
Absence and Jealousies. Friendship, on the contrary, must have something to
support it, and faints away for want of mutual Offices, Confidences and
Complaisance.

XXII. Love and Friendship do reciprocally exclude one another.

XXIII. Hatred is not so far from Friendship, as Antipathy is.

XXIV. To live with our Friends, as if they were to be one day our Enemies; and
with our Enemies as with those that may become our Friends, is neither
according to the Rules of Friendship, nor the Nature of Hatred.

XXV. We ought to take Care not to make those our Enemies, which if better
known, we should be glad to count among our Friends: And on the other side, we
ought to choose Friends so true and so honest, that when they cease to be so,
will scorn to take an Advantage against us, of our former Confidence.

XXVI. Men can never go a great way in Friendship, without a Disposition to
wink mutually at one another small Defects.

* XXVII. There Is more hazard in the Succor of a new powerful Friend, than in
the Hostility of an old dangerous Enemy.

* XXVIII. A principal fruit of Friendship, is, the ease and discharge of the
fullness and swellings of the Heart, which are caused by Passions of all kinds.
We know Diseases of Stoppings and Suffocations are the most dangerous in the
Body, and it is not much otherwise in the Mind.

* XXIX. We may observe how high a rate Princes do set upon this Fruit of
Friendship, since they purchase it many times at the hazard of their own Safety
and Greatness. For Princes, by reason of the distance of their Fortune from
that of their Subjects and Servants, cannot gather this Fruit except they raise
some Persons to be as it were Companions, and almost equal to themselves, which
many times proves of dangerous Consequence.

XXX. As uncommon a thing as True-Love is, it is yet more frequent than
True-friendship.

XXXI. True Friendship destroys Envy, as True-Love breaks a Coquet Humor.

XXXII. Though we ought not to love our Friends, only for the good they do us,
yet it is a plain case, they love not us, if they do not do us good, when they
have it in their power.

XXXIII. Though the generality of Friendships contracted in the World, do by no
means deserve that honorable Name; yet a Man may very well make his best of
them, as he sees occasion, as of a Trade, that is not fixed upon any sure Fund,
and where nothing is more usual, than to find our selves cheated.

XXXIV. There is in all Sciences some Chimera or other, which we eternally
pursue in vain. As Chemistry has its Philosophers Stone; so has Geometry its
Quadrature of the Circle; Astronomy its Longitudes; Mechanics their perpetual
Motion: It is impossible to find out all these, but it is very useful to search
after them, by reason of the Discoveries we make by the way. Moral have also
their Chimera, that is, Disinterestness, or Perfect Friendship: No Man will
ever come up to it, yet it is good that all should pretend to it, since by that
they attain to many other Virtues.

XXXV. A true Friend is but a pleasing Dream of the Love of our selves, which
Adversity and Experience dissipate.

* XXXVI. We speak well of our Friends to get the Friendship of others, by a
show of Gratitude.

* XXXVII. It is as hard to be a good Friend and a Lover of Women, as it is to
be a good Friend and a Lover of Money.

* XXXVIII. He will be much out in his Account, who numbers his Friends by the
visits that are made him, and confounds the Decencies of Ceremony and Commerce
with the Offices of United Affections.

* XXXIX. He will find himself in as great a Mistake, that either seeks for a
Friend in a Court, or tries him at a feast.

* XL. A false Friend is like the Shadow in a Dial; it appears in Clear
Weather, but vanishes as soon as that is Cloudy.

XLI. There are some Friends, whose only Prospect is their own Satisfaction;
provided they have nothing to reproach themselves withal, the Misfortune of
another does not much affect them; nay, they would be concerned, that it was
ended so soon. They continue it sometimes for the Continuance of their own
Glory. They Rejoice, they Triumph in secret for a Disgrace, which gives them an
occasion of showing themselves, instead of searching the most ready means to
assist you; they search the most signal ones to make themselves honored, and
look upon their Friends, as Victims devoted to their Reputation.

XLII. The Offices of True Friends, have something of Liveliness, which always
precedes our Wants, and even prevents our very Desires. But Honor, which
disguiseth it self under the Name of Friendship, is nothing but a Self Love,
that serves it self in the Person it makes an appearance of serving. The
Friend, who Acts but by this Motive, advances to do good in Proportion only to
the increase of his Reputation. He stops short when his Witnesses are gone:
It Is a false Brave, that turns his Eyes to see if he is regarded: It Is a
Hypocrite that gives Alms with an unwilling Mind, and pays this Tribute to God,
only to impose upon Men.

Gesture, Countenance.
I. ALL Passions and Resentments of the Soul, have their Tone of Voice, their
Gestures of the Body, and their Forms and Air peculiar to them; and the mutual
Relation of them, either good or bad, makes accordingly Persons either pleasant
or unpleasant.

II. All Men affect an Air and Out side, suitable to their Profession, that may
make them appear what they have a mind to be taken for. So that we may say,
That the World is made up of nothing but formal Countenances and Shows.

III. The Air and Affectation of a Citizen, is sometimes lost in an Army, but
never in a Court.

Hatred, Revenge.
I. WHen our Hatred is too fierce, it subjects us to the Persons we hate.

II. The exposing of a Man, and making him Ridiculous, dishonours him more than
a real Dishonor.

III. The most illustrious Revenge, is to pardon where we might destroy.

IV. As we love more and more, those we still oblige; so we hate most violently
those we have injured.

V. It is as hard to smother the Resentment of a fresh Injury, as to preserve
it after a certain Time.

* VI. Some People, to gratify their Resentments, court their Enemies
Persecution, that they may have deeper grounds for Revenge.

VII. Hatreds are generally so obstinate and sullen, that the greatest sign of
Death in a sick Body, is his desire of being reconciled to his Enemies.

VIII. The most subtle and artificial Revenge, is to make as if one was not
offended; For the grief and smart our Enemy intended us by the A^front, falls
soul upon him, and cruelly Torments him with the Sting of the Disappointment.

IX. Weakness makes us hate an Enemy, and seek to be revenged on him: But
Laziness generally allays our Resentment, and makes us pass by the A^^ront.

* X. Revenge is a kind of wild Justice, which the more Man's Nature runs to,
the more ought Law to weed it out: For as the first Wrong, it does but offend
the Law; but the Revenge of that Wrong puts the Law out of Office. Certainly in
taking Revenge, a Man is but even with his Enemy; but in passing it over he is
Superior, for it is only a Princes part to pardon.

* XI. The most tolerable sort of Revenge, is, for those Wrongs, which there is
no Law to Redres^: But then, let a Man take heed that the Revenge ^e such, as
there is no Law to punish; else a Man's Enemy is still beforehand, and it is
two for one.

* XII. Some People are Slaves to their Revenge, and are sometimes so angry
with others, as to hurt themselves for it.

Health.
I. IT IS a troublesome sort of Disease, the Living strictly by Rule, for the
Preservation of Health.

II. Sobriety in the generality of Men, is only a fondness of Health, or the
effect of a weak Constitution, which will not bear Intemperance.

III. We ingratiate our selves with other People, either by humouring their
Reigning Passion, or being compassionate to, and bearing with their Bodily
Infirmities: To these may be referred all our Applications and Attendances; and
hence it is, that Men in perfect Health, or free from Passions, are more
difficult to be managed.

Heaviness.
I. IF we consider the several Effects of Heaviness, we shall find, that it
makes us neglect our Duty, more than our Interest does.

Honor.
I. Honor and Disgrace are mistaken and imaginary Appellations, if not related
to the real good or ill that attends them.

II. Nothing can be more Foolish and Chimerical, than the Passion of those,
that through a World of Hardships and Dangers, endeavor to transmit a famous
Name to after Ages. All this Honor and Reputation, which they look upon as
boundless, is yet confined within the narrow compass of their Imagination,
which, crowding all Posterity into one Age, sets before their Eyes, as if they
were present together, those future Honors, which they shall never live to
enjoy.

III. It is with Glory, as with Beauty; for as a single sine Lineament cannot
make a handsome Face, neither can a single good Quality render a Man
Accomplished; but a Concurrence of many fine Features and good Qualities, makes
True Beauty and True Honor.

IV. Honor is but an imaginary Duty, which robs us often of real Conveniences.

* V. Every Man sets up a Court of Honor within himself; Pronounces every
thing Honorable, that serves his purpose, and laughs at them that think
otherwise.

Humor.
I. THE Caprices of our Humors are more whimsical and unaccountable, than
those of Fortune.

II. We are sensible only of great Transports, and extraordinary Emotions in
our Humor and Constitution; as of Anger, when it is violent; but very few take
notice that these Humors have a regular and stated Course, which moves and
winds our Wills to different Actions, by gentle and insensible Impressions.
They go their Rounds, as it were, and command us by turns; so that a
considerable part of what we do is theirs, though we are not able to see how it
is so.

III. All the Gifts of Fortune are no more, than our Humor is pleased to rate
them.

IV. There are always more Defects in the Humor, than in the Mind.

V. It is with our Humors, as with the generality of Buildings; they have
several Facings and Prospects, some of them ^ine and pleasant, and some rough
and disagreeable.

VI. Fools and Blockheads see every thing through their own Humor.

VII. The Composedness, or Perturbation of our Humor, does not depend so much
upon the great and most considerable Accidents of our Lives, as upon a suitable
or unsuitable Management of little Things, that befall us every day.

VIII. Some Men adapt themselves to all sorts of Characters, with so dextrous a
Compliance, that one would swear their Humor were that of all others; they
appear Generous with Men of Honor; subtle with Intriguing Persons; without
Parts to the Stupid; and commit voluntary Fopperies to agree with real Fops.

IX. As those who concert things the best, don't always stick to the justice of
Rules; so the most Irregular don't always follow the Disorders of their
Inclinations and Humors.

* X. Some People are always in good Humor, because they are never out of
Conceit with themselves.

XI. When we say of a Man who is hasty, passionate, inconstant, quarrelsom,
morose, exceptious, whimsical, etc. That Is his Humor; we do not so much excuse
him, as confess unawares, that so great Faults are past mending.

Hope.
I. HOpe, though never so uncertain and deceitful, is still of this good Use to
us, that it Conducts us to our Journey's End, an easier and more pleasant way.

II. In a miserable Condition, where all things are despaired of, a Man is
easily persuaded rather to confide in another, than in himself.

Happiness, Misfortunes.
I. HAppiness lies not in the Things themselves, but in our own Palate, and the
relish we have of them: We are happy by the Enjoyment of what we fancy and
desire, and not what other People think lovely and desirable.

II. One considerable part of Happiness, is, to know how far a Man may be
Unhappy.

III. We generally make a false Estimate, both of our Misfortunes and
Felicities; and we are never so happy or unfortunate, as we think we are.

IV. If a Man cannot find Ease within himself, it is preposterous for him to
seek it any where else.

V. Nothing goes so far in the Happiness of our Lives, as to know things as
really they are; and this Knowledge is to be acquired by frequent Reflections
upon Men, and the several Affairs of the World, rather than by the perusal of
Books.

* VI. Nothing goes nearer a Man in his Misfortunes, than to find himself
undone by his own Folly, or but any way accessory to his own Ruin.

VII. Pity and Compassion is often a Resentment of our own Miseries, occasioned
by those of our Neighbors: It is an ingenious Foresight of the Disgraces we
may fall into; we relieve others, to engage them to return the like, when our
own Occasions call for it; and the good Offices we do them, are, in strict
speaking, so many Kindnesses done to our selves beforehand.

VIII. It goes a great way toward Felicity, the using of our selves to other
Peoples Follies, and not taking offense at every Impertinence, that passes in
our Company.

IX. It is an ordinary Impertinence, for Men in Disgrace, to infect every thing
with their Misfortunes.

X. There are some common Misfortunes, which have a Relation to all Men; but
every Man has his particular Sentiments of them, and so endures in that Sense,
the whole weight of his Affliction singly. But in our private Disgraces, that
which affects us most, is to see no body bear a Resemblance to us. We cannot
with Patience behold our selves destined to suffer an Unhappiness alone, which
all the World may be affected with as well as we: And nothing so much augments
the Sharpness of our Afflictions, as the Fierceness and Pride of those who seem
to brave and despise them.

* XI. The more we struggle with our Misfortunes, we draw the Knot the harder,
as the more the Bird flaps and flutters in the Snare, the surer she is caught.

* XII. The Misery and Happiness of the whole Life of Mortals, are Themes
scarce worth a Passion. Whatever we endure as an Evil, or possess as a Good,
are both so short, that as the one need not sink us to an Excess of Grief, so
neither does the other deserve an Excess of Joy.

XIII. There is but one real Misfortune that can befall a Man, which is to be in
Fault, and to be reproacht with any ill Thing by one's own Conscience.

* XIV. No Man is to account any thing a Loss, if he gets Wisdom by the
bargain; for as we say, Bought Wit is best. And it is in some Proportion in the
Business of this World, as it is in that of the next; in the Cases, I mean, of
Losses, Miscarriages and Disappointments: We are in both Respects the better
for them, for they are Monitory and Instructive. Affliction makes a Man both
Honest and Wife; for the Smart brings him to a sense of his Error, and the
Experiment to the knowledge of it.

* XV. There are no People so Miserable, but that at some time or other, in
some thing or other, they have reason to account themselves happy. And if they
would but duly consider, how it is with many of their Neighbors, they would
find it their Duty to be thankful, that it is no worse with themselves; for it
is some Relief to the Unfortunate, to show them that there are others yet more
Miserable.

* XVI. It may seem to be a kind of a Malicious Satisfaction, that one Man
derives from the Misfortunes of another. But the Philosophy of this Reflection
stands upon another Ground; for our Comfort does not arise from other Peoples
being Miserable, but from this Inference upon the Balance, that we suffer only
the Lot of Humane Nature; and as we are Happy or Miserable, compared with
others, so other People are Miserable or Happy compared with us: By which
Justice of Providence, we come to be convinced of the Sin, and the mistake of
our Ingratitude.

* XVII. In all the Cases of our Lives, we fancy our selves much more Miserable
than we are; for want of taking a true Estimate of Things, we fly into
Transports without Reason, and judge of the Happiness or Calamity of Humane
Life, by false Lights. A strict Enquiry into the Truth of Matters will help us
in the one, and Comparison will set us right in the other.

Idleness, Sloth.
I. MAny People are kept within their Duty, because they have not the Courage,
or will not be at the pains of being Wicked: And in such Cases Virtue runs away
with that Praise, which is due only to Timidity or Sloth.

II. When Idle Men have indulged themselves, as much as they think fit, no body
is then so full of Haste and Activity as they, because, they hope, this
quickening of others will give them the Reputation of Diligence.

III. Of all the Passions we are exposed to, none is more concealed from our
knowledge than Idleness; it is the most violent and most mischievous of any,
though its Violence be insensible, and its Mischievousness unheeded and secret:
If we carefully consider its power, it will be found upon all occasions to have
an absolute Sway over our Sentiments, our Interests, and our Pleasures. This is
a Remora that can stop the largest Ships, and a Calm more dangerous to our
Undertakings than any Rocks or Sands, or even the most violent Storms. The Ease
and Tranquillity of Sloth is a powerful Charm, that suppresses on the sudden our
most vigorous Pursuits, and shakes our most peremptory Resolutions: In a Word,
(to give a true Notion of this Passion) Idleness is a Blessedness of the Soul,
that makes her easy under all her Losses, and supplies the place of all her
Enjoyments and Advantages.

IV. It Is a mighty Error to suppose, that none but violent and strong Passions,
such as Love and Ambition, are able to conquer the rest. Even Idleness, as
feeble and languishing as it is, does often triumph over them all: This Usurps
the Throne, and sits Paramount over all the Designs and Actions of our Lives;
and insensibly wastes and destroys both all our Virtues and Vices^

V. Of all our Failings, we are apt to confess Laziness the more easily,
because we persuade our selves, that it sticks close to all peaceable Virtues;
and as for the rest, that it does not destroy any of them utterly, but only
suspends the Exercise of them.

VI. There is more Laziness in the Mind, than in the Body.

VII. Idleness and Constancy fix the Mind to it what finds easy and agreeable:
This Habit always confines and cramps up our Notions, and no body was ever at
the pains to stretch and carry his Understanding, as far as it could go.

VIII. We have very often more Strength than good Will to use it; but we fancy
things impossible to be done, to reconcile our selves to our own Idleness.

IX. If we cast an Eye on all the Tempests, which arise within our Breasts, and
consider the Causes and Remedies of all the violent Desires, malicious Envies,
intemperate Ioys, and irregular Griefs, by which the Lives of most Men become
Miserable, or Guilty; we shall find that they are generally produced by
Idleness, and may be most naturally cured by Diversion. Whatever Art shall be
able to busy the Minds of Men, with a constant Course of Innocent Works, or to
fill them with as vigorous and pleasant Images, as those ill Impressions, by
which they are deluded; it will certainly have a surer Effect in the composing
and purifying of their Thoughts, than all the Precepts of the Moralists.

Jealousy.
I. Jealousy lives upon Doubts and Suspicions; but as soon as these become
Certainties, then the Passion either ceases, or turns absolute Madness.

II. Jealousy is always born with Love, but it does not always dye with it.

III. Unfaithfulness ought to quench our Love quite; and we do ill to be
jealous when there is Reason: No body deserves the Jealousy of another, who
will give any just occasion for it.

IV. Jealousy is not so much the effect of the Love of another, as the Love of
our selves.

V. The reason why the pains we feel from Shame and Jealousy are so smart and
cutting, is, because Vanity cannot assist us to bear them.

VI. Jealousy is the greatest of Evils, and yet the least pitied by those that
occasion it.

Interest.
I. INterest speaks all manner of Languages, and acts all forts of Parts, even
that of Impartiality.

II. Interest makes some People blind, and others quick^sighted.

III. We Promise according to our Hopes, and perform according to our Fears.

IV. Virtues are lost in Interest, as Rivers are swallowed up in the Sea.

V. The bare Name and Pretense of Virtue, is more serviceable to a Man's
Interest than Vice.

VI. Interest puts Men upon exercising Virtues and Vices, as the Occasion
requires.

VII. Interest, upon which we generally lay the blame of all our ill Actions,
oftentimes deserves to be commended for our good ones.

VIII. Luxury and too great Delicacy of Manners in a State, are infallible
Symptoms of its Declension: For when Men are so overcurious and nice in their
own Concerns and Interests, the Good of the Public is generally neglected.

IX. Magnanimity despises all, that it may grasp all.

* X Whosoever gains by the Dead, has not much Kindness for the Living.

* XI. Interest supersedes all Arguments of Affection and Consanguinity.

Justice, Injustice, Judgment.
I. JUstice, in strict speaking, is nothing else, but a quick and intimate Fear
of losing one's own. This makes Men tender of their Neighbors Property and
Interests, and religiously careful not to invade it. This Fear holds Men in,
within the compass of that Estate which either Birth or Fortune has given them;
and were it not for this, they would continually be making Incursions upon one
another.

II. Justice, in moderate and well-behaved Judges, is often only the love of
their Preferment.

III. We except against some Judges in matters of very little concern, when at
the same time we are content to have our Reputation and Honor depend upon the
Judgment of Men, which are all against us, either by Jealousy, Prejudice, or
Ignorance: And we expose our Ease and our Loves only to bribe them, to give
Sentence in our Favor.

IV. Men and Actions are like Objects of Sight, and have also their Points of
Perspective; some must be seen at a distance, and others, at close view, to be
exactly judged of.

V. The Judgments our Enemies make concerning us, come nearer to the Truth,
than those we pass concerning our selves.

VI. Every one erects a Court of Judicature for himself; There he sits supreme
Judge over his Neighbor, and proceeds upon him in as Arbitrary and
Authoritative a manner, as if he had some particular Prerogative over him. But,
methinks, we should be more modest and sparing, in passing Sentence thus upon
others, if we did but consider, that they too will take the same Freedoms, and
use us with the same Severity, when in their power.

* VII. Of all Injustices, that is the most abominable and capital, which
imposes upon us under the color of Kindness and good Meaning.

* VIII. It is not only generous, but profitable too, for a Man in some Cases
to remit somewhat of the straitness of his just due.

IX. The Duty of a Judge is to administer Justice, and his Trade to delay it:
Some know their Duty, and only follow their Trade.

X. Those that make ill Judgments of us, without being acquainted with us, do
not wrong us in the least; it is not us they Condemn, but only an imaginary
Chimera of their own making.

XI. We are revenged upon the ill Judgments some Men make of our Wit and
Manners, by the Unworthiness of those they approve of.

* XII. The Wickedness of other Men we have always in our Eye, but we cast our
own over our Shoulders. He that loves his Neighbor's Wife, and for that very
Reason, because she is another, locks up his own: A worse Father Chastises a
better Son, and we quarrel with the Offender rather than the Offense.

* XIII. It is very hard to find an equal Judge: There are no greater exacters
of Faith, than the Persidious, no greater Persecutors of Falsehood than the
Perjurious: A Tyrant is offended at Bloodshed; the Sacrilegious punishes Theft,
and the greater part of the World quarrels with the Offender, rather than with
the Offense.

* XIV. It is with Justice as with sick Men: In time past, when we had fewer
Doctors, as well of Law as of ^hysick, we had more Right and more Health: But
we are now destroyed by Multitudes and Consultations, which serve to no other
end, than to inflame both the Distemper and the Reckoning.

* XV. It may seem somewhat a hard Case for the greater Thieves to punish the
less, and for Public Purloiners and Oppressors to sit in Triumph upon the
Lives of the little ones, that go to the Gallows; for the Tie of Morality is
the same upon both, and they stand both accountable to the same Master: But
Time, Power and Corruption give a Reputation to the worst of Practices; and it
is no longer Oppression when it comes gilded with the name of Authority. Now in
the sight of Heaven, the greater the Temptation, the less is the Sin; and yet
in the Vogue of the World, it passes for an Exploit of Honor, for Kings and
States to run away with whole Countries, that they have no Color or Pretense
to; when many a poor Devil stands condemned to a Halter, or a Whipping Post,
for the pilfering of a Silver-Spoon perhaps, or the robbing of a Hen-Roost.

* XVI. We cannot judge of Characters of Things and Persons, given at second
hand, unless we knew exactly how capable those Persons, from whom such
Characters were first taken, were to pass a right Judgment upon such Subjects;
and also the particular Motives that biased them to pass such Censures.

* XVII. It is easy for Men to fall into gross Errors, and to mistake the
wrong Causes for the true, in the Judgment which they make of others Opinions
and Inclinations: When they behold them addicted to such or such Vices, and to
have withal some good Qualities, in which they themselves do not excel, they
presently are apt to imagine the bad to arise from the good, and so condemn
both together; whereas, pe^haps, it sprung from some other hidden Cause, of
which they took no notice.

Knowledge, Learning, Ignorance.
I. IT is requisite in order to know things thoroughly well, to be acquainted
with the Particulars of them; but these being Infinite, and not to be attained
to in this Life; Our Sciences are consequently very superficial and imperfect.

II. There are two sorts of Curiosity, the first which proceeds from Interest,
is a desire to learn things that can be useful and beneficial to us; the other
which springs from Pride, is a desire of knowing more than our Neighbors.

III. It Is much easier to know what Men are in general, than to know a single
Man in Particular.

IV. The love of new Notions and greater Knowledge, proceeds not so much from
our being weary of what we had before, or any Satisfaction there is in Change,
as from the concern for being too little admired by those that know us well,
and from the hope of being admired more by them that know us but little.

V. It is with some good Qualities, as with our Senses; those that never had
the use of them, can never have any Notion of them.

VI. It is so usual with most Men to judge of things so very slightly and
superficially, that the most ordinary Words and Actions, set off with a good
Grace, and some little Knowledge how Matters go in the World, very often gain a
Man more Reputation than the most profound Wisdom and Learning.

VII. It is not so very difficult for Men to know themselves, if they did but
take the pains of enquiring into themselves; but they are more sollicitous to
be thought what they should be, than really careful to be what they should be.

VIII. Ignorance creates Weakness and Fear, but Learning makes Men bold and
assured: Nothing affects or disturbs a Mind, that has a true Apprehension of
Things, and knows how to distinguish them rightly.

IX. Study and the enquiry after Truth, have seldom any other Effect, than to
make us experimentally convinced of our natural Ignorance.

XII. This Maxim, Let a thing be never so secret, yet it will be discovered at
one time or other; is very uncertain, if not false: For it has no other ground,
than those things that have been found out; and for ought we know, there may be
as many that never did or shall come to our knowledge.

XIII. There are some sort of People, that never look into a Book, and yet with
their own stock of natural Parts, have a better Sense of Things that depend
upon clear and true Reason, than some great and bookish Professors.

XIV. A great many People are fond of Books as they are of Furniture, to dress
and set off their Rooms, more than to adorn and enrich their Minds.

XV. If we set aside those Cases, in which Religion is concerned, a Man ought
to measure his Studies and his Books by the Standard of his own Reason, and not
enslave his Reason to his Books.

XVI. Studious Men propose to themselves the filling their Heads with Notions,
that they may talk fluently and nicely, and be taken notice of in the World;
more than their own real Improvement, and better Information, that they might
be qualified to make a right Judgment of Things.

XVII. Such words as Sympathize, Ie ne s^ay quoy's, Occult Qualities, and a
thousand more of the same stamp, have no Sense nor Signification at all. A Man
is wonderfully deceived, if he fancies himself one jot the wiser for them. They
were only found out to supply the want of Reason, and to be used when we would
fain say something, but indeed have nothing to say.

XVIII. In the study of Humane Learning, our Mind ought always to preserve its
own Freedom, and not to enslave its self to other Peoples fancies. The liberty
of the Judgment should have its full scope, and not take any thing upon trust,
from the Credit of any Man's Authority. When different Opinions are proposed to
us, we should consider and choose, if there are such odds between them, as to
admit of a Choice; and if there be not, then we should continue in suspense
still.

XIX. The highest pitch of Humane Understanding, is to be thoroughly acquainted
with our own Weakness, Vanity and Misery; and the less Wit a Man has, the less
he knows of these Matters.

XX. That sort of Ignorance, which is but a Privation or Emptiness of
Knowledge, is much less despicable than the other kind of Ignorance, which is
full and puss'd up with Error and Impertinence, and which the World oftentimes
mistakes for Learning and Knowledge.

XXI. Too servile a Submission to the Books and Opinions of the Ancients, has
spoiled many an ingenious Man, and plagued the World with abundance of Pesants.

XXII. The knowing of others well is a fair step to gain an Ascendant and
Mastery over them; for the Man that is thoroughly known, depends in some measure
upon the Person that knows him.

XXIII. As there is no Man but may draw great Supplies and Advantages from
Learning, so there are very few who do not find great prejudices from the
Notions they acquire by Studies, except they use them, as if they were natural
to them.

XXIV. Men are most esteemed when the World does not know the utmost of their
Parts and Abilities. For things that are understood but by halves, are always
presumed greater than really they are.

XXV. The eager desire Men have of making their Parts and Abilities known,
hinders 'em generally from acquiring any considerable: For whilst they are
busy to let the World see what Knowledge they have, they lose the opportunity
to learn that which they want.

XXVI. The best Disposition, when untaught, is always blind and unsettled. A
Man ought to take all imaginable Care to inform himself, that his Ignorance may
make him neither Childishly Bashtul, nor Ridiculously Confident.

XXVII. None but little Souls are disturbed at having their Ignorance reproved;
and the reason is, that being generally very Blind and Foolish, they never
trouble themselves with Doubts; and are fully satisfied they see those things
clearly, which they see only through the thick Mist of a clouded Understanding

XXVIII. To know things judiciously, we ought always to be upon our guard
against the Reputation of him that speaks them; the Air of the Face; the manner
of Speaking; the Quality, the Time, the Place, all imposes.

XXIX. Study makes a greater difference between a Scholar and an Ignorant Man,
than there is between an Ignorant Man and a Brute. But the Air of the World yet
makes a greater Distinction between a Polite and a Learned Person. Knowledge
begins the Gentleman; and the Commerce of the World compleats him.

XXX. It Is the fault of weak Reasoners to venture upon many things they don't
understand, and to renounce them as soon as they come to know them.

XXXI. All Objects have different Faces, and the Mind, which is in a continual
Motion, looks upon them as it turns, insomuch that we have nothing. If I may so
speak, but new Aspects, thinking to enjoy new Discoveries.

XXXII. The great Commerce with the World hinders all Attention; what we see in
others, keeps us from examining well our selves.

XXXIII. By a little knowledge of Nature Men become Atheists; but a great deal
returns them back again, to a sound and religious Mind.

* XXXIV. Though it may be an Argument of great Wit, to give ingenious Reasons
for many wonderful Appearances in Nature; yet it is an Evidence of small
Judgment to be positive in any thing, but the acknowledgment of our own
Ignorance.

* XXXV. Our Pride is always greater than our Ignorance; and what we want in
Knowledge we supply by Sufficiency. When we have looked about us as far as we
can, we conclude there is no more to be seen; when we have shot our best, we
are sure none ever did, nor ever can shoot better, or beyond it. Our own Reason
is the certain measure of Truth; our own Knowledge of what is possible in
Nature. Though our Mind and our Thoughts change every seven Years, as well as
our Strength and our Features: Nay, though our Opinions change every Week, or
every Day, yet we are sure, or at least confident, that our present Thoughts
and Conclusions are just and true, and cannot be deceived: And among all the
Miseries to which Man is born and subjected in the whole Course of his Life, he
has this one Felicity to comfort and support him, that in all Ages, in all
things, every Man is always in the right. A Boy of fifteen is wiser than his
Father at forty; the meanest Subject, than his Prince or Governors, and the
Modern Scholars, because they have for a Hundred Years past learnt their Lesson
pretty well, are much more knowing than the Ancients Masters.

* XXXVI. It is undoubtedly true, that scarce any Man's Mind is so capable of
thinking strongly, in the presence of one whom he Fears and Reverences, as he
is when that Restraint is taken off. And this is to be found, not only in
weighty Matters, but also in the Arts of Discourse and Raillery themselves: For
we have often seen Men of bold Tempers, that have over-awed and governed the
Wit of most Companies, to have been disturbed and dumb, and bashful as
Children, when some other Man has been near, who used to out-talk them. Such a
kind of natural Sovereignty there is in some Men's Minds over others, which must
needs be much greater when it is advanced by long use, and the venerable name
of a Master.

* XXXVII. Those who take their Opinions from others Rules, are commonly
stricter imposers upon their Scholars, than their own Authors were on them, or
than the first Inventors of things themselves are upon others. Whatever the
Cause of this be, whether the first Men are made meek and gentle, by their long
search, and by better understanding all the difficulties of Knowledge; while
those that learn afterward, only hastily catching things in small Systems, are
soon satisfied, before they have broken their Pride, and so become more
imperious; or whether it arises from hence, that the same meanness of Soul,
which made them bound their Thoughts by others Precepts, makes them also
Insolent to their Inferiors, as we always find Cowards the most Cruel: Or
whatever other Cause may be alleged, the Observation is certain, that the
Successors are usually more positive and tyrannical, than the Beginners.

* XXXVIII. It is Liberty alone which inspires Men with losty Thoughts, and
elevates their Souls to a higher Pitch, than Rules of Art can direct. Books of
Rhetoric make Men Copious and Methodical; but they alone can never infuse that
true Enthusiastic Rage which Liberty breaths into their Souls who enjoy it,
and which guided by a sedate Judgment, will carry Men further than the greatest
Industry, and the quickest Parts can go without it.

* XXXIX. All Men who make a Mystery of Matters of Learning, and industriously
oblige their Scholars to conceal their Dictates, give the World great Reason to
suspect, that their Knowledge is all Juggling and Trick.

* XL. No Pretenses to greater measures of Knowledge, grounded upon account of
long Successions of Learned Men in any Country, ought to gain belief, when set
against the Learning of other Nations who make no such Pretenses, unless
Inventions and Discoveries answerable to those Advantages, be produced by their
Advocates.

* XLI. The growth of Learning, as well as of Natural Bodies, has some short
Periods beyond which it cannot reach, and after which it must begin to decay.
It falls in one Country or one Age, and rises again in others, but never beyond
a certain Pitch. One Man, or one Country, at a certain time runs a great length
in some certain kinds of Knowledge, but lose as much ground in others, that
were perhaps as useful and valuable. There is a certain degree of Capacity in
the greatest Vessel, and when it is full, if you pour in still, it must run out
some way or other, and the more it runs out on one side, the less runs out at
the other: So the greatest Memory, after a certain degree, as it learns or
retains more of some Things or Words, loses and forgets as much of others. The
largest and deepest reach of Thought, the more it pursues some certain
Subjects, the more it neglects others.

* XLII. It is natural to all Ranks of Men, to have some one Darling, upon
which their Care is chiefly fixed. If Mechanics alone were to make a
Philosophy, they would bring it all into their Shops; and force it wholly to
consist of Springs and Wheels and Weights: If Physicians, they would not depart
from their Art; scarce any thing would be considered besides the Body of Man,
the Causes, Signs and Cures of Diseases. So much is to be found in Men of all
Conditions, of that which is called Pedantry in Scholars, which is nothing else
but an obstinate Addiction to the forms of some private Life, and not regarding
general things enough.

XLIII. We meet with very few Authors that are plain and natural; for even the
Best are seldom contented either with their first Thoughts, or with those
Expressions, which present themselves without study. The generality of Men
mistake the Per^ection of the Productions of Wit, and value them in Proportion
to the pains and troubles they stand them in; as if Thoughts and Expressions
were like Silver and Gold, which must be dug out of Earth, and purged of
their Dross with great Labor, before they can be good for any thing.

XLIV. A Dogmatical Tone, is generally the effect of a great Ignorance. He that
knows nothing, thinks that he teaches others what he has learnt himself a
Moment before: On the contrary, he that knows much does hardly think, that what
he says can be unknown to other People, and so he speaks with a kind of
Indifference.

* XLV. The Men of Reading do very much busy themselves about such
Conceptions, which are no where to be ^ound out of their own Chambers. The
Sense, the Custom, the Practice, the Judgment of the World is quite a different
thing from what they imagine it to be in private: And therefore it is no
wonder, if when they come abroad into Business, the Sight of Men, the Tumult
and Noise of Cities, and the very Brightness of Day it self affright them.

* XLVI. The studious Men, while they continue heaping up in their Memories the
Customs of past Ages, fall insensibly to imitate them, without any manner of
Care how suitable they are to Times and Things. In the Ancient Authors, which
they turn over, they find Descriptions of Virtues more perfect than indeed they
were: The Governments are represented better, and the ways of Life pleasanter
than they deserved. Upon this, these Bookish Wise Men strait compare what they
read with what they see; and here beholding nothing so heroically Transcendent,
because they are able to mark all the Spots as well as Beauties of every thing,
that is so close to their sight, they presently begin to despise their own
Times, to exalt the past, to contemn the Virtues, and aggravate the Vices of
their Country; not indeavouting to amend them, but by such Examples as are now
unpracticable, by reason of the Alteration of Men and Manners.

Kings, Princes, Government.
I. A Prince makes himself first unhappy when he makes others so.

II. There are some fierce Souls, who have but an imperfect Pleasure in being
Masters, i^ they don't make their Power felt by others, who place Greatness in
Force, and the Happiness of their Condition in making People miserable at their
pleasure.

III. It Is as great a Severity in a Prince to pardon all Crimes, as to pardon
none.

IV. Frequent Executions cast as great blemish on the Reputation of a King, as
frequent Funerals on that of a Physician.

* V. The Public is but one Body, and the Prince the Head on it; so that what
Member soever withdraws his Service from the Head, is no better than a Negative
Traitor to his Country and himself.

VI. Princes and their Ministers have their Nature much like that of Celestial
Bodies; they have much Splendour, but no Rest.

* VII. Princes are no farther touched with one another Misfortunes, than
concerns their own Interest.

* VIII. The Periods of Empire, like Natural Bodies, grow for a certain Time,
and to a certain Size, which they are not to exceed.

* IX. The Sources of Conquests, like those of great Rivers, are generally
obscure, or taken little notice of, until their Streams increasing by the
Influence of many others, make so mighty Inundations, as to grow famous in
Stories, as well as Maps of the World.

* X. Usurpers and Tyrants do commonly Justice upon themselves, for the
Injuries they have done to others; their own Consciences doing the Office of
Tormentors, and avenging their Public Crimes, by their Private Sufferings; for
they live in a perpetual Anguish of Thought, with Fears and Jealousies.

* XI It is an easy matter for Princes to cover and de^end their unlawful
Desires and unfaithful Vows with many outward seeming fair Pretenses;
especially seeing there is no Umpire or Moderator of Matters concluded upon, to
whom a Reason should be tendered.

* XII. When Princes that ought to be common Parents, make themselves as a
Party, and lean to a Side; it is a Boat that is over-thrown by uneven weight on
the one side. For when the Authority of Princes is made but an Accessory to a
Cause, and that there are other Bands that tie faster than the Band of
Sovereignty; Kings begin to be almost put out of Possession.

* XIII. It is a miserable state of Mind to have few things to desire, and many
things to fear; and yet that commonly is the Case of Kings, who being at the
highest, want matter of Desire, which makes their Minds more languishing, and
have many Representations of Perils and Shadows, which makes their Minds the
less clear.

* XIV. Kings that have been fortunate Conquerors in their first Years, it
being not possible for them to go forward infinitely, but that they must have
some Check or Arrest in their Successes, turn generally in their later Years to
be Superstitious and Melancholy.

* XV. Nothing destroys Authority so much, as the unequal and untimely
interchange of Power, pressed too far, and relaxed too much.

* XVI. The Honor of a Prince is a good Excuse, when he has no mind to engage
in a deceitful or unjust War; but it is often forgotten, when the Circumstances
are more favorable.

* XVII. There is no way more effectual to engage all to adhere to the Crown,
than the grateful Acknowledgments of past Services.

* XVIII. In a weak Government an ill digested Insurrection raises the Power of
the Prince, and adds as much Spirit to his Friends, as it depresses the Faction
against him; and it also gives a handle to do some things, for which it were
not easy otherwise to find either Colors or Instruments.

* XIX. A Prince that does not secure Friends to himself, while he is in Power
and Condition to oblige them, must never expect to find 'em when he is Old and
Impotent, and no longer able to do them any Good. If he Governs Tyrannically in
his Youth, he will be sure to be treated contemptibly in his Old Age; and the
baser his Enemies are, the more insolent and intolerable will be the Affront.

* XX. There is no Subject so inconsiderable, but his Prince at one time or
other, may have occasion for him; and it holds through the whole Scale of the
Creation, that the Great and the Little have need of one another.

* XXI. There Is no meddling with Princes, either with Text or Argument. Morality
is not the Povince of a Cabinet-Council; and Ghostly Fathers signify no more
than Spiritual Bug-bears in the Case of an unaccountable Privilege.

XXII. Truth discovers it self to Princes no longer than while they are Young
and under Age: It ^lies a Crown, and vanishes out of sight, as soon as they
come to be invested with Power. If these first Years be not made use of to give
them good Advice and Instruction, there will be no retrieving it in the
following part of their Lives; For all then goes off in mere juggle and
disguise.

XXIII. There wants nothing more to make a Prince completely happy, than the
Sweetness of a private Life: If any thing can make him amends for so great a
Loss, it must be the Charms of Friendship, and Fidelity of true Friends.

XXIV. One of the greatest Misfortunes that can attend a Prince, is, that he
has often Secrets that lie heavy upon his Soul, and which it is not safe for
him to disclose. His Happiness is to find a true bosom Friend on whom he may
throw off his Burden.

XXV. Nothing is so much for a Princes Credit, as the Modesty of his Favorites.

XXVI. What a happy Condition is that which gives a Man so frequent
Opportunities, to do good to so many Thousands! What a dangerous Post is that,
which exposes a Man to do hurt to so many Millions!

* XXVIII. All Precepts concerning Kings, are fummarily comprehended in these
two; Remember that thou art a Man, and that thou art instead of God: The one
bridles their Power, and the other their Will.

Laughing, Raillery, Bantering.
I. NOthing is more rare, than to see a Man either Laugh or Weep to the purpose.

II. The Enjoyments, which a Plentiful Fortune affords, and the Calm and
Smoothness of Prosperity, furnish Princes and Great Men with so much Mirth,
that they can Laugh at a Monkey, a Dwarf, and oftentimes at an Cold Jest; but
Men of Inferior Fortunes seldom Laugh, but where there is occasion.

III. All the World is plagued with Cold Iesters, we tread every where upon
those Insects. A good Iester is a thing very uncommon; and even those that are
born such, find it a very hard Task to make good their Character a considerable
Time: And besides, he that makes other People Laugh, seldom makes himself to be
Esteemed.

IV. To Laugh at Witty Men, is the Privilege of Blockheads: They are in the
World, what your Scurrilous Iesters are at Court.

* V. No Men are more unwilling to bear a Jest, than those who are forward to
break it.

* VI. The Wounding of a Friend for the sake of a jest, is an Intemperance and
Immorality, not to be endured.

* VII. Men ought to find the difference betwixt Saltness and Bitterness; for
he that has a Satirical Vein, as he makes others afraid of his Wit, so he had
need be afraid of others Mcmory.

* VIII. It is commonly the Fate of Apes and Buffoons, that while they think to
make sport with others, they serve only in the Conclusion, for a Laughing Stock
themselves.

* IX. The true Raillery should be a Defense for good and virtuous Works, and
should only design the Derision of extravagant, and the Disgrace of vile and
dishonorable Things. This kind of Wit ought to have the nature of Salt, to
which it is usually compared; which preserves and keeps sweet the good and
sound Parts of all Bodies, and only frets, dries up, and destroys those Humors
which putrify and corrupt.

* X. There Is not one Man of a Thousand, that understands the just, the safe,
warrantable, decent and precise Limits of that which we call Bantering or
Fooling; but it is either too Course, too Rude, too Churlish, too Bitter, too
much on it, too Pedantick, too Fine, out of Measure, or out of Season. Now the
least Error or Mistake in the Management of this Humor, lays People open to
great Censure and Reproach. It is not every Man's Talent to know when and how
to cast out a pleasant Word, with such a regard to Modesty and Respect, as not
to Transgress the true and fair Allowances of Wit, good Nature and good
Breeding. The Skill and Faculty of Governing this Freedom within the Terms of
Sobriety and Diseretion, goes a great way in the Character of an agreeable
Conversation; for that which we call Raillery, in this Sense, is the very Sauce
of Civil Entertainment, and without some such Tincture of Urbanity, even in
Matters the most serious, the good Humor flattens for want of Refreshment and
Relief. But there is a Medium yet betwixt All-Fool and All-Philosopher; I mean,
a proper and discreet Mixture, that in some sort partakes of both, and renders
Wisdom it self the more grateful and effectual.

* XI. It Is the Nature and Practice of Jesters and Buffoons, to be Insolent
toward those that will bear it, and as Slavish to others that are more than
their Match.

Life, Death.
I. ONE cannot look either the Sun or Death in the Face.

II. Very few People are acquainted with Death; it is generally submitted to
rather out of Insensibility and Custom, than Resolution; and all Men yield to
Death, only because they cannot help it.

III. We often see those that are led to Execution, affect a Constancy and
Contempt of Death; which in truth is nothing else, but the fear of looking it
in the Face: So that this pretended Bravery and Contempt, may be said to do
their Mind the same good Office, that the Head-band or Nightcap does their
Eyes.

IV. Nothing can be more counterseit and deceitful, than the Contempt of Death.
That Contempt of it, I mean, which the Heathens pretended to out of their
natural Reason and Constancy, without the Hopes of a better Life. There is a
great deal of difference between Dying with Bravery and Resolution, and
slighting Death. The former is frequent enough, but I look upon the other to be
never real and sincere; and yet Philosophers have used all the Arguments that
the Subject can bear, to persuade us that Death is no Evil; and Men of very
inferior Characters, as well as Hero's, have furnished us with a great many
Eminent Examples in Confirmation of that Opinion. Nevertheless I do still
question whether any Thinking Man, ever gave his assent to it; nay, the trouble
they are at to persuade others and themselves, plainly shows that this was no
such easy Undertaking. A Man indeed may have a great many Reasons to be out of
conceit with Life, but he can have none to despise Death: Even those, who
voluntarily lay violent hands upon themselves, do not look upon it as an
inconsiderable matter, but are startled at it, and decline it as much as
others, if it approach them in any other shape, but that of their own choosing.
The Unevenness of Courage, observable in a World of Brave Men, has no other
Bortom, than the various Influence of Death, which works more powerfully upon
their Fancy, upon some Occasions, and at some Times, than it does at others.
Hence it is, that after having slighted what they did not know, they fear it
now, when they come to be better acquainted with it. If a Man would persuade
himself, that it is not the greatest of Evils, he must decline looking it in
the Face, and considering all its Ghastly Circumstances. The Wisest and Bravest
Men, are they, that take the fairest and most honorable Pretenses, to keep
their View from it. But every body that knows it, as it really is, ^inds it to
be a thing full of Horror. The Constancy of Philosophers, was nothing else but
the Necessity of Dying; they thought when there was no Remedy, but a Man must
go, it was best to go with a good Grace. And since they were not able to make
their Lives Eternal, they would stick at nothing to make their Names so, and
secure all that from the Wreck, which was capable of being secured. Let us put
the best Face upon the Matter we can, content our selves with not speaking all
we think, and hope more from a happy Constitution, than all the feeble
Reasonings, that gull us with a fancy that we can approach it without concern.
The Glory of Dying gallantly, the Hope of being Lamented when we are gone, the
desire of leaving a good Name behind us, the Assurance of being set free from
the Miseries of the present Life, and of depending no longer upon a ^ickle and
humourfom Fortune, are Remedies not altogether to be rejected, though they be
far from being Sovereign. They help no more to put us in Heart, than a poor
Hedge in an Engagement contributes to encourage the Soldiers that are to march
near, where the Enemy is firing; it appears a good Shelter at a distance, but
proves a very thin defense at close view. We do vainly flatter our selves to
think that Death will be the same when near, as we fancy it to be when remote;
and that our Reasonings, which in Truth are Weakness it self, will prove of so
hardened a Temper as to hold out proof, and not yield to the severest of all
Trials: Besides, it shows we are but little acquainted with Self-Love, when we
imagine, that will do us any Service toward the looking upon that very thing as
a* Trifle, which must unavoidably cause its utter Ruin; and Reason, from which
we expect so many Supplies, is then too weak to persuade us what we wish to be
true: Nay, Reason it self generally betrays us upon this occasion, and instead
of animating us with a Contempt of Death, gives us a more lively Representation
of all its Terror and Gastliness: All it is able to do in our behalf, is only
to advise us to turn our Heads another way, and divert the Thought by fixing
our Eyes upon some other Objects. Cato and Brutus chose noble Ones. A Lackey,
not long ago, satisfied himself with dancing upon the Scaffold, whither he was
brought to be broke upon the Wheel. And thus, though the Motives be different,
they produce still the same Effects. So true it is, that after all the
disproportion between Great Men and the Vulgar, People of both sorts do often
meet Death, with the same Face and Disposition: But still with this difference,
that in the Contempt of Death, which Great Men express, the desire and love of
Honor is the thing that keeps Death from their sight; and in the Vulgar it is
Ignorance and Stupidity that leaves them at liberty to think upon something
else, and keeps them from seeing the greatness of the Evil they are to suffer.

V. Every thing in this Life is Accidental, even our Birth, that brings us into
it: Death is the only thing we can be sure of; and yet we behave our selves
just as if all the rest were certain, and Death alone accidental.

* VI. We are apt to pick Quarrels with the World for every little Foolery, or
every trivial Cross: But our Tongues run quite to another Tune, when we come
once to parting with it in earnest.

* VII. Nothing but the Conscience of a virtuous Life can make Death easy to
us: Wherefore there is no trusting to a Deathbed Repentance. When Men come to
that last Extremity once by Langor, Pain or Sickness, and to lie Agonizing
betwixt Heaven and Hell, under the stroke either of a Divine Judgment, or of
Humane Frailty, they are not commonly so sensible of their Wickedness, or so
effectually touched with the remorse of a true Repentance, as they are
distracted with the Terrors of Death, and the dark Visionary Apprehensions of
what is to come. People in that Condition do but discharge themselves of
burdensome Reflections, as they do of the Cargo of a Ship at Sea, that has
sprung a Leak: Every thing is done in a Hurry, and Men only part with their
Sins in the one Case, as they do with their Goods in the other; to fish them up
again so soon as the Storm is over. Grace must be very strong in these
Conflicts, wholly to vanquish the Weaknesses of distressed Nature. That
certainly is none of the Time to make choice of for the great Work of
reconciling our selves to Heaven, when we are divided and confounded betwixt an
Anguish of Body and Mind: And the Man is worse than Mad, that ventures his
Salvation upon that desperate Issue.

VIII. There is not any thing that Men are so prodigal, and at the same time,
so fond of, as their Lives.

IX. Death happens but once; but the Sense of it renews in all the Moments of
our Lives; and the fear we have of it, is ten times worse than the submitting
to it.

X. That part of Death which is certain, is much alleviated by that which is
uncertain.

XI. We hope to grow Old, and yet we fear Old Age, that is to say, we love
Life, and decline Death.

XII. Nature generally makes a long Sickness, intermediate betwixt Life and
Death, with design, it seems, to make Death it self a kind of Release, both to
him that Dies, and those that survive him.

XIII. That Death which prevents a crazy Old Age, comes in better time, than
that which terminates it.

XIV. There are but three great Events for us Men, Birth, Life and Death: We
are not sensible of our Birth; we suffer in Dying, and forget to live.

XV. Most Men spend the first part of their Lives in rendering the other
miserable.

* XVI. Men fear Death, as Children fear to go in the Dark; and as that natural
Fear is increased in Children with Tales, so is the other. Certainly the
Stoics bestowed too much cost upon Death, and by their great Preparations made
it appear more fearful. It is as natural to die as to be born; and to a little
Infant, perhaps, the one is as painful as the other.

* XVII. It is observable, that there is no Passion in the Mind of Man, but it
Masters the Fear of Death: And therefore Death is no such terrible Enemy, when
a Man has so many Friends about him, that can gain him the Victory. Revenge
Triumphs over Death; Love ^lights it; Honor aspires to it; Grief flies to it;
Fear procures it. Nay, we read, that Pity it self, which is the Tenderest of
all Affections, has provoked many to die out of mere Compassion. Nay, Seneca
adds Niceness and Satiety; A Man (says he) would die, though he were neither
Valiant nor Miserable, only upon a Weariness to do the same thing so often over
and over.

Liberality, Prodigality.
I. LIberality is oftentimes nothing else but the Vanity of Giving, of which we
are more fond than the Things we give.

II. There goes a great deal of Art and Address to make a Denial go down, and
by fair and civil Expressions, to supply the Kindness we cannot grant.

III. There are a sort of Persons that say No so very naturally, that their No
always ushers in whatever they are about to say. This renders them so
disagreeable, that though they be prevailed upon with much Importunity to grant
any Request, yet all the Grace and Commendation of such Grants are utterly lost
by so very untoward a beginning.

IV. All things are not to be granted at all times, nor all Men to be
gratified: And it is altogether as commendable to refuse, upon Occasion, as to
give. This makes some Peoples No better received than other Peoples Yes. A
Denial, accompanied with Sweetness and Civility, pleases more a Man of
Understanding, than a Courtesy granted coldly and rudely.

V. We engage others more effectually to serve us by Promises, than by
Presents; for while Men are kept upon the Tenters, they endeavor to deserve
those Kindnesses they expect from us.

* VI. He that gives to all without Diseretion, will soon stand in need of
every Body.

* VII. He that defers Charity till Death, is rather Liberal of another Man's,
than of his own.

VIII. Liberality does not consist so much in giving largely, as in giving
seasonably.

IX. There is something Heroical in great Liberality, as well as in great
Valor; and there is a great Analogy between those two Virtues; the one raises
the Soul above the Consideration of Wealth, as the other beyond the Management
and Desire of Life. But with all these Gay and Generous Motives, the one
becomes Ruinous, and the other Fatal.

X. There are some Men, jealous of the Honor of their Motions, who refuse all
things at the Inspirations of others, because they would not be prevented in
their Designs, and troubled in the order of the good they would do. That may
proceed sometimes from a good Principle, and be met with in very lo^ty Souls;
but for the most part they are Dishonest, Jealous, and ^alse Niceties of
Honor, which produce a true Repugnancy to the doing of Favors.

XI. Those whom cross Accidents of Fortune have undone, are pitied by all the
World, because it is a Misfortune the Condition of Humanity submits us to: But
those who are reduced to Misery by Vain Profusion, raise more Contempt than
Commiseration, because it is the issue of a peculiar Folly, from which every
Man has the good conceit to think himself exempt.

Love.
I. IN Friendship we take notice of those Failings that may prejudice our
Friends: In Love we never see in the Party beloved, but those Defects only by
which we are offended.

II. There is but the first Quarrel in Love, as the first Fault in Friendship,
which may turn to good account.

III. Coldness or Slackness in Friendship, has generally a Cause: In Love there
is most commonly no other reason for People loving no more, than their having
loved too much.

IV. Both the Beginning and Decay of Love, show themselves by the Uneasiness
and Trouble Lovers are in, when they are together by themselves.

V. When a Man has a Passion for an illfavour'd Woman, it must needs be an
extraordinary one: For either his Love proceeds from his own Weakness, or is
influenced by more secret and irresistible Charms than those of Beauty.

VI. When a Passion is worn out, we often visit a Mistress out of Custom; and
tell one another that we love still, when our Actions testi^ie that we love no
more.

VII. Being absent from what we love, is a Good, in comparison of living with
that we hate.

VIII. As disinterested as a Man may be, either in Friendship or Love, he ought
sometimes to put a Constraint upon himself, and be so generous as to receive.

IX. Love is to the Soul of a Lover, what the Soul is to the Body.

X. It is very hard to give a just Definition of Love; the most we can say of
it, is this: That in the Soul, it is a greedy Desire to Govern; in Spirits, it
is a Sympathy; and in the Body, it is only a nice and secret Longing to enjoy
the thing beloved, after a great deal of Bustle and Formality.

XI. If there be any such thing as Love pure, and untained with the Mixture of
any other Passion, it is that which lurks in the deepest Recesses of our
Hearts, unknown to our selves.

XII. Love has such peculiar distinguishing Characters, that it is as hard to
hide it when true, as to dissemble it when false.

XIII. Considering how little the Beginning or the Ceasing to love, is in our
own Power, it is equally unreasonable for a Lover no complain of his Mistress's
Fickleness, as for a Mistress of her Lover's Inconstancy.

XIV. If we judge of Love according to most of its Effects, we shall find that
it more resembles Hat^ed than Friendship.

XV. Love can no more continue without a constant motion, than Fire can; and it
ceases to be, when it ceases either to Hope or Fear.

XVI. It is with true Love, as it is with Ghosts and Apparitions, a thing that
every body talks of, and scarce any body has seen.

XVII. We father upon Love several Dealings and Intercourses, in which it is no
more concerned, than the Doge is, in what is done at Venice.

XVIII. When we have loved our selves weary, the kindest and most welcome thing
that can be, is, the Infidelity of others, which may give us a fair Pretense to
disengage our Faithfulness.

XIX. The more passionately a Man loves his Mistress, the readier he is to hate
her.

XX. When a Woman has once given her self over to entertain Love, Loving is
then the least Fault she can be guilty of.

XXI. Some Persons had never been in love, had they never been entertained with
any discourse of it.

XXII. The greatest Pleasure of Love, is Loving; and a Man is more happy in his
own Passion, than in that he influences in another.

XXIII. Absence cools moderate Passions, and inflames violent ones; just as the
Wind blows out Candles, but kindles Fires.

XXIV. It is much easier to usher in Love into one's Breast, than to drive it
out when it is once admitted.

XXV. In Love, loving but little, proves often the best way to be loved again.

XXVI. The Sincerity which Lovers and their Mistresses bargain for, in agreeing
to tell one another when they can love no longer, is not asked so much out of a
Desire to know when their Love is at an end, as to be satisfied that Love does
really continue, so long as they are told nothing to the contrary.

XXVII. In Love, he that is first cured, is best cured

XXVIII. To speak feelingly of Love, is as coquetish in a young Woman, as it is
ridiculous in an old Man.

XXIX. * Love is a kind of penurious God, very niggard of his Opportunities; he
must be watched like a hard-hearted Treasurer; for he bolts out of a sudden,
and if you take him not in the nick, he vanishes in a twinkling.

XXX. * There is no reason in the World to revenge upon a Lover the Deceits of
his Love; for as in War, so in Love, Stratagems are always allowed.

XXXI. * A silly Mistress is like a weak Place, soon got, soon lost.

XXXII. * Mistresses are like Books; if you pore upon them too much, they doze
you, and make you unfit for Company; but if used discreetly, you are the sitter
for Conversation by them.

XXXIII. * Some Women pray for Husbands, that they may the better love at
random.

XXXIV. * Many a Spark that hunts after a Mistress, often gets a Wife, and
stands condemned to a Repentance during Life, without Redemption, except one of
the two dies.

XXXV. * Some People fall in love by Contagi^n, and merely by conversing with
the infected.

XXXVI. * Men do not see, or taste, or find the thing they love; but they
create it: They fashion an Idol in what Figure or Shape they please; set it up,
worship it, dote upon it, pursue it, and sometimes run mad for it.

XXXVII. * The extravagant Transports of Love, and the wonderful Force of
Nature, are uncontrollable: The one carries us out of our selves, and the other
brings us back again.

XXXVIII. Two passionate Lovers cannot partake of other Pleasures, than those
which they receive from their Love.

XXXIX. There is no Passion that more excites us to every thing that is Noble
and Generous, than an honest Love.

XL. Short absence excites Passions, whereas a long one destroys them.

XLI. Women who preserve a Passion for Persons that are absent, raise but
little in those who see them; and the continuation of their Love for the
Absent, is less an Honor to their Constancy, than a Scandal to their Beauty.

XLII. The Love of young People is only an irregular Passion, and boiling
Desire, that has no other Object than Pleasure, and which Enjoyment dissipates.

XLIII. Love comes in by the Ears, as well as by the Eyes; and therefore it is
a great Indiscretion in a Man, to make a long Descant upon his Mistress's
Perfections, before his Friend.

XLIV. Love has, as it were, never well established his Power, till he has
ruined that of Reason.

XLV. Love begins by Love; and the greatest Friendship can never influence but
a very small Passion.

XLVI. Nothing resembles true Friendship so well, as those Engagements which
have a secret Love at the bottom.

XLVII. We never love truly but once, and that is the first time we love: The
following Passions are less involuntary.

XLVIII. That Passion which is raised on the sudden, is the most difficult to
be cured.

XLIX. That Love which increases by degrees, is so much like Friendship, that
it can never be a violent Passion.

L. As nice as we are in Love, we still forgive more Faults in that, than in
Friendship.

LI. We tell our Secrets in Friendship, but they slip from us in Love.

LII. There are many Remedies to cure Love; but never a one of them is
infallible.

LIII. The greatest Miracle Love can work, is to cure a Coquet Humor.

LIVE. Coquets make it a Pride to be jealous of their Lovers, only to conceal
their Envy of other Women.

LV. The reason why Lovers are but seldom unea^ie in one another's Company, is
because they never talk of any thing but themselves.

LVI. It is a Lover's Fault, if he is not sensible when he ceases to be beloved.

LVII. A Man of Parts may love indiscreetly, but not ^ottishly.

LVIII. The Grace of Novelty is to Love, what the Blue-mourn, or Gloss, is to
the Fruits; it gives them a Luster which is easily defaced; and when once gone,
never returns any more.

LIX. A Fever is the properest Simile of Love; for in both Cases, the Degree
and the Continuance of the Disease is out of our own Power.

LX. It Is better for a Man sometimes to be deceived in what he loves, than to
be plainly dealt with.

LXI. It is as hard for a Woman to manage a fond Lover, as a cold one.

LXII. Women generally keep the first Lover, only for want of a second:

LXIII. Men often go from Love to Ambition, but seldom come back again from
Ambition to Love.

LXIV. All our Passions engage Men in some Faults; but those of Love are the
most ridiculous.

LXV. Of all violent Passions, Love becomes a Woman best.

LXVI. In the first Passion, Women have commonly an Affection for the Lover;
but afterward they seldom love, but for the Pleasure of Loving.

LXVII. Love, though never so agreeable a Passion, pleases still more by the ways
it takes to show it self, than it does upon its own account.

LXVIII. Though Love is worn out, yet it makes both Lover and Mistress uneasy to
part.

LXIX. It is oftentimes much harder to forbear loving an unkind Mistress, than
to bear with her cruel Usage.

LXX. It is with old Love, as with old Age, a Man lives to all the Miseries,
but is dead to all the Pleasures of Life.

LXXI. There is one kind of Love, whose excess prevents Jealousy.

LXXII. In Love, Cozening always exceeds Distrust.

LXXIII. There are some self-conceited Fops, who, when they are in Love,
entertain themselves with their own Passion, instead of the Person that causes
it.

Marriage, Matrimony, Children.
I. MAny Marriages prove convenient and useful, but few delightful.

II. * It Is much with Wedlock, as with our Elixirs and Antidotes; there goes a
thousand Ingredients to the making of the Composition; but then if they be not
timed, proportioned, and prepared according to Art, it is a Clog to us rather
than a Relief.

III. * Marriages are governed rather by an overruling Fatality, than any
solemnity of Choice and Judgment; though it is a hard matter to ^ind out a Woman,
even at the best, that is of a just Scantling for her Age, Person, Humor, and
Fortune, to make a Wife of. The one single disparity of Years, is of it self
sufficient, without a more than ordinary Measure of Virtue and Prudence, to
make a Man ridiculous.

IV. * A Wife and Children are a kind of Discipline of Humanity; and Single
Men, though they be many times more charitable, because their Means are less
exhausted, yet, on the other side, they are more cruel and hard-hearted,
because their Tenderness is not so often called upon.

V. * Grave Natures, led by Custom, and therefore constant, are commonly loving
Husbands.

VI. * Chaste Women are often proud and froward, as presuming upon the Merit of
their Chastity.

VII. * It is one of the best Bonds, both of Chastity and Obedience in the
Wife, if the think her Husband Wise; which she will never do, if she find him
Jealous.

VIII. * Wives are young Men's Mistresses; Companions for middle-Age; and old
Men, Nurses.

IX. * The Joys of Parents are secret; and so are their Griefs and Fears: They
cannot utter the one, nor will they express the other. Children sweeten Labor,
but they make Misfortunes more bitter: They increase the Cares of Life, but
they mitigate the Remembrance of Death.

X. * They that are the First Raisers of their Families, are most indulgent
toward their Children, beholding them as the Continuance, not only of their
Kind, but of their Works; and so both Children and Creatures.

XI. * He that has Wife and Children, has given Hostages to Fortune; for they
are Impediments to great Enterprises, either of Virtue or Mischief. The
Perpetuity by Generation is common to Beasts; but Memory, Merit, and Noble
Works, are proper to Men: And certainly a Man shall find the Noblest Works and
Foundations, have always proceeded from Childless Men, which have sought to
express the Images of their Minds, where those of their Bodies have failed; and
both in A^^ection and Means have married and endowed the Public: So that the
Care of Posterity is most in them that have none.

XI. * The most ordinary cause of a single Life, is Liberty, especially in
certain Self-pleasing and Humourous Minds; which are so sensible of every
Restraint, that they will go near to think their Girdles and Garters to be
Bonds and Shackles.

XII. * Unmarried Men are best Friends, best Masters, best Servants, but not
always best Subjects; for they are light to run away; and almost all Fugitives
are of that Condition.

Mind, Understanding, Wit, Memory, Heart.
I. THe Strength and Weakness of a Man's Mind, are improper Terms, since they
are really nothing else but the Organs of our Bodies, being well or ill
disposed.

II. It Is a great Error, the making a difference between the Wit and the
Judgment: For, in truth, the Judgment is nothing else but the Brightness of
Wit, which penetrates into the very bottom of Things, observes all that ought
to be observed there, and descries what seemed to be imperceptible. From whence
we must conclude, That it is the Extention and Energy of this Light of Wit, that
produces all those Effects, usually ascribed to Judgment.

III. All Men may be allowed to give a good Character of their Hearts (or
Inclinations) but no body dares to speak well of his own Wit.

IV. Polite Wit consists in nice, curious, and honest Thoughts.

V. The G^llantry of Wit consists in Flattery well couched.

VI. It often happens, that some things offer themselves to our Wit, which are
naturally finer and better, than is possible for a Man to make them by the
Additions of Art and Study.

VII. Wit is always made a Cully to the Heart.

VIII. Many People are acquainted with their own Wit, that are not acquainted
with their own Heart.

IX. It is not in the power of Wit, to act a long while the Part of the Heart.

X. A Man of Wit would be sometimes miserably at a loss, but for the Company of
Fools.

XI. A Man of Wit may sometimes be a Coxcomb; but a Man of Judgment never can.

XII. The different Ways or Methods for compassing a Design, come not so much
from the Quickness and Fertility of an industrious Wit, as dim-^ighted
Understanding, which makes us pitch upon every fresh Matter that presents it
self to our groping Fancy, and does not furnish us with Judgment sufficient to
discern at first sight, which of them is best for our Purpose.

XIII. The Twang of a Man's Native Country, sticks by him as much in his Mind
and Disposition, as it does in his Tone of Speaking.

XIV. Wit serves sometimes to make us play the Fool with greater Considence.

XV. Shallow Wits are apt to censure every thing above their own Capacity.

XVI. It Is past the Power of Imagination it self, to invent so many distant
Contrarieties, as there are naturally in the Heart of every Man.

XVII. No body is so well acquainted with himself, as to know his own Mind at
all times.

XVIII. Every body complains of his Memory, but no body of his Judgment.

XIX. There is a kind of general Revolution, not more visible in the turn it
gives to the Fortunes of the World, than it is in the Change of Men's
Understandings, and the different Relish of Wit.

XX. Men often think to conduct and govern themselves, when all the while they
are led and managed; and while their Understanding aims at one thing, their
Heart insensibly draws them into another.

XXI. Great Souls are not distinguished by having less Passion, and more
Virtue; but by having nobler and greater Designs than the Vulgar.

XXII. We allow few Men to be either Witty or Reasonable, besides those who are
of our own Opinion.

XXIII. We are as much pleased to discover another Man's Mind, as we are
discontented to have our own found out.

XXIV. A straight and well-contriv'd Mind, finds it easier to yield to a
perverse one, than to direct and manage it.

XXV. Coxcombs are never so troublesome, as when they pretend to Wit.

XXVI. A little Wit with Discretion, tires less at long-run, than much Wit
without Judgment.

XXVII. Nothing comes amiss to a great Soul; and there is as much Wisdom in
bearing other People's Defects, as in relishing their good Qualities.

XXVIII. It argues a great height of Judgment in a Man, to discover what is in
another's Breast, and to conceal what is in his own.

XXIX. If Poverty be the Mother of Wickedness, want of Wit must be the Father.

XXX. * A Mind that has no Balance in it self, turns insolent, or abject, out
of measure, with the various Change of Fortune.

XXXI. * Our Memories are frail and treac^erous; and we think many excellent
things, which for want of making a deep impression, we can never recover
afterward. In vain we hunt for the straggling Idea, and rummage all the
Solitudes and Retirements of our Soul, for a lost. Thought, which has left no
Track or Footsteps behind it: The swift Offspring of the Mind is gone; it is
dead as soon as born; nay, often proves abortive in the moment it was
conceived* The only way therefore to retain our Thoughts, is to ^asten them in
Words* and chain them in Writing.

XXXII. * A Man is never so great a Dunce by Nature, but Love, Malice, or
Necessity, will supply him with some Wit.

XXXIII. * There is a Defect which is almost unavoidable in great Inventors; it
is the Custom of such earnest and powerful Minds, to do wonderful Things in the
beginning; but shortly after, to be overborn by the Multitude and Weight of
their own Thoughts; then to yield and cool by little and little, and at last
grow weary, and even to loath that, upon which they were at first the most
eager. This is the wonted Constitution of great Wits; such tender things are
those exalted Actions of the Mind; and so hard it is for those Imaginations,
that can run swift and mighty Races, to be able to travel a long and constant
Journey. The Effects of this Infirmity have been so remarkable, that we have
certianly lost very many Inventions, after they have been in part fashioned, by
the mere Languishing and Negligence of their Authors.

Moderation.
I. MOderation in Prosperity, generally springs either from apprehension of the
Shame and Reproach that attends Passion and Excess, or ehe fear of losing our
Fortunes and Advantages.

II. Moderation is like Temperance; a Man would be well enough pleased to eat
more, but only he is afraid of a Surfeit.

III. The Moderation of some fortunate Men, is the effect of a smooth and
composed Temper, owing to the Calm of their Prosperity.

IV. Moderation is a fear of falling into that Envy and Contempt, which those
who grow giddy with their good Fortune, most justly draw upon themselves; it is
a vain O^tentation of the Greatness of our Mind: And in short, the Moderation
of Men in the most exalted Fortunes, is a Desire to be thought above those
Things that have raised them so high.

V. Moderation is represented as a Virtue, with a design to restrain the
Ambition of Great Men; and to persuade those of a meaner Condition, to be
contented with a less proportion of Merit and Fortune.

Merit, Worth.
I. PEople that are conceited of their own Merits, do sometimes take a pride in
being unfortunate, in order to persuade themselves and others, that they are
considerable enough to be the Envy and the Mark of Fortune.

II. The undeceiving a Man strongly possessed with an Opinion of his own Merit,
is the very same ill Office that was done the Fool at Athens, who fancied all
the Ships that came into Harbor were his own.

III. The surest Evidence of true Merit, is when a Man is commended even by
those that envy him most.

IV. The Merit of some People consists in saying and doing useful Fooleries;
and when they are once taken out of this Road, you quite spoil them, and they
are good for nothing.

V. Princes put a value upon Men as well as Money; and we are forced to take
them both, not according to their true Worth, but according to what they are
stamped for.

VI. Nature gives Merit and Parts, but it is Fortune improves and exerts them.

VII. The Address and Industry of improving moderate Abilities to the best
Advantage, steal away, if I may so speak, our Esteem, and bring a Man
oftentimes in to greater Reputation than real Merit.

VIII. Real Merit gains a Man the Esteem of good Men; but it is only Fate that
gains him that of the Multitude.

IX. The Appearances of Merit are oftener Rewarded than Merit it self.

X. There are a great many Men valued in the World, who have no other Merit,
than Vices profitable to Commerce and Society.

XI. A Man's Merit has its particular Season, as well as Fruits.

XII. A Man's Palate (or discerning Faculty) lowers proportionably to his Merit.

XIII. As much as the World is inclined to think ill of one another, we see
them oftener favorable to false Merit, than injurious to true.

XIV. Some Men are like Ballads, which are in vogue but for a while.

XV. A Noble Birth, or a Great Fortune, proclaims Merit, and makes it the more
conspicuous.

Nature.
I. MOst young People think often to follow Nature, when they are only
unpolished and ill-bred.

II. Nothing hinders Men so much from being plain and natural, as the straining
themselves to be thought so.

III. Nature was given to exercise the Philosophers, like some dark intricate
Riddle; every one makes his own Sense the Key, and out of that contrives his
own System. He that by his Principles explains most Difficulties, may be
allowed thus far to value himself, That he has hit upon the most probable
Opinion.

IV. Something of one's Temper always enters into the best formed Designs; and
Nature is never so much reduced, but that the keeps as much Right over our
Actions, as we can take over her Motions.

V. * It is a wonderful thing how the very Force of Nature will exert it self,
in the meanest and the weakest of Creatures, in cases of extreme Necessity and
Danger.

VI. * The different Abilities of Men, which we call Wisdom, or Prudence, for
the Conduct of public Affairs, or private Life, grow directly out of that
little Grain of Intellect, or good Sense, which they bring with them into the
World; and that the Defect of it in Men, comes from some want in their
Conception, or Birth. And though this may be improved, or impaired, in some
degree, by Accidents of Education, Study, Conversation, or Business; yet it
cannot go beyond the reach of its Native Force, no more than Life can, beyond
the Period to which it was destined, by the Strength or Weakness of the Seminal
Virtue.

VII. It Is impossible to renounce Nature, and to raise our selves above the
Condition God has placed us in. We shall see a Wise Man not able to defend
himself from Humor and Folly; an Hero feeble, full of Defects, and as much a
Man as they which are below him: For, in truth, there are no Great Men, if we
compare 'em one with another; but they are in themselves weak, unequal, and
deficient, in some part or other.

VIII. Nothing is durable, that is not suited to Nature. Too austere a
Philosophy, makes few wise Men; too rigorous a Government, few good Subjects;
too harsh a Religion, few religious Souls; I mean, that will long continue so.

Nobility, Gentility.
I. THere cannot be a meaner thing, than to take advantage of one's Quality and
Greatness, to ridicule and insult over those of an inferior Condition.

II. They that are so ridiculous as to value themselves merely upon their
Quality, do in a manner slight that very thing that gave them their Quality;
since it is only the V^rtue of their Ancestors that first ennobled their Blood.

III. The great Mistake of most Noblemen, is, That they look upon their
Nobility as a Character given them by Nature.

IV. True Quality, and that which is the Gift of Nature, is only the Noble
Advantages and Endowments of the Body and Mind.

V. The more ancient that Nobility is which we derive from our Ancestors, the
more suspicious and uncertain it is; and therefore the less valuable. The Son
of a Marshall of France, who by his own Worth has raised himself to this
Office, should, in all Reason, be more Noble, than the Posterity that descend
from him. The Spring of Honor is yet fresh in the Son's Veins, and kept up by
the Example of the Father; b^t the further it runs from the Fountain, the
weaker and drier it grows.

VI. We are surpised every Day, to see some Men, that are come from the Scum
of the People, raise themselves to great Fortunes and Honors; and we commonly
mention this with Scorn and Reproach; as if all the Great Families in the World
had not as mean a Beginning, if we would but take pains to trace them back to
their Originals.

VII. * A bragging Fool that is raised out of a Dunghill, and sets up for a Man
of Quality, is ashamed of nothing in the World but his own Father.

VIII. It is with the Original of Nations, as with Genealogies of private
Persons; these are purely imaginary; those show themselves in Fables. From
whence it comes to pass, that the Ancients held themselves obliged to some
Deity or other, either upon the account of descending from it, or else because
they acknowledged a particular Care and Protection from its Tutelary Virtue.

IX. * It is the Saying of a Great Man, That if we could trace our Descents, we
should find all Slaves to come from Princes, and all Princes from Slaves: But
Fortune has turned all Things topsie-turvy, in a long Story of Revolutions. But
it matters not whence we come, but what we are; nor is it any more to our
Honor, the Glory of our Predecessors, than it is to their Shame, the
Wickedness of their Posterity.

X. It is a great Advantage for a Man to be Nobly descended; but it is still a
greater one for him to be such by his own Merit, that People never enquire
whether he be a Gentleman or no.

XI. * N^bility of Birth, commonly abates Industry; and he that is not
industrious, envies him that is. Beside, Noble Persons cannot go much higher;
and he that stands at a stay, when others rise, can hardly avoid Motions of
Envy.

XII. * A Monarchy, where there is no Nobility at all, is a pure absolute
Tyranny; for Nobility attempers Sovereignty, and draws the Eyes of the People
somewhat aside from the Royal Line.

XIII. * Those that are first raised to Nobility, are commonly more virtuous,
but less innocent, than their Descendants; for there is rarely any Rising, but
by a commixture of good and evil Arts.

Obstinacy, Contradiction.
I. STubborness and Obstinacy, are the Effects of a shallow Wit; for we can
never believe, what we cannot apprehend.

II. Men of mean Capacities, but especially your half-witted Fellows and
pedantick Scholars, are most apt to be stiff and peremptory. None but Manly
Souls can unsay what they have said, and forsake an Error, when they find
themselves on the wrong side.

III. Contradiction should awaken our Attention and Care, and not our Passion:
Our Interest ought to be no other than that of Truth; and therefore we must
rather hear those that oppose it, than avoid them, which is little better than
yielding the Victory.

IV. There can be no arguing with a Man obstinate in his Opinion; for when he
has once contradicted, his Mind is barred up against all Light and better
Information; Arguments, though never so well grounded, do but provoke him, and
make him even afraid to be convinced of the Truth.

VI. The generality of Men do not make it their Business to be in the right, so
much as to be thought so: This makes them stickle so stiffly for their own
Opinions, even when they know and are satisfied, they are false.

VII. The Obstinacy of some People in contradicting Opinions generally
received, is the effect rather of Pride than Ignorance: Those that are on the
right side, have got the upper hand, and they scorn to take up with the lower.

VIII. No Men are so often in the wrong, as those who pretend to be always in
the right.

Passions.
I. PAssion often makes a Fool of a witty Man, and no less frequently a witty
Man of a Fool.

II. It is with our Passions, as it is with Fire and Water; they are good
Servants, and bad Masters, and Sub-minister to the best and worst of Purposes
at once.

III. The continuance of our Passions, is no more in our own Power, than the
Term of our Lives.

IV. Those great and glittering Actions which dazzle the Eyes of most Men; and
are represented by Politicians, as the Effects of great Wisdom and Design, are
indeed generally influenced by litte Humors and Passions. Thus the War of
Augustus and Anthony, for the purpose, which is ascribed to the violent
Ambition each of them had to get the Mastery of the whole World, was
occasioned, perhaps, by a little rise of Jealousy between them.

V. Passions are Nature's never-failing Rhetoric, and the only Orators that
can master our Affections. The plainest Man inspired by a Passion, persuades
much better than the most eloquent, who is inspired by none.

VI. There is in all Passions a kind of Injustice and Self-interest, which
makes them very dangerous to be followed; and we ought not to trust them, even
when they appear most fair and reasonable.

VII. There is in our Hearts a constant Generation of Passions; so that the
Destruction of one, is generally the Production of another.

VIII. As wary and cautious Men are to conceal their Passions, under the
specious Dress of Honor and Piety, this Disguise is too thin; and they seldom
fail to break through it at one time or other.

IX. The Passions often give birth to others of a Nature quite contrary to
their own: Avarice sometimes brings forth Poodigality; and Prodigality,
Avarice: Some are Resolute out of Weakness, and Bold out of Timorousness and
Fear.

X. All Passions are nothing else but the different degrees of Heat and Cold in
the Blood.

XI. The Victory we gain sometimes over our Passions, is owing to their
Weakness, more than our own Strength.

XII. The Health of the Mind is as frail and uncertain, as that of the Body:
And though a Man may seem free from all manner of Passions, yet is he in so much
danger of falling into them, as one in a perfect state of Health, is of having
a fit of Sickness.

XIII. It is one of the greatest Secrets of Nature, that Men's Passions are
more capable of being raised to higher degrees in Companies, than in Solitude;
and that we sooner grieve, fear, rejoice, love, admire, etc. when we behold
many others so moved, than when we are alone.

XIV. No Man can guess in cold Blood, what he may do in a Passion.

XV. While our Heart is ruffled by the remains of a Passion, it is more
susceptible of a new one, than if it was entirely settled.

XVI. Those that have had great Passions, find themselves perpetually happy and
unhappy, in being cured of them.

XVII. We are to blame not to distinguish between the several sorts of Anger;
for there is a Light, and, as it were, a harmless one, which results from a
warm Complexion; and another exceeding vicious, which is, in strict speaking,
the Rage and Fierceness of Pride.

XVIII. Nature, it seems, has treasured up, in the bottom of our Hearts, some
secret Talents and Abilities, which Passions only have the privilege to
improve; and which, upon some Exigencies, gives us a surer prospect of Things,
than ever Art could do.

XIX. It is is as unseasonable to recompense in a ^it of Joy, as to punish in a
Passion.

XX. * That Mind is truly happy, which can entirely deny some Passions, and
only unbend it self to some others.

XXI. The Soul is tired to be always in the same posture, and at a long run, it
would lose all its Vigor, if it were not awakened by the Passions.

Penetration.
I. PEnetration is so Conjuring like, that it flatters our Vanity more than any
other Accomplishment of the Mind.

II. The greatest Fault of a Penetrating Wit, is not coming short of the Mark,
but overshooting it.

III. There is always a part of our Thought that stays behind; we very seldom
communicate it entirely; and it is by Penetration, more than knowledge of Words,
that we enter absolutely into the Conception of others.

Philosophy.
I. PHilosophy easily conquers and triumphs over past and future Evils; but the
present ones triumph over Philosophy.

II. The Contempt of Riches in Philosophers, was only a desire of vindicating
their own Merit, and taking a Revenge upon the Injustice of Fortune, by
undervaluitg those Enjoyments which she had not given them: This was a Secret
to secure them from the Disparagement of Poverty, and a By-way to arrive to
that Consideration and Esteem, which they could not compass by Riches.

III. The Philosophers, and Seneca among the rest, did not remove Men's Faults
by their Precepts, but only improved them by the setting up of Pride: So that
their Virtues (as a Father of the Church has it) were but glittering Vices.

IV. * There is no Condition that does not sit well upon a wise Man: For this
Reason, I shall never quarrel with a Philosopher for living in a Palace; but
shall, at the same time, not excuse him, if he cannot content himself with a
Cottage. I shall not be scandalized to behold him in the Apparel of Kings,
provided he have not their Ambition.

Pleasures.
I. ALl our Actions have no real Object but Pleasure; and though we take
different ways, yet we see all Mankind incline to the same end; without that,
the most laborious Persons would live languishing and idle: It Is that alone
which makes us active, which moves all Bodies; it is that which gives motion to
all the Universe. He that searches for Reputation in the Field, and breaks
through all the Dangers of Fire and Bullets to obtain Honor, would not expose
himself to the least Danger, if he did not expect that Satisfaction he finds in
himself, or that which is derived from Fame: And he that grows old in the
Closer, amongst a parcel of moldy, Moth-eaten Books, would not employ the
least pain, in the acquisition of Sciences, if he did not receive from it some
Pleasure in the pursuit.

II. A Man that knows how to mingle Pleasures with Business, is never possessed
of them; he quits them, and retakes them at his Will; and in the habit which he
has made of them, he rather finds an unweariness of Spirits, than a dangerous
Charm that might corrupt him. It is not so with these austere Persons, who by
an alteration of Temper, come to taste of Voluptuousness, they are immediately
enchanted with its Sweetness; and having nothing but an Aversion for the
Austerity of their past Lives, abandon themselves to the first Delights they
meet with.

III. * It Is not so hard to counterfeit Joy in the depth of Affliction, as to
dissemble Mirth in the Company of Fools.

IV. The excess of Delights palls our Appetites oftener than it pleases.

V. It is much better to seek every thing that can please in any Man, than to
seek for a Man that can please in every thing; for a Man in all respects
agreeable, is so great a rarity, that it is no Wisdom to hunt after that we are
hardly ever like to find.

VI. We are so fond of every thing that is fresh and uncommon, that we take a
secret Pleasure, and find entertainment even in the sight of the dismallest and
most tragical Accidents; and that partly because they are new, and partly from
a Principle of Ill Nature that is in us.

VII. The continual Society, even of the best Men, becomes at length tiresome,
or insensible; which makes those Persons that have a delicate Apprehension of
Pleasure, voluntarily remove themselves from one another, to avoid the Disgust
that threatens them, and to have a better Taste of the Charms of Conversation,
by a new Vigor which they bestow upon their Thoughts.

VIII. There is no Man but is sometimes at a loss with himself; the Wisest are
weary of themselves, after they have been weary of others.

IX. We never fail to be tiresome to our selves, by too long and too serious a
Commerce with our own Thoughts. He that intends to live happy, must make but
few Reflections upon Life; nay, he must often depart, as it were, from himself;
and amidst the Pleasures which exterior Objects furnish him with, steal from
the Knowledge of his own Miseries.

Pride.
I. PRide always indemnifies it self one way or other; and loses nothing, no
not in Self-denial.

II. When Pride has appeared in all its Shapes, and played all the Parts of
Human Life, as if it were tired with its own Disguises and Transformations, it
pulls off the Mask; and showing its true Face at last, is known by its
Insolence; so that, properly speaking, Insolence is the breaking out, and
Demonstration of Pride.

III. It Is only because we are proud our selves, that we complain of, and
cannot bear with the Pride of others.

IV. Pride is much the ^ame in all Men, as to the Degree of it, and differs
only by the various Methods of exerting it.

V. The Wisdom of Nature is to be admired, not only in sitting the Organs of
the Body, for our Happiness and Convenience, but also in bestowing Pride upon
Men, to keep their Sight from the troublesome View of their own Imperfections.

VI. There is oftentimes more Pride than Goodness in our Reproofs; and we chide
other People for their Faults, not so much with design to correct them, as to
make them believe that we our selves have none.

VII. Blindness and Folly are the most pernicious Effects of Pride; for they
both cherish and increase the Vice, by concealing from us those Remedies, that
might conduce to the Cure of our Miseries, and correct our Excesses and
Extravagances.

VIII. Nothing ^latters our Pride so much, as the Intimacy and Con^idence of
Great Persons; for we are apt to think our selves admitted to these by our own
Desert; and never consider that it happens much oftener, from a particular
Vanity in their Humors, or their not being able to keep their own Counsel.

IX. * All proud Men, over and above the Stroke of a Divine Judgment, are
miserable, even in themselves, and no Circumstances in the World can ever make
them otherwise. Their Appetites are in^atiable, and their Hearts consequently
never at rest; whether it be Wealth, Power, Honor, Popular Esteem, or whatever
else they pretend to: They envy, and are envied: It Is impossible for them to be
at rest, without enjoying what it is impossible for them to attain; they live,
gaping after more, and in a perpetual fear of losing what they have already:
The higher they are raised, the giddier they are, the more slippery is their
Standing, and the deeper they Fall. They are never well, so long as any thing
is above them; and their Ambition carries them to the supplanting of their
Masters and Makers; when yet, by a most ridiculous Contradiction, they lie
effectually, in the same instant, at the Mercy of the Men they most despise.

X. Humility is very often the putting on of a Submission, by which Men hope to
bring other People to submit to them. It is a mere artificial sort of Pride,
which debases it self with a design of being exalted: And though this Vice
transform it self into a thousand several Shapes, yet it is never more
effectually disguised, or more capable of imposing upon the World, than when
concealed under a Form of Humility.

XI. A readiness to believe Ill, without a previous Examination, proceeds from
Laziness and Pride: We are pleased to find others to blame, and loath to give
our selves the trouble of enquiring, how far, and whether they are so, or not.

XII. Pride, that so often inspires Men with Envy, does sometimes moderate it
too.

XIII. Pride generally increases by the Parings of other Faults.

XIII. The same Pride that disposes us to condemn the Faults we think our
selves free from, inclines us to undervalue the Good Qualities we want.

XIII. The Compassion we express for our Enemies Misfortunes, is sometimes more
the effect of Pride, than Goodnature, and only a Desire to let them know that
we are above them.

XIV. Pride, as well as other Passions, is unaccountable and humoursome. We are
ashamed to own our being Jealous, when we are so; and yet we value our selves
upon having been so, and for being capable of being so.

XV. It is as good and commendable to be proud with one's self, as it is
ridiculous with others.

XVI. Magnanimity is a bold Stroke of Pride, which makes a Man Master of
himself, in order to make him so of every thing else.

XVII. A Man of Wit, that is naturally proud, loses nothing of his Pride and
Stiffness, by being low in the World; but, on the contrary, if any thing can
soften his Humor, and make him more courteous and sociable, it must be a
little Prosp^rity.

Raillery, Laughter.
I. RAillery is harder to be born than Injuries, because it is an allowable
thing to be concerned at Injuries; but a ridiculous one to be angry at a Jest.

II. Raillery is an Injury disguised full of Malice and Ill Nature, which is
endured with so much less Patience, as it shows, that they who use it, would be
thought above us.

III. Princes and Persons in eminent Stations, would do well to be exceedingly
reserved, as to this part of Conversation: The Resentments of their Raillery,
are the more dangerous, because kept more concealed, and that Men are ever
contriving some private ways of Revenge for it.

IV. Raillery very often betrays want of Wit; Men call it in to their Relief,
when they have nothing of Sense and Argument le^t to say for themselves.

V. * No Man was ever ridiculous to others, that laughed at himself first.

VI. There are small Defects which we are content to abandon to the Censure and
Raillery of others; such Defects as those we ought to choose, to jeer other
People upon.

Reason.
I. WE have not Strength enough to follow our Reason, so far as it would carry
us.

II. That Man has but little Reason left him, who is past hopes of finding
Reason from others.

III. He is not to be accounted Reasonable, who stumbles upon Reason by chance;
but he that knows, and can judge, and has a true relish of it.

IV. Our Reason is much better employed, in bearing up, and allaying present
Misfortunes, than in fore-casting future ones.

V. A Man never wishes for any thing very eagerly, which he wishes for only by
the Dictates of Reason.

VI. No Man can be perfectly just and good, without a great measure of Sense
and Right Reason, which will always incline him to choose the juster Side, in
every Action of his Life. And it is a foolish thing to extol wicked Men and
Knaves, as the World commonly does, for Persons of Wit and Understanding: Such
People have only one part of that sound Sense, which is the reason why they are
successful upon some Occasions, but imperfect and at a loss upon a thousand
others.

VII. As nothing betrays greater Weakness and want of Reason, than to submit
one's Judgment to another Man's, without any Examination or Consideration of
our own; so nothing argues a great Spirit, and true Wisdom, more than the
submitting to Almighty God, with absolute and implicit Faith, and believing
whatever he says upon the single Anthority of his own Word.

VIII. We attribute more to Reason, than is her due; she frequently usurps what
of right belongs to our Constitution, and would have but few Advantages, if she
had no more than are strictly her own.

IX. Reason does seldom cure any Passion, but rather strikes in with the
strongest; for there is no Passion, but is authorized and countenanced by some
Reason or other:

X. Good and Right Reason is a Light in the Mind, by which it discerns things
as they are in themselves: But in this World, this Light is encompassed and
darkened by a thousand Mists and Clouds.

XI. Good Sense and Reason ought to be the Vmpire of all Rules, both Ancient
and Modern; whatever does not agree with this Standard, is false.

XII. * The same Faculty of Reason, which gives Mankind the great Advantage and
Prerogative over the rest of the Creation, seems to make the greatest Default
in Human Nature; and subjects it to more Troubles, Miseries, or at least
Disquiets of Life, than any of its FellowCreatures. It Is this furnishes us with
such variety of Passions, and consequently of Wants and Desires, which no
others feel; and these followed by infinite Designs and endless Pursuits, and
improved by that Restlesness of Thought, which is natural to most Men, gives us
a Condition of Life, suitable to that of our Birth; so that as we are born
crying, we live complaining, and die disappointed.

XIII. * Since we cannot escape the Pursuit of Passions, and Perplexity of
Thoughts which our Reason furnishes us, there is no way left, but to endeavor
all we can, either to subdue, or to divert them.

XIV. Superstition renders a Man a Fool, and Skepticism is enough to make him
mad. To believe all things, is above Reason; to give credit to nothing, is
below it.

XV. Most Men rather choose implicitly, than to put themselves to the expense of
Judging; without instructing themselves in the nature of Things, they take
those to be the best, that have the most Examples, and the greatest Crowd of
Admirers: They don't follow Reason, but only the Resemblance of it; and stiffly
retain their Errors, because they are countenanced by those of other Men.

XVI. It is much better for a Man to fall naturally into the good Sense of
others by his Reason, than to make his Humors received by force.

XVII. * There are times when Sense may be unseasonable, as well as Truth.

XVIII. Common Sense is of the Growth of every Country; and all People who
unite into Societies, and form Governments, will, in time, make prudent Laws of
all kinds; since it is not Strength of Imagination, nor Subtilty of Reasoning,
but Constancy in making Observations upon the several Ways of Working of Human
Nature, that first stored the World with Moral Truths, and put Mankind upon
forming such Rules of Practice, as best suited with these Observations.

Reputation.
I. WHat an ill Name soever a Man has got in the World, yet it is almost always
in his own Power to recover his Reputation.

II. The great Characters of being Men of Honor and Justice, are very often
grounded more upon Forms, and a Knack of appearing to be such, than any true
and solid Worth.

III. Those that have the Accomplishments essential to the making a good Man,
supposing they need no Art, neglect Formalities; act more according to Nature,
and consequently live more obscure and in the dark. For those that judge of
them, have something else to do than to examine them; and so they pronounce
Sentence only according to outward Appearances.

IV. Reputation would not be so highly valued, if we did but seriously
consider, how very unjust the generality of Men are, both in the giving and
taking it away. We should content our selves to deserve it by our
Good-behaviour; and when that Care is taken, not be over-anxious about the
Success.

V. The Vulgar value and extol Actions, and other Things, not only for their
Excellence, but more generally for the Uncommonness of them: And this gives
occasion to all the false Methods Men take to gain the Approbation of the World.

VI. A great Reputation, is a great Charge, very hard for a Man to acquit
himself well of; an obscure Life is more natural, and more easy.

VII. The first Step that a Man makes in the World, generally determines all
the rest, and is the Foundation of his Reputation, and best Presage of his
Fortune; and from the first Marches that he makes, those that have had
Experience, will tell how far he will advance. It Is then very necessary to make
this first Step with a great deal of Caution, and to signalize ones Entry by
something that is glorious and great.

VIII. A Great Man ought not to suffer the Depth of his Capacity to be founded,
if he will be always esteemed by the Vulgar: He ought, on the contrary, to
behave himself after such a manner, as never to discover all his Ability, and
that no Man may assign Limits to his Learning. For let a Man be never so
Learned, the Opinion we have of him, when we know him but by halves, goes
always farther than the Idea we conceive of him, when we are wholly acquainted
with him.

IX. Reputation is a Noise which strikes nothing but the Ear, and which cannot
make a sensible Impression upon a Noble Soul; it depends less upon our selves
than Fortune: But as it is impossible to acquire a general one; so the
possession of it would be absolutely unserviceable.

X. A Man who is sensible of his Force, and knows the Advantages of his Mind,
if he aspires to Glory, and will raise his Reputation, ought to dread, as a
Rock, his being suspected that he is gov^rn'd by others.

XI. Some People lose their Reputation, by being too eager in their Endeavors
to preserve it. This foolish Deportment, is ordinary with those, who being
suspected of any ill thing, make use of long passionate Speeches for their
Apology; for though they may be guiltless, yet the excess of Words they run into,
cannot but make us think the contrary.

XII. There is no Passion which makes People more unhappy than this, which
almost all Men entertain for a general Esteem and Reputation; for excepting
some Persons of truly Heroical Minds, who act only for the Satisfaction of
their Conscience, and perhaps too for the approbation of good Men, all the rest
do that for Noise, which ought to be done for Virtue; and suffer themselves to
be enchanted with the Shadow and Appearance of a Thing, whose real Body does
not so much as affect them.

XIII. Industry holds the Plac^ of the greatest Merit, and the Art of making
himself esteemed, oftener gives more Reputation than the thing it self.

XIV. * No Man can be said to be truly Great, that depends for his Reputation
upon the Opinion of the Multitude.

Self-Love.
I. SElf-Love, is the love of one's self, and of every thing else for one's
self: It makes Men Idolaters of themselves, and would make them Tyrants over
others, if they could prevail with Fortune to get the Power and Opportunities.
It never rests out of it self, and never dwells upon other Subjects, but, as
Bees do upon Flowers, to suck out what it thinks may be for its advantage.
Nothing is so violent as its Desires; nothing so secret as its Intrigues;
nothing so quick and ingenious as its Managements. Its Pliantness is past
description; its Transformations exceed the Poetical Metamorphosis, and its
Niceties the refining of Chemistry. One can neither fathom its depth, nor
pierce through the Darkness of its Abyss. Here it is quite out of the view of
the most penetrating and sagacious Eyes; here it turns to and fro in a thousand
insensible Shapes; here it is oftentimes invisible to it self; here it hatches
and breeds several Affections and Hatreds unknown to it self; and some of these
are so strange and monstrous, that when they come to the Birth, either it does
not know them, or is ashamed to own them. From this gross Mist, with which it
is over-cast, spring the ridiculous Opinions it has of it self; hence procced
all its Errors, Mistakes, and Fopperies concerning it self; hence it is, that
it thinks its Inclinations to be quite dead, when they are but lulled asleep;
that it fancies to have done running, when it does but rest; and that it
believes to have lost its Appetite, when it has only filled its Stomach for the
present. And yet this thick and gloomy Darkness, which hinders it from seeing
it self, is no obstruction to its sight of any thing else; (in which it is like
our Eyes, which perceive all, and yet are blind only with regard to
themselves;) for in its greatest Concerns, where the violence of its Desires
summon all its Attention, it sees, feels, and hears; it imagines, suspects,
penetrates, and guesses every thing, even to that degree, that a Man is apt to
think that each of its Passions has a kind of Witchcraft particular to it.
Nothing is so strong and close as its Ti^s, which it strives in vain to break
off, at the view of the impending Calamities; nevertheless, it ^ff^cts
sometimes in a moment, and without Pains, what it could never accomplish with
the most powerful and continued Endeavors of many Years. From whence we may
likely conclude, That its Desires are kindled by its self, rather than by the
Worth or Beauty of its Objects; and that its own Palate gives them both the
Value that makes them precious, and the Gloss that sets them off: So that it
follows its own self, when it seems to pursue any thing else. Self-love is all
made up of Contraries; it is Imperious and Dutiful, High-flown and Humble,
Sincere and Counterfeit, Merciful and Cruel, Timorous and Bold. It has
different Inclinations, after the diversity of Tempers, which turn and devote
it sometimes to Riches, sometimes to Glory, sometimes to Pleasure; it alters
them according to the variety of our Age, Fortune, and Experience: It never
matters whether it has many, or but one, because it divides it self to many, or
gathers and collects it self to one, when either its Interest or Fancy requires
it. It is unsteady; and besides the Alterations it receives from external
Things, there are a thousand that spring from it self. It is inconstant by
Fickleness, by Love, by Novelty, and by Nauseating and Dislike. It is
capricious and humoursome: Sometimes with incredible Hardships it snatches at
Things, not only unprofitable, but even hurtful and offensive, which it hankers
after only because it has a mind to it. It is unaccountable and fantastical; it
often busies it self about the most vain and frivolous Employments; it delights
in the most insipid Things, and keeps its Loftiness and Pride in the vilest
Drudgery. It is in all states of Life, as in all sorts of Conditions; it lives
everywhere; it lives upon every thing, sometimes upon nothing. It is contented
with the Enjoyment of Things, and the Want of them. It sides with its Foes,
follows their Designs, and, which is wonderful, it hates it self, hatches its
own Rnin, and pushes on its Overthrow. To sum up all, All its care is to
subsist; provided it be, it is content to be its own Enemy. We ought not
therefore to think it strange, to see it associate with the roughest Ansterity
and hardest Mortification, and side with them to destroy it self; for it is no
sooner cast down in one place, but it rises up again in another. When it seems
to forsake its Pleasure, it does but suspend or alter it; nay, when it is so
conquered, that Men would believe themselves to be rid of it, it springs up
again, and triumphs in its Overthrow. This is the true Picture of Self-love, of
which the whole Life is but a strong and long Agitation. The Sea is a sensible
and lively Image of it; for you may find in the continual Ebbs and Flows of its
Waves, a faithful Representation of the boisterous and turbulent Succession of
Self-love's everlasting and endless Movements.

II. Self-love is the greatest Flatterer in the World.

III. Self-love bears less patiently the Condemnation of our Tastes or (
Inclinations) than of our Opinions.

IV. The Fondness or Indifference that Philosop^ers expressed for Life, was but
a particular Tang of the Love of themselves, for which there is no more reason
to be given, than for the variety of Palates, or the choice of Colors in some
People.

V. The first motion of Joy that we resent at the Happiness and Preferment of
our Friends, does seldom proceed either from our Goodnature, or the Kindness
we have for them, but generally from Self-love, which flatters us that our Turn
of being happy is coming, or that we shall reap some B^nefit from their
Prosperity.

VI. As if the Power of transforming it self were small, Self-love does
frequently transform its Objects too, and that after a most wonderful manner;
for it not only disguises them so artificially, as to deceive it self, but it
perfectly alters the Nature and Condition of the Things themselves. Thus when
any Person acts in opposition to us, when he crosses and persecutes us,
Self-love passes Sentence upon his Actions, with the utmost strictness and
severity of Justice; it aggravates all his Imperfections so, as to make them
look monstrous and horrible; and sets his Good Qualities in so ill a Light, as
to make them appear more disagreeable and nauseous than his very Failings. And
yet as soon as the same Person ceases to be our Enemy, or that any of our
Interests brings him to Reconciliation and Favor, the Satisfaction we receive,
presently restores his Merit, and allows it that Luster, our Aversion so lately
robbed it of. His Ill Qualities vanish out of sight, and his Perfections appear
in a greater Splendor; nay, we summon all our Indulgence to excuse and
justifi^ the Quarrel he formerly had against us. Though this Truth be evidenced
by every Passion, yet none demonstrates it so sensibly as Love: For we see a
Lover full of Rage and Despair, at the Neglect or Infidelity of his Fondling,
contrive and meditate for his Revenge, whatever his violent Passions suggests
him. Nevertheless, no sooner has a kind Smile of his Darling calmed his
boisterous Resentments, but his Joy and Rapture pronounces this Beauty
innocent; he accuses himself alone, and condemns nothing but his own Condemning
her before; and by this miraculous Power of Self-love, he takes away the
Blemish and Odiousness of his Mistress's Proceedings, he clears her of the
Crime, and lays it upon himself.

VII. The love of our selves makes our Friends appear more or less deserving,
in proportion to the delight we take in them; and the Estimate we make of their
Worth, depends upon the manner of their conversing with us.

VIII. One would think, that Self-love were over-reached by Goodnature and
Liberality; and that a Man forgets himself, when he promotes the Advantages of
others: Nevertheless, this is the most effectual way to gain our ends; it is
lending on Usury, under the pretense of giving freely. In a word, it is a nice
and dexterous Way of winning over the Affections of every body.

IX. There is no Passion wherein Self-love is so predominant, as in that of
Love: And Men are always more disposed to sacrifice all the Ease of them they
love, than to part with their own.

X. We feel and resent both our good and ill Fortune, in proportion to our
Self-love.

XI. Self-love makes more Men Cruel, than natural Sternness and a rough Temper.

XII. Self-love is often cheated by its own self; for when it considers its own
Interests, it so wholly overlooks the Interests of others, as thereby to lose
all the Advantage that might be^ made by the exchange of Kindnesses and good
Offices.

XIII. A Man is but little the better for liking himself, when no body else
likes him; for an immoderate Love of one's self, is very often chastifed by
Contempt from others.

XIV. Self-love, according as it is rightly or otherwise understood and
applied, is the Cause of all the Moral Virtues and Vices in the World.

XV. That Prudence which is made use of in the good Management of Men's
Affairs, is only a wise and quick-sighted Self-love, whose contrary is
Inconsideration and Blindness.

XVI. Though according to that Position, we may rightly conclude, That Men in all
their Actions, keep still an eye to their own Interest; yet does it not follow,
that there is no such thing left in the World, as Justice and Honesty. Men may
govern themselves by commendable and honest Interests; and it is the just
Discretion of a well-regulated Self-love, that makes a Good or an Honest Man.

XVIII. The Love of our selves inclines us to look upon all the Pleasures and
Happiness of Life as things that we have a right to call ours; and upon all the
Evils and Calamiti^s, as things fo^eign and unnatural, and such as are Wrongs
and Hardships upon us. This gives the occasion to all our Expostulations and
Complaints.

Sincerity, Dissimulation.
I. SIncerity is the disclosing and opening of one's Heart: This is hardly to
be found in any body; and what we commonly look upon to be so, is only a more
cunning and shrewd ^ort of Dissimulation, to insinuate our selves into the
Confidence of other People.

II. The Vanity of talking of our selves, and the Desire of showing our
Failings on that side we are content they should be seen on, make up the
greatest part of our Sincerity.

III. Half-witted People can never be sincere.

IV. As much as we di^trust the Sincerity of those we converse with, yet still
we think they tell more Truth to us, than any body else.

V. * The ablest Men that ever were, have had all an openness and frankness of
Dealing, and a Name of Certainty and Veracity: But then they were like Horses
well managed; for they could tell extremely well, when to stop, and when to
turn; and at such times, when they thought the Case indeed required
Dissimulation, if then they used it, it came to pass that the former Opinion
spread abroad, of their Good Faith and Clearness of Dealing, made it almost
invisible.

VI. * Nakedness is indecent, as well in Mind as Body; and its no small
Reverence to Men's Manners and Actions, if they be not altogether open.

VII. * A general Custom of Dissimulation, is a Vice rising either of a natural
Falseness, or Fearfulness, or of a Mind that has some main Faults; which
because a Man must needs disguise, it makes him practice Dissimulation in other
things, lest his hand be out of ure.

VIII. * The best Composition and Temperature, is to have Openness in Fame and
Opinion, S^cre^ie in Habit, Dissimulation in seasonable Use, and a power to
Feign, if there be no Remedy.

IX. * It Is the Practice of the World for People in distress to serve God and
Man in several Respects, both alike; that is to say, when they lie under any
Affliction, or propose to themselves any considerable Advantages, and find they
have need of another's help; how do they Beg, Vow, Promise, Solicit, Swear,
Sign and Seal; and yet conscious to themselves all this while, that they
neither intend nor are able to make one Article good.

Silence, Speaking, Eloquence.
I. HE that distrusts himself, does best to keep Silence.

II. A Man never forgets things so effectually, as when he has talked himself
weary of them.

III. Some Men oftentimes choose to speak ill, rather than say nothing of
themselves.

IV. As it is proper for great Wits to speak little, and say much; so, on the
contrary, it is the Character of your Half-witted Fellows, to speak much, and
say little.

V. All the World knows well enough, how improper it is for a Man to talk too
much of his Wife; but very few consider how ridiculous it is to talk of one's
self.

VI. What a strange thing it is, that Men should remember the smallest
Particulars of their Affairs, when at the same time they forget how often they
have tired others with the tedious Recital of them.

VII. The exceeding Delight we take in talking of our selves, may well make us
suspect that we give but little to our Auditors.

VIII. There is as as much Eloquence in the Tone and Cadence of the Voice, in
the Eyes, and in the Air, of a Man, as in the very Choice of Words and
Expressions.

IX. True Eloquence consists in saying all that is fit to be said, and leaving
out all that is not.

X. * There is a particular way of Hearkening to one's self, very displeasing
in Conversation; for it is as ridiculous to hear one's self in Company, as to
talk when a Man is by himself.

XI. Talking all, is so great a Fault, both in Business and Conversation, that
any thing that is Good, is doubly so, if it be short; and we often gain by
brevity, what we should always have lost by being tedious.

XII. Some People are so blind, and ^latter themselves to so great a degree,
that they always believe what they wish, and think to make every body believe
what they have a mind to. Tho the Arguments they would persuade us with, are
never so poor and weak, yet their Prepossessions are so strong, that they think
they need only talk loud and big, and be very positive, to make all the World
of their Opinion.

XIII. True Eloquence is good Sense, delivered in a natural and unaffected Way.
That which must be set off with the artificial Ornaments of Tropes and Figures,
is acceptable only because the generality of Men are easily imposed upon, and
see things but by halves.

XIV. Great things must be delivered plainly an emphatical Tone would spoil
all. On the contrary, small things must be said nobly, nothing supports them
but the Expression, the Tone of the Voice, and the Countenance of him that
speaks.

XV. * Talkative and noisie Persons, are commonly vain and credulous withal:
For he that talks what he knows, will also talk oftentimes what he does not.

XVI. Some in their Discourse desire rather Commendations of Wit, in being able
to hold all Arguments, than of Judgment in discerni^g what is true; as if it
were a Praise to know what might be said, and not what should be thought:

Taste, Palate.
I. THe Change of a Man's Taste, or Palate, is as common, as that of his
Inclinations is rare.

II. A good Taste and Relish of Things, is more the effect of Judgment than Wit.

III. We forsake our Interests sooner than our Tastes.

Truth.
I. MOst Men do not speak Truth out of an Aversion to Lies; but generally out
of a secret Ambition of making what they say considerable, and their Words
respected as Oracles.

II. There is a disguised Falsuy, which is so lively a Representation of Truth,
that we should injure our Judgments, not to submit to the Cheat.

III. Errors sometimes have as long a run as the greatest Truths; because
being once received for Truth, Men admit whatever makes for them, with an
implicit Consent, and reject or overlook all that is capable of undeceiving
them.

IV. The Conversation of Men that are Peremptory and Dogmatical, is the most
troublesome thing in the World. The best Temper is always to be ready to submit
to the Truth, and receive it, let it come which way it will.

V. * Truth is the great Lesson of Reasonable Nature, both in Philosophy and
Religion; but nowadays Fallacies of Words, Equivocations, Mental
Reservations, and Double-Meanings, in a word, the Knack of Fast and Loose, pass
with a world of foolish People for Turns of Wit: but they are not aware all
this while, of the desperate Consequences of an Ill habit; and that the
Practice of Falsifying with Men, will lead us on insensibly to a Double-dealing
with GOD Himself.

VI. * Truth (as to the Knowledge of our own Nature) may perhaps come to the
Price of a Pearl, that shows best by Day; but it will not rise to the Price of
a Diamond, or Carbuncle, that shows best in varied Lights. A mixture of a Lie
does ever add Pleasure. Does any Man doubt, that if there were taken out of
Men's Minds, vain Opinions, flattering Hopes, false Valuations, and
ill-grounded Conceits, but it would leave the Minds of most Men poor shrunken
things, full of Melancholy and Indisposition, and unpleasing to themselves? But
to pass from Philosophical Truth, to the Truth of Civil Business, it will be
acknowledged even by those that practice it not, that clear and ^ound Dealing
is the Honor of Man's Nature; and that mixture of Falsehood, is like Allay in
Coin of Gold and Silver, which may make the Metal work the better, but it
embases it. There is no Vice that does so cover a Man with Shame, as to be
found false and perfidious: And therefore the Word Lie, is such a Disgrace, and
too odious a Charge, because, to say that a Man Lies, is as much as to say,
that he is brave toward God, and a Coward toward Men; for a Lie faces God, and
shrinks from Man.

Vanity.
I. THey that speak without Vanity, are contented with saying but little.

II. The Pomp and Solemnity of Funerals, is not so much to do Honor to the
Dead, as to gratify the Vanity of the Living.

III. If Vanity does not quite over-turn Virtue, yet it gives it terrible
Shocks, and keeps it in a tottering Condition.

IV. We cannot bear with other People's Vanity, because it is offensive to our
own.

V. The strongest Passions sometimes remit of their Violence; but Vanity tosses
and hurries Men continually.

VI. The generality of Men speak ill of other People, rather out of Vanity than
Malice.

VII. Vanity prevails with us to deny our selves, more than Reason can do.

VIII. We are all of us desirous to live in the Opinion of others, by a
fantastical sort of Life. If we are Generous, Honest, Temperate, etc. we
presently endeavor to acquaint others with it, to join those Virtues to that
external and imaginary Being of ours; we would sooner part with our best
Qualities, than with that Chimara; and could be content to be Cowards, so we
might get the Reputation of being Valiant.

IX. We do sometimes, out of Vanity or Decency, what we could do out of
Inclination and D^ty. How many a Man has caught his Death, by sitting up with
a sick Wife that he did not love!

X Vanity makes a Man find his Pleasure and Satisfaction, in speaking either
well or ill of himself: A modest Man never speaks of himself.

XI. Nothing so much betrays how ridiculous and shameful a Vice Vanity is, as
its not daring to show its self but under the appearance of its Contrary.

XII. Vanity, and the good Opinion we have of our selves, make us often think
that other People are proud and slight us, when there is no such thing. A
modest Person is never troubled with those Niceties.

Virtue, Vice.
I. GReat Vices are disguised under the Resemblance of eminent Virtues.

II. What we take for Virtue, is frequently nothing else but the Concurrence of
several Actions and Interests, gathered and brought together either by Fortune,
or our own Industry. It is not always from a Principle of Valor that Men are
Stout, or from a Principle of Modesty that Women are Chaste.

III. Some Vices are mingled with Virtue, just as poisonous Ingredients are put
sometimes into the best Medicines. A wise and skilful Hand tempers them
together, and makes excellent use of them against the Misfortunes that attend
Human Life.

IV. We generally run Vice down, and cry up Virtue, according to our Interests.

V. Nature seems at each Man's Birth to have marked out the Bounds of his
Virtue and Vices.

VI. Vices may be said to take us one after another, in the course of our
Lives, just as Innkeepers, where we lodge upon a Journey, do. And I question
whether the Experience of having been ill used, would prevail with us to change
our House, if we could travel the same Road over again.

VII. When Vices leave us, we flatter our selves that we leave them.

VIII. There are Relapses in the Distempers of the Soul, as well as in the
Diseases of the Body; and we often take that for a full Recovery, which is only
a Relaxation, or an Alteration of the Fit.

IX. The multiplicity of Vices, keep often a Man from giving himself over
entirely to one.

X. Some Persons are so extremely Trifling and inconsiderable, that they are as
far from real Faults, as they are from substantial Virtues.

XI. Virtue would seldom make such Advances, did not Vanity bear it company.

XII. Hypocrisy is a sort of Homage, which Vice pays to Virtu^.

XIII. There is no better Proof a Man's being truly Good, than his desiring to
be constantly under the Observation of good Men.

XIV. Though Men be never so wicked, yet they have not the Confidence to profess
themselves Enemies to Virtue, and when they persecute it, they either pretend
not to think it real, or forge some Faults to lay them to its charge.

XV. Some Good Qualities degenerate into Vices, when natural; and others again
are never perfect, when acquired; as for instance: A Man should learn
Good-Husbandry in his Estate, and his Confidences from Reason and Experience;
and, on the other side, Courage and Goodnature must be innate with us, or else
we can never have them in any good degree.

XVI. Our Qualities are doubtful and uncertain, and apt to be either Good or
Evil, according to our Circumstances.

XVII. When great Men think to impose upon the World by the show of Virtue, it
is of ill consequence to work them out of their Conceit; for by that means, we
take away that pique of Honor, which prompts them to do those good Actions,
that are agreeable to the Virtues they pretend to.

XVIII. * Old Sinners Continency, is much like Gamesters for swearing Play,
when they have (...) their Money.

XIX. * Many things that are innocent in themselves, are made criminal and
injurious by Misconstruction.

XX. * General Reformers are of all Men the most troublesome to themselves and
others.

XXI. A Man in much Business, does generally either make himself a Knave, or
else the World makes him a Fool.

XXII. It is with our Manners, as with our Healths; it is a degree of Virtue the
abatement of Vice, as it is a degree of Health the abatement of a Fit.

XXIII. * It is the Practice of the Multitude to bark at eminent Men, as little
Dogs do at Strangers; for they look upon other Men's Virtues, as the upbraiding
of their own Wickedness.

XXIV. * The Complaint of the present Times, is the general Complaint of all
Times; it ever has been so, and it ever will be so; not considering that the
Wickedness of the World is always the same, as to the degree of it, though it may
change Places, perhaps, and vary a little in the Matter.

XXV. * Wickedness comes on by degrees, as well as Virtue, and sudden leaps
from one Extreme to another, are unnatural Motions in the course of our Lives
and Humors.

XXVI. * Virtue is like precious Odours, most fragrant when they are incensed
or crushed; for Prosperity does best discover Vice; but Adversity bent exerts
Virtue.

XXVII. * Providence has armed us with Powers and Faculties, sufficient for the
conf^^ding of all the Enemies we have to encounter. We have Life and Death
before us; that is to say, Good and Evil; and we know which is which too:
Beside, that it is at our Choice, to take, or to refuse. So that we understand
what we ought to do; b^t when we come to deliberate, we play Booty against our
selves; and while our Judgments and our Consciences direct us one Way, our
Corruptions hurry us another.

XXVIII. The Bonds of Virtue ought to be closer and nearer, than those of
Blood: For a good Man is more of kin to another, by the Conformity of Manners
and Conversation, than a Son is to his Father by the Resemblance of Faces.

XXIX. There is nothing in the World but has some Perfection or other. It is
the peculiar Happiness of a discerning Palate, to find out each Thing's
particular Excellence: But our innate Malice makes us often discover a Vice,
among many Virtues, that so we may reveal and proclaim that to their
Disparagement. Now this is not so much an Argument of nice Judgment, as of an
ill Nature; and that Man has but an ill Life on it, who feeds himself with the
Faults of other People.

XXX. Nothing goes so far in the Knowledge of the general Depravity of Mankind,
as an exact Enquiry into our Disorders and Excesses. If we re^lect upon our
Thoughts, we shall find within our Breasts, the Principles and Seeds of those
Vices we are apt to cast in other Men's teeth. If we are not vicious in our
Actions, we are so by a natural Proneness to Vice; for there is no kind of ill,
but is suggested to us by Self-love, to be improved as occasion shall serve;
and few are so virtuous, as to be above Temptations.

XXXI. Men of low Degree are often troubled with many unprofitable Virtues and
Qualifications, which they have not the Opportunities and Means to exert.

XXXII. Considering how much Men are wont to be taken with any thing that is
uncommon, it is strange how they are so little affected by Virtue.

XXXIII. Virtue is an inward Beauty, as Beauty is an outward Virtue.

XXXIII. A fine Woman is amiable in her own Nature; she loses nothing by being
in her Neglige; she charms us without any other Set-off, than that of her
Beauty and Youth, and the native Grace that sparkles in her Face, and animates
all her Motions: Nay, we could behold her with less concern, with all the Train
of a modish Dress. It is the same with a Good Man; he challenges Respect and
Honor by his own self independently, upon all the Forms and Shows of an
affected Gravity. A reformed Countenance, an over-strained Modesty, a
supercilious Brow, a singular Dress, do not so much set off, as paint Virtue,
and make it pass for Counterfeit.

XXXIV. Virtue loses nothing, no more than Nature: The Seeds of Goodness
circulate eternally, and pass without intermission from one subject to another;
and the Principles which contribute to the Production of the Wise, no more
annihilate, than those which concur to the Generation of Men.

XXXV. He that is perpetually crying up himself for a Good and Honest Man; that
says he does no body hurt, and desires the Ill he designs other People may
light upon his own head, and swears too, to make himself to be credited, has
not Wit enough to counterfeit a Good Man.

XXXVI. A Good Man, for all his Modesty, makes other People say of him, what a
Knave can say of himself.

Vulgar.
I. * NOthing is so fickle and inconstant, as the Mobile, driven hither and
thither with every artificial Declaration of Statesmen, or Pretense of Faction.

II. * The Men of Ability cabal and improve their Interests, whilst the Vulgar
are easily drawn into Parties, as their Affections bias them.

III. * The Mobile are uneasy, without a Ruler; and they are as restless with
one: And the oftener they shift, the worse they are pleased. So That Government,
or no Government; a King of God's making, or of the People's, or none at all.
The Multitude are never to be satisfied.

IV. * In Popular Factions, pragmatical Fools commonly begin the Squabble, and
crafty K^aves reap the Benefit of it.

V. * Scoundrels are apt to be insolent toward their Superiors; but it is
below the Dignity of a Man of Honor and Wisdom, to entertain Contests with
People that have neither Qualification, Wit, nor Courage; beside the Folly of
contending with a miserable Wretch, where the Competion is a Scandal. Contempt
in such a Case as this, is the only honorable Revenge.

VI. * The lowest Virtues draw Praise from the Multitude; the middle Virtues
work in them Astonishment or Admiration; but of the highest Virtues, they have
no sense or perceiving at all.

War, Peace.
I. NO body can be healthful without Exercise, neither a Natural Body, nor a
Politic; and certainly to a Kingdom, or Estate, a Just and Honorable War is
the true Exercise; for in a slothful Peace, both Courages will effeminate, and
Manners corrupt.

II. * A Peace that puts People out of Condition of Defense, in case of a War,
must expect a War; and such a State as leaves them at the Mercy of an Enemy, is
worse than War it self. There is no trusting to the Articles and Formalities of
an outside Peace, upon the pretended Reconciliation of an implacable Enemy.
Christian Religion bids us forgive, but Christian Prudence bids us have a care
too whom we trust. Truces and Cessations are both made and broken, for present
Convenience; and where the Allies find they may be the better for it, we may
lay down this for an undoubted Truth, That there can never want a Color for a
Rupture, where there is a Good Will for it

Weakness.
I. WEakness is more opposite to Virtue, than Vice it self.

II. How can we expect another should keep our Secrets, when we had the
Weakness to trust him with them.

III. Treachery is oftener the effect of Weakness, than set purpose and design.

IV. Weakness is the only Failing of the Mind that cannot be mended.

V. Nothing is more scarce than true Goodness and Humanity; and those that
value themselves upon their Goodnature, are generally no better than either
Weak or Complaisant.

VI. We are often comforted for those Misfortunes by Weakness, which Reason
could not comfort us under.

VII. To be overmuch pleased with one's self, is Foppery; not to be pleased at
all, is Weakness.

Wisdom, Skill, Folly.
I. IT is as hard to be Wise in a Man's own Concern, as it is easy to be so in
another's.

II. Most Men are wise in the Accessories, and Fools in the Main.

III. The nicest Folly proceeds from the nicest Wisdom.

IV. Folly keeps us company through all the course of our Lives; and if any Man
seem to be wise, it is only because his Folly is suited to his Age and Fortune.

V. It Is a kind of Folly to be wise by one's self.

VI. Some Follies are as catching as any infectious Disease.

VII. Some Remedies may be found to cure a Man of his Folly; but a perverse
irrational Spirit, can never be reformed.

VIII. Briskness that increases with Age, is but one degree removed from Folly.

IX. There is no Miscarriage so unlucky, but what may be beneficial, one way or
other, to a wise Man; nor any Accident so fortunate, but what a Fool may turn
to his own Prejudice.

X. There are Men cut out for Fools, that do not only make their Follies their
Choice, but are forced into them by Fortune, whether they will or no.

XI. There are Mischances from which Fools do best come off clear.

XII. If the Folly of some People did never appear, it is because it was never
nicely looked into.

XIII. Old Fools are always more ridiculous than young ones.

XIV. We should make the Follies of others, rather a Warning and Instruction,
than a subject of Mirth and Mockery.

XV. There is a grave composed sort of Folly, highly satisfied with it self,
that carries an Air of Wisdom a thousand times more troublesome and
impertinent, than that humoursome and diverting Folly, which never thinks at
all.

XVI. A Man's greatest Wisdom is to be acquainted with his own Follies.

XVII. There is no such thing as true Wisdom in this World, except that which
instructs us in Christian Morality; for this, if we abstract from all the
Supports of Faith, and Advantages of Religion, is of it self the most pure and
perfect Rule of Life.

XVIII. The desire of being thought a wise Man, oftentimes hinders Man to
become really such.

XXIX. There are a sort of silly Coxcombs, who knowing themselves to be such,
improve to their own Advantage their Simplicity and Foppery.

XXX. The height of Skill and Wisdom, is to know the true Worth of every thing.

XXXI. It Is a great Wisdom to be able to conceal, upon occasion, one's being
wise.

XXXI. It Is a degree of Wisdom in a mean Wit, to follow the Judgment and
Conduct of others.

XXXII. Wisdom has its excess as well as other things, and for the most part a
Man makes ill use of his Reason with those who have none.

XXXIII. The state of Virtue is not a state of Indolence; we suffer in it a
perpetual Conflict, betwixt Duty and Inclination: But that of Wisdom is sweet
and calm; it reigns peaceably over our Movements, being only to govern well as
Subjects, what Virtue combats as Enemies.

XXXIV. * There is in Humane Nature more of the Fool than of the wise Man; and
therefore those Faculties by which the foolish part of Men's Minds is taken,
are more potent.

Wonders.
I. THere is nothing deserves so much to be wondered at, as our frequent
wondering at nothing.

II. There is nothing that the Mind of Man receives with so much satisfaction,
as the Opinion of miraculous things, nor leaves with more dif^icuity or concern.

Women.
I. THe Shiness and Reserve of handsome Women, is only a Paint, which they use
to set off their Beauty.

VI. Chastity in most Women is but the Love of their own Quiet, and a
Tenderness of their Reputation.

VII. Vanity, Shame, and especially a suitable Constitution are generally the
Causes of the Courage of Men, and the Virtue of Women.

VIII. A Coeq^et Humor is the very Nature and Property of Women. And if some
do not practice it, it is because they are restrained either by Fear or better
Sense.

IX. There can be no such thing as Rules in the Mind or Heart of Women, if
their Constitution be not consenting.

X. The Affliction of Women upon dead Lovers, proceeds not so much from the
Love they had for them, as from a Desire to get others by a Show of Tenderness
and Humanity.

XI. There are but few Honest Women but what are weary of their Trade.

XII. The Generality of honest Women are like hidden Treasures, which are safe
only because no body seeks after them.

XIII. Most Women yield rather out of Weakness than Love; and this is the
reason, that a bold daring Fellow sooner gains their Favor than a
fainthearted, though more accomplished Competitor.

XIV. A Ladies first Intrigue is seldom taken notice of before she has a second.

XV. There are some Women that never had an Intrigue, but there is scarce any
that never had but one.

XVI. A Woman in Love will sooner forgive a great Indiscretion than a small
In^idelity.

XVII. Women are seldom acquainted with all their Cocquet Humors.

XVIII. Women are never absolutely reserved, except where they have an Aversion.

XIX. Women can more easily conquer their Passion than their Cocquet Humor.

XX. It is one Kind of Cocquet Humor to put People always upon observing, that
we are not Cocquetish.

XXI. Youth without Beauty in a Woman signifies as little as Beauty without
Youth.

XXII. Women often think to be in Love when there is no such thing. The
Diversion of an Intrigue, the Commotions that an Amor raises in their Breasts,
the natural Inclination to the Pleasure of being courted, and the Trouble of
denying makes them fancy that what they feel is Passion, when in truth it is
nothing but a Cocquet Humor.

XXIII. A Woman's Resentment against a Man that brags of her Favors, is not so
much an Argument of her Virtue, as her Inclination to be kind to one that could
keep Counsel.

XXIV. Women are pleased with Courtship, and the most disdainful cannot but be
complaisant to those that tell them they are handsome.

XXV. Nothing is so unaccountable as the Caprices of Women: For it frequently
happens that the first Applications of a new Face, gain more upon them than the
long Services of a constant old one.

XXVI. There is no Court but where Women have Credit and Interests; no State
Intrigues but they have a hand in them.

XXVII. Men and Women do seldom agree upon the Estimate of the Merit of a
Woman; their Interests are too opposite.

XXVIII. Women displease one another by the same Agreements that charm Men, and
what excites great Passions in these, raises amongst them Aversion and
Antipathy.

XXIX. If Women expect their Lovers, they set out themselves to receive them,
but if they be surprised with their Visits, they presently forget at their
Arrival the Irregularity of their Dress, and busy their Fancy about something
else. But with Persons that are indifferent, they have time enough to re^lect
on the Disorder of their Neglige, and either dress themselves before them, or
disappear for a Moment, and come in again with all their Attire.

XXX. Caprice in Women is generally contiguous to Beauty, to be, as it were,
its Antidote to prevent the further mischief it would do the Men.

XXXI. Women engage themselves to the Men by Favors they grant them; Men, on
the contrary disengage themselves from Women by the Favors they receive.

XXXII. When Women cease to Jove their Gallants, they forget even the Favors
they have granted them.

XXXIII. A Woman that has but one Gallant thinks herself to be no Cocquet; she
that has several concludes her self no more than a Cocquet.

XXXIV. Many a Woman prevents being thought a Cocquet by her Constancy to one,
that passes for a Fool for her ill Choice.

XXXV. There are very few Intrigues that are kept secret, and a great many
Ladies are as well known by their Gallants as by their Husbands.

XXXVI. The Difference betwixt an Amorous Lady and a Cocquet is, that the first
is for being loved, and the other only for passing for handsome and lovely. The
one has a Mind to engage us, and the other only to please us; the intriguing
Woman passes from one Engagement to another sucessively; the Cocquet has
several Amusements at once; Passion and Pleasure are predominant in the first,
Vanity and Levity in the last. Gallantry is a Weakness of the Heart, or perhaps
a Vice of Constitution: A Cocquet Humor is an Irregularity or Debauchery of
the Mind. To conclude, an Amorous Woman makes her self to be feared, and a
Cocquet to be hated. From these two Characters we may frame a third, the worst
of them all.

XXXVII. A weak Woman is she whom we tell of her Faults, who reproaches her
self with them; whose Inclination is in a perpetual Conflict with her Reason;
who desires to mend, who shall never mend, at least but very late.

XXXVIII. A Woman is inconstant when she ceases to love; fickle when she begins
to love; light when she does not know her self whether she loves or no;
indifferent when she loves nothing.

XXXIX. A great many Ladies conceal their Amors under a great deal of Reserve
and Modesty, that get often no more by their continued Affectation, than to
make other People say at last, Lord, I took her for a Saint.

XL. There are Women that love their Money better than their Friends; and their
Lovers better than their Money.

XLI. It Is strange to find in some Women's Heart something more quick and strong
than the Love of Men. I mean Ambition, and the Passion of Gaming. Such Women
make Men chaste, they have nothing of their Sex but the Petticoat.

XLII. Women run into Extremes, and are generally either better or worse than
Men.

XLIII. There is no such thing as Principles in Women; they conduct themselves
by the Heart, and depend for their Manners, upon those they love.

XLIV. Women go further in Love than Men, but Men outstrip them in Friendship.

XLV. It Is the Men's Fault that Women hate one another.

XXVI. A Man is more reserved and secret in his Friends Concern than his own; a
Woman on the contrary keeps her own Secret better than another.

XLVII. There is never so strong a Love in a young Lady's Breast, but what may
receive some Addition either from Ambition or Interest.

XLVIII. How many Maids are there in the World that never reaped any other
Advantage from a great Beauty than the Hopes of having a great Match.

XLVIII. There is a Time where Maids, even those that have the most
considerable Fortunes, ought seriously to think of bestowing themselves, least
their Refusal of the first Proffers, be attended with a long and bitter
Repentance. The Reputation of their Riches does generally decrease with that of
their Beauty, but on the contrary, every thing is favorable to a young Lady,
and Men are content to aggravate all the Advantages that can most stir up their
Passion, and make her worthy of their Applications and Desires.

XLIX. Handsome Ladies do generally Justice upon themselves for the ill
Treatments they have done to some of their Lovers, by marrying either ugly,
old, or at least undeserving Husbands.

L. Most Women judge of the Merit and Personal Accomplishments of Men, by the
Impression they make upon them, and will scarce allow any to that Man, whom
they can see without Concern.

LI. When a Man is at a loss to know whether Age has made any considerable
Alteration in his Person, he may consult the Eyes and Tone of the Voice of
those young Women he accosts; he will soon learn what he is afraid to know: But
this is a hard way of learning.

LII. A Woman that is always casting her Eyes upon the same Man, or that takes
them away continually from him, gives us an equal Suspicion of what she feels.

LIII. It is easy for a Woman to say what she does not feel, but it is yet
more easy for a* Man to say what he does.

LIVE. It happens sometimes that while the Woman dissembles a true Passion, the
Man dissembles a ^alse one.

LV. A Man may easily impose upon a Woman by a pretended Passion, provided he
have no real one for another.

LVI. Suppose a Man that is indifferent for all Women have a Mind to pretend a
Passion, the Question is, Whether he will sooner impose upon that Woman that
has a Kindness for him, than her that has none?

LVII. The greatest Concern of a Woman in Love, is not to persuade her own
Passion, as to be satisfied of that of the Person she loves.

LVIII. Women are cured of their Natural Laziness either by Vanity or Love.

LIX. Laziness, on the contrary, in Women naturally brisk and aerie, is the
Forerunner of Love.

LX. A Man breaks out into a Passion against an unfaithful Mistress, and then
forgets her; a Woman, on the contrary, makes but little Noise at the Infidelity
of her Lover, but keeps a long while her Resentments.

FINIS.
Books printed for Abel Roper and E. Wilkinson at the Black Boy over against
St. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet.
THE second Volume of Monsieur St. Eremont's Essays.

The State of Innocence, or the Fall of Man. By Mr. Dryden.

Walker of Coins and Medals.

Officium Eucharisticum, or a Preparatory Office for the devout Reception of
the holy Communion. By Dr. Edward Lake.

The Works of the Reverend Dr. Hammond, in four Volumes.

The Works of Dr. Cudworth.

The Rules and Maxims of pleading. By Sir Robert Health.

Ambitious Slave. A Play.

Distressed Innocence. A Play.

Books printed for Roger Clavel at the Peacock over against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet.
THE Life of Christ, with Forty Sculptures, written in Heroic Verse. Ey Mr.
Wesley.

Epictetus in Verse. By Mr. Walker.

Cojugium Conjurgium, or some Considerations concerning Marriage.

Dying and dead Men's living Words. By Dr. Lloyd.

Noy's Complete Lawyer.

Dalton's Office of Sheriffs.


