THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITY, YET WORKING In the Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, for the destruction of Religion truly Protestant. DISCOVERED, As
by other grounds apparent and probable, so especially by the late Cessation in
Ireland, no way so likely to be balanced, as by a firm Union of England and
Scotland, in the late solemn Covenant, and a religious pursuance of it.

ZEPH. 3. 4. 5. Her Princes within her are roaring lions; her Judges are
evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the morrow.

4 Her Prophets are light and treacherous persons: her Priests have polluted
the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.

5 The just Lord is in the midst thereof: he will not do iniquity: every
morning does he bring his judgment to light, he fails not, but the unjust
knows no shame.

LONDON: Printed for SAMVEL GELLIBRAND. 1643.

THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITY, Yet working in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, for the destruction of Religion truly Protestant.
WEre there not a more then ordinary stupiditie possessing the hearts of men,
which God usually permits as the forerunner of heavy judgments, after so
many real and bloody demonstrations of a damnable design upon our Religion
and Liberty, it were the most unnecessary work imaginable to publish written
ones. But let this unhappy necessity be obeyed, and honest men be persuaded a
little to withdraw their thoughts from their perplex^d reflections upon the
business of Hull, and the Militia, and the London Tumults, (which are usually
looked upon as the grounds, but never were other then occasions and advantages
sought to throw us into this confusion, which now over-spreads the face of
England, and, unless God, who casts out the counsels of Princes, and takes
the wise in their own craftiness, mercifully prevent, is like to overwhelme
it) and apply themselves to a diligent observation of the contexture and
comprehension of affairs, as they have been these later years managed by our
Adversaries: That so comparing one part of their proceedings with another, and
all with this proposed end of subverting the Protestant Religion, together with
the Subjects Liberty, (the Elm of that Vine) the impartial and diligent
Reader may discern an evident conjuncture of Jesuits, Priests, Princes,
Prelates, Papists, Politicians, Atheists, profane and ignorant persons, for
the ruin of that Religion, to which some of them are Professed Enemies, others
Pretended Friends, but which of them the most pernicious is hard to judge.

But, that no body may be wronged, this Heterogeneous number must, in reference
to this great work, receive its proportionable distribution; and we must not
conceive all these equally engaged, or upon the same grounds. Babel is to be
built, the Architects are the Jesuits, taking in some Atheistical Politicians
to their assistance, as Surveyors of the work: Princes must find the
materials, as being made believe that the work is designed for the House of
their Kingdom, and the honor of their Majesty. Papists, with the rabble of
superstitious and ambitious Clergy, are the daily Laborers, the profane and
ignorant multitude are employed in the most servi^e works, as Hewers of wood,
and Drawers of water, and are now made to tread mortar for this building
moistened with their own blood.

And because all these must be presumed reasonable men (though the later sort
are used as natural bruit beasts, made to be taken and destroye^) who, though
they are not so wise as to know what they do, yet must not be thought so
foolish as not to know why they take this pains, different ends are held out.
And therefore this great building is designed as a Church for the Papists
Devotion, as a Palace for the Prelates ambition, as a Castle for the Princes
power, and the rest have several baits by these cunning Anglers cast out unto
them, according to the variety of their dispositions.

But lest I should seem rather to write then to reveal a Mystery, it will be
convenient to use all plainness of speech, that they who are concerned may
discern truth before it be beaten into their heads with a Poleax.

First, I presume it will be granted on all parts, that the Roman Strumpet is
very industrious to corrupt the Earth with her Fornications, Rev. 19. 2. and
has to that end constituted a great Council, De propaganda fide, as they call
it, but rather, De propaganda perfidia, whose most vigilant Instruments and
Emissaries are the Jesuits, who have by their diligence obtained the honor to
be Cupbearers of this Wine of Fornication, and are justly accounted by us those
Frogs, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, the Beast, and the false
Prophet, going forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole world, Rev.
16. 12. These men, as they compass sea and land, and have spread themselves
well nigh in all parts, so they have always had a special eye to the
Kingdoms of Britain, it being doubtless propounded to them, and all Romish
Agents, as a piece of eminent service, if by any means that might be reduced
to the vassalage of Rome.

And this is the second step which I think there will be no contesting for, that
the Romish Agents have bin very earnest and industrious in reconciling this
Island with the adjacent to their Religion; it being a service which the Pope
himself disdained not to stoop to, in that Letter (yet uncontradicted) which
he writ to the Prince in Spain, now extant in the English tongue; where he
desires that the Prince of Wales might be brought back again into the lap of
the Romish Church, and the Prince of the Apostles put in possession of this
most noble Isle. Which desires of the Pope have been seconded with continual
endeavors of swarms of Jesuits and Priests resident amongst us.

It being then granted, that ever since the Reformation there has been such a
design, it remains to show how it has been prosecuted, and how far it has
prevailed, where the Impediment now is, what labor there is to remove it, that
all true Protestants may the better understand their own condition and
Interests. Only let this be premised, that we being to deal with a Mystery,
a work of darkness, it must not be expected that all which shall be
produced, should be clear and convincing; as if a judicial proceeding were
undertaken, but that the Argument be so probable and dependant, as, though not
a legal, yet a rational judgment may be passed against our Adversaries in
this Cause. And it has been a very unjust triumph of the Enemy over the
Parliament and their friends in want of evidence, when they have (though the
nature of the business, being treasonable, and therefore clandestinely
carried, and bound up by oaths of secrecy) been put to make up the grounds
of their proceedings from the connection of several particulars and
probabilities, which are enough for a Statesman, though not a Judge. And the
diligent observer may take notice how these fears and jealousies, pretended to
be groundless, have been justified by after proceedings, as the use made of
Newcastle has vindicated the securing Hull. The Ship from Denmark has
justified their suspicion, grounded (as it is said) upon the slighted testimony
of the Skipper at Roterdam. The Lord Digbies endeavors, and the residence
there of King and Cochran, the Propositions to the Scots at Newcastle
(hereafter to be mentioned) for the joining of the Scottish and English Armies
against the Parliament, have justified all the suspicions and accusations, then
pretended, and protested to be unjust and groundless. In such times and cases
as these, fears and jealousies are pardonable, and distrust, especially after
evident breaches of trust, is the mother of security. It is a very unequal
thing, that the King with his Cavaliers should renounce the Parliament, destroy
his good Subjects, upon the jealousy that Parliaments and Puritans are Enemies
to his Prerogative and Power (which can never be proved if Justice be made the
Rule of Power) and we railed on for defending our selves against the
confederacy of Papists, Prelates, Court Parasites, and their Adherents, whose
endeavors of introducing Popery and Tyranny, are far beyond jealousy, as is
now to be demonstrated.

I will not retire so far back (having so much work before me) as to insist
upon the manifest and manifold attempts upon this Kingdom in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, whom when they had discerned to have settled her Interests
for the Protestants against Spain and Rome, and established her Council
according to those Interests: So that though the Bishops brought her to
dis-favour Puritanes, yet they could not persuade her to favor the Papists,
but she still kept a strict and vigilant eye over them, as being rightly
informed, that they, and not the other, were the greatest Enemies to Royal
Power. When they saw this, the usual arts of Rome against disaffected
Princes, are put in practice, viz. Bulls, Interdicts, Poysonings,
Assassinations; which God wonderfully preserved that heroicke Lady from; the
Spanish Armado, the Rebellion in Ireland, may be further Testimonies of their
zeal in this business^. To the enumeration of these, let us only add
thankfulness and caution, and proceed to their after Machinations, the bitter
fruits of which the Protestant Churches yet feel.

King James, before he came to the Crown of England, had a heart too large for
his Dominion, and therefore extended his affectionate thoughts to the Kingdoms
of England and Ireland, which he longed for a peaceable possession of.

The Factors of Rome having studied his interest and nature, according to their
wonted confidence attempt him: as for his Understanding, so well informed in
the Forgeries and Falsehoods of the Romish Religion, it was not to be ventured
on, and therefore they proportion their workings to his Passions, which were,
desire of the accession of power, mixed with a more then ordinary fear (in
which he was naturally unhappy) lest he should be interrupted, if not
disappointed in the entrance: And in this Conflict obtain from him some
intimations, if not assurances, of favor to the Catholic Cause, with which
they were for the present satisfied.

The King upon his entrance and settlement in England, saw cause rather to
dispense with his promises then his principles; whereupon the Popish Faction
grew discontented against him, and a fruit of that discontent was the Romish
Hellish Powderplot, never to be mentioned by any good Protestant, but with due
gratitude to Almighty God, and just detestation of the Romish Religion.

This Treason wrought not kindly with his Majesty: for whereas he might have
made the Plot a ground of defiance, and the Deliverance a ground of confidence;
the horror of the business wrought such impression of dread upon his timorous
spirit, that though he was not blown up, yet he was shaken by it all his life
after, and drawn successively to a Compliance with, at least a Connivance at
their proceedings. And notwithstanding the free exercise of his wit and pen
against Popery, which they could well allow him, they constrained him to
purchase his own security (contrary to the Interests of Protestant Religion,
and Paternall affection) with the ruin of the neigbour Churches of Bohemia and
the Palatinate.

We should not have looked upon the day of our Brethren: to that we may reduce
the many impediments that have fallen in betwixt us and the help of our
friends, and that posture wherein God himself stands toward us, even as a man
astonished, a mighty man that cannot save, Jer. 14. 9. Though we have this hope
left, that God will recompense that mischief, not upon the Nation, the body
whereof had a just fellow-feeling with the distresses of their neighbors, but
upon that curfed Faction whose pernicious Councels yet rule among us.

This was the most considerable Progress made in his time, though the
preparatory workings for a fitter opportunity were not omitted, as the
cherishing in him a dis-affection to Puritanes, an inclination to Bishops,
procuring countenance to Profaneness, both by practice, and Declaration to
the remote Counties for licentious Sabbath-breaking, and settling about him
persons regardlesse of the good of Church or Commonwealth. To which may be
added the untimely death of Prince Henry, when it was once observed that he
grew popular, inclined to martial affairs, and disaffected to Spanish
proceedings. As also the Propositions of the Treaty of marriage with Spain
offered from England, revised at Rome, and then by the Negotiation of Bristoll
agreed to (though after broken) with so many advantages to the spreading of
Popery in England, as might discover the design to have been considerably
advanced in King James his time.

I shall shut up the discourse of his Reign with this observation of the
providence of God: That those Princes who have trusted God with their lives and
Kingdoms, and kept Spain and Rome at distance and defiance, have sped better
then they, who to their dishonored selves, have sacrificed the welfare of the
Church of God, as, by comparing the History of Queen Elizab^th, with those of
Henry the fourth of France, and King James, may appear; who trusting to their
own politic Conservations, the thing that they feared, came upon them. For so
it was, That when by the journey into Spain, fairer hopes were conceived of the
Prince, as by his intercourse with the Pope, and the presumptions of the
jesuit (which you shall find in the Treatise of the English Pope, not
unworthy an Englishmans deligent observation) most fully appears; King James
came to be looked upon as (...), and must be taken out of the way, that the
Mystery might work the more effectually, and so died he, both a Friend and
Martyr of the Catholic Cause. Though it was doubted, and feared, there were
several ingredients into his death, the world talks of a drink, and a
plaster, the Cup might be mingled for Romes sake, and some other hands
accessory to spreading the plaster; if so, Let them share the guilt, I leave
them to him, whose eyes are upon all the ways of men, to render them according
to their ways, and the fruit of their doing. It is said, the Archbishop of
York, if he have not too much, or too little Grace, can tell you more of this
business.

Let our trembling pen pass on, to His now Majesty's reign; and here
doubtless some Apology is expected, but I hope to say nothing that needs it;
I shall endeavor to avoid known falsehoods, or unseasonable truths.

An earnest affection to the Preservation and Reformation of the Church of God,
has put me upon this disquisition, and the desire of preserving good men from
a snare, which shall be in vain spread in the sight of any bird, has prevailed
with me for the discovery of my thoughts: It is in service to that Cause, which
I desire not to over-live the welfare of. And therefore, without any more
complement, Let us begin to search out the Pla^formes, Groundworks, Materials,
Instruments of this great service, for recovery of Britain to Babylon.

In the beginning of His Majesty's reign, the Popish Faction having in Spain,
and otherwise, obtained testimonies of His disposition, a strange wi^e is
prepared for him, which, according to Scripture truth, is a dangerous
preparative for a strange god: Surely they will turn away your heart after
their gods, 1 Kings 11. 2.

Upon this marriage, is the Court (sufficiently loose, and luxurious enough at
all times) dissolved into Riots and Masquings, and in the midst of that noise,
were our Counsels and Enterprises, most perfidiously mis-laid, and betrayed,
as those of Ree and Cales, and especially that of Rochell, which, as if no
sleighter a Complement could be thought of for the fair Lady, received from
France, must by English hands, and Popish Councels, be betrayed in its Religion
and Liberty. Thus is our guilt increased, and our strength diminished; and lest
the Remainder of it should be employed according to the Interests of our
Religion and Nation, a peace with Spain is concluded, the Palatinate left to
that which leaves it yet miserable, and is hastening us after it, a Course of
treating with them, who carry destruction and misery in their paths, but the
way of peace they have not known. These things have been long known, but little
considered; and it stands well enough with my intent and purpose, to repeat
things mentioned by others, because I aim at showing the dependence of the
Jesuiticall proceedings, one upon another, and all upon the main end of
suoverting Religion and Liberty.

After these parts so well played abroad, Let us consider how the design was
carried on among our selves, from the fourth year of His Maj^sties reign. And
here, as good workmen use to do. They forecast the manner, and provide the
Instruments of their work. It must be done, either by force, o^ fraud; the
first is, disapproved, probably upon these reasons:

1. The King could not be supposed to yield to an invasion of His own Kingdom,
and it was pity to betray so hopeful a Prince. 2. It was more full of hazard,
as subject to the Accidents of war; as also, that a violent attempt would
probably join the Prot^stant and Puritan, against the Papist, whereas a
fraudulent graduall proceeding might possibly unite the Papist, and Indifferent
Protestant against the Puritan, which they have now accomplished. The latter
way is resolved upon, and Instruments accordingly fitted, which are certainly
the most considerable requisites in any work.
And because it was of very great concernment, That the King should be brought
to favor and further these Popish proceedings, and preparations, He must be
engaged either upon religious or politic considerations, to promote this
Reconciliation with Rome.

Not to dispute how far He was prevailed with in matters of Religion; if not
for an absolute alteration, yet an Accommodation; or whether* the ultimate End,
and full Design, were discovered to Him, or rather He made to prosecute it
under another Notion: This is certain, That He manifestly favored those
Courses that made way for Popery and Tyranny; and it is to be conceived, rather
with respect to power and profit (which were always observed to be His
Majesty's well consistent Interests) then to the Popish, or any other Religion,
which is evidenced by that passage that fell from His Majesty, observed by the
Venetian that wrote the Narrative, called the Popes Nuntio, sc. That His
Majesty could at that time reconcile Himself to Rome with much advantage. And
when it was discerned that the Interest of absolute Rule, with its advantages,
was so firmly settled in His Majesty, and that He was subject to be violent in
the prosecution of it, and not likely to stumble at small blocks, which they
might well guess by the dissolution of Parliaments, billeting Soldiers, the
design of the German^ horse, etc. They cherish him in it, and set France with
its broken Parliaments and full power, as an Object of Emulation before him, as
finding the Interests of Popery and Tyranny very well to agree.

Now therefore, is His Majesty persuaded that His Crown, and the Popes Chair
have common Friends, and common Enemies.

Parliaments and Puritans, are their Enemies; Prelacy and Profaneness, their
Friends.

Let us see how things were carried with respect to them all.

First, For Parliaments, which the Popish Party knew to be very good advantages
in their constitution, to the preservation and reformation of the Protestant
Religion, they represent them to his Majesty as most disadvantagious to his
desired power and profit. These were only times of recompense for wrong, of
petitions for right, Controllers of Prerogative, Assertors of popular Liberty;
and therefore are they dissolved, disgraced by scandalous Declarations,
publicly aspersed both from the Press an^ Pulpit, as by Doctor Alablaster,
Beale, Manwaring, and others of that stamp. And that there might be no occasion
of drawing supplies of money that way, which had so many other Inconveniences
attending it, several exquisite Engines of iniquity and oppression were found
out by Weston, Noy, and others, as Loans, Patents, Ship Money, etc. And thus
for twelve years, or thereabouts, were Parliaments intermitted, and the hopes,
if not remembrance, of them almost worn out.

Then for Puritanes, men cordially Protestant and zealous of their own
Religion, which no where but among us is a fault, because they were tenacious
of just Liberty, and true Religion, how studiously and spightfully are they
disgraced, as men of Antimonarchicall Principles, factious spirits, ranked with
Jesuits (who were yet better used) as the Incendiaries of Churches and States.
For the suppressing these men, the authority of the High Commission,
Star Chamber, Bishops Courts, and the ordinary Courts of Justice, through the
corruption of Judges and other inferior Officers, were made very serviceable;
and that they might have no shelter nearer then New England, most of the
faithful Ministers, and religious Justices were for some pretense or other
discountenanced, displaced; and it was grown to that pass, that he that
departed from evil made himself a prey. For the rooting out of Ministers,
whose only fault was painfulnesse in their places, several artifices were
used: And because there were a sort of conformable Puritanes, whom the old
Ceremonies reached not (who were the least tolera^le, because the least liable)
several Innovations, and that p^stilent Declaration of the Sabbath, were
introduced, which to oppose or refuse, was to be marked out to destruction. And
all this done, that the Faction, as they called it, that so much hindered the
good work in hand, this intended reconciliation, might be weakened, and
removed.

But were not the Cup in the hand of the Whore very stupifying, it were
impossible to make Princes so much mistake their friends for enemies. The
Principles of Popery are certainly more propense to Treasons and Rebellions
then those of the Protestant Religion, which always made good Subjects, though
not Slaves. And besides reason and experience of former Princes, this present
Conjuncture of time and affairs may give testimony thereof. Suppose a Popish
Prince that had broken the Original Contract bound with Oath, subverted the
fundamental Constitutions of government in this Kingdom (imagine by
Parliaments) and gave evident testimony of not being firm to the established
Religion; can it be conceived that such a one could enjoy any security in the
midst of Roman Catholics? Yet with us, after manifold oppressions, breaches
of privilege, intrenchments upon liberty, setting up of the Standard, which
some would have interpreted a renouncing of the peoples protection, upon which
their allegiance depends, casting off a Parliament, by so late an Act made
indissoluble, without their own consent, charging them with actual Rebellion,
and disclaiming all acts done by them, or right in them to exercise his or
their own power: The King hears no other language then Gracious Sovereign,
Your sacred Majesty, not only in formal compellations, but solemn Covenants.
Let the world judge whether the challenged Power of the Pope, and the grounds
of Popery, would not have given the Subjects an absolution, and established
proceedings upon other grounds then the Puritanes of England and Scotland yet
do. Yet so far, through the just judgments of God, have the intoxications of
Rome, backed with continual evil Councels, prevailed with His Majesty, as
that it may be said justly of him as David, he loves his enemies, and hates his
friends, and prefers them who have played some of Absaloms tricks with him, to
his most faithful servants and people. It may be his Majesty is led by this
Principle, That if he prevail he gains much, if not, he loses nothing; only
is where he was: but this may prove a dec^itfull arguing, if not prevented in
time. That of the wise man may be peculiarly applied to these Councels, so full
of folly and hazard, The wicked works a deceitful work. But pardon this
digression, it was well meant, however it may be interpreted.

So fared it with the Friends of Popery, the Prelates; who but they, must be
the Kings Friends, Neal to King James, Laud to King Charles; and there they
suborned a fraudulent Proverb to serve their turn, which was, No Bishop, no
King, nay (in Sydenhams Rhetoric) no God, whereas the truth was, No Prelate,
no Pope. And here again, was the King cheated by the Bishops, which will
evidently appear, if ever (which God forbid) these Cockatrice Eggs be hatched.
In the mean time, let reason, and former experience be Judges. The pomp and
splendor of the Church, is the Popes proper Interest; to which, the greatness
of Princes, is rather opposite, then subservient. Increase of power, was in the
Negotiation, pretended for the King, intended for the Bishops, who only made
use of the Kings power, for the advancement of their own. And though the King
might easily judge, that no addition of power could be in them, without a
Diminution of His; yet so far had this Circean Cup prevailed, that Bishops
and their Agents, because they served the turn for the present, and prostituted
their learning, power, and consciences, to the vindication of illegal Actions,
and Authority, were entrusted, not only with Ecclesiastical, but a very great
share in Civil affairs; some of them being of the Privy Council, in all the
three Kingdoms, and more especially the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, Chancellor
of Scotland, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Controller of the Council in
England, who, through the Kings confidence, and his own pragmatick disposition,
had an influence upon all business of consequence that was transacted; And as
the King presumed them his friends, so the Pope knew they were his own. Their
function was a degree nearer in kindred to him, then any other Government of
the Church, and the persons of some of them (as being men addicted to
Superstition and Idolatry) were more serviceable then their Offices.

And it is worth the observation, what care the Faction did take to keep this
main out-work to Popery, in pressing their Calling upon men's consciences, which
every body, unless some of their own Favorites, found so offensive in all
other respects. And therefore, from the Pulpit and Press, was their Ius
divinum pleaded, as by others, so by the prostitute pen of D. Hall, who must
also contribute his Mite toward this Reconciliation, by his Printed
Reconciler, being a penance enjoined him for writing formerly, No peace with
Rome. And lest their Rhetoric should fail, They took care in their Conclave
(for it was neither Synod, nor Convocation) held 1640. for the binding men to
this Government by an Oath, so absolutely necessary to this work, was their
standing justly thought to be.

Lastly, Another Introduction made for the resignation of this Church and
Kingdom into the bosom of Rome; was that Ignorance and Profaneness, which
were generally countenanced in the Kingdom. That there was all means used for
the growth of these Cardinal virtues is evidently manifest. As for Ignorance,
how studiously did the Pharisaicall Prelates keep from the people the Key of
knowledge, by disgracing and discountenancing Preaching, silencing painful
Ministers, putting down Lectures, and when good men (willing to take any
advantage to discharge their Consciences) in stead of Preaching, expounded the
common Catechism, in that they were restrained by Wrens Articles, and all
discourse of Religion forbidden upon occasional meetings. But I am sure, that
is no Apostolic Rule, if Saint Paul be consulted, ( Col. 3. 16.) for the
advancement of the Apostolic Sea, as it is called.

The most of the Preaching that was allowed, was degenerate into railing
against Parliaments and Puritans, crying up absolute authority, passive
obedience, strains of wit fitter for a Stage then a Pulpit. And that men might
not be relieved from the Press, where the Pulpit failed, some Superstitious,
profane Chaplains were set to be Overseers of it, to whom an Egyptian command
was given, as to the Midwives there, to kill the Males in the birth; and not
satisfied with that, as if one age were too narrow Limits for their iniquity to
be exercised in, Order was given, for the Re-printing Books formerly licenced,
with their corrections, or rather corruptions, according to the Tridentine
invention of Index expurgatorius.

The like care was taken in matters of Profaneness; which, as if it had not
been sufficiently provided for by Ignorance, the natural mother of it, the
Prelates by the examples of their own families for the most part, and the
procuring and pressing the Book of licentiousness upon the Sabbath, were
diligent Nurses thereof.

And if it be further enquired, how these Twins became serviceable to Popery,
the resolution is very clear: Ignorance you know, is the mother of Popish
Devotion, that is, Superstition, and a special qualification of a disciple of
Rome, where blindfold is the only play, a trick the Pope borrows from the
Devil, The god of this world has blinded their minds, 2 Cor. 4. 4. And so
likewise Profaneness is a borderer upon Popery, by the loose Principles, of
which, it is much countenanced. It is true, Some sins are not so good cheap,
among them, as others, but all may be had at a reasonable rate. And profane
persons, whose remainders of Conscience tell them, they must at least pretend
to some Religion, or other (unless they have arrived at the height of Atheism)
readily pitch upon that next hand, which would allow most Liberty. And our
present experience gives testimony of the service these two fruits of the
Bishops Government have done* Profaneness has made a general averseness to
Reformation* and Ignorance, with the help of that, has furnished the King with
an Army against the Parliament, fetched from the barren Mountains of Wales,
Cornwall* and the North, which were kept s^re without the means of knowledge,
as a fit reserve for such a time, as this. I speak of the common sort of
soldiers, many of the rest have too much knowledge, and too little conscience.

Thus have we an account of the more remote preparations for this great
service, which had wrought so well, that it was thought seasonable to adventure
more boldly upon the business. And the Prelates, with their forward dependants,
as impatient of this dilatory proceeding begin to offer and press Popish
innovations, to preach diverse doctrines of gross Popery, for the which I
refer you to the Canterburians self-conviction. The Schools, the Press, the
Pulpit, began to speak Italian apace. The Martyrs of the Protestant Religion
disgraced, the Conspirators in the Powder Treason excused* as in a Sermon at
Saint Mary's in Cambridge by Kemp of Queens College. And the affront to Rome
in the Common Prayer Book, viz. Whose Faith is Faction, Religion Rebellion,
must be taken out, that the Proverb might be verified* Misso non mordet. Our
Churches began to put on the attire of the Harlot; Altars, Crucifixes and other
idolatrous Pictures, were frequently set up* and ^ervently maintained. The
Divine service, as they called it, was a Mess so prepared, as that strangers
from beyond Sea could scarce believe themselves to be in England* but rather in
France or Italy, and cried, Non tam ovum ovo simile, nec lac lact^, etc.

And if all this will not persuade the incredulous Reader* that there was a
strong endeavor of altering Religion among us. I shall commend to his
consideration* not so much Romes Masterpiece, (which may be Canterbur^es
Master* piece for ought I know, it looks so like a disguise) as that serious
and ingenious Tract, called* The English Pope, together with the Popes Nuntioes
annexed, which gives a more exact account then I thought the secrecy of those
Negotiations could have afforded to a man disaffected to them: Wherein you
have the propounding and driving of the bargain betwixt the Agents for Rome*
and the Archbishop with his Accomplices, who bought and sold the Puritans for
Cardinals Caps, and pensions, among whom the then Chichester, now Salisbury,
was a Chief* and therefore fi^est to be the Princes Tutour. But I should wrong
both that Author, and my Reader, to tell that Story after him.

And though England was the maine Shop of this Forgerie, as being most
considerable; as also because in Ireland there needed not so much diligence,
and in Scotland there was not much matter to be wrought upon; yet in the two
other Kingdoms this pious inclination to peace with Rome was not neglected. In
Ireland, in the fourth year of his Majesty, several Immunities and
Encouragements were granted to the Papists* The then Deputy, though his Vein
lay more right for tyranny and exaction, in regard of his imperious spirit, yet
he failed not to do^ many good Offices for the papists, by connivence and
countenance given to the free and public exercise of Idolatry. This the King
helped on by making many popish peers, that a parliament in that Kingdom
might occasionally prove rather advantageous to the design, then otherwise.
The fruit of which liberality of honor was reaped in the Irish parliaments,
allowing a Contribution to the war against Scotland and their sending a
Committee, many of which were forward papists, now chief Rebels, to White
hall, the summer before the Rebellion brake forth, who in all probability
shuffled the Cards for the cloudy Game which was played October after. And that
Canterbury might not stand idle, he dispatched thither Chapel, and other such
Agents who by their Arminianisme and Superstition, might train up the ordinary
sort of Protestants there, and bring them to that temper* that upon a
difference they should propend rather to the Papists then the true Protestants;
of which allay, Ormond, Canterburies Nursling, and his followers, now prove.
Thus was Ireland managed, that it might serve the turn it now does, of which
afterward.

In Scotland likewise all possible industry was used to facilitate an
Accommodation with Englad first, and so with Rome. And to that purpose the
Popish and prelaticall party were very busy there; particularly Spotswood
Archbishop of Saint Andrews, a deep and subtle Dissembler, who had discouraged
and extirpated by degrees, and under diverse pretexts* most of the faithful
Ministers there; and had he been left to his own Politics in which he was
beyond his patron Canterbury, in probability, he had made the condition of that
Nation almost desperate. But Canterbury meeting with a man of his own metal,
Maxwell Bishop of Rosse (^it to be Iehu's coachman, being a furious driver to
this Samaritane mixture, who apprehended and represented the condition of that
Nation too forwardly and presumptuously, in his zeal rather then discretion)
gave heed to him, and would needs be gathering the (...) of the Scottish
endeavouts before they could be ripened in that cold Country, more backward
then England, and so set his own and fellows teeth on edge.

In confidence therefore that the Scottish Church and Nation was so well
prepared, (as by other endeavors, so by his Sermon preached at Edinburgh, when
he was there with the King, about the Partition Wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. which he
miserably handled, when he made it to be the Jesuits and Puritans hindering his
Reformation, that is, Reconciliation with Rome) as to receive the English
Liturgy* and that corrupted or to give good advantages to the Design by their
refu^all. It was boldly offered them, backed with the Kings power, prostituted
to all such services, by that Prelaticall Pander to the Whore of Rome. As also
a book of corrupt Canons, which though they comprehended abundant iniquity,
yet it was thought fit by one Canon commended by Rosse to Canterbury, that a
door should be left open wide enough for the Pope himself to enter at a fit
opportunity, to this effect; That since no Reformation in Doctrine or
D^scipline can be made perfect at once, it should be lawful by his Majesty's
consent, etc. which fell in so directly with Canterburies Design, that he
procured it to be approved by the King at Greenwich, May ^3. 1635. and enjoined
it to be inserted, giving thanks to his Agent the Bishop of Rosse, in a lerter
yet to be seen, saying, he was glad of the canon so (...) placed behind the
curtain, and commanded it to be fully printed.

But these Southern plants, being slips of an Italian Stock, could not endure
this Northern Climate* but were sorely nipt, and ( hinc ill^ lachrymae) the
Scots instead of a Common Prayer Book* joined in a Covenant; which when
Spotswood saw, he said (prophetita^ly, I hope, as once Caiaphas) the bottom of
their business was broken out, and for his part he thought it seasonable to
repair into England, which he forthwith did and with grief dyed a Martyr to
this Design, and so was the prediction of Master Walsh, a famous Scottish
Minister, fulfilled upon him, who in a Letter to the Bishop, written 1604. told
him he should dve an Outcast.

The resolute rejection of this book, together with the Prelates, altered the
Scene, but no way the Plot of this Tragedy, and gave occasion for new Actors to
enter in a military (...), it being determined by this Romish confederacy, that
force must be added to fraud, the peoples blood to the Prelates sweat; rather
then this bles^el work dis-appointed.

When therefore it was resolved that the many humble Petitions and
Remonstrances of the Scottish Nation should be answered in blood, preparations
are accordingly made; and because the Bishops had rendered themselves so odious
by their Superstitious and Lordly carriage, though the quarrel was theirs, the
action must be entered in the Kings name the war must be called Bellum Ragale,
and not Episcopale, and the Scots persecuted, not as men disaffected to
Episcopacy, but to Monarchy. And thus, by blowing the Trumpet of Lies and
Slanders, some desperate, some deluded persons were gathered together, to force
the Scottish Nation to Canonical obedience, and a Conformity to England, now
in Confederacy with Rome. His Majesty's person for the credit of the Cause
must be engaged, who coming down to the Borders, and finding the Scots
standing upon their defense at Dunce hill, the King having left his firebrands
at home, in stead of fighting treats and concludes a Pacification at Berwicke;
which when the Councillors of mischief, especially Canterbury and Strafford,
saw, as they had before incensed his Majesty against his people to now (as
became the Grace of the one, and Lordship of the other) they make him fall out
with himself, and his own act, and sacrifice his faith and honor to the
Quarrel. This poor paper, because it gave advantage toward a peace, so
unsatisfying to them, and unserviceable to their ends, it must receive the
measure more due to the Incendaries, be dis-avowed, and burnt by the hands of
the Hangman.

And this was done upon these or the like considerations. If Scotland be so
left, it will not only be hopeless in regard of it self, and so hinder the
perfection of the good work, but remain as an ill president to all good
Subjects to stand up in defense of their Religion and Liberties, (which
Canterbury and Strafford had a mind to invade) against all illegal and violent
attempts, though in orced with the Kings personal pre^erce. And further, the
example of that Kingdom will not only remain as an encouragement, but their
unbroken strength (...) (it is to feared) prove serviceable to the Puritans of
England, who are justly thought so many and obstinate, that without a blow they
are not to be subdued. It is therefore concluded necessary by the Factours for
Tyranny and Popery, that Arms be resumed by the King, of which at least they
thought to reap this advantage, that which side soever prevailed, it would be
an engagement of the Kingdoms in war (which was so earnestly pressed by
Strafford) that so they might be dis-(...) and made the more unserviceable to
each other in case of necessity. Thereupon they further persuading the King of
the possibility of prevailing, (which he used to regard more then the nature of
the Council) Arms are taken un again. Strafford, with his Assistant Sir Toby
Matthews, an Episcopal extract, are dispatched for Ireland, the one deals
with the Parliament, the other with the Papists, for supplies in this
Catholic cause, and prevailed not only in that, but an auxiliary strength is
there raised of about 8000. men, most of them papists, who might be transported
for Engl^nd or Scotland, as occasion should require.

And Canterbury no less busy at home, dispatches his Bulls to the Clergy for
Contributions to the present design and Soldiers are pressed with the
advantages of Coat and conduct money in the several Counties. But the
Soldiers a sed in (...), Hartfordshire, and thereabouts, as if they had rather
been to serve under a Scottish Covenant, then a popish Command f^ll to pulling
down Images, burning the railes about the Alta^s, and affronting papists,
which was an un^oward Omen but yet dis-heartned not the stout prelates and rest
of the Faction from their enterprises.

While these Firebrands were smoking in England and Ireland, the Scotti^h
Nation, who love not After games were not idle, but made good their bearing,
their Lion was rampant while the English were but passant, and so not being
willing to trust another pacification at the Borders, march into England with
an Arny, carrying a petition to the King, and Declaration to the Kingdom, in
one hand, and Arms (the only arguments then hopeful) in the other, and
forced their passage at Newburn, with the repulse of the English, if they
deserve so to be called, most of them having changed their hearts for French
and Spanish; so were they possessed of Newcastle, and the Bishopric of
Durham, and fought with their Adversaries upon their own ground and charges.

The success of this design being ill, and the experce great and
insupportable to the Contrivers, notwithstanding all their extravagant
oppressions, they are so impudent as to try if they could entitle the English
Nation to the maintenance and countenance of that war, which was levied by a
Faction, and persuade the King to call a parliament, intending, through the
specious pretenses of Loyalty, and promises of taking away grievances, to
deceive them into a contribution to this war, which through Gods great mercy
and good providence, they avoided, though it cost them a dissolution.

Hereupon the Instruments of violence double their diligent injustice, which
grew so intolerable, that some of the Lords take the confidence to petition the
King who being betwixt the Scylla of a Northern Army, and the Charibdis of a
Southern petition, yielded to a second parliament, yet continued, and enters
into a Treaty with the Scots, being out of hopes of any other End, unless it
were of his men and money.

Thus have you a brief account of the Scottish broiles and let the Reader but
consider the ground thereof, ( viz. the reducing that Nation to a conformity
with England, now in treaty of accommodation wtth Rome) the Instruments raising
and ^omenting it, Canterbury and the rest of that Faction, zealous for popery
and Tyranny, and the forwardness of the papists, who use not to make blind
bargains in the furthering that Design, and give a free and impartial
liberty to the use of his own reason, I doubt not but he will conclude with
me, and for me, that this war was undertaken as a hopeful mean of
subverting the protestant Religion, and the native Liberty of the British
Na^ion.

Well, Hac non successit, alia aggrediendum via. The disappointment and foil
that the enterprise received by the Scottish business, was so far from
making them cast away their confidence, that they do but double their
diligence, and call a College of these State Physicians to recover life into
this broken business. And, (...) the proverb might not be renewed, Dum
consulitur Romae, capitur Saguntum, the sudden result of those Councels
appears to have been, that some way or other this Parliament (going a course
so contrary to theirs, and, through the lowness of their present State,
gaining ground apace, though put to dispute every step) must be interrupted and
disappointed, nay, rather then fail, destroyed.

And no wonder at this practice against the parliament, which went on at that
time so roundly against their interests, and courses formerly mentioned,
propounding a further distance from Rome by a Reformation, in stead of their
reconciliation by corruptions, striking sore at the abatement, threatening the
abolition of Prelacy, which they could not spare; countenancing Puritans, whom
they could not endure; accusing and punishing Delinquents, their grand
Instruments; not sparing Canterbury or Strafford, who were the left and right
hands of the Design.

So that we need not look any further for a ground of all possable mischiefs
to be plotted and practiced against the Parliament, then its direct opposition
to the projected Design of Tyranny and Popery, which had been so far
advanced, and was now like to be interrupted and broken. All the other
differences, as particularly that of Hull was but the picking a Quarrel, and
seeking occasion to raise an Army, under pretense of a Guard, for that purpose
to which it is now employed.

And it being of so great consequence to the discovery of this Mystery, that we
understand the true natural ground of this war, on the Kings part as also
that the Cure is more easily prescribed, when the Cause is found out: I shall
take a little pains to demonstrate, that the ground of these present
calamities was not the pretended invasion of the Kings right in the business
of Hull and the Militia, but a resolution to persist in the intended mischief
to Religion and Liberty.

To which purpose let it be known to the world, which to me is sufficiently
evident, that before the execution of the Earl of Straffo^d, when his Majesty
had received no other carriage from his Parliament, then what he professed
himself satisfied with, and that if the Bi^s he had past, were again to be
offered, he should cheerfully and readily assent unto them; even then were
dispatched Letters and an Agent to the King of Denmark from his Majesty,
complaining of the Parliament, that instead of his supplies expected from
thence, among other Ends, ad propulsandos hosts, you may easily guess who
were meant (we being in a deep peace with all popish princes) he found it,
pertinaciter, and injustis de causis, in (...) vir^ exitium intentum and
defixum (undoubtedly Strafford, betwixt whose impeachment and execution the
Letters were sent) and thereupon declares himself in these words, ad alia
consilia ^nimum convertendum duximus. What those Counsels were will hereafter
more fully appear. One part of them was executed in the same Letter, wherein
an Agent was named, with credit given, and aid desired. And that it may appear
this Letter was sent, out of which these passages are excerpted not only the
Copy of the Letter, but the authentic Answer has been seen, and that it
prevailed in some sort, appeare^ not only by the Answer from Denmark, but the
Kings declaring upon the Offer to the Scots at Newcastle, that he was to have
money and horse from Denmark, to encourage them to join with him; and all
this notwithstanding the deep protestations, at that very instant, against
Foreign Forces.

And if there want further proof, it may be added that the intention to bring
up the Army to over awe if not destroy the parliament, was long before his
Majesty's departure from London, which intention if it he not sufficiently
proved by the Declaration of the Lords and Commons of the nineteenth of May
1642. with the depositions and Letters annexed, which may possibly prevail
with the indifferent Reader: yet the proposi^ tions about the same time made to
the Scots at Newcastle, of joining with the English Army against the
parliament, and the bonntifull Offers made thereupon, Of 300000. l. to he paid
down, Of four Northern Counties, and the plunder of London, The quitting of
his Revenues and customs in that Kingdom to their public use, The Kings
residence at York for the better accommodation of both Nations, or fuller r^
(...) to London, (which Sir John Henderson, who imparted that gracious Message
by virtue of Letters of full credence given him by his Majesty signed C.R. can
testify, or if he will not many honester men may, though the paper be
regained) may sufficiently convince any man, who has not determined with
himself, Non pers^adebis etiamsi persuaseris: which I have made the more bold
to add, because though the Penner of the Answer to the Petition of both Houses
March 26. 1624. defy the Devil (whom he knew would never take pains to
discover his own plot) to prove there was any such Design with his Majesty's
knowledge, yet he denies not honest men liberty of speaking the truth.

And not to let this business pass without the just honor and vindication of
the Scottish Nation, let the world take notice, that they not only refused
this offer, but acquainted those who were most entrusted with the affairs of
the English Parliament, and offered rather (if need were) their best assistance
to secure the just and lawful proceedings and privileges of Parliament, and
settle both Nations in truth and peace, the embracing whereof might have
probably prevented a great deal of bloodshed both in England and Ireland and
had been the Fore-game of our present After-game. But they were then so far
more tender of his Majesty's honor then their own safety. that they made use
neither of the Kings offer to the Scots by declaring it, nor the Scots to them
by accepting it, and one of them was so far more ambitious of his Majesty's
favor then careful of his own honor, as to acquaint the King with the
business: A^ke the Lord of Dorset who it was.

But I hasten from this Digression, and return to that conclusion, which I
think I may clearly make from these premises; That his Majesty before any of
these apparent Quarrels about Tumules, or the like, used earnest endeavors for
destroying the Parliament, so contrary both in its constitution and proceedings
to the intended subversion of Religion and Liberty, either in their persons or
privileges.

So that though these plots and transactions did not serve the Kings turn, for
the intended mischief, yet they serve mine very well in the clear proof of
the intention of the mischief. Something might further be added out of the
Irish business, to make this assertion clear, but I reserve that to its own
place, being the Mystery of this Mystery, and the Iniquity of this Iniquity.

By what has been declared, it may appear what aspect the King and the
Councels in which he was engaged had toward the Parliament of England. Let us
proceed to examine the cour^es which were afterward taken in prosecution of
this Design against them, and those that for love of Religion and Liber^y
adhered to them; and by considering the Ways, Counsels, Instruments, which
have been used in this service, we shall obtain yet further evidence, that
this present war, undertaken by the King and his party was intended for the
subvers on of the professed Religion, and established Government. When therefore
the Armies raised both in England and Ireland (not without some relustancy, as
not having performed their intended service) were unavoidably to be dis-banded
in the declining part of the year 1641. we must suppose a Counsel most
solemnly to be called at White Hall about July or August, before the Kings
going into Scotland (it being then very seasonable in regard that the Irish
Committee (especially so able and active men as Gormonston, Muskery, Plunket,
Brown and Bourke, who were privately treated with) was then in England)
wherein, as may appear by the precedent and future practices, it was laid as a
ground, That this Parliament, with the Puritanes, their Adherents, who stood so
obstinately in the way of this propounded, and so far promoted Design, must
be removed, or subdned. And to this End ways of violence (blood being the
Whores drink, Revel. 17. 6. and i^perium quolibet pretio constans been, an
absolute rule being cheap at any rate) are resolved upon, especially
considering that many broken pieces of the Armies raised against Scotland might
easily be made use of again, the Occasion being very little different. And in
this Conspiracy was that monst^ous Rebellion in Ireland (to use the words in
the Kings answer to the Petition of the Irish Commanders, dated at Oxford
December 1. 1642. for we cannot wish better words, though we expect better
deeds) practiced by those merciless and idolatrous Rebels, more then probably
contrived. Let us stand behind the curtain, some policy may be learnt, and
honesty too, by way of defiance.

After the Proposition of the destroying this Parliament, in case it could not
be reduced to the service of this Catholic Design, (which was almost past
hope, seeing no more royal inclinations in them, after so many Acts of Grace,
besides personal honors, and offers made to some, accepted by others) which
was resolved doubrlesse, nemine contradicente. The next consultation must
naturally and necessarily be of the manner, which must likewise be Confusion
and Blood; sceleribus non nisi per scelera tutum est iter.

But nothing is to be done rashly, the Cause being as full of hazard as
importance; let therefore the State of the Kingdom of England, and the
neighbor Kingdoms and States, in reference to this Cause be duly considered.

The condition of England may be thus represented, for the body of it; It
consists of Papists, Protestants, viz. the King, Prelates, Courtiers, and
Cavaliers. the dissolute Gentry, the superstitious Clergy, the profane and
ignorant people the only Protestants now accounted of, all the rest are but
Anabaptists and Brownists; and a third party of Purita is that is Lovers of the
Protestant Religion, with the desire of Reformation, friends to the Parliament,
and native Liberty of the Subject. This latter part though very strong, yet may
be supposed well balanced by the other two, whom they without a mistake, as
now appea^es presumed might be made one, upon the Coincidencie of popery,
absolute power, Prelacie, indifferency in Religion, and profaneness;
especially with the advantages of their opposition to puritanisme and
Reformation, and the manifold pretenses that might be continually made against
the Parliament. And whereas it might be objected that the Parliament now made
indissoluble by a late act, would be a very great impediment, in regard of its
power and estimation with the people, especially now after their pressures
sustained for want of Parliaments.

This was put of with the projects of defaming and disgraceing it, withdrawing
some of the Members, corrupting others, and bringing the Kingdom into that
condition that the Parliament shall be constrained to disingage the people by
requiring Contribution, rather then engage them by present freedom and
reformation. England thus represented is no great discouragement to the work.

But what shall be done with Scotland? a people full of foresight and
resolution; their late carriage toward this very business, has given
abundant testimony, That they upon the stateing of the Quarrel by the
Parliament, for Religion and Liberty will easily be drawn into their
assistance.

The course since taken, seems grounded upon such Council as this; The King
is to go into Scotland; and so to pas^e by the Armies, the Commanders of whieh
may occasionally be saluted, and there he may upon the place be advised, to
what may be best for his ends. If by fair offers and pretenses they can be
deluded, let them not be spared, that they may be either engaged by kindness,
or upbraided with unkindnesse. If they be found peremptory, since there is an
advantage of the Kings presence* and so many resolved Cavaliers to attend him
(as there did both Popish and others) let some of the Heads of the faction bt
taken off, as Argyle for one, and Hamilton likewise (who by playing booty on
both sides that he might be sure to save his stake had like to have lost all)
which was accordingly attempted by Crawfords Design but through Gods
providence prevented, by making a difference betwixt the Contrivers, and
stirring up a more ^oble resolution in one of the Commanders (though since
unworthy enough) who thought and said, it was the work of Butchers and not
Soldiers, that was propounded. But let the worst be supposed and provided for,
As Scotland is for the most part Puritanicall, so is Ireland Popish. And the
Irish Papists may first suppress the Protestants among themselves, and so not
only occasion the Exhaustion of England and the distraction of the Parliament
there, by a war, but also be serv^ceable upon the perfection of their work,
or an allowed Cessation from it, to strengthen the Kings party in En^land* or
annoy Scotland to the prevention of their Assistance. Very good or at least
very true.

But what may be expected of Holland? from the people little hind^ance, being
drowned in their own interest of gain: Were we all Spaniards, we could have
supplies from thence for our money; and from the Prince of Orange (who has
well gained, not only by that state, but upon it) all possible assistance by
reason of the contra^t of marriage with England, and the possibility there may
be of requiting him in the same kind, when our work is done. Which (by the
way) when the Netherlanders are awake they shall do well ^o consider of, and
reflect upon the Belgic blood, and English treasure expended in the freeing
them from that bondage, to which by (...) at supplies against the Parliament
they are hastening again. As for Denmark the case is clear, the Obligation
of Consanguinity the interest of Royalty will engage that Prince, and to put
it utterly out of doubt the encouragement given by Letters under his own hand,
is abundantly sufficient.

As for France and Spain, Popery and Monarchy, (or rather Tyranny) will bring
^n them, (notwithstanding, their great and important differences) as Pilate and
Herod, to join in crucifiing Christ: The greatest doubt may seem of France,
Spain having a firmer interest in the Papists of Ireland and England; but
considering it is for the Catholic Cause, And that if the proceedings of the
true Protestants of England and Scotland prosper, it may be an ill president to
the Protestants of France, to strive to regain, what the other strive to keep:
no doubt he will cast a favorable eye upon this business, as now appears by
sending his Agent into Scotland, to hinder the Union of the two Nations.

Things being thus digested (as in all reason they might and were) no wonder
though the King upon his return from Scotland* and the Rebellion begun in
Ireland, altered his language and carriage to the Parliament, and sought
nothing more then occasions of beginning the Quarrel; as by the illegal
accusation of their members, Going to the house of Commons to demand them, so
attended; upon whose instigation, and with what intention, appears by the
Queens carriage at his frustrate return, as also by the confessions of diverse
of that desperate Guard. These violent assassinating courses attempted in
England and Scotland, practiced in Ireland, though they are not certain
Evidences, are usual signs of a Popish Design, and Jesuiticall Councels.

After this attempt, (not through pretended fear, (for his Majesty adventured
into the City the next day, with a small Guard) but through indignation at the
disappointed mischief, and, (as the Lord Digbie says) to keep the Cavaliers
from trampling and reproach,) the King removes from London, cum tota sequela,
except some who were left to be Agents in City and Parliament for this great
service, whom we could as well have spared.

And now the plot of raising an Army, long before contrived being ready for the
birth, June Lucina f^r opem, Let the Queen find a pretense to go into Holland,
(taking with her the Crown Jewels, which were pawned or sold, not to gain,
but lose the Pearl of price) with the more freedom to negotiate foreign
supplies of Money, Arms, Ammunition, and Commanders, whither likewise some
other officious persons, as Iermine, Digbie, etc. were before, by his Majesty's
warrant, despatched, and to speak without flattery, she did special service,
for which no doubt she shall have her Indulgences and Pardons free, as she has
occasion to use them.

In the mean while the King is going on pilgrimage in Devotion to this Romish
Cause, and though continually petitioned for return, and obtested by bleeding
Ireland, makes little stay till he comes to York, where after the Courting of
that Country, and his many Protestations, (taking the Lords in for security,
June 15. 1642. whose honors were pawned for his Majesty's intentions whereby
it was thought the people were better prepared then indeed they were) he goes
to Hull, and upon Sit John Hothams refusal takes occasion to raise a Guard for
his person in a place, whose Loyalty was so much magnified, which by the help
of the Commission of Array, and foreign supplies has engendered a plentiful
issue of three or four Armies.

But what is all this to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, if there
had been any such intention in the raising the Army, the Papists whose special
interest it was, should have been taken in, who are by a Proclamation dated at
York, August 10. 1642. forbidden, not only the Court, (a place so unfit for
them, the Queen being now absent) but any Office or service in the Kings Army;
and as if his Majesty were so far from expecting their assistance, that he
feared their vengeance, in his instructions to the Commissioners of Array,
August 29. 1642. dated at Nottingham, charge is given that Recusants be
disarmed.

This cannot be denied, but it may be contradicted, as it was by his Majesty,
in an answer to the Petition of the Recusants of Lancashire, dated at Chester,
September 27. 1642. where they are not only allowed, but (according to the
known Law of the Land) required to provide sufficient arms, for themselves,
their servants, and tennants.

And whereas it may be said the case was different in August and September; its
yielded, his Majesty's Case was different, though his Cause the same. To have
received them before others were engaged, had been to disingage the
Protestants and interrupt the work in its tender beginnings. And therefore it
must be so timed, that as many Protestants as could be deluded with pretenses,
might be drawn in and engaged, beyond a retreat, before the assistance of the
Papists was required.

Thus have you an account of those ground^, for which those Counsels,
Con^rivances, and disguises, by which the maine Army countenanced by the Kings
favor and presence, was raised against the Parliament.

I have no mind to trace it over-shooes, through that innocent blood which
has been spilt by it, neither is it to my present purpose to do it. The
endeavors to the same end in the North, by the Earl of Newcastle, in Wales
and Cornwall by the Marqu of Hertford, and Sir Ralph Hopton; (These latter
grounded rather as I suppose upon the Principles of Prerogative then Popery) I
purposely omit: only let me take notice, that this work of darkness has
made the dark corners of the land its refuge and received most assistance from
places most void of the knowledge of God, which we are in a high degree to
impute to the more then barbarous cruelty of the Prelates not only not
providing, but preventing their supplies, and discouraging the Liberality and
Piety of those who endeavored the propagation of the Gospel, by disappointing
the intention of buying in Impropriations, and discountenancing Lecture.

These Armies thus raised, and made up by Papists prelates, Courtiers,
superstitious Clergymen, dissolute Gentry, and a Herd of profane ignorant
people; what by treating and fighting, by false friends and bitter enemies
(though the just hand of God upon this Nation, for their idolatry, and
backsliding bloodshed and oppression, and undervaluing the precious Gospel of
Jesus Christ) have turned this Kingdom into a Field of blood, and of the
esteem and envy of other Nations, have made it the pity of our few friends,
and the reproach of our adversaries.

But why should all this Calamity be reduced to his Majesty's Counsels and
Courses, has not he offered Treaties of peace* as at Nottingham, and
entertained them, as at Oxford.

I know there are many that afflict themselves with the neglect of the offer
from Nottingham, sent from the desolate Standare, and look upon it as the
loss of a happy opportunity. I deny not but his Majesty, in that condition not
out of love to peace (an affection that could not well consist with those (...)
endeavors to leavie war) but fear lest he might lose that power he strived
to increase, might be for some time real in that motion but his inclinations
to it were not so strong as to revoke his Proclama^ion. (which measure not
only the Scots found, but the Irish Rebels likewise, now by authority derived
from his Majesty, called Catholic Subjects) or to resist (as the re^ is) the
suggestions of the Earl of Bristoll, who desired him (...) (...) his promise
to the Q^eene and therefore not like to have been so constant, as to have
produced a settled peace.

As for the other Treaties offered and entertained, as they were intended so
they proved, accommodations for war, rather the^ peace, as that Overture before
the Brainford business: And as for that treaty at Oxford, If the King had
entertained the same disposition toward his Parliament in England, as he has
since expressed toward his late Rebels in Ireland, he would not have been so
scrupulous in all the passages of it, and so indulgent to the almost starved
Rebels, by the manifold advantages of that Cessation, afterward to be examined.

It is true, there have been diverse Overtures since, the most of them private,
but we have lost by every bargain; among the rest the Queen was appointed and
used as a most hopeful instrument of quenching the flames she had so
diligently kindled and blown, and as I am too truly informed, favor offered to
her faction by those who (though all this was come upon us) ought not to have
stretched out their hands to a strange God shall not God search this out? Psa.
44. But what peace so long as, etc.

There were possibly some Lords and Gentlemen (in other respects) of worth, as
Hartford, South hampton, Falkland, and some others, (who finding things
contrary to their expectation, and being wearied with the tediousness of this
unnatural war) that had and have real inclinations to peace: but what does
this avail us, when his Majesty is wholly swayed by those Counsels which are
as averse to peace, as to the Protestant Religion, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom; so that there is little hope that the Arms taken up by the King
should be willingly laid down, till the ends for which they were raised, the
subduing the Parliament and Puritans, the subversion of Religion and Liberty,
(which God prevent) be accomplished.

But I am not ignorant of the prejudice and unbelief that all which has been
or can be said in this business is like to meet with, so averse are men from
looking upon this as a Quarrel of Religion, and from laying it to heart
accordingly. I shall therefore take the boldness to produce yet some further
Evidence, whereby it may appear that the Interests of the King and Papists as
in all parts, so particularly in Ireland, are deeply and desperately involved.

First in general, the Papists (who do not use to reckon without their Host)
in all places interpret the Cause of the King against the Parliament to be
their own, and declare it not only in words, but in their personal
assistance, and plentiful Contributions, as appears by the notice given to the
Papists in Flanders, of the acceptable service they should do to the Catholic
Cause, by sending money for the maintenance of the Army against the Parliament,
witnessed upon Oath. And though our selves who are most nearly concerned are so
hard of belief in this Case, yet the neighbor Protestants, as of Zeland and
Scotland, do so state it, as appears by the Letter of solicitation for a
seasonable engagement in the behalf of the English Protestants, from Zeland to
the General Assembly of Scotland, and by the Remonstrance of the Assembly of
Scotland, to the Convention of Estates there, and their answer thereunto, dated
June 27. July 4. 1643.

But the fullest and saddest Evidence in this business is to be drawn from the
due examination, and consideration of the Rebellion in Ireland, (for so it was
once called) wherein there have perished near two hundred thousand souls, by
the hands of those wicked and detestable Rebels (as they are called by his
Majesty in his Declaration of April the 8. 1642.) so odious to God and all good
men, with whom if his Majesty's Counsels prove consederate, I think it will be
sufficient to convince our moderate men, and awake them out of that Neutrality,
which is as unprofitable as it is detestable, since it neither procures
friends, nor reconciles enemies.

That the ground of that Rebellion was the advancement of the Catholic Cause,
is professedly declared by the Acts of the General Assembly of Rebels at
Kilkenny, held 1642. which Acts were printed at London, March the sixth 1643.
in these words.

FOR the exaltation therefore of the Holy Roman Catholic Church, for the
advancement of his Majesty's service, and for the preservation of the Lives,
Estates and Liberties of his Majesty's true Subjects of this Kingdom, against
the injustice, murders, O* du^um *
massacres, rapes, depredations, robberies, burnings, frequent breaches of
Publi^e Faith and quarter, and destruction daily acted and perpetrated upon his
Majesty's said Subjects, and advised, contrived, and daily executed by the
malignant party, some of them managing the Government and affairs of Estate in
Dublin, and some other parts of this Kingdom to his Highness great
disservice, and complying with their Confederates, the malignant party in
England, and elsewere, who as it is known to all the world, complot and
practice to dishonor and dest^oy his Majesty, his Royal Consort, their
Children, and Monarchical Government, which is of most dangerous consequence,
to all the Monarchies and Princes of Christendom. The said Assembly does order
and establish a Council by the name of a supreme Council, of the confederate
Catholics of Ireland, etc.

You see how near the Exaltation of the holy Roman Catholic Church, and the
advancement of his Majesty's service, stand together, and who are accounted his
Majesty's true Subjects, who Malignants. But all this is easily blasted with
the Consideration that they are the Expressions of Rebels, pretending his
Majesty's name and service for their advantage; No, under favor, they are the
expressions of his Roman Catholic Subjects, so styled in the late Cessation,
concluded in his Majesty's name, and by his Majesty's authority, September 15.
1643. and ranked equally with other his Majesty's good Subjects, and therefore
no reason to discountenance this Evidence, not yet those of the like nature
hereafter to be produced. However it abundantly shows the end for which it
was mentioned, the proving that Rebellion to be a Quarrel of Religion.

Let us now try what Evidence may be brought forth to prove that the Papists
in Ireland, and the Armies in England, engaged against the Parliament, are
doing the same work, and that there is a line of Communication betwixt their
Counsels. To this purpose, let us consider a Commission, and a Cessation, to
which whatsoever else is to be said in this matter may be reduced.

Common fame, none of the worst witnesses, has brought to every man's ears the
noise of the Kings favoring the Irish Massacre, and that the Catholic
Subjects there have called themselves the Queens Army, and intimated
themselves the Kings, by saying they had good warrant in black and white for
their proceedings, and crying out upon the English Parliament and Puritanes, as
the Kings Enemies and theirs. It were well worth the knowing the truth of this
so important business. Let us go as near it as the nature of a Mystery will
admit.

And first let the Copy of the Commission, said to be given by the King to his
Catholic Subjects of Ireland, be read and examined.

From our Camp at Newrie this fourth of November 1641. Philem Oneale. Rorie
Macguire.
To all Catholics of the Romish Party both English and Irish, within the
Kingdom of Ireland, we wish all Happiness, Freedom of Conscience, and
Victory over the English Heretics, who have for a long time tyrannized over
our bodies, and usurped by Extortion our Estates.
BE it hereby made known unto you all our Friends and Contrymen, that the
Kings most excellent Majesty (for many great and urgent Causes him thereunto
moving, reposing trust and confidence in our fidelities) has signified unto us
by his Commission under the great Seal of Scotland, bearing date at Edingburgh
the first day of this instant October 1641. and also by Letters under his sign
manual, bearing date with the said Commission, of diverse great and heinous
astronts that the English Protestants, especially the Parliament there have
published against his Royal Prerogative, and also against our Catholic
Friends within the Kingdom of England; The Copy of which Commission we have
here sent unto you to be published with all speed in all parts of this
Kingdom, that you may be assured of our sufficient warrant and authority
herein.

THE COMMISSION.
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the faith* etc. To all our Catholic Subjects within Our Kingdom
of Ireland, greeting. Know ye, that We for the safeguard and preservation of
Our person, have been enforced to make Our abode and residence in our Kingdom
of Scotland for a long season, occasioned by reason of the obstinate and
disobedient carriage of Our Parliament in England against Us, who have not
only presumed to take upon them the government and disposing of those Princely
Rights and Prerogatives that have justly descended upon Us from Our
Predecessors, both Kings and Queens of the said Kingdom for many hundred
years past, but also have possessed themselves of the whole strength of the
said Kingdom, in appointing Governors, Commanders, and Officers, in all parts
and places therein, at their own wills and pleasures, without Our consent,
whereby we are deprived of Our Sovereignty, and left naked without defense. And
forasmuch as we are (in Our self) very sensible, that these storms blow
aloft, and are very likely to be carried by the vehemence of the ^rotestant
Party a Pu^itan in another copy.
into Our Kingdom of Ireland, and endanger Our Regal power and authority
there also: Know ye therefore, that we reposing much care and trust in your
duties and obedience, which we have for many years past found, Do hereby give
unto you full power and authority to assemble and meet together with all the
speed and diligence that a business of so great a Consequence does require,
and to advise and consult together by sufficient and discreet numbers, at all
times, days, and places, which you shall in your judgments hold most
convenient and material for the ordering, settling, and effecting of this Great
work, (mentioned and directed unto you in Our Letters) and to use all politic
ways and means possible to possess your selves (for Our use and safety) of
all the Forts, Castles, and places of strength and defense within the said
Kingdom (except the Places, Persons, and Estates of Our loyal and loving
Subjects the Scots) and also to arrest and seize the Goods, Estates, and
Persons of all the English Protestants within the said Kingdom to Our use: And
in your care and speedy performance of this Our will and pleasure we shall
perceive your wonted duty and allegiance unto Us, which we shall accept and
reward in due time. witness Our self at Edinburgh the first day of October,
in the seventeenth year of Our Reign.


This Deponent makes Oath, that about the middle of November last, living then
in the Parish of Saint Michans, near Dublin, being accompanied with one master
Stapleton of Dublin aforesaid, Gentleman, they happened into the company of a
Popish Priest, commonly called Father Birne, who being formerly acquainted with
the said master Stapleton, desired to drink with him at a Ta^ern called the
Bull, upon Merchants key in Dublin, where (...) of the injuries and troubles of
the times, the Priest answered, that the Irish (not enduring to have them
called Rebels) had sufficient warrant for what they did, and stood strongly in
defense of their actions; and presently to justify his words, produced a
writing, according to the tenor of the premises mentioned in this writing
abovesaid; whereof the Deponent desired a Copy, and he willingly yielded unto
it, and thereupon he wrote this Copy out of his literatim, in the presence of
the said master Stapleton, who is now living in Dublin.

This is the true copy of that Commission, with the annexed Warrant and
Deposition (for I will conceal nothing in a business of this importance) as
it came to my hands in a paper thus endorsed: A copy of the forged Commission
in Ireland, published by those traitorous Rebels, Sir Philemy Oneale Knight,
Rory Maguier Esquire, and others, with their lying perswasi^n to seduce and
stir up the whole Romish Party to Rebellion, wherein may be seen how
heinously his Majesty is abused and the Parliament unjustly taxed by the
^apists.

This last clause I take for granted, but as for the rest, give me leave to try
whether the inside or the outside of my paper be the tiuer. And this I shall
do with all due respect both to the King and Parliament, that his Majesty may
see that there was some fire in the midst of all the smoke, and that the
jealousies of his people, concerning the Irish business, were not altogether
groundless; as also that the King may have a sit occasion to ab^ure this
Commission, and clear himself of the aspersions cast upon him, with respect
thereto, and chastise (as his Majesty's phrase is) those wicked fellows (but I
crave mercy, they are not my fellows, they are owned Subjects, but I, and the
rest of the Parliaments friends proclaimed Rebels) And that the more full and
particular satisfaction may be given (for discourses and protestations will not
be taken any longer for payment) I shall give all the Arguments I can to prove
the reality of it.

First therefore let us consider the time (a material circumstance) when this
Commission is dated that is the first of October 1641. in one copy, and the
fourth in another, (no great difference) the Massacre beginning the 23. of the
same month, which was presently after the Conferences at White Hall with the
Lord Muskerie and his fellows, who returned into Ireland the same month his
Majesty went for Scotland, leaving the Lord Dillon, who was presently after
sent with the Queens Letters, requesting or requiring his being made
Counselor of Ireland, to his Majesty then at Edinburgh, where it is said this
Commission was signed with the broad Seal of that Kingdom, being not then
settled in the hands of any Officer who could be answerable for the use of it,
but during the vacancy of the Chancellors place, intmsted with Marquess
Hammilton, and by him with one master John Hammilton, the Scribe to the Cross
Petitioners in Scotland, and sometimes under the care of master Endimion
Porter; a very fit opportunity for such a clandestine transaction. And let it
not be omitted, that presently after the date of this Commission, Dillon,
Butler, and diverse other Irish Commanders, of which the Court was then full,
were dispatched for Ireland by his Majesty's License, not without the just
suspicion of Bystanders.

The Commission it self, for the grounds and language of it, is very suitable
to other dispatches and writings under his Majesty's name, expressing much
bittemesse against the Parliament, and jealousy of the diminution of his
Prerogative, which was always his great fear. But I shall be unwilling to
fetch the least proof from the matter or style of the Commission the Argument
is not so beggarly as to necessitate a Petitio Principii.

Let us go on to examine the grounds, why such a thing should be forged, and
why such a thing should be granted, and see which are the more probable.

I know no ground why such a Commission should be forged. It was not to make
his Majesty odious, for in all their writings they express all tenderness of
his honor, and forwardness of their obedience particularly in the
forementioned Assembly at Kilkenny, where, next after the Article for the
enjoyment of all the Privileges and Immunities of the Roman Church, as in the
ninth year of Henry the third, the Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty is
established, (its likely according to the agreement of the Reconciliation with
a Salvo to the Sea of Rome) and their constant and general professions of
loyalty (now so well confirmed by his Majesty's expressions to them, and their
contributions to him) do clearly evince, that they had not so much ill will to
the King, as to raise such a scandal of him. And more especially, though a
Commission might do them some advantage, yet the forgery of one could not but
be prejudicial, it being a necessary engagement of his Majesty in his own
justification, to have used the utmost of his skill and power against them, as
to have staid with his Parliament and prevented a war in England. But though a
forged Commission might be unprofitable, yet a real one I wonder not should be
demanded though a stranger to the Mystery would wonder it should be granted.

First, that hereby the King, whom they knew in his own disposition apt enough
to start from his Expressions upon an advantage, might be firmly bound to them
and their proceedings, as also that the more backward Papists, who were more
good natured then to rebel against a King whom they had ^ound so propitious,
and more wary, then by such Rebellion to forfeit their Estates, which under
him, with the advantage of their Religion, they doubted not to enjoy, might the
more easily be brought in.

If it be objected, this might be done by a forged Commission* I answer, not so
well; Forgery is an unruly help, being often requited with the double
hinderance of a discovery. Papists, though sometimes they delude us, they deal
freely, especially in a common Catholic Cause, with one another. And what end
such fraud could have upon the Protestants, unless a little to amaze them at
first, and then exasperate them, I cannot conceive. However it is, be assured
that Oneale and Mac-^arty bear so high upon this Commission, that they have
offered Major Monro, and the Scots in V^ster, an appeal to the King which have
the truer Commission, and which are the better Subjects, and according to that
determination to quit or hold their employment if the Scots would mutually
promi^e the same.

But sure, says my honest Reader, who thinks other men mean as well as he,
this cannot be. Why not? as well as that Commission for the cutting thy throat
at London, much after this ^enour and pasted in the same private manner. But
how can it stand with his Ma^estes Protestations against them, under the name
of wicked and detestable Rebels, with his Declaration against any toleration of
Religion there, or (...) of the Laws in force against Recusants, with his
Pr^clamation of Rebellion against then, dated ^anuary ^. 1641. directly
opposite to this Commission?

It were heartily to be wished, that his Majesty had ^ept his word as well with
the Protestants as with the Popish Faction. There passed one Article in the
Treaty of marriage with the Queen, which through the care of Canterbury, and
the pains of Windebank, has been better kept then any Protestant
Protestation. The words of which Article are faithfully translated out of the
French copy, to this effect: The 27. Article is, That the King of Great
Britain, having regard unto the prayer of the Lady, and (...) testify his
affection to her, shall grant unto his Catholic Subjects the security of
their lives and goods, so that they shall not be troubled for making profession
of the Catholic Religion, they rendering unto him that obedience and fidelity
they ow^ unto him, to which they shall not be thought deficient for refusing to
take any Oath, or do any act contrary to their Religion. But it is answered,
It concerns his Majesty most to look to that, how his words and warrants
agree: yet we will be so bold, in a Cause of so great consequence as the
imminent danger of the Protestant Religion, as to examine some of his Actions,
and see whether they have been more suitable to the Commission, o^ Proclamation.

The Proclamation it self though in its nature opposite ye in its time and
circumstances was too suitable to the Commission, being deferred from the
latter end of October to the first of January, and then so sparingly printed,
so warily published, as if it had been under the control of some former Act
whose leave must first be craved. But his Majesty has reason to express
violence against these his Catholic Subjects, or to chastise them at least,
for they went beyond this Commission, though supposed real; that gave but a
Yard, they took an Ell: though they were allowed to sei^e the goods, estates,
and persons of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, yet they were not allowed to
cut their throats, (unle^le the private Letters concomitant can help out at
such a pinch) and their very transgression in this matter might justly occasion
and provoke the title of merciless wicked Rebels. But to return to Actions,
the best Commentaries upon words; it is to be feared they will be found more
agreeable to the Commission then the Proclamation, as may be discerned in the
unanswered Remonstrance of the rise and progress of the Grand Rebellion in
Ireland. For instance, What shall indifferent men think of his Majesty's
withdrawing himself from his Parliament, declared by the then real, though now
pretended Parliament, to be a great obstruction to the prosperity of the Irish
undertakings? Of his raising war against his Subjects here, the greatest
service that could be done to the pretended rebels there, being a diversion of
that strength, and a distraction of those Counsels that should have suppressed
them? Of his granting passes for notorious Papists, as Butler, the sons of the
lord Nettersfield* and others, to go thither, for which see the Declaration of
Parliament March. 16. 1641. and, if you will the Answ March 19. The stopping of
provisions going to the supply of the Army against them taking away the horses
prepared by the E. of Leicester for that service, as appears by his complaint
in a printed letter to the Earl of Northumberlana? Of the free access of those
that have been active in that Design to his Majesty's camp and Court? Of his
putting in demu^res to the Bill of pressing soldiers, and denial to the
sending ships for that service?

It must not be denied that his Majesty was earnest in pressing care of that
business of Ireland upon the Houses, and passed some things to the advantage
of it, and (in a message of the 8. of April 1642.) spared not to offer his
going in person to chastise those wicked and detestable Rebels, with the
renouncing of all other Ends, (but if his Majesty had continued in that angry
mind, he might with ease have chastised them, when they came over to him, as
they have done ^ince plentifully.) I wish I had many more such actions to
repeat. But it must be considered, there was a Proclamation that required some
countenance, and could not well have less then it had: but I forestall no man's
judgment, but leave the impartial reader to the weighing what has been said,
and what has been produced upon Oath in the Declaration of the Commons, July
25. 1643. And if the balance be equal, I shall only cast in some scruples of
the late Cessation, which, unless the beam be false, will make the Commission
weigh down the Proclamation.

1. First the scruple of etc. in the nomination of the parties in this Treaty.
Is his Majesty's Title of Defender of the Faith come to an intricate etc. Y^s,
and good reason, for the other party, with whom his (...) treats upon equ^ll
terms, are content with an etc. and are called His Roman Catholic Subjects
now in arms, etc. whereas it should have been added according to the Acts of
K^lkenny, for the Exaltation of the Holy Roman Catholic Church.

2. The scruple of their sudden transformation from monstrous merciless
Rebels into Subjects conj^yned with other his Majesty's good Subjects. What
shall the (...) of Scotland think of this, who hardly obtained the l^ke
retractation when they defended the P^orestant Religion, or the Parliament of
England, and their Adherents, who cannot yet find that favor. But yet, Mopso
Nisa datur quid non speremus, etc. His Majesty sure had thoughts of this
dishonorable recancation, when he was so loath to publish the Proclamation
against them.

3. The third scruple is ^ersecute, for that is the word in the Irish copy,
not pros^cute; A license granted to (...)! ^ure the Bishops had a finger in
this Article, and that Persecuted Protestants should expect no protection from
his Majesty, nor any of his forces, against the Parsecution of the Papists, but
rather have occasion to fear the joining of the forces the King shall have
interest in, in the Pers^cution, as is desired by the Catholics, to whom no
such trifle must be denied, is to me a sad story.

4. The fourth scruple, that these Catholic Subjects shall have liberty to
send such Agents to his Majesty, as they shall think fit from time to time.
Priests and Jesuits not excepted.

If the Scales be not yet turned, take the whole Cessation, and the thirty
thousand eight hundred pound, and that will (...) weigh it down to the ground.
But I have much (...) leave the contemplation of this Cessation, Let us take a
second view,

1. Of the time when it was granted, most seasonably when the P^pish party was
driven to great Extremities for want of victual, and had been in greater, had
nor the Forces raised and (...) by the Parliament been seduc^d into a
disaff^ction to their service.

2. O^ the Grounds, all Acts of importance that are to pass the eye and
censure of the world use to come armed against a^l Exceptions with a preamble,
showing the ground and necessity of them: How comes it to be here ^mitted, that
we have neither real* nor This discovery was p^nned upon the sight of the na^ed
Cessation, as it came from ^reland before the short cove^ing of the Grounds and
Motives, etc. which are not so considerable ^s to occasion any alteration
unless of the lord pretended.
pretended causes and considerations but a downright Ces^ation, or rather
Accommodation as Soldiers judge it. Was it such broad^^ced iniquity that no
mask neit^er in Oxford nor Dublin would fit it? Was it neither for the
preservation of the Protestant Religion* nor affection to the ancient and
native ^ingdom of Scotland, nor for the reconciling of the Distractions of the
Kingdom of England: Since those dull contrivers could f^nde no matter for a
foundation give us leave to ^upply. Seeing the Catholic cause (which the King
of England is induced to serve either nakedly or clothed with this pret^rce o^
upholding his Power and Prerogative, which is suggested to be invaded and
endangered by the Puritans there) is now very much concer^ed in the due
ordering of the affairs of Great Britain and Ireland. And whereas the Irish
Catholics have given so good t^stimony of their approved zeal and cruelty in
massacring near two hundred thousand Heretics and may hereafter do the li^e
service in England and Scotland, if in this their pre^^nt extremity they may be
respited and relieved. And whereas it is of very great consequence that the
Papists and all that will upon any pretense or for any advantage, adhere to
them in this Cause* be firmly united together against the Puritans and their
ad^erents, whether in Eng^and or Scotland: It is concluded and accorded betwixt
the two Etcaetera's, that a Cessation o^ Arms the like was never heard of,
should be agreed on, from whence the Catholic Cause and Party may expect
these Advantages.

1. Free importation of Arms, Ammunition, Victuals and Provis^ons of all
kinds, and free access of any of their Con^ederates from any part of the
world. 2. (...) tran^portation i^to E^gland, or other parts, of such suppli^s
which s^all be necessary for his Majesty's service against the Puritans and
Pa^iament t^ere. 3. The strengthening the Popish party with the Union of the
indifferent Protestants, and consequently weakening and dividing the Adversary,
upon whom the whole strength may be now turned. 4. Either an advantage to
ruin the Scottish Army in Ulster, if they refuse the Cessation, and stay, or
if they withdraw, an opportunity to settle Ireland, and among England or
Scotland, as occasion shall be. 5. That some useful Prisoners (as the Earl of
Antrim who was then in hold) might be released. 6. That there shall be a
Reserve of Wood-Kernes, whom this Cessation shall not reach, who shall kill and
spoil at their pleasure, th^se who may be presumed disaffected to the Catholic
Cause.
And thus have I made bold to represent to the world this horrid ghastly Monster
of the Irish massacre, and (I hope more to the worlds benefit then my own
content) raked in this sink of iniquity. The Evidence is furnished* Let the
diligent impartial Reader, and the Conscience of mankind, make a judgment
upon it.

But seeing the discovery and foresight of mischief is but half a wise man's
work, (which now every body pretends to, and I for company) Let us study in a
few words to declare the best Rules of prevention to this Inundation of Tyranny
and Popery, which from the Romish Sea is like to overwhelm us; The prud^nt man
foresees the Plague and hides himself.

Many rules both of Piety and Policy might be laid down upon the grounds of
Scripture, Reason, and Experience. But since the most of them are so well
summed up in that solemn League and Covenant agreed on and entered into by
these two Nations of England and Scotland; I will not scatter them, but
propound the deliberate Entrance into that Covenant, and the faithful
pursuance thereof to be the most Religious and reasonable way, to unite and
strengthen the too much divided party of true Protestants against these
Conspiracies discovered, which are likely yet further to enlarge their bounds.

There are some, it may be, who stand off for want of the Kings consent. We
want not good authority, though such is our unhappiness, that for the present,
his concurrence is rather to be wished then hoped. In the mean time let not the
Truth and Gospel of Christ be sacrificed to the Counsels and Consederacies of
evil and unreasonable men. Especially, when they who have a great share in
enacting and conserving those Laws by which our Religion is confirmed, have
engaged themselves and their authority with us; Neither let us be startled at
the noise of a Proclamation, that turns Religion into Treason* and Union into
Sedition. Proclamations are neither the Laws of England, nor yet of the Medes
and Persians which alter not, but may be retracted either with some difficulty,
as that against Scotland, or more ease, as that concerning Irel^nd.

Others there are who are not strangers to the present affairs, but there is
something that ^its nearer them then Religion or public Liberty, which they
are loath to adventure by such an engagement in this declining State of the
Parliament affairs, and therefore study an ungodly and unprofitable
Neutrality. To these men I wish a sound mind and a changed heart, to (...)
first the Kingdom of God: Let such con^ider, that if he who was the Way, the
Truth and the Life, prescribed the true way to life, they are in the false, his
rule in such cases is, He that saves shall lose. And let them know further,
that they will one day have more need of protection from God, then his Cause
has now of theirs, when they shall (without repentance) receive this repulse,
Go to the gods whom ye have served.

Me think it should not be in vain to spend a word or two upon that more
t^mperate party of them, who are now unhappily engaged against the Parliament
in this wretched Cause. Sure there are some to whom the Counsels of the
Digbies, and the insolent carriage of Prince Rupert, and his Harpyes, are
little less odious, then these courses which the two Houses of Parliament are
constrained to. There is yet place for Repentance (God send Grace:) And if the
sense of their own honor, which they take so much pains to bury in the ruins
of their Countries Liberty, nor yet of the honor of God* which if not their
intentions, yet certainly their* Actions desperately strike at, in this
apparent danger to Religion, yet let the consideration of the issue of that
work they are about, supposing their prevailing (not so probable as they may
conceive) a little move them. Will it not as much trouble them to see the
Kingdom governed (as now one part of it is) by a Spanish Popish ^unto, as by
an English Protestant Parliament? To see their beloved moderation swallowed up
in the violence of that desperate Jesuitical party that rules at the Court, as
in the supposed Severity o^ those Councels, Civil or Ecclesiastical; that
govern at the City. Let such men be assured that their Ends* unless such as
are consistent with Tyranny and Popery, must give way to the predom^nant*
Interest which will be sound to be that of the Feminine Planet in the Issue,
when they have served, they shall like useless Instruments be laid aside, and
dis-regarded.

Certainly the intentions of those who are drawn in to this Popish confederacy
are so different, that I am confident if they prevail against us, their
Quarrels will be as many and bitter against each other, as now against the
Parliament. Vices are opposite and destructive, not only to virtue, but one to
another. Me thinks these Gentlemen, who pretend to justice, peace, moderation,
and something of Religion, should think themselves but ill associated, in the
midst of such profane plundering companions, to which they are not so much
companions as subjects. Sure they cannot be well at ease to see the first
fruits of this Irish Cessation presented to their union, but how then can they
endure* when his Majesty's Reregard of his Roman Catholic Subjects, shall be
brought over with their hands full of the b^ood of more then 100000,
offencelesse Protestants, whom they have cruelly massacred? Sure the
apprehensions of this cannot but shake their Prerogative faith, and make them
appreh^nd themselves in more danger from their confederates, then t^eir
supposed (...). I^ this labor to them be lost, I am sorry, but g^ad it was ^o
more.

(...) me ^peak to them who are counsellable that is, those who in the trut^
and uprightnes^e o^ their Hearts have ^ntred into this (...) and (...) engaged
(...) to the pres^rvation o^ (...) (...) and Libe^ty; such must labor ^or
sted^ in (...) (...)* lest out medicin^ prove our poison.

Let none of us go about to deceive our selves with unprofitable Treaties, or
hopes of a yet impossible Accommodation, but cheerfully and faithfully
accomplish a speedy and firm Union with the Councels and strength of Scotland
(which will encourage not only religious but wise men to join with us) it
being beyond a reasonable expectation that by our own strength or wisdom we
should extricate our selves from this growing calamity in which we are daily
more and more involved. It now becomes every man to wind up his thoughts to a
Christian resolution befitting the present necessities and Condition of the
Church of God, and walk worthy of it, and let the Lord do what seems good
unto him.

I might now make my self a great deal of more work, and create some trouble to
my Reader, if I should after this satisfaction I have given to my own heart and
the friends of this Cause of Religion, go about to satisfy the world, and
answer their several quarrels with this undertaking, but I will be more
merciful to the Reader, and more just to my self then to accuse my self by
excuses. Only I will give you a taste of that which I am like to have plenty.

The first Question will be Who is this? I answer, it matters not who, but
what. The next is a position, Sure he was a madman thus to provoke Majesty it
self, did he ever learn that verse in Homer.

(...). Yes but he has, and that in Job too. In such a cause as this, let me
not I pray you accept any man's person, neither let me give flattering titles
unto man. I hope to see the day when I shall be accounted a better subject to
the King then he that accuses me. In the mean time I am satisfied with being a
good subject to the Kingdom, and no Traitor to the Church. If I have incurred
any danger, it is to show thee thine, if a good Protestant. But there need not
have been so much bitterness used which often disadvantages a good Cause? It
is the language of the times, and not mine. A filthy ulcer must have a sharp
lance; the massacre of Ireland is a bitter cup. Quis temperet invectivis? Here
are many things produced in this Treatise that are but slender proofs? Then
take them altogether. Altogether are but a rap^idy scraped up out of the
Parliament Declarations, and such scandalous pamphlets, as Plain English, and
the English Pope? Truth is a common inheritance, and now so scarce that I was
glad to take it where I could find it. Tush I can tell mrre of these affairs
then this Discoverer? Then tell them, or tell me, and I will. But Mercurius
Aulicus will be sure to meet with you? This is no time to be afraid of Court
Bull Beggars, but if he meet with me he must go out of his way: I tell truth,
he tells lies.

But I have now done; and it may be done that which has provoked almost every
body, but my own conscience, which witnesses with me that I have not written
any willing or negligent falsehood, nor (to my best understanding) any
unseasonable or unnecessary truth. There is no man but will stand in need of
some charity, I shall find it from them that have it; from those that have it
not, I will not expect it. There are other Mysteries in this world of
Iniquity, carried on by them who under the pretense of Service do the greatest
dis-service and dishonor to the Cause of Religion and Liberty, which must
either be amended or not concealed: let other men do their share, as I have
done mine, and the world will certainly be either honester or wiser.

This Discourse cannot be better concluded then with that which is the earnest
and constant request of the Author to the Lord God of Hosts, the God of Israel,
that seeing wisdom and might are his, he would vouchsafe wisdom to the
Counselors, courage and constancy to the Soldiers, willingness to the
people, and faithfulness to all those that have or shall engage themselves in
this great Cause so infinitely valuable beyond the estates and lives of all
that undertake it. To him be glory, and peace upon Israel.

FINIS.
Imprimatur hic Liber

December. 12. 164^. JOHN WHITE.


