Imprimatur,

November. 18. 1691. Robert Southwell. P. R. S.

Medicinal Experiments; OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, FOR The most part
Simple, and Easily Prepared.

By the Honorable R. BOIL, Esquire Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

THE PREFACE OF The Publisher.
THese Receipts, taken out of a large Collection, as consisting of a few safe
Ingredients, commonly to be found at easy Rates in most places, were sent to a
learned Physician beyond Sea: To whom they were a welcome Present, and
answered, without doubt, the Ends he had in desiring them.

That Excellent Person, to whom these choice Prescriptions are owing, did
permit a few Copies of them to be Printed, and was pleased to put them in the
Hands of some of his Friends, provided, as there was occasion, they would make
Trial of them, and faithfully report the Success.

Diverse of those, who on these Conditions had received so great a Favor, held
themselves obliged to enquire for Persons affected with any of the Maladies
against which the said Medicines were prescribed; and, upon many Experiments
carefully made, having found, that frequently they have relieved those who used
them, and sometimes strangely outdone Expectation; they addressed themselves
with much Importunity to the Noble Author, to suffer Things which were of such
general Benefit, and so easily to be procured by the Poor, to be made more
public.

And at length he has been prevailed with not only to allow the former
Receipts, which but few had seen, to be Reprinted, but has, out of his rich
Treasury, stored us with a fresh Collection, which, as in Number it exceeds
what we had before, so in Quality and Virtue it falls not short of it.

And if what here, with such an honest and kind Design is offered to the
Public, be but heartily and favorably received, we may still hope for more
Blessings of this sort from him, who has not only a constant Will and great
Ability to do good, but has, perhaps, obliged the Age as much as any private
Person in it.

The Author's PREFACE.
THE following Prescriptions are a part of a Collection of Receipts and
Processes, that from Time to Time have been recommended to me by the Experience
of others, or approved by my own: Receipts that being Parable or Cheap, may
easily be made serviceable to poor Country People.

For Medicines so Simple, and for the most part so Cheap, I have found all of
them to be good in their kind: And though I think most of them safer than many
other Medicines that are in great Request, yet I do not pretend that these
should play the Part of Medicines and Physicians too; but that they may be
usefully employed by one who knows how to administer them discreetly.

I distinguish them into three Classes or Orders, annexing to the Title of each
particular Medicine one of the three first Letters of the Alphabet; wherefore A
is the Mark of a Remedy of the highst Classis of these, Recommended as very
considerable and efficatious in its kind. B, Denotes a second or inferior sort,
but yet to be valuable for their good Operations. C, belongs to those Remedies
that are of the lowest Order, though good enough not to be despised.

Those Receipts, which were my own, are expressed in my own Terms; so also
those which I received from others by word of Mouth: But them which were
imparted to me in Writing, though I my self would not have worded them, as they
did that I had them from, yet I oftentimes made a Scruple to Correct or Alter
their Expressions, though not suitable to the Current Style of the Formularies of
Receipts, being more concerned that the Meaning should be close kept to, than
the Style rectified.

THE TABLE OF DISEASES.
Note, The Number answers to the Page.

A
AGues. Page 4, 13, 25, 74 Amulet against Agues. Page 13 Amulet against Cramps.
Page 15 Acidities to Cure. Page 19 Afterbirth to bring away. Page 21 Appetite
to restore. Page 21 Antimonial Remedy for Leprosies and Fevers. Page 54
Antimonial Infusion. Page 56 Apoplexy to prevent. Page 6(...) Arthritick Pains.
Page 7(...) Apoplectick Fits. Page 78
B
Bloody Flux. Page (...) Bowels to Strengthen. Page 14 Blood to stanch. Page 16
Blood to Sweeten. Page 19 Breast Vlcerated. Page 23 Broken Belly. Page 33, 40
Black Jaundice. Page 44 Burns. Page 8(...)
C
Coughs. Page 1, 32 Convulsions. Page 9, 20 Consumptions. Page 12 Child to
bring away. Page 14 Cramp. Page 15 Contusions. Page 28, 29 Cutis Excoriated.
Page 30 Continual Fevers. Page 51, 52, 54, 79 Chilblains. Page 53 Colic. Page
55, 62, 78, 85 Childbearing to be cleansed after. Page 57 Cancer not broken.
Page 67 Colds. Page 69 Childrens Jaundice. Page 70 Chin Cough. Page 74
D
Dysentery. Page 7, 18, 59, 68 Diseases from Obstruction. Page 38 Difficulty of
Hearing. Page 39 Drink for continual Fevers. Page 51, 52 Drink for the Scurvy.
Page 64 Diuretic Medicine. Page 64 Decoction of Quicksilver. Page 80
E
Evil. Page 7 Eyes to Cure. Page 20 Excoriations. Page 30 External Piles. Page
63 Experiment for a Weak Sight. Page 73 External Remedy for Fevers. Page 79
F
Fits of the Stone. Page 8 Fluxes sharp. Page 18, 26, 37, 59 Films to clear.
Page 20 Fits of Agues. Page 4, 13, 25 Fits of the Gout. Page 40 Fits of the
Mother. Page 50 Fevers continual. Page 51, 52, 54, 79 Falling Sickness. Page 75
Fits Apoplectick. Page 78 Fresh strain. Page 83
G
Gripings. Page 26 Gout. 40, 50, 71 Gums to Strengthen. 69
H
Hemorrhoids. Page 10, 17, 27, 63, 84 Heart Burning. Page 34 Hearing difficult.
Page 39 Hoarsness on a Could. Page 69 Heat in the Eyes. Page 72 Heat of the
Stomach. Page 87
I
Jaundice Yellow. Page 5, 6, 70 Inflammations of Ulcers Page 31 Jaundice Black.
Page 44 Itch to cure. Page 58 Internal Piles. Page 63 Issue raw to make. Page
86
K
Kings Evil. Page 7 Kings Evil cured with Lime Water, etc. Page 82
L
Lime Water to make. Page 11 Lime Water for Obstructions. Page 12 Legs Inflamed
and Vlcerated. Page 31 Looseness. Page 37 Leprosy. Page 54 Lungs Stuffed. Page
74 Lime Water for the Kings Evil. Page 82
M
Medicine for the Stone. Page 49, 76 Mother Fits. Page 50 Medicine for a fresh
Strain. Page 52 Medicine to cleanse the Womb. Page 57 Medicine for a sore
Throat. Page 60, 66, 77 Medicine for the Colic. Page 62 Medicine for a Cancer.
Page 67
N
Nitre, a Medicine of it for the Colic. Page 85
O
Obstructions. Page 12, 38 Outward Contusions. Page 28, 29 Oil of Turpentine
mixed with Ointment of Tobacco, and Balls of Sulphur for the Piles. Page 84
P
Pains of the Stone. Page 2 Pain of the Teeth. Page 4 Piles. Page 10, 17, 27,
63, 84 Pains. Page 31, 50, 71 Plaster to discuss Tumors. Page 43 Plaster to
strengthen the Joints. Page 50 Pleurisy. Page 68 Prolapsus Vteri. Page 71
Q
Quicksilver prepared against Worms. Page 80
R
Rheumes. Page 1, 32, 68 Ruptures. Page 33, 40 Resent Strain. Page 35 Remedy
for Chilblains. Page 53 Remedies for Fluxes. Page 7, 18, 26, 59
S
Stone. Page 2, 8, 49, 76 Sharpness of Urine. Page 3 Strengthen the Bowels.
Page 14 Stanching Blood. Page 16 Stomach to Strengthen. Page 21 Strain. Page
34, 35, 37, 52, 83, 85 Strengthening Plaster. Page 31 Sores. Page 41 Sore
Throat. Page 60, 66, 86 Sharp Humors. Page 62 Scurvy. Page 64 Strengthen the
Gums. Page 69 Syrup for Rheums. Page 68 Sharp Humors in the Eyes. Page 72
Sight Weak. Page 73 Stomach Heat. Page 87 Stomachical Tincture. Page 88
T
Tooth Ach. Page 4, 32 Tertian Ague. Page 13, 74 Tumors. Page 17 Tickling
Rheum. Page 32 Teeth to keep Sound. Page 32 Tumors to discuss and ripen. Page
43 Throat Sore. Page 60, 66, 77, 86 Teeth to make firm. Page 69
U
Urine Sharp. Page 3 Ulcers of the Breast. Page 23 Ulcers. Page 41 Uteri
Prolapsus. Page 71 Urine stopped. Page 76
W.
Women in Labor. Page 14 Wounds bleeding. Page 16 Weakness of the Joints. Page
37 Water for Ulcers. Page 41 Womb to cleanse. Page 57 Wash for the Iteh. Page
58 Weak Sight. Page 73 Worms in Children. Page 80 Whitloe to Cure. Page 81
Y.
Yellow Jaundice. Page 5
A Catalogue of the Philosophical and Theological Books and Tracts, Written by
the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire Together with the Order of Time, wherein each of
them has been Published respectively.

DECAD I.
I. For Coughs, especially such as proceed from thin Rheums.
B TAke of choice Olibanum, finely powdered, from one Scruple to half a Dram,
and mix carefully with it an equal weight of Sugar Candy, (white or brown,) or,
in want of that, of fine Sugar; and let the Patient take it at Bedtime in the
Pap of an Apple, or some other proper Additament, for several nights together:
If it be found needful, it may be taken at any other time, when the Stomach is
empty.

II. To give Ease in the Pains of the Stone, even that of the Bladder.
A TAke the transparent Sparr that grows upon the Veins of Lead-ore, and having
reduced it to fine Powder, give from half a Dram to a whole Dram of it at a
time, in a moderate Draught of some convenient Vehicle. N. B. Though there be
(at least in most of our English Mines) two Teguments, as it were, of the Veins
of Lead, that grow close together; yet that which the Diggers name Cawk, which
is white and opacous, is not the Medicine I mean, but the Transparent, or at
least Semi-Diaphanous; which easily breaks into smooth Fragments, and in the
Fire cleaves into several pieces, that are wont to be smooth and prettily
shaped.

III. For Sharpness of Urine.
B TAke of the dry Stuff that divides the Lobes of the Kernels of Walnuts, beat
them to Powder, and of this give about half a Dram at a time, in a draught of
White Wind, or Posset Drink made with it, or in any other convenient Liquor.

IV. To Appease the Violent Pains of the Toothache.
B MAke up a Scruple of Pil. lulae Mastichinae, and half a Grain of Laudanum,
into two or three Pills for the Patient to take at Bedtime.

V. For Agues.
A TAke Salt of Card. Benedict. and Salt of Wormwood and 15 Grains, Tartar
Vitriolate half a Scruple; mix them, and give them in a few Spoonfuls of
Rhenishwine, or of some other convenient Vehicle, either before the Fit, or at
some other time when the Stomach is empty.

VI. For the Yellow-Jaundice.
B TAke an Ounce of Castle-Soap (the Elder the better,) slice it thin, put it
into a Pint of Smallbeer cold, set it on the Fire, let it boil gently half
away, after boiling some time, scum it once; then strain it through a small
Sive, warm it, and drink it all in a morning fasting; take a small Lump of
Sugar after it, and fast two or three hours: The Party may walk about his
Business, and eat his acstomed Meals: If at any time he drinks Wine, let it be
White wine. N. B. If he be far gone in the Distemper; two or three day after,
he may take it once or twice more, and no oftener. Refrain all other Medicines:
It will keep a Week or longer.

VII. For the Jaundice.
B TAke two or three Ounces of Semen Cannabis (Hempseed) and boil them till the
Seeds (some of them) begin to burst, and a little longer, in a sufficient
quantity of New Milk, to make one good Draught; which the Patient is to take
warm, renewing it if need be, for some days together.

VIII. For the Dysentery.
B TAke Pigs-Dung, dry it, and burn it to gray (not white) Ashes; of these give
about half a Dram for a Dose, drinking after them about three Spoonfuls of
Wine-Vinegar.

IX. For the Kings Evil.
B TAke Cuttle-bone uncalcin'd, and having scraped off the outside or colored
part, dry the white part; and of this, finely powdered, give half a Dram for a
Dose in Aqua Malvae.

X. A Safe and Easy Medicine in Fits of the Stone.
B TAke Sack, or, in want of that, Claret Wine, and by shaking or otherwise,
mix with it, as well as you can, an equal quantity of Oil of Wallnuts; and of
this Mixture give from 4 or 6 to 8 or 10 Ounces at a time as a Glyster.

DECAD II.
I. For Convulsions, especially in Children.
B TAke Earthworms, wash them well in White Wind to cleanse them, but so as
that they may not die in the Wine: Then, upon hollow Tiles or between them, dry
the Worms with a moderate Heat, and no further than that they may be
conveniently reduced to Powder; to one Ounce of which add a pretty number of
Grains of Ambergrise, both to perfume the Powder, (whose scent of it self is
rank) and to make the Medicine more Efficatious. The Dose is from one Dram to a
Dram and half in any convenient Vehicle.

II. For the Pyles.
B TAke the Powder of Earthworms prepared as in the former Receipt, (but
leaving out the Ambergrise,) and incorporate it exactly with as much
Hensgrease, as will serve to make it up into an Ointment. Apply this to the
Part affected, whose Pains it usually much and safely mitigates.

III. To make Limewater Useful in diverse Distempers.
C TAke one Pound of good Quicklime, and slake it in a Gallon of warm Water,
and let it stand 'till all that will subside be settled at the bottom, and
(Separation being made,) the Water swim clear at the top: (At which time it
will often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle Substance, almost like Ice,
will cover the Surface of the Liquor:) As soon as the Water is thus
sufficiently impregnated, delay not to pour it off warily, and keep it very
well stopped for Use.

IV. A Limewater for Obstructions an Consumptions.
B TAke a Gallon of Limewater made as above, and infuse in it cold Sassaffras,
Liquorice, and Anyseeds, of each four Ounces, adding thereto half a Pound of
choice Currants, or the like Quantity of sliced Raisins of the Sun: The Dose of
this compound Limewater is four or five Ounces, to be taken twice a day.

V. An Amulet against Agues, especially Tertian.
B TAke a handful of Groundsel, shred and cut it small, put it into a square
Paper Bag of about four Inches every way, pricking that side that is to be next
the Skin, full of large holes; and cover it with some Sarcenet or fine Linen,
that nothing may fall out. Let the Patient wear this upon the Pit of his
Stomach, renewing it two hours before every Fit.

VI. For Women in Labor to bring away the Child.
B TAke about one Dram of choice Myrrh, and having reduced it to fine Powder,
let the Patient take it in a Draught of Rhenish-wine or Sack; or, if you would
have the Liquor less active White Wind, Posset Drink, or some other temperate
Vehicle.

VI. For Strengthening the Bowels.
B TAke Cloves or Chives (not Bulbs) of Garlic, and let the Patient from time
to time swallow one or two, without chewing.

VIII. An Amulet against the Cramp.
A TAke the Root of Mechoacan, and having reduced it to Powder, fill with this
Powder a little square Bag or Sacket of Sarcenet, or some such slight Stuff;
which Bag is to be about three Inches Square, and to be hung by a String about
the Patient's Neck, so as that it may reach to the Pit of the Stomach, and
immediately touch the Skin.

IX. For Stanching of Blood especially in Wounds.
A TAke those round Mushrooms that Bonatists call Crepitus Lupi, (in English
Puff-balls,) when they are full ripe (which is in Autumn); and breaking them
warily, save carefully the Powder that will fly up, and the rest that remains
in their Cavities: And strew this Powder all over the Part affected, binding it
on, or proceeding further, if need be, according to Art.

X. For the Tumors and Pains of the Hemorrhoides, not too much inflamed.
B LET the Patient dip his Finger in Balsam of Sulphur, made with Oil of
Turpentine, and with his Finger so besmeared anoint the Tumors, whether
external or internal, once or twice a day.

DECAD III.
I. For the Dysentery and other sharp Fluxes.
A TAke the Stalks and Leaves of the Herb called, in Latin, Coniza Media (in
English, Flea-bane,) dry it gently, till it be reducible to Powder; of this
Powder give about one Dram at a time, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient
Vehicle or else incorporate it in Conserve of Red Roses.

II. To sweeten the Blood, and Cure diverse Distempers caused by its Acidity.
B TAke Coral, the clearest and reddest you can get; reduce it (by exactly
grinding it on a Porphory, or Marble Stone,) to an impalpable Powder. Of this
Magistery made without Acids, give the Patient once or twice a day (as need
shall require,) a large dose, viz. ordinarily about one dram at a time, or from
two Scruples to five. N. B. Let him long continue the Use of it.

III. To clear the Eyes, even from Filmes.
A TAke Paracelsus's Zibethum Occidentale (viz. human dung) of a good Color
and Consistence, dry it slowly till it be pulverable: Then reduce it into an
inpalpable Powder; which is to be blown once, twice, or thrice a day, as
occasion shall require, into the Patients Eyes.

IV. For Convulsions in Children.
A GIve the Patient from 2, 3, or 4, to 5, 6, or 7 Grains, according to the
Child's Age, of the true Volatile Salt of Amber, in any proper Vehicle. N. B.
It Is not near so Efficatious in full grown Persons.

V. To bring away the Afterbirth.
B GIve about 30 Drops, or any Number between 25 and 35, of good Essential (as
Chimists call it,) Oil of Juniper, in a good Draught of any convenient Vehicle.

VI. To Strengthen the Stomach, and help the want of Appetite.
B MAke the Roots of Gentian (sound and not superannuated,) pulverable, with no
more waste of their moisture than is necessary. Reduce these to Powder; of
which let the Patient take from 12 or 15 Grains to double that quantity (or
more if need be,) twice or thrice a day. N. B. It may be taken on an empty
Stomach, or, if that cannot conveniently be done, at Meal-times. To correct the
Bitterness, one may add to it powdered Sugar, or make it up with some fit
Conserve, or mix it with a Syrup. It is very good, not only for want of
Appetite, but for Obstructions. And I ( R B.) have usefully given it in
Vertiginous Affections of the Brain, and to lessen, if not quite take away, the
Fits of Agues, and even Quartans. But in this last Case the Dose must be
considerably augmented. One may also, if one pleases, instead of the Powder,
give the Extract drawn with fair Water, and for those that like that form, made
up into Pills with a sufficient quantity of Powdered Tumerick, or the like
proper Additament; to which I have sometimes added some Grains of Salt of
Wormwood with good Success in Fluxes that proceeded from Crudities and
Indigestion. Where the Winter-Season or the Patients cold Constitution invite,
or the Medicine is to be long kept, I choose rather to make the Extract with
Wine moderately strong, than with Water.

VII. For Ulcers in the Breast, and elsewhere.
A TAke Millepedes, (in English by some called Woodlice, by others Sows,) and
having washed them clean with a little Whitewine, and dried them with a Linen
Cloth, beat them very well in a Glass or Marble Mortar (for they ought not to
be touched with any thing of Metal) and give the first time as much Juice, as
you can by strong Expression obtain from five or six of them. This Juice may be
given in small Ale or White Wind, in which the next time you may give as much
as can be squeezed out of eight or nine Millepedes; and so you may continue,
increasing the number that you employ of them by two or three at a time, till
it amount to twenty five or thirty; and if need be, to forty or more, for one
taking. And note, that if upon the Pounding of these Insects, you find the Mass
they afford too dry, as it now and then happens; you may dilute it with a
little White Wind or Ale, to be well agitated with it, that being penetrated,
and so softened, with the Liquor, the Mass may the better part with its Juice.

VIII. For taking off the Fits of Agues.
B TAke good common Brimstone (not Flores Sulphuris,) and having reduced them,
by passing them through a very fine Sieve, to the subtillest Powder you can;
give of this Powder one Dram and half or two Drams, either made up into a Bolus
with a little good Honey, or else in any appropriated Vehicle; let it be given
at the usual times, and reiterated once or twice if need be, especially if the
Fits should return.

IX. For Fluxes, especially accompanied with Gripings.
A TAke of Crude Lapis Caliminaris finely powdered two Scruples, of white Chalk
on(...) Scruple, mix them exactly, and give them in a Spoonful or two of New
Milk twice, or, if the case be urgent, thrice a day.

X. For the Pains of the Piles.
B TAke of Myrrh, Olibanum, and common Frankincense, of each a like quantity;
having powdered them, mix them very well, and let the Patient receive the Fume
of this Mixture, cast upon a Chaffen-dish with Embers, in a Close-stool, for
about a quarter of an hour, (less or more, as he needs it, and is able to bear
it.)

DECAD IV.
I. For an outward Contusion.
C APply to the Part affected, skim'd or purified Honey, spread upon Cap-Paper,
to be kept on with some convenient Plaster, or the like Bandage, and shifted
once or twice a day.

II. Another for the same.
B BEat Aloes Succotrina (or else Hepatica,) to fine Powder; then pour on it as
much Rose Water as you guess may dissolve a great part of it. This done, stir
them well for a while, and when the Mixture is settled, pour off the Liquor, and
in it dip Linen Rags, which being applied to the Part affected, will soon
stick to it, and seldom need be removed till the Patient be relieved; and then
to get them off, the Rags must be well wetted with warm Water, which will
soften and loosen the adhering Aloes.

III. For a slighter Excoriation.
B MElt Mutton-Suet taken from about the Kidneys, and freed from its
superfluous Fibers or Strings, and to about two Ounces of this add little by
little about 16 or 18 Drops (sometimes 8 or 10 may serve) of Oil (not Ethereal
Spirit) of Turpentine; spread this Mixture on a Linen Cloth, and by binding or
otherwise, keep it upon the Part affected.

IV. For an Excoriation, when the true Cutis is affected.
B TAke Prunella (in English Self-heal,) and having pounded it very well in a
Marble or Glass Mortar, (not one of Metal,) apply it to the Part affected,
renewing it but seldom, and not without need.

V. To take off the Pain and Inflammation of Ulcers in the Legs and elsewhere.
B IN a Quart of Water boil about so much White-bread, as in ordinary years may
be found in a Half-penny-loaf; then add to it two Ounces of good Sheeps Suet
cut very small; and when that is boiled a little, add to it one Ounce of finely
powdered Rosin, and a little well searc'd Brimstone: Of these make a Cataplasm,
which is to be kept constantly on the Part affected, and shifted once or twice
a day, as need shall require.

VI. For a Cough, especially accompanied with a Tickling Rheum.
B TAke equal Parts of finely powdered Olibanum and Venice Treacle, incorporate
them exactly, and of this Mass form Pills of what bigness you please. Of these
let the Patient take about half a Dram at Bedtime, or, if need be, one
Scruple, (or more,) twice a day.

VII. To prevent the Toothache, and keep the Teeth sound.
B LET the Patient frequently rub his Teeth moderately with the Ashes that
remain in Tobacco Pipes, after the rest of the Body has been consumed in
Smoke; sometimes after washing (if need be,) his Mouth with fair Water not too
cold.

VIII. For a Rupture, especially in a Child or young Person.
A TAke of that Geranium or Cranes-bill that is commonly called Columbinum,
reduce the Root and Leaves to fine Powder, and of this let the Patient take
about half a Spoonful Night and Morning for three or four Weeks together,
washing it down each time with some Spoonfuls of Red Wine.

IX. For the Heart-burning, as they call it.
B TAke from 15 or 20, to 30 or 40, Grains of Crab's-eyes (known commonly in the
Shops by the Name of Lapides Cancrorum,) reduced to very fine Powder, and
either take it alone, or in any convenient Conserve or Syrup. It Is for the most
part best to take this Medicine when the Stomach is empty.

X. For a Strain.
B TAke the strongest Vinegar you can get, and boil in it a convenient quantity
of Wheat-Bran, till you have brought it to the Consistence of a Poultess. Apply
this as early as may be to the Part affected, and renew it when it begins to
grow dry.

DECAD V.
I. For a Recent Strain.
B TAKE Wormwood and pound it very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass; then
put to it as much of the Whites of Eggs, beaten to Water, as may serve to make
it up into such a Consistence, as may be applied like a Poultess to the Part
affected.

II. A Strengthening Plaster after a Strain, or when there is any Weakness in
the Joint.
B MEEL down together, and incorporate very well, two parts of Diapalma, and
one part of Emplastrum ad Herniam; spread this Mixture, (but not very thick,)
upon Leather, and lay it to the Joint to be strengthened.

III. For Loosnesses.
C BOil a convenient quantity of Cork in Spring Water, till the Liquor taste
strong thereof: Of this Decoction let the Patient drink a moderate Draught from
time to time, till he finds himself sufficiently relieved by it.

IV. For Obstructions, and diverse Diseases proceeding thence.
B LET the Patient drink, every Morning fasting, a moderate Draught of his own
Urine newly made, (and if it can conveniently be,) whilst it is yet warm
forbearing Food for an hour or two after it.

V. For Difficulty of Hearing, from a cold Cause.
B OUT of a Bulb or Root of Garlic, choose a Chive of a convenient Bigness;
then having passed a fine piece of Thread or Silk through one end of it, that
thereby it may be pulled out at pleasure, crush it a little between your
Fingers, and having anointed it all over with Oil of Bitter (or in want of
that, Sweet) Almonds, put it into the Cavity of the Patients Ear at Bedtime,
and draw it out the next Morning, stopping the Ear afterward with Black Wool;
but if need require, this Operation is to be reiterated with fresh Garlic for
some days successively.

VI. For Ruptures in the Belly, especially in Children.
A HAving well cleans'd the Roots of Sigillum Salam(...)nis, scrape one Ounce
of them into a Quart of Broth, and let the Patient take a Mess, or a Porringer
full of it for his Breakfast; or else give half a Dram or two Scruples of the
Powder of it at a time, in any convenient Vehicle.

VII. To give checks to Fits of the Gout, and in some measure to prevent them.
B TAke three Ounces of Sarsaparilla sliced and cut thin; to these add an equal
weight of Raisins of the Sun, rubbed very clean, but not broken: Put both these
Ingredients into three Quarts of Spring Water, and let the Vessel stand in a
moderate heat, that the Liquor may simper for many hours, yet without bursting
most part of the Raisins; keep this Decoction well stopped, and let the Patient
use it for his only Drink, till he need it no longer.

VIII. A Water for Ulcers and Sores.
B TAke a Solution of Venetian Sublimate, and having made with very good
Quicklime as strong a Limewater as you can, (so that, if it be possible, it
may bear an Egg,) drop this upon the dissolved Sublimate, till it will
precipitate no more reddish stuff at all; (which will not so soon be done as
one that has not tried will imagine): As soon as you perceive that the Liquors
act no longer visibly upon one another, pour the Mixture into a Filter of
Cap-Paper, which retaining the Orange-colour'd Precipitate, will transmit an
indifferently clear Liquor: Which is to be in a Glass Viol kept stopped for its
proper Use; namely, that the Part affected may be therewith washed from time to
time, and, if need be, kept covered with double Linen Cloths wetted in the
same Liquor.

IX. A Plaster to Discuss Tumors, or Ripen them if it cannot Discuss them.
B TAke of Yellow Wax, Franincense, and Rosin, of each four Ounces, or a
sufficient quantity, melt them together gently, and being strained, make up the
Mass into a Roll for Use.

X. For the Black Jaundice it self.
A TAke a Spoonful of Honey boil it gently, and scum it, till it come to a
good Consistence; then add of Wheat Flour and Saffron (reduced to a Powder,)
as much of each as you may take up upon the Point of a Knife; and having mixed
all well, put it over the Coals again, until it lose its smell: Afterward you
may put it into a little Stone or Earthen Pot, and keep it for Use; which is,
that the Patient take the quantity of a Pea, and anoint the Navil, and fill the
Cavity thereof with it; repeating the Application for some days together, when
the Stomach is empty, and abstaining from Meat and Drink about two hours after
the Medicine is used.

The End of the First Part.
Medicinal Experiments; OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, FOR The most part
Simple, and Easily Prepared.

The latter Five DECADS being A SECOND PART.

By the Honorable R. BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

DECAD VI.
I. A parable Medicine for the Stone.
B TAke of the Seed of Flixweed, and give of it about as much as will lie upon
a Shilling, either whole or grossly bruised, in any convenient Vehicle.

II. For Fits of the Mother.
B DIssolve store of Sea Salt in the best Wine Vinegar, and in this dip a soft
Linen Cloth, which being folded so as to make 3 or 4 Doubles, is to be applied
somewhat warm to the Soles of the Patient's Feet, and kept on till the Fit be
over.

III. A choice Plaster to Strengthen the Joints after the Gout, and hasten the
going off of the Pain.
A TAke of Paracelsus and Diapalma ana, melt them and incorporate them exactly
together, and spread the mixture very thin upon fine Leather, to be used as a
Plaster to the Part affected.

IV. A very good Drink in continual Fevers.
A MAke a Decoction of the Leaves of Rue in fair Water, till the Liquor taste
pretty strong of the Plant: This, being strained, is to be made somewhat
Palatable with Liquorice or a little Sugar, or Aromatic Body: To half a Pint of
this add about 10 Drops of Spirit (not Oil) of Vitriol: Let the Patient use
this for his ordinary Drink.

V. A good Drink to be frequently used in Fevers, especially continual Ones.
A GIve, in half a Pint of some small convenient Drink, half an Ounce of
Hartshorn, burnt to great whiteness; which is to be a little boiled in the
Liquor; and this, thus altered, is to be given from time to time.

VI. An easy Medicine for a fresh Strain.
B MAke up the Clay with which the Bungs of Barrels are wont to be stopped,
with as much Vinegar as will bring it to the Consistence of an indifferently
stiff Cataplasm: Then warm it a little, and apply it to the Part affected.

VII. A Remedy much used for Chilblains.
C TAke a Turnep, roast it well under the Embers, and beat it to a Poultice;
then apply it very hot to the Part affected; and keep it on (if need be,) for 3
or 4 days, in that time shifting it twice or thrice, if occasion require.

VIII. A Simple Antimonial Remedy, that has often done much Good even in the
Leprosy, and all continual Fevers.
A TAke Crude Antimony, well chosen and powdered; of this give about one, two,
or three Scruples Morning and Evening, according to the Age of the Patient, in
a little Syrup of Clove Gilly-Flowers, or any such Vehicle, or else mixed with
fine Sugar, enough to make it somewhat Palatable. This may be continued for 4
or 5 Months, if need require; and if the first Dose prove Beneficial to the
Patient, in Cases not urgent, a Scruple or half a Dram may serve the Turn, nor
need the Exhibition be continued for so long a time.

IX. For the Cholick and diverse other Distempers.
B TAke four or five Balls of fresh Stone-horse Dung, and let them steep for
about a quarter of an Hour (or less,) in a Pint of White Wind, in a Vessel well
stopped, that the Liquor may be richly impregnated with the more volatile and
subtle Parts of the Dung; strain this, and give of it from a quarter to half a
Pint, or some Ounces more, at a time; the Patient having a Care not to take
Cold after it.

X. An often Experimented Antimonial Infusion.
B TAke one Ounce of powdered Antimony, tied up in a little Bag of clean
Linen, and hang it in a Gallon of Beer or Ale that is brought from the
Brew House, and is yet scarce fit to be drawn out, much less to be drank. Of
this Liquor when it is ripe, let the Patient make use for his ordinary Drink;
only having a Care, that if by Age or Accident it be perceived to grow sour,
that Vessel then be left off, for fear, least the Acidity of the Liquor,
corroding the Antimony, might make it vomitive.

DECAD VII.
I. An easy Medicine to cleanse the Womb, especially after Childbearing.
B TAke a large white Onion, of about four Ounces in weight, if you can get so
big a one, and boil it in about a Pint of Water, with any thing fit to make a
very thin Broth, till a third part or more of the Liquor be consumed: of this
Broth, which may be made a little palatable with Nutmeg, etc. the Patient is to
take six or eight Ounces twice or thrice a day.

II. An Experienced Wash that quickly cures the Itch.
A TAke strong Quicklime one Pound, and put to a Gallon of Spring Water, let
them lie together for some hours, and then warily pour off the clear, filter
the rest, and take two Ounces of Quicksilver, tied up in a Linen Bag, and
hang it in the Liquor, and boil it for half an hour or more; then pour off the
clear Liquor once more, and wash the Hands only with it twice, or at most
thrice, a day.

III. A Remedy often used, with Success, in Fluxes, and even Dysenteries.
B TAke fresh Roots of Bistort, cut them into thin Slices, and moisten them
well with fair Water and Wine, to make them more soft and Succulent; then press
out the Juice as strongly as you can. And of this give about three or four
Spoonfuls, mingled with half a Dozen Spoonfuls, or somewhat more, of Red Wine,
or some other convenient Liquor.

IV. A good Medicine for a sore Throat.
B TAke the White of a New-laid Egg, and by beating it, reduce it into Water;
and with this Water mix diligently so much Conserve of Red Roses as will reduce
it to a soft Mass: Whereof the Patient is to let a little bit at a time melt
leisurely in his Mouth.

V. A choice Medicine for a sore Throat.
A TAke a piece of greasy Linen Cloth, of such a bigness, as that, being
doubled, it may make a Bag in form of a Stay, to reach from one side of the
Throat to the other, and contain as much matter, as may make it of the
thickness of an Inch or more: This Bag being filled with common Salt is to be
heated thoroughly, and applied to the Part affected as warm as the Patient can
conveniently endure; and within 2 hours after, or when it begins to grow too
could; another like it and well heated, is to be substituted in its room; and
whilst this is cooling, the other may be heated and made ready for use: So
that the Part affected may be always kept in a considerable degree of warmth,
for about 48 hours, if the Remedy be so long needed.

VI. An often experienced Medicine for the Cholick, especially produced by
sharp Humors.
A TAke a Quart of Claret, and put into the Vessel about two Ounces of
Nettle-seeds, stop the Bottle, and keep it in Boiling Water, till the Water has
made three or four walms, to assist the Wines Impregnation with the finer part
of the Seeds: of this Liquor let the Patient take a small Draught once or twice
a day.

VII. To appease the Pain of the Haemorrhoids, whether Internal or External.
B TAke two Parts of Flowers of Sulphur, and one part of Sugar very finely
powdered, mix them exactly together, and make them up with a sufficient
Quantity of a Mucilage of Gum Tragacarth into Lozenges, of about a Dram apiece:
Of which you may give one at a time, thrice in a Day, or if need be, 4 or 5
times.

VIII. To make an Excellent Drink for the Scurvy.
A TAke two handsfuls of Water Trefoil, and let it work in about 8 Gallons of
Wort, in stead of Hops, or of Small Ale or Wort, made for it: And let the
Patient use it for all, or for a great part of, his ordinary Drink.

IX. To make an easy Diuretic.
C PEel off the Inner Skin of an Egg shell, then beat the Shell to a very fine
Powder: Give about a Scruple of it at a time in any convenient Vehicle.

X. A Powerful Application to prevent and check the Apoplexy.
A MAke an Issue at the Meeting of the Sutures, and keep it open for a good
while; but if the Case will not admit delay, clap on a good Cupping-Glass,
without Scarification, or with it, as need shall require, upon the same
Concourse of the Sutures.

DECAD VIII.
I. A choice Remedy for a sore Throat.
A TAke Housleek, and having lightly beaten it in a Glass or Stone Mortar,
press out the Juice hard between two Plates; to this Juice put almost an equal
Quantity of Virgin Honey, mix them well, and add to the mixture a little Burnt
Allom, as much as is requisite to give it a discernable Aluminous Taste: Let
the Patient take this from time to time, with a Liquorish Stick, or some such
Thing.

II. An Approved Medicine for a Cancer not broken.
B TAke Dulcified Colcothar, and with Cream, or Whites of Eggs beaten to a
Water, bring it to the Consistence of a Cataplasm; which ought to be made
large, and spread about the thickness of half a Crown, and applied warm to the
part affected, shifting it at least once a day.

III. To make a very good Syrup for thin Rheums.
A TAke Syrup of Jubibes, Syrup of Dried Roses, and Syrup of Corn Poppy
Flowers, of each a like quantity, mix and use them as the necessity of the Sick
requires.

IV. For the Dysentery and Pleurisy.
B GRrate to fine Powder the dried Pizzel of a Stagg, and give of it as much as
will lie upon a Shilling, or thereabouts, once or twice a day, in any
convenient Vehicle.

V. To Strengthen the Gums, and make the Teeth grow firm.
B TAke Catechu, Terra Japonica, or Japonian Earth, and dissolve as much as you
can of it in a Pint of Claret, or Red Wine; then Decant the Liquor warily from
the subsiding Faeces, and let the Patient now and then wash his Mouth with it,
especially at Bed time.

VI. For a Hoarsness upon a Cold.
B TAke three Ounces of Hyssop Water, sweeten it with Sugar Candy; then beat
well into it the Yolk of one Egg, and Drink it at a Draught.

VII. A choice Medicine for the Jaundies in Children.
B TAke half an Ounce of choice Rhubarb made into Powder; incorporate with it
exactly by long beating, two Handfulls of well chosen, and cleans'd Currants. Of
this Electuary let the Patient take every Morning about the quantity of a
Nutmeg, for several days together.

VIII. A rare Medicine to take away Gouty, and other Arthritick Pains.
A TAke highly rectified Spirit of Man's Urine, and anoint the Part with it, the
Cold being just taken off, once or twice the first day; and no longer, unless
the Pain continue.

IX. For a Prolapsus Uteri.
B APply to the Patients Navel a pretty large Cupping-Glass; but let it not
stay on too long, not above a quarter of an hour, for fear of injuring the part
it covers, especially the Navel-String.

X. To allay Heat in the Eyes, proceeding from sharp Humors.
B BEat the White of an Egg, into a Water, in which dissolve a pretty quantity
of Refined Loaf Sugar, and then drop some of it into the Patients Eye.

DECAD IX.
I. An Experienced Medicine for Strengthening a Weak Sight.
B TAke of Eyebright, sweet Fennel Seeds, and fine Sugar, all reduced to
Powder, of each an Ounce, Nutmeg also pulverized, one Dram (at most;) mix these
very well together, and take of the Composition from a Dram to two or more,
from time to time.

II. An often tried Medicine for Tertian Agues.
B TAke Crude Alum and Nutmeg finely scraped, of each about half a Dram, mix
the Pouders well together, and with about six Grains of Saffron; Give this in
two or three Spoonfuls of White Wind Vinegar at the usual time.

III. For Stuffings of the Lungs, and the Chin Cough.
B MAke Syrup of Penny Royal, or of Ground Ivy, moderately Tart with Oil of
Vitriol; and of this let the Patient take very leisurely about a quarter of a
Spoonful from time to time.

IV. For the Falling Sickness in Children.
B TAke half a Dram of choice Amber, finely powdered, and give it for six or
seven Weeks together, once a day, when the Stomach is empty, in about four
Ounces of good White Wind.

V. An Approved Medicine to drive the Stone, and cure Suppression of Urine,
proceeding from it.
A TAke the Roots of Wild Garlic, (by some Country People called Crow Garlic)
wipe them very clean, stamp them very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass, and
strain out the Juice; with which make a moderate Draught of good White Wind
considerably strong, and let the Patient take it once or twice a day.

VI. An Experienced Medicine for Sore Throats.
A TAke of Scabious Water six Ounces, of Wine Vinegar a small Spoonful, of
Mustard Seed beaten, and of Honey, of each a Spoonful; stir and shake them very
well together; and then filter the mixture and keep it for Use.

VII. An often Experienced External Remedy in Apoplectick Fits.
A FIx a Cupping-Glass (without Scarification) to the Nape of the Neck, and
another to each of the Shoulders, and let them stick on a competent time.

VIII. An easy but approved Medicine for the Cholick.
B TAke about half a Dram of Mastick, and mix it with the Yolk of a new laid
Egg, and give it the Patient once or twice a day.

IX. To appease the heat of Fevers by an External Remedy.
C APply to the Soles of the Feet a mixture, or thin Cataplasm made of the
Leaves of Tobacco, fit to be cut to fill a Pipe with, beaten up with as much of
the freshest Currants you can get, as will bring the Tobacco to the Consistence
of a Poultis.

X. The Medicine that is in such Request in Italy against the Worms in Children.
B INfuse one Dram of clean Quicksilver all Night in about two Ounces of the
Water of Goats Rue, destil'd the common way in a cold Still: And afterward
strain and filter it, to sever it from all Dregs that may happen in the making
it. This quantity is given for one Dose.

DECAD X.
I. A choice Medicine for a Whitloe.
A TAke Shell Snails, and beat the pulpy part of them very well, with a
convenient quantity of fine chopped Parsley, which is to be applied warm to the
affected part, and shifted two or three times a day.

II. A Simple but useful Limewater, good for the Kings Evil, and diverse other
Cases.
B TAke half a Pound of good Quicklime, and put it into one Gallon of Spring
Water, and infuse it for Twenty four Hours; then decant the Liquor, and let the
Patient Drink a good Draught of it two or three times a day, or he may use it
for his ordinary Drink; this Infusion may be coloured-with Saffron, or Red
Sanders; and if need be to make it stronger, add more Lime, and warm the Water
and keep it well stopped.

III. An Excellent Medicine for a fresh strain.
A TAke four Ounces of Bean Flower, two Ounces of Wine Vinegar; of these make a
Cataplasm to be applied a little warm to the part affected; but if this should
prove something too sharp, (as in some Cases it may) then take two Drams of
Litharg, and boil it a little in the Vinegar; before you put it to the Bean
Flower.

IV. For the Piles.
A TAke Balsam of Sulphur made with Oil of Turpentine, Ointment of Tobacco,
equal Parts, incorporate them well, and Anoint the grieved place therewith.

V. For a Burn.
B MIngle Limewater with Linseed Oil, by beating them together with a Spoon,
and with a Feather dress the Burn several times a day.

VI. For a fresh Strain.
A BOil Bran in Wine Vinegar to the consistency of a Poultis, apply it warm,
and renew the Poultis once in twelve hours, for two or three times.

VII. An Experienced Medicine for the Cholick.
A TAke good Nitre one Ounce, and rub it well in a clean Mortar of Glass or
Stone, then grind with it half a Scruple or more of fine Saffron, and of this
mixture give about half a Dram for a Dose in three or four Ounces of Cold
Spring Water.

VIII. To make an Issue raw, that begins to heal up.
B TAke of Lapis Infernalis one Ounce, of Crown Soap an Ounce and half, Chalk
finely powdered six Drams, mix them all together carefully, and keep them close
stopped, except when you mean to use them.

IX. For a Sore Throat.
A MAke a Plaster of Paracelsus, three or four Fingers broad, and length
enough to reach almost from one Ear to the other, and apply it to the part
affected, so that it may touch the Throat as much as may be.

X. For heat about the Orifice of the Stomach.
B MAke a Syrup with the Juice of House Leek and Sugar, and give about one
Spoonful of it from time to time.

A Stomachical Tincture.
A TAke Agrimony two Drams, small Centory Tops one Dram, Coriander Seeds
bruised one Scruple, Sassatras Shavings and Bark, one Dram, Gentian Root half a
Dram, Zedoary Root ten Grains; pour upon these three quarters of a Pint of
boiling Spring Water, cover it, and let it steep twelve hours, then Strain it,
and put it in a Bottle; then drop a drop of Oil of Cinnamon, upon a lump of
Sugar, and put it into the Liquor. The Dose is three Spoonfuls twice a day, an
hour or two before Meals.

The END.
A CATALOGUE OF THE Philosophical Books and Tracts, Written by the Honorable
ROBERT BOIL Esquire Together with the ORDER or TIME Wherein each of them has been
Published respectively.

To which is added A CATALOGUE Of the THEOLOGICAL BOOKS, Written by the same
Author.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Sign of the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1692.

Advetisements of the Publisher.
I. Many Ingenious Persons, especially Strangers, having pressingly endeavored
to procure a Catalogue of the Honorable Mr. Boyle's Writings; and the Author
himself being not at leisure to draw one up; 'twas thought it might be some
Satisfaction to those Inquirers, if I published the following List, as it was
drawn out, for his own use, of the Philosophical Transactions, as well as the
Printed Volumes, by an Ingenious French Physician, studious of the Authors
Writings, some of which he Translated and Printed in his own Language.

II. The Letter L affixt in the Margin, denotes the Book related to, to have
been Translated, and Published in the Latin Tongue also. Several of the rest
having likewise been translated into Latin but not yet Published.

III. Those that have an Asterisk prefixed to them, came forth without the
Authors Name, though it is not doubted but they are His.

IV. Such as have this Mark prefixed to them, are Sold by Samuel Smith at the
Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

V. Diverse of those mentioned, as drawn out of the Transactions, did probably
come abroad in Latin; some of the Transactions themselves having been published
in that Language.

A Catalogue of the Philosophical Books and Tracts.
L
NEw Experiments Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and the Weight of the
Air, and its Effects, (made for the most part in a new Pneumatical Engine)
written by way of Letter to the Right Honorable Charles Lord Viscount of
Dungavan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Cork, by the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire

L
A Defense of the Doctrine, touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, proposed
by the Author in his New Physico-Mechanical Experiments; against the Objections
of Franciscus Linus, wherewith the Objectors Punicular Hypothesis is also
examined.

An Examen of Mr. Tho Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Natura Aeris, as far as it
concerns the Authors Book of New Experiments, touching the Spring of the Air;
with an Appendix touching Mr. Hobbes's Doctine of Fluidity and Firmness.

These three together in a Volume in 4^, being a Second Edition; The First at
Oxford 1662, had been published, Anno 1660.

The two others at London, 1662, had been published, Anno 1661.

The Skeptical Chemist, etc. 1661.


L
Physiological Essays, or Tentamina, Written and collected upon diverse times and
Occasions, with an History of Fluidity and Firmness, in 40. 1662.

L
An Experimental History of Colors begun, 80. 1663.


Some Considerations touching the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy,
proposed in a familiar Discourse to a Friend, by way of Invitation to the Study
of it: A Second Edition 40. Oxford, 1664. The first had been published 1663.


Of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, the Second Part; The first Section, of
its Usefulness to Physic, with an Appendix to this First Section of the Second
Part, 40 1669.

Of the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, etc. the second Tome,
containing the latter Section of the Second Part, 40, Oxford, 1671.

The First Volume of these three Books contains Five Essays.

The First, Of the Usefulness, etc. Principally as it relates to the Mind of
Man.

The Second, A Continuation of the former.

The Third, A further Continuation.

The Fourth, A requisite Digression concerning those, who would exclude the
Deity from intermed^ing with Matter.

In the Fifth, The Discourse, interrupted by the late Digression, is resumed
and concluded.

The Second Volume contains likewise five Essays.

The first, Of the Usefulness, etc. As to the Physiological part of Physic.

The second, As to the Pathological part of Pphysick.

The third, as to the Semeiotical part of Physic.

The fourth, As to the Hygicinal part of Physic.

The fifth, as to the Therapeutical part of Physic, in 20 Chapters.

The Third Volume contains six Essays.

The first, General Considerations about the Means, whereby Experimental
Philosophy may become useful to Human Life.

The second, Of the usefulness of Mathematics to Natural Philosophy.

The third, Of the usefulness of Mechanical Disciplines to Natural Philosophy.

The fourth, That the Goods of Mankind may be much increased by the Naturalists
insight into Trades, with an Appendix.

The fifth, Of doing by Physical Knowledge, what is wont to require Manual
Skill.

The sixth, Of Men's great Ignorance of the Uses of Natural Things.


An Experimental History of Cold, and some Discourses concerning New
Thermometrical Experiments, and Thoughts about the Doctrine of Antiperistasis;
with

An Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine touching Cold, a second Edition, Quarto.
1665.

Attempts of a way to convey Liquors immediately into the Mass of Blood
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of December the 4th 1665.

Observations and Experiments upon the Barometer or Balance of Air, invented,
directed, and begun, Anno 1659, communicated to Dr Beal that continued them,
and mentioned in the Transactions of February the 12th and March the 12th, 1666.

L
Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by new Experiments, for the most part Physical
and easy, occasioned by Monsieur Paschal's Tract of the Equilibrium of
Liquors, and of the Weight of the Air, 1666.

An Account of an Earthquake near Oxford, and the Cocomitants thereof,
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of April 2d, 1666.

New Observations and Directions about the Barometer, in the same.

General Heads for a Natural History of a Country, great or small, communicated
in the same.

L
The Origin of Forms and Qualities illustrated by Considerations and
Experiments, in two Parts, Octavo, 1666.

A way of preserving Birds, taken out of the Egg, and other small Faetus's,
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of May the 7th, 1666.

An Account of a new kind of Baroscope, which may be called Statical, and of
some advantages and conveniences it has above the Mercurial, communicated in
the Philosophical Transactions of July the 2d, 1666.

A new Frigorific Experiment, showing how a considerable degree of Cold may be
suddenly produced, without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind or Nitre, and that
at any time of the year, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of July
the 18th, 1666.

Trials proposed to Dr. Lower for the improvement of transfusing Blood out of
one live Animal into another, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of
February the 11th, 1666.

Free Considerations about subordinate Forms, being an Appendix to the Origin
of Forms and Qualities published last year, and reprinted with this, 1667. In
Octavo.

A Letter to the Author of the Philosophical Transactions, giving an
Information of some Experiments which he had made himself several years ago, by
injecting acid Liquors into Blood, upon the occasion of those communicated by
Signior Fracassati, in a Letter written from Oxford, October the 19th, 1667.

New Experiments concerning the Relation between Light and Air, (in shining
Wood and Fish) in a Letter from Oxford to the Publisher of the Philosophical
Transactions of January the 6th, 1668.

A Continuation of the same Letter in the Philosophical Transactions of
February the 10th, 1668.

A Continuation of new Experiments, Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and
Weight of the Air, and their Effects; The first part. With a Discouse of the
Atmospheres of Consistent Bodies, Oxford, 1669.

An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water with ordinary Balances and
Weights, in the Philosophical Transactions of August the 16th, 1669.

L
Certain Philosophical Essays and other Tracts, second Edition; with a Discourse
about the Absolute rest of Bodies, Quarto. London, 1669. The first Edition had
been published, Anno 1662.

New Pneumatical Experiments about Respiration, upon Ducks, Vipers, Frogs, etc.
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of August 8. 1670.

L
A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions of
September the 12th, 1670.

L
Tracts: About the Cosmical Qualities of Things: The Temperature of the
Subterraneal and Submarine Regions, and the bottom of the Sea; together with an
Introduction to the History of particular Qualities, Octavo, Oxford, 1670.

Tracts: A Discovery of the admirable Rarefaction of the Air (even without
Heat:) New Observations about the duration of the Spring of the Air New
Experiments touching the condensation of the Air by mere Cold, and its
compression without Mechanical Engines, and the admirably differing extensions
of the same quantity of Air, rarefied and compressed, Quarto, London, 1670.

L
An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, Quarto, London, 1672.

Some Observations about shining Flesh, both of Veal, and Pullet, and that
without any sensible Putrefaction in those Bodies, communicated by way of
Letter to the publisher of the Philosophical Transactions, in the Transactions
of December the 16th, 1672.

A new Experiment concerning an effect of the varying weight of the Atmosphere
upon some Bodies in the Water, the Description whereof was presented to the
Lord Broncker, Anno 1671. Suggesting a conjecture, that the alterations of the
very Weight of the Air, may have considerable Operations, even upon Men's
Sickness or Health, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February
the 24th, 1673.


Tracts: Containing new Experiments, touching the Relation between Flame and
Air, and about Explosions. An Hydrostatical Discourse, occasioned by some
Objections of Dr. Henry Moor, etc. to which is annexed an Hydrostatical Letter
about a way of weighing Water in Water: New Experiments of the positive, or
relative, levity of Bodies under Water: Of the Airs-Spring on Bodies under
Water, and about the differing Pressure of heavy Solids and Fluids, Octavo,
London, 1672, 1691.

L
Essays of the strange Subtilty, great efficacy, and determinate nature of
Effluvin^s; to which are annexed new Experiments to make the parts of Fire and
Flame, Stable and Ponderable, with Experiments about arresting and weighing of
Igneous Corpuscles; and a Discovery of the perviousness of Glass to ponderable
parts of Flame, Octavo, London, 1673.

A Letter of September the 13th, 1673. concerning Ambergreece, and its being a
Vegetable Production, mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions of October
the 8th, 1673.

L
Tracts: Observations about the saltness of the Sea: An account of the Statical
Hyroscope, and its Uses, together with an Appendix about the force of the Airs
Moisture, and a Fragment about the Natural and Preternatural state of Bodies.
To all which is premised a Skeptical Dialogue about the positive or privative
Nature of Cold, Octave, London, 1674, 1691.

L
A Discourse about the Excellency and Grounds of the Mechanical Hypothesis,
occasionally proposed to a Friend, annexed to another, Entitled, The
Excellency of Theology, compared with Natural Philosophy, Octavo, London, 1674.

An account of the two sorts of Helmontian Laudanum, together with the way of
the Noble Baron F. M. Van Helmont (Son to the famous John Baptista) of
preparing his Laudanum, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of
October the 26th, 1674.

L
Tracts: Containing, 1. Suspicions about some hidden Qualities of the Air, with
an Appendix touching Celestial Magnets, and some other particulars. 2.
Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbes's Problemata de vac^o. 3. A Discourse of the
Cause of Attraction by Suction, Octavo, London, 1674, 1691.

Some Physico-Theological considerations about the possibility of the
Resurrection, annexed to a Discourse, Entitled, The Reconcileableness of
Reason and Religion, Octavo. London, 1674/5.

A Conjecture concerning the Bladders of Air, that are found in Fishes,
communicated by A. J. and illustrated by an Experiment, suggested by the Author
in the Philosophical Transactions of April the 26th, 1675.

A New Essay-Instrument, invented and described by the Author, together with
the Uses thereof, in 3 Parts.

The first shows the occasion of making it, and the Hydrostatical Principles
it is founded on.

The second describes the Construction of the Instrument.

The third represents the Uses; which, as relating to Metals, are

1. To discover whether a proposed Guinea be true, or counterfeit. 2. To
examine diverse other Gold Coins, and particularly half Guinea's. 3. To examine
the new English Crown pieces of Silver. 4. To estimate the goodness of Tin and
Pewter. 5. To estimate Alloys of Gold and Silver, and some other Metalline
Mixtures. All this makes up the Philosophical Transactions of June 21. 1675.
Ten new Experiments about the weakened Spring, and some unobserved Effects, of
the Air, where occur not only several Trials to discover; whether the Spring of
the Air, as it may diverse ways be increased, so may not by other ways than
Cold, or Dillation be weakened, but also some odd Experiments to show the
change of Colors producible in some Solutions and Precipitations by the
Operation of the Air, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of
December 27. 1675.

An Experimental Discourse of Quicksilver, growing hot with Gold, English and
Latin, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February 21. 1676.

L
Experiments, Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin or Production of diverse
particular Qualities, amongst which, is inserted a Discourse of the
Imperfections of the Chemists Doctrine of Qualities, together with some
Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, Octavo, London, 1676,
1690.

This Discourse comprehends Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin and
Production of Cold.

Of Heat. Of Tastes. Of Odours. Of Volatility. Of Fixtness. Of Corrosiveness. Of
Corrosibility. Of Chemical Precipitation. Of Magnetical Qualities. Of
Electricity.
New Experiments about the superficial Figures of Fluids, especially of Liquors
contiguous to other Liquors: Likely to conduce much to the Physical Theory of
the grand System of the World, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions
of January the 29th, 1676/7.

A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions in
February the 1676/7.


The Skeptical Chemist, or Chymico-Physical Paradoxes, touching the Experiments
whereby vulgar Spagyrists are wont to endeavor to evince their Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury to be the true Principles of Things; to which in this second
Edition are subjoined diverse Experiments and Notes, about the Producibleness of
Chemical Principles, Octavo. Oxford, 1680, 1690.

L
A second Continuation of new Experiments Physico-Mechanical, in which, various
Experiments, touching the Spring of the Air, either compressed or Artificial,
are contained, with a Description of new Engines to perform them, 1680.

L
The Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phenomenon, and a Process of a factitious
Self-shining Substance, Octavo, London.

L
The Glaical or Icy Noctiluca, with a Chemical Paradox founded on new
Experiments, whence it may be made probable, that Chemical Principles may be
converted one into another, Octavo, London, 1680.

L
Memoirs for the Natural History of Human Blood, especially the Spirit of that
Liquor, London, 1684.

L
Experiments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies, in Two Essays: The
former of the Porousness of Animal Bodies; The other of the Porousness of solid
Bodies, Octavo, London, 1684.


Short Memoirs for the Natural Experimental History of Mineral Waters, Octavo,
1685.

An Historical Account of a strangely Self-moving Liquor, communicated in the
Philosophical Transactions of November the 26th, 1685.

L
Of the Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines, to the Corpuscular Philosophy,
to which is annexed a Discourse about the advantages of the use of Simple
Medicines, proposed by way of Invitation to it, Octavo, London, 1685.


An Essay of the great Effects of Languid and unheeded Motion. To which is
annexed an Experimental Discourse of some unheeded Causes of the Salubrity and
Insalubrity of the Air and its Effects, Octavo, London, 1685, 1690.

*L
A free Inquiry into the vulgarly received Notion of Nature, in an Essay
addressed to a Friend, Octavo, London, 1685/6.

*

A Disquisition about the Final Causes of Natural Things. With an Appendix of
some Uncommon Observations about vitiated Sight, Octavo, London, 1688.


Medicina Hydrostatica: Or, Hydrostaticks, applied to the Materia Medica,
showing, How by the Weight that diverse Bodies used in Physic, have in Water;
one may discover, whether they be Genuine or Adulterate. To which is subjoined,
a previous Hydrostatical way of estimating Ores, Octavo, London, 1690.


Experimenta and Observationes Physicae; wherein are briefly treated of several
Subjects relating to Natural Philosophy in an Experimental way; to which is
added, a small Collection of strange Reports, in two Parts, Octavo, London,
1691.


Medicinal Experiments: Or, a Collection of Choice Remedies, for the most part
simple and easily prepared, Twelves, London, 1692. Price 1 s.

Advertisements.
Because among those that willingly read the Author's Writings, there are some
that relish those most, (as most suitable to their Genius, addicted to
Religious Studies) that Treat of Matters relating to Divinity: The Publisher
thinks fit to gratify them with a Catalogue of those Theological Books that
pass for Mr. Boyle's, because they were ascribed to him, and never positively
disowned by him; though such of them as are marked with an Asterisk, come abroad
without having his Name prefixed to them.

SEraphic Love, five or six times Printed but first Published in the year, 1660
Octavo.

L
Considerations about the Style of the Scripture, whereof the first Edition was
Published in the year, 1662. in English, and afterward turned into, and several
times Printed in Latin, Octavo.

*

Occasional Reflections on several Subjects, with a Preliminary Discourse of the
way of meditating there Exemplified; First Published in the year, 1665. and
afterward turned into Latin, but not yet Printed in that Language, Octavo.

*

Of the Excellency of the Study of Theology, compared with that of Natural
Philosophy. Printed in the year, 1674. Octavo.

*

Considerations about the Reconcileableness of Reason and Religion. To which is
annexed a Discourse about the Possibility of the Resurrection. Printed in the
year, 1675. Octavo.

*
A Treatise of Things above Reason. To which are annexed some Advices about
Things that are said to transcend Reason. Printed in the year, 1681. in
English, and afterward Translated into Latin, but not yet Printed in that
Language, Octavo.

L
Of the Veneration that Man's Intellect owes to God. Printed in the year, 1685.

*
The Martyrdom of Theodora, and of Didymus. London, 1687.


The Christian Vertuoso: Showing, That by being addicted to Experimental
Philosophy, a Man is rather assisted, than Indisposed, to be a good Christian.
The First Part; To which are subjoined, 1. A Discourse about the Distinction,
that represents some Things as above Reason, but not contrary to Reason. 2. The
first Chapters of a Discourse, Entitled, Greatness of Mind promoted by
Christianity, Octavo, London, 1690.

A Catalogue of new Physic Books Printed for Sam. Smith at the Prince's Arms
in St. Paul's Church Yard.
PAarmacopeia Bateana. Qua nonginta Circiter Pharmaca, pleraque omnia e Praxi
Georgii Batei Regi Carolo secundo Medici Primarii excerpta, ordine alphabetico
conci^e exhibentur. Quorum Nonnulla in Laboritorio Publico Pharmacopoeano Land.
fideliter parantur Venalia: Atque in usu sunt hodierno apud Medicos
Londinenses. Editio Altera Priori multo Locupletior: Cum viribus ac dosious
annexis. Huic accesserunt Arcana Goddardiana ex Autographo Authoris desumpta.
Item ad Calcem Orthotonia Medicorum Observata: Insuper and tabula Posologica
Dosibus Pharmacorum accommodata. Cum Indice Morborum, Curationum, etc. Cura J.
S. Pharmacopoei Land. In Twelves. 1691.

Praxeos Mayernianae in Morbis internis Praecipue Gravioribus and Chronicis
Syntagma, ex Adversariis, Consiliis ac Epistolis ejus, summa Cura ac Diligentia
concinnatum. Londini. In Oct. 1690.

Phthisiologia seu Exercitationes de Phthisi Tribus Libris comprehensae.
Totumque Opus variis Historiis illustratum. Autore Richardo Morton, Med. D. and
Regii Collegii Medicor. Land. Socio. Londini. In Octavo. 1689.

Osteologia Nova, or some New Observations of the Bones, and the Parts
belonging to them, with the manner of their Accretion, and Nutrition,
communicated to the Royal Society in several Discourses. I. Of the Membrane,
Nature, Constituent parts, and Internal Structure of the Bones. II. Of
Accretion, and Nutrition, as also of the Affections of the Bones in the
Rickets, and of Venereal Nodes. III. Of the Medulla, or Marrow. IV. Of the
Mucilaginous Glands, with the Etiology or Explication of the Causes of a
Rheumatism, and the Gout, and the manner how they are produced. To which is
added, A Fifth Discourse of the Cartilages. By Clopton Havers. M. D. Fellow of
the Royal Society. London. In Octavo. 1691.

Synopsis Methodica Stirpium Brittannicarum, in quatum Notae generum
Characteristicae traduntur, tum Species singulae breviter describuntur:
Ducentae quinquaginta plus minus novae Species p^^tim suis locis inseruntur,
partim in Appendice seorsim exhibentur. Cum Indice and Virium Epitome. Auctore
Joanne Raio e Societate Regia. Londini. In Octavo. 1690.

Pharmacopaelae Collegii Regalis Londini Remedia Omnia succincte descripta,
atque serie alphabetica ita digesta, ut singula promptius primo intuitu
investigare possint, Editio Altera Priori Castigatior and Auctior: Huic Annexus
est Catalogus Simplicium tum locupletior tum compendiosor quam antehac editus;
Accedit in Calce Manuale ad forum nec non Pinax posographicus, Cura Ja. Shipton
Phamacop. Land. In T'welves. 1689.

THE END.

