Medicinal Experiments: OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, Chiefly Simple,
and easily Prepared: Useful in Families, and fitted for the Service of Country
People.

By the Honorable R. BOIL Esquire late Fellow of the Royal Society.

The Third and Last Volume.

Published from the Author's Original Manuscripts. Whereunto is added, Several
other Useful Notes explicatory of the same.

LONDON, Printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

Licensed,

November. 24th 1693. Edward Cook.

THE PREFACE.
THE Honorable Robert Boil Esquire Deceased, bath gratified the whole Race of
Mankind, by his Public Labors. The World may be divided into the Learned and
the Unlearned Part thereof. The former he much obliged by his Elaborate
Discourses on several Subjects: The latter, which are far more numerous, he
has condescended also to oblige, by consulting their Health in the ensuing
Receipts. For, whereas the Ordinary and Inferior Sort of Men, either have not
Ability (by reason of the Tenuity of their Estates) to reward Physicians; or by
reason of the Remoteness of their Habitations, have not Opportunity to Consult
them: Here they have Remedies provided to their Hands, and almost at their own
Doors; some of which the Learned Collector had Experience of Himself; and
others were recommended to him by Credible Persons, who had Experienced their
Benefit in themselves, or their Friends.

And though those ways of Probation might be sufficient to justify their
Publication; yet such was the scrupulous Care and Zeal of this Author, that he
would not suffer them to see the Light, till they had been first perused by
some Eminent Physicians of his Acquaintance; to whom he was pleased to commit
the Supervisal of his Medicinal Receipts, both Galenical and Chemical.

This Century bears the Name of Parable Receipts; because they may be easily
procured and prepared by Country People, as their respective Diseases do
require.

What comes forth in the Name of Mr. Boil, and is genuinly His, needs no
farther Recommendation.

His Ipse Dixit is sufficient, and such are these Praescripts, as being found
among his many other Papers of like Import, which in time may be Published also.

I shall therefore only recommend them, and their Success to the Blessing of
God, the alone Giver, Preserver and Restorer of Health.

J. W.

THE INDEX^
A
Afterbirth to bring away Page 10 Ague to prevent or Cure Page 13.14.81 Agues
Tertian Page 14 Ague Page 30.44 Aching of a hollow Tooth Page 36 Apoplectic
Fits Page 40 Astmatic Distempers Page 43.86 Aqua Opthalmica Page 62
B
BOdy bound, to loosen Page 35.83 Biting of a Viper Page 29 Blood-shot Eyes
Page 6.80 Blood to stench Page 11.55.57.88 Burns Page 16.55.88 Burns recent
Page 20 Breath shortness Page 31 Blood to sweeten Page 33 Bloody Flux Page
4.36.56.56.79 Belly Fluxes Page 53 Blood Cleansing by Troches of Vipers Page 67
Burn or Scald in the Eye Page 7 Bruise of the Eye Page 46.93
C
CAtaract beginning Page 74 Cold newly taken, a good Medicine Page 1 Corns, a
tried Medicine Page 11.54.87 Cholic Page 15 Cholic, a simple Remedy Page 18
Costiveness Page 35.83 Convulsive Fits Page 51 Cholic, a Medicine Page 66
Cinnamon drink for Gripes Page 37 Courses to provoke Page 39 Contusion of the
Eye Page 46.69.70
D
DRopsy Page 5.80 Dentrifice Innocent Page 7.81 Distempers of the Genus
Nervosum Page 9 Dead Child to bring away Page 10 Defluxions of Rheum Page 12
Deafness Page 15 Drink for the Scurvy Page 20 Drink for the Kings Evil Page
24.82 Dysentery Page 4.36.56.56 Dysenteric Fluxes Page 56 Defluxion in the Eyes
Page 72 Dry Inflammation Page 76
E
EYes that are foul, a good Water Page 2.62 Eyes Inflamed Page
6.23.38.42.58.80.85 Eyes Burnt or Scald Page 7 Electuary, Purging Page 22
Erysipelas Page 47.86 Eye-Water, by a Famous French Man Page 60 Eye-Water, a
Caution about the Vitriolate Page 69 Eye-Water famous Page 90 Eyes red Page
38.58.77.85.89 Eyes to Strengthen, subject to Rheums Page 72.91 Eyelids sore
Page 74 Eye bruised Page 46.69.70 Eyes dry Page 63 Eyes with hot and sharp
humors Page 73 Eyes pained Page 75
F
FIlms of the Eyes Page 71.93 Fluxes of the Belly Page 4.37.53.79.84 Fits of a
Furor Vterinus Page 19 Fits of the Head ach Page 32 Fluor-Albus in Women Page
48 Fumigation for pains in the Eyes, and overgreat Dryness, and when one fears
the beginning of a Cataract Page 74 Fits of the Mother Page 9.65 Furor Vterinus
to cure Page 19
G
GRavel to Expel Page 25.83 Gleetings, a good Liquor Page 28 Gripes and Fluxes
Page 37.84 Gonorrheaa Page 45 Gums to fasten and help Page 8 Gums Scorbutic
Page 68.92
H
HEad to clear Page 3 Headache Page 17.31 Hiccup in Fevers ibid. Hordeum on the
Eyelids Page 42 Hysteric Affections Page 9 Humors hot and sharp in the Eyes
Page 73
I
Inflammation of the Eyes Page 23.42.80 Itch, a good Medicine Page 33
Inflammation dry Page 75
K
King's Evil, a useful Drink Page 24.82.94 King's Evil, an approved Remedy Page
26
L
LEprosy, a Specific. Page 16
M
MEdicine for the Dropsy Page 5 Medicine for Hysterical Affections Page 9
Medicine for Genus Nervosum ibid. Medicine to cleanse the Womb Page 18 Medicine
for the Toothache Page 21 Menses suppressed Page 39 Medicine to kill Tetters
Page 44 Medicine to prevent Dryness, and some other Disaffections of the Eyes
Page 64 Medicine for the Stone, by a Famous Emperie Page 64 Medicine for Fits
of the Mother Page 9.65 Medicine for the Cholic Page 66 Medicine for Scorbutic
Gums, and to fasten the Teeth Page 68.92 Medicine for a Stroke or Contusion of
the Eyes Page 69 Another excellent Medicine for a Bruise in the Eye Page 70
O
OCulorum Propter gravedinem and dolorem Page 75
P
PAin of the Teeth, from Rheum Page 3.36 Pain in the Eyes Page 75 Plaster
preferred to the Soap Plaster Page 28 Pericarpium for Agues Page 14 Pleurisy
Page 36.56 Piles Page 52 Plaster to strengthen the Eyes and stop Defluxions
Page 72 Powder Styptick Page 11 Purging Electuary for Children Page 22
R
RElaxation of the Uvula Page 59 Redness of the Eyes Page 38.58.77.85.89 Remedy
for an Ague Page 13.30.44 Rheums a powerful Medicine Page 12.60 Remedy to take
off Films, and such like things from the Eyes Page 71.93 Remedy for sharp and
hot Humors in the Eyes Page 73 Rheumatick pain of the Teeth Page 3 Running of
the Reins to cure Page 45 Rheums to stop Page 60 Running of the Eyes Page
72.73.91
S
SOap Plaster for the Gout Page 28 Sight to strengthen Page 19 Scurvey
beginning Page 20 Stone in the Bladder Page 21 Strains Recent Page 41.85
Sternutatory to clear the Head Page 3 Shortness of Breath Page 31 Scrophulous
Ulcers Page 40 Sores and Ulcers Page 49 Scorbutic Gums Page 68.92 Stroke of
the Eyes Page 46.93 Sleep wanting Page 50 Stenching of Blood Page 11.55.57.88
Stone a famous Medicine Page 64.91.95 Stoppage of Urine Page 25.30
T
TErms to provoke Page 39 Teeth to fasten Page 8.92 Tumors, a Fomentation
ibid. Toothache Page 12.21.27.36 Tooth Hollow Page 27.36 Teeth to fasten Page
68 Tumors from sharp Humors Page 8 Tettars to kill Page 44
U
URine to provoke Page 25.83 Viper Biting Page 29 Urine suppressed Page 25.30
Vapors of the Spleen Page 31 Ulcers, an excellent Medicine Page 34 Ulcers
Scrophulous Page 40 Uvula relaxed Page 59.89 Ulcers and Sores Page 49
Vitriolate Eye-water Page 69
W
WEakness to help Page 67 Womb-Madness to cure Page 19 Womb to cleanse Page 18
Womb of a Puerpera, to cleanse Page 10 Wounds Green to heal Page 39 Whites in
Women Page 48.87
These following BOOKS, Published by the Honorable Author, and Printed for J.
Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1. A Free Inquiry into the vulgarly received Notion of Nature. 2. A
Disquisition about the final Causes of natural things, with Observations about
vitiated Sight. 3. The Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus. 4. The Christian
Virtuoso. 5. Experimenta and Observationes Physicae, with a Collection of
strange Reports. 6. A Natural History of a Country, great and small, for the
Use of Travelers and Navigators. 7. His Seraphick Love.
Books printed for J. Tailor.
DR. Salmon's Practical Physic. Dr. Yworth's new Art of Brewing. -- His whole
Art of Distillation. Logic, or the Art of Thinking. Lord Viscount Shandon's
Moral Essays. -- His Characters and Discourses. -- His Letter to an Atheist
Acquaintance. Dr. Salmon's, with Dr. Sydenham's and Monsieur Blanchard's new
Method of caring the French Disease. Love's whole Art of Surveying. Strodes's
easy Method for the Art of Dyalling. Plutarch's Morals, 5 Vol. englished by
several Hands. Culpepper's Directory for Midwives. Kirkwood's new Family-Book,
with an Epistle by Dr. Horneck. Abbady's Truth of the Christian Religion
englished. Gouge's Words to Saints and Sinners. -- His Christian Directions.
Counselor Manner's Legacy to his Son. Ryder's new Practice of Surgery.
Evelyn's French Gardener, with Cuts. Gilbert's Florists Vade mecum. Baxter's
Call to the Unconverted. Osborn's Works, Divine, Moral, Historical and
Political. Virgilius Notis Minelii. Quintilian's Declamations, english.
Legrand's Historia sacra. Newton's complete Arithmetician. The Modern Courtier.
Miracles performed by Money, a Poem. The Humors of a Coffee-house, a Poem.
Foxes and Firebrands. A Defense of their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.
Strode of Combinations, etc. The Swordsman's Vade mecum, by Sir William Hope.
Dyer's Works. Vanity of the Creature. Public Devotion, by Mr. Camfield.
A Collection of Choice and Safe REMEDIES. VOL. III.
1. A good Medicine for a newly taken, though violent, Cold.
TAke about four Ounces of Spring Water, and in a convenient Vessel, put to it
three Leaves of good Tussilago (Coltsfoot) and a pugil of Maidenhair, and a
Stick of Liquorish, for bigness and length, like the furthest Joint of the
Little-finger; make the Water warm, and when it is ready to boil, put in the
forementioned Ingredients, (the Liquorish being first sliced and minced) cover
the Pot well, let it boil for a few walmes, then take it off the Fire, and
having presently strained it, let the Patient drink it hot like Tea, he being
already in Bed; do this three or four Nights consecutively, or till there be no
more need of the Medicine.

2. A good Water for Eyes that are foul, and pained by sharp Humors.
TAke prepared Pearl and Coral, Ana one scruple, Aloes Cabalina finely powdered
three grains, red Rose Water and Succory-water, Ana one ounce, mix them well;
and if you would have the mixture stronger, put in a very few grains of
Trochisci alli Rhasis in very fine Powder.

3. A good Medicine for Pain of the Teeth that comes from Rheum.
OF the Powder of white Helebore, put into a clean Linen Rag like a Nodule, of
about the bigness of the largest sort of Peace, or somewhat greater and let the
Patient hold it between his Teeth, with his Head and Face somewhat inclined,
that the Rheum may run freely out of his Mouth.

4. An Experienced Sternutatory to clear the Head.
LEt the Patient snuff up in the Morning fasting, a small Spoonful, or less, of
the clarified Juice of Haedera terrestris, i.e. Ground Ivy, or of Beets,
spitting out from time to time as much Liquor as comes into his Mouth.

5. An often tried Remedy for the Dysentery and sharp Fluxes of the Belly.
GIve from fifteen to twenty grains of carefully made Mercurius Dulcis
incorporated, with about two ounces of Catholicon, or else with about one
scruple of toasted or somewhat less of untoasted Rhubarb.

See Numb. (1.)

6. A good, though uncommon, Medicine for the Dropsy.
TAke Virginian Snake-weed a sufficient quantity, and having cut and sliced it
very small, infuse it into a competent quantity of good Sack till the Liquor be
very strongly impregnated with the Plant. Of this Infusion let the Patient take
three, four or five Spoonfuls at a time (or more if the case be urgent) when
the Stomach is empty.

See Numb. (2.)

7. An often Experienced Medicine for Blood-shot, or Inflamed Eyes.
CUt a new-laid Egg boiled hard, into two halfs, (without taking out the Yelks)
and apply one of these considerably warm, but not too hot, to the part
affected, and keep it on for some hours (six or eight if it need so long.) Note
well, To the same purpose, you may apply with good effect, a Poultis made of a
rotten Apple, the cold being first quite taken off.

See Numb. (3.)

8. An Excellent Remedy for a Burn or Scald in the Eye.
TAke Mucilages of Quinceseed, Fleawort, Linseed and Fenugreek-seed, of each
one scruple; boil it but very lightly in four ounces of Betony-water, filter
it, and apply it to the Part.

9. A good and innocent Dentrifice.
TAke Mastich and Dragon's-blood, of each a sufficient quantity; powder them,
and mix them together, and let the Patient use them as a Dentrifice.

See Numb. (4.)

10. To Correct the Laxity of the Gums, and fasten the Teeth.
TO a Pint of Red or Claret Wine, take about two drams of Japan Earth, and
having dissolved so much as you can, pour off the clear, and let the Patient
wash his Mouth therewith from time to time.

11. An uncommon, but effectual, Fomentation for Tumors accompanied with sharp
Humors.
TO a Gallon of Spring Water, put as much dried Sage, as you judge will afford a
Decoction strong enough of the Herb. Into this, when it first grows hot, cast
about two ounces or some drams of Castle-Soap, and let it dissolve there till
your Decoction be completed. With this and Stuphes, foment the part for a good
while together.

12. A rare Medicine for Hysterical Affections, and several Distempers of the
Genus Nervosum.
TAke one ounce, or a sufficient quantity of Volatile Salt of Hartshorn,
(which need not be exactly pure) and drop on it as much Spirit of Tartar as
will serve to satiate it, when the conflict is quite ceased. Digest the mixture
for a while, that it may acquire a red Color, and keep it carefully stopped for
Use, and give four or five drops twice a day in any convenient Vehicle.

13. An often proved Remedy to bring away what is or should not be left in the
Womb of a Puerpera, though it were part of a Dead Child.
WIth the Juice of Sheeps Sorrel, and some of the strong infusion of the same
Herb (unpress'd) in Water, and a sufficient quantity of Sugar, make a Syrup: Of
which let the Patient take about a Spoonful (a little more or less as need may
require) twice or thrice a day.

14. A tried Medicine to take away Corns.
THe parts being made soft with Bathing, and scraped, apply to the Corn a
Plaster of Shoe-maker's-wax; but if the part be very tender, your Plaster may
consist of equal parts of Shoe-maker's-wax and Diapalma melted together and
spread somewhat thin.

15. To make an Excellent Styptic Powder to stench Blood.
TAke of White Sugar Candy, Roach-Allom burnt (but not too much calcined) and
white Vitriol, and pulverize them exceeding well, and mix them diligently; and
having dipped Plagets of Flax or Lint, moistened with the White of an Egg into
this Powder, apply them to the Orifices of the Bleeding parts. Note well,
'twill do very well after the dry Ingredients are mixed, to grind them with as
much Whites of Eggs beaten to water, as will make a Paste, which is afterward
to be thoroughly dried in the Air, and then again reduced to Powder.

16. For a Toothache, proceeding from Defluxion or Rheum from the Gums.
DIssolve one ounce of choice Japan Earth in a Pint at least of good Red or
Claret Wine, and let the Patient hold in his Mouth often, and a good while
together.

17. To prevent the Fit of an Ague, or cure that Disease.
TAke of the scraping or gratings of the Root of Angelica half a dram, and of
the Flowers of Antimony, mix them well, and let the Patient take them at the
usual times.

Note here, That the Flowers of Antimony are not to be given inwardly in
Substance, but only in Infusion; for in Substance they will hazard life,
bringing first strong Convulsions, and then Death: But you may make the
Medicine thus.

See Numb. (5.)

18. To make an often tried Pericarpium for Agues, especially Tertians.
TAke a handful and a half of fresh Rue, half a handful of fresh Sage, a small
spoonful of Bay Salt, and a spoonful of good Vinegar. Beat all these very well
together into an uniform Mass; which divide into two parts, and make thereof
two Wrist Plasters to be applied at the usual times before the Fit; and to be
renewed, if there be Occasion, to keep them on till they grow dry and
troublesome.

19. For the Cholic.
ORange Peels dried till one may grate them to Powder; and when they are
pulverized, take about a spoonful of the Powder at a time, mixed with a little
white Sugar to sweeten it, in or before some spoonfuls of any convenient
Vehicle.

20. An approved Remedy for Present Deafness.
TAke of the Breast Milk of a Woman that has had her first Male Child some time
before, and drop three or four drops of it warm as it comes from the Nipple,
into the part affected.

21. A choice Medicine for Burns.
TAke Goose-grease, (which the Country People call the Leaf of a Goose) and
having softly melted, and a little skim'd it, squeeze into it as much freshly
expressed Juice of Ground-Ivy-Leaves, as by continual stirring, will bring it to
the consistence of a Green Ointment. With this anoint the part it self
affected; and afterward lay on it fine old Rags, well dipped in the same
Ointment.

22. An External Remedy, almost Specific for the Leprosy.
TAke Pomatum one ounce, Flower of Sulphur one dram, Sal Prunellae half an
ounce, and having mixed them very well together, from time to time anoint the
part affected therewith, as long as there is need.

23. For the Headache.
TAke green Hemlock, that is tender, and put it in your Socks, so that it may
lie thinly between them and the Soles of your Feet; shift the Herb once a day.

24. For the Hiccup (even in Fevers.)
GIve two or three preserved Dampsons at a time.

25. A Simple Remedy for the Cholic.
IN a Draught of any convenient Liquor, dissolve about one dram of good Salt of
Tartar, and let the Patient take it for one Dose.

26. An Experienced Medicine to cleanse the Womb.
TAke a large white Onion, cut it into small pieces, and boil it in about a
pint of Water, or less, as if it were to be dressed for eating. And of this
Decoction give seven or eight ounces for a dose, mixed with about half an ounce
of fresh Oil of Walnuts.

27. To appease the Fits of a Furor Uterinus.
TAke the Feathers of Partridges (it matters not much from what part of the
Fowl) and burn them for a competent time under the Patient's Nose.

28. A very good Syrup to strengthen the Sight.
TAke about a small Spoonful of a Syrup made of Betony-water and Honey, twice,
thrice or four times a day.

29. An easily prepared, but useful Drink for a beginning Scurvy.
TO a quart of Small-Beer (of six Shillings per Barrel) or Small-Ale, put over
Night about a handful of Scurvy-grass-Leaves, and let the Patient drink this
Liquor at Dinner for his ordinary drink for six or eight Weeks together.

30. A Parable Remedy for recent Burns.
APply as speedily as you can to the part affected an Onion, or more, (if the
burnt place be large) beaten to a Mash.

31. For the Toothache.
APply a Plaster of Caranna to that part that burns, between the bottom of the
Ear and the Temples, on the same side where the Pulsation of the Artery is the
most manifestly or strongly felt.

32. An Excellent Medicine, tho not Curative, for those that are tormented with
the Stone in the Bladder.
TAke Powder of Comfrey-Roots an ounce and half, Marsh-mallow-Roots three
ounces, Liquorice Powder two drams, Seeds of Daucus of Creet two drams; Seeds
of Purslane, of Winter Cherries, of each half a dram; Nutmegs two drams,
Saffron one dram; the Species Diamargariton frigid, six drams; Syrup of
Marshmallows four ounces; mix and make a soft Electuary: of which let the Sick
daily take the quantity of a Walnut. It is profitable against the Stone in the
Reins and Bladder, but chiefly against the latter; as also against the
Strangury, Dysuria, etc.

33. To make a Purging Electuary, especially for Children.
TAke an Ounce of choice Rhubarb reduced to fine Powder, and eight ounces of
very good Currants, picked, washed and rubbed dry; beat these together in a Glass
or Marble Mortar for near two hours. Of this Electuary, let the Patient take
about the bigness of a small or a large Chestnut in the Morning fasting, and if
need be at Bedtime. If the case be very urgent, the Medicine may be taken
thrice in twenty four hours.

34. An excellent Remedy for an Inflammation of the Eyes.
TAke a Pippin (or other Apple) cut it into two halfs, take out all the Core of
each of them, fill up the Cavities with the tender tops of common Wormwood, tie
the halfs together, and roast the Apple well. Then beat it and the Herb
together to a kind of Poultis, and apply it warm (but not hot) to the part
affected, and bind it thereon, letting it lie all Night, or if you use it in
the Day time, for six or eight hours.

35. An useful Drink for the King's Evil, and some Affections that have the like
Causes to it.
TAke a large handful (or two little Physical handfuls) of the Leaves of
Ground Ivy, green, or (if the Season denies you them) well dried, wash off the
Dust with Beer, (not Water) and put the Herb into a Gallon of Ale-wort; when
it is ripe for drinking, draw it out into Bottles, and let the Patient take a
draught of it twice or thrice a day, or if it be thought fit, he may use it at
Meals.

See Numb. (6.)

36. An often experienced Remedy to expel Gravel, and provoke suppressed Urin.
KIll a black Cock or Hen, (rather than one of any other color) take out the
thick Membrane or Skin that lines the Gizzard or Stomach, and having wiped it
clean, dry it cautiously, so as it may be beaten to powder: With this mix an
equal part, or half so much of choice red Coral calcined. Of this mixture, give
from twenty or thirty Grains to forty or fifty Grains.

See Numb. (7.)

37. An approved Remedy for the King's Evil.
SEt a quart of new Milk on the Fire till it just boils up, then take it off,
and put into it two spoonfuls of the best Honey, and stir it till it be
dissolved: And then set it on the Fire again, and let it boil two or three
walms: Then divide it into four parts, and drink one part warm early in the
Morning, another about ten of the Clock, another about four in the Afternoon,
and the last a little before Bedtime. Do this daily for two or three Months,
except you purge, which must be once a Week, taking (if a grown Man) three
quarters of an ounce of Caryo-costinum dissolved in Posset Drink: Dress the
Sores if they run, with any drawing Sear-cloth, or a Plaster of
Burgundy-Pitch. The Medicine, though not very promising, is very famous, by the
many Cures done with it, by a charitable Lady, of whose Ingenious Chaplain I
procured it.

38. A good Composition to stop a hollow Tooth, and appease the Pain.
TAke two parts of fine Sugar, (that of Lisbon does best) and one part of black
round Pepper, both finely powdered and mixed; put them into a Silver spoon over
two or three well-kindled Coals; and when the Sugar begins to melt, take off
the Spoon, and whilst the mixture is yet soft, form it into little grains for
size and shape, suited to the part affected.

39. A Plaster preferred by an old Physician, that often tried it, to the
common Soap Plaster.
MIx about one dram of Castle-Soap, with one ounce of Diachylum, and make
thereof a thin Plaster, to be worn upon the part affected.

40. An Excellent Liquor to be used Topically in Gleetings.
TAke four ounces of Spring Water [or Plantane-Water] and dissolve in it about
one scruple of the Sympathetic-Pouder, or so much as will give it a sensible,
yet but faint, Vitriol-like taste: And of this mixture, inject as much as is
usual of a small Syringe, every Morning and Evening, as long as need require,
directing the Patient to retain the injected Liquor as long as conveniently he
can.

41. An approved Medicine in the biting of a Viper.
TAke of white Horehound, and apply the Plant, well beaten into the form of a
Poultis, to the part affected, and give the Patient a spoonful or two of the
Juice of the same Herb to drink: It Is also very good for the Jaundice.

42. An almost specific Medicine for the suppression of Urin.
TAke of Stoechas Citrina (in English, French Lavender) and infuse in a good
heat, two handful of the Flowers in a pint of good Brandy, (not rectified
Spirit of Wine) and of this infusion, give about a small Wine-glass-full at a
time [diluted, if there be great need, with a sufficient quantity of some
appropriated Liquor.]

43. For an Ague often tried.
BOil Yarrow [ Mille-folium] in new Milk, till it be tender enough to have a
Cataplasm made of it. Apply this to the Patient's Wrists, just when the cold
Fit is coming on, and let it lie on the parts till the Fit be gone; and if
another Fit comes, use fresh Cataplasms as before.

44. An useful Plaster for those that are troubled with Vapors of the Spleen,
and shortness of Breath, when it is a Nervous Affection.
TAke two parts of strained Galbanum, and one part of Asafoetida, and make
thereof, according to Art, a Plaster of about the bigness of the Palm of one's
Hand, taking care to leave a broad Edg quire round, to prevent its sticking to
one's Linen and putting a pretty large piece of Cotton in the middle, that the
Gums may not touch the Navel; to which the Plaster is to be applied.

45. A slight, but excellent, Medicine to take off Fits of the Headache.
TAke about a handful of fresh Rosemary, and boil it for a pretty while in a
quart of common Water, then almost fill with it a pint Pot [or rather a Mug]
let the Patient cover his Head and Face with a Napkin, so that he may receive
the Steam as hot as he can well bear, and keep the Vessel there as long as he
finds the Steam strong enough.

46. An easy and tried Medicine for the Itch, Praenissis Universalibus.
BOil four Ounces of clean Quicksilver in about a Gallon and a half of
Springwater, and let the Patient take of this between a quarter and half a pint
at a time, aromatizing it if he pleases with a little Lemon Peel.

47. An easy Medicine to purify and sweeten the Blood.
TAke the Minera of Hungarian, or other choice Antimony, and having ground it
to very fine Powder, without suffering it to touch any Metal, give of this dry
Alcohole from ten Grains to a Dram, giving it once a day, and (unless some
particular reason dissuade that time) let it be at Dinner, that it may mingle
with the Patient's Meat in his Stomach.

48. A cheap, but excellent, Medicine for Ulcers.
TAke one dram at least of Corrosive Sublimate finely powdered, dissolve it in
a quart of fair Water, and let it lie there, if you have leisure, four or five
days (in a light Digestion) that it may be thoroughly dissolved. Then drop in it
as much Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or as much Oil of Tartar, per deliquium, as
will precipitate it all: Then filter it carefully, and keep it stopped for use,
which is to imbibe Dorsels or Plagets with it, and apply them to the Ulcer
twice or thrice a day.

49. An easy and innocent Medicine for Costiveness.
BOil in as much Broth as will serve to fill a large Poringer, about half a
handful of the Leaves of common Mallows chopped, and of this Broth (being
strained) let the Patient make the first part of his Meal.

See Numb. (8.)

50. For the Aching of a hollow Tooth.
TAke Oil of Wax, and with it moisten well a little Cotton, and thrust it up
into the hollow Tooth, letting it lie there till the pain be sufficiently
asswag'd.

51. An often tried Medicine for the Bloody Flux, being good also for
Pleurisies.
GIve the weight of an Escu D'or (or near one dram) of the Seed of Sophia
Chirurgorum, in English Flax-seed, in two or three spoonfuls of any convenient
vehicle once or twice a day.

52. The Cinnamon Drink, good in Gripes and Fluxes, etc.
TAke two ounces of calcined Hart's-horn, powder it, and boil it in three pints
of Springwater, till a pint be wasted; then take it off the Fire, and infuse in
it, an ounce and half of good Cinnamon, setting it upon Embers in a covered
Vessel for about an hour. Then sweeten it with Sugar to your Palate, and drink
about a quarter of a pint at a time. If taken for prevention only, a fourth
part of the Cinnamon will serve the turn.

See Numb. (9.)

53. An easy, but useful Medicine for redness of the Eyes.
TAke a Blanched Almond, and about three Grains of Camphire, and in a Glass or
a Marble Mortar, incorporate them by wary grinding; and then add to them little
by little two or three ounces of red Rose Water, still grinding them till the
whole be brought to a kind of Emulsion. Drop a little of this into the part
affected.

See Numb. (10.)

54. A most excellent Balsam for any green Wound, of what Nature soever.
Oil of St. John's-wort, and Venice-Turpentine, of each a like quantity, set
them over the Fire in a gentle heat, half an hour or less, that they may
incorporate. Then put them up, and keep it for use as one of the best of
Balsams.

55. A good Medicine for suppression of the Menses.
GIve for three Mornings together, about the expected time of the Monthly
Evacuation, a dram or dram and half or thereabouts of the Gauls and Livers of
Eels dried and made into Powder.

56. An experienced Remedy to prevent Apoplectic Fits.
MAke at the crossing of the Sutures and Issue with Diapalma, and Oil of
Vitriol, and keep it open the ordinary way.

57. To dry up, or correct the Humor that makes Scrophulous Ulcers.
TAke of the Bone of the Cuttlefish, and having reduced it to an impalpable
Powder, give about one dram of it at a time in any convenient vehicle.

58. An effectual Medicine for a recent Strain.
TAke a handful of Wormwood-Leaves, and boil them in strong Ale, till the
Consumption of about a third, that you may reduce them to the Form of a
Cataplasm, which when you take from the Fire, you must strengthen by putting
into it two or at most three of Brandy, and apply it very warm, renewing it, if
need be, in twenty four hours at least.

See Numb. (11.)

59. For a slight Inflammation of the Eyes, as also a Hordeum growing on the
Eyelid.
TAke fresh Housleek, and having powdered it very well to a kind of Cataplasm,
cover as much as is needful of it (for example sake, to the thickness of a
half-Crown, or a Crown-piece) in the fold of a Rag or Linen-cloth, that may be
so applied that the Cataplasm may reach the Eye, and the rest of the Cloth be
fastened about the Patient's Head. Let the Medicine lie on all Night, and be
taken off the next Morning. Repeat this Application two or three times, in case
there be need.

60. For most Astmatic Distempers.
TAke of the Roots of Elecampain, thinly sliced, one ounce, of the Leaves of
Ground Ivy, a good handful. Boil these in three pints of Spring Water to a
quart, then strain the Decoction, sweeten it with a little live Honey, and let
the Patient take it five, six or seven spoonfuls at a time. ( Note well,
Remember the efficacy of Saffron in the same Disease, as it is commended by Mr.
Ray, in his Catalogue of Plants.)

See Numb. (12.)

61. For an Ague.
TAke of the Bone, called Patella, of the Knee of a dead Man, and having
reduced it to fine Powder, give of it as much as will lie upon a Groat or a
Sixpence for one Dose, in any proper Conserve or fit Vehicle, at a convenient
time (before the cold Fit.)

62. An experienced Medicine to kill Tetters.
TAke of Flowers of Brimstone, Ginger and Burnt-allum, of each alike, mingle
them well, and of this mixture, incorporate as much with new unsalted Butter,
as is requisite to bring it to the consistence of an Unguent. With this anoint
the part affected, as hot as the Patient can well endure it, and let it stay on
all Night; and the next Morning wash it off with Celandine-water. But when the
Patient goes to Bed, he is to take a Dose of some Alexipharmacal Medicine, as
Gascon's Powder, Treacle, etc. to keep the Humor from being driven into the
Mass of Blood: He is also to bathe the part oftentimes in a day with the
Celandine-water.

63. To make a good Powder for a Gonorrhaea.
TAke of choice red Coral, and of Mastich, equal parts, reduce them separately
to fine Powder. Mingle them very well, and of this mixture, give about thirty
or forty Grains for one Dose.

64. A choice Medicine for a slight Stroke or Bruise of the Eye.
TAke two spoonfuls of Fennel-water, or of Betony-water, and drop into it three
or four drops (or five at most) of good clarified Honey: shake them well
together, and use them twice or thrice a day. But you must have a care to make
this mixture fresh once in four, or at most in five days, especially in Summer;
for if it be longer kept, 'twill be apt to grow sour.

65. An often tried external Medicine for an Erysipelas.
TAke the Blood of a Hare, ('it is best if killed by Hunting in March) and if you
can have it fresh, anoint the part affected with it, otherwise apply on it a
Linen Rag that has (though a good while ago) thoroughly imbibed the fresh Blood
of that Animal, and dried in the Air. But if the imbued Linen be too hard or
stiff, it must be softened with a little fair water, and then the cold taken
off, applied to, and bound upon the part.

See Numb. (13.)

66. An Emperics, much boasted Remedy for the Fluor Albus, or Whites in Women.
MAke a strong Decoction of the Herb Alchymilla (in English, Ladies-Mantle,)
and let the Patient drink of it about half a pint every Morning fasting; and if
the case be urgent, make an Injection of the same Plant, boiled till it be very
tender, and let the Patient make use of it from time to time.

See Numb. (14.)

67. An excellent Water for Ulcers and Sores [try'd with great Success.]
TO a quart of Spring Water, take one dram of Mercury sublimate finely
powdered; and when it is quite dissolved, drop into the Solution, either Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac (which is best) or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, till you see
that no more will manifestly precipitate. This done, filter the mixture through
Cap-paper, and reserve the Precipitate for other uses. The Liquor that passes,
you must keep close stopped in a Glass-Viol; and when you will use it, you must
dip Linen Rags in it, and being thoroughly wetted, apply them to the part
affected; single, or doubled, more or less, as need requires. This Application
may be renewed twice, or (if the case be urgent) thrice a day.

68. An experienced Medicine for want of Sleep, proceeding from great Heats of
the Head.
TAke the palest Carrots you can get, and scrape a sufficient quantity of them
to afford scrapings enough to make a Cataplasm of about two Fingers or two
Inches broad, and of the thickness of a Half-crown piece of Silver, or
thereabouts. Let the Patient apply this in a piece of doubled [Linen] to his
Throat, so that it may reach to the Jugular Vessels on each side, when he goes
to Bed, and let it lie on all Night (for it will not easily grow dry,) if the
first Application do not prevail, it is to be applied the following Night; and
so a third and fourth time, if need require.

69. A Parable Medicine that has cured very many, especially Children, and
young Boys and Girls, of Convulsive Fits.
TAke of the Powder (whether made by Filing, Rasping, or, otherwise) of the
sound Skull of a Dead Man, and give of it about as much as will lie upon a
Groat, made up into a Bolus with Conserve of Rosemary-Flowers (or any other
that is proper) to a young Boy or Girl: But in Persons more Aged and Strong,
the Dose of the Powder must be augmented to double the quantity. The Medicine
must be given often, if necessity requires it: If the Patient be a Child,
'twill be useful to apply to his Throat, a kind of Necklace, made of the Roots
of Vervain cut into Beads.

70. An easy, and experienced Remedy for the Piles.
IN four ounces of Spring Water, dissolve about one dram of Salt of Tartar, or
as much as will give the Liquor a manifest, but not strong Alcalisate taste,
and apply soft Rags dipped in lukewarm or somewhat more to the part affected,
shifting it from time to time.

71. A succcssful Medicine for Fluxes of the Belly.
TAke Rice-Meal, and mix with it about a fifth part of finely powdered and
sifted Chalk, boil these in Water, or which is better, if it agrees with the
Patient, in Milk, and make thereof a hasty Pudding, to be moderately seasoned
with Sugar and powdered Cinnamon; and let the Patient eat it at Meals, and if
need be at some other times.

72. An often tried Remedy for Corns.
TAke the Juice of Housleek, and mix it up with about equal parts of the thick
Balm or Yest, that sticks to the Barrel or to the Clay that stops it. Of these
make a kind of Plaster, which being kept upon the Toe for a while, and then if
need be, renewed, will make the Corn very soft and easy to be drawn out and
extirpated.

See Numb. (15.)

73. A good Medicine for Burns and Stenching of Blood.
DIssolve in Spring Water, or which is better Rainwater, as much Sugar as will
make it a strong Solution, and then with a sufficient quantity of Linseed-Oil,
or Oil of Olives, beat up this Liquor till the Oil on it be brought to the
consistence of an Unguent, with which anoint the part affected, as timely as
you can, renewing the Application as often as need shall require.

See Numb. (16.)

74. An approved Medicine for the Bloody Flux, being good also for Pleurisies.
GIve two or three scruples of Hare's Blood beaten to Powder for one Dose, to
be taken in a spoonful or two or three of Mint-water, or any other fit Vehicle.

75. A very often (though homely) experienced Remedy for Dysenteric and other
Fluxes.
TAke the fresh Dung of a Hog, (and if you can, whilst it is yet warm) and boil
in a Poringer full of new Milk, as much of it as may amount to the bigness of a
Wal-nut; and also an equal quantity of fine Mutton Suet sliced very thin: When
these are well incorporated with the Milk, strain them well through a clean
Linen cloth; and if there be need, sweeten them a little with Loaf-Sugar: Let
the Patient take this warm, once or twice a day.

76. A powerful Styptic to stench Blood, where it can be applied.
TAke the fine Powder of Lapis Haematites, made by grinding it exactly well
with an equal or double weight of Sal Ammoniac: And of this high-colour'd
Sublimate, put a little upon the Orifice of the Vessel.

77. For a slight Redness of the Eyes.
TAke of French Barley half an ounce, and Damask Roses half an handful. Boil
them but very little in a pint of Springwater, and with this moisten the part
affected.

See Numb. (17.)

78. For the Relaxation of the Uvula.
TAke bluish Pease (or in want of them, white ones) and chew them very well,
so as to reduce them to the consistence of a Poultis. Lay this warm upon the
Crown of the Head, to the breadth and thickness of a Five-shilling-piece of
Silver, or somewhat larger, shifting it in the Morning, and at Bedtime.

See Numb. (18.)

79. A powerful Medicine to stop sharp Rheums.
TAke a Dram of Catechu, or Japan Earth, and make thereof a Decoction in five
or six ounces of good White Wind, or else of some Distilled Water, or other
Liquor appropriated to the Disease. Of this, give two or three spoonfuls at
Night, and in the Morning as much also if need require.

80. The French-Man's Famous Eye-Water.
TAke two or three ounces of the Water of Simple Pimpernel, distilled in
Balneo, and put this into a little Pot or Poringer of Rose-Copper; then put
into it, about the bigness of a Hazel-nut, or a Filbert, of strong Quicklime:
Cover the Pot, and let the Ingredients lie in it till the Liquor has acquired
a bluish color. Then very warily pour off tke clear, and add to it as much
live Honey, as will give a little, or but little, Taste: Use it after the
wonted manner of such Waters; and if you find it too strong, dilate it a little
with water of the same Plant, or good Spring Water, which for a need, may be
used from first to last, instead of the Water of Pimpernel.

See Numb. (19.)

81. Eye-Water.
TAke Red Rose Water, Plantane-water, of each an ounce; Tutia prepared, half a
scruple; Lapis Lazuli prepared, six grains; red Coral prepared, five grains;
mix and make a Collyrium or Eye-water.

This dropped into the Eyes, being first well shak'd, cures Inflammations of the
Eyes, provided there be no great foulness, nor Scrophulous disposition in the
Patient. It takes off the redness of the Eyelids, if with a Sponge dipped in
it, the Eyelids be often wetted, it takes off Films very well.

82. A safe and useful Medicine to prevent Dryness and some other Disaffections
of the Eyes.
TAke of choice Virgin-Honey, two spoonfuls, of Succory-water, or the distilled
Water, of each four spoonfuls; mix them, and in a very clean Vessel over a very
gentle Fire, let them evaporate (taking off from time to time any Scum that may
arise) till the mixture be brought to the consistence of a Syrup [or of Honey]
keep this in a Glass well stopped, and make use of it, by letting fall a drop or
two, or at most three of it, at a time, into the Eye.

See Numb. (20.)

83. The Medicine of a Famous Empyric for the Stone.
TAke Amber (clear and yellow) Seahorse Pizzle and Niter, of each a like
quantity, ( Note well, in case of Ulcerated Kidneys, put half the quantity of
the Amber) and an eighth part of the Nitre (of Natural Balsam.) Pulverize each
apart, and make them up into Pills with Chios (or at least clean Strasburgh
Turpentine) take five, six or seven Pills (of above ten to one ounce) Morning
and Evening.

See Numb. (21.)

84. An excellent Medicine for Fits of the Mother.
TAke Sagapenum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, and strained through a Sieve,
and again inspisiated or thickened: Ammoniacum in like manner prepared: Steel
prepared, Myrrh, Fecula of Bryony, of each half a Dram: English Saffron,
Castoreum, of each a scruple: Borax two scruples: Syrup of Staechas a
sufficient quantity; mix and make Pills of a convenient bigness to be
swallowed; of which take three Morning and Night, with care.

85. A choice Medicine for the Cholic.
TAke clean white Chalk, and having dried it with a gentle heat, reduce it to
fine Powder; wet this Powder with the expressed Juice of Cammomil, and then let
it dry in the Air, without the heat, either of the Fire, or of the Sun. This
done, wet it again with new Juice of Cammomil, and dry it the second time as
before. Wet and dry it again the third time, and, if you please, the fourth
time; and then reduce the dry Mass to fine Powder again. Of this Powder, let
the Patient take at a time, as much as will lie upon a Groat or a Sixpence, in
some spoonfuls of Wine, or other proper Vehicle.

86. Troches of Vipers, successfully used to cleanse the Blood, and to
strengthen weak Patients.
TAke of Vipers reduced to fine Powder one ounce, Diaphoretic Antimony half an
ounce, clear yellow Amber two drams, of Starch as much as of all the rest, and
of Sugar as much as of Starch; make them to a fine Paste, with Spirit of Wine,
and then make them into small Cakes, whereof one may serve for a Dose.

87. An approved Medicine for Scorbutic Gums, and to fasten the Teeth.
TAke of White Wind, a pint, of Alum half an ounce, of Juniper Berries and of
red Sage ana one ounce: Boil these together till a quarter of the Liquor be
wasted, then put into the remaining part four ounces of Honey, and let it boil
till the Scum be all risen; then filter it, and put into it one dram of
Balsamum Vitae.

See Numb. (22.)

88. A Caution about the Vitriolate Eye-water.
TAke four grains of Roman Vitriol, not more, to four ounces of Distilled
Water, either of Roses, Succory, Fennel, etc.

89. A good Medicine for a light Stroke, or Contusion of the Eye.
TAke half an ounce of Celendine-water, and shake well into it, three or four
drops of clarified Honey, and let fall of this into the Eye, a drop or two,
twice or thrice a day.

90. An excellent Medicine for a Stroke or Bruise in the Eye.
TAke of Betony-water and Hysop-water, of each one ounce, and in their mixture,
stir some Blades of Saffron, till the Liquor be pretty well colored, and no
more. And lastly, add to it four or five drops of clarified Honey.

See Numb. (23.)

91. An excellent Remedy to take off Films, and such like things from the Eyes.
TAke choice Bole-Armonic, and reduce it to very fine Powder, blow this gently
into the Eye, once, or at most twice a day. But if the Patient be subject to,
or fearful of, any swelling, heat, or disaffection in the Eyelids, incorporate
the Powder with a little clarified Honey.

See Numb. (24.)

92. To strengthen weak Eyes subject to Rheums.
TAke Lapis Calaminaris four ounces, Rose Water a pint, shake them well
together two days. Then let it settle, pour off this Water into a little Viol,
and drop of it in weak Eyes, two or three times a day, etc.

93. A Plaster to strengthen the Eyes, and stop Defluctions on them.
TAke of Frankincense two drams, Olibanum and Mastic ana half a dram; Mix these
well, and reduce them into fine Powder: Of which, a convenient quantity is to
be melted and spread upon black Ribbon, or some such thing, with a hot Knife or
Spatula, and so presently applied to the Temples.

94. An experienced Remedy for sharp and hot Humors in the Eyes.
INto a quart of new Milk already boiling, put about two handfuls or less of
green Housleek, freshly gathered, and chopped small, and let the Milk boil on
till 'twill yield no more Curd. Then strain the green Posset Drink, and let the
Patient take every day, once or twice a pint (or as near that quantity as he
can well reach to) sweetened a little if need be with fine Sugar. The drink may
be best taken cold.

95. An excellent Fumigation for Pains in the Eyes, and overgreat dryness of
them, and when one fears the beginning of a Cataract.
TAke of Fennel, Hysop, Betony, Celandine, Carduus, of each half a handful, or
a handful; of the Seeds of Linseed, Quinces, Fenugreek, Fleawort, of each half
a dram, of French Barley one ounce; Boil these in two quarts of fair water, and
half a pint of White Wind: Let the Patient hold his Head over the Fumes for
about a quarter of an hour every Morning.

96. For Sore Eyelids.
TAke Crumbs of White-bread half an ounce; Coral, and Pearl prepared, Tutia,
White-Sugar-candy, of each half a dram; Powder of Red Roses a dram and half;
Flowers of St. John's-wort one dram: and with a sufficient quantity of Milk
make a Cataplasm or Pultice, which spread upon linen Cloth, and bind it over
the Eye.

97. For Heaviness and Pain in the Eyes.
TAke Flowers of Melilot, of Elder, and of Marigolds, of each a small handful;
Linseed, Seeds of Fenugreek, Fleawort, Cumin, and Quinces of each half a
scruple; French-Barley half an ounce; Damask Roses half an ounce; Spring Water
a pint and half: mix and make a Decoction with which foment the Forehead,
Temples and Eyebrows, being sufficiently warm.

98. For a Dry Inflammation.
TAke of Betony, Hysop, Rue, Wormwood, Vervain, as also of Sage-flowers and
Rosemary-flowers, of each of all these, half a handful. (To which may be
usefully added Cummin-seeds, Fennel-seeds and Carduus-seeds, of each a quarter
of an ounce.) Boil these a little in two or three quarts of fair Water, and
then let the Patient hold his Head for about a quarter of an hour over the
Steam of this Decoction, making use of a Napkin, to keep the Smoke from
dissipating, and direct it to his Eyes. A while after, he may put into them, if
it be thought fit, a little clarified Honey.

FINIS.
Several necessary Notes, Explicating, Illustrating, or Enlarging some of the
Heads in the Preceding Volume.
Numb. (1.) For the Bloody Flux, or other Fluxes. See Page 4.
TAke Japan Earth, Powder of Rhubarb, of each equal parts: of which give half a
dram at a time every Morning fasting.

Numb. (2.) A good Medicine for the Dropsy. See p. 5.
NOte, An Infusion of Mechoacan in White Wind, (an Ounce and half thin-sliced
to a pint) being infused 24 hours, and drank off every Morning for some days,
is a most admirable thing: and if a little Mustard Seed be infused in it, it
will be so much the better.

Numb. (3.) A Medicine for Bloodshot, or inflamed Eyes. See p. 6.
THere is no better a Remedy for inflamed Eyes, than to wash them every day
several times with this. Take Frogspawn-water, a pint; Salt of Tartar, a dram:
mix and dissolve, and wash therewith.

Numb. (4.) A good and innocent Dentrifice. See p. 7.
BUt that which exceeds all, is a fine Powder of Red Coral, with which you may
rub them two or three times a day, and then wash them with Water in which Sal
Prunellae is dissolved.

Numb. (5.) To prevent or cure an Ague. See p. 13.
TAke gratings of Angelica Root, Flowers of Antimony, of each half a dram;
choice Canary three ounces: Infuse in a cold place for one or two days, and
pour off the clear for two Doses: It is a singular good Vomit for the cure of
Agues of all sorts, being given in the Morning fasting 4 or 6 hours before the
coming of the Fit; and if it be not a Quotidian Ague, then on the intermitting
day.

Numb. (6.) An useful Drink for the King's Evil. See p. 24.
THere is no better thing in the World for the King's Evil than to give daily
some spoonfuls of this following Liquor. Take White Wind a quart, Juice of
Pellitory of the Wall a pint, Spirit of Wine half a pint, Sal Prunellae an
ounce: mix and dissolve; then pour off the clear, and sweeten with white Sugar:
Dose 6 spoonfuls Morning and Night.

Numb. (7.) An Experienced Remedy to expel Gravel, and provoke Vrin. See p. 25.
TAke the Juice of Onions two spoonfuls; White Wind half a pint or more: mix
them, for a draught it gives present ease; and if repeated for some time, in a
short season cures.

Numb. (8.) An easy Medicine for Costiveness. See p. 35.
A Turpentine Clyster thus made is admirable, to cause Stools in a very great
Costiveness.

Take Strasburgh Turpentine an ounce, Yolk of one or two Eggs, grind them well
together; then put thereto a pint of fat Mutton Broth, and exhibit it Bloodwarm.

Numb. (9.) A Remedy for Gripes and Fluxes. See p. 37.
A Most excellent Remedy for Gripings, is a Tincture of Corn Poppy-flowers made
with common Spirit of Wine: of this you may give from a spoonful to two
spoonfuls, in Spirit of Opium half an ounce, mixed with Black-cherry water four
ounces: This gives ease upon the spot.

Numb. (10.) A Medicine for Redness of the Eyes. See p. 38.
IF the redness be with a fierce hot Rheum, it is from weakness of the Eyes;
and then the only Remedy is to wash them twice or thrice a day with Brandy:
there is no danger in it, nor will it smart much.

Numb. (11.) An effectual Medicine for a Strain. See p. 41.
TAke Comfrey-Roots beaten to a pulp, half a pound, Powder of Japan Earth four
ounces, Spirit of Wine a sufficient quantity; mix, and apply it to the part.

Numb. (12.) For most Astmatic Distempers. See p. 43.
TAke Juice of Hyssop, choice Honey, of each two pound: mix, boil, scum, and
make a Syrup; of which, let the Sick take four spoonfuls or more, Morning,
Noon, and Night.

Numb. (13.) An external Medicine for an Erysipelas. See p. 47.
THe Blood of almost any living Creature is found by many Experiments to be a
Specific against an Erysipelas, being often anointed on the affect, or Cloths
dipped in the some, being laid moist thereon.

Numb. (14.) A Remedy for the Whites in Women. See p. 48.
THe best of Remedies in this case (after due purging) is to give two, three or
four grains of Laudanum, and to inject three, four, or six times a day this
water.

Take Spring Water two quarts, white Vitriol, Roch Alum, of each two ounces:
being in Powder, mix and dissolve, let it settle, and use only the clear.

Numb. (15.) A tried Remedy for Corns. See p. 54.
TAke Ammoniacum strained, Emplastrum Diapalma, of each an ounce; Arcanum
Coralinum half an ounce; white Precipitate two drams: mix them them well
together, and apply it only over the Corn, being first cut as close as it
conveniently can be.

Numb. (16.) A Medicine for Burns and stenching of Blood. See p. 55.
BUt for stenching of Blood, there are but few Medicines which exceed the
Colcothar of Vitriol, whether washed and freed from its Salt, or not washed:
it is but a common thing, but will do more than a thousand much more enobled.

Numb. (17.) For a slight Redness of the Eyes. See p. 58.
ONe of the best of Remedies against Redness and Inflammation of the Eyes, is
often to wash them with this Water: Take Frog-spawn-Water a pint, Common Spirit
of Wine four ounces; mix them: wash herewith five or six times a day; and at
Bedtime apply over the sore Eyes a Cataplasm of a rotten Apple.

Numb. (18.) For the Relaxation of the Uvula. See p. 59.
THis common Medicine is found very successful: The Throat being first gargled
with Claret Wine, in which a little Roch Alum has been dissolved, as hot as it
can well be endured; then anoint it with this. Take Honey one ounce, Powder of
Elecampane two drams, Pepper in Powder half a dram: mix them, and apply it
thrice a day with your Finger.

Numb. (19.) A famous Eye-Water. See p. 61.
TAke Red Rose Water a quart; Aloes in fine Powder, half an ounce; white
Vitriol, Vitrum Antimonii, Crocus Metalorum, of each six drams; mix and digest
warm a Month: then use the clear water three or four times a day, it has
scarcely any equal.

Numb. (20.) A Medicine to prevent Running of the Eyes. See p. 63.
TAke White Wind half a pint, dissolve in it white Vitriol two drams; filter or
strain, and therein dissolve choice Honey two ounces: with this fill the Eyes
two or three times a day; it is good against most Distempers of the Eyes.

Numb. (21.) A Medicine for the Stone. See p. 64.
TAke Strasburgh Turpentine two ounces, grind it well with Yolks of Eggs, and
then mix therewith this following Syrup. Take water a pint and half, Sal
Prunellae an ounce and half: mix and dissolve, and with Honey a pound, boil it
into a Syrup, which add to the former mixture. Dose two or three spoonfuls
Morning and Night.

Numb. (22.) A Medicine for Scorbutic Gums, and to fasten the Teeth. See p. 68.
THere is nothing fastens the Teeth better than to wash them with this mixture.
Take Claret Wine a pint, Roch Alum half an ounce; mix and dissolve, and then
add thereto six ounces of a strong Tincture of Japan Earth, made with common
Brandy.

Numb. (23.) For a Stroke or Bruise in the Eye. See p. 70.
TAke Celandine-water three ounces, Spirit of Saffron one ounce, mix them, with
which wash the Eyes several times aday; and if the Eyes be very sore, red, or
blood-shot, after washing anoint them every time with a little pure Virgin
Honey.

Numb. (24.) An excellent Remedy to take off Films from the Eyes.
TAke Powder of Coral levigated one ounce, Powder of Pearls levigated three
drams, Crab's-eyes levigated one dram, Virgin Honey two ounces; mix them, and
anoint four or five times a day, but chiefly Morning and Night.

Numb. (25.) A Remedy for the King's Evil.
TAke Roots of Pilewort a sufficient quantity, bruise them, and boil them in
Hog's Lard till they are Crisp, after which press them hard out; and boil in
like manner as many more fresh Roots, and press out again, doing it the third
time: then keep the Ointment for use to anoint with, Morning and Night.

Numb. (26.) A Remedy for the Stone.
GIve every Morning fasting, and every Night going to Bed, half a dram of the
Powder of Winter Cherries in a draught Parsley or Arsmart-water, or in Glass of
White Wind.

FINIS.

