THE DUTY AND DANGER OF SWEARING: Opened in a Sermon preached at YORK February
3. 1655. the day of Swearing the Lord Mayor.

By Edward Bowls M: A. Preacher of the Gospel there.

Zach. 5. 4. And I will bring forth the Curse, says the Lord of Hosts, and it
shall enter into the House of the Thief, and into the House of him that
swears falsely by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and
shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Printed and
sold in York by Tho: Broad. 1655.

To the Honorable Stephen Watson Lord Mayor, the Aldermen and the Common
Counsel of the ancient City of York.
Honored and beloved,
IT has pleased the Lord of the Harvest in his wise and good Providence, to
allot my Work and Service (if it be worth the name of Service) to that City
which God has made not only your habitation, but also your charge; I am
pleased with my lot, not only as it is from the Lord, but as it is among you:
I must acknowledge (and hereby do) that I have found that affection and respect
from you as becomes a Minister of Christ; and I have endeavored to give you a
testimony, that I have not sought my own profit, but the profit of many, that
they might be saved, (if I may use the words of so great an Apostle concerning
my self) I have been induced partly by way of acknowledgement and respect, but
especially by the sense of my duty, as a Minister, to offer to your reading and
consideration the substance of a Sermon lately preached among you, which I hope
(through Divine blessing) may be useful to you. You who are awakened cannot
but be sensible how easily, and how quickly the Word spoken slips from you. It
is soon gone from us who study it, and write it, and speak it; you have less
advantage to retain it, who hear it but once, unless the peculiar Promise and
Blessing made to the Word Preached, do befriend you. I am jealous over you (I
hope) with a godly jealousy, least through inadvertency of mind,
unsutablenesse and unprepardnesse of heart, earthlinesse of affection, seconded
with Satan's depths and devices, this counsel given you concerning Oaths may
be forgotten. I know you have almost daily need to consider of this subject,
being frequently called to actions relating thereunto, and it is now in your
power daily, or at least frequently, to peruse it: If you walk in the violation
of the Oaths of God that are upon you, it will not be charged upon me, I have
delivered my own soul, and endeavored to deliver yours. I have but two words
further to speak unto you at this present; First, that you would more
frequently and diligently attend the preaching of the Word, The Power of God
unto salvation. It pleases God out of his bounty and good will to you, to
afford you besides the public Ordinances on the Lords day, a weekly Lecture,
which I apprehend to be very much neglected, and I have often heard the paucity
of hearers laid as a reproach upon the City, by well disposed strangers. I pray
consider your selves and those that are sorrowful for the solewn assembly to
whom the reproach of it is a burden* Zeph. 3. 18. You may plead our
unworthiness when preach unto you, but that Plea I doubt will not be admitted
at the great Bar; there is not the meanest o^ the Ministers of Christ by whose
labors you might not profit, if the defect were not in your own hearts*
Remember that Divine Institution and Blessing are the main advantages in
hearing the Word, not the Gifts of the Speakers, or the capacity of the
Hearers. God is pleased most frequently to concur with the plainest, (I had
almost said the meanest) gift, in the conversion of men, that the glory might
be of God, and not of men. I am sure you cannot plead want of leisure, through
multitude of trading and worldly employment, I wish it were more; and truly I
think there is no better way to help it, then to deal liberally with God in
public Duties. First, he has secured you that you shall be no loosers, by
that promise made to the Israel of God, Neither shall any man desire thy Land
(that is, thou shall sustain no damage, Exodus 34. 24.
the Lord is thy security) when thou go up to appear before the Lord thy
God. Nay, I think you may safely apply that passage of the Lord to his people,
Hagg. 2. 18. Consider the day that the foundation of the Temple was laid,
consider it, from this day will I bless you. Try the Lord, or rather trust
the Lord. You complain of great decays, and they are visible; You Sow much,
and bring in little, etc. Consider your ways; Hagg. 1. 6, 7.
whether you be not defective in that which concerns the House of God. The
second is this, that you would study by all means to preserve peace and unity
among your selves, by delivering up unto perpetual oblivion all inveterate
envies and enmities; to that end that Magistrates would equally and gently (as
to Brethren) administer justice, ( I mean only such a gentleness as to
execute the Law with a Gospel spirit) that the people would submit themselves
in the fear of God, and not wear out the spirits of their Rulers by their
cumbrance and strife; but turn some of their complaints into prayers, to which
they are obliged by the sacred Rule 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2
. It is easier to blame then understand the work and weight of Magistracy and
Ministry, especially when they have to deal with a people that are poor and
foolish, and know not the way the Lord, nor the judgment of their God, Jer. 5.
4. And lastly, it will tend much to unity, that you be very careful what
Ministers are planted among you, such as give some evidence of the Spirit of
God dwelling in them, whose fruits are love and peace; such as are desirous of
Reformation, least superstition, vanity and strife proceed from them who
should be the greatest promoters of Knowledge Truth and Peace. I will detain
you no longer, if I have erred in what I have written to you, impute it to the
largeness of my affection to the City, which may possibly have entrenched
upon my understanding in what I have said. 2 Cor. 13. 11.
Finally, brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of love und peace shall be with you.

York, March, 15. 1655. Your affectionate servant in the Lords work, Edw:
Bowls.

Matthew. 5. 33, 34. Again ye have heard it has been said by them of old time,
thou shall not for swear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine
Oaths; But I say unto you, swear not at all, etc.
I Have often had it in my thoughts to speak something concerning Oaths, a
subject which (duly considered) would administer matter of humiliation and
reformation to us and many more: and having this opportunity put into my hands,
I shall deliver my self, taking the words of our Savior which have been read
unto you for my groundwork, which, whosoever would understand, must diligently
consider the scope of the place, and the persons he had to deal with, viz. the
Jews, leavened with Pharisaicall glosses, and corrupt traditions.

Our Savior was now in the exercise of his prophetical Office, and preaching
the Gospel of the Kingdom, and finding the Sect and opinion of the Pharisees
to be most opposite and prejudicial to his intention, he sets himself in this
Sermon to pull down the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, that so he
might bring in the righteousness which is of God by faith; and therefore tells
them plainly, that except their righteousness did exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no case enter into the Kingdom of
God, Verse 20. Now because the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees was
in better credit among the people then to be blasted with a bare assertion,
Christ shows the vanity and defectivenesse of it, in that it fell exceeding
short of its pretense, which was, to fulfill the Law of Moses, which instead of
fulfilling they destroyed. For as it is the common practice of erroneous
persons when they cannot bring their opinions to the Scripture, they will wrest
the Scripture to their opinions, as the Father speaks of some who did
pertrahere Evangelium ad sententiae suae praecipitium; so the Pharisees seeing
they could not raise their righteousness to the line of the Law, they brought
down the Law to the level of their own righteousness; in particular, they
restrained the Commamdements which in themselves are spiritual and exceeding
broad (reaching the thoughts and intents of the heart, all kinds and degrees of
evil) to some outward actions, which in the strength of moral principles they
might forbear, whose right Heirs are the Papists, who, resolved to establish a
righteousness of works, and possibility of fulfilling the Law, will by no
means grant that concupiscence is sin, least thereby their legal
righteousness should be tainted.

But to return to the Pharisees with whom Christ had to deal* they restrained
the seventh Commandment to the act of Adultery, Christ extends it to the
wanderings of the eye and heart: they limited the sixth Commandment to actual
murder, whereas Christ extends it to inordinate passion and ill language: so
dealt they in this particular whereof we treat. They confined the third
Commandment to prejurie, whereas Christ extends it to the prohibition of rash
vain swearing by the Creatures. And so I come to the words, only I must first
endeavor the determination of one Question, whether Christ in this discourse
intend an abrogation of the Law, an addition to it, or only an interpretation
of it? Certainly not an abrogation of the moral Law, which he professes he
came not to destroy, but to fulfill, Verse 17. Some would have it to be an
addition, which opinion indeed has the countenance of some of the Fathers; but
the Socinians are most earnest in this conception, upon this ground, they will
not admit of the satisfaction of Christ, o^ justification by his death; and for
the wrong they do to his Priestly Office, they pretend to make amends in his
Prophetical, and say that he came to improve and raise the Precepts of the old
Testament, and give a more exact Law then was given by Moses, in the
observation whereof our Gospel righteousness should consist. But we believe
that our Lord Jesus only intended a restoration of the Law from the corrupt
glosses and traditions of the Elders, with whom he deals in this discourse, not
with Moses, who was faithful in the House of God: for he professes that he
came not to destroy the Law, which upon the matter he had done, if he had
showed it to be a short or crooked rule, but to fulfill it, or (as the word
will bear) to fill it up, (...).
by true and full interpretations. Christ fulfilled the Law both practically in
obeying it, and doctrinally in making up those gaps which the Pharisaicall
glosses and traditions had made in it.

You have heard that it has been said by them of old time, (...), or as some
would have it, to them of old time: It may be here enquired what times and
persons Christ has reference to in this passage; some may think that he has
respect unto Moses and the people of Israel to whom he spoke things to this
purpose: Lev. 19: 12, Ye shall not swear by my Name falsely, etc. But I believe
that an antiquity of a much later date is meant by this expression, even of
those Elders mentioned, Mat. 15. 2. whose traditions the Pharsees complained
were broken by Christ's Disciples; for the word (...), signifies sometimes that
which is not long past, as Act. 15. 7. And here take notice that after the Law
and the Prophets there rose up a generation of men who were not content with
the written word, but added the supplement of traditions, which though in the
esteem of the Pharisees, Act. 22. 3.
were ancient, yet very far short of true antiquity which was Moses and the
Prophets; the counterpart of this dealing we find in the Church of Rome; who
besides the verbum (...), will have a verbum (...), a traditionall word which
they make equal to the Scripture in authority and esteem; thus the Council of
Trent, Traditiones ipsas tum ad fidem tum ad mores pertinentes pari pietatis
affectu ac Scripturas suscipit and veneratur Ecclesia Romana. And they will
pretend much of antiquity for their practices, but it is a modern antiquity,
(if I may so speak) the true antiquity of Christ and his Apostles they have no
mind to deal with, not yet that of the first three hundred years after Christ,
unless it be some pieces which they may justly call theirs, because they have
either forged or corrupted them: although we must acknowledge, that some of
their corruptions began early in the Church, of which we have an intimation, 2
Thessalonians 2. 7. 1 John 2. 18.

What is it that was said by them of old time? Thou shall not forswear thy
self, etc. was it not well said? yes doubtless it was the truth, but not all
the truth; take the words in themselves and it was well said, but take them
with respect to the third Commandment, which thereby they intended to
interpret, it was a miss; for they contain not the sum and substance of that
Commandment, which reaches not only to forswearing, but to vain swearing,
swearing by the Creatures, and other abuses of the name of God, then frequent
among the Jews, who (provided they did not swear by the name of God) thought
themselves excusable if they swore frequently in ordinary communication, and
that by the Creatures; and that some of their Oaths by the Creatures were not
obliging, as we find Matthew. 23. 16. where the Gold and the Gift were by their
covetousness advanced to be more sacred then the Temple or Altar.

But I say unto you, Swear not at all. These words seem to be a direct
prohibition of all Oaths, and hence the Anabaptists have concluded the
unlawfulness of swearing in any case, and it has deceived some of the
Ancients: Hierome himself says upon this place, that Evangelica veritas non
recipit juramentum: But I hope we shall without much difficulty evince, that
it is not the intention of the Holy Ghost to forbid swearing in all cases by
this expression, but that particula omnino non ad substantiam sed ad formam
referenda, as Rivet well observes: For we must know this in general, that
universal terms in Scripture are sometimes to be taken with restriction, 1
Cor. 9: 22.
as in that passage of Paul, I became all things to all men, that is, all
lawful things; and so I conceive must that place Romans ^. 18. be interpreted,
By the righteousness of one (that is, Christ) the free gift came upon all men
to justification of life; that is, upon all that have relation to the second
Adam, as mankind had to the first, viz. to be of his Seed. So that this
expression [swear not at all] may be limited, notwithstanding its seeming
universalitie, and must be expounded by the temper of those times in which it
was spoken, and those persons to whom it was spoken; for where the Scripture
speaks ad hominem, as it does much in this place, their disposition and opinion
must be considered, which was to swear ordinarily in their communicaon, when
bare affirmations or negations would have sufficed: and because they had not
only a religious but a superstitious apprehension of the name of God, and
would not use it when they might, they swore by the Creatures, and thought they
were not much bound by such Oaths; so that all our Savior intends, is this,
Swear not as you are wont to do, or, as you think you may do; swear not at all
by the Creatures: for the general word [ not at all] must be interpreted by
the particulars enumerated, which if they had been omitted, or, if the name of
God had been put among them, it must have been construed as a general
prohibition, which now it cannot be. And whereas this not mentioning of the
name of God may seem to be supplied in that of Iam. 5. 12. where to the
enumeration of some particulars this general clause is added, [ Neither by any
other oath] it must be restrained to oaths of that kind; for it were strange
that the name of God should be intended and not mentioned in either of these
Scriptures, which ought especially to be vindicated from profanation. If this
Question need any further clearing, I shall mention another place, where under
the single expression of swearing, not all swearing, but falls, vain, and rash
swearing is discountenanced, viz. Eccles. 9. 2. He that swears, and he that
fears an Oath are opposed; where he that swears, signifies, a profane
swearer, and he that fears an Oath; one that reverenceth, not one that
refuses it in all cases, So that you see it is agreeable to the scope and
circumstances of this place, as also to other Scriptures, that this universal
clause [ Swear not at all] be interpreted with restriction to the vain,
unnecessary customary abuse of swearing among the Jews.

The words thus explaned, offer to our observation these two Propositions;

Propos. I. It is not utterly unlawful to swear.

II. It is utterly abominable to forswear.

The later of these Propositions was never under question, the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees which reached not heaven, yet reached thus far,
Thou shall not forswear thy self. The former has endured some dispute, and
therefore I shall endeavor to confirm it by some arguments.

1. The first taken from the consideration of the third Commandment, to which
swearing is generally reduced, and indeed seems to be the main intent of it; it
is there said, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: thou
shall not use it nee frustra, nee falso, for the word [ vain] in Scripture
signifies both. But it is not said, Thou shall not use it, or lift it up, (as
the word signifies) in any case; but the forbidding of the abuse does implie,
or rather enjoin a lawful use of the name of God in swearing, which is the
affirmative part of the Precept. And if the Moral Law (of which this is a
special part) be of general and perpetual obligation to all men in all ages,
(a^ without doubt it is) we yet remain not only under the liberty but in just
cases under the duty of swearing.

2. It is a part of Divine worship, not a Ceremonial or mutable part, there is
no shadow of a shadow or Type in it, as one well observes, and therefore not
out of date in the new Testament. It is so considerable a part of worship, that
all worship is sometimes expressed by it, Psalm. 63. 12.
as at other times by calling upon the name of God. Ierem. 10. 25.
And the Apostle to the Hebrews, though his work be to show the diasnulling of
all carnal and temporary ordinances among the Jews, is so far from putting
sweaing among them, that he seems to establish it as a standing Ordinance in
that place, Heb. 6. 16. where it is said, That an Oa^^ for confirmacion is (not
was) the end of all strife. And indeed it i^ an action which (duly and
reverently managed) does give a great deal of honor to God, which is the
proper end of worship; it gives him the honor of his Soveraigntie, Omniscience
Justice and Truth; it gives him the last appeal in all differenrences, which is
a great Trust, and consequently a great honor; and, Inquisitio post juramentum
Deo irrogat injuriam, It reflects upon God himself, when men will not rest in
an Oath which was appointed for the end of strife.

3. The ground and occasion of Oaths yet remains, and the Law must remain till
the foundation of it be removed. An Oath was appointed in remedium defectus,
and these defects which swearing was appointed as a remedy for, yet continue
such as the deceit, falsehood, incredulity of men, the ground of assertory
Oaths; the instability and changeableness of men, the ground of promissary
Oaths. There are controversies yet to be decided, and will be, and so an
usefulness of Oaths for the ending of them. Humane Societies cannot subsist
without evidences of truth, and mutual belief among men, which sometimes must
be established by an Oath; and therefore Julian the Apostate taking it for
grant, that the Christian Religion did forbid all Oaths, insulted upon it as
false and ridiculous, because it did Tollere praecipuum humanae societatis
vinculum.

Having spoken to the vindication of Oaths, it is not unnecessary to add
something concerning the regulation of them, and because I must not exceed the
limits of a Sermon, I shall only open that known place Ier. 4. 2. Thou shall
swear the Lord lives, in truth, in righteousness, and in judgment: where we
have the form and qualifications of a lawful Oath; the form, The Lord lives.
In every Oath there ought to be an interposing of the Name of God; Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Thou shall swear by his Name. To swear is to confess a Deity, as appears by
comparing those two places, Isa. 45. 23. To me shall every knee bow, and every
tongue swear; with Phil. 2. 11. That every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord. And because we find this expression frequent in Scripture, The
Lord lives, it deserves a little opening; to which purpose we may take notice
of that passage in Hebrews, 6. 16. Men verily swear by the greater. And when
the Lord swears, Deuteronomy. 32. 40.
he does it by that in himself which is the greatest, Psalm. 89. 35.
his Life, and his Holiness, which are more then single Attributes: His Life
is his fundamental excellency, and his holiness is more then an Attribute,
for it is that complexion which runs through all his Attributes, and makes them
beautiful. And this is the usual form in Scripture which Men and Angels have
made use of. Revel. 10. 6. because of the peculiar accommodation of the life of
God unto an Oath, for it imports that he sees and knows our appeal, that he
abides ready to confirm the truth, or avenge the false-hood of him that swears.
And I see not how swearing by any Creature can be exempted from Idoltary, if
swearing be (as it has been proved) a part of Worship. God complains that the
Children of Israel swore by them that were no gods, Ierem. 5. 7. and to swear
by Creatures, turns them into Idols, if they were not so before: to worship an
Image and swear by a Creature, may be ranked together. And though some would
excuse that expression of Joseph, [ By the life of Pharaoh] and tell us that
the primitive Christians did sometimes swear per salutem Imperatoris, yet the
former language seems fitter for Egypt then for Canaan, and the later savours
more of Courtship then Christianity. There is indeed a passage of our Savior,
Matthew. 23. 21, 22. where he seems to make it all one to swear by some
Creatures, as to swear by God himself; for he says, that he that swears by
the Temple, swears by him that dwells therein; and he that swears by
Heaven the Throne of God, swears by him that sits thereon: but the scope
of our Savior must be attended, who reproves the vain conceit of the
Pharisees, who thought God was not concerned in those Oaths where his Name was
not expressly mentioned; and tells them, that because those Oaths were reducible
unto God, who accounted himself interessed in every Oath, they could not be
excused from perjury in the breach of them. Pareus expresses it briefly and
well, that those Oaths were formaliter vitiosa, sed finaliter obligatoria: So
that our Savior does not countenance those forms of swearing, but
discountenance their great vanity and folly in the construction of them; for
an Oath taken by that which is no god, if he that swears, puts it in the room
of God, it will be found to oblige. Thus much for the Form of an Oath, from
which howsoever it has pleased men to vary, yet it is good to have recourse to
the first and purest use of Oaths, which was, to mention the Name of the Lord
with lifting up the hand to Heaven; so Abraham (as fit for our pattern as any
man else) Genes. 14. 22. I have lift up my hand to the Lord, the Possessor of
Heaven and Earth, that I will not, etc.

Thus much concerning the Form, the Qualifications follow, In truth, in
righteousness, and in judgment. Hierome gives this brief and clear
interpretation of these words, There must be veritas in re, justitia in causa,
juditium in modo jucandi. First, he that swears must have a principal eye to
Truth, for the end of an essertory oath is to evidence truth, and of a
promissory oath to engage truth: veritas entis must be looked to in the former,
veritas mentis in the latter, and no room is left for equivocation, which
crosses the very end of an Oath. It is certainly a most horrid impiety to call
God to witness an untruth, who delights to be styled The God of truth; it is an
affront we should be ashamed to offer a Person of Honor, to make him a partner
in our iniquity. In brief, he that swears a falsehood, does insinuate, that God
does either not know the truth, or not regard it; but his eyes are on the
truth, Ierem. 5 2, 3. Let those that swear falsely well consider it, lest a
curse enter into their houses, as the Lord threatens, Zech. 5. 3, 4.

2. He that swears must do it in righteousness, in a lawful and just
matter; if the oath be promissory, the thing sworn must be lawful and good;
not such an oath as David swore against Nabal and his house, 1 Samuel 25. 22. or
Herod to Herodias, Matthew. 14. 7. If the oath be assertory, let it be with
righteous and just intentions, to the furtherance of justice and charity, and
upon no other account.

3. In judgment, that is, wisely discerning the occasion and ordering the
circumstances of his oath; for instance, he that swears in judgment will not
swear in a trivial or slight business; the Name of the Lord is great,
wonderful, and holy, and not to be made use of but in solemn and serious
things. An honest man will not swear in a false matter, nor a wise man in a
frivolous. Oaths and Lots are of like nature in this particular, both
seriously to be used, and in cases of necessity. Temere jurat qui aliter
potest proximo consulere, is a sober speech, and to be regarded; If by any
other means we can provide for our neighbors good and safety, it is rashness
to swear on his behalf. To swear in judgment, is to do it with deliberation,
and actual consideration of the importance of an oath; the Majesty, Truth, and
Justice of him by whom, or unto whom we swear.

Having thus confirmed and illustrated the Proposition, a word of application
will be needful.

First, by way of consutation to those who utterly deny the lawfulness of
oaths in the times of the Gospel, and that under the countenance of this
Scripture which I am insisting on, together with that of the Apostle James,
Iam. 5. 12.
already mentioned, which I hope are sufficiently vindicated from any such
meaning, in the judgment of the considerate Reader: If men will run away with
the sound of words, instead of the sense of them, and single out an expression
of Scripture, and urge it against the evidence of several plain places,
speaking the contrary, it argues an Heretical disposition, more addicted to
opinion than to truth. Calvin takes notice of such a temper, in his Commentary
upon this place, his words are these, Vna cum rixandi libidine crassam
inscitiam produnt Anabaptistae dum, vocem unam morose urgendo, totum sermonis
tenorem clausis oculis praetereunt: The Anabaptists by occasion of this
Scripture discover (together with their perverseness) gross ignorance, while
they frowardly urge one word, neglecting the whole frame of the discourse. It
is said our Anabaptists (if they will admit of that name, which they must
rather than we to gratify them with the name of the baptized Churches, deny
our own Baptism) allow of oaths: It is well if it proceed from a soundness,
and not from a latitude of Principles: But by denying the use of them God loses
honor, and men come short (many times) of truth and justice. It is true, if
men were as they ought, yea and nay might suffice instead of Oaths. Omnis
fidelis sermo pro juramento est, says Hierome; but we must take men as they
are, with their defects of faith, truth, and knowledge, and the remedy of those
defects, which is an Oath, must still continue.

2. But because where there is one too scrupulous, there are many too profuse
in the matter of oaths, a severe reprehension belongs to those who observe no
rule in swearing; such are they who swear by the Creatures, light, bread, or
any thing that comes next hand, whereby a man first abuses his own reason; for
what ridiculous folly is it to call inanimate Creatures to attest any thing?
what madness to curse ourselves by our blessings? Secondly, he abuses the Name
of God, which ought to be interposed in an oath, by substituting any other
thing in his room, which there is nothing in Heaven or Earth fit to supply.
And thirdly, he abuses the Creature it self, by employing it to an end
dishonorable to its Creator, an use to which it never was appointed; and this
may well be part of that burden under which the Creature groaneth and
travelleth in pain, as the Apostle speaks Romans 1. 22. and of that vanity of
sin and trouble which it is subjected to. To swear by Creatures below our
selves, is to under-value our selves: For men verily swear by the greater,
Hebr. 6. 16. To swear by Creatures above our selves, (as glorified Saints and
Angels) is to overvalue them, for what or who are they that they should be to
us in the room of God? They also who regard not truth, judgment, and
righteousness in their oaths, what reproof is sharp enough for them? To swear
falsely by the Name of the God of truth, how great a provocation is it? Those
that swear falsely, that is, either that which they know to be false, or that
which they know not to be truly, are highly guilty of offense against the God
of truth, whose eyes are upon the truth, Ierem. 5. 3. and also against humane
society, which is knit together by the bands of truth and justice. The
Egyptians had so reverent an esteem of their Idols, which were but vanity, and
a lie, that if any were found to swear falsely by them, they were adjudged
worthy of death; and shall we make light of abusing the name of the living and
true God? There is no person of honor and honesty but would look upon it with
highest indignation to be called to attest an untruth; what shall we then think
of the God of truth, will he not be very jealous for his honor, in such a
case? It is sad to see and consider how often men are produced to swear
contradictions, where one must needs be guilty of false-hood in swearing,
unless, both parts of a contradiction can be found true, which is impossible.
And that which adds to the mischief, is, that unrighteousness is bound up with
untruth in the most false Oaths, and so both Tables are broken at once.
Sometimes men swear falsely, out of malice, and revenge, but it is a strange
revenge, to destroy a man's reputation, to wound his conscience, to hazard his
salvation, that he may require another. Oh what folly and madness is in the
hearts of the sons of men while they live, and after they go to the dead, as
the wise man complains, Eccles. 9. 3. Others swear falsely out of a covetous
principle, loving the wages of unrighteousness, as Balaam did; but what profit
is it to win the world and lose a man's own soul, says Christ, who knew well
enough what the worth of both was, Matthew. 16. 26. such a man is like to come to
Judas his reckoning, who dearly earned the reward of iniquity, Act. 1. 18.
Others who think it base to forswear themselves for money, will yet do it out
of respect to a Superior, or kindness to a friend; but for a man to pawn his
soul in courtesy, is madness and not kindness, and most desperate folly for
one to lay down his own conscience or comfort as a Bridge to make passage for
another to his worldly advantages. But I shut up this admonition with that of
the Lord by the Prophet Zechariab, 8. 17. Let nme of you imagine evil in your
hearts against his neighbor, and love no false Oath, for these things I hate,
says the Lord. Odium terminatur ad non esse. Destruction is the fruit of
hatred.

And lastly, the number of them that swear but not in judgment, is exceeding
great; alas, how few are there that understand an Oath, and fewer that consider
it! Those that swear in common conversation, certainly swear not in judgment,
they do it so frequently, so slightly, that their understanding cannot
exercise any deliberate act about it; they take so little notice of it that
they will hardly be brought to acknowledge they have sworn; if they confess it
they will tell you it was before they were aware, and so are found witnesses
against themselves, that they swear not in judgment: but if every idle word is
to be accounted for, as our Savior tells us Matthew. 12. 36. what shall we think
of idle oaths, which signify nothing but a profane and vain spirit, will not
they inflame the reckoning exceedingly? The sons of men (especially great and
noble persons) cannot endure to have their Names tossed up and down among vain
men, or used upon slight occasions: and will no the God of heaven take it in
greater indignation that his Name [ which is great, wonderful, holy] should be
made trivial or common, by the frequent usurpations of ignorant and wicked men
certainly he will not hold them guiltless that thus take hi^ Name in vain: It
is not the plea of custom that will excuse no^ yet extenuate the sin. It is
true, some places are so profane, the swearing is become the very dialect of
the Town or Family where they dwell, and shall they escape by the commonnesse
of their iniquity, no surely neither nature nor custom which is the second
nature are tolerable excuses for any evil, but rather aggravations of it. Sin
is not the less but rather the more to be bewailed, because of the deep root
it has in our corrupt natures. In this glass it was that David and Paul saw
their sins to be above measure sinful, Psalm. 51. and Romans 7. And the like may
be said of custom, alteranatura; it is so little capable of being pleaded by
way of mitigation of the sin of swearing, or any other iniquity, that it
renders it the more mischievous and dangerous. The Lord by the Prophet Jeremy
gives an account of the state of Judah, Chap. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good who are accustomed
to do evil. But was this any advantage to them, that they were so accustomed
to evil, that they could not leave it? No, for it follows verse. 24. Therefore
will I scatter them as the stubble that passes away by the wind of the
wilderness. This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, says the
Lord. Let men take heed of customary sins. If men will be wont to sin, God is
wont to punish.

Others there are more deliberate in this wickedness, and so more guilty; they
think it a kind of a gallantrie and gracefulness of speech to interlace it
with Oaths and Execrations; nay, some are become so exceeding vain and vile,
that they will study new-fashion'd Oaths, as well as clothes, and so go down
to destruction in the right mode: Concerning these persons I know not well what
to say, but choose rather to stand and admire, first, the depth of wickedness
and madness in the heart of man, which casts up such mire and dirt; and then
the infinite patience of the God of heaven, who is highly sensible of such
affronts and provocations, and easily able to avenge himself, yet forbears to
execute his just displeasure. But let them who like raging waves of the Sea
thus foam out their own shame, and vent the superfluity of naughtiness that
is in them, know, that though God be long suffering, yet he will not always
suffer, his patience has prefixed bounds; and though for some time there may
be one event to the righteous and the sinner, to him that swears and him that
fears an oath, as says the Preacher, Eccles. 9. 2. yet there is a day of the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God approaching, and then will the
Lord put an everlasting difference betwixt the righteous and the wicked;
betwixt him that serves God, and him that serves him not, Malach. 3. ult. It
may be such profane persons find not the Curse entered into their houses,
according to the threatening Zach. 5. 3, 4. but it is entered into their hearts,
which is of worse consequence, for by their hardness and impenitency they
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.

And though the persons mentioned do most notoriously offend against this rule
of swearing in judgment, for they have no judgment in their goings or doings,
yet they are not the only offenders in this point; there are many who call
others to swear, and are called lawfully thereunto; that rush upon oaths
without due consideration: they consider not the weight of the matter, or the
necessity of an Oath in the case. Every unnecessary Oath is a vain Oath, and
litigious persons who occasion many Oaths for the decision of their needless
controversies, will find they have much to answer for; their sins against
charity by contentions, against justice by vexations, and against the Name of
God by calling men to swear about that which is hardly worthy a man's going over
the threshold to prove. And though Erasmus was too strict in saying, Non est
ingenui Christiani jur are pro rebus hujus seculi, pro praediis and nummis; yet
the truth lies very near it, and that is, men should be very backward to
swearing in such cases, and utterly averse if the difference may otherwise be
determined. Exodus 22. 11.
An Oath is rather to be reckoned in necessariis quam in simpliciter bonis. The
command to swear by the Name of God, Deuter. 6. 13. is not like that of calling
upon his name, but the meaning is, If there be a just occasion of thy swearing,
then let it be by the Name of God, and not by any Idol or Creature.

Others consider not the solemnity of an Oath, the Majesty and Dread of that
Name which is in vocated thereby, but lightly, hastily, and irreverently use
the Name of God, which is full of provocation. It is sad to see how in Courts
of Justice, where Magistrates are tender enough of their own Honor and Power,
the Name of God is profaned with rude and irreverent swearing: what hudling of
Oaths there is with very little sense or consideration of the weight and
importance of them, which if administered with deliberation and solemnity,
would conduce much to the Honor of God, and the right end of an Oath, which is
the serious confirmation of a Truth in question. And it would be no small
degree of reformation among us in civil proceedings, if the number of Oaths
were lessened, and those that must be taken were administered with more
solemnity, as all the parts of Gods Worship ought to be: Let me therefore put
you my Lord Mayor and the rest of the Magistrates in mind, that God has
entrusted you with a very great Treasure, which is The glorious and fearful
name of the Lord your God, which he is very tender of, and expects you should
be so also, and express your regard thereto, by punishing unlawful Oaths,
preventing unnecessary Oaths, and duly regulating those which are lawful and
necessary, in order to truth and peace. The day is hastening upon us when we
shall have no other refuge but the Name of the Lord, which is a strong Power to
the righteous, Proverbs 18. 10. and how sad will it be to find such a repulse
as this, What have you to do take my Name in your mouths, which you have
profaned and suffered to be profaned, for want of executing the Power and Trust
committed to you by God and men? Is not every man's particular burden heavy
enough for him to bear? Let us not then neither Magistrates nor Ministers (for
we are most concerned) make our selves partakers of other men's sins, by not
discharging our duty to them. This shall suffice o have spoken of (...)
wherein I have had more special respect to ass(...) I come now to the second,
which will more directly c(...) Oaths promissory, such as you have taken this
day.

Propos. II. It is utterly abominable to forswear, or not to perform our Oaths
unto the Lord. The righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees which came short
of the Law, and short of Heaven (as I have already said) yet reach^d thus far,
that Oaths were to be performed; if Scripture were silent, the Law of Nature
and Nations would speak plain and loud in this point, there being hardly any
sin upon which they have set a fowler mark then that of perjury; I suppose
because of the peculiar mischief and malignitie that it carries with it to
humane Societies, which are preserved by truth and fidelity. Apud omnes populos
and ab omni aevo circa pollicitationes et contractus maxima semper vis fui^
jures jurandi. Grot. de jure belli and pacis.
I think it utterly superfluous to produce any thing by way of proof in so
clear a point as this is, I only give this argument from the less to the
greater, if it be generally looked upon as unworthy to break a man's word or
promise (as indeed it is, for it renders a man inconstant, if not unfaithful)
much more unworthy is it to recede from a promise strengthened and seconded
with an Oath. It is worth the consideration that of Paul. 2 Cor. 1. 17. Where
you find him exceeding solicitor to preserve his reputation from the stain of
lightness; When therefore was thus minded did I use lightness? or the things
that purpose do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should b^
yea, yea, and nay, nay? But as God is true, our word toward you wa^ not yea,
and nay: And so it becomes every one that names the name of Christ, the
faithful and true witness, to have a tende^ respect to credit and conscience
in the matter of Oaths and promises which is one special branch of that
blessed exercise o^ keeping a good conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men.

To this may be added the consideration of the strictness o^ God in this
particular, how severe has he been in reprehensions and punishments for the
violation of promissory Oaths, though some excuse might have been pleaded for
the breach of them* When Saul broke the Oath made by Joshua and the Princes o^
the Congregation to the Gibeonites, Joshua 9. 15. he might have said it was
made by his Predecessors, but not by himself; it was a surprise, a Covenant
obtained by indirect and fallacious means, it seemed to clash with the
injunction of God for destroying the Nations; and lastly, that he did it not
out of revenge or self-interest, but in zeal to the people of God, the Children
of Israel: but notwithstanding all these Pleas, the Lord took himself so much
concerned in the breach, that he looked upon the House of Saul as a bloody
House for this cause, and took a sharp recompense for his transgression, 2 Samuel
21. 1, 2, etc. Another instance may be that of the King and Princes of Judah,
who being overcome by the King of Babylon, entered into an Oath and a Covenant
with him, which afterward they violated, by sending Ambassadors to Egypt for
Auxiliaries, that they might get their neck from under the Yoke. Forth is also
something might be pleaded, as That it was a forced Oath, drawn from them in
extremity, that it was contrary to the promises made to Israel, that it should
be high above all Nations, contrary to the honor and interest of the Church of
God to be under the oppression of strangers: should Israel be a servant, a
home-born slave, and not deliver himself at his first advantage? But
notwithstanding all this the Lord tells them, that though the oath was made to
the King of Babylon that was his enemy as well as theirs, yet it was the Lords
Oath: Theref^re thus says the Lord, as I live surely mine Oath that he has
despised, and my Covenant that he has broken, even it will I recompense upon
his own head, and I will spread my Net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare; seeing no Bands of men's making will hold him fast, I will make a snare
for him in which he shall be surely held.

But because notwithstanding the strictness of the obligation of promissory
Oaths, there will be sometimes a necessity of dispensation, some explicatory
Rules must be added; as,

1. An unlawful Oath or engagement, I mean, that which obliges to a sinful
Act, a breach of any of Gods Commandments, must not be performed. Iuravit
David temete sed non implevit jurationem majori pietate. August.
Iuramentun non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis. Ames. and therefore David did
much better in breaking his Oath made against Naball and his house by way of
revenge, 1 Samuel 25. 22: 23. then Herod did by keeping that rash and sinful
engagement made to Herodias, Matthew. 14. 7, 8, 9. For though it may seem to
reflect upon the obligation of an Oath, that in any case it should be remitted,
yet it would be a greater dishonor to the nature of an Oath if it should be
allowed to tie a man to the disobedience of Gods commands, and so have
influence into sin. And therefore if any be so unwarrantably engaged, they must
repent of the first sin in making such an Oath, and not add a second in the
keeping of it: for as we say of precepts, so we may of promises, Durand. lib.
2: did. 39.
Praeceptum inferioris non obligat contra potestatem superioris. Neither
precepts nor promises made against the lawful power of our Superior, (much
less our supreme God himself) are binding. Natural light reaches thus far,
lib. 6: Cap. 7.
for we find in Curtius that Nicomachus having rashly sworn secrecy to Dymnus,
when he understood the business to be an intended murder against the King, he
denied that he was obliged by a religious Bond to a wicked Act, and revealed
the matter.

2. An Oath binds not to impossibility, to swear that which is at the present
impossible, is great rashness and folly; but a man sometimes finds it
impossible to perform that which was possible when he engaged to it, but
certainly with the possibility the obligation ceases, and it suffies that
there be a willingness to perform, and a propensitie to embrace an opportunity
of fulfilling it when God shall render it possible and fit to be done; and here
the Lord himself makes a dispensation by providence, as in the case of an
unlawful Oath he does by Precept.

3. If the Oath be lawful and possible, though it be extremely prejudicial,
and incovenient unto the person so engaged, he is not to dispense with the
performance of it. This is made a character of a Citizen of Zion, that he
swears to his own hurt, and changes not; and it suffices not for an excuse
of the breach, to say, We did it rashly and upon mistakes, for so might Joshua
and the Princes of Israel have said concerning their Oath to the Gibeonites,
which was an Oath of disadvantage to Israel, as Saul thought, when in zeal to
their good he brake it, and an Oath wherein they were surprised, yet they were
obliged by it. And as for that dispensation which some allow in the case of
prejudice to public good, although I would not wholly reject it, for a man may
pass away his own right when he cannot do so with the public, yet it is to be
admitted with very much caution and tenderness, because there is great danger
least it open a gap to unjust and unnecessary violations of this religious
bond, and be made a cloak to private interests as frequently it is, and
therefore let it be a clear and indisputable good, and judged so to be by
others rather then him that is to dispense with his Oath about it. To keep an
Oath with my own disadvantage is a demonstration how far I prefer the name of
God, the honor of Religion unto my own concernments, and so an argument of
sincerity toward God, or at least of honesty among men. Having gone as far as
the limits of a Sermon will permit, I must refer to Treatises for that which
is further desired concerning this subject, only I must close with a word of
application.

First, Application
to those who have the power of imposing promissory Oaths upon others; that
they would be exceeding tender, nay I will say, backward and averse unto such
kind of obligations, some have thought them utterly unlawful and that our
Savior in this Text intends the prohibition of them, whom though we cannot
agree to, yet we must acknowledge them to be exceeding dangerous; Assrrtory
Oaths are the end of all strife, but promissory Oaths prove many times the
beginnings and aggravations of strife, and if there ought to be so great care
to avoid unnecessary Oaths in case of assertion, certainly much more in case
of obligation: to offend in the former is an act more transient, in the latter
more permanent. Governors are ready to think it is their great security to
establish themselves by Oaths, Covenants, and engagements; the use of them is
not absolutely denied, but the abuse and unprofitablesse of them is evidently
manifest; how easily men say even concerning these, Let us break their bonds in
sunder, and cast away their cords from us. The policies of men have been
pronounced vain in this case, and will be, so long as men purpose according to
the flesh, (as Paul speaks 2 Cor. 1.) their words will be yea and nay; and
especially to do it at such a time as this, a time of unsetlednesse and quick
revolution, wherein it were too hard a task to bid a man lay hold of the Sails
of a whirling Windmill, or stay the wheels of a running Chariot: the truth is,
men will not be bound, much less will the Almighty by such Cords as these.
Can thou draw out Leviathan ^ith a Hook? Job 41. 1.

The like may be said in some degree concerning the Oaths taken by inferior
Officers, by Tradesmen in Companies and Corporations; these Oaths are too much
used, and too little observed among them: I think it is possible to hold forth
a more excellent way both in the former case and this latter; if ^agistrates
would take fast hold of the people, and lay firm obligations upon them; it must
not be by words, but actions; not ^y the peoples Promises, but their own
performances: Vbi non (...) sanctitas, pietas, fides, instabile regnum est,
says the Heathen Poet. ^onsciencious persons who lay to heart the things of
God, should be obliged by nothing more then due liberty and order (...) matters
of Religion, which two howsoever they have been kept at distance, are not only
possible but willing to be reconciled. Faith and Order are matter of rejoicing
to an Apostle Col. 2. 5. And as those who are for heaven would be most engaged
by such means; so they who are for the earth, by consulting their profit and
their quiet, both the one and the other by public justice in which all are
equally concerned. And as to the latter case, concerning the tying of Officers
and others to their duties by the Bond of Oaths, it is indeed in it self the
most sacred and strong tie, but it is not so to the generality of men, who are
more awed by Penalties then by Oaths; and till the reverence of an Oath be
restored to the world, that men shall regard their Consciences more then their
Purses; it would be advantage to both Parties concerned in Promissory Oaths,
that penalties were many times imposed in the room of them.

2. I shall add a word to those persons who are engaged in Oaths promissory.
First, that we should look back upon all the solemn obligations of this kind
into which we have at any time entered, and seriously bewail before the Lord our
great sin and folly concerning them; how rashly, slightly, implicitly and
inconsiderately have we adventured upon Oaths, Scholars in the Universities,
Tradesmen upon their admissions to freedom, Officers entering on public
employments? and if we search our consciences it may be we shall find little
of them remaining, but the guilt; let us humble our selves and pray that it may
be removed. And let us not think that sufficient, but account it our duty to
revive them, and so far as it is lawful or possible, hold our selves obliged
to perform them, though we have been incautelously and unwisely surprised in
them. Loose and libertine spirits are very forward to say, Let us break these
Bonds in sunder, and cast away these Cords from us; let us look upon them as
Almanacks out of date; but let such take heed they reckon not without the Lord,
whose account shall only stand in the day of our great account, and if that be
found upon the File, which we thought had been cancelled it will be a sad
reckoning* And to invort that of the Roman Senator: Si non Romiae tamen vestri
miserescite. If you have no compassion of your selves, yet pity a poor Nation
that lies mourning under Oaths, Iereniah 23. 10.
not only the rash vain Oaths of profane and licentious men, but deliberate
promissory Oaths and Covenants so frequently and ^alsly violated. I would not
extenuate any sin, much less that of swearing, but the ^ormer Oaths are like
man slaughter, when the latter are as murder. The Lord forgive our sin and
heal our Land.

And for the time to come let us as far as possibly we may avoid them, Falsa
juratio mala est, omnis periculosa. But if there be a just and necessary
occasion for a promissory Oath, as sometimes there may, let us be exceeding
circumspect in the taking of it, well weighing what we do and with what
intention, and being once engaged, not to study evasions but executions of
trust and promise. What can I say more then the Lord has said in his
perpetual law: The Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in
vain. There is much said, but more intended then expressed, in these words; the
Lord will deal with such a person as one who is deeply guilty of provocation.

Give me leave to be particular and plain: You my Lord Major and Sheriffs are
under the band of an Oath; That you will diligently execute the office you are
called unto according to your skill, power and understanding. Hereby you are
tacitly obliged to do your utmost to understand the duty of your places, and
expressly bound to execute them to the utmost of your skill and power, which is a
great word and hard to be performed.

You the Aldermen, Common Council, and four and twenty (as you are called) are
sworn to assist the Mayor in his office, to come to Council at all times, when
you are sent for, unless you have a just excuse; take heed of hindering instead
of assisting, take heed of absenting your selves upon frivolous excuses, or
things of less moment then that you are called unto; think not to be your own
judges in the excuse, you will find another besides you, and above you, whose
Judgment is according to truth. Think not that if you have not taken the Oath
this year, you are not obliged, a former Oath binds you as long as you continue
in your Station. Give not heed to evasions, but in all doubtful things take
the safer course. You also take an Oath of secrecy, in which there is a snare,
be careful that you be not taken in it, but let prudence and conscience set a
watch before the door of your lips.

You that are Freemen of the City are also under this sacred Bond, for
preserv^tion of the due rights and privileges of the City, and to be obedient
to the just and good government of the same: Take you heed also, and be
exceeding circumspect, dispense not with your obedience, where the Laws of
God, and the Laws of the Land allow not a dispensation; think not it is left
to your private determination, what is just and good government; you must take
it as you find it, and do all things without murmurings and disputings, where
the Laws of your Superiors are not contrary to the Divine and Supreme Law. So
shall you seek and procure the peace of the City, and of your own souls also.

You are sometimes called as Jurors, and sworn to make true Inquisitions and
Presentiments; not to present for hatred or malice, not to forbear Presenting
for favor or reward, truly to try Issues according to your evidence, not your
priv^^e opinions and mistaken charity. Take the counsel given by Moses to
Israel, Take head to your selves, and keep your souls deligently. In all things
that I have said unto you be circumspect. I add only this one consideration
from the usual close of your Oaths wherein you promise to do such and such
things, so help you God; a most weighty and important expression. If the Lord
help not, how sad is the condition of any of us* and shall we forfeit our
Interest in it by breaking the Oaths we enter into? and give the Lord occasion
to say when we fly for help unto his Name, How can you expect help from me,
remember the day when you said and swore, that as you expected help from me,
you would do the things which you have not regarded. Thus have I according to
my measure given in that counsel which I desire may be acceptable to you. The
Lord by his blessed Spirit supply the defects of my words, and of all our
hearts and ways.

FINIS.

