A SHORT CENSURE OF THE BOOK OF W. P. ENTITLED, The University of Oxfords
Plea, Refuted.

printer's or publisher's device SAPIENTIA FELICITATE
depiction of book ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS


Printed in the Year, 1648.

A short Censure of the Book of VV. P. ENTITLED, The University of Oxfords
Plea refuted.
I May not in respect of the place where I am, LONDON, wherein it is perilous,
if not capital, to write Law: nor I cannot in respect of my occasions, which
will not permit me too, I have not leisure to write much, make any large
refutation of that Book: But shall only content my self with an (...), the work
of one day, A brief Censure of the Book: First, in general; next, in
particular.

In this, and other of his Writings, I find the Author to profess Aristotle in
his Problemes, and the Author of The Trial of Wits) do often meet together:
Whence it commonly comes to pass, that at the end and close of his labors, he
leaves his adversaries with more truth, or at least more evidence on his side,
then he first found about him; as in this Book against his once Mother the
University of Oxford shall more appear.

2. And therefore I come in the second place to a more particular discussing of
this his last piece, The University Plea, (which in his Book he vaunts to have
fully refuted) he makes to be this:

Page 2.
That the right of Visiting the University of Oxon, is only in the Kings
Majesty: and that it is exempt from all other Jurisdiction, both by
Foundation, Prescription, and several Grants of Exemption.

Whether this be the Universities Plea by their Delegates, in totidem verbis,
which he again repeats, page 7, 8. calling it A false Plea, I am not able to
say, having now forgotten it: But because he often mentions it in his Script,
in the very same words, I will believe he has not committed that fault of
mis-recitall here: But I am confident he has mis-understood it quite
throughout. And therefore in my duty and love to my dear Mother the University
of Oxford, I will be bold to render her sense and meaning of her Plea in these
words a little more enlarged.

meaning ^^e Plea.
That the Supreme and Primitive Right of Visiting the University of Oxford, as
it is an University, (not of a particular College in it, which has a special
kind of endowment of another consideration) is only in the Kings Majesty, as
an ancient inseparable jurisdiction annexed to his Crown. And that it is
exempt from all other jurisdiction (but what is immediately derived from him)
both by Foundation, Prescription, and several Grants of Exemption, are legally
to be understood, especially at this day, since the dissolution of Papal
Supremacy by the Statutes of 24 H. 8. c. 12. 25 H. 8. c. 19. 20. and 21. and 26
H. 8. c. 1. and 1 Eliz. c. 1. etc.

Against this Plea thus explained, he has alleged not one material thing in
all his Book, which I shall make appear by assayling his five men of straw,
which he has drawn forth against this Plea, which he calls his five
Positions, which I shall thus endeavor to shake, if not bring down to that
Nothing on which they seem founded.

1. His first Position is this, That the University of Oxford was anciently of
right for many Ages under the Jurisdiction, if not Visitation of the Bishop of
Lincoln, as he was their Diocesan.

Wherein he says just nothing: Oxford was made a Bishopric, 'twas never
denied but the Bishop of Lincoln was Diocesan over the Parochial Churches,
nor the Clergy there be within his jurisdiction, quatenus Ordinarius loci; but
what is that to the Visitation of the University, being quite another thing,
and belonging of right to the King, or to such as are immediately sent by him,
as W. P. truly alleges their saying, page 54. and makes it a doubt himself,
whether the University was anciently of right under the Visitation of the
Bishop of Lincoln, because he says (if not Visitation) whereby he makes his
Position not positive, contrary to all Logic: And the proofs he brings for
his first Position, makes the truth of it more suspicious; for he has them all
out of History, as Matthew Paris, B. Goodwin, Archbishop Barker, p. 4, 5, 6,
7. and not out of any authority of Law: And a most learned Lawyer advises
Students to take heed of Chronicle-Law as false and erroneous. Sir Edw: (...)
Pref. to the Rep.
And all his Historical proofs do not affirm that the Bishops of Lincoln
did visit out of right, but only they did it de facto, Et a facto ad jus non
valet argumentum.

His second Position being the Body-horse of his Teame, verbatim thus:

page 3.
Secondly, that it was aunciently of Right, and so continued till this
Parliament, under the visitation and jurisdiction of the Archbishops of
Canterbury, as Metropolitans (who have frequently visited this University, and
Cambridge too) as being within their Province, and have been acknowledged and
adjudged by K. Richard 2. K. Henry 4. and an whole Parliament in his Reign;
and by K. Charles himself, upon solemn Debate to be lawful Visitors of it,
de Jure. And that these three Kings and the Parliament of 13 Hen. 4. have by
their Charters and Votes, absolutely disclamed the Kings sole Right of visiting
the Universities; and always resolved the contrary, when the Universities for
their own ends, have set it on foot, and laid Claim unto it: No King of
England, before Hen. 8. ever visiting either of the Universities, for ought
appears by any Authentic Records.

Canterbury to visit the Universities, de Jure, (as he speaks) and so adjudged
by three Kings, and one Parliament; then it could not Anciently and of right be
visited by the Bishops of Lincoln, which he avers in his first position: But
this second, nor the proofs and records he brings in it, does give any jot of
satisfaction to the University Plea, but that the Right of Visitation is still
in the Crown, and ever was an undoubted Right of the Crown: And that these
Visitations of the Archbishops, unless they had Commission so to do, under
the Kings own proper Broad Seal, were mere usurpations upon the Crown,
which I shall make thus shortly and plainly to appear.

It is very well known to men studied in our Laws, That none but the Kings of
England could be truly and properly the Founders of the Universities, (par
Caesari opus) for it is not the erecting of Buildings that makes an University,
but the dedicating and consecrating of a place, (whether already built, or to
be built) to the Muses as a Seminary and Nursery of Learning to perpetuity, the
Incorporation of it with Governors, Statutes, and Laws, the Endowment of it
with Franchises, Privileges, Immunities, etc. (which none can do but the
King) is chiefly and properly the Foundation of an University. It is an old
Rule in Law, Patronum faciunt Dos, aedificatio, fundus, either of these three
make a man a Founder, but chiefly the first; which is Endowment, being to an
University all in all; and therefore as Founder of the Universities, the Right
of Visitation did as truly and properly belong to the King, as did the right of
Investure into Episcopacies, of which the King was likewise Founder, till the
Popes Canon Law was first admitted into this Kingdom, which fell out in the
days of K. Hen. 1. and King Stephen. And afterward the Extravagants of Pope
Boniface the 8. (called by that name, because they were extra Canonem) the
admission of these Laws into this Kingdom, together with the Popes Bulls,
swelled the Archi-episcopall Authority into a Papal Jurisdiction (for so was
Anselme called in the days of Hen. 1. (Alterius orbis Papa) which continued
swelling much worse afterward, till it received a Purgation in the days of
Hen. 8. And by this usurped power it was, that the Bishops of themselves,
without the Kings Authority did visit Universities, and do other Acts
belonging to the Crown, until the days of Hen. 8. etc. I could say much more
on this jubject, but Mr. Pryn saves me a labor, for it does not appear by
those two Charters (which he so much boasts of throughout his Book) of Rich. 2.
and Hen. 4. and confirmed afterward by Act of Parliament, 13 Hen. 4. that the
Archi-episcopall visitation of the Universities, was any other then a
usurpation, de facto, permitted by Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. not a Jurisdiction of
Right. This appears plainly by the Charter of 12. Caroli which he mentions in
this Position, and cites at large page 35, 36, 37, 38. (which Charter mentions
the two forwer Charters, where it is thus said, Primo and ante omnia per
probationes legitimas and per concessionem utriusque partis nobis constabat,
Nos jure Coronae nostrae Angliae habuisse and habere potestatem visitandi
Universitates praedictas, quoties and quandocunque nobis and successoribus
nostris visum fuerit: And afterward, page 38. where the King gives the
Archbishop leave to visit, (and giving of leave declares a right) not once in
his life, but as often as he shall see reasonable cause, which has this
restriction, Ex causa rationabili, etc. per nos and successores nostros
primitus approbanda: By which it appears that the granting of this Visitation
of the Universities belongs to the Crown, and the cause of Visiting after the
Grant must be first approved by the King: and therefore his saying, page 10.
and page 21. that Rich. 2. and H. 4. in their Charters disclaimed the sole
Right of visiting the Universities: and page 39. that King Charles in his
Charter to the late Archbishop disavowed it; is most notoriously untrue, and
no such thing is to be found in them.

The Author W. P. in the prosecution of the proof of his second Position, has
consumed almost 40. pages of paper, and I believe as many days of time, and
the Logic of all amounts but to this, that the Archbishops of Cant. have
anciently been Visitors of the University of Oxford, and have so been confirmed
by the Letters Patents of three Kings of England. The Archbishops of Cant. are
now extinct, and gone (which this Author well knows, having a chief hand in
cutting off the last) Ergo, the King and such as are immediately sent by him,
(for so is the Universities Plea to be understood, and is so confessed by W. P.
page 54.) are not the sole Visitors of the University: How this Argument holds
together, leave it for young Sophisters to judge; Only I pity the great pains
he has taken to join together a rope of sand.

The University did expect that so learned a man, as he by voluminous
quotations desires to appear, would have given satisfaction in declaring who
had the sole Right of her Visitation, if the King and those immediately
appointed by him had it not, whether the two Houses of Parliament, or one of
them, if so, then by what way and means they had that Right, whether by
immediate Commission from the King, if so, then whether by the Great Seal,
which was made by the two Houses, or by what other? For that the King in his
last Message to the Houses questions the validity of it, as that which he says
was made without his Warrant* Or if it had his warrant for those persons that
were to visit, whether they first acquainted the King with the cause of
Visitation, (the words of the Kings Charter being Ex legitima causa per nos and
successores nostros primitus approbanda; with diverse more in that kind, which
would have given much satisfaction to the double charged Consciences of that
poor University, in their Oaths to God, and their Allegiance to their Prince.
But not a word of any of these in his Book, wherein he might have much righted
the Houses and himself* only he makes much ado in excusing the persons of
the Visitors, and freeing them from the exceptions taken against them, page 59,
60, 61, 62. Only one visible exception is forgot, which I believe was thought
of by the University, though not expressed; viz. the exception taken by an
ancient Law against a Visitor or Judge, that he was to be integri corporis, as
well as Animi, and therefore by the ancient Canons if a Visitor or Judge had
Corpus mutilatum, or membram abscissum, it was an exception; And therefore if
there were cause of such an exception against any of these Visitors, it had
been his part to have cleared it, that so he might not have appeared male
audere in that University which he was to Visit.

The other three Positions, as the Refutes does not much insist upon them, so
it will not hurt the University in her Plea to grant them all.

H. 8. 1 E. 6. and 1 Eliz. Cardinal Poole the Popes Legate, as Legatus factus,
the Archbishop of Canterbury as Legati nati, might and did Visit without the
Kings Commission; And so might Chancellours of the University which heretofore
were Clergymen; but then this Visitation was more de facto, then de jure; But
since those Statutes all the Visitations of the Universities have been by the
Kings immediate Commission. And so did Sir William Cecill, 1. Eliz. visit
Cambridge, as Chancellor of that University.

That most particular Colleges and Halls in both Universities, have their
particular Visitors appointed by the Founders, to whose Visitation they are
subject, and not to the Kings.

A most true position, and the University strives not with him in it if he can
rest there, she only dislikes his irrational inference thereupon, Ergo the
Right of Visiting the University of Oxford, is not only in the Kings Majesty:
Much like to this Argument, the Lord Mayor of London is the proper Governor of
that City, Ergo, the King has not the sole right of governing the Kingdom,
contrary to the Statute of the 1. Eliz. and the Oath of Supremacy, calling him
the only Supreme Governor: According to the lines of proportion and
similitude, as a City is to a Kingdom, so is a particular College to an
University; The King sole Governor of the Kingdom, the Lord Major with the
Aldermen, etc. sole Governors of the City; the King (or those whom he
immediately appoints, which must ever be understood) sole Visitors of the
University of Oxford; the Bishop of Lincoln sole Visitor of Brazen-nose
College: when the King comes into the City, the Lord Major yields up his
Sword, and his Government is for that time suspended: So when the King visits
the University of Oxford, the Visitation of the Bishop of Lincoln is then
suspended, like as in the Metropoliticall Visitation, the Episcopal Visitation
is suspended. And these subordinations are full of Harmony, and do not
contradict each other, as he thinks when he thus speaks, How then the King
can truly and really be styled the sole Founder and Visitor of the University
of Oxford when there are but three Colleges there of his Foundation, and but
one of his Visitation, I desire the University at leisure to resolve.

Truly, his once Mother, the University of Oxford has resolved it already, and
will take no further time; But wishes him hereafter to be a good Child, and
leave an old fault of his of mistaking the question: For the University never
made it a Question, Whether the King was sole Founder or Visitor of a
particular College, but of an University, they being two distinct things,
distinct Corporations, having distinct Governors, distinct Officers, distinct
Statutes, etc.

But the Conclusion of this fourth Position may not be passed by without
reproof, where he calls this Right of the Kings sole visiting the University;
The Kings pretended Royal Monopoly; which being spoken of him a sacred person,
especially in this his day of affliction by his own natural born Subject, and
by a man professing Religion, favors more of a son of Shimei, then a servant
of Christ.

That the pretended Grants of exemption from Visitation, etc. now pleaded by
the University, were not procured from the Kings of England, but from Popes by
their Bulls, and that our Kings themselves and one Parliament, have damned them
as derogatory to the Kings Prerogative, etc.

This Position he braggingly says, page 43. that he has already substantially
proved in every syllable, amongst the proofs of his second Position, and
surceaseth any farther proof, But concludes thus bitterly against the
University in this manner: The Author of the Universities Privileges was very
ill advised to plead the Popes exploded illegal Antichristian Bulls in Bar
against the Jurisdiction of both Houses, and the Visitors deputed by them, in
these anti-papall times of Reformation; which might justly induce them to
suspect, that the Heads and Members of the University have a higher and more
reverend esteem of the Popes usurped abandoned authority and illegal Bulls,
then of both Houses rightful power and Ordinances. A very reproachful, and
that though I could say more, a most envious and causlesse Censure, for the
Popes Bulls were leges temporum, though not leges scripturarum (as they say in
schools) and custom and time had set them up for Laws; and as they were
pleadable then, so in the way that the University has pleaded those Bulls,
they may be pleaded at this day, without making such a noise and roaring
against all the Heads and Members of the University (not a man excepted) I will
give one instance instead of many; diverse Parliament Men have Impropriations of
Church Livings, and some of them (perhaps) discharged from payment of Tithes by
reason of the Cisterstian order (an Order of Friars exempted by the Popes Bulls
from the payment of Tithes of Lands in their own possession) shall not a
Parliament Man therefore in a suite against him for Tithes plead the Popes Bull
by way of discharge without being counted a Papist, and inclining to Popery?
there is no doubt but he may. Besides, the pleading of the Popes Bulls of
Exemption by the University was so far from Popery, that nothing could more
advance their Princes supremacy and their own Loyalty, having this inference in
it, That if the Pope by an usurped power upon the Crown could visit and exempt
from Visitation at his pleasure: how much more might the King which has in
himself that ancient, true, and proper Right of the Crown?

And therefore for Conclusion, the University of Oxford out of her Motherly
affection to one that pretends to be her son, advises W. P. to read often that
place, Deuteronomy. 27. v. 16. Cursed be he that sets light by his Father or his
Mother, and all the people shall say, Amen. The same application of it to his
Prince the Father of the Country; And the Lord give him repentance for the
Evil he has done.

And thus have I shortly examined all his five Positions, and his proofs of
them, being the substance of his whole Book.

I will now for Conclusion pass my particular Censure upon it in the words of
the Emperor Julian upon a Book brought to him containing a Confession of Faith
of the best Church in the world; And what he corruptly censured of that
Confession, I will truly and sincerely censure the same of the script of W. P.
in refutation of the Plea of the best University, (...), I have read it, I have
considered it, and I do utterly condemn it.

Et cedo mihi quemvis arbitrum.
FINIS.

