Plain English: OR, A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE ACCOMMODATION, The Army, The
Association.

Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur.

Printed (unless men be the more careful, and God the more merciful) the
last of Liberty. 1643.

Plain English:
He that desires and promotes not an honest and honorable peace, let him
suffer under the danger and confusion of a Civil winter war; He that would
seek or accept peace upon unsafe and unworthy terms, let him have it; I can
wish him no greater mischief.

It is a mutual complaint in the world, that some are all for peace, others
wholly for war; I am for neither, and yet for both; I always loved peace
well, but better now then ever: upon a just cause and calling I can scorn the
danger of war, but the sin and confusion of an Army I hate; I love peace so
well, that I can endure war to accomplish it; and I think I love it better,
I am sure I love a better peace then they that can abide the thought of nothing
else, though they enjoy nothing less; they would have a truce, I love a peace.

I love peace as my health, war I cannot say I love but use as Physic: were
not health very sweet, pills would be very bitter, there is no such pleasure in
blood letting. I look to peace as my end, I look upon war as the unhappy,
yet not always, yet not now the unjust means to procure it; I cannot be in
the opinion of them who think happiness inconsistent with war, and
inseparable from peace; where God is there is happiness, he is the Lord of
Hosts, the God of peace.

To come nearer, We have found it not impossible to be miserable under the
Motto of Beati Pacifici, if it be misery, as indeed it is, to see our
neighbors and friends wasted, and the foundation of our own ruin laid. This
war is the fruit of peace, Peace may be the fruit of this war; I dare
undertake to make good one, the God of heaven make good the other.

It was peace with our spiritual enemies, with our sins, with our
superstitious idolatries* Sabbath breakings, it was peace with our outward both
Foreign and intestine enemies, Spain and its faction, that, we may both in a
religious and reasonable way conclude, have brought us to this pass. God may
justly let those counsels that have wrought our neighbors misery work our own.

And here let me take leave in this freedom of speaking to give an account of
my thoughts concerning the hinges upon which these troubles now move: Because I
find many at a stand, admiring how we are come to this height of calamity: We
look upon the hand that moves, and hear the hammer that strikes, and tells us
we are at the Evening of our unsound peace, and that we are in danger to pass
a midnight before we shall see a better and clearer morning of truth and peace
arise upon us springing from on high. But there are very few that look upon
the wheels and springs, the weights and lines, which move and act the things
we see and hear.

For my part I am very far from a Statesman, my years will not allow me
experience, my parts insight, my calling leisure, nor my acquaintance
intelligence, all which are necessary thereto. But I never yet shut my eyes to
light, nor my ears to truth, I have not been indiligent in observing and
comparing the actions and proceedings of men, I have desired as a man to know,
as another man to know news, as a Christian man to know and consider the
present and probable state of the Church of God, and the account I have given
my self is this.

I look upon a grand design of the Jesuits and their faction as the great
wheel moving to and in this business. He that knows any thing of the
Christian world must know something of the Antichristian, and in that of the
masters of the faction the Jesuits, which are a Compendium of the Romish
religion, in which and in whom, besides idolatry and superstition, are met
pride, subtilty, and cruelty. It has been not unjustly suspected that there
has been a design of these masters of Religion, or rather rebellion, to which
they have been moved by the weights of intolerable pride and misguided zeal,
to reduce as much of the world as they can comprehend in their vast thoughts to
the Monarchy of Spain and the Supremacy of Rome. And to this purpose they
have been indefatigable in their endeavors in all Countries and of all kinds.
It concerns not this present business much for me to observe what they have
attempted, and how far they have prevailed in other Countries; Though it
deserves our notice to consider how far they have proceeded in Germany; what
seeds they have sown in France and in Holland it self, notwithstanding its
professed detestation of them and vigilancie against them; even such as we may
justly suspect may grow up the next spring and set all Christendom in a
confusion, and make the world a fit shop for these sons of perdition to work
in.

But let us a little more fully view their proceedings toward us, where at
first we discern an earnest and not groundless desire of reducing us among
the first, as knowing England would be a rich Diamond in a Crown or Mitre, and
as advantageous to their honor, power and riches as any other. The several
attempts in the time of our glorious Queen Elizabeth are sufficient
attestations of this design and desire; They saw it unpossible to work upon
her in regard of her averseness to their nation and religion, they beg^^ to
work against her both; her person and her Kingdom; He that knows any thing,
knows and acknowledges the many deliverances God* vouchsafed her, ^ud this
Kingdom in her, from a continued succession of treasons and Asassinations;
Their several machinations against her kingdom, especially that grand one of
88. are equally known, and when they saw it unlikely to prevail here, they
endeavor to weaken and vex her with rebellions in Ireland; an old play new
acted. After this Sun was set, they hoped for a succession of thick darkness
by interrupting the lawful Succession of one whom they could not so well be
assured of, though some say they attempted him, and prevailed far enough:
That could not be done, they are put to an after-game, which they play first
desperately, in the Powder Treason, then subtly, as may hereafter appear.
They began to be weary of violent attempts, and discerned a nature in his
Majesty which they could make a good advantage of, peaceable and fearful,
willing quietly to enjoy that addition of power and revenue he had attained.
They let him be quiet, provided that he would quietly see and suffer the
Protestant Churches of Germany to be spoiled and wasted, which I am sorry to
say he did, through the disadvantage of his nature and Counsels, though he was
a man in point ^^^judgement right against Popery. But they could easily allow
him that, let him dispute and play at Ticktack with Bellarmine at his leisure,
provided they could destroy the Palatinate, and get more another way. It was
doubtless suggested to him an attempt to be absolute, that by catching at
more, he might endanger all; its like he might well enough digest the thought,
but not the means so full of danger and hazard: therefore left that work for
another of more forwardness, and less foresight. The plot and circumstances
of the Spanish Match, some of which are printed, show how far they had
prevailed, and what hopes they had. To come to his now Majesty's reign, of
which I shall speak as tenderly and as truly as I can. The same design has
been still doubtless driven; Its true, in a Match we changed Spain for
France, Coelum non animum, as it falls out. The two great works they have
endeavored have been upon our Religion and our Liberties, to blind our eyes by
superstition and ignorance, to bind our hands by oppression and slavery, that
they might lead us or carry us any whither. The first they looked at as the
end, the second as the means: In all places a temporal tyranny is a great step
to Ecclesiastical; and especially in our Kingdom, where our Religion is
fenced in with positive Law, they must break this hedge before they can spoil
the vineyard; but he that breaks this hedge a Serpent shall bite him. And
truly they had made a mischievous progress, they had gotten instruments for
their turn in Church and State three or four especially, who indeed moved
all; One in Church of a right Antichristian spirit, insufferably insolent, more
cruel then subtle, through the violence of his passion, a man delighting in
the blood of souls; In the State two or three, one of strong parts, and a
spirit fit for a great Turk; another or two mischievously subtle, and of a
thorough Spanish dye. They had observed all the rules that the Jesuit gives
for reducing a Protestant State, as in a Sermon preached this late 5. of
November is more exactly declared. They had procured the discontinuance of
Parliaments, and made themselves and their instruments incapable of account,
but to one whom they had so far seduced as to like it well enough. They had
brought us a great way in a still march, and had drawn us further had not the
Conductours mistook their way, and led us too far Northward, which has set
them some years backward, if not spoiled the plot. Here they kindled a fire
which they knew not how to quench, and so they resolved to increase it, though
they burnt their fingers. When they saw it impossible to avoid a Parliament,
they thought to delude it; this was the attempt upon the first Parliament, when
that could not be done, they dissolved it, and went about to delude the people
with a promise to right grievances out of Parliament as much as in it; which
how well kept let any man call up his two years memory; that promise was not a
promise, but a prophecy of more such promises; which prophecy has been
fulfilled though the promises have not. It would not yet do; Men's eyes were
opened, the string of their tongues loosed, Another Parliament must be called,
even that which because it cannot be recalled must be mis-call'd, because it
would not (at least for a time) be deluded, it must be destroyed; and thus am
I led to the present condition: What need we look for any other ground of the
several attempts against this Parliament, then that disposition and those
Counsels which discontinued them, which are still as strong, and more desperate
then ever, because of the new quarrels that are fallen in; I know there have
bin many particular occasions, at least taken, of breaches, and discontents,
but yet the quarrel is not against this, but all Parliaments, unless they
could get one new molded that should be a Conciliabulum rather then a
Concilium.

But I must be called to account for this Discourse: It may be thought
impossible, that we should be so besotted as to drive a Spanish design, and to
fight for them in England, who fight against us in Ireland; Its true it were a
wonder we should do this, if it were a wonder we should do any thing to undo
our selves: It has been our dispos^tion a good while, either to do nothing, or
any thing, excepting always some persons who are vigilant and earnest to
disappoint these mischiefs. We have made several expeditions to serve them;
One to Cales to show them where they were weakest, and give them notice, that
no body else should take it; Another to R^e to weaken our selves; A third to
Rochell, to see the Town safely delivered up; A fourth and fifth to Scotland,
to make them our yoke-fellowes; and why not now a sixth, more directly against
our selves.

But its further objected, it cannot be believed this should be either his
Majesty's intention to inslave his Kingdom, or the intention of those Lords
and Gentlemen that are with him to despoile themselves of their Religion and
Liberties. I return this: They may do the work they intend not, and as wise
as they take themselves may be over-acted in their own designs. I cannot, I
dare not say, that they do agree in the serving this Jesuiticall design, they
have many ends different from this and one another. But thus first, I heartily
doubt, it is the design of many, some beyond sea, some in England, who have it
may be a double voice in the managing this business: The Papists had never
been so full and forward in their contributions both of purse and person, were
not there to them by themselves, and it may be by others propounded great
enjoyments. 2. All that join in this antiparliamentary war though they do it
not formally, yet by consequent they serve this design of slavery and
superstition by endeavoring the overthrow of the Parliament, either in it self
or privileges, which must preserve both liberty and religion. They say they
mean but the reducing it, why that is to break it in its freedoms, and they
cannot stop there, because they carry with them men, that as they hate to be
ruled by a Parliament, so they love not to be ruled by anybody, and when they
are running down hill, especially Descensus Averni who can stop them, not he
that set them on? So that in the prevailing of the now raised force the ruin
of this, and indeed all Parliaments may be easily discerned, unless such an
one as may lawfully ruin us: in the ruining Parliaments, who sees not the
ruin of Religion, Law, Liberty, and this Kingdom, nay which is more the
extreme danger if not destruction of the Protestant Religion through
Christendom.

If men have other intentions in this their expedition, as they do not
justify them though they were better then they are, so neither do they avail
us, They fight not to serve Spain or Rome but themselves. But in mean time
they are served, and themselves it may be disappointed. The masters of this
mischief have a way to improve other men's principles and practices to the^r
own ends, they see a Parliament is not for their turn, they must have a war,
it is a hard matter to find so many men of one mind as to agree to make an Army
for the same quarrel with the same end, therefore say they, let us observe
their principles and make them believe they do their own work.

Is there a man that has much to loose and is through guilt afraid of it, let
him be possessd there is no way to keep it but by strong hand, is he
revengefull let him often hear of injuries real or pretended, is he proud,
let him be promised an unlimited absolute government, let him be told how
unworthy it is a great man to have so many joynd with him in the point next
supremacy, nay supremacy it self, The legislative power. Is there any that
have endevourd the betraying their Couutrie, the building their ambitious
projects upon the ruins of our safety and liberty, let them be possessed there
is no mercy in a Parliament, their estates if not persons must satisfy for
their faults? Are there a people as there are too many whose lust is their
life, that fear the power of Religion and strict discipline, they must be
possessed that there is an endeavor of introducing a rigid Presbytery, an
absurd independencie? Are there some who know not their own rights nor the
state of our government, let them be possessed with the Majesty nay with the
Deity of a King, what a horrid thing it is to oppose an unlawful command
though to save a Kingdom. Are there an ignorant people that will be deluded
with promises and pretenses, let the hopes of pillage be propounded to them? Is
there any thing men love, that the Parliament will take away, is there any thing
they fear, that they will do. Thus do the contrivers of this mischief make use
of every man's weakness or prejudice, and either propound to them or let them
propound to themselves ends according to their several tempers, and lead them
on with hope of their own ends, to further theirs. In sum the matter seems
to be this, Popery must grow up amongst us, till it have overgrown us; to
accomplish that, the sense of our vineyard, our laws and liberties must be
plucked up, and that can hardly be done so long as Parliaments continue, or at
least continue in their power and privilege, to this purpose let them be
defamed, dismembered, let an Army be drawn up to overawe them, if that be
prevented, let another be raised, under pretense of a guard, to destroy them;
That this may be, let the Prince fight for his prerogative, for the maintenance
or improvement of his falsely supposed violated power. Let the Lords and
Gentlemen fight for their lusts, the Divines and Lawyers (if yet they deserve
such names) for the keeping and getting preferments, the Delinquents for their
estates, their offices and shares in an arbitrary power, the Welchmen for the
word King and a common prayer book, the poor for pillage, the ignorant they
know not why: in the accomplishing these ends they shall accomplish a work they
think not of, the destruction of our government, an end they know not of, the
growth of Popery, the wrong and ruin of the Protestant Religion here and in
our neighbor Nations; the work is done, we are undone, there wants nothing but
the Plaudite of the Popish Iesuited faction, and the late repentance of the
unadvised furtherers of this mischief.

Now it were a question worth disputing and resolving what were the best way to
prevent all this misery and mischief that is growing upon us. I know wiser men
have it in hand, the Lord who is great in counsel, and mighty in working
direct and protect them, and make them faithful to them from whom they have
found faithfulness. But in this age wherein every man will be saying
something, I will adventure for a share. It may be the last service, (if it be
a service) that I can do, I will speak as if it were the last.

First there is no man, or at least no Christian that doubts but a safe and
honorable Accommodation betwixt his Majesty and his Parliament, were to be
preferred not only to the danger of a war but the certainty of a victory; for in
the one we should get an interest in his heart, by the other only in his
Person, and the effusion of innocent blood would be prevented. But the great
difficulty is, whether these just and honorable terms are likelier to be
procured by fair means or by foul, by treating or fighting. To the resolving
of this it must first be considered what is a safe, and what an honorable
Accommodation.

And here it must be supposed that no government that is settled by men, or in
men can be absolutely out of the reach of danger and destruction. The
governments of men areas men are, subject to corruption. As the Poet of persons
and vices, Vitiis nemo fine -- optimus ille -- Qui minimis urgetur. So I of
governments none without it is wants and inconveniences, that the best which
has least; we must never look either by peace or war so to settle our selves,
as not to be unsettled. Yet it concerns us toward a safe Accommodation to
labor so to order things as not to lie open to manifest, or justly suspected
misery or mischief.

Let it therefore be considered whether we can be safe, unless the power of
the Militia be placed in men of known trust and faithfulness to the
Kingdom. Some are of opinion, it had better never been meddled with; that it
has occasioned this trouble, I much doubt it, this business was resovl'd
should be; on that ground or some other. That Accommodation can only be safe to
this Kingdom, which shall place the power of it in the hands of them that may
be groundedly presumed will use it for the preservation of it self, and
consequently not leave or place it in the hands of them who have, or are likely
to abuse it, to the destruction of the Kingdom. Some say let every man stand
upon his own guard, leave it undetermined: it was always unfit and unsafe,
now most of all, both in regard of our selves and foreign nations? We have
received the first fruits of Ireland, something from other Nations as a pledge
of more in convenient time. We have a desperate Delinquent, Popish party among
our selves that calls for the settlement of the power of the Kingdom, so as to
be used for its own safety. Reports concerning Denmark have been accounted
ridiculous by them who thought they had contrived their business so cunningly
that it could not be known.

It Is true, that work of darkness has been so clandestinely carried as that a
judicial proof could not be produced to satisfy the world; but besides the
scornd relation of the Skipper at Roterdam, who we yet see may speak as true as
a Courttier, and the common fame which runs abroad, I believe there wants not
some who know the earnest endeavor of calling in forces from thence, the way
and instruments of prosecuting that unworthy motion. What has been acted in
Holland, may be a sufficient argument of what has been attempted otherwhere,
all the world knows how and by whom that work has been carried on; and let
all the world judge whether the power of the Kingdom ought to be put or left
in those hands, who have endeavored to raise power against it or to be left
undetermind, when there are and have been such determinations against us from
abroad, and such bitter quarrels at home among our selves, who need after these
desperate instigations no crueller enemies then one another. It Is true, though
it be said that it much matters not who has the command of our trained Bands,
who have hitherto served for little use but to arm the Kings forces against
the several Countries and the Parliament, but what hands the principal forts,
arms and Ammunition are, and especially the Navy, is of as much consequence as
the safety of the Kingdom.

2 Let it be considered, whether we can be safe till the neck of this mentioned
design be broken of, whereby the servants of tyranny and superstition endeavor
to bring us under; It is believed that they are a restless generation that are
always either conceiving mischief or bringing forth iniquity. Our interests
must be untwined from the interests of Spain and Rome, for so long as my Lo.
Cottingtons house stands so near the Spanish Ambassadors, and Bristow is so
convenient a harbor for Spain, we must look for little safety but less
Religion.

Now that this fire may be quenched, and not only raked up, it will be
necessary that the fuel and fuellers be removed, that the instruments and
matter of compassing this design be abandond.

The instruments are conceived some particular men, who besides other
characters plain enough upon them, may be known by their advancing an
arbitrary Government in the King; and the mancipation of themselves, to the
promiscuous service of the Queen, who is professedly zealous in this point and
follows the plot by inheritance. The neck of this design will scarce be
broken, till the necks of some of the principal authors and actors be, and the
rest disabled. And to that purpose, the Papists who are the dried fuel of this
fire must be brought into another condition: the damnable compositions
thoroughly damned, the laws against them made up into one good law, which in
some cases may destroy them, in every thing disable them. This point of
delinquents, though made a very tender point in regard of particular interests
and relations which make have to destroy the public, is of exceeding
consequence to our safety. Our neighbors though they may possibly not do us
the expected good, teach us this (but that we are resolved to learn nothing)
by their complement in the business which has made them, I fear, unable to
help us, and in us themselves, and makes them turn the thought of their
neighbors welfare into a more direct solicitude for their own, in regard of
her now dangerous and it is like shortly desperate party left amongst them, and
left able to hurt them. They flatter themselves with their hardy poverty that
it will not be worth the while to attempt them, that is sure but a poor
refuge, wrath is outrageous, and anger is cruel, but who can stand before
envy and revenge? Let them be assured, that if we be overborne with this
feared mischief, and that party whom they know to have been the instruments
of their trouble as well as ours prevail, they will find the malignity of our
Nation to have a strange influence into theirs to the doubling of their enemies
among themselves and from us, to whom especially some among us they owe a great
deal toward their present safety, they must expect fewer friends then
formerly, unless they show themselves more friendly, and so we shall have a
third union of the two kingdoms, an union in bondage: But pardon this
digression, though I be out of the Kingdom, I am not much out of the way.

3. How can we be safe, unless our Laws be so by which we are preserved, and
how can that possibly be, unless there be some new power established, or the
old power (if it be found only to have been deficient in respect of the persons
trusted) in new hands, how shall we be the better for our Laws, were our Laws
better then they are, unless some exact course be taken to give us the benefit
of them, and though it seems an unreasonable thing to nominate officers in the
behalf of him who has commanded and countenanced the violation of law, that
doubtless must be the least; and no man, no reasonable man but sees the case
extraordinary: The God of Heaven direct to a better remedy then for ought I
hear is intended.

In the next place let it be considered what is required to an honorable
Accommodation.

An honorable Accommodation must be so in regard of God and of our selves. And
here I crave mercy from our over-forward Accommodators; I mean them from whom
it is in vain to crave justice and truth, that I mention God, who sure is not
in all their thoughts, they fear God in a wrong sense, they fear lest he
should rule among us; whom yet if we give occasion to depart from us, which we
shall do by unworthy terms, our defense is departed from us; whom if we now
forsake he may justly cast us off for ever. An honorable Accommodation in
respect of God is a safe one in regard of our selves, his honor is bound up
with our happiness; were it possible to settle peace without truth, we should
yet be but what the French say of a beautiful harlot, A Paradise to the eye,
but a Purgatory to the foul.

Now in regard of God that Accommdation can be only honorable that may
establish his true Religion in purity and plenty; Such as one as may extirpate
Popery and superstition, lay the grounds of a pious painful Ministry, and to
that end cast out those scandalous seditious persons, who have now showed
themselves as ill affected to the state as formerly to the Church, and if this
advantage against them of stirring up the people to war against the
Parliament be neglected, I know no way of ejecting them, such an one as may
purge our doctrine, free it from such expressions as Sancta Clara, and the
Arminians take advantage of, reform our Discipline and make it more conducible
to the end of all Discipline, the preservation of a Church from corruption in
Doctrine and manners. And let it be weighed, whether that can be done without
the supplanting those plants which our heavenly father never planted, the
Bishops, which have hitherto brought forth the fruits of prophannesse,
ignorance, superstition, and from whom little other can be expected: If you
suggest, Put better men in the places. We answer, the places will make them
worse: for so constant experience tells, the persons were ever worse by the
office, the office never better by the persons.

An Accommodation honorable in regard of God must be such as may cleanse the
land from blood, that innocent and precious blood which cries to be avenged by
our Parliament, or upon it.

That Accommodation which should be honorable in regard of our selves, must be
such as might put that part of the Kingdom which have stood up in the defense
of it, into such a condition as to be f^^e from the insufferable insolence and
scorn, as they will always lie under, from their unsuppressed enemies; but
that is the least: Such an Accommodation shall we account honorable which may
be so in regard of the Parliament, such as may retract the strange indignities
offered that supreme Court and vindicate their honor and power, and enable
them to discharge that great debt which they have undertaken for, lest public
faith be justly accounted no better then public fraud, which is the highest
dishonor for so high a Court.

If it be here interposed, where is your care for the Kings honor in the
Accommodation. I answer, I think it more necessary to the welfare of this
Kingdom, that the honor of this Supreme Court be kept unstaind then of any
particular person whatsoever, I could wish the members of it would think so
too, and avoid those retreats which wise men have already observed in their
proceedings, and will in a short time appear to every body.

His Majesty has fairer ways out of his real mistakes then the Parliament
out of their supposed. He is though a great yet but one person, in whom an
error is more tolerable, he is supposed to act according to the misinformation
of evil counsels about him, let them bear the blame and shame. If it be so
stood upon, that his Majesty scorns any such evasion, and as he has already
been persuaded to do, take all upon himself, why should we endanger our
selves by a solicitude for the reparations of that honor, which they, whom it
most concerns, are not at all.

For the Parliament to do what has been required, and it may be, is expected;
I had almost said what some of themselves are about to do, were to make them
ridiculous and vile in the eyes of discerning people, as the relinquishing
their orders, retracting their Declarations, deserting their friends. For the
King to do what they have desired (though at another time it would have been
unreasonably asked, and dishonourably granted) is now both reasonable and
honorable to a true judgment, if it be honor in a Prince to promote by all
possible means the happiness and security of his people, it were but to do
that of which there might be Examples given in other cases, where Princes have
not thought it dishonorable, because they have done it to give satisfaction to
people, to retract calumnies, to sacrifice delinquents, or at least receive
them as a gratuity, though not worth the giving or taking.

The next great Question is, whether we are likely by a treaty to obtain from
his Majesty a real grant of such propositions as may stand with the safety of
the Kingdom, the honor of God, of the Parliament and Nation.

And here the former particulars must be resumed. First, is it likely that
during this unpretended danger we should obtain a settlement of the power of
the Kingdom, princip^lly of the Ships, Forts and Arms in the hands of them
who are known friends of public safety or Liberty, taking it granted that we
could find them. Here is a double doubt to be made, first, whether he will;
secondly, whether he, considered in his present condition, can do what may be
for our security; His constant Declaration of himself seems to express that
he has received two Principles against it.

The one suggested by them who see no way of security, or at least of thriving
but in a way of violence, who endeavor to possess his Majesty, that he cannot
be safe in the Arms of his Parliament and people, because they cannot; that
there are inclinations to a defection in his people, and to an innovation of
Government even in the greatest points of it in the Parliament, or many
considerable persons in it, and thence infer, that there is no way for his
Majesty to keep his privileges, nor his person and Crown but by force of
arms, and therefore must have them placed in hands that his confidence so
contrary to ours may be put in. How far such suggestions have prevailed with
his Majesty appears by his late answer to the Parliaments vain repetition of
a Petition of return, in which he says, that to come up and trust them, were
but tamely to lay down his Crown, which by force they saw they could not take
from him. I do not know of any such inclinations in his people, but I am sure
such counsels and such carriages are the way to beget them: He is further told,
or needs no telling, that he parts with the Flowers of his Crown, which it is
not reasonable, nay not lawful for him to do in regard of posterity. But see
here how indifferent these men are as he for one who wrote the late Answer to
the Observations printed by Command at Oxford. It is lawful, nay necessary for
us to invest his Majesty with what right God has given us, a right in our
selves we may part with, yet more of our liberty, and lawfully and profitably
make our selves slaves, but it is not lawful for the King to part with an inch
of Prerogative or abate a jot of power, though for that end for which all his
power was given him, his peoples good, and given him by us. He cannot do it
without wrong to his issue: This will but give us occasion to discuss how
far we are obliged by any acts or grants of our ancestors, giving away their
and our liberty, and determine for our advantage. Doubtless his Majesty's
thoughts remaining as they have of late appeared to be, it cannot be expected
that (had we the hearts to ask it, which some say unworthily begin to fail
men, and make them fail their trust) he should entrust the power of the
Kingdom in those hands, whom we can only trust, that is such as in this
present business have showed themselves faithful to the Kingdom.

The case of constituting a power to see the Laws duly executed, or at least
of placing the present power in better hands is the like. These counselors
tell him there can be no new power but what is cut out of his, and the
disposing of the former power is likewise his, that if it be not disposed by
him, or else underhand by some body for him, it will be an insufferable
diminution of his observance and authority. And no wonder though many endeavor
thus to possess him, because they look to have this power placed in
themselves, to use it as they have done: His Majesty has been always
observed to be too true to his own ends, and to the persons promoting them,
though other men who would yet be more confided in, have found a way to employ
men and desert them; so that a reasonable man who weighs persons and things
must conclude, that the King is not likely to yield heartily to the settling of
that power, whereby he judges and rules, but into such hands that have given
open testimony, or do give secret intimations and hopes either by their
p^omises or their persons that the power shall be used to the advance of
prerogative and keeping the high way. You say some body must be trusted, I say
trust them that have not deceived their trust; you ask where they are to be
found? I with I could answer it; As Luther once called for the 46th Psalm, so
I for the twelfth, Help, Lord, for the godly man ceases, the faithful fail
from the children of men. But if our eyes were opened we might pretty well see
whom not to trust, neither with Laws or Arms; that is, some tall Cedar posts,
whose varnish is now worn off, the worms seen, the rottenness discovered,
let not these be any longer accounted or used as pillars of the Commonwealth:
Trust not men that are really needy, unless you be sure they can make no
better bargain; trust not men that by covetousness make themselves needy,
they will make a bargain for themselves and of you; trust not men that are
known vicious and sensually corrupt, though forward assertors of Liberty, they
are in danger to be given up by God, or to give themselves up to actions every
way dishonorable. The truth is, though it sound like a Paradox, where few can
be trusted more must: and seeing we find men very subject to be corrupted by
honor and authority, especially in these times where such snares are laid and
such baits propounded, let the Law and Rule be made as plain and certain as
may be, the Offices of Rule and Judicature must be made more temporary and
arbitrary in respect of the people then formerly. Though this will sound harsh
to men even accounted moderate, for I observe a generation that are extremely
set for liberty only, that themselves may be licentious, and very hot against
arbitrary Government, till themselves have or hope to have a share in it, as in
the Earl of Straffords case, whose steps you see men of sound repute now
beginning to trace, not thinking of his end.

In the next place let it be examined, whether it be like to obtain of his
Majesty in this conjuncture, the suppression of that party Popish and
otherwise Malignant, in whose impunity it is impossible for us to be safe;
Whether I be mistaken let wise men judge, but to me the popish faction, the
promoters of an arbitrary government by force, for such is that I fear, and
the true patrons and lovers of truth and just liberty are as two scales or
buckets, if one be high the other must be low; as it is against piety, so is it
beyond the reach of policy, so to poyse them especially after such stirring the
humors on both sides, as to keep peace in this Kingdom. One must down, it
concerns us nearly to see which: First, let us consider, whether it is likely
by out treaty so to abate the number and power of Papists, as that they shall
not remain continual thorns in our sides. It is justly feared they have too
deep an interest, and another kind of reward is expected by them and intended
to them for their favor and useful service at home and abroad, all that they
have done in Ireland is not like to prevail so much to their discountenance as
what they have done against Scotland and England to their favor, they have
been former preached to be, and have now made good Squire Priests prophecy of
the good Samaritane; good subjects in the Kings sense, though not in the
kingdoms. Shall they be discouraged, shall they be discarded, no let the point
of the sword and their swords too be turned upon another sort of men who have
rebelliously armed themselves to save a Parliament from assassination and a
kingdom from ruin. Shall not the Queen be gratified with the more free use
of her religion, after that abundant service in Holland for the provision of
men and arms against us. It requires doubtless a faith little short of
presumption to believe that ever by treaty the Popish party shall be weakened,
faith may be kept with them though they keep none.

So for delinquents of the same kind, though another Religion, though we allow
as much as can be allowed, that there be not a short and punctual profecution
of all that have showed themselves enemies to the State. Is it possible to
obtain so much of his Majesty's favor or justice as to have the heads or
necks of some of them who have been most desperate and active in the embroyling
this kingdom in this civil war, and the proportionable censure of the rest.
It is doubted, nay it is despaired, whom we call enemies of the State, he calls
friends and makes favorites, and keeps them in his bosom, who by the warmth
of his favor are so heightened, that those whose care and pains have been
indefatigable for the preservation of the Kingdom from ruin both by sea and
land, are accounted the same to his Majesty as those counselors to us: where
the Parliament thinks of punishments or should think, his Majesty thinks of
rewards, and so on the contrary.

If you say that all must be remitted, first the just and reasonable
expectation and engagement of the Kingdom cannot be so satisfied. Secondly, we
still keep within our bosom the fuel of a greater fire, if possible, and more
ready after these exasperations to take fire upon all occasions, and will be
most ready of all, when dried, as they are like to be, by the Parliaments
impunity and the Kings favor.

3. We leave our selves to the scorn and insolency of them whose pride and
blasphemy is not like to stop till it comes at, Where is now their God? Which
if it seem good to the disposing hand of Heaven, let me rather dye than see or
suffer.

If any here think or say, there is a great deal of reason his Majesty should
grant what may be for the safety of the Kingdom, it is for his own safety: I
answer my question is concerning will, not concerning reason. We are indeed
told by him that undertakes the answer to the Observator, that we must suppose
that Prince out of his wits, either not come to them or past them, a mad man or
a child that will not do all for the safety and prosperity of his people, in
which he is safe and flourishes. We are told this but find the contrary and
have found it so often, that it ceases to be a wonder. It is not impossible for
a man not out of his wits, neither though in that particular he has not the
right use of them to do that which may tend to his own ruin for want of
foresight, if you be not in this resolved ask our reverend Prelates.

But further, though a Prince may be tender of the lives of his subjects,
because he would have many to rule over; yet it is a question or a negative
conclusion; Whether he desires to prefer their lives, so as they may be worth
the enjoying with the advantages of their estates and liberties. It is true in
right reason this ought to be his desire and endeavor, because it is the honor
of a Prince to be ruler of a rich and free people; but we many times find that
Princes represent their subjects to themselves in the same relation as the land
to the sea, what I can gain out of it is mine own; Every abatement of a
privilege in them is an advancement of a prerogative in me, the emptying their
purses fills my Coffers, and so make the happiness of the people and their
own, which should be wrapped up together, to be two distinct, nay two contrary
things, as it is in France, and has appeared to be in England in the midst of
that 14 years spoil made upon us. Judge now whether it be not possible upon
these terms for a Prince to be so far from seeking the honor and safety of
his people as to seek their ruin as the foundation of his rising; and make a
second judgment, Whether we have not so represented to his Majesty; So that
you see or may see there is absolute necessity, that a Prince should always
seek the true safety of his people with the advantages of wealth and liberty:
But his gracious Majesty will; we have no way to judge of men's wills and
dispositions, but their former actions and present preparations: it is too
apparent, he has at least permitted things to be done very much to the
prejudice of his people, but we have promises for what we wish, We wish there
were no reason to diffide. Its one extreme unhappiness that the word of a King
cannot rid us of all fears; What would you have further; that which we pray
God for; a hearty close: But what would you have his Majesty do further for
your satisfaction? We would have him do, Prevent the propositions with
something that might really advance the good of his people, and abdicate all
those persons and Counselors who have fomented this destructive jealousy,
and given the advice for this unhappy division. It must not be wondered that
people will not be satisfied with promises and protestations, that have lived
upon them while they are almost starved, and they evidently see Esau's rough
hand going along with Jacob's smooth voice.

And truly for my part, as it is doubted whether he will, so whether he can,
without a hard adventure yield to things so much for our advantage, and for the
disadvantage of his great Guard. The devil is now got out of the Circle and
plays Reakes, the guard is thriven to an Army, two or three. Its some doubt
whether the power that raised the devil can lay him; I have heard it reported,
and am ready to believe it, when I consider the disposition of many men about
his Majesty, that some should say, as they had engaged themselves, their
friends and fortunes in the quarrel, as war could not be made without them,
peace should not. And there is one doubtless in whose breast you may find that
indignation of Juno, Mean incoept^ desistere victam, etc. So that in the making
of peace it is feared there must be Articles made by them and for them, in
whose peace we can have no peace.

Judge ye now of the likelihood of a safe Accommodation, something may be
further added concerning the probability of an honorable.

Honorable in respect of God: What hopes is there that Popery should be
rooted up? May we not rather, in regard of the service done by the Papists,
expect an intolerable toleration. But we have many engagements for the
Protestant Profession. I must here seriously profess my doubt, that there is
some equivocation in that word Protestant; that the sense is taken as it has
been by some very large. You know how by the superstitious Prelates, the
pillars of the Kings protestant Religion, popery has been restraind, and
protestancie must be accordingly enlarged. The Archbishop of Canturbury
professed himself a direct enemy to popery truly and properly so called, which
I believe he only thought to be the Popes Supremacy, which he could scarce
spare him; for all other points or most, we know were preached and printed with
his Command or connivence. Now if the protestant Religion be enlarged,
according as the popish is straightened, a promise to maintain the protestant
Religion is more then a man can wish.

What hopes that superstition should be abolished, his Majesty expressed
himself at Cambridge an approver of all the superstitious dresses and gestures
there used.

Of the purging our Doctrine or reforming our Discipline what hopes? We shall
have a Synod, but who dares come to it upon the Accommodation? or who dares
speak freely in it, after the Parliament by this Accommodation, shall submit
to the King; wonder not that I count an Accommodation a submission; I believe
the King (and justly) accounts the offer of it a victory. How miserably will
you find the indifferent Clergy warping to the prevailing party, the zealous
absent, and that justly, for I have a great deal of reason to be confident,
that scarce any considerable man, who has been engaged in this quarrel on the
Parliament part, I make bold to call it so, for I hope they will yet own it,
if he retain his integrity, da^es abide the issue of a present Accommodation.

For the maine thing tending to the honor of God and the Salvation of men, the
establishing of a faithful painful Ministry, how impossible is it by
Accommodation. Way must be made for that great work by displacing those idle,
scandalous, superstitious, ignorant persons, who are fundi nostri calamitas.
But how this can be done by composition, I apprehend not, if this advantage
against them of stirring up the people to spoil and rapine were taken, it were
a good likely means of rooting out them who had shuffled their cards so
cunningly as to be out of the reach of Law in other respects, but if these men
so unfit either for Church or Commonwealth be demanded, I believe this black
guard must not be parted with; they may contend with the highest delinquents,
nay Papists themselves for point of Service in this cause; they have been the
frogs coming out of the mouth of the beast, and the false prophet, stirring up
the people to battle, telling them that though they damn themselves, God will
save them, they shall either live Saints or dye Martyrs: These men must be
spared in regard of the service they have done, cannot be spared in regard of
the service they may again do upon the like occasion: for let any man observe
and he shall find, that those places which have been the dens of superstition,
the dungeons of ignorance, the sinkes of prophannesse in regard of scandalous
Ministers, have contributed the forwardest assistance in this cause against the
Parliament. Though I will not deny but some learned and ingenuous men (whose
principles have yet been below the power of godliness) have upon general
mistakes and the swaying of particular ends engaged themselves in this
business, though not so deep as others.

And no doubt but the Prelates themselves will be again accommodated by this
Accommodation, notwithstanding the votes (to them now ridiculous and called
dotes) passed against them, for they say a Parliament ordinance can recoile as
well as a Convocation Canon. No doubt, I say, but they may regaine their power
in the Church, though it is ike the Lords house may never have need of them.

And lastly, how can the Land by this Accommodation be cleansed from blood,
that crying sin, which has been contracted by this quarrel, if the
Parliament have engaged men to shed innocent blood, I see no reason but that
they submit, and an expiation be made; if on the contrary the Antiparliamentary
faction bear the guilt, why not the punishment? As I apprehend it, the chief
end of this taking up Arms on their party was to bring Delinquents to
punishment, if now they give up on these terms, they have made many
Delinquents, punished none, but rather given them a fair encouragement to the
like offenses by showing them the worst they can look for from the justice of
a Parliament. And truly this to me is a sad consideration which makes me
believe God will not prosper an Accommodation without the execution of justice
upon these bloodthirsty men. I read in the story of Manasses, that though he
afterward repented, which our enemies are far from, yet wrath came upon Judah
and Jerusalem, because of the provocations of Manasses, 2 Kin. 24. 4.
but particularly for the innocent blood which he shed, which the Lord would
not pardon. If the people, and especially the Parliament do not their utmost
to wash their hands, and cleanse the Land from this innocent and precious blood
that has been shed; I fear that blood, which they take not care to be
avenged by them, will be avenged upon them; which they will believe, when they
see their Accommodation turned into an Assassination, which is no impossible
business, neither will it be thought so upon a little recollection. The
design must on, the authors are impatient of this retrograde they have
suffered these three years, they cannot make use of so much further patience as
to work by wiles and windings, in all probability the mystery of iniquity so
works, as that if they that have let will let they must be taken out of the
way. Pardon these melancholic thoughts, I doubt there are too many of my mind,
and yet, it may be, not many enough.

But says my confident friend, when you see safe and honorable propositions
offered and agreed upon, are not you gallantly deceived. I confess I am, I
shall be deceived if such terms be offered; more if they be kept.

But what will you say when you see the King come to London, upon the motion of
the City, and a yielding of the fairest terms you can expect? I cannot tell
what to say, but I know what to think. Yet I may tell you what the Italians
say, They fear courtesies sometimes more then injuries, and this jealousy is
not always folly. I would make it a rule for my own practice, let other men
live by their own rules; If my provoked professed enemy suddenly and without
ground become miraculously kind, and close with me; I shall remember Ioab and
Amasa. I ask pardon again: My melancholy is deep.

In conclusion my thoughts are these, first that upon these considerations it
seems to me improbable that safe and honorable terms if they be offered,
should be granted and kept.

Secondly, though men be weary of the present, and desire to tumble into their
former conditions; It seems not agreeable to the order of divine dispensation,
that all this stir should be made, this blood shed, to produce a cold
Accommodation: Doubtless the period of this business will be some great
alteration, liberty or tyranny, Popery or true piety.

Though men, greatmen and a great many sometimes raise a great deal of dust,
and make a mighty bussle and bring forth nothing but wind: Yet God who does
nothing in vain is not wont to lay such foundations, and temper mortar with
blood, to have the rest of the building daubed up with untempored mortar. There
are many, though not prophesies, yet sad predictions which godly and wise men
have found by prayer and observation, to be fulfild upon us before we can look
for happiness though in Gods due time, and we hope in a short time he may
bring light out of darkness, and perfect peace out of this trouble. All the
suffering almost has fallen upon the house of God, judgment commonly begins
there, but me thinks it should not end there: If the green tree be cut to
bleeding, sure the dry shall be cut to burning. We have been so long dandled in
peace and sensual pleasures that we can endure to think of nothing else, but
it is to be doubted we must account for what we have enjoyed, for what we have
abused, before we be trusted with more. These I say are my fears, though my
hopes and prayers be, that the Lord would say to the destroying Angel, It is
enough. I can and do expostulate, Ier. 47. ^
as once the Prophet, O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be
quiet? put up thy self into thy scabberd, rest and be still. But my mouth is
ready to be stopped with the following verse, How can it be quiet, seeing the
Lord has given it a charge against England, etc. Let me not here be
misinterpreted (I know I speak to angry men) I lay down this as a bare
opinion, I make it not a rule to my own or others working. I pray for peace,
labor for peace, advise for a good and seasonable peace, though my thoughts
misgive in Point of sudden event. Let certain rules and known grounds such
as these, (Follow peace with all men and holiness, therefore love the truth and
peace, If it be possible (now that is only possible which is lawful; How can
I do this and sin?) live peaceably with all men) be the guides of mine and
others actions, notwithstanding such, though not groundless, surmises. The
world seems to be big with some great birth, the Lord hasten it in its time,
alterations seem to abide all Christendom, I pray God make ours for the
better. I leave it now to the world, or at least to the little world of prudent
men, to judge what likelihood there is of a safe and honorable Accommodation;
such a one as may be built upon the foundation of truth: Peace without truth is
no true peace, If the wisdom which lies against the truth is earthly, (...).
3. 15.
sensual, and divellish, whatsoever is done by or for us, God grant it may be
done by that wisdom which is from above, that is first pure, then peaceable,
without partiality, without hypocrisy. And then the fruit of righteousness
will be sown in peace to them that make peace.

But suppose (if it be lawful to be supposed) that the Parliament, through the
absence of many resolved men, now employed in particular services for their
own Countries, out of an intolerable weariness of this present condition, and
fear of the event, agree to the making up of an unsafe unsatisfying
Accommodation. This would beget a question, which I hope I shall never have
occasion to dispute, whether in case the representative body cannot, or will
not, discharge their trust to the satisfaction, not of fancy, but of reason in
the people; they may resume (if ever yet they parted with a power to their
manifest undoing) and use their power so far as conduces to their safety; And
it this doubt cannot be resolved to the advantage of the people but be found
either unlawful or otherwise impossible. I know but two ways more betwixt
which the choice is very hard, hang or fly. As for hanging I should not much
like it, though it were in a blue ribband, but for flying you will say the way
is open, I would it were as I could wish it, if ever God bring us to such a
strait; But in the mean time, if honest and engaged men be so far deserted,
as to be constrained to flight, it will be full of dishonor and danger;
Dishonor to them by whom they have been so engaged and employed, and danger to
the Nation, which by their absence will be the more exposed to an inrode of
superstition and tyranny. It may be there are some that will be ready to say a
fair riddance, they are the troublers of Israel who are thus full of
jealousies, as to run away from the shadow of their own dreams; but there
will be others, as wise as they of another mind, who know that the Puritans
though they be thought a little factious and troublesome in the Church, yet
they are good Commonwealths men, resolute asserters of public liberty, that
will pay roundly, and fight too, if need be, and cannot well be spared. And
truly as there is a great deal of unsafety in it in reason, so doubtless it
would give God an advantage against the Nation and make him proceed without any
such demuire, as, How shall I give thee up, O Ephraim? O England.

But one thing further: Although an Accommodation may be probable, yet I meet
with many who hold a strong conveniencie, if not an absolute necessity of
sending propositions, in whose denial may be advantage. But it is in vain for
me to dispute that which the Parliament have determined; I only wish the
sending of them may do as much good, as the delay in framing of them has done
harm. It is expected the not granting of them, should bring off some of the
Kings party; I am sure the making them at this time has lost some of the
Parliaments, it has divided the City, the Parliament, the Kingdom, almost
starved the Army, and brought things to confusion. For when people conceive the
Parliament recide from their principles and votes, whereby they have formerly
declared themselves in an incapacity of treating and give little less then an
implicit consent to an accusation of treason against their instruments, they
begin to withdraw their hearts and hands, not knowing how low they mean to go
themselves, or bring their friends. It were therefore to be wished, that
preparations for war and peace were carried on with an equal hand, that the
enemies of the Parliament had not so much encouragement, nor their friends so
much discourragement; For let us be assured, if the Parliament give them, whom
they called malignants, equal interest in them with their friends, friends
will be harder to find then ever they were, and furthest off when there is
most need of them. And what a lamentable thing a Parliament is without the
people, in all just cases to stick to them, if you know not, remember the
fourth of January, the great Army by land and Navy by Sea, the pikes and
protestations, that have been mentioned with a jeering indignation. But I here
seriously ask pardon for making that my work, which is the work of wiser men.
I am lead to a discourse I hope beyond exception, which will be a just
inference from that which has been said concerning Accommodation.

We all know that force and arms must now do that which faith and truth before
this Iron Age were wont to do, and whether we treat or not, it is of absolute
necessity that there be an army till the King see fit to discharge his guard;
If this army be dissolved he is a wise man that knows where to have another;
If we have none, we shall never need to think of making propositions they shall
be made to our hands, or to our heads, and necks. It is left therefore to
indifferent men to judge, whether it be not fit that this persent Army raised
by the Parliamet and maintained by the City and Kingdom, may not in justice
expect countenance and maintenance from them, by whom, and for whom, they have
been employed and engaged. For the first, which is countenance they stand not
so much upon, only as it is a part of their reputation, but the latter is the
maine.

I find even among the Parliament men, many who have conceived and expressed,
I think unjust I am sure unpolitike jealousies of the army, which have so
far wrought upon many considerable men in it, that in case the like necessity
again return, I very much fear, whether they would not rather fly to save
their own lives then stand to fight for them who so requite them. It is a
strange and unhappy turn, that where the safety not long since was, (and to a
right judgment now is) there the danger should be. Cannot we be content to be
jealous of our enemies? But it is not to be wondered at, when the people who
have been their immediate safety find the like measure from some of them, who
begin now to suspect, that they have been so forward for their supplies and
defense, only, that they might make use of them to do some strange thing, and
be midwives to some Chimera, which yet no body knows what to make of. I guess
at such thoughts by some expressions I have heard from them, who say they doubt
the people aim at some great infandum, something to big for their mouths
though not for their hearts, which they are so horribly afraid of being
serviceable to, that they many times doubt whether themselves should do their
own duty, because they suspect other men forget theirs. Not considering that
this is the way to beget a counter-jealousie which may undo all, but the
Parliament first.

There are some men, it may be, that will not speak what they would have, it
is as likely that they will never attempt it, men's wishes may be modest enough,
all things considered, and yet not easily expressed. The Parliament find it an
extreme hard thing to say what themselves would have, they are as men walking
among Quagmires, know not where to fasten a foot. No wonder though the poor
people whose thoughts are all swallowed up in danger and distraction cannot say
what they would have for their own safety.

But for the matter of the Army, this Treaty is not like to be of so speedy
dispatch, if safely carried, but it will admit, nay urge a consideration of
maintaining the Army, and finding out a settled way of maintenance. The
Kingdom has hitherto supplied the Army as the King supplied himself before
the Parliament by loanes and bargains, and a contribution liable to two great
mischiefs, trouble and uncertainty, it were good some constant course were
undertaken, that we might be rid of our fears, and the hopes of our enemies a
little dashed, who flatter themselves with the failing of our treasure, knowing
we have not the Conscience to live as they do. And to this purpose an excize,
a weekly assessement or voluntary contribution must be thought on. As it is no
contemptible sum that is paid upon a voluntary monthly contribution, so it
might be made more considerable, if men were by some means or other brought to
a level: for it is the unevenesse of the grounds men are upon that makes them
stumble at this way of supply; they say and say justly, that unless the
disaffected party be reduced to some proportionable terms, they shall go on
to impoverish themselves, and make themselves the objects of the scorn and
insolency of their enemies, and the pity of their friends. Here therefore let
it be considered (nay let it be no longer considered, Inretam iusta nonest
deliberandum) whether with all diligence (I had almost said with all violence,)
the Ordinance for assessing the Non-contributors be not to be put in execution:
I am ashamed of the excuses made in this particular, some that are employed
pretend they are afraid of the ill will of their ill neighbors. But what
equity is there in this proceeding, it is a continual quarrel ( ad ravim
usque) in the City, that the Army marches not against brestworkes, batteries,
and the mouth of the Ordnance, when themselves do not, and pretend dare not,
with the advantage of an Ordinance of Parliament, adventure upon the open mouth
of a malignant upon the hopes of our ruin, mounted against them.

But it may be some fear their hands more then their thoughts or tongues. That
is hard, that the power of Parliament and Militia in the hands of men
well-affected to the Parliament should leave grounds of terror in the minds of
the City, let them assure themselves that fear this fear, that they shall
never have less reason to be afraid then now they have, and if they let them
go on at this rate, the thing that they fear will come upon them; our
diffidence is their strength; We have so used them hitherto, that they can be
more merry in a prison then we in our freest meetings. And it is ^o me a sad
thought (which the mention of a prison has brought to my mind) that our
prisoners, men of repute, piety, and valor should be so unworthily used by our
adversaries; and we in the mean time suffer theirs to enjoy not only
unnecessary but unlawful contents, witness the plenty of wine, and the resort
of women (where there be Cats, there must be Vermin) at Lambeth house. How
just were it that we had twenty or thirty of the Chief of them, some of the
soldiers, some of the Citizens, sent to Windsor Castle or some other place,
where they might at the best fare but like soldiers, or otherwise according to
intelligence. Let the Parliament be assured, that if they give up on these
terms, they will leave an everlasting discouragement upon their friends and
not know where to find men to stick to them (for themselves see how they are
abused by the petitioners for peace, whose sense is fully enough expressed in
the libellous complaint to the Commons) when they shall have need, which I am
confident through the restless designs of them who lie at the bottom of this
business, they will quickly have.

But it will be here objected, the Army give continual disadvantage to their
own maintenance and encouragement by the ill managing the affairs committed
to their trust.

To this I answer, First, that I would not be taken for the general Advocate
of the Army; doubtless there are faults personal and real, more then I know,
more then can be excused: But first there have been many things said against
the Army that never were, or could be proved; and further the Army is
prejudiced by the expectation of things impossible. When the people are
unchangeable, and the Parliament infallible, the Army shall be unblameable. It
is expected by the Parliament and City that the Officers should be all honest
and faithful; what an unreasonable thing is this, will you expect that in a
Camp, that you find not in a Court? no not in the two great Courts of the
Kingdom and City, the Council of the Commons, and the Common Council. And to
make good my title and speak Plain English, The Parliament and City have
shared in the power of the Army, it is good reason likewise they should share
in the blame: They have recommended many of the Officers they find fault with,
whatsoever other men are; I can assure they are not all Saints that they have
put into the Calendar. For the consequent of corrupt Officers, which is false
Musters, it is a great and a just quarrel which all honest men desire to
remove the ground of. But first let it be considered, that it is the common
lot of all the Armies of Christendom, the Prince of Orange makes the same
complaint, to which purpose I could tell you a story, but that I am resolved
against tediousness. The noble and victorious King of Sweden did by his very
great diligence provide against it as much as was possible. But in stead of
quarrelling, let us attempt, a not impossible, redress. Let the Parliament or
City, if they can in this wicked world find some stoicall men, that despise
money -- Quos dignos spectatu arbitremur, appoint pay-masters to every Regiment
from whom the Officers and Soldiers should receive their pay: let them attend
constantly, and pay two or three times a week at an appointed place in the
quarter with the forfeiture of pay upon an unlawful absence. The honest
Officers would heartily embrace this motion, and be glad to be free from the
continual trouble they now endure from their importunate retinue, as for
Knaves they will not speak against it, least they show themselves so. It being
always reserved, that honest men upon better reason may speak against this
motion, to which I submit. This would be a way to save money, to keep the
soldiers together; only let care be taken that the men to whom this trust is
committed be of good repute, and able sometimes at a pinch to disburse some
money to the common Soldiers. But I leave this in the midst.

Another great quarrel is, but the most unjust, that they march not, that they
are not active. The Soldiers hands indeed go not so fast as other men's
tongues. Action is not so quick as thought, especially thoughts winged with
earnest desires, Desiderio etiam ^^leritas in mora est. Are there not
continual parties out, and that with no contemptible success, according to
which if men glorified God, and were thankful, they would not be so vain in
their imaginations: Let them look upon other Armies in foreign Nations; upon
the Kings Army, whom it concerns to be active, if they had opportunity. To
assault Reading, nay to gain it, would not countervaile the hazard and loss,
it is likely they would attempt Oxford, though against reason, if the
Parliament and City will undertake for their own security in the interim, and
make good the necessary damage of a winter siege. Oh how easy a thing is it to
give a hard censure, to fare well and lie warm, and to condemn poor
soldiers, to lie in winter-trenches at the mercy of wet and cold. Sure there
are many men that think it as easy a matter to win a Town, though fortified,
as to make a breach in the walls of a Christmas Pie. But as I undertook not an
absolute justification in the other complaints, so neither do I in this, but
doubt not but they may receive satisfaction from them whose experience makes
them able to say more then I can; but of late the complaint has bin
reciprocal: The soldiers would not act for want of pay, the people would not
pay for want of action. The best way is to mend both together.

In fine, let us be well assured that whosoever suffers his discontent against
the Army to grow up to revenge, means in the issue to strike himself. And
whereas it is said that the putting the Army into an expectation of constant
supply would make them unwilling ever to disband, how void of reason is this
exception? whereas in the hands of the Parliament and City are those nerves
and ligaments which hold the Army together, which they may shrink or cut as
they see cause. But from the necessity of an Army I pass to the conveniencie
if not necessity of an Association.

And how could I now wish that my pen could drop spirit and vigor into the
hearts of my plannet-stricken Countrymen. Or rather that he who forms the
spirit of man within him, and fashioneth the hearts of the children of men,
would give them so much of his own spirit, which is a Spirit of truth and
action* as to make them valiant for the truth once committed to them. How sad a
thing is it to see what a French tincture our English Nation has gotten, as if
there were a bridge made from Calis to Dover. What an apish disposition has
possessed our Gentry, what an asinine disposition our Commonalty, which if not
timely shaken of will make way for the worst of France to be ruled by horses in
stead of men, which is a thing I have long feared.

Hear, O people, Consider that you are considerable or might be, if good
counsel would be taken. Do not you see how you are courted by the King, what
care the Parliament take for your satisfaction? Sure you are not so
contemptible a thing as some would make you; your right is much, and your power
no less, if you would know the one and use the other. I am sensible how
offensive this discourse is like to be, but it never was my intention (had it
bin possible) to please all men. But let me not be mistaken, I am far from
the Monster of a Democracy, that which I call to the people for, is but a quick
and regular motion in their own sphere, to do that which the Parliament has
sometimes called upon them for, to contribute their best helps to two great
works, of mercy and justice; Mercy to the Kingdom in its preservation, Justice
to its Enemies in their destruction. Suppose they hit not upon the same means,
but, through the narrowness of their precept, which can scarcely be extended
to all circumstances and opportunities, be constrained to outrun a command,
their faithful prosecution of the end designed them, which is the safety and
preservation of the Kingdom, and in it their own, may justly excuse them, if
not commend them; As by the votes of acceptable service may appear.

And here I confess my self at a stand, I know not what remedy to prescribe
to this Lethargy, the things that one would have thought should have quickened
the people have stupefied them; If the dint of the sword, the noise of the
Canon directed and discharged against themselves, their laws and liberties,
their wives and children, cannot awaken them, I know not what will; unless it
be the thunder of some terrible judgment from heaven that will at once awake
them, and lay them down to a perpetual sleep. How strangely are men's eyes
dimmed, and hearts deaded; Not above a year since upon the noise of bringing up
an Army to put the Parliament in wardship, upon the attempt of an illegal
seizure upon some of their members, what a high and yet just tide were men
flowen to, Quantum mutatus ab illo -- Hectore -- We now see that done with open
face which was then studiously concealed, a mighty Guard actually raised,
brought up as near the Parliament as fear would suffer them? for
notwithstanding that short Covering of the Brainford business, to knowing men
it is undoubted, that the design was upon the Parliament and City, where if
God had not mercifully and miraculously prevented, after their Sabbaths days
plunder of London (their usual Sanctification) strange Acts might upon Monday
morning have been made at Westminster; when terror had seized upon the good,
and confidence, if not impudence, possessed the evil. We now see in stead of
those 6. at least 26 accused of treason for the same cause that they were, that
is, being forward and active for the preservation of the Kingdom from the
Kings Guard. It is the same season of the year, a more unquestionable cause,
where are your pikes and protestations? your courage and resolutions? Do you
conceive your danger more, your enemies more formidable, should not your valor
increase with your danger, if it were so, when the cause remains the same? But
look seriously about you, you will not want encouragement. Look West or North,
or South, to Sussex, Devonshire, to Lancashire and Yorkshire; but especially
look above you to heaven it self, you can want no arguments to stir you up in
this service; let no man be dismayed by the dream of impossibility. Do you say
that life is sweet? is not Religion? is not Liberty so likewise? they should be
as delightsome as they are wholesome: Summum creed ^efas animam praferr^ pud^ri
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas.


I am ashamed that any man that understands these lines should not so far
understand himself, as to count all things loss and dung, to gain the price
that is now in his hand, and let him be ashamed too, with a shame that puts on
to amendment.

We have long pretended a zeal against idolatry, while in the mean time we are
all become one idol. We have eyes and see not, etc. We have eyes and see not
an Army of papists, not only with permission allowed to use their own religion,
but with commission appointed (in event) to destroy ours; we have ears and
hear not the continual blasphemies against our God, the reproaches and slanders
against our Parliament; It cannot indeed be said we have mouths and speak not:
for they that do least commonly speak most. But I am sure I may say, feet have
we and march not, hands have we and handle not the sword and shield. We talk
of want of arms, its want of hearts; had we no Smith in England, as once in
Israel, if men had had their true English protestant spirits, and well timed
their attempts, their enemies had been meat to them, though many of them (as
they that viewed the carcasses at Kint^n say) rotten meat. But I am weary of
complaint, let me turn to advice. Besides those foggy mists of ignorance and
misinformation that have at once blinded men's eyes, and dulled their spirits,
the great disadvantage of this great body of the people which I now speak to,
from doing great things, has been the disunion of them, many twigs have been
broken which if bound up together would have made a rod for the severe
correction, if not destruction, of their enemies.

Let it therefore be considered, whether an Association well and warily laid
may not be a great advantage for the recollection of these loose and distracted
spirits, which united might be so serviceable. An Association I say well and
firmly laid; An Association not subject to Equivocation, an Association more
particular then the Protestation, which like the net in the Gospel brought up
fishes good and bad, and stones as well as fishes.

And here let the children of this generation (for I hope they shall never see
the next) the Bishops, be taken into example for the manner though not the
matter of the act. When they went to contrive an Oath they did it to the
purpose, a sifting, distinguishing oath that should have scarcely left an
honest minister in the Kingdom. Therefore I say let this Association be wisely
laid so as to give us to know our friends from our enemies, yet not so strictly
as to engage to things impossible or too many, but something to this purpose.
To the maintenance of our established Religion and law with all possible
improvement, to the maintenance of this army (raised under the conduct of the
truly noble and valiant Earl of Essex Captain General) by purse and person
against the opposite faction, and to bring delinquents so voted, by the (once
sacred) votes and consent of Parliament to condign punishments. But I am now
beyond my own line, I know there has bin pains taken in this business, and
the speculation of it has been more fully studied by others, then my desire of
practice will for the present allow me to do. This business as it must be well
laid, so warily and religiously entered into. There is a great deal of danger
in promissary oaths, I would have no man lose his soul to save a Kingdom,
which he that knows well the price of souls, having paid for so many, prefers
to a whole world. This Association especially in the Eastern and Southern
parts of the Kingdom that enjoy the benefit of the now raisd Army, in all
reason must be for a contribution to the maintenance of it. To agree for the
preservation of their own counties by their native power, had been sufficient
(it may be) before an opposite army raised; but it will be now found most
concerningly necessary to look at the present army raised in the defense of
the Kingdom as the best groundworke of safety, and I doubt not but they will
so approve themselves when the spring of action comes. There are a generation
of men too fruitful, who though the Arc and Israel lie in tents, yet they
must go in and eat and drink, and lie with their wives, of whom good use may
yet be made, let them pay for an indulgence for this their indulgency, these
are well-woulders to the Parliament and Kingdom, let the impediments of their
action, their wives and children, be content to purchase the presence of their
husbands and parents, with the want of those accomplishments which in these
times may be well spared, and by this means I doubt a sum too considerable
may be raised.

The benefit of such an Association would be doubtless great; It would
concenter and determine the loose and languishing affections of men and
propound them a particular mark of action. It would be a good second string in
case the Parliament should unhappily miscarry, whereas otherwise we should be
found as sheep scattered, a fit pray for the Wolves of these times. Much more
might be said to this purpose, but a little done, were better then a great deal
said. Let therefore thoughts and words put on action, the love of Christ
prevail as much in Protestants for a confederacy, as the zeal for Antichrist
has done in Papists for a Conspiracy. When Thieves and murderers say, Let us
all have one purse, let us lay wait for blood; does it not concern true men,
men of truth to say, Let us have one heart, let us go out (as it was said of
the children of Israel) as one man against them; Let us therefore lay aside our
particular interests, and embarque our selves in this common cause of Religion,
law and liberty, all the pains we otherwise take is but building without a
foundation. It is in vain for an honest man to think of prosperity or
security in this Nation, but in the success of this present business; Its
true there are great unavoidable difficulties propound themselves on every
side, but let us do our duty and wait on God, even the God of our salvation,
who may answer us by terrible things in his righteousness which we lookd not
for, God has put us to many a loss that we might have opportunity of seeking
and finding him. His way is in the sea, and his paths in the great waters, his
footsteps are not known. Yet he led and will still lead on his people toward a
land flowing with milk and honey, the sincere milk of truth, the sweet honey
of peace.

FINIS.
Whatsoever errors have escaped the Author or Printer, as the commission of
them speaks a man, so let the pardon show a good man. I meant Plain English,
its like he meant true.

Veniam pro laud. --

