The Complete FRENCH-MASTER* FOR LADIES and GENTLEMEN. BEING A New Method, to
Learn with ease and delight the French Tongue, as it is now spoken in the Court
of France.

In Three Parts.
I. A Short and Plain Grammar. II. A Vocabulary; Familiar Dialogues; The
Niceties of the French Tongue; And Twelve Discourses, 1. Upon Religion. 2.
Languages. 3. Philosophy. 4. Mathematics. 5. History. 6. Politics. 7.
Exercises. 8. Manners. 9. Travels. 10. Pleasures. 11. Love. 12. Friendship.
III. Four Collections, 1. Of Je^ts, Repartees, and Stories* 2. Choice Letters.
3. Of Proverbs. 4. Of New Songs.

Dedicated to HIS ROYAL* HIGHNESS The DUKE of GLOUCESTER.

By A. BOYER, Gent.

Gallis dedit ore rotundo Musa loqui.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Kings Arms next St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1694.

Books newly Printed for T. Salusbury at the Kings Arms next St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street.
THE Reformed Gentleman, or the Old English Moral^ rescued from the
Immoralities of the present Age; showing how inconsistent those pretended
Genteel Accomplishments of Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, and Sabbath-breaking,
are with the true Generosity of an Englishman. With an account of the
proceedings of the Government for the Reformation of Manners. By A. M. of the
Church of England, Bound in 8^^. price 1 ^. 6 d.

An Essay against Unequal Marri^g^^* in fou^ Chapt^^^* 1. The Introduction. 2.
Against O^d Persons. Mar^^ing with Young. 3. Against Persons Marr^ing without
Parents or Friends Consent. 4. Against Persons Marrying without their own
Consent. By S. Buffo^^, Gent. in 12. bound price 1 s.

Taxili^, or Love preferred before Duty; a Novel. By D. W. Gent. 12. bound,
price 1 s.

The History of the late great Re^olu^ion in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was accomplished, with a particular account of the
Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon, as likewise the settlement
of both the Kingdoms under their most serene Majestics King William and Queen
Mary, with a List of the Convention. 8vo. bound, price 5 ^.

Remarks on the Dream of the late Abdicated Queen of England, and upon that of
Madam the Duchess of Lavaleer, late Mistress to the French King, wherein is
plainly showed the late sucesses of King William in Ireland, as likewise his
future successes in France, with the miserable end of the French King,
translated out of French. 4^^. price, 6 d.

A Collection of the Famous Mr. George Wither's Wonderful Prophesies, relating
to the English Nation and Government, many of which not yet fulfilled. 4^^. 6 d.

Ecclesia R^viviseens, A Poem, or a short account of the Rise, Progress, and
Present State of the New Reformation of Manners. By a late Gentleman of the
Temple.

The English-Man's (...) and true (...) in a vigorous profecution of the War
against France* and serving King William and Queen Mary, and acknowledging
their Right. As also, the Case and State of the Nation laid Open with respect
to the Grievances* And a Detection of the Persons who endeavor to undermine
the Protestant Religion, and Present Government. Price ^ d.

An Historical and Geographical Description of France, showing its Government,
both in Church and State, Policy, Strength, Riches, and Revenues, both in its
Prosperity, and during this War: Power of the Parliaments, State of the
Nobility and Gentry (...) Increase of Popery; The Beginning, Progress, and
Downfall of the Reformation; the great Poverty and Misery of the People, by
the Persecution of the Profestants; the decay of Trade, and the present War;
the different Revolutions of the several Governments of that Kingdom in
general, and of each Province and Capital City in particular; the Description
of its Climate, Rivers, Lakes, Mountains, Seaports, and other Towns and
Places, with their distances from each other; very necessary for the right
understanding the present Affairs of that Kingdom. Humbly Dedicated to his
Majesty King William. By I. De Lacrose, a Native of that Kingdom.

(...) (...) A Law-Dictionary, interpreting such difficult and obscure words
and Terms as are found either in our Common or Statute, Ancient or Modern Laws,
with References to the several Statutes, Records, Registers, Law Books,
Charters, Ancient Deeds and Manuscripts wherein the Words are used, being the
very best Extant. The Second Edition, by Tho. Blunt of the Inner Temple, Esquire in
Folio bound, price 10 s.

Chymicus Rationalis, or the Fundamental Grounds of the Chemical Art,
rationally stated, and demonstrated by various Examples in Distillation,
Rectification and Exaltation of Wines, Spirits, Tinctures, Oils, Salts, Powers
and Oleosmus, in such a Method, as to retain the Speciphick Virtues of
Concretts in the greatest power and force, 8vo. bound* 2 s.

Arithmetical Rules Digested and Contracted, made plain and easy for the help
and benefit of the Memory, very necessary for all Gentlemen and Tradesmen, as
for Youth and Aprentices in Merchantile Affairs, 12. bound, price ^ s.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS WILLIAM Duke of Gloucester.
May it please Your Highness,
THIS Book having been composed within the extent of Your Family, I durst not
expose it abroad, before it had paid its Homage to Your HIGHNESS, and begg^d
the mighty Protection of Your Illustrious Name. And besides, the hopes that it
may one day, be of some use to Your HIGHNESS, have been still a prevailing
Consideration with me, to lay it at Your Princely Feet. The French Tongue has
acquired of late so universal an Esteem, as to be reckoned one of the most
necessary Qualifications for all Well-bred Persons; but is so, in a more
peculiar manner, for all Kings and Princes in Europe: For being linked
together, either in Consanguinity or Interests, it is no less requisite for
them to agree upon a general Language, than it is for common Relations and
Friends to understand one another.

Some perhaps, will think it too soon to Dedicate a Book to Your HIGHNESS: But
besides that my undertaking is not altogether without precedent, I may claim to
be dispensed with Rules, in writing to a Prince, who by his early Virtues, is
Himself so extraordinary. In effect, your HIGHNESS was no sooner Born, but
despising the common Toys of Children, You have showed an eager desire of
entertaining Your blooming Wit, with what the mo^^ Skilful Artists have been
whole Year^ to invent; which Noble Desire of Knowledge, joined with the Natural
Superiority, that even through the Vail of Your Tender Age, appears in all Your
Words and Actions, cannot but create in us wonder and amazement, and raise our
Hopes to the highest and most glorious Expectations.

These, Sir, are the promising signs that make Your Highness the dearest
Comfort and Delight of Your ROYAL PARENTS, and which unite the Hearts and
Wishes of all these Nations, who do already anticipate, by longing Desires, the
future Glory they shall derive from Your Riper Accomplishments.

That it may prove so, is the most hearty and ^ervent Wish of him, who has no
other Ambition, no other prospect of Honor, than to be,

Your Highness's Most Humble, most Obedient, and most Devoted Servant. ABEL
BOYER.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
OF all Arts in the World, none is so Ancient, so Useful, and so Admirable, as
that of Speaking and Writing well; and it deserves to be esteemed so much the
more, that it is peculiar to Men, and is the only Knot of Society and
Conversation.

And indeed the importance of this Art, has seemed so great to Men of Knowledge
in all Ages, that many Eminent Wits and Philosophers, and even Princes, Kings,
and Emperors, have not thought it below their Dignity, not only to Learn its
Precepts, but to make Remarks and publish Treatises upon it; To which, may be
added, that no Science or Liberal Art in the Commonwealth of Learning, has
produced so many Books as this, in all polite Countries.

Since the French-Tongue is arrived to that pitch of Reputation, as to become
the General Language of all Courts, and one of the chiefest Qualifications of
accomplished Persons in Europe, there is scarce any thing to be seen every
where, but French-Grammars.

It is beyond my purpose to say any thing of those that have been Printed in
other Countries: But, I must confess, that among the great number of those we
have had in England, I find none but what are imperfect, and which among many
good things have considerable defects, either in the Subject Matter, or in the
order and disposition of it.

The small Credit which many of th^se Grammars have gotten in the World, saves
me the trouble of enumerating their defects; and confines me to speak of that,
which Fifteen Editions have proclaimed the best. And indeed, if any
Understanding Reader does but examine it without partiality, he will soon be
convinced, that it is but a confused heap of fragments, and scraps of other
Grammars shuffled and jumbled together without Method: There you will see most
Rules of the Latin Tongue promiscuously used for the French, as if the Picture
of a Young Aerie Daughter, was like to be well drawn, by that of an Antiquated
Mother; and if every Language had not a particular Air and Character that
distinguish it from all others. There you will see many things essential to
Grammar, either superficially hinted, or wholly omitted, when at the same time,
you will be tired by the tedious particulars of many insignificant Niceties.

Mr. M -- it seems, had been sensible of the faults of former Grammarians, and
had given us the hopes of redressing them; but his cure has proved worse than
the Disease, and forgetting the fair promises of his Preface, when he comes to
the Execution, he falls into such prolixity of Precepts, Rules, and Exceptions,
as would create in the most patient and laborious Reader, a disgust for the
very Name of Grammar.

But it is time for me to give an Account of this Book, to let the Reader judge,
whether the performance answers to the Title, and whether it be free from those
faults I reprehend in others.

I call it, The Complete French-Master, because I make bold to say, that it
comprehends in a manner all that is necessary for the attaining of the
French-Tongue; and that too, with such a pleasant and delightful variety, as
renders it the most proper that ever was made in this nature, for Ladies and
Gentlemen.

It is divided in three Parts, of which, the first is a short and plain
Grammar, which contains nothing but what is essential, and that too so
Naturally (I had almost said so Geometrically) disposed, that one may see, as
it were, at a view, the true situation and coherency of the Parts for the
composition of the Whole; the Declensions of Nouns, and the Conjugation of
Verbs Regular and Irregular, the two most intricate things in other Grammars,
though the most important, are made so plain and so easy in this, that I presume
to say, that nothing can be added to it.

The Second Part contains, first, a large Vocabulary, more Copious and Regular
than any extant, and which besides that, excels above the others by two
additional Collections, one of Nouns Adjective, the other of Verbs. 2dly, A
good store of Familiar Dialogues upon all Occasions, and for all manner of
Persons. 3dly, A Collection of most of those Phrases, in which the nicety of
the French Tongue consists; and Finally, twelve Discourses by way of
Conversation, both upon serious and delightful Matters; as, Religion, Studies,
Exercises, Manners, Travels, Pleasures, Love and Friendship.

The Third Part is that, which may be termed the Recreative, for besides a
Collection of the best Jests and Repartees of several Eminent Persons, both
Modern and Ancient, and some pleasant Stories, it contains a Second, of choice
Letters upon Gallantry and other Subjects, a Third, of the properest Proverbs;
and lastly, a Fourth, of French Songs, upon the finest Tunes, either French or
English.

Now in the Spelling and Expressions, my chief business has been, to follow
those Authors who are now in the highest Reputation in the Court of France, and
as for the Dialogues, Jests, Letters, etc. I have endeavored to set them in
that free easy Style, as may suit best with those, whom chiefly I design to
please.

ERRATA.
In the Grammar.
Page 6. Line 35. Read to tie, p. 48. l. ult. r. recoivent, p. 58. l 9 r. But
most, p. 59. l. 10. r. Faloit, p. 69. l. 1. r. Cuei^^ir p. 103. l. 24. r.
Guerre.

In the Familiar Dialogues.
P. 224. l. 6. r. lits, p. 232. l. 9. r. que, p. 238. l. 7. r. n'ont.

In the 12. Discourses.
P. 3. l. 21. r. f^ra, p. 26. l. 13. r* leave, ^. 24. r. I dare Call, p. 27. l.
^1. r. given them.

In the Third Part.
P. 71. l. 21. r. est-ce, P. 75. r. La vraye, p. 77. l. 16. r. Po^esie.

The CONTENTS.
In the First part, The Grammar.
THE Introduction, page 1.
CHAP. I.
The definition and division of Grammar. 2
CHAP. II.
Of the Pronunciation of Letters. Art. 1. Of Vowels. 4 Art. 2. Of Dipthongs and
Tripthongs. 6 Art. 3. Of the Pronunciation of Consonants. 7 Art. 4. Of Mute
Letters. 7
CHAP. III.
Of the Parts of Speech. Art. 1. Of Articles. 8 Art. 2. Of the Noun. 9 Art. 3.
Of the Pronoun. 16 Art. 4. Of the Verb. 25 Art. 5. Of Participles. 102 Art. 6.
Of Adverbs. 105 Art. 7. Of Conjunctions. 113 Art. 8. Of Prepositions. 115 Art.
9. Of Interjections. 117
CHAP. IV.
Of the Syntax or Construction of words. 118
CHAP. V.
Of distinctions used in Writing. 123 Art. 1. Of Accents, ibid. Art. 2. Of
Stops and Points. 125
In the Second Part. The Vocabulary.
Of the World in general. Of Time. The Days of the Week. The Months of the
Year. The Seasons of the year. The Holy Days. Of Mankind. The Parts of Man's
Body. The blemishes of the Body. Of Diseases. Of the Soul. Of Clothes, and
first of Man's Clothes. Women's Clothes. Things used for clothing. Of Eating
The Meat. The Drink. Degrees of Kindred. The Clergy. Temporal Dignities.
Officers of Justice. Of a Town, or, City. The Inhahitants. Of a House.
Houshold-St^ff. Of Kitching-Tackling. Of Servants. Of the Country. Of a Garden.
Of Trees and Fruits. Of the Journey. Of the War and Warlike Officers. Of Arms.
Of Nations. Of Beasts. Of Birds. Of Fishes. Of Metals. Of Stones. Of Gums. Of
Colors. Of Plays and Pastimes. Of Exercises. Of Coins. Of Numbers. Nouns
Adjectives. A Collection of Verbs. The Familiar Dialogues. A Collection of the
Niceties of the French Tongue. 1. To pray or desire. 2. To complement and give
thanks. 3. To affirm, to consent, to deny and to refuse. 4. To consult, or,
consider. 5. To wish one well or ill. 6. To scold, to threaten, and to abuse.
7. To laugh at and call Names. 8. To show ones grief. 9. To ask a question. 10.
To forbid. 11. To express joy and sadness.

Twelve Discourses by way of Conversation.
1. Of Religion. 2. Of Languages. 3. Of Philosophy. 4. Of Mathematics. 5. Of
History. 6. Of Politics. 7. Of Exercises. 8. Of Politeness and Civility. 9. Of
Travels. 10. Of Pleasures and Diversions. 11. Of Love. 12. Of Friendship.
In the Third Part.
A Collection of Jests, Repartees and Stories. A Collection of Letters upon
several Subjects. A Collection of Proverbs. A Collection of Songs.
A Short and Plain French-GRAMMAR, FOR Ladies and Young Gentlemen that do not
yet understand Latin.
The Introduction.
NO question, but the ^est and surest way for one to Learn French, is to join
Rules to Practice: For in this, as in all other Arts, without a good
Foundation, the Building will soon decay and fall of it self. But because most
People, especially Ladies and Young Persons, who are unacquainted with Latin,
are cloyed and puzzled, by the long intricate Rules which are commonly set down
in Grammars; I shall endeavor to give in this, a plain and brief Account of
all those difficulties that use to discourage them from Learning a Language so
sweet, so fine, and so fashionable, that it is accounted a piece of
Ill-Breeding to be ignorant of it.

CHAP. I.
THE Grammar in general, is the Art of Speaking and Writing well a Language,
and consequently, the French-Grammar Teaches one how to Speak and Write well in
French.

The first Principles of Grammar are Letters, which are twenty two in French,
all which together, are called Alphabet or Abece, and are thus written.

A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, U, or V, X, Y, Z.

Or thus.

a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, i, l, m, n, o, p, q, r, s, t, u, or v, x, y, z.

And which in general may be thus pronounced.

Aw, Be, Ce, De, Ea, Of, Ge, Aush, Ee, Ell, Em, En, O, Pe, Qu, Er, Es, Te, U,
Ex, Ee Greac, Zed.

The Letters of the first row are called Capitals, and those of the second
Common.

Capitals are used in the beginning of a Sentence and of a Verse, of Proper
Names, of Names of Office and Title, and of an^ thing of Note.

Letters are divided into Vowels and Consonants.

The Vowels are five, A, E, I or Y, O, V, and are so called, because they form
a voice or sound by themselves.

The rest of the Letters are called Consonants, because they cannot make a
sound, or be pronounced, without the help of a Vowel either before or after,
as, be, ^e, em, en, etc.

Now the joining and mingling of Vowels and Consonants together, make
Syllables, Syllables make Words, Words make Phrases or Sentences, which last
make up a Language.

A Language is the way of expressing ones Thoughts, which may be done, either
by word of Mouth or in Writing.

Therefore there are two chief things required to that purpose, viz. True
Pronunciation and Spelling; the former is attainable in some measure by Rules,
but the other, only by frequent and diligent Reading.

* I shall in the next Chapter, give you some few Rules about the French
Pronunciation; tho at the same time I must needs tell you, that it is
impossible to arrive to any perfection in that, without the help of an able
Master, and the Conversation of those that Speak good French.

CHAP. II.
Of the Pronunciation of Letters.
ARTICLE I.
Of Vowels.
1. A.
A In French, sounds like A in English, in these words, war, Tall, as, l' Ame
the Soul, Attaquer to Attack.

Exception, a before an i marked with two tittles, or before an y, sounds like
the English a in, Make, as, Pa^s Country, Abbayer to Bark.

2. E.
The Vowel e has four several sounds, all comprehended in this word,

E 1.
mpe 2.
che 3.
e, 4.
busy; or in this, e 1.
nfe 2.
rme 1.
e, 1.
shut in.

I. The first e, before m and n, sounds like an a.

Exceptions.
1. In some words that come from other Languages, e sounds like a in the
English words, Face, Make, as, Hymen, Amen, Jerusalem.

2. En, coming after i or y, sounds like (...), in these English words, Then,
Den, as Chien Dog, Bien well, Moye^ means*

3. In the third Plural Person of the Present Tense of the Indicative Mood,
where n is to be left out, e sounds like ea in English, as ils parlen^ they
speak, ils mange^t they eat.

II. The second e is called open, because to pronounce it, one ought to open
the Mouth wider, than to pronounce the others; it sounds like the English a, in
the words, Face, Grace.

III. The third e is called Masculine, because it is pronounced clearly and
strongly; it sounds like ea in these English words, Beaft, Dream, and is
commonly marked with an Accent.

IV. The fourth e is called Feminine, because it is but weakly pronounced, as
in the English words, Love, Grove.

3. I and Y.
I is generally pronounced like the English ee in, Seen, or like the short
English i in, Visible; as, Verite Truth, Fidelite Faithfulness.

I before m or n, sounds in French like the long English i in Time, Fine, as
Simple Simple, Vin Wine.

* There is in French like in English, an i Consonant, thus written j, which
sounds much like a g, as, Iuger to Judge.

Y a Greek Vowel, has two sounds in French, the one simple like an i Vowel, as
la Syntaxe the Syntax; and the other double, as in the English words, Young,
Your, as Begayer to stutter, Envoyer to send.

4. O.
O sounds in French as in these English words, Ore, Over, as Paroles words,
Monopole Monopoly.

But o before m and n, sounds like oo in these words, Soon, Moon, as Homme Man,
Garcon Boy.

5. V.
V sounds like the English u, in this word Surprise, in French Surprise.

* There is both in English and French an u Consonant, thus written v, as in
Venerable, Visible, in French Ven^rable, Visible.

ART. II.
Of Dipthongs and Tripthongs.
WHen two Vowels join together in one sound* they are called a Dipthong, and if
three, a Tripthong.

* According to that Rule, there are few crew Dipthongs and Tripthongs in
French; for though there be a great many words, where two or three Vowels meet
together, yet they often amount to no more than a single Vowel, the rest being
mute, or not heard, so in the word Iean, e is smothered up, in Paon, o, and in
Saoul, a, etc.

The Dipthongs.
The Dipthongs may be reduced to the seven following.

1. Ai or Ay, sounds like Ai in these English words, Raig^, Fair, as Fair to
do, Plaire to please, Ie Feray I shall do.

When Ai comes before m or n, there a is little or nothing heard, and m and n
have a liquid so^nd, as Faim Hunger, Pain Bread.

When Ai goes before l or ll, the Vowel i is little heard, but then l has a
liquid sound, as in this English word, Collier, as Travail work, labor,
Travailler to work.

2. Au is pronounced like o, as Chaud warm, Fault Fault.

3. Ei sounds like ai, as Reine Queen.

4. Eu keeps the sound of both Vowels, as Ieu Play, Game, Feu Fire.

5. Ie is a Dipthong in some words, as Ciel Heaven, Miel Honey, Fief Manor,
Mien Mine, Entier Whole.

6. Oi and Oy, sound sometimes like Oai, as in Foin Hay, Foy Faith, Loy Law;
but it is usually pronounced like Ai, as, Connoitre to know, Anglois English.

7. Ou sounds like the English oo, as Poudre Powder, Dust, un Pou a Louse.

* Note, that two Vowels do often meet together without making a Dipthong,
being to be pronounced separately; and that always when one of them is marked
with two tittles or an Accent, as lier to lie, supplier to bese^ch, Laon a Name
of a Town, Pais Country, Reussir to succeed, Reiterer to Reiterate, Piete
Piety, Heroique Heroic.

The Trip^^ongs.
1. Eau, is pronounced like a single O, as Peau Skin, Beau Handsome, Chap^^u Hat.

2. Ieu, has the sound of the three Vowels, as Dieu God, Monsieur Sir.

3. Oient, is pronounced as atc in these English words, Hate, Date, as, ils
aimoient they loved, il^ disoient they said.

ART. III.
Of the Pronunciation of Consonants.
COnsonants in French are generally pro^ounc^d as in English, and if there be
any difference, it is so nice* that the best way is to learn it by a good and
understanding Master.

ART. IV.
Of Mute Letters.
1. EFeminine, is always smothered up, if the next Word begins by a Vowel, as,
Vne belle ame, read, Vne bell' ame. Vne (...) read, Vn' arm invincib^e.

2. The fi^^l Vowel of these particles, le, la. de, j^, me, te, se, n^, que, is
drowned when joined to a word that begins by a Vowel ^ as, L'Emperour the
Emperor. L'Ombre the Shadow. Parler d'amour to speak of Love. Il M'aime, He
loves me.

3. I in the word, Si, is drowned if it be joined to these two words, il, ils;
as, s^il s'ils.

4. Most Consonants ending a word, especially, d, g, p, q, s, ^, x, z* are not
pronounced when the word following begins by a Consonant.

5. R is little or not at all heard in the Infinitive Moods of Verb, no more
than in the Nouns ending in ier, as, Parler to speak, Manger to eat, Premier
first, Dernier last.

6. None of these five Consonants, d, f, g, p, t, is pronounced when it ends
the word with an s; as, mes grands Amiss, my great Friends. Les Boeufs and les
Vaches, the Oxen and the Cows, etc.

7. H is not properly a Letter, but only a mark of Aspiration, as in Hate
haste, Honte shame, Heroes Hero, etc. but it is often Mute, as in Habile able,
Homme Man, Souhait wish, etc.

CHAP. III.
WE have hinted before, that from the joining and mingling of Vowels and
Consonants together, arise Syllables; Syllables make Words* Words make
Sentences; and Sentences make up the whole Language or Speech.

A Syllable is pronounced in one time, and consists sometimes of one Letter,
sometimes of more; as, A-me Soul, Enten-de-ment Un-der-stand-ing.

A Word consists of one or more Syllables; as, Dieu God, Par-ler to speak,
De-man-der to ask.

A Sentence or Phrase is made up of several Words that make a Sense together;
as, Les Dames Angl^ises s^nt les plus belles and l^s plus ch^^ma^tes Femmes du
Monde. English Ladies are the hand^omest and the most charming Women in the
World.

There is in French Nine sorts of Words, commonly called the Parts of Speech,
viz. The Ar^icle, the Noun, the Pronoun, the Verb, the Par^^cipl^, the Adverb,
the Conjunction, the Preposition, and the Interjection.

ART. I.
Of the Articles.
ARticles are Words consisting of one or two Syllables, which are commonly put
before Nouns and Pronouns to show their Gender, Number, and Declensio^. There
are Eleven Articles in French, viz.

Masc. Singul.
1. Le, The. 2. Da, Of, or, from* 3. Au* To, or, to the. 10. D^, Of, or, from.
11. A, To.
Femin Singul.
4. La, The* 5. De^ ^, Of the, or from. 6. Al., To the, or to.
Common. Plur.
7. Les, The. 8. Des, Of, or, from. 9. Aux, To the, or, to.
^To which may be added, Un, Vne, A, An, One. Des, Some.

ART. II.
Of the Noun.
A Noun is a word that serves to name a thing; as, Dieu God, Le Monde the
World, Bon good, Grand great.

A Noun is either Substantive or Adjective.

1. A Noun Substantive signifies a thing subsisting of it self, and to whose
signific^tion nothing needs to be added; as, Maison House, Homme Man, Fe^me
Woman.

A Noun Substantive is divided into Proper and Common; a Proper Noun is the
particular Name of any single thing; as, Iean John, Marie Mary, Londres London.
But a Common Noun, signifies all things of the same kind; as, Un Homme a Man,
Vne Ville a Town or City.

2. A Noun Adjective is that which expresses the manner and the quality of a
Noun Substantive; as, Beau Handsome, Grand great, Rouge red.

There are four things called Accidents to be considered in Nouns, viz.

1. The Gender. 2. The Number. 3. The Declension. 4. The Comparison.
. 1. Of Gender.
THE Gender is properly that which shows the difference of Sexes.

Genders are threefold in French, viz.

1. Masculine, marked by Le; as, Le Roy the King, Le Soulie^ the Shooc. 2.
Feminine, marked by La; as, La Reine the Queen, La Iupe the Petticoat. 3.
Common, marked by Le or La; as, Le Manche the Handle, La Manche the Sleeve, Le
or La Ieune the young.
* Though the proper use of Genders be only to distinguish the Male from the
Female, yet the French, like the Latins, observe that distinction even in
inanimated things, amongst which there is neither he nor she, so that all Nouns
in French are o^ one of the forementioned Genders.

Now to find out what Gender a Noun is of, I shall not trouble you with any
Rules, for the best way is to learn it by practice. I would only have you
observe, That Nouns Adjectives, being to express the quality of the
Substantives, they ought to follow their Gender, and be sometimes of the
Masculine, and sometimes of the Feminine, to which purpose the two following
Rules will be of great use.

1. Adjectives ending in E Feminine, are for both Genders, or Common: as, Ieune
young, Aimable lovely.

2. Adjectives of the Masculine Gender ending by these Vowels e, i, u, or by a
Consonant, do general^y form the Feminine Gender, by adding an E Feminine; as*
Grand, Grande Great. Infini, Infinie Infinite. Eternel, Eternelle Eternal.
Amer, Amere Bitter. Assure Assuree, Assured. Resolu, Resolve Resolute. F^ip^n,
Friponne Roguish. Brillant, Brillante Glittering.


1. The Adjectives Masculine ending in F, make their Feminine by changing F
into Ve; as, Neuf, Neuve New. Bre^, Breve Short. Pensif, Pensive Pensive.

2. The following Adjectives form the Feminine Gender irregularly.

Bell, or Beau, Belle handsome. Crud, Crew Raw. Public, Public Public.
Absous, Absoute Absolved. Blanc, Blanch White. Viel, or Vieu^, Vielle Old.
Nud, Nue Naked. Fou, Folle Mad, Fool. Sec, S^che Dry.
Certain Nouns, though Substantive by nature, become sometimes Adjective; as,
Flateur, Flateuse Fla^terer. I^itateur, Imitatri^e Imitatour. Puceau, Pucelle
Maid. Devin, Devineresse Conjurer. Menteur, Menteuse L^ar. Tygre, Tygresse
Tiger, Cruel. Iumeau, Iumelle Twin. Borgne, Borgnesse blind of one Eye.


2. Of Number.
THE Number is an Accident of Nouns that shows the difference between one and
several things; and so it is either Singular* or Plural.

The Singular speaks of one single thing, as, le Iour the Day, l^ Maison the
House.

The Plural speaks of more than one, as les Iours the Days, les M^is^^s the
Houses.

The Plural Number is formed in French as in English, by adding an s to the
Singular, as you see in the foregoing Examples.

1. But Singular Nouns, ending in s, x, or z, are still the same in the Plural;
as, le Bras the Arm, les Bras the Arms. Vne Noix a Walnut, Des Noix Walnuts. Le
Nez the Nose, les Nez the Noses.

2. Most Singular Nouns in All or Ail, make their Plural in Aux; as, Mal Evil,
M^ux; Travail Labor, Travaux. But these un Bal a Ball, Naval Naval, and some
others, follow the general Rule.

3. Of the Declension.
THE Declension of Nouns is the manner of turning and changing them according
to their several ways of Signification, both in the Singular and the Plural,
which is performed in French as in English, by the help of Articles.

Declension of proper Names.
I. PRoper Names of Men, Women, Cities and Villages, are generally declined in
the following manner; where it is to be observed, that if those Nouns be of the
Singular Number, they have no Plural; and if of the Plural, they have no
Singular.

Examples. Singular. Singular. Jaques, James. Marie, Mary. De Jaques, Of or
from James. De Marie, Of or from Mary. A Jaques, To James. A Marie. To Mary.
Singular. Singular. Londres, London. Paris, Paris. De Londres, Of or from
London. De Paris, Of or from Paris. A Londres, To London. A Paris. To Paris.

II. Proper Names of Kingdoms, Provinces, Seas, Rivers, and Mountains, are
generally thus declined.

Examples. Singular. Singular. La France, France. Le Danemarc, Denmark. De la
France, Of or from France. Du Danemarc, Of or from Denmark. A la France. To
France. Au Danemarc, To Denmark. Singular. Singular. La Manche, The Channel. La
Thamise, The Thames. De la Manche, Of or from the Channel. De la Thamise. Of or
from the Thames. A la Manche, To the Channel. A la Thamise, To the Thames.

Declension of common Nouns.
Nouns of the Masculine Gender, beginning by a Consonant, are thus declined.

Singular. Plural. Le Roy, The King. Les Rois, The Kings. Du Roy, Of or from
the King. Des Rois, Of or from the Kings. Au Roy, To the King. Aux Rois, To the
Kings. Un Roy, A King. Des Rois, Kings.

Nouns of the Masculine Gender, beginning with a Vowel, or an h mute, are thus
declined.

Singular. Plural. L'Empereur, The Emperor. Les Empereurs, The Emperors. De
l'Empereur, Of or from the Emperor. Des Empereurs, Of or from the Emperors. A
l'Empereur, To the Emperor. Aux Empereurs, To the Emperors. Un Empereur, An
Emperor. Des Empereurs, Emperors. Singular. Plural. L'Homme, The Man. Les
Hommes, The Men. De l'Homme, Of or form the Man. Des Hommes, Of or from the
Men. A l'Homme, To the Man. Aux Hommes, To the Men. Un Homme, A Man. Des
Hommes, Men.

Nouns of the Feminine Gender, beginning with a Consonant, are thus declined.

Singular. Plural. La Reine, The Queen. Les Reins, The Queens. De la Reine, Of
or from the Queen. Des Reins, Of or from the Queens. A la Reine, To the Queen.
Aux Reins, To the Queens. Une Reine, A Queen. Des Reins. Queens.

Nouns of the Feminine Gender, beginning with a Vowel, or an h mute, are thus
declined.

Singular. Plural. L'Eglise, The Church. Les Eglises, The Churches. De
l'Eglise, Of or from the Church. Des Eglises, Of or from the Churches. A
l'Eglise, To the Church. Aux Eglises, To the Churches. Une Eglise, A Church.
Des Eglises, Churches. Singular. Plural. L'Histoire, The History. Les
Histoires, The Histories. De l'Histoire, Of or from the History. Des Histoires,
Of or from the Histories. A l'Histoire. To the History. Aux Histoires, To the
Histories. Une Histoire, An History. Des Histoires, Histories.

* Note, that common Nouns expressing a thing, that, being divided, the parts
still retain the Name and Signification of the whole, such as, Le Pain, the
Bread. La Viande, the Meat. Le Vin, the Wine. L'Eau, the Water, etc. are only
declined in the Singular, in this manner.

Singular. Sing. Masculine. Feminine. Le Pain, The Bread. La Viande, The Meat.
Du Pain, Of or from the Bread. De la Viande, Of or from the Meat. Au Pain, To
the Bread. A la Viande, To the Meat. Du Pain, Some Bread. De la Viande, Some
Meat. Singular. Sing. Masculine. Feminine. L'Or, The Gold. L'lvoire, The Ivory.
De l'Or, Of or from the Gold. De l'Ivoire, Of or from the Ivory. A l'Or, To the
Gold. A l'Ivoire, To the Ivory. De l'Or, Some Gold. De l'Ivoire, Some Ivory.

. 4. Of the Comparison of Adjectives.
BEsides the three forementioned Accidents of Nouns, which are common both to
Substantives and Adjectives, there is a fourth peculiar to these, called
Comparison.

The Comparison of Nouns, is the way of increasing or raising their
Signification by certain Degrees, which are three, viz.

1. The Positive. 2. The Comparative. 3. The Superlative.
1. The Positive lays down the natural Signification; as, Grand, Grande, Great.


2. The Comparative raises it to a higher degree, by comparing it to the
Positive, which is performed in French by the Adverb, Plus more; as, Plus
Grand, Plus Grande, Greater.


3. The Superlative raises the Signification as high as possible, which is
performed by adding the Articles Le, or La, to the Comparative; as, Le plus
Grand, La plus Grande, The Greatest.


. Except these which are irregular.

M.Bon, Meilleur, Le Meilleur, F.Bonne, Meilleure, La Meilleure, Good. Better.
The Best. M. Mechant, F. Mechante, Pire, Le Pire, ou Plus Mechant, La Pire, M.
Mauvais, Le Plus Mechant, F. Mauvaise, La plus Mechante, ill. or, bad. worse,
etc. the worst, etc. Moindre, Le Moindre, M. Petit, or, La Moindre, or F.
Petite, Plus Petite, Le Plus Petit, La Plus petite, little. lesser. the least,
etc.

* Before we leave Nouns, you must observe that the Adjective in English goes
always before the Substantive; as* a pretty Man, a great House, a new Muff, an
old Building, etc. but in French the Adjective goes sometimes before the
Substantive, sometimes after; as, Vne grande Mais^n, un joli homme, un Manchon
neuf.

ART. III.
Of Pronouns.
PRonouns are so called, because they are often used instead of Nouns, to avoid
the too frequent Repetition of them.

There are ^ix sorts of Pronouns, viz.

1. Personal. 2. Demonstrative. 3. Possessive. 4. Interrogative. 5. Relative.
6. Indefinite.
Pronouns have four Accidents or Circumstances to attend them, viz. The Gender,
the Number, the Declension, (which three are the same as in the Noun,) and the
Person.

There are three Persons, both in the Singular and Plural.

The first is that which speaks; as, Ie vous aim, I love you, Nous vous
admirans, we admire you.

The second is that which one speaks to; as* Tu es un petit badin, Thou are a
little wag-(...). Vous e^ez belles comme des anges, You are handsome as Angels.

The third, is that which is spoken of; as, il est bien fai^, He is handsome,
Elle est volage, she is fickle, ils ont de l'honneur, ^hey are Men of Honor,
else sont laides a fair peur, they are as ugly as Scare-Crows.

. 1. Of Pronouns Personal.
Pronouns Personal are five, viz Ie, Tu, Il, Elle, Soi, which are Declined in
the following manner.

Je, I. Singular. Plural. Je or Moy, I. Nous, We or us. De Moy, Of or from me.
De nous, Of or from us. A Moy, To me. A nous, To us. Me, me. Tu, Thou.
Singular. Plural. Tu or Toy, Thou. Vous, You or Ye. De Toy, Of or from thee. De
vous, Of or from you. A Toy, To thee. A vous, To you. Te, Thee. Il, Elle, He,
She. Singular. Plural. Il, He. Ils, They. De lui, Of or from him. D'Eux, Of or
from them. A lui, To him. A Eux, To them. Le or lui, Him. Les or Eux, or Leur,
Them. Singular. Plural. Elle, She. Else, They. D'Elle, Of or from her.
D'Elles, Of or from them. A Elle, To her. A Else, To them. La or luy, Her.
Les, or Else, or Leur, Them. Soi, Ones self. Singular and Plural. Soi or Se,
Ones self, himself, her self. De Soi, Of or from ones self, himself, her self.
A Soi, To ones self, himself, her self.

Note, That their Compounds are Declined as the simple; as, Moy-meme, My-self.
Nous-memes, Our-selves. Toy-meme, Thy-self. Vous-memes, Your-selves. Lui-meme,
Him-self. Eux-memes, Themselves. Elle-meme, Her-self. Elles-memes, Themselves.
Soi-meme, Ones-self.

2. Of Pronouns Demonstrative.
A Pronoun Demonstrative serves to show a Person or a Thing.

There are but four such Pronouns in French, viz. Ce, Celui, Cecy, and Cela; of
which, the two first are used to show both persons and Things, the two others
for Things only.

Ce, Cette, This. Singular. Plural. Masculin. Feminine. Common. Ce, ou Cet,
Cette, This, it. Ces, These. De ce, ou De Cet, De cette, Of or from this. De
ces, Of or from these. A ce, ou A Cet, A cette, To this. A Ces, To these.

* Cet is used instead of Ce, before Nouns beginning with a Vowel or an h mute.

Celui, Celle, He, She. Singular. Plural. Masc. Fem. Masc. Fem. Celui, Celle,
He, She. Ceux, Celles, Those. De celui, De celle, Of or from him, her. De ceux,
De celles, Of or from those. A celui, A celle. To him or her. A ceux, A celles,
To those.

* After this manner is Declined its Compound, Celui-ci, Celle-ci, This, and
Celui-la, Celle-la, That.

Ceci, This. Cela, That. Singular. Singular. Ceci, This. Cela, That. De ceci,
Of or from this. De cela, Of or from that. A ceci, To this. A cela, To that.

3. Of Pronouns Possessive.
PRonouns possessive are those that signify the possession o^ app^rtenance of
any thing.

There are Twenty one Pronouns Possessive in French, viz.

Masc. Mon, ton, son. My, Thy His or Hers. Fem. Ma, ta, sa. My, Thy, His or
Hers. Masc. Le mien, le tien, le sien. Mine, Thine, His or Hers. Fem. La
mienne, la tienne, la sienne. Mine, Thine, His or Hers. Com. Notre, votre,
leur. Our, Your, Their. Masc. Le notre, le votre, le leur. Our, Your, Their.
Fem. La nootre, la v^tre, la leur. Our, Your, Their. Mon, Ma, My. Singular.
Plural. Mas. Fem. Commun. Mon, Ma, My. Mes, My De Mon, De ma, Of or from my. De
mes, Of or from my A Mon, A ma, To my. A mes, To m^

* And so are declined, Ton, ta, tes, Thy; son* sa, ses, His or Hers.

Le Mien, la Mienne, Mine. Singular. Plural. Masc. Fem. Le Mien, la mienne,
mine. Les miens, Les miennes, mine. Du mien, de la mienne, Of mine. Des miens,
Des miennes, Of mine. Au mien, A la mienne, To mine. Aux miens, Aux miennes, To
mine.

* In this manner are Declined, Le tien, La tienne, Thine; Le sien, La sienne,
His or H^rs.

Notre, Ours. Singular. Plural. Notre, Our. Nos, Our. De notre, Of or from our.
De nos, Of or from our. A notre, To our. A nos, To our.

* And so are Declined, Votre, Vos, Your; Leur, Leurs, Their.

Le Notre, la Notre, Our. Singular. Plural. Masc. Fem. Common. Le notre, La
notre, Our. Les notres, Our. Du notre, De la notre, Of or from our. Des notres,
Of or from our. Au notre, A la notre, To our. Aux notres, To our.

* Decline in that manner, Le votre, La votre, Your; Le leur, La leur, Their.

4. Of Pronouns Interrogative.
PRonouns interrogative are used to ask any question, and are but three in
French, viz.

Qui? Who? Quel? Which? Quoy? What? Qui, Who, whom. Quoi, What. De qui, Of or
from whom. De quoi, Of or from what. A qui, To whom. A quoi, To what. Quel?
Quelle? Which? What? Singular. Plural. Masc. Fem. Masc. Fem. Quel, Quelle,
What, which. Quels, Quelles, Which. De quel, De quelle, Of or from which. De
quels, De quelles, Of or from which. A quel, A quelle, To which. A quels, A
quelles, To which.

5. Of Pronouns Relative.
RElative Pronouns are those that show the relation that a N^un has with what
follows it.

All Pronouns in French have sometimes a Relative Signification; but the
chiefest are, Qui, who, Quoi, what, Lequel, which, D^nt, of whom, or of which;
and these three particl^s, (...), y, en, which have a various signification.

Qui, Who. Quoi, What. De qui. or Don't, Of or from whom. De quoi, or Don't, Of
or from what. A qui, To whom. A Quoi, To what. Que, Whom. Lequel, Laquelle,
Which. Singular. Plural. Masc. Fem. Lequel, Laquelle, Which. Lesquels,
Lesquelles, Which* Du quel, or Don't De laquelle, or Don't Of or from which.
Desquels, or Don't Desquelles, or Don't Of or from which. Auquel, A laqu^lle, To
which. Auxquels, au^quelles, To which.

As for these three Particles, Ou where, wherein, whether; Y, in it, of it,
there; En, of it, some, any; they are often used like Relative Pronouns; as,

Y a-t-il des Chambres, ou nous puissions coucher? Ouy, il y en a. Are there
any Rooms for us to lie in? Yes, there are some.

6. Of Pronouns Indefinite.
INdefinite Pronouns are those that have a general and unlimited Signification.

There are eighteen of them, viz.

Null, nulle, None. Tell, tell, Such. Tout, toute, All. L'un, l'une, One.
Chacun, chacune, Every one. Le meme, la meme. The same. Quelqu'un, quelqu'une,
some body. Chaque, Every. Autre, Other. Person, No body. Quiconque, qui que ce
soit. Whosoever. Quelque, Some. Autrui, Others. Aucun, aucune, Any. Peu, Few.
Plusieurs, Many, several. L'Autre, The other.
All these Pronouns are Declined with the Article De and A, except these three,
l'un, l'une, le^ uns, les unes, le meme, la meme, les memes, l'autre, les
autres.

Construction of Pronouns.
I. Personal.
1. PErsonal Pronouns are used sometimes instead of Possessive; as,

Ce Livre est a may, That Book is mine. Ce Manch^n est a vous. That Muff is
yours. Cet Eventail est a elle. That ^an is he^s
2. The French put Personal Pronouns before the Verb, when they should by right
go after; as,

Ie vous aim, I Love you. Elle me hait, she hates me. (...) se promene, he
walks. Leur avez-vous dit? Have you told them? Il le menace, he threatens him.
Il la vit a la promenade and en devint am^ureux. He saw her a walking, and fell
in Love with her.

II. Possessive.
1. The Gender of pronouns Possessive in French, does not follow that of the
Person that speaks, or is spoken of, but the particular Gender of every Noun
wherewith they are joined; as,

Monsieur Thomas and sa Mere vinrent hier i^y, Master Thomas and his Mother
came here yesterday. C'est son evantail, this is her Fan. Voicy sa Cravate,
here is his Cravat.

But for sweetness sake these Masculine Pronouns, Mon, ton, son are used
instead of the Feminine, ma, ta, sa, before Feminine Nouns beginning with a
Vowel or h mute; as,

Mon ame, my Soul. Ton ^^ee, thy Sword. Son Histoire, his History.

2. These Pronouns, Le mien, le tien, le sien; le notre, le votre, le leur,
signify ones own; as,

I'ay depens^ une Guinee du mien, I spent a Guinea of my own. Vous avez joue du
notre, You have gamed out of our own.

ART. IV.
Of Verbs.
THe Verb is a part of Speech which serves to express all manner of Actions;
as, Manger to eat. Se promener to walk. Etre to be. Il pleut it rains.

According to the most general Division, the Verb is either Personal, or
Impersonal.

A Verb Personal is that which is Conjugated by the three Persons; as,

Je parle, I speak. Tu parles, Thou speak Il parle, He speaks. Elle parle,
She speaks. Nous parlons, We speak. Vous parlez, You speak. Ils parlent, ou
Else parlent, They speak.
But the Impersonal is Conjuga^ed by the third Person of the Singular; as, Il
neige it Snows. On dit, it is said.

There is in the Verb six Accidents or Circumstances to be considered, viz.

The Gender, the Mood, the Tense, the Person, the Number, and the Conjugation.

1. Of the Gender.
THe Gender or the form of Verbs is that which shows their nature and proper
Signification; and is of five sorts, viz. Active, Passive, Neuter, Common, and
Reciprocal.

1. An active Verb expresses an action that passes from one subject to another;
as, Dieu aim les Hommes, God loves Men. Elle mange une Perdrix, she eats a
Partridge.

2. A Passive Verb expresses the suffering or reception of the action; as, Ie
suis batu, I am beaten. Vous etes love, you are praised.

3. A Neuter Verb expresses an action which remains in the subject that
produces it; as, Ie suis, I am. Ie Course, I run. Ie palis, I grow pale.

4. A common Verb is that which is sometimes Active, and sometimes Neuter. As,
Engraisser, to fatten, or, to grow fat. Rougir, to make red, or to blush.

5. A Verb Reciprocal reflects the action upon the subject that produces it,
and so all Active Verbs may be turned into Reciprocal; as, Se dorloter, to
pamper ones self. S* admirer, to admire ones self. Se tuer, to kill ones self.

2. Of Moods.
A Mood is an Accident of Verbs that shows the different ways and manners an
action may be done by.

There are properly but four Moods, viz. Indicative, Imperative, Conjunctive,
and Infinitive.

1. The Indicative expresses the action directly and absolutely; as, Ie mange,
I eat. Ie mangerai, I shall eat.

2. The Imperative commands or forbids the doing of any action; as, Mange, eat
thou. Qu'il Mange, let him eat.

3. The Conjunctive is so called, first, because it is most commonly used with
Conjunctions before it, such as, Que that. Affinque that, or, to the end that.
Pourveuque, provided that. Pleut a Dieu que, would to God that, etc. Secondly
because it never makes a sense, except it be joined with the Indicative, either
before or after; as, Ie, souhaite que vous m'aimiez, I wish you love me. Ie
vous assure, que vous m'obligeriez beaucoup, I assure you, that you would
greatly oblige me.

4. The Infinitive has an indetermined Signification, and expresses the action
without any Circumstance either of Number or Person; as, aimer to love, avoir
aim to have loved: And it is Construed with the other Moods, by which only it
is determined; as,

Ie veux aimer I will love, allez dormir go to sleep, je voudrois savoir I
would fain know.

There are three Prepositions which are commonly joined with the Infinitive,
viz. De, A, Pour, which are generally rendered into English by the Particle, To;
as,

Ie vous pry de considerer, I desire you to consider. So^haitez vous de savoir
les nouvelles? Have you a mind to hear the News? Ie vous done cela a garder, I
give you that to keep. Il le fai^ pour gagner de l'argent, He does it to get
Money.
The Infinitive is also used after these two Prepositions, Sans and Apres, with
the first it is usually Englished by the Participle present; as, L'amour ne
peut vivre sans esperer, Love cannot live without hoping. Elle s'est Mariee
sans demander le Consentement de son Pere, She is Married without asking her
Father's consent.


But after the second, it is commonly Englished by the Indicative Mood; as,

Caesar apres avoir vainc^ les Gaulois, Caesar after he had vanquished the
Gauls.
3. Of Tenses.
THE Tense, (or Time) is that Accident of Verbs which shows when the Action is
done; and so there is properly but three Tenses, viz. the Present, the Preter,
(or Time past) and the Future (or Time to come.) But the Preter in French is
divided into five Branches, generally called,

In the Indicative Mood. And in the Conjunctive. Preter imperfect, 1. Preteri
mperfect, Preter perfect Definice, 2. Preter imperfect, Preter perfect, Preter
perfect, 1. Preter pluperfect, 1. Preter pluperfect, 2. Preter pluperfect. 2.
Preter pluperfect.

The Imperative Mood has but one mixed Tense which relates to the Present and
the Future.

The Infinitive has but two, viz. the Present and the Preter.

4. Of the Tenses of the Indicative Mood.
THE Indicative Mood, as we have already hinted, has seven Tenses, of which
four are Simple, and three Compound.

The four Simple Tenses are,
1. The Present which signifies the moment wherein the Action is doing; as,
J'aime, I love. Tu chantes, Thou singest, etc.

2. The Preterimperfect, so called, because it signifies an Action begun and
not finished; as, Je Chantois quand vous etes enter. I sung when you came in.


3. The third Simple Tense, is called Perfect Definite, because it is used to
signify a precise and determined time; as, Je chantai hier, I sung yesterday.
Je parlai au Prince l'annee pars^e. I spoke to the Prince last year.


* This Tense is very much used in Narrations, from whence it is called by
some, Narrative or Historical Tense; but note that we never use it to express
an Action done that Day we speak in.

4. The Future which expresses a thing to come; as, j'aimeray I shall love, je
Chanterai I shall sing.

The three Compound Tenses.
BEsides the four Simple Tenses, the Indicative has three others, Compound with
the three first Simple Tenses of the Auxiliary Verb; Avoir to have, and the
Participle Preter, or Passive, of any Verb that is to be conjugated: as, 1.
J'ay aim, I have loved. 2. J'avois aim, I had loved. 3. J'eut aim, I had
loved.


1. The first Compound Tense, called Preterperfect, is used to express either
an Action perf^ctly past, without determining and precise time; as, J'ai aim
vingt fois en ma vie, I have loved twenty times in my life. Or else to express
an Action done the same Day one speaks; as, J'ay chante ce Matin, I have sung
this morning.

2. The second Compound called 1. Preterpluperfect, signifies an Action, not
only perfectly past, but done also before another (of which one speaks) was
begun; as,

J'avois chante quand vous vintes, I had sung when you came.
3. The third Compound Tense, commonly called, 2. Pluperfect, but more
properly, Definite Compound, ^ignifies also an Action perfectly past and
preceding to another: And besides, it has a precise and determined
significatioin; as, Des que j'eus chante, je vous ecrivis. As soon as I had
sung I wrote unto you.


5. Of the Tenses of the Imperative Mood.
WHAT has been said already about this Mood is sufficient.

6. Of the Tenses of the Conjunctive Mood.
THE Conjunctive Mood has seven Tenses, three Simple and four Compound.

The three Simple Tenses are,
1. The Present which has sometimes a Future signification; as, Bien que
j'aime, Though I love. A^in que vous chantiez, That you may sing.


2. The 1. Preter imperfect, called by some Uncertain Tense, but more properly,
Future Conditional, which is commonly construed with the Imperfect Tense of the
Indicative; as, Si tu m'aimois, je t'aimerois. Did^ thou love me, I should love
thee.


3. The third Simple Tense, is the 2. Imperfect which derives from the Perfect
Definite of the Indicative; as, Bien que j'aimasse, Though I loved. Bien que
j'emplisse, Though I filled.


The Four Compound Tenses.
THE four Compound Tenses are formed of the three Simple Tenses of the
Conjunctive Mood, and of the Future of the Indicative, of the Auxiliary Avoir,
and the Participle past of the Verb to be conjugated; as, I. Preterperfect.
J'aye aim, I have loved. II. 1. Preterpluperfect, or Preter conditional.
J'aurois aim, I would have, or, I had loved. III. 2. Pluperfect. J'^usse aim,
I had loved. IV. Future. J'aural aim, I shall have loved.


4. Of the Tenses of the Infinitive Mood.
THE Infinitive has but two Tenses, one Simple, viz. (...) Present; as, Aimer
to love; the other Compound, (...) Aim to have loved.

Of the English Conjugation, in reference to the French.
IT is very requisite for the true Understanding of the French Conjugation to
know the English too; and what Tenses in English answer to the French. (But we
shall say nothing about the Imperative and Infinitive, because there is no
difficulty in them.)

The English both in the Indicative and Conjunctive Moods have but five Tenses,
as you may see in the following Table.

Indicative. Present, I love, or, I do love. Perfect, I have loved. Imperfect,
I loved, or, I did love. Pluperfect, I had loved. Future, I shall, or, I will
love. Conjunctive. Present, I love. Pluperfect, I had loved, or, I should,
would, could have loved. Imperfect, I loved, or, I could, should, would love.
Future, I shall have loved. Perfect, I have loved.

Where you must observe, That the Conjunctive borrows all its Tenses from the
Indicative, except the Future.

* The English in imitation of the Greek, do conjugate sometimes their Verbs
with the Auxiliary, To be, through all its Moods and Tenses, and the Participle
present of the Verb to be conjugated, and so they say, I am loving, I was
loving, I have been loving, I had been loving, I shall or will be loving, etc.
but this is nothing to our purpose.

Now (being as you have seen before, that the French have seven Tenses in both
Moods,) in the Indicative, the Imperfect in English answers to the Imperfect
and Preter Definite in French, and the Pluperfect to both Pluperfects; as,
J'aimois, I loved, or, I did love. J'aimai, I loved, or, I did love. J'avois
aim, I had loved. J'eus aim, I had loved.


And in the Conjunctive Mood, the Imperfect in English answers to both
Imperfects in French, and the Pluperfect to both Pluperfects; as, J'aimerois, I
loved, or, I could, should, would love. J'ai^asse, I loved, or, I could should,
would love. J'aurois aim, I had loved, or, I could, I would, I should have
loved. J'eusse aim, I had loved, or, I could, I would, I should have loved.


Which must be carefully observed, to avoid the common mistakes of those, who
say, Ie (...) ce matin, for, Ie chantois ce matin, I Sung this morning. I'ai
veu hier, for, Ie vis hier. I saw yesterday. Si j'aimerois, for si j'aimois. If
I Loved, etc.


7. Of Persons.
THere are three Persons in Verbs as well as in Pronouns; as, je parle, I
speak, tu parles, thou speak, il parle, he speaks, nous parlons, we speak,
vous parlez, you speak, ils parlent, they speak.

8. Of Numbers.
EVery Tense in the three first Moods has two Numbers, viz. The Singular, as,
je parle, I speak, and the Plural; as, nous parlons, we speak; which in the
Conjugation we shall mark thus, S. P.

9. Of the Conjugation.
THE Conjugation, is the way of turning and joining the several parts of a Verb
by Moods, Tenses, Persons, and Numbers. There are four different Conjugations
in French, each of them having a particular Character that distinguishes it
from the others.

The First, Makes the Infinitive in Er, as, Aimer, to Love. The Second, Ir,
Emplir, to Fill. The Third, Oir, Recevoir, to Receive. The Fourth, Re, Vendre,
to Sell.

No Verb of any of these four Conjugations, can be conjugated through all its
Moods and Tenses, without these two, Avoir and Etre, which upon that account
are called Auxiliary, or helping Verbs, and which must be learnt before one
ingages himself into the Conjugation of others.

* Some Grammarians reckon a third Auxiliary Verb, viz. Devoir, To ow, or, To
be to, because it is often joined with the Infinitive of other Verbs through
most of its Moods, Tenses and Persons, to signify an Action, that must or
shall be done in this manner.

Ie dois aimer, I am to Love, or I must Love, Vous devriez emplir cette
bouteille, you should fill that Bottle. Elle ne devoir pas avoir ete si
cruelle, She should not have been so cruel. Devant aller demain a la campaign,
being to go to morrow into the Country.

But I don't take it to be an Helping Verb, no more than many others (which are
joined to the Infinitive, through all their Moods, Tenses and Persons, such as
vouloir, to will, Fair, to do, commencer, to begin, etc.) because Verbs can be
Conjugated without them.

The Auxiliary Verb. Avoir, to have.
Indicative Mood.
Present Tense.
S. J'Ay, tu as, il a. P. Nous vons, vous avez, ils ont. I have, thou have, he
has, We have, you have, they have.
Preter Imperfect.
S. J'avois, tu avois, il avoit. P. Nous avions, vous aviez, ils avoient. I
had, thou had, he had. We had, you had, they had.
P. Perfect Definite.
S. J'eu, tu eus, il eut. P. Nous eumes, vous entes, ils eurent. I had, etc. As
the former.
P. Perfect.
S. J'ai eu, tu as eu, il a eu. P. Nous avons eu, vous avez eu, ils ont eu. I
have had, thou have had, etc.
1. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois eu, tu avois eu, il avoit eu. P. Nous avions eu, vous aviez eu, ils
avoient eu. I had had, thou had had, he had had. We had had, you had had,
they had had.
2. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu eu, tu eus eu, il eut eu. P. Nous eumes eu, vous eutes eu, ils eurent
eu. I had had, etc. As the former.
Future.
S. J'auray, (...), il aura. P. Nous (...), aurez, ils auront. I shall have,
thou shall have, he shall have* We shall have, you shall have, they shall have.
Or, I will have, thou will have, he will have. We will have, you will have,
they will have.
Conjunctive Mood.
Present.
S. QUoique j'aye, tu ayes, il ait. P. Nous ayons, vous ayez, ils ayent. Though I
have, thou have, he have. We have, you have, they have.
1. Preter Imperfect
S. J'aurois, tu aurois, il auroit. P. Nous aurions, vous auriez, ils auroient.
I should have, thou should have, he should have. We should, you should have,
they should have. Or, I would have, thou would have, he would have. We would
have, you would have, they would have.
2. P. Imperfect.
S. J'eusse, tu eusses, il eust. P. Nous eussions, vous eussiez, ils eussent. I
had, etc. Like the Preter Imperfect of the Indicative.
Preter Perfect.
S. J'aye eu, tu ayes eu, il ait eu. P. Nous ayons eu, vous ayez eu, ils ayent
eu. I have had, thou have had, etc.
1. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'aurois eu, tu aurois eu, il auroit eu. P. Nous aurions eu, vous auriez
eu, ils auroient eu. I had had, thou had had, he had had. We had had, ye had
had, they had had. Or, I could have had, thou could have had, be could have
had. We could have had, you could have had, they could have had.
2. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse eu, tu eusses eu, il eut eu. P. Nous eussions eu, vous eussiez eu,
ils eussent eu. I had had, etc. As the former.
Future.
S. J'aurai eu, tu auras eu, il aura eu. P. Nous aurons eu, vous aurez eu, ils
auront eu. I shall have had, thou shall have had, he shall have had. We shall
have had, you shall have had, they shall have had.
Imperative Mood.
S. Aye, qu'il ait. P. Ayons, ayez, qu'ils ayent. Have thou, let him have. Let
us have, have you, let them have.
Infinitive Mood.
Pres. Tense. P. Perfect.
AVoir, to have Avoir eu, have had.
Participles.
Present. Ayant, having. Past. Eu, had.
The Auxiliary Verb. Etre, to be.
Indicative Mood.
Present Tense.
S. JE suis, tu es, il est. P. Nous sommes, vous es^es, ils ^ont. I am, thou
art, he is. We are, you are, they are.
Preter Imperfect.
S. J'etois, tu etois, il e toit. P. Nous etions, vous etiez, ils etoient. I
was, thou wast, he was. We were, you were, they were.
P. Perfect Definite.
S. Je fus, tu fus, il fut. P. Nous fumes, vous futes, ils furent. I was, thou
wast, he was. We were, you were, they were.
P. Perfect.
S J'ay ete, tu as ete, il a ete. P. Nous avons ete, vous avez ete, ils ont
ete. I have been, thou have been, he has been. We have been, (...) have been,
they have been.
1. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois ete, tu avois ete, il avoit ete. P. Nous avions ete, yous aviez
ete, ils avoient ete. I had been, thou had been, he had been. We had been,
you had been, they had been.
2. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu ete, tu eus ete, il eut ete. P. Nous eumes ete, vous eutes ete, ils
eurent ete. I had been, thou had been, he had been. We had been, ye had been,
they had been.
The Future.
S. Je serai, tu seras, il sera. P. Nous serons, vous serez, ils seront. I
shall be, thou shall be, he shall be. We shall be, you shall be, they shall be.
* You must observe in this Tense, the same difference of expressing it in
English, which we have marked in the foregoing Verb. And this ought to be a
constant Rule for all other Verbs.
Conjunctive Mood.
Present Tense.
S. AFinque je sois, (...) sois, il soit. P. No^^ soyo^s, vous soyez, il
soient. That I may be, thou may (...) he may be. We may be, you man be, they
may be.
1. P. Imperfect.
S. Je serois, tu serois, (...) seroit. P. Nous serions, vous seriez, ils
seroient. I should be, thou should be, he should be. We should be, you should
be, they should be. * You must observe in this Tense, the same difference of
expressing it in English, which we have marked in the foregoing Verb. And this
ought to be a constant Rule for all other Verbs.
2. P. Imperfect.
S. Je fusse, tu fusses, il fust. P. Nous fussions, vous fussiez, ils fussent.
I were, thou were, he were. We were, you were, they were.
P. Perfect.
S. J'aye ete, tu ayes ete, il ait ete. P. Nous ayons ete, vous ayez ete, ils
ayont ete. I have been, thou have been, he have been. We have been, you have
been, they have been.
1. P. Pluperfect.
S. J'aurois ete, tu aurois ete, il auroit ete. P. Nous aurions ete, vous
auriez ete, ils auroient ete. I had been, thou had been, he had been. We had
been, you had been, they had been.
2. P. Pluperfect.
J'eusse ete, tu eusses ete, il eust ete. P. Nous eussions ete, vous eussiez
ete, ils eussent ete. I had been, etc. As the former.
Future.
S. J'aurai ete, tu auras ete, il aura ete. P. Nous aurons ete, vous aurez ete,
ils auront ete. I shall have been, thou shall have been, he shall have been. We
shall have been, you shall have been, they shall have been.
Imperative Mood.
S. SOis, qu'il soit. P. soyons, soyez. qu'ils soient. Be thou, let him be. Let
us be, be you, let them be.
Infinitive Mood.
Pres. Tens. ETre, to be. P. Perfect. Avoir ete, to have been.
Participles.
Present. Etant, being. Past. Ete, been.
Active Verb of the first Conjugation in Er; as, Aimer, to love.
Indicative.
Present.
S. J'Aime, tu aims, il aim, P. Nous aimons, vous aimez, ils aiment. I love,
thou love, he loves, we love, you love, they love. Or I do love, etc.
Imperfect.
S. J'aimois, tu aimois, il amoit. P. Nous aimions, vous aimiez, ils aimoient.
I loved, thou lovedst, he loved, we loved, you loved, they loved. Or, I did
love, thou did love, he did love, we di^ love, you did love, they did love.
Perfect Definite.
S. J'aimai, tu aimas, il aima, P. Nous aimames, vous aimates, ils aimerent. I
loved, or I did love, etc. as the former.
Preter perfect.
S. J'ay aim, tu as aim, il a aim. P. Nous avons aim, vous avez aim, ils
ont aim. I have loved, thou have loved, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois aim, tu avois aim, il avoit aim. P. Nous avions aim, vous aviez
aim, ils avoient aim. I had loved, thou had loved, he had loved, we had
loved, you had loved, they had loved.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu aim, tu eus aim, il eut aim P. Nous eumes aim, vous eutes aim,
ils eurent aim. I had loved, etc. as the former.
Future.
S. J'aimerai, tu aimeras, il aimera. P. Nous aimerons, vous aimerez, ils
aimeront. I shall or will love, thou shall or wilt love, he shall or will love.
We shall or will love, you shall or will love, they shall or will love.
Conjunctive.
Present.
S. QUe j'aime, tu aims, il aim. P. Nous aimio^s, vous aimiez, ils aiment.
That I love, thou love, he love. We love, you love, they love. * This Tense is
Englished several ways, but the chiefest are, I love, etc. and the following. I
may love, thou may love, he may love. We may love, you may love, they may
love.
1. Imperfect.
S. J'aimerois, tu aimerois, il aimeroit. P. Nous aimerions, vous aimeriez, ils
aimeroient. I should love, thou should love, he should love. We should love,
you should love, they should love. Or, I would love, thou would love, etc.
Or, I could love, thou could love, etc.
2. Imperfect.
S. J'aimasse, tu aimasses, il aimat. P. Nous aimassions, vous aimassiez, ils
aimassent. I loved, or did love, etc. as the Imperfect of the Indicative. Or, I
would, could, should, might love, etc.
Preter perfect.
S. J'^ve aim, tu ayes aim, il ^it aim. P. Nous ayons aim, vous ayez aim,
ils ayent aim. I have loved, thou have loved, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'^ur^is aim, tu aurois aim, il (...) aim. P. Nous aurious aim, vous
auriez aine* us (...)' aim. I would have loved, thou would have loved, he
would have loved. We would have loved, you would have loved, they would have
loved. Or, I had loved, etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse aim, tu eusses aim, il (...) aim. P. Nous eussions aim, vous
eussiez aim, ils eussent aim. I had loved, etc. like the 1. Pluperfect of the
Indicative.
Future.
S. J'aurai a'me, tu auras aim, il aura aim. P. Nous aurons aim, vous aurez
aim, ils auront aim. I shall have loved, thou shall have loved, he shall have
loved. We shall have loved, you shall have loved, they shall have loved.
Imperative.
S. Aim, qu'il aim. P. Aimons, Aimez, qu'ils aiment. Love thou, let him love.
Let us love, love you, let them love.
Infinitive.
Present.
AImer, to love.
Perfect.
Avoir aim, to have loved.
Participles.
Present. Aimant, loving. Past. Aim, loved.
Active Verb of the second Conjugation in ir, Emplir, to fill.
Indicative.
Present.
S. J'Emplis, tu emplis, il emplit. P. Nous emplusons, vous emplissez, ils
emplissent. I fill, thou fillest, he fills. We fill, you fill, they fill. Or,
I do fill, etc.
Imperfect.
S. J'emplissois, tu emplissois, il emplissoit. P. Nous emplissions, vous
empliss^^^, ils emplissoient. I filled, thou filledst, he (...). We filled, you
filled, they filled. Or, I did fill, thou did fill, etc.
Preterperfect Definite.
S. J'emplis, tu emplis, il emplit. P. Nous emplimes vous emplites, ils
emplirent. I filled, or I did fill, etc. as the former.
Preter perfect.
J'ay empli, tu as empli, il a empli. P. Nous avons empli, vous avez empli, ils
ont empli. I have filled, thou have filled, he has filled. We have filled, you
have filled, they have filled.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois empli, tu avois empli, il avoit empli P. Nous av^ons empli, vous
aviez empli, ils avoient empli. I had filled, thou had filled, he had filled.
We had filled, you had filled, they had filled.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu empli, tu eus empli, il eut empli. P. Nous eumes empli, vous eutes
empli, ils eurent empli. I had filled, etc. as the former.
Future.
S. J'emplirai, tu empliras, il empli^a. P. Nous emplirons, vous emplirez, ils
emplirent. I shall, or I will fill, thou shall or wilt fill, he shall or will
fill. We shall or will fill, you shall or will fill, they shall or will fill.
Conjunctive.
Present.
S. Blenque j'emplisse, tu emplisses, il emplisse. P. Nous emplissions, vous
emplissiez, ils emplissent. Though I fill, thou fillest, he fill. We fill, you
fill, they fill.
1. Imperfect.
S. J'emplirois, tu emplirois, il empliroit. P. Nous emplirions, vous
empliriez, ils empliroient. I could, would, or should fill, etc.
2. Imperfect.
S. J'emplisse, tu emplisses, il emplisse. P. Nous emplissions, vous
emplissiez, ils emplissent. I filled or did fill, etc. a^ the Imperfect of the
Indicative. Or, I could, would, should, (...) might fill, etc.
P. perfect.
S. J'aye empli, tu ayez empli, il ait empli. P. Nousayons empli, vous ayez
empli, ils ayent empli. I have filled, thou have filled, he have filled. We
have filled, you have filled, they have filled.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'aurois empli, tu aurois empli, il auroit empli. P. Nous aurions empli,
vous auriez empli, ils auroient empli. I had filled, etc. as the 1. Pluperfect
of the Indicative. Or, I would have filled, etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse empli, tu eusses empli, il eust empli. P. Nous eussions empli, vous
eussiez empli, ils eussent empli. I had filled, etc. as the former.
Future.
S. J'aurai empli, tu auras empli, il aure empli. P. Nous aurons empli, vous
aurez empli, ils auront empli. I shall have filled, thou shall have filled, he
shall have filled. W^ shall have filled, you shall have filled, they shall have
filled.
Imperative.
S. EMpli, qu'il emplisse. P. Emplissons, emplissez, qu'ils emplissent. Fill
thou, let him fill. Let us fill, fill you, let them fill.
Infinitive.
Present.
EMplir, to fill.
Preter.
Avoir empli, to have filled.
Participles.
Present. Emplissant, filling. Past. Empli, filled.
Active Verb of the Third Conjugation in Oir, as, Recevoir, to receive.
Indicative.
Present.
S. JE recoi, tu recois, il recoit. P. Nous recevons, vous recevez, ils
recoivent. I receive, thou receivest, he receives. We receive, you receive,
they receive. Or, I do receive, etc.
Imperfect.
S. Je recevois, tu recevois, il recevoit. P. No^s recevions, vous receviez,
ils recevoient. I received, thou receivedst, he received. We received, you
received, they received. Or, I did receive, etc.
Perfect Definite.
S. Je recus, tu recus, il recut. P. Nous recumes, vous recutes, ils recurent.
I received, or I did receive, etc. as the former.
Preter perfect.
S. J'ay recu, tu as recu, il a recu. P. Nous avons recu, vous avez recu, ils
ont recu. I have received, thou have received, he has received. We have
received, you have received, they have received.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois recu, tu avois recu, il avoit recu. P. Nous avions recu, vous aviez
recu, ils avoient re^u. I had received, thou had received, he had received.
We h^d received, you had received, they had received.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu recu, tu eus recu, il eut recu. P. Nous eumes recu, vous ^u^es recu,
ils eurent recu. I had received, etc. as the former.
Future.
S. Je recevrai, tu recevras, il recevra. P. Nons recevrons, vous recevrez, ils
recevront. I shall, or I will receive, thou shall receive, he shall receive, we
shall receive, you shall receive, they shall receive.
Conjunctive.
Present.
AFinque Je recoive, tu recoives, il recoive. P. Nous recevions, vous receviez,
ils recoivent. That I receive, thou receive, he receive. We receive, you
receive, they receive.
Imperfect.
S. Je recevrois, tu recevrois, il recevroit. P. Nous resevrions, vous
recevriez, ils recevroient. I could, would, or should receive, etc.
2. Imperfect.
S. Je receusse, tu recusses, il recut. P. Nous recussions, vous recussiez, ils
recussent. I received, or I did receive, etc. As the Imperfect of the
Indicative. Or, I could, would, or should receive, etc.
P. Perfect.
S. J'aye recu, tu ayes recu, il ait recu. P. Nous ayons recu, vous ayez recu,
ils ayent recu. I have received, thou have received, he have received. We have
received, you have received, they have received.
1. Pluperfect.
S J'aurois recu, tu aurois recu, il auroit recu. P. Nous aurions recu, vous
auriez recu, ils auroient recu. I had filled, etc. as the Pluperfect of the
Indicative. Or, I would have received, etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse recu, tu eusses recu, il e^^t^recu P. Nous eussions recu, vous
eussiez recu, ils eussent recu, I had received, etc. as the former.
Future.
S. J'aurai recu, tu auras recu, il aura recu. P. Nous aurons recu, vous aurez
recu, ils auront recu. I shall have received, thou shall have received, he
shall have receeved. We shall have received, you shall have received, they
shall have received.
Imperative.
S. REcoi, qu'l recoive. P. Recevons, Recevez, qu'ils re^^ivent. Receive thou,
let him receiv^* Let us receive, receive you, (...) them receive.
Infinitive.
Present.
REcevoir, to receive.
Preter.
Avoir recu, to have received.
Participles.
Present. Recevant, receiving.
Past. Recu, received.
Active Verb of the Fourth Conjugation in re, as, Vendre, to sell.
Indicative.
Present.
S. JE ven, tu vens, il vend. P. Nous vendons, vous vendez, ils vendent. I
sell, thou sellest, he sells. We sell, you sell, they sell. Or, I do sell,
etc.
Imperfect.
S. Je vendois, tu vendois, il vendoit. P. Nous vendions, vous vendiez, ils
vendoient. I sold, thou soldest, he sold. We sold, you sold, they sold. Or, I
did sell, etc.
Perfect Definite.
S. Je vendis, tu vendis, il vendit. P. Nous vendimes, vous vendites, ils
vendirent. I sold, or I did sell, etc. as the former.
Preter Perfect.
S. J'ai vendu, tu as vendu, il a vendu. P. Nous avons vendu, vous avez vendu,
ils ont vendu. I have sold, thou have sold, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois vendu, tu avois vendu, il avoit vendu. P. Nous avions vendu, vous
aviez vendu, ils avoient vendu. I had sold, thou had sold* etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu vendu, tu eus vendu, il eut vendu. P. Nous eumes vendu, vous eutes
vendu, ils eurent vendu. I had sold, thou had sold etc.
Future.
S. Je vendrai, tu vendras, il vendra. P. Nous vendrons, vous vendrez, ils
vendront. I shall, or will sell, etc.
Conjunctive.
Present.
S. QUoique je vende, tu vendes, il vende. P. Nous vendions, vous vendiez, ils
vendent. Though I sell, thou sellest, he sell. We sell, you sell, they sell.
1. Imperfect.
S. Je vendrois, tu vendrois, il vendroit. P. Nous vendrions, vous vendriez,
ils vendroient. I could, would, or should sell, etc.
2. Imperfect.
S. Je vendisse, tu vendisses, il vendisse. P. Nous vendissions, vous
vendissiez, ils vendissent. I sold, or I did sell, etc. as the 1. Imperfect of
the Indicative. Or, I could, would or should sell, etc.
Preter perfect.
S. J'aye vendu, tu ayes vendu, il ait vendu. P. Nous ayons vendu, vous ayez
vendu, ils ayent vendu. I have sold, thou have sold, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'aurois vendu, tu auroi^ vendu, il auroit vendu. P. Nous aurions vendu,
vous auriez vendu, ils auroient vendu. I had sold, etc. as the 1. Pluperfect of
the Indicative. Or, I would have sold, etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse vendu, tu eusses vendu, il eust vendu. P. Nous eussions vendu, vous
eussiez vendu, ils eussent vendu. I had sold, etc.
Future.
S. J'aurai vendu, tu auras vendu, il aura vendu. P. Nous aurons vendu, vous
aurez vendu, ils auront vendu. I shall have sold, etc.
Imperative.
S VEN, qu'il vende. P. Vendons, vendez, qu'ils vendent. Sell thou, let him
sell. Let us sell, sell you, let them sell.
Infinitive.
Present.
VEndre, to sell.
Preter.
Avoir vendu, to have sold.
Participles.
Pre^ent. Vendant, selling. Past. Vendu, sold.
* Note that this last Conjugation is not so regular as the others; and that
all the Verbs which have an i before n in the last Syllable but one, of the
Infinitive, such as, Craindre to fear, Peindre to paint, Joindre to join, etc.
add a g before that n, in the last Syllable but one, of Tenses which have more
than one Syllable, except the Future of the Indicative, and the 1. Imperfect of
the Conjunctive. And besides, those Verbs form the Participle past, by changing
dre of the Infinitive into t, as, Craindre, Craint feared, Peindre, Peint
painted, Joindre, Joint, joined, as you shall see in the following Example.

Verbs of the Fourth Conjugation that have an i^ before n, in the last Syllable
but one, such as Craindre, to fear, are thus conjugated.
Indicative.
Present.
S. JE crains, tu crains, il craint. P. Nous craignons, vous craignez, ils
craignent. I fear, etc.
Imperfect.
S. Je craignois, tu craignois, il craignoit, P. Nous craignions, vous
craigniez, ils craignoient. I feared, or I did fear, etc.
Perfect Definite.
S. Je craignis, tu craignis, il craignit. P. Nous craignimes, vous craignites,
ils craignitent. I feared, or I did fear, etc.
Preter perfect.
S. J'ai craint, tu as craint, il a crai^t. P. Nous avons craint, vous avez
craint, ils ont craint. I have feared, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'avois craint, tu avois craint, il avoit craint. P. Nous avions craint,
vous aviez craint, ils avoient craint. I had feared, etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eu craint, tu eus craint, il eut craint. P. Nous eumes craint, vous eutes
craint, ils eurent craint. I had feared, etc.
Future.
S. Je craindrai, tu craindras, il craindra. P. Nous craindrons, vous
craindrez, ils craindront. I shall, or I will fear, etc.
Conjunctive.
Present.
S. QUE je craigne, tu craignes, il craigne. P. Nous craignions, vous
craigniez, ils craignent. That I fear, etc.
1. Imperfect.
S. Je craindrois, tu craindrois, il craindroit. P. Nous craindrions, vous
craindriez, ils craindroient. I feared, etc. Or, I should, would, could fear,
etc.
2. Imperfect.
S. Je craignisse, tu craignisses, il craignist. P. Nous craignissions, vous
craignissiez, ils craignissent. I feared, etc.
Preter perfect.
S. J'aye craint, tu ayes craint, il ait craint. P. Nous ayons craint, vous
ayez craint, ils ayent craint. I have feared, etc.
1. Pluperfect.
S. J'aurois craint, tu aurois craint, il auroit craint. P. Nous aurions
craint, vous auriez craint, ils auroient craint. I had, or I would have feared,
etc.
2. Pluperfect.
S. J'eusse craint, tu eusses craint, il eust craint. P. Nous eussions craint,
vous eussiez craint, ils eussent craint. I had feared, etc.
Future.
S. J'aurai craint, tu auras craint, il aura craint. P. Nous aurons craint,
vous aurez craint, ils auront craint. I shall have feared, etc.
Imperative.
S. CRains, qu'il craigne. P. Craignons, craiguez, qu'ils craignent. Fear thou,
let him fear. Let us fear, fear you, let them fear.
Infinitive.
Present.
CCraindre, to fear.
Preter.
Avoir craint, to have feared.
Participles.
Present. Craignant, fearing. Past. Craint, feared.
Conjugation of Passive Verbs. Conjugation of Passive Verbs.
THE Passive Verb in French, as in English, has no Termination that
distinguishes it from others, and is only formed out of the Participle past, of
any Active Verb, joined to the Auxiliary Verb Etre, through all its Moods,
Tenses, Numbers and Persons; as, Je suis aimee, I am Loved, Elle est aimee, she
is Loved. Vous etes emplis, you are filled, else sont emplies, they are
filled. Nous fumes receus, we were received. Elle avoit ete vendue, she had
been sold. Ils seront vendus, they will be sold. Etre craint, to be feared.


Where you must observe, that the Participle varies according to the difference
of Gender and Number.

Conjugation of Neuter and Common Verbs.
NEuter and Common Verbs, such, as, Badiner, to play the Fool, Palir, to grow
pale, Engraisser, to fatten, or grow fat, Rougir, to make red or blush, are
Conjugated all along like the Active.

Except these thirteen Neutral Verbs, viz.

Arriver, to arrive. Retourner, to return. Entrer, to go or come in. Tomber, to
fall. Monter, to go or come up. Aller, to go. Passer, to pass or go by. Sortir,
to go or come out. Mourir, to die. Descendre, to come down. Accourir, to run
to. Naitre, to be born. Venir, to come.
Whose Compound Tenses are Conjugated by the Auxiliary Etre, as the Passive
Verbs, and not by the Verb Avoir, as the Active; as you may see in the
following Example.

Arriver. To Arrive.
Indicative. Present. J'Arrive.
Imperfect. J'arrivois. Perfect Definite. J'arrivay. Perfect. Je suis arrive,
ou ee. 1. Pluperfect. J'etois arrive, ou ee. 2. Pluperfect. Je fus arrive ou
ee. Future. J'arriverai.
Conjunctive.
Present. QUE j'arrive. 1. Imperfect. J'arriverois. 2. Imperfect. J'arrivasse.
Perfect. Je sois arrive, ou ee. 1. Pluperfect. Je serois arrive, ou ee. 2.
Pluperfect. Je fusse arrive, ou ee. Future. Je serai arrive, ou ee.
Imperative.
S. ARrive, qu'il arrive. P. Arrivons, arrivez, qu'ils arrivent.
Infinitive.
Present. ARriver. Preter. Etre arrive. Participles.
Present. Arrivant. Past. Arrive, ou ee.

*1. Note that in these Verbs, as in the Passive, the Participle varies
according to the difference of Gender and Number, except when it comes before
the Infinitive of any Verb, where it remains still the same; as,

Il est all voir. He is gone to see. Elle est all voir. She is gone to see.
* 2. These two Verbs, Passer and Monter, with their Compounds, Repasser, to
pass again, Remonter, to go or come up again, may be Conjugated in their
Compound Tenses, either with the Verb Etre, or with the Verb Avoir.

* 3. These six, Aller, Venir, Sortir, Accourir, Mourir, Naitre, are not only
Conjugated by the Verb Etre, but do vary besides from the Rule in several
Tenses, as we shall show in the Conjugation of Irregular Verbs.

Conjugation of Reciprocal Verbs.
A Verb Reciprocal, is commonly nothing else, but a Verb Active, used with
these Pronouns, me, te, se, in the Singular Number, nous, vous, se, in the
Plural; but so that all its Compounds, Tenses, are Conjugated as the foregoing
Neutral, by the Verb Etre.

It Is true, that some Verbs are always Reciprocal, and those are* known by the
Infinitive Mood, where the Pronoun se goes ever before them; as, se repentir,
to Repent, se moquer, to Laugh at.

The following Example of the first Conjugation, will teach you how to
Conjugate any Verb Reciprocal.

Se Lever, to Rise.
Indicative.
Present. S. Je me leve, tu te leves, il se leve. P. Nous nous levons, vous
vous levez, ils se levent. Imperfect.Je me levois, etc. Perfect Definite.Je me
levay, etc. Perfect.Je me suis leve, etc. 1. Pluperfect.Je m'e^ois leve etc. 2.
Pluperfect.Je me fus leve, etc. Future.Je me leverai, etc.
Conjunctive
Present. S. Que je me leve, tu te leves, il se leve. P. Nous nous levions,
vous vous leviez, ils se levent. ^ Imperfect.Je me ^everois, etc. Imperfect.Je,
me ^^asse, etc. Perfect.Je me ^ois leve, etc. 1. Pluperfect.Je me serois leve,
etc. 2. Pluperfect.Je me fusse leve, etc. Future.Je me serai leve, etc.
Imperative.
S. LEve toi, qu'il se leve. P. Levons nous, levez-vous, qu'ils se levent.
Infinitive.
Present. SE lever. Preter. S'etre leve. Participles.
Present. Se levant. Past. S'etant leve.

* The Participle past, admits in Verbs Reciprocal, the same difference as we
have marked in the foregoing Neutral Verbs.

Of Verbs Impersonal.
A Verb Impersonal is so called, not because it expresses to Person at all; but
first, because it is used often to represent Natural Actions, which have no
relation to any Man's Person; as, il pleut, it rains, il fait chaud, it is hot;
And secondly, because it is Conjugated by the Third Person singular only.

Of Verbs Impersonal some are absolutely such; as, il (...), one must, il
importe, it matters, it imports; most come from Verbs Personal; as, il fair
f^oid, it is cold, il est (...), it is true, on assure, it is affirmed, on
pense, it is thought, (...) vend, they sell.

There are two Particles in French, viz. Il and On, which commonly go before
the Verb Impersonal; Il is used sometimes with the Verbs that signify a
Natural Action; as, Il pleut, it Rains. Il tonne, it thunders.


And sometimes with those that have relation, either to the Manners or Actions
of Men; as, Il faut, one must. Il me souvient, I remember. Il sied, it becomes.


But on is only used in this last Notion, and keeps the signification of the
word it derives from, viz. Homme, Man; and being joined with any Verb, renders
it Impersonal, through all its Tenses and Moods, except the Infinitive; as, On
dit, they say, or it is said. On fait, they do. On croit, they believe, or it is
believed.


The Letter ( L) is often put before on, when the word that goes before it,
ends by a Vowel; as, Si l'on veut, if they will. Ie veux que l'on m'ecoute, I
will be listened to.


But when the word that comes next after the Particle on begins by an l, then
on must be without it; as, Si on l'estime, if they have an esteem for him.


* Some Verbs Impersonal, distinguish the Persons both in the Singular and
Plural Numbers, by the means of Personal Pronouns; as,

Il m'importe, it concerns me. Il vous importe, it concerns you. Il me faut
aller la, I must go thither. Il fa^^loit qu'ils y allassent, they should have
gone thither. Vous souvient il? Do you remember? Il luy vint dans l'esprit, it
came into his mind.
Of the Conjugation of Verbs Impersonal.
VErbs Impersonal are Conjugated by the Th^rd Person of the Singular Number, in
all Moods and Tenses, according to the Character of their Conjugation.

1. There are some of the First; as,
Il grele. It hails. Il gele. It freezes. Il degele. It thaws. Il semble. It
seems. On aim. They Love. On rapporte. It Is reported.
Which are Conjugated in the following manner.

Greler. To Hail.
Indicative.
Present. IL Grele, it hails. Imperfect.Il greloit, it hailed or did hail.
Perfect Definite.Il grela, ( as the former.) Perfect.Il a grele, it has hailed.
1. Pluperfect.Il avoit grele, it had hailed. 2. Pluperfect.Il eut grele, it had
hailed. Future.Il grelera, it shall hail.
Conjunctive.
Present.QU'il grele, that i^ hail. 1. Imperfect.Il greleroit, it would, co^^^
or should hail. 2. Imperfect.Il grelast, it hailed or w^^ hail, etc. Perfect.Il
ayt grele, it has hailed. 1. Pluperfect.Il auroit grele, it had hailed. 2.
Pluperfect.Il eust grele, it had hailed. Future.Il aura grele, it shall have
hail^^
Imperative.
QU'il grele, let it hail.
Infinitive.
Present. GReler, to hail. Preter. Avoir grele have hailed. Participles.
Present. Grelant, hailing. Past. Grele, hailed.

. 2. Some are of the Second Conjugation; as,
On reussit, they succeed. Il souvient, one remembers.

Il vient dans l'esprit, it comes into ones mind.

3. Others are of the Third Conjugation; as,
Il faut, one must. Il vaut mieux, it is better. Il pleut, it rains. Il y a,
there is.

* The Verb, il faut, being the most useful of all Impersonal, we. shall
Conjugate it through all its Moods and Tenses.

Il faut, one must.
Indicative.
Present. IL faut. Imperfect. Il faloit. Perfect Definite. Il falut. Perfect.
Il a falu. 1. Pluperfect. Il avoit falu. 2. Pluperfect. Il eut falu. Future.Il
fa^dra.
Conjunctive.
Present. IL faille. 1. Imperfect. Il faudroit. 2. Imperfect. Il falust.
Perfect. Il aye falu. 1. Pluperfect. Il auroit falu. 2. Pluperfect. Il eust
falu. Future. Il aura falu.
Imperative.
QU'il faille.
Infinitive.
Present. FAloir, ( which is not in use.) Preter. Avoir falu. Participles.
Present. Fallant, ( not in use.) Past. Falu.

This Verb is used four several ways in the French Tongue.

1st. Before the Conjunctive Mood with the Particle (...) which Conjunctive
Mood is rendered in English by the ^^^finitive; as,

Il faul que j'aille, I must go. Il faut que vou^ aimiez, yo^ must love. Il
faut que cela soit, that must be. (...) faudroit que cela se fit, that should
be done.

And so in all other Tenses and Persons.

2dly. It is used before an Infinitive Mood, either in an ^^^determined
Signification; as, Il faut fair cela, that must be done. Or, with these
Personal Pronouns, me, te, nous, vous, ce^^ as, Il me faut fair cela, I must
do that. Il te falloit battre contre lui, you should have fought him. Il nous
faut manger tout cela, we must eat all that. Il vous faut accorder, you must
agree.


And so of other Tenses and Persons.

3dly. It is used before Substantives, either absolutely as, Il faut de
l'argent, Money must be had.


Or with these Personal Pronouns, me, te, lui, nous, v^^* leur; as,

Ie me faut de l'argent, I must have (or I want) Money; (...) so in other
Tenses and Persons.

4thly. It is used sometimes at the end of a Sentence, in this manner; Vous
faites ce qu'il faut, you do what is fitting.

4. Lastly, There are Impersonal Verbs of the Fourth Conjugation; as,
Il suffit, it suffices. C'est, it is. Il plait, it pleases. Il sensuit, it
follows. Il est, it is. On dit, it is said. Il paroit, it appears. Il fait, it
is.

* Il fait is used instead of the Verb Etre, either when we speak of the
Weather; as,

Il fait bea^ tems, it is fine Weather. Il fait beau soleil, the Sun shines
purely.

Or before such Words as these; Bon, Mal, Meilleur, Dangereux; as,

Il fait bon i^y, it is good being here. Il fait meilleur (...), it is better
being there. Il fait dangereux sur mer, it is dangerous being at Sea.

Besides the forementioned Verbs Impersonal, the French use this Pronoun Se
Impersonally; as,

Il se mange de bo^ Beuf en Anglet^rre, there is good Beef eaten in England. Il
se boit de bon Vin en France, good Wine is drunk in France, Cela se dit par
tout, that is said every where. Cela s'e^ va sa^s dire, that is to be understood.

Conjugation of Verbs Irregular.
IRregular Ver^s are those whose Conjugation does not follow the common Rule,
either by different Terminations, or by the want of some of their Moods,
Tenses, or Persons.

There are Irregular Verbs of all Conjugations*

1. Irregular Verb of the First Conjugation.
THOUGH the First Conjugation comprehend by it self ten times more Verbs than the
other three together, yet it has but one Irregular Verb, viz. Aller to go, and
its compound S'en aller to go, which follows the form of Reciprocal Verbs in
its Neutral Signification, as we have hinted before.

Aller, To Go,
Indicative.
Present. S. JE vai, tu vas, il va. P. Nous allons, vous allez, ils vont.
Imperfect. J'allois, tu allois, etc. Perfect Definite. J'allai, tu allas, etc.
Perfect. Je suis all, tu es all, etc. 1. Pluperfect. J'etois all, etc. 2.
Pluperfect. Je fus all, etc. Future. S. J'irai, tu iras, il ira. P. Nous
irons, vous irez, ils iront.
Conjunctive.
Present. S. QUE j'aille, tu ailles, il aille. P. Nous ai^. lions, vous
ailliez, ils aillent. 1. Imperfect. J'irois, etc. 2. Imperfect. J'allasse, etc.
Perfect. Je sois all, etc. 1. Pluperfect. Je serois all, etc. 2. Pluperfect.
Je fusse all, etc. Future. Je serai all, etc.
Imperative.
S. VA, qu'il aille. P. Allons, allez, qu'ils aillent.
Infinitive.
Present. ALler. Preter. Etre all. Participles.
Present. Allant. Past. All.

S'en Aller. To Go.
S'en Aller, is Conjugated thus.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE m'en vai, tu t'en vas, il s'en va. P. Nous nous en allons, vous vous en
allez, ils s'en vont. And so in the other Tenses.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUe je m'en aille, tu t'en ailles, il s'en aille. Nous nous en aillions,
vous vous en ailliez, ils s'en aillent. And so in the other Tenses.
Imperative.
S. VAt'en, qu'il s'en aille. P. Allons nous en, allez vous en, qu'ils s'en
aillent.
Infinitive.
Present. S'En aller. Preter. S'en etre all. Participles.
Present. S'en allant. Past. S'en etant all.

2. Irregular Verbs of the second Conjugation.
THE Second Conjugation has no less than Twenty Four, which I shall set down
in an Alphabetical Order.

1. Bouillir. To boil.
This Verb is not much in use, besides the Infinitive, and the third Person of
the Tenses of other Moods; however, it may be Conjugated thus.

Indicative.
Present. S. JE bous, tu bous, il bout, P. Nous bouillons, vous bouillez, ils
bouillent. Imperfect. Je bouillois, etc. Perfect Definite. Je bouillis, etc.
Perfect. J'ai bouilli, etc. 1. Pluperfect. J'avois bouilli, etc. 2. Pluperfect.
J'eu bouilli, etc. Future. Je bouillerai, etc.
Conjunctive.
Present. S. QUE je bouille, tu bouilles, il bouille. P. Nous bouillions, vous
bouilliez, ils bouillent. 1. Imperfect. Je bouillirois, etc. 2. Imperfect. Je
bouillisse, etc. Perfect. J'aye bouilli, etc. 1. Pluperfect. J'aurois bouilli,
etc. 2. Pluperfect. J'eusse bouilli, etc. Future. J'aurai bouilli.
Imperative.
S. BOu, qu'il bouille. P. Bouillons, bouillez, qu'ils bouillent.
Infinitive.
Present. BOuillir. Preter. Avoir bouilli* Participles.
Present. Bouillant. Past. Bouilli.

Y^s Compound Rebour^lir, to boil again, is Conjugated as the (...).

2. Courir ou Courre, To Run.
THis Verb is Neuter by Nature, yet it has sometimes an Active signification;
as, when we say, Courir Fortune, or Courre Risque, To run the hazard, Courre la
bague, to run the Ring.

Indicative.
Present. S. JE course, tu course, il court. P. Nous courons, vous courez, ils
courent. Imperfect. Je courois, etc. Perfect Definite. Je courus, etc. Perfect.
J'ai couru, etc. 1. Pluperfect. J'avois couru, etc. 2. Pluperfect. J'eu couru,
etc. Future. Je courrai, etc.
Conjunctive.
Present. S. QUE je coure, tu coures, il coure. P. Nous courions, vous couriez,
ils courent. 1. Imperfect. Je courois, etc. 2. Imperfect. Je courusse, etc.
Perfect. J'aye couru, etc. 1. Pluperfect. J'aurois couru, etc. 2. Pluperfect.
J'eusse couru, etc. Future. J'aurai coura, etc.
Imperative.
S. Course, qu'il coure. P. Courons, courez, qu'ils courent.
Infinitive.
Present. COurir, ou Courre. Preter. Avoi^ Couru. Participles.
Present. Courant. Past. Couru.

And so are Conjugated its Compounds,

Discourir, to discourse. Encourir, to incur. Parcourir, to run over. Recourir,
to fly to. Secourir, to succor. Concourir, to concur.

But Accourir to run to, is Conjugated like the Neutral Verbs, of which we have
already spoken.

3. Couvrir. To Cover.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE couvre, tu couvres, il couvre. P. Nous couvrons, vous couvrez, ils
couvrent. Je couvrois, je couvris. J'ai couvert, ^'avois couvert, j'eu couvert,
etc. Je couvrirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je couvre, tu couvres, il couvre. P. Nou^ couvrions, vous couvriez, il^
couvrent. J^^ couvrirois, je couvrisse. J'a^e couvert, j'aurois co^^^vert,
^^eusse couvert, j'auray couvert, etc.
Imperative.
S. COuvre, qu'il couvre, P. Couvrons, couvrez, qu'ils couvrent.
Infinitive.
Couvrir, avoir couvert. Participles.
Couvrant, couvert.

And so Conjugate its Compounds, Decouvrir, to discover, Recouvrir, to cover
again.

4. Cueiller, To gather or to pluck.
This Verb was formerly of the first Conjugation, of which its Present,
Imperfect, and Future Tenses of the Indicative, are still.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE cueille, tu cueilles, il cueille. P. Nous cueillons, vous cueillez, ils
cueillent. Je cueillois, je cueillis. J'ai cueilli, j'avois cueilli, j'eu
cueilli, etc. Je cueillerai, and not cueillirai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je cueille, tu cueilles, il cueille. P. Nous cueillions, vous
cueilliez, ils cueillent. Je cueillerois, je cueillisse. J'aye cueilli,
j'aurois cueilli, j'eusse cueilli, j'aurai cueilli, etc.
Imperative.
S. CUeille, qu'il cueille. P. Cueillons, cueillez, qu'ils cueillent.
Infinitive.
Present. CUeillir. Preter. Avoir cueilli. Participles.
Present. Cueillant. Past. Cueilli.

As for its Compounds Recueillir, and Aecueiller, to Receive, they are exactly
Conjugated as the simple Cueillir.

5. Dormir, To Sleep.
Indicative. Present. S. JE dors, tu dors, il dort,
P. Nous dormons, vous dormez, ils dorment. Je dormois, je dormis J'ay dormi,
j'avois dormi, j'eu dormi, etc. Je dormiray, etc.
Conjunctive.
S. QUE je dorme, tu dormes, il dorme. P. Nou^ dormions, vous dormiez, ils
dorme^t. Je dormirois, je dormisse. J'aye dormi, j'aurois dormi, J'eusse dormi,
etc. J'aurai dormi, etc.
Imperative.
S. DOrs, qu'il dorme. P. Dormons, dormez, qu'ils dorment.
Infinitive.
Present. Dormir. Preter. Avoir dormi. Participle.
Present. Dormant.

And so are Conjugated its Compounds, endormir to make asleep, etc.

6. Faillir, To Fail.
This Verb is defective, and is not in use in the Present and Imperfect Tenses.

But they say in the Indicative,
Je faillis, j'ai failli, j'avois failli, j'eus failli. Je faillirai, etc.
And in the Conjunctive.
Je faillisse, que j'aye failli. j'aurois failli, j'eusse failli, j'aurai
failli.
Its Compound Defaillir, is little in use besides the Infinitive.

7. Fuir, To fly.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE fuis, tu fuis, il fuit. P. Nous fuions, vous fuiez, ils fuient. Je
fuivois. je fuis. J'aye fui, j'avois fui, j'eus fui. Je fuirai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je fuie, tu fuies, il fuie. P. Nous fuiyons, vous f^iyez, ils fuiyent.
Je fuirois, je fuisse. J'ay* fui, j'aurois fui, j'eusse fui, j'aurai fui.
Imperative.
S. FUi, qu'il fuie. P. Fuions, fuiez, qu'ils fuient.
Infinitive.
Present. FUir. Preter. Avoir fui. Participles.
Present. Fuiant. Past. Fui.

8. Hair. To Hate.
This Verb has nothing Irregular but the three Persons Singular of the Present
Indicative. Ie hai, tu hais, il hait, and the Imperative Hai, where h is
pronounced with aspiration, and ai as a Dipthongue; in all others places (but
the Infinitive) h has no aspiration, and ai is divided; as,

Je Haissois, je Hairai, etc.

9. Mentir, To Lie, or Tell a Lie.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE men's, tu men's, il meant. P. Nous mentons, vous mentez, ils mentent. Je
mentois, je mentis. J'ay menti, j'avois menti, j'eu menti. Je mentirai.
Conjunctive. Present.
QUE je mente, tu mentes, etc. Je mentirois, je mentisse. J'aye menti, j'aurois
menti, j'eusse menti, j'aurai menti.
Imperative.
S. Men's, qu'il mente. P. Mentons, mentez, qu'ils mentent.
Infinitive.
MEntir, avoir menti, mentant.
And so is Conjugated its Compound Dementir, to give one the Lie.

10. Mourir, To Die.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE meurs, tu meurs, il meurt. P. Nous mourons, vous mourez, ils meurent. Je
mourois, je mourus. Je suis mort, j'etois mort, je fus mort. Je mourrai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je meure, tu meures, il meure. P. Nous mourions, vous mouriez, ils
meurent. Je mourrois, je mourusse. Je sois mort, je serois mort, je fusse mort,
je serai mort.
Imperative.
S. MEurs, qu'il meure. P. Mourons, mourez, qu'ils meurent.
Infinitive.
MOurir. Etre mort. Mourant. Mort.
This Verb is sometimes Reciprocal in the Present and Imperfect Tenses, to
signify that one is going to die; as,

Je me meurs, je me mourois, etc.

11. Offrir, to Offer. 12. Ouvrir, to Open.
These two Verbs are Conjugated after the manner of Couvrir, to Cover.

13. Ouir, To Hear.
This Verb grows something out of use, especially in the Present and Imperfect
Tenses, and instead of it, the French do commonly make use of the Verb
Entendre, which signifies both to hear and to understand.

Indicative. Present.
S. J'Oy, tu ois, il oit, etc. J'oyois, j'ouis. J'ay oui, j'avois oui, j'eu
oui. J'ouirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
QUE j'oye, tu oyes, etc. J'ouirois, j'ouisse. J'aye oui, j'aurois oui, j'eusse
oui, j'aurai oui.
The Imperative is quite out of use.
Infinitive, Ouir, Avoir Oui, Oyant, Oui.
14. Partir, To Depart, or, to go away.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE pars, tu pars, il part. P. Nous partons, vous partez, ils partent. Je
partois, je partis. Je suis parti, j'etois parti, je fus parti. Je partirai,
etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je part, tu parts, etc. Je partirois, je partisse. Je sois parti, je
serois parti, je fusse parti, je serai parti.
Imperative.
S. PArs, qu'il part. P. partons, partez, qu'ils partent.
Infinitive.
PArtir. Etre parti. Partant. Parti.
And so are Conjugated its Compounds Repartir, etc.

15. Puir, To stink.
This Verb has nothing that is in use, but the Indicative's present, sometimes
the Singular of the Imperfect, and the Participle present in Ant; as,

Je pus, tu pus, il put, nous puons, vous puez, ils puent.

Je puois, tu puois, il puoit. Puant; Instead of Puir, the French use, Sentir
mauvais, or, Err puant.

16. Querir, To fetch.
This Verb has nothing in use but the Infinitive, nor this neither, without one
of these three Verbs, Aller, Venir, Envoyer before it; but its Compounds,
Acquerir, to acquire, or, to purchase. Conquerir, to Conquer, and Requerir, to
require, are thus Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. J'Acquiers, tu acquiers, il acquiert. P. Nous acquerons, vous acquerez, ils
acquierent. J'acquerois, j'acquis. J'ais acquis, j'avois acquis, j'eu acquis.
J'acquerrai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE j'acquiere, tu acquieres, il acquiere. P. Nous acquerions, vous
acqueriez, ils acquierent. J'acquerrois, j'acquisse. J'aye acquis, j'aurois
acquis, j'eusse acquis, j'aurai acquis.
Imperative.
S. ACquier, qu'il acquiere. P. Acquerons, acquerez, qu'ils acquierent.
Infinitive.
ACquerir, avoir acquis. Participles.
Acquerant, acquis.

And so is Conjugated Requerir: But Conquerir in the Present Tense, both of the
Indicative and Conjunctive, has but the first and second Persons in the Plural,
Nous Conquerons, vous Conquerez, Que nous Conquerions, vous Conqueri^z. And in
the Imperative, Conquerons, Conquerez, all the rest is like Acquerir.

17. Se Repentir, To repent.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE me repens, tu be repens, il se repent. P. Nous nous repentons, vous vous
repentez, ils se repentent. Je me repentois, je me repentis. Je me suis
repenti, je m'etois repenti, je me fus repenti. Je me repentirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je me repent, etc. Je me repentirois, je me repentisse. Je me sois
repenti, je me serois repenti, je me fusse repenti, je me serai repenti.
Imperative.
S. REpen toi, qu'il se repent. P. Repentons nous, repentez vous, qu'ils se
repentent.
Infinitive.
SE Repentir, s'etre repenti. Se repentant, repenti.
18. Sentir, To feel, To smell.
This Verb and its Compounds, Consentir, to consent, Ressentir, to resent,
Presentir, to perceive beforehand, are Conjugated like Se Repentir, except that
their Compound Tenss take the Verb Avoir, instead of Etre. Thus, Iai Senti,
I'avois Senti, etc.

19. Servir, To serve.
This Verb and its Compounds are Conjugated like Dormir, to sleep.

20. Sortir, To go out.
This Verb and its Compounds are Conjugated as Dormir, but that in their
Compound Tenses they have the Verb Etre, instead of Avoir.

21. Souffrir, To suffer.
This Verb is Conjugated like Couvrir, to cover.

22. Tenir, To hold.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE tiens, tu tiens, ils tient. P. Nous tenons, vous tenez, ils tiennent. Je
tenois, etc. S. Je tins, tu tins, il tint. P. Nous timmes, vous tintes, ils
tinrent. J'ay tenu, j'avois tenu, j'eu tenu. Je tiendrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je tienne, etc. Je tiendrois, je tinsse. J'aye tenu, j'aurois tenu,
J'eusse tenu, j'aurai tenu.
Imperative.
S. TIen, qu'il tienne. P. Tenons, Tenez, qu'ils tiennent.
Infinitive.
TEnir, avoir tenu. Participles.
Tenant, tenu.

And so are Conjugated its Compounds, Appartenir, to belong, Contenir, to
contain.

23. Venir, To come.
Venir, to come, Devenir, to become, Revenir, to come again, Survenir, to come
upon, are Conjugated like Tenir, except their Compound Tenses, which take the
Verb Etre. As for the other Compounds of Venir, viz. Convenir, to agree,
Contrevenir, to Contravene, Prevenir, to prevent, and Subvenir, to relieve,
they are Conjugated like Tenir.

24. Vetir, To put on.
This Verb is little used but in its Compound Tenses; as, I'ay vetu, j'avois
vetu, etc. yet it is used sometimes in the Imperative; as, Vetez cet habit, put
on that suit of Clothes, it is Conjugated thus.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE vets, tu vets, il vet, P. Nous vetons, vous vetez, ils vetent. Je
vetois, je vetis. J'ay vetu, j'avois vetu, j'eu vetu. Je vetirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je vete, etc. Je vetirois, je vetisse. J'aye vetu, j'aurois vetu,
j'eusse vetu, j'aurai vetu.
Imperative.
S. VEts, qu'il vete. P. vetons, vetez, qu'ils vetent.
Infinitive.
VEtir, avoir vetu. Participles.
Vetant, vetu.

Its Compound Revetir, to put on, is so Conjugated, and is something more in
use. But, Travestir, to Disguise, and Investir, to Invest, or to Surround, are
regular.

. 3. Irregular Verbs of the Third Conjugation.

The third Conjugation has 19 Irregular Verbs.

1. Avoir, To have.
This Verb is the first of the Auxiliary Verbs, of which you have had the full
Conjugation already.

2. Cheoir, or, Choir, To fall.
This Verb is so grown out of date, that if any Tense of it may be used, these
two must be them, Ie cheus, I fell, and je suis chu, I am fallen. As for all
other Tenses it is best to make use of Tomber. But it has two Compounds,
Dechoir, to decay or to waste, and Echoir, to expire, of which the former is
thus Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. Je dechois, to dechois, il dechoit. P. Nous decheons, vous decheez, ils
decheent. Je decheois, je dechus. Je suis dechu, J'etois dechu, je fus dechu.
Je decherrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present*
S. QUE je dechee, tu dechees, il dechee. P. Nous decheions, vous decheiez, ils
decheent. Je decherrois, je dechusse. Je sois dechu, je serois dechu, je fusse
dechu, je serai dechu.
Imperative.
This Mood is never used.
Infinitive.
Dechoir, etre dechu. Participles.
Decheant, dechu.

As for echoir, it is only used impersonally; as, Il echoit it happens, it
falls out, it expires, Il echeoit, il echut, etc.

3. Mouvoir, To move.
This Verb is quite worn out, and instead of it the French use remuer, but its
Compound Emouvoir, which signifies the same thing, is very frequent, and is
thus Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. J'Emeus, tu emeus, il emeut. P. Nous emouvons, vous emouvez, ils emeuvent.
J'emouvois, j'emus. J'ai emu, j'avois emu, j'eu emu. J'emouvrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE j'emeuve, etc. P. Nous emouvions, etc. J'emouvrois, j'emusse. J'aye
emu, j'aurois emu, j'eusse emu, j'aurai emu.
Imperative.
S. EMeus, qu'il emeuve, P. Emouvons, emouvez, qu'ils emeuvent.
Infinitive.
EMo^voir. Avoir emu. Participles.
Emouvant. Emu.

4. Pleuvoir, To Rain.
This Verb is Impersonal, and is thus Conjugated.

Indicative.
IL pleut, il pleuvoit, il pleut. Il a pleu, il avoit pleu, il cut pleu. Il
pleuvra.
Conjunctive.
QU'il pleuve, il pleuvroit, il plust. Il ait plu, il auroit plu, il eust plu,
il aura plu.
Imperative.
QU'il pleuve.
Infinitive.
PLeuvoir. Participles.
Pleuvant, plu.

5. Pouvoir, To be able, or, Can.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE puis, tu peus, il peut. P. Nous pouvons, vous pouvez, ^ls peuvent. Je
pouvois, je pus. J'ay p^, j'avois pu, j'eu pu. Je pourrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je puisse, etc. Je pourois, je pusse. J'aye pu, j'aurois pu, j'eusse
pu, j'aurai pu.
This Verb has no Imperative.
Infinitive.
Pouvoir, avoir pu.
Participles.
Pouvant, pu.
6. Scavoir, ou, Savoir, To know.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE sai, tu sais, il sait. P* Nous savons, vous savez, ils savent. Je
savois, je sus. J'ai su, j'avois su, j'eu su. Je saurai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je sache, tu saches, il sache. P. Nous sachions, vous sachiez, ils
sachent. Je saurois, je susse. J'aye su, j'aurois su, j'eusse su, j'aurai su.
Imperative.
S. SAI, qu'il sache. P. Sachons, sachez, qu'ils sachent.
Infinitive.
SAvoir, avoir su. Participles.
Sachant, su.

7. Valoir, To be Worth.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE vaus, tu vaus, il vaut. P. Nous valons, vous valez, ils valent. Je
valois, je valus. Jai valu, j'avois valu, j'eu valu. Je vaudrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je vaille, etc. Je vaudrois, je valusse. J'aye valu, j'aurois valu,
j'eusse valu, j'aurai valu.
This Verb has no Imperative.
Infinitive.
Valoir, avoir valu. Participles.
Valant, valu.

And so Conjugate Prevaloir, to prevail.

8. Voir, To see.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE vois, tu vois, il voit. P. Nous voyons, vous voyez, ils voyent. Je
voyois, je vis. J'ai veu, j'avois veu, j'eu veu. Je verrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je voye, etc. Je verrois, je visse. J'aye veu, j'aurois veu j'eusse
veu, j'aurai veu.
Imperative.
S. VOI, qu'il voye. P. Voyons, voyez, qu'ils voyent.
Infinitive.
VOir, avoir veu. Participles.
Voyant, veu.

And so Conjugate its Compounds, Entrevoir, to have a glimpse of. Prevoir, to
foresee. Pourvoir, to provide. Revoir, to see again.

9. Vouloir, To will.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE veux, tu veux, il veut. P. Nous voulons, vous voulez, ils veulent. Je
voulois, je voulus. J'ai voulu, j'avois voulu, j'eu voulu. Je voudrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je veuille, tu veuilles, il veuille. P. Nous voulions, vous vouliez,
ils veuillent. Je voudrois, je voulusse. J'aye voulu, j'aurois voulu, j'eusse
voulu, j'aurai voulu.
This Verb has no Imperative.
Infinitive.
Vouloir, avoir voulu. Participles.
Voulant, voulu.

10. Seoir, To sit down.
This Verb is scarce ever used, instead of it, the French make use of Assoir,
which has the same Signification, and is thus Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE m'assieds, tu t'assi^ds, il s'assied. P. Nous nous asseyons, vous vous
asseyez, ils s'asseyent. Je m'asseyois, je m'assis. Je me suis assis, je
m'etois assis, je me fus assis. Je m'assoirai, or, je m'assierai, or, je
m'assirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je m'asseye, etc. Je m'assierois, or, je m'assirois, etc. Je m'assisse.
Je me sois assis, je me serois assis, je me fusse assis, je me serai assis.
Imperative.
S. ASsied toi, qu'il s'asseye. P. Asseyons nous, asseyez vous, qu'ils
s'asseyent.
Infinitive.
S'Assoir, etre assis. Participles.
S'asseyant, assis.

Seoir, has another Compound, viz. Sursoir, to delay, to put off, which is
Conjugated as Assoir.

. 4. Irregular Verbs of the fourth Conjugation.
The fourth Conjugation has 27 Irregular Verbs, viz.

1. Battre, To beat.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE bats, tu bats, il bat. P. Nous battons, vous battez, ils battent. Je
batois, je battis, j'ay batu, etc. Je battrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je batte, etc. Je battrois, je batisse. J'aye battu, etc.
Imperative.
BAts, qu'il batte. Battons, battez, qu'ils battent.
Infinitive.
BAttre, avoir battu. Battant, battu.
2. Boire, To drink.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE bois, tu bois, il boit. P. Nous beuvons, vous beuvez, ils boivent. Je
beuvois, je bus, j'ai bu, etc. Je boirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je boive, tu boives, il boive. P. Nous beuvions, vous beuvi^z, ils
boivent. Je boirois, je busse. J'aye bu.
Imperative.
BOI, qu'il boive, beuvons, beuvez, qu'ils boivent.
Infinitive.
BOive, avoir bu. Beuvant, bu.
3. Braire, Comme un Ane, To Bray.
This Verb is seldom in use but in the third Person. However it may be thus
Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE brais, tu brais, il brait. P. Nous brayons, vous brayez, ils brayent. Je
brayois, j'ai brai, etc. Je brairai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je braye, etc. Je brairois, j'aye brai, etc.
Imperative.
B^ai, qu'il braye, etc.
Infinitive.
BRaire, avoir brai. Brayant, brai.
4. Clorre, To shut.
This Verb and its Compounds Eclorre, to hatch, Enclorre, to enclose, are never
used but in the Infinitive, and in the Participle passive, Clos Close, Eclos
Eclose.

As for the Verbs Conclurre to conclude, Exclurre to exclude, inclurre to
enclose, which derive from Clorre, they are thus Conjugated.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE conclus, tu conclus, il conclut. P. concluons, vous concluez, ils
concluent. Je concluois, je conclus, j'ai conclu, etc. Je conclurrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je conclue, etc. Je conclurrois, je conclusse. J'aye conclu, etc.
Imperative.
COnclu, qu'il conclue, concluons, concluez, qu'ils concluent.
Infinitive.
Conclurre, avoir conclu, concluant, conclu.
5. Connoitre, To know.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE connois, tu connois, il connoit. P. Nous connoissons, vous connoissez,
ils connoissent. Je connoissois, je connus, j'ai connu, etc. Je connoitrai,
etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je connoisse, etc. Je connoitrois, je connusse. J'aye connu, etc.
Imperative.
COnnoi, qu'il connoisse, connoissons, connoissez, qu'ils connoissent.
Infinitive.
COnnoitre, avoir connu, connoissant, connu.
And so are Conjugated its Compounds Mecon^oitre to mistake, and Reconnoitre to
acknowledge, or, to know again.

6. Construire, To build.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE construis, tu construis, il construit. P. Nous construisons, vous
construisez, ils construisent. Je construisois, je construisis, j'ay construit,
etc. Je construirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je construise, etc. Je construirois, je construisisse. J'aye construit,
etc.
Imperative.
COnstrui, qu'il construise, construisons, construisez, qu'ils construisent.
Infinitive.
COnstruire, avoir construit, construisant, construit.
7. Coudre, To sow.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE cous, tu cous, il cout. P. Nous cousons, vous cousez, ils cousent. Je
cousois, je cousus. J'ay cousu, etc. Je coudrai, ^c.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je couse, etc. Je coudrois, je coususse. J'aye cousu, etc.
Imperative.
COus, qu'il couse, cousons, cousez, qu'ils cousent.
Infinitive.
COudre, avoir cousu. Cousant, cousu.
And so Conjugate its Compounds, Decoudre, to unsow* Recoudre, to sow again.

8. Croire, To believe.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE crois, tu crois, il croit. P. Nous croyons, vous croyez, ils croyent. Je
croyois, je crus. J'ay cru, etc. Je croirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je croye, etc. Je croirois, je crusse. J'aye cru, etc.
Imperative.
CRoi, qu'il croye, croyons, croyez, qu'ils croyent.
Infinitive.
CRoire, avoir cru. Croyant, cru.
* The Dipthongue oi, in this Verb is commonly pronounced like an ( e) open.
And instead of Croyons, Croyez, je Croyois, je Croye. We often say, Creyons,
Creyez, je Creyois, je Creye, etc.

9. Croitre, To grow.
This Verb and its Compounds, Accroitre, to increase, etc. are Conjugated as
Connoitre.

10. Cuire, To Roast, to Boil, or to Bake
This Verb and its Compounds, Recuire are Conjugated as Construire.

11. Detruire, To destroy.
This Verb is Conjugated like Construire.

12. Dire, To say.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE dis, tu dis, il dit. P. Nous disons, vous dites, ils disent. Je disois,
je dis. J'ai dit, etc. Je dirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je dise, etc. Je dirois, je disse. J' aye dit, etc.
Imperative.
DI, qu'il dise, disons, dites, qu'ils disent.
Infinitive.
DIre, avoir dit. Disant, dit.
And so Conjugate its Compounds, Maudire, to Curse, Predire, to foretell, etc.
Except that Maudire in the Plural of the Present Indicative, is thus
Conjugated, Nous Maudissons, vous Maudissez, ils Maudissent.

13. Ecrire, To Write.
Indicative. Present.
S. J'Ecris, tu ecris, il ecrit. P. Nous ecrivons, vous ecrivez, ils ecrivent.
J'ecrivois, j'ecrivis. J'ai ecrit, etc. J'ecrirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE j'ecrive, etc. J'ecrirois, jecrivisse. J'aye ecrit, etc.
Imperative.
ECri, qu'il ecrive, ecrivons, ecrivez, qu'ils ecrivent.
Infinitive.
ECrire, avoir ecrit. Ecrivant, ecrit.
And so are Conjugated its Compounds, Decrire, to describe, Prescrire, to
prescribe, etc.

14. Fair, To do, or, to make.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE fais, tu fais, il fait. P. Nous faisons, vous faites, ils font. Je
faisois, je fis. J'ai fait, etc. Je ferai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je fasse, etc. Je ferois, je fisse. J'aye fait, etc.
Imperative.
FAis, qu'il fasse, faisons, faites, qu'ils fassent.
Infinitive.
Fair, avoir fait. Faisant, fait.
Thus are Conjugated all its Compounds, Contrefaire, to Counterfeit, Defaire,
to undo, etc.

*These two Verbs, Confire, to Candy. Suffire, to suffice, which derive from
Fair, are Conjugated like Dire to say, except that Suffire has I'ai Suffi,
without a ( t) in all the Compound Tenses.

15. Lire, To Read.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE lis (...) lit. P. (...) vous lisez, ils (...). Je lisois, (...)* etc.
J'ay lu, and^. (...) Je lirai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je lise, etc. Je lirois, je lusse. J'aye lu, etc.
Imperative.
LIS, qu'il lise, lisons, lisez, qu'ils lisent.
Infinitive.
LIre, avoir lu. Lisant lu.
In the same manner are Conjugated Elire, to Elect, Relire, to read again.

16. Luire, To Shine.
This Verb is Conjugated at Cuire, but that its Preter perfect is j'ai lui.

17. Mettre, to put, to lay.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE mets, tu mets, il met. P. Nous mettons, vous mettez, ils mettent. Je
mettois, je mis. J'ai mis, etc. Je mettrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je met, etc. Je mettrois, je miss. J'aye mis, etc.
Imperative.
MEts, qu'il met, mettons, mettez, qu'ils mettent.
Infinitive.
MEttre, avoir mis, mettant, mis.
And so are Conjugated its Compounds, Commettre, to commit, etc.

18. Moudre, To grind.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE mouls, tu mouls, il moult. P. Nous moulons, vous moulez, ils moulent. Je
moulois, je moulus. J'ai moulu, etc. je moudrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je moule, etc. Je moudrois, je moulusse. J'aye moulu, etc.
Imperative.
MOuls, qu'il moule, moulons, moulez, qu'ils moulent.
Infinitive.
MOudre, avoir moulu, Moulant, moulu.
Thus are Conjugated its Compounds, Remoudre, to grind again, etc.

19. Naitre, To be Born.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE nais, tu nais, il nait. P. Nous naisons, vous naissez, ils naissent. Je
naissois, je naquis. Je suis ne, etc. Je naitrai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je naisse, etc. Je naitrois, je naquisse. Je sois ne, etc.
Imperative.
NAis, qu'il naisse, naissons, naissez, qu'ils naissent.
Infinitive.
NAitre, etre ne. Naissant, ne.
And thus may be Conjugated its Compound, Renaitre, to be born again, but that
it has no Compound Tenses.

20. Nuire, To hurt, to anoy.
This Verb is Conjugated as Construire, but that its Preter perfect is I'ai nui.

21. Paitre, To feed.
This Verb is Conjugated as Naitre, but that it has no Compound Tenses; its
Compound, Repaitre, to feed, is Conjugated thus.

Indicative. Present.
S. JE repais, tu repais, il repait. P. Nous repaissons. vous repaissez, ils
repaissent. Je repaissois, je repeus. J'ay repeu, etc. Je repaitrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je repaisse, etc. Je repaitrois, je repeusse. J'aye repu, etc.
Imperative.
REpais, qu'il repaisse, repaissons, repaissez, qu'ils repaissent.
Infinitive.
REpaitre, avoir repeu, repaissant, repeu.
22. Paroitre, To appear.
This Verb and its Compounds, Disparoitre, to disappear, etc. are Conjugated,
as Connoitre.

23. Plaire, to please.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE plais, tu plais, il plait. P. Nous plaisons, vous plaisez, ils plaisent.
Je plaisois, je plus. J'ay plu, etc. je plairai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je plaise, etc. Je plairois, je plusse. J'aye plu, etc.
Imperative.
PLais, qu'il plaise, plaisons, plaisez, qu'ils plaisent.
Infinitive.
PLaire, avoir plu, plaisant, plu.
And so its Compound Deplaire, to displease, is Conjugated. As for Complaire,
to be complaisant, it is only used in the Infinitive.

24. Prendre, To take.
Indicative. Present.
S. Je prens, tu prens, il prent. P. Nous prenons, vous prenez, ils prenent. Je
prenois, je pris. J'ai pris, etc. je prendrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je prene, etc. Je prendrois, je prisse. J'aye pris, etc.
Imperative.
PRen, qu'il prene, prenons, prenez, qu'ils prenent.
Infinitive.
PRendre, avoir pris. Prenant, Pris.
Thus are Conjugated its Compounds, Apprendre, to learn, Comprendre, to
apprehend, etc.

25. Rire, To laugh.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE ris, tu ris, il rit. P. Nous rions, vous riez, ils rient. Je riois, je
ris. J'ai ri, etc. Je rirai.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je rye, etc. Je rirois, je risse. J'aye ri, etc.
Imperative.
RI, qu'il rye, rions, riez, qu'ils rient.
Infinitive.
RIre, avoir ri. Riant, ri.
And so is Conjugated Sourire, to smile.

26. Suivre, To follow.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE suis, tu suis, il suit. P. Nous suivons, vous suivez, ils suivent. Je
suivois, je suivis. J'ai suivi, etc. Je suivrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je suive, etc. Je suivrois, je suivisse. J'aye suivi, etc.
Imperative.
SUI, qu'il suive, suivons, suivez, qu'ils suivent.
Infinitive.
SUivre, avoir suivi. Suivant, suivi.
Thus are Conjugated its Compounds, Poursuivre, to follow, etc.

27. Vivre, To live.
Indicative. Present.
S. JE vis, tu vis, il vit. P. Nous vivons, vous vivez, ils vivent. Je vivois,
je vecus. J'ay vecu, etc. Je vivrai, etc.
Conjunctive. Present.
S. QUE je vive, etc. Je vivrois, je vecusse. J'aye vecu, etc.
Imperative.
VI, qu'il vive, vivons, vivez, qu'ils vivent.
Infinitive.
VIvre, avoir vecu. Vivant.
Thus are Conjugated its Compounds, Revivre, to come to life again, and
Survivre, to outlive.

Of the way of Conjugating Verbs with an Interrogation, with a Negation, with
an Interrogation and Negation together, and with these Particles en and y.
1. THE way to Conjugate a Verb with an Interrogation, is to put the Personal
Pronoun after the Verb; as,

Aim je? do I love? aimez vous? do you love? aim t-^lle? doe^ she love? vas
tu? do you go? va-^-il? does he go? vont il^* do they go? nous levons nous? do
we rise? se levent else? do they rise? pleut il? does it rain? aime-t-on? do
they love?

* Note that in the third Person Singular, there is a ( ^) put before the
Pronouns il, elle, and on, only for the sweetning of the Pronunciation.

2. To Conjugate a Verb with a Negation, the Frenc^ make commonly use of two
Negative Particles, vis. ne an^ pas, the first goes betwixt the Person and the
Verb, an^ pas after the Verb; Thus,

Ie ne parle pas, I do not speak; Vous ne parlez pas, yo^ speak not; Ie ne me
leve pas, I do not rise; Elle ne s^^leve pas, she does not rise; Il ne gele
pas, it does not freeze:

3. Now when there is an Interrogation with a Negation together, ne goes before
the Verb, and pas after the Verb and the Pronoun; as,

Ne vous levez vous pas? do you not rise? Ne parle t-elle pas? does she not
speak? Ne pleut il pas? does it not rain.

But the Particle ne is sometimes left out, especially before the Verbs
beginning with a Con^onant; as, Le Roi veut il fair cela? will not the King do
that? La Princess partira-t-elle pas demain? will not the Princess go away to
morrow?


* Note that the Imperative Mood cannot be used with an Interrogation, but in
the Negative it may; as,

Ne parle pas, do not speak; Quelle ne dise rie^, let her say nothing.

4. As for the two Particles en and y they come between the Person, and the
Verb, where the Verb is used without an Interrogation; as, I'en parle, I speak
of it; Else en parlent, they speak of it. Tu y vas, thou go thither; Vous y
irez, you shall go thither. But in the Imperative Mood they run thus.
Parles-en, do thou speak of it; Vas y, do thou go thither. Qu'il en parle, let
him speak of it; Qu'elle-y-aille, let her go thither.


If the Negatives come in with these Particles, then they must be placed as
follows;

Ie n'en parle pas? I speak not of it? Ie n'y vai pas, I do not go thither; Ie
n'en ai pas parl^, I did not speak of it; Ie n'y suis pas all, I did not go
thither.

But, if with these Particles, a Verb be used with an Interrogation, it must be
thus,

N'en parle je pas? do I not speak of it?

N'y allons nous pas? do we not go thither?

ART. V.
Of Participles.
THE Participle is a Part of Speech, so called, because it partaketh something
of a Noun and something of a Verb.

The Participles besides the Nature of a Noun Adjective (or Substantive,) has
the signification of the Verb from which it derives, and these two Tenses, the
Present, and the Preter, from whence comes the division of Participles, into
Participles of the Present, and others of the Preter Tense.

1. Participles of the Present Tense.
All Participles present in French, end in ant, and are thus formed from the
Infinitive of Verbs.

In the First Conjugation, by turning er into ant, Parler, parlant.

In the Second Conjugation, by turning er into issant, Emplir, Emplissant.

In the Third Conjugation, by turning oir into ant, Recevoir, Recevant.

In the Fourth, this Participle is formed from the first person plural of the
Present Tense of the Indicative, changing ons into ant, Craign^ns, Craignant,
Vendons, Vendant.

Except the Irregular Verbs of the three last Conjugations which form their
Participles Present, as you may see in the List of Irregular Verbs.

Construction of Participles Present.
The Participle in ant, never varies as long as it has the force and
Signification of the Verb it derives from, but is of all Numbers and Genders;
as, Le Soleil echauffant ^a Terre, etc. The Sun warming the Earth, etc. La Lune
luisant dans la nuit. The Moon shining in the Night. Les Etoiles Brillant dans
une nuit obscure. The Stars Sparkling in a dark night. Le Roy etant assis sur
son Throne. The King sitting on his Throne. La Reine etant malade. The Queen
being sick. Ces Dames etant un peu delicates. Those Ladies being a little nice.


But when the Participles present takes the form of a Noun, then it varies
according to the difference of Genders, and Numbers; as, Un homme brillant, A
man of a brisk and lively humor. Un beauty charmante, A charming beauty. Les
Etoiles etincelantes, The sparkling Stars. Un grand panchant au vice, A great
proneness to vice. Vne servante adroite, A cunning and handy Maid. Le croissant
de la Lune, The increase of the Moon.


To conclude, this Participle is often Construed with the Preposition en; as,
E^ parlant de la ^uerre nous dimes beaucoup de chooses touchant les conquetes du
Roy. As we were speaking of the War, we said many things about the Kings
Conquests. Elle m'avoua en soupirant qu'elle vous aimoit. She confessed to me
with a sigh, that she loved you.


2. Participles of the Preter Tense.
These Participles are generally formed from the Infinitive Mood.

In the First Conjugation by changing er in e, Parler, Parle.

In the Second Conjugation by changing ir in i, Empli^ Empli

In the Third Conjugation by putting away oir Recevoir, Receu.

In the Fourth Conjugation by changing re into u, as Vendre, Vendu.

Except the Irregular Verbs of the three last Conjugations whose Participles
Preter have several endings, as you may see in the Conjugation of Irregular
Verbs.

Construction of Participles Preter.
The Participle Preter being used in the active Signification with the
Auxiliary Avoir, never changes, but is of all Genders, Numbers, and Persons; as,

I'ay, aim. I have loved. Tu as aim. Thou have loved. Elle a aim. She has
loved. Nous avons aim. We have loved. Vous aviez aim. You had loved. Ils
auront aim. They shall have loved.
Yet when these Pronouns Que, Le, La, Les, go before this Participle, then the
Participle must agree with the Pronoun, both in Gender, and Number; as,

Le livre que j'ai lu. The Book which I have read; La Lettre que j'ai veue, The
Letter I have seen; Les Dames que j'ai saluees, The Ladies which I bowed to; Ie
l'ai veu, I have seen him; Ie l'ai veue, I have seen her; Ie les ai emplis, I
have filled them; Ie les ai emplies, I have filled them.

The Participle Preter used in the Passive and Reciprocal Signification, varies
according to the difference of Genders and Numbers, as you have seen in the
Conjugation of Verbs.

The Gender Feminine is formed from the Masculine, by adding an e. Feminine; as,

Aim, Aimee, loved. Empli, Emplie, filled, etc.

The Plural Number Masculine in the first Conjugation is formed^ from the
Singular, by adding a ( z) and putting away the Accent, or, by adding an ( s)
and keeping the Accent; as,

Aim, Aimez* or, Aims, in the other three it is formed by adding an ( s)
only; as, Empli, Emplis, filled, etc.

The Plural Number Feminine is formed from the Singular, by the sole addition
of an ( s); as,

Aimee, Aimees, loved. Emplie, Emplies, filled.

* Note that when the Pronoun ( vous) is put for the Singular, ( tu) the
Participle Past that follows it, is put in the Singular; as,

Vous etes aim ou aimee, You are loved.

ART. VI.
Of Adverbs.
AN Adverb is a part of Speech, which being joined with the Verbs, and
sometimes with the Nouns, explains, or fills up their Signification; as, Cette
Dame chante divinement, That Lady sings divinely. Elle est extremement belle,
She is extremely handsome.


* Every Adverb is not expressed in one word; but some of them consist of a
Preposition and a Noun, as a l'impreveu, unawares, and others of a Preposition
and an Adverb* as, vis-a-vis, over against, etc.

Now there are several sorts of Adverbs, and First.

1. Of Adverbs of Time.
PResentement, now. A present, at present. Maintenant, now. A cette heure, at
this time. Dans ce moment, at this moment. Aujourd'huy, to day. Hier,
yesterday. Avanthier, the day before yesterday. Autrefois, formerly.
Auparavant, before. Anciennement, of old. Dernierement, lately. Tout
fraichement, newly. Nouvellement, Recemment, newly. Depuis peu, Nagueres, not
long since. Hier au soir, yesternight. L'annee passee, last year. Demain, to
morrow. Apres demain, after to morrow. Ci-apres, hereafter. Tantot, by and by.
A l'Avenir, in the Future. Desormais, D'orenavant, henceforth. Dans peu, within
a little while. L'an qui vient, the next year. A jamais, for ever. Pour
toujours, for evermore. Deja, already. Pas encore, not yet. De nuit, in the
night. De jour, in the day time. De bonne heure, betimes. Tard, trop tard,
late, (...) late. Tot, trop tot, soon, too soon. De nouveau, again. Une autre
fois, another time. Quand, when. Toujours, jamais, always, never. Souvent,
often. Incessamment, continually. Rarement, seldom. Incontinent, presently. De
tems en tems, now and then. Journellement, daily. A tou^ moment, every moment.
Tous les jours, every day. Cependant, in the mean while. Presque toujours, most
commonly. Durant trois jours, during three days. Lorsque, when. Puis, then.
Depuis, du depuis, since. Encore, yet, as yet. Lors, pour lors, alors, then.
D'ici, as, dans un an d'ici, a year hence. Tout a l'heure, forthwith. Tout
maintenant, presently. Quelquefois, sometimes.
2. Adverbs of Place.
Ici, ca, la, here, there. Deca, dela, on this side, on that side. Enhaut,
enbas, up, down. La haut, above. Devant, derriere, before, behind. Dessus,
dessous, upon, under. Dedans, dehors, within, without. Ceans, here, within. Ou,
where. Par icy, this way. Par la, that way. De cote and d'autre, up and down.
Par tout, every where. Nulle part, No where. Ailleurs, elsewhere. De tous
cotez, on every side. Tout au tour, round, round about. D'ou, from whence.
D'icy, from hence. De quel endroit, from what place. Par deca, on this side.
Par dela, on that side. Prez, proche, near. Loin, far. Y. En. There, hence.
3. Adverbs of Quantity.
Combien, how much, how many. Assez, trop, enough, too much. Beaucoup, much,
mnny. Force, Quantite, much, many. Plus, moins, more, less. Point, none. Tant
soit peu, but a little. Point du tout, not at all. A fond, thoroughly. Tant,
autant, so much, as much. Tout au plus, at the most. Tres, fort, most, very. A
tout le moins, at least. Pour moins, for less. Quasi, presque, almost. Guere,
but little. A peu pres, very near. A demi, by halves. Tout a fait, quite.
4. Adverbs of Number.
Une fois, deux fois, once, twice. Trois fois, three times. Tant de fois, so
many times. Davantage, more farther. Plusieurs fois, several times. Combien de
fois, how many times. De deux jours l'un, every other day.
5. Adverbs of Order.
Premierement, en premier lieu, First, in the first place. Secondement, en
second lieu, Secondly. Avaunt toures chooses, before all. ^pres tout, after all.
Tour a tour, by turns. En suite, afterward, then. En order, par order,
orderly, in order. Enfin, a la fin, in fine, at last. De front, or de rang, a
breast. De file, a la file, in a file, one after another. A la ronde, round
about. De suite, together.
6. Adverbs of affirming.
Ouui, ouida, yes, yes forsooth. Assurement, assuredly. Oui vraime^t, yes
indeed. Certes, truly. Certainement, certainly. Veritablement, verily. Si, yes,
as, je dis que si, I say yes. Sans doubt, without doubt. En verite, in truth,
indeed. A la verite, it is true, indeed. Vraiment, truly. Indubitablement,
undoubtedly.
7. Of Denying.
Non, ne, ni, point, pas, nenni pas, no, not. Point du tout, not at all.
Nullement, by no means, not at all. En nulle maniere, in no wise.
8. Of Doubting.
Peut etre, Perhaps, may be. S'il arrivoit, if it should fall out. Cela se
peut, that may be. Par hazard, by chance.
9. Of Asking.
Pourquoy? Why? Pourquoi non? Why not? Que? What? Why? Comment? How? A quoi
bon? To what purpose?
10. Of Choosing.
Pluto^, rather, sooner. Sur tout, above all. Mieux, rather. Avaunt que, before
that.
11. Of Comparing.
Comme, as, like. Ainsi, dememe, so, thus. Egalement, equally. Que, than; as,
plus petit que moy, less than I. Plus, moins, more, less. Pareillement,
semblablement, likewise.
12. Of Showing.
Voici, voila, here is, there is, or behold.
13. Of Consenting.
D'accord, soit, I grant it. Tope, je le veux, done, I will. Posous le cas que,
suppose that.
14. Of Forbidding.
Gardez-vous bien de, be sure to not. Prenez guard que, have a car^ that.
15. Of Confusion.
Confusement, confusedly. Pele-mele, Pell-mell, in a confusion. Au rebours, the
wrong way. Sens devant derriere, Preposterously. Sens dessus dessous,
topsie-^urvey. A l'envers, the wrong side.
16. Adverbs of Gathering.
Ensemble, together. Conjointement, jointly.
17. Of Separation.
Separement, separately. A quartier, aside. A part, Apart, aside. A l'ecart,
aside, out of the way.
18. Of Deliberation.
Expres, on purpose. De propos delibere, Of set purpose. A dessein, purposely,
designedly. Tout de bon, in good earnest.
19. Of Rashness.
Par megarde, by oversight. Brusquement, bluntly. A la volee, at random.
Precipitammant, headlong. A l'Etourdie, rashly, heedlesly. Temerairement,
rashly.
20. Of Opportunity.
A propos, seasonably, aptly. Tout a point, at the nick of time. Commodement,
Conveniently. A point nomme, very seasonably.
21. Of Difficulty.
A peine, hardly, scarce. A regret, against ones will. Mal aisement, with much
ado. A contre coeur, against one^ mind.
22. Of Haste.
Vite, vitement, quickly. Tout a coup, tout d'un coup, on a sudden. Promtement,
quickly. Subitement, suddenly. A la hate, in haste. Sur le champ, out of hand.
23. Of Gentleness.
Peu a peu, by little and little. Tout beau, tout doucement, softly, by
degrees. Pas a pas, step by step. Tout bellement, gently, softly.
24. Of Quality.
Justement, justly. Galamment, handsomely. Bien, Mieux, well, better.
Infiniment, infinitely. Mediocrement, indifferent. Mal, pire, bad, ill, worse.
* Most of the Adverbs of Quality in French, are formed from Nouns Adjective of
the Feminine Gender, by adding meant; as,

Royale, Royalement. Bonne, Bonnement. Grande, Grandement. Royal, Royally.
Good, Ingenuously. Great, Greatly.
But that Rule has four Exceptions.

1. If the Noun Adjectiue be of the common Gender, the Adverb is formed by
adding meant only; as, from Just, utile, just, useful, comes Iustement,
utilement, which have always an ( e) Feminine before meant, except these which
have an ( e) Masculine.

Communement, Precisement, Commodement. Commonly, Precisely, Conveniently.
2. If the Nown Adjective ends by an ( e) Masculine, by an ( i) or by an ( u),
the Adverb is formed of the Masculine, and not of the Feminine; as, from
Assure, joli* res^lu, comes Assurement, assuredly, joliment, prettily,
resolument, resolutely.

3. Nouns Adjectives ending in ant or ent, form their Adverbs by changing nt in
^, and adding meant, as from Constant, Prudent, comes Constainment, constantly,
Prude^ment, prudently.

4. Finally Nouns Adjectives ending in meant; as Vehement, Clement, have no
Adverbs, and instead of Veheme^^ment, and Clememment, we say avec Clemence,
with Clemency, avec Vehemence, with vehemence.

Note that most Adverbs which derive from Adjectives, have like them three
degrees of Comparisons; as,

Iustement, justly, Plus justement, more justly, Le plus justement, most justly.

ART. VII.
Of Conjunctions.
A Conjunction is a part of Speech that serves to join Words, Sentences, and
Periods together.

Conjunctions are divided into several Orders, of which some are.

1. Conjunctions Copulative.
Et, and. Aussi, also. Encore, yet, still. Deplus, Davantage, moreover. Au
rest, for the rest. Enfin, in fine, or, now.
2. Disjunctive.
OU, Or. Soitque, whether, or, Encore que, though, when. Ni, neither, nor.
Bienque, quoique, though, although.
3. Adversative, i. e. Showing some Contrariety.
Mais, que, but, then. Cependant, in the mean time. Pourtant, however.
Nonobstant cela, notwithstaning. Toutefois, yet, but still. Neantmoins,
nevertheless. Si est ce que, but for all that. Au contraire, on the contrary.
4. Conditional.
Si, if, whether. A condition que, upon condition that. Pourveu que, provided*
that. Amoins, que; unless except.
5. Causal, or, giving reason of what is said.
Parceque, because. Dautantque, for as much as. Veu que, seeing that. Car, for.
Sur ce que, whereas. Affinque, to the end that.
6. Conclusive.
Donc, doncque, then. Pour cet effet, to that end. C'est pourquoi, therefore.
De sort que, so that.
7. Continuative.
Au rest, as for the rest. Et certes, and indeed. Or, or est il, now, now
since. En effet, indeed. Tant y a, however. Sinon, but, save, if not.
* Observe that there is so great affinity an between Adverbs and Conjunctions,
that it is very hard sometimes to distinguish them from one another: And
besides, Conjunctions being used in several Senses, have also several Names:
But 'ti smuch more profitable to know all these petty differences by the
reading of good Authors, than by any Rules of Grammar.

ART VIII.
Of Prepositions.
A Preposition is a part of Speech which goes before the other parts to explain
their various Signification.

Prepositions are divided into Separable and Inseparable.

A separable Preposition is commonly separated from other words, and signifies
something by it self; as, Dans in, Avec with.

An inseparable is never found but in Compound words, and signifies nothing of
it self; as, Ad-mettre, to admit, E-taller, to show, Im-poser, to impose.

* Most of these Compound words deriving from the Latin, to show the true
nature of inseparable Prepositions, it would be requisite to consider each of
them singly, and to dive into the Latin for their Signification, but that being
quite out of our purpose, and besides of no use, I shall give you the List of
the separable.

Prepositions.
DE, du, dela, des, Of, from. Horse, loin, out, far. Pres, aupres, proche, near.
Arriere, away, back. Vis-a-vis, a l'opposite, over against. A l'abri de,
sheltered from. A couvert, free, secure from. A l'ecart, aside. A l'envi, in
emulation. Au milieu, au mitan, in the middle. Sur, sus, dessus, au dessus, up,
upon. Sous, dessous, au dessous, under. A, au, aux, to. A fleur de terre, close
to the ground. A fleur d'eau, even with the water. A l'insceu, without the
knowledge. A la maniere, after the manner. A la mode, after the fashion. A
raison de, at the rate of. A la reserve, except, but. Au tour, a l'entour,
about. Derr^ere, au derriere, behind. Devant, au devant, before. Dans, dedans,
au dedans, en, in, within. Horse, dehors, au dehors, out without. A travers, au
travers, cross, through. Le long, along. Avec, with. Contre, against. Verse,
envers, toward, to. Environ, about. Suivant, selon, according. Outre, besides.
Moyennant, for, provided. Pendant, whilst. Par, by. Touchant, touching, about.
Jusque, jusques, till, to, even to. Avaunt, apres, before, after. Chez, at, to.
Depuis, since, from. Durant, during. Enter, between. Except, horsmis, except,
saving, but. Malgre, in spite. Parmi, among. Pour, for. Sans, without.
Conformement a, according (...).
ART. IX.
Of Interjections.
AN Interjection is a part of Speech expressing a sudden motion of the mind,
such as are,

1. Of joy.
^a, courage, come, cheer up. Allons, gai, come, cheerfully. Ha, ha, ha, ha,
ha, ha.
2. Of Sorrow.
Helas! ah! alas! ah! Ah mon Dieu! oh my God! Eh Seigneur! oh Lord!
3. Of Pain.
Ai! ah! ouf! ai! oh! oh! O Ciel! oh Heaven!
4. Of Encouraging.
Allons sus, come. Or, sus, ca, sus donc, march, come on. Courage, courage,
cheer up.
5. Of Warning.
Gare, prenez guard, have a care. Tout beau, softly Arretez, hola, hold, hold.
6. Of Calling.
Hola ho, hola hei, ho there, ho hey. Parlez hei, speak here.
7. Of Admiration.
Ouaih! voyez! lack a day! see! Ah ouida! ay marry!
8. Of Aversion.
Fi, fi, pouah, Fie, fie, sough* Fi le vilain, fie, nasty. Fi le pouacre, fie
upon, faugh. Foin de vous, fie upon you. Au diantre, dew^e take. Des nefles,
des sottises, ^agatelles, trifles, away, silly stuff.
9. Of Laughing.
Ha, ha, he, hi, hi, hi, ah, ah, eh, eh.
10. Of Silence.
Chut, st, st, hush, not a word. Paix, paix la, pea^e there. Silence, silence.
CHAP. IV.
Of Sentences. Or, The Construction of words, called, Syntax.
HAving explained in the foregoing Chapter, the nine Parts of Speech, each by
it self, I come now to the Syntax, which is the Construction of them together,
into Sentences, according to right use.

It Is true, that a great deal of this has been already treated of, in the
Exposition of the parts of Speech: But because something more may be said, of
no small use, I shall give you the following Rules.

1. Rule.
The Article, the Noun Adjective, the Pronoun, and the Participle, agree with
the Noun Substantive, both in Number and Gender; as,

Le grand lit, The great bed; La grande table, The great table; Les beaux
hommes, les belles femmes, The handsome men; the handsome women; L'homme
bless, The wounded man; Vne femme aimee, a woman loved; Un Prince charmant, a
Charming Prince; Vne Princess charmante, a charming Princess; Mon Prince and
ma Princess, My Prince and my Princess.

*But Note, that in the use of these Pronouns Possessive, mon, ton, son, the
French mind less the strictness of the Rule, than the sweetness of the
Language; And so they say, Mon ame, my Soul, Ton Epee, thy Sword, Son amie, his
or her friend, although Ame, epee, amie, be of the Feminine Gender, and mon, ton,
son, of the Masculine.

2. Rule.
Two or more Nouns Substantive in the Singular Number being joined together by
a Conjunction, are as good as a Plural Number; and therefore if a Verb and an
Adjective come after them, both these must be put in the Plural Number; as,

Le Pere and le fills sont malheureux, The Father and the Son are unfortunate;
La mere and la fille sont egalement belles, The Mother and the Daughter are
equally handsome.

3. Rule.
If one of the Substantives be of the Masculine Gender, and the other of the
Feminine, the Adjective Plural that goes along with the Verb, will be also of
the Masculine; as,

Les hommes and les femmes sont mortels, Both Men and Women are mortal.

4. Rule.
But if there comes no Verb after two Substantives of a different Gender, then
the Adjective agrees with the last, both in Number and Gender; as, IN ai le
coeur and la main ouverte pour vous recevoir. My heart and hand are open to
receive you. On voit souvent le merit, l'honneur and la justice opprimee. We
often see merit, honor, and justice oppressed.


* Note that these two words Quelque chose, something, though of the Feminine
Gender, will have the Adjective that comes after, relating to them, in the
Masculine Gender; as,

Sa Conversation a quelque chose d'ennuyeux, His Conversation is somewhat
tedious.

5. Rule.
All Pronouns Relative, such as il, elle, qui, quel, quelle, etc. agree with
their Antecedent, both in Number and Gender; as, C'est la Dame pour laquelle
j'ai tant d'estime and damitie. That Is the Lady I have so much esteem and
kindness for. C'est votre mari and v^us devez le respecter. He is your Husband
and you ought to respect him.


6. Rule.
A Verb Personal being joined with a Substantive, agrees with it in Number and
Person; as, L'amour de Dieu contient toutes les autres vertus. The Love of God
comprehends all other Virtues. Les avantages de la nature sont preferables a
ceux de l^ fortune. The advantages of nature are preferable to those of fortune.


Note that all Nouns both Singular and Plural are of the third Person, except
these Pronouns Personal, Ie, nous, (...), vous, which are of the first and
second: And all Nouns which are joined with the first or second Persons of the
Imperative Mood; as,

IN aim la virtue, I love virtue; Nous haissons le vice* we hate vice; Tu
caquettes comme une Pie, thou twatlest like a Mag-Pye; Vous etes heureux, you
are happy; Camarade, s^i moy, follow me, Friend; Monsieur Pierre, venez icy,
Mr. Peter, come hither; Ayons bon courage, mes amiss, Let Us cheer up, Friends;
Messieurs, songez a vous, Gentlemen, look to your selves.

7. Rule.
The First Person is counted better than the Second, and the Second better than
the Third; Therefore where two or three Persons go before a Verb, this agrees
with the best Person; as,

Vous and moi etions fort en peine, you and I were very much troubled; Elle and
moi nous promenames ensemble, she and I walked together; Vous and mon friar
dinerez icy, you and my Brother shall dine here.

8. Rule.
After Collective words, such as Vne infinite, la plupart, etc. the Verb agrees
in Number with the Substantive that comes after the Collective; as, Vne
infinite de persons me sont venus voir. A great many people came to see me.
Vne infinite de monde m'est venu voir. A world of people is come to see me. La
plupart des hommes aiment la gloire. Most men love glory. La p^upart du monde
suit ses passions. Most people follow their passions.


* It would be an easy matter for me to enlarge this Chapter of the Syntax,
with several Observations upon the Idiom or Propriety of the French-Tongue: But
as I have said before, I have made all along several Remarks upon the
Construction of the Parts of Speech, to which, I think, it is enough to refer
the Reader: For Experience convinces me, that most people learn much sooner how
to Construe Words into Sentences, by the frequent reading of good Authors, and
by an assiduous Practice, than by a cluster of Rules, which most commonly do
but over-burden ones memory, without instructing the Understanding.

CHAP. V.
Of Distinctions used in writing. VIZ. Accents, Stops, and Points.
AMongst the Distinctions used in Writing, some are proper to Vowels, others to
Words and Sentences.

ART. I.
The Distinctions proper to Vowels, are three, viz.

1. Accent. 2. Division. 3. Apostroph.
1. The Accent (which is as the Soul of Words) is an elevation or rising of the
Voice in one of the Syllables of a word.

The Accent is threefold, viz. Acute thus marked (a), Grave thus marked (a),
Circumflex thus marked (a).

The Acute shows the elevation of Syllables; the Grave denotes their falling or
depression, and the Circumflex, both the rising and falling of the Syllable,
which therefore ought to be a long one; as,

Autel, Altar. Virtue, Virtue. Impot, Tax.

* The Greek have been strict observers of Accents, in which they were in a
great measure imitated by the Latin; but in all Modern Languages, the right use
of them is little or not all understood.

The Acute in French, is peculiar to the Vowel, e.

1. When the e is Masculine; as, Piete, Piety. Epee, Sword. 2. When an s is
left out because unpronounced; as, etre, to be, emouvoir, to move, formerly
spelt estre, esmouvoir.
The Grave is peculiar to the Preposition a, to, and to the Adverbs la, there,
and ou, where; only for distinction sake, a from a has, in the Verb avoir; la,
from la the, a Feminine Article and Pronoun; and ou from the Conjunction ou, or.

The Circumflex is put upon any of the five Vowels, a, e, i, o, u, when any
Vowel or Consonant is left out in the same Syllable, which the French do often
in their new way of spelling; as,

age, age. Aune, yard. Baton, stick. Pan, Peacock. Formerly spelt aage, aulne,
baston, paon; and likewise,

Queque for quelque, some; Niece for Niepce, Niece; Pretre for Prestre, Priest;
Conoitre for Conoistre, to know; Notre for Nostre, our; Couteau for Cousteau,
knife; bu for beu, drunk; C^u for Col, neck; fou for fol, fool; genou for
genouil, knee; fenou for fenouil, fennel.

II. By the division, I mean those two little points which are sometimes met
with on the top of the Vowels, e, and i, to show that the Vowel so marked,
belongs not to the same Syllable, as the Vowel that is before it; as, Jouer,
jouir, to play, to enjoy.
which words consist of these two Syllables, jou-er, jou-ir.

III. An Apostroph (') is an inverted c, showing that there is a Vowel wanting,
and two words made into one, as it happens, when of two words, the first ends
in one of these Vowels, a, e, i, and the next begins with any Vowel; as, L'ame
for la ame, the Soul, l'unite for la unite, the unity*
L'enfant for le enfant, the Child, s'il for si il, if he.


* To this purpose, see the IV. Article of the Second Chap.

ART. 2.
THE Distinctions proper to Words and Sentences, are eight in Number, viz.

1. A Note of continuation thus marked - 2. A Comma thus marked, 3. A Colon
thus marked: 4. A Semicolon thus marked; 5. A Parenthesis thus marked () 6. A
Note of interrogation thus marked? 7. A Note of Admiration thus marked! 8. A
period. thus marked.


1. A Note of Continuation (-) is made use of at the end of the line, when the
word is divided betwixt that Line and the next, or else when two words are
joined into one; as, Mal-seant, unbecoming.


2. A Comma (,) marks the little pauses one makes in a Discourse, both to grace
it, and to make it clear to the Reader; as,

Un Prince genereux, doux, benin and communicatif est aim de tous ses Sujets.
A Generous, Gentle, Kind and Affable Prince, is beloved of all his Subjects.

3. A Colon (:) marks a Sense that seems to be complete, but so that there is
still something to be added.

4. A Semicolon (;) marks a short member of a Sentence, which though it has a
full sense of it self, yet contributes toward the making up of a complete
Period.

5. A Parenthesis (^) incloses within its two Figures a Sentence by it self,
which may be used or omitted, and yet the Sense remain entire.

6. A note of Interrogation (?) is used where one asks a Question.

7. A note of Admiration (!) where one admires, or cries out for wonder.

8. A Period (.) shows that the Sense of the Sentence is full. Of all which you
have an Example in the following Lines.

Ie vis cette belle person a la promenade: la voir and l'aimer fut presque
tout un, j'essayay (mais inutilement) D'etouffer cette passion naissante; mais
comment resister aux charms de la beauty? j'aimai donc; je trouvai le moyen
d'entretenir mon Divin objet; and c'est ce qui acheva de me perdre; car ayant
remarque tant d'Esprit, and tant de virtue dans cette aimable Person, ma
raison ne s'opposa plus a mon amor. Ma^s, O Malheur! lors que je commencois a
ne lui^etre pas indifferent la mort m'a ravi toutes mes esperances.

I saw that Charming Person a walking: To see her, and to love her was almost
all one; I strived (but in vain) to stifle this rising Passion; but how can one
resist the Powerful Charms of Beauty? I loved her; I found the way to discourse
with her, and this was my utter ruin; for meeting with so much Wit, and so much
Virtue in this Divine Creature, my Reason opposed my Love no longer. But, O
Misfortune! When I begun not to be indifferent to her, Death robbed me of all
my hopes.

THE COMPLETE French-Master.

The Second Part.

CONTAINING, I. A Vocabulary. II. The Familiar Dialogues. III. The Niceties of
the French-Tongue. IV. Twelve Discourses by way of Conversation.


LONDON: Printed by Ri^. Everingham, for T. Salisbury, near St. Dunstan's-
Church in Fleet Street, 1694.

A VOCABULARY English and French.
BEING A Collection of all the Words most necessary to Speak either Language.
Of the World in general.
Du Monde en general.
GOd, Dieu. Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ. The Holy Ghost, Le Saint Esprit. The
World, le Monde. The Heaven, le Ciel. An Angel, un Ange. The Saints, les
Saints. The Blessed, les Bien-heureux. The Paradise, le Paradis, The Hell,
I'Enfer. The Devil, le Diable, ou le Demon. The Fire, le Feu. The Air, I'Air.
The Earth, la Terre. The water, I'Eau. The Sea, la Mer. A Star, un Astre, ou
une Etoile. The Sun, le Soleil. The Moon, la Lune. The Light, la Lumiere. The
Darkness, les Tenebres. The beams of the Sun, les rayons du Soleil. The Clouds,
les nues, ou nuages. The Wind, le vent. The Rain, la pluie. The Thunder, le
tonnere. The thunderbolt, la foudre. The lightning, l'eclair. The rainbow,
l'arc-en-ciel. The hail, la grele. The snow, la neige. The frost, la gelee. The
ice* la glace. The mist or fog, le brouillard. The glazed frost, le verglas.
The dew, la Rosee. The Earthquake, le tremblement de ^erre. The heat, la
chaleur, ou le chaud. The ^^ld, le froid. A month, un mois. A year, un an, ou
une ann^e. An Age, or Century, un siecle.
The days of the Week,
Les jours de la Semaine.
Monday, Le Lundy. Tuesday, le M^rdy. Wednesday, le Mecredy. Thursday, le
Jeudy. Friday, le Vendredy. Saturday, le Samedy. Sunday, le Dimanche.
Of the Time, du Tems.
The day, le jour, ou la journee. The night, la nuit. The noon, le midy. The
midnight, le minuit. The morning, le matin, ou la matinee. The Evening, le
soir, ou la soiree. An hour, une heure. A quarter of an hour, un quart d'heure.
Half an hour, demi heure. A moment, un moment. A week, une semaine.
The Months of the Year,
Les Mois de l'Annee.
January, Janvier. February, Fevrier. March, Mars. April, Avril. May, May.
June, Juin. July, Juillet. August, Aout. September, Septembre. October,
Octobre. November, Novembre. December, Decembre.
The Times, or Seasons of the Year.
Les Saisons de l'Annee.
The Spring, le printems. The Summer, I'Ete. The Autumn, or, fall of the Leaf,
I'automne. The Winter, L'hyver.
The Holy days, or, Festivals of the year.
Les Fetes de I'Annee.
The New-Years-Day, Le jour de I'an. The Twelth-day, or, Epiphany, le jour des
Rois. Candlemass-day, la Chandeleur. Shrove-tide, le Carnaval. The ^ent, le
Car^me. The Ember-weeks, les quatre tems. The Holy-week, la Semaine Saint.
Palm Sunday, le Dimanche des Rameaux. Good Friday, le Vendredy Saint.
Easter Day, le jour de P^ques. Ascension-day, L'Ascension. Whit-Sunday, la
Pentecote. Mid-summer-day, la Saint Jean. All-Saints-day, la Tous-Sains.
Christmas, Noel. The Eve, La Veille, or Vigile. The Harvest, la Moisson. The
Vintage, les Vendanges.
Of Mankind.
Du Genre Humain.
The Man, L'homme. The Woman, la Femme. An Old Man, Un viellard, ou, un homme
age. An Old-woman, une vieille, ou, une femme agee. A young man, un jeune
homme. A young woman, une jeune femme. A Batchelour, or, a Boy, un Garcon. A
Maid, or, Girl, une fille. An infant, or, a child, un Enfant. A Virgin, or,
Maid, une vierge, ou, pu^elle.
The Parts of Man's body.
Les Parties du Corpse humain.
The Body, le corpse. The Head, la Tete. The face, le visage. The features, les
traits. The forehead, le front. The top of the head, le sommet de la tete. The
eye, the eyes, I'oeil, les yeux. The eyebrows, les sourcils. The eyelid, la
paupiere. The eye-ball, la prunelle de l'oeil. The nose, le nez. The nostrils,
les narines. The cheek, la joue. The lip, la levre. The mouth, la bouche. A
tooth, une dent. The tongue, la langue. The palate, le palais de la bouche. The
jaw, la machoire. The gum, la gen^ive. The throat, le gosier. The ear,
I'oreille. The temple, la temple. The chin, le menton. The neck, le cou, ( ou,
la gorge.) The breast or bosom, la poitrine, ou le feign. A woman's breast, un
teton, ou la mamelle. The shoulder, l'epaule. The arm, le bras. The arm-hole,
l'aisselle. The elbow, le could. The wrist, le poignet. The hand, la main. The
thumb, le pouce. The finger, le doigt. The nail, l'ongle. The palm of the hand,
la paume de la main. The fist, le poing. The belly, le ventre. The navel, le
nombril. The back, le dos. The reins (or loins,) les reins. The wast, le
ceinture. The side, le cote. A rib, une cote. The buttocks, les fesses. The
hip, la hanche. The groi^, l'aine. The thigh, la cuisse. The knee, le genou.
The ham, le jarret. The leg, la jambe. The calf of the leg, le gras de la
jambe. The ancle-bone, la cheville du pie. The foot, le pie. The sole of the
foot, la plant du pie. The instep, le cou du pie. The heel, le talon. A toe,
un orteil. The skin, la peau. The flesh, la chair. A bone, un os. The fat, la
graisse, ou, le gras. The blood, le sang. A vein, une vein. A sinew, un nerf.
The marrow, la moelle. The skull, le crane. The brain, le cerveau, ( ou, la
cervelle.) The entrails, les entrailles. The stomach, l'estomac. The bowels,
les boyaux, ( ou, les tripes.) The heart, le coeur. The Lungs, les poumons. The
liver, le foye. The kidney, le rognon. The spleen, le rate. The gall, le fiel.
The bladder, le vesie. The milk, le lait. The hair, le poil. The hair of the
head, les cheveux, ( ou, la cheveleure.) The beard, la barbe. The whiskers, la
moustache. The urin, l'urine. The snot, la morve. The spittle, la salive. The
spit, le crachat. A tear, une larme. The dandriff, la crasse de tete. The
breath, l'haleine, ( ou, le souffle. The pi^chor shape, la taille. The looks,
la mine, ou, l'air. The gate, le port, ou, la demarche. The action, or motion,
le geste. The good case, l'embonpoint. The health, la sante. The leanness, la
maigreur. The beauty, la beauty. The ugliness, la laideur. The voice, la voix.
The speech, la parole. The sigh, le soupir. The groan, le gemissement. The
sight, la veue. The hearing, l'ouie. The smelling, l'odorat. -- The taste, le
gout. The feeling, le sentiment, ou, (l'attouchement.)
Blemishes of the Body.
Defauts du Corpse.
The blearedness, la chassie. A wart, une verrue, ( ou, poireau.) A wrinckle,
une ride. A pimple, un bouton. A red-pimple, un rubis. A freckle, une lentille,
ou, rousseur de visage. A wen, une loupe. A scratch, une egratigneure. A
strain, une entorse. A flat nose, un nez camus. One-eyed, un borgne. A
squint-eyed, un louche. A blind, un aveugle. A purblind, qui a la velie court.
A stammering, un begue. A lame, un estropie. A cripple, or lame, un boiteux. A
crooked, un bossu, ( ou, voute.) A bald-pated, un chauve. A dumb, un m^et. A
deaf, un sourd. A dwarf, un nain, ( ou, nabot.) A gelded, un chatre. A
toothless, un edente.
Of Diseases.
Des Maladies.
A distemper, or disease, une incommodite, ou, une malady. A pain, une
douleur. An ailment, une indisposition. A fever or ague, une fievre. A fit, un
acce^. The cold fit, le frisson. Headache, mal de tete. Toath-ach, mal de
dents. Belly-ach, mal de ventre. Short wind, difficul^e de respiration. The
cough, la toux. The falling sickness, le haut mal. The green sickness, le
jaunisse, ( ou, les pales couleurs.) Hoarseness, enrouement. A swooning, un
evanouissement. A fainting, une pamoiso^. The pl^gue, la peste. The
small-(...), la petite verole. The meazells, la rougeolle. The consumption, la
Ph^hifie, ou, Consomption. The Gripings, les Trenchees de Ventre. The hiccup,
le hoquet. The scurvy, le scorbut. The leprosy, la lepre. The dizziness, or,
giddiness, le vertige. A sore, or, ulcer, un ulcere. The itch, or, scab, la
galle. A wheal, or, blister, une p^stule. A wound, une blessure, ou, une play.
A corn, un cor au pie. A cut, une coupure. A scald-head, la teigne. A box on
the ear, un soufle^. A fifty-cuff, un coup de poing. A kick, un coup de pie. A
miscarriage, une fausse couche. The life, la vie. The death, la mort.
Of the Soul.
De l'Ame.
The mind, l'Esprit. The understanding, l'entendement. The will, la volonte.
The Reason, la raison. The wit, l'esprit, ou, le genie. Duln^ss, stupidite.
Liveliness, vivacite. Wisdom, sagesse. Discretion, jugement. Folly, Folly.
Love, amor. Hatred, haine. Fear, crainte. Loathing, degout. Bashfulness,
honte, pudeur, timidite. Joy, joye. Sadness, tristesse. Grief, sorrow, douleur,
deplaisir. A^ger, colere. Pity, pity, compassion.
Of Clothes.
Des Habits.
Man's clothes, habit d'homme. The Linen, le linge. A shirt, or, shift, une
ch^mise. The drawers, le calecon. An under-wastcoat, une camisole, ou,
chemisette. The sleeves, la manche. The strings, les attaches. The Cuffs, or,
Ruffles, les manchettes. The band, le colet, ou, rabat. The Cravat, la cravate.
The handkerchief, le mouchoir. A neck-cloath, un tour de co^. A nightcap, un
bonnet de nuit. The socks, les chauffons. The stockings, les bas. The Garters,
les jartieres. The Stirrup-Stockings, les chaussetes. The shoes, les souliers.
The sole of the shoe, la semelle du soulier. The buckle, la boucle. The
Slippers, les pantoufle^. The hat, le chapeau. The cap, le bonnet. The
hat-band, la leffe du chapeau, ou, le cordon. The close-coat, le just au corpse.
The breeches, la culote, ou, le haut de chausses. The Cod-piece, la brayette. A
Fob, un gouffet. The pocket, la poche. A Vest-coat, une vest. A Great-coat, un
sur-tou^. A Frock, une souquenille. A cloak, un manteau. A button, un bouton. A
button-hole, une boutonniere. The lining, la doublure. A nightgown, une robe
de chamber. A girdle, une ceinture. A wig, or, Peruke, une ^ perruque. A glove,
un gand. A muff, un manchon. A comb, un peigne. A brush, Des vergettes. A
ribbon, un ruban. A knot of Ribbons, un noeud de rubans. The lace, la dentelle.
The fringe, la frange. The trimming, la garniture. A sword, une epee. A belt,
un ceinturon. A boot, une bote. A spur, un Eperon. A ring, une bague, ou, un
anneau. A watch, une montre. A Table Book, des tablettes. A purse, une bourse.
A Tooth-picker, un curedent. The Case, l'teui.
Women's Clothes.
Habits de Femme.
A smock, or, shift, une chemise. A hood, une Coiffe. A head-suit, une
coiffure. The petticoat, la jupe, ou, la cote. The Stays, or, Bodice, le corpse
jupe. The apron, le tablier. The combing-cloth, le peignoir. The cover-s^uts,
les fausses manches. A tippe^, une palatine. The scarf, l echarpe. The
neck-lace, le colier. The fan, I'evan^ail. The mask, or, vizor, le masque, ou,
le lou. A gold-chain, une chain d'or. The bracelets, les brasselets. The
pendants, les pendants d'orcille. The busk, le buse. The curls, les frisons.
The toilet, la toilette. The pins, les epingles. The pin-cushion, la pelote.
The thimble, le de. The needle, l'eguille. The Cizars, les c^seaux. The silk,
la soye. The thread, le fill. The paint, le fard. The patches, les mouches. The
sweet-water, I'eau de senteur. The p^wder, la poudre. The box, la boite. A
jewel, un joyau, ou, un bijou. A looking-glass, un miroir. A pattin, un patin.
Names of Things made use of for clothing.
Noms des chooses don't on se sert pour le vetement.
Linnen-cloath, la toil. The Muslin, la mousseline. The Callico, la toil de
cotton. The buckram, le treillis. The cloth, le drap. The velvet, le velours.
The plush, la pan. The list of cloth, la lisiere. Silk-stuff, etoffe de soye.
The Drugget, le droguet. The camlet, le camelot. The freeze, la frise. A stuff,
une etoffe. The fustian, la futaine. The dimitty, le basin. The leather, le
cuir. The skin, la peau. Spanish-leather, le maroquin.
Of Eating.
Du Manger.
A Meal, un repas. The breakfast, le dejune. The dinner, le dine. The
afternooning, le gout. The Supper, le soupe. A feast, un festin, A treat, un
regal. The bread, le pain. Houshold-bread, pain de me^age. White-bread, pain
blanc. Brown-bread, pain bis. The crum, la mie, ou, miette. The crust, la
croute. The loaf, le pain. A bit, un morceau. A fritter, un bignet. A Custard,
un flan. The meat, le viande. The boiled meat, le bouilli. The roasted meat, le
r^ti. The mutton, le mouton. The veal, le veau. The beef, le boeuf. The Lamb,
l'agneau. Minced-meat, un hachi. Broiled-meat, une grillee. The bacon, le lard.
A Gammon of Bacon, un jambon. A Sausage, or, Link, une Saucisse, ou, andouille.
A Pie, or, Pasty, un pate. A pudding, un boudin. A Fricassy, une fricassee. The
Potage, or, Soop, le potage, ou, la soupe. The broth, le bouillon. The pap, or,
milk-porridge, la bouillie. The water gruel, les gruaux. The milk, le lair. The
butter, le beurre. The cheese, le fromage. An egg, un ceuf. A pancake of eggs,
une amelette. A tart, une tarte, ou, tourte. A cake, un gateau, ou, un
tourteau. A sallet, une salade. The salt, le sell. The oil, l'huile. The
vinegar, le vinaigre. A sauce, une sauce. The Mustard, la moutarde. The pepper,
le poivre. Cloves, des clous de girof^e. Cinnamon, la cannelle. Caper, des
capres. Mushroms, des champignons. An Onion, un oignon. The garlic, l'a^l. The
sweetmeats, les confitures. The dainties, les friandises. The fruit, le
d^ffert, ou, le Fruit. The drink, la boisson. The wine, le vin. The Claret, le
clairet, ou, le vin rouge. The sack, le vin d'espagne. The beer, la biere. The
Syder, le cidre. The mead, l'hydromel. Dead wine, du vin evente. A piece of
meat, une piece de viande. A j^^nt, un membre. A qu^rter, un quartier. A leg,
une eclanche. A loyn, une long. A neck, un collet. A shoulder, une epaule. A
breast, une poitrine. A short-rib, un aloyau. The sweetbread of veal, le
risde-veau. The wings of Fowls, les ailes. The legs, les cuisses. The meal, or,
flour, la farine* The dough, or, paste, la pate. The leaven, le levain.
Degrees of Kindred.
Degrez de Parente.
The Father, le pere. The mother, la mere. The son, le fills. The daughter, le
fille. The Grandfather, le grand-pere, ou, ayeul. The Grandmother, la
grand-mere, ou, ayeule. The grandson, le petit fills. The granddaughter, la
petite fille. The brother, le friar. The sister, la soeur. The eldest-son,
l'aine The younger-brother, le cadet An uncle, un oncle. An aunt, une ^ante.
The Nephew, le neveu. The niece, la niece. An he first-cousin, un cousin
germain. A she first-cousin, une cousine german. The parents, les peers and
meres. The Relations, or, Kinsfolks, les parents; ou, alliez. The Bridegroom,
le france, ou, l'epoux. The Bride, la fiancee, ou, l'epouse. The husband, le
mari. The wife, la femme. The father-in-law, le beau pere. The Mother-in-law,
le belle mere. The step-father, le beau pere. The stepmother, la maratre. The
son-in-law, le beau fills, ou, le gendre. The daughter-in-law, la belle fille,
ou, la bru. The brother-in-law, le beau friar. The sister-in-law, la belle
soeur. A godfather, un parrain. A god-mother, une marraine, An Heir, un
heritier. An heiress, une heritiere. A widower, un veuf. A widow, une veuve. A
guardian, un tuteur. A pupil, un pupille. A god-son, un filleul. A
god-daughter, une filleule. One that is brought to bed, une accouchee. The
Midwife, la^sage femme. The Nurse for the Child, la nourisse. The Nurse for the
woman, or, sick-person, la guard. A bastard, un batard, ou, fills naturel. The
Matrimony, or, Wedlock* le marriage. The wedding, les noces. A match, une
alliance. A lover, un galand, ou, amant. A mistress, une maitresse, ou, amante.
The Clergy, or, Churchmen.
Le Clerge, ou, les Ecclesiastiques.
The pope, le pape. A cardinal, un cardinal. An archbishop, un Archeveque. A
bishop, un eveque. A priest, un pretre. A dean, un doyen. A Canon, un chanoine.
A prebendary, un prebendier. A deacon, un diacre. A parson, or, curate, un
cure. A minister, un ministre. A reader, un lecteur. A vicar, un vicaire. A
vestry-keeper, un sacristain. A churchwarden, un marguillier.
Temporal Dignities.
Dignites Temporelles.
An emperor, un empereur. An empress, une imperatrice. A king, un roy. A
queen, une reine. A prince, un prince. A princess, une princess. A duke, un
due. A duchess, une duchess. A marquess, un marquis. A marchioness, une
marquise. An earl, un comte. A countess, une comtesse. A viscount, un vicomte.
A baron, un baron. A baroness, une baronne. A knight, un chevalier. A squire,
un ecuyer. A gentleman, un Gentilhomme. A lady, une dame. A gentlewoman, une
demoiselle. An ambassador, un ambassadeur. An ambassadress, une ambassadrice.
A governor, un gouverneur. A governess, une gouvernante.
Places and Officers of Justice.
Charges and Officiers de Justice.
The chancelour, le chancelier. The Secretary of State, le secretaire d'erat.
The chamberlain, le chambe^lan. The keeper of the privy seal, le guard des
seaux. The treasurer, le tresorier. A sergeant at law, un conseillier. A
justice of peace, un juge d^ paix. An advocat, or, lawyer, (...) avocat. An
attorney, un procureur. A scrivener, un notaire. A baily, un sergent. A jailer,
or, keeper, un geolier, ou, concierge. The Hangman, le Bou^reau.
A Town, or, City.
Une Ville.
The church, l'eglise. A house, une maison. A great noble-man's-house, un
hotel. The street, or, lane, la rue. The gates, les ports. A bridge, un pont.
The suburbs, les fauxbourgs. A narrow lane, une ruelle. A piazza, or, open
place, une place. A square, un quarre. The Marketplace, la place du march. A
steeple, un clocher. A bell, une cloche. A clock, une horloge. A
fencing-school, une sale d'armes. An inn, une hotelerie. A tavern, un cabaret a
vin. An alehouse, un cabaret a biere. A cooks-shop, une rotisserie. The
playhouse, la Comedy. Bedlam, les petites maisons. The prison, or, goal, la
prison. The round-house, la prison du guer.
The Inhabitants.
Les Habitants.
A citizen, un bourgeois. The Mayor, le maire. The Lord Chief Justice, le juge
mage. A physician, un medecin. A surgeon, un chirurgien. An apothecary, un
apotiquaire. A tradesman, un artisan, ou, un homme de metier. A merchand, un
marchand. A Printer, un Imprimeur. A bookseller, un libraire. A painter, un
peintre. A barber, un barbier. A perriwig-maker, un pe^ruquier. A
woollen-draper, un marchand drapier. A linnen-draper, un marchand de toil. A
grocer, un epicier. An haberdasher, un marchand de chapeaux. An haberdasher of
small wares, quinquaillier, un mercier. A baker, un boulanger. A pastry-cook,
un pati^ier. A cook that has a shop, un rotisseur. A bu^cher, un boucher. A
brewer, un brasseur. A tavern man, or, ale-housekeeper, un cabaretier. A
goldsmiths, un or^evre. A silver-smith, un argentier. A watch-maker, un
orlogeur. A tailor, un tailleur. A shoo-maker, un cordonnier. A cobbler, un
savetier. A hatter, un chapelier. A carpenter, un charpentier. A joyner, un
menuisier. A brick-layer, un masson. A miller, un meunier. A sadler, un
sellier. A farrier, un marechal. A smith, un forgeron. A lock-smith, un
serrurier. An upholsterer, un tapissier. A broker, un fripier. A glover, un
gantier. A swords-cutler, un four bisseur. A cutler, un coutelier. A
streets-porter, un croche^eur. A chairman, un porteur de chaise. A tinker, un
chauderonnier. A post, un courrier. A milliner, une coifuse. A semstress, une
lingere. A washer-woman, une blanchisseuse. A beggar, un mendiant, ou, un
gueux. A thief, un voleur, ou, A pimp, un maquereau. A bawd, une maquerelle. A
whore, or, crack, une putain, ou, garce. A witch, une sorciere. A cheat, un
filon. A bully, un breteur.
A House.
Une Maison.
The wall, la muraille. The floor, le plancher, ou, le pave. The cieling, le
platfond, ou, plancher. The shop, la boutique. A story, un etage. An
appartment, un appartement. The door, or, gate, la port. The stairs,
I'escalier, ou, la montee. The roof, le toit. The yard, or, court, la cour, ou,
la bassecour. The hall, or, parlour, la sale, ou, le salon. A room, une
chamber. A bedchamber, chamber ou l'on couche. A closet, un cabinet. A
wardrobe, or, press, une garderobe. A garret, un galetas, ou, un grenier. A
gallery, une gallerie. A balcony, un balcon. The window, le fenetre. The
window-glasses, les vitres. A dining room, le refectoire. The buttery, la
depense. The pantry, la paneterie. The larder, le charnier. The kitchen, la
cuisine. The Bake-house, la boulangerie. The Oven, le four. The Cellar, la cave
The Stables for Horses, l'Ecurie. The house of Office, les lieux, (le Prive.)
The Garden* le jardin. The Coach-house, la Remise. A lock, une serrure. The
key, la Clef. The bolt, le verrou. A knocker, un marteau. A board, un ais, (une
planche.) A stone, une pierre. Freestone, pierre de taille. A brick, une
brique. A beam, une poutre. The mortar, le mortier. The lime, la chaux.
Household Stuff.
Meubles de maison.
The Furniture, La Garniture. The hangings, la tapisserie. Tapistry hangings,
tapisserie de haute lice. The pictures, les tableaux (ou portraits.) A chair,
une chaise. An Elbow-Chair, un Fauteuil (ou, chaise a hras.) A stool, une
selle, (ou Tabouret.) A Ioint-stool, un Escabeau. A Cushion, un Coussin (ou,
Carreau.) A Table, une Table. A Drawer, un Tiroir, (ou Layette.) A Carpet, un
Tapis, The Table-cloth, la Nappe. The Napkin, la Serviette. The Plate,
l'Assiette. The Knife, le Couteau. The Fork, la Fourchette. The Spoon, la
Cuilliere. The Salt-sellar, la Saliere. A Porringer, une ecuelle. An Ewer, une
Aiguiere. A Glass, un verre. A Mug, un petit pot. A Cup, un Godet, (ou,
Gobelet.) A Bottle, une Bouteille. A Flagon, un Flacon. A Basin, un Bassin. A
Towel, un Essuymain. A Candlestick, un Chandelier. A Candle, une Chandelle. The
Snuffers, les Mouchettes. Snuffers-pan, l'assiette a Mouchettes. A Stand, un
Gueridon. A Trunk, un Coffre. A Box, or Chest, une Boite, ou Caisse. A strong
Box, un Coffre fort (une Casse^te.) A Portmantle, une Male.
A Bed.
Un Lit.
The Bed-sted, le Bois du lit. The Bed-posts, les Colomnes. The Straw-bed, la
Paillasse. The Feather-bed, le lit de plume. The Bolster, le Chevet. The Top of
the Bed, le Ciel du Lit. The Bedside, la Ruelle du Lit. The Pillow,
l'Oreiller. The Blankets, les Couvertures. The Sheets, les Draps. The Curtains,
les Rideaux. The Warming-pan, la Bassinoire. The Chamber Pot, le Pot de
Chamber. A bed of State, un lit de Parade. A Couch, un lit de Repo^. A Cradle,
un Berceau. The Chimney, la Cheminee. The Andiron, le Chenet, (ou Landier.) The
Bellows, le soufflet. The Tongs, les Pincettes. The Fire-shovel, la Pele a Feu.
The Fire, le Feu. The Wood, le Bois. The Coal, le Charbon. A Spark, une
Eti^celle. The Live Coal, la Braise. The Flame, la Flamme. The Smoke, la Fumee.
The Soot, la Suye. A Flint, une Pierre a Feu. The Steel, le Fusil. The Match,
la Meche, ou Allumette. A Save-all, un Binet.
Kitchin-Tackling.
Battery de Cuisine.
A Kettle, un Chauderon. A great Pot, une Marmite. A Skillet, un Poilon. The
Drying Pan, la poile a Frire. A Gridiron, un Gril. A Spit, une Broche. A Pale,
or Bucket, un Seau. A Broom, un Balay. A Basket, un Panier, ou, une Corbeille.)
A Dish clout, un Torchon. A Jack, un Tourne-broche. A Dripping-pan, une
Lechefrite. A Cha^ing-dish, un Rechaut. The Pot-hanger, la Cremiliere. A
Neading-trough, une Mais. A Sieve, un Tamis, (ou sas.) A Washing-Tub, une Cuve.
A Pot-lid, un Couvercle. A Rubbing-brush, les Decrotoires. A Wallet, or Bag,
une Besace.
The Study.
l'Etude.
The Book, le Liv^e. The Paper, le Papier. The Paper-book, le Cayer. The Sheet,
la Fueille. The Page, or, Side, la Page. The Margin, la Marge. The Ink,
l'Encr^. The Pen, or Quill, la Plume. The I^khorn, or Standish, i'Ecritoire.
The Penknife, le Ganif. The Packthread, la Fiselle. The powder or sand, la
poudre ou, ^able. The powder-box, le poudrier. The wax, la cire. The wafer, une
oublie. A Seal, un cachet. The ^ritting, l'Ecriture. A Letter, une lettre. A
Love-letter, un poulet (un billet doux.) The Table Book, les tablettes. The
pin^el, le crayon. The Exercise, le theme. The translation, la traduction. The
Gardner le jardinier. The porter, le portier. The Groom of the Stables, le
palefrenier, The Lackey, or Footman, le Laquais, (ou valet de pie.) The
housekeeper. la Femme de charge. The waiting Gentlewoman, la Suivante. The
waiting woman, la Soubrette. A Chambermaid, une Chambriere. A Maid, une
servante.
The Master,
Le Maitre.
A menial Servant, un domestique, A Steward, un maitre d' hotel ou, intendant.
The Chaplain, le Chapelain, ou, l'Aumonier. The Secretary, le Secretaire. The
Tutor, le Precepteur. The Master of the Horse, l'Ecuyer. The Valet de Chamber,
le Valet de Chamber. The Clerk of the Kitchen, l'Ecuyer de Cuisine. A page, un
page. A butler, un sommelier. A cook, un Cuisinier. The Coachman, le Cocher.
The Country,
La Campaign.
A Village, un Village. An Hamlet, un hameau. A borrough, un bourg, A hill or
mountain, une Montagne A little hill, une colline. A valley or dale, une
vallee, ou, un valon. The plain, la plain. A Field, un champ. A Meadow, un
pre, ou, une prairie. A wood, un bois. A forest, une foret. A Grove, un bocage.
A Tree, un arbre. A shrub, un arbrisseau. A Bush, un buisson. The Corn, le ble.
The Wheat, le Froment. The Rye, le Seigle. The Barley, l'Orge. The Oats,
l'Avoine. The Hay, le Foin. The Straw, la Paille.
A Garden.
Un Jardin.
A Kitchin-Garden, un Jardin Potager. A Flower-Garden, un Jardin a Fleurs, (ou,
un Parterre.) An Orchard, un Verger. A Walk, or Alley, un Promenoir, (ou une
A^^ee.) A Garden's Bed, un carreau, ou une Table. A Grass-plot, un Parterre de
Gazon. A Bower, un Cabinet de Verdure. An Arbor, un Berceau. A Spring, une
Fontaine. A Fountain, or Water-spout, un jet d'Eau. A rose, une Rose. A Tulip,
une Tulipe. A Violet, une Violette. A Pink, or Gilliflower, un Oeillet. The
Lilly, le Lis. The Iessemin, le Jasmin.
The Herbs.
Les Herbs Potageres.
The Pulse, les Legumes. A Bean, une Feve. A Pease, un Pois. The Husk of Pulse,
la Gousse. The Stalk, or Blade, la Tige. An Artichoke, un Artichau. A Sparagus,
une Asperge. A Melon, un Melon. A Carret, une Carote. A Councumber, un
Concombre. A Turnip, un Navet. A Radish, une Rave. An Onion, un Oignon. A
Shallot, une Echalote. The Garlic, l'ail. A Cabbidge, un Chou. A Lettice, un
Lait^ue. Succory, or Endive, la Chicoree, ((...)) The Sellery, le Sellery. The
Purs^ain, le Pourpie. Cresses, du Cresson. The Parsley, le Persil. A Leek, un
porreau. A Parsnip, une pastinade. A Red Parsnip, une Be^erave.
A Fruit-Tree.
Un Arbre Fruitier.
A Shrub, un Arbrisscau. A Wall-tree, un Espalier, An Almond-tree, un Amandier.
An Almond, une Amande. An Apple Tree, un pommier. An Apple, une pomme. A
Apricock-tree, un Abricotier. An Apricock, un Abricot. A Peach-tree, un
pechier. A Peach, une p^che. A Cherry-tree, un Cerisier. A Cherry, une Cerise.
A Fig Tree, un Figuier. A Fig, une Figue. A Chesnut-tree, un chataignier. A
Chestnut, une Chataigne. An Olive Tree, un Olivier. An Olive, une Olive. A
Walnut-tree, un Noyer. A small Nut-tree, or Filberd, un Noisettier. A small
Nut, une Noisette. A Filberd, une Aveline. A Plumb-tree, un prunier. A plumb,
une prune. A pear tree, un poirier. A pear, une poire. A pomgranate-tree, un
Grenadier. A pomgranate, une Grenade. A Quince-tree, un Coignier. A Quince, un
Coing. A Sorb-apple-tree, un Cormier. A Sorb-apple, une Corme. A Medlar-tree,
un Neflier. A Medlar, une Nefle. A Vine, une Vigne. A Grape, un Raisin. A
Goose-berry-tree, un Groisellier. A Currand-tree, un Groisellier. A
Goose-berry, une Groiseille. A Currand, une Groiselle rouge. A Strawberry, une
Fraise. An Oak, un Chene. An Akron, un Gland. A pine tree, un pin. A
pineapple, une pomme de pin. The Kernel of a pineapple, le pignon. A
Cork-tree, un Liege. A Fir Tree, un Sapin. A Willow-tree, un Saul. A
poplar-tree, un peuplier. The Root, la Racine. The trunk or stump, le Tronc. A
Branch, une Branche. A Branch with Leaves, un Rameau. A Leaf, une Fueille. The
Moss of a tree, la Mousse. A young Sprig, un Rejetton. A Hedge, une Hay.
The Journey.
La Voyage.
The Way, le Chemin. The highway, le grand chemin. The Road, la Route. A
By-way, un Chemin-ecarte. A path, un Sentier* A Beast for the Sadd^e, une
Monture. A Horse, un Cheval. A Mare, une Cavale, ou jument. A great Mule, un
Mulet. A Mule, une Mule. An he-Ass, un Ane. A she-Ass, une Anesse. A Colt, un
poulain. A Camel, un Chameau. A Cart or wagon, une Charrette (un Chariot.) A
Coach, un carrosse. A hackney-coach, un fiac^oe, u, un carrosse de louage. A
Stage-coach, un coche, ou carrosse de voiture. A Chariot, une caleche. A
calesh, un souflet. A wheel, une roue. The coach-beam, la fleche.
The Sea.
La Mer.
A Lake, un lac, A Rivtr, une Riviere. A great River, un fleuve. A Morass, un
marais. A Pond, un Etang. A Fish Pond, une vivier. A bridge, un pont. A Boat,
un Bateau. A great boat, une barque, (ou chaloupe) A Ship, un Vaisseau, ou
Navire A Man of War, un Vaisseau de guerre. A Fire-ship, un Brulot.
The War.
La Guerre.
An Army, une Armee. An Officer, un Officier. A Soldier, un Soldat. An
Admiral^, un Amiral. A Vire-admiral, un Vice-Amiral. A Reer-Admiral, un
Contramiral. A General, un General. A Lieutenant General, un Lieutenant
General. A Major General, Major General. A Brigadeer of an Army, un Brigadier
d' Armee. A Colonel, un Colonel. A Lieutenant Colonel, un Lieutenant Colonel. A
Major, un Major. An Adjutant, un aid de Camp. A Captain, un Captain. A
Lieutenant, un Lieutenant. A Cornet, un Cornete. An Ensign, un Enseigne. A
Quartermaster, un Marechal de logis. A Brigadeer, un Brigadier. A Sergeant, un
Sergent. A Corporal, un Caporal. A Muster-Master, un Commissaire, A Trooper, un
Cavalier. A Foot-soldier, un Fantassin. A Dragoon, un Dragon, A Pike-man, un
Piquier. A Sentinel, une sentinelle. A Trumpeter, un Trompette. A
Kettle-Drummer, un Timbalier. A Drummer, un Tambour. A Gunner, un Canonier. A
Pioneer, un pionnier. A Miner, un Mineur. A flying Army, un Camp volant The
forlorn hope, les Enfans perdus. The Main Body, le gros de l'Armee. The
Van-gard, l'avant guard. The Reer-gard l'arriere guard. The Horse, la
Cavalerie. The Foot, l'infanterie. A Squadron, un Escadron. A Battallion, un
Battaillon. A Regiment, un Regiment. A Troop or Company, une Compagnie. A Camp,
un Camp. A Sutler, un Vivandier. A Tent, un Tente. An Arm, une Arm. A musket,
une mousquet. A Carabine, une Carabine A Blunderbuss, un Mousqueton A hand Gun,
un Fusil. A great Gun, or Canon, un Canon. A Bomb, une bombe. A Fire-ball, une
Grenade. A Morter-piece, un Mortier. A Sword, une Epee. A Hanger, un sabre. A
Dagger une B^yonnette. An Halbert, une halebarde. A Pike, une Pique. A Dart, un
dard (un javelot) A Sling, une fronde. A Bow, un Are, ou, Arbalete. An Arrow,
une Fleche. A Quiver, un Carquois. A Headpiece, un Casque. An Armor, une
Cuirasse. A Neck-piece, un hausse-Cou. A Buckler, un Bouclier.
A Country or Land.
Un Pais.
England, l'Angleterre* Scotland, l'Ecosse. France, La France. Ireland,
l'Irlande. Spain, l'Espagne. Italy, l'Italie. Germany l'Allemagne. Hungary, la
Hongrie. Poland, la Pologne. Muscovy, la Moscovie. Sweden, la Suede. Denmark,
le Danemark. Flanders, la Flandre. Holland, la Hollande. Turkey, la Turquie.
A Nation.
Un Nation
An Englishman, un Anglois. A Scotchman, un Ecossois. A Frenchman, un Francois.
An Irishman, un Irlandois. A Spaniard, un Espagnol. An Italian. un Italien. A
German, un Allemand. An Hungarian, un Hongrois. A Polacker, un Polonois. A
Muscovite, un Moscovite. A Swed^, un Suedois. A Dan^, un Danois. A Dutchman, un
Flamand. An Hollander, un Hollandois. A Turk, un Turc.
A Beast.
Une Beat, ou un Animal.
A wild Beast, Une beat sauvage. A Lion, un Lion. A Wolf, un loup. A Bear, un
Ours. A wild Boar, un Sanglier. A Tame Beast, une beat apprivoisee. An Ox, un
bo^^f. A Cow, une vache. A Bull, un Taureau. A Calf, un Veau. An Heifer, une
genisse. A Horse un Cheval. A Mare, une Cavale ou jument. A Ewe or sheep, une
brebis. A Ram, un Belier. A He-goat, un bouc. A She-goat, une chevre. A Kid, un
chevreau. A Hog, un cochon, ou pourceau. A Sow, une truie. A Pig, un cochon de
lait. A Dog, un chien. A Bitch, une chienne. A Cat, un chat. A Rot, un Rat. A
Mouse, une Souris. A Hare, un lievre. A Rabbit, un lapin. A Fox, un Renard. An
Ape or Monkey, un Singe. A She- Ape, une gueno^. A Deer, une beat fauve. A Heart
or Stag, un cerf. A Hind, une Biche. A Roe-buck, un chevreuil. A Fallow-Deer,
un Daim. A Squirrel un ecureuil. A Weasel, une belette.
A Bird or Fowl.
Un Oiseau.
An Eagle, une Aigle. A Raven, un Corbeau. A Crow, une corneille. A Cock, un
Coq. A Hen, une poule. A Capon, un chapon. A Chicken-un poulet. A Partridge,
une perdrix, A Wood-cock, une becasse. A Wood-hen, une gelinotte. A Quail, une
Caille. A Lark, une Alouette. A Thrush, une Grive. A Goose, une Oye. A Drak, un
canard. A Duck, une cane, A Swan, un cigne. A Pigeon, un Pigeon, A Nightingale,
un rossignol. A Blackbird, un merle. A Sparrow un moineau. A Canary-bird, un
serin (...) Canary. A Linnet, une Linote. A Parrot, un Perroquet.
An Insect.
Un Insecte.
A Creeping thing or Serpent, un Reptile. A Worm, un Ver. A Snake, un serpent.
A spider, une aragnee. An Ant, une Fourmi. A Grass-hopper, une sauterelle, ou,
cigale. A Frog, une grenouille. A Toad, un crapaut. A Catter-pillar, une
chenille. A Louse, un Pou. A Flea, une Puce. A Bug, une Punaise. A Fly, une
mouche, A Be, une abeille (ou, une mouche a miel,)
A Fish.
Un Poisson.
A Pike, un brochet. A Perch, une perch. A Sole, une sole. A Trout, une
Truite. A Carp, une Carpe. A Crab or Lobster, une Ecrevisse. An Herring, un
hareng. An Eel, une Anguille. A Barbel, un Barbeau. A Thor^-Back, une raie. An
Anchove, une Anchoye. An Oyster, une huitre. Stock Fish, la morue. A Whale, une
Baleine. The Snout, le museau. The Gills, les ouies. The Fins, les nageoires.
The Scales, les Ecailles. The Bones, les aretes. The Spawn, la fraye, ou les,
oeuss. The Shell, l'ecaille, ou, coquille.
A Metal.
Un Metal.
The Gold, l'Or. The Silver, l'argent. The Copper or Brass, le Guivre, ou,
l'airain The Yellow brass, le leton. The Lead, le Plomb. The Pewter, or Tin,
l'Etain. The Iron, le Fer. The Steel, l'Acier.
A Mineral.
Un Mineral.
Quicksilver, or Mercury, Argent vif, ou, Mercure. Antimony, l'antimoine. A
Lodestone, un Aimant. The Starch-l' Amydon. The Brimstone, le souphre.
A Stone.
Une Pierre.
A Rock, un Rocher, ou une Roche. A Pumiee-stone, une pierre ponce. A
touchstone, une pierre de touch. A Flint, or Fire-stone, un caillou, ou une
pierre a feu. A Slate, une Ardoise. A Precious stone, une pierre precieuse. A
Diamond, un Diamant. A Ruby, un Rubis. An Amethyst, une Amethyste. An Emerald,
une Emeraude. A Pearl, une perle. An Agat, une agathe. The Crystal, le
Crystal. The Marble, le Marbre.
The Gum.
La Gomme.
The Pitch, la poix. The Pitch and Tar, le Goderon. The Benjamin, le Benjoin.
The Mirrh, la Myrrh. The Frankincense, l'Encens. The Wax, la Cire. The Tallow,
le Suif.
The Color.
La Couleur.
The White, le blane. The Black, le noir. The Red, le rouge. The Green, le
vert. The Blew, le bleu. The Yellow, le jaune. The Gray, le gris. The Brown, le
brun.
^The Play or Pastime.
Le Jeu, ou Divertisement.
The Tennis, la paume. The Billiard, le billiard. The Nine-Pins les Quilles.
The Bowls les boules. Blind man's buff, colin maillard. The Draughts, les dames*
The shittle-cock, le volant. The Top, le sabot (ou, la Toupie) The Chess, les
echez. The Lottery or chance Play, le jeu de ^afard, ou la Lotterie. A Dice, un
dez. A Dice-Box. un Cornet. The Cards, les Carts. Even or Odd, Pair non pair.
The Goose, l'Oye. The Dance, la Dance. The Singing, le Chant. The Music, la
Music. A Flute, une Flute. A Flagelet, un Flageolet. A Hoboy, un Ha^t^oi^, A
Fiddle or violin, un Violon. A Vi^le, une Viole. A Lute, un Lut. A Guitter, une
Guitterre. An Harpsecol, un Clavesin. A Harp, une Harp. A Bag-pipe, une
Cornemuse. A Trumpet, une Trompette.
An Exercise.
Un Exercice.
The Walking, la Promenade. The Wrestling, la Lutte. The Leaping, le Saut. The
Running, or Race, la course. The Running at the Ring, la Course de Bague. The
Horse-race, la Course a Cheval. The Hunting, la Chasse. The Fowling, la Chasse
aux Oiseaux. The Fishing, la Peche. The Swimming, la Nage. The Fencing,
l'Escrime, (ou l'art de fair des Arms.) The riding the great Horse, le
Manege.
Of Coins.
Des Monoies.
A Farthing, ^n Liard, A Penny, un Sol. A Groat, une piece de quat^e Sols. A
Sixpence, un six Sols. A Shilling, un Chelin. Half a Crown, un Demi e^u, (ou,
un trente Sols. A Crown, un E^u. A Pound Sterling, or a Piece, (une Livre,
Sterlin, ou, une Piece. a Guinea, une Guinee. a Broad-piece, un Jacobus, a
French-Pistol, a Lewis d'Or, un Louis d'Or.
The Number.
Le Number.
Cardinal Number, Nombre Cardinal. 1 One, I. Un. 2 Two, II. Deux. 3 Three, III.
Trois. 4 Four, IV. Qua^e. 5 Five, V. Cinq. 6 Six, VI. Six. 7 Seven, VII. Sept.
8 Eight, VIII. Huit. 9 Nine, IX. Neuf. 10 Ten, X. Dix. 11 Eleven, XI. Onze. 12
Twelve, XII. Douze. 13 Thirteen, XIII. Treize. 14 Fourteen, XIV. Quatorze. 15
Fifteen, XV. Quinze. 16 Sixteen, XVI. Seize. 16 Seventeen, XVII. Dix-sept. 17
Eighteen, XVIII. Dix-huit. 19 Nineteen, XIX. Dix-neuf. 20 Twenty, XX. Vingt. 21
One and twenty, XXI. Vingt and un. 22 Two and twenty, XXII. Vingt and deux,
etc. 30 Thirty, XXX. Trente. 40 Forty, XL. Quarante. 50 Fifty, L. Cinquante. 60
Sixty, LX. Soixante. 70 Seventy, LXX. Soixante. and dix. 80 Fourscore, LXXX.
Quatre-vingts. 90 Fourscore and ten, XC. Quatre-vingt-dix. 100 Hundred, C.
Cent. 120 Sixscore, CXX. Six vingts. 200 Two hundred, CC. Deux Cens. 500 Five
hundred, D. Cinq Cens. 1000 a thousand, M. Mill. 1000000 a Million, X. C. M.
un Million.
Ordinal Number.
Nombre Ordinal.
the First, le Premier. the Second, le second, ou, le Deuxieme. Third,
Troisieme. Fourth, Quatrieme. Fifth, Cinquieme. Sixth, Sixieme. Seventh,
Septieme. Eighth, Huitieme. Ninth, Neusieme. Tenth, Dixieme. Eleventh, Onzieme.
Twelfth, Douzieme. Thirteenth, Treizieme. Fourteenth, Quatorzieme. Fifteenth,
Quinzieme. Sixteenth, Seizieme. Seventeenth, Dixseptieme. Eighteenth, Dix
huitieme. Nineteenth, Dix neufieme. Twentieth, Vingtieme. One and twentieth,
Vingt and unieme. Thirtieth, Trentieme. Fortieth, Quarantieme. Fiftieth,
Cinquantieme. Sixtieth, Soixantieme. Seventieth, Soixante and Dixieme.
Eightieth, Quatre Vingtieme. Ninetieth, Quatre Vingt dixieme. Hundredth,
Centieme.
A Collection of Nouns Ajectives.
Masc. Fem. GOod, Bon, Bonne, Bad, Mauvais, Mauvaise. Naughty, Mechant,
Mechante. Big, Gros, Gross. High, Haut, Haure. Low, Bas, Basse. Thick, Epais,
Epaisse. Thin, Mince. Long, Long, Longue. Short, Court, Court. Bref, Breve.
New, Nouveau, Nouvelle. Neuf, Neuve. Old, Vieux, Vielle. Fat, Gras, Grass.
Lean, Maigre. Heavy, Pesant, Pesante. Light, Ledger, Legere. Full, Plein,
Pleine. Empty, Vuide. Hard, Dur, Dure. Soft, Mou, Molle. Sweet, Doux, Douce.
Sour, Aigre. Broad, Large. Narrow, Etroit, Etroite. Clean, Net, Net. Cleanly,
neat, Propre. Dirty, Sale. Nasty, Vilain, Vilaine. Hot, Chaud, Chaude, Cold,
Froid, Froide. Dry, Sec, Seche. Wet, Mouille, Mouillee. Right, Droit, Droite.
Left, Gauche. Handsome, Beau, Belle. Fine, comely. Bien fait, bienfaite. Pretty,
Joly, Jolie. Ugly, Laid, Laid. Homely, Malfait, Malfaite. Dressed, Habille.
lee. Naked, Nud, Niie. Strong, Fort, Forte. Weak, Foible. Brave, Brave.
valiant, courageux, courageuse. Coward, Lache, ou Poltron, Poltronne. Drunk or
fuddled, Sou, soul, ou, yvre. Full, satisfied, Sou, Soul, Rassasie,
Rassasiee. Handy, cunning. adroit, adroite. Awkward, Maladroit, Maladroite.
Happy, Heureux, Heureuse, Unhappy, Malheureux, Malheureuse. Liar, Menteur,
Menteuse. Cheat, deceitful. Trompeur, Trompeuse. Proud, Fire, Fiere. Haughty,
Orgueilleux, Orgueilleuse. Troublesome, Uncommode, Importun, une. Peevish,
cross, Chagrin, ine. Humoursom, Fantasque, Bourru, bourru. Odd, Bizarre.
Downright, Franc. Franche. Cunning Fin, Fine. Ruse, Rusee. Wise, Sage, Fool,
Fou, Folle. Mad, Insense, See. Quarrelsom, Mutin, Mutine, Querelleux, euse.
Raving-mad, Enrage, Enragee. Civil, Civil, Civil. Uncivil, Incivil, Incivile.
Clownish, Grossier, Grossiere. Rude, Brutal, Brutale. Bashful, Timide, Honteux,
honteuse Brazen-face, Effronte, tee. Bold, Fire, Fiere. Wanton, and full of
play. Badin, Badine. Folatre. Courteous, Affable. Stubborn, Opiniatre. Rich,
Rich. Poor, Poor. Covetous, Avare, Avaricieux, euse. (...), Chiehe. Grateful,
Reconnoissant, ante. Vng^^^eful, Ingrat, Ingrate. Dainty-mouth'd, Friand,
friand^^ Glutton, Goulu, Goulue, ou, Gourmand, mande. Idle, Lazy. Paresseux,
eus^. Sloathful, Oifif, Oisi^e. Fainea^, ante. Bold, Hardi, Hardy. Fearful,
Peureux, euse. Hasty, Promt, Promte. Soon angry, Colere. Passionate, Emport^,
ee. Glad, joyful, Joyeux, euse. Sad, Sorrowful, Triste. All, Tou^, Tou^e. None,
Null, Nulle, Aucum, aucu^^ Some, Quelque, Quelqu'un, un^. Either, L'un, ou
1'autre Neither, Ni l'un ni l'autre Other, Autre. Alone, Seul, Seule. Both,
Tous les deux. No Body, Person. A Certain, Certain, Certain.

A Collection of Verbs, to express the most common Actions.
To study, Etudier. To read, Lire. To write, ecrire. To learn, apprendre. To
get by heart, Apprendre par coeur. To subscribe, signer. To fold up, plier. To
seal, cacheter. To put the superscription, meter. le dessus. To Correct
corriger. To blot out, Effacer. To translate, traduire. To begin, commencer. To
go on, continuer. To make an end, achever. To finish, finir. To do, or make,
fair. To know, savoir, ou connoitre. To be able, pouvoir. To be willing,
Vouloir. To remember, se souvenir. To forget, oublier. To speak, parler. To
pronounce, prononcer. To accent accentuer. To say, or tell, dire. To rehearse,
reciter. To cry out, or squeak, crier, ou s'^crier. To prattle, causer. To
twattle, jaser. To chate, caquetter. To call, appeller. To ^^k a question,
interroger. To answer, repondre. To hold ones tongue, se taire. To bring up,
elever. To teach, enseigner, ou, montrer To instruct, instruire. To warn,
avertir. To chide, grond^r. To command or bid, commander, ou, ordonner. To
obey, obeir. To confess or own, avouer ou confesser. To deny, nier. To disown,
desavouer. To forbid, defendre. To hlame, blamer. To threaten, menacer. To
chastise, chatier. To whip, fouetter. To grumble, or mumble, marmoter. To
complain, se plaindre. To contend, con^ester. To dispute, disputer.
Actions of the Mind.
Actions de l' Esprit.
To imagine, or fancy, s'imaginer. To believe, croire. To doubt or question,
douter. To suspect, soupcouner. To observe, observer. To mind any thing, songer
^^quelque chose. To have a care, prendre guard To wish, souhaiter. To hope,
esperer. To fear, craindre. To dissemble, dissimuler. To feign, feindre. To
make as if -- fair semblant de -- To try* essayer. To assure, assurer. To
judgt, juger. To conclude, conclurre. To resolve, resoudre. To eat, manger. To
drink, boire. To taste, gouter. To chew, macher. To swallow, avaler. To fast,
juner. To breakfast, dejuner. To dine, diner. To eat ones afternooning, gouter.
To sup, souper. To treat, regaler. To be hungry, avoir faim. To be dry, avoir
soif. To fill or satisfy, rassasier. To have a stomach, avoir appetit. To
drink hard; fair la debauche. To fuddle ones self, s'enyvrer. To go to bed,
s'aller coucher. To slumber, sommeiller. To fall asleep, s'endormir. To sleep,
dormir. To watch, veiller. To rest, reposer. To snore, ronfler. To dream,
songer ou rever. To walk, s'eveiller. To rise, le lever. To dress ones self,
s'habiller. To undress ones self, se deshabiller. To put on ones stockings, se
chausser, ou, mettre ses bas. To put on ones shoes; se chausser, ou, mettre ses
souliers. To pull off ones shoes or stockings, se dechausser. To comb ones
head, se peigner. To dress ones head, se coiffer. To powder ones hair, se
poudrer. To curl ones bair, se friser. To paint, se farther. To put on ones hat,
mettre (...) chapeau, ou, se couvrir. To button ones self, se boutonner, To
lace ones self, se lacer.
Actions natural to Men.
Actions naturelles aux hommes.
To laugh, ^ire. To sing, chanter. To cry or weep, pleurer. To Sigh, soupirer.
To g^oan, gemir. To sob, sangloter. To sneeze, eternuer. To gape, baailler. To
blow, souffler. To whistle, siffler. To hearken, ecouter. to hear, ouir, ou,
entendre. to spit, cracher. to smell, flairer, ou, sentir. to blow ones nose,
se mouche^ to see, voir. to look, regarder. to bleed at the nose, seigner
^^^nez. to sweat. suer. to wipe, essuyer. to rub, froter. to tremble' trembler.
to scratch, grater, ou, egrat^gner. to pinch. pinser. to tickle* chatouiller.
to feel, sentir, ou tater. to have got acold, etre enrhum^. to cough, tousser.
to Hawk, cracher. to swell, s'enfler.
Love and Hatred.
D'amour and de Haine.
To love, aimer. To caress, or, fawn upon, Caresser, ou, amadouer. To flatter,
or, Coaxe, flatter, ou, cajoler. To show a kindness, fair amity. To embrace,
embracer. To kiss, ba^ser. To salute, saluer. To make a bow, or, a courtesy,
fair la reverence. To praise, or, to commend, lover. To feed, nourrir. To take
up, reprendre. To correct, corriger. To chasten, chatier. To whip, fouetter. To
forgive, pardonner. To hate, hair. To blame, blamer. To abuse, maltraiter. To
beat, battre. To punish, punir. To turn away, chasser. To quarrel, quereller.
To fight, se battre. To overcome, vaincre. To strip, depouiller. To plunder,
pillar. To kill, tuer. To stifle, or, choke, etouffer. To rob, or, steal,
derober, o^, ^oler.
To take ones pleasure.
Se divertir.
To sing, chanter. To dance, danser. To leap, or, jump, sauter. To play, jouer.
To fence, fair des arms. To ride the great horse, monter a cheval. To play at
cards, jouer aux carts. To win, gagner. To lose, perdre. To lay a wager,
gager, ou, parier. To venture, risquer, ou, hazarder. To cut, couper. To
shuff^e, meler. To jeer, or, banter, railler. To laugh at -- se moquer de --
To be Sick.
Etre Malade.
To take care, avoir soin. To dress a wound, pancer. To cure, guerir. To
recover, relever, ou, se remettre. To let blood, tirer du sang, ou, saigner. To
take Physic, prendre medicine. To bind with a fillet, bander.
To Buy.
Acheter.
To change, or, chop, changer, troquer. To sell, vendre. To pay, payer. To
borrow, emprunter. To lend, preter. To ow, devoir. To give, donner. To take,
prendre. To receive, recevoir. To re^use, or, deny, refuser. To cheat, tromper.
To take away, oter, emporter. To promise, promettre. To bid for, offrir. To ask
high, surfaire. To pawn, engager. To lose, perdre. To pray, or, beg, prier,
(...), supplier. To obtain, obtenir.
Of Life.
De la Vie.
To be brought to bed, accoucher. To be born, nai^re. To grow, croitre. To
live, vivre. To dye, mourir. To bury, enterrer, ensevelir*
Of Motion.
Du Mouvement.
To move, to stir, remuer, (...) remuer, bouger. To go, aller. To come, venir.
To depart, or, go away, parti^^ ou, s'en aller. To arrive, to com^ at, arriver.
To com^ back, revenir, ou, ^^tourner. (...) back, se reculer. To go, or, come
near, s'approcher. To stand, se tenir debout. To walk, to mar^h, cheminer,
marcher, se promene^. To run, courir. To stay, demeurer. To run away, fuir,
s'enfuir. To follow, suivre. To shun, eviter. To escape, echaper. To overtake,
attrape^. To turn, tourner. To slide, glisser. To lean, s'appuyer. To fall,
tomber. To stumble, broncher. To go, or, come on, avancer. To go from,
s'eloigner. To go to meet, aller au devant. To go, or, come in, entrer. To go,
or, come out, sortir. To go, or, come up, monter. To go, or, come down,
descendre. To stand on, s'amuser. -- To send, envoyer. To make haste, se hater,
ou, se depecher. To tarry, tarder. To sit down, s'asseoir. To swim, nager. To
dive or duck, plonger. To drown, neyer.
Handy works.
Ouvrages de main.
To work, travailler. To touch, toucher. To handle, manier. To shut, fermer. To
stop, or, dam up, boucher. To open, ouvrir. To lift up, hausser, lever. To
fill, emplir, remplir. To pour, or, fill, verser. To spill, or, shed, repandre.
To dip, or, steep, tremper. To reach, baille^, donner. To tie, or, bind, lier,
attacher. To untie, delier, detacher. To knot, nouer* To heap, amasser. To
gather, or, pluck, cueillir, amasser. To break, casser, ou, rompre. To tear,
dechirer. To cut, couper. To bruise, or, beat in pieces, briser. To squeeze,
or, to crow'd, serrer, presser. To hold, tenir. To hide, cacher. To cover,
couvrir. To discover, decouvrir. To look for, chercher. To find, trouver. To
stain, or, dirty, tacher, salir. To cleanse, neteyer. To rinse, rincer. To
was^^, laver. To draw pictures, peindre. To ingrave, grayer. To carve, tailler.
To build, batir. To pull down, abbatre, demolir. To kindle, or, light, allumer.
To put out, eteindre. To mend, raccommoder. To sow, or, stitch, coudre. To
shoe a horse, ferrer un cheval.
The sounds of Beasts.
Les Sons des Animaux.
The horse neighs, le cheval hennit. The ass brays, l'ane brait. The lion
roars, le lion rugit. The ox bellows, le boeuf mugit. The hog grants, le (...)
grogne. The wolf howls, le loup hurl. The dog barks, le chien abbaye. The fox
yelps, le renard glapit. The Hare squeaks, le lievre cry. The sheep bleats, la
brebis hole. The snake hisses, le serpent siffle. The cat mews, le chat miaule.
The Birds are used.
Les oiseaux o^t accoutume.
To sing, de chanter. To chirp, de gazouiller. To peck, de bequetter. The
cock-crows, le coc chante. The raven croaks, le corbeau croasse.
The end of the Vocabulary.
Dialogues Familiers, Francois and Anglois.
Premier Dialogue.
BOn jour, Monsieur, comment vous porrez vous?

Comment va la sante?

Fort bien a votre service.

Pr^t a vous render service.

Et vous, Monsieur, comment vous va?

Je me port bien, pour vous servir.

Assez-bien. La, la.

Je vous suis oblige.

Je vous remercie.

Je me rejouis de vous voir en bonne sante.

Comment se port Monsieur votre friar?

Il se port bien, Dieu mercy.

J'en suis bien aise.

Il sera bien aise de vous voir.

Je suis son Serviteur.

(...) se port Mada^e vorte femme?

La voici qui vient.

(...), je suis votre serviteur tres-humble.

Monsieur, je suis votre servante.

Comment vou^ e^es vous portee depuis hier?

(...), passablement bien.

J'ai e^e un peu indisposee la ^uit p^ssee.

Vrayment, j'en suis bien f^che.

Comment se port Madame votre mere?

Elle se port bien.

Elle est votre servante.

Elle sera bien aise de vous voir.

Je suis son tres-humble serviteur.

Je suis fache, de ce que je n'ay pas le tems de la voir aujourd'huy.

Asseyez vous un peu.

Je ne saurois en verite.

Vous etes bien press.

Je n'etois venu que pour savoir comment vous vous portiez.

Adieu, Monsieur.

Je vous remercie de cette visit.

Bon soir, Madame.

Bon soir, Monsieur.

Second Dialogue.
JE vous pry.

Donnez-moy.

Baillez moy.

S'il vous plait.

Je vous rends grace.

Apportez moy.

Pretez moy.

Je vous remercie.

Allez chercher, ou, allez querir. --

Tout a I'heure.

Mon cher, Monsieur, faites moy ce plaisir.

Ma chere Demoiselle, faites moy cette faveur.

Je vous en supply.

Accordez moy cette grace.

Je vous en conjure.

Ma vie, ma chere ame.

Je le ferai avec plaisir.

Je suis tout a vous.

Vous etes trop obligeant.

Vous vous donnez trop de peine.

Je n'en trouve point a vous servir.

Je vous pry d'en user librement avec moy.

Sans compliment.

Sans ceremony.

Je vous aim de tout mon coeur.

Et moy aussi.

Troisieme Dialogue.
D'Ou venez-vous?

Ou allez vous?

Je viens -- je vais --

Montez -- Descendez* --

Entrez -- Sortez --

Avancez.

Approchez vous de moy.

Retirez vous.

Recul^z vous un peu.

Venez ca, venez ici.

Je ne saurois.

Je ne veux pas.

Et bien laissez vous en.

Allez vous en.

De tout mon coeur.

Otez vous de devant moy.

Pourquoy? Parceque.

Je suis bien ici.

La port est fermee

La port est ouverte.

Ouvrez la port.

Fer^ez la port.

Que faites vous?

Je ne fais rien.

Que dites vous?

Je ne dis rien.

Taisez vous.

Ne dites mo^.

Dem^^rez en repos.

Ne faires pas du bruit.

Quel ^^^^amarre faites vous la?

Vous me rompez la tere.

Vous m'e^ourdissez.

O! que vous etes incommode.

Qua^rieme Dialogue.
Du Tems and de l'heure.
QUel tems fait il?

Fait il beau tems?

Fait il chaud?

Fait il froid?

Le soleil luit-il?

Il fait beau tems.

Il fait mauvais tems.

Il fait chaud.

Il fait grand froid.

Il fait un tems clair and serain.

Le soleil luit.

Pleut il?

Je ne le crois pas.

Il pleuvra aujourd'huy.

Il pleut a verse.

Il grele d'une grande force.

Il neige a gros flocons.

Il gele.

Il degele.

Il tonne.

Il fait des eclairs.

Il fait du vent.

Le vent est change.

L'orage est pass.

Le ciel commence a s'eclaircir.

Les nuages le separent, and disparoissent peu a peu.

Il me semble qu'il fait un grand brouillard.

Voila un brouillard qui se leve.

Le brouillard est fort epais.

Mais le soleil commence a le dissiper.

J'apprehende que nous aurons de la pluye.

Il ne faut pas sortir par ce tems-la.

Quelle heure est-il?

Il est de bonne heure.

Il n'est pas tard.

Le soleil est il leve?

Est il jour?

Le jour commence a poindre.

Il est grand jour.

Il est six heures.

Il est pass six heures.

Il est six heures and un quart.

Il est dix heures and demie.

Il est onze heures trois quarts.

Il s'en va midi.

Il est pres de midi.

Comment le savez vous?

L'horloge frape.

L'entendez vous fraper?

Est-il tems de dejeuner?

Deux heures sont sonnees.

Il est tems de diner.

Que ferons nous apres dine.

Nous irons nous promener.

Cinquieme Dialogue.
Enter une Gouvernante and une jeune Demoiselle.
ETes-vous encore au lit?

Dormez-vous?

Etes vous endormie?

Non, je ne fais que sommeiller.

Est-il deja tems de se lever?

Vrayment, en doutez vous?

Il est tantot dix heures.

Levez vous promtement.

Hates vous, ou, depechez vous.

Prenez guard, vous avez pense tomber.

Approchez vous du feu.

Tenez vous chaudement.

Je suis enrhumee.

Je n'ay fait que tousser and cracher toute la nuit.

Mouchez vous.

Habillez vous.

Chaussez vous, ou, metrez vos bas.

Chaussez vous, ou, mettez vos souliers.

Lavez vos mains, votre bouche, and votre visage.

Neteyez vos dents.

Coifez vous.

Faites vous lacer.

Avez vous fait?

Pas encore.

Vous etes bien longue.

Dites vos prieres.

Parlez haut.

Continuez.

O^ est votre livre de prieres?

Apportez votre Bible.

Cherchez votre bible.

Lisez un chapitre.

Lisez doucement.

Epelez ce mot-la.

Vous lisez trop vite.

Vous ne lisez pas bien.

Vous lisez trop lentement.

Vous n^apprenez rien.

Vous n'etudiez pas.

Vous ne profitez pas.

Vous etes paressuse.

Que marmotez vous la?

Vous ne savez pas votre lecon?

Voila votre lecon.

Pourquoy me parlez vous ^nglois?

Parlez toujours Francois.

Voulez vous dejuner?

Que voulez vous pour votre dejune?

Voulez vous du pain and du beurre?

Hatez vous de dejuner.

Prenez votre ouvrage.

Montrez moy votre ouvrage.

Cela n'est pas bien.

Refaites tout cela.

Vous faites des grimaces.

Avez vous une bonne aiguille?

Avez vous du fill?

A^^ez jouer un peu.

Revenez travailler quand vous aurez joue.

Allez vous promener dans le jardin.

Ne vous echauffez pas.

Retournez bien-tot.

Sixieme Dialogue.
Enter une Dame and sa Femme de Chamber.
Pour se lever.
MA sonnette a-t'elle son?

Je crois qu'ouy.

W. -- Qu'elle heure est-il?

Madame, il s'en va onze heures.

Est-il si tard que ca?

Donnez moy ma chemise.

Elle n'est pas chaude; je m'en vai la chauffer.

Y-a-t'il un bon feu dans mon cabinet?

Ouy, Madame.

Redonnez moy mes brassieres.

Ou est ma Robe de chamber?

La voici.

Donnez moy mes pantoufles (ou mes mules,) mes bas, and mes jartieres.

Je ne saurois trouver les jartieres.

Que sont-elles devenues?

Je ne saurois vous dire.

Vous laissez tout en desordre.

Vous devriez mettre tout en order avaunt de vous coucher.

Etendez la Toiletre.

La glace de ce miroir est toute sale, frottez la un peu.

Donnez moy une chaise.

Mes peignes sont ils nets?

O^y, Madame, ils le sont.

Peignez moy.

Doucement, comme vous y allez?

Vous m'avez ecorche la tete.

Donnez moy ma coiffure.

Ou est la Pelote?

Ou est la boite a mouches?

Baillez moy une epingle.

La Coiffuse a t'elle apporte la palatine and les engageantes que je commandai
avaunt hier?

Non, Madame.

Elle n'aura plus ma pratique.

Elle neglige trop ses chalands.

Donnez moy mon corpse de jupe.

Lacez moy, fort serre.

Donnez moy ma jupe a franges d'argent, and ma robe jaune.

Ou sont mes gans, mon manchon, and mon mouchoir?

Les voila, Madame.

Mettez de l'eau de senteur a ce mouchoir, (ou, Parfumez ce mouchoir)

Emplissez cette bouteille d'eau de la Reine de Hongrie.

Ou est ma montre?

La voila.

Va t-elle?

Non, Madame, elle ne va pas.

Donnez la moy affinque je la monte.

Mais allez plutot voir qu'elle heure il est a la Pendule de la salle ou l'on
mange.

Madame, il est onze heures and demie.

Allez dire au cocher qu'il met les chevaux au carrosse.

A la Caleche.

Madame le Carrosse est pret, il est devant la port.

Madame, voicy Messieurs vos fills qui viennent vous demander votre benediction.

Dieu benisse mon ch^r fills.

Soyez sage, (...) bien.

Mais ou est (...) fi^le?

La voici.

Baisez moy ma chere poupone, ma chere fanfan, ma petite mignonne.

Septieme Dialogue.
De manger and de boire.
J'Ay faim, j'ay grand faim.

Et moy j'ay soif.

Je meurs de faim, il me semble qu'il y a trois-jours que je n'ay rien mange.

Pour moy je meurs de soif.

Je suis fort altere.

Je mangerois bien un morceau de quelque chose.

Mangez donc, qui vous empeche?

Je boirois bien un verte de vin.

Beuvez donc, sans tant de facon.

J'ay bon appetit.

Je n'ay plus d'appetit.

Je suis rassasie.

Je suis tout degoute.

Je n'ay plus de soif.

Je suis desaltere.

Huitieme Dialogue.
De la Promenade.
ALlons nous promener.

Allons prendre l'air.

Voulez-vous venir avec moy?

Je le veux bien.

Voulez-vous aller fair un tour?

J'y consens.

J'en suis d'accord.

Ou irons nous?

Allons au Parc.

Allons dans les Prairiee.

Irons nous en carosse?

Ou a pie?

Comme il vous plaira.

Comme vous voudrez.

Allons y a pie.

C'est bon pour la sante.

Vous avez raison.

Courage, Marchons.

Par ou allez-vous?

Par ici. Par la.

A main droite.

A main gauche.

Reposons nous un peu.

Ce n'est pas la peine.

Etes vous las.

Je suis fort fatigue.

Vous etes un mauvais marheur.

Retournons nous en*

Il se fait card.

Le soleil se couche.

N'allez pas si vi^e.

Attendez moy.

Je ne saurois vous tenir pie.

Allons, allons vous vous delasserez en soupant.

Neufieme Dialogue.
Pou fair une visit le matin.
OU est ton Maitre.

Dort-il encore?

Non, Monsieur, il est eveille.

Est-il leve?

Se leve t'il? est il debout?

Non, Monsieur, il est encore au lit.

Quoy! vous etes encore au lit?

Je me couchay hier si tard, que je n'ay pu me lever de bonne heure.

Qui fites vous done apres soupe?

Aussi-tot que vous futes sorri on parla de jouer.

Jouates vous?

Ouy, Mon^ieur, je ^o^^ay.

A quel jeu?

Nous jouames au piquet Mr. le Chevalier -- and moy.

Et les autres.

Les uns jouerent a l'Ombre.

Les autres a la Bassette.

Et les autres aux Echez.

Qui a gagne? Qui a perdu?

Madame la Duchess de M -- gagna vingt guinees.

Le Comte de F. en perdit quinze.

Le Chevalier T. me gagna dix ecus.

A ce que je vois la perte, ni le gain n'ont pas ete considerables.

Nous ne jouons jamais que pour le divertissement.

Mais il me semble que le jeu est un divertissement bien dangereux.

Sur tout quand on joue gros jeu.

Est-ce que vous ne jouez jamais?

Vous m'excuserez, mais quand je joue, je ne joue pas gros jeu.

Nous jouons petit jeu and nous nous piquons de jouer franc.

Mais a propos jusques a quelle heure jou^tes vous?

Jusques a minuit.

A quelle heure vous etes vous couche?

A une heure apres minuit.

Je ne m'etonne pas si vous vous levez si tard.

Quelle heure est il bien?

Quelle heure croyez vous qu'il est?

Je crois qu'il n'est pas encore huit heures.

Comment huit heures, il est dix heures sonnees.

Il faut donc que je me leve au plus vite.

Dixieme Dialogue.
Le Gentilhomme and le valet de chamber.
Pour s'habiller.
Qui est-la?

Que vous plait-il, Monsieur?

Allons vite, faites du feu, habillez moy.

Il y a du feu, Monsieur.

Donnez moy ma chemise.

La voila, Monsieur.

Elle n'est pas chaude.

Elle est encore toute froide.

Si vous souhaitez je la chaufferai.

Non, non; ou est ma robe de chamber?

Ou sont mes pantouffles.

Apportez moy mes bas de soye.

Ils sont trouez.

Ne sauriez vous y fair un point?

Donnez moy donc une pair de bas d'Estame.

Peignez moy.

Prenez un autre peigne.

Peignez ma Perruque.

Mettez y de l'essence.

Donnez moy mon mouchoir.

En voila un blanc.

Donnez moy celui qui est dans la poche de mon just-aucorps.

Je l'ai done a la blanchisseuse, il etoit sale.

Vous avez bien fait.

A-t-elle apporte mon linge.

Ouy, Monsieur, il n'y manque rien.

Donnez moy ma culotte.

Quel habit mettez vous aujourd' huy.

Celuy que j'avois hier.

Quoy, Monsieur, ne vous souvient il pas que c'est aujourd' huy, la Naissance
du Duc de Gloucester, and que le Tailleur doit apporter bientot votre habit neuf.

J'ai tort^

Vous avez raison.

Vous avez bien fait de m'en fair souvenir.

Mais on heurte, voyez qui ^'est?

Qui est-ce?

C'est le Tailleur,

Faites le monter.

Faites le entrer.

Dialogue Douzieme.
Le Gentilhomme and le Tailleur.
APortez vous mon habit?

Ouy, Monsieur, le voicy.

Je vous attendois; essayez le moy.

Vous plait-il d'essayer le justau-corps.

Voyons s'il est bien fait.

J'espere que vous en serez content.

Il me semble bien long.

On les port longs a present.

On ne les port plus si courts qu'on faisoit auparavant.

Boutonnez moy.

Il me serre trop.

Pour etre bien fait, il faut qu'il soit just.

Les manches ne sont else pas trop larges?

Non, Monsieur, else vont fort bien.

La culotte est bien etroite.

C'est la mode.

On les port fort etroite.

Les rouleaux ne sont pas assez gros.

Je vous demand pardon.

C'est habit vous sied fort bien.

Mais les bas ne l'assortissent pas.

N'importe, on n'y regard pas de si pres.

Que dites vous de mon chapeau?

C'est un fort beau castor.

Vous vous trompez ce n'est qu'un demi castor.

Quelle less y mettrez vous?

Un galon d'or avec une bou^le de Diamans.

Ne m'avez-vous pas achete un neud de cravate?

Pardonnez moy, le voicy.

Combien coute la verge de ce ruban?

On ne le vend pas a la verge, on le vend a l'aune.

Combien?

Un chelin and six sols.

Ce n'est pas trop. Ce n'est pas cher.

C'est bon march.

Avez vous fait vos parties?

Je n'ay pas eule tems.

Apportez les demain, je vous payerai.

Dialogue Treizieme.
Pour parler au Cordonnier.
LE Cordonnier est il venu?

Non, Monsieur, il n'est pas venu.

Courez done chez luy, and lui dites de m'apporter mes souliers.

Monsieur, le voicy, je l'ay trouve en chemin.

Sont ce mes souliers?

Ouy, Monsieur.

Chaussez les moy, mettez les moy.

Ils me pressent un peu.

Ils s'elargiront assez en les portant.

Mais Ils ne laisseront pas de me blesser cependant.

Mes cors en souffriront.

Mes pies sont a la torture.

Faites m'en d'autres.

Vous etes difficile.

Vous plait-il d'en essayer une autre pair que j'ai apporte par hazard.

Je le veux bien.

Je croy qu'ils vous seront propres.

J'ay mon pie plus a mon aise.

Que valent ces souliers?

Cinq Chelins.

C'est trop.

C'est un prix fait.

C'est un soulier, bien fait, and bien pique.

Faites m'en une autre pair de semblables.

Prenez ma mesure.

Voila votre argent.

Quatorzieme Dialogue.
Pour Dejuner.
AVez-vous apporte quelque chose pour dejuner?

Ouy, Monsieur, voila des saucisses and des petits patez.

Voulez vous que j'apporte le jambon.

Ouy, apportez le, nous en couperons une tranche.

Mettez une serviette sur cette table, and donnez nous des assietes, des
couteaux and des fourchettes.

Rincez les vertes.

Donnez un siege a Monsieur.

Asseyez vous, Monsieur, mettez vous proche du feu.

Je n'ay point froid, je serai fort bien icy.

Voyons si le vin sera bon.

Debouchez cette bouteille.

Goutez ce vin, je vous en pry.

Comment le trouvez vous?

Qu'en dites vous?

Il n'est pas mauvais, il est bon.

Otez ce plat.

Mangez des saucisses.

Voila une orange.

Etreignez la sur vos sau^isses.

Donnez moy a boire.

Monsieur, je salve votre sante.

A votre sante, Monsieur.

Je vous remercie, Monsieur.

Donnez a boire a Monsieur.

Je viens de boire.

Les petits patez etoient fort bons.

Ils etoient tant soit peu trop euits.

Vous ne mangez pas.

J'ay tant mange, que je ne pourrai pas diner.

Vous vous moquez vous n'avez rien mange.

Rendons graces.

Quinzieme Dialogue.
Pour parler Francois.
PArlez vous Francois?

Etes vous bien savant dans la langue Francoise?

Pas trop, je ne Sai quasi rien.

On dit pourtant que vons parlez sort bien.

Je voudrois bien qu'il fut vray.

Je sau^ois ce que je ne sai pas.

Il sera vrai si vous voulez, and je vous enseignerai l'a maniere d'apprendre
bien tot le Franscois.

Vous me ferez un tres grand plaisir.

La Method la plus facile pour apprendre le Francois est de le parler souvent.

Mais pour parler, il faut savoir quelque chose.

Vous en savez deja assez.

Je ne sai que quatre ou cinq mots que j'ay appris par coeur.

Cela suffit pout commencer a parler.

Si cela etoit, je Deviendr^is savant en peu de tems.

N'entendez vous point ce que je vous dis?

Je l'entens, and je le comprens fort bien.

Mais je n'ay pas la facilite de parler.

J'ay de la peine a parler.

La facilite de parler viendra avec le tems.

Je suis trop impatient.

Dites moy un peu, comment appellez vous cela?

Je croy qu'on l'appelle.

Fort bien, and ceci?

Prononce je bien?

Assez bien. Passablement.

Il ne vous manque qu'un peu d'exercice.

Combien y-a-til que vous apprenez?

Il n'y a pas plus de huit jours.

Il n'y a pas encore un mois.

Comment s'appelle votre Maitre de langues?

Il s'appelle Monsieur --

Combien de fois vous vientil donner Lecon.

Il vient trois fois la Semaine.

Combien lui donnez-vous par mois.

Je lui done -- tant.

Vient il trois jours de suite?

Non, il vient de deux jours l'un.

Savoir, le Lundi, le Mardi, and le Vendredi.

Le matin, ou l'aprezmidi?

Le matin.

Ou demeure-t-il?

Dans la rue de Grafton.

Chez qui?

Il loge chez un Tailleur a l'enseigne de la Boule bleue.

Ne vous dit il pas qu'il faut toujours parler Francois?

Ouy, Monsieur, il me le dit souvent.

Pourquoy donc ne parlez vous pas?

Avec qui voulez vous que je parle?

A^ec ceux qui vous parleron^.

Je voudrois parler, mais je n'ose.

Croyez moy, soyez hardi, and parlez sans prendre guard si vous dites bien ou
mal.

Si je parle de cette maniere la, tout le monde se moquera de moy.

Ne savez vous pas que pour apprendre a parler bien, on commence a parler mal?

Je suivrai donc votre avis.

Seizieme Dialogue.
Des Nouvelles.
QUE dit on de nouveau?

Savez vous rien de nouveau?

Je n'ay rien appris de nouveau.

De quoy parle t-on en ville?

On ne par^e de rien.

Avez vous rien ouy dire de la guerre?

Je n'en ay pas entendu parler.

On parle pourtant d'un Siege.

On le disoit; mais ce bruit s'est trouve faux.

Au contraire on parle d'une battaille.

Je le sai de bonne part.

Croyez vous que nous aurons la Paix?

Je crois qu'ouy.

Pour moy, je crois que non.

Sur quoy vous fondez vous?

Parce que je vois que les esprits de l'un and de l'autre parti n'y sont gueres
portez.

Cependant on ne sauroit nier que la paix ue fut fort advantageuse pour le
Commerce.

Que dit on a la cour?

On parle d'un voyage.

Quand croit on que le Roy partira?

On ne le sait pas. On ne le dit pas.

Ou dit on qu'il ira?

Les un disent en Flandres, les autres sur la Flotte.

Et la Gazette que dit-elle?

Je ne l'ay pas leave*

Et pour vous parler franchement, on tient les desseins de la cour si secrets,
que je crois que les nouvellistes n'en savent rien.

Les chefs meme, que le Ro^ choisit pour executer ses desseins, ignorent a quoy
les preparatifs qu'on fait a la Tour and dans les ports sont destinez.

Apres cela p^ut on parler de nos affairs d'un ton affirmatif?

Les persons de bon sens ne parlent jamais de ces matieres la qu'avec
beaucoup de retenue.

Pour moy, je ne saurois excuser l'imprudence de certaines gens qui parlent du
Gouvernement sans le conno^tre.

Ils font la paix, and la guerre selon leur Caprice, ou leur interet, and se
melent de reglet l'Etat dans le tems qu'ils laissent leurs familles daus un
desordre qui les ruin.

Parlons des nouvelles particulieres.

Est il vray, ce qu'on dit de Monsieur?

Qu'en dit on?

On dit qu'il est bless a mort.

J'en serois fache e'est un honnete homme.

Qui l'a bless?

Deux Fripons.

Deux coquins qui l'ont attaque.

Sait on pourquoy?

Le br^it court que c'est pour avoir mal parle d'eux, and done un soufflet a
un deux.

Je ne le crois pas.

Ni moy non plus.

Quoy qu'il en soit, on le saura bientot.

Dixseptieme Dialogue.
Pour s'informer de quelqu'un.
QUI est ce Gentilhomme qui vous parloit tantot?

C'est un Anglois.

Je le croyois Allemand.

Il parle fort bien Francois.

Quoy qu'il soit Anglois, il parle si bien Francois, Itali^n, Allemand, and
Espagnol, que parmi les Francois, on le croit Francois.

Il parle Italien, comme les Italiens memes.

Il pass pour Allemand parmi les Allemands, and pour Espagnol parmi les
Espagnols.

Il est difficile de posseder tant de langues differentes.

Il a ete long tems dans ces pais la.

Y-a-t'il long tems que vous le connoissez?

Il-y a environ deux ans que je le connois.

Je fis connoissance avec lui a Paris.

Il a bon air, il est bien turn.

Il a bonne mine.

Il est de belle taille.

Il n'est ni trop grand ni trop petit.

Il est bien fait, and sa taille est degagee.

Il a le port noble.

Il n'a rien de degoutant dans ses manieres.

Il est civil, affable et complaisant avec tout le monde.

Il a beaucoup d'esprit, and est fort enjoue en Conversation.

Il monte bien a cheval, il est adroit a fair des arms, and il dance
proprement, ou de bonne grace.

Il joue du luth, de la guiterre and de plusieurs autres instrumens.

Et ce qui le rend encore plus recommendable c'est qu'il a trouve le moyen de
se fair aimer du Prince, de qui il recoit souvent des bienfaits.

Et qui sans doubt, ne manquera pas de l'avancer.

Je serois bien aise de fair connoissance avec lui.

Je vous en donnerai la connoissance.

Savez vous ou il demeure?

Il demeure j^-y pres.

Quand voulez vous que nous. L'allions saluer ensemble.

Quand il vous plaira, car c'est mon ami intime.

Ce sera quand vous en aurez le tems.

A votre commodit^.

A votre loisir.

Dix huitieme Dialogue.
Enter un Precepteur and deux jeunes Gentilhommes
MEssieurs je vous souhaite le bonjour.

Monsieur je vous le souhaite.

Il-a-t-il long tems que vous etes levez.

Il y a environ une heure.

Avez vous bien dormi la nuit passee.

Avez vous bien repose?

Mon petit friar a fort bien dormi.

Pour moy j'ai pass une party de la nuit a dormir, l'autre a sommeiller and
l'autre a veiller,

Avec vous dejeune?

Ouy Mousieur.

Avec vous demand la benediction a votre Papa, a votre Mama and a votre
Grand-Mama.

Papa est sorti avaunt que nous nous levassions.

Mama n'est pas eveillee.

Mais nous avons ete a Grand-Mama.

Apportez vos livres.

Quels livres faut il que j'apporte?

Quel jour de la semaine est-ce?

C'est aujourd'huy Mardi.

Apportez donc la Grammaire Latin, and les Phrases familieres.

Et pour mon friar?

L'histoire de la Bible, and la Grammaire Francoise.

Declinez un Nom, conjuguez un Verb.

Et vous Monsieur P -- apprenez cette lecon par coeur.

Monsieur B -- songez a ce que vous faites.

Je vous reprens vingt fois d'une chose, and vous ne vous corrigez jamais.

Vous etes toujours distrait.

Vous n'etes pas capable de fair ces beveues fi vous y preniez tant soit peu
guard.

Vous ne profitez pas.

Monsieur P -- vous n'etudiez pas.

Vous ne faites que jouer.

Vous ne faites que badiner.

Dites votre lecon.

Vous hesitez a chaque mot.

Monsieur B -- expliquez en Francois dix phrases latins.

Faites-en les parties.

Ecrivez les proprement dans votre cayer, avec la traduction Francoise a cote.

Et apprenez eusuite tout cela par coeur.

Je vous done une petite tache affin que vous l'appreniez plutot and que vous
la reteniez plus long tems.

Savez vous deja votre lecon?

Ouy, Monsieur, je la say.

Et bien voyons. Recitez la.

Parlez haut, qu'on vous entende.

Vous parlez trop bas.

Demeurez en repos; vos mains sont toujours en action.

Brave Monsieur, B -- voila qui est bien:

Je me love fort de vous.

Si vous etiez toujours aussi sage and aussi diligent, je ne serois jamais
chagrin ni de mauvaise humeur.

Pour Monsieur, P -- il est si eveille qu'sl ne peut s'empecher, de folatrer,
de fair du bruit, and de causer pour nous interrompre.

Puis que nous avons acheve nos exercices allons nous promener.

Appellez, G -- pour vous habiller.

Dix neufieme Dialogue.
Enter les memes pour se Promener dans le Parc.
ALlons au Parc.

Irons nous a pie, bu en carosse?

Nous pouvonsy aller a pie.

les Rues ne sont pas sales,

Il n'y a point de boue

Donnez moy, la main,

Vous avez pense tomber.

Vous bronchez a chaque pas.

Monsieur, par ou entrerons nous dans le Parc.

Par l'hotel (ou, par le Palais) de St. Jaques.

Et bien, Monsieur, comment trouvez vous le Parc.

Quoy que je m'y promene tous les jours je ne cesse d'en admirerles allees a
perte do vue.

Remarquez vous avec qu'elle proprete le Mail est tenu?

Que fait on de ces monceaux de coquilles.

On les repand dans le Mail and apres cela on les ecrase avec le Cylindre, (ou,
avec le rouleau.)

Faisons le tonr de Parc.

Voyez vous, Monsieur, avec qu'elle force l'eau enter dans ce canal?

Ouy, Monsieur, d'ou vient cela?

C'est qu'il a le flux and reflux;

Mais par ou enter la Maree?

Par dessous terre.

La maree monte.

La maree descend.

Que represente cette belle statue de bronze?

Un homme qui se bat a coups de poing.

Approchons nous du Cadran pour y regler nos montres.

Allons voir maintenent la voliere.

Quelle sort d'oiseaux y a t-il?

Il en a de plusieurs sorts.

Si vous avez quelque chose de bon a manger vous n'avez qu'a le jetter dans
l'eau and vous verrez comment les Canards and les Oyes voleront verse nous.

C'est un joli divertisement.

Il y plaisir de voir avec qu'elle avidite ils tachent de ^'arracher le Manger
le^ uns des autres.

Monsieur B -- pour joindre l'utile, a l'agreable ditesmoy une Fable d' Esope
en Verse Francois.

Quelle Fable, Monsieur?

Celle de la Cour du Lion.

Dites moy maintenant l'Histoire de l'Huitre, and des Plaideurs.

Et vous, Monsieur P. dites moy la Fable du Corbeau and du Renard.

Voila qui est bien.

Voici un Monsieur de ma connoissance qui vient a nous.

Je crois qu'il a envy de nous accoster, ou, de nous aborder.

Ne manquez pas de le saluer en meme tems que moy.

Vingtieme Dialogue.
Pour aborder quelqu'un.
OH! l'heureuse rencontre.

Il y a long tems que je n'avois eu l'honneur de vous voir.

J'ay bien de la joye de vous voir en bonne sante.

Ou avez vous ete perdu pendant si long tems.

J'ay ete a la Campaign, (ou aux champs.)

Depuis quand est l'arrivoe?

Il n'y a que deux jours.

Sont-ce la les deux jeunes Messieurs, que vous elevez.

Ouy, Monsieur.

Ils sont tous deux fort bien faits.

Quel age a l'aine?

Il n'a que huit ans and demi.

Il est fort grand pour cet age la.

Il est fort bien fait.

Et il a le Port, l'Air and les Manieres d'un Homme de vingt ans.

Parle t'il bien Francois?

Il se demele assez bien d'une Conversation familiere.

Prenez la peine de l'examiner vous meme. --

Je vous assure que j'en suis surpris. Il a l'accent bon: Il parle fort bien.

Vous pouvez remarquer qu'il fait quelques fautes, and qu'il ne sait pas
certains mots.

Cela vient en party de ce que ne parlant qu'avec moy il ne peut pas apprendre
la diversite d'Expressions qui se presentente en parlant a diverses Persons.

Et outre cela, la plupart des mots qu'il ne sait pas en Francois sont ceux
don't il ignore meme la Signification en Anglois.

Mais d'abord qu'il Commencera a frequenter les compagnies il aquerra bien tot
la facilite de s'exprimer.

Car je puis dire qu'il entend assez bien, les Histoires, les Comedies, and les
Romans.

Avez vous commence a lui montrer le Latin?

Ouy, Monsieur, il en a quelque teinture.

Et il sait de plus quelque peu de Geographie.

Il est fort avance.

Il a fait des grands progrez.

Il ne sauroit manquer de devenir Savant sous un si bon Maitre.

Je vous assure, sans le flatter, que son bon naturel, son esprit and sa
docilite y contribuent plus que moy.

Et son petit cadet quel age a t-il.

Il a six ans and trois mois.

ll est fait a peindre.

On voit en lui toutes les petites graces qu'on attribue aux Anges and qui
n'avoient ete jusqu'a present que dans l'imagination des peintres.

Parle-t-il Francois aussi?

Ouy, Monsieur, and il le lit passablement. Mais il est plein de malice.

Cela sied fort bien a son age.

Vous en retournez vous au logis?

Ouy, Monsieur.

Quand aurai je l'honneur de vous revoir.

Je me do^nerai l'honneur de vous aller voir chez vous.

Vous serez fort bien venu.

Adieu, jusqu'au revoir.

Vingt and unieme Dialogue*
A Diner.
ESt-il tems de diner?

Je crois qu'ouy.

A t'on mis la nappe (ou le couvert?)

Pas encore.

Mettez des sieges a l'entour de la table.

Nous aurons compagnie au jourd'hui.

Il manque la deux couverts.

Garcon faites servir le dine.

Il n'est pas encore pret.

On a son la cloche.

On a servi.

Mettons nous a table.

Monsieur, prenez votre place.

Je ne souffrirai pas que vous vous asseyez au bas bout.

Vous vous assirez au haut bout, s'il vous plait.

En verite je n'en ferai rien.

Treve de complimens je vous pry.

Pour quoy faites vous tant de facons.

On vit sans facon enter amiss.

Qui benit la table?

Aimez vous la soupe a la Francoise.

Ouy pour veu que le bouillon soit bien fait.

Voulez vous que je vous serve de ce bouilli.

Servez vous vous meme.

Monsieur vous ne mangez rien.

Il est vray que nous n'avons rien d'extraordinaite pour vous inciter a manger.

Vous voulez sans doubt me railler de ce que je ne fais l'Eloge de ce Regal
qu'en bien mangeant.

Vous avez la repartie prete, mais quoy qu'il en soit, jespere, que le second
reparera l'entree.

Mais, Monsieur, nous n'avez pas encore beu.

Garcon, donnez a boire a Monsieur.

Madame. je salve vos graces.

Monsieur. je vous remercie.

Je suis votre servante.

Comment trouvez vous cette Biere?

Je la trouve assez bonne.

Que je la gout.

Pour moy, je la trouve trop amere:

J'en ferai des reproaches au Brasseur.

Allons, Monsieur, mangez de ce que vous trouverez le plus a votre gout.

Que dites vous de cette langue de boeuf.

De cet hachis? de cette fricassee? voulez vous que je vous serve de ce chapon
de ces poulets, de ces beccasses ou de ces perdrix?

Tout ce qu'il vous plairra?

Qu'aimez vous mieux l'aile ou la cuisse?

Ce m'est tout un.

Mangez quelque rave pour vous aiguiser l'appetit.

Je n'ay deja que trop mange.

Donnez moy un verre de vin.

Monsieur, je salve votre sante.

Allons, Monsieur, je vous port la sante du jeune Prince.

Je vous ferai raison de tout mon coeur.

Voila d'excellent vin.

Comment trouvez vous ce pate de pigeonneaux?

Extremement bon; fort bien assaisonne.

Quoy! des entremets apres un second si magnifique?

Vous nous faites un Festin de Roy, au lieu de nous donner un repas d'amy?

Le dessert repond a tout le rest.

Vous avez ramasse les fruits les plus exquis que la saison nous fournisse.

Cette paticerie est fort bien faite.

Monsieur, vous me faites rougir de prevenir par vos louanges les excuses que
je vous dois pour vous avoir fait si mechante chere.

Mais je croy que tout le monde a fait.

Desservez.

Rendons graces.

Vingt and Deuxieme Dialogue.
Pour jouer aux Echez.
A Quoy* passerons nous l'apresmi di!

Jouons une party aux Echez.

Je le veux bien.

Mais vous etes plus fort que moy.

Point du tont.

Vous m'avez toujours gagne.

Je ne jouerai plus contre vous a moins que vous ne me donniez quelque avantage.

Vraiment je ne saurois; voyez si vous voulez jouer du pair?

Que jouerons nous?

Je ne joue jamais que fort petit jeu.

Jouons demi-ecu la party.

Mais jouez franc: Jouez beau jeu.

Je ne triche jamais.

Je prens ce Pion.

J'en suis bien aise car je m'en vai prendre ce Fou, and vous donner Echec.

Vous ne gagnerez rien a cette affair, voila une Tour que j'emporte avec mon
Chevalier.

Mais vous, comment, sauverez vous votre Dame?

En vous donnant Echec-and mat avec mon Fou and ma Tour.

J'ay perdu le party je ne saurois remuer mon Roy.

Vous me devez donc trente sols.

J'en conviens.

XXIII. Dialogue.
Pour aller a la Comedy.
ON joue aujoud'hy une piece nouvelle voulez vous que nous l'allions voir?

De tout mon coeur.

Est-ce une Comedy, ou une Tragedy.

C'est un Comedy.

Comment s'appelle t'elle?

Le vieux Garcon.

Est-ce la premiere fois qu'on la joue?

Non, Monsieur, c'est la trois eme fois: C'est le jour du Poet.

Je m'en vai donner order au cocher d'appreter le Carosse and nous y irons tout
aussi tot.

Irons nous dans une loge?

Je ferai ce qu'il vous plaira mais il me semble qu'il est mieux d'aller au
Parterre.

Pourquoy?

Parce que nous pourons nous a muser a causer avec quelqu'un avaunt qu'on leve
la oil.

Que dites vous de cette symphonie?

Je la trouve fort belle.

Ne remarquez vous pas cet haut-bois qui fait un si bell effet parmi les violons
and les clavessins?

Les loges sont deja pleines.

Et comme vous voyez nous sommes fort serrez dans le Parterr^.

Je n'ay jamais veu la Comedy si pleine.

Il y a beancoup de beau monde.

J'aime autant que la Comedy la veue de ces belles Dames qui font l'ornement
des loges.

Else sont fort bien mises (on ajustees)

Else joignent les beautez and les agremens du corpse, a la richesse des
ajustemens, and a l'eclat de leurs pierreries.

Remarquez vous cette Dame qui est a cote de la Princess?

Ouy, je la voy, elle est jolie, elle est bein faite.

Comment jolie? il faut dire que cet une beauty parfaite.

La connoissez vous?

Ouy je la connois.

Elle a la taille belle and degagee.

Avez vous pris guard a son tein.

C'est le plus beau tein du monde.

La Blancheur de son sein (ou de sa Gorge) and le Vermillon de son visage font
tort aux lis, and aux Roses.

Elle a les dents blanches comme neige.

Je crois qu'elle a beaucoup d'esprit.

On peut bien voir la beauty, mais non pas l'esprit.

Si elle avoit autant d'esprit que de beauty on pourroit dire que c'est un
abrege de toutes les perfections.

Mais on leve la toil, ecoutons.

Voila la Comedy achevee.

la toil est abatue.

Rerournous nous en chez nous.

XXIV. Dialogue.
Pour fair un troc.
QUelle Epee avez vous la?

C'est une epee que je viens d'acheter chez le Fourbisieur?

La guard est elle d'acier, du de Cuivre d'ore?

Belle demand! Ne voyez vous pas qu'elle est de Vermell?

La poignee est fine sans doubt

Voulez vous troquer votre epee?

Contre quoy?

Contre la mienne?

Je le veux bien, combien me voulez vous render?

Rien.

Donnez moy deux ecus de retour.

Vrayment vous vous moquez de moy; est ce que mon epee ne vaut pas autant que
la votre?

Non asseurement, il s'en fant beaucoup.

Vous m'en contez de belles.

C'est bien a moy qu'il en faut donner a garder?

Si vous voulez fair troc de Gentilhomme, avisez.

Que voulez vous dire par la?

Changer but a but.

Je m'en garderai bien.

Je n'ay guard de le fair.

Cherchez vos dupes aileurs.

Et bien laissez vous en^.

Je vous donnerai donc huit chelins de retour

Tope.

XXV. Dialogue
Enter une Dame, and sa Fille, Touchant les Exercices.
MA Fille, avec vous fair, tous vos Exercices aujourd huy.

Non Madame; mon Maitte de dance n'est pas encore venu.

Votre Maitre de Mufique est il parti?

Oui Madame, il vient de sort^r.

Quel air a^ez vous chante?

U^ Air du Nouvel Opera

Quel Opera voulez vous dire?

La Reine des-Fees.

Dites m'en les paroles.

Si l'Amour est doux, etc.

Cette chanson est, devenue aussi, commune qu'un Vaudeville.

C'est le sort ordinaire des plus beaux Airs; qu'on chante aux deux Theaters.

ChanteZ devant moy

Quelle chanson, Madame?

Qu'heureux sont le Bergers, avec leurs Bergeres!

Tenez vous droite.

Haussez la Tete

Voila qui est bien.

Vous chantez assez bien.

Vous n'avez pas tout a fait. Oublie cet air mais Vous Fredonnez trop.

Votre Maitre de langues. vint-il hier.

Ouy, Madame.

Dit-il que vous parlez bien Francois?

Il dit, que je parle auss^bien qu'aucune de ses Ecolieres pour le tems que
j'ay apris.

Il trouve donc que vous profitez?

Je ne sai si c'est pour me flater, ou pour m'encourager, mais il m'asseure que
je fais d^s grands progrez.

Il fait bien de ne vous rebuter pas.

Je souhaite que vous continuiez de meme.

Ne vous relachez pas.

Et sur tout, defaites vous de vos manieres badines.

Avez vous travaille a votre ouvrage?

A quel ouvrage.

A l'ouvrage a l'aiguille.

La Broderie.

A Fl^urir votre peignoir.

A quelle heure votr Maitre de Dance vient il Aujourd'huy?

A quatre heures.

Quelles Dances vous montret'il?

Les Dances Francoies; comme la Courante, le Menuet, etc.

Ne vous montre t'il pas des Branles de Province?

Pardonnez moy.

Montrez moy comment vous faites la Reverence.

Voila qui est bien.

Mais quand vous faites la Reverence n'envisagez pas les gens si fixement.

XXVI. Dialogue.
Pour Ecrire une Lettre.
N'Est-il pas aujourd'huy jour de Post?

Je crois qu'ouy.

A qui ecrivez vous?

A Mademoiselle de C. --

N'est elle pas en Ville?

Elle est aux Champs depuis deux jours.

Donnez moy, une fueille de papier do^e, une plume and un peu d'encre.

Entrez dans mon Cabinet, vous trouverez sur la Table tout ce qu'il vous faudra.

Il n'y a point de Plumes.

En voila dans l'Ecritoire.

Else ne valent rien.

En voila d'autres.

Ces Plumes ne sont pas taillees.

Ou est votre Canif?

Savez vous tailler les plumes?

Je les taille a ma maniere.

Celle-cy n'est pas mauvaise.

Pendant que j'acheveray cette Lettre, faites moy la grace de fair un Packet
de ces Verse and de cet imprime.

Qnel cachet, voulez vous que j'y met.

Cachettez les avec mon chiffre, ou avec mes Arms.

Quelle eire y mettrai-je?

Mettez en de la rouge, ou de la noire, il n'importe.

N'y puis je pas mettre des oublies?

C'est tout un.

Avez vous mis la date.

Je crois qu'ouy, mais je n'ay pas sign.

Le quantieme du mois avons nous?

Le Dixieme, le Vingtieme, etc.

Mettez y le dessus.

Ou est la poudre?

Vous n'avez ni poudre ni sable.

Il y en a dans le Poudrier.

Comment faites vous tenir vos Lettres?

Par la Post.

Voila mon valet, qui les y po^tera, si vous voulez les lui confier.

Portez les Lettres de Monsieur a la Post, and n'oubliez pas de payer le Port.

Je n'ay point d'argent.

En voila. Allez vite, and revenez bien tot.

XXVII. Dialogue.
Pour lover un Logement.
MAdemoiselle vous avez ici un billet a votre port qui marque que vous avez
des Chambres a lou^r.

Aussi ai^je Monsieur. Vous plait il de les voir?

Combien vous en faut-il?

Il me faut une bonne Chamber avec un Cabinet pour moy; and un Galetas pour mon
Valet.

Faut il que votre Chamber, soit garnie, ou non garnie?

Garnie.

Ayez la bonte d'attendre un moment dans le Parloir and j'irai querir les C^efs.

Voulez vous prendre la peine ^e monter?

Nous vous suivons, Mademoiselle.

Voici une Chamber a lover au premier etage.

Je vous repons, que voila un tres bon lit.

Et vous voyez qu'il y^a tout ce qui est necessaire dans une Chamber garnie,
comme Table Tablette, Gueridons, Chaises, Miroir and Belle Tapisserie.

Mais ou est le Cabinet.

Le voici.

Ceci m'accommode assez bien.

La Chamber me revient fort; Combien en demandez vous par semaine?

Je ne love mes chambres que par mois, ou par quartier.

Et bien je la prendrai par mois, combien en voulez vous?

Je n'ai jam^is eu, moins de fix ecus par mois de cette Chamber.

C'est trop.

Sans tant Marchander je vous en donnerai quatre.

C'est trop peu: Vous ne savez pas combien je pay de rent pour cette maison.

Il ne m'importe pas de le savoir.

Mais en un mot comme en cent, voulez vous que nous partagions le different?

Je vous assure que^j'y pers mais je le ferai a votre consideration.

Et pour le galetas de mon valet combien en voulez vous par mois.

Vous m'en donnerez deux ecus.

Je vous en donnerai huit Chelins.

Ce n'est pas assez, cependant plutot que de vous renvoyer, j'y consens.

Ce n'est pas la peine de Marchander pour fi peu de chose.

Mais a propos, ne puis je pas etre en pension chez vous?

Vous m'excuserea.

Combien prenez vous de chaque pensionnaire par semaine.

Pour la Chamber and la pension, tout ensemble je prens douze chelins.

Et pour la pension seule?

Huit.

J'aime donc mieux vous donner douze chelins par semaine pour tout.

Faites comme il vous plaira.

Et bien je commencerai demain.

XXVIII. Dialogue.
Pour Appreter les Viandes.
Enter le Maitre d'hotel and le Cuisinier.
MAitre Cuisinier, milord aura compagnie a diner; il faut Montrer tout ce que
vour savez fair.

Si je ne fais pas bonne chere ce ne fera pas ma fault; mais. Monsieur
l'intendant, vous me rognez, si fort les ailes, avec les Cizeaux de votre
economie. que --

Tout bellement -- qu'est-ce qu'il vous faut acheter?

Combien de persons y aura t'il a Table?

Je pense qu'ils seront sept.

Et bien, pour le Bouilli il faudra un gigot de Mouton and deux poules.

Pour les entrees une Fricassee de Poulets, Un jambon, Une Tourte de Pigeonnaux.

Pour le Roti, ou pour le second.

Un Cochon de lait.

Quatre Poulardes.

Quatre Perdrix.

E^uue douzaine d'Alouettes

Pour ce qui est du desert la Femme de charge aura soin de cela.

Allez donc promptement chez le boucher, and chez le Poulalier Chercher tout ce
qu'il vous faut.

Fournissez l'argent, and ecrivez ce que vous aurez depense je vous
rembourcerai, au bout de la semaine.

Egorgez ce cochon de lait tout presentement; faites lui griller les pies!
mettez le dans l'eau bouillante, and pendez le au croc.

Ecurez la marmite, remplissez la d'eau bien net, and la mettez a la
Cremiliere.

Plumez ces Poulardes, eventrez les, troussez les comme il saut, and lardez les
proprement.

Egoussez ces pois and ces seves, and faites les bouillir pendant un quart
d'heure.

donnez moy la broche*

Montez le turn Broche.

XXIX, Dialogue.
Pour Aeheter un Habit.
MOnsieur, je viens a vous de la parr de Monsieur B --

Pourquoy est ce qu'il vous envoye?

Il m'a dit, que vous aviez un habit a faite.

Mon ami, vous etes bien venu, je pretens que vous me fassiez un habit propre
and a la mode.

Dequoy voulez vous l'avoir?

De quelque beau drap d'Angleterre.

De quelle couleur?

Je verrai.

Vous plait-il d'acheter le drap, ou bien que je le Fournisse?

Je m'en vai l'acheter tout de ce pas, venez avec moy.

Que souhaitez vous, Monsieur?

Que cherchez vous?

J'ay a fair d'un bon and beau drap.

Entrez, Monsieur, Vous verrez icy les plus beaux draps de Londres.

Montrez moy le meilleur que vous ayez.

En voila un tres beau comme on le port a present.

Il est bon, mais la couleur ne m'agree pas.

En voila une autre piece plus claire que l'autre.

J'aime bien cette couleur, mais le drap est trop mince, Il n'est pas assez
fort.

Voyez cette piece icy vous n'en trouverez pas de si belle ailleurs, ni qui
vous fasse un si bell usage.

Combien me vendrez vous l'Aune?

Sans vous surfaire d'un sol, il vaut vingt Chelins.

Je ne suis pas accoutume a Marchander, dites moy le denier mot.

Je vous l'ay dit, Monsieur, elle vaut autant.

C'est trop cher; je vous en donnerai dix huit.

Il n'y a pas un sol a rabattre; and si vous considerez la bonte and la finesse
du drap vous le trouverez a bon march.

Allons, Allons coupez en deux Aunes.

Je vous jure foy d'honnete homme que je ne gague pas trente sols avec vons.

Montrez moy maintenant un Drap raye pour la culotte.

En voicy un qui assortira votre just-au-Corps le mieux du Monde.

Combien le faites vous l'aune

Il ^'est jamais sorti de ma boutique a moins de vingt six Chelins.

Je vous en donnerai a raison de vingt quatre.

Combien vous en faut il?

Trois quatre d'aune.

Tenez, Monsieur, voila votre Argent, voyez si je me suis meconte.

Je ne voudrois pas vous fair tort d'un liard.

Monsieur, l'argent est bon and le conte y est.

Revenez vous en avec moy and venez prendre ma mesure.

Vous plait il que je fournisse le rest?

Cela s'en va sans dire.

Doublez le justaucorps de quelque bonne soye and la culotte d'une bonne toil
de Cotton.

Vous serez satisfai^.

Achetez moy des bons bas de soye.

Les voulez vous saits a l'aiguille, ou au metier?

Je veux les avoir a l'aiguille.

Au rest, prenez un soin tont parriculier que mon habit soit bien fait.

Je vous promets qu'il le sera.

Mail il faut que je l'aye au plus tard daus deux jours.

Vous l'aurez sans manquer.

XXX. Dialogne.
Pour jouer au Piquet.
JOuons une party au Piquet.

Combien voulez vous jouer?

Jouons un ecu pour passer le tems.

Donnez nous un jeu de Carts and des jettons.

Voyons qui fera?

C'est a vous a saire.

J'ay la main; J'ay le devant,

Melez les Carts, toutes les Tetes sont ensemble.

Else sont assez melees.

Coupez, Monsieur.

Avez vous vos Carts.

Je crois qu'ouy,

Combien en prenez vous?

Je prens tout.

J'en laisle une.

J'ay un mauvais jeu.

A refaire.

Non pas pour cette fois.

Avez vous ecarte.

Non, Monsieur, Mon jeu m'embarasse.

Vous devez avoir beau jeu, puis que je n'ay rien.

Contez votre point.

Cinqua^te, soixante, etc.

Ils ne valent pas.

Ils sont bons.

Quinte Major, quinte de Roy, quinte de Dame. Quatrieme de valet. Tierce de dix.

Trois as, trois Rois.

J'en ay autant.

Quatorze de Dames.

Jouez.

Coe^rs, Piques, Carreaux, Trefles.

L'as, le Roy, la Dame, le Valet, le Dix, le Neuf, le huit, le Sept.

Uu Pic, un repic.

Je gagne les Carts.

J'ay sept. mains, (ou sept Leves).

J'ay perdu.

Vous avez gagne.

Vous me devez un ecu.

Vous me le deviez.

Nous sommes quittes.

Donnez moy ma revenche

XXXI. Dialogue.
Pour le Voyage.
COmbien de miles (ou de lieues) y-a-t-il d'icy a N?

Il y a huit lieues.

Nous ne pourrons pas y arriver aujourd'huy, il est trop tard.

Il n'est pas plus de midy, vous y arriverez encore de bonne heure.

Le chemin est-il beau?

Pas trop, il y a des bois and des rivieres a passer.

Y a-t-il de danger sur le chemin.

On n'en parle pas; c'est un grand chemin, ou on trouve du Monde a tous momens.

Ne dit-on pas qu'il y a des Voleurs dans les Bois?

Il n'y a rien a craindre, ni de jour, ni de nuit.

Quel chemin faut il prendre?

Quand vous serez proche de la Montagne, vous prendrez a main droite.

Il ne faudra donc pas monter la montagne.

Non, Monsieur.

Le chemin est il difficile dans le Bois?

Vous ne pouvez pas vous egarer.

Quand vous serez horse du bois, souvenez vous de pren^dre a gauche.

Je vous remercie, Monsieur.

Allons, Messieurs, allons montons a cheval.

Adieu, Monsieur, Adieu.

Je vous souhaite un heureux voyage.

Monsieur, si je ne me trompe v^tre cheval est defer.

Voulez vous bien m'attendre jusqu'a ce que je l'aye sait ferrer.

De tout mon coeur.

XXXII. Dialogue.
Du soupe, and du Logement.
POuvons nous loger icy?

Ouy, Monsieur, nous avons de belles Chambres and des bons ^its.

Descendons, Messieurs.

Faites menor nos chevaux a l'ecurie.

Prenez les chevaux de ces Messieurs, ayez en soin.

Ca voyons, que nous donnerez vous a souper?

Voyez, Monsieur, ce qui vous agreera.

Donnez nous une fricassee de Poulets, une demi douzaine de Pig^ouneaux, une
Salade, six Cailles, and une douzaine d'alouettes.

Ne voulez vous rien autre chose?

Non, c'est assez; mais donnez nous de bon Vin, and du dessert.

Laissez moy fair, je vous repons que vous serez contents.

Allons, Messieurs, allons voir nos Chambres.

Eclairez ces Messieurs a monter.

Faites nous souper au plus vite.

Avaunt qve vous soyez debottez le soupe sera pret

Ou sont nos laquais.

Ils sont montez la haut avec vos valises.

Avez vous apporte mes Pistolets?

Ouy, Monsieur, les voila.

Debottex moy, and vous irez voir apres si on a done du soin aux chevaux, vous
les menerez a la riviere, and vous aurez soin qu'on leur done l'avoine.

J'auray soin de tout, ne vous mettez point en peine.

Faites venir le soupe.

Messieurs, le ^oupe est pret, on a servi.

Allons souper, Messieurs, affin que nous puissions nous aller coucher de bonne
heure.

Asseyons nous, Messieurs, mettons nous a Table.

Il manque un Couvert.

Mangez de cette fricassee elle est fort bien assaisonnee.

Les Pigeonnaux ne sont pas cuits.

Donnez nous a boire.

A votre sante, Messieurs.

Le Vin est il bon?

Il n'est pas mauvais.

Beuvons donc.

Ces cailles sont sort tendres.

Vous ne mangez pas, Monsieur.

Je n'ay point d'appetit je suis las and fatigue.

Il faut prendre courage.

Je serai asseurement mieux au lit qu'a la Table.

Faites bassiner votre lit.

Achevez de souper, Messieurs; je m'en vai me reposer.

Vous sentez vous Mal?

Voulez vous quelque chose?

Je n'ay besoin d'autre chose que de repos.

Adieu, Messieurs, bon soir.

Je vous souhaite une bonne nuit, tachez de vous bien porter.

Apportez le dessert, and allez dire a l'Hote qu'il nous vienne parler.

Le voic^ qui apporte une bouteille de vin.

XXXII. Dialogue.
Pour conter avec l'hote.
BOn soir, Messieurs etes vous contens du Soupe.

Nous sommes contens, mais il faut vous satis^aire.

Contons Monsieur notre hot combien avons nous depense?

L'Ecot n'est pas grand.

Voyez ce qu'il vous faut, pour nous, pour nos valets, and pour nos chevaux.

Contez vous memes, Messieurs, and vous verrez qu'il y a sept ecus.

Il me semble que vous demandez trop.

Au contraire, je fais bon march.

Combien nous contez vous pour le vin?

Je vous le vends quinze sols la bouteille.

Apportez en une autre bouteille, and nous vous donnerons demain matin sept
ecus en dejunant.

Quand il vous plaira.

Donnez order qu'on, nous done des draps blancs.

Les draps que vous aurez sont blancs de lessive.

Je n'y manquerai pas.

Ditez au valet d'ecurie qu'il pa^se bien nos chevaux, qu'il les etrille comme
il faut; and qu'il ayt soin qu il ne manquent point de foin.

Je le ferai. Adieu, Messieurs, Bon soir.

XXXIV. Dialogue.
Pour parler a un Malade.
QU'avez vous?

Je me port mal.

Vous en avez la mine.

Vous n'avez pas bon visage

Vous avez mauvais visage.

Ah! Monsieur je me meurs, Je suis a demi^mort.

Je languis.

Qu'est ce qui vous fait mal?

J'ai mal a la tete, le coeur me sait mal, and l'estomac.

Que je ta^e: otre pous.

Vous avez la. fievre.

Je sens une pesauteur en tout mon Corpse

Il faut vous fair saigner.

Je me (...) saigner l'autre jour.

Il n'importe: Demain vous prendrez medecin.

Quel regime faut il que je tienne?

Prenez des oe^fs frais, and des consumes.

Avez vous une guard?

Ouy, Monsieur.

Prenez courage, ne vous etonnez pas pour si peu de chose.

Ah! Monsieur, vous ne connoissez guere mon mal, je n'en puis plus.

J'ai deja un pie dans la fosse.

Vrayment, j'en suis bien fache, mais il fe peut fair que vous en releverez.

Je suis covnfisque, je dechois a veu^ d'oeit.

Je de^iens tousles j^urs plus soible.

Je suis pulmonique, and il n'^ a plus de ressource.

Il me faut mourir, mon mal est t^op inverere.

Vous faites votre mal plus grand qu'il n'est; peut etre vi^^ez vous encore
(...) long tems que^moy.

Vous trouvez vous mieux.

Ouy, Dieu merci, je me trouve un pen soul^ge.

Votre purgation a-t'elle bien opere?

Fort bien.

Combien de fois avez vous ete a selle?

Six ou sept fois.

Votre appetit ne revient il pas?

Ouy, Monsieur, je mangerois bien un poulet.

Dans deux ou trois jours vous pourrez sortir.

Tachez Seulement de reposer.

XXXV. Dialogue.
Enter Vne Demoiselle and sa soubrette.
QUi est la?

Avez vous appelle, Madame?

Apportez moy mes coiffes and ma palatine.

Que je voye; Tenez le miroir; Dieux! j'ay un visage a saire peur aujourd' huy.

Que ne m'aidez vous?

Que vous etes maladroite!

Que voulez vous que j'y fasse?

Ma coiffure ne va-t-elle pas de travers?

Non, Madame elle va fort bien.

Donnez moy un mouchoir blanc.

Allez maintenant dire au laquais qu'il aille fair venir une chaise des plus
hautes, ou don't le siege soit sort bas.

J'y course.

Attendez, Madame Suson vous etes si prompte lors qu'il saut aller parler au
Laquais --

Que vous plait-il, Madame?

Allez voir plutot si ma soeur est prete and si elle veut aller chez la
Princess avec moy.

Et bien, que dit elle?

Elle est deja sortie.

Vrayment, voila qui a fort bonne grace, de me manquer ainsi de parole.

Ne m'avoit elle pas envoye dire qu'elle ne vouloit sortir qu'a cinq heures?

Ouy, Madame.

Quelle heure, est-il donc maintenant.

A peine est il cinq-heures.

Dites au laquais qu'il fasse venir une chaise.

Madame, il y en la bas --

Y a t-il une chaise?

Non, Madame, il y a Monsieur. L. -- qui vient vous voir.

Lui a ton dit que j'etois au logis?

Je croy qu'ouy.

Je ne saurois donc sortir reprenez tout cela.

Comment me trouvez vous?

Fort bien.

Vous pouvez dire a Monsieur L -- que je suis prete a le recevoir.

XXXVI. Dialogue.
D'AMOUR.
Enter un Amant and sa Maitresse.
JE rends graces a la fortune, du bonheur que j'ay de vous trouver au logis.

Ce n'est pas un grand miracle, ce me semble.

J'avoue Madame, qu'il n'est pas extraordinaire de vous trouver chez vous, mais
jusques ici je n'avois jamais eu le bonheur de vous y voir seule.

Monsieur, vous me mettez dans l'embaras; je ne saurois m'imaginer ce que vous
pouvez avoir a me dire.

Bien, de chooses, mon doux Ange! envelopees dans un mot, j'aime.

Vous aimez?

Ouy, j'aime --

Cela n'est pas impossible; mais il me semble que vous feriez beaucoup mieux,
d'aller parler de votre amor a celle qui la fait naitre; Car outre que vous
pourriez en recevoir quelque soulagement, vous me delivreriez de l'importunite,
que cause le recit des maux des autres, quand on ne peut y donner du remede.

Ah! que vous etes ingenieuse a dissimuler! est il bien possible que mes
regards and mes actions ne vous ayent pas convaincue mill and mill fois, que
ce sont vos beaux yeux, qui causent les tourmens que je souffre?

Les regards amoureux and les civilites des hommes sont des marquis, trop
incertaines d'une veritable Passion; Et ils ne s'en servent la plupart du tems
que pour sonder la foiblesse de notre Sex, and pour rire de notre credulite.

Ah! ne me faites pas ce tort de juger de moy par les autres: je n'ay jamais
ete Galand de Profession; Je n'ay connu le pouvoir de l'Amour, que depuis le
moment que je vous vis. Soup-connez moy de toute autre chose, plutot que de
dissimulation: Oui, ma Charmante Celie, je vous aim plus que Moy-meme, and mon
Amor durera autant que ma vie.

Chacun tient les memes discourse, tous les Hommes sont semblables par les
paroles, and ce niest que les actions qui les decouvrent differens.

Puis que les seules actions font connoitre ce que nous sommes, la seule grace
que je vous demand, est d'attendre a juger de mon Coeur par else, and de me
donner l'occasion de vous, convaincre de la sincerite and de l'honnetete de mes
feux.

Helas! qu'avec facilite on se laisse persuader ce que l'on souhai^e! Ouy,
Lisidor, je crois que vous m'aimez d'un veritable Amor; and je retranche mon
chagrin aux apprehensions du blame, qu'on pourra me donner si je les sou^fre.

Ah! Ma chere, Celie, vous me transportez si fort horse de moy-meme, que je ne
s^i ou trouver des paroles pour vous marquer ma reconnoissance. Mais, je vous
pry, sur quoy fondez vous vos craintes?

Je ne puis vous le dire a present: il est tems de se separer ma mere doit etre
icy dans un moment, and je serois fachee qu'elle nous trouvat tete a tete.

Helas! de quel coup me percez vous le coeur, lors que vous parlez de nous
separer, and avec combien de chagrin je suis oblige de vous quitter!

Nous trouverons le moyen de nous revoir, cependant, soyez fidele and je ne
serai pas ingrate.

XXXVII. Dialogue.
Enter deux Cousines. des VISITES.
QUoy, Cousine, person n^ t'est venn render visit an-jourd-huy?

Perfonne du Monde.

Vrayement voila qui m'e tonne que nous ayons ete seules, l'une and l'autre,
tour aujourd-huy.

Cela m' etonne aussi car ce n'est guere notre coutume. Et votre maison, Dieu
merci, est le refuge de tous les faineans de la Cour.

L'apres-dinee a dire vray, m'a semble fort longue.

Et moy je l'ay trouvee fort court.

Les beaux esprits Cousine, aiment la Solitude.

Ah! tres humble Servanteau bell esprit; vous savez que ce n'est pas la que je
vise.

Pour moy j'aime la Compagnie, je l'avoue.

Je l'aime aussi mais je l'aime choisie, and la quantite des sottes visites
qu'il faut essuyer parmi les autres, est cause bien souvent que je prens
plaisir d'eere seule.

La delicatesse est trop grande de ne pouvoir souffrir que des gens triez.

Et la complaisance est trop generale, de souffrir indifferemment toutes sorts
de persons.

Je gout ceux qui sont raisonnables and me divertis des extravagans.

Ma soy, les extravagans ne vout guere loin sans vous ennuyer, and la plus part
de ces gens la ne plaisent plus des la second visit.

Voila Climene, Madame, qui vient icy pour vous voir.

Eh mon Dieu! quelle visit!

Vous vous plaigniez d'etre seule, aussi le ciel vous en punit,

Vite, qu'on aille dire que je n'y suis pas.

On luy a deja dit que vous y etiez.

Et qui est le sot qui l'a dit?

Moy Madame.

Diantre soit le petit vilain, je vous apprendrai a fair Vps reponses de vous
meme.

Je m'en vais lui dire Madame, que vous voulez etre forty. --

Arretez Animal; and la laissez monter, puis que la sottise est faite.

Pour quoi, vous mettez vous a rire?

Je me ris de la naivete de votre petit laquais.

Ah Cousine! que cette visit m'embarasse a l'heure qu'il est.

N'importe, il vous la faut boire.

XXXVIII. Dialogue.
Des Marionetes.
OU Futes vons hier aprez midi?

J'allay fair ma cour au Duc de Gloucester.

Comment se port t-il?

Il se port fort bien.

Il fait toujours paroitre beau^oup d'esprit and de vivacite.

J'ouates vous avec lui?

Ouy, Monsieur, nous j'ouames un peu en attendant, que le Bateleur eut prepare
ses Marionettes.

Comment? Y eut-il un jeu de Marionetes?

Ouy, Monsieur.

Cela etoit-il fort divertis sant?

Le Prince y prit il bien du plaisir?

Extremement, Il se mettoit a rire de tems en tems.

De quel pais etoit le Bateleur?

Il ^toit Francois.

Comment le savez vous?

Parce qu'il ecorchoit l'Anglois, and qu'il saisoit parler Polichinelle en
Francois la plupart du tems?

Comment est ce donc que les spectateurs pouvoient entendre ce qu'il disoit?

La Femme du Bateleur lui servoit d'interprete.

Y avoit-il grande compagni^?

Oui, Monsieur.

Combien de tems dura ce Spectable.

Environ une heure and demi,

A quelle heure prites vous, conge du jeune Prince?

A huit heures.

Qu'est ce que vous aimez mieux voir, des Marionetes, ou des joueurs de
Gobelets?

J'admire l'adresse des tours de passe-passe mais je trouve les Marionertes
plus divertissantes and pl^s agreables.

XXXIX. Dialogue.
Du MARRIAGE.
Enter un Pere and sa Fille.
MA Fille, la Douceur and la docilite de votre esprit n'^^^pas peu contribue a
augmenter l'amour, que j'ai roujours eu pour vous, and comme vous etes dans un
^ge a etre Mariee, J'ai j^tte les yeux sur le Chevalier, N -- pour en ^aire
votre mari.

Quoy! mon Pere, une Fille de mon age epouser le Chevalier N.

Pourquoy non? Cest un hom^e meur, prudent and sage, qui na pas plus de
cinquante ans and don't on vante les grands biens.

Le Marriage, est une affair de trop grande consequence, pour en deliberer si
promptement, and puis qu'il y va d'etre heureuse ou malheureuse toute m^ v^e,
je vous pry de me donner quelque tems pour y songer.

Je sai ce qui vous est propre mieux que vous meme, and ainsi je vous dis, que
vous l'epouserez des demain.

Puis que vous me pressez si fort, il ^saut que je vous dise mes veritables
sentimens, and que je vous avoue que j'aimerois mieux me jetter dans un
convent, que d'epouser M. N. puis qu'un Marriage ne sauroit etre heureux ou
l'inclination n'est pas.

C'est une chose, ma fille, qui peut etre viendra ensuite; and l'on dit, que
l'amour est souveut un fruit du marriage.

Mais, Monfieur, il y a des grands risques du cote des Femmes: and il me
souviendra toujours d'avoir entendu dire a ma Grand-mere, que la Virtue d'une
femme n'est jamais en si grand danger, que lors qu'elle est mariee a une homme
qu'elle n'aime pas.

Sans tant de raisonnement j'ay resolu que vous epousiez M. N. il est rich,
and cela vous doit suffire.

Et moy je vous proteste avec tout le respect que je vous dois, que je ne veux
point etre sacrifiee a l'interest; puis que cette grande inegalite d'^ge,
d'humeur and de sentimens ne peut que render un marriage sujet a des ac. ^idens
tres sacheux.

A t'on jamais veu une fille parler de la sort a son Pere!

Mais a t-on jamais veu un Pere marier sa fille de la sort?

C'est un parti ou il n'y a rien a redire; and je gage que tout le Monde
approuvera mon choix.

Et moy je gage qu'il ne sauroit etre approuve d'aucune person raisonnable.

En veux tu passer, au jugement de ton friar?

Je n'en veux passer au jugement de person; mon coeur ne sauroit se soumettre
a cette tyranny, and en un mot, j'epouserai plutot la mort que M. N.

XL. Dialogue.
Des Divertissements de la Campaign.
MOnsieur, je suis ravi de vous voir; ou est ce que vous vous tenez a present?

Il y a deux mois que nous sommes a une maison des champs.

Etez vous revenu en ville pour toujours?

Non, Monsieur, je m'en return demain matin.

Commen^ vous divertissez vous a la Campaign?

Comment passez vous le tems?

J'en pass une party a etudier.

Mais quels sont vos divertissements apres vos occupations serieuses.

Je vais quelque-fois a la Chasse.

A quelle chasse?

Tantot nous Courons le Cerf and tantot le Lievre.

Avez vous des bons Chiens?

Nous avons une Meute de chiens Courans.

Deux Levriers, Deux Levretes, quatre Bassets, and trois Chiens Couchants.

Ne chassez vous jamais aux oiseaux?

Vous me pardonnerez.

Sur quoy est ce que vous tirez?

Sur toute sort de gibier, comme Perdrix, Phaisants, Becasses, Gelinotes,
Cailles, Grives, etc.

Tirez vous en volant ou a la course?

Je fais l'un and l'autre.

Comment prenez vous les Lapins?

Quelquesois avec des Poches and le Furet, and quelquefois nous les tuons a
coups de fuzil?

Et les Cailles?

La plupart du temps avec un Filet and un Chien Couchant.

Pechez vous aussi quelquefois?

Fort rarement.

Dou vient?

Parce que nous sommes fort eloignez de la Riviere^^*

Mais nous avons un vivier ou nous prenons des Carpes avec la ligne.

Que faites vous, quand vous n'allez ni a la Chasse ni a la Peche?

Nous jouons a la boule.

Etez vous un bon joueur de boule.

Je me defens assez bien.

Votre jeu de boule est il bon? est il bien uni? est il bien tenu?

Il est passablement bon: il n'est pas des plus raboteux.

Jouez vous quelquefois au Billiard?

Ouy, Monsieur.

Ne jouez vous pas aussi aux Quilles?

Je n'aime guere le jeu des Quilles and je n'y joue jamais que par complaisance.

A ce que je vois, vous n'avez pas le tems de vous ennuyer a la Campaign?

Il vous le semble, cepandant c'est toute autre chose:

Je commence deja a regreter la Ville; tant il est vray qu'on se degoute de
tout.

Familiar Dialogues, French and English.
First Dialogue.
GOod morrow* Sir, how do you do?

How is it with your health?

Very well, at your servio^.

Ready to do you service.

And you, Sir, how is it with you?

I am well to serve you.

Pretty well. So, so.

I am obliged to you.

I thank you.

I am glad to see you in good health.

How does your brother do?

He is well, thank God.

I am glad of it.

He will be glad to see you.

I am his Servant.

^

Here she is a coming.

Madam, I am your* very humble Servant.

Sir, I am your servant.

How have you done (...) yesterday?

Pre^^y well, indiffere^^ w^ll.

I (...) a little out of order last night.

Truly, I am very sorry for it.

How does your Lady Mother do?

She is well.

She is your servant.

She Will be glad to see you.

I am her most humble servant.

I am sorry that I have ^ the time to see her to day.

Sit down a little.

I cannot indeed.

You are in great haste.

I only came to know how (...) did.

Farewell, Sir.

I thank you for this visit.

Good night, Madam.

Good night, Sir.

Second Dialogue.
I Pray you.

Give me.

Reach me, or, give me.

If you please.

I give you thanks.

Bring me.

Lend me.

I thank you.

Go and fetch --

Presently.

Dear, Sir, do me that kindness.

Dear Madam, do me that favor.

I beseech you.

Grant me that favor.

I conjure you to it.

My Life, my dear Soul.

I shall do it heartily.

I am wholly yours.

You are too obliging.

You give your self too much trouble.

I find none in serving you.

I desire you to be free with me.

Without complements.

Without ceremony.

I love you with all my heart.

And I also.

Third Dialogue.
FRom whence come you?

Where do you go?

I come -- I go --

Come up -- come down --

Come in -- go out --

Come on.

Come near me.

Get you gone.

Go back a little.

Come hither.

I cannot.

I will not.

Well choose, or, let it.

Go your ways.

With all my heart.

Get you out of my sight.

Why? because.

I am well here.

The door is shut.

The door is open.

Open the door.

Shut the door.

What do you do?

I do nothing.

What do you say?

I say nothing.

Hold your tongue.

Say not a word.

Be quiet.

Don't make a noise.

What a thundering noise you make there?

You break my head.

You make my head giddy.

Oh! how troublesome you are.

Fourth Dialogue.
Of the Weather, and of the Hour.
HOw is the weather?

Is it fine weather?

Is it hot?

Is it cold?

Does the Sun shine?

It is fine weather.

It is bad weather.

It is hot.

It is very cold.

It is a clear and serene weather.

The Sun shines.

Does it rain?

I don't believe it.

It will rain to day.

It rains as fast as it can pour.

It hails deadly hard.

It snows by great lumps.

It freezes.

It thaws.

It thunders.

It lightens.

It Is windy weather.

The wind is changed.

The storm is over.

The sky begins to clear up.

The clouds break asunder, and disappear by degrees.

Methinks that there is a great fog.

There is a fog arising.

The fog is very thick.

But the Sun begins to dissipate it.

I am afraid, that we shall have some rain.

We must not go out in that weather.

What Is a clock?

It is betimes, it is early.

It is not late.

Is the sun up?

Is it daylight?

The day begins to peep, or to break.

It is broad day.

It is six a clock.

It is past six a clock.

It is a quarter past six.

It is half an hour past ten.

It is three quarters past eleven.

It Is even twelve a clock.

It Is near upon twelve.

How do you know it?

The clock strikes.

Do you hear it strike?

Is it time to breakfast?

It has struck two.

It is dinner time.

What shall we do after di^^

We will go to walk.

Fifth Dialogue.
Between a Governess and a young Gentlewoman.
ARe you a-bed still?

Do you sleep?

Are you asleep?

No, I do but slumber.

Is it time to rise already?

Why truly, do you question it?

It Is near ten a Clock.

Rise quickly.

Make haste.

Have a care, you were like to fall.

Come near the fire.

Keep your self warm.

I got a cold.

I have done nothing but cough and hawk all the night long.

Blow your nose.

Dress your self.

Put on your stockings.

Put on your shoes.

Wash your hands, your mouth, and your face.

Cleanse your teeth.

Dress your head.

Get your self laced.

Have you done?

Not yet.

You are tedious.

Say your prayers.

Speak aloud.

Go on.

Where is your prayer book?

Bring your Bible.

Look for your Bible.

Read a Chapter.

Read softly.

Spell that word.

You read too fast.

You don't read well.

You read too slowly.

You learn nothing.

You do not study.

You don't improve.

You are idle.

What do you mumble there?

You do not know your lesson?

There is your lesson.

Why do you speak English to me?

Speak always French.

Will you eat your breakfast?

What will you have for your breakfast?

Will you have some bread and butter?

Make haste to eat your breakfast.

Take your work.

Show me your work.

That is not well.

Do all that up again.

You make mouths.

Have you a good needle?

Have you any thread?

Go and play a little.

Come to work again when you have played.

Go and walk in the garden.

Do not over-heat your self.

Return quickly.

Sixth Dialogue.
Between a Lady and her waiting woman.
To Rise.
HAS my Bell rung?

I believe yes.

W. -- What Is a clock?

Madam, it is even eleven a clock.

Is it so late?

Give me my smock.

It is not warm; I am going to warm it.

Is there a good fire in my closet?

Yes, Madam.

Give me my wastcoat again.

Where is my Nightgown?

Here it is.

Give me my slippers, my stockings, and my Garters.

I cannot find the garters.

What Is become of them?

I cannot tell.

You leave all things in a c^^fusion.

You should put all things in order before you go to bed.

Spread the Toilet.

The glass of that looking-glass is all dirty, wipe it a little.

Give me a chair.

Are my Combs clean?

^es, Madam, they are so.

Comb my head.

Softly, how you go to i^?

You have taken the skin off (...) my head.

Give me my head-dress.

Where is the pin-cushion?

Where is the Patch-box?

Give me a pin.

Has the Sempstress brought (...) Tippet and the Ingageants (...) I bespoke the
day before yesterday

No, Madam.

She shall have my custom a longer.

She neglects her customers (...) much.

Give me my stays.

Lace me very tite, or (...) close.

Give me my silver-fringed (...) ticoat, and my yellow (...).

Where are my gloves, my muff, and my handerchief?

Here they be, Madam.

Put some sweet-water to that Handkerchief.

Fill up this bottle with Hungary water.

Where is my watch?

There it is.

Does it go?

No, Madam, it is down.

Give it me, that I may wi^^ it up.

But go first, and see what a clock it is by the Dining-rooms Clock.

Madam, it is half an hour past eleven.

Go and bid the Coachman put the Horses in the Coach.

In the Chariot.

Madame, the Coach is ready, it is at the door.

Madam, here come your Ladyship's Sons to ask your blessing.

God bless my dear boys.

Be good and mind your book.

But where is my girl?

Here she is.

Kiss me dear honey, my dear child, my little darling.

Seventh Dialogue.
Of Eating and Drinking.
I Am hungry, I am very hungry.

And I am dry.

I am almost starved, m^thinks I have eat nothing these three days.

For my part I am alm^^^choak'd.

I am mighty thirsty.

I could eat a bit of something.

Eat then, who hinders you?

I could drink a glass of wine.

Drink then, without more ad^.

I have a good stomach.

I have no more stomach.

I am satisfied, I have my belly full.

I have no stomach at all.

I am no more dry.

My thirst is quenched.

Eighth Dialogue.
Of Walking.
Let Us go to walk.

Let us go to take the air.

Will you go along with me.

I will.

Will you go and take a turn.

I consent to it.

I consent to it.

Where shall we go?

Let us go into the Park.

Let Us go into the Fields.

Shall we go in a Coach.

Or on foot.

As you please.

As you will.

Let Us go on foot.

It Is good for ones health.

You are in the right.

Come on, lets walk.

Which way do you go?

This way. That way.

On the right hand.

On the left hand.

Let Us rest a little.

It is not worth the while.

Are you weary.

I am mighty weary, or, tired.

You are a sorry walker.

Lets go back again.

It grows late.

The Sun goes down.

Don't go so fast.

Stay for me.

I cannot keep pace with you.

Come, come, you will unweary your self at supper.

Ninth Dialogue.
To make a visit in the Morning.
WHere is thy Master?

Is he asleep still?

No, Sir, he is awake.

Is he up?

Is he stirring? Is he up?

No, Sir, he is a bed still.

How now! are you a bed still

I went to bed so late yesterd^^ that I could not get up betimes.

What did you then after S^per?

As soon as you was gone ^^they spoke of playing.

Did you play?

Yes, Sir, I did play.

At what game?

We played at Picket, Sir -- and I.

And the others?

Some played at ^mber.

Others at Basset.

And others at Chess.

Who won? who lost?

My Lady Duchess of M. won twenty guineas.

The Earl of F. lost fifteen.

Sir -- T. won Ten Crowns of me.

As far as I see the loss or gain were not of great moment.

We never play but for diversion sake.

But methinks that gaming is a very dangerous diversion.

Especially when one plays deep.

What, do you never play?

Excuse me; but when I play, I do not play high.

We play for a small matter, and we make it a point of Honor to play fair.

But now I think on it, till what time did you play?

Till twelve a Clock at night.

What time did you go to bed?

At one a Clock at Night.

I don't wonder that you rise so late.

What a Clock is it?

What a Clock do you take it to be?

I don't believe it is eight a Clock.

How, eight a Clock! it has struck ten.

I must rise then as fast (...) I can.

Tenth Dialogue.
The Gentleman and his Valet de Chamber.
To Dress ones self.
WHo is there? who (...)

What do you want, Sir*

Come quickly, make a fire.

Dress me.

There is a fire, Sir.

Give me my Shirt.

There it is, Sir.

It is not warm.

It is quite cold still.

I shall warm it if you please.

No, no, where is my (...) gown?

Where are my slippers?

Bring me my silk Stocking.

There are holes in them.

Can you not stitch them?

Give me then a pair of (...) Stockings.

Comb my head.

Take another comb.

Come my wigg.

Put some essence to it.

Give me my handkerchief.

There is a clean one.

Give me that which is in my my Coat's pocket.

I gave it to the washer-woman it was foul.

You have done well.

Has she brought my linen.

Yes, Sir, there wants nothing^

Give me my breeches.

What Suit of clothes do you put on to day?

That as I had on yesterday.

How, Sir, don't you remember that to day is the Duke of Glocester's Birthday,
and that the Tailor is to bring your new Suit presently.

I am in the wrong.

You are in the right.

It Is well you put me in mind of it.

But some body knocks, see who it is.

Who is it?

It Is the Tailor.

Call him up.

Let him come in.

Twelve Dialogue.
The Gentleman and the Tailor.
DO you bring my suit of Clothes?

Yes, Sir, here it is.

I stood for you; try it me on.

Will you be pleased to try the close-coat on.

Let Us see whether it be well made.

I hope it will please you.

It is very long methinks.

They wear them long now.

They don't wear them now so short as they did before.

Button me.

It is too close.

To be well made, it ought to be close.

Are not the sleeves too wide?

No, Sir, they sit very well.

The breech^s are very narrow.

That Is the fashion.

They wear them very narrow.

The rolls are not big enough.

I beg your pardon.

That Suit becomes you mighty well.

But my stockings do not match it.

No matter, such things is not so nicely observed.

What do you say to my hat?

It Is a very fine beaver.

You are mistaken, it is but a Castor.

What hat-band will you put to it?

A gold-galoon with a diamond buckle.

Did you not buy me a cravat string.

Pardon me, here it is.

What is the yard of this ribbon?

They don't sell by the yard, they sell it by the eli.

How much?

A Shilling and Sixpence.

It Is not too much. It Is not dear.

It Is cheap.

Have you made your Bill?

I had not the time.

Bring it to morrow, I shall pay you.

Thirteenth Dialogue.
To speak to the Shooemaker.
IS the Shoemaker come?

No, Sir, he is not come.

Run then to him, and bid him bring my shoes.

Sir, here he is, ^ met him by the way,

Are these my shoes?

Yes, Sir.

Put them on.

They pinch me a little.

They Will grow wider, by wearing

But they will hurt me in the mean while.

My Corns will suffer for it.

My feet are in the Stocks.

Make me some others.

You are hard to be pleased.

Will you be pleased to try another pair, which I brought by chance.

I will.

They will fit you, I believe.

I have my foot more at ease.

What are these shoes worth?

Five shillings.

That Is too much.

It Is a set price.

It Is a shoe well made, and well stitcht.

Make me another pair like these.

Take my measure.

There is your money.

Fourteenth Dialogue.
To Breakfast.
HAve you brought any thing to breakfast?

Yes, Sir, there are sausages and petty-patees.

Shall I bring the Gammon of Bacon.

Yes, bring it, we shall cut a slice of it.

Lay a napkin on that table, and give us plates, knives and forks.

Rinse the glasses.

Reach the Gentleman a seat.

Sit down, Sir, sit by the fire.

I am not cold, I will be very well here.

Let Us see whether the wine be good.

Pull the cork of that bottle.

Taste that wine, pray.

How do you like it?

What do you say to it?

It is not bad; it is good.

Take that dish away.

Eat sausages.

There is an Orange.

Squeese it upon your Sausages.

Give me some drink.

Sir, my Service to you.

Sir, to your health.

I thank you, Sir.

Give the Gentleman some drink.

I drunk but just now.

The petty-pattees were very good.

They were baked a little too much,

You do not eat.

I have eat so much, that I shall not be able to eat my dinner.

You only jest, you have eat nothing.

Let Us say grace.

Fifteenth Dialogue.
To Speak French.
DO you speak French?

Are you very Learned in the French Tongue?

Not much, I know nothing almost.

It Is said however, that you speak very well.

I would it were true.

I should know, what I do not.

It will be true, if you please, and I shall teach you the way to learn French
quickly.

You shall do me a very great favor.

The easiest Method to Learn French, is to speak it often.

But to speak, a body must know something.

You know enough already.

I know but four or five words which I have got by heart.

That Is enough to begin to speak.

Were it so, I should become a great Scholar in a little time.

Don't you understand what I say to you?

I both understand it, and apprehend it very well.

But I have not a fluent expression.

I can hardly speak.

The facility of speaking will come in time.

I am too hasty.

Tell me a little, how do you call that?

I believe, it is called.

Very well, and this.

Do I pronounce well?

Pretty well. Indifferent.

You want but a little Practice.

How long is it since you learn?

It Is not above eight days.

It is not a Month since.

What is your Master of Languages's name?

His name is Master --

How many times does he come to teach you?

He comes three times a week.

How much do you give him a month.

I give him -- so much.

Does he come three days one after another?

No, he comes every other day,

To wit, On Mundays, Wenesday, and Frydays.

In the forenoon, or in the afternoon?

In the forenoon.

Where does he live?

In Grafton-street.

At whose house?

He lodges at a Taylor's, at the sign of the Blue-ball.

Does he not tell you, that you should always speak French?

Yes, Sir, he tells me so often.

Why don't you speak then?

Who will you have me speak with?

With those as shall speak to you.

I Would fain speak, but I dare not.

Believe me, be confident, and speak without minding whether you say right or
no.

If I speak so every body will laugh at me.

Don't you know that so learn to speak well, a body begins by speaking ill.

I shall then follow your advice.

Sixteenth Dialogue.
Of News.
WHat news is there abroad?

Do you know any news?

I have heard no news.

What do they say abroad?

There is no talk of any thing.

Did you hear any thing of the War?

I heard nothing of it.

There is a talk of a Siege.

They said so; but that report has proved false.

On the contrary, they talk of a battle.

I have it of good hands.

Do you believe we shall have a Peace?

I believe yes.

For my part I believe not.

What grounds have you for it?

Because I see the minds of both Partys are little inclined that way.

Mean while, it cannot be denied but that Peace would be a great advantage to
Trade.

What do they say at Court?

They talk of a journey.

When is it believed the King will go?

It is not known. They say nothing of it.

Where do they say he will go?

Some say into Flanders, others upon the Fleet.

And what says the Gazette?

I have not read it.

And to speak freely with you, the designs of the Court are kept so secret,
that I think Newsmongers know nothing of them.

The Commanders themselves, whom the King chooses to execute his designs, do not
know what the preparations that are a making in the Tower and in the Seaports
are intended for.

After all this can a body speak p^ssitively of our affairs.

Men of sense never speak of those matters, but with great wariness and
discretion.

For my part, I cannot excuse the foolishness of some people, who talk of
Government without being acquainted with it.

They make peace and war, according to their freaks, or interests, and take
upon themselves to settle the Nation, when at the same time they leave their
Families in a ruinous disorder.

Let us speak of private news.

It is true, what is reported of Master --

What of him?

They say he is wounded to death.

I would be sorry for it, he is an honest man.

Who has given him the wound?

Two Knaves.

Two Villains that set upon him.

Do they know upon what account?

It Is reported because he spok^ ill of them, and gave a box in the ear to one
of them.

I don't believe it.

Nor I neither.

Whatever it be, 'twill be quickly known.

Seventeenth Dialogue.
To enquire after one.
WHO is that Gentleman who spoke to you just now?

He is an Englishman.

I took him to be a German.

He speaks very good French.

Though he be an Englishman, he speaks so well French, Italian, German and
Spanish, that among the French they believe him to be a Frenchman.

He speaks Italian as the Italians themselves.

He goes for a German with the Germans, and for a Spaniard among the Spaniards.

It Is a hard matter to be Master of so many different Languages.

He has been a long while in those Countries.

Is it long since you know him?

It Is about two years since I know him.

I got acquainted with him at Paris.

He is very genteel.

He has a fine Presence.

He is of a fine proper size.

He is neither too tall nor too little.

He is handsome, and his shape is easy and sree.

He has a noble gate.

He has nothing unpleasant in his ways.

He is civil, courteous, and complaisant with every body.

He has a great deal of Wit and is very jovial and agreeable in Conversation.

He Rides the great Horse very well; He is quick and handy to Fence, and Dances
very neatly, (or handsomely).

He plays on the lute, the guittar, and several other instruments.

But what renders him the more commendable, is that he has found the way to get
the Prince's favor* who often bestows favors upon him.

And who without question will not fail to prefer him.

I should be glad to get acquainted with him.

I shall get you acquainted with him.

Do you know where he lives.

He lives hard by.

When shall you and I go and wait on him.

When you please, for he is my intimate Friend.

'Twill be when you can spare time.

When it is convenient for you.

At your leisure.

Eighteenth Dialogue.
Between a Tutor and Two Young Gentlemen.
GEntlemen, good morro^ to you.

Sir, I wish it to you.

Have you been up a long while?

It is about an hour since.

Have you well slept last night?

Have you had a good nights rest?

My little brother has slept very well.

For my part, I spent part of the night in sleeping, the other in slumbering,
and the other in waking.

Have you breakfasted?

Yes Sir.

Have you asked your Papa's, your Mama's and Grand-Mama's blessing?

Papa went out before we got up.

Mama is not awake.

But we have been at Grand-Mama's.

Bring your Books.

What Books must I bring?

What day of the Week is it?

To day is Tuesday.

Bring then the Latin Grammar and the Familiar Phrases.

And for my Brother?

The history of the Bible and the French Grammar.

Decline a Noun, Conjugate a verb.

And you, Master P -- get this Lesson by heart.

Master B -- mind what you are about.

I tell you twenty times of a thing, and you never mend.

You are always wandering. Or, you never mind.

You are not capable of committing those oversights, if you minded never so
little.

You do not improve.

Master P -- you do not study.

You do nothing but play.

You do but play the wag.

Say your Lesson,

You stammer at every word.

Master B -- put, (or explain) into French li^ Latin phrases.

Construe them.

Write them fairly in your paper-book, with the French translation against it.

And get afterward all that by heart.

I give you a small task that you may get it by heart the sooner, and keep it
the longer.

Do you know your Lesson already?

Yes, Sir, I know it.

Well, let us see. Rehearse it.

Speak loud that one may hear you.

You speak too low.

Be quiet; your hands are always in action*

Very well, Master B -- very well.

You please me very much.

Were you always as good and as diligent, I would never be cross, or
ill-humoured

As for Master P -- he is so lively, that he cannot forbear playing the fool,
making a noise, and twittle twattle to disturb us,

Since we have done our exercises. Let us go take a walk

Call W -- to dress you.

Nineteenth Dialogue.
Between the same, to walk in the Park.
LEt us go to the Park.

Shall (...) go. on foot, or in a coach.

We may go there on foot.

The streets are not dirty,

There is no dirt

Give me your hand.

You have been like to fall.

You stumble at every step.

Sir, which way shall we go into the Park.

By St. James's house.

Well, Sir, how do you like the Park.

Tho I walk in it every day, I don't leave off admiring the Walks longer that
ones eyes can reach.

Do you take notice how cleanly the Mail is kept.

What do they do with those heaps of Cockle-shels?

They spread them over the Mail, and bruise them afterward with the Roller.

Let Us go round the Park.

Do you see, Sir, with what violence the water comes in that Canal.

Yes, Sir, how comes that about?

It Is because it Ebbs and Flows.

But which way does the tide come in?

Under ground.

The tide comes in.

The tide goes out.

What does that fine brazen figure represent.

A man that fights at Fisty-Cuffs.

Let Us go to the Sun-Dial to set our Watches by it.

Let Us go now to the Bird-Cage.

What sort of birds is there?

There are several sorts of them.

If you have any thing that is good to Eat, do but throw it into the Water, and
you will see how the Ducks and Geese will fly to us.

It Is a pretty Diversion.

It Is pleasant to see how greedily they strive to snatch the Victuals away from
one another.

Master B. to join profit to pleasure, tell me one of Aesop's Fables in French
Meter.

What Fable, Sir?

That of the Lyon's Court.

Tell me now the Story of the Oysters, and of the Litigious People.

And you, Master P. tell me the Fable of the Raven and the Fox.

That Is well.

Here is a Gentleman of my Acquaintance coming to us.

I believe he has a mind to accost us, or, to draw near us.

Do^^ fail to pull of your Hat to him as soon as I.

Twentieth Dialogue.
To draw near one.
OH! the happy meeting.

It is long since I had not had the Honor to see you.

I am very glad to see you in good Health.

Where have you been lost all this long while?

I have been in the Country.

How long have you been come?

It Is but two days since.

Are those the two young Gentlemen you bring up?

Yes, Sir.

They are both very handsome.

How old is the eldest?

He is but eight years and a half old.

He is very tall for that age.

He is very handsome.

And He has the Gate, the Air, and the Manners of a Man of twenty.

Does he speak good French.

He comes off pretty well of a familiar Conversation.

Do so much as to examine him your self. --

I assure you, I wonder at it, He has a good accent, he speaks very well.

You may take notice that he makes some faults, and does not know some words.

That comes partly because he speaks with no body but me, and so he cannot
learn the variety of Expressions which arises by speaking to several people.

And besides, most part of the words he does not know in French, are those
whose signification he does not know in English.

But as soon as he shall begin to get into Companies, he will soon get the
facility of expressing himself.

For I may say, that he understands Historys, Plays, and Romances pretty well.

Have you begun to teach him Latin.

Yes, Sir, he has some smattering of it.

And he understands besides a little Geography.

He is very forward.

He has made great progress.

He cannot but become a good Scholar under so good a Master.

I assure you, without any flattery to him, that his good nature, his wit and
docility do contribute to it more than I.

And his little younger brother, how old is he?

He is six years and a quarter old.

He is extremely handsome.

One may see in him all the little Graces which are ascribed to Angels, and
which had never been till now, but in the Painters fancy.

Does he speak French too?

Yes, Sir, and he reads it indifferently. But he is full of roguery.

That becomes his age very well.

Do you return home?

Yes, Sir.

When shall I have the honor to see you again?

I shall give my self the honor to wait on you at your house.

You shall be very welcome.

Farewell, till we meet again.

One and Twentieth Dialogue.
At Dinner.
IS it Dinner time?

I believe it is.

Is the Cloth laid?

Not yet.

Put chairs round the table.

We shall have company to day.

There wants two plates.

Boy, call for the dinner.

It is not ready yet.

They have rung the bell.

The meat is on the table.

Let Us sit down at table.

Sir, take your place.

I will not suffer you to sit at the lower end of the table.

You shall sit at the upper end, if you please.

Indeed, I shall not.

Let Us forbear complements, I pray.

Why do you make such ceremonies.

Friends live freely together.

Who says Grace.

Do you love French Potage?

Yes, provided the broth be well made,

Shall I help you to some boile^meat.

Help your self.

Sir, you eat nothing.

It Is true, we have nothing extraordinary to incite you to eat.

No question, but you have a mind to jeer me, because I don't commend this
treat, otherwise than by eating well.

You are quick at repartee, But however, I hope the second Course will make
amends for the first.

But, Sir, you have not drank yet.

Boy, give the Gentleman some drink.

Madam, my humble service to you.

Sir, I thank you.

I am your servant.

How do you like that beer?

I like it pretty well.

Let me taste it.

For my part I think it is too bitter.

I Will scold at the Brewer for it.

Come, Sir, eat what you shall like best for.

What do you say of that Neats tongue?

Of that minced Meat? of that Fricassee? shall I help you to some Capon, some
Chicken, some woodcock, or some Partridge?

Even as you please.

What do you love best, the Wing or the Leg?

It Is all one to me.

Eat some Radishes to sharpen (or whet) your stomach.

I have eat too much already.

Give me a glass of Wine.

Sir, my service to you.

Come, Sir. I drink the young Prince's health to you.

I shall pledge you with all my heart.

There is excellent Wine.

How do you find that Pigeon-pye?

Extraordinary good; very well seasoned.

What? Dainty dishes after so magnificent a second Course.

You give us a Kings Feast, instead of a Friendly Meal.

The Fruit answers to all the rest.

You have gathered the most ^xquisite Fruits the Season affords.

This Pastry-work is very well made.

Sir, you make me blush to prevent by your commendations, the excuses I ow you,
for entertaining you so ill.

But I think that every body has done.

Take away.

Let Us say Grace.

Twenty Second Dialogue.
To play at Chess.
HOw shall we spend this afternoon,

Let Us play a Game at Chess.

With all my heart.

But you play better than I.

Not at all.

You always beat me.

I Will no more play with you, except you give me odds.

Indeed I cannot: See whether you have a mind to play even.

What shall we play for?

I never play but for a small matter.

Lets play for half a Crown a Set.

But play fair.

I never play foul.

I take that Pawn.

I am glad of it, for I am going to take that Bishop and check you.

You Will get nothing in that business, there is a Rook, I take away with my
Knight.

But how shall you save your Queen.

By Check-mating you with my Bishop and my Rook.

I lost the Set, I cannot move the King.

You ow me then half a Crown.

I grant it.

XXIII. Dialogue.
To go to see a Play.
THere is a new Play Acted to day, shall we go and see it?

With all my heart.

It is a Comedy, or a Tragedy?

It Is a Comedy?

What Is its name?

The Old Bachelor.

Is this the first time it is acted?

No, Sir, this is the third time, this is the Poets-day.

I Will go and bid the Coachman get the Coach ready, and and we shall go the next
minute.

Shall we go in a Box.

I Will do what you please, but methinks it is best to go in the Pit,

Why?

Because we may pass the time away in talking with some body, before the
Curtain is drawn:

What do you say of that Symphony.

Methinks it is very good.

Don't you take notice of that Hoboy that sounds so finely among the violins
and harpsecol.

The Boxes are full already.

And as you see we are very crowded in the Pit.

I never saw the house so full.

There are a great many fine People.

I love as much as the Play the sight of those fine Ladies, who grace the Boxes.

They are very finely dressed, (or in a fine Garb)

They join the Beauty and Charms of the Body to the Richness of the Attire; and
to the brightness of their Jewels.

Do you take notice of that Lady, who sits next to the Princess.

Yes, I see her, she is pretty, she is handsome.

How pretty? You should say that she is a perfect beauty.

Do you know her?

Yes, I know her.

She has a fine easy shape.

Have you took notice of her Complexion.

It Is the finest Complexion in the World.

The whiteness of her bosom (or neck) and the Vermilion of her face, wrong the
Lilies and the Roses.

She has teeth as white as snow.

I think that she has a great deal of wit.

Beauty may be seen, but not wit.

Had she as much wit as Beauty, one might say, that she is an abridgment of all
perfections.

But the Curtain is drawing, let us hear.

The Play is done.

The Curtain is let down.

Let Us return home.

XXIV. Dialogue.
To make an Exchange.
WHat Sword is that you have there?

It Is a Sword I bought just now at the Sword-Cutlers.

Is the Hilt of Steel or Gilt-Copper?

A fine Question! don't you see it is Silver-Gilt.

The Handle is of Silver without question.

Will you truck (or Chop) your Sword?

With what?

With mine.

With all my Heart, what will you give me to boot.

Nothing.

Give me ten shillings to boot.

Truly you jeer me. What! is not my Sword as good as yours to the full?

No really; far from it.

You tell me fine Stories.

I am not so easy to be impose^ upon.

See whether you will make a Gentleman's Exchange.

What do you mean by that?

To change even hands.

I Will be sure not to do it.

I am not such a Fool to do it.

Look for your Cullies somewhere else.

Well choose.

I Will give you then eight Shillings to boot.

Done.

XXV. Dialogue
Betwixt a Lady and her daughter about the Exercises.
DAughter, have you done all your Exercises to day?

No, Madam, my dancing Master is not come yet.

Is your Singing Master gone?

Yes, Madam, he is just gone out.

What Song did you sing?

A Song of the New Opera

What Opera do you mean?

The Fairy Queen.

Tell me the words of it.

If Love's a sweet Passion, etc.

That Song is grown as common as a Ballad.

It Is the common Fate of the finest Songs which are sung at both the Theaters.

Sing before me.

What Song, Madam?

How blessed are Shepherds, how happy their Lesses!

Stand upr^ght.

Hold up yrur Head.

That Is well.

You si^g pretty well.

You ha^'t quite forgot that Tune, but you trill too much.

Did your Master of Languages come yesterday.

Yes, Madam.

Does he say that you speak good French?

He says, I speak as well as any of his Scholars, considering the time I have
learnt.

He finds then that you improve?

I don't know whether it is to flatter, or to encourage me, but he tells me I
make great progresses.

He does well not to discourage you.

I wish you may go on at the same rate.

Do not be slack, be not negligent

And above all, leave off your wanton Tricks.

Have you been about your work?

What Work.

The Needle work.

The Embroidery.

The flowering of your Combing Cloth.

At what Hour does your Dancing Master come to day?

At four a Clock.

What Dances does he teach yo^?

French Dances; as the Courant, the Menuet, etc.

Does he not teach you Country Dances.

Pardon me.

Let me see how you make a Curtesy.

That Is well.

But when you make a Courtesey, don't stare so people in the face.

XXVI. Dialogue.
To write a Letter.
IS it not to day a Post-day?

I believe it is.

Who do you write to?

To Madam C.

Is she not in Town?

She has been in the Country these two days.

Give me a Sheet of guilt Paper, a Pen, and a little Ink.

Step in my Closet, you will find upon the Table all that you lack.

There are no Pens.

There are some in the inkhorn or (standish.)

They are good for nothing.

There are some others.

These are but Quills, they are not cut.

Where is your Penknife?

Can you make a Pen?

I make them my own way.

This is not bad.

While I make an end of this Letter, be so kind as to make a bundle of that
Copy of Verses and that Pamphlet.

What Seal will you have me put to it?

Seal it with my Cipher, or with my Coat of Arms.

What Wax shall I put to it?

Put either red or black, no matter which.

May Not I put Wafers to it?

It Is all one.

Have you put the Date?

I believe yes: But I did not subscribe.

What day of the month is this?

The tenth, the twentieth.

Put the Superscription.

Where is the Dust?

You have neither Dust nor Sand.

There is some in the Powder-Box.

How do you convey your Letters?

By the Post.

There is my man who shall carry them there, if you will trust him with them.

Carry the Gentleman's Letters to the Post, and do not forget to pay the
Postage.

I have no money.

There is some. Go quickly and make haste to come back.

XXVII. Dialogue.
To hire a Lodging.
MAdam, you have here a Bill at your door, that shows, you have Rooms to let.

So' I have Sir. Will you be pleased to see them?

How ma^y do you want?

I want a good Room and a Closet to it, for me, and a Garre^ for my Man.

Must your Room be furnished or unfurnished?

Furnished.

Do me the favor to stay ^ moment in this Parlour, and I will go fetch the
Keys.

Will you take the pains to come up.

We follow you, Madam.

Here Is a Chamber to be liet in the first story.

I pass my word (or I warrant you) there is a very good Bed.

And you see, that there are all things requisite in a f^rnished Room, as
Table, Hanging-Shelf, Stands, Chairs, Looking-Glass, and fine Tapistry.

But where is the Closet?

Here it is.

This fits me well enough.

I like the Room very well; what do you ask for it a week?

I never le^ my Chambers but by the Month or by the Quarter.

Well, I shall take it by the Month: What will you have for it?

I never had less than six Crowns a month for this Room.

That Is too much.

Without so much ^agling, I Will give four for it.

That Is too little: you don't know what Rent I pay for this house.

It Is no business of mine to know it.

But in a word as well as in a hundred, shall we divide the difference?

I assure you, that I lose by it but I shall do it upon your account.

And for my man's Garret, how much will yon have for it a month?

You shall give me Ten Shillings for it.

I shall give you eight for it

It is not enough; however, rather than to put you off, I consent to it.

It Is not worth the while to cheapen for such a small matter.

But now I think on it, may I not board at your house?

Excuse me.

What do you take for each Boarder a week?

For the Chamber and Boarding together, I take twelve shillings.

And for the Boarding only, Eight.

I have rather then give you Twelve shillings a week for all.

Do even as you please.

Well, I shall begin to morrow.

XXVIII. Dialogue.
To Dress Victuals.
Between the Steward and the Cook.
MAster Cook, my Lord shall have company at Dinner; you must show all that you
can do, (or all yonr skill.)

If I don't make good cheer, 'twill be no fault of mine; But look you, master
Steward, you clip my wings so with the Ciz^rs of your husbandry, that --

Fair and softly. -- What must you buy?

How many people will there be at Table?

I think they will be seven.

Well, for the boiled meat, there must be a Leg of Mutton, and two Hens.

For the first, a Fricasy of Chickens, a Gammon of Bacon, a Pigeon-Pye.

For the second course,

A Pig.

Four Pullets.

Four Partridges.

And a dozen of Larks.

As for the Fruit, the Housekeeper shall take care of that.

Go then quickly to the Butchers and Poulterers, to fetch all that you want.

Lay out the money, and write down what you spend; I shall pay it you again at
the end of the week.

Kill this Pig immediately; broyl his feet; put him in boiling water, and hang
him on the Hook.

Scowr the great Pot, fill it with clean water, and put it to the Pot-hanger.

Pick (or fleece) them Pullets; draw them, tuck them up well, and lard them
neatly.

Shell them Pe^se and Beans, and let them boil about a quarter of an hour.

Give me the Spit.

Wind up the Jack.

XXIX. Dialogue.
To Buy a Suit of Clothes.
SIR, I come to wait on you from Master B --

What does he send you for?

He told me, you had a suit of Clothes to make.

Friend, you are welcome; I expect that you will make me a neat and modish suit
of Clothes.

What will you have it made of?

Of some fine English Cloth.

Of what Color?

I shall see.

Will you be pleased to buy the Cloth, or shall I buy it my self?

I go to buy it now, come along with me.

What do you want Sir?

What do you look for?

I want a good and fite Cloth.

Come in, Sir, you will see here the finest Cloths in London.

Show me the best you have.

There is a very fine one, and as they wear them now.

It is good, but the Color does not please me.

There is another piece lighter than the other.

I like that color; but the cloth is too thin, it is not strong enough.

Look upon this piece here, you will find none so fine in another place, nor
that will do you so much service.

How much will you sell it an Ell?

Without exacting upon you of a penny, it is worth twenty shillings.

I am not used to cheapen, tell me the last word.

I told it you, Sir, it is worth so much.

That Is too dear; I Will give you eighteen for it.

There is not a penny to bate. And if you consider the goodness and sineness of
the cloth, you will find it very cheap.

Come, come, cut two Else of it.

I swear, upon my honest word, that I don't get half a Crown with you.

Show me now a stripped cloth for the Breeches.

Here is one that will match your close coat the best in the world.

What do you ask for the Ell?

It never went out of my Shop under six and twenty Shillings.

I Will give you at the Rate of four and twenty.

How much must you have of it?

Three Quarrers of an Ell.

Here, Sir, there is your money; see whether I did misreckon.

I would not wrong you of a farthing.

Sir, the money is good, and well told.

Come home with me to take my measure.

Shall I find the rest?

That Is without question.

Line the Coat with some good Silk, and the Breeches with good Callico.

You shall be contented.

Buy me a good pair of Silk Stockings.

Will you have them knit or woven?

I will have them knit.

For the rest, take a special care that my suit be well made.

It shall be so, I promise you.

But I must have it within two days at the furthest.

You shall have it without fail.

XXX. Dialogue.
To Play at Picket.
Let Us play a Game at Picket.

What will you play for?

Let Us play for a Crown to pass away the time.

Give us a pack of Cards and some Counters.

Let Us see, who shall deal?

You are to deal.

I am to play first; I have the hand.

Shuffle the Cards; all the Figures are together.

They are shuffled enough.

Cut, Sir.

Have you your Cards?

I believe I have.

How many do you take in?

I take all.

I leave one.

I have bad Cards.

Let Us deal again.

Not this time.

Have you put away?

No, Sir, my Cards puzzle me.

You must needs have good Cards, since I have nothing.

Tell how many you have.

Fifty, Sixty, etc.

They an't good.

They are good.

Quint major, Quint to the King, Quint to the Queen. Fourth to the Knave: Third
to the Tenth.

Three Aces, three Kings.

I have as much.

Fourteenth of Queens.

Play on.

Hearts, Spades, Diamonds, Clubbs.

The Ace, the King, the Queen, the Knave, tht Tenth, the Nine, the Eight, the
Seven.

A Peek, a Repeek.

I have the Cards.

I have seven Tricks.

I have lost.

You have won.

You owe me a Crown.

You owed me.

We are even (or quit).

Give me my Revenge.

XXXI. Dialogue.
For the Journey.
HOw many miles (or leagues) is N. from this place.

It is eight leagues.

We cannot go so far to d^y, it is too late.

It is not above twelve a clock at noon: you will arrive there betimes.

Is the way good?

Not much, there are Woods and Rivers to pass by.

Is there any danger upon the Road?

There is no talk of it; it is a Road where a body meets with a people every
moment.

Don't they say, that there are High-way-men in the Woods?

There is nothing to be feared either by day or night.

Which way must one take?

When you come near the hill, you shall go to the right hand.

We must not then go up the hill.

No Sir.

Is it a difficult way through the Wood?

You cannot loose your way.

When you are out of the Wood, remember to take to the left.

I thank you Sir.

Come, Gentlemen, come, let us get on horseback.

Farewell, Sir, farewell.

I wish you a good Journey.

Sir, if I don't mistake, your horse has lost his Shoe.

Will you be so kind as to stay for me till I get him Choe'd.

With all my heart. XXXII.

XXXII. Dialogues.
Of the Supper and Lodging.
CAn we lodge here?

Yes Sir, we have fine Rooms, and good Beds.

Let Us alight, Gentlemen.

Bid some body put our horses into the Stables.

Take the Gentlemen's horses, take care of them.

Now let us see, what shall you give us for supper?

See Sir, what you shall like.

Give us a fricasy of Chickens, half a dozen Pigeons, a Sallet, six Quails, and
a dozen of Larks.

Will you have nothing else?

No, that is enough; but give us good Wine and Fruit.

Let me alone, you shall be contented I warrant you.

Come, Gentlemen, let us go and see our Chambers.

Light the Gentlemen up.

Let Us have our supper as soon as possible.

Before your Boots are pulled off, will supper be got ready.

Where are our Lackeys?

They are gone up stairs with your Portmantles.

Have you brought my Pistols?

Yes Sir, there they be.

Pull of my Boots, and then you shall go to see whether they have given Hay to
the Horses; you spall carry them to the River, and shall take care to let them
have some Oats.

I Will take care of all, don't trouble your self.

Call for supper.

Gentlemen, supper is ready, the meat is on the Table.

Let Us go to supper, Gentlemen, that we may go to bed betimes.

Let Us sit down, Gentlemen; let us sit down at Table.

There wants a Plate.

Eat of that Fricasy, it is very well seasoned.

The Pigeons are not enough.

Give us some drink.

My service to ye, Gentlemen.

Is the Wine good?

It is not bad.

Let Us drink then.

These Quails are very tender.

You don't eat, Sir.

I have no stomach; I am weary and tired.

You must cheer up.

I Will certainly be better a bed than at Table.

Get your bed warm.

Make an end of your supper; Gentlemen, I go to take my rest.

Do you find your self ill?

Do you want any thing?

I want nothing but rest.

Farewell, Gentlemen, good night.

I wish you a good night; endeavor to be well.

Bring the Fruit, and call the Landlord (or Innkeeper) to speak to us.

Here he comes with a Bottle of Wine.

XXXIII. Dialogue.
To pay the Reckoning.
YOur Servant Gentlemen, how did you like your supper?

We are contented, but we must content you too.

Let Us reckon Landlord, what have we to pay, or what have we had?

The Reckoning is not great.

See what you must have for us, for our men, and for our horses.

Reckon your selves, Gentlemen, and you will find, that there is seven Crowns.

Methinks you ask too much.

On the contrary, I am very cheap.

How much do you reckon for the Wine?

I sell it to you fifteen pence a Bottle.

Bring another Bottle, and we shall give you seven Crowns to morrow morning at
breakfast.

When you please.

Give orders that we may have clean Sheets.

The Sheets you shall have, ar^ Lye-washed.

I will not fail.

Bid the Ostler dress our horses well, curry them as he should, and take care
that they don't want for hay.

I will. Farewell, Gentlemen, good night to ye.

XXXIV. Dialogue.
To speak to a sic^ Body.
WHat ails you?

I am ill.

You look as if you ^^re.

You don't look well.

You look ill.

Oh! Sir, I am dying, I am half Dead.

I linger, or I pine away.

Where is your pain?

My head and my heart ache, and I have a pain in my stomach.

Let me f^el your Pulse.

You have got a Fever.

I feel a heaviness in all my Body.

You must be let Blood.

I was let Blood the other day.

No matter: To morrow you shall take Physic.

What Diet must I keep?

Take new-laid Eggs, and I^lly Broths.

Have you a Nurse?

Yes, Sir.

Cheer up, don't be cast down for such a small matter.

Oh! Sir, you little know how ill I am; I am almost spent.

I have one foot already in the grave.

Truly, I am very sorry for it. Put it is possible that you will recover.

I am gone, I decay very sersibly

I grow weaker every day.

I am in a Consumption, and I am past recovery.

I must die, my Disease is an old Disea^e.

You make your Disease worse than it is. You may outlive (...).

Do you find your self better.

Yes, thank God, I find my self eased.

Did your Physic work well?

Very well.

How many times was you at stool?

Seven or eight times.

Have you no better stomach?

Yes, Sir, I could eat a Chicken.

Within two or three days you may go abroad

Do but endeavor to rest.

XXXV* Dialogue.
Between a Gentlewoman and her Woman.
WHo waits?

Did your Ladyship call Madam.

Bring me my Hood^ and Tippet.

Let me see; hold the Glass Lord! I look wretchedly to day.

Why don't you help me?

How awkward you are!

How can I help it?

Is not my Head wry?

No Madam, it sits very well.

Give me a clean handkerchief.

Go now to the Footman and bid him get a chair with a high roof, or a very low
seat.

I run.

Stay Mistress sue, you are so ready to go the Footman. --

What will you be pleased to have, Madam.

Go first, and see whether my Sister be ready, and if she be willing to go to
the Princess with me.

Well, what says she?

She is gone out already.

Truly that is very handsome, to disappoint me so.

Did she not send me word, that she would not go out before five a clock.

Yes, Madam.

What a clock is it then now?

It Is hardly Five.

Bid the Footman call for a Chair.

Madam, there is below. --

Is there a Chair?

No, Madam, there is Master L. -- to wait upon your Ladyship.

Did they tell him I was at home?

I believe, yes.

Then I cannot go out; take all that again.

How do I look?

Very well

You may tell Master L -- that I am ready to receive him.

XXXVI. Dialogue.
Of LOVE.
Between a Lover and his Mistress.
SO Fortune be praised, for the blessing I have to find you at home.

It Is no Miracle, I think.

It is not, I confess, very extraordinary, to find you at home; but hitherto,
Madam, I had never the happiness to see you there alone.

Sir, you puzzle me. I cannot imagine what you may have to say to me.

Many things, my dear Angel! wrept up in a Word, I Love.

You love!

Yes, I love. --

That is not so impossible; but, I think, you would do much better to entertain
her with your (...), who influences it; for besides that, she might give you
some relief* you would free me from the trouble, which is caused by the recital
of other peoples misfortunes, to those who are not in a capacity of helping
them.

Oh! how ingenious you are to dissemble* Is it possible that my looks and
actions have not convinced you a thousand times, that your sparkling eyes
influence the torment, I endure?

The amorous Looks and Civilities of men, are too uncertain proofs of a true
passion; and they seldom make use of them, but to try our Sex's Weakness, and
laugh at our Credulity.

Oh! do not wrong me so much as to judge of me by others: I was never a lover
by profession ( or, a general Lover). I never knew the power of Love before the
moment I saw you. Suspect any thing in me but dissimulation: I swear, my
charming Cae^ia, I love you more than my self, and my love shall be as lasting
as my life.

Every body speaks the same; all men are alike in their Language, and the
Actions only, make them appear different.

Since nothing but Actions can show what we are, the only favor I beg of you,
is ^o judge of my heart by them, and to give me the occasion of convincing you
of the sincerity and pureness of my flames.

Alas! How easily we are persuaded what we wish for! Yes, Lisidor, I believe
you love me with a true love; and I have no other trouble than the fear of the
blame I may incur, if I encourage it.

Oh! my dearest Caelia, you so transport me out of my self, that I don't know
where to find expressions to show you my Gratitude. But pray, what do you
ground your f^ars upon?

I cannot tell it you know: It is time for us to part, my mother will be here
presently, and I should be sorry, she should find us in a private Conversation.

Alas! what a blow you strike in my heart, when you speak of parting, and with
how much grief am I forced to leave you!

We shall find the way to meet again; mean while be faithful, and I shall not
be ungrateful.

XXXVII. Dialogue.
Between two Couzens. Of VISITS.
HOw now, Cozen, is no body come to visit you to day?

No body in the world.

Truly, I wonder we have both been alone all this day.

I wonder at it too, for we are seldom so; and your house, thank God, is the
Sanctuary of all the idle Courtiers.

To tell truth, this afternoon has been very long to me.

And I found it very short.

Great Wits Cousen Love solitude.

What do I care for wit? you know wit is not what I pretend to.

For my part, I love Company I confess it.

I love it too, but I love a choice one, and the great number of nau^^ous (...)
one is obliged to entertain among the others, makes me often love to be by my
s^^f.

That ni^^^ness is too great, that cannot bear with none but chosen persons.

And tha^ complaisance is too general, that bears with all manner of persons.

I relish those that are reasonable, and laugh at Fops and Impertinents.

Truly, Fops grow soon tedious, and most of them please no more at the second
Visit.

Madam, there is Climene that comes to wait on your Ladyship.

Oh Lord! what a Visit!

You was grumbling for being alone, so heaven punishes you for it.

Quickly, go and tell that I am not at home.

They have told her already, that you were.

Who is that block-head as told so?

It Is I, Madam.

Deuce take the little Booby, I Will teach you to make Answers of your own self.

Madam, I Will go and tell her that you have a mind to be gone out. --

Stay, beast, and let her come up, since the Folly is done already.

Why do you fall a laughing?

I laugh at your little Lack eyes Simplicity.

Ah Cousen! how this Visit troubles me now?

No matter, it must go down with you.

XXXVIII. Dialogue.
Of Puppet Shows.
WHere went you yesterday in the Afternoon?

I went to give my Attendance to the Duke of Gloucester.

How does he do?

He is very well.

He always shows a great deal of wit and Liveliness.

Did you play with him?

Yes, Sir, we played a little, whilst the Puppet-playe^ was getting his Puppets
ready.

How! was there a Puppet-Shew?

Yes, Sir.

Was that very diverting?

Was his Highness well pleased with it?

Extremely; he fell a laughing now and then.

What Country man was the Puppet-Player?

He was a Frenchman.

How do you know it?

Because he spoke broken English, and made Punchinello speak French most
^ommonly.

How could then the lookers on understand what he said?

The Puppet-players Wife was his Interpreter.

Was there a great deal of company?

Yes, Sir.

How long did the Show last?

About an hour and a half.

At what hour did you take your leave of the young Prince?

At Eight a Clock.

What had you rather to see, Puppet Shows or Iugglers.

I admire the dexterity of Iugling Tricks; but I find, Puppet-Shews more
diverting and pleasant.

XXXIX. Dialogue.
Of MARRIAGE.
Between a Father and his Daughter.
DAughter, your good nature and tractableness have not little contributed to
increase that love I ever had for you; and seeing you are of an (...) fit to be
married, I have (...) my eyes upon Sir N. -- (...) be your husband.

How! Father, a Maid (...) my age marry Sir N. --

Why not? he is a sober, st^^l, prudent, and wise man, not above Fifty, and who
is cried (...) for his great Estate.

Marriage is a business of (...) great consequence, to be so quickly resolved
upon, and since (...) happiness of my whole life is (...) stake, I beg of you
to give (...) some time to think on it.

I know what is good for you better than your self, and therefore I tell you,
that you shall marry him to morrow.

Since you urge me so far, I must tell you my true Sentiments, and confess to
you, that I Would rather throw my self into a Nunnery, than to marry S. N. since a
Marriage cannot be happy where there is no inclination.

That Is a thing, Daughter, which may be, will come afterward; and they say*
that Love is often the fruit of Matrimony.

But, Sir, there is a great hazard on the women's side and I shall never forget
what I have heard my Grandmother say, That a Woman's Virtue is never so much in
danger, as when she is married to one she does not like.

Without so many Reasons, I am Resolved you shall marry S. N. he is rich, and
that must satisfy you.

And I protest to you, with all the Duty and Respect I owe you, that I will not be
^acrificed to Interest, since that great unequality of Age, Humor, and
Sentiments, cannot but render ^ Marriage liable to many dismal accidents.

Did any body ever see a Daugh^ter speak so to her Father?

But did any body ever see a Father marry his Daughter so?

It Is a match which nothing can be said against, and I lay that every body will
approve of my choice.

And I lay that it cannot be approved by any reasonable person.

Will you yield to your Brothers Judgment?

I Will yield to no bodies Judgment; my heart cannot submit to such a Tyranny, and
in a word, I Will rather marry Death th^^ S. N.

XL. Dialogue.
Of Country Diversions.
SIR, I am very glad to see you; where do you live now?

We have been these two months at a Country house.

Are you come to Town for good and all?

No, Sir, I go back to morrow morning.

How do you enjoy your self in the Country?

How do you pass away the time?

I bestow part of it upon Books.

But which are your Diversions after your serious Occupations?

I go sometimes a Hunting.

What do you hunt?

Sometimes we hunt a Deer, and sometimes a Hare.

Have you good Dogs?

We have a Pack of Hounds?

Two Greyhound Dogs, two Gray hound Bitches, four Terriers, and
three-S^tting-dogs.

Do you never go a Fowling?

Pardon me.

What do you shoot at?

All manner of Game, as Partridges, Pheasan^s, Wood-cocks, Wood-hens, Quails,
Thrushes, etc.

Do you shoot flying, or ru^ring?

I do both.

How do you catch Rabbits?

Sometimes with Purse-Netts and a Ferret, and sometimes we kill them with a Gun.

And Quails?

Most commonly with a Net and a Setting-Dog.

Do you also fish sometimes?

Very seldom.

Why?

Because we are a great way from the River.

But we have a Fish Pond, where we take Carps with a Line.

What do you do when you neither Hunt nor Fish?

We Bowl.

Are you a good Bowler?

I make a shift to cope with another.

Have you a good Bowling-green? Is it even? Is it well kept?

It is pretty good. It is none of the roughest.

Do you sometimes play at Billiards?

Yes, Sir.

Do you not play at Nine-Pins too?

I do not love much to play at Nine-Pins, and I never do it but out of
Complaisance.

As ^ar as I see, your time is so well employed, that you cannot be tired with
being in the Country?

You think so, and yet it is quite otherwise: I begin already to long to be in
Town; so true it is, that men grow weary of every thing.

A COLLECTION OF SOME NICETIES OF THE French Tongue,
Whereas the French Tongue excells above all living Languages, by the fineness
and Nicety of some Expressions, I thought it most necessary to my purpose, to
Print this Collection, which comprehends most of these Expressions, Divided
according to the variety of Circumstances.
I.
Pour Prier, ou Demander.
MOn Cher, Monsieur, faites moy ce plaisir.

Accordez moy cette faveur.

Je vous pry, Madame, faires moy cette grace.

Mon amor. Ma Vie.

Ma mignonne.

Eh je vous conjure.

Faites moy cette amity.

Je vous en supply.

Je vous le demand par grace.

Obligez moy de cela

Ma mie.

Ma peti^e poupone.

Ma chere fanfan.

Ma che^e Enfant.

Mon bell Ange.

Mon petit Coeur.

Mon tout.

II.
Po^r fair Civilite and pour remercier.
Votre serviteur, Monsieur.

Votre tres humble serviteur.

Je suis tout a vous.

Je vous suis oblige.

Je vous suis infiniment oblige.

Je vous rends graces.

Je vous remercie.

Je vous rends mill graces.

Faites fond sur moy.

Commandez moy.

Honnorez moy de vos commandemeus.

Voyez si je puis vous et^e utile en quelque chose.

Disposez de votre serviteur.

Vous n'avez qu'a commander.

Je n'attens que vos commandemens.

Vous n'avez qu'a dire.

Puis que vous le voulez ainsi.

Vous me faites trop d'hon. neur.

Laissons ces Ceremonies.

Treve de compliments je vous pry.

Vous etes trop obligeant.

Je ne sai comment je pour^rai reconnoitre tant d'obligations que je vous ay.

Faites, je vous pry, mes baisemains a Monsieur.

Je ne manquerai pas.

Je vous pry dassurer Madame B -- de mes respects.

Je vous pry d'accepter.

Vous l'of^rez de fi bonne grace que je ne sauroi^ le refufer.

Je souhaiterois bien d'avoir l'honneur de jouir plus long tems de votre
agreeable compagnie.

Si je n'etois pas extremement press vous pouvez bien croire, que je serois
ravi moi-meme de vous posseder.

Je suis confus de toutes vos civilites.

Brisons la dessus; laissons ces compliments.

Monsieur, s'il vous plait de passer devaut, je fuis pret a vous suivre.

Apres vous, Monsieur.

Je sai trop bien ce que je von^ dois.

Je ne m'oublierai pas jusques la.

Vous voulez donc que je commette une incivilite?

Je le f^rai pour vous obe^r.

Pour vous complaire.

Je ne suis point fassonnier.

III.
Pour affirmer, pour Consentir and pour Nier.
IL est vrai.

Il n'est que trop vray.

Pour vous dire la verite.

A ne vous poiut mentir.

En effet, il est ainsi.

Qui en doubt?

Il n'y a poinr de doubt.

Je crois qu'ouy.

Je crois que non.

Je gage qu'ouy.

Je gage que non.

Ouy, Par ma Foy.

En Conscience.

S^r ma vie.

Que je meure, si cela n'est.

Je vous jure foy de Gentil-homme.

Foy d'honnete homme.

Sur mon honneur.

Foy d'homme d'honne^r,

Foy d'homme de bien.

Je dis que si.

Je dis que non.

Pour ne pas mentir,

Croyez moy.

Je puis vous dire.

Je puis vous assurer.

Je gagerois quelque chose.

Ne vous moquez vous pas?

Je dis tout de bon:

Je vous en repons.

Vous avez devine.

Je vous en crois.

On vous peut croire.

Ce que vous dites n'est pas incroyable, ou impossible.

He bien, a la bonne heure.

Tout beau, Tout beau.

C'est assez.

Il n'est pas vray.

Cela est faux.

Il n'y a rien de cela.

Je me moquois.

Je le faisois pour rire.

Je le disois pour rire

Vrayment ouy.

Ne me rompez pas la tete.

Ne m'etourdissez pas.

Je ne veux pas.

IV.
Pour Consulter, ou Pour considerer.
QUE faut it fair?

Qu'y a t'il a fair?

Quel remede?

Quel parti prendrons nous?

Que ferons nous?

Faisons comme cela --

Faisons une chose --

Il vaudra mieux que je --

Arretez un peu.

Ne vaudroit il pas mieux que --

J'aimerois mieux.

Vous feriez Mieux si --

Laissez moy fair.

Si j'etois a votre place.

Si j'etois que de vous, je --

V.
Pour souhaiter du bien ou du Mal.
JE vous souhaite toute sort de bien, ou de bonheur.

Dieu vous benisse.

Dieu vous assiste.

Dieu nous en preserve.

Dieu nous en guard.

A Dieu ne plaise.

Le ciel vous conserve.

Dieu vous accompagne.

Je pry Dieu qu'il vous fasse prosperer.

A Dieu, A revoir.

Soyez le bien venu.

Va te fair pendre.

Maudit sois tu.

Que la fievre te serre.

Dla^tre ^oit l'impertinent.

VI.
Pour se facher, Menacer and insulter.
JE te casserai la tete.

Est^ce ainsi, que l'on traite les honnetes gens?

Quelle honte!

Ne devrois tu pas avoir honte?

Me fair un affront comme celui-la?

Ah coquin! Ah Fripon!

Voyez le nigaud.

Si je prens un baton, je vous rosseray d'importance.

Melez vous de vos affairs

Quoy! vous etes obstine?

Vous etes un Fourbe.

Apprenez, beat que vous etes --

O qu'il est civil.

Quelle mouche a pique ce sot?

Voyez un peu ce sot, comme il me traite.

O le Po^tron! O le lache!

Tu es un scelerat.

O quel beau museau.

Vous faites bien l'homme d'importance.

Savez vous que je vous frotterai les oreilles?

Ne faites pas tant le brave, Person ne vous craint.

Je te mettrai la tete en compote.

Je te battrai comme platre.

Vous etes un impertinent, Un effronte; un fat, un faquin.

Tu t'attireras cinquante coups de baton.

Si vous osez.

Je vous rendrai la pareille.

Tu me la payeras.

Je te jure, que tu t'en repentiras.

Tu m'en as fait une --

Je te la rendrai, va.

Si vous me mettez en colere.

Tu me feras tant enrager qu'a la fin --

Je suis bon, mais. --

Ne me romps pas en visiere.

Ne me tourmente pas.

Attendez, Attendez.

Benitre de coquil, je t'apprendrai a te taire.

VII.
Pour se moquer and injurier.
VIsage a fair rire.

O quel beau museau!

Quelle mine de singe

Gros Animal.

Gross beat.

Mine de Chien.

Fripon fieffe.

Frauc coquin.

Grand Poltron.

Ame de boue.

Scelerat.

VIII.
Pour marquer l'ennuy and le chagrin.
J'Enrage.

Laisse moy en repos.

Va t'en je t'en pry.

Ne me romps pas les oreilles

Dieu te conduise.

Otez vous de devant moy.

Otez vous d'icy.

Allez vous fair pendre.

Melez vous de vos affairs.

Diantre soit de l'importun.

Ne m'etourdis pas.

O que vous etes ennuyant.

Vous me ^avez dit and redit plus de cent sois.

ca voyons venons au fait.

Voila de beaux contes a d^rmir debout.

IX.
Pour interroger.
COmment dites vous?

Qu'est ce que c'est?

Que dit on?

Qu'est ce qu'il ya?

Que veut dire?

A quoy sert? A quoy bon?

Que vous semble?

A quel propos?

Dites moy peut-on savoir --

Dites moy peu on vous demander.

Comment Monsieur?

Qu'entendez vous?

Que voulez vous dire?

Qu'y a t-il a faite?

X.
Pour Defendre.
LAissez cela.

Ne me touchez pas.

Ne dis Mot.

Ne pars point d'icy.

Ne bouge point d'icy.

Gardez vous bien de --

Prenez guard.

Je ne le veux pas.

Je le defends.

XI.
Pour marquer la Joy and la Tristresse.
QUel plaisir, quelle joye?

Que je suis content?

O que je suis heureux.

O heureux jour.

Quel bou^eur?

J'en suis fac^e.

J'en ay bien du chagrin, ou du deplaisir.

Cela me perce le coeur.

Cela me touch jusqu'au coeur.

I.
To Pray or Desire.
DEar Sir, do me that Favor.

Grant me that favor.

I pray you, Madam, do me that kindness.

My Love. My Life.

My Darling.

I conjure, or entreat you.

Do me that kindness.

I beseech you.

I beg it as a favor.

Oblige me so far.

My sweeting, or sweetheart.

My little honey.

My dear Child.

My dear Angel.

My little heart.

My all.

II.
To Complement and give Thanks.
SIR, your Servant.

Your most humble Servant.

I am wholly yours.

I am obliged to you.

I am infinitely obliged to you.

I give you thanks.

I thank you.

I give you a thousand thanks.

Rely upon me.

Command me.

Honor me with your Commands.

See whether I can be serviceable to you in any thing.

Dispose of your servant.

Do but command.

I only wait for your Commands.

Do but speak the word.

Since you will have it so.

You do me too much Honor.

Let Us forbear Ceremonies.

Let Us forbear Complements, I pray you.

You are too obliging.

I don't know how I shall be able to acknowledge so many obligations you have
laid on me.

Pray present my service to Master.

I will not fail.

Pray present my Duty to my Lady B. --

I beg the favor of you to accept

You offer it so handsomely, that I don't know how to r^fute it.

I wish I might have the houour to enjoy a little longer your sweet company.

Were I not in very great haste, you may be assured, that I should be very glad
my self to enjoy yours.

I am ashamed of all your Civilities.

Let Us break-off there; let us forbear Complements.

Sir, if you please to go before, I am ready to follow you.

After you Sir.

I know too well what I owe you.

I will not forget my self so far.

You will have me then commit a piece of rudeness.

I shall do it to obey you.

To please you.

I don't love Ceremonies.

III.
To Affirm, to Consent, and to Deny.
IT is true.

It is too true.

To tell you the truth.

Really, it is so.

Who doubts it? who questions it?

There is no doubt on it.

I believe yes.

I believe not.

I lay it is.

I lay it is not.

Yes, Faith.

In my Conscience.

Upon my life.

Let me die if it be not so.

I swear, as I am a Gentleman.

Upon my honest word.

Upon my Honor or Credit.

Upon my honest word.

I say, yes.

I say, not.

To tell the truth.

Believe me.

I can tell you.

I can assure you.

I could lay something.

Are you in earnest?

I speak in earnest.

I warrant you.

You guessed right.

I believe you.

One may believe you.

What you say is not incredible, or impossible.

Well, let it ^e ^o; well and good.

Softly. Fair and softly.

That Is enough.

It is not true.

It is false.

There is no such thing.

I Ieer'd.

I did it in jest.

I said it in Jest.

Oh! yes indeed.

Don't break my head.

Don't make my head guiddy.

I will not.

IV.
To Consult, or Consider.
WHat is to be done?

What Remedy?

What course shall we take?

What shall we do?

Let Us do so --

Let Us do o^e thing. --

It will be better for me to --

Hold a little.

Would it not be much better that --

I had rather.

You had best to --

Let me alone.

Were I in your place.

If I was you, I --

V.
To wish one well* or ill.
I Wish you all sort of happiness.

God bless you.

God help you.

God forbid.

May heaven preserve you.

God go along with you.

I wish God may prosper you.

Farewell, till we meet again.

You are welcome.

Go and be hanged.

Curse light on thee.

The Fever squeeze thee.

Deuce take the Impertinent.

VI.
To scold, to threaten and to abuse.
I Will break your ^ead.

Is that the way to deal with Gentlemen?

Fie for shame!

Are you not ashamed?

To affront or abuse me thus.

Ah! Rogue! Ah! K^ave*

If I take a Cudgel I Will maul you soundly.

Go about your business.

What! are you obstinate still?

You are a cheat.

Learn, beast as you are. --

Oh! how civil he is!

What ails the fellow?

Pray see that block-head, how he uses me.

Oh! Cowardly Curr!

Thou art a profligate wretch.

A pretty Face indeed.

You carry it very high indeed.

I Will rub, or Ill bang your ears, do you know that?

Don't ^uff so, no body is afraid of you.

I Will beat you to Mummy, or to Ielly.

You are an impertinent, braz^n-fac'd, silly, base, pitiful Fellow.

Thou shallt draw a sound Bastinado on thy back.

If you dare.

I Will give you like for like.

I shall be even with thee.

I swear, thou shall rue it.

Thou have played me such a trick.

I shall pay you off, go.

If you make me angry.

Thou shall make me so mad that at last --

I am good natured, but --

Don't you outface me.

Do not tease me.

Stay, stay.

Insolent Rascal, I shall learn you to rule thy Tongue.

VII.
To laugh at and call Names.
PRetty Face, to make one laugh.

Oh! what a pretty face!

What a monky face.

Great Beast.

Ugly cur^.

Downright Knave.

Downright Rogue.

Great Coward.

Base, sneaking Soul.

Rake-hell.

VIII.
To show ones Trouble and Grief.
I Am mad.

Let me alone.

Pray be gone.

Don't break my Ears.

God go along with (...).

Go from before my Face.

Go hence.

Go and be hanged.

Go about your business.

Deuee take the troublesome Fellow.

Don't make me guiddy.

Oh! how tiresome you are?

You have told it me a hundred times over and over.

Come, let us see, let us come to the main business.

There are fine Stories ind^ed.

IX.
To ask a Question.
HOw do you say?

What Is that? What Is the matter?

What do they say?

What is the matter?

What means?

To what purpose?

What do you think?

To what purpose?

Tell me, may a body know?

Tell me, may a body ask you?

How Sir?

What do you mean?

What is there to be done?

X.
To Forbid.
LEt that alone.

Don't touch me.

Don't speak a word.

Don't stir from hence.

Be sure you don't. --

Have a care.

I will not have it.

I forbid it.

XI.
To show Joy and Sadness.
WHat pleasure! What Joy!

How content I am!

Oh! how happy I am!

Oh! happy day!

What happiness!

I am sorry for it.

I am very sorry for it.

It grieves my heart.

That grieves me to the very heart.

TWELVE Dialogues or Discourses BY WAY OF CONVERSATION, UPON I. Religion. II.
Languages. III. Philosophy. IV. Mathematics. V. History. VI. Politics. VII.
Exercises. VIII. Politeness and Civility. IX. Travels. X. Pleasures and
Diversions. XI. Love. XII. Friendship.


DOUZE ENTRETIENS SUR, I. La Religion. II. Les Langues. III. La Philosophy.
IV. Les Mathematiques. V. L' Histoire. VI. La Politic. VII. Les Exercices.
VIII. La Politesse and la Civilite. IX. Les Voyages. X. Les Plaisirs and
Divertissements XI. L' Amor. XII. L' Amity.


DIALOGUES, etc.
DIALOGUE I.
Upon RELIGION.
Between the Earl of C --, and My Lord Bishop of L --.
THE Earl. I find, my Lord, that the persuasion of a God, the immortality of my
Soul, and the uncertainty of my Condition after death, do often disturb my
Tranquillity; and I am by turns, either vexed or pleased, according to the
Sentiments I embrace. But because my knowledge is too weak, to calm my
Irresolutions, you will infinitely oblige me, to apply to my Distemper those
Remedies which your great Learning, will make you think the most conducing to
the cure of it.


Bishop. I am overjoyed to find, at the same time, both the opportunity of
serving your Lordship, and of acquitting my self of one of the most important
Duties of my Calling: And I make no doubt of your Cure, since I find in you all
that can most contribute to it. The Being of a God, and the Immortality of your
Soul, lead you to a necessity of a Religion; the Example of your Parents, and
your good Education, have prepared you for it; and you are free from the bad
Inclinations which are the greatest hindrance to it, in persons of your Age and
Quality. And indeed, My Lord, as it is proper for Errors to trouble ones
Heart, and to start up superstitious Fears; so does true Religion suppress our
Agitations; it softens our wild Humors; it supports us in the miseries of
Life, and at last, triumphs over Death it self; by the Belief it imprints in us
of an eternal Happiness.


Earl. You know, My Lord, that I was both born and brought up, in the bosom of
the Church of England; but I ingenuously confess, that I have hitherto stuck to
it, rather by an Habit than by Choice; rather by the Impressions of others,
than by any Reasons of my own. Now, that I begin to enter the World, I see
there is a great diversity of contrary Religions; and consequently, all False
but one: and because I have no Reasons to be persuaded, that which I profess to
be true, rather than any other, be pleased to tell me first, how many different
Religions there are in the World?


Bishop. All the different Religions may be reduced to Four, viz. The Jewish,
the Heathenish, the Christian, and the Mohammedan.


Earl. By what Tokens now can I know the true Religion, since every one will be
believed upon its own Authority, and threatens the unbelievers?


Bishop. The chiefest Characters of true Religion, and which distinguish it
from the false ones, are, the Five following.

I. True Religion ought to oblige one to love God entirely, and above all
Creatures.

II True Religion must know our Nature; for the true Nature of Man, his true
Happiness, true Virtue, and true Religion, are things inseparable.

III. True Religion must know, that Man is the most excellent of all Creatures,
and at the same time the most miserable.

IV. True Religion ought to teach, that Man's Excellency consists in being
capable of God, and Virtue; and that his misery lies in his Concupiscence, and
in the Corruption of his Nature; which makes him both unworthy of God, and
unable to acquire Virtue.

V. Finally, true Religion must show the necessity of a Mediator, between God
and Men.


Earl. But pray, to what Religion do these Characters belong?


Bishop. After a true examination of the forenamed Religions, it is plain, that
they exactly belong to Christian Religion, and to it only.


Earl. You will do me a great kindness to make that examination before me, that
I may have no scruple left. But I shall save you the trouble of telling me any
thing about the Heathenish Religion; for I am sufficiently convinced, that it
is but a superstitious Worship of Idolaters, or an human Invention politickly
Established to rule Men. But for the Jewish, since by the general consent of
all Christians it was the true Religion, till theirs came up, you will oblige me
to tell me how the Jews are fallen from that Prerogative of being God's People,
they had formerly.


(...). The difficulty you start, will only serve to put a brighter gloss upon
Christianity: For you must observe, that this Religion which consists in
believing, that Man is fallen from a State of Glory and Communication with God,
into a State of baseness and separation from God, but that he would be restored
by the Messiah, was always upon Earth. The promise of this Messiah was first
made to Adam; it was repeated to Noah, and then to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
God being afterward willing to make to himself a People Holy, which he would
separate from other Nations, and deliver from its Enemies, chose the Posterity
of Abraham, then in Bondage in Egypt; from which he freed them by the Ministry
of Moses. After that he kept them under a severe and ceremonial Law, not so
much to distinguish 'em from other Nations, as to make them sensible of their
Miseries, and of the necessity they had of a Messiah, to free them from the
Yoke of Sin, and of the Law. The Time and Manner of this Messiah's coming, was
several times foretold, by those Prophets* God raised from time to time among
the Jews. The Prophecies have at last been fulfilled in the consummation of
Times: The Messi^s, the Christ, or the Redeemer is come, and has proved his
Mission by an infinite Number of Miracles; by the Purity of his Doctrine* and
by the Holiness of his Conversation He has undergone Death to give us Life, and
to reconcile us to God ^is Father The third-day he did rise from the Dead, both
to show his Omnipotency, and the Victory he has gotten over Death; and at last
he has been taken up to Heaven, from whence he will not come till the end of
the Ages to Judge the World. After the Ascension of the Savior, his Doctrine,
in a word, Christianity has spread it self over all the World, where it has
taken Root, and did always stand, tho always opposed.


Earl. The brightness of so many Arguments you have linked together is such,
that in my Opinion, it is impossible not to acknowledge the Truth and Divinity
of Christian Religion; and one thing, which is past my finding out, is the
blindness of the Jews, in mistaking the Messiah promised.


Bishop. I Will tell you the reason of it: God having brought them out of Egypt,
with all those great Miracles he made for them; carried them into the happy and
frui^ful Land of Canaan; gave them Kings, and a magnificent Temple: All this
drowned the Jews into Earthly and Carnal Thoughts. They expected their Messiah
would be a great Temporal Prince, that should make them Masters of all the
World; so that seeing in him nothing but Mean, most of them scornfully rejected
him. There were indeed some few Spiritual Jews, who searching into the
Scriptures, saw that there were two comings of the Messiah foretold by the
Prophets, one of Meanness and Humiliation, of which the Time is marked out for
fear it should be mistaken, the other of Exaltation and Glory, the Time of
which is not marked, because it will be so signal, so notable, and so plain,
that his very Enemies will acknowledge him.


Earl. I have no difficulty left upon that matter, and you will oblige me to
tell me, what one ought to think of Mahumetism?


Bishop. It Is enough to read the History of Mahomet, to be convinced that he is
a mere Cheat. For what Character has he, but any one may have, that will take
upon himself to be a Prophet? He was not foretold; he has no Authority but his
own; which he never proved by any Miracle. His Alchoran swarms with
Absurdities; nor was his Doctrine ever established, but by force of Arms, and by
killing others; when that of Jesus Christ was established by Humility, and
suffering its Professors to be put to Death; which argues, that if Mahomet has
taken the course to succeed Humanely, Jesus Christ has followed that of
Perishing, had he not been supported by a most Divine Power.


Earl. I am fully convinced of the Truth of Christianity, but what still
troubles me is, to see it divided into several contrary Branches: You will
therefore oblige me to tell me which is the most agreeable to Jesus Christ's
Doctrine?


Bishop. The different Opinions that make the sad division of Christians, may
be reduced to these Two Religions, viz. the Protestant, and the Roman
Catholic. It would be too tedious to tell you the advantages the former has
upon this; and you may see the Errors of Catholics about Transubstantiation,
Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, Meritorious Works, Purgatory, and
Indulgences, confuted in many Books. As for the diverse Branches of the
Protestant Religion, it is plain, that the Church of England is the most pure,
and the most agreeable to Primitive Christianity.


Earl. My Lord, I give you a thousand Thanks for your Instructions. I have now
no scruple in the least upon this matter; and I give God thanks, that I am born
in so pure and holy a Church, as ours is.


Bishop. I am mighty glad to see your Lordship in these happy Dispositions: and
I shall take my leave of you, by an Advice which I Am sure will be of great Use
to you, ^n all the course of your Life; which is, that it is not enough to have
known the Truth of our Religion, since it consists more in the Practice of
Precepts, than in the speculation of Tenets; and so I exhort your Lordship, to
lead a Life answerable to the worthy Name of Christian you bear: Above all
things, to fly from Drolls, and Libertines, with as much caution as from an
infectious Disease; for tho some of these Libertines speak with little respect
of Religion, and Droll on those things they should Reverence, only by an
extravagant and ridiculous Vanity, and to show their wit, by maintaining
particular Sentiments, yet most of them are plunged in Lewdness and Vice, and
their Manners are no less disordered than their wit.


DIALOGUE II.
BETWEEN Lisidor and Dorantes; About a Gentleman's STUDIES. And First
Of LANGVAGES.
LIsidor. Sir, It Is a little while since I designed to beg a Favor of you.


Dorantes. What is there, dear Lisidor, wherein I may be useful to you?


Lisidor. The Favor I must beg of you is, to tell me what Sciences a Gentleman
ought to apply himself to, to appear with Honor in the World?


Dorantes. You have too good an Opinion of me to think I am so learned, as to
be able to give my Advice upon so nice and so important a Matter: However,
without more entreaty, nor pretending that you should submit your judgment to
my Opinion; I shall tell you, that the Scienences which I think the most
suitable and necessary to a Man of Quality, are Languages, Philosophy,
Mathematics, History, and Politics.


Lisidor. You will oblige me, to tell me how much one ought to know of each of
these Sciences? For, in my Opinion, a Man's Life would not be enough to learn
them all perfectly.


Dorante. You say very right. Neither do I mean that a Gentleman should
thoroughly learn Languages, Philosophy, etc. but only that, which is most
necessary either for his own satisfaction or the Commerce and Society of Life.


Lisidor. If you was so kind Sir, as to tell me wherein you make that Necessary
consist, and to begin with Languages.


Dorantes. I am going to satisfy you. You know, that Languages are commonly
divided into two sorts, viz. the Dead and the Living. Of the first, Latin is
the most necessary; it is the Language of the Learned; it gives us the entrance
into all the fine things of Antiquity; several modern Authors write in Latin,
and in some Courts all the Negotiations are performed in that Language. To the
study of Latin I would advise one to join that of the Greek, since it cannot be
a small advantage to one, to understand the Language of the most refined Nation
that ever was, and from which all others have drawn their Arts and Sciences.


Lisidor. And which of the Living Languages are necessary for one to know?


Dorantes. As for Living Languages, I would have one first to be Master of his
Mother Tongue, to know its different Ways and Delicacies. It is not enough for
one to be born in France to speak good French: Nor had Sir Roger L'Estrange,
Mr. Dryden, and some others, ever got so much Reputation by their Pen, had they
never learnt English but at their Nurses. Next to ones Mother Tongue, one ought
to know that which is most in Vogue in that Age he lives in; for you must
observe, that Fortune exercises her Caprichio's in Languages, as in other human
Things. It Is about Thirty Years ago, that the French Tongue, by a surprising
Revolution, is become the general Language of all Courts, and Gentlemen in
Europe, and so you see how necessary it is for one to understand it well.


Lisidor. As far as I see, the French have a great advantage over other
Nations, since they need not be troubled to learn any other Language, but their
own.


Dorantes. It Is very true. However most Courtiers and Scholars in France, make
it their business to speak Italian and Spanish, and most Officers in the Army
learn the German Tongue, which is mighty useful to them in their frequent Wars
upon the Rhine, and in Flanders.


Lisidor. Do you not think it fit for an English man, to learn all these
Languages?


Dorantes. I think that an Englishman who is Master of his Latin and French
except he have private Business either in Spain, or Germany, may very well make
shift without them: But I would have him to learn a little of the Italian
Tongue. A well Educated Gentleman, commonly finishes his Studies by the Travels
into France and Italy, and no body questions, but that it is extremely
necessary to understand a little of ^he Language of that Country one finds
himself in.


DIALOGUE III.
Between the same.
Of PHILOSOPHY.
LIsidor. Sir, shall we now come to speak of Philosophy?


Dorantes. With all my Heart. The Word Philosophy is Greek, and signifies, the
Love of Wisdom. This was formerly the first of all Sciences, or rather, it
comprehended them all. Philosophers among the Ancients, determined the Worship
of the Gods; they prescribed the Laws of Society; they studied Nature, and were
in so great esteem, that in many places Statues were erected to them. Since the
World has been enlightened by the Gospel, Philosophy was confined within
narrower Limits; and it is now little used, but to direct the Mind in the
Inquiry of Truth, and the Knowledge of Natural Things. 'sis commonly divided in
Schools, in four Parts, viz. Logic, Metaphysick, Physic, or Natural
Philosophy, and Morals.

I. Logic is that part of Philosophy that teaches us to Reason, and to direct
the Understanding in the enquiry of Truth.

II. Metaphysick treats of Things supernatural, or merely spiritual.

III. Physic, or Natural Philosophy, explains the Principles of Natural
Things, and the Proprieties of Bodies.

IV. Morals treat of Felicity, and teach Men how to rule their Passions.


Lisidor. Do you think it necessary for a Gentleman to study these four parts
of Philosophy?


Dorantes. There is but L^gick which I think necessary, because of the great
use it may be in all the rencounters of Life; but I could wish it were taught
in an easier, shorter, and plainer Method than it is commonly. As for
Metaphysick, it is too painful, if not above the reach of our capacity. Natural
Philosophy is too uncertain to be worth our application; and my Advice upon
this matter is, that one should read, as an History, the Abridgment of the
Opinions of the most eminent Men that have treated of it, scuh as Plato,
Aristotle, Zeno, Epicurus, Descartes, Gassendi: For then he will see that they
agree upon nothing, and he will admire how any thinking Man can spend his Life
to seek after unprofitable Things. As for Morals, no question but they are very
necessary, since they aim to direct us toward Happiness; but those of
Philosophers are no true Morals, because they only draw their Principles from
Reason, when the Morals of Christians ought to be grounded not only upon
Reason, but also upon the Will of God, revealed in his Scriptures.


DIALOGUE. IV.
Between the same;
Of MATHEMATICS.
LIsidor. Will you be pleased, dear Dorantes, to tell me your Opinion about
Mathematics?


Dorantes. I will do it the more cheerfully, that this is the Science which I
take the greatest delight in, and which I think deserves, before any other, the
application of a thinking Man, because of the certainty that goes along with
it. They are called Mathematics, which Name signifies Discipline, because they
are so comprehensive, that there is scarce any Profession to which they may not
be useful; or any Conveniences in this Life, and Imbellishments in the Arts for
which we are not indebted to them.


Lisidor. Pray which are the parts of Mathematics?


Dorantes. Mathematics comprehend Arithmetic Geometry, Astronomy, Chronology,
Geography, Dialling, Surveying, Architecture, Fortification, Navigation,
Music, Perspective, Dioptrick, Catoptrick, and Mcchanicks: They contain
besides, the Elements of most Sciences, for without their help one cannot be a
good Philosopher; and as for Arts none can make shift without them.


Lisidor. I confess that there are no Commendations but what I give to great
Mathematicians; I admire their Works and their Inventions, but when I consider
the thorns that surround that Science, the deep Meditations it requires, and
how it draws one from Actions and Enjoyments, its Demonstrations seem very dear
to me. One must be a great lover of Truth to purchase it at that rate; and
after all, I think it is enough for a Man of Sense, to know how to apply the
Inventions of others; for to speak the truth, it is much better for us to enjoy
the World, than to know it.


Dorantes. The Objections you raise against Mathematics will come to nothing,
if you do but consider, first, that if there be any thorns or difficulties to
learn their Demonstrations, it is in a great measure the fault of those who
commonly treat of them, and that they may be rendered so easy, as not to breed
any disgust. But suppose there were some difficulty, it is always
counterballanc'd by the Pleasure, and bountifully rewarded by the Usefulness
one draws from them. They are more fit than Philosophy to form and open ones
Mind, and to render it piercing, capacious, and enlightened. As for what you
urge against Mathematics, that they draw one from pleasures, it is the
strongest of my Arguments to advise the study of them to young Gentlemen, were
it but to fill up the gap of their first years, and prevent Vice to take
possession of it. What you say on the latter end has no better grounds than the
rest, since it is impossible to know how to make a right Use of the Inventions
of others, except one has a little knowledge of the means whereby they have
^ound them out.


Lisidor. I am convinced of the necessity of Mathematics; I only now want to
know, what parts of them a Gentleman ought to Study?


Dorantes. Arithmetic and Geometry, are the most necessary, because they are
the Basis and contain the Principles of all the others: As for these, one may
learn them according to the Study, Employments, or Professions they are
necessary to; or still, for his own satisfaction. So in History, Chronology,
and Geography, are extremly necessary. A Man of War must understand
Fortification: A Seaman Navigation: A Painter Perspective; and so forth.


DIALOGUE V.
Between the same.
Of History, Chronology, and Geography.
LIsidor. History is, I think, the fourth Science you think necessary for a
Gentleman: For my part, I take it besides, to be the most suitable to all sorts
of Persons; and the variety of Laws, Religions, Customs, Politics, and War,
that go along with it, renders it, in my opinion, the most delightful of all
Studies.


Dorantes. You might have added, that besides the delight one reaps from that
variety; when History sets before our Eyes a faithful Picture of what is past,
represents to us the different Characters of Men, and which have been the
springs of their Actions; one may draw from them Examples for the present, and
Cautions for the future.


Lisidor. Pray what distinction is there to be observed in History?


Dorantes. The most general Division of History is in two, viz. Ancient and
Modern; the first comprehends what is past from the beginning of the World to
our Savior's time; and Modern, that which has happened from our Savior's time
to our Age.


Lisidor. In how many parts is Ancient History divided?


Dorantes. In Three, viz. The Holy History, the Profane, and the Fabulous or
Poetical.

I. The first is the History of the People of the Jews, as we find it in the
Holy Scriptures.

II. Profane History is that of Heathenish Nations,. which may be reduced to
the History of the Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans.

III. And Fabulous History is that of Heathenish Gods, and Demi Gods; of their
Metamorphosis; in a word, of all those Fables which have no other reality, than
in the Fancy of Poets.


Lisidor. How is Modern History, or the History from Christ to us, divided?


Dorantes. Into Church, and Empire History; the first comprehends the History
of Church Government, of Schisms* Heresies, Cou^ci^^ and* The History of the
Empire contains what is come to pass in the Temporal Government, the
Revolutions of Empires, Kingdoms, States, and Commonwealths.


Lisidor. Do you think it necessary to know all the different parts of History
you have just now mentioned?


Dorantes. Yes, no doubt. But still there is some distinction to be observed,
both in the time and manner of studying them.


Lisidor. Which is the method you think the best for that purpose?


Dorantes. I suppose first, that a Gentleman has a Tutor, who from his
tenderest years makes him often read in the Bible, and that he reflects so ^uch
on it, as to take notice of the most considerable Changes of the People of God.

2. I would have him at the same time, and as it were by way of Recreation,
read the Fabulous History; from which he would draw a great Advantage toward
the understanding of Poets.

3. Next to Poetic History, I would give him a smattering of the History of
Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans.

4. When his mind would be so strong as to be able to look on several things at
a view, then one might let him read an Abridgment of the Universal History from
the beginning of the World, until our times.

5. After such a preparation performed, under the Eyes of an able and
understanding Master, the Gentleman might of himself study particular
Histories, especially that of the Roman Empire, and of his Native Country.

6. Finally, it would be much necessary for him to study, with a special
application, the History of the Changes happened in the States, and the
greatest Familes of Europe, from the Emperor Charles the Fifth's time unto
ours; for by those alterations it is, that he may come to understand the
Politics and Interests of the Princes of this present time.


Lisidor. I take notice that you have said nothing all this while touching the
History of the Church.


Dorantes. My opinion upon that matter is, that a Gentleman ought not to
entangle himself with the particulars of it, he may (...) that study to
Churchmen, and be contented to know the most famous Heretiarchs, and the
History of the Reformation.


Lisidor. Did you not tell me, when you spoke of Mathematics, that Chronology
and Geography were necessary to the study of History.


Dorantes. They are so necessary, that I call them the Eyes of History, since
without them one gropes in the dark, and knows nothing but confusedly.


Lisidor. Wherein does that great Usefulness of these two Sciences consist?


Dorantes. Chronology marks the Di^^erence of Times, and Geography of Places
wherein any thing is come to pass.


DIALOGUE VI.
Between the same,
Of POLITICS.
LIsidor. We are now come to Politics, the last Science, which you think
necessary to a Man of Quality; pray, what does it consist in?


Dorantes. Politics consist in the right Conduct and Government of one self in
Fortune. It may be said in general, that this Science is necessary to all Men,
but it is so more particularly to Princes, Courtiers, and to all those who seek
for preferment in the World, by noble Means, or are willing to keep with
Honor, what either their Birth or Fortune have given (...) them.


Lisidor. Which are the Maxims one must follow, to conduct and direct one self
well in Fortune?


Dorantts. The variety both of Persons, and of the Circumstances they may find
themselves in, is so great, that it is very hard to come to particulars; and in
this matter Precepts are of lesser use than Practice and Experience: Therefore
all that I can say now about it, is, that a Man that follows-Fortune ought to
be thoroughly instructed of State Affairs; to understand the Constitution, and
fundamental Laws of the Government, and know exactly the Interest of Princes
and great Families, their Alliances and Pretensions, etc.


DIALOGUE VII.
Of a Gentleman's EXERCISES.
Between the same.
Lisidor. I give you a thousand Thanks, my dear Dorantes, for your Instructions
about a Gentleman's Studies; will you be so kind as to do the like about his
Exercises.


Dorantes. I Will do any thing to oblige you, and without keeping you in
expectation, I shall tell you, that besides Dancing and Music, a Gentleman
ought to learn to Fence, to Ride the Great Horse, and to Design ( or Draw.)


Lisidor. Then you are not of the Cowley's Essays, page 101.
EnglishHorace's opinion, who says, that a Man in his serious humor would
think Dancing to be but a vain and ridiculous Thing.


Dorantes. Being this famous Man never was of this Sentiment, but when his
diseased and morose Mind made him retire from Court to embrace solitude. I had
rather be of Xenoph. Feast.
Socrate's Mind, who thinks, that whosoever has a mind to have a healthful,
pliant, free and easy Body, ought to use himself to Dance.


Lisidor. What sort of Music do you think the fittest for a Gentleman?


Dorantes. Music, either Vocal or Instrumental, is very agreeable, and
contributes much to render a Gentleman accomplished. The first is indeed so much
the more charming that it is natural; so that a Gentleman that has a good Voice
will do very well to learn to Sing; or else he may be contented to play on the
Lute, the Guitar, the Flute, or the Flageolet: As for the Harpsecol, -- Ladies
are in possession of it; and indeed that Instrument becomes them better than
Men, and they play upon it much more neatly and nicely than we. I say nothing
of other Instruments, because they are only fit for those who make a Trade of
Music.


Lisidor. I see well enough how necessary it is for a Gentleman to learn to
Fence and Ride the Great Horse, but I wonder why you would have him learn to
Design?


Dorantes. Because it is not only a fine and pleasant Diversion; but also very
necessary in Mathematics, and for a Traveller.


DIALOGUE VIII.
Of Politeness, of Manners or Civility, and Decency.
Between a Courtier and his Nephew.
COurtier. I am extremly glad, dear Nephew, to see you have succeeded so well
both in your Studies and Exercises, since thereby you have rendered your self
capable of the most important Employments. However, because one that enters the
World, must be very careful that the first Impressions be to his Advantage; and
that one seldom comes from Colleges and Academies without a certain air of
Pedantry and Coursness, very unpleasant; I advise you to make it your
particular Business to study Politeness, (or Genteelness), for that only will
qualify you, to appear with Honor in Companies, and to ingratiate your self
with the Prince.


Nephew. If you please, Sir, to tell me wherein Politeness does consist.


Courtier. Politeness is a mixture of Civility, Decency, Discretion, and
Complaisance, accompanied with a gentle and pleasant Air overspread upon all
our Words and Actions.


Nephew. But, pray, by what means may one attain so fine and so necessary a
Qualification?


Courtier. Of the several parts which make up Politeness, there are but the two
first, upon which Maxims may be given: The others are seldom learnt but in the
Commerce of the World, especially in the company of Ladies; for whether Women
be naturally more Polite, or that to please them, ones mind be raised and
beautified, it is with them chiefly one learns to be discreet, complaisant,
gentle and agreeable.


Nephew. I am very well contented you send me to a School so pleasant, as the
Company of Ladies, to learn the last parts of Politeness: In the mean while you
will infinitely oblige me, to tell me what Rules one must observe in the Two
former; and first in Civility?


Courtier. You know there are a great many Rules to follow to be Civil: We
must, for Example, not only show our Respect and Submission to our Betters; but
we must too, if possible, prevent the Civilities of our Equals, and be
Courteous to our Inferiors. We must give the Right Hand and the Wall to
Ladies, and Persons of Distinction; and yield them, in general, whatever is
most convenient. Your Judgment prescribes you to do it; and 'twould be needless
to add any other Maxim but this, That every thing must look Natural in a
Gentleman: For it is not enough to practice exactly the Rules of Civility,
except it be done in a delicate, free, easy way, that savours nothing either
of Art or Affectation; which render most People, especially Country 'Squires,
ridiculous and unpleasant.


Nephew. Will you be pleased now to tell me what Decency consists in?


Courtier. Decency consists in fitting ones Words and Actions according to
one's Sex, Age, Quality and Profession, in observing the Difference of Times
and Places; and above all, in a Character of Modesty in one's Face and Manners.
And indeed, if my Lady -- is so cried down at Court, it is because she flies
sometimes into a Passion like a Bully. My Lord -- is the Laughing Stock of
others, by his Affectation of Talking Bawdy, like a Town-Crack. And Sir --
makes himself ridiculous, when among the Ladies, he forgets his Age, and sets
up for a Beau, as a Young Man at Twenty.


Nephew. One thing that seems very troublesome to me, is, To know how one must
use what they call Complements, or Ceremonies.


Courtier. My Opinion in that Matter, is, That one must not be either too
nignardly or too prodigal of them: If one makes too little, he is looked upon
as Unmannerly; if too much, he is Troublsom. So that the general Rule which
Judgment gives us in the different Occasions of Complements, is, to use those
Distinctions which Decency prescribes; to observe the Age and the Quality of
Persons, and the Condition they are in. Men of War, or Magistrates, do not love
to waste Time in useless Ceremonies: A Great Lord would think a petty Tradesman
who would use Ceremonies, no less insipid, than his Man should be ridiculous to
proffer him his Service. And if one finds the Persons he makes a Visit to,
either Sick or Busy, the more Ceremonial he is, the more Troublesome: He ought,
upon such Occasions, to be short, and signify his Sentiments rather by some
respectful Action, than by fulsom Complements.


DIALOGUE IX.
Of TRAVELS.
Between Philoxenes and Dorimant.
Philoxenes. WEll, Dorimant, what do you design to do, now you have made an end
of your Studies and Exercises? Have you not a mind to Travel?


Dorimant. I long for it mightily: I fancy already a thousand Pleasures to my
self; and my Curiosity enjoys before -hand the Delight of the Variety one meets
with in Traveling.


Philoxenes. If nothing but Pleasure and Curiosity promt you to it, I dare say,
That Traveling is not only Useless, but very Dangerous besides.


Dorimant. Tell me then, I beseech you, which ought to be the chiefest Aim of
one that travels.


Philoxenes. He must make it his Business to know the Government of the Country
he travels in, its Policy, Laws, Customs, Religion and Manners: its
Pretensions; its Forces both by Sea and Land: to know the Names and Genius of
the Ministers of every Court; to enquire into the Antiquities; and to know
exactly the Situation of Places, and the Course of Rivers. A Man that Travels
in this manner, will reap a great Advantrge from it: He will form his
Understanding and Judgment; and when he comes Home, be able to serve his own
Country.


Dorimant. I take it to be very hard, to put in execution all that you speak
of; and you will infinitely oblige me, to tell me what Course a Man must take to
do it.


Philoxenes. He must get good Acquaintances, and manage them cunningly.


Dorimant. But to do this, must he not understand the Languages of the Country?


Philoxenes. Yes, without doubt: for that is the only means to get into
Companies, and acquainted with those that may satisfy him about what he
designs to learn.


Dorimant. How must one carry himself, to manage the acquaintance he has gotten
among Strangers?


Philoxenes. He must endeavor to make them his Friends; embrace their
Sentiments, caress them; praise the Manners and Customs of their Country, never
preferring those of his own; speak little, and hearken much.


Dirimant. Are those all the Maxims to be observed in Traveling?


Philoxenes. There are an infinite number besides, according to the diversities
of Times and Places; but I leave it to your Judgment, and the Prudence of your
Governor, to prescribe you the Use of them. I shall only add, That you must
shun, with a special Care, the common Rocks of Travelers, viz. Love of Women,
Gaming, and extravagant Expenses; for if you give your self over to any of
these Vices, it had been much better for you to have staid at Home.


DIALOGUE X.
Of PLEASURES and DIVERSIONS.
Between Philemon and Clitander.
Philemon. NO Body is a greater Lover of Mirth than I: I will have it in my
Family: I endeavor to inspire it wherever I go; and maintain every where,
That Pleasures and Diversions are the best and the most universal Remedies we
may apply to our Ills.


Clitander. I am no Enemy to Pleasures; but methinks one must enjoy them with
much Soberness and Moderation.


Phil. I dare say too, That no body has a greater Aversion for Excess and
Debauchery than I: I look upon them as Rocks to be avoided; and I fly from
Libertines and Debauchees, as from People infected with a contagious Disease.


Cli. You are very much in the right; for when all is done, Excess in
Pleasures, even in lawful ones, does not only bring one under Infamy, but under
Pain too. A Man that loses his Credit by Debauchery, loses, most commonly, his
Health also, and hurts no less his Constitution than his Honor.


Piil. Besides Reputation and Health, we may add, That Excess in Pleasures and
Diversions ruins infallibly any one's Fortune and Business. So that, in my
mind, one ought to enjoy Pl^asures only as a Refreshment after serious
Employments; and we should imitate the Great Man among the Ancients, whose
Leisure was voluptuous, but by a just husbandry of his Time, with a facility of
the Work, of which he had got the Mastery, never was any Business put off by
his Pleasures.


Cli. Pray, which are the Pleasures that take up your spare Time?.


Phil. Besides good Cheer, Walking and Conversation: I love to see a Play; I
like Music, and I Play sometimes.


Cli. I think your Choice is very reasonable; but wherein do you make good
Cheer consist?


Phil. In a delicious way of eating and Drinking managed by Niceness, and
temperated by Sobriety: And I love good Cheer so much the better, that I find
it does not only keep ones Body in health, but contributes more than any thing
else to the liveliness of the Mind.


Clit. Walking contributes no less to ones health than good Cheer; it
dissipates those humors which commonly trouble sedentary People, and renders
our Bodies hardy and vigorous.


Phil. As for Conversation it is, in my mind, the most agreeable enjoyment of
Life; it is the knot of Society; it is by it that Minds communicate their
Thoughts to one another; that the Hearts express their Affections, and that
Friendships are both begun and entertained; Finally, if Study increases the
Endowments of Nature, it is Conversation that uses and polishes them.


Clit. I know very well the advantages of Conversation; but which are those you
find in Plays?


Phil. Comedies are, you know, the representation of the ordinary life,
according to the variety of Humors: and if the different Characters of
Cheating, Simplicity, Avarice, Gallantry, Affectation, Fantastical Humor, etc.
be wittily framed, they are no less instructive than delightful.


Clit. I will not trouble you about Music, I am very sensible of its Charms,
and my Ears are always tickled with delight by good Voices acd Instruments; but
as for Gaming, which you reckon among your Recreations, methinks it is a very
dangerous one; Anger, Passion, and Quarrels do commonly attend it; it disturbs
many a Night's rest, and at the long run, puts always one to hard shifts; And
besides, a Man must always be upon his his Guard to prevent being Cheated, and
it is a very troublesome thing to tread always, as if it were, upon an Enemy's
Ground.


Phil. What you say is very true, when a Man plays deep, and sets up for a
Gamester; For my part, I seldom Play but for a small matter, most commonly out
of Complaisance, and always in a Company of Men of Honor, who never Play but
for diversion sake: And so you would never see upon our Faces either the greediness
of winning, the fear of losing, or the grief of having lost. and as no body
Plays foul, so no body is afraid of being Cheated.


DIALOGUE XI.
Of LOVE.
Between Philogenes and Clinias.
Clinias. WHence comes, Dear Philogenes, you are not so jovial and smerking as
you used to be; You look pensive and melancholy; What! has the fair Caelia made
you feel the power of her Charms, and taken away your good humor?


Philog. I cannot but own that, which you may read in my face; and if that be
Love to feel a Pleasure at the sight of a fine Person, and a Discontent when
she is absent, I confess that I am in Love.


Clin. Never doubt it, Philogenes, these are the two infallible Signs of a
newborn Love.


Philog. As far as I see, my Disease is not yet desperate, since it does but
begin?


Clin. Do you call that a Disease which is the most noble of all Passions? the
Passion of great Souls, and which all well accomplished Gentlemen value
themselves upon?


Philog. I confess, that having never loved before, I don't know yet whether I
must call Ill or Good: But I find you so Learned upon this Matter, that you
will extremely oblige me to impart me your Instructions, and to tell me first
what Love is.


Clin. This general Passion may be referred to three Motions, viz. To Love, To
Burn, To Languish. To Love simply, is the first state of the Soul moved by the
impression of some agreeable object; there arises a secret Sentiment of
Complacency in him that loves, which becomes afterward a Passion toward the
object loved. To Burn, is a violent Condition, liable to Disquiets, Troubles,
Torments and Despair. To Languish, is the finest of Love's motions, it is the
effect of a pure and clear flame, which consumes us insensibly, it is a dear and
tender Disease, which makes us hate the very thought of being cured: one keeps
it secretly in the bottom of the Heart, and if it comes to be discovered, the
Eyes, the Silence, a neglected Sigh, an unwilling Tear, express it better than
all the Eloquence of Discourse could do.


Philog. By the description you make of Love, who can doubt but that it is a
great Evil?


Clin. And yet it is quite contrary. The torments of a true Passion, are
Pleasures. He that loves well is never miserable; And only thinks he has been
so, when he loves no more.


Philog* Pray, what Method must a Man follow with the Fair, to be loved again?


Clin. The Precepts one might give, upon this Matter are infinite, but when all
is done, they signify but little; and he that loves truly, uses them
naturally without knowing them: However, one may say, That this is already a
great Merit, with Ladies to love theem, next to that, a Lover must endeavor to
get in the confidence of their Inclinations; he must flatter all their freaks
and humors; Make them jealous to see what progress his love has made; feign,
or really be jealous himself, to show his love. If nothing of that leads him to
their Heart, he must win their Mind by Praises and Courtship, and cunningly
make the best Advantage of all that is lovely in them; for he seldom fails to
please Ladies, who gives 'em the means to be better pleased with themselves.


DIALOGUE XII.
Of FRIENDSHIP.
Between Dorilas and Philander.
Dorilas. IS it true, Philander, what they say of you, that you never loved in
your life?


Philand. If by loving you mean to be in love, I answer, that I never loved but
very little, but still enough, to learn that love is a dangerous Passion, and
which one ought to shun: But if by loving, you understand having of Friends, I
confess that I have loved, that I love still, and that I find nothing that
conduces so much to the sweet^ess of Life, as Friendship.


Doril. Pray, which are the Advantages you find in Friendship?


Philand. Friendship has all the sweetnesses of love without any of its
defects; it is instead of all things to those that know how to love well, of
Riches without Cares, and of Honors without Vanity. It increases our
Pleasures, and lessens our Troubles; for nothing allays one's Pain. so much as
the liberty of Complaining; nothing renders the Sentiment of Joy so quick, as
the Pleasure of Telling it.


Doril. I don't question but Friendship has often great Sweetnesses; but I
believe too, that it has sometimes its Bitterness; and I know some, to whom
Friends have given many a bad Night.


Philand. That may be very true; and I confess, That as Friendship allays the
Miseries of Life, so nothing disturbs its Tranquillity so much, if we want
Discretion to choose Friends.


Doril. Pray, how ought true Friendship to be formed?


Philand. Honesty and Virtue must be the Principles of true Friendship, When
our Discretion and Judgment have made us discover those Qualifications in any
Person, there arises in us a Sentiment of Benevolence; this is not yet
Friendship, but the Cause that produces it. This first Sentiment we feel for
the Virtuous Person, makes us wish him well; and after that, the mutual Esteem
and resemblance of Humor tie the Knot of true Friendship; which shows it self
by the share we take in our Friend's Pleasures and Troubles; by that, we wish
him to take in ours, and by the forwardness we ought to show of serving him.


Doril. I take notice, that you allow no other Principle of Friendship, but
Virtue; and yet methinks that most Friendships arise from the Communication of
Diversions and Pleasures.


Philand. These things may serve indeed to get Acquaintances, and even to
entertain Friendship, but Merit and Virtue only, ought to be the Foundation of
it; for when all is done, if the sole Interest of Diversion ties the Knot of
Friendship; Absence, Employments, or the Griefs of Life, may easily break it.
And it falls out often, that the new Delight we relish with new Friends, blot
out the remembrance of Contentments past.


Doril. Do you approve of the Maxim, That one ought to have many Friends; and
that one can never have too many?


Philand. I am so far from approving of it, that I think that nothing is so
troublesome as having too many, let them be never so honest and discreet;
besides, one cannot rely but weekly upon those who are for a great many
Friends. A Heart that is divided, cannot but love by halves: And, I believe, I
may apply here the Saying of the Wisest Man of Greece, Friends (said he) are no
Friends. Signifying, that this Word ought to be restrained to one.


ENTRETIEN I.
Sur La RELIGION.
Enter Le Comte de C --, and Monseig^eur L'Eveque de L --
LE Comte. Ie reconnois, Milord, que la persuasion de la Divinite, l'
immortalite de mon Ame, and l' incertitude de ma Condition, apres la mort,
troublent souvent ma Tranquillite; and j'ay tour a tour, des chagrins and de la
satisfaction, selon les Sentimens que je veux prendre. Mais comme je n'ay pas
assez de lumieres pour fair cesser mes Irresolutions, vous m'obligerez
infiniment, d' appliquer a mes maux les Remedes que votre grand savoir vous
feront juger les plus propres pour les guerir.


L' Eveque. Ie suis ravi, Milord, de trouver en meme tems l'occasion de vous
servir, and de m'acquitter d'un des plus importans Devoirs de ma Vocation: Et
je ne doubt pas de votre Guerison, puis que je remarque en vous tout ce qui
peut y contribuer davantage. L'Exis^ence d'un Dieu, and L'immortalite de votre
Ame, vous conduisent a la necessite d'une Religion; L'exemple de vos Parens,
and votre bonne Education, vous y ont prepare; and vous etes exemt des
mauvaises Inclinations qui y portent le plus d'obstacle dans les persons de
votre age and de votre Qualite. En effet, Milord, comme cest le propre des
Erreurs de troubler le Coeur, and de soulever des craintes supersticieuses; la
Vraye Religion appaise ce qu'il y a d'agite chez nous; elle adoucit ce qu'il y
a de Farouche; elle nous so utient dans les miseres de la Vie; and enfin, elle
triomphe de la mort meme par la persuasion qu'elle nous done des biens
Eternels.


Comte. Vous savez, Milord, que je suis ne and que j'ay ete eleve dans le sein
de l' Eglise Anglicane; mais je vous avoue ingenument, qu'elle ma tenu a elle,
jusques ici, plutot par Habitude, que par Choix; plutot par les Impressions
qu'on m'en a donnees que par aucun Raisonnement. Maintenant que je commence
d'entrer dans le Monde, j'y remarque une grande diversite de Religions
contraires, and par consequent toutes fausses except une: Et comme je n'ay
point de Raisons qui me persuadent que celle que je profess soit la veritable
plutot qu' aucune autre, je vous pry de me dire premierement combien il y en a
de differentes dans le Monde.


Eveque. Les diverses Religions se peuvent reduire a Quatre, savoir, La Iuive,
la Payenne, la Chretienne, and la Mahomet ane.


Comte. A quelles Marquis puis je maintenant connoitre la veritable Religion,
puis que chacune veut etre crew par sa propre Autrite, and menace les
Incredules?


Eveque. Les principales Marquis qui characterisent la veritable Religion, and
qui la distinguent des fausses, sont les cinq suivantes.

I. La Vraye Religion doit obliger a aimer Dieu uniquement, and par dessus
toutes les Creatures.

II. La Vraye Religion doit connoitre notre Nature; car la vraye Nature de l'
Homme, son vray bien, la vraye Virtue, and la vraye Religion sont chooses
inseparables.

III. La vraye Religion doit connoitre, que l' Homme est la plus excellent des
Creatures, and en meme tems la plus miserable.

IV. La vraye Religion doit enseigner, que l' Excellence de l' Homme, consiste
a etre capable de Dieu, and de la Virtue; and que sa misere consiste (...) la
concupiscence and dans la Corruption de sa Nature, qui le rend indigne de Dieu,
and impuissant a acquerir la Virtue.

V. Enfin, la vraye Religion doit fair voir la necessite d'un Mediateur, enter
Dieu and les Hommes.


Comte. Mais je vous pry a quelle Religion est ce que ces Marquis conviennent?


Eveque. Apres un just examen des quatre Religions, que je viens de nommer il
est aise, de voir qu'elles conviennent parfaitement a la Religion Chretienne,
and qu'elles ne conviennent qu'a elle seule.


Comte. Vous me ferez un grand plaisir de fair cet examen devant moy, afin
qu'il ne me rest aucun scrupule? Mais je vous epargnerai la peine, de me rten
dire sur la Religion Payenne, car je reconnois assez qu elle nest qu'un Culte
Superstitieux d' Idolatres, ou une Invention human politiquement etablie pour
gouverner les Hommes. Pour ce qui est de la Religion Iuive, comme du
consentement de tous les Chretiens elle a ete la veritable jusques a ce que la
leur s'est etablie, vous me ferez plaisir de me dire comment les Juifs sont
decheus de cette Prerogative d'etre le Peuple de Dieu, qu'ils avoient autrefois.


Eveque. La difficulte que vous me faites ne servira qu'a mettre la verite de
la Religion Chretienne, dans un plus grand jour: Car vous remarquerez que cette
Religion qui consiste a croire que l' Homme est tomb d'un etat de Gloire and
de Communication avec Dieu, dans un etat de bassesse and de'eloignement de
Dieu, mais qu'enfin il seroit retabli par un Messie, a ete toujours sur la
Terre. La promise de ce Messie fut premierement faite a Adam; elle fut repetee
a Noe, and ensuite a Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Dieu voulant ensuite se former
un Peuple saint, qu'il separeroit des autres Nations, and qu'il delivreroit de
ses Enemis, choisit la Posterite d' Abraham, alors esclave en Egypt; d'ont il
les retira par le Ministere de Moyse. Ensuite il les assujetit a une Loy, rude
et pleine de Ceremonies, non pas tant pour les distinguer des autres Nations,
que pour leur fair sentir leurs miseres, and la necessite d'un Messie, qui les
delivrast du joug du peche and de la Loy. Le Tems and la Maniere de la venue du
Messie, a ete plusieurs fois predite par les Prophets que Dieu suscitoit de
tems en tems parmi le Peuple Juif. Les Propheties ont ete accomplies en la
consommation des Tems: Le Messie, le Christ, ou le Redempteur est venu, and a
prouve sa Mission par une infinite de Miracles; par la purete de sa Doctrine,
and par la saintete de sa vie. Il a souffert la Mort pous nous procurer la vie,
and pour nous reconcilier a Dieu son Pe^e. Il est esuscite ^des Morts au
troisieme jour pour marquer sa toute Puissance, ^ la Victoire qu'^^ a remport^e
sur la Mort; and (...) a este enleve au Ciel d'ou u ne doit venir qu'a la fin
des siecles pour Iuger le Monde. Apres l' Ascension du Sauveur sa Doctrine, la
Religion Chretienne en un mot, s'est repandue dans tout le Monde, ou elle s'est
etablie and a toujours subsiste, quoi que toujours combatue.


Comte. L' Enchainement des preuves que vous venez de rapporter, form un si
grand eclat de lumiere qu'il me semble impossible de ne pas reconnoitre la
Verite and la Divinite de la Religion Chretienne; and un^ chose que je ne
saurois comprendre, est l' aveuglement des Juifs, a meconnoitre le Messie
promis.


Eveque. Ie m'en vai vous en dire la Raison. Dieu les ayant retirez de l'
Egypt avec tous les grands Signs qu'il fit en leur favor, les avoit menez
dans la terre heureuse, and abondante de Canaan, and leur avoit done des Rois,
and un Temple magnifique: Tout cela plongea les Juifs dans des pensees
Terrestres and Charnelles. Ils s' attendoient que leur Messie seroit un grand
Prince Temporel, qui les rendroit Maitres de tout le Monde; tellement que ne
voyant rien, en lui que de bas, la pluspart le rejetterent avec m^pris. Il n'y
eut que quelque Juifs Spirituels, qui sondant les Ecritures, virent quily avoit
deux avenements du Messie predis dans les Prophets, l'un d' Humiliation, and
de bassesse don't le Tems est marque, parce qu'autrement on pourroit le
meconnoitre. Le second de Grandeur and de Gloire, don't le Tem^ n'est pas marque
parce qu'il doit etre si eclatant, and si manifest que ses ennemis meme le
reconnoistront.


Comte. Il ne me rest plus aucune difficulte la dessus, and vous me ferez
plaisir de me dire maintenant ce qu'il faut croire de la Religion Mahomet?


Eveque. Il suffit de lire l' Histoire de cet Homme pour reconnoitre, que ce
n'est qu'un Imposteur. Car quelle Marque a t'il que n'ait aussi tout homme qui
voudra se dire Prophet? Il n'a point ete predit, il n'a aucune Autorite que la
sienne; and il n'a fait aucun Miracle pour la prouver. Son Alchoran est rempli
de mill^ Absurdites; aussi sa Doctrine ne s'est etablie, que par la force des
Arms, and en tuant les autres; au lieu que celle de Jesus Christ s'est etablie
pa^ l' Humilite, and en faisant tue^ les siens: Ce qui fait voir que si Mahomet
a pris le voye de re ussir Humainement, Jesus Christ a pris celle de perir
humainement, s'il n'eust ete sou^enu par une force toute Divine.


Comte. Ie suis pleinement convaincu de la Verite de la Religion Chretienne,
mais ce qui me fait encore de le peine cest de la voir divisee en^ plusieurs
Branches differentes: c'est po^rquoy vous m'obligerez de me dire quelle est la
plus conform a la Doctrine de I. Christ.


Eveque. Les diverses Opinions qui font la division funeste des Chretiens, se
peuvent reduire a deux Religions Principales, savoir, la Protestante, and la
Catholic Roman. Il seroit trop long de vous dire les grands avantages que
la premiere a sur celleci, and vou^ pourrez voir les erreurs des Catholics
sur la Transubstantiation, sur l'Invocation des Saints, sur le Culte des
Images, sur le Merit des oeuvres, sur le Purgatoire, and sur les Indulgences,
refutees dans plusieurs Livres. Pour ce qui est des diverses Branches de le
Religion Protestante il est tres certain que l' Eglise Anglicane est la plus
pure, and la plus conform en toutes chooses a l' Eglise Primitive.


Comte. Ievous rends un million de Graces, Milord, des eclaircissements que
vous venez de me donner. Il ne me rest maintenant aucun doubt sur
cettematiere; and jeremercie Dieu de m'avoir fait naitre dans une Eglise si
pure, and si saint que la notre.


Eveque. I'aibien de la joye, Milord, de vous voir dans de si heureuses
Dispositions: and je prendrai conge de vous, par un avis qui je m'assure vous
sera d'un grand Usage dans tout le course de votre Vie: C'est qu'il ne suffit
pas d' avoir connu la Verite de notre Religion, puis qu'elle consiste plus dans
le Pratique des Precepts, que dans la speculation des Dogmes; ainsi je vous
exhort a vivre d'une maniere qui reponde au digne nom de Chretien que vous
portez; sur tout evitez les Libertins, avec autant de precaution qu'on fait les
maladies Contagieuses; car quoy que quelques uns de ces Libertins ne parlent
peu respectueusement de la Religion, and ne raillent des chooses qu'ils
devroient reverer que par une extravagante and ridicule Vanite, and pous fair
paroitre leur esprit en sou^ enant des Sentimens particuliers, la plupart sont
plongez dans le Vice, and leurs moeurs ne sont par moins dereglees que leur
Esprit.


ENTRETIEN II.
ENTER Lisidor and Dorante; Touchant Les ETUDES D'un Gentilhomme. Et
Premierement
Des LANGVES.
L^dor. Il ya quelque tems* Monsieur, que j'ay form le dessein de vous
demander une Grace.


Dorante. Qu'y at il, moncher Lisidor, en quoy je puisse vous etre utile?


Lisidor. Le Grace que j'ay a vous demander est, de me dire quelles sont les
Sciences, ausquelles un Gentilhomme doit s'appliquer pour paroitre avec Honneur
dans le Monde.


Dorante. Vous avez trop bonne Opinion de moy, de me croire assez habile pour
etre con^sulte sur une matiere si delicate, and si importante: Cepandant, sans
me fair tan^ prier, ni pretendre que vot^ soumettiez votre jugement a mes
Sentiments; jevous d^rai, que les Sciences, qui me paroissent les plus
necessaire^ pour un Homme de naissance, sont les Langues, la Philosophy, les
Mathematiques, l' Histoire, and la Politic.


Lisidor. Vous m' obligerez bien de me dire ce qu'il faut savoir de chacune de
ces Sciences: Car, il me semble que la Vie de l' Homme ne suffiroit pas pour
les apprendre toutes parfaitement.


Dorante. Ce que vous dites est tres vray; Aussi quand je vous dis qu'il est
necessaire qu'um Gentilhomme sache les Langues, la Philosophy les
Mathematiques, etc. Ie ^^entens pas qu'il doive savoir tou^es ces Sciences a
fond, mais seul^ment^ce qu'il y a de plus necessaire, soit pour sa satisfaction
soit dans le Commerce, and la Societe de la Vie.


Lisidor. Si v^us voulie^ Monsieur, me dire, en quoy vous faites consister ce
Necessaire, and de commencer par les Langues.


Dorante. Ie m'en v^i vous satisfaire. Vous savez qu'^^ divise ordinairement
les Langues en deux especes, savoir, les Mortes and les Vivantes. Des
premieres, le Latin est la plu^ necessaire; cest la Langue d^s Savans, c'est
elle qui nous done l' entree dans toutes les belles chooses de l' Antiquite:
Plusieurs modernes meme ne: crivent qu'en Latin; and il y a des Course ou les
Negotiations ne se font qu'en cette Langue. A l' Etude du Latin, je
conseillerois qu'on joignit celle du Grec, puis qu'on ne peut tirer qu'un fort
grand avantage d'entendre la Langue de la Nation la plus polie qui ait jamai
ete, and d' ou les autres ont puise les Sciences and les beaux Arts.


Lisidor. Et quelles sont les Langues Vivantes qu'il est necessaire de savoir?


Dorante. Pour ce qui regard les Langues Vivantes je voudrois premierement
qu'on possedat bien le Langue de son pais, qu'on en connut les Detours and les
Delicatesses. Il ne suffit pas d'etre ne en France pour bien parler Francois.
Et le Chevalier L' Estrange, Monsieur Dryden, and quelques autres, n'auroient
jamais aquis tant de Reputation par leur plume s'ils n'eussent appris l'
Anglois que chez leurs Nourrices. Apre^ la Langue de son Pais il faut savoir
cell^ qui est dominante dans le siecle ou l'on vit; car vous remarquerez que la
Fortune exerce se^ Bizarreries sur les Langues de meme que sur les autres
chooses Humaines; il y a environ trente annees que la Langue Francoise par une
Revolution surprenante est devenue la Langue Generale de toutes les Course, and
de tous les Honnetes Gens de in Europe, and ainsi, vous voyez quelle necessite
il y a de la bien savoir.


Lisidor. A ce que je vous vo^^ les Francois ont un grand avantage sur les
autres Nations, puis qu'ils peuvent se passer d'apprendre d'autre Langue que la
leur.


Dorante. Cela est fort vray. Cependant la plupart de Courtisans and des gens
de Lettres de France se piquent de parler Italien and Espagnol, and la plupart
des Officiers de l'Armee apprenn^nt l' Alleman, don't ils reconnoissent
l'utilite dans les frequentes guerres qu'ils on^ sur le Rhin, and en Flandres.


Lisidor. Ne trouveriez vous pas a propos qu'un Anglois apprit aussi toutes ces
Langues.


Dorante. Il me semble qu'un Anglois qui sait bien le Latin and le Francois, a
moins qui^ n'ayt des Affairs particulieres en Espagne ou en Allemagne, se peut
fort bien passer d' apprendre les Langues de ces Pais la. Mais je souhaiterois
qu'on apprit quelque peu d' Italien. Un Gentilhomme bien eleve finit
ordinairement ses Etudes par le Voyage de France and d' Italy, and person ne
doubt, qu'il ne soit tout a fait necessaire* de savoir au meins quelque chose
de la Langue du Pais ou l'on se trouve.


ENTRETIEN III.
Enter les Memes.
Dela PHILOSOPHY
LIsidor. Vous plait-il Monsieur, que nous passions a la Philosophy?


Dorante. De tout mon Coeur. Ce mot de Philosophy est Grec, and veut dire l'
Amor de la Sagesse: C' etoit autrefois la premiere de toutes les Sciences, ou
pour mieux dire, elle les comprenoit toutes. Les Philosophes parmi les Anciens.
regloient le service des Dieux; ils prescrivoient les Loix de la Societe; ils
s'appliquoient a la connoissance de la Nature and etoient en si grande estime,
qu'en beaucoup d'endroits on leur erigeoit des Statues. Depuis que le Monde a
ete eclaire des lumieres de l'Evangile, la Philosophy a ete reduite a des
bornes bien plus etroites, and on ne s'en sert gueres qu'a regler l'esprit dans
la recherche de la Verite, and a connoitre les cho^os Naturelles; on la divise
ordinairement dans les Ecoles en quatre Parties, Savoir, La Logique, la
Metaphysique, la Physique, and la Morale.

I. La Logique est cette party de la Philosophy qui no^^ enseigne araisonner,
and a bi^n conduire la Raison dans la recherche de la Verite.

II. La Metaphysique traite des chooses surnaturelles, ou Spirituelles.

III. La Physique explique les Principes des Chooses Naturelles, and les
Proprietez d^^ Corpse.

IV. La Morale traite de la Felicite, and enseigne aux Homme a moderer leurs
Passions.


Lisidor. Croyez vous, qu'il soit necessaire qu'un Gentilhomme etudie ces
quatre parties de la Philosophy?


Dorante. Il n'y a que la Logique qui me paroisse necessaire a cause de ^'usage
qu'on en peut fair, dans tous les rencontres de la Vie; mais je souhaiterois
qu'on ^'enseignat a'une maniere plus aisee, plus court, and plus claire qu'on
ne fait ordinairement. Pour ce qui regard la Metaphysique, je la crois trop
penible, and meme au dessus de notre capacite: La Physique est trop incertaine
pour meriter notre application, and ce que je conseillerois sur cette matiere
seroit de lire, comme une H^stoire l' Abrege des Sentimens des plus grands
Hommes qui en ont traite, comme Platon, Aristotle, Zenon, Epicure, Descartes,
Gassendi: On verra que tout y est conteste, and on admirera comment un homme
sage peut passer la Vie a des recherches inutiles. Pour la Morale, elle est
sans doubt tres necessaire, puis qu'elle tend a nous conduire a la recherche du
bien; mais celle des Philosophes n'est pas la veritable pairce qu'elle ne tire
ses Principes que de la Raison; au lieu que le Morale des Chretiens doit etre
fondee, non seulement sur la Raison, mais aussi sur la volonte de Dieu revelee
dans ses Ecritures.


ENTRETIEN IV.
Enter les memes.
Des MATHEMATIQUES.
LIsidor. Voulez vous bien, mon cher Dorante, me dire vos Sentimens sur les
Mathematiques?


Dorante. Ie le ferai avec d'autant plus de plaisir, que c'est la Science dans
laquelle je me plais le plus; and que je crois la plus digne de fair l'
occupation d'un Homme raisonnable, a cause de la certitude qui l' accompagne;
on les nomme Mathematiques, nom qui veut dire Discipline, par ce qu'elles
renferment tant de chooses, qu'il n'y a point de Profession a laquelle else ne
puissent etre utiles; and il y a peu de Commodites dans la Vie, peu d'
Embelissemens dans les Arts don't nous ne leur soyons obligez.


Lisidor. Quelles sont, je vous pry, les parties des Mathematiques?


Dorante. Les Mathematiques comprenent l' Arithmetique, la Geometry, l'
Astronomy, la Chronology, la Geographie, la Gnomonique' l' Arpentage, l'
Architecture, les Fortifications, la Marine, la Music, la Perspective, la
Dioptrique, la Catoptrique, and les Mechaniques. Else contiennent outre cela,
les Elemens de presque toutes les Sciences; car, sans leur secours, l'on ne
peut etre bon Philosophe, and tous les Arts ne s'en peuvent passer.


Lisidor. Ie vous avoue, qu'il n'y a point de Louanges, que je n^ done aux
grands Mathematiciens; j' admire leurs Inventions and les Ouvrages qu'ils
produisent; mais quand je song aux Epines qui environnent cette Science, aux
profondes Meditations qu'elle exige, and comme elle vous tire des l' Action and
des Plaisir, ses Demonstrations me semblent bien cheres. Il faut etre fort
amoureux des Verites, pour les acheter a ce prix la; and apres tout, je pense
que c'est assez aux Persons de bon Sens, de savoir bien appliquer les
Inventions des autres: Car a parler sagement, nous avous plus a'interet ^ jouir
du Monde, qu'^ le conn^itre.


Dorante. Les Objections que vous me faites contre les Mathematiques
s'evanouiront si vous considerez premierement que s'ily a des Epines cu de la
difficulte a apprendre les verites qu'elles proposent ^'ste en party lafaute
de Ceux qui les traitent ordinairement, and qu'on peut les render assez aisees
pour ne donner aucun degout. Mais quand memes il y auroit de la difficulte,
elle est toujours contrebalancee par le plasir; and liberalement recompensee
par l' utilite qu'on en retire. Else, sont plus pr^pres que la Philosophy a
ouvrir and former l'esprit, and a le render percant, etendu, and eclaire. Pour
ce que vous dites que les Mathematiques retirent des plaisirs, c'est le plus
fort de mes Argumens, pour en conseiller l' etude aux jeunes Gentilhommes;
quand ce ne seroit que pour remplir le vuide de leurs premieres annees, and
empecher que le Vice ne s'en empare. Ce que vous dites en dernier lieu n'est
pas mieux fond que le rest, puis qu'il est impossible de savoir se bien
servir des Inventions des autres, a moins qu'on n'ait quelque teinture des
moyens par lesquels ils les ont trouvees.


Lisidor. Ie suis convaineu de la necessite des Mathematiques; il me rest a
savoir qu'elles sont les parties don't vous conseillez l'etude a un Gentilhomme?


Dorante. L' Arithmetique and la Geometry, sont les plus necessaires, parce
qu'elles sont le fondement and contiennent les Principes de toutes les autres.
Pour cellesci on peut les apprendre selon les Etudes, les Emplois, ou les
Professions, ou else sont necessaires, ou bien encore, pour sa propre
satisfaction. Ainsi dans l' Histoire, la Chronology, and le Geographie, sont
de la derniere necessite. Un Homme de Guerre doit savoir les Fortifications: Un
officier de Mer, la Marine: Un Peintre la Perspective, and ainsi des autres.


ENTRFTIEN V.
Enter les memes.
Del'Histoire, dela Chronology, and de la Geographie.
LIsidor. L'Histoire est ce me semble la quatrieme Science que vous jugez
necessaire a un Gentilhomme: Pour moy. je la crois outre cela, lv plus propre
pour toutes sorts de Persons, and les diversitez de Loix, de Religions, de
Coutumes, de Politic, and de Guerre qui l' accompagnent la font passer dans
mon esprit pour la plus agreeable de toutes les Etudes.


Dorante. Vous pourriez ajouter qu'outre le plais^ qu'on retire de cette
variete; lors que l'Histoire nous done des fidelles tableaux du pass qu'elle
nous represente les differens Caracteres des Hommes, and nous fait connoitre
les diverse Ressorts, qui les one fait Agir, on en peut puiser des Exemples pour
le present and des Precautions pour l'avenir.


Lisidor. Quelle distinction, je vous pry, faut il observer dans l' Histoire?


Dorante. La division la plus generale de l' Histoire est en Ancienne and en
Modern: La premiere comprend ce qui s'est pass depuis le commencement du
Monde, jusques a Jesus Christ, and la Modern, ce qui est arrive depuis Jesus
Christ jusques a notre siecle.


Lisidor. En combien de parties divise t'on l'Histoire Ancienne?


Dorante. En trois, savoir, L' Histoire Saint, la Profane, Et la Fabuleure ou
Poetique.

I. La premiere est l'Histoire du Peuple Juif* comme nous la trouvons dans
l'Ecriture Saint.

II. L' Histoire Profane, est celle des Nations Payennes qu'on peut reduire a
l'Histoire des Assyriens, des Perses, des Grecs, and des Romans.

III: Et Histoire Fabuleuse, est celle des Dieux, and des DemyDieux des Payens,
de leurs Metamorphoses, en un mot, de toutes les Fables qui n'lnt d'autre
realite, que dans ^'Imagination des Poets.


Lisidor. Comment divise t'on l' Histoire Modern, ou de Jesus Christ jusqu' a
notre tems?


Dorante. En Histoire de l' Eglise, and de l' Empire; la premiere comprend
l'Histoire du Gouvernement Ecclesiastique, des Schisms, des Heresies, des
Conciles, etc. L' Histoire de l'Empire, contient ce qui est arrive dans le
Gouvernement Temporel les Revolutions des Empires, des Royaumes, des Etats, and
des Republiques.


Lisidor. Croyez vous quil soit necessaire de savoir toutes les diverses
parties de l' Histoire don't vous venez de parler?


Dorante. Ouy sans doubt. Mais il y a quelques distinctions a fair dans le
terms, and dans la maniere de s'y appliquer.


Lisidor. Quelle est le method que vous ^^royez la meilleure pour cela?


Dorante. Ie suppose premierement, qu'un Gentilhomme a un Precepteur, qui des
sa plus tender jeunesse lui fait lire souvent l' Ecriture Saint, and qu'il y
fait assez de reflection pour remarquer ce qui est arrive de plus considerable
au Peuple de Dieu.

2. Ie voudrois qu'en meme tems, and comme par maniere de Recreation, on lui
fit lire l' Histoire Fabuleuse, don't il retireroit ensuite de grands Avantages
pour l' intelligence des Poets.

3. Apres l' Histoire Poetique, il faudroit lui donner une teinture legere de
l' Histoire des Assyriens, des Perses, des Grecs, and des Romans.

4. Lors que son esprit auroit assez de force pour envisager beaucoup de chooses
a la fois, on pourroit lui fair lire un Abrege de l' Histoire Vniverselle
depuis le commencement du Monde jusques a notre tems.

5. Apres une tell preparation faite sous les yeux d'un Maitre habile and
eclaire; le Gentilhomme pourroit de lui meme s' attacher a la lecture des
Histoires particulie^es, sur tout de celle de l'Empire Romain, and du Pais ou
la Fortune l' a fait Naitre.

6. Enfin, il seroit necessaire qu'il etudiat avez un soin tou^ particulier l'
Histoire des Changemens arrives dans les Etats, and dans les plus grandes
Familles de l' Europe, depuis l' Empereur Charles Quint, jusques a notre tems,
car c'est par ces Changemens qu'il connoitroit la Politic and l'Interet des
Princes d' apresent.


Lisidor. Ie remarque que vous n'avez encore rien dit touchant l' Histoire de
l' Eglise.


Dorante. Mon sentiment la dessus, est qu'un Gentilhomme ne doit pas
s'embarrasser a en savoir toutes les particularitez; il doit laisser cette
etude aux Ecclesiastiques, and se contenter de connoitre les plus fameux
Heresiarques, les Conciles Generaur, and de savoir l' Histoire de la
Reformation.


Lisidor, N'avez vous pas dit en parlant des Mathematiques, que la Chronology,
and la Geographie etoient necessaires a l'etude de l'Histoire.


Dorante. Else sont d'une si grande necessite que j' oserois les nommer les
yeux de l' Histoire, puis que sans else on march dans les tenebres, and qu'on
ne sait rien que confusement.


Lisidor. Quelle est done cette grande utilite qu'on retire de ces Sciences?


Dorante. La Chronology nous marque la difference des Tems, and la Geographie
celle des lieux, ou les chooses se sont Passees.


ENTRETIEN VI.
Enter les memes,
De la POLITIQVE.
LIsidor. Nous voici arrivez a la Politic, la derniere Science qui est, selon
vous, necessaire a un Homme de Qualite. En qu'oy est ce, je vous pry, quelle
consiste;


Dorante. La Politic consiste dans l' Art de se bien conduire dans la
Fortune. On peut dire en general que c'est une Science necessaire a tout le
Monde: Mais elle l'est plus particulierement aux Princes, aux Gens de la Cour,
and a tous ceux qui veulent s'avancer dans le Monde par des voyes Nobles, ou
conserver avec Honneur, ce que leur naissance ou la Fortune leur a done.


Lisidor. Quelles sont les Maxims qu'il faut suivre pour se bien conduire dans
la Fortune?


Dorante. La diversite des Persons, and des Circonstances ou else ses
peuvent trouver est si grande, qu'il est fort difficile d' on venir au detail;
and icy les Precepts sont moins utiles que la Pratique and l' Experience:
Ainsi tout ce que j'ai a vous dire maintenant sur cette matiere, est, qu'un
Homme qui suit la Fortune doit s'instruire a fond des Affairs de l' Etat,
savoir la Constitutiion, and les Loix Fondamentales du Gouvernment, and
connoitre exactement l'Inter^t des Princes, and des grandes Maisons, leurs
Alliances and leurs Pretensions.


ENTRETIEN VI.
Des EXERCICES D'un Gentilhomme.
Enter les memes.
LIsidor. Ie vous rends mill Graces, mon cher Dorante, des eclaireissement que
vous m'avez donnez sur les Etudes d'un Gentilhomme; voulez vous bien en fair
autant sur les Exercices?


Dorante. Il n'y a rien que je ne fasse pour vous obliger; and sans vous fair
attendre d'avantage, je vous dirai qu'outre la Dance and la Music, un
Gentilhomme doit apprendre a tirer des Arms, a Monter Cheval, and a Dessiner.


Lisidor. Vous n'etes donc, pas, du sentiment de l' Horace de l'Angleterre, qui
dit qu'un Homme dans son bon sens prendroit la danse pour une Chose vain and
ridicule?


Dorante. Comme cet Homme illustre ne fut de ce Sentiment que lors que son
esprit malad^ and chagrin le fit retirer de la Cour, pour embrasser la
Solitude, j'aime mieux suivre l' opinion de Socrate Fest. de Xenoph.
Qui estime, que quiconque voudra avoir un Corpse sain souple, libre and aise
doit s'applique^ a la danse.


Lisidor. Quelle espece de Music croyez vous la plus propre pour un
Gentilhomme?


Dorante. La Music, so it de Voix soit d' Instrumens, est for^ agreeable, and
contribue beaucoup a render un Gentilhomme accompli. La premiere est a la
verite d'autant plus touchante qu'elle est naturelle; ainsi un Gentilhomme qui
a la Voix belle fera fort bien d'apprendre a chanter; smon il se pourra
contenter d' apprendre a jouer du Lut, de la Guiterre, de la Flute, ou du
Flageolet, selon son inclination. Pour le Clavessin les Dames en sont en
possession; il leur sied aussi beaucoup mieux qu'aux Hommes, and else ont bien
plus d' adresse, and de delicatesse que nous a le toucher. Ie ne dis rien des
autres Instrumens parce qu'ils ne sont propres que pour ceux qui font un metier
de la Music.


Lisidor. Ie reconnois assez la necessite quil y a qu'un Gentilhomme sache
tirer des Arms and Monter a Cheval, mais je voudrois bien savoir pourquoy vous
voulez qu il apprenne le Dessein?


Dorante. Outre que c'est une belle and agreeable Occupation, elle est tous a
fait necessaire dans les Mathematiques, and pour un Homme qui Voyage.


ENTRETIEN VIII.
De la Politesse, de la Civilite, and de la Bienseance.
Enter un Courtisan, and son Neveu.
COurtisan. I'ay bien de la joye, mon cher Neveu, de ce que vous avez si bien
reussi dans vos Etudes and dans vos Exercices; puis que par la vous vous etes
rendu capable des Emplois les plus importans. Cependant, comme en entrant dans
le Monde il faut fair en en sort que les premieres Impressions soient a notre
Avantage, and que d' ailleurs on rapporte ordinairement du College and des
Academies un certain air de Pedanterie and de Grossierete for degoutant, je
vous conseille de vous fair une etude particuliere de la Politesse, car ce
n'est que par la que vous paroitrez avez Honneur dans les Compagnies, and que
vous pourrez vous insinuer aupres du Prince.


Neveu. Si vous vouliez, Monsieur, me dire en quoy consiste la Politesse.


Courtisan. La Politesse est un melange de Civilite, de Bienseance, de
Discretion, and de Complaisance, aicompagne d'un Air doux and agreeable repandu
sur tout ce qu'on fait and que l'on dits.


Neveu. Mais je vous pry par quel moyen peut on acquerir une Qualite si belle
and si necessaire?


Courtisan. Des diverses parties qui composent la Politesse, il n'y a que les
deux premieres sur lesquelles on peut etablir des Maxims; les autres ne
s'apprennent gu^re que par le Commerce d^ Monde; and sur tout dans la compagnie
des Dames, car soit que les Femmes soient naturellement plus Polies, ou que
pour leur plaire l'esprit s'eleve and sembelisse c'est aupres d'elles
principalement, qu'on apprend a etre discret, complaisant, doux and agreeable.


Neveu. Ie ne suis pas f^che que vous me renvoyiez ^ uneEcole siagreable que la
Compagnie des Belles, pou^ apprendre les dernieres parties de la Politesse;
cepa^^dant vous m'obligerez infiniment de me dire quelies regle^il faut
observer dans les deux autres and premierement dans la Civilite.


Courtisan. Vous savez qu'il y a une infinite de Regles a suivre si l'on veut
etre civil* Il faut, par exemple, non seulement marquer nos respects and nos
soumissions a ceux qui sont au dessus de nous; m^is il faut aussi, s'il se
peut, prevenir les civilites de nos Egaux; and etre affable a nos Inferieurs.
Il faut donner la droite and le haut dis Pave aux Dames, and aux persons de
consideration: and leur ceder meme generalement, ce qu'il y a de plus commode.
Le jugement vous prescrit assez de le fair, sans qu'il soit necessaire d'y
ajouter d' autres maxims que celle-cy, que tout doit paroitre naturel dans un
Galant homme; car il ne suffit pas de pratiquer exactement les regles de la
civilite, il faut de plus le fair d' une maniere fine and aisee qui ne sent
rien de l' art and de l' affectation qui rendent ridicules and desagreables la
plupart des gens, and sur tout les Provinciaux.


Neveu. Vous plait il maintenant de me d^re eniquoy consiste Bienseanee?


Courtisan. La Bienseanee consiste a parler and a agir s^lon le sex, l'age, la
Qualite and la Profession; a observer la difference des tems and des lieux; and
sur tout a porter un caractere de modesty sur le visage and dans les manieres.
En esset si Madame. -- est si decriee a la cour c'est a cause quelle a des
emportemens d'un Gendarme. Milord -- apprete a ^ire aux autres par son
affectation de parler gras comme une petite Courtisane. Et le Chevalier -- se
rend ridicule lors que parmi les Dames il oublie son age and fait le doucereux
comme un jeune homme de vingtans.


Neveu. Une chose qui me paroit fort embarassante dans le Monde, est de quelle
maniere ou doit se servir de ce qu'on nomme Complimens ou Ceremonies?


Courtier. Mon sentiment sur cette matiere, est qu'il n'en faut etre ni trop
avare, ni trop prodigue: si l'on en fait trop peu, on pass pour incivil; and
si l'on en fait trop, l'on devient importun. Ainsi ce que le jugement nous peut
or donner de mieux dans les diverses occasions ou nous sommes obligez de fair
des Compliments, est d'user des Distinctions que la Bienseanee nous prescrit;
de regarder l'age and la Condition des Persons, and l'etat ou else se
trouvent. Les Officiers dArmee, and les Magistrates n'aiment point qu'on leur
fasse perdre du ^ems en Ceremonies inutiles: Un Grand Seigneur ne trouveroit
pas moins plaisant, un petit Bourgeois qui voudroit fair des Ceremonies, que
son Valet seroit ridicule de lui fair des offres de service. Et si l'on trouve
les Persons, a qui ou rend visit, ou malades ou occupees, plus on fait de
Ceremonies, plus on se rend incommode: Il faut alors couper court, and donner a
connoitre ses Sentimens plutot par quelque Action respectueuse que par des
Complimens importuns.


ENTRETIEN IX.
Des VOYAGES.
Enter Philoxene and Dorimant.
Philoxene. HE bien, Dorimant, que vous proposez vous de fair apres avoir
acheve vos etudes, and vos Exercices? N'avez vous point envy de Voyager?


Dorimant. I'en ai une envy tout a fait grande: Ie me figure deja mill
Plaisirs: and ma Curiosite se repait agreablem^nt par avance de la diversite
qu'on trouve en Voyageant.


Philoxene. S'il n'y a que le seul Plaisir and la Curiosite qui vous y portent,
I'ose dire que c'est une chose inutile, and meme fort dangereuse, que les
Voyages.


Dorimant. Dites moy done, je vous pry, anel doit etre le principal but d'un
voyageur.


Philoxene. C'est de s'appliquer a connoitre le Gouvernement d^ pais ou il
voyage, sa Politic ses Loix, ses Coutumes, sa Religion, ses Moeurs, ses
Pretensions, ses Forces, soit de Terre, soit de Mer: d'apprendre les Noms, and
le Genie des Ministres des Chaque Cour, des s'informer des Antiquites, and de
savoir exactement la Carte des Lieux, and le course des Rivieres. Un homme qui
voyagera de cette maniere, en retirera de tres grands avantages, il se formera
l'esprit and le jugement and a san retour il sera en etat de render des
Services a sa Patrie.


Dorimant. Il me semble qu'il est tres difficile d'executer ce que vous venez
de me tracer; and vous m'obligerez infiniment de me dire de quelle maniere il
faut s'y prendre.


Philoxene. Il faut se fair de bonnes Connoissances and ies menager avec
adresse.


Dorimant. Mais pour cet effet ne faut il pas savoir la Langue du Pais?


Philoxene. Oui, sans doubt: car c'est le seul moyen d'entrer dans les
Compagnies, and de fair Societe avec les Persons qni peuvent lui donner des
lumieres sur ce qu'il souhaite d'apprendre.


Dorimant. Quelle est je vous pry la conduite qu'il faut tenir pous menager
les connoissances qu'on a faites parmi les Etrangers?


Philoxene. Il faut t^cher de s'en fair aimer: Donner dans leurs pensees, les
caresser; applaudir meme aux coutumes and aux Manieres de leur pais, ne leur
preferer jamait celles du sien; parler peu, and ecouter beaucoup.


Dorimant. Sont ce la toutes les Maxims qu'il faut observer dans les Voyages?


Philoxenes. Il y en a une infinite d'autres selon les diverses circonstances
des Tems and des Lieux; mais je laisse a votre jugement and a la prudence de
votre Gouverneur de vous en fair connoitre l'usage. I'ajouterai seulement que
vous devez eviter avec un soin tout particulier les ecueils ordinaires des
Voyageurs, savoir, l'Amour des Femmes, le jeu, and les Folles depenses; car si
vous vous laissez aller a l'un de ces Vices, il vous auroit beaucoup mieux valu
de n'etre jamais sorti de chez vous.


ENTRETIEN X.
Des PLAISIRS and des DIVERTISSEMENS.
Enter Philemon and Clitandre.
Philemon. IE ne connois pas d'homme qui aim plus la joye que moy: Ie la veux
dans mon domestique, je tache de l'inspirer ou je vas; and je soutiens par tout
que les Plaisirs and les Divertissemens sont les meilleurs and les plus
universels remedes que nous puissions opposer a nos maux.


Clitandre. Ie ne suis pas ennemi des Plaisirs, mais il me semble qu'on doit
les gouter avec beaucoup de retenue and de moderation.


Phil. I'ose dire aussi que person n'a plus d'aversion que moy pour l'exces,
and pour le Libertinage. Ie les regard comme des ecueils qu'il faut eviter,
and je fu^s les Libertins and les Debauchez comme des hommes infectez d'une
malady contagieuse.


Cli. Vous av^c grande raison; car enfin, l'exces dans les plaisirs, meme dans
les plaisirs innocens, ne va pas seulement a l'infamie, mais encore a la
douleur un homme qui perd sa Reputation a la Debauche y perd le plus souvent sa
sante, and ne bless pas moins sa Constitution que son Honneur.


Phil. Outre la Reputation and la sante, on peut ajouter que l' exces des
Plaisirt and des Divertissemens ru^ne immanquablement les as^aires and la
fortune de toutes sorts de gens. Ainsi selon moy l'on ne doit gouter les
plaisirs que pour se delasser des occupations serieuses, and il faut imiter ce
grand homme de lAntiquite, don't le loisir etoit voluptueux, mais par une just
dispensation de son tems, avec la facilile du travail dons il s'etoit rendu le
maitre, jamais affair ne fut retardee par ses plaisirs.


Cli. Quels sont je vous pry les plaisirs qui occupent vos heures de loisir?


Phil. Outre la bonne Chere, la Promenade, and la Conversation, je me plais a
la Comedy, j'aime la Music, and je jou^ quelquefois.


Cli. Ie trouve votre choix fort raisonnable; mais en quoy faites vous
consister la bonne Chere?.


Phil. Dons une maniere'de manger and de boire delicieuse, menagee par la
Delicatesse, and temperee par la sobriele: Et j'aime d' autant plus la bonne
chere que je remarque que non seulement elle entretient la sante du Corpse, mais
contribue plus que toute autre chose, a la vivacite de l' Esprit.


Clit. Le Promenade n^ contribue pas moins a la sante que la bonne Chere; elle
dissipe les humeurs qui incommodent ordinairement les Persons sedentaires,
and rend nos Corpse robustes and vigoureux.


Phil. Pour la Conversation elle pass dans mon esprit pour le plus agreeable
bien de la Vie; c'est le lien de la Societe; c'est par elle que les esprits se
Communiquent leurs Pensees; que les coeurs expriment leurs mouvements, and que
les amities se commencencent and se Conservent: Enfin si l'Etude augmente les
tatens de la Nature, c'est la Conversation qui les met en oeuvre and qui les
polit.


Clit. Ie reconnois aussi bien que vous les avantages de la conversation; mais
quels sont ceux que vous trouvez a la Comedy*


Phil. La Comedy est, comme vous savez la representation de la Vie ordinaire,
selon la diversite des Humeurs; and si les differens Caracteres de fourberie,
de Simplicite, d'Avarice, de Coqueterie, d'Affectation ridicule, de Bizarrerie,
etc. sont ingenieusement formez, ils n'instruisent pas moins qu'ils
divertissent.


Clit. Ie ne vous demand rien sur la Music j'en reconnois assez les Charms,
and mon Oreille est tonjours agreablement Chatouillee des belles voix and des
Instrumens; Mais pour ce qui est du jeu que vous faites entrer dans vos
Recreations, il me semble que c'est un divertissement bien dangereux; La
Colere, l'emporteme^t, les Querelles, l'accompagnent ordinairement; il done
souvent de mechantes Nuits, and a la longue il incommodc toujours; D'ailleurs
il faut etre toujours sur ses Gardes pour s'empecher d'etre trompe and c'est
une chose bien facheuse, que de marcher toujours comme en pais Ennemi.


Phil. Ce que vous dites est tres vray, lors qu'on joue gros jeu, and qu'on
fait le metier de joueur; Pour moy je ne jo^e que fort petit jeu, la plupart du
tems par Complais^ence, and toujours dans une Societe d'honnetes gens, que le
seul divertissement fait jouer, ainsi on ne voit point sur nos Visages, ni
l'avidite du gain, ni la crainte de perdre, ni la douleur d'avoir perdu; and
comme Person ne Triche, aussi Person n'apprehende d'etre trompe.


ENTRETIEN XI.
De L'AMOUR.
Enter Philogene, and Clinias.
Clinias. D'Ou vient, mon che^ Philogene, que vous n'etes plus si enjo^e que
vous eties autrefois, vout me paroissez reveur and melancolique; n'est ce pas
la belle Celie qui vous a fait sentir le pouvoir de ses Charms and vous a ot^
votre belle humeur?


Philog. Ie ne saurois me deffendre d'une chose que mo^ visage decouvre, and si
c'est etre amoureux que de sentir d^ la joye a la veue d'une belle Person,
and de la douleur lors qu'on ne la voit plus, je vous avo^^ que je le suis.


Clin. N'en doutez point, Philogene, ce sont la les d'eur marquis infaillibles
d'un amor naissant.


Philog. A ce que je v^is mon mal n'est pas encore Desespere, puis qu'il ne
fait que Commencer?


Clin. Appellez vous un mal la plus noble de toutas les Passions? la Passion
des belles ames, and de laquelle il n'y ^ point de jeune homme bien form pour
le monde qui ne se fasse honneur?


Philog. Ie vous avo^e quo n'ayant jamais aim auparavant, je ne sai pas encore
si je la dois appeller un bien ou un mal; Mais je vous trouve si savant sur
cette matiere, que vous m'obligerez beaucoup de me fair part de vos
Instructions and de me dire, premierement ce que c'est que l'Amour.


Clin. On peut rapporter a trois mouvemens un^ Passion si generale, Aimer,
Bruler, Languir. Aimer simplement, est le premier etat de l'ame lors qu'elle,
se meut par l'Impression, de quelque objet agreeable; la il se form un
Sentiment secret de Complaisance en celui qui aim, qui devient ensuite un
attachement a la Person qui est aimee. Bruler est un etat violent, sujet aux
Inquietudes, aux Peines, aux Tourmens, quelquefois ax Transports and au
Desespoir. Languir, est le plus beau des mouvemens de l'Amour, c'est l'effet
delicat, d'une flamme pure qui nous consume insensiblement: C'est une Malady
chere and tender, qui nous fait hair la pensee de notre guerison; on
l'entretient secretement au fond de son coeur, and si elle vient a se
decouvrir, les yeuz, le silence, un soupir qui nous echape, une larme qui coule
malgre nous l'Expriment mieux, que ne pourroit fair toute l'Eloquence du
Discourse.


Philog. Par la description que vous venez de Fair de l'Amour qui peut douter
qu'il (...) soit un Grand mal?


Clin. C'est pourtant tou^ le contraire. Les tourmens d'une veritable Passion
sont des Plaisirs, en aimant bien, l'on n'est jamais miserable; On croit
seulement l'avoir ete quand on n'aime plus.


Philog. Quels sont (...) moyens je vous pry, don't (...) peut ses servir
aupres d^^ belles, pour en etre aim, a son tour.


Clin. Les Precepts qu'on pourroit donner sur cela sont infinis, mais apres
tout, ils ne servent pas de grand chose; and lors qu'on aim veritablement, on
les met en usage sans les savoir; cepandant l'^ peut dire, que c'est deja (...)
grand merit aupres des Damese, que d'aimer; apres cela il faut entrer dans la
Confidence de leurs Caprices, donner de la jalousie pour reconnoitre les
progrez que l'on a fait chez l'objet aim; en feindre ou en prendre a son tour
pour fair paroitre que l'on aim. Si rien de cela ne mean au secret de leur
coeur il faut gagner leur esprit par des Louanges and fair valoir
ingenieusement tout ce qu'elles ont d'aimable, car celui -- la ne manque guere
de plaire aux belles, qui leur done le moyen de se plaire d'avantage.


ENTRETIEN XII.
De L'AMITIE.
Enter Dorilas and Philandre.
Dorilas. ESt-il bien vray, Philandre, ce qu'on dit de vous que vous n'avez
jamais aim?


Philand. Si par aimer vous entendez etre amoureux, je r^pons que je ne l'ai
jamais ete que fort legerement, mais assez pour reconnoitre que l'Amour est une
Passion dangereuse, and qu'on doit eviter: Mais si par aimer vous entendez
avoir des Amiss, je vous avoue que j'ay aim, que j'aime encore, and que je ne
trouve rien, qui contribue si fort a la douceur de la vie que l'Amitie.


Doril. Quels sont je vous pry les avantages que vous trouves dans l'Amitie.


Philand. L'Amitie a toutes les douceurs de l'Amour and n'a pas un de ses
defauts: elle tient lieu de toutes chooses a ceux qui savent bien aimer, de
richesses, sans soins; and d'honneur sans vanite; elle augmente les plaisirs
and diminue les peines; car rien ne soulage tant la douleur que la liberte de
se plaindre, rien ne fait mieux sentir la joy^ que le plaisir de la dire.


Doril. Ie crois bien q^^ l'Amitie a souvent des grandes douceurs, mais je
crois auss^ qu'elle a quelquefois des amertumes, and je connois des gens a qui
leurs amiss ont fait passer d^^mechantes nuits.


Philand. Ce que vous dites peut etre fort vray; and je vous avoue que si d'un
eote l'Amitie adoucit les miseres de la vi^, rien n'en trouble tant le repos,
(...) nous n'avons pas assez de discerrement pour bien choisir les Amiss.


Doril. Comment est ce je vous pry, que se doit former une veritable Amity?


Philand. La Probite and (...) Virtue doivent etre les principes d'une veritable
Amity, lors (...) la justesse de notre discernement nous ont fait connoitre
ces qu^litez dans quelque person, il nait en nous un Sentiment de
Bienveillance, ce n'est pas encore Amity, mais c'est la cause qui la produit,
ce premier mouvement que nous sentons pour l^ person vertueuse, nous fait lui
souhaiter du bien; apres cela l'estime mutuelle and la conformite d'humeurs
forment les noeuds d'une Amity veritable; qui se fait voir part la part que
nous prenons dans les plaisirs and dans les chagrins de notre ami, par celle
que nous souhaitons qu'il prenne aux notres, and par l'empressement que nous
devons fair paroitre de le servir.


Doril. Ie remarque que vous ne donnez d'autre principe a l'Amitie que la
Virtue, cependant il me semble que la plupart des amities, ne se forment que de
la Commnnication des Divertisements ou des parties de plaisir.


Philand. Ces chooses peuvent bien servir a fair des co^noissances, and meme a
entretenir l'Amitie, mais le seul merit and la Virtue en doivent etre le
fondement; car enfin, lorsque le s^ul interest de nos Divertisemens form le
noeud de l'Amitie, l'Absence, les Occupatious, les chagrins de la vie peuvent
aisement le rompre. Et souvent des nouvelles douceurs qu'on gout avec des
nouveaux amiss effacent le souvenir des contentemens passez.


Doril. Approuvez vousla Maxim qui dit qu'il faut se fair plusieurs amiss and
qu'on n'en sauroit jamais avoir trop?


Philand. Bien loin de l'approuver, je crois que quelques honnetes and quelques
reglez que soie^t les amiss, c'est une chose incommode que d'en avoir tro^;
outre qu'il y a tres peu de fondement a fair sur ces gens qui cherchent
beaucoup d'amis, un coeur partage ne sauroit aimer qu' a demi; and ja crois que
je pui^ appliquer icy le mot du sage de le Greece, Les Amiss (dit il) ne sont
point Amiss. Voulant dire que ce mot' ne doit s'etendre qu'a un seul.


The Complete FRENCH-MASTER*

PART III.

CONTAINING Four COLLECTIONS,

I. Of Jests, Repartees, and Stories. II. Of Choice LETTERS upon several
Subjects. III. Of PROVERBS. IV. Of SONGS.
A COLLECTION Of Jests and quick Repartees, Of several Illustrious Persons,
both Modern and Ancient; WITH Some little Stories, or pleasant Tales.
1.
A Chemist having dedicated a Book to Pope Leo X. wherein he pretended to teach
the way of making Gold, expected from him a magnificent Present. The Pope sent
him a great empty Purse, with this Complement, That since he knew how to make
Gold, he wanted but a place to put it in.

2.
A Gentleman of the Court of France went to see one of his Friends, to wish him
Joy of a new Dignity he had gotten: This Man puffed up with his Preferment,
asked who he was? the other, without discomposing himself in the least, shifts
his dicourse, and tells him, That he came to show him his grief for the
misfortune that had befallen him, and was very sorry to see him both Deaf and
Blind, since he did not know his best Friends.

3.
An Italian that was a sorry Preacher, Preached one day the Panegyric of a
Saint, and being in the heat of his Discourse, asked with a great motion, Where
shall I put my Saint, where shall I put my Saint? A Joking Man, who was in his
Auditory, tired with his Sermon, resolved to go out, and ery'd to him in a loud
Voice. Here is my room for him.

4.
Moliere being dead, many petty Rhymers made Epitaphs on him. One of those,
presented one of his own making, to a Prince very famous for his wit, Would to
God, Sir, said the Prince, receiving the Epitaph, that Moliere presented me
yours.

5.
A young Prince having made an end both of his Studies and Exercises; One of
his Servants was asked, what he had learnt best, To Ride the great Horse,
answered he, because his Horses have not flattered him.

6.
A French Courtier was suspected to be impotent, but would never own it. One
day meeting the Poet Benserade, who had often jeered him about it; Well Sir,
said he, for all your Drolleries, my Wife was brought to bed two days ago; Lord
Sir, replied Benserade, We never questioned your Wife.

7.
A petty Prince of Italy, being informed that a French Gentleman that was at
his Court had Jok'd him and his designs, sent him word to go out of his
Territories within three days; He does me too great a Favor, answered the
Frenchman, to grant me so much time, I don't want above three quarters of an
hour to obey him.

8.
The Mother of a wanton Young Lady, had a mind to send her to the Convent of
the Repenting-Maids; I am not of that opinion said a Lady of her Relations, and
why, asked the Mother, Because she is neither, quo' the the other.

9.
Some body found fault with the Emperor Sigismond, that instead of putting to
death the Enemies he had Conquered, he bestowed many Favors on them, and so
put them in a Condition to do him mischief; Why, said the Emperor, don't I put
them to death, by taking away their Hatred, and making them my Friends?

10.
A Lord had pitched upon an Ignoramus to be his Librarykeeper; That Is the
Seraglio, said a very witry Lady, committed to the Custody of an E^^uch.

11.
Thomas More, a famous Chancellor of England, being in Prison by king Henry the
Eighth's Orders, let both his Hair and Beard grow: A Barber coming to him to
Trim him, Friend, said he, being the King and I are at Law for my Head, I will
lay out nothing to set it off till I know which of us is to dispose of it.

12.
Henry the Eighth, King of England, having some differences with Francis I.
King of France, resolved to send him an Ambassador with many haughty and
threatening Speeches; he chused to that purpose a Bishop in whom he had a great
deal of Confidence: That Bishop represented him the danger his Life would run,
if he kept such a Language to a King so high-spirited as Francis the First:
Fear nothing, said Henry the Eighth to him, for should the French King put you
to death, many a Head of the French that are in my Power would answer me for
yours, I don't question it, answered the Bishop, but of all those Heads, added
he with a Smile, none would fit me so well as this, pointing to his own. This
witty Answer so pleased the King, that he Reformed the Instruction of his
Ambassador.

13.
Bacon, a Renowned Chancellor of England, was visited by Queen Elizabeth, in a
Country House which he had built before his Fortune: How is it, said the Queen
to him, that you have built so little a House; Madam, replied the Chancellor, I
made not the House too little, but your Majesty made me too great for my House.
Besides the Wit and Genteelness of this Answer, it shows so much Modesty and
Gratefulness as makes it to be esteemed.

14.
In Spain they only live to Love; in France what they call Love, is most
commonly nothing but to speak of Love, and add to the Sentiments of Ambition,
the Vanity of Intrigues. Hence it is, that a Spanish Lady reading not long
since the Romance of Cleopatra, and after a long recital of tedious Adventures,
being come to a nice and tender Conversation of a Lover and his Mistress
equally in Love; Bless me, said she, how much Wit lost, what are all these fine
Discourses good for, when they are together and alone?

15.
The Count of Orgaz, a Grandee of Spain, had a mind to have a Scholar with him
for Conversation sake; one of his Friends presented him one, whom he asked at
the first sight whether he could make Verses? The Scholar answered, that he
should judge of it himself, by the Composures he would show him of his own
making. The next day he brought him many Romances and other Spanish Poesys of
all sorts. The Grandee having cast his Eyes upon them, told his Friend, that
this Scholar did not fit him, Why, asked his Friend, because, replied he, that
Man is a Dunce that cannot make two Verses, but he is a Fool that makes four.
The Spanish runs thus, Tengo por necio al que no sabe hazer una copla y por
loco al que haze dos.

16.
A Spanish Lady, Young and Beautiful, went to Confess to one of her Country
Friars; The Father Confessor after many questions about her Confession, was
curious to be better acquainted with her, and craved her Name. The Lady feeling
no Temptation to satisfy his Curiosity, answered him, Father, my Name is no
Sin.

17.
Alexander the Great, having gotten the Victory over Darius King of Persia his
Army, Darius begged a Peace, and proffered him half the Asia with Ten thousand
Talents. Parmenio, one of his Favorites, transported with so advantageous a
Proposal; Sir, said he, to his Master, I Vow, that were I Alexander, I would
gladly accept of these Profers; And so would I, replied Alexander, if I was
Parmenio.

18.
Anacharsis a famous Philosopher being born in Scythia, a Grecian, who had no
other Merit than to be born in Greece, looking on him with Envy, upbraided him
with the Barbarity of his Country; I confess, replied Anacharsis, that my
Country is a Shame to me, but thou art the Shame of thy Country. This Repartee
may be well applied to those shallow Wits, who run down Strangers, only because
they are Strangers, not considering that Learning and Merit are of all
Countries.

19.
Pompey being sick of a Fever, one of his Friends went to see him, and as he
came into the Room, he saw a handsome Slave whom Pompey loved, going out: He
asked Pompey how he did, the Fever left me but just now, said Pompey, Very
like, replied his Friend, for I met her a going out.

20.
Alexander the Great being at Delphes, dragged in the Temple Apollo's Priestess
to consult the Oracle upon a forbidden Day; The Priestess having attempted in
vain to resist his Violences, cried out, Alexander, thou art Invincible, I
desire no other Oracle but that, replied he.

21.
A Rich Athenian desired the Philosopher Aristippus, to tell him what he would
have to instruct his Son; Aristippus asked him a Thousand Drachms. How, said
the Athenian, I could buy a Slave for that Money; Do so, answered Aristippus,
and thou shall have two. Giving him to understand, that his Son would have the
Vices of a Slave, if he did not bestow on him a good Education.

22.
The Emperor Augustus seeking the reason of the great likeness that was between
him and a young Grecian, asked him, whether his Mother was ever at Rome; No,
Sir, answered the Grecian, but my Father has, many a time.

23.
Dari^s King of Persia, sent great Presents to Epaminondas the Theban General,
wi^h a design to bribe him. If Darius, said this great Captain to those that
brought them, has a mind to be a Friend to the Thebans, ^e need not buy my
Friendship, and if he has other Intentions, he has not Riches enough to corrupt
me.

24.
Pisistrates, a Tyrant of Athens, being resolved to marry a second Wife, his
Children asked him whether any discontent he had received from them, prompted
him to it. On the contrary, answered he, I am so pleased with you, and I find
you to be so brave Men, that I have a mind to have others like you.

25.
The Son of Dionysius the Tyrant of Syracusa, having ravished a Lady, his
Father asked him in a Passion, whether he ever heard that he had done any such
thing in his Youth; Why, answered this intemperate Son, it is because you was
not born Son of a King; Thou'^t never be the Father of one, replied the Tyrant.
This Repartee is very instructive for Sovereigns Sons, who misuse the
Prerogative of their Birth.

Of an Old Lord and a Waiting Woman.
AN Old Nobleman fell in Love with a young Gentlewoman that waited upon his
Wife. The little stock of Virtue which is commonly found in Waiting-women*
being happily supported by the defects of the old Dotard was strong enough to
resist his Solicitations; She told her Lady of it, and confirmed by a shower
of Tears, those proofs of her Chastity. I cannot by no means, Madam, said she,
bear it any longer: Who does he take me for? and how can he have the Thoughts
that I am capable to do any thing against my Duty, either to your Ladyship, or
to my Honor? If he continues, I beseech you, Madam, to give me leave to go
away: The good Lady, as much provoked against her Husband, as satisfied with
her Maids honesty told her; Child, let it never come into your thoughts to
leave me, being so assured as you are of the kindness I have for you. Then,
Madam, be so kind as to deliver me from my Master's Persecutions; Well, said
the Lady, I think of an Expedient very fit for that purpose; You must dissemble
a Kindness for him, and give him in the Night an Assignation to your Room; I*
Madam, cried the Waiting Woman, give an Assignation? Listen to the end what I
have to say to you; After you have appointed him the hour, and left the Door
open to let him in, I will go in your stead into your Bed, and you shall slip
into my Room; and then when he comes I Will shame him out of any thoughts of
tormenting you. The Waiting Woman executed with Care her Lady's Orders. The
Night being come, the Old doting Fop crept into the Waiting-woman's Chamber,
and eagerly went to that Bed where his Wife staid for him. She did not think
fit to quarrel him at first; But seeing this Adventure was more chastely
performed, than she had expected; she was tired with it, and resolved to give
her Tongue its liberty: Is it but for all this, said she, that you have taken
so much pains? The Husband acknowledging his Error, by his Wife's Voice; I Vow,
Madam, said he, my Body has been discre^ter than my Mind, for it has known you,
when my deluded Mind took you for a handsome Maid.

Of a Lady and a Friar.
A Spanish Lady young and handsome, went to a Friars Church in order to Confess;
and finding a Friar of that Convent alone in one of the Chapels, she kneeled
down by him, and told him all her Sins, and seeing he answered nothing; begged
of him her Absolution. I cannot give it you, said the Friar, for I am no
Priest: You are no Priest? said the Lady, both Surprised and in a Passion, No,
Madam, answered, coldly the Friar, Well, quoth she, I Will go and make complaints
of you to your Superior for hearing my Confession: And I, replied the Friar,
I Will go and tell stories of you to your Husband. Whereupon being entered into a
Compensation of Threatenings, they parted upon equal Term^. The Lady having
Wisely thought fit for her Interest, not to publish this Adventure.

Of the King of Naples and Piovano Arlotto.
AN Italian Parson Named, il Piovana Arlotto, going through Naples, went to pay
his respects to the King Alfontius, who being told by one of his Courtiers,
that this Parson was a jocose Man, who freely and pleasantly deliveed his
Thoughts to the most Eminent Persons, and had a Book in which he wrote down the
Errors (or Blunders) of the Chiefest Men in his time. Messer Piovano, said the
King to him, am I set down in your Book? I Will see, answered il Piovano; and the
King having commanded him to fetch it, he Read in it, Error committed by
Alfontius King of Naples, in sending into Germany, a German that was in his
Court to buy him Horses. How do you find I have done amiss, said the King, in
giving that Commission to the German. Because, answered il Piovano, he will
stay in his Country with your Money: What if he returns with Horses, or brings
me my Money back? Then, replied il Piovano, I Will blot you out of my Book, and
write the German instead of you.

Evil is for him that Evil thinks.
AN Italian Parson invited one day to Dinner il Piov^n^ Arlotto, with many
other Parsons: And having ^ mind to show his Wit, took these aside and told
them, Gentlemen, I design to make us merry to day at Piovano's Cost; who, you
know, plays the merry Grig, and Drolls upon every Body, being my Clark is Sick,
and I have no Body to wait on us, I will propose to cast Lots with a straw, to
see which of us shall go to the Cellar draw the Wine, and wait on the Other at
Dinner; and I shall contrive it so, that the Lot will fall upon il Piovano
Arlotto; which being so concluded amongst them, was put in Execution
accordingly. Arlotto smelled out the Plot, and resolved to make his Host repent
it. Down he goes to the Cellar to fill the Bottles, whilst the others fell to
Meat; and being come up again with the Bottles, You see, Gentlemen, said he,
How I have done what the Play bad me do, lets now play again, to see which of
us shall go down to the Cellar to shut the Hog sheads I left open. The
Landlord, talked no more of casting Lots, and knowing Arlotto to b^ a Man that
might have done it, as well as said it, present^y goes from the Table, and runs
to the Cellar, where he found the Vessels open and part of his Wine lost; of
which afterward complaining to Arlotto, You have no reason to complain,
answered he, since I have punctually satisfied the Conditions of the Play,
whereby I was to draw the Wine and fill the Bottles, but not to shut again the
Vessels of a Landlord, who entertains his Guests so scurvily.

Matrimony is a Cure for Love.
CLitander having seen by chance the fair Celimene, stood both surprised and
smitten, yet considering that, with an extraordinary Beauty, she had but a very
mean Fortune, and that he was a very rich Man, he reflected upon this
engagement, which he found no less strong, than sudden: He had lost all his
Tranquillity, he felt himself continually tossed, and feared lest a Passion that
was so violent in its beginning should prompt him at last, to satisfy his
heart to the prejudice of his Fortune: To banish from his heart so dangerous an
inclination, he served a Campaign in Hungary, but he came back deeper in Love
than he went away. Then accusing himself of weakness, he made a second Attempt,
and undertook the Travel of Italy, but the Diversions of Rome, and the Carnava^
of Venice, proved as uneffectual as the Siege of Buda. Clitander was at his
return more ardent and eager than ever, and as his Friend Philemon went to
visit him; Dear, Philemon, said he, I lead a Lingering Wretched Life, I cannot
forget Celimene, I fancy her always present to my Eyes with all her Charms; At
last, added he, at last I must Marry her, to cease to love her. He did so, and
a fortnight of Marriage changed his violent and boystrous Love into a gentle
and quiet Friendship.

Example of Generosity.
BAlsac having occasion for Money, sent to his Friend Voiture, to desire him to
lend him a Hundred Pound and charged the Bearer to give him a Note of the like
Sum. Voiture having told the Money, was offered the Note, which ran thus,

I undernamed, confess to ow to Mr. Voiture the Sum of a Hundred pound which he
has lent me etc.

Voiture Takes it, Reads it, and uoderwrites these words.

I undernamed. confess to ow to Mr. Balsac, the Sum of Two Hundred pounds, for
the Favor he has done me, to borrow one hundred of me. And so he gives the
Note to the Valet de Chamber to carry it back.

Of the Queen of Spain and her Parrots.
THe Camerara Major, or the first Lady of Honor to the late Queen of Spain,
was a mighty Sour Angry Woman; who took upon her rather to Govern than to
serve her Mistress: She mortally hated Two Parrots* the Queen had brought along
with her from France, because they could talk French. One day her Majesty going
abroad, the Camerara having gotten the Parrots from their Keeper, wrung off
their Necks in cold Blood, and then went her way. Asson as the Queen came home,
she asked for her Parrots, that were her chief Diversion in a Country where
she enjoyed but few other; her Women amassed, discovered surprise in their
Faces, and not being able to answer a word, at last confessed the matter. This
struck her heart; but she thought it convenient to conceal her resentments. In
the mean time the Camerara coming back, and seeing her Majesty calm enough,
offered to kiss her hands, as she used to do, but was received by the Queen
with two great boxes on the Ears, The Confusion of that haughty Woman, upon so
sensible an Affront can hardly be expressed, she went out in a Passion, and
gathering all her kindred and Relations, she applied her self to the King, with
a Train of Four Hundred Ladies, and was so importunate with him for the
reparation of her Honor, that he was fain to come and ask the Queen her
Reasons; Sir, replied readily, that ingenious Princess, It was but to save a
Woman's longing; do you then think two enough? Madam, answered the King, else,
pray, let her have two Dozen, And as one misfortune comes upon the Neck of
another, the Camerara lost her place to boot. A well deserved Reward for such
as keep not the respect due to so Sacred Persons.

RECUEIL De bons Mots and Reparties fines, De Plusieurs Persons Illustres
Modernes and Anciennes; AVEC Quelques Historiettes, ou Contes Divertissants.
I.
UN Chymiste ayant dedie au Pape Leon X. un Livre ou il se vantoit d'apprendre
la maniere de fair de l'Or, s'attendoit a recevoir un magnifique Present. Le
Pape lui envoya une grande bourse toute vuide, and lui fit dire que puis qu'il
savoit fair de l'Or, il n'avoit besoin que d'un lieu pour le mettre.

II.
Un Gallant Homme de la Cour de France alla chez un de ses amiss pour le
feliciter d'une dignite qu'il avoit obtenue depuis peu: Cet Homme tout fire de
sa nouvelle elevation, demanda qui il etoit? l'autre, sans se deconcerter,
change de langage, and lui dit, Qu'il venoit lui t'emoigner la douleur qu'il
avoit du malheur qui lui etoit arrive and qu'il etoit fort touch de le voir
sourd and aveugle, puis qu'il ne reconnoi^^oit plus ses meilleurs amiss.

III.
Un Mechant Predicateur Italien Prechoit un jour le Panegyrique d'un Saint, and
etant dans l'ardeur de son Discourse, il demandoit avec beaucoup d'emotion, ou
mettray-je mon Saint? Ou mettrai-je mon Saint? Un plaisant qui etoit dans son
auditoire, ennuye de sa Predication, resolut de s'en aller, and lui cria tout
haut, Voila ma place que je lui laisse.

IV.
Quand Moliere fut mort plusieurs man vais Poets lui firent des Epitaphes. Un
d'entreux, alla en presenter une de sa facon a un Prince fort celebre par son
esprit. Plut-a-Dieu, Monsieur, lui dit-le Prince en la recevant, que Moliere me
presentat la votre.

V.
Un jeune Prince ayant acheve ses etudes and ses exercices on demanda a un de
ses Domestiques ce qu'il avoit le mieux appr^s, c'est Repondit il a monter a
Cheval, parce que ses Chevaux ne l'ont point flate.

VI.
Un homme de la Cour de France etoit soup conne d'etre impuissant, and ne
vouloit pas demeurer d'accord qu'il le fut. Il rencontra un jour le Poet
Benserade, qui l'avoit souvent raille la dessus, Monsieur lui dit-il,
nonobstant toutes vos mauvaises plaisanteries, ma Femme est accouchee depuis
deux jours. He, Monsieur, lui repliqua Benserade, on n'a j^mais doubt de Madame
votre Femme.

VII.
Un petit Prince d'Italie ayant appris qu'un Gentilhomme Francois qui etoit en
sa Cour avoit fait quelques railleries de lui and de ses desseins lui envoya
dire qu'il eut a sortir dans tro^ jours de ses etats, Il me fait trop de grace,
repondit le Francois, de m'accorder un si long term, je n'ay pas besoi^ de
plus de trois quarts d'heure pour lui obeir.

VIII.
La Mere d'une Demoiselle Galante vouloit l'envoyer au Convent des Filles
Repenties, je n'en suis pas d'avis, dit une Dame de ses Parents, and pourquoi?
lui demanda la Mere, C'est, repondit-elle, parce qu'elle n'est ni l'une ni
l'autre.

IX.
Quelqu'un reprochoit a l' Empereur Sigismond, qu'an lieu de fair Mourir ses
ennemis vaincus il les combloit de graces, and les mettoit en etat de lui
nuire: Ne les fais-je pas mourir, dit-il, en faisant cesser leur hayne and les
rendant mes amiss?

X.
Un Segneur avoit Choisi un homme ignorant pour etre son Bibliotequaire, C'est,
dit une Femme de qualite fort Spirifue^^e, le Serail qu'un a done a garder a
un Eunuque.

XI.
Thomas More fameux Chancelier d' Angleterre, etant en Prison par l'ordre d'
Henry VIII. laissa croitre ses cheveux and sa barbe; un Barbier se presenta
pour les lui couper and pour le Razer, Mon ami, lui dit-il, Comme nous avons le
Roy and Moy, un process pour ma tete, je ne veux fair aucune depense pour
l'ajuster que je ne sache qui de nous deux en doit disposer.

XII.
Henry VIII. Roy d' Angleterre, ayant des demeles avec Francois I* Roy de
France, resolut de lui envoyer un Ambassadeur, and de le charger de plusieurs
paroles fieres and menacantes; il choisit pour cet employ un Eveque en qui il
avoit beaucoup de confiance; cet Eveque lui representa que se vie seroit en
grand danger, s'il tenoit de pareils discourse a un Roy aussi fire, qu'etoit le
Roy Francois Premier: Ne craignez rien, lui dit Henry VIII. si le Roy de France
vous faisoit mourir, je ferois abbatre bien de tetes a quantite de Francois qui
sont en ma puissance, je le crois repondit, l'Eveque, Mais de toutes ces tetes,
ajouta t-il en riant, il n'y en a pas une qui vi^t si bien sur mon corpse que
celle ey, en lui montrant la Sienne. Cette Reponse agreeable pleut au Roy, and
l'obligea a reformer l'instruction de son Ambassadeur.

XIII.
Bacon, celebre Chancelier d' Angleterre fur visit par la Reine Elisabeth dans
une maison de Campaign qu'il avoit fait batir devant sa Fortune; D'ou vient,
lui dit la Reine, que vous avez fait une si petite maison, Ce n'est pas moy,
Madame, lui dit le Chancelier, qui ay fait ma maison trop petite, mais c'est
votre Majeste qui m'a fait trop grand pour ma maison. Outre l'esprit and
e'agrement de cette reponse, elle marque une modesty and une reconnoissance
qui doivent la fair estimer.

XIV.
En Espagne on ne vit que pour Aimer, ce qu'on appelle Aimer en France n'est le
plus souvent que parler d'amour and meler aux Sentimens de l'Ambition, la
Vanite des Galanteries. D'ou vient qu'une Femme de Qualite Espagnole lisant il
n'y a pas long tems le Roman de Cleopatre, and apres um long recit d'Avantures,
etant tombee sur une Conversation delicate d'un Amant and d'une Amante
egalement Passionnez; Que d'esprit mal employe dit elle, a quoi bon tous ces
beaux Discourse quand ils sont ensemble, and qu'ils sont seuls.

XV.
Le Comte D'Orgaz, grand D' Espagne, vouloit avoir aupres de lui um Homme de
Lettres pour le plaisir de la Conversation, un de ses amiss lui en Presenta un a
qui il demanda d'abord s'il savoit fair des Verse? L'Homme de Lettres lui
repondit qu'il en jugeroit par les ouvrages qu'il lui feroit voir de sa facon;
il lui apporta le lendemain quantite de Romanees and d'autres Po^sies
Espagnolles de toutes les Especes. Le grand D' Espagne apres les avoir lues,
dit a son ami que cet Homme ne l'accommodoit pas, and pourquoi? lui demanda son
ami, c'est, repliqua til, qu^il faut etre sot pour ne pas fair deux Verse, mais
il faut etre fou pour en fair quatre.

XVI.
Vne Dame Espagnolle jeune and bienfaite etoit a confess a un Religieux de son
pays, ce Confessieur apres lui avoir fais plusieurs questions sur les matieres
de sa Confession, devint curieux de la Connoitre, and lui demanda son nom, la
Dame (...) se sentit point tentee de satisfaire sa curiosite, and lui repondit,
Mon Pere, mon nom n'est pas un Peche.

XVII.
Alexandre le Grand, ayant remporte la Victoire sur l'Armee de Darius Roy de
Perse, celui-ci lui demanda la Paix, and lui offrit la moitie de l'Asie avec
dix mill Talents. Parmenion un de ses Favoris charm d'une Proposition si
avantageuse, Seigneur, dit-il a Son maitre, je vous proteste que si j'etois
Alexandre j'accepterois ces offres avec Joy, Et moy aussi, lui repondit
Alexandre, si j^etois Parmenion.

XVIII.
Le fameux Philosophe Anacharsis etoit Scythe, and um Grec qui n'avoit d'autre
merit que d'etre ne en Greece le regardant avec envy lui reprochoit la
Barbary de son pais, J'avoue, lui repliqua Anacharsis, que mon pais me fai^
honte, mais tu fais honte a ton pais. Ce mot peut etre fort bien applique a ces
petits esprits qui meprisent les etrangers, parce seulement qu'ils sont
etrangers, and qui ne savent pas que le Savoir and le merit sont de tout pais.

XIX.
Pompee etant malade de la Fievre, un de ses amiss le vint voir, and vit en
entrant dans sa Chamber une belle Esclave don't Pompee etoit amoureux qui en
sortoit, il demanda a Pompee comment il se portoit, la Fievre vient de me
quitter, lui dit Pompee, Je l'ai rencontree qui sortoit de chez vous, lui dit
son ami.

XX.
Alexandre le Grand etant a Delphes, entraina la Pretresse d' Apollon dans le
Temple pour lui fair render un Oracle en un jour deffendu; elle s'erta comme
il l'entra^noit de f^rce and apres avoir resist en vain, Alexandre, tu es
invincible, Je ne veux point, dit-il, d'autre Oracle que celui-l^.

XXI.
Un Rich Athenien pria le Philosophe Aristippe de lui dire (...) qu'il
desiroit pour instruire son fills. Aristippe lui demanda Mill Drachmes:
Comment! dit l'Athenien, j'acheterois un Esclave de cet argent la Achetes en
un, lui repondit Aristippe, and tu en auras deux. Lui faisant entendre que son
fills auroit les defauts d'un Esclave s'il ne faisoit pas la depense necessaire
pour le bien elever.

XXII.
L' Empereur Auguste cherchant des raisons de la grande ressemblance qui etoit
enter lui and un jeune homme Grec; lui demanda si sa mere avoit jamais ete a
Rome, Non Seigneur, lui repondit le Grec. Mais mon pere y est venu plusieurs
fois.

XXIII.
Darius Roy de Perse Envoya des grands presents a Epaminondas chef des Thebains
pour tacher de le Corrompre; si Darius reut etre ami des Thebains, dit ce grand
Captain a ceux qui les lui portoient, il n'est pas necessaire qu'il Achete
mon amity, and s'il d'autres sentimens, il n'est pas assez rich pour me
Corrompre.

XXIV.
Pisistrate Tyrant d'Athenes ayant resolu de se remarier, ses enfans lui
demanderent si c'etoit a Cause de quelque mecontentement quil eut receu d'eux.
Au contraire, leur repondit-il, je suis si satisfait de vous, and je vous
trouve si honnetes gens que je veux en avoir encore d'autres qui vous
ressemblent.

XXV.
Le Fills de Denis Tyran de Syracuse ayant viol e une Dame, son Pere lui demanda
en colere s' il avoit jamais entendu, dire que durants a jeunesse il eut fait
de pareillesactions; c'est lui repondit ce fills emporte, qui vous n'etiez par
ne fills de Roy: Tu n'en seras jamais Pere, lui repliqua le Tyran. Cemot est
fort instructif aux enfans des Souverains, qui abusent, des privileges de leur
naissance.

D'un Vieux Seigneur and d'une Suivante.
UN Vieux Seigneur devint amoureux d'une jeune D^m^iselle qui ser voit sa
Femme, le peu de Virtue qu'on trou^e ordinairement dans les Suivantes se
trouvant utilement s^^tenu^e par les desagremens du viellard, fut assez fort
pour ^^sister a ses Solicitations; elle en avertit sa Maitresse, and ^^firma
par ses larmes ces temoignages de sa Chastete, Il n'est pas possible, Madame,
lui dit elle, que je souffre d'avantage, pour qui me prend-il? and comment
peut-il me croire capable de manquer a ce que je dois and a vous and a ^on
Honneur? S'il continue, je vous supply de me permettre de me retirer. La bonne
Dame fort piquee contre son Mary, and nes content de l'honnetete de sa
Suivante, lui dit, ma fille, ^e te mets point en peine, il ne faut pas que to
songs a me quitter etant si asseuree que tu l'es de mon amity; il faut done,
Madame, que vous me delivriez des Persecutions de Monsieur: He been, lui dit la
Dame il me vient un expedient fort propre pour cela, il faut que tu fasses
semblant de t'adou^ir pour lui, and qu'ensuite tu lui donnes la nuit un
rendezvous dans ta Chamber, Moy, Madame, un rendez-vous? lui dit sa Demoiselle;
ecoute jusqu'au bout ce que j'ay a te dire, quand, tu lui auras done ^'heure
and l'aisse la port ouverte j'iray en ta place dans ton lit, and tu passer as
dans ma Chamber, and alors quand il viendra je tui ferai tant de honte qu'il
perdra l'envie de te tourmenter. La soubrette executa avec soin les ordres de
sa Maitresse, la nuit veniie, le viellard amoureux se glissa dans la Chamber de
la Suivante, and il alla avec Empressement dans le lit ou sa Femme l'attendoit,
elle ne jugea pas a propos de le quereller d'abord, mais comme cette avanture
se passoit plus Chastement qu'elle ne se l'etoit imagine elle s'en ennuya and
se resolut en^in de parler; N'est ce pas pour cela, lui dit-ellie, que vous
vous etes done tant de peine Le Mari reconnut alors son Err^ur, and la voix de
sa Femme, Je vous avoue, Madame, lui dit-il. que mon corpse est plus sage que
mon esprit, cas il vous a reconnue, and mon esprit aveugle vous prenoit pour
une jolie Fille.

D'une Dame and D'un Religieux.
UNe Dame Espagnolle jeune and bienfaite alla dans une Eglise de Religieux a
desseinde s'y Confesser, elle y trouva un Religieux de cette maison qui etoit
alors seul dans une Chapelle de cette Eglise. Elle se mit a genoux aupres de
lui, and lui dit tous ses peches, and comme il ne lui repondit rien, elle lui
demanda ensuite l' Absolution, je ne puis pas vous la donner, lui dit le
Religeux, 'car je ne suis pas Pretre. Vous n'etes pas Pretre? Lui dit la Dame
fort surprise and fort en colere, non Madame, lui repondit froidement le
Religeux. Ie vais, lui repliqua t-elle me plaindre a votre Superieur, de ce que
vois auez entendu ma Confession, and moy, lui repartit les Religeux, je vais
dire de vos Nouvelles a votre Mari. Surquoi etant entrez en Compensation de
Menaces, ils se separerent but a but, la Dame ayant juge sagement, qu'il
n'etoit pas de son interetl de divulguer cette avanture.

Du Roy de Naples, and de Piovano Arlotto.
UN Cure Italien Nomme il Piovano Arlotto passant par Naples, alla saliler le
Roy Alfonce, qui apprit par un de jes Courtisans quece Cure etoit un homme
plaisant qui disoit librement and agreablement, ce qu'il pensoit aux persons
les plus elevees, and qu'il avoit un livre ou il ecrivoit toutes let fautes des
Principaux de son tems, Messer Piovano, lui dit le Roy, ne serois je point
ecrit sur votre livre? il faut voir, repondit le Piovano; and le Roy luy ayant
ordonne de l'aller querir, il y leut. Fault faite par Alfonce Roy de Naples,
d'avoir envoye en Allemagne, un Allemand qui etoit en sa cour avec deux Mill
Ducats pour lui acheter des Chevaux. En quoy trouves-tu que j'aye failli, dit
le Roy, de donner cette Commission a cet Allemand? c'est, repondit le Piovano,
parce qu'il restera en son pais avec votre; argent. Et (...) revient avec des
Chevaux ou qu'ilme rapporte mo^ argent? Repartit le Roy: Alors, repliqua le
Piovano, je vous effaceray de mon livre, and j'y ecrisay l' Allemand en votre
place.

Qui Mal Pense, Mal lui vient.
UN Cure Italien invita un jour a Diner il Piovano Arlotto avec plusieurs
autres Cures, ce Cure qui voulut fair le plaisant, tira ceux-cy a part and
leur dit, Messieurs, je suis d'avis que nous nous divertissions aujourd' huy
aux depens du Piovano, qui comme vous savez, fait le bon Compagnon and se moque
de tout le monde; comme mon Clerc est malade, and que je n'ay person pour
nous servir j'ay dessein de vous proposer de (...) a la court paille, pour
voir lequel de nous ira a la cave tirer le vin; and servir les autres pendant
qu'ils Dineront, and je ferai en sort que le sort tombera sur le Piovano
Arlotto; ce qui ayant ete conclu entr'eux fut execute, Arlotto s'appercut du
complot, and resolut d'en fair repentir son Hot; il alla a la cave remplir
les bouteilles pendant que les autres commen coient a diner and etant remonte
avec les Bou^eilles, Vous voyez, Messieurs, leur dit il, comme j'ay fait ce que
le jeu, m'a ordonne; rejouons presentement pour voir lequel de nous descendra a
la cave pour refermer les muids que j'ai laissez ouverts. Alors le Maitre de la
maison, ne parla plus de tirer a la Court paille, and connoissant Arlotto pour
etre homme a l'avoir fait comme il le disoit, il quitta promptement son diner
and courut a la cave ou il trouva ses muids ouverts, and une party de son vin
perdu; don't il fit ensuite de grandes plaintes a Arlotto. Vous n'avez pas
raison de vous plaindre de moy, iuy repondit-il, puis que j'ay satifait
ponctuellement au jeu, qui m'avoit Bien ordonne d'aller tirer le vin, and de
remplir les Bouteilles mais non pas de refermer les muids d'un hot qui fait si
mal les honneurs de sa maison.

Le Marriage est un Remede contre l'Amour.
CLitandre ayant veu par hasard lae belle Celimene, il en demeura surpris and
charm. Cependant comme elle n'avoit qu'un bien mediocre, avec une Beauty
extraordinaire, and qu'il avoit des Richesses immenses il fit reflection sur un
engagement qu'il trouvoit bien prompt, and bien fort. Il n'avoit plus de repos,
il se sentoit continuellement agite, and il craignoit qu'une passion qui etoit
si violente des son commencement, ne le portat enfin a satisfaire son coeur au
prejudice de sa Fortune. Pour bannir de son ame une tendresse si dangereuse il
alla fair une Campaign on Hongrie; mais il revint plus amoureux qu'il (...)
etoit parti. Puis s'accusant de foiblesse il fit un second effort, and
entreprit le voyage d'Italie, mais le^ divertissemens de Rome, and le Carnaval
de Venise ne furent pas moins inutiles que le Siege de Bude. Clitandre fut a
son retour, plus ardent and plus passionne que jamais, and comme son ami
Philemon fut lui render visit, mon cher Philemon lui dit-il, je train une vie
Malheureuse, je ne puis oublier Celimene. je m'imagine qu'elle est toujours
devant mesreux avec tous ses charms; Ensin, Ajouta t-il, Enfin il faudra que
je l'epouse pour cesser de l'aimer. Il l'epousa en effet, and quinze jours de
Marriage changerent son amor violente and tumultileuse, en une amity douoe and
tranquille.

Exemple de Generosite.
BAlzac ayant besoin d'argent envoya prier Voiture son ami de vouloir bien lui
preter quatre cens eeus, and chargea le porteur de donner a Voiture une
Promise de parcille sum. Voiture conta l'argent and on lui presenta la
promise, ouil y avoit ces mots,

Je soussigne confess devoir a Monsieur de Voiture la sum de quatre cens
ecus qu'il m'a pretee, etc.

Voiture prend la promise, la lit and souscrit ces paroles,

Je soussigne confess devoir a Monsieur de Balzac, la sum de huit cens ecus,
pour le plaisir qu'il m'a fait de m'en emprunter quatre cens. Apres cela il
rend la promise au Valet-de-chambre pour la reporter.

De la Reine d' Espagne and de ses Perroquets.
LA Camerara Major, au la premiere Dame d' Honneur de la feue Reine d' Espagne,
etoit une Femme d' une huneur chagrine and emportee, qui au lieu de servir sa
Maitresse se croyoit en droit de la Gouverner: Elle haissoit mortellement deux
Perroqvets que la Reyne avoit apportez de France, parce qu'ills parloient
Francois. Un jour sa Majeste et^nt sortie, la Camerara prit les Perroquets de
celui qui (...), leur tordit le coss de sang froid, and en ^lla. Aussi tot que
la Reyne fut revenu, elle demanda ses Perroquets qui etoient son plus grand
Divertissement dans un Pais ou elle n^en avoit guere d'autre; ses Femmes ^out
etonnees firent paroitre leur surprise sur leurs visages, and n'ayant pas le
mot en bouche; lui avo^^erent enfin ce qui en etoit. Cela lui perca le coeur,
mais elle trouva a propos de cacher son ressentiment. Cependant la Camerara
etant de retour, and voyant sa Majeste assez calm, s'aprocha d'elle pour luy
baiser la Main comme elle avoit accoutume de fair, mais elle en fut receiie
avec deux grand Souffets, A peine peut on exprimer la Confusion qu'un affront
si sensible donna a cette Femme superbeo, elle sortit toute en colere and
ramassant toutes ses Parents and Alliees elle s'en alla trouver le Roy avec
une suite de quatre cens Dames, and lui demanda la reparation de son honneur
avec tant d'importunite, qu'il se vit oblige d'aller chez la Reyne, pour savoir
ses raisons, Sire, repliqua cette ingenieuse Princess, Cen'etoit que pour
contenter l'envie d'une Femme gross; est-^ donc assez de deux, Madame,
repondit le Roy? Autrement je vous pry, appliquez lui en deux douzaines. Et
comme un malheur ne vient jamais seul, la Camerara perdit sa place sur le
march. Digne recompense pour ceux qui ne gardent pas le respect qui est du a
des Persons si Augustes.

A COLLECTION Of Choice Letters upon several Subjects.
I. LETTER*
To my Lord Marquess of M -- Prisoner in FRANCE.
My Lord,
YOU would not be sorry to be Taken, if you did but know how much you are
pitied. There is, I protest, less Satisfaction to be in London, than to be
lamented as you are; The Complaints which so many Persons of Honor make for
you, are much better than the fairest Liberty in the World; and you ought not
to reckon among your Misfortunes an Accident that yields your Lordship the
Testimonies of Affection of all that is Lovely in England. In this general
Resentment of all the World, it is not fit, methinks, for me to tell your
Lordship of mine; For how could I expect that you would take notice of me,
among Princesses, Princes, Lords and Ladies, and among some Gentlewomen of no
less worth. When you have considered a long while all those Illustrious
Persons, I shall most humbly entreat your Lordship to believe that no Man in
the World has a greater share in all your good and bad Fortunes than I, nor is
with more Affection.

Your, etc.

II. LETTER.
To My LADY L -- (He Comforts Her of Her Father's Death.)
Madam,
HAving been kept hitherto by an awful Respect from Writing to your Ladyship, I
am extremely sorry to be forced to it now by so dismal an Occasion as this. I
do not question, that losing my Lord, your Father, in the time he gave you the
greatest Proofs of his Affection, but this Loss was most grievous to your
Ladyship; and that being altogether unused to such fierce blows of Fortune,
this has extremely affected you. But, I hope, that the same equality of Mind,
which never suffered your Ladyship either to do, or say any thing but with a
just measure, will not be wanting in this occasion, and that you will rule your
Grief and your Tears as you have done all the Actions of your Life. I hope
also, that so Divine a Person as your Ladyship, will comply with the Pleasure
of Heaven, and suffer it to take something away of what it had so bountifully
bestowed on you. I pray God may be pleased to calm the Agitations of your Mind,
to cure that Wound he has made himself in your Heart, and to restore to all
those who have the Honor to know your Ladyship, the Gladness which your Sorrow
has taken away from them. I am,

Madam, Your, etc

III. LETTER.
I Have, Dear Cousin, received all your Letters, and it is but reasonable I
should thank you for the delight they have given me^ how little sensible as I
am to pleasure, I cannot but relish a great one, whenever I hear from you;
besides the Contentment which I find in the Tokens of your Affection, the
pleasant variety of your Letters yields me still a new one; and so I am no less
obliged to your heart than to your wit, for Conspiring both to Charm my
sorrows. I wish I were able to repay you by my Letters, the delight I find in
yours. But if my heart requites you, it is very hard considering the condition I
am now in, for my wit to do the like. What shall I entertain you with. You
attack me with the fair Sex, and Verses, and a long time ^ince, I converse
neither with Love, nor Poetry; I have gone through too many Tempests in Love,
to venture again upon a Sea so stormy and so inconstant; and as for Verses who
should inspire me with them? My Love was always my only Apollo, and after I
have bid an eternal farewell to the Fair, it is not likely I should henceforth
Court the Muses. It Is time to change Objects, and after so many Unfruitful
wanderings, to aim at something that is material. But besides, as I am now, if
I would give my mind to it, I could expect but a very bad success. There is no
going to Parnassus with that crowd of griefs and misfortunes which attend me a
while since; and the Gall and Wormwood which Heaven gives me to drink every
day, is, questionless a very unfit Liquor to inspire me with sweet Poesy. All
that I can do to oblige you, is to send you certain Verses I made before my
misfortunes, and which, in my opininn, will be the last Sighs of my dying (or
buried) Muse. I add to it a Madrigal which our illustrious M. M. has composed
upon your Famous Walker, Farewell, and be sure, I am,

Always Yours, etc.

IV. LETTER
Sir,
I Thought indeed you had a little kindess for me, but I never durst flatter my
self you had so much, as to write me so obliging a Letter, as that I received
this Morning; and I confess that I am so puzzled to find out Expressions to
Counterbalance your Civilities, that I could wish almost that I had not
received your Letter, to be rid of the Obligation of Answering it. This is the
reason still, that has kept me silent all this while, but I must be so no
longer, for fear you should ascribe it to a wilful negligence. I therefore
venture this Letter, not as an Answer, but only, Sir, to give you a Testimony
of my thankfulness, and to beg of you the Continuation of your Friendship. As
for what you say in yours, I wish it were true; and that I had something worthy
to be communicated unto you; if I had, you may be sure I would send it you with
all speed, were it but to know your opinion of it, which I would prefer to many
others, and even to my own, I have not forgotten the Problem, I promised you
before you went away, but I have not been able to go about it, for want of a
Sector: If I don't receive very speedily that which I expect from Holland I Will
endeavor to get one from another place, to satisfy your desire, mean while, I
am without Affectation:

Your, etc.

V. LETTER.
Dear Sir,
THE bad Weather which robs me of the pleasure of your Company, would be
extremely grievous to me, were I not happily recompensed of that Loss, by the
charming Letter you have honored me withal, for I do see you there, such as
you are, that is, full of Wit and Genteelness. I cannot but admire the free,
easy way of your Expressions, and the admirable knack you have of settting out
things, which savours much more the Gentleman and the Courtier, than the
Pedantick way of ordinary Scholars; your Reflections are extraordinary exact;
and one may see every where the Character of a fine Writer. But give me leave
to break off there, to speak of Madam C --, you know as well as I, that she is
a Person, who besides her Birth, is Eminent above the rest of our Young Ladies
by a thousand Accomplishments, how could I then, after I had the Honor to be
acquainted with so lovely a Person, have neglected the Occasions to see her,
and enjoy the Advantages of her sweet Company? Therefore, he you judge whether
I am guilty of the Crime that is laid to my Charge: Be pleased to make her my
Complements, and tell her, I hop^ to have the Honor very shortly to play at
Ombre with her; it is so long since I did play at it, that it puts me quite out
of order. Farewell, My Dear,

I am, Your, etc.

VI. LETTER.
To My LADY F --
Madam,
I Make bold to give your Ladyship a Counsel, tho Women love seldom to receive
any; But no matter, I am too much concerned for your Beauty to forbear telling
you how much you shall wrong it, if you chance to set off your self on the
Princesses Birthday. Leave Ornaments to others; Finery is a borrowed Beauty
which is to them instead of a natural, and we are obliged to them for giving
our Eyes something that is more agreeable than their Persons. We should not have
the same Obligation, to your Ladyship, every Ornament you put on, hides a
Beauty; every Ornament you take away, renders you a Grace, and you are never so
well as when we see in you nothing but your self. Most Ladies are
advantageously lost under their Attire; some look very well with their Pearls,
that would look very ill with their Neck: The finest Necklace in the World
would yield an ill Effect upon yours, it would occasion some Alteration in your
Person, and no Alteration can be an advantage to what is Perfect. Let, Madam,
let others lavish their Money upon Jewels and Clothes; Nature has laid out for
you all that you lackd. You would be ungrateful and we unskilful, were we not
equally contented with the Liberalities she has bestowed on you. I am

Madam, Your Ladyships, etc.

VII. LETTER.
SIR,
NO doubt but this Letter will Surprise you; and one may think it a great
Da^^^gness in me, both for the design of Writing, and the way of Conveying it
unto you; But I am in a Condition that Excuses me from keeping any Measures:
The just Horror I have of a Marriage, which threatens me within six Days, makes
me venture all things; And in the Resolution I have of preventing it by any
means, I thought I had better choose you than despair: However do not believe*
you are wholly indebted to my ill Fate; The constraint I am in, has not
influenced the Sentiments I have for you, but only precipitated the discovery
of them, and made me lay aside those Formalities unto which Decency obliges our
Sex. It will be long of you if I am not yours very suddenly, and I only expect
to hear the Intentions of your Love, to let you know my Resolution; But above
all, remember that the time is short, and that a Word must be sufficient to a
Loving Couple.

Celia.

VIII. LETTER.
Madam,
I Send you here your Character, which lays before your Eyes the Sentiment of
all those who have the Honor to know you, and informs you, if you do not know
it, that there is not in England any thing so perfect as your self. Do not be
so severe upon your self, as to refuse that due, which every Body gives you;
Most Ladies are easily persuaded, and receive gladly, pleasing Errors; 'twould
be very strange, that you would not believe a Truth.

I am, etc.
The Character of an Accomplished Lady.
MRs. E. P -- has an easy, free middle-size Shape; Black Hair in abundance;
The Face oval; The Fe^tures delicate and regular; The Complexion so clear, so
fair and so lively, that all your trivial Similes of Lillies and Roses come
very short of expressing it; Large sparkling Black Eyes, thick and well parted
Eyebrows; Teeth white and even; Fresh incarnate Lips; An Alablaster Neck, the
Hands and Arms so smooth and so well framed, that one would take them to be
artificially turned. In fine, she is such an accomplished Beauty as would serve
to finish that Picture of Venus, which Apelles left unperfect; to which you may
add, what is past any Painters Skill to represent; I mean, her noble, but
gentle Carriage; her modest, but natural Countenance, never composed nor
disturbed, her sweet Smiles, winning Looks, graceful Speech and charming
Motions, accompanied with all the Endearments of Freedom and Decency.

Whether it be to mortify the Handsome, or to comfort the Ill-favored, we
seldom see Beauty and Wit go together. But Nature designing M. P -- for her
Masterpiece has bestowed on her the Perfections both of Mind and Body to the
most eminent Degree: In Conversation she knows when to speak and when to be
silent, she says nothing with Study or Affectation, and yet nothing at random;
Her Thoughts are lively, exact, and delivered with all the delicacy of
Expression; She is quick at Repartee, she rails finely, but without Malice, and
though she have a great deal of Wit, no body had ever reason to wish her less;
She understands the Rules of Civility and good Breeding, and practices them
without being troublesome to her self or others; she is a passionate lover of
Freedom, but what Honesty most Women receive from the fear of Shame, she has by
natural Innocence; and to finish by what ought to be considered before all the
rest, she discharges all the Duties of Religion without either indifferency or
Superstition.



IX. LETTER.
Answer.
Sir,
WHen you praise my Beauty and Wit, you should take care of my modesty, and
fear lest you make me lose a good Quality I have, by giving me those I have
not. However I received your praises with great joy; not that I believe what
you say of me, but because they are a great testimony of your Friendship, and
that you cannot but love me much, since you wroug in my behalf, your judgment
in a thing, of which upon other, occasions, you are so good a Judge. Be
persuaded, that if I had all the accomplishments, you are pleased to give me, I
would draw no other advantage from 'em, than the gaining in your Heart, the
room I see, I have there already.

X. LETTER
To Belinda.
IF the Grief of being severed from what you Love, be as sensible to you as it
is to me, and if you feel during that absence, any thing like to what I endure,
what considerations, fair Belinda, are those that can keep you from seeing me
two whole days? And why do we not run into any other extremity, than that we
are reduced to by this Misfortune? Is it reasonable to forebear our enjoyments,
to keep four or five people from taking notice, and talking of them? And to
prevent a little noise, must we suffer so great a torment. No, no, dear
Belin^a; the greatest misfortune that can befall us, is to be parted, and I
don't think of any other which we ought to fear so much. And when all is done,
for all the trouble we are at, don't think our affection to be the more secret;
the sorrow that is over my Face, when you are absent, discovers it to every
body, and proclaims it louder than any man could do: Let Us then, for the
future, renounce a discretion that costs us so dear, and avails us nothing, and
give me this Afternoon the opportunity to see you, at least, if you will have
me live.

XI. LETTER.
Answer.
HAve you lost your Senses since Yesterday? I found you reasonable, and now you
appear to me the most unjust of all men. Do you not remember the reasons I have
for denying your demand to day? Is it possible that for a moment of pleasure
you would venture my Honor and Reputation? Oh! If they have not been able to
drive Love from my heart, it is not reasonable that love should wholly triumph
over them; and I am so persuaded that a disgraced Mistress has no charms for a
Man of honor, and a nice Lover, that you will never oblige me to do any thing
that may be against my honor, as that would be, to see you to day. If to see
you I could venture my Life without my Credit, I should re^dily do it at any
time, I love you with an eagerness, any thing p^oof but Inf^my. You will be
convinced of it, if to morrow's Assignation at N -- Succeeds, I expect it with
the most impatient desire, etc.

XII. LETTER.
To Celia.
I See now plainly, that for all my attempts, I shall never get loose from you.
As you do still every day something to vex me, that gives me the desire to
rebel, so. I discover still every day in you a new grace that keeps me loyal;
and even as my sorrows grow deeper, so do your charms, and my chains increase.
After I have strived with might and main to withstand those Beauties I know in
your Person and in your Mind, it so falls out that when I see you, I find some
I did not know before, and against which I was not prepared; and there is in
you such a variety of Charms, that I meet always with some or other, to which I
cannot but yield the victory.

Lisidor.

XIII. LETTER.
To Celia.
IF all that is handsome, charming and agreeable in the World, was put together,
would it make any thing so lovely as you was last night? And all that Poets
fancy of Smiles, Graces and Loves, was it not really to be seen about your
Person? After I have been so happy as to see all this with my own eyes, I make
a resolution never to complain of any thing. I know well enough it will cost me
the rest of my Soul, but let me dye! If I grudge it, and if I had all the Souls
in the world, I should willingly give them for such a pleasure as I had to see
you.

Lisidor.

XIV. LETTER.
Sir,
YOur endeavors to please me, have succeeded so well that I had begun to love
yon to day* had it been the first time I saw you in my Life* you have spoke to
me in a condition so fit to be loved, that I could have wished that when you
went out of the Play, you had gone to lock your self in your Closet: For I
cannot think without a little rise of jealousy, that when I go from your eyes,
you make others happy by the sight of them.

Celia.

XV. LETTER.
He Reproaches her, her Infidelity.
Madam,
Though I took your Silence to be Ominous, yet could I never have suspected so
quick an alteration in you; and when I compare the great Expressions of
Affection and Tenderness of your former Letters with the Coldness and
Indifference of this last, I am no less amazed than if I saw the Clearness of
Serenity of the Sky, broke on a sudden by a violent Hurrican. It Is past my
finding out, how you can call my Demands unreasonable after your repeated
Protestations of Sacrificing any thing in the World, to live happy in my
Company. Call back to your Memory our sweet and familiar Intercourse, and if
the remembrance of it, can revive any spark of your past Affection, you will find
reasons enough to reconcile the seeming Contradictions of my Letter, and to
justify the unreasonableness of my Demands, You tell me, you wait for my
Answer, which is this, That except you restore me my former Ease and Calmness
of Mind, by showing me the same Friendship you did before, I am fully resolved
to go for Flanders, where, I hope, I shall put a period to that Life, which
your Infidelity has rendered so unfortunate.

XVI. LETTER.
The Praise of Matrimony.
Madam,
I Cannot express how sorry I am to hear of the Aversion you show to Matrimony;
I never discommended a seeming Reluctance in our Sex, because it is commonly
rewarded by Men's eagerness, but I fear you are a little mistaken in the use of
it, and that your Coyness will prove at last to quench Master C. Love, when it
should only be managed as a Trial of his Affection. I therefore thought fit to
impart unto you, those Reasons which my Reading and Experience make me think
most powerful to Conquer your obstinate Shyness.

And first, Madam, be pleased to consider, what a Holy and Commendable State
Marriage is* both by the Institution of it by God himself in the Earthly
Paradise, and by the end it aims at, viz. the Propagation of reasonable
Creatures. To which you may add, that it was at a Wedding that our Savior
Signalized first his Miraculous Power; and that Matrimony according to the
Apostle is the Figure of Christ's Union with his Church.

Secondly, Marriage is the most Honorable of all Conditions, since by it we
bestow continual Presents both on Church and State. In so much esteem was it
among the Jews, and so eminent above Virginity, that barrenness was accounted a
kind of Disgrace and Reproach. And among the Romans, those that had been often
Married, deserved the Honor of Coronation, and appeared in their public
Festivals, with Laurels and other Marks of Victory, as Contributing no less
than the Emperors to the Grandeur of their Empire. The Lacedaemonians of
another side, Instituted, A Yearly Solemnity, where unmarried People, above
five and Twenty, were publicly Scourged by Wise, Grave and Lusty Matrons. To
all which, 'twill not be amiss to add, the Precedent of one of the French
King's Proclamations, (and this is the only thing I could ever find Commendable
in him) Whereby the Parents of Ten Children are not only freed from all manner
of Taxes, but also Recompensed for their Labor with a considerable Pension.

But besides, Matrimony is no less an happy and blissful State, than it is Holy
and Honorable. For since it made the greater Felicity of our first Parents in
the State of Innocence, no question, but it is now the greatest Supporter of
our Human Miseries, and the Sweetest Refreshment of the Ca^^s of Life. And does
not the Wedding-Ring demonstrate by its Circle, that as Rotundity is Infinite,
the same is the Contentment of Married Couples? Thence it is, that among the
Ancients, Cupid and the Graces were reckoned among the Attendants of I^^o,
Goddess of Wedlock, and that in this Goddess's Sacrifices, the Priests were
used to throw away the Gall of the Victim, to denote that no bitterness ought
to trouble the enjoyments of Matrimony.

To all this I may add^^ Fourth Mativ^; which is Charity rewards our Mother
country. We are, you know by the Ambition of (...) in a most sad and
lamentable War, which daily carries away Thousands of our Men, and is it not
reasonable that while our Armies are exposed abroad to secure our ^ranquility
at home, we should employ it to repair their losses.

But what need I Enumerate so many Reasons? The Experience I have ^gotten by
two Husbands sufficiently convinces me, that we are not further Women than we
are liable to love. Follow them Dear R. follow the Natural Inclination of our
Sex, and do with Gentleness that which you cannot keep from without violence.

XVII. LETTER.
An Account of a Journey into the Country.
Madam,
I Have been so taken up by the Company we have had at P -- P -- that I have
often tried in vain to discharge the promise I made you before I went away, to
send you the particulars of our Journey; and now when I thought to make amends
by a long Letter, the Affliction which fills this house, so overcasts my mind,
as to render it very unfit to give you a pleasant entertainment.

But, let us make an attempt; and let Affliction though never so just disappear
for a moment; For when all is done, it is not reasonable for me to give that
heart over to grief, to which you have so great a claim.

On Monday or Tuesday (or any other day of the Week, you please, for I forgot
which) we set forth from Ritskens at break of day; betwixt Eleven and Twelve at
Noon, we came to Ailsbury, where Mr. C -- and Mr Sp. -- had waited for us about
an hour, they showed at first a great deal of joy at our arrival, but their
gladness was soon turned into sorrow, when they heard you was not in our
Company; especially Mr. Sp -- both by his Looks and Speech seemed to be much
grieved for your absence.

Two hours after, the rest of the Ladies being come with Sir B --, We sit at
Table, we Dine: About Three of the Clock, we get in the Coach* and about nine
we arrive safely at P -- P --

During the four or five first days of our being there, the illness of my Lady
B -- t occasioned such a grief amongst us all, that we had little or no other
Diversion, than that of going to see the magnificent House and fine Gardens of
Sir W -- F -- and even that was troubled by a small accident that befell our
Coach.

My Lady B -- t being well again, every body seemed to recover with her; our
enjoyments were brisker than before; Mr. Sp -- Sung; Mr. C -- Drunk and
smoked; Mr. L -- entertained Mrs. W -- with amorous Nonsense: As for Mrs. D --
and I being in some conformity of Destiny, we stole often from the Company, and
went upon the Terrass-walk, to enjoy the delight of talking of you and Mr. C.

The briefness which ought to be observed in a Letter, will not let me give a
Description of a famous Rejoicing we had at Mid-Summer-Day; of our private
Dancings at home, of a Visit we made to Mr. C -- and of my going with Mr. H --
to my Lord S -- s Country House, and to Northhampton.

At our return from this last place we heard the News of Miss B -- being ill;
fatal News which cut off all our joys; prevented a Hunting-Match we had made
for the next day; and precipitated our going away.

There you have a Summary account of our Journey into Northamptonshire; I hope
to give you the particulars of it, at our first interview after which I
continually sigh.

Though you have been at Ritskens, I cannot forbear telling you, that it is one
of the finest Seats in England, and where Nature seems to have framed a
thousand charming Solitudes on purpose either to complain of the cruelties, or
to receive the favors of a Mistress. I am sincerely.

Your, etc.

RECVEIL De Lettres Choisies sur diverse Sujets
LETTRE I.
A Monsieur le Marquis de M -- Prisonnier en FRANCE.
Monsieur,
VOus ne seriez pas fache d'etre pris, si vous saviez combien vous etes plaint.
Il y a sans mentir moins de plaisir d'etre a Londres, que d'y etre regrette
comme vous etes: Les plaintes que font pour vous tant d'honnetes-gens, valent
mieux que la plus belle liberte du monde; and vous ne devez pas mettre au rang
de vos malheurs, un accident qui vous a fait recevoir des temoignages de
l'affection de tout ce quil y a d'aimables Persons en Angleterre. Dans ce
sentiment general de tout le Monde, il n'est pas ce me semble a propos,
Monsieur, que je vous dise a cette heure les miens'. Car quelle appearance y
a-t-il que vous me dussiez considerer parmi des Princesses, des Princes, des
Seigneurs, des Dames, and parmi des Demoiselles qui valent autant que tout
cela. Quand vous aurez song assez long tems a toutes ces Illustres Persons,
je vous supplierai tres' humblement de croire qui'il n'y a qui que ce soit au
Monde, qui prenne plus de part a toutes vos bonnes and mauvaises Fortunes que
moy; ni qui soit avec plus de Passion.

Votre, etc.

LETTRE II.
A MADAME de L -- (Il la Console de la Mort de son Pere.
Madame,
N'ayant ose par respect vous ecrire jusqu'icy, j'ay un extreme regret d'y etre
contraint par une si funeste occasion que celle qui m'y oblige a cette heure.
Ie ne doubt pas, Madame, qu'ayant perdu Monseigneur votre Pere dans le tems que
vous receviez le plus, des preuves de son Affection, cette perte ne vous soit
infiniment sensible; and que n'etant p^^ accoutumee a recevoir de pareils coups
de la Fortune, celui-ci ne vous ait extremement touchee. Mais j^espere que
cette justesse d'esprit qui ne vous a jamais permis de rien fair, ni de rien
dire, que dans vraye mesure qu'il le falloit, vous servira en cette rencontre;
and que vous reglerez votre douleur and vos larmes comme vous avez su regler
toutes les actions de votre vie, j'espere aussi, Madame, qu'une Person aussi
celeste qne vous, s'accommodera aux v^lontez du Ciel: Et qu'ayant tant recu de
lui, vous souffrirez qu'il vous ote quelque chose. Ie pry Dieu quil veuille
calmer les Agitations de votre esprit, guerir lui meme la play quil a faite a
votre coeur and redonner a to^s ceux qui ont l'honneur de vous connoitre la
joye que votre tristesse leur a otee. Ie suis,

Madame, Votre, etc.

LETTRE III.
J'Ay recu, toutes vos Lettres, Mon cher Cousin, and il est bien just que je
vous remercie du plaisir qu'elles m'on^ done; quelque peu sensible que je sois
a la joye, je ne puis m'empecher d'en gouter beaucoup toutes les fois que je
recois de vos nouvelles; outre le piaisir que je trouve dans les marquis de
votre teudresse, la maniere agreeable don't vous diversi fiez vos lettres m'en
fait gouter encore un nouveau: Ainsi je suis oblige a votre coeur and a votre
esprit de ce qu'ils concourent tous deux a charmer mes ennuis. Ie souhaiterois
pouvoir a mon tour vous ecrire des Lettres qui vous rendissent le plaisir que
les votres me donnent; mais si mon coeur vous rend la pareille, il est mal aise
que dans l'etat ou je suis, mon esprit fasse la meme chose. Dequoy vous
parlerai-je? Vous m'attaquez sur les belles and sur les verse and depuis long
tems je ne connois ni L'amour ni la Poes^ie, I'ay trop essuye de tempetes dans
L'amour pour me rengager jamais dans une mer si inconstante and si Orageuse;
and pour les verse, qui me les inspireroit? Mon amor a toujours ete mon seul
Apollon, and apres avoir dit un adieu eternel aux belles, il n'y a guere
appearance, que je courtise desormais les Muses. Il est tems de changer d'objet,
and apres tant de courses inutiles, je dois songer a quelque chose de solid.
Mais outre cela dans l'etat ou se suis, quand je voudrois m'attacher je ne
pourrois sans doubt que mal reussir. On ne va point au Parnasse avec cette
foul d'ennuis and d'infortunes qui me suivent depuis quelque tems, and le fiel
and l'absynthe don't le Ciel m'abbreuve tous les jours, est sans doubt une
boisson peu propre, a m'inspirer de doux verse. Tout ce que je pui^ fair pour
votre service est de vous envoyer certains verse que j'avois faits avaunt mes
malheurs, and qui a mon avis, seront les derniers soupirs de ma muse ensevelie;
j'y joins un Madrigal que notre illustre. M. M. a fait sur votre fameux Walker.
Adieu, and Croyez moy toujours tout a vous.

LETTRE IV.
Monsieur,
JE croyois bien que vous aviez quelque amity pour mo^, mais je n'avois jamais
ose me flater que vous ^n ^ussiez assez pour m'ecrire une Lettre si obligeante
que celle que j'ai rece^e ce matin; and je vous avoue, que dans l'embarras ou
je suis de trouver des Expressions assez fortes pour contrepezer vos
honnetetez, je souhaiterois presque de n'avoir pas recu votre Lettre, afin de
n'etre point oblige d'y fair r^ponse. C'est cela meme encore qui m'a tenu
jusques a present dans le silence, mais enfin il faut le rompre, de peur que
vous ne l'attribuiez a une negligence criminelle. C'est pour quoy, Monsieur je
hazard cette Lettre, non pas comme une repons^, mais s^ulement pour vous
temoigner ma reconnoissance, and pour vous prier de m^ continuer votre amity.
Au rest, je voudrois bien que ce que vous dites dans votre Lettre fut vray,
and que j'eusse quelque chose de bon a vous communiquor, si cela etoit je vous
l'envoyerois tout aussi tot, quand ce ne seroit que pour savoir votre
sentiment, que je prefererois a beaucoup d'autres and au mien propre. Ie n'ay
pas oublie le Problem que je vous promis avaunt votre depart, mais je n'ay peu
y travailler faut^ d'un Compass de Proportion, si l'on ne m'envoye pas au plutot
celui que j'attens de Hollande je tacherai d'em av^ir un d'ailleurs afin de
vous satisfaire, cepe^ant je suis sans Affectation.

Votre, etc.

LETTRE V.
Mon cher Monsieur,
LE mauvais tems qui me prive du plaisir de vous voir and de vous entretenir,
me seroit extremement facheux si je n'etois heureusement recompense de cette
perte par la Lettre charmante que vous m'avez fait l'honneur de m'ecrire parce
qu'en effet, je vous y vois tell que vous etes, C'est ^ dire plein d'esprit and
de politesse. Ie ne saurois m'empecher d'admirer les manieres aisees de vos
Expressions, and le tour admirable que vous donnez a toutes chooses qui sent
bien plus le Cavalier and l'homme de Cour que la Pedanterie des savans
ordinaires; vos Reflections sont de la derniere justesse, and on voit par tout
le Caractere de bon ecrivain. Mai^ permettez moy de brizer la dessus pour
parler de Mademoiselle de C --, Vous savez, aussi bien que moy, que c'est une
person qui outre la naissance, possede mill autres belles qualites qui la
distinguent du rest de nos Demoiselles; qu'elle appearance donc, je vous pry,
qu'apres avoir eu l'honneur de connoitre une si aimable Person j'eusse
neglige les Occasions de la voir, and de profiter d'une aussi agreeable
compagnie que la sienne? Iugez apres cela si je suis coupable du crime don't on
m'accuse. Faites lui, s'il vous plait, mes complimens and dites lui, que
j'espere d'avoir bientot l'honneur de jouer a l'Ombre avec elle, il y a si long
tems que je n'y ai joue que j'en suis presque Malade, Adieu, Mon cher.

Je suis, Votre, etc.

LETTRE VI.
A MADAME F --
J'Entreprens de vous donner un Conseil, Madame, bien que les Femmes n'aiment
guere a en recevoir. Mais il n'imporete, je suis trop dans l'interet de votre
Beauty pour ne vous avertir pas du tort que vous lui ferez s'il vous arrive de
vous parer a la naissance de la Princess. Laissez les Ornemens pour les
autres; les Ornemens s^nt des Beautez etrangeres qui leur tiennent lieu de
naturelles, and nous leur sommes obligez de donner a nos yeux quelque chose de
plus agreeable que leurs Persons. Nous ne vous aurions p^^ la meme Obligation,
Madame, chaque Ornement qu'on vous done cache une beauty, Chaque ornement
qu'on vous ote vous rend une Grace, and vous n'etes jamais si bien que lors que
l'on ne voit en vous que vous meme. La plupart des Dames, se perdent
avantageusement sous leur parure. Il y en a qu'on trouve fort bien avec leurs
perles, qu'on trouveroit fort mal av^c leur Col; Le plus beau Collier du monde
feroit un mechant effet sur le votre. Il en arriveroit quelque Changement en
votre Person, and tout Changement qui se fait dans une chose parfaite, ne lui
sauroit etre avantageux. Laissez, Madame, laissez ruiner les autres en
pierreries and en habits, la Nature a fait pour vous toutes les depenses. Vous
seriez une ingrate, and nous aurions mechant gout, si n^us n'etions egalement
contens des liber^litez qu'elle vous a faites. Ie suis

Madame, Votre, etc.

LETTRE VII.
Monsieur,
CEtte Lettre vous surp^endra sans doubt; and l'on (...) trouver bien hardi
pour moy, and le dessein de vous ^ecrire, and la maniere de vous la fair
tenir^; mais je me voy dans un etat a ne plus garder de Mes^res; la just
ho^neur d'un Marriage, don't je ^ui^ menacee dans six jours, me fait hazarder
toutes chooses, and dans la Resolution de m'en affr^n^hir quelque voye que ce
soit, j'ay cre^ que je devois plu^at vous choisir que le desespoir. Ne croyez
pas pourtant quevous soyez redevable de tout a ma mau^^ise destinee; ce n'est
^as la contrainte ou je me trouve qui a fait naitre les sentimens qui j'ay pour
vous; Mais c'est elle qui ^n precipite le temoignage* and qui me fait passer
sur des formalitez, ou la ^ien seance du Sex oblige. Il ne tiendra qu^ a vous
que je sois a vous bien tot and j'attens seulement que vous m'ayez marque les
Intentions de votre amor, pour vous fair savoir la Resolution que j'ay prise;
mais sur tout, songez que le tems press, and que deux coeurs qui s'aiment
doivent S'entendre a demi-mot.

^elie.

LETTRE VIII.
Mademoiselle,
JE vous envoye votre Caractere, qui vous explique le Sentiment de tous ceux
qui^ont l'honneur de vous connoitre; and vous apprend, si vous ne le savez,
qu'il n'y a rien en Angleterre. de si parfait que vous. Ne soyez pas si
rigoureuse a vous meme que de vous denier une Justice que tout le monde vous
^end; la plupart des Dames se laissent persuader aisement and recoivent avec
plaisir de douces Er^eurs, il seroit bien etrange que vous ne voulussiez pas
croire une verite.

Je suis, etc.
Caractere d'une Dame Parfaite.
ME E. P -- a la Taille mediocre, libre and degagee; quantite de Cheveux Noirs;
Le Visage ovale; Les Traits delicats and reguliers; Le Teint si uny, si beau,
and si anime que les Lys and les Roses sont des Comparaisons trop foibles pour
l'exprimer; Elle a les Yeux Noirs grands and pleins de feu; Les Sourcils bien
garnis and separez; Les Dents blanches and bien rangees, les levres d'un
Incarnat Vif; Vne Gorge d'Albatre, le Bras and la Main d'une beauty and d'une
polissure si admirable qu'en les croiroit faits au Tour; Enf^, c'est une Beauty
si accomplie qu'elle pourroit servir de ^^dele pour achever la Venus, qu'
Apelles laissa imparfaite; (...) y ce que le Pinceau le plus habile ne sauroit
depeindre, Ie veux dire son Port noble me^e de Douceur; son Maintien serieux
mais naturel, qui ne se Compose* ni ne se concerte point; Le Rire, les Regards,
le Parler, and le Geste accompagnez de tous les Agrements de Liberte and de
bien Seance.

Soit pour mortifier les belles Persons, ou pour consoler celles qui ne le
sont pas, il est fort rare de voir ensemble ^'Esprit and la Beauty; Mais dans
le dessein que la Nature a eu de fair un Chef d'oenvre elle a done a M. P --
les Perfections du Corpse and de l'esprit dans le Degree le plus eminent. Dans la
Conversation elle sait egalement se taire and par^er a propos, elle ne dit rien
avec etude ou Affectation; and rien par hazard; Ses pensees sont vives, justes,
and exprimees d'un tour delicat; Elle a toujours la Repartie prete; Elle raille
finement, mais sans Malice; and quoy qu'elle ayt beaucoup d'esprit Person n'a
jamais eu Sujet de lui en Souhaiter moins; Elle sait les Regles de la Civilite,
qu'elle pratique sans peine and sans se render incommode aux autres. Elle aim
la Liberte avec Passion, mais cette Virtue don't la plupart des Femmes sont
redevables a la crainte de l'infamie, elle la tient de son Innocence naturelle;
and pour finir par la qualite qui doit etre consideree devant toutes les
autres, elle s'aquitte de tous les devoirs de la Religion d'une maniere
egalement e^oignee de l'indifference and de la Superstition.



LETTRE. IX.
Reponse.
Monsieur.
ENme louant de ma Beauty and de mon Esprit, vous devriez avoir soin de ma
Modesty, and craindre de me fair perdre une bonne qualite que ^'ay, en m'en
voulant donner d'autres que je n'ay pas. I'ay recu pourtant vos louanges avec
beaucoup de joye, non pas que je croye de moy ce que vous m'en dites, mais
parce que ce m'est une grande marque de votre amity, and qu'il faut que vous
m'aimiez beaucoup, puis qu'en ma faveur vous vous etes trompe en une chose de
laquelle d'ailleurs vous etes si bon juge: Soyez persuade que quand j'aurois
toutes les belles qua itez que vous me donnez, je n'en voudrois par tirer de
plus grand avantage, que de gagner en votre coeur, la place que je connois que
^'y ay deja.

LETTRE X.
A Belinde.
SI le deplaisir de ne point voir ce que vous aimez vous est aussi sensible
qu'a moi, and si vous souffrez durant cette absence quelque chose approchant de
ce que j'endure, qu'elles considerations y a til, ma chere Belinde, qui vous
puissent obliger, d'etre deux jours sans me voir; and pour quoy ne nous jettons
nous pas plutot a toute autre extremite qu' a celle ou ce malhevr nous reduit?
Pour empecher que quatre ou cinq Persons ne parlent and qu'elles ne
remarquent nos contentemens, est-il raisonnable que nous n'en ayons plus? Et
pour eviter un peu de bruit faut-il que nous endurions tant de mal? Non, non,
ma chere Belinde le plus grand mal qui puisse nous arriver c'est d'etre separez
l'un de l'autre and je n'en sache point que nous devions tant craindre que
celui-la. Aussi bien, pour tant de peine que nous nous donnons, ne croyez pas
que notre affection en soit plus secrette. La tristesse qui est sur mon visage
toutes les fois que je ne vo^s vois point la decouvre a tout-le monde, and
parle plus haut que person ne sauroit fair, Qu^ttons donc desormai^ une
discretion qui nous coute si cher, and qui ne nous sere de rien; and donnez moy
des apres-diner quelque moyen de vous voir, au moins si vous voulez que je vive.

LETTRE XI.
Reponse.
LA T^te vous a t-elle turn depuis hier? Ie vous trouvois raisonnable and
vous me paroissez le plus injuste de tous les hommes. Ne vous souvient-il plus
des raisons que j'ay de vous refuser aujourd' huy ce que vous me demandez?
Est-il possible que vous vouliez hasarder pour un moment de plaisir ma
reputation and ma gloire? Ah! si else n'ont pu chasser l'amour de mon coeur,
il-n' est pas just non plus que le meme amor en triomphe absolument; and je
suis si persuade^ qu'une maitresse decri^e n'a point de charms aux yeux
d'unhannete homme and d'un amant delicat, que vous ne m'obligerez jamais a
fair des demarch^s qui puissent me deshonnorer; comme seroit celle de vous
voir aujourd'huy. Si pour vous voir je pouvois hazarder ma vie sans mon
honneur, je n'y balancerois pas un moment, je vous aim avec une ardeur a toute
epreuve, horse celle de l'infamie: Vous en conviendr^z, si le rendez-vous de
demain chez N -- reussit je l'attens avec la derniere impatience, etc,

LETTRE. XII.
A Celie.
JE voi^ bien que je ne sortirai jamais de vos mains and que to^s les desseins
que je fais de m'en tirer sont inutiles. Comme vous me faites tous les jours
quelque nouveau depit qui me done envy de me revolter, je decouvre en vous de
jour en jour quelque nouvelle grace qui me retient: Et a mesure que mes
deplaisirs s'accroissent, vos charms s' augmentent and mes chains
seredoublent. Apres avoir fait d'extremes efforts pour refister a tout ce que
connois de beau dans votre person and dans votre esprit, il arrive que quand
je vous vois j'y trouve quelque beauty que je n'y avois, point connue, and
contre laquelle je ne m'etois, pas prepare: Et ily a en vous une si grande,
diversite de chooses aimables, qu'il s'en rencontre toujours quelqu'une contre
laquelle je ne me puis defendre.

Lisidor.

LETTRE XIII.
A Celie.
SI tout ce qu'il y a de beau de charmant and d'agreable dans le monde etoit
mis ensemble seroit-il rien de si aimable que vous l'etiez hier au soir? Et
tout ce que les Poets disent des Ris, des Graces, and des Amors, ne se voyoit
il pas visiblement a l'entour de votre person? Apres avoir eu tant de bonheur
que d'avoir veu tout cela de mes yeux, je fais une resolution de ne me plus
plaindre jamais de rien. Ie sai bien qu'il m'en coutera l^ rest de mon ame,
mais, que je meure! si j'y ay regret. Et si ^'avois toutes celles du monde, j^^
les donnerois de bon coeur, pour u^ plais^^ comme celui que j'eus de vous voir,

Lisidor.

LETTRE. XIV.
Monsieur,
LES soins que vous avez pris pour me plaire ont si bien reussi que j' aurois
commence a vous aimer aujourd'buy ^i je vous avois veu pour la permiere fois de
ma vie. Vous m'avez parle dan^ un etat si propre a vous fair aimer, que
j'aurois bien voulu qu'en sortant de la Comedy, vous eussiez et^ vous enf^rmer
dans votre Cabinet: Car je ne puis songer sans quelque mouvement de jalousie
qu'en m'eloignant de vos yeux vous alliez les fair voir a d'autres.

Celie.

LETTRE XV.
Il lui Reproach son Infidelite.
Mademoiselle,
QVoy que votre silence me parut de mauvait, augure, je ne me fusse pourtant
jamais attendu a un changement si promt, Et quand je compare les grandes
expressions d'affection and de tendresse de vos Lettres precedentes, avec la
froideur and l'indifference de cette derniere, je suis frape d'un aussi grand
etonnement, que si je voyois un ciel doux and serain, trouble tout a coup par
un orage violent. Ie ne saurois m'imaginer comment vous pouvez appeller mes
demandes deraisonnables apres vos protestations reiter^es de sacrifier tout au
Monde pour vivre heureuse avec moy. Rappellez dans votre memoire les douceurs
de notre commerce familier; and si ce souvenir peut rallumer quelque etincelle
de votre flamme passee, vous trouverez assez de raisons pour reconcilier les
pretendues contrarietez de mes Lettres, and p^ur justifier l'injustice de mes
demandes. Vous me dites qu^ vous attendez ma reponce; je vous repons donc, qu'a
moins que vous rendiez a mon esprit sa premiere tranquillite, en me temoignant
la meme amity qu'auparavant, je suis entierement resolu de passer en Flandres,
ou j'espere de finir (...) Vie, que votre infidelite a rendue si malheureuse.

LETTRE XVI.
l'Eloge du Marriage.
Mademoiselle,
JE ne saurois vous exprimer le deplaisir que j'ay d'apprendre l'aversion que
vous temoignez pour le Marriage; je n'ay (...) blame uue repugnance feinte dans
notre sex, parce qu'elle est ordinairement recompensee per une nouvelle ard^ur
du eote des hommes, mais j'apprehende que vous n'^n fasfi^z un mauvais usage,
and que votre froideur affectee n'eteigne enfin l'amour de Mr. C. aulieu
qu'elle ne devroit etre employe^ qu'a sonder son coeur. Ainsi il me semble
qu'il est necessair^ de vous fair part des raisons que ma lecture and mon
experience me font croire les plus capables de surmonter l'opiniatrete de votre
retenile.

Premierement, Mademoiselle, je vous pry de considerer que (...) Marriage est
l'e^^t le plus saine and le plus auguste par (...) stitution que Dieu en fi^
lui-me^^e (...) le Paradis terrestre and par la f^n que l'on ^'y propose
savoir, (...) propagation des creatures raisonnables: A^outez a cela qu^ ce fut
a des noces (...) no^re sauveur fit son premier miracl^; and que le Ma^iag^
selon l'Apotre, est la figure de l'union de I. Christ avec son ^glise.

Secondement, is n'y a point d'etat dans la vi^ plus ho^norable que le Marriage,
puis que ^^est une condition qui fa^^ incessamment des presens and a l'Eg^^se
and a (...) pouvez juger dans quelle estime if (...) parmi les ju^fs; (...)
combien on le preferoit a la virginite, pu^^ que la steri^^^ passoit pour une
espece de honte and d'opprobre: Et parmi les Romans ceux la etoient couronnoz
qui avoient ete mariez plusieurs fois, and dans les rejouissances publiques ils
paroissoient avec le laurier and les autres marquis de victoire, comme ne
contribuans pas moins que les Empereurs a la grandeur de l'Empire. Les
Spartiates d'un autre cote institu^reut une fete annuelle ou ceux qui au dessus
de ving^ cinq ans etoient encore a marier etoient fouettez par des sages,
graves and robustos Matrones. Et apres avoir bien examine le Roy de France, je
ne ^rouve rien en lui si digne de louange que la D^claration par laquelle il
exemte des taxes publiques, les peers de dix enfans and outre cela, il les
recompense de leurs fatigues par une pension considerable.

Mais outre cela, l'Etat du Marriage n'est pas moins heur^ux qu'il est saint and
honnorable, and ^'il a fait la plus grand^ felicite de nos premiers parents dan
l'etat d'innocence, nous ne devons pas douter qu'il ne soit maintenant, le plus
grand soutien des miseres humaines; and le plus doux soulagement des soucis de
cette vie. Et meme le cercle de l'ann^^^ Matrimonial ne marque t-il pas que
comme la rondeur est infi^^ie, le contentement de deux mariez l'est aussi. De
la vient, que les Anciens donnoient a junon Deesse du Marriage, Cupidon and les
Graces pour lui tenir Compagnie, and qu'aux sacrisices de cette D^esse les
Pretres avoit accoutume de jetter le fiel des victimes pour fair voir
qu'aucune amertume ne doit troubler les douceurs du Marriage.

A tout cela je pourrois ajouter un quatrieme motif, qui est celui de la
charity envers notre Patrie: Vous savez que par l'ambition des (...) assez dans
une triste and (...) tous les jours des milliers d'hommes, and n'est-il pas
just qne pendant que nos Armees s'exposent au dehors pour nous conserver notre
tr^nquillite au dedans, (...) 'employons a re^^rer ^urs pertos?

Mais qu'ay-je a fair de tant de ^aisonnements? l'experience que jai acquise
(...) me fait assez connoitre que nous ne sommes femmes qu'autant que nous
sommes sensibles a l'amour, suivez donc ma chere R. suivez la pente naturelle
de notre sex, and faites de bonne grace, ce que vous ne pouvez vous empecher
de fair sans violenc^.

LETTRE XVII.
Relation d'un Voyage a la Campaign.
Mademoiselle,
J'Ay ete si fort dissipe par la Compagnie que nous avons eu a P -- P -- que
j'ai tente inutilement pl^sieurs fois de m' aquitter de la promise que je vous
fis avaunt de partir de vous ecrire les particularitez de notre voyage; and
maintenant que je croyois recompenser tout par une longue Lettre, l'affliction
don't cette maison est remplie, ne me laisse guere l'Esprit libre pour vous
entretenir agreablement.

Mais faisons un effort; Que l'affliction quoy que just disparoisse pour un
moment, car aussi bsen n'est il pas raisonnable d'abandonner a la Tristesse un
coeur ou vous avez tant de part.

C'etoit un lundi, ou, un Mardi, (ou tell autre jour de la semaine qu'il vous
plaira car j'ay oublie lequel) que nous partimes de Ritskens a la petite point
du jour, nous arrivames a Ailsbury enter onze heures and midy, ou Mr. C -- and
Mr. Sp -- nous attendoient depuis une heure; ils parurent d'abord fort joyeux,
de notre arrivee, mais leur joye fut bien tot changee en trissesse en apprenant
que vous n'etiez pas de notre troop; Mr. Sp -- Sur tout, par son visage and
par ses paroles me parut fort touch de votre absence. Deux heures apres le
rest des Dames etant arrivees aveo Monsieur le Chevalier B -- on se met a
Table; on dine; sur les trois heures nous remontons en Carosse, and environ les
neuf, nous arrivons heureusement a P -- P --

Pendant ler quatre ou cinq premiers jours du sejour que nous y avons fait,
l'indisposition de Madame B -- T -- causa une si grande tristesse a tout le
Monde, que nous n'eu^^s guere d'autre divertissement que celui d'aller voir la
maison magnifique and l^s beaux jardins dn Chevalier F -- qui fut meme trouble
par un petit accident qni arriva a no^re Carosse.

Madame B -- t, Se Por^ant bien nous semblames tous revivre avec elle, nos
diverssemens ne furent plus si ianguissans* Mr. Sp -- chanta; Mr. C -- but and
fuma; Mr. L -- conta fleuret^e a Me. W -- Pour Me. D -- and moy, comme nous
etions dans quelque conformite de sort, nous nous derobames fort souvent de la
Compagnie, and allames nous entretenir^ agreablement s^r la Terrasse de vous
and de Mr. C --

La brievete qu'on doit garder dans une Lettre, ne me perme^ pas de vous do^ner
^ne descriptioo (...) celebre rejo^^ance que nous eumes le jour de la St. Jean;
des dances particulieres que nous eumes chez nous; d'une vifite que nous
rendimes a Mr. C -- and du voyage que Mr. H -- and moy fimes a la maison de
Campaign de Mylord S -- Et a Northampton.

Ce fut en re^enant de ce dernier endroit que-nous apprimes la nouve^^e de la
malady de Madem^iselle. B -- nouvelle fatale qui coupa course a toutes nos
joys. prevint une partic de chasse que nous avions fait^ pour le lendemain and
precipita notre depart.

Voila en gros la relation de notre Voyage de Northamptonshire; j'espere de
vous en donner le derail a notre premiere entr^veue, apres laquelle je pousse
continuellement mill soupirs.

Quoy que vous ayez ete a Ritskens je ne saurois m'empecher de vous dire que
c'est un des plus beaux Lieux d'Anglettere, and ou la Nature semble avoir form
mill charmantes solitudes pour se plaindre des cruautez ou pour recevoir de^
fav^urs d'une Maitresse. Ie suis sincerement.

Votre, etc.

A COLLECTION Of the BEST PROVERBS.
Proverbs are concise and pithy Sayings, drawn out of Experience, and of the
Observations of Old Wise Men: But great Care ought to be taken to bring them in
to the purpose, and not to drag them in by the Hair, else they will seem rather
Extravagancies, than Maxims.
1. ONE Swallow never makes a Summer. 2. A Man must eat a Peck of Salt with his
Friend, before he knows him. 3. Harm watch, Harm catch. 4. Evil is for him that
Evil thinks. 5. One Door shuts, and another opens. 6. Never seek that by foul
means, which thou can do by fair. 7. Between two Stools, the Breech falls
upon the Ground. 8. He that buys and sells, shall find his Gains in his Purse.
9. Ioan's as good as my Lady in the dark. 10. Opportunity makes a Thief. 11. All
is not lost that is delayed. 12. A Bird in the hand is worth two in the bush.
13. It Is not for Asses to lick honey. 14. Policy goes beyond strength. 15.
Patience is a Plaster for all Sores. 15. Honors change Manners. 17. Let the
Pullet live though she have got the pip. 18. Let every one measure himself with
his own Ell. 19. He that will not, when he may, When he fain would, shall have
nay. 20. That that covers thee, discovers thee. 21. Hold opportunity by the
forelock before she turns her Tail, 22. Paper speaks when beards never wag. 23.
One hold fast, is better than two I Will give thee's. 24. A Rat is oftimes as
good as a Cat. 25. No longer pipe, no longer dance. 26. Show me thy Company,
and I Will tell what thou art. 27. Like Master, like man. 28. He that waits upon
Fortune, is never sure of a Dinner. 29. Covetousness is the root of all evil.
30. He that meddles with another Man's business Milks his Cow into a Sieve. 31.
Every Sheep to her Mate. 32. Do as thy Master commands thee, though it be to sit
at his Table. 33. Keep honest Company, and honest thou shall be. 34. Where the
Goat is tied, she must browze. 35. A tattered Cloak may cover a good Drinker.
36. He whom God assists, does better than he that rises betimes in the Morning.
37. It Is the Belly makes the Feet amble, and not the Feet the Belly. 38. He Is a
Fool that will not give an Egg for an Ox. 39. We must not stir the Rice though it
sticks to the pot. 40. It Is a good Horse that never trips. 41. A thing once
begun is half ended. 42. In giving and taking, there may be mistaking. 43. When
God intends a Man a kindness he comes to his House. 44. Daub your self with
honey, and you will never want Flies. 45. A good Stomach is the best Sauce. 46.
The Pot calls the Kettle black-arse. 47. When they give thee a Cow, run and
fetch a halter. 48. When Fortune knocks, be sure to open the door. 49. Let us
not be more beasts, than the Wolf that devours us. 50. Goods ill gotten never
prosper. 51. Man proposes and God disposes. 52. There Is no man can say, I will
not drink of this Water. 53. We must take our lot as it falls. 54. Every Man is
the Architect of his own Fortune. 55. Delay breeds danger. 56. An Opportunity
lost is not so soon regained. 57. One word is enough to the wise. 58. Beat the
Iron whilst it is hot. 59. One Misfortune forerunneth another. 60. Lightly come,
lightly go.
RECUEIL Des Meilleurs PROVERBES.
Les Proverbes sont des breves Sentences, tirees de l'Experience, and
desObservations des Sages de l'Antiquite: Mais on doit bien prendre guard de
n'en dire qu' a propos, and de ne les pas tirer par les Cheveux, Autrement ils
ont bien plus l'air d'Extravagances que de Maxims.
1. UNe Hirondelle ne fait pas le Printems. 2. Il faut bien du te^s, avaunt de
connoitre les gens. 3. Celui qui cherche le peril, ne manque point d'y perir.
4. Le mal est pour celui qui le va cherher. 5. Le Diable n'est pas toujours a
la port d'un pauvre homme. 6. Ne cherche point par force ce que tu peus avoir
de gre. 7. Enter deux Selles le cul a terre. 8. Qui achete and vend, en sa
bource le sent. 9. Dans la nuit tous Cha^s sont gris. 10. L'occasion fait le
Larron. 11. Ce qui est differe n'est pas perdu. 12. Le moineau dans la main,
vaut mieux que l'oye qui vole. 13. Le miel n'est pas pour la gueule de l'Ane.
14. L'Adresse surmonte la force. 15. La Patience est un remede a tous maux. 16.
Les honneurs changent les moeurs. 17. Vive la Poule encore qu'elle ayt la
pepie. 18. Que chacun se mesure a son aune. 19. Qui ue sait pas se servir de la
fortune quand elle vient ne doit pas se plaindre quand elle s'en va, 20. Ce qui
te couvre, te decouore. 21. Pren l'occasion aux cheveux, avaunt qu'elle turn
le dos. 22. Papier parle. quand les hommes se taisent. 23. Un tien, vaut mieux
que deux tu l'auras. 24. Un Rat est souvent aussi bon qu'un Chat. 25. Point
d'argent point de Suisse. 26. Dis-moy qui tu frequentes. and je dirai qui tu
es. 27. Tell maitre tell valet. 28. Qu' is attend au hazard, n'est pas trop
asseure de diner. 29. La Convoitise rompt le sac. 30. C'est pour les soucis
d'autrui qu'il en coute la vie a l'ane. 31. Chaque Brebis avec sa pareille. 32.
Fai^ ce que ton maitre te command and to assied a table aupres de lui. 33.
Mets toy avec les bons, and tu seras bon. 34. La ou la chevre est attachee il
faut qu'elle broute, 35. Sous un mechant manteau, il y asouvent un bon beuveur.
36. Celui que Die^ aid fait encore mieux que celui qui se leve matin. 37.
C'est le ventre qui fait aller les pies, and non pas les pies le ventre. 38. Il
ne faut pas eraindre de donner un oeuf pour avoir unboeuf. 39. Ne remuons point
le Ris, encore qu'il s'attache au pot. 40. Il n'y a point de bon cheval qui ne
br^nche. 41. Vne chose bien commencee est a demi achevee. 42. A donner and a
prendre, on se peut aisement meprendre. 43. Quand Dieu veut du bien a un homme,
il y paroit a sa maison. 44. Faites vous beat and le loup vous mangera. 45.
Sauce d'appetit est la meilleure. 46. La Pele se moque du fourgon. 47. Si on te
done la vache' course y vite avec la cord. 48. Quand la fortuue est a la port
il faut lui ouvrir sans la fair attendre. 49. Ne nous faisons pas plus betes
que le loup qui nous mange. 50. Le bien mal acquis jamais ne prospere. 51.
L'Homme propose, and Dieu dispose. 52. Person ne peut dire je ne boirai
jamais de cette eau. 53. Il faut prendre le tems comme il vient. 54. Chacun est
ouvrier de sa fortune. 55. Le peril est dans le retardement. 56. L'Occasson
perdue ne'se retrouve pas toujours. 57. Le sage entend a demy-mot. 58. Il faut
batsre le fer pendant qu'il est chaud. 59. Un Malheur ne vient jamais seul. 60.
Ce qui vient par la flute, s'en return par le tambour.
A COLLECTION OF French Songs, TO THE Newest and best FRENCH and ENGLISH Tunes.

London: Printed by W. Only, for T. Salusbury.

I Song.
^ SI l'A -- mour ne nous e -- clai -- re, tout lan -- ^ -- gui^ rien ne peut
plai-re, Si l'Amour ne nous e -- ^ -- clai-re, tout lan -- guit rien ne peut
plaire chan- ^ -- tons ne^ cessons ja-mais de-pu-bli -- er ses bien- ^ --
faits, chantons ne cessons ja -- mais de pu-bli- ^ -- er de pu-bli -- er ses
bien -- faits ch^n -- tons ^ ne cessons ja -- mais chan -- tons ne cessons ja
-- ^ -- mais de pu-bli -- er, de pu -- bli -- er ses bi^n -- ^ -- faits;
chantons ne cessons ja-mais, ne cessons ja -- ^ -- mais de pu-bli -- er ses
bien -- faits.

II Song.
^ SVi -- vez, Sui -- vez le pen -- chant de vos ^ A -- mes, vous au-rez, vous
au-rez de ^ par-faits plai-sirs; Suivez, suivez l' Amor ^ sui-vez ses flam --
mes l'Hy -- men comble -- ra ^ vos de -- sirs. Sui-vez, sui -- vez l' A-mour ^
su, vez ses flammes l' Hymen comble-ra vos desirs.

III Song.
A Round O.
^ QVe n' aimez vous? Coeurs in-s^n -- si-bles, ^ Que n'aimez vous rien n'est
si doux. Non, ne vous ^ van-tez pas do you -- tree in -- vin -- ci -- bles, ^ Les
Dieux les plus grands Dieux ont ai -- me ^ tous Que n'aimez vous? Co^urs in-sen
-- si -- bles, ^ Que n'aimez vous Rien ^'est si -- doux. ^ l'Amour n'a plus de
traits rer -- ri-bles pour un ^ coeur qui cede a s^s coups.

IV Song.
A Minuet.
^ DAns nos Bois Syl -- vandre S'e -- cri -- e, ^ Dans nos Bois il re-dit cent
fois; ^ Si c'est un mal dan -- ge -- reux que l'A -- mour ^ He -- las! j'en
veux per -- dre la vie, ^ Si c'est un mal dan -- ge -- reux que ^ l'A -- mour,
He -- las! j'en veux ^ per -- dre le jour.

V Song.
A Minuet.
^ SVi -- vons l' A -- mour c'est ^lui qui nous ^ me -- ne, Tout doit sen --
tir son ^ aima-ble ar -- deur; Un pe^ d' A -- ^ -- mour nous fait moins de p^i
-- ne, ^ que l'em-bar -- ras de gar -- der ^ no -- tree -- Cocur.

II.
Malgre nos Soins l' Amor non* entraine,
On ne peut fuir ce charmant vainqueur;
Un peu d' Amor nous fait m^ins de pein^,
Qu^ l'embarras de garder notre Cocur.
VI Song.
^ QVand Clo -- ris prend plaisir a boi -- re Bacchus ^ croit que c'est pour sa
gloi -- re, mais l' Amor ^ en a tout l'honneur. neur Car en bu -- vant, ^ le
vin la rend si bell -- le que ^ le plus al -- t^-^e bu -- veur. S'en -- y-vre
moinsde ^ sa li-queur, que de l' A-mour, que de l' A -- ^ -- mour qu'il prend
pour el -- le.

VII Song.
A New Minuet.
^ CEs -- fez de Craindre les Al -- lar -- ^ -- mes Qu'Amour, re -- pan -- doit
dans vos ^ coeurs; Il vous of -- fre ses Charms, ^ ses dou -- ceurs ses plus
ten-dres fa -- ^ -- veurs sans ri -- gueurs. Ces -- sez de ^ crain -- dre les
Al -- lar -- mes Qis' A -- ^ -- mour re -- pan-doit dans vos Coeurs: ^ S'il se
sert i -- cy de ses Ar-mes ^ C'est pour en ban -- nir les lan -- gueurs; ^ Ces
-- sez de crain-dre les Al -- lar-mes, ^ Qu' Amor re -- pan -- doit dans vos
coeurs.

VIII Song.
A Jigg.
^ AH! Qu'il est doux de re -- voir ce qu'on ^ ai -- me dans le tems me-me
qu'on ^ perd tout es -- poir de ja -- mais le re -- ^ -- voir. Quand le plai --
sir suit u -- ne pei -- ^ ne ex -- tree me, C'est un bon -- heur qu'on ne ^ peut
con -- ce -- voir. Ah qu'il est doux de ^ re -- voir ce qu'on ai-me dans le
tems ^ meme dans le tems me -- me qu'on perd tout ^ es -- poir de ja -- mais le
re -- voir.

IX Song.
To the Tune of the Rigodoon.
Etre Discret,
Genereux, and Sincere
Et quand on a Su plaire,
Garder le secret;
Avoir l' Air doux,
De la Delicatesse sans etre jaloux;
l'Esprit bien fait,
Et beaucoup de tendresse, iris, c'est mon Portrait.
II.
Etre jeune and volage,
Voir tout avec mepris,
Tenir en Esclavage,
Tous les coeurs qu'on a pris,
Rire, chanter sans cesse and n'aimer rien.
Iris, voila le tien.
X Song.
To the Tune of, Why are mine Eyes still flowing, etc.
Pour quoy mon Coeur toujours fidelle,
Ne Sauroit-il rompre ses fers?
Qu'elle fatalite cruelle,
Comble les maux que j'ay soufferts?
Injuste Amor, Helas! tout vient de toy
Tes plus rudes coups sont pour moy,
Et bien, ^ruel, puis qu'on n'en peut guerir,
Redouble -- les, je veux mourir.
XI Song.
To the Tune of, If Love's a sweet Passion, etc.
L'Amour nous engage pour nous render hureux,
C'est un doux Esclavage que d'etre amoureux;
Quel que soit le chagrin que l'on souffre en aimant,
Les plaisirs effacent, les plus grands tourmens.
La plus cruelle Chain se change en douceur,
Quand l'objet que l'on aim n'a plus de rigueur.
XII Song.
To the Tune of, If Love's a sweet Passion, etc.
Helas! je Soupire la Nuit and le jour,
Ie me plains, je desire je brule d' Amor;
Il faut bien que je meure Si sans differer;
Ie ne trouve une heure pour me declarer:
Mes soins and ma Constance n'obtiendront ils rien?
Ah! qu'un peu d'esperance, me feroit grand bien.
FINIS.

