THE SONGS OF THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT IN MEETER:

By M. ZACHARY BOYD Preacher of Gods Word.

EPHESIANS. 5. 18. 19. Be ye filled with the Spirit, etc. Speaking to your selves
in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your
heart to the Lord. GLASGOW, Printed by the Heirs of GEORGE ANDERSON. Anno 1648.

The Songs of the Old and New Testament.
THe Song of Songs, 1 The Song of Moses at the red Sea. 2. The song of Moses a
little before his death 3 The song of Deborah. 4 The song of Hannah. 5 David's
lamentations for: Saul and Jonathan. 6 The song of David at the promise of
Messiah. 7 The song of Isaiah concerning the vineyard. 8 Isaiahs song of thanks
for Gods mercies. 9 Isaiahs song inciting to confidence in God. 10 The song of
Hezekiah. 11 The Lamentations of Ierem^ah. 12 The song of Jonah. 13 The song of
Habakktik. 14 The song of Marie. 15 The song of Zachari^s. 16 The song of
Simeon. 17
To the right Reverend, the faithful Ministers of GODS Word of the Church of
Scotland.
RIGHT REVEREND,
IT pleased You in the General Assembly last, at Edinburgh, Anno 1647. to take
to your consideration, the great utility the Church of GOD may have by the
Songs contained in holy Scriptures; After due deliberation, it pleased You to
ordain that I should labor in that work^ In obedience unto You, I have
endeavored to come as near to the Text as was possible for me to do; And those
my labors I in all humility offer to be considered, by the most learned and
most judicious Brethren, that the Church having the use thereof, may in
obedience to the Apostles precept Ephesians. 5. 18. in Psalms, and Hymns, and
spiritual Songs, make melody in their heart to the Lord, whom I entreat in all
humility to direct You in all things by his holy Spirit; So I remain

From Glasgow, the 27 of February, 1648. Your humble servant in the LORD, M.
ZACHARY BOYD.

THE SONG OF Solomon made in praise of Christ, and his Church.
CHAPTER I.
The Church speaks to Christ. LEt him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth,
for thy love is better then wine.

LEt him with kisses of his mouth
to kiss me now incline,
For sure thy love far better is
then is the finest wine.
2 Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment powered
forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

2
Because that of thine ointments ^ood
the savor sweet does prove,
Thy Name as ointment forth is powered
thee therefore virgins love.
3 Draw me, we will run after thee: the King has brought me into his chambers:

3
Do thou me draw and then anon
we after thee will run:
The King himself he has me now
his chambers brought within.
We will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy love more then wine:
the upright love thee.

We Will in thee glade be and rejoice,
thy love also will we
Remember more then sinest wine,
the upright do love thee.
4 I am black, but comely, (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the tents of Kedar,
as the curtains of Solomon.

4
O Salems daughters black I am,
but yet a comely one
As tents of Kedar, and even as
curtains of Solomon.
5 Look not upon me because I am black, because the Sun has looked upon me.

5
Upon me look not ye, because
I black do seem to be,
Because the Sun has with his beams
long looked upon me.
My mothers children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyard have I not kept.

My mothers children wroth with me
the vineyards keeper made,
But I my self have not at all
so kept mine own vineyard.
6 Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou make
thy flock to rest at noon:

6
O thou, whom dearly loves my soul,
I pray thee tell me soon
Where thou do feed, and where thou makst
thy flock to rest at noon.
For why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions?

For why should I be any way
as one that turns aside
By flocks of thy companions
where ever they do abide?
CHRIST. 7 If thou know not, (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by
the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds tents.

7
O fairest one if thou not know,
by the flocks footsteps go,
And do thou feed thy kids beside
the shepherds tents also.
8 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs chariots.

8
My love unto a company
I have compared thee,
Of horses in the chariots
that for King Pharo be.
9 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold.

10 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

9
With jewel rows thy cheeks are fair,
with chains of gold thy neck:
10
Of gold we borders will thee make
which silver studs do deck.

The Church. 11 While the king sits at his table, my spikenard sends forth
the smell thereof.

12 A bundle of myrrh is my welbeloved unto me;

11
While at his table sits the King
my spiknard sends it smell:
12
Of mirrhe a bundle unto me
is my beloved well.
He shall ly all night betwixt my breasts.

13 My beloved is unto me, as a cluster of Camphire, in the vineyards of Engedi.

Betwixt my breasts he will lie all night
13
My welbelov'd's to me
As of Engedies vineyards rare,
the Camphires clusters be*

CHRIST. 14 Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes.

14
O do behold, most fair thou art
even thou my love so rare,
Behold of Doves the eyes thou have,
and thou art very fair.

The Church. 15 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea pleasant: also our bed
is green.

16 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fire.

15
Lo, pleasant fair thou art my love,
green also is our bed:
16
Beams of our house they cedars are,
of fur our rafters made.

CHAPTER II.
CHRIST. I Am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys.

2 As the lilly among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

I AM Sharons rose, the lilly als
that valleys grows along:
2
As lillies among thorns, my love
so daughters is among.

The Church. 3 As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons.

3
As the apple tree among the trees
is of the wood so throng,
So likewise my Beloved is,
the sons of men among.
^ I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to
my taste.

Under his shadow I sat down
with great delight there placed,
And there his fruit which pleasant is
was sweet unto my taste.
4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was love.

4
Unto the house of banqueting*
to come he did me move*
His banner that was over me
was altogether love.
5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love.

6 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.

5
Me sick of love with flagons stay,
with apples me solace:
6
Under my head his left hand is,
his right me does embrace.
7 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hinds of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

7
By Roes, field Hindes, O Salems maids,
I charge you that ye cease
^o stir or yet at all awake
my love, until he please.
8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he co^eth leaping upon the mountains,
skipping upon ^^e hills.

The voice of my Beloved! behold!
he comes thus anon
upon the mountains leaping high
and skipping hills upon.
9 My beloved is like a roe, or a young heart: hold, he stands behind our
wall, he looks ^^th at the windows, showing himself through ^^e lattesse.

He Is like a Roe or Heart that is young,
he stands behind our wall,
^t windows he looks forth, himself
he shows through lattesse all.
10 My beloved spoke, and said unto me, ^se up my love, my fair one, and come
away.

11 For lo, the winter is past, the rain is over ^^d gone.

Then my Beloved said, Rise my love,
away come my fair One:
For lo the winter it is past,
the rain is over and gone.
12 The flowers appear on the earth, the time ^he singing of birds is come, and
the voice of turtle is heard in our land.

12
The flowers upon the earth appear,
of singing of the bird
The time is come; the Turtles voice
within our land is heard.
13 The fig tree puts forth her green figs and the vines with the tender
grape give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

13
The fig tree her green figs puts forth,
vines with grapes tender they
Do sweetly smell; arise my love
my fair one come away.

CHRIST. 14 O my dove that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret places
of the stairs,

14
O thou my dove that art even now
in clifts within the rock,
Within the secret places of
the stairs where thou do lurk.
Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and
thy countenance is comely.

Let thou me see thy countenance,
thy voice let thou me hear,
For sweet thy voice is, and also
thy countenance is clear.
15 Take us the Foxes, the little foxes that spoil the vines: for our vines
have tender grapes.

15
Do ye for us the foxes take,
foxes that little be
That spoil the vines, for tender grapes
our vines have, as ye see.

The Church. 16 My beloved is mine, and I am his: he ^eedeth among the lillies.

16
My Welbeloved sure is mine,
and I am his indeed,
Among the lillies smelling sweet
he pleasantly does feed.
17 Until the day break, and the shadows ^lee away: turn my beloved, and be
thou like a Roe, or a young Heart, upon the mountains of Bether.

17
Until day break and shads flee hence,
turn my beloved, and be
Thou like a Roe, or Heart that is young
on Bethers mountains hie.

CHAPTER III.
BY night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him, but I found
^im not.

BY night I did upon my bed
him seek with all my mind
Whom my soul loves; I him sought,
but him I did not find.
2 I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the broad
ways I will seek him whom my Soul loves:

2
I will now rise, and in the streets
about the city move,
And in the broad ways I will seek
him whom my soul does love.
I sought him, but I found him not.

3 The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him
whom my Soul loves.

I sought him, but I found him not,
3
The Cities watchmen me
Did find; I said then did ye him
whom my soul loves see?
4 It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my Soul
loves;

4
It but a little was that I
from them did pass away,
But I him whom my soul does love
did find without delay:
I held him, and would not let him go, until I had brought him into my
mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me.

I held and would not let him go,
until that by me he
Was to her house and chamber brought
that had conceived me.
5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes, and by the Hindes of
the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love till he please.

5
O Salems daughters I you charge
by Roes, field Hindes ye cease
To stir or yet for to awake
my love until he please.
6 Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant.

6
Of smoke like pillars who is this
that comes from wilderness,
Perfumed with frankincense and mirrhe,
all merchands powders als.
7 Behold his bed, which is Solomon's: threescore valiant men are about it, of
the valiant of Israel.

7
Behold, his bed is Solomon's,
threescore men valiant all
About it are, of those that are
the valiant of Israel.
8 They all hold swords, being expert in war, Every man has his sword upon his
thigh, because of fear in the night.

8
Expert in war, they all do hold
swords in their hands most bright,
^ach man his sword has on his thigh,
because of fear by night.
9 King Solomon made himself a charet of the wood of Lebanon.

10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold,

9
Of Lebanons wood Solomon
himself a charet made;
10
It Is pillars made of silver were,
with gold the bottom laid:
The covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.

The covering of it purple was,
the midst of it for them
Was paved with love, that daughters were
of his Jerusalem.
11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon,

11
Oye that Zions daughters are
do ye go forth anon,
And do ye with great reverence
behold king Solomon.
With the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals,
and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

With crown wherewith his mother him
crowned in his spousals day,
And in the day his heart was filled
with gladenesse every way.
CHAPTER IV.
CHRIST. BEhold, thou art fair, my love, behold thou art fair, thou have
doves eyes within thy locks:

BEhold my love thou art most fair*
behold fair is thy skin,
The pure and chaste eyes of the Dove
thou have thy locks within:
Thy hair is as a flock of goats, that appear^ from mount Gilead.

Thy hair that is upon thy head,
is also very near*
Like to a flock of goats that from
mount Gilead do appear.
2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, that are even shorn which came up from
the washing, whereof every one bear twins, and none is barren among them.

2
Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep,
even shorn from washing gone,
Whereof each one bare twins, and them
among is barren none.
3 Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: thy temples
are like a prece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

3
Thy speech is comely, and thy lips
like scarlet thread we see,
Within thy locks thy temples like
piece of pomgranats be.
4 Thy neck is like the tower of David, buil^ded for an armory, whereon there
hang a thou^sand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

4
Thy neck is like King David's tower,
built for an armorie,
Whereon a thousand bucklers hang,
men's shields that mighty be.
5 Thy two breasts are like two young Roe^ that are twins, which feed among the
lillies.

5
Thy breasts in number two are like
unto two Roes indeed
That young are, and are also twins
which among the lillies feed.
6 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the
mo^ntaine of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

6
Until the day most clearly break
and shaddows flee from hence;
I Will get me to thee mounts of Myrrh,
and hill of frankincense.
7 Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee.

8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon:

7
Thou art all fair my love, there is
no spot at all in thee:
8
Spouse come with me from Lebanon
from Lebanon with me
Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions
dens, from the mountains of the Leopards.

Look from the tops of Amana,
Shenir and Hermon hie,
From Lions dens, from mountains great
where Leopards there be.
9 Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse, thou have ravished my
heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

9
My heart thou ravished, sister, spouse,
my heart thou in effect
Have ravished with one of thine eyes,
with one chain of thy neck.
10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse, how much better is thy love
then wine? and the smell of thine ointments then all spices.

10
How fair's thy love, my sister spouse?
how better much then wine
Is this thy love! thine ointments smell
more then all spices fine!
11 Thy lips, O my spouse drop as the hon comb, honey and milk are under thy
tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.

11
Thy lips, Spouse, drop as honey comb,
the honey milk excel
Under thy tongue; as Lebanon
thy garments they do smell.
12 A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse: a spring shut up, a fountain
sealed.

12
My sister spouse a garden is,
which is enclosed well,
A spring shut up, a fountain als
whereon is set a seal.
13 Thy plants are an orchard of Pomegranates, with pleasant fruits, Camphire,
with Spikenard.

13
Thy plants an orchard are also
even of pomegranates rare,
With pleasant fruits, the Camphire sweet
and Spiknard likewise are:
14 Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all trees of frankincense,
Myrrh, and Aloes, with all the chief spices:

14
Spiknard, Saffron, and Calamus,
and Cynamon with all,
Trees of franklncense, Aloes, Mirrhe,
all spices principal.
15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from Lebanon.

15
A fountain for to water well
the gardens all anon*
A well of living waters als
and streams from Lebanon.

The Church. 16 Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out;

16
O north wind, do thou now awake,
and come thou south about,
Upon my garden blow; that so
its spices may flow out:
Let my beloved come into his garden, and cat his plea^^nt fruits.

Let him that my beloved is
come to his garden sweet,
That he his fruits that pleasant are
may with contentment eat.

CHAPTER V.
CHRIST. I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse, I have gathered my
Myrrh with my spice,

MY sister and my spouse, I am
my garden come into,
I carefully have gathered
my mirrhe and spice also.
I have eaten my honey comb with my honey, I have drunk my wine with my milk:
eat, O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O beloved!

I honey comb with honey ate,
my wine, milk, drunk have I,
Eat, O ye friends, drink O Beloved;
yea, drink abundantly.

The Church. 2 I sleep, but mine heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved
that knocks, saying,

2
I sleep securely but my heart
does wake both night and day,
It is the voice of my Beloved
that knocking thus does say,
Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled
with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night.

My Sister, Love, Dove, undefiled,
now open to me right,
For filled is my head with dew,
my locks with drops of night.
3 I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how
shall I defile them?

3
I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on a while?
I washed also have my feet
how shall I them defile?
4 My beloved put in his hand by the hole o the door, and my bowels were moved
for him.

4
By of the door the hole his hand
my Welbelov'd put in,
And for him then my bowels all
were moved me within.
5 I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with Myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling Myrrh, upon the handles o^ the lock.

5
To open to my love I rose,
my hands with myrrh did drop,
My fingers with sweet smelling myrrh
on handles of the lock.
6 I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone:

6
To my Beloved I opened then,
but my Beloved alone
Withdrawn himself had far away,
and from the door was gone:
My soul failed: when he spoke I sought him but I could not find him: I called
him, but he gave me no answer.

My soul it failed when he spoke,
I after him did crave,
But could not find him, I him called,
but he no answer gave.
7 The watchmen that went about the city, found me, they smote me, they
wounded me, the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

7
The cities watchmen found me then,
me smot, me wounded they,
The keepers of the walls they took
my vail from me away.
8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell
him, that I am sick of love.

8
O daughters of Jerusalem
I charge you from above,
If my Beloved ye find, that ye
him tell, I Am sick of love.

The Daughters of Jerusalem. 9 What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O
thou fairest among women? what is thy beloved more then another beloved, that
thou do so charge us?

9
O fairest, among women thou
what is thy Beloved more?
What is he more then others are,
that thou do charge so sore?
The Church. 10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand.

11 His head is as the most fine gold, his looks are bushie and black as a
raven.

10
Both white and rudy's my Beloved,
chief among thousands ten:
11
His head's as gold, his bushy locks
are black as is a rav'n.
(...) His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed with
milk and fitly set.

12
His eyes are as the eyes of doves
that by the rivers sit,
They washed also are with milk
and they are fitly set.
13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like lillies,
dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

13
His cheeks are as the spices bed,
as flowers that sweet excel,
His lips like lillies droping Myrrh,
that has the sweetest smell.
14 His hands are as gold rings set with the Berill: His belly is as bright
ivory, overlaid with Saphires.

14
His hands as goldrings als are set
with Berill richly made,
His belly as bright ivory is
with Saphires overlaid.
15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his
countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars.

15
His legs like Marble pillars are,
on fine gold sockers set;
His countenance is as Lebanon,
as Cedars passing great.
16 His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely: This is my beloved,
and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

16
Most sweet his mouth is, yea he is
most lovely altogether:
This my Beloved, and this my Friend
is, O thou Salems daughter.

CHAPTER VI.
The Daughters of Jerusalem. WHether is thy beloved gone? O thou fairest among
women, whether is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

O Whither's thy Beloved gone,
of women all most fair?
O whither turned, that we with thee
may seek him, now declare?
The Church. 2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices,
to feed in the gardens, and to gather lillies.

2
Into his garden my Beloved
to beds of spices rare,
To feed in gardens is gone down
to gather lillies there.
3 I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mines be feeds among the lillies.

3
My Welbeloveds I am all,
and my Beloved Indeed
Is likewise mine: and now he does
among the lillies feed.

CHRIST. 4 Thou art beautiful, O my love as Tirzah comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners.

4
My love as Tirza beautiful
as Salem comely so
Thou art; as one host terrible
that does with banners go.
5 Turn away thine eyes from me for they have overcome me: thy hair is as a
flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

5
From me thine eyes turn thou away,
for they me overcome,
Thy hair is as a flock of goats
from Gilead that do come.
6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing, whereof
every one bears twins, and there is not one barren among them.

6
Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep,
which go from washing throng:
Eacl^ one bears twins, and there is not
one barren them among.
7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.

7
The temples also of thine head
within thy locks that ly,
As of a pomegtanate a piece
do seem right pleasantly.
8 There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins without
number.

8
Though threescore of fair queens there be,
and concubines fourscore,
And virgins als them to attend,
even without number more.
9 My dove, my undefiled is but one: she is the only one of her mother, she is
the choice one of her that bare her:

9
My Dove my undefild's but one,
she of her mother ^ale
Is the only one, and she the choice
is of her that her bare.
The daughters saw her, and blessed her* yea, the Queens and the Concubines and
they praised her.

The daughters of the land her saw,
and blessed her likewise,
Yea even the Queens and Concubines and they als did her praise.
10 Who is she that looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon clear as
the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?

10
Who Is she as morning that looks forth,
fair as the Moon, and clear
As is the sun, and armies as
that dreadful banners bear.
11 I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and
to see whether the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded.

11
I down to the Nut-garden went
the valleys fruits to see:
To see if vines were flouri^h'd, and
pomegranates budded be.
12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of Amminadab.

12
Or ever then I was aware,
my soul i^ at the last
Like charets of Aminadab
made me to make great have.
13 Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may look upon thee:

13
Return, return O Shulamite,
return, return to me:
That we with gladness great of heart
may so now look on thee;
What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two armies.

What will ye in the Shulamite
with great contentment see?
Even such a sight as if it were
two Armies company.

CHAPTER VII.
HOw beautiful are thy feet with sho^es, O Princes daughter, the joints of thy
thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a cun^ing workman.

HOw beatifull thy feet with shoes
O Princes daughter are!
Joints of thy thighs are jewels like
wrought by a workman rare.
2 Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wants not licour: thy belly is
like an heap of wheat, set about with lillies.

2
Thy navel's like a goblet round,
which liquor wants not:
Thy belly's like an heap of wheat,
with lillies set about.
3 Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, that are twins.

4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory: thine eyes like the fish pooles in Heshbon,
by the gate of Bathrabbim:

3
Thy breasts are like two twin young Roes:
As ivory tower is set
4
Thy neck, thine eyes like Heshbons pools
hard by Bathrabbims gate.
Thy nose is as the tower of Lebanon, which looks toward Damascus.

Thy nose it is even like the tower
that is in Lebanon,
Which toward all the city of
Damascus looks down.
5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmell, and the hair of thine head like
purple, the King is held in the galleries.

5
Thy head on thee is Carmel like,
als of thine head the hair
Is Purple like, the King is held
in galleries most rare.
6 How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for delights!

7 This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters of
grapes.

6
O love how art thou for delights
both pleasant and how fair!
^
Thy stature^'s like palm trees, thy breasts
they like grapes clusters are.
8 I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof,

8
I did then say that I go up
unto the palm tree would,
Yea of the boughs thereof I will
with all my force take hold.
Now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy
nose like apples.

Now also shall thy breasts all be
as clusters of the vine,
And of thy nose the pleasant smell
like apples that are fine.
9 And the roof of thy mouth like the best wine for my beloved, that goes
down sweetly, causing the lips of those that are asleep, to speak.

9
Roof of thy mouth like best wine is
that sweetly down does go
For my Beloved, and sleepers lips
does cause to speak also.
The Church. 10 I am my beloveds, and his dosire is toward me.

11 Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field:

10
I my Beloveds am, and his
desire is toward me,
11
Come my Beloved, unto the field,
let us forth going be,
Let us lodge in the villages.

12 Let us get up early to the vineyards, let us see if the vine flourish,

12
Let us lodge in the villages:
Up early get to be
At vineyards, if so that the vines
do flourish let us see:
Whether the tender grapesappear, and the pomegranates bud forth: there will I
give thee my loves.

Even whether tender grapes appear,
and pomegranates bud forth,
There surely will I give to thee
my loves of greatest worth.
^3 The mandraks give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of pleasant
fruits, new and old which I have laid up for thee, O my ^eloved.

13
The mandrakes smell, and at our gates
all pleasant fruits there be,
Both new and old, which I laid up,
O my Beloved for thee.

CHAPTER VIII.
The believing Jews. O That thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of
my mother, when I should find thee without,

O That thou as my brother were
that of my mother kind
Did suck the breasts, even at what time
I thee without should find.
I would kiss thee, yet I should not be despised.

2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house, who would instruct
me:

2
I would thee kiss, yet not be loathed
Yea I would thee conduct,
And bring thee to my mothers house
who would me there instruct.
I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate.

3 His left hand should be under my head: and his right hand should embrace me.

3
^ would thee cause drink spiced wine
of my pomegranats juice:
Under my head his left hand laid,
his right should me embrace.
4 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my
love until he please.

4
O daughters of Jerusalem,
I charge you that you cease
To stir up or awake my love,
and that until he please.
CHRIST. 5 Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved?

5
Who is this from the wilderness
that comes up by and by?
And thus on her Beloved One
does leaning still rely?
I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother brought thee forth,
there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

Under the aple tree I thee ^
did raise up being there,
Thy mother there thee did bring sorth,
she brought forth that thee bare.

Jewish Church. 6 Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm:
For love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave:

6
Me as a seal upon thine heart
as seal on arm m'ingrave:
For love's as death strong, jealousy
is cruel as the grave.
The coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.

7 Many waters cannot quench love, neith^ can the floods drown it:

7
The coals there of are coals of fire,
which has a vehement flame:
The waters great, love can not quench
nor floods can drown the same.
If a man would give all the substance of ^ house for love, It would utterly be
contemned

If of his house the substance all
a man for love to buy
Would gladely give, yet would it be
contemned utterly.
8 We have a little sister, and she has (...) breasts, what shall we do for
our sister, in (...) day when she shall be spoken for?

8
We have a little sister, which
no breasts has less or more,
What shall we for her do the day
she shall be spoken for?

CHRIST. 9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her palace of silver: and if
she be a door, we (...) enclose her with boards of Cedar.

9
If ^he a wall be, we will on her
a palace build of silver;
If she a door be, we her will
enclose with boards of Cedar.

The Church. 10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers* then was I in his eyes
as one that found favor.

10
I am a wall, my breasts they are
like towrs upon the ground,
Then was I in his eyes as one
that had his favor found.

CHRIST. 11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto
keepers:

11
At Baal-Hamon a vineyard
king Solomon had set;
The vineyard unto keepers he
for profit out had let.
Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.

Of those his servants evry one
for the fruit of the vine
A thousand pieces was to bring
of silver that was fine.
12 My vineyard which is mine, is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof, two hundred.

12
My vineyard mine before me is,
thou must O Solomon
A thousand have; who keep its fruits
two hundred live upon,
13 Thou that dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy voice,
cause me (...) hear it.

13
O thou that in the gardens fair
most pleasantly do dwell,
Companions hearken to thy voice,
cause me to hear it well.

The Church. 14 Make haste, my beloved, and be thou lik^ ^^to a Roe, or to a
young Heart, upon the mountain^ of spices.

14
Make have my Welbelov'd, and be
thou like unto a To,
Or unto a young Heart that does
on hills of spices go.

The Song of Moses at the Red Sea, after God had drowned Pharao and his whole
host. EXODUS 15. 1.
I Will sing unto the Lord, for he has trium^phed gloriously; the horse and
his rider h^^^ he thrown into the sea.

I To the Lord will sing, for he
triumphed has gloriously;
The horse he and his rider als
has thrown into the sea.
2 The Lord is my strength and song, and (...) is become my salvation: he is my
God, and I (...) prepare him an habitation;

2
The Lord my strength is and my song,
and he is my salvation,
He is my God, and I Will prepare
for him an habitation.
My fathers God, and I will exalt him.

3 The Lord is a man of war: the Lord is ^is Name.

He is my fathers God, and I
will high exalt his fame:
3
The Lord he is a man of war,
JEHOVAH is his Name.
4 Pharaohs chariots and his host has he cast unto the sea: his chosen
captains also are drown^d in the Red sea.

4
He Pharos charets and his host
has cast into the sea:
Now in the red sea also drowned
his chosen captains be.
5 The depths have covered them, they sank unto the bottom as a stone.

The fearful depths they likewise have,
them covered eachone,
unto the bottom headlongs they
then sank as does a stone.
6 Thy right hand, O Lord is become glori^us in power; thy right hand, O Lord,
has dash^d in pieces the enemy.

6
Thy right hand Lord it is become
in power glorious all,
Thy right hand Lord the enemy
has da^h'd in pieces small.
7 And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them that
rose up against thee; thou sentest forth thy wrath, which consumed them as
stubble.

7
Who against thee rose them thou ov'rthrew,
in great excellency,
Thy wrath thou sentest forth which them
consumed as stubble dry.
8 And with the blast of thy nostrils, the waters were gathered together: the
floods stood upright as an heap, and the depths were congealed in the heart of
the sea.

8
The waters at thy nostrils blast,
together gathred were:
Floods stood as heaps, in heart of sea,
the depths congealed were there.
9 The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil: my
lust shall be satisfied upon them:

9
The en'my said, I will pursue,
I Will overtake anon,
I Will part the spoil; my lust shall be
them satisfied upon;
I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.

10 Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sank as lead in
the mighty wa^ers.

I Will draw my sword, my hand it shall
destroy them all indeed:
10
Thy wind blew, seas them cov^^d, they in
great waters sank as lead:
11 Who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is like thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

11
Who Is like thee Lord among the gods
who is like thee glorious
In holiness, fearful in praise
and doing wonders thus?
12 Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

13 Thou in thy mercy have led forth the people which thou have redeemed:

12
Thy right hand then thou stretched out,
earth swallowed them at last.
13
In mercy thou the folk ledst forth
which thou redeemed have:
Thou have guided them in thy strength unto ^hy holy habitation.

14 The people shall hear, and be afraid: ^orrow shall take hold on the
inhabitants of Palestina.

Thou have them to thy holy house
in thy strength guided well.
14
Men shall hear, fear, grief shall them seiz
in Palestine that dwell:
15 Then the dukes of Edom shall be amazed: the mighty men of Moah trembling
shall take hold upon them: all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

15
The Dukes of Edom then amazed,
strong Moab trembling shall
On them take hold, the Cananites
they melt away shall all.
16 Fear and dread shall fall upon them, by the greatness of thine arm they
shall be as still as a stone, till thy people pass over,

16
By greatness of thine arm^ strong
fear, dread, shall on them fall,
They shall be still even as a stone
till pass thy people all.
O Lord, till the people pass over, which thou have purchased.

O Lord till that the people do
pass ov're with great renown,
Which thou by thine Almighty hand
have purchased as thine own.
17 Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance, in the place O Lord, which thou have made for thee to dwell. in.

17
In hill of thine inheritance
Lord thou shall bring them well,
And plant them in the place which thou
have made for them to dwell.
In the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hand^ have established.

18 The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.

O Lord even in the Sanctuary
which thy hand stablish'd all:
18
The Lord for ever and also
for ever reign he shall.
19 For the horse of Pharaoh went in with his chariots, and with his horsemen
into the sea, and the Lord brought again the waters of the sea, upon them:

19
For Pharos horse with charets went
and horsemen in the sea,
The Lord again sea waters brought
upon them fearfully.
But the children of Israel went on dry land in the midst of the sea.

But those that were the children then
of Israel by descent,
They in the midst of all the sea
on dry land safely went.
The Song of Moses a little before his death. DEUTERONOMY. 32.
The Preface.
GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the words of my
mouth.

O Ye the heavens that are high
do ye to me give ear,
The words that from my mouth proceed
O earth now do thou hear.
2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass.

2
My doctrine as the rain shall drop,
my speech as dew shall pass,
As small rain on the tender herb,
and showrs upon the grass.
3 Because I will publish the name of the Lord: ascribe ye greatness unto our
God.

3
Because I surely publish will
the Name of God the Lord,
Ye greatness to our God therefore
ascribe with one accord.
The first Part.
4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are judgment: a God
of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he.

4
He is the rock, his work's persite,
his ways all judgment be;
A God of truth, void of all sin,
most just and right is he.
5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children:
they are ^ perverse and crooked generation.

5
Their spot is not his childrens spot,
themselves corrupt'd they far,
A crooked generation
and a perverse they are.
6 Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? is not be thy
father that has bought thee? has he not made thee, and established thee?

6
Unwise people, do ye requite
the Lord thus? Is not he
Thy father, buyer? Has he not
made and established thee?
7 Remember the days of old, consider the years of many generations: ask thy
father, and he will show thee, thy elders, and they will tell thee.

7
Remember ye the days of old,
years past consider well;
Thy father ask, he will thee show,
thy Elders will thee tell.
8 When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, when he
separated the sons of Adam,

8
When the most High to Nations did
the inheritance divide,
When he the sons of Adam all
did separate beside,
He set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
Israel.

He by his wisdom set the bounds
then of the people all,
According to the number of
the children of Israel.
9 For the Lords portion is his people: Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.

9
For to his portion has the Lord
his people without blot:
And of his own inheritance
his Jacob is the lot.
10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness: he led
him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the apple of his eye.

10
In wilderness he found (...), in
wast howling desert dry:
He led, instructed, and (...) kept
as th'^ple of his eye.
11 As an eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her wings.

11
As the Eagle stirs up her nest,
fluttreth her young upon,
Her wings does spread, and takes them,
and bears them thereon.
12 So the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange god with him.

12
So by his might the Lord alone
did lead him carefully,
And no strange god there was at all
with him in company.
13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the
increase of the fields, and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil
out of the flinty rock.

13
On earths high place he made him ride,
fields increase for to eat,
From flinty rocks he made him suck
the oil and honey sweet.
14 Butter of kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rams of the breed
of Bashan,

14
Of Kine the butter, and of sheep
the milk, for them in need,
With fat of lambs, and also rams,
that were of Bashans breed.
And goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou did drink the pure
blood of the grape.

He gave them goats, with Kidneys fat
of wheat that was right good,
And thou also even of the grape
did drink the purest blood.
The second Part.
15 But Iesurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick,

15
But Jesurun then waxed fat,
and he did also kick:
Thou waxed art exceeding fat,
thou art grown very thick,
Thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation.

With fatness thou art cov'rd, he then
God which him made forsook,
And he of his salvations rock
light estimation took.
16 They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations
provoked they him to anger.

16
They him provoked to jealousy
with strange gods evry way,
Him with abominations
to wrath provoked they.
17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew not, to new
gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not.

17
To dev'ls not God they sacrificed,
to gods whom they not knew,
New gods whom not your fathers feared,
that were come up of new.
18 Of the rock that begat thee thou art unmindfull, and have forgotten God
that formed thee.

18
Thou art unmindfull of the rock
which once thee did beget,
And God himself that formed thee
thou likewise did forget.
The third Part.
19 And when the Lord saw it, he abhorred them, because of the provocking of
his sons, and of his daughters.

19
And when the Lord it saw, he did
abhor them evry one,
Because of the provoking great
of daughter and of son.
20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their end shall
be: for they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.

20
He said, I Will hide from them my face,
and I their end will see:
For they a very froward race,
and faithless children be.
21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God, they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities:

21
With that which is not God they have
me moved to jealousy,
To anger they have me provoked,
even with their vanity.
And I will move them to jealousy with those which are not a people, I will
provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.

And I Will them move to jealousy
with such as are no flock,
Them with a foolish nation
to anger I Will provoke.
22 For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn unto the lowest hell, and
shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on fire the foundations of
the mountains.

22
For fire is kindled in my wrath,
it burns to lowest hell,
Earths increase, hills foundations
consum^ and fire it shall.
23 I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon them.

23
Upon them likewise great mischiefs
most surely heap I will,
And in mine anger I will spend
on them mine arrows ill.
24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat, and with
bitter destruction:

24
They shall be altogether burnt
with pain of hunger great,
And with destruction bitter als
devoured with burning heat:
I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of
the dust.

I also will the teeth of beasts
upon them fiercely thrust,
Even with the poison that is of
the serpents of the dust.
25 The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the young man and
the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray hairs.

25
The sword without, terror within,
the young man shall destroy,
The virgin, and the suckling als
with him whose hairs are gray.
26 I said, I would s^atter them into corners, I would make the remembrance of
them to cease from among men:

26
I said, that into corners I
would them all scatter then,
I would make their remembrance als
to cease from among men:
27 Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should behave themselves strang^ly,

27
Yea were it not I feared the wrath
of the enemy they have,
And lest that their adversaries
should strangely them behave,
And lest they should say, Our hand is high, and the Lord has not done all
this.

And lest that they with hauty heart
should say these words anon:
Our hand now high is, and the Lord
this work all has not done.
28 For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them.

29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end.

28
For of counsel a Nation void
they are, nothing know they,
29
O that they wise this understood,
and their last end would weigh.
30 How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except
their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up?

30
How should but one a thousand chase,
and two chase thousands ten:
^xcept their Rock thus had them sold,
and them shut up had then.
31 For their rock is not as our Rock, even ^ur enemies themselves being judges.

31
For in no way the rock that is theirs
as our Rock mighty is,
Our enemies themselves they are
the judges even of this.
32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom^^nd of the fields of Gomorrah: their
grapes are ^^apes of gall, their clusters are bitter.

^2
Of Sodoms vine and Gomors fields,
their vine is surely all,
Their clusters they most bitter are,
their grapes are grapes of gall.
33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and ^he cruel venime of aspes.

34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and ^aled up among my treasures?

^3
Their wine of dragons poison is,
of asps the venim strong:
^4
4 Is not this laid in store with me
my treasures sealed among?
The fourth Part.
35 To me belongs vengeance, and re^mpence, their foot shall slide in due
time:

35
Vengeance to me and recompense
belongs for their crime:
Their foot shall slide assuredly
in due appointed time.
For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon
them make haste.

The day of their calamity
it is now near at hand,
And things that shall upon them come
make have, and shall not stand.
36 For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his servants;
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left.

36
For God shall his own people judge,
and for his saints repent,
When none shut up or left he sees
but that their power is spent.
37 And he shall say, where are their gods, their rock in whom they trusted.

37
And he in his great wrath shall say,
where are their gods now gone?
Their stable rock in whom they all
did put their trust alone.
38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their
drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and be your protection.

38
Which fat ate of their sacrifice,
and drank drink offerings wine:
Let them rise up now and you help,
as your protection fine.
39 See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I
make alive; I wound, and I heal:

39
See now that I am he, even I,
no god there is with me:
I kill, and make alive; I wound,
and als make whole to be.
Neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.

Nor is there any now that can
out of my hand deliver:
40
For I lift up my hand to heaven,
and say, I live for ever.
41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on judgment; I will
render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me.

41
If hold my hand on judgment take,
and glittring sword I whet,
I Will render vengeance to my foes,
and pay those that me hate.
42 I will make mine arrows drunk wit^ blood (and my sword shall devour flesh)

42
I also those mine arrows will
make drunk with blood therefore,
The flesh of all mine enemies
my sword it shall devore.
And that with the blood of the slain, and o^ the captives, from the beginning
of revenges upon the enemy.

With blood of those that have been slain
and those that captives ly*
From the beginning of revenge
upon the enemy.
43 Rejoice, O ye nations with his people* for he will avenge the blood of his
servants,

43
Rejoice ye nations with his folk,
for he who does not change,
Will of his servants all the blood
in his own time avenge.
And will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his
land, and to his people.

And will to his adversaries
a vengeance render full,
And to his people and his land
he will be merciful.
The Song of Deborah, and Barak, after the victory against the army of Iabin
King of Canaan; who reigned in Hazor, whose captain was Sisera, whose head was
cut off by Iahell, the wi^e of Heber. JUDGES 5. verse. 2.
PRaise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the people willingly
offered themselves:

FOr the avenging of Isra^l
praise ye the Lord most hy,
When as the people offered
themselves most willingly.
3 Hear, O ye kings, give ear, O ye princes; I, even I will ^ing unto the Lord,
I will sing praise to the Lord God of Israel.

3
Hear Oye Kings, ye Princes als
give ear, I, even I will
Sing to the Lord, to Isreal's God
I will sing praises still.
4 Lord when thou wentedst out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of the field of
Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the clouds also dropped
water.

4
Lord when thou wentest out of Seir,
and marched from Edom field,
The earth did tremble, heavens did drop,
the clouds did water yield.
5 The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the
Lord God of Israel.

5
The mountains melted from before
the Lord God Eternal,
Even that Sinai from God before,
the God of Israel.
6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Iael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travelers walked through bywayes.

6
In days of Shamgar Anaths son
of Jael in the days,
The high ways were unoccupi'd
men traveled through bywayes.
7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel, until that
I^Deborah arose that I arose a mother in Israel.

7
They ceased that dwelt in villages,
in Israel they did cease,
Till I Deborah in Israel
a mother rose for peace.
8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield or spear
seen among forty thousand in Israel?

They chose new gods, war seizd their gates
was there a shield or spear?
That forty thousand men among
in Israel did appear.
9 My heart is toward the Governors of ^rael, that offered themselves
willingly among (...) people: Bless ye the Lord.

My heart's to Isreal's governors
who t'offer did accord
Themselves among people willingly,
O do ye bless the Lord.
10 Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that (...) in judgment, and walk by
the way.

^0
^0 Ye that do ride on asses white
do ye together say;
^e that do in the judgment sit
and walk als by the way.
11 They that are delivered from the noise (...) archers in the places of
drawing water, there^all they rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord,

^1
Who saved are from the archers noise
where they did water draw,
^here shall they of the Lord rehearse
the righteous acts and law.
Even the righteous acts toward the inha^itants of his villages in Israel:
then shall the^^ople of the Lord go down to the gates.

The righteous acts in Israel
in villages there done:
Then shall the people of the Lord
unto the gates go down.
12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake utter a song, ariso Barak, and lead thy
captivi^captive, thou son of Abinoam.

12
Wake, wake, wake, wake, Deborah sing^
thou Barak rise anon,
Thy captive lead captivity
thou Abinoams son.
13 Then he made him that remains have dominion over the nobles among the
people: the Lord made me have dominion over the mighty.

13
Him that remains dominion^ then
he over the Nobles gave
Among people; God dominion made
me over the mighty have.
14 Out of Ephraim was there a root (...) them against Amalek, after thee
Benjamin, amon^ thy people:

14
Of Ephraim against Amalek
there was a worthy root:
And after thee, was Benjamin,
among thy people great.
Out of Machir came down governors, an^ out of Zebulun they that handle the
pen of (...) writer.

And out of Machir als came down
thy Governors, and then
They did come out of Zebulon
that handle writers pen.
15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah: even Issachar,

15
And the most mighie Princes there
of Issachar that day,
Were with Deborah in the field,
even Issachar I say,
And also Barak, he was sent on foot into the ^alley: for the divisions of
Reuben, there were ^reat thoughts of heart.

Als Barack to the valley sent
on foot, did soon depart:
For Reuben his divisions
thee were great thoughts of heart.
16 Why abodest thou among the sheep folds, ^o hear the bleatings of the
flocks? for the divisions of Reuben, there were great searchings of heart.

16
Why in sheep folds abodest thou
to hear flocks bleet apart?
For Reuben his divisions
were searchings great of heart.
17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher
continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches.

17
Beyond the Jordan Gilead 'bod,
why Dan in ships remained;
Asher continued on sea shore,
within his breaches trained,
18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives unto the
death, in the high places of the field.

18
Then Zebulon and Naphtali
were people that did yield
Their lives to jeopard unto death,
in high parts of the field,
19 The kings came and fought, then fough^ the kings of Canaan in Taanach by
the water^ of Megiddo, they took no gain of money.

19
Kings came and fought, in Taanah fough^
the Kings of Canaan then
They by Megiddos waters fought,
of money took no gain.
20 They fought from heaven, the stars i^ their courses fought against Sisera.

20
Together against Sisera
they fought from heavens hy,
The Stars als in their courses all
did fight then by and by.
21 The river of Kishon swept them away, the ancient river, the river Kishon: O
my sou^ thou have trodden down strength.

21
The river Kishon, Kishon old
away them sweept eachone,
O thou my soul thou surely have,
great strength now trodden down.
22 Then were the horse hoofs broken, by ^he means of the pransings, the
pransings of their mighty ones.

22
Then were the hoofs of horses strong
all broken with their bones,
Even by the means of pransings^ great,
pransings of mighty ones.
23 Curse ye Meroz, (said the angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof:

^3
Curse ye the men of Meros all,
said the Angel of the Lord:
Curse ye th'inhabitans thereof
most bitterly by word;
Because they came not to the help of the Lord, (...) the help of the Lord
against the mighty.

Because that they came not all
their help for to afford
unto the Lord, against mighty men
they did not help the Lord.
24 Blessed above women shall Iael the wise ^f Heber the Kenite be, blessed
shall she be above women in the tent.

24
Jael of Heber Kenite wife
'bove women blessed shall be,
Above all women in the tent
a blessing shall she see.
25 He asked water, and she gave him milk she brought forth butter in a lordly
dish.

25
He water asked, and she gave
him milk of sweet relish,
She also to him butter brought
forth in a lordly dish.
26 She put her hand to the nail, and h^ right hand to the workmens hammer: and
wi^^ the hammer she smot Sisera,

26
Her right hand to the hammer there
unto the nail she put
Her hand, and with the hammer then
there Sisera she smot*
She smot of his head, when she had pierce and stricken through his temples.

When she th^^ through his temples both
had stricken in great speed,
And pierced him, thereafter she
did there smite off his head.
27 At her feet he bowed, he sell, he (...) down: at her feet he bowed, he
fell; where (...) bowed, there he fell down dead.

27
He at her feet did bow, he fell,
and he lay down anon,
He at her feet bowed, fell, where bowed,
there he even dead fell down.
28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through the
lattesse, why is his chariot so long in coming?

28
Then Sis'ras mother looked out
at windows, and did cry
Through lattesse, what can be the cause
his charets thus do stay?
Why tarry the wheels of his chariots?

29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to her self,

Why tarry thus his charet wheels?
29
Her ladies wise did say,
Yea she unto her self returned
an answer on this way,
30 Have they not sped? have they not divided the prey, to every man a damsel
or two?

30
Have they not sped? and have they not
the wealthy prey also
Divided unto evry man
a damsel or two?
To Sisera a prey of diverse colors, a prey of diverse colors of needle work,

To Sisera a prey that they
of diverse colors make,
Of diverse colors even a prey
that is of needle work.
Of diverse colors of needle work on both sides, meet for the necks of them
that take the spoil?

Of diverse colors on both sides
of needle work they make,
Which for the neck of them is meet,
that thus the spoil do take.
31 So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord but let them that love him, be as
the sun when he goes forth in his might.

31
Lord let thy foes so perish all;
but who him love upright,
Let them be as the Sun, when as
he forth goth in his might.
The Song of Hannah, which she sang to God when she had born Samuel, after long
barre^nesse. 1 SAMUEL 2. verse. 1.
MY heart rejoiceth in the Lord, mine horn is exalted in the Lord, my mouth is
enlarged over mine enemies: because I rejoice in thy salvotion.

MY heart in God does joy, in God
my horn's raised: ov're my foes
My mouth enlarged is, for I
do in thy health rejoice.
2 There is none holy as the Lord: for there is none beside thee: neither is
there any rock like our God.

2
There is none holy as the Lord,
for none is thee beside:
Nor is there any rock that does
like to our God abide.
3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogancy come out of your mouth:

3
See that henceforth ye do no more
exceeding proudly talk,
Nor let your tongue within your mouth
with arrogance wall^.
For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.

Because the Lord he is a God*
of knowledge as we see,
And by him in a balance just
all actions weighed be.
4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled, are girt with
strength.

4
The bows even of the mighty men
are broken all at length,
And they that stumbled here and there
are well now girt with strength.
5 They that were full, have hired out themselves for bread, and they that were
hungry, ^eased:

5
They that very full now have
hired out themselves for bread,
And they that also hungry were,
did cease from having need:
So that the barren has born seven, and she that has many children, is waxed
feeble.

So that she that still barren was,
has born sev'n great and small,
And she that many children has
is waxed feeble all.
6 The Lord kills, and makes alive, (...) brings down to the grave, and
brings up.

6
The Lord almighty does both kill
and als alive does save,
He brings up, and likewise he
brings down unto the grave.
7 The Lord makes poor, and makes ri^^ he brings low, and lifts up.

7
The Lord is he that makes poor
and also makes rich,
He brings very low, and he
up lifts to a pitch.
8 He raises up the poor out of the dust, an^ lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to se^ them among princes,

8
He raises from the dust the poor,
the beggar from dunghill*
He lifts up, them for to set
among the Princes still.
And to make them inherit the throne of glory: ^^r the pillars of the earth are
the Lords, and (...) has set the world upon them.

Of glorys Throne to make them heirs,
for that the Lords alone
Of earth the pillars are, and he
the world set them upon.
9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the ^icked shall be silent in
darkness; for by ^^ength shall no man prevail.

^
He of his saints will keep the feet,
the wicked all at length
^ dark shall silent be, for none
prevail shall by his strength.
10 The adversaries of the Lord shall be bro^^n to pieces: out of heaven shall
he thunder ^^no them:

10
The Lords adversaries they shall
in pieces broken be,
^ut of the heaven upon them
a thundering make shall he.
The Lord shall judge the ends of the earth, ^^d he shall give strength unto
his king, and ex^^ he horn of his anointed.

Ends of the earth the Lord shall judge,
and strength give to his King,
The horn of his Anointed One
he shall exalt to reign.
The lamentations of David for the death of Saul and Jonathan, slain upon the
mountain of Gilboah.
2 SAMUEL 1. verse. 19. THe beauty of Israel is slain upon thy hi^ places: how are
the mighty fallen.

OF Israel is the beauty slain
upon thy places hy,
How is it that thy mighty men
are fallen shamefully!
2 Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in (...) streets of Askelon: lest the
daughters of (...) Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the (...)
circumcised triumph.

2
Tell't not in Gath nor Askelon,
lest Philistines rejoice,
Lest daughters of the uncircumcisde
triumph with shouting voice.
3 Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be (...) dew, neither let there be rain
upon you, nor fiel^ of offerings:

3
Ye of Gilboah mountains high
O let there be no dew,
Let neither fields of offerings,
nor rain be upon you,
For there the shield of the mighty is vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as
though he had not been anointed with oil.

For of the mighty is the shield,
there cast away as vile,
The shield of Saul as he had not,
anointed been with oil.
4 From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.

4
From blood of slain, from mighties fate
the bow of Jonathan
Did not turn back, the sword of Saul
returned not empty than.
5 Saul and Jonathan were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their
death they were not divided.

5
Saul, Jonathan, both lovely were
and pleasant in their lives,
And in their death at last they not
divided were likewise.
They were swifter then eagles, they were stronger then lions.

Then Eagles that are swift in flight
they were both swifter far,
Yea they both stronger were also
then fiercest lions are.
6 Ye daughters of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with
other delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel.

6
Ye Isreal's daughters, weep over Saul
who with delights eachone
In scarlet clothed, who ornaments
of gold your clothes put on.
7 How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast
slain in thine bigh places.

7
How in midst of the battle do
the mighty fallen ly!
O Jonathan thou wast even slain
upon thy places hy.
8 I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou been
unto me:

8
My brother Jonathan, I am
distressed ^ore for thee,
For very pleasant thou have been
at all times unto me:
Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women.

9 How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished.

Thy love to me was wonderful,
all women's love it past:
9
How fell the mighty, and of war
were all the weapons lost!
The Song of David, which he sang to give thanks after that Nathan had promised
him benefits and blessings, but chiefly the Messiah to come of his seed. 2 SAMUEL
7. verse. 18.
WHo am I, O Lord God? and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto?

O Lord my God, now who am I
that thou on me have thought?
What is my house that thou in love
me hitherto have brought?
2 And this was yet a small thing in thy sight, O Lord God; but thou have
spoken also of thy servants house for a great while to come,

2
And this O Lord God in thy sight,
a small thing was in sum;
But of thy servants house thou spak'st
for a great while to come.
And is this the manner of man, O Lord God?

3 And what can David say more unto thee? for thou, Lord God, know thy
servant.

Lord God, is this the manner of man?
3
What David more thee to
Can say? for thou O Lord my God
do me thy servant kno.
4 For thy words sake, and according to thine own heart have thou done all
these great things; to make thy servant know them.

4
For thy words sake, according to
thine own heart have thou done
All those great things, for them to make
unto thy servant known.
5 Wherefore thou art great, O Lord God: for there is none like thee, neither
is there any god beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.

5
Thou Lord art great, like thee is none,
no God is thee beside,
According to all things that we
with our own ears have tried.
6 And what one nation in the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom
God went to redeem for a people to himself,

6
And what one Nation in the earth
does like thy people seem,
Like Israel whom to himself,
God went for to redeem,
And to make him a name, and to do for you great things, and terrible for thy
land,

Even for a people, and a Name
to make him, and to do
For you great things and terrible,
for this thy land also,
Before thy people which thou redeemdst to thee from Egypt, from the nations
and their gods?

Before thy people which thou have*
redeemed unto thee
From Egypt, from the Nations,
and these their gods that be.
7 For thou have confirmed to thy self thy people Israel to be a people unto
thee for ever^ and thou, Lord, art become their God.

7
For to thy self thou Israel have
confirmed to thee for ay
A people; and thou art, O Lord,
become their God always.
8 And now, O Lord God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant,
and concerning his house, establish it for ever, and do as thou have said.

8
What of thy servant and his house
thou Lord have spoken now,
Do as thou said, and so for ay
establish it do thou.
9 And let thy name be magnified for ever, saying; The Lord of hosts is the God
over Israel:

9
And let thy Name that is glorious
be magnified for ay,
The Lord of hosts he is the God
that is over Israel, say;
And let the house of thy servant David he established before thee.

10 For thou, O Lord of hosts, God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant,

Let David's house thy servant be
before thee stablish'd well:
10
Thou Lord of hosts, Israls God did
to thy servant reveal:
Saying, I will build thee an house: therefore has thy servant found in his
heart to pray this prayer unto thee.

Thou said I will thee build an house,
therefore thy servant he
Has in his heart found for to pray
this prayer unto thee.
11 And now, O Lord God, thou art that God, and thy words he true, and thou
have promised this goodness unto thy servant.

11
And now, O Lord, that God thou art,
thy words are very true,
And thou this goodness promisde have
unto thy servant now.
12 Therefore now let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that
it may continue for ever before thee:

12
Therefore be pleased for to bless
thy servants house always,
That it may so continue still
before thee fast for ay.
For thou O Lord God, have spoken it, and with thy blessing let the house of
thy servant be blessed for ever.

For thou Lord God have spoken it,
with blessings come from thee
O do thou let thy servants house
for ever blessed be.
The Song of Isaiah, concerning the vineyard, wherein Gods people is reproved
for their barrenness in good works, notwithstanding of all the pains were
taken by the Prophets. ISAIAH* 5. verse. 1.
NOw will I sing to my welbeloved, a song, of my beloved touching his vineyard:
my welbeloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill.

TO my Beloved of his vine
a song now sing I will:
My Welbelov'd a vineyard has
in a most fruitful hill.
2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with
the choicest vine, and bult a tower in the midst of it.

2
He did it fence, and gathered out
the stones thereof eachone,
He planted it with choicest vine,
a tower he built thereon.
And also made a wine press therein: and he looked that it should bring forth
grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

He a vine-presse made als therein,
and looked it should bring forth
Good grapes, but forth at last it brought
wild grapes of nothing worth.
3 And now; O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you,
betwix^ me and my vineyard.

3
And now, O ye inhabitants
of Salem, and als ye
Of Judah men, judge, I you pray,
'twixt my vineyard and me.
4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, brought it forth
wild grapes?

4
What could I my vineyard unto
do more then I have done?
Wherefore when for good grapes I looked,
did wild grapes grow thereon?
5 And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard, I will take
away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up:

5
And now go to; I Will tell you what
I Will to my vineyard do,
I Will take away its hedge, and it
shall be up eaten so:
And break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down.

6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be pruned, nor dug,

And I Will break down the wall thereof,
and it trod down shall be:
6
I Will lay it wast, none pruned shall
nor yet it dug see,
But there shall come up briers and thorns: I will also command the clouds that
they rain no rain upon it.

But briars and thorns there shall come up:
I also will anon
Command the clouds that they no rain
shall rain the same upon.
7 For the vineyard of the Lord of hoasts is the house of Israel, and the men
of Judah his pleasant plant.

7
For vineyard of the Lord of hosts
the house of Israel is,
The men of Judah also are
the plasant plant of his.
And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but
behold a cry.

And he did then for judgment look,
but lo oppression hard;
For rigtheousnesse, but O behold,
a cry then there was heard.
A Song of thanks for the mercies of God. ISA. 12. verse. 1.
O Lord, I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

I Will thee praise, O Lord, though thou
with me most angry wast,
Thine anger turned is away,
thou me comforted have.
2 Behold, God is my salvation: I will trust, and not be afraid; for the Lord
JEHOVAH is my strength and my song, be also is become my salvation.

2
Behold, God's my salvation.
I Will trust, and will not fear^
For Lord Jovah's my strength and song,
he is my salvation near.
3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water ^t of the wells of salvation.

4 And in that day shall ye say,

^
Therefore ye of salvation,
with joy shall in that day,
Out of the wells draw water als,
4
Ye in that day shall say,
Praise the Lord, call upon his name, declare ^is doings among the people, make
mention that ^is name is exalted.

Praise ye the Lord* call on his Name,
the doings that are his
Show to his people, mention make
that is Name exalted is.
5 Sing unto the Lord; for he has done excellent things: this is known in all
the earth.

5
Do ye now sing unto the Lord;
because that he has done
The things that be most excellent;
this in all earth is known.
6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the holy one of
Israel in the midst of thee.

6
Of Zion thou inhabitant,
cry out, and shouting be:
For of Isra^l the holy One
is great in midst of thee,
A Song inciting to confidence in GOD. Isa. 26. verse. 1.
WE have a strong city, salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

WE have a city that is strong,
the Lord salvation so
He will appoint for mighty walls
and bulwarks strong also.
2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps the truth may
enter in.

2
Open ye the gates, that so
the righteous Nation
Which constantly the truth does keep
may enter in anon.
3 Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee: because
he trusts in thee.

3
Assuredly thou will him keep
in perfect peace to be,
Whose mind is still upon thee staid, because he trusts in thee.
4 Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting
strength.

4
For ever trust ye in the Lord,
for ye shall feel at length,
That in the Lord JEHOVAH is
an everlasting strength.
5 For he brings down them that dwell on ^igh, the lofty city he lays it
low, he lays it (...), even to the ground, he brings it even to ^e dust.

For dwellers high he does bring down,
the city proud lays low,
He lays it low, to ground it brings
even to the dust below.
6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet (...) the poor, and the steps
of the needy.

7 The way of the just is uprightness: thou ost upright, do weight the path
of the just.

The foot, poores feet and needies steps
shall tread it in the way:
Upright's the justs way, thou upright,
the just man's path do weigh.
8 Yea in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, ^ve we waited for thee; the desire
of our soul to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee.

Yea in thy judgments way, O Lord,
we waited have for thee,
^ur souls desires unto thy Name,
and thy remembrance be.
9 With my soul have I desired thee in the ^ght, yea with my spirit within me
will I seek (...) early.

I with my soul desired have
thee in the time of hight,
Yea with my spirit within me I
will seek thee early right:
For when thy judgments are in the earth the inhabitants of the world will
learn righteousness.

For when the judgments that thou sends
upon the earth do press,
Then all the worlds inhabitants
will learn thy righteousness.
10 Let favor be showed to the wicked, y^ will he not learn righteousness:

10
Let unto him that wicked is
be favor showed not small,
Yet for the same he righteousness
will not then learn at all:
In the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the
majesty of (...) LORD.

Even in the land of uprightness
he will unjustly deal,
And of the Lord the Majesty
behold no way he will.
11 Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, the will not see: but they shall see, and
be asham^ for their envy at the people,

11
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up,
they will not see; but they
Shall see, and be ashamed, because
the people they envy.
Yea the fire of thine enemies shall devour them.

12 Lord, thou will ordain peace for us: for ^hou also have wrought all our
works in us.

Yea them thy foes fire shall devore,
12
Lord thou will ordain thus
Firm peace for us, for thou als have
wrought all our works in us.
13 O Lord our God, other lords besides ^eo have had dominion over us: but by
thee ^nly will we make mention of thy name.

^3
^3 Lord God, besides thee other gods
over us dominion had:
We'd only of thy Name, by thee
will mention to be made.
14 They are dead, they shall not live; they ^re deceased, they shall not rise:

14
Henceforth these wicked shall not live
who are now dead and slain,
^t last they all deceased are,
they shall not rise again.
Therefore have thou visited and destroyed (...), and made all their memory to
perish.

Therefore thou have them visited,
and them destroyed always,
and als have made their memory
to perish quite away.
15 Thou have increased the nation, O Lord thou have increased the nation, thou
art glorified thou had removed it far unto all the ends of the earth.

15
Thou have increased the nation, Lord
thou have increased its worth,
You Are glorified; thou it removed
far to all ends of earth.
16 Lord, in trouble have they visited thee, the poured out a prayer when thy
chastening wa^ upon them.

16
Lord, when they were in trouble they
did visit thee anon,
They prayers powered out when was
thy chastning them upon.
17 Like as a woman with child that draws near the time of her delivery, is
in pain, an^ cries out in her pangs; so have we been in the sight, O Lord.

17
As she that is with child draws near
to her deliverie;
In pain is, and cries in her pangs,
so in thy sight were we.
18 We have been with child, we have bee^ in pain, we have as it were brought
forth wind

18
We surely all have been with child,
we in great pain of mind
Have all been, we have as it were
brought forth the very wind:
We have not wrought any deliverance in the ^rth, neither have the inhabitants
of the world ^llen.

^e have not a deliverance wrought
on earth, as we perceive,
^or yet the worlds inhabitants
at all down fallen have.
19 Thy dead men shall live, together with dead body shall they arise:

Thy men that dead are they shall live
together well they all
^ith my dead body even revive,
and als arise they shall:
Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust: for thy (...) is as the dew of herbs,
and the earth shall ^ out the dead.

^ake, sing ye in dust that dwell,
as dew of herbs indeed
is thy dew, and als the earth
shall cast out all her dead.
Come, my people, enter thou into thy cham^^^s, and shut thy doors about thee:
hide thy (...) as it were for a little moment, until the ^ignation be overpast.

My people, to thy chambers come
doors shut about thee fast,
(...) thou thee for a moment hide,
till wrath be overpast.
21 For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the inhabitants of
the earth for their iniquity:

21
For lo, the Lord out of his place
does come most speedily
To punish earths inhabitants,
for their iniquity.
The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

The earth shall als disclose the blood,
that in it did remain,
And shall no more the means afford,
to cover close her slain.
The Song of Hezekiah, after God had healed him of his sickness. etc. ISA. 38.
verse. 10.
I Said in the cutting off of my days, I shall g^ to the gates of the grave: I
am deprived o^ the residue of my years.

IN cutting off my days I said,
to gates of grave I Will go:
Of those my years the residue
I am deprived so.
2 I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the living: I
shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world,

2
In livings land the Lord, the Lord,
I said, I shall not see:
I shall no more see man with those
on earth that dwellers be.
3 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me, as a shepherds tent: I have
cut off like a weaver my life:

3
Departed is mine age, and is
removed from me with strife
As shepherds tents; I weaver like
have thus cut off my life.
He will cut me of with pining sickness: from day even to night will thou make
an end of me.

That I may wholly be cut off,
he will pining sickness send,
From day even unto night will thou
so of me make an end.
4 I reckoned till monrning, that as a lion so will he break all my bones: from
day even to ^ight will thou make an end of me.

4
I reck'ned until morn, that as
a lion so will he
Break all my bones; from day to night
thou wilt make an end of me.
5 Like a cran or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a dove,

5
Even like a cran in my distress,
or as a swallow sad
So did I chatter: as a dove
a heavy mourning had.
Mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me.

Mine eyes they long with looking up
now very failed be,
O Lord, I am oppressed sore,
do undertake for me.
6 What shall I say? he has both spoken unto me, and himself has done it: I
shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

6
What shall I say? He spoken has,
and als has done no less,
I shall go softly all my years
in my souls bitterness.
7 O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the life of my
spirit: so will thou recover me, and make me to live.

7
Lord by those things men live, in them
my spirit life does take,
And so thou will recover me,
and me to live wilt make.
8 Behold, for peace I had great bitterness; but thou have in love to my soul
delivered it from the pit of corruption:

8
O do behold, how for my peace
I had great bitterness,
But thou in love have saved my soul
from pit of rottenness.
For thou have cast all my sins behind thy (...)

9 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee: they that go
down into the ^it cannot hope for thy truth.

My sins thou cast behind thy back:
9
For neither grave nor death
Can praise thee, they that go to pit
cannot hope for thy truth.
10 The living, the living, he shall praise ^hee, as I do this day: the father
to the children shall make known thy truth.

10
The living, yea the living shall
thee praise, as I this day:
The father to the children shall
make known thy truth always.
11 The Lord was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs to the
stringed instruments, all the days of our life, in the house of the LORD.

11
The Lord was ready me to save,
we will while we live accord
My songs to stringed instruments
in the house of the Lord.
THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH.
CHAPTER. 1.
HOw does the city sit solitary, that was full of people? how is she become as
a widow?

HOw is it that the City does
sit solitary still?
How is she as a Widow now,
that people much did fill?
She that was great among the nations, and princess among the provinces, how
is she become tributarie.

She that among the Nations
was great, and Princess made
Among Provinces, how is she
thus tributary tread?
2 She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheecks: among all
her lovers she has none to comfort her,

2
She weepeth very sore by night,
and on her cheeks are tears;
Mong all her Lovers she has none
for comfort in her fears.
All her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

3 Judah is gone into captivity, because of affliction,

Her friends all have dealt treacherously
with her, and turned her foes;
Judah's gone to captivity,
because of many woes;
And because of great servitude: she dwel^h among the heathen, she finds no
rest: all ^r persecutors overtook her between the straits.

and for the servitude that is great:
among heathen she does dwell,
^e finds no rest, her took in straits
her persecutors fell.
4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none me to the solemn feasts: all her
gates are solate:

The ways of Zion they do mourn,
because there is none that
^ome to the solemn feasts, yea all
her gates are desolate.
Her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, (...) she is in bitterness.

^er Priests they in great trouble sigh,
her Virgins more and less
^re grievously afflicted all,
and she is in bitterness.
5 Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies ^sper: for the Lord has
afflicted her.

These that are her adversaries,
the chief above her be;
Her enemies prosper, for the Lord
afflicted her has he.
For the multitude of her transgressions, her children are gone into captivity
before the enemy.

And also for the multitude
of her transgressions hye,
Her children before the en'my are
gone in captivity.
6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her princes are
become like hearts that find no pasture,

6
From her that Zions daughter is,
the beauty all is gone,
Her Princes are become like Hearts,
that pasture do find none.
And they are gone without strength before the pursuer.

7 Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction.

Before the fierce pursuer they
without all strength are gone.
7
Salem remembered in the days
of her affliction,
And of her miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old,

And in time of her miseries
things pleasant to behold,
That she had in possession
even in the days of old,
When her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her, the
adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

When fell in hands of enemies
the people of her stock,
And none her helped, the foes it saw,
and did her Sabbaths mock.
8 Jerusalem has grievously sinned: therefore she is removed: all that
honored her, despise her,

8
Jerusalem sinned greivously,
she is removed therefore:
They all together her despise,
that honour^d her before:
Because they have seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth and turns backward.

Because that they her nakedness
have seen while she did mourn,
Yea, she does sigh most heavily,
and backward als does turn:
9 Her filthiness is in her skirts, she remembers not her last end, therefore
she came down wonderfully:

9
Her filthiness is in her skirts,
her last end she not on
At all remembers, therefore she
came wonderfully down.
She had no comforter: O Lord, behold my affliction: for the enemy has
magnified himself.

No comforter she had; O Lord,
see my affliction,
For that the enemy himself
has magnified alone.
10 The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things: for
she has seen

10
The adversary has spread out
his hand on what had been
All her things pleasant on the earth,
for she has clearly seen
That the heathen entered into her Sanctuary, whom thou did command that they
should not enter into thy congregation.

That heathen men had thus into
her Sanctuary gone,
Whom thou would not to enter in
thy Congregation.
11 All her people sigh, they seek bread, they have given their pleasant things
for meat to relieve the soul:

11
Her people sigh, they all seek bread,
and also they did give
Their things that pleasant are for mear,
their soul for to relieve.
See, O Lord, and consider, for I am become ^ile.

12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see,

See Lord: consider, for I Am vile,
12
Is it nothing to you
All passers by? See and also
this well consider now,
If there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith
the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of his fierce anger.

If any sorrow be like mine
done to me, every way
Wherewith the Lord afflicted me
in his fierce angers day.
13 From above has he sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against them:

13
He from above into my bones
sent fire me to assail,
And it in a most fearful way
against them does prevail:
He has spread a net for my feet, he has ^urned me back: he has made me
desolate, and faint all the day.

He turned me back, and for my feet
a net spread in the way;
He has als made me desolate,
and faint even all the day.
14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are wreathed, and
come up upon my n^c^:

14
The yoke of my transgressions is
bound by his hand alone,
They wreathed are, and also they
come up my neck upon:
He has made my strength to fall, the Lord has delivered me into their hands,
from whom I am not able to rise up.

He has my strength made for to fall,
the Lord has me likewise
Delivered into their hands
from whom I cannot rise.
15 The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me: he
has called an assembly against me,

15
God under foot in midst of me
has trod my mighties all,
In midst of me; he against me
did an assembly call
To crush my young men: the Lord has trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah,
as in ^ wine press.

So for to crush my young men all;
the Lord has with distress
The virgin Judahs daughter trod,
even as in a wine press.
16 For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with water,
because the comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me:

16
For this I weep, with water down
mine eye does run, mine eye,
For the comforter that my soul
should save, is far from me:
My children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

17 Zion spreads forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:

Because the enemy prevailed
my sons are spoiled eachone
17
Zion she spreads forth her hands,
to comfort her there is none,
The Lord has commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should be round
about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

Concerning Jacob God ordaind
his foes about him round;
Among them is Jerus'lem as
a menstruous woman found.
18 The Lord is righteous, for I have rebel^ed against his commandment: hear I
pray you, ^ll people, and behold my sorrow:

18
The Lord is righteous, for I have
rebelled against his will:
I pray you people all to hear.
and see my sorrow still:
My virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

19 I called for my lovers but they deceived me;

My Virgins and my young Men are
gone in captivity*
19
I for my lovers then did call,
but they deceived me.
My priests and mine elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought
their meat to relieve their souls.

My Priests, yea and mine Elders als
then up the ghost did give,
While meat they in the city sought
their souls for to relieve.
20 Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress; my bowels are troubled; mine heart
is turned within me, for I have grievously rebelled:

20
See Lord, my bowels troubled are,
for in distress am I:
Mine heart's turned in me, for I have
rebelled grievously,
Abroad the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

21 They have heard that I sigh, there is none to comfort me:

Abroad the sword bereaves, at home
there is as death we see:
21
They have all heard that I do sigh
there is none to comfort me:
All mine enemies have heard of my trouble, they are glad that thou have done
it* thou will bring the day that thou have called,

Mine enemies all my trouble heard,
that thou the same have done
They are right glade; thou wilt bring they day
that thou have called anon,
And they shall be like unto me.

22 Let all their wickedness come before thee, and do unto them,

And they shall be like unto me:
22
Do thou now let therefore
Even all their grievous wickedness
come clearly thee before.
And do thou unto them as thou have done unto me for all my transgressions, for
my sigh^ are many and my heart is faint.

As thou to me for all my faults
have done, do them unto,
For now my sighs they many are,
my heart is faint also.
CHAPTER II.
HOw has the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger, and
cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel,

HOw Zions daughter has the Lord
cov'rd with a cloud in wrath?
And unto earth from heaven cast down
Isreal's beauty has?
And remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger?

2 The Lord swallowed up the habitations of Jacob:

And in the day of's wrath did not
to mind his footstool call?
2
The Lord the habitations has
of Jacob swallowed all,
And has not pitied: he has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter of Judah:

And he them has not pitied:
he in his wrath so sad
Thrown down by force has the strong holds
that Judahs daughter had:
He has brought them down to the ground: he has polluted the kingdom and the
princes thereof.

He by his might unto the ground
has made them all to fall:
The kingdom he polluted has,
and Princes there of all,
3 He has cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he has drawn
back his right hand from before the enemy,

3
Of Israel all the horn cut off
in his fierce wrath has he,
He has drawn back his right hand from
before the enemy:
And ^e burned against Jacob like a flaming fire which devoureth round about.

4 He has bent his bow like an enemy:

Against Jacob he like flaming fire
did burn which wastes about:
4
He has his bow bent, like unto
an enemy most stou^.
He stood with his right hand as an adversary* and slew all that were pleasant
to the eye, in the ^bernacle of the daughter of Zion:

^s an adversary he stood,
what pleasant was to the eye
^ith his right hand within the tent
of Zion all slew he:
He poured out his fury like fire.

5 The Lord was as an enemy: he has swallowed up Israel, he has swallowed up
all her palaces:

His fury he powered out like fire,
5
God was as enemy:
He swallowed Israel, he devoured
he palaces so hy:
He has destroyed his strong holds, and has increased in the daughter of
Judah mourning and lamentation.

His strong holds he destroyed has,
and has increasde anon
In Judahs daughter mourning great,
and lamentation.
6 And he has violently taken away^his tabernacle, as if it were of a garden,
he has destroyed his places of the assembly:

5
He violently removed his tent,
as't of a garden were,
He of the assembly has destroyed
the places that are there:
The Lord has caused the solemn feasts and ^abbaths to be forgotten in Zion,
and has despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

God causd in Zion sol^mn feasts
and sabbaths be forgot,
In his wraths indignation he
King, Priest, regarded not.
7 The Lord has cast off his alter: he has abhorred his sanctuary: he has
given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces;

7
The Lord his altar has cast off,
and loathed his Sanctuary:
Her palace walls he in the hand
gave of the enemy,
They have made a noise in the house of the Lord, as in the day of a solemn
feast.

Within the house that is the Lords
a noise als made have they,
As if it for a solemn feast
had been a joyful day.
8 The Lord has purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion; he has
stretched out a line: he has not withdrawn his hand from destroying:

8
The Lord has purposed to destroy
his Zions daughters wall
He stretched a line, he not withdrew
his hand from wasting all.
Therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament, they languished together.

9 Her g^^es are sunk into the ground;

Therefore he made the rampart so
and wall for to lament;
They languished together then;
9
Her gates to ground they went:
He has destroyed and broken her bars; her king and her princes are among the
Gentiles; the law is no more,

He has destroyed, and broke her bars,
her King and Princes thus,
Among the Gentiles scattered are,
the law no more's for us.
Her prophets also find no vision from the LORD.

10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground and keep silence:

Her Prophets also from the Lord
at all no vision found,
10
Of Zions daughter th'elders als
sit silent on the ground;
They have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded themselves with
sackcloth;

In this their grief they have cast up
the dust their heads upon,
And they themselves have also girt
with sackcloth evry one;
The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.

11 Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels are troubled;

And Salems virgins hang their heads
down to the ground right far,
^1
Mine eyes they now do fail with tears:
my bowels troubled are,
My liver is poured upon the earth, for the de^^ruction of the daughter of my
people, because ^e children and the sucklings swoon in the ^e^ts of the city.

^y liver is powered on the earth
for the destruction
^f people mine, because in streets
young children sucklings swoon.
12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn ^d wine? when they swooned as the
wounded in ^e streets of the city,

^2
They to their mothers said, Where is
corn, wine for to be found?
^hen as within the cities streets
as wounded men they swoon'd,
When their soul was poured out into their others bosom.

^'n at the same time when their soul
the city all throughout
to their mothers bosom was
with sorrow powered out.
13 What thing shall I take to witness for ^e? what thing shall I liken to
thee? O ^^ghter of Jerusalem?

13
What thing for thee to witness now
shall taken be by me?
O Salems daughter what shall I
now liken unto thee?
What shall I equal to thee, that I may fort the^, O virgin daughter of Zion?
for breach is great like the sea;

O Virgin Zions daughter dear
that I may comfort thee,
What shall I equal thee unto?
thy breach great's like the sea.
Who can heal thee?

14 Thy prophets have seen vain and f^ things for thee,

Who is he that well can thee heal?
14
Thy prophets they have seen
Such things for thee as merely vain
and foolish als have been,
And they have not discovered thine iniq^ ^urn away thy captivity; but have
seen for false burdens, and causes of banishment.

Thy sin they not discovered,
thy thrall to turn away
But burdens false, of banishment
the causes seen have they.
15 All that pass by, clap their ha^ thee; they hiss and wag their head at
the d^^er of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city,

15
All that pass by clap hands at thee
they hiss and wag their head
At Salems daughter, saying thus,
is this the town indeed,
That men call the perfection of beauty, the ^oy of the whole earth?

16 All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash ^he teeth:

That men beauties perfection call
of the whole earth the joy,
16
Against thee thy foes their mouth make wide,
hiss, gnash their teeth do they:
They say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is the day that we looked
for: we have found, we have seen it.

They say we have her swallowed up
this surely is the day
We looked for; we have it found,
we have it seen always.
17 The Lord has done that which he had devised: he has fulfilled his word
that he had commanded in the days of old:

17
The Lord has done what he devisd,
fulfilled he has by sword,
That in the days that were of old
he did command by word.
He has thrown down, and has not pitied and he has caused thine enemies to
rejoice o^ thee, he has set up the horn of thine adversari^*

He down did throw and piti'd not
he causd thine enemies
To joy over thee, the horn he raisd
of thine adversaries.
18 Their heart cried unto the Lord, O w^ of the daughter of Zion, let tears
run down li^ a river day and night:

18
Their heart did cry unto the Lord,
O Zions daughters wall,
Let tears down still both day and night
even like a river fall.
Give thy self no rest, let not the appl^ (...) thine eyes cease.

19 Arise, cry out in the night:

Give to thy self no rest, let not
cease the apple of thine eye
19
Do thou arise, and in the night
cease thou not out to cry:
In the beginning of the watches power (...) thine heart like water before the
face of the Lord*

See that in the beginning of
the watches thou power out
Thine heart before the face of God,
like water round about.
Lift up thy hands toward him, for the life of ^y young children, that faint
for hunger in the ^p of every street.

^hy hand to him lift for the life
of thy young children all:
that in the top of every street
for hunger fainting fall.
20 Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom ^ou have done this: shall the women
eat their ^uit, and children of a span long?

^0
Lo. Lord, consider to whom thou
have done this us among:
^ shall the women eat their fruit
and babes of a span long?
Shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in (...) sanctuary of the Lord.

21 The young and the old lie on the ground (...) the streets:

shall Priest and Prophet thus be slain
in Gods own Sanctuary?
^1
The young and old both on the ground
within the streets do ly:
My virgins and my young men are fallen by (...) sword: thou have slain them in
the day of ^y anger, thou have killed and not pitied.

^ly Virgins, young men fell by sword,
thou have them slain at last,
^v'n in the day of thy fierce wrath
thou killed, not piti'd have.
22 Thou have called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so that in the
day of the Lords anger none escaped

22
Thou have as in a solemn day
my terrors round about
Called so, that in Gods day of wrath
none has escaped out,
Nor remained: those that I have swadled and brought up, has mine enemy
consumed.

Nor yet remained has alive.
those that I swadled have,
And als brought up, mine enemy
consumed has in the grave.
CHAPTER III.
I Am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

2 He has led me and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

I Am the man that greef has seen
by rod of his own wrath.
2
Now into darkness, not to light
me led, and brought he has.
3 Surely against me is he turned, he turns his hand against me all the day.

3
Surely against me every where
he turned is always:
He in his wrath does turn his hand
against me all the day*
4 My flesh and my skin has he made old, he (...) broken my bones.

5 He has builded against me, and compas^^ me with gall and travel.

My flesh and skin he has made old,
and bones has broken small:
He against me built, and compast me
with travel and with gall.
6 He has set me in dark places, as they (...) be dead of old.

7 He has hedged me about, that I cannot (...) out: he has made my chain
heavy.

He has me in dark places set,
as who of old be dead:
He hedged me, out I can not get,
my chain he heavy made.
8 Also when I cry and shout, he shuts out ^y prayer.

9 He has enclosed my ways with hewe^ one: he has made my paths ^ro^ked.

When also I do cry and shout,
my prayer out shuts he:
He with hew'n stone my ways enclosd,
my paths made crook'd to be.
10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret places.

^0
He was unto me as a Bear,
that lying is in wait,
And as a lion that is in
the places most secret.
11 He has turned aside my ways, and pu^led me in pieces: he has made me
desolate.

11
He turned has aside my ways,
and also more then that
He has me pulled in pieces all,
he made me desolate.
12 He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

13 He has caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.

12
He bent his bow, he as a mark
for th'arrow set me so.
13
He has his quivers arrows causd
to pierce my reins into.
14 I was a derision to all my people, and their song all the day.

15 He has filled me with bitterness, he has made me drunken with wormwood.

14
I to my people scorn, and song
all day was made to be:
15
He has me filled with bitterness,
with wormwood drunk made he.
16 He has also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he has covered me with
ashes.

16
He also broken has my teeth
with gravel stones in wrath,
And likewise in his rage he me
with ashes cov'red has.
17 And thou have removed my soul far off from peace: I forga^ prosperity.

18 And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord.

17
I good forgot, my soul thou have
from peace removed far:
18
I said that from the Lord my strength
and hope als perished are.
19 Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.

20 My soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

19
Remembering mine affliction,
gall, wormwood, misery;
20
My soul does still remember them,
and humbled is in me.
21 This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

22 It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,

21
This I do to my mind recall,
therefore I hope in thee,
22
It Is of the mercies of the Lord
we not consumed be,
Because his compassions fail not.

32 They are new every morning: great is the faithfulness.

Because that his compassions
fail not in any case:
23
They evry-morning still are new,
great is thy faithfulness.
24 The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

25 The Lord is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him.

24
The Lord's my portion, says my soul,
I Will hope in him therefore:
25
God's good to them that wait for him
to souls that him adore.
26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation
of the Lord.

26
It Is good that both a man should hope,
and also quietly
For the salvation of the Lord
wait on continually.
27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.

28 He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him.

27
It Is good in's youth man bear the yoke,
28
He sits so alone,
And silence keeps, because that he
has born it him upon.
29 He puts his mouth in the dust: if so (...) there may be hope.

30 He gives his cheek to him that smi^et^ ^im, he is filled full with
reproach.

^9
His mouth he puts in the dust,
if so there hope may be:
30
He to the smiter* gives his cheek,
filled with reproach is he,
31 For the Lord will not cast off for ever.

32 But though he cause grief, yet will he ^ave compassion according to the
multitude of his ^^ercies.

31
For God for ay will not cast off:
32
Though greef he cause, yet good
He Will pity have according to
his mercies multitude.
33 For he does not afflict willingly; nor grieve the children of men.

34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth,

33
For willingly he not afflicts,
nor does men's children grieve:
34
Under his feet all prisoners
to crush on earth that live.
35 To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most high.

36 To subvert a man in his cause, the Lord ^ppro^eth not.

35
To turn aside man's right before
the face of the most Hye,
36
God to subvert man in his cause
approves not willingly.
37 Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it
not.

37
Who is he that says, and it then
to pass comes in the land,
When as the Lord in any way
did not the same command?
38 Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good.

39 Wherefore does a living man complain,

38
Out of the most Highs mouth does not
both good and ill proceed,
39
Wherefore thus does a living man
complain in any need?
A man for the punishment of his sins?

40 Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

A man for his sins punishment.
40
Let us to search attain
And try our ways, and to the Lord
let us now turn again.
41 Let us lift our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

42 We have transgressed and have rebelled, thou have not pardoned.

41
Let us lift up our heart and hands
to God in heaven at last:
42
We have transgressed and rebel'd
and thou not pardoned have.
43 Thou have covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou have stain, thou have
not pitied.

43
Thou persecuted have, and us
with anger cov'rd at last,
Thou have us by our enemies slain.
and thou not pitied have.
44 Thou have covered thy self with a cloud that our prayer should not pass
through.

45 Thou have made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of the people.

44
Thou with a cloud thee cov'rd, that through
our suit pass should not thus.
45
The offscouring and refuse thou madst
in midst of people us.
46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

47 Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

46
Against us opned have their mouths
our enemies eachone:
47
Destruction, desolation, fear,
and snares come us upon.
48 Mine eye runs down with rivers of water, for the destruction of the
daughter of my people.

48
With rivers even of water great
still runs down mine eye,
Even for destruction that does on
my peoples daughter ly.
49 Mine eye trickleth down and cease not, without any intermission:

50 ^ill the Lord look down, and behold from heaven.

49
Mine eye down trickleth, without cease
or intermission:
50
Till that the Lord from Heaven behold,
and us look down upon.
51 Mine eye affects mine heart, because of all the daughters of my city.

52 Mine enemies chased me sore like a bird, without cause.

51
Mine eye affects* my heart, even for
my cities daughters all:
52
Me without cause sore chased my foes
like to a bird that is small.
53 They have cut of my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon me.

54 Waters flowed over mine head, then I said, I am cut off.

53
In dungeon they cut off my life,
and cast on me a stone;
54
The waters over my head did flow,
I said, cut off I Am gone.
55 I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of ^he low dungeon.

56 Thou have heard my voice, hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.

55
Out of the dungeon low, O Lord,
on thy Name called I,
56
Thou heardst my voice, hide not thine ear
while I do breath and cry.
57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou said, Fear not.

58 O Lord, thou have plead^d the causes of my soul, thou have redeemed my life.

57
Thou near drewst when I called on thee,
thou said, Let fear be past,
58
Thou pleadst the causes of my soul,
my life redeemed thou have.
59 O Lord, thou have seen my wrong, judge thou my cause.

60 Thou have seen all their vengeance, and all their imaginations against me.

59
O Lord, do thou now judge my cause
my wrong all seen thou have,
60
Thou their imaginations sawst
and vengeance against me have.
61 Thou have heard their reproach, O Lord, and all their imaginations against
me.

61
Thou have most clearly heard, O Lord,
how their reproach did fall,
And their imaginations
that were against me all.
62 The lips of those that rose up against me and their device against me all
the day.

62
The lips of those that up did rise
against me evry way,
And their device mischievous all
against me all the day.
63 Behold their sitting down and their rising up, I am their music.

63
Behold their sitting down, and als
their rising up for ill:
I in this case most surely am
become their music still.
64 Render unto them a recompense, O Lord, according to the work of their hands.

64
Unto them in thy sury great
O thou, the mighty Lord,
According to their handy work
a recompense afford,
65 Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

66 Persecute and destroy them in anger, from under the heavens of the Lord.

65
Unto them sorrow give of heart,
thy curse unto them render,
66
From under the Lords heavens destroy,
them persecute in anger.
CHAPTER IV.
HOw is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the stones of
the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.

HOw is the gold thus dim become?
how is fine gold changed f^rre?
The temples stones out in the top
of each street powered are.
2 The precious sons of Zion, compareable to fine gold, how are they esteemed
to earthen pi^ohers, the work of the hands of the potter!

2
The precious sons of Sion like
to fine gold in the lands,
How are they as earths pitchers thought
the work of potters hands?
3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, ^hey give suck to their young
ones: the daughter ^f my people is become cruel, like the ostriches ^n the
wilderness.

^
^ Sea monsters even draw out the breasts
their young ones suck to give,
My people's fierce like ostritches
in wilderness that live.
4 The tongue of the sucking child cleaves ^o the roof of his mouth for
thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaks it unto them.

4
The sucking child his tongue for thirst
to his mouths roof cleaves so,
The children young ask bread, and none
it breaks them unto.
5 They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the streets: they that were
brought up in scarlet, embrace dunghils.

5
They that did delicatly feed
in streets are desolate?
They that in scarlet were brought up
dunghills embrace for that:
6 For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people, is greater
then the punishment of the sin of Sodom,

6
Of sins my peoples daughter did
the punishment is more
Then of the sin of Sodom was
the punishment before.
That was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

7 Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were whiter then milk,

That in a moment was ov'rthrown,
no hands did stay on her;
7
Her Nazarites more pure then snow,
then milk they whiter were.
They were more rudy in body then rubies, their ^olishing was of sapphire.

8 Their visage is blacker then a coal: they are not known in the streets:

Then rubies they more rudy were,
as polished sapphire drawn:
8
Their visage blacker's then a coal,
in streets they are not known,
Their skin cleaves to their bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick.

9 They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be slain with
hunger:

Their skin it cleaves to their bones,
it like a stick does wither:
9
The slain with sword are better then
they that be slain with hunger.
For these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the field.

For piece and piece those pine away,
before to death they yield,
They stricken through are for the want
of fruits that fill the field.
10 The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, they were
their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

10
The hands of women pitiful
their children sodden have,
My folk in their destruction
for meat them did receive.
11 The Lord has accomplished his fury, he has poured out his fierce anger,
and has kindled a fire in Zion, and it has devoured the foundations thereof.

11
His fury God accomplished has,
his wrath he out did power;
In Zion he put fire which there
its ground-works did devour.
12 The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have
believed, that the adversary and the enemy should have entered into the gates
of Jerusalem.

12
Kings of the earth and dwellers in
the world would not believe,
That the en'mie into Salems gates
to enter should get leave.
13 For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, that have
shed the blood of the just in the midst of her;

13
For sins of all her prophets vile
and priests iniquities,
That of the just have shed the blood
in midst of her that lies.
14 They have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
th^mselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

14
As blind they wandered in the streets,
themselves polluted much
They have with blood, even so that men
could not their garments touch.
15 They cried unto them, Depart ye, it is unclean, depart, depart, touch not,
when they fled away and wandered:

15
They cried unto them, Depart,
unclean it is, we say,
Depart, depart, touch not, when thus
they wandering fled away:
They said among the heathen, they shall no more sojourn there.

16 The anger of the Lord has divided them,

They said among the heathen, there
no more sojourn they shall.
16
The anger of the mighty Lord
divided has them all.
He will no more regard them: they respected not the persons of the priests,
they favored not the elders.

He Will have no more regard to them:
of priests the persons they
Respected not, they favored not
the elders any way.
17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our watching we
have watched for a nation that could not save us.

17
For us, our eyes for our vain help
as yet they f^iled have,
We in our watching watched for
a Nation could not save.
18 They hunt our steps that we cannot go i^ our streets: our end is near, our
days are fulfilled, for our end is come.

18
They hunt our steps, that we can not
go in our streets ov'rcome,
Our end is near, our days fulfilled
are, for our end is come.
19 Our persecutors are swifter then the eagles of the heaven they pursued us
upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the wilderness.

19
Our persecutors swifter are
then heavens Eagles, thus
On hills they us pursued, and wait
in desert laid for us.
20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointe^ of the Lord was taken in their
pits, of whom we said,

20
Likewise of our nostrils the breath
the Anointed of the Lord,
Was apprehended in their pits
of whom we said this word,
Under his shadow we shall live among the heathen.

21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwell in the land of Vz.

Under his ^^addow we shall live
among the heathen thus,
21
Rejoice, O E^oms daughter that
dwell'st in the land of Uz.
The cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shall be drunken, and shall
make thy self naked.

The cup also shall pass even through
till it come unto thee:
Thou shall thy self all naked make,
and thou shall drunken be.
22 The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion, he
will no more carry thee away into captivity.

22
The punishment accomplished is
of thine iniquity,
O Zions daughter he will no more
as captive carry thee.
He will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom, he will discover thy sins.

O thou that Edoms daughter art
he surely visit still
Wilt thine iniquity, and he
thy sins discover will.
CHAPTER V.
REmember, O Lord, what is come upon us: consider and behold our reproach.

REmember now, O Lord our God,
what is come us upon,
Consider also our reproach,
and it behold anon.
2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to alients.

3 We are Orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

2
To strangers turnd's our heritage,
our house to aliants far:
3
We Orphans are and Fatherless,
our mothers widows are.
4 We have drunken our water for money, our wood is sold unto us.

5 Our necks are under persecution: we labor and have no rest.

4
For money we our water drink,
our wood is sold to us:
5
Our necks under affliction are
we restless labor thus.
6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be
satisfied with bread.

6
We unto the Egyptians
have given the hand in need,
And to the Assyrians, for to be
but satisfied with bread.
7 Our fathers have sinned and are not, and ^e have born their iniquities.

8 Servants have ruled over us: there is ^ne that does deliver us out of their
hand.

Sinned have our fathers, and are not,
and born their sins we have,
Over us ruled servants, and none does
out of their hand us save.
9 We gat our bread with the peril of our (...), because of the sword of the
wilderness.

With peril of our lives we gat
our bread in great distress,
because of the most bloody sword
that was in wilderness.
10 Our skin was black like an oven, because the terrible famine.

11 They ravished the women in Zion, and ^^maids in the cities of Judah.

^^
Our skin for famine terrible
like as ^ne ov'n was black,
They Zions women, Judahs maids
by ravishing did take.
12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the ^es of elders were not honored.

12
Up by their hand most cruelly
the Princes hanged are there,
The faces of the Elders als
by no man honored were
13 They took the young men to grind, an^ the children fell under the wood.

14 The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their music.

13
They took the young men for to grind
boys under wood did fall,
14
The Elders ceased from the gate,
from music young men all.
15 The joy of our heart is ceased, our da^^ is turned into mourning.

16 The crown is fallen from our head: (...) unto us that we have sinned.

15
Joy of our heart it ceased is,
our dance to mourning's t^rned,
16
The crown is fallen from our head,
woe's us that we have sinned.
17 For this our heart is faint, for these thi^ our eyes are dim.

18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which desola^e, the foxes walk upon it.

17
For this our heart is faint, our eyes
are dim for things so done,
18
For Zions hill that is desolate,
it foxes walk upon.
19 Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever: thy ^^rone from generation to generation.

19
Thou who art the most mighty Lord
remainst for ever fast:
^hy Throne from generation does
to generation last.
20 Wherefore do thou forget us for ever, ^^d forsake us so long time?

21 Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we ^^ll be turned:

^^
(...) Why us forgetst thou still and als
^so long forsak'st us all:
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord,
and turned be we shall:
(...) Renew our days as of old.

22 But thou have utterly rejected us: thou art (...) wroth against us.

(...) as of old renew our days:
22
But utterly thou both
(...) us rejected, and thou art
with us exceeding wroth.
The Song of Jonah, for his deliverance out of the belly of the Whale. Jonah.
2. verse. 2.
^^^ryed by reason of mine affliction unto the lord, and he heard me; out of
the belly of hell (...) I, and thou heardest my voice.

BY reason of my trouble I
to God who heard me cried,
Out of hells belly did I cry,
thou heardst my voice I tried.
2 For thou had cast me into the deep, in (...) midst of the seas, and the
floods compassed me (...) bout, all thy billows and thy waves passed over (...)

2
For thou had cast me in the deep,
in midst even of the sea,
Floods compassde me, thy billows all
and waves past over me.
3 Then I said, I am cast out of thy sig^^ yet I will look again toward thy
holy temple.

3
Then said I, I out of thy sight
am cast with great disdain,
Yet to thy holy temple I
at last will look again.
4 The waters compassed me about eve^^ the soul: the depth closed me round
about, (...) weeds were wrapped about my head.

4
The waters compassde me about
even to the soul indeed,
The depth me closd about, and weeds
were wrapped about my head.
5 I went down to the bottoms of the (...) ^ains; the earth with her bars was
abo^^ for ever:

Even to the bottomes I went down
of mountains high that be,
^ikewise the earth was with her bars
for ever about me.
Yet have thou brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.

^et thou who art the Lord my God,
now by thy power alone
^y life in danger great have brought
up from corruption.
6 When my soul fainted within me, I re^^mbred the Lord, and my prayer came in
unto ^ee, in thine holy temple.

The Lord I did remember when
my soul did faint in me,
^^to thy holy Temple came
my prayer unto thee*
7 They that observe lying vanities, forsake ^^eir own mercy.

They that do lying vanities
observe in any way.
^he mercy then that is their own
they do forsake always.
8 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the ^^ice of thanksgiving, I will pay
that that I have ^^wed: salvation is of the Lord.

But I to thee with voice of thanks
will sacrifice afford,
I will what I have vowed pay;
salvation's of the Lord.
The Song and prayer of Habbakkuk, upon Sigionoth. HABAK. 3. verse. 2.
I Have heard thy speech and was afraid,: (...) Lord, revive thy work in the
midst of the year^ in the midst of the years make known; in wr^^^ remember
mercy.

I Heard thy speech, and was afraid,
in midst of years on earth,
Revive thy work, Lord make it known
on mercy think in wrath.
2 God came from Teman, and the holy (...) from mount Paran. Selah. His glory
covere^ the heavens, and the earth was full of his prai^^

2
From Teman and from Paran mou^^
came God the holy One, Selah.
His glory cov'rd the heavens, his praise
filled all the earth anon,
3 And his brightness was as the light, he (...) horns coming out of his hand,
and there w^^ the biding of his power.

3
His brightness als was as the light,
out of his hand moreover
He horns had coming, and there was
the hiding of his power.
4 Before him went the pestilence, and burn^ng coals went forth at his feet.

5 He stood and measured the earth:

4
Before him went the pest, and coals
went burning from his feet;
5
He stood and also measured
the earth as was most meet:
He beheld and drove asunder the ^ations, and ^he everlasting mountains were
scattered, the per^^ctuall hills did bow: his ways are everlasting.

He looked and sunder nations drove,
old mountains scattred were,
The hills perpetual did bow,
his ways eternal are.
6 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the land of
Midian did tremble.

6
The tents of Cushan I did see
under affliction;
The curtains of the Midian land
did tremble evry one.
7 Was the Lord displeased against the rivers? was thine anger against the
rivers?

7
Was the displeasure of the Lord
made against the rivers fall?
Or was thine anger that is great
against the rivers all?
Was thy wrath against the sea, that tho^ did ride upon thine horses, and thy
chariots o^ salvation?

Or was thy wrath against the sea
that thou did ride upon*
Thine horses and the chariots
of thy salvation?
8 Thy bow was made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy
word, Selah. Thou did cleave the earth with rivers.

8
Thy bow was made quite naked as
thou oaths to tribes did give,
Even thine own word; thou also did
the earth with rivers cleave.
9 The mountains saw thee, and they trembled; the overflowing of the water
passed by^ the deep uttered his voice, and lift up his hands on high.

9
The hills thee saw, and trembled all,
great waters passed by,
The deep his voice did utter then,
and lift his hands on hy.
10 The Sun and Moon stood still in their habitations: at the light of thine
arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear,

10
The Sun and Moon stood where they dwelt,
of those thine arrows clear,
They at the sight went, and the shine
of thy most glittring spear.
11 Thou did march through the land in indignation, thou did thresh the
heathen in anger.

11
Thou in thine indignation
through all the land did press,
And als the heathen people thou
did in thine anger thresh.
12 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for salvation with
thine anointed,

12
Thou of thy people wentest forth
for the salvation:
Yea even for the salvation great
with thine Anointed One,
Thou woundest the head out of the house of the wicked, by discovering the
foundation unto the neck. Selah.

Out of the house of wicked men
thou did wound the head,
Discov'ring the foundation
unto the neck with speed. Selah.
13 Thou did strike through with his staves the head of his villages: they
came out as a whirlewinde to scatter me:

13
Thou through his village heads did strike
with staves of his that be,
They as a whirlewind did come out,
and that to scatter me:
Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor secretly.

14 Thou did walk through the sea with thine horses through the heap of great
waters.

Their joy it was as to devore
the poor man secretly:
14
Through heaps of water great thou walkst
with horses through the sea.
15 When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips quivered at the voice: rottennes
entered into my bones,

15
My belly trembled when I heard.
and at the voice anon
My lips did quiver, rottenesse
did enter in my bone:
And I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble: when he
comes up unto the people, he will invade them with his troops.

I trembled in my self, that I
might rest in days most sad,
When he up to the people comes
with troops he will them invade.
16 Although the fig tree shall not blosso^^ neither shall fruit be in the
vines, the labou^ of the olive shall fail,

16
Though that the fig tree blossom not
nor fruit in vines shall be,
The labor of the olive fa^
shall fail as all shall see.
And the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold,
and there shall be no herd in the stalls:

The fields shall not yield any meat,
the flock als from the fold
Shall be cut off, there shall no herd
in stals be young or old.
17 Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

17
Yet I in him will now rejoice
who is the Lord alone,
I also joy will in the God
of my salvation.
18 The Lord God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hindes feet, and
he will make me to walk upon mine high places.

18
The Lord my God hs is my strength,
he will make my feet to be
Like seet of Hindes, he will make me walk
upon my places hie.
The Song of Mary, after Elizabeth told he^ that at her salutation the child in
her wo^^ leaped for joy. Luke 1. 46.
MY soul does magnify the Lord, 2 And my spirit has rejoiced in Go^ my
Savior.

MY soul now with all gladness fill'^
the Lord does magnify,
2
My sprit rejoiced has in God
a Savior for me.
3 For he has regarded the low estate of h^ handmaiden: for behold, from
henceforth all g^^nerations shall call me blessed.

3
For of his handmaid he did so
regard the state so small,
For lo, all generations me
from henceforth blessed shall call.
4 For he that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his name.

5 And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.

4
He mighty did great things to me,
and holy is his Name:
5
They that him fear from race to race,
his mercy have on them.
6 He has showed strength with his arm, h^ has scattered the proud, in the
inmagination o^ their hearts.

6
He with his arm has showed strength,
the proud he in all parts
In the imagination
has scattered of their hearts.
7 He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.

7
He has put down even from their seats
those that most mighty be,
And also he exalted has
them of a low degree.
8 He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty
away.

8
Them that are hungry he has filled
with good things evry way,
And those that rich are also he
has empty sent away.
9 He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy.

10 As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

9
He helped his servant Israel,
he mercy did remember,
10
As he unto our fathers spoke;
t'Abr'am and's seed for ever.
The Song of Zacharias after he had been nine months dumb for not believing
the angel Gabriel. Luke 1. verse. 68.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people,

THe Lord the God of Israel
for ever blessed be,
For that his people visited
and als redeemed has he.
2 And has raised up an horn of salvation for us, in the house of his servant
David.

2
And of salvation he for us
has raised up on hy
A glorious horn in David's house,
who served him faithfully.
3 As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began.

3
As by the mouth of those that were
his holy prophets than,
Which have among his people been
even since the world began.
4 That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate
us.

4
That from those that our enemies are
we should be saved here;
And likewise from the hand of all
that hatred to us bear.
5 To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy
covenant.

5
The mercies promisd to perform
unto our fathers ever,
And als his holy Covenant
made with them to remember.
6 The oath which he swear to our father Abraham,

7 That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies,

6
The oath which unto Abraham
our father then he swear:
7
That he would grant that we from those
saved that our enemies are,
Might serve him without fear.

8 In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

Without all fear so might him serve,
8
In holiness always
And righteousness before him als
of our life all the days
9 And thou child shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shall
go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways;

9
And thou O child shall called be
the Highests prophet rare.
For thou before the Lord shall go,
his ways for to prepare.
10 To give knowledge of salvation unto (...) people, by the remission of their
sins.

10
That so he might the knowledge give
of his salvation
Unto his people, by their sins
most free remission.
11 Through the tender mercy of our God whereby the dayspring from on high
has vi^sited us,

11
Even through the mercy of our God
that tender is, whereby
Us on the earth has visited
the DAYSPRING from on hy.
12 To give light to them that sit in dark^nesse, and in the shadow of death,
to guide ou^ feet into the way of peace.

12
To light them that in darkness sit,
and in death shade abide,
Into the way of holy peace
our feet there for to guide.
The Song of SIMEON. Luke 2. verse. 29.
LOrd now let thou thy servant depart (...) peace, according to thy word.

NOw in thy mercy let thou
thine own servant O Lord
At last by death in peace depart,
according to thy word.
2 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation:

3 Which thou have prepared before the face of all people,

2
For thy salvation mine eyes
have seen for great and small,
3
Which thou prepared have before
the face of people all.
4 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

4
A precious light to lighten all
the Gentiles far and near,
And als the glory of Israel
that is thy people dear.
FINIS.
Georgii Buchanani hymnus Matutinus ad Christum.
PRoles parentis optimi,
Et par parenti maximo,
De luce vera vera lux;
Verusque de Deo Deus:
En nox recessit jam nitet
Aurora luce praevia
Coelum solumque purpurans:
Et clausa tenebris detegens;
Sed fuscat ignorantiae
Caligo nostra pectora,
Et nubilis erroribus
Men's pene cedit obruta.
Exurge sol purissime,
Diemque da mundo suum:
Nostramque noctem illuminans
Erroris umbram discute.
Dissolve frigus horridum,
Arvumque nostri pectoris,
Calore lampadis tuae,
Humore purganoxio:
Ut irrigetur coelitus
Roris beati nectare,
Et centuplo cum foenore
Coeleste semen proferat.
A Morning Hymn for CHRIST.
O Day spring from on hy
Cause pass away our night,
Clear first our morning sky,
And after shine thou bright:
2
Of lights thou art the Light
Of righteousness the Sun,
Thy beams they are most bright,
Through all the world they run:
3
The day thou have begun,
Thou will it clearer make,
We hope to see this Sun
High in our Zodiac.
4
And there he beams shall shake,
Of a most golden hew,
Which fading flowrs shall make
Their colors to renew.
5
O make thy morning dew
To fall without all cease,
Do thou such favor show
As unto Gideons fleece.
6
O do thou never cease,
To make that dew to fall
The dew of grace and peace,
And joys celestial.
7
This morning we do call
Upon thy Name divine,
That thou among us all
Cause thine Aurora shine.
8
Let shadows all decline
And wholly pass away,
That light which is divine.
May bring to us our day.
9
A day to shine for ay,
A day that is most bright;
A day that never may
Be followed with a night.
10
O of all lights the light,
The light that is most true,
Now banish thou our night,
And still our light renew.
11
Thy face now to us show,
O Son of God most dear,
O Morning Star most true
Make thou our darkness clear.
12
Nothing at all is here
That with thee can compare,
^ unto us draw near,
And us thy children spare.
13
Thy mercies they are rare
^f they were understood,
^rath due to us thou bare
And for us shed thy blood.
14
Like beasts they are most rude,
Whom reason cannot move;
Who do not for thy good
Thee most entirely love.
15
Make us mind things above,
Even things that most excel,
Of thine untainted love
Give us the sacred seal.
16
In mercy with us deal,
And all our sins remove,
Thy self to us reveal,
And this our song approve,
17
Us in thy mercy move
To walk still in thy way
First make us sick of love,
And then with flagons stay.
18
Let us not go astray
To wander far from thee,
Thou art the only way
To joys that lasting be,
19
O that we light could see.
That shines in thy face,
So at the last should we
To glory go from grace;
20
Within thy sacred place,
Is only true content,
Where God's seen face to face
Above the firmament.
21
O that our hours were spent
Among the sons of men,
To praise the Omnipotent!
Amen, yea, and Amen.
FINIS.

