THE Contented Cuckold, OR THE Woman's Advocate: A COMEDY.

This may be Printed.

April 26 th, 1692.

Rob. Midgley.

LONDON; Printed, and Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, A. D. 1692.

To his worthy Friends John Huxly of Wyerhall in Edmonson, in the County of
Middlesex, Esquire. and Richard Andrew of the same, Gentleman.
Generous Gentlemen,
THIS Trifle which I am bold to prefix your Name in, like a well drawn Picture,
looks alike on each of you, and challenges your Protection and Patronage, you
being the sole Promoters and Countenancers of its being what it is; your
Commands, together with my want of Consideration, made me undertake a Task
which I am conscious to my self I am altogether unfit for. When I had plunged
my self into this Sea of Thought, I quickly found my Mistake, and presently
became sensible of my Error, though too late to recall it, having given my
Promise before for the performance of it. I have taken what care I could to
walk by the Rules prescribed me, as you will find by the perusal of it. If
there be any thing in it can force a Smile or a kind Look from you, I have
reached my end, and hope it may take off the edge of your Anger at the rest of
an ill writ Play, which wants both Language, Wit and Plot, (which Three if I
mistake not,) are the chief Ingredients that make up a Comedy, with which if it
be fraught, Nonsense may sometimes pass unregarded. I expect not in this
Critical and Censorious Age to fare better than the rest and best of Poets, who
for the most part are branded with the Name of Scribbling Fops and Half-wits;
and to say Truth, the World has still been at that pass for some Ages past.
Produce me but one Poet, either Ancient or Modern, that ever escaped the Lash
of Envious and Malicious Tongues, -- Et eris mihi Magnus Apollo; yet I hope
that good Nature and sweet Disposition, which you are in a large measure
endowed withal, will pass by small Faults and accept the Will for the Deed,
from him whose highest Ambition is, that without offense, he may subscribe
himself

Your Obliged Humble Servant, Reuben Bourne.

THE PROLOGUE.
INdulgent Parents take what care they can
To breed their Son; but when he once writes Man,
He thinks himself too great to be advised,
And those which took such care, are then Despised:
He sets up for himself, and learns the way
To Whore all Night, to Swear and Drink all Day.
The Spark being thus accomplished, think's he is fit
At a New Play to be a Judge of Wit;
And takes his Place with as much Confidence,
As he that is Master of the greatest Sense;
Sets his Cravat, and then invokes the Powers,
And Swears all Vizard Masks are Common Whores.
So Poets tickled with Applause, they are
Quite altered, and no more the Men they were:
They then grow Proud, and huff their Benefactors,
And Swear the fault's not in the Play, but Actors.
The Music that shall hardly escape his Curse;
The Scenes and Habits he likes ten times worse;
And all to make his Bandy Play go down,
With the more civil Gentry of the Town.
A Smutty Tale will please the Common sort,
His greatest care is how to take the Court,
And get the name of Poet from some Lord,
None dare gainsay, but gladly take his Word.
Our Poet's none of these, all his Intent
Is among Neighbors to make Merriment;
Which if it take effect, he'th gained his ends;
If not, he hopes the Ladies are his Friends,
And backed by them, he cares not who contends.
Our Poet to your Beauties does submit,
And Humbly offers both himself and it.
The ACTORS NAMES.
SIR Peter Lovejoy, The Contented Cuckold. Lady Lovejoy, His Wife. Lettis, Her
Maid. Mr. Friendly, Lady Lovejoys Uncle. Mr. Sparkish, Two Gentlemen of the
times. Mr. Modish, Two Gentlemen of the times. Mr. Serious, An old Gouty
Gentleman. Ralph, His Man. Tom, Man to Mr. Sparkish. Stephen, Man to Mr.
Modish. Flavia and Julia, Sisters to Lady Lovejoy. A Hackny Coachman. A Drawer.
And a Footboy.
THE Contented Cuckold, OR THE Woman's Advocate.
ACT I.
Mr. Serious on his Couch, Ralph standing by him. Mr. Serious. RAlph,


Ralph. Sir.


Mr. Serious. How goes the day?


Ralph. The glorious Sun is posting forward to the hour of Nine.


Mr. Serious. Impertinent Coxcomb, that think to dress thy Speech with
flourishes, and set thy self in more esteem with Men by Rhetoric, tell me
directly how the day goes forward, without the least Addition?


Ralph. Without Addition, then it is near on Nine; the last that struck was
Eight.


Mr. Serious. I think at Ten, Sir Peter Lovejoy said he would be here.


Ralph. He did so, Sir.


Mr. Serious. Time runs away; it is 20 year since first I knew that Man, the
most contented Cuckold in the World, yet thinks himself a Wit, and will no more
believe his Wife dishonest, than I the Alcoran to be a Truth; such Fools there
are in Nature: But were I he, I would find her haunts, and break them. But
speak to him, and it is to no more purpose than grasping the Air. But hark, I
hear him coming.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy. Sir Peter. Good morrow Sir, I see your old Distemper
will be your Guest, tho uninvited, and keep you Chamber-prisoner.


Mr. Serious. I see Sir Peter you still keep your humor, look Fat and Fair; I
hope your Lady's well.


S. Peter. She is; Let them look Sad that are always out of Humor, those
Jealous-pated Fools, who dare not trust their Wives beyond their sight, but sit
uneasy, sigh, and make complaint, and either Rail at Fortune, or the Priest
that joined their Wives and them; whilst I, like Birds at liberty, sit
Chirping, and spend my hours with Mirth.


Mr. Serious. You are happy Sir, that can set light by grief; but let me tell
you Sir, I have known as wise a Man as you deceived.


Sir Peter. Away thou Fool, go Preach your Rif-Raf to those Jealous-Coxcombs
will give you the hearing of it: so good morrow.


Mr. Serious. Farewell thou senseless Sot; and now it is time for me to use my
Legs, and move to some close Corner of my House, and lay my Plot to compass
Lovejoy's Sister; for Gouty as I now pretend my self, my inclination is still
that way given, and this my borrowed shape to reach my End. Exeunt.


Enter Lady Lovejoy, Flavia, Julia and Lettice. Lady Lovejoy. Methinks the
hours move slowly forward; for I have rested badly, and in that seeming Rest I
have enjoyed, have been disturbed with Fears and dismal Visions, such as
disturb the Mind, and fill the Heart with Grief.


Julia. Come Sister, talk no more of Dreams and Fantasies, which serve for
nothing but to spoil good Company. Let Us contrive how to enjoy our selves in
the Afternoon, and spend the day with mirth.


Lady Lovejoy. Fie Sister, it is not generous thus to triumph over my
misfortunes. I have known the time when I could have been Jovial, and danced
all Night without the least regret.


Flavia. Sister, I am of your mind, that there is more satisfaction in an hours
privacy, than in the enjoyment of all worldly pleasure a longer space of time.


Julia. I still would have all parties pleased; you shall have my Consent to be
Cloistered up in some close Nunnery; and Lettice, if she likes your Choice, to
wait on you.


Lettice. I like her Choice! No, I would rather choose to show the Tumbler in
London Streets, or in Bridewell beat Hemp, than lose the satisfaction I
conceive there is in a married Life.


Lady Lovejoy. Sure you cannot in me perceive such Joy, or such Satisfaction as
you speak of.


Lettice. If e're I marry, all I wish is this, may I meet with just such
another as my Master, who tho I Cuckold him times without number, may still
believe me honest.


L. Lovejoy. Sir Peter has no other Cause I am sure; but what occasion you may
give your Husband, I am not fit to Judge.


Julia. Faith Sister, I believe you never the sooner for the fair Character you
give your self; for I have known those that have made a large Discourse of
Modesty, their Hearts have leaned the quite contrary way.


L. Lovejoy. Fie Sister, how you talk; but you will have your way, there is no
opposing you, tho what you say is altogether false.


Julia. Then without Railery, I yesterday received this Letter from one who
speaks very fair, and Lords his Sentences with Scripture-phrases: There you may
see the Cheat then; vindicate him if you can, from the deserved name of
Hypocrite, which justly he falls under; and I wish such Godly persons as they
call themselves, may meet no better Fate than he is like to do, or else I miss
my Aim.


L. Lovejoy. Sure it cannot be, that Men should try their Wits to Cheat the
World in matters of Religion too: It Is false; I know it must be so.


Julia. If you dare trust your Eyes, the thing is plain to every person
unconcerned, that will Consult their Reason; but if you still continue
obstinate, there is no reclaiming of you.


L. Lovejoy. Pray read this Libel against this Holy Man; lets hear his Crimes.


Julia. Not I, but you may if you please; here, take the Letter. Gives the
Letter.


L. Rovejoy reads. Madam,
Tho Gouty as I now pretend my self, if you please to appoint your place and
time, you shall find me as brisk and lively as your Modish Gallant. Pray favor
me with a Line from your fair hand; for I long to be employed by your Commands.

Your Humble Servant Serious.





Julia. What think you of this Dissembling Wretch?


L. Lovejoy. Ah Sister! You are unacquainted with the World: The Envious still
are Virtues Enemies, while Vice is let alone and unregarded.


Julia. I blush to see you thus unreasonable; but if you please to be where
I Will appoint you, I Will make you an Ear-witness of this Truth to which you will
give no Credit: If this will not make you hate such Hypocrites, I Will leave you as
I found you, wedded to your own Will and blind Opinion, and take the sweetness
of this Evenings Air. But if you will comply with what I propose, and send a
Summons for him, if he disobeys I Will bare the blame, and own I have wronged the
Gentleman.


L. Lovejoy. Pray try your Skill; I am very willing to be undeceived, and not
so obstinate as you would make me.


Julia. Now I like you; at Seven a Clock this Night be in your Closet joining
to the Parlour, whither I Will bring him at the time appointed, where you shall
hear our whole Discourse at large, and I Will leave you to be Judge who is in the
Right. Farewell. Exit.


Flavia. Sister, there must be something in this business worth the hearing:
Pray let me be in the Closet with you, 'twill ad^ much to my satisfaction.


L. Lovejoy. You shall Lettice: Pray convey my Sister to me at the time
appointed. Exeunt ambo.


Lettice. I shall. In the mean time my Prayers and Wishes are, that this
dissembling doting Letcher may be unmasked; and shown in his proper Colors;
for I love mischief, especially to those I know are impotent, and will pretend
to what they cannot perform. Were he in Youth and Vigor, 't may be I might
help him in his business, and get a small reward or two for my pains; it is part
of my Employment to help a Generous person in distress, and by that means
perhaps oblige both persons, and so be feed on both sides. It sometimes happens
so: But I am sure for him she has no kindness, nor have I any the least
Respect: But I must in and see how matters go, and wait till Night to know the
upshot of it.


Enter Friendly and Serious, with Ralph. Serious. Dear Sir, I always took you
for my Friend, and therefore always made you of my Counsel.


Friendly. And still you found me just to what I promised, and ever will be so.


Serious. That good Opinion I have always had of you, and still retain, has
made me venture to discover to you a matter of Importance. This Paper will
inform you more at large; and I would beg you Judgment.


Friendly Reads. Sir,
I received yours, and desire you will not fail to come to me at seven a Clock
this Evening to my Brothers, where I have taken care for your Reception.

Julia.





Sir, You are a happy Man: I never heard her talked of for a Gallant; but I Will
assist you what I may, for I am past those things, and may be trusted: And
truly I had thought, time had made alterations in your person, to have made you
past Intriegues; but what would you have me do in this business?


Serious. Only keep Counsel, and when you find an Opportunity, give her a
Character of me as best will suit her temper: You know how, better than I can
tell you. So Farewell. Exit.


Friendly. Ralph, Ralph.


Ralph. Sir.


Friendly. Who brought this Letter to your Master?


Ralph. A Lady Sir, I suppose some Attendant; and said there needed nothing of
an Answer. Exit.


Friendly. It Is well: I wonder much, that this Girl that is under 20, should
dote on 73, for that I am sure he is: There must be more in it than he
suspects, or I am yet aware of; but be it what it will I need not care, nor do
I. To morrow I shall hear how matters go; in the mean time I Will find a Friend
and take a Chirping Cup, and that I think is far beyond Intriegues and
Night-Adventures.


Enter Ralph and Serious. Serious. If any body comes to ask for me, tell them
it will be late e're I return.


Ralph. I will Sir. A prosperous Journey to him, he has something in his Head
more than ordinary: I wish him good success, or I shall have a scurvy living
on it.


Enter Julia and Lettice. Julia. Now we are alone, prithee Lettice lets
contrive a way to punish this Old Fornicator: After we have made him appear to
be what he is, and satisfied my Sister in him, lets satisfy our selves, and
have some pastime: Thou have been good at it in thy time; lets lay our Heads
together.


Lettice. With all my heart; lets in and think upon it. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy and Lady. S. Peter. I have appointed a Meeting this
Evening with 3 or 4 honest Fellows, such as my self; we'll make the Skies lock
Blew and every Man shall bear a Bob in faith.


Lady. Pray don't tarry late, 'twill prejudice your Health; be sides, I love
your Company.


S. Peter. I Will make what haste I can; in the mean time secure your self from
harm; I Will drink thy Health. Exit.


Lady. Adieu. Now if I had the Company of Mr. Modish in his room an hour or
two, I could dispense with it: But Rome was not built in a day, nor they say
wont be destroyed in a year. I may so carry the matter, that he and I may be
better acquainted: In the mean time I live in hopes of what may be hereafter.
Exit.


Enter Flavia. Flavia. The time draws near; I long to be convinced; I think for
my part, we are always a Longing: Before Marriage we Long to be married; after
Marriage we are, they say, in a Longing Condition; but if I were married, I
would be sure to long for something that were good. I Long too methinks, to be
making the Experiment; and for all my Dissembling, do what I can, my
Inclination lies toward a Man.


Enter Julia and Lettice. Julia. Do you think this Plot will take? I fear he
will never be brought to undertake this piece of Service.


Lettice. Then let him go like an old doting Fool as he is; but I Will warrant
you rather than lose the design he proposes to himself, he will perform any thing
you enjoin him without the least regret.


Julia. I wish it prove so: Methinks I would not lose my expectation, for more
than I will speak of.


Lettice. Never fear't Madam: But if the worst come to the worst, you will be
rid of a troublesome Customer; for if he refuse your first Command, he cannot in
Reason expect after that to be entertained with any Respect or show of Kindness.


Julia. I cannot but think how like a Fool he will look when he is Blindfold, and
his Hands tied behind him.


Lettice. Then he looks as he is; for who but a Fool could think that a Lady of
your years should have any kindness for a Man of his? There must needs be a
great agreeableness between 19 and 73. Hark, my Lady calls, I must away. Exit.


Julia. If it were not for this Wench, I know not what I should have done. Now
must I humor him, and make him abundance of fair promises, which I never
intend to perform, to bring this business to pass. This is a new Stratagem to
get rid of a troublesome Gallant. Exit.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy and Mr. Friendly. S. Peter. Uncle Friendly, I am Joy'd
to see you: You are so taken up of late, a Man knows not where to find you.


Mr. Friendly. I am no Man of business you know; but in the Evening, I am for a
Glass of the best Wine I can get; but in full Quarts, that I may not be cheated
of my Measure. We were at Tom's last Night, Quart after Quart, in faith, the
Kings, Queens, and all the Royal Family.


S. Peter. Look ye Uncle, as Cunning as you take your self to be, to my certain
knowledge your Cunning has failed you; for Tom has never a sealed Quart in
his House, nor has not had this seven years: Besides, there is difference in
the Wine. We were got in the Garden to the Sealed Bottles, rare Wine in faith;
We Bump't it away with a Huzzah; did you not hear us Uncle?


Mr. Friendly. Hear you! We took you to be all Mad: I am for quietness and
privacy, tho in a Public House, as you call it.


S. Peter. Well Uncle, if you will Dine with me, well and good; in the
Afternoon I am engaged: Upon my Honor I must at it again; good Wine you know,
never hurts a Man, but makes him Brisk and Airy, Creates an Appetite. I am so
hungry now, I know not which way to turn my self; we'll in and call for Dinner.


Exit. Enter Lady Lovejoy and Flavia. L. Lovejoy. Sister, methinks now we are
retired and quiet, we have some enjoyment of our selves, and live like
Christians: My Sister Julia's of another Humor, let her take her Fancy which
way it lies; in the end she will repent it, and wish she had taken my advice.


Flavia. Truly, I think there is no such Trouble as the World styles Pleasure;
the Noise and Bustle there is abroad, besides Expense of time, the daily Visits
that are created by it, that one can never be private, nor retired, without
being counted Rude, or at best unmannerly, while we escape their Censure, and
the Charge of giving Entertainments.


L. Lovejoy. You are in the right, I am glad to see that there are yet some
left that hold of my Opinion, and are not glu'd nor wedded to the Trifles this
World affords, which are at best but Transitory, and give no Satisfaction nor
Content; methinks I am weary with the very thoughts on it; but I Will retire, and
ease me on my Couch. Exit.


Flavia. If I am deceived, so be it; but I believe she is a great dissembles;
one Reason is, 'cause I am so my self, and would be private in my undertaking,
for fear of being balkt in my designs; for were I sure not to be denied, I
would quickly change my Note, and try Conclusions; but as it is, I must keep on
the Mask till a fit opportunity. Exit.


Enter Julia and Lettice. Lettice. Madam, How like you now your Sisters Humor?
you have her free Confession, tho in private, and I dare pawn my Life the
other's of her Mind, if we knew all.


Julia. How luckily we came to hear them? I Am glad to find Flavia is not really
what she seems to be in Public; but, how she carries it to Cheat my Sister
Lovejoy! Lettice, Are all our things in readiness for our design?


Lettice. Leave all to me, you shall have nothing wanting that is requisite; in
the mean time, do you prepare your self to fit him with Discourse.


Julia. I will; but let me dye if I know how to manage my Countenance: The very
thoughts of my Project will betray my Design. Exit.


Lettice How many Fears she is in! first she fears the Project will not take; the
next fear is, the discovering of it: Had I such a business of my own in hand, I
would try him every way, tho he were the Man I loved above all others: First I
would try his Wit, next his Constancy, next his Courage, next, Bless me! what
was I going to say? But it is no matter.

I would know all his Humors e're I Would marry:
And like a Spannel, make him Fetch and Carry.

The End of the First ACT.
ACT II.
Enter Julia and Lettice. Julia. I Think the time's expired, it is 7 a Clock; he
will not be long before he is here: Some body knocks, it is he sure. Now to
dissemble well, and Cheat this Fool, and make him think I love him.


Enter Mr. Serious. Serious. Madam, This is a happiness beyond belief, to enjoy
your Company, and in private too; I hope we may be so.


Julia. Yes Sir: Lettice withdraw, and leave us.


Lettice. Yes Madam. But I think my Stars, I shall have the pleasure of hearing
all in private. aside.


Julia. Sir, I suppose you had the Note I sent you, by your coming so exactly.


Mr. Serious. I hope you take me to be a person of better Breeding and Courage,
than to be tardy in such weighty Matters.


Julia. I take you to be a person of Discretion, fit to be trusted with a
Ladies Honor. Such Godly men as you are never suspected.


Mr. Serious. If my borrowed Shape offends you, I Will throw that by, and show
you what in Truth I am, and always have been; my aim and whole desire is, your
fair Beauty; which gained, I am no more the Man I seem, than is your Sister
Lovejoy what she seems.


Julia. Is she too one of the Dissembling sort, that Cheats the World in Zeal?


Mr. Serious. No better, nor no worse; but to our business in hand, the thing
we meet for.


Julia. Soft and fair goes far: I have several Articles must be agreed to
before I yield the Fort, so long maintained against homebred Enemies, and
Foreign Foes.


Mr. Serious. Before they are named I agree to them, let them be what they will.


Julia. This general Consent will not do with me: Besides, I have an odd Humor
must be satisfied. I have made a Resolution never to yield to any Man, without
he Consents to be Blind-folded, and his Hands tied behind him; so to walk from
my House to his, let it be where it will: Now this must be performed before we
proceed any further.


Mr. Serious. A pretty Frolic: This performed, you say, you and I may come to
a right understanding.


Julia. Yes, when we meet again, no question, to your Satisfaction: Do you
agree to this?


Mr. Serious. It Is something hard; but rather than lose your Favor, I Will
consent to any thing in Reason: Who must Blind me?


Julia. Take no thought for that, I Will see it done.


Mr. Serious. Well, I commit my self into your hands, use me as you think good:
They say, Lovers are Blind, and I can be no more when this is done; but I fear
after all, I shall be at a loss to find my way home.


Julia. Come Sir, let us in and set the project on foot: I Long to see you begin
your Journey. Exeunt.


Enter Friendly and Sparkish. Sparkish. Mr. Friendly, my old Acquaintance, most
happily encountered, methinks it is an Age since last I saw you.


Friendly. Your Servant Sir, I retain my old Humor still, never trouble my
self with State Affairs, nor business above my Apprehension: I warrant you you
shall never find me in a Plot, either against King or Government; nor my Name
in Print, to show my Wit and Parts, and undergo the Censure of the World; all
my Aim is to serve my Friend, provided it be not to my own prejudice; and to
know where I may be furnished with a Glass of rare Claret in the Evening; with
this I rest contented.


Sparkish. I like your Humor well: I was yesterday at the piercing of a
Hogshead of such Wine as you speak of; if you please, I have a Bottle of it at
your Service.


Friendly. With all my heart; I am for a Whet, as you call it, before Dinner:
Lead on Sir, I Will bear you Company, provided you don't move too fast for me.


Sparkish. Come on Sir.
Thus various ways the differing World do move,
But without Wine, there is neither Life nor Love.

Enter Mr. Serious Blindfold, his Hands tied behind him, Lady Lovejoy, Julia,
Flavia, and Lettice, Laughing. Mr. Serious. I am glad Ladies I can contribute
any thing to your Mirth; but it is not fair to insult over a Man in his
Misfortunes.


Lady Lovejoy. The truth of it is, I should not have done it, but you began
first with me, like an untoward Man as you are; so what I do is out of Revenge.


Julia. What I do is out of Love, I suppose the Gentleman is satisfied in that.


Lettice. I did nothing, but what you all Commanded, and he desired; but let me
dye, now it is done, if I can forbear Laughing, I beg the Gentleman's Excuse.


Flavia. Faith, I pity the poor Gentleman; but this is the Fate of Lovers, they
must undergo whatever is enjoined them.


Julia. Well Mr. Serious, it is well it is no worse; whatever the Service be, you
know the Reward is sweet, and will answer your Expectation: In the mean time,
you shall have my good wishes for your safe Deliverance; else, for ought I
know, I may be brought in as Contriver of his Murder. Let him have a good
beginning, whatever the end be; prithee Lettice sing him a Song, before he sets
onward of his Journey.


Lettice. I Will do my endeavor to please you all if possible, but you know I
could never sing well: Besides, I have nothing new to Sing; mine are all old.


Lettice Sings. TEll me what a thing is Love,
O ye Gods that live above:
You in wanton pleasures rove,
And all its secret Joys do prove:
Whilst we poor Mortals here below,
Scarce a part of it do know;
But linger out a Life in pain,
And naught but scornful Love we gain
Why was Man cut out by Fate,
Capable of better State?
And why was Woman made his Mate
To help him, yet his Toils create?
If we were made the Lords of all,
Must we to our Subjects fall;
And Cringe to that which is our own,
By right of our Creation?
Mr. Serious. Your Servant Ladies: This is some refreshment in the midst of all
my Misfortunes. Now for my Journey.


Julia. Ha, ha, ha, look Lettice, the Gentleman has left his Dog-trot, and
has found out a new way of Ambling.


Lettice. He walks in State; now he may Cock his Bever, and take the Wall of a
Dog.


Lady Lovejoy. This is excellent sport; let us in and have our Laugh out. Exeunt
omnes.


Enter Sparkish and Modish. Sparkish. I wonder Modish what makes you so
Melancholy of late, thou usest to be of another temper.


Modish. I rather wonder what makes you so Merry. I see no cause for it.


Sparkish. Prithee, what should make me otherwise; I have good Clothes on my
Back, good Victuals in my Belly, and good Money that Commands the World, in my
Pocket. I need want for nothing this World affords: And I know no reason that
Noble Creature Man, the Lord of the Creation, should deny himself any thing; I
have known you of this Opinion formerly, what e're 's the matter with you now.


Modish. I have considered of it, and can find no reason, why any Man should,
Narcissus like, be in love with his own Image, but am rather of my Lord
Rochester's Opinion, that a Man had better be a Bear, a Lion, or a Monky, than
what he is; for the Devil, the World, or the Flesh, are always laying Siege to
him; and if he hearkens to their Temptations, they generally Reward him, the
Devil with Shame, a Woman with Scorn, and the World with gaudy Trifles, and
gilded Nothings, and it may be at last with a Halter: Therefore I wonder much,
that any Man of Reason will either follow, or be led by them.


Sparkish. By Heavens, I think thou art beside thy self, to argue at this rate;
it makes me mad to hear thee.


Modish. You may when you please go out of the hearing of it; the Door's open;
you can find the way out sure, as well as you found the way in; you need no
guide.


Sparkish. Sure thou art not in Earnest; this is but a Copy of your Countenance.


Modish. Prithee trouble me with no more of your impertinent Discourse, you
hinder me from my Contemplations; which are more to me than all the World
beside.


Sparkish. Rather than hinder you, I Will take my leave, and expect the News will
be, Thou have hanged thy self, or else thou art put in Bedlam; so farewell. Exit


Enter Stephen. Stephen. Sir, There Is a Lady below desires to speak with you.


Modish. Another Devil to torment me in the shape of an Angel of Light? Conduct
her up.


Enter Lettice. Lettice. Good morrow Sir, I hope you will pardon my boldnest,
for giving you this early Visit, when you understand the Cause of it.


Modish. Such Divine Forms as yours, are never employed but by the Powers
above, with Joyful News to drooping Mortals, oppressed with the weight of Grief
and Woe beyond their strength; such Wretches as I am!


Lettice. I wish the News I bring may tend to your Relief, and give you
Satisfaction and Content. I hope it will.


Modish. Pray let me hear the heavenly News you bring, and keep me not in doubt
'twixt hope and fear, like Men in Fevers, sometimes intermitting, and then
again the Burning Fit returns, and dashes all their hopes.


Lettice. First, You must be obliged to secrecy, because a Ladies Honor is
concerned; none of the meaner sort for Beauty, nor for Breeding: But one that
may Challenge Honor and Respect, from Men of the best Rank.


Modish. I Vow and Swear, I Will bind my self to secrecy by all you can invent.


Lettice. Hold Sir, your word's enough, for Persons of your generous
Disposition never break their promise. To keep you then no longer in the Dark;
it is Madam Julia, Lady Lovejoy's Sister.


Modish. The only Woman in the World I would have wished: Your words Revive my
drooping Spirits, and add new Life, like Oil to Lamps expiring. I from this
hour may date any Happiness, and my new Life is wholly at your Service, to be
employed as you direct and order; for without you, I still am at a loss, like
Ships in Storms, without a skilful Pilot to guide them safe to Harbor.


Lettice. If I must manage this design, I would have you first acquainted with
her Brother Sir Peter Lovejoy; for you must know, my Lady Lovejoy has a
kindness for you; so that you must pretend your Love to her, and under that
disguise may reach your End.


Modish. I know Sir Peter's Humor, he still believes all Women honest; and
therefore there is no fear of his suspicion: But how will Madam Julia like this
Plot, that I should Court her Sister to Debauch her?


Lettice. Leave that to me to manage; you see I am free with you Sir: All this
I do the Lady is ignorant of; but I have heard her speak of you with more than
ordinary Respect and Kindness; but you must try your Skill to gain her Favor.


Modish. Else I deserve the worst of Characters; that have the Wealth of both
the Indies offered me, that Glorious Creature, more than all the World, should
I stop at any thing to gain her Favor.


Enter Stephen. Stephen. Sir Peter Lovejoy Sir, desires to see you.


Modish. I Will wait on him; up Madam, be pleased to step into this Closet, there
you may over-hear us; and when he is gone, resolve what Course to take.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy. Sir Peter. How is it Man? I was last Night in Company,
where I heard thou were in a Melancholy Mode: What Is the matter Man! Thou
usedst to be Brisk and Airy with thy Jokes and Fancies, that a Man had as good
be hanged as come near thee.


Modish. I am glad to see you hold your old Humor still; one thing or other is
always predominant in us, sometimes Melancholy, sometimes Mirth, sometimes
Love; these take their place by turns, and supply us with matter in our vacant
hours to work upon, and produce different effects, according to the temper of
the Person they have to do withal.


Sir Peter. Thou say right; we are all our own Carvers in these Cases; but I
never trouble my self about these matters: If Mirth, I cherish it, if
Melancholy, I presently fly to my old Remedy Wine, and hear no more of it.


Modish. You are a happy Man Sir, that can divert your serious thoughts so
easily; I think I must try your Physic, before I shall be perfectly Cured;
I Will Visit you Sir, and drink a Bottle with you.


Sir Peter. With all my Heart in faith, thou shall be as welcome as any Man I
know, prithee come this Afternoon; there will be a Knot of Honest Fellows; it is
an appointed Match to try our Strength.


Modish. It Is ten to one but I wait on you, but you must give grains of
Allowance to Men not well in Health.


Sir Peter. Ay, Ay, man, let not that hinder thee from coming; sit next me,
I Will favor thee.


Modish. Enough Sir, I Will wait on you.


Sir Peter. Give me thy Hand upon the same: We shall be very merry; the Ladies
will be glad to see thee too.


Modish. You may trust me with them for any trouble I shall put them too.


Sir Peter. Hay day, I think thy Sickness has made thee lose thy memory; do
not know I vindicate the Reputation of all the Women in the World? There is no
such thing in Nature as a Cuckold; whatever Women are before, after Marriage to
be sure, they are honest, it cannot be otherwise.


Modish. You have read much, and I Will not dispute it with you.


Sir Peter. Nay, it is your best way to lay down the Cudgels, for I should have
been too hard for you: Good morrow Sir, I shall expect you.


Modish. Your Servant Sir.


Enter Lettice. Lettice. Was ever such a confessed Coxcomb seen? But it makes
for our Design.


Modish. This Visit fell pat for our business; here is our Admittance gained
already.


Lettice. Pray make good use of it; when Fortune favors us, it is dangerous
slighting of her.


Modish. When we have such a good Opportunity put into our hand, if we don't
make good use of it, we deserve to be slighted by her another time.


Lettice. I am glad you are so sensible; but I must leave you now, I know you
are a Gentleman of Worth and Honor: I need not mind you of any thing more than
what I have said already; your Servant Sir.


Modish. Stay thou blessed Messenger of happy News, and take this small
Acknowledgment. Gives her Gold.


Lettice. You load me with you kindness.


Modish. Desert me if I once ungrateful prove,
I Will part with all I have for Julia's Love.

The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Enter Modish solus. Modish. I Am now in hopes, that Fortune may be kind, for
sure by this time she has spit her Venom: I have been her Sport this 3 months
now, or more, perhaps the Tide may turn, and I may become her Favorite, that
have been her Scorn and Maygame; whilst others less deserving, are prosperous
in all their Undertakings, and have what e're they wish.


Enter Mr. Serious. Mr. Serious. How now Mr. Modish, what are you Railing at
Fortune too? I thought all the World had been at Ease, and only I tormented.


Modish. What Is the matter man, that makes Fortune and thee differ? Thou art
past the thoughts of Women, and Gaming you never were addicted to.


Mr. Serious. Matter! There Is matter enough to make a man mad, were he never so
well in his Senses; I warrant you I have broke my Shins in 40 places, or rather
but in one; for from my Knee to my Instep, it is all as Raw as a galled
Horseback.


Modish. Prithee how man, by what misfortune?


Serious. Ay, there is the Devil on it, I must be making Experiments, whether a
man might not walk blind-folded with his hands behind him, as well as he that
has his hands at liberty, and his Eyes to see his way.


Modish. Ha, ha, ha, who put thee upon this? Or was it thy own free Choice?


Serious. You had need ask that question, whether it were my own Choice or no:
You find many men in this Age willing to break their Necks, if they can find
any way in the World to avoid it.


Modish. But how did I know what the Devil might tempt you to do ^


Serious. No Sir, 'twas a Woman, and that is as bad I think, to undertake this
piece of Gallantry; but it is very well I saved my Neck, my Shins may be Cured;
but that had been an ugly Joint to set again.


Modish. I am heartily sorry for your misfortune; but these things are common
with them that have to do with those sort of Cattle.


Serious. Common, quoth he; I don't believe the like was ever before heard of
in a Civil Commonwealth: But 'twas my own fault, like a Fool as I was, to
undertake it; and therefore I had as good hold my Tongue.


Modish. I am of your mind Sir, therefore lay these thoughts aside, and go with
me this Afternoon, where we'll be very merry.


Serious. You may be so, you have no cause to the contrary; but I have Sores
enough at present to hinder my Mirth, which I must take care of, and get some
Plasters for: This comes of it when men will not take warning, tho they have
Examples in the like kind every day. Exit.


Modish. By what I can gather from all People I converse withal, a man in this
Age had need be endued with a great deal of Constancy and Resolution: I am
persuaded, the Ladies of our times take their measures from the French King, to
rule by an Arbitrary Power, and keep their Subjects continually upon Duty, that
they may be alway's fit for Service and ready upon all occasions.


Enter Sparkish. Sparkish. Modish! Give us thy hand. I come to congratulate thy
safe Recovery: I hear thy Distemper has left thee, and thou art in thy Right
Wits again.


Modish. I know no body was ever out of their Wits, except your self; there is a
sort of men in the World that think all men mad that are not of their Principle
and Opinion; like Lunatic Men that call all the World their own, though they
have never a Foot of Land in it.


Sparkish. I believe if thy Distemper were ever off, it is returning again; by
this Discourse one would guess so.


Modish. Thus formal Fops condemn all sober Persons, while Men of Sense, stand
gazing at such Fools like Men on Comets. It Is strange that the Masterpiece of
Nature should so degenerate more than senseless Animals: They keep their Order,
and are are always moving in the Pathway Nature has ordered for them, and
obey all her Laws she has prescribed them, with all the Willingness
imaginable: But Man must, like a Clock, be always looked to; or else like
Horses, headstrong and unruly, be curbed to keep them under; the motion of his
Will being averse to what he was designed for.


Sparkish. A very learned Speech; this is only to show thou have been at the
University. If I should stay long, thou would craze thy self with
endeavoring to persuade me out of my Reason. Exit.


Modish. I am so far from that, I believe he has none in him: But those that
have least, are generally most conceited of their own Parts, and are beyond
reclaiming so irrecoverably blinded with self-conceit, that they think they are
arrived to a perfection in Knowledge above the common sort of Men; and therefore
look down as it were on others with Contempt and Scorn, whilst he that is truly
knowing is still desirous to be thought less than what indeed he is, and
modestly refuses the Praises when given him; tho it be no more than he might
justly claim, and does of right belong to him; while the other sort mistake a
Shadow for the real Substance, and prize false Coin as much as sterling Silver;
as the Indians part with Gold and all they have, for Glass and Gaudy Trifles;
things of no Esteem in better Judgments that understand their Value.

Thus Fops with Noise and Tumults fill the World,
As if that all were in Confusion hurld.

Enter Lettice, Flavia and Julia. Lettice. All our business is prosperous
hitherto, and every thing is adding to our Plots beyond Belief or Expectation.


Julia. Thou art luckly still in what thou undertakest. I would give something
to have thy Nativity calculated, and know what Planet Ruled when thou wast born.


Flavia. A fortunate one no doubt, all she does is so natural; she never
studies, but all her Plots flow free and easy from her, as if all she were made
for were only to help the distressed and raise her Fortune to what height she
pleases.


Lettice. I am glad Ladies it lies in my Power to oblige you; you may be sure
I Will never be wanting in my Duty: The utmost of my Skill and Study is to serve
and wish I could do more.


Julia. With thy help we can work Miracles. You say this Afternoon they have
appointed, and Modish will be here.


Lettice. He has promised my Master so; I shall get much by the Bargain; when
my Master is in his Cups I must be called in I know to make 'em Sport.


Flavia. You must rub up your Memory for a Song to please them; for if it ben't
to their Minds you will have no Commendations.


Lettice. I do what I can to please you all: I don't know what you would have
more of me: You can have no more than her Skin, as the old Saying is.


Flavia. Thou do so much good while thou live, it is a Thousand Pities thou
should ever dye; but I expect some Good of thee before that time comes.


Julia. Pray let your Elder Sister be served; for she has more Business upon
her Hands already than any one Woman can turn her self to.


Lettice. Pray don't fall out, I Will please you both if it be possible, one
after the other: There Is no time lost, I hope.


Flavia. I am well enough pleased; only when your Hand's in the Hony-pot I
would not be forgotten.


Lettice. Nor shall you: but this would be an ill matter at last, if while I am
making Markets for other People, my own should stick a-hand.


Julia. Never fear that, so long as there is Money to be had, or Chapmen to buy.


Lettice. In the mean time if my Lady should turn me out of her Service,
between you both I hope you will give me House-Room till I can provide for my
self, or you for me.


Julia. I willingly agree, and think it reasonable.


Flavia. And I.


Lettice. Then I proceed, and make it my whole Study to bring every thing to
pass to both your Satisfactions.

The wiser sort first for themselves take Care,
For Want's a Burden that is too great to bear.

Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy and Lady. L. Lovejoy. Pray S. Peter what makes you so
out of humor to day? it is something extraordinary.


S. Peter. Cause enough, I have invited 3 or 4 Honest Fellows this Afternoon;
nay, and they promised to come too; and when I came to examine my Sellar, my
Claret's upon the fret, not drinkable: Would not this vex any man alive?


Lady. 'Twas well you went down before they came: Now you have time to provide
for them; pray who are they that are to come?


S. Peter. Uncle Friendly, Mr. Sparkish, Mr. Serious and Mr. Modish, all Honest
Fellows and Loyal Men as live. Exit.


L. Lovejoy. The Name of Mr. Modish revives my Heart: You see what we Women
are; the least cross Accident throws us into a melancholy Fit, the good News
revives us, and you may know it by our Looks as well as by our Actions, which
if Mr. Modish understands as well as I, he shall read such a Love-Lesson in my
Looks, he shall not forget this Month, if his Memory be but as good as mine. but I
must in and set my self off to the best advantage against their coming. Exit.


Enter Mr. Serious. Mr. Serious. Now I am in a fine Condition. I could not get
rid of Sr. Peter without my promise to come with him this Afternoon; I am sure
this is not the way to cure my Shins; it is well if I don't make them worse:
Besides, if Women appear, I shall be laughed out of my Life.


Enter Mr. Friendly. Friendly. What Mr. Serious, in Doubts and Disputations
with your self? Are you not well?


Mr. Serious. Indifferent as to Health, but much in pain: I must use
Abstinence, I know no other Remedy.


Friendly. Away, away: Talk of Abstinence! Give me good eating and drinking,
that is a certain Cure for all Distempers: Your Kitchin-Phisick Sir there is
nothing like it; your Doctors shall never get any Estate by me I Will warrant 'em.


Mr. Serious. Several men, several minds Sir; what is one man's meat is another
man's poison, Age will not be hid: Do what we can to Cheat the World, we shall
find alterations in our selves as Age grows on.


Mr. Friendly. Shall we so Sir! It Is not long since you was of another Opinion,
and venturing at Women.


Serious. 'Twas all but talk; and to tell you as my Friend, I Will sooner venture
at Hanging, were I put to my Choice; for Women are good for nothing that I know
of, but to bring a man into trouble, and Laugh at him when they have done. Exit.


Enter Sir Peter, Modish, Sparkish, Serious and Friendly. Sir Peter. Gentlemen,
pray take your feats; here is no Women that you need stand upon Complements.


Modish. I like Sir Peter's free Humor; when we Visit him, we have always a
hearty Welcome, and good Wine.


Sparkish. By the World, thou art in the right; I hate your sniveling stingy
Humor that when a man of parts comes to give him a Visit, denies himself, or
else brings his half Bottle of Claret his Wife and he left the day before, to
entertain you with.


Friendly. Cousin, pray uncork a Bottle, let us taste the Wine you so much boast
of; it looks well, and tast's well; this will do.


Sir Peter. I am glad it likes you Modish; Prithee what News abroad, what
Plots, what Intriegues on Foot?


Modish. Mr. Serious can give the best account of Intriegues of any man I know.


Sir Peter. Ha, ha, ha, Faith I heard something of it by the by; prithee
Serious how was it?


Mr. Serious. It Is not a laughing matter Sir, to have Tricks put on men to
endanger their Lives.


Sparkish. Prithee how man, were they Foot or Horse that robbed thee?


Serious. Who talks of being robbed? your Wits are a Wool-gathering, if ever
you had any: Pray trouble your self with what concerns you; pay your Taylor's
Bill, your Surgeon, your Landlady for your Lodgings, your Sempstress, and
the rest you deal withal, and not with me.


Sparkish. What, angry old Friend? I know no cause for it by the World.


Friendly. His Shins rage, and that makes him Testy; if you must know all, he
has lately had a Run at Blinds-mans-buff with the Ladies.


Modish. I Will warrant they set Joynt-Stools in his way, or some such Trick.


Sir Peter. Come leave quarreling, and mind the work of the day; who pledges a
Bumper?


Modish. Come this way Sir, if you please; your Right Hand man about, is the
best way that every man may drink alike.


Sir Peter. Fill it away. They drink round.


Friendly. About with it, never let the Glass stand; we have nothing to pay in
a Friends House.


Sir Peter. Said like thy self in faith, I am more beholding to thee than to all
the Company; they stand sucking their Thumbs, as if I had no Wine in the House,
or were unwilling to part with it, I hate such Milk-sops.


Modish. You shall have no reason of Complaint before we part; we'll have the
Royal Health in a Bumper of the largest Size.


Sir Peter. Now I like thee, thou savourest something of a Gentleman: I am for
dealing the Cards above-board; not like your serious Phanatick, who exclaims
against Wine abroad, but will be as Drunk at home as a Woman at a Gossiping.


Sparkish. Come Gentlemen, since nothing else will give Sir Peter satisfaction,
away with it, all hands aloft: He that denies his Glass deserves to be sewed in
a Hand-Basket, sent to the County-Goal, and bound to answer it at the next
Jail-delivery.


Friendly. He needs no other punishment; for he must plead his own Cause; a
Lawyer dares not undertake it, lest he be thought to hinder the Kings Revenue.


Serious. Right; but give me leave to tell you, if every man pleaded his own
Cause, there would be less Law, and more Honesty than now adays there is.


Modish. Come Sir Peter call for a Beer-glass, and let the King's Health go
round.


Sir Peter. Agreed, with All Joy to great Caesar, that every man may bear a
part, and show his Loyalty by his Singing, as well as by his Drinking or
Fighting; a little Mirth will make the Wine go down the better.


Enter Footboy with Beer-glasses: Fills the Glass; they all sing, All Joy to
great Caesar. Sir Peter. Be sure every man has his Glass: Mr. Modish, Pray let
that be your Care.


Modish. I Will warrant you, we'll never wrong our selves; the more we have, the
Richer we are; and who would go home Poor, when he may have Riches more than
enough for carrying away, and the good will of the Donor into the Bargain?


Sparkish. By the World, thou art in the right again; for who would disoblige
an old Acquaintance for not drinking the other Bottle, and lose his Real Friend
for a bare punctilio in Manners?


Sir Peter. Away with it Boys, I long till the Glass comes round: You are so
tedious in promoting the design in hand, that a man forgets the taste of the
last Glass, before another comes to his turn to drink: I love to converse with
those sort of men that dispatch business when they are about it; you need never
to call upon them to drink their Glass: It Is no sooner said but done; here is
one, there is the other; you can no sooner make a Vye, but it is seen and
doubled; there is no going away with whole Stakes, but every man's a sufferer,
and all concludes in Mirth.


Friendly. I like your Conclusion, and was always of that mind; a little mirth,
is worth a great deal of sorrow.


Modish. I am of Opinion, set Wine aside, nothing adds more to mirth than
Women, they have for the most part agreeable Wishes, and then they Dance well;
there is no being without them at a merry-meeting.


Serious. I have had too much of them not long since: You that have had the
good Fortune to be kindly used by them may covet their Company.


Friendly. Never mind what he says, but come along with me; we will fetch
every Man his Woman, and Sir Peter shall sit as Judge, and see fair play.


Sir Peter. Agreed, bring them in Boys. Exit. Modish, Sparkish, Friendly and
Serious.


Sir Peter. Now they are all gone, it is not amiss to play the good husband, and
add the Remnants of Wine together; so, this will pass for a fresh Bottle.


Enter Friendly and Lady Lovejoy. Modish and Julia. Sparkish and Lettice.
Serious and Flavia. Friendly. We have performed our promise with much ado; you
see Sir Peter we have prevailed.


Sir Peter. Done like men of Honor; come fill them a Glass.


Lady Lovejoy. We beseech you Sir Peter, excuse us drinking; if you are for a
Dance, we'll help you out at a dead lift.


Sir Peter. Stay, we are not come to that yet, I am a Cup too low; but if you
will in the mean time oblige us with a Song, 'twill be very acceptable: Come
Sister Juliae, I know you love to show your parts.


Julia. I am ready enough to betray my Imperfections, you should not ask me
twice, but I have got such a Cold, and am so stuffed at my Stomach, I can
hardly fetch my Breath; but Lettice here is in good Condition, sound Wind and
Limb, and fit for Service.


Lettice. Your Servant Madam, I am willing to accept the offer to oblige you,
and so much good Company as I see here met together, and wish I could do better.


Sir Peter. Come begin, we are no Critics in these matters: I am for an old
Song thou know.


SONG.
1. Lettice sings.
Phillis for shame, let us improve a Thousand several ways.
These few short minutes snatched by Love from many tedious days;
Whilst you want Courage to despise the Censures of the Grave,
For all the Tyrants in your Eyes, your Heart is but a Slave.
2.
My Love is full of noble pride,
And never will submit
To let that Fop Discretion, ride
In Triumph over Wit.
3.
False Friends I have as well as you,
Who daily Counsel me,
Fame and Ambition to pursue,
And leave off loving thee.
4.
When I the least belief bestow
On what such Fools advise,
May I be dull enough to grow
Most miserably wise.
S. Peter. A very pretty matter this, and well humor'd, let us have one Bumper
about, and then for the Dance you talk of.


Modish. With all my heart; the Lady's health that sung the Song. puts Gold
into the Glass.


Friendly. Well thought on, let it go round, it is an obliging Health, and a
Dose of Cantharides will make the Wine relish the better, and show our
Acceptance and liking to the Song.


S. Peter. Now set forward for a Dance.


Dance of Eight. Sr. Peter and Flavia. Sparkish and Lady Lovejoy. Serious and
Julia. Friendly and Lettice. S. Peter. How think you Mr. Modish, was it not
well performed?


Mr. Modish. Most excellent. You drove the World before you; never were at a
stand; you had it at your Fingers ends, you needed no Instructions.


Mr. Serious. Come, it is time to break up: Let us hinder Sr. Peter and his Lady
no longer from going to their rest.


Sparkish, Friendly. Ay, ay; let us depart every Man to his own Home. Exeunt all
but Modish.


Modish. It Is some satisfaction that I have had a sight of that Incomparable
Beauty I so much longed to be acquainted with.

Thus step by step we pass from Grief to Joy;
But in an instant all our Hopes destroy.

The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
Enter Sparkish, Tom and a Hackney Coachman. Coachman. PRAY Mr. don't make me
wait any longer; I have lost my Fare already.


Sparkish. Prithee hold thy peace, thou art more importunate than a Dunning Set
on a Saturday Morning: I must call at the New Bell before I go. Here Tom, find
out Modish and give him that Note; tell him I shall return at Night.


Coachman. I Will call you, Master.


Sparkish. Half an Hour hence I am for you; don't grumble; I Will consider thee
for thy Pains when I come to London. Exit.


Coachman. I believe no man in England has such Luck as I to meet with drunken
Customers: When they get into a Tavern there is no getting of them out again
without a Quarrel, and then before I come by the worst of it. Well, God mend
'em I say, and send me better Fortune for the future. Exit.


Enter Sparkish and a Drawer. Sparkish. Where Is your Master? I must see him
before I go to London, and the Coach stay's.


Drawer. He is in bed Sir: If you please I Will show you up to him.


Sparkish. Do so. Exit.


Enter Tom and Modish. Modish. It Is very well; if my Occasions be not too
urgent I Will meet him in the Evening. Exit Tom.


Modish. All I can find by his Note is to let me know he is going to a Whore.
This Fool takes more pains to make himself public than others do to keep
themselves from the Censure of the World But take it for a general Rule, your
sly pretending formal Hypocrite is the great'st Whore Master.


Enter Serious with an Infant in his Arms. Modish. How now Mr. Serious, what
turned Nurse in your old Age? or is this one of thy Frolicks to divert thy self
for an Ayer^ing after last nights Debauch.


Serious. Needs must when the Devil drives. I am in a Strai^ and know not which
way to turn my self without your Advice and Assistance: I have met it seems
with a fruitful Whore and here is the Effects of my Labor: What will you advise
me in this Case?


Modish. Cut the Throat or stifel it in the next House of Office It Is but
venturing a Swing at Tyburn: I know no quicker way to get rid of it; but you
had best keep your own Counsel.


Serious. Pray be reserved Mr. Modish, you see I trust my Honor in your Hands
as the only Friend I dare be bold withal; you are better acquainted here than
I am, therefore pray advise me.


Modish. You are mistaken in your Man: I never have any thing to do with Women,
and by that means avoid both the Trouble and Charge that attends on whoring;
for if you dance you must pay your Music.


Mr. Serious. I know thou understandst the World, the Theorick part at least if
not the practick; like some studious men in the World, who by their reading
will give a better Description of the Ways and Manners of a Foraign Country,
than those who have traveled out of Curiosity to learn their Language.


Modish. All this I grant; but I am not bound, as I take it, to make every one
as wise as my self: Your Divine, if he gives you a Sermon, deserves a Reward;
your Lawyer meddles not with your Cause, tho never so good, without his Fee;
nor will your Surgeon perfect your Cure without Money; nor will a Nurse take
this trouble off your Hands without being satisfied how she shall be rewarded
for her Care and Trouble; nor will I venture to pull the Thorn out of your
Foot, and put into my own without a Reward 'to sweeten the Sorrow I may undergo
before I get it out again


Mr. Serious. Thou shall not want for Encouragement; If Gold will purchase thy
Assistance I Will not be ungrateful; here is 100 Guinnea's I design to bestow on
that man, be he whom he will that takes this Burden from me; this from my own
Hands.


Modish. A shrewd Temptation; the Money is quickly earned: I Will venture on it for
once; it is the first I ever undertook to see disposed of. Who knows what Luck
I may have? Come what will, we shall live well while the Guinnea's last; and
before they are gone I hope to see it well provided for; give me the Gold and
Infant: Dad's own Eyes and Nose, as like the Father as if he had been spit out
of his Mouth, as the saying is.


Mr. Serious. Nay the Child is well enough, and I think this the best Bargain I
ever made in my life, to quit my hands of it. Fie upon whoring if this be it.
Exit.


Modish. You see Gallants what Gold can make men do: This yellow Earth has
wrought more mischief in the World than can be numbered up; this has prevailed
on Widows, Maids and Wives, to undergo Eternal Shame and Infamy; for this the
Father has betrayed the Son, and brought upon him Mischief worse than Death,
and now has wrought on me to hide this Wretch's Shame.

Gold saves our Lives, and it can Death procure,
It sets men free, yet nothing binds more sure Exit.

Enter Lettice. Lettice. Upon examining my Pocket I find I am well paid for my
singing, I may afford to drink Eggs and Muscadine to Clear my Voice against the
next Opportunity; this comes of Diligence; I might have lain still long enough
'ere this would have dropped into my Mouth; but according to the old Proverb, A
wagging Hand gets the Penny.


Enter Modish. Modish. My little Mercury of happy News, my Comfort in Distress!
What News have brought? I read a joyful Message in thy Looks.


Lettice. I come to let you know the Lady is at leisure to entertain your Suit;
but as I came I met your Rival Serious going to her with a quick Pace, as
longing Lovers use when Opportunity presents it is self; Impatient of Delay
think Minutes Hours, and Hours as long as Years, nay Ages, 'till they compass
their Designs and reach the Happiness they covet after.


Modish. If nothing else be in our way but he, it is no great matter; I have a
Hank on him.


Lettice. Pray Sir what is it? Remove but him, you have as free Access as can
be wished.


Modish. In short then, for I am uneasy till I see her: I eased him of a
Bastard Child this Morning, and had a 100 Guinnea's for my pains; I Will near
betray my Trust; but you I know will conceal it from the World, therefore I
trust you.


Lettice. Be confident I Will never divulge the Secret; but I have a sudden
Motion in my Mind may do me service: What think you if you should employ your
Man as an Apparitor to frighten him and gain you Privacy and Freedom with her?


Modish. There Is nothing that could be thought on better; had thou studied
seven Years for a Plot to prevent him, this would have taken place.


Lettice. I Will step and call your Man; do you instruct him how he should behave
himself?


Modish. I Will warrant you, when you have done all there is nothing like a Woman's
Wit; there is nothing comes amiss to them; I might have studied long enough for
this Stratagem 'ere I should have thought of it; but their Genius never fails
them.


Enter Stephen. Modish. What think you Stephen, can you counterfeit the part of
an Apparitor and fright Mr. Serious out of a Distemper lately taken hold on him?


Stephen. You may trust me to perform a greater piece of service than that
comes to. Give me a few Instructions.


Modish. Then know there is lately laid to him a Bastard Child, which doubtless
is not his; if by this means you can divert him for an hour or two, 'twill do
me service.


Stephen. Leave me to manage him; let me but know where to find him I Will deal
with him.


Modish. He is now at Sir Peter Lovejoy's House, there you may find him.


Stephen. I Will instantly be with him; but first I Will write my Summons that must
frighten him, and by that means screw something out of him, or else he will take
me for a Cheat and no Apparitor. Exit.


Modish. Now I may make my Visit; for besure we shall not be troubled long with
him to interrupt us.


Lettice. 'Twill be worth seeing him in this Convulsion betwixt Love and Fear;
but I must to my Post as if I were not at all concerned. Exeunt Ambo.


Enter Serious and Julia. Serious. I hope Madam you will pardon my Rudeness
among the rest, for keeping you up so late last night; I had not been with them
but only to behold your Beauty.


Julia. Now I am sure you flatter me; but that is the way of the Men now-adays,
and you and I will be in the Fashion.


Enter Modish. Modish. All Happiness attend you Madam; I was passing by your
Door, and could do no less than give Sir Peter my Thanks; but understand he is
not within.


Julia. Nor his Lady neither, they are both abroad.


Modish. Taking their mornings Walk: A Loving Couple, love to be together.


Enter Stephen in the Habit of an Apparitor. Stephen. Is Mr. Serious here?
Pardon my Rudeness Madam, I found the Door open, and was informed he was here.


Serious. What Is your Business with him, Friend?


Enter Lettice. Stephen. I have a little private business to him: Are you the
Man Sir?


Serious. I am so; what is your Want?


Stephen. Please to walk aside; my Message is quickly delivered, pulls out the
Summons I am ordered to leave that with your Worship, that is all.


Serious. I Will send an Answer by you: Where may I see you by and by?


Stephen. I am just now going to the New Bell to take Horse for London: I am in
have, Time is precious with me now. Exit.


Serious. I Will go with you. Madam, a good Morning to you. I have a little
earnest Business must be dispatched.


Julia. That must not be neglected, I wish you good Success in your Affairs.


Serious. Your Servant Madam, Good Morrow Mr. Modish. Exit.


Modish. E'ne Sir a good Riddance of a troublesome Companion; I think him so.


Julia. And I am of your Opinion; I am a year the older methinks for this
little I have had of his Company.


Modish. I am for Company agreeable, that is, I would have the Aged with those
like themselves, declining People; the Melancholy with those who are Enemies to
Mirth; and the youthful with the brisk and airy; for by this equal sorting of
Company all Parties would be satisfied: For as Water savours most of the last
Mineral it ran through; so we retain the Remembrance of the last Company we
converse withal.


Julia. What a Consternation of Spirit he was in! Sure the Messenger brought
him some unwelcome News.


Modish. If we may judge of the Cause by the Effects, there is no contradicting
what your Ladyship has said; for he seemed to be in a great Agony.


Lettice. He was loath to leave you Madam, but was constrained to it against his
Inclination.


Julia. Dissembling Hypocrite, would make the World believe that all he does
and says is just and honest, when he means nothing less; he sets a gilded
Outside to the World, when all within is Rottenness and Stench.


Modish. Madam, I find you have a piercing Eye, and can discern with Ease
'twixt Truth and Falsehood; There Is that within you that is Divine and Sacred,
and therefore not to be imposed upon.


Julia. Be we as careful as we can, we are sometimes outwitted by those we
least suspect.


Modish. But we lose Time more precious than the Wealth of both the Indies,
while we discourse of such dissembling Wretches, and may employ it to much
better purpose, now Opportunity presents it self, and Fortune's obliging to
lend us thus much Time and Privacy.


Julia. You are now a Sphere above my Apprehension. I am much too young to
comprehend deep Mysteries; be plain in what you say, that I may understand your
Meaning.


Modish. Ah Madam! I want Words to tell my Story, and let you know the great
Esteem and Veneration I have for your person; but could you draw aside my
fleshly Curtain and view your fair Idea where it is seated within my Breast,
above my power or skill to raze out or demolish; perhaps you would have some
kind Resentments then, and bear Compassion for your suffering Slave.


Julia. May I believe that what you say is real?


Modish. Or may I ever after be suspected, and not believed when I speak
greatest Truths.


Julia. I on these Terms accept you as a person I would sometimes converse with
when Opportunity presents it self, and ease a Heart as full of Cares as yours,
and full as richly fraught with virtuous Love.


Modish. And when you find me otherwise inclined than wholly to be acted by
your Will and absolute Command, despise me as the worst of human Kind, and
stigmatize me with some Mark of Infamy that I may ever be abhorred by all good
meaning People, and like a place infected by the Plague be shunned by all that
know me.


Julia. I have been the freer with you, because I expect Sir Peter and my
Sister, who will disturb our Privacy. I know my Sister has a great Esteem for
you, the which I would have you cherish; it will help much to forward our
Design; the rest I Will leave to your wise Management, and take my leave at
present; for if my Sister finds us both together she will then suspect our
Plot. Exit.


Modish. Like weary Travelers who have lost their Way benighted in some
strange and unknown Country, espy some Light from the next Country Village, and
with what speed they can they make toward it, where being refreshed with
Course, but wholesome Food, forget the Labor of the fore-spent Day; so I with
this small Glimps of Happiness forget my weary Hours and restless Nights, as if
they had ^^ver been.

Thus Snowr's and Sunshine, Joy and Grief take place
Like Night and Day which run their constant Race. Exit.

Lettice. This goes as I would wish. This Couple are come already to a ^^gh^
Understanding. Would her Sister were as well p^ovided for; ^^t that is a Work of
Time, nor will my Lady be a little out of sorts when she knows Mr. Modish has
been here and she mist the Sight of him; so passionate we are when any thing
crosses our Humor, and how transported with Joy when every thing hits to our
Minds?


Enter Sir Peter, Lady Lovejoy and Flavia, as from walking. S. Peter. You are
not fit to have the name of Walkers: I Will undertake in two Miles to gain one of
you, and never put my self in a Disorder. Lettice, has any body been here
since we went?


Lettice. Here has been Mr. Modish to tender his Service.


L. Lovejoy. What an Opportunity is here mist! But it cannot be helped, now if I
should break my Heart. aside.

This comes of your Folly. S. Peter; when you should be at home to entertain
your Friend you are beating the Fields like a Setting-Dog.


S. Peter. Prithee ben't so passionate, we shall see him again very suddenly
I Will warrant you.


L. Lovejoy. You warrant. I wonder how long you have been a Star gazer, you can
foretell future Events so well: Never any Woman was so hampered with a
conceited Coxcomb as I am with you; there is no end of your Folly: Wretched
Woman that I am!


S. Peter. Nay pray don't weep about any thing that has happened, we'll set
all to rights again: Upon my Honor I am sorry I led thee so far; thou art
weary I warrant, I cannot much blame thee.


Flavia. If she ben't, I am: When you get me a walking with you again it shall not
be in a Morning, nor in the common Field; the next time you draw me into the
Snare I Will give you leave to laugh at me and call me Fool as long as you know
me. Call you me this walking? Exit.


L. Lovejoy. It shall learn me Wit for the future; I am so weary I know not
which way to turn my self. I must in and lie down or else I shall eat no
Dinner. Exit.


Lettice. It Is a strange thing you would have my Lady so far to tire her thus;
for ought I know it may make her miscarry. Ex. Running


S. Peter. It Is well you are as light heel'd as nimble tongued, I should have
been on the Bones of you else; 'twould make a Dog break his Halter to hear
these two Women complain; they are soon out of Humor and as soon in again: I Will
lay my life after Dinner their Tongues will run so fast a Man shant crowd in a
Word Edg-ways if he would never so fain, with them, but they will have all the
Talk tho it signifies no more than a black Pudding.


Enter Friendly and Sparkish. Friendly. What Is the matter with thee Sparkish,
thou look so dull, and rub'st thy Head this Morning; what offends thee man?


Sparkish. It Is the Wine I drank last Night lies in my Head. I wonder how you
rub through with it so well as you do; I am as Squeamish as a new married
Woman, that is breeding her first Child; when she is in one of her breeding
fits, she resolves never to have any more Children; and I in one of my sick
qualms, never to drink any more Wine: But you see how quickly we break our
Resolutions; the first kind proffer, and the first good Company, make us run
the hazard of a disorder, tho we have experienced the sad effects before.


Friendly. Bear up man, never give way, and part good Company for the Headache,
or disaffected Stomach; it is so Childish, I am ashamed to hear thee name it:
One Bottle sets thee right again, and makes thee as sound as a Roch; there is no
Medicine I know like it, it is beyond all the Pills in the World.


Sparkish. I have heard much talk of the Devil of Edmonton, but I think I met
with him last Night. Well Sir, if you will bear me Company, I Will venture at a
Dose of your Physic, and try what effects it will have on my weak Constitution.


Friendly. Come then, observe but my directions, and if I fail, let me never
more be trusted in the like Case. Exeunt ambo.


Enter Modish and Sir Peter Lovejoy. Sir Peter. Faith Modish, I have been
severely Chid for being abroad this Morning when you called; my Lady was so
angry as past; but when she sees you, I hope she will be reconciled again: You
must stand my Friend, and beg my pardon; for I have appointed a Meeting this
Afternoon, but durst as well have been hanged as have gone, if I had not met
with you.


Modish. I Will warrant you I Will make you Friends; since I occasioned your
falling out, it is but reasonable I should perform that Friendly Office.


Enter Lady Lovejoy. Lady Lovejoy. Mr. Modish, your humble Servant; I have been
telling Sir Peter a piece of my mind; for being out of the way when you called
this Morning, I was afraid you would have taken distaste, and not have seen us
presently again.


Modish. Madam, you oblige me with your Favors, which I prize more than Life:
Besides, do you think I could forget my generous Friend Sir Peter, and prove
ungrateful under all his kindness? Have better thoughts of your obliged Servant.


Sir Peter. I Will as soon suspect thy Loyalty as thy Friendship; but to satisfy
my Lady of it, you must stay and Dine with us, or else all will not be right.


Modish. Any thing I Will yield to, rather than have my Lady disturbed, tho I can
ill spare time.


Lady Lovejoy. The Obligation is the greater that you will afford us your
Company, when you have Conferences of more Moment lack your Attendance, and
wait your care to manage them.


Modish. We must lay aside Interest, Madam, sometimes, to serve our Friends, or
else we live like Savages or Hermits, without Converse and Company; we should
turn wild and barbarous, not value Life nor Wealth, nor Reputation; but like
the Bruits, make Herbs and Roots our Sustenance, Contemn all Laws, and be each
others prey.


Sir Peter. Said like thy self in faith, there is nothing like Peace and
Quietness when all is done: I hate to hear of Wars and Tumults; Sedition and
Rebellion, are things I abominate; it is against my Natural Inclination, to see
our Trainbands in Arms once a year when they are mustered. I Will warrant you, my
Heart would not have served me to have seen the Camp at Hounslow, if any Man
would have given me 100 Guinea's.


L. Lovejoy. Well said Goodman Wiseacre, if you are so Henhearted, cannot you
keep it to your self, and not make all the World acquainted with it?


S. Peter. Soft and fair Mrs. Prate-a-pace, since the King has been pleased to
give me the Title of Knighthood, methinks you might give me the Title of
Gentleman; it is an Affront to Authority, and give me leave to tell you, I don't
see how you will answer it before your Betters.


L. Lovejoy. You had best turn Informer; it is the best employment I know of for
you: His Majesty is well helped up with such Justices of the Peace as you are:
There Is too many such, God help us, makes us at that pass we are at; they will
Acquit a Man for House-breaking, and Commit a Man to Goal for taking a lawful
Course for what is his own.


S. Peter. Well, if you were not my Bosom-Friend, this should not pass
unpunished; but we forget our Dinner, that will be spoiled while we stand
trifling our time away.


Ex. S. Peter, L. Lovejoy and Modish. Enter Friendly and Sparkish. Friendly.
How think you now of my way of Curing the Headache?


Sparkish. I like well enough of it; it is soon done, and not very Chargeable, a
Shilling's the most it Costs: Who would not give that for such a Refreshment?


Friendly. It Is as certain a Cure for the Headache, as your Jesuits Powder for
an Ague: I have tried all Experiments, and find nothing like it.


Sparkish. It has one ill property that I know of, it sets a Man in for all
day, if he like his Company.


Friendly. Who would not bear with a small Inconveniency to get rid of a
dolorous Pain? the Headache is as bad or worse than Teethach, and that they say
will make a Dog run mad.


Sparkish. Your Physic makes a Man wanton; even like Opium, it sets a Man a
dosing that he never feels his Pain and knows not whether he be sick or well.


Friendly. Other Physic makes a Man sick before it works, and that I think no
body likes; besides, it is expected you should keep your Chamber with it; this
requires no such Observances, but you are at your Liberty, free and unconfined;
it adds a Beauty to the Face, and makes a Man look as fresh as a Rose in June.


Sparkish. It makes a Man bold I know, and do that which is most against the
Bias of his Will and Inclination at another time: Thus Alexander killed his
Friend in his Wine; an Act which could he have recalled again, he would have
given his new vanquished World, and thought it well bestowed.


Friendly. I have over stayed my time; come, will you walk, and as we go we'll
end this hot Debate. Exit Friendly and Sparkish


Enter Lettice and Modish. Lettice. I knew she would try your Patience before
you got lose from her; for all her Pretensions I would not be a handsome young
Gentleman in her way when she is in the Humor, for more than I will speak of.


Modish. She is as unreasonable as a losing Gamster; there is no parting with
her without a Quarrel; whatsoever Man's Occasions be, she will be first served
under penalty of losing her Favor for the future. Mrs. Lettice, is there no
seeing Madam Julia?


Lettice. At Eight a Clock this Evening if you come I Will so contrive it you
shall be in private with her, till then farewell. Ex. Lettice.


Modish. This Woman, my Lady as you call her, has put me in a Heat with her
Clack; she will have six Words to your one, make the best use of your time you
can; it is an Egyptian Slavery to keep her Company.


Enter Sparkish. Sparkish. Modish your Servant; I have been enquiring for you
in all your Haunts, and could not hear of you to acquaint you with my good
fortune. I have received a Challeng from a person of Honor to meet her this
Evening, Eight the time, a clear Stage, and no Quarter to be given on either
side, and without Seconds Boy.


Modish. At this rate you may, for all I know, be glad to turn Child again, and
cry kings-truce for a breathing while; you take like Tinder and are transported
with the Thoughts of your hot Engagement like a raw Soldier, nothing but Fire
and Faggot will content you; but after an Engagement or two, he fights with
Moderation, keeps Rank and File and comes up with his Leader.


Sparkish. I question not to come off with flying Colors: How malicious thou
art, because thy cross Fate will not afford thee one happy Day in a year, thou
would have every body else under the like Circumstances: I hate such
ill-humour'd snarling Companions; and so I leave you to fret in your Grease,
'till you return to a better Humor. Exit.


Modish. I Will lay my life this Appointment is one of Lettice's contriving, to
keep her Lady employed while we are together in the Evening; how fond the Fool
is of it!

Both Plants and Trees their certain Season know,
Rise with the Sun and wither when it is low;
Beasts their appointed time to seek their Prey,
They range all Night, and to their Dens at Day:
Yet Man the Lord of all, that is here below
Courts Care and Toil, and will no time bestow
To ease his restless and disturbed Mind;
Courts what is bad, and leaves what is good behind.

The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V.
Enter S. Peter Lovejoy, Friendly and Modish. Friendly. AS positive as you are
S. Peter, I am not bound to pin my Faith upon any man's Sleeve in the World,
neither will I be persuaded to act against my Reason, except you can bring
better Arguments for what you have affirmed, than I can against it; I will not be
bubled out of that little Sense I have left me.


S. Peter. What Argument would you have me undertake to gratify your
Curiosity? I Will use my weak Endeavors to give you satisfaction, if that will
do.


Friendly. Pray then make good, if you can, your Maxim, that you are always
forcing upon People to make them believe there is no Whore after Marriage.


Modish. If he makes that Argument good, it will go a great way in reconciling
the World, and he will perform a friendly Office to the Public.


S. Peter. To the Point in hand then. First I would know if you take our
Lawmakers to be wise and considerate men or no.


Friendly. No doubt they were so; who denies that is to blame.


Modish. Beyond all contradiction, there is no denying it.


S. Peter. That granted you go a great way in confirming my Argument; for I
find by my reading, that there can be no Bastard born in Wedlock, therefore no
Whore after Marriage. What have ye to say against it Gentlemen?


Modish. As I live the Knight speaks reason, deny it who can; I am convinced.


Friendly. On my word I cannot contradict what he says, nor will I go about it.


S. Peter. Nay it is but a Folly, having granted the Premises, to go about to
deny the Conclusion. Let Reason rule you; and tho it be a vulgar Error which I
have here confuted, sit down satisfied there are thousands mistaken besides
your self, which I hope in a short time to convince and make sensible of their
Error.


Modish. But in this case where the Husband is beyond the Seas your Argument
will not hold good, the Law is expressly against you.


S. Peter. Right, but there our Lawmakers were short-sighted; for is it
reasonable because the Husband is beyond the Seas the Wife should lose her
teeming? Besides she does it out of mere necessity, and against that you know
there is no Law.


Friendly. As I live well answered; he has both Sense and Reason on his side,
and against that there is no disputing.


S. Peter. This is nothing but what is common that I have made out to you; but
I hear the Virtuoso's are about a Project, which if it take effect, will be
worthy their Pains and Labor, and very beneficial to the World.


Modish. What may it be S. Peter, if a man may inquire without offense, this
use you speak of?


S. Peter. I find you are out at Mystery; sure you converse with none but
thick-scul'd Fellows you hear not of it; why they have undertaken, nay upon the
matter brought it to perfection too, to make a Man a Woman.


Friendly. An excellent Project this. But how is it so beneficial to the World
as you talk of?


S. Peter. There you are short again of your Comprehension: How many great
Estates have been lost for want of an Heir?


Modish. This does not at all mend the matter, the making a Man a Woman; it had
been something to have made a Woman a Man, that might have been of use where an
Heir Male had been wanting.


S. Peter. That Is implied, if they compass the one the other comes of Course;
for it is less trouble to make a Woman a Man, than it is to make a Man a Woman.


Modish. I acquiesce Sir, and modestly submit to better Judgments.


Friendly. But if this Argument prevails among us, where are all the Cuckolds
and Witals the World has so much talked of? There are no such Creatures; it is
strange we should be thus imposed upon, and swallow it for a Truth for diverse
Ages.


S. Peter. Why they are agreed, and gone a different Voyage, the Witals to seek
the Phoenix in Arabia, and the Cuckolds the Unicorn in the Isle of Pines.


Friendly. Say you so Sir, then without doubt at their Return, they will make a
saving Voyage of it; for a Phoenix and an Unicorn will be worth the seeing,
being such Rarities as were never yet seen, tho much talked of; they must of
necessity gain abundance of Wealth by them.


S. Peter. No doubt of it, when these things come to pass they need not want
Money; for I look upon a Wital or a Cuckold, to be as strange, or a stranger
sight than the Unicorn or Phoenix, and may as soon be found: But I have Affairs
in hand which must not be neglected, and therefore must beg your Pardon for
leaving you thus abruptly. Exit Sir Peter.


Friendly. On my word, the Knight argues Reason, and by his Reading finds we
are imposed upon, and frankly undeceives the ignorant, and deserves
Commendations for his Care. I find we still may learn, tho we live never so
long. Exit.


Modish. This Fool takes all the other says for Oracles. How some are imposed
upon, and yield to things incredible and nonsense; and are prevailed upon to
own Absurdities and Contradictions, both to Sense and Reason? By which we may
see, there are Bigots in Opinions as well as in Religion; while sober Men
abandon all such. Follies, and laugh at those that are deluded by them.

The Ignorant are thus abused and galled
By those, whose business is to Cheat the World.

Enter Julia, and after her Lettice singing. 1.
Lettice. Since we poor slavish Women know,
Our men we cannot pick and choose,
To him we love we say him no,
And both our time and labor lose.
By our put-off's and fond delays
A lovers Appetite we pall,
And if too long the Gallant stays,
His Stomach's gone for good and all.
2.
Or our impatient Amorous Guest,
Unknown to us away may steal,
And rather than stay for a Feast,
Take up with some course homely Meal:
When Opportunity is kind,
Let prudent Women be so too;
And if the Man be to her mind,
Be sure she do not let him go.
3.
The Match soon made is happiest still,
For Love has only there to do;
Let no one marry against her Will,
But stand off when her Parents woo:
And to the Suitor be not Coy,
For she whom Jointure can obtain,
To let a Fop her Bed enjoy,
Is but a lawful Wench for Gain.
Julia. Well thou art as mad a Lass as ever I met withal; fall Back, fall Edg
thou art always merry.


Lettice. Hang Sorrow, Care will kill a Catt, there is nothing gained by
thinking, I say; it only brings People into Distempers: From a melancholy
thinking Life I still pray to be delivered.


Julia. And may thou have thy Wish I say: But how have you ordered Matters
for our Meeting to night in private, as you promised?


Lettice. Well enough I Will warrant you: I have provided my Lady a Companion,
which if she parts with presently, I have lost my Aim and she her old Wont;
when they are together we are secure for a short Space of time; I Song you the
old Song to put you in mind of what you are going about, that you forget not to
make use of your Time, for that is a precious Commodity as the World goes.


Julia. I deserve, if I lose such an Opportunity as this, to be balk't ever
after, and not so much as pitied by thee or any body else.


Lettice. Come will you move toward your Chamber to recieve him when he comes?
I Will take that care of you to bring you together, and leave you to agree the
matter between your selves.


Exit Julia. Enter Sparkish. Sparkish. Your Servant Lady, is my Lady Lovejoy
within?


Lettice. Yes Sir, that Door will bring you to the Room where she is waiting
your Coming. Exit Sparkish.

So, there is one Couple provided for according to their wish; my next care is
for the young Couple to see them fitted to their Minds.


Enter Modish. Modish. My Guide, my Convoy, now I see thee I am safe; I commit
my self wholly to thy Care and Management.


Let. I should fit him finely now, if I should send him to yonder Couple in
the Parlour; but that would so discourage him he would not look a Woman in the
Face this Month, and by that time my Charge above stairs would pine her self to
death. If you please to take the pains to walk up stairs, the first Room on the
Right Hand you will find the Lady you look for; pray be brief, and let us have
none of your Canterbury Stories; make use of your Time.


Modish. As near as I can I will observe your Directions; but still I am of
that Philosophers mind, who blamed Nature, and not without a Cause, who had
given Man so long a Lesson and so short a time to learn it in. Exit.


Lettice. How eagerly he pursues that which now he counts his Happiness! Like
Children who are for the present fond of Trifles, but straight grow weary of
them, and the next pleasing Object makes them quite forgotten; so some years
hence discourse this eager Lover, he will tell you then that Marriage is a
burden too hard for him to bear, and I who am now respected and rewarded for my
Service, may then lie under the bitterest Curses that Malice can invent.

Before Enjoyment Women Angels seem*
But afterward they are of no Esteem:
Among our Gallants Mistresses are so Common,
They hate the name of Wife or Civil Woman. Ex.

Enter Friendly and Serious. Friendly. Thou art always upon Extremes, sometimes
nothing but a Woman can please thee, at another time, the very sight of a Woman
puts thee into a disorder: Is there no mien between Loving and Loathing? But
good Counsel is thrown away upon such obdurate men as thou art. Exit.


Serious. Now I have the liberty to steer my Course which way I like best, it
must be after the Female Sex still, tho I have suffered so deeply by them: I
may talk of Religion, but that serves only to blind the World. Exit.


Enter Ralph. Ralph. I have been in all the likeliest places hereabouts, to
find this Master of mine, but can hear no News of him; he is got into some blind
Corner or other with a Female Sinner: It is a strange thing nothing will Cure
him of this Itch of Letchery; for he has been used badly enough by that sort
of Creatures, and to my knowledge is under Cure for his third Clap: But I must
not give over hunting till I find him, and see him safe in his Lodging. Exit.


Enter Sparkish, leading in Lady Lovejoy. Sparkish. Madam, the Obligations you
have now laid on me, binds me for ever your devoted Servant; when shall I be
thus blessed again? Dear Madam, such Ravishing Delights as pass belief, dwell
ever in your Eyes, and in your Face a Thousand Charms are moving; the least of
which has force enough to revive Nature settled on the Lees, and turn old Age
to Youth.


L. Lovejoy. Sir, You are maker of your own good Fortune; if you style this
your Happiness, it is in your power to give a da^e to Love, and make it short or
lasting, as you please; I am but like a Dial in Tempestuous Weather, of no use
till you the Sun appear.


Sparkish. If I may have my wish, we will lose no time, but Husband it still to
promote our Happiness, that after Ages envying our Felicity, shall take their
Measures from us, and Copy what we leave fairly Written.


L. Lovejoy. It Is still the fate of Lovers to be at first extremely fond and
Court-like, till time that alters all things, makes us Common and Cheap to one
another; if not, Age will not be hid; and then what seemed so fair and lovely to
us, is defaced and blotted* like Garments out of Fashion, not regarded; so
Love, as Age grows on, declines, and nauseates what before it most longed after.


Sparkish. With sickly Appetites all nourishment is loathsome, but you have
Charms that still create more liking, and add a Luster to your heavenly Form,
which Captivates at sight.


Enter Lettice. Lettice. Madam, I hear my Master in the Street, he is coming
home; I thought it part of my Duty to give your Ladyship notice.


L. Lovejoy. It Is well done, go to Bed, I Will let your Master in* Your absence
will now be necessary.


Sparkish. Madam, Your Servant.


L. Lovejoy. That Door will lead you the Back-way out; your Servant Sir, good
Night. Ex. Sparkish.

By this means I may make a Discovery, and see what humor my Knight is in when
he is Top and Top-Gallant; for being faulty my self, makes me have a mighty
suspicion of other People.


Knocking without, L. Lovejoy blows out the Candle, then opens the door. Enter
Sir Peter. Sir. Peter. Well Lettice, Is thy Mrs. safe?


L. Lovejoy. Whist, Whist.


Sir Peter. Nay, I can be as silent as any body if that will do; march on tho
it be dark, I shall make some shift or other to follow my Leader.


Enter Modish leading in Julia, Lettice following them. Modish. Transporting
Joys are always short and fleeting, not permanent and durable; the satisfaction
scarce balances the loss of parting with them; your beauteous form has made
such deep Impression in me, that wanting you I want my better part, and can no
more reach Happiness without you, than Fruit in Autumn ripens without Sunshine.


Julia. This is no time for long Discourses Sir, the Night's far spent, and I
am indisposed, and much disordered.


Lettice. Come Sir, Face to the Right, and follow your Leader: I Will conduct you
out, it is time to part.


Modish. And must we part? Farewell till next we meet, thou Beauteous Soul:
Eternal Love wait and attend upon thee. Exit.


Julia. The thoughts of future happiness still make us undergo the greatest
Slavery and Servitude without Repining; but slighted once, nothing exceeds the
malice of a Woman.

We Love beyond belief, but if men prove
Once false, our hatred far exceeds our Love.

Enter Lettice. Lettice. So, with much ado they are separated; had I let them
alone this month together, the last Tune would have been Loath to depart: The
truth of it is, I should be of the same mind, were the Case my own, as now it is
theirs.

Love knows no Bounds, and moves no common Way,
An Age with Lovers seems but a short day. Exit.

Enter Flavia. Flavia. When every bodies turn is served, it may be I may be
remembered, for 'twould be hard to lie alone all my lifetime; but afterward to
lead Apes, is a thing I abhor the thoughts of.


Exit. Enter Lady Lovejoy, and Sir Peter following her. L. Lovejoy. Urge me no
more, you know I am in my Nature reconcilable, and therefore you use me as you
do.


Sir Peter. Thou art as Waspish this Morning, as the Barber that killed his
Horse, because he would not stand to be trimmed.


Lady Lovejoy. You are as void of Sense as the Woman, that because her Gallant
turned her off, discovered the Intriegue to her Husband, and made a Westminster
business of it.


Sir Peter. I think Edmonton Air has made thee sharp-witted; you are so quick
at Repartee, there is no speaking to you.


L. Lovejoy. There is no Air will alter you from what you are: A dull Drone,
that cannot make a Warrant without the Statute-Book, nor a Mittimus without the
help of your Clark, forsooth.


S. Peter. Prithee be not so angry, we have all our failings; thou know we
must bear with small faults.


Enter Lettice. L. Lovejoy. Here Is another that creates me trouble hourly, but
I Will quit my hands of her: Lettice, I would have you provide your self of a
place, for I find you are not for my turn, therefore pray pack up, and be
moving: There Is what is due to you.


gives her money. Lettice. Short warning, I would gladly know the Cause.


L. Lovejoy. It Is enough I will have it so.


S. Peter. She has been a good Servant to thee; don't turn her away for a
small fault.


L. Lovejoy. You may do what you please with your Men, pray let me alone with
my Maids.


Lettice. Your Servant Madam, I can dispose of my self without giving you a
further trouble.


L. Lovejoy. Stay, and take that along with you: gives her money. I earned that
last Night for you; you had had it then, 'twas designed for you, but being gone
to Bed you mist of it; and I should be as unjust as you, should I defraud you.


S. Peter. Sits the Wind in that Door? then it is time for me to be moving, for
fear of an after-Reckoning; in a little time her heat will be over. Exit Sir
Peter.


L. Lovejoy. You see by this, and find by daily experience, that your sly
pretending Coxcomb, who one would think, had neither Life nor Soul in him, will
be as sweet on a Whore in a Corner, as the daring Hector, who makes it his
business to Debauch himself and others; yet I am still of the Opinion, your
half-witted Men make the best Husbands, because they are fittest to be imposed
upon, and may be wrought into what Form we best like of.

We Marry that our Loves may settled be,
Yet nothing pleases like Variety.

Enter Julia, Flavia and Lettice. Lettice. Ladies, You see at last I am
deserted by my Lady, who have made it my whole employment to serve you to the
utmost of my power, but am now out of a Capacity to serve you further.


Julia. There can be nothing laid to thy Charge by us; we must own thou have
been diligent in thy Office: But you must finish the work you have begun, or we
are in a worse Condition than ever.


Flavia. If she leaves us now in this perplexing doubt, it is Inhumanity beyond
Example.


Lettice. Ladies I would not have you despair, but be assisting in contriving
your own good Fortune; there shall be nothing wanting in me to forward it, if
it be in my power.


Julia. Set us but in the way; then, if we follow not thy Directions the fault
lies at our Door, not yours.


Flavia. Do but tell us what we shall do to attain what you have so
successfully hitherto carried on, and leave us to perform it.


Lettice. If I must still be concerned in your Affair I Will try my Skill; I
think this Plot may take: It Is Madam Julia that they all adore, but can but one
possess her; therefore to carry on our Design she must promise them all fair to
draw them into the snare of Matrimony, upon this condition, that they shall be
content to be married after the Masquerading way, in a Disguise; for by that
means we may all be provided for to our wish; for Mr. Sparkish desires this day
to court her for his Wife; the other two you know have long been Suitors: This
will be no great Task to undergo; and this performed we gain what we desire.


Julia. True Lettice, still thy Plots are laid above the reach of Fate to
frustrate or prevent.


Lettice. Now I Will leave you and possess Modish with our Stratagem, and leave
the rest to you. Exit.


Julia. Now Sister what remains, but that we carry on this Plot with Secrecy so
happily begun?


Flavia. It must of force be prosperous; you shall have Modish: let Sparkish be
my Prize, and leave the old dissembling Letcher Serious for Lettice to convert.


Julia. Agreed, and all are satisfied.
Where differing Humors meet there is always Strife;
But all Contentment in a married Life. Exeunt Ambo.

Enter Sparkish and Julia. Sparkish. As I have used your Brothers House, I
still observed that Sweentness in your Carriage and such transcendent Beauty in
your Face as cannot be resisted; what I have said of you, is not* strange but
common, being the Talk and wish of all Beholders.


Julia. In Rallery and Jest, not Earnest sure.


Sparkish. Such Divine Forms as yours, are rather to be worshipped and adored
than made our Mirth and Pastime.


Julia. Now you betray the worst of Natures, Flattery, and think I take what
you speak in Rallery, for real Truth.


Sparkish. You wrong me much, my Heart and Tongue agree: I heard by chance that
Modish long had wooed you, which brought me now to know if my small service and
the Love I owe you may be accepted with you.


Julia. Would you be so unkind to wrong your Friend and prove his Rival in the
Choice he has made?


Sparkish. Would I not? What is it I would not do to gain your Favor? Make me a
promise that I shall enjoy you, impose what 'ere you will I Will undergo it with
as much Willingness as I would eat or drink to strengthen and support decaying
Nature.


Julia. In that Sir I Will never promise any man, but am resolved who 'ere I
marry it shall be in a Disguise; and that you may know I have no Aversion for
your Person I Will make you of my Council: To Morrow I design to alter my
Condition, if you dare venture to take your Lot or Chance; I am ti'd to make no
further Discovery, you may. I will provide a Non-con shall join us, for here
will be two more of the same Humor to marry in Disguises: Now if you dare to
venture, so; if not, farewell. Exit.


Sparkish. Come what may come I Will venture, for I am acquainted with her Sister
and Lettice too, by which means I may inform my self as to her Garb and Dress
that I mistake not this great Concern and hug a Cloud for Juno.


Enter Lettice. Sparkish. I was just coming to find you out about a matter that
concerns me much, my Happiness depends upon it.


Lettice. If I can serve you you know you may command me to my power.


Sparkish. Know then to Morrow is the time appointed: I am to take my Choice
unsight unseen, as the saying is: Now if by any means you can inform me which
of the three is Julia, for so many there is to be provided for, you will
eternally oblige me.


Lettice. It happens so that I am of the Council, and therefore can inform you;
but am obliged to Secrecy, and it is not generous to betray my Trust, nor can I.


Sparkish. Here Is Gold for thy Reward; give me some private Mark to know her by
is all I ask.


Lettice. If I may counsel you, take the middle-most as they stand together;
you need no more direction.


Sparkish. A word's enough to the wise: What Luck had I to think of this kind
Creature to direct me! Exit.


Lettice. Now will he be cousen'd as the Dog who thought he had been going to
Breakfast, and was going to be hanged. But it is no matter, what she designed
for him will be good enough and too good without he were better.

Who knows, when married, but his roveing Mind
May keep one center and to one prove kind. Exit.

Enter Friendly and Serious Friendly. A pretty Frolic this, to be married
Incognito, as they called; but were I concer'd they should look the Bridegroom
where they could find him for me; this is like buying a Pig in a Poke, as the
old saying is. Well I would have you as my Friend to look before you leap; they
will put some Trick upon you, you had best take heed.


Serious. No, no, I am safe enough for that; I have a private Mark to know her
by; besides I have undergon so much to gain her Favor as might fill a small
Romance; and do you think she will after all deceive me? You wrong her much to
start this Question Sir, and me in harboring such hard Thoughts of her, and
were you not my Friend, I should as old as I am, demand satisfaction of you for
the Affront offered.


Friendly. I only put the Worst, the Best will help it self; and if for this
you are angry you may turn the Buckel of your Girdle behind you, for any thing
I care.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy. S. Peter. What angry one with another? Let Us know the
Cause: I Will make you Friends again or it shall cost me all the Money in my
Pocket.


Friendly. The matter is not worth the speaking of, Mr. Serious can inform you
if he pleases the Reason of our Difference.


Mr. Serious. I Will as soon be hanged, cant a Man speak a hasty Word but it must
presently be brought upon the Stage? I have no Quarrel with any man living that
I know of, so be satisfied.


S. Peter. I am very well satisfied there is no difference between you; for my
part you are both my Friends and therefore was concerned.


Friendly. 'Twas kindly offered. Where do you dine to day, At home or abroad?


S. Peter. At Tom's, where Modish gives a Venison Pasty, where I am sure your
Company will be as acceptable as any that is there.


Friendly. I guess no less and shall be glad to wait on you. What say you Mr.
Serious?


Serious. I think to meet you there, but have some Business of importance must
be dispatched first, then I am for you Gentlemen.


S. Peter. Well, we'll expect you Sir. Come Uncle we'll in and drink our
Mornings-draught, and then set forwards. Ex. omnes.


Enter Julia, Flavia and Lettice disguised on one side. Modish, Sparkish and
Serious on the other side. Modish. This World's a Lottery; where still the
least deserving are most prosperous, and the best natured, meet the most
Misfortunes. Besides, we are imposed upon, for to one Prize you will find a
thousand Blanks; yet like frank Gamesters still we will be pushing and urge Ill
Fortune to our overthrow, still in pursuit of that which must torments us, and
part with all our Faculties at once to follow what another shall think equal.


Sparkish. By the World thou art in the right, for in this case there can but
one possess the Lovely Julia, the other two must take what is left; you are
contented I first make my Choice.


Serious, Modish. We are.


Sparkish. Then here I fix, and laugh to see you Two deceived and cheated,
while I possess the beauteous Julia, in whose Arms I Will sport my self and dare
Ill Fortune to disturb my Peace.


Serious. I smile to see how confident the Fool is, but I am on sure ground,
and here I make my Choice, and think my self as happy as Conquering Soldiers
laden with their Spoils, or Shipwreck't Men just landed.


Modish. Then what remains, but that I take this Lady, and fancy her to be the
Heavenly Julia? Now to the Priest, who stays in the Dining Room, where joined,
we then shall know our certain Dooms, who we are tied to lead our Lives
withal. Exeunt.


Enter Sir Peter Lovejoy, Lady Lovejoy and Friendly. S. Peter. A Masquerading
say you? I thought that had been out of Fashion.


Friendly. In short Sir, they are both gone to be married, and Lettice with
them; she is to have a Husband too among them.


L. Lovejoy. Sir Peter, you have managed your matter finely, to let them be
disposed of unknown to you.


S. Peter. Tricks of youth, tricks of youth: Girls will have their Frolicks.


Enter Serious leading Lettice, Sparkish leading Flavia, Modish leading in
Julia. Serious. I beg your pardon Sir Peter, for marrying your Sister without
your Consent.


Sir Peter. What Sister?


Serious. Julia. Lettice pulls off her Mask.


Lettice. Lettice if you please, for so I think they call me.


Serious. What, Cheated! Put upon!


Sparkish. Then I must beg your excuse, for making bold without your leave,
with your Beauteous Sister Madam Julia.


Sir Peter. Hey day, how many Julia's shall we have? Sure they drop out of the
Clouds there is so many of them.


Flavia. Prepare you to see a Face, though not so Beauteous, yet as true as
Julia's. pulls off her Mask


Sparkish. Tricks as I live! By the World, as Modish says, I think the World is
a Lottery; but we are got among Prizes, I see no Blanks.


Modish. Then sure the faithful Julia is my Wife; for yet she is concealed:
Come push aside this Cloud, and show thy Beauty.


Julia Then be it as you wish, you have your Julia, and I the Man I love above
the World.


Modish. Come Gentlemen, let discontent be banished from all Faces, and only
Joy appear: You know the old Proverb is, Marriage and Hanging goes by destiny.
Come, the Venison Pasty is ready by this time: Let Us Laugh it out, and make a
merry day on it.


Sir Peter. First satisfy this good Company how you like your Mornings Work,
and then we are for you.


Sparkish. Agreed: Come Mr. Serious, you were married first, and are the most
likeliest to find fault, therefore pray lead the way.


Serious advancing with Lettice, By me you may perceive as Age grows on,
How we poor Animals are put upon:
Of a bad Chance, it is well it proves no worse,
I doubt not but she will make a careful Nurse.

Sparkish advances with Flavia, Tho Choused by Madam Julia, yet I find
Great satisfaction in my roving Mind:
This Flavia proves as Chaste as Babes new born,
And sweet as Rose-buds in a Summer Morn.

Modish advances with Julia, My Joy's too great in words to be expressed.
In faithful Julia I am double blessed:
Fortune has made amends for all her Spite;
Thus after Darkness we rejoice at Light.

Sir Peter advances with Lady Lovejoy, Since all seem satisfied, why should
not we
With Mirth and Joy conclude this Comedy;
Forget what is past, and let this happy Night
Conclude all Quarrel, and set all things Right.

Friendly to the Company, Could we but hope that you were pleased, we then
Should rest satisfied, like happy Men;
Who what this World affords, they do possess;
But your dislike is our unhappiness.

The EPILOGUE.
CVSTOM prevails, and you expect we know
To hear an Epilogue before you go.
Our Poet finds your Appetites are nice,
And dares not rule, but gives you this Advice;
Be governed by the Learned in the Laws,
Who before Judgment always try the Cause,
And afterward, if for the first Offense,
In gentle and kind Terms express their Sense
In hopes of the Offenders Reformation*
At least they will allow him Transpor^^^ion,
Such is the Goodness of our English Nation.
Then why should you, who here as Judges sit;
Count all but D^oss that is not like your Wit?
Wit may be Wit, tho not so finely dressed,
As Sense without an Oath may be expressed.
Pray tell me Gallants, is the Face the worse
Because the Garment's Country like and Course?
You are for Beauties, as you are for Wits,
Nothing but what is Extreme your Fancy fits.
He that writ best never could please you long,
Sometimes your Humor* lies toward a Song;
But that must be well worded, and refined,
Thus various are the Motions of your Mind,
As Fishmongers say by their Wares, the Play
And Poet too are fresh and new as they.
Novelties use to please you, but of late
Nothing will do, such is your cruel Fate:
We court your Love, but still we meet our Hate.
If you resolve still to be so severe
Thus few will try their Wits to treat you here,
But spend what is left, where Men more kind will prove
At least they will return us Love for Love.
They Are void of Care and Strife we will spend our Days
In Love and Friendship, and never think of Plays.
It Is the first Fault, and therefore Sirs be kind,
And let the Play a kind Reception find.
FINIS

