A POEM Humbly presented to His most Excellent MAJESTY King. William the
Third, Upon His most Miraculous and Happy Preservation from that Barbarous
Jacobitish Conspirary To Assassinate His Royal Person, February Anno 1695.

By R. B.

-- Nec Ignes
Nec potuit ferrum!
LONDON; Printed by J. Dover, for Richard Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1696.

A POEM upon His Majesty's Miraculous and Happy Preservation from JACOBITE and
FRENCH Assassines.
WHilst Treacherous France in his Versail secures
His Guilty Mouldering Carcass, and immures
In lewd Maintinion's Arms his Conscious Soul,
Which in streams of Blood makes Gasping Europe roll,
And Massacres whole Countries by Surprise,
Boasting his breach of Faith for Victories:
Whilst he t'Inglorious Poisonings resorts,
And in Secret Murders makes his great Efforts;
Sordid Attempts! despised by Men of Arms,
Honor their Blood for Just Atcheiv'ments warms*
These Court the Glorious Field, and seek Renown
Where toyling Hero's strive for Vict'ries Crown:
But Mean, and Abject Souls, such as the base
Case-hard'ned Priests, and Cain's pale Treacherous Race
Of Hated Vagabonds, and Bigoted Fools,
Bog-Trotting Ruffians, Mercenary Tools,
(Fit Instruments to advance the vast Design
In which great Lewis, and just James conjoin)
Barbarous Attempts these naturally Choose,
Black as their Cause, such are the Means they use.
The Brave are Heaven's Care, this Caesar taught
When his frighted Pilot in a Tempest wrought,
Proud swelling Surges crushed the Trembling Keel,
And made the Captain's blustering Courage reel,
Mountains of Water combat on the Main,
And into foaming Billows dash again;
The Scaly Legion to the Bottom creep
TO avoid the Fury of the angry Deep;
The Watery Regions glows with Sparks of Fire,
And all the Glories of the Day retire,
Dark pitchy Clouds obscure the spangled Sky,
And thunder down their Terrors from on High:
The Crazy Vessel like a Cork was tossed,
And the half-dead Seamen yielded all was lost.
The Undaunted Hero checques their gloomy Fear,
And buoys their Spirits sinking in Despair:
Cheer up my Mates! the Gods of Us take Care,
Caesar, and the Empires Fortune are lodged here:
Not all the Raging Floods can Swallow's up;
I see a Calm from yonder Mountain's Top:
A bright Serenity shines in my Mind,
And shows the Empires Work is yet behind;
This shattered Vessel, though by Tempests Tore,
Shall Caesar whaft to the Appointed Shore,
Nor will his better Stars see him Forlorn
Who was for Glory, and an Empire Born.
How often has England's greater Caesar found
His Guardian Angel shield his Temples round?
Your Sacred Head was covered from on High
When Storms of Ball obscured the Ecchoing Sky;
When Bombs, whose Murdering Thunders rend the Air,
Like the Last Tempest which the Globe shall Tear,
Have set great Camps, and Cities all on Fire
As if the World should in that Blaze expire;
Your Heav'n-skreen'd Person has unshaken stood
In midst of Hurricanes of Fire and Blood.
Great Cannon-Ball, disarmed of all their Force,
Slide over Your Shoulders, baffled in their Course!
Some touch Your Royal Garments, and pass by,
's if Awed by Laws of Supreme Destiny.
Not all the Battles Rome's great Generals fought,
Not all the Trophies which to Rome they brought,
With Your Immortal Triumphs ever can shine,
If we regard Your Glories at the Boyn;
Or Namur's Walls, which like to Vulcan's Forge,
Or Etna's Top, Thunder, and Fire disgorge.
This Castle France Impregnable did boast,
Here he laid out his utmost Care, and Cost,
In this he vaunted as of Babel's Tower,
'twas the Result of all his Might, and Power:
This Your Great Soul with Indignation filled,
This Mighty Fortress to Your Sword must yield!
Namur's the Word, and it is Resolved upon
France shall not keep Towns, and England's King look on!
What Conduct here, what Bravery was shown,
What Rage, what Arts, in former Fights unknown?
This Draggoon Buffleur with Amazement saw,
And filled Chantillie's shaken Soul with Awe;
They saw the English against Rocks aspire,
Combat with Cannon, Grapple Storms of Fire!
Courage like this our Stout Forefathers showed,
They Came, they Saw, like Caesar, and Subdued.
Astonished Villeroy the Seige Beheld,
And the English reap the Honor of the Field,
His Hundred Thousand French durst not appear,
But stood, like Statues, Petrified with Fear.
Whilst, Royal SIR, with Honor You Chastise,
Your Foes resort to Feeble Treacheries,
In Camp they Basely seek Your Precious Life
By Poison, or a Consecrated Knife;
In Your Own Court their Treasons they pursue;
What is 't their Guilty Fears will not hurry 'em to?
A Set of Spurious Wretches, Vile, and Base,
Spawned, like their Councils, of the Infernal Race,
The Scum, Reproach, and Pest of the Human Line,
As the fallen Angels are of that Divine;
Alike in Rancour, and alike in Spite,
Both fight against Almighty Power, and Light:
These are the Crew Chose by Most Christian France,
His Long-Projected Empire to Advance;
Now that his Priest-blest Arms, and Councils fail,
He Will try if Hell-spawn'd Tories cannot prevail.
SIR, it is Your Noble Virtue makes them dread,
And raise their baffled Plots against Your Head;
Had You at first but Crushed the Viprous Brood,
They had not Now been Hunting for Your Blood!
But Your Mild Reign, Indulgent to a Fault,
Cherisht those Serpents which Your Life Assault;
Those Home bred Foes, more dangerous by far
Than all the Open Violence of War:
Not Impious Louis with his Fleet, and Host,
Of which (till the Late Reigns) he never could Boast,
Could stop the Justice of Your Conquering Sword,
But for the Aids Our Traitors Hence afford.
Now, Sir, Your Thunder let the Miscreants share,
Whom Heaven discovers, let not Favor spare:
Root the Malignant Race that dare disown
Your Peoples Right to Give a Forfeit Crown,
Who from false Toppicks, false Conclusions draw,
And give the Prince a Power to Null the Law;
These, to foment Our Woes, Two Titles bring*
Make One de facto, One de jure King;
Such Politiciaus would a Claim Reserve,
The French Designs to Complement, and serve*
To pamper their Insatiate Avarice,
They Would Europe sell, and England sacrifice.
When such as these are from Preferments Purged,
And by Your Justice for their Treasons Scourged,
Intrigu'ing France shall gain no more from hence,
Supplies of Treasure, and Intelligence;
But this will mortify the Monsieur more
Than five Campaigns have ever done before;
The Gallic Power would but weak appear,
If not supported by his Engines Here.
Great Sir, by Wonders Raised, England to save
From b'ing a Spiritual, and a Temp'ral Slave,
Whom the Eternal Goodness has Preserved,
And for some Greater Work to Come Reserved;
On whom all Europe fix their Suppliant Eyes
To Save 'em from French Chains, and Cruelties;
See with what Zeal Your People join in One
To Guard Your Person, and Secure Your Throne*
The Associating Senate lead the Van,
Your Lords and Commons as one Single Man;
Your Loyal City, Opulent, and Great,
'bove all the Glorious Sun ever shined on yet;
Taking Copy from Original so fair,
Express their Love, their Duty, and their Care.
No sooner was the Welcome Tidings hurled
Of their Darling's Safety through Your English World,
But in Rural Triumphs they their Joy proclaim;
And vow to Die for Brave King WILLIAM.
In Cheerful Throngs each County crowds to Sign,
And with their Representatives Conjoin:
This Bond of Union is approved by All,
And Swells from Corporate to National.
Nor will the General Pact determine here,
But Foreign Princes in the League appear;
The Potentates of Europe, One and All,
States, and Crowned Heads, Allies, and Neuteral:
None can be Safe, all Government's destroyed,
When Butchers are for Holy Ends Employed.
How Execrable must this make the Names
Of the Twin-Cut-Throats Lou' le Grand, and James?
Whilst these fresh Treasons wake your Friends at Land
Your floating Towers, their Force at Sea withstand;
This to Your Royal Vigilance We owe,
Soft they Approached, but found no Sleepy Foe:
Soon when your Startling Squadron came in view,
The Noisy French Armada straight withdrew,
The affrighted Flota to the Sands do Creep,
And durst not meet Your Adm'ral on the Deep*
Their Pannick Army they Debarque again,
And Heave their Cannon in the watery Main;
And, though in Haste their Hero to Restore,
They durst not venture on Your English Shore.
Your Royal Flagg made Ships, and Troops to Run,
They mind the Setting of their Rising Sun.
Great RVSSEL stops them in their Hot Carier,
Russel, whose Name the French with Trembling hear.
That Illustrious Captain, Monsieur durst not meet,
They felt his Courage, when He burnt their Fleet.
Thus what false France designed for England's Woe,
Kind Prov'dence turns to France's Overthrow,
And, well Improved, will fix Your Interest more
On Your People's Hearts than ever heretofore.
But I must Crave your Majesty's Excuse
For an Vnpollisht, Melancholy Muse,
Who, Vninstructed in the Arts of Verse,
Presumes Your Royal Story to Rehearse,
This might become famed Mouse, or Dorset's Lyre,
Whose Eloquence can charm, and Sense inspire:
But, if Hearty Zeal may for the rest Atone,
May Heav'n-sav'd William long wear England's Crown*
FINIS.

