A CATALOGUE OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL Books and Tracts, Written by the Honorable
ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Together with the ORDER or TIME, Wherein Each of them has
been published respectively. To which is added A CATALOGUE Of the Theological
Books, Written by the same AUTHOR.

In the Savoy, Printed by Edw. Jones. 1689.

A CATALOGUE OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL Books and Tracts, Written by the Honorable
ROBERT BOIL Esquire.
Advertisements of the Publisher.
1. Many ingenious Persons, especially Strangers, having pressingly endeavored
to procure a Catalogue of the Honorable Mr. Boyles Writings; and the Author
himself being not at leisure to draw one up; 'twas thought it might be some
satisfaction to those Inquirers, if I published the following List, as it was
drawn out, for his own use, of the Philosophical Transactions, as well as the
Printed Volumes, by an ingenious French Physician, studious of the Authors
Writings, some of which he Translated and Printed in his own Language. 2. The
Letter L. affixt in the Margin, denotes the Book related to, to have been
Translated, and Published in the Latin Tongue also. Several of the rest having
likewise been Translated into Latin, but not yet Published. 3. Those that have
an Asterisk prefixed to them, came forth without the Authors Name, tho it is not
doubted, but they are His. 4. Diverse of those mentioned as drawn out of the
Transactions, did probably come abroad in Latin; some of the Transactions
themselves having been published in that Language.
Charles Lord Viscount of Dungarvan, Eldest Son to the Earl of Cork, by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire.

Franciscus Linus, wherewith the Objectors Funicular Hypothesis is also
examined.

An Examen of Mr. Tho. Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Natura Aeris, as far as it
concerns the Authors Book of New Experiments touching the Spring of the Air;
with an Appendix touching Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine of Fluidity and Firmness.

These three together in a Volume in 4o, being a second Edition; the first at
Oxford 1662, had been published Anno 1660. The two others at London 1662, had
been published Anno 1661.

etc. 1661.

Tentamina, Written and Collected upon diverse Times and Occasions, with an
History of Fluidity and Firmness in 4o. 1662.



Some Considerations touching the usefulness of Experimental Natural
Philosophy, proposed in a familiar Discourse to a Friend, by way of Invitation
to the study of it; a second Edition 4o. Oxford 1664. The first had been
published 1663.

Of the Usefulness of Natural Philosophy, the second Part; the first Section,
of its Usefulness to Physic, with an Appendix to this first Section of the
second Part, 4o. 1669.

Of the Usefulness of Experimental Natural Philosophy, etc. the second Tome,
containing the later Section of the second Part, 4o. Oxford 1671.

The first Volume of these Three Books contains five Essays.

The first, Of the Usefulness, etc. Principally as it relates to the Mind of
Man.

The second, A Continuation of the former.

The third, A further Continuation.

The fourth, A requisite Digression concerning those, who would exclude the
Deity from intermedling with Matter.

In the fifth, The Discourse, interrupted by the late Digression, is resumed
and concluded.

The Second Volume contains likewise five Essays.

The first, Of the Usefulness, etc. As to the Physiological part of Physic.

The second, As to the Pathological part of Physic.

The third, As to the Semeiotical part of Physic.

The fourth, As to the Hygieinal part of Physic.

The fifth, As to the Therapeutical part of Physic, in 20 Chapters.

The Third Volume contains six Essays.

The first, General Considerations about the Means, whereby Experimental
Philosophy may become useful to Human Life.

The second, Of the usefulness of Mathematics to Natural Philosophy.

The third, Of the usefulness of Mechanical Disciplines to Natural Philosophy.

The fourth, That the Goods of Mankind may be much increased by the Naturalists
insight into Trades, with an Appendix.

The fifth, Of doing by Physical Knowledge, what is wont to require Manual
Skill.

The sixth, Of Men's great Ignorance of the Uses of Natural Things.

An Experimental History of Cold, and some Discourses Concerning New
Thermometrical Experiments, and Thoughts about the Doctrine of Antiperistasis;
with

An Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine touching Cold, a second Edition, 4o 1665.

Attempts of a way to convey Liquors immediately into the Mass of Blood,
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of December the 4th. 1665.

Observations and Experiments upon the Barometer or Balance of Air, invented,
directed, and begun, Anno 1659. communicated to Dr. Beal that continued them,
and mentioned in the Transactions of February the 12th, and March the 12th.
1666.

Paschal's Tract of the Equilibrium of Liquors, and of the weight of the Air,
1666.

An account of an Earthquake near Oxford, and the Concomitants thereof,
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of April the 2d. 1666.

New Observations and Directions about the Barometer, in the same.

General Heads for a Natural History of a Country, great or small, communicated
in the same.



A way of preserving Birds taken out of the Egg, and other small Faetus's,
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of May 7th. 1666.

An Account of a new kind of Baroscope, which may be called Statical, and of
some advantages and conveniences it has above the Mercurial, communicated in
the Philosophical Transactions of July the 2d. 1666.

A new Frigorific Experiment, showing how a considerable degree of Cold may be
suddenly produced, without the help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind or Nitre, and that
at any time of the year, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of July
18th. 1666.

Trials proposed to Dr. Lower for the improvement of transfusing Blood out of
one live Animal into another, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of
February the 11th. 1666.

Appendix to the Origin of Forms and Qualities published last year, and
reprinted with this, 1667. 8o.

A Letter to the Author of the Philosophical Transactions, giving an
Information of some Experiments which he had made himself several years ago, by
injecting acid Liquors into Blood, upon the occasion of those communicated by
Signior Fracassati, in a Letter written from Oxford, October the 19th. 1667.

New Experiments concerning the Relation between Light and Air, (in shining
Wood and Fish) in a Letter from Oxford to the Publisher of the Philosophical
Transactions of January the 6th. 1668.

A Continuation of the same Letter in the Philosophical Transactions of
February the 10th. 1668.

A Continuation of new Experiments, Physico-Mechanical, touching the Spring and
Weight of the Air, and their Effects; The first Part. With a Discourse of the
Atmospheres of Consistent Bodies, Oxford, 1669.

An Invention for estimating the Weight of Water with ordinary Balances and
Weights, in the Philosophical Transactions of August the 16th. 1669.

London 1669. The first Edition had been published, Anno 1662.

New Pneumatical Experiments about Respiration, upon Ducks, Vipers, Frogs, etc.
communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of August 8. 1670.

A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions of
September the 12th. 1670.

with an Introduction to the History of particular Qualities, 8o. Oxford 1670.

London 1670.

London 1672.

Some Observations about shining Flesh, both of Veal, and a Pullet, and that
without any sensible Putrefaction in those Bodies, communicated by way of
Letter to the Publisher of the Philosophical Transactions, in the Transactions
of December the 16th. 1672.

A new Experiment concerning an effect of the varying weight of the Atmosphere
upon some Bodies in the Water, the Description whereof was presented to the
Lord Broncker, Anno 1671. Suggesting a conjecture, that the alterations of the
very Weight of the Air, may have considerable Operations, even upon Men's
Sickness or Health, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February
the 24th. 1673.

Tracts: Containing new Experiments, touching the Relation between Flame and
Air, and about Explosions. An Hydrostatical Discourse, occasioned by some
Objections of Dr. Henry Moor, etc. to which is annexed an Hydrostatical Letter
about a way of weighing Water in Water: New Experiments of the positive, or
relative, levity of Bodies under Water: Of the Airs-Spring on Bodies under
Water, and about the differing Pressure of heavy Solids and Fluids, 8o. London
1672.

Effluviums; to which are annexed new Experiments to make the Parts of Fire and
Flame, Stable and Ponderable, with Experiments about arresting and weighing of
Igneous Corpuscles; and a Discovery of the perviousness of Glass to ponderable
parts of Flame, 8o. London 1673.

A Letter of September the 13th. 1673. concerning Ambergreece, and its being a
Vegetable Production, mentioned in the Philosophical Transactions of October
the 6th. 1673.

London 1674.

The Excellency of Theology, compared with Natural Philosophy, 8o. London 1674.

An account of the two sorts of the Helmontian Laudanum, together with the way
of the Noble Baron F. M. Van Helmont (Son to the famous John Baptista) of
preparing his Laudanum, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of
October 26th. 1674.

with an Appendix touching Celestial Magnets, and some other Particulars. 2.
Animadversions upon Mr. Hobbes's Problemata de vacuo. 3. A Discourse of the
Cause of Attraction by Suction, 8o. London 1674.

Some Physico-Theological considerations about the possibility of the
Resurrection, annexed to a Discourse, entitled, The Reconcileableness of
Reason and Religion, 8o. London 1674/1675.

A Conjecture concerning the Bladders of Air, that are found in Fishes,
communicated by A. J. and illustrated by an Experiment, suggested by the Author
in the Philosophical Transactions of April the 26th. 1675.

A New Essay-Instrument, invented and described by the Author, together with
the Uses thereof, in three Parts.

The first shows the occasion of making it, and the Hydrostatical Principles
it is founded on.

The second describes the Construction of the Instrument.

The third represents the Uses, which, as relating to Metals, are 1. To
discover, whether a proposed Guinea be true, or counterfeit. 2. To examine
diverse other Gold Coins, and particularly half Guinea's. 3. To examine the new
English Crown Pieces of Silver. 4. To estimate the goodness of Tin and Pewter.
5. To estimate Alloys of Gold and Silver, and some other Metalline Mixtures.
All this makes up the Philosophical Transactions of June 21. 1675.


Ten new Experiments about the weakened Spring, and some unobserved Effects, of
the Air, where occur not only several Trials to discover, whether the Spring of
the Air, as it may diverse ways be increased, so may not by other ways than Cold
or Dilatation be weakened; but also some odd Experiments to show the change of
Colors producible in some Solutions and Precipitations by the Operation of the
Air, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of December the 27th. 1675.

An Experimental Discourse of Quicksilver growing hot with Gold, English and
Latin, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions of February 21. 1676.

Experiments, Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin or Production of diverse
particular Qualities, amongst which is inserted a Discourse of the
Imperfections of the Chemists Doctrine of Qualities, together with some
Reflections upon the Hypothesis of Alcali and Acidum, 8o. London 1676.

This Discourse comprehends Notes, etc. about the Mechanical Origin and
Production Of Cold.

Of Heat. Of Tastes. Of Odours. Of Volatility. Of Fixtness. Of Corrosiveness. Of
Corrosibility. Of Chemical Precipitation. Of Magnetical Qualities. Of
Electricity.
New Experiments about the superficial Figures of Fluids, especially of Liquors
contiguous to other Liquors: Likely to conduce much to the Physical Theory of
the grand System of the World, communicated in the Philosophical Transactions
of January the 29th. 1676/1677.

A Continuation of the same Experiments in the Philosophical Transactions of
February the 26th. 1676/1677.

The Skeptical Chemist, of Chymico-Physical Paradoxes, touching the Experiments
whereby vulgar Spagyrists are wont to endeavor to evince their Salt, Sulphur
and Mercury to be the true Principles of Things; to which in this Second
Edition are subjoined diverse Experiments and Notes about the Producibleness of
Chemical Principles, 8o. Oxford 1680.



Aerial Noctiluca, or some new Phoenomena, and a Process of a factitious
self-shining Substance, 8o. London 1680.

Icy Noctiluca, with a Chemical Paradox founded on new Experiments, whence it
may be made probable, that Chemical Principles may be converted one into
another; 8o. London 1680.

London 1684.

London 1684.

Short Memoirs for the Natural Experimental History of Mineral Waters, 8o.
1684/1685.

An Historical account of a strangely self-moving Liquor, communicated in the
Philosophical Transactions of November the 26th. 1685.

London 1685.

An Essay of the great Effects of Languid and unheeded Motion. To which is
annexed an Experimental Discourse of some unheeded Causes of the Salubrity and
Insalubrity of the Air and its Effects, 8o. London 1685.

London 1685/1686.

London 1687/1688.

Advertisement.
Because among those that willingly read the Authors Writings, there are some
that relish those most, (as most suitable to their Genius, addicted to
Religious Studies) that treat of Matters relating to Divinity; the Publisher
thinks fit to gratify them with a Catalogue of those Theological Books that
pass for Mr. Boyles, because they were ascribed to him, and never positively
disowned by him; tho such of them as are marked with an Asterisk, came abroad
without having his Name prefixed to them.

SEraphic Love, five or six times printed, but first published in the year
1660. 8o.



First published in the year 1665, and afterward turned into Latin, but not
yet printed in that Language, 8o.









Theodora and of Didymus. London 1687.

The End.

