THE Boys Whipped Home: OR, A RHYTHME UPON THE Apprentices Poem, etc. 13. Aug.
1681
What against Nature! 'Prentice Poets too?
The Laurel Ravished by such things as you!
See how she fades, and shrinks from your command:
Plant-Animal! she flies your Artless hand.
Long since she hated Noise and sooty smells,
And in serene and quiet Champions dwells:
The heavenly Muses scorn to be confined
Within the Limits of a servile Mind:
Their thoughts are boundless, as the Aetherial Sky,
And born by winged Imagination, fly
Above the reach of those that trembling stand,
Beneath the Terror of a Masters Hand.
Poor Boys! Just from A-B-C Whippins come,
That scarce secure from Atkins fate, their Bum:
At a Cit's Table now preferred to wait,
With Looks demure, to change a Greasy Plate;
Where they have picked up some Tory-Scraps of State
From the Grave Softness of their Masters Pate.
Huge Politicians grown of mickle might!
Champions Equip't to Fight, to Write, to Sh --
If Master gives 'um leave; shut Cupboard too
A Mouse will do as much as they can do.
Poor Boys! A brace of Bucks was made their cheer
To show their Courage, Hearted like a Dear,
Whose spreading Horns foretell the future Fates
Their Wives shall fix upon their graver Pates.
Unhappy Youths! misguided by your Zeal,
Come mind your Shops, and not the Commonweal.
To his most steady hand; who stears the Throne
Best, by that Sacred Judgment of his own:
Around whose Temples rests a blisful Crown,
Self guarded by the Powers of his Frown,
Against all, but those insatiate Woolves of Rome
May English Mastiffs prove their hasty Doom.
But come Poor Boys, ye may in time be wise,
Despair not, there are better ways to Rise:
Follow your Trades, and you may chance to be,
Thought worthy of their Masters Pedigree:
His pretty modest Daughter he will bestow,
Which you're acquainted with before, or so:
To whom you have sung Ballad-obscenity
The very Zenith of your Poetry.
When Shops shut down sitting on Jolted knee.
Thus hopefully you will rise, and time may place
An Aldermans upon your Beard-less Face:
Where grunting out scarce sense, it is understood
The Apothegme of the Brotherhood.
FINIS.
London, Printed for Lu. Smith, 1681.


