SOME MOTIVES AND INCENTIVES To the Love of GOD.

Pathetically discoursed of, in A Letter to a Friend.

BY The Honble R. B. Esquire;.

Let us consider one another, to Provoke unto Love. Heb. 10.24. London, Printed
for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Anchor in the lower
walk in the New Exchange. 1659

TO THE COUNTESS OF WARWICK.
My Dear Sister,
I Expect you should somewhat wonder, that after having for above Eleven years
been careful, to keep this following Letter from the Public View, and that
too notwithstanding the Solicitation (not to say, Importunity) of diverse
Illustrious Persons, and even Your Commands, to Release it from its
Confinement; I should now at length give way to its Passing Abroad into the
World, and its making You a Public and Solemn Address. Wherefore judging my
self obliged to give You an Account of a Paper, for which You have long been
pleased, so Highly, and so Obligingly, to Concern Your self; I must, to remove
Your Wonder, inform You, that I am Reduced to this Publication in mine own
Defense. For, whilst I was far from Dreaming of permitting this Epistle to
pass out of my Closet; it happened, that a broken Copy of it did, by I know
not what Misfortune for me, fall into the hands of a Necessitous Person, who
would needs persuade himself, that, by Printing it, he might relieve some of
his present Wants; and thereupon proffered to sell the Copy for a sum of Money.
But my good Fortune leading him to a Stationer, to whom my name was not
unknown, he, very civilly, sent me forthwith notice of the Proposition that was
made him; and after came himself to acquaint me, that the Copy, about which he
had been treated with, being but One of two or Three that were then abroad,
some or other of them would, questionless, soon find the way to the Press.
This unwelcome Accident did little less Trouble than Surprise me; for, Besides
that it imposed on me the necessity of a Publication I had so long declined;
and Besides that I knew, that Composures of a very differing Nature being
Expected from me, the appearing of This, instead of Them, would make this
Unwelcome to many, though it had fewer Imperfections than it has: Besides these
things I say, my Sight was then, and is still, so impaired, by a distemper in
my Eyes; and the Hours I could dispose of were so prae-ingag'd to
Philosophical Themes; that I could not promise my self so much, as to Read it
over before its going to the Printer. But considering after all this, that the
Copy I had by me, was like to prove more Full, and less Faulty, than any of
those that some endeavored to obtrude upon the World, I thought it less
Inconvenient to venture mine own abroad, than to run the hazard of a
Surreptitious Edition of a Discourse, that could so ill bear the appearing with
any other Blemishes, than those it brought with it into the World from my Pen.
And therefore, having put it into the hands of Persons, whose eminent
Abilities, the more Knowing part of the Nation has long and justly admired, and
begged their Impartial Opinion and Castigations of it, (giving them entire
Liberty, to Alter and Expunge whatever they disliked;) and finding, by hastily
turning over the Leaves, that their Castigations were only enough to let me
see, that they had heedfully read it over; and were accompanied with
Encouragements, which care was taken, to keep me from looking upon as mere
Complements I let it go to the Press, without so much as having once Perused
it, or heard it read over, since the Stationer first gave me the Advertisement
I told You of: Which I made the less scruple to do, because a Critic, whose
Judgment and Piety I much reverence, seriously endeavored to persuade me, that
I ought not in Conscience to decline publishing, what be was pleased to think
proper to Kindle or Cherish the Flames of Divine Love, in the Breasts of the
Readers. And my Haste it self did afterward Promise me these advantages, That
notwithstanding my Book's not coming forth sooner, I should not Lose the
Excuse of Youth I had, when it was Written: nay, and That the Faulty passages
which may be met with in it, will perhaps be charged upon those, that suffered
them to pass uncorrected, when they had so absolute a Power to Expunge or
Reform them. These, and the like Motives, having induced me to consent to the
Publication of the following Letter, I needed not Deliberate long, To whom I
should Address it. For, since that Accomplished Lindamor, whom it so much
Concerned, has left the World, there is no Person in it, to whom this Address
is any thing near so due, as unto You, Dear Sister. It was at that delicious
Leeze, where You are now the Mistress, that this Letter was written, and it was
of You that I borrowed those hours I spent in writing it. 'Twas to You that I
showed it almost Sheet by Sheet, before I resolved to send it away. It Is You
that can best Excuse the Imperfections of it, as knowing not only the more
Obvious, but the more Private Avocations, and other Disadvantages, among which
it was penned. It Is You that have ever since Solicited me to divulge it, and
have given me the greatest Encouragements to do so, not only by those
Solicitations, which implied Your own favorable Opinion of it, but by
procuring me (by Concealing or Disguising my name) the unsuspected Approbation
of diverse competent Judges. In a word, this Address belongs upon so many
Scores to You, that I could not make it any where else, without manifestly
Wronging You. I know, Dear Sister, that it is Not Usual, to Dedicate Books to
so near a Relation; and that it Is usual in Dedicatory Epistles, both to
Depreciate what one has Written, and to Extol the Person that one Writes to,
especially, if it be one of Your Sex and Quality. But You know too, that I
never Swore Allegiance to Custom, and therefore will not, I Suppose, Wonder to
see me as little Sollicitous to Conform to it on This occasion, as on Others.
In an Age, when so few Persons have Merit enough, to keep that from being
Flattery, which should be but Praise, I am not at all Ambitious, of casting my
self upon the unhappy Necessity, of either Flattering, or appearing Rude; when
by better choosing the Objects of my Addresses, I can, as Occasion requires,
give Praises without Untruth, or forbear them without Incivility. Nor dare I
presume, that a Lie Ceases to be a Fault, by being Put into a Dedicatory
Epistle; as Anciently the Hurtful Beasts forgot their Pernicious Nature, when
brought into the Ark Not to mention, that Books of Devotion have generally the
strange and unhappy Fate, of being Lesse-Welcome to them that Most, than to
them that Less need them. As for the Discourse I present You, though my
Opinion of it may be guessed at, by the Privacy to which I have so long
Confined it: Yet because, as in Physic, to have a good Opinion of the
Medicine, and the Doctor; so in Books of Devotion, (which are a kind of Physic
for the Mind) to have one, of the Composure, or of the Writer, both inclines us
to look after the Prescriptions and Advantages their Operations. I shall say
nothing to Disparage a Disc^urse, which is of a Nature, to aim more at the
being Practiced by the Readers, than the being Pardoned. And shall not at all
repine to see it find from the Public as Favorable a Reception, as it has
hitherto met with in Closets. And now, Dear Sister, though I know You will not;
yet, I doubt, my other Readers will expect, that this Letter should, according
to the Fashion of other Epistles Dedicatory, be Concluded with Commendations of
You, and Complements to You. But, though I can Praise You, without either
Disbelieving my self, or fearing to be Disbelieved by any that knows You; Yet,
besides that Our Relation, and Our Friendship, would make such a Way of Writing
misbecomming me on all Occasions; I know, Your Piety and Your Modesty would,
peculiarly disallow it upon This, where the Subject I am to Entertain You with,
is of such a Nature, as would make a Flaunting Address, but a very Unsuitable
Introduction to it. The Nature of my Theme, as well as the Strictness of Your
Virtue, and Our Friendship, forbidding me here to Celebrate You, otherwise than
by letting the World see, that I dare even in a Dedicatory Address, without
fear of displeasing You, forbear to Celebrate You. And if it be demanded, Why
then I refrain not likewise, from Writing You a Dedication? I shall answer,
That I am unwilling to lose this Opportunity, of making a Public
Acknowledgment, that as I have the Honor to be Your Brother, and Your Friend;
so I have the Justice, to think it very much my Happiness, to be so:
Especially, since You are pleased to assure me, That my Relation to You, has
rather been the Occasion, than the Ground, of a Friendship, that does (whilst
it enjoynes me to Profess my self, without Complement) Oblige me to be, with
all the Sincerity that is Possible,

My Dear Sister, Your most affectionate Brother, and most faithful humble
Servant, ROBERT BOIL.

Advertisements to the Reader. (As they were written some years since, when
some Intelligent Persons were to have a sight of the following Discourse.)
TO prevent those Scruples which else might arise in the perusal of the
ensuing Discourse, the Reader of it is requested to take notice

I. That though Ignorance has been of late so much in Fashion with too many of
our Young Nobility, that some passages of the ensuing Papers may seem unfit to
have been written to a Young Gentleman, yet the Person, they were addressed to,
being both a Traveller, a Linguist and a Scholar, it was not improper to
discourse with him, at the Rate of supposing him so qualified.

II. That the ensuing Letter was not written single, being but the Last of
Diverse, wherein Love in general was Confessed, Justified, and Celebrated;
wherein the Received way of Making Love was Explicated, Defended, and Opposed;
wherein Constancy and Inconstancy in Love were argued For and Against; wherein
Platonic Love was Explicated, Celebrated, and Derided; wherein the Cure of
Love was Proposed and Presecuted; wherein (to dispatch) the Controverted points
concerning Love were Discoursed of in a way suited to the several Themes, and
to the Humors and Principles of the supposed Writers. But all the Former
papers, (written in Complement to a fair Lady) though very free from the guilt
of either Licentiousness or Profaneness, have been by the Author judged too
little Serious, either to appear Alone, or to Accompany the ensuing Discourse,
wherein he has expressed his Own Opinions, as in the Former he but deduced
those of Imaginary Persons.

III. That the following Paper was to have been Attended by Another, wherein
the Properties and Duties of Seraphick Love were to have been Explicated and
insisted on, but that the Author, before he had written that other,
accidentally meeting with a French Book, wherein, L' Amon. Divin. de Mr du
Moulin.
though what he had already Discoursed of, were not handled, he found much of
what he had Designed to set down, was Anticipated; and the most pertinent
Considerations his intended Themes suggested, were skillfully Displayed
already. He feared it might be Injurious to his Reader, and himself, if he
should either turn a Transcriber of another's Notions, or decline the Best
thoughts belonging to his Theme, that the Less good ones might pass without
suspicion for his Own.

IV. That the ensuing Trifle having been written in Haste, and by Snatches,
amongst distracting Avocations, and far from Literary Accommodations, is freely
Prostrated to the Censure of Learned and Impartial Perusers, especially
Divines: who are, by the Author, Requested, to believe its Mistaking Passages,
and Unwary Expressions, (if it contain any such) to have been altogether
Unintentionall, and such as they shall find it never to be more than One
Labor, to make him Discern and Retract; he being Resolved, by God's
assistance, to continue still Obsequious enough, to all Clearer Discoveries of
Truth, to be able to say, Errare Possum, Haereticus esse Nolo. And as he is on
his part so Resigned, and so willing to be Rectified; so he expects this Equity
from those, to whose Judgments he Submits, That, considering he intended not to
write a Solemn and Regular Treatise, but a Private and Familiar Epistle, they
will passe-by such Unaccuratenesses, as are wont to be Incident to Composures
of this later Nature. He presumed, he might sometimes make Bold with the Vulgar
Laws of Tenses, treating of an Eternity that admits them not. He hopes, that
the freedom taken in some of his Expressions, concerning Love, and the wonted
Objects of it, would be excused, by its being Exacted by the Design he had
upon Lindamor, though he had not (which yet he has) otherwise Accounted for it.
In a Dedication of all the forementioned Letters, to my Lady T. J.
And as for those common Places, which the Method of our Author's Discourse
allowed him not to Decline, he hopes, the Reader will Discern, by his way of
Writing, that he loves to use them, not as Travelers, but as Hunters, use the
Highwaies: For the Traveller, when he once gets into the Road, makes it his
business to keep in it; whereas the Hunter, if he meets one, lying in his way,
is not fond of Staying in it, but Nimbly Crosses it, or Traverses so much of
it, as is requisite to be Past through, in the Pursuit of the Game.

Another Advertisement.
Given by a Friend of the Author's, to the Philosophical READERS.
IT appears by a Passage in the Epistle Dedicatory, premised to the following
Treatise, that the Writer of it ignores not, that diverse Learned men expect
from him Composures, of a very differing Nature from this. And indeed, it has
been freely told by Friends, That if he will not Disappoint, and, perhaps,
Disoblige many Ingenious Men, he must also publish those Experimental Essay's,
and other Physiologicall Writings, which he is known to have, lying by him.
Wherefore, to Gratify insome measure their Curiosity, who are sollicitous to
know, what is like to become of his Philosophical Papers, I shall venture to
inform them, That though our Author does not conceive himself, to have made any
Engagement to the Public, to Divulge any thing of this Nature; yet, I suppose,
one of the chief things that makes him (yet) confine those Composures to his
Closet, is, That, expecting shortly Home, from foreign Travells, a near
Relation of his, to Whom most of them are Written, as the Ensuing Treatise is
to Lindamor; he thinks, it would be Improper, by Publishing of them, before his
hopeful Kinsman's Return, to let Promiscuous Readers have an earlier sight of
them, than the Person to whom they are Particularly written. And as for some of
his Essay's, the Author has been content to Promise some eminent Philosophers,
that have solicited the Publication of them, That when the Party they are
Addressed to, has Perused them, he will give way to their Disposing of those
Papers, as They shall think fit. And though he has promised this, but as to
some Few of his Treatises; yet those that know, how great a Lover he is of
Experiment all Philosophy, and Ingenious Men, will, I presume, scarce doubt,
but that, as far as the Laws of Discretion will permit, he will, in due time,
communicate to them such other Things, as he shall think likely, either to
Promote Real Learning, or to Advantage and Gratify Those, that are Seriously
addicted to It.

SOME MOTIVES To the Love of GOD.
My Dearest Lindamor,
I Am very much delighted, to learn both by the voice of Fame, and the
Information of much more credible Relators, that Hermione's cold usage has
cured you of the Fever, her scorching eyes had given you: And that when once
you found your self reserved to show what wonders her eyes were able to
perform, you seasonably resolved to become an Instance of the power, rather of
Reason, than of Love; and accordingly, did your self the right to frustrate
the vain hopes, your Insulting Mistress cherished to manifest in you, That her
charms were capable to make your flame persevere, when her change had made it
as well causeless as hopeless. I could wish indeed for your sake, that you
owed your cure more entirely to your Reason, and less to your Resentment; That
the Extraction of your freedom may no ways blemish it. But since unallay'd
Satisfactions are joys too heavenly, to fall to many men's share on earth, I
cannot but conclude, that your recovery even on these Terms deserves, I should
Congratulate it? For, the French say truly, that Les plus courts Folies sont
les meilleures. And liberty being too high a Blessing to be divestible of that
nature by Circumstances; I (that seldom deplore him, who by losing his
Mistress recovers Himself) think that Hermione has but intentionally, not
eventually disobliged you; and has made your flames a better return, by
restoring you your own heart, than she could have done by exchanging hers for
it. But that which not least endeares to me your recovery, is, That I am
assured by persons, from whom I dare Credit even so welcome News, that my
endeavors proved so happy as to be conducive to it, and that the
Considerations I ventured to present you, did at least so far contribute to
your Freedom, as to give you the desire, and the design of regaining it. For I
hope, I need not tell you, that I seldom use endeavors, whose prosperousnesse
is more more welcome to me, than those, that aspire to serve Lindamor. And
though I cannot ever pay you any great Services in relation to my vastly
greater desires, yet I can scarce do you little ones in Relation to the delight
resulting from the having done you any. Nor has the Joy which this success of
my discourses brings me, been sparingly increased by my having ventured them
with much more desire, then expectation of their prospering; and less out of
any strong hope they would succeed, than out of an unwillingnesse to leave the
means, I thought least improbable, unessayed: being invited to excite you to
greater hopes, than I durst allow my self for you; by the Example of Generals,
who, whatsoeverdistrustfull thoughts they harbor in their breasts, suppose,
that before the Battle, to make their Soldiers fight successefully, it is as
well conducive as requisite, by encouraging Orations, to make them think they
shall do so: For, although I endeavored indeed to persuade you, that Reason
being born Sovereign of the Passions though her Lenity or supineness do
sometimes both occasion and permit their Usurpation; She is seldom so diversted
of her native power; but that whenever she pleases to employ what she has
left, she is able to resume, what she has lost. And though I was willing you
should believe that to perfect what your Resentment had begun, was a task so
easy, that the Victory was as much in your power, as the Resolution of
attempting it: Yet notwithstanding all this, I say, I was once half persuaded,
that to undertake the Curing of a Lover was the next weakness to the being
one. And, Lindamor, to deal ingenuously with you, your Recovery has
circumstances in it, that make me very apprehensive, that you are not yet out
of the danger of a Relapse, and that you have not half so absolutely abandoned
your former amorous constitution of mind, as the former Idol of it. I know that
from a person, who, for one that has never yet been hurt by Cupid, is accused
of using him sleightingly and feverely enough, you will expect Endeavors to
preserve you from Relapses by such disswasions from Love, as its Votaries will
scarce vouchsafe so mild a Title to, as that of Invectives against it. And I
shall ingenuously acknowledge, Lindamor, that I have been sometimes no very
unready Satyrist on that Theme; and with a pen, rellishing of the Liberty I
cherished in myheart, endeavored to disabuse those Servile souls, that being
born to Reason, so far degraded themselves as to boast solely on excess of
Passion; and had such low and narrow thoughts of faelicity, and misery, as to
expect either, from a Woman's usage: All which I thought I might the freelier
do, because having never known the infaelicities of Love, but in the sufferings
of others, I might probably suppose, that my Declamations against it, would
pass for the productions of my Reason, not my Revenge. But, Lindamor, though
the extravagancies of some men's folly, have been sometimes too great, to let me
avoid laughing somewhat Satyrically at it; yet I am really too little an enemy
to Love, unless excessive or mis-plac'd by indistinct and disfiguring
Considerations, to represent to you the noblest Passion of the Mind, as its
most hideous and formidable disease.

To love even with some passionatenesse the Person you would Marry, which is a
Relation, which though I can with much less Reluctance permit others, then
Contract my self; yet dare I not absolutely condemn a condition of Life, as
expedient to no man, without which, even Paradise and Innocence were not
sufficient to complete the happiness of the first man. Thus you see, Lindamor,
that I do not promiscuously quarrel with all sorts of Love, but endeavor
only to possess you with this Truth, That as anciently, among the Jews,
there were odoriferous Unguents, which it was neither unusual nor unlawful to
anoint themselves with, or bestow upon their friends: But there was a certain
peculiar Composition too, of a precious Ointment, which God having reserved to
be employed in his own Service; with that, Exodus 30.31, 32.
the Perfuming of their friends was Criminal and Sacrilegious: So there are
regulated degrees of Love, which it is not forbidden to harbor for a friend, a
Mistress, or a Wife: but there is too, a certain peculiar Strain, or, if I may
so call it, Heroic Temperament of Love, which where ever it is found, makes it
belong, as unalienably, as justly, unto GOD. A virtuous Wife may love both her
Husband and her own Relations, and yet be truly said to love him with her
whole heart: because there is a certain unrivaled degree of fondness, and a
peculiar sort of Love, which constitutes true Conjugall affection, which she
confines to him, and reserves entirely for him, and would think it Criminal to
harbor for any other Person. So a Religious soul may obey the Command, of
Loving God entirely, though she allow her affections other objects; provided,
they be kept in a due subordination to, and kept from entering into Competition
with that Love, which ought to be appropriated to him: and which results
chiefly from, an either altogether, or almost unincreaseable Elevation, and
vastness of affection; from an entire resignement to, and an absolute
dependence on the Loved Party; from a restless disquiet upon the least sense
or doubt of her displeasure; from a greater Concern in her interests, than ones
own; from an expectation of no less, then felicity or wretchedness from her
friendship or indignation, or at least a perswadedness that nothing can be a
greater happiness, then her favor, or deferve the name of happiness without
it. For, where ever a passion has these properties or any of them conspicuous
in it; it cannot, but by being consecrated to God, avoid, becoming injurious
both to Him and to it self. The very Nobleness of it, entitles him to it: as
in some Kingdoms, (and particularly here in England) though Veins of coorser
Metalls may belong to the owner of the Soil they grow in, yet all the Mines of
the more perfect Metalls, (as Gold and Silver) are by the Law made Mines
Royal, and belong to the King, to whom their value appropriates them. By
reflecting upon this peculiar Notion of Love, you may be pleased, Lindamor, to
interpret such indefinite expressions, as you may meet with in the following
discourse. And this Love, I have taken the freedom to style Seraphick Love,
borrowing the name from (if the Romish Divines be good Marshalls of the
Heavenly Host) those nobler Spirits of the Caelestiall Hierarchy, whose Name
in the Language to which it belongs, expresses them to be of a flaming Nature;
The Name Seraphim, in Hebrew, springs from the Root Saraph, which signifies to
burn or flame: Whence, Numb. 21.6. those pernicious Creatures, that our
Translators English, Fiery-Serpents, are styled in the Original, Hannechasim
has-seraphim.
and whose employment, mentioned in the Isa. 6.2, 3.
Evangelicall Prophet's Mysterious Vision, sufficiently points at the divine
Object, to which the flames, that warm them, aspire and tend. And methinks,
Lindamor, that you should find it no faint Invitation to embrace Seraphick
Love, that you may have the advantage by making your self a Rival to these
glorious Spirits, to make them your friends, and the honor to be engaged in a
Service, where you are sure of such Illustrious concurrents. At least if you be
of the mind of that generous Youth (to whose successful Valor the Conquered
world was both Theater and Trophie) who refused to run at the Olympic Games,
because there were no Monarchs to run with him. But I fear, Lindamor, I have
a little digressed since I might have told you in fewer words, that it is not
my design in this paper to declame against Love in general, or make a solemn
Harangue of the fickleness of women: and that therefore, as when young
Gallants, (such as you, Lindamor) are subject to cast away their Love upon
unfitting Objects, their discreeter friends, sensible of the truth of the
Italian Comick's observation, that Onecta contra more
E troppo frale schermo.
In giovinetto cuore.
In youthful hearts bare Virtue's wont to prove
But a weak shield against the darts of love.
Without taking any more than necessary notice of their former fond and
straggling Passion, reclaim them by either matching them, or at least (in order
thereunto) engageing their addresses to persons, whose Beauty or Prerogatives
may both legitimate and confine their affections. So I shall now endeavor to
prevent the future gaddings of your Love to objects, that cannot deserve so
transcendent and disinterest a one, as I have observed yours to have been; by
preferring and engageing it to the true Object that passion was born to, the
noblest it can aspire to, and the most satisfying it can enjoy. Yes, Lindamor,
as it has hitherto been my not-unprosperous Task, to un-hood your Soul, I shall
now make it my business, to show her Game to fly at. I see that Love in
Lindamor is too noble and predominant an affection, to be either easy or fit
to be destroyed. It will therefore be my design not to suppress your flame,
but to address it. I wished it withdrawn from Hermione, not to annihilate it,
but to transfigure it. I would not have a passion, which wanted nothing, but a
due object, to be Seraphick Love, like vulgar men, be swallowed up by Death,
the common fate: But be enobled by a destiny like that of Enoch and Elias,
who, having ceased to converse with Mortals, dyed not, but were translated
into Heaven.

What has been said already, Saying of an Eminent Father, Nemo aliquem amat,
quem non vult esse meliorem) to endeavor to exalt your passion by directing
and settling it, upon an Object, the due Contemplation of whose Loveliness may
Cure as perfectly all hurts received from any Mortal Beauty, as anciently the
sight of the Mysterious Serpent on the Pole did cure the hurts, Numb. c. 21. v.
8, 9.
the fiery Serpents gave. For, since to gaze steadfastly on an outward beauty
where all your looking will but discover the same face, is found so effectual
to kindle or to blow the fire of Love (which the Greeks prettily enough
express by their (...)) how much must a due contemplation enamour us of that
divine, and, though refulgent, yet ever more and more discoverable object;
where attention and wonder, still mutually excite and cherish each other?
Whence the zealousest and perfectest Lovers of God, are the glorious Angels,
of whom our Savior says, that in Heaven, Matthew. 18.20.
They always behold tha face of his Father which is in Heaven. And those
blessed Saints, whose employment and whose happiness is, in the Revelation,
expressed to be, Rev. 14.4.
To follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. And those unblemisht persons are in
that place recorded to have kept themselves undefiled by mortal Beauties; to
teach us, that the nearer and cleerer Intuition, that Heaven affords them of
the glorious object of their passion, was, not the Cause of it, but the
Recompense; and that, whilst they lived exiles here on earth, 'twas such a
speculation, as I am recommending (Lindamor) to you, wherewith they lived, (to
borrow the Expresion used of Moses) as seeeing him who is invisible; Heb. 11.^7.
a sight, whose glory made them look on fading Beauties, with as undazl'd and
untroubled eyes, as Eagles can be supposed to cast on Glowormes when they have
been newly gazing on the Sun.

To engage your Love, Lindamor, to this sublimest of Objects, I shall desire,
that all that I have said to divert your former flames, and all that I may say
to depreciate and discredit those degrading and disquieting Amors, that are
wont to inveagle Mortals, may be looked upon as meant rather by way of
preparative, then of Motive, aiming but to disabuse and rectify your mind,
that with composed and unprepossessed thoughts you may judge of the Object, I
propose to you. Which to qualify you to be but impartial to, this Method
seemed expedient, being but employed upon such a Score, as that, on which the
Platonists used to premise certain virtues, which they (significantly enough)
called Purgative, to dispose and fit the mind for the Reception of sublimer
truths. As Physicians to clear the sight are wont to purge the head, that the
eye freed from all darkning and disguising Tinctures, may the more perfectly
discern the objects presented to it. And certainly, the Love I would persuade,
is of a nature, that makes nothing more conducive to it, then the greatest
uncloudednesse of the eye, and the perfectest Illustration of the object: which
is such, that the cleerest Reason is the most advantageous light, it can desire
to be seen by. You know the story of that witty Wench, who used merrily to wish
her Lovers all good Qualities, but a good Understanding; for that, said she,
would them make cut of love with me. The Divine object to which I would prefer
you, Lindamor, is so far from being obnoxious to a Danger of that Nature, that
I need not disparage any other to enamour you of this. For, the Creator is too
full of Excellencies to need to be recommended or set off by the Creature's
Defects. He was soveraignly lovely in himself, before they had a being, nor has
his giving us that passion, called Love, made him the unfitter object for it.
To love God but because your Mistress has personal faults, is a greater, then
any of those for which you have declined her; and is such a Soloecism in
Seraphick Love, as it were in the Persian Religion (for that has yet imbracers
in the East, as those, that have there conversed with them, assure me) to make
the Spots, that blemish the Moon, the Motives of their worshipping the Sun.
Hermione is a Lady, to whose noble Relations I am too much a servant, not to
have a Respect for Her; and I cannot, without concluding her an extraordinary
person, remember how lately she enjoyed the honor of Captivating Lindamor: and
though she has since by injuriously declining, justly forfeited the glorious
Title of his Mistress; yet the Qualities, that gave it her, made me among
diverse others like her so well, that it is now my quarrel to her, that she Is
not, what she Was. And therefore, what ever may fall from my pen to her
disadvantage, relates to her but as she was, or may again be, an Obstacle to
your devotednesse to Seraphick Love. To engage you to which (all this
notwithstanding, Lindamor) I must do you the right to tell you, that God
deserves the highest Elevation of your Love, though Hermione had not rejected
it. Were she not only as Handsome as you fancyed her, but as Constant as you
wished her, Her beauty, and her Friendship too concurring, could not have made
her other, than, as Disadvantagious as Injurious, a Rival unto God; and, in
the very fruition of as obliging returns, as her Kindness could have made
your Passion, she would have deserved but a more Moderate Degree of it. Angels,
to whom women were never false or cruel, love their Maker above all things:
Rev 22.4. and 19.1.
and he to whom St. John presents his adoration, refused it for himself. to
direct it unto God. Would not you your self, Lindamor, have thought your
Hermione absolutely handsome, though Moors had not worn the Devill's Livery;
and the thing called Deformity, had been as much a stranger, as it is unwelcome
to her sex. It Is true, such is our frailty, that, as the Israelites needed a
cruel and oppressive bondage in Egypt, to make them resolve on returning to
the blessed Land of Canaan: So oftentimes, the amorous Soul needs the harsh usage
of a disdainful Mistress, to disgust it with its thraldom, and make it aspire
to its more genuine and satisfying Object. I may therefore allow Hermione's
Defects to have given you freedom and occasion, to consider the Prerogatives
of Seraphick Love: But I must not allow them to be the chief Motives of your
embracing it; For, it were too injurious to its glorious Object, to make that
but the Refuge of a Defeated Passion, whose Transcendency entitles it to more
than the most elevate and entire one. Alas, God needs not these beggarly
Parallels with any fading objects, to become that of our disabus'd Devotion,
and He were Lovely Without comparison as well as He is so Above it. And though
I be not so unjust, as to deny, that there are Ladies (some of which I have the
happiness not to be unknown to my self) whose Excellencies are capable to
ennoble their whole Sex: Yet their greatest accomplishments compared to his
Perfections, whose gifts they are, are, in that Eclipsing company, as
inconspicuous as the faint Qualities of more ordinary persons. As, when in a
clear Morning the rising-Sun vouchsafes to visit us, as well those Bright
Stars, that did Adorn our Hemisphere, as those Dark Shades, that did benight
it, vanish: Consonantly whereunto, give me leave to observe to you, Lindamor,
that though diverse of God's Attributes are through his goodness participated
by his Creatures, yet the Scripture makes so vast a disparity betwixt the
excellencies, that it ascribes to men, and the same Perfections considered as
they exist in God, that it seems absolutely to exclude created Beeings from any
Title to those Attributes; because they possess them but in a way so inferior
to that transcendent, peculiar, and divine manner, in which, they belong to
God. Thus our Savior says to him that (taking him but for a man) called him
good, Why call thou me good? Mat. 19.16, 17.
There is none good but One (that is) God. Thus St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.15.
calls God (or Christ) the only Potentate, (...), though the earth be shared
by several Potentates; and even the Devout Eunuch in the Acts; Act. 8.17. Luke
1.52.
and the deposed Grandees mentioned by the Blessed Virgin in her Canticle, are,
in the Original, styled Potentates. Mat 25.5.
Thus, though there be wise Virgins as well as foolish; and though our Savior
tells us, Luke 16.8.
That the Children of this world are in their generation wiser, than the
Children of Light: 1 Timothy 1.17. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Yet St. Paul scruples not to rearm his Maker, The only wise God; and thus he
elsewhere Paraphrases him, He that only has immortality, Though Angels and
humane Souls be deathless. In so incommunicable a manner does the Superiority
of God's nature make him possess those very Excellencies, which the
diffusivenesse of his goodness, makes him pleased to communicate. I am the
more zealous, Lindamor, to transfigure your Love into Devotion (which I must
desire you to look upon but as a varied name for Seraphick Love) because I have
observed your passion to have been extremely impatient of confinement, and to
have esteemed whatever may be termed Limits to be Prisons. Few therefore can
Need more or Deserve better, an object for their love, for which too immense a
vastness were impossible. And such a one is God; whose sovereign Perfections
render him so incapable of being loved Too Much, that the most aspiring passion
can scarce arrive (so much, as) to lessen its disproportion to the object.
Other passions like other Rivers, are most liked, when they calmly flow within
their wonted Banks: but of Seraphick Love, as of Nilus, the very Inundations
might be desirable, and his overflowings make him the more welcome. For
mortal beauties, our passions are like our selves: If our Stature chance to
exceed a certain size or standart, it make us monstrous: but Devotion is like a
flawless Diamond, where the bigness taxes the Value and the unusual Bulk
both rates and inhances the Luster and the Price. To give GOD All our Love is
the greatest command both of the Law and Gospel (in its capacious and teeming
womb both comprising and cherishing all the other services, God requires) and
that there is not more exacted of us, is not, that an addition were Culpable,
but because it is Impossible. So noble is the nature of Devotion, that it
admits of failings but by one of the extremes, which is that of Defect. For,
Mediocritie (whose office it is to restrain us from approaching the utmost
Limits,) which in other passions is an Excellence, is here an imperfection. Or,
at least, if Mediocrity be that which creates passions virtues; the Mediocrity
of this Love must consist in the Excess of it, since that is it, which makes
it most a virtue. Psalm. 42.1. Cervina caro sicca est, etc. Sennert. Insti. De
Alimenter facultatibus. lib. 4. part. 1. cap. 3.
The man after God's own heart is not a feared to own even to his Maker an
ardency of love for Him, which must be expressed with the significant Metaphor of
Thirst; and that such a Thirst too, as makes the panting Heart (by Naturallists
observed to be a very dry Creature) bray (as I remember the Hebrew has it)
for those refreshing streams, whose want distresses and reduces her to an
almost gasping condition: My very Soul (says he) thirsts for God. verse. 2.
And we know that thirst is not only so violent an appetite, that it lessens
the wonder of that Monarch's Bargain, whom History reco^ds to have parted with
his Kingdom for a cup of water: but thirst does so confine our longings to
what it craves, that nothing else can satisfy them. The wealth of both the
Indies would not excuse the want of a needed Cup, supposing their Possessor
tormented with an Appetite, which cannot be quenched but by Drink. To which I
must add, that the uneasinesse of unrelieved Thirst, is not, like that of
other inconveniences, ^essen'd by continuance, but grows by lasting the more
unsupportable. The same inspired Poet scruples not also to profess so sensible
and so active a Concern for Gods interests, that the zeal of Gods house had
eaten him up; and hugely troubled he is, that others are not affected with the
same zeal. Psalm. 119.158.
I beheld (says he) the Transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not
thy Word. Nay, Rivers of waters, says he, run down mine eyes, Ibidem v. 136.
because they keep not thy Law; and to manifest, how much the tenderness and
unreserv'dnesse of his Love, made him think those his friends or enemies, that
were so to God, Ps. 101.6.
Mine eyes (says he) shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may
dwell with me. He that walks perfect in the way, he shall serve me. Do not I
hate them, O Lord, that hate Thee, and am not I grieved with those, Psalm.
139.21.22.
that rise up against Thee? I hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them
mine Enemies. At this Rate, did pious David love his Maker, but he was so far
from thinking this rate Excessive, that, transported by the sense of his
personal disability, to pay that Divine object all the Love that his
perfections merited: he is not content to rouse up all his own faculties to
praise God, Ps. 103.1.
(Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless His holy Name,)
but he invites all the Godly to assist him in the payment of so vast a debt,
Ps. 117.1.
(Love the Lord all ye Saints, for etc.) And again, (Praise the Lord all ye
Nations, praise him all ye people.) And not content neither frequently to do
this, as may appear by very many passages of his sacred Poems, Ps. 138.2.
he extends his Invitation to the Angels, and all the other Hosts of God, and
concludes the book of Psalms with a, Let every thing, that has breath, praise
the Lord: Hallelujah. Nor does it invalidate, what has now been delivered.

That some men have, If you Love me, keep my Commandments) and therefore it is
very possible, to be too devout, not because any expression of Seraphick love
can be made with too much Ardency, whilst it is considered abstractedly in it
self, and irrelatively to the rest; But because, that there being several
duties of Love which require an Ardency of it; it is injurious, to exercise all
that in one alone, or a few, that belongs equally to the neglected others. We
must not, (as too many Professors are now wont to do, of whose error you may
receive a fuller account in some other papers,) dash in pieces the two Tables
of the Law against one another; But must so love GOD with all our hearts, as to
love our Neighbors as our selves. You know, what our Savior says to the
Pharisees, Mat. 23.23.
that Tithed Mint and Cummin, with a neglect of Judgment, Mercy, and Faith,
those weightier matters o^ the Law; These ought you ((...)) t^ have done, and
not to leave the other undone. And indeed this Partiality, Lindamor, which
makes us display so much of the strength and vigor of our Spirits in some few
favorite-Duties, that we can but languidly and perfunctorily perform those
others, we are less fond of, begets in Devotion a disease, not unlike that new
one in Children, we call the Rickets, which some Learned Physicians do not
improbably conceive to arise from the unequal Nutrition of the parts; for,
though none of them receive excessive Nourishment, yet some of them receiving
as much as is convenient for them, and thereby growing up to their natural
bigness, whilst others are less nourished, than (were the Body healthful)
they would be, do grow so little, that the sounder parts seem Overgrown, and so
the disproportion betwixt Them, and the Ricketting ones makes the whole Body,
they compose, misshapen, and unweildy. But, Lindamor, this proves not, that we
can love God too much, but only, that we may employ too much of that Love, in
this or that way of expressing it. Whilst we are, Job. 4.19.
(as Job speaks) Inhabitants of these houses of Clay, there are many Duties,
which do as well challenge an intensity of our affections, as those, which
relate more immediately to God. As St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33, 34.
That there is difference betwixt married and single Persons; the affections of
the one being at liberty, to devote themselves more undistractedly to God,
whereas those of the other are distracted, as Adam's were, betwixt his Maker
and his Rib. But, where a direct and immediate expression of Love to God,
defraudes not any other Duty, there it is free from the danger of excess.
Though Prayers may easily be too long, and Fasts grow exorbitant; yet Christ
could spend the whole night in Prayer, and fast forty days without
immoderatenesse, when the other expressions of his Love to his Father, and the
other exercises of his Mediatory Function, were not thereby disturbed, 1 King.
19.8.
but furthered, and promoted. And so Elijah might inculpably fast long, when
that fasting did not disable him to prosecute his journey to the Mount of God;
and though just men here on Earth must express their Love to their Master, by
(that busy distracting, and remoter way of service) Trading with his Talents
trusted to them; yet when their devesture of Mortality dispenses them from
those laborious and avocating duties to distressed Christians, and their own
secular Relations, which were here requisite to be performed; their glorified
spirits may now, without any immoderate devotion, employ, I say not, their
Time, but their Eternity it self in Conversing with God, and following the
Lamb whithersoever he goes. And congruously I observe, that the four mysterious
Beasts, Rev. 4.6, 7.
allowed to approach nearest to the Throne of God (though their many wings and
more numerous eyes, intimate them of a very active nature) are represented to
us in the Apocalypse, as addicted but to one employment, verse. 8.
ceasing neither day nor night from saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty; and from giving Glory, and Honor, and Thanks unto him. And of those
that have whitened their Robes in the blood of the Lamb, this account is in the
same book given us, Rev. 7.14, 15.
that they are before the Throne of God, and serve Him day and night in his
Temple. So true it is, that no degree of Seraphick Love can be Excessive, nay
nor any expression of it, Immoderate, unless it be made so, not by its
Greatness, but by its Usurpation, whereby, it either engrosses or invades what
belongs to its injured, and languishing associates. Our Love unto the Creatures
is a Present, but unto God it is a Tribute: and though we may easily play the
Prodigalls in parting (over-freely) with our Gifts, we can scarce be so in the
payment of our Debts; for, be the Sums never so vast we pay away, their being
due in spite of their being great, makes the disbursement too much an Act of
Justice, to be one of Profuseness: Seraphick Love, (whose Passionatenesse is
its best Complexion) has then most approach't its noblest measure, when it can
least be measured: nor ought its extent to admit any other limits, then an
utter disability to exceed those, that terminate it. For he alone loves God, as
much as he Ought, that loving Him as much as he Can, strives to repair the
deplored imperfection of that love, with an extreme Regret to find it no
greater. Such a sublimity of love will best entitle you to the Consolation,
accruing from that memorable passage of St. John, 1 John 4.16.
where he says, that God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in
God, and God in him. Which supplies me with a forcible inducement, to invite
you to an eager aspiring to a Transcendency in devotion, since it may render
self-denial so easy, that 'twill (at last) almost divest that name. For,
this sublimer love being, by an intimate conjunction with its Object, wholly
devoted to it, and thoroughly refined from all base dross of selfishnesse and
interest, nobly begets a most strict Union of our wills with God's, or (rather)
a perfect submission of the one to the other. And thus, when it is become your
will to obey His, no dispensations of Providence will immoderately disquiet
you; for, you possess your wishes in the General and in Bulk, though
possibly not always in Retaile; for, your chiefest desire being to see your
Maker's will fulfilled, your knowledge of his being the Sovereign and
uncontrolled Disposer of Events, assures you, that all Accidents, that can
befall you, are but exact accomplishments of His Will, and consequently of
yours so far forth, as that is included and comprised in his. When you have
Resigned, or rather Consigned, your expropriated will (if I may so call it) to
God; and thereby, (as it were) entrusted him to will for you; all his
disposalls of, and his dispensations toward you, are, in effect, the acts of
your own will, with the Advantage of their being directed and specified by
Him. An Advantage that does at once assure you both of their Rectitude and
their Success. God's Wisdom, Power, and Love to you considered, how much more
happy must you be in your Elections of his naming for you, than your immediate
own? The Patient thinks himself obliged, to gratify his Physician, for
choosing for him, what sorts of meat he is to feed on; though the Doctor be
wont to make such a choice for him, as deprives him of the Dishes he best
likes, and oftentimes confines him to those he loathes. Alas, how often might
God say of our requests, as Christ did of those of the two aspiring Disciples;
Ye know not what ye ask. I admire, and blush to read in a Heathen Satyrist, so
Heavenly a Lesson, as, Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris:
Nam pro Jucundis utilia quaeque dabunt Di.
Charior est illis homo, quam sibi: nos animorum
Impulsu, and caeca pravaque cupidine ducti,
Conjugium petimus partumque uxois; at illis
Notum, qui pueri, qualisque futura sit uxor.
Unto the wiser gods the care permit,
Of what is for us and our affairs most fit.
They will for Pleasant things the Best confer;
To whom Man is, than to himself, more dear.
We by our blinder passions led astray,
Do for a Wife perhaps or Children pray:
Which they may chance refuse us out of Love,
Knowing, what both the Wife and Boys would prove.


The consideration of which made a heathen Philosopher say, That he was wont
only in general Terms to beg Good things of the gods, leaving it to them, to
determine what things were Good for him: And indeed, our own wishes are but too
commonly as blind as Rachel's, who having so eagerly longed for Children that
she impatiently cries, Give me Children, or else I dye; Genesis 35.18.
dyed in Childbearing: And as destructive to the wishers, as their Longings
proved to the Murmuring Israelites, Numb. 11.33.
who loathing the wholesome Manna (that bread of Angels) God had provided for
them, are their own Bane in the flesh, they had so greedily lusted for. Thus,
Lindamor, that soaffrightning virtue of Selfe-denyall, proves to be little
more, than a Son's Letter of Attorney to his Father, of whose paternall
fondness and consummate abilities in the management of affairs, his confidence
amounts unto a certainty. Nay, till my second thoughts checked the over-forward
Impetuosity of my first, I was about to add; Since God resents an infinite
satisfaction in the accomplishment of his own will, your making over your whole
will to God, will impart to you that felicity, proportioned to the degree of
the resignment. And, as the eye whilst by the Optic Nerve tied unto the head,
so chained can taste delights; which it is dead to, being once severed from it,
though (otherwise) it enjoy the best condition of which its inanimate Nature
can be supposed to be capable: So may your will by an Identity or Sameness (in
Tendency, though not in Nature) with your Maker's, as twere engrafted into
Gods, receive a new, and an enlarged capacity, which will enable you to contain,
and relish joys, highly transcending those, which the fullest fruition of
your private wishes were able to create. Thus self-denial is a kind of holy
association with God, and (by making you his partner) interesses you in all his
happiness, and acquisitions. And consonantly we see that Glorified Saints and
Blessed Angels, whose wills have the most exquisite and exact conformity to
God's, enjoy a happiness most appreaching His; whereas the Apostate Spirits in a
confirmed Repugnancy to his will, find the extreamitie of wretchedness.

But though I dare not own, Lindamor, Seraphick Love from Ordinary Flames. For,
he that makes a Present of his heart to any Mortal Beauty, even by her
welcomming it and lodging it with her own, grows subject to have it wounded in
her breast. Those misfortunes reach him that would otherwise terminate in her:
her afflictions torment him, whilst his own reprieve him; and the Felicity of
two persons grows requisite to make one happy. The letting out our love to
mutable Objects, does but enlarge our hearts and make them the wider Marks for
fortune, and capable of being wounded in more places: For, although Love may as
well make us participate the Joys, as resent the Infelicities of the Parties
loved; yet even the least unhappy persons do in so fickle and so tempestuous a
Sea as we all find this world, meet with so many more either cross winds or
stormy gusts, then prosperous gales; and we are so much more sensible of Pain
than Pleasure (an akeing corn, though less then a sickness, unfitting us to
relish, the otherwise perfect health of the whole body) that even Friendship
it self, though a much calmer affection than Love, ought to be declined as
Injurious to our quiet, did we consider it, but as a Partnership of Fortunes,
not an Exercise of Virtues. But he, whose wiser Love settles it self on God,
is not only by the immutable and even Essential happiness of that Adorable
Object, secured from participated infelicitys; but finds his personal crosses
and distresses sweetened by considering, that what he most loves, is most happy;
and as able as willing in due time to make Him so. And though Seraphick Love
makes us partake but God's Felicities, yet his acceptance of it makes him
resent Our sorrows: In all their afflictions he was afflicted, Esa. 63.3.
says the Prophet of God, and of the Israelites. And so the Son of God (who is
so much one with those that love him, that both he as the Head, and they as the
members are sometimes, as making up one body, called by one name, 1 Cor. 12.12.
Christ) though as high as Heaven above the reach of personal or immediate
persecutions, calls out to Saul for an intention of harming those, that loved
him: Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And, to demonstrate the tenderness
of this Compassion, the Prophet says to the returned Israelites, concerning
God: He that touches you, Zach. 2.8.
touches the apple of his Eye. Nor is God's compassion like a Mistresse's, a
grieving only and an useless pity, whereby the suffering Lover is oftentimes
less comforted as it proceeds from her kindness, than afflicted because it
breeds her disquiet: But God's is a compassion, though Active, yet Serene, and
worthy of Himself, which without produceing the discomposure, produces the
effects of the most sensible Pity, by engaging him to a timely Relief and
Rescue: As that freshly-mentioned Expression, In all their affliction he was
afflicted; is immediately followed by, And the Angel of his presence saved
them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old. Yes, this pity for its not disturbing Gods
Happiness, enclines him not the less to express a sense of our Miseries and
makes us find (to use a Scripture phrase as I would render it) (...), Heb. 4.16.
Grace for an opportune relief; I say, with the divine Writer, an Opportune or
Seasonable Relief, because it comes not always when it is most desired, but
when it is most fit; And when that is, he that has at once all present past
and future things in his Prospect, is fittest to determine. Christ's words to
his Disciples, (It is not for you to know the Times or the Seasons, Act. 1.7.
which the Father has put in his own power,) are applicable to more cases,
then that, which occasioned them. Mar. 7.27
The Canaanitish woman must put up a Refusal, and the reproachful name of Dog
(which yet, by the way, was a Paraphrase commonly enough used by the Jews of
the Heathen, The Text refers her extraction to Syrophaenicia, the same Region
with Canaan.
and as such was under stood by this (...), Gentile not Greek) The Israelites
(comprizing the Patriarchs their progenitors) were reduced to wait four
hundred and thirty years, ere they were introduced into the promised Land: Gal
3.17.
and during a great part of that long space of time, languish'd and groaned
under the heavy Burdens, and other as heavy pressures, of the as cruelly as
unsuccessefully politic Egyptians. St. Ezekiel. 28.24. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Paul himself prayed the Lord thrice, for the removal of that rude (...),
Thorn to the flesh (whatsoever that may mean.) Nay of the blessed Virgin Mother
her self her divine Son would not be found till the third day, Luke 2.48
though she sought him sorrowing. And Lazarus, to whom even during his
sickness he vouchsafed (a Title to which all Caesar's were but Trifles) the
style of Friend, Joh. 11.2.
which emboldned the pious Mary to paraphrase him by a, verse. 3.
He whom thou love, was permitted not only to lie a dying, but to dye; his
Rescue being deferred till it was thought Impossible; and was so indeed, to any
less power then Omnipotence. Which manifests, that as no degree of Distress is
unrelievable by his power; so no extremity of it, is inconsistent with his
compassion, no nor with his friendship. He whose spirit inspired the Prophets,
Mal. 3.3.
is in the last of them represented under the Notion of a Refiner: and it is not
the Custom of Refiners to snatch the beloved Metal out of the fire, as soon
as it feels the violence of that purifying Element, nay nor as soon as it is
melted by it, but they let it long endure the brunt of the active flames,
actuated by exciting Blasts, till it have stood its due time in the fire, and
there obtained its full purity and splendour. And I hope you will give a
converser with Furnaces (though no pretender to the Philosopher's Stone) leave
to improve a Chymicall Metaphor, and observe, that though in afflictions,
especially National or Public Calamities, God oftentimes seems to make no
distinction betwixt the objects of his compassion and those of his fury,
indiscriminately involving them in the same destiny; yet his prescience and
intentions make a vast Difference, where his inflictions seem not to make any:
As, when on the same Test, and with the self-same Fire, we urge (as well) the
Gold as the blended Lead or Antimony; but with foreknowing and designing such a
disparity in the events, as to consume the Ignobler Mineralls or blow them off
into dross or fumes, and make the Gold more pure and full of Luster.

It is true, Lindamor, Seraphick Love, is moderated by the Effects of that
Sublimity, the Eager Desires, it creates of a more complete fruition of its
perfect and divine Object. Such aspiring Salleys of the longing Soul, made the
languishing Spouse in the Canticles cry out, Stay me with Flaggons, Cant. 11.5
Comfort me with Apples; for I am sick of Love. Such made the ravished Apostle
desire to return (for so I should rather translate the word (...) there, Phil.
1.23.
and so I find it Luke 12.36.
elsewhere to fignifie) and to be with Christ: and the Inspired Poet thus
expresses his longings to the blessed Object of them, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee O
God. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God: when shall I come and
appear before God. But, Lindamor, it was fit, that to elevate our thoughts and
wishes to Heaven, some peculiar and elsewhere incommunicable degrees of Joy,
should be reserved for us there. And it is a good sign, and such as worldly
Objects cannot boast, when the Incompleatnesse of our Seraphick Lover's
happiness in his fruitions, proceeds not from their want of Satisfactorinesse,
but his want of an Entirer Possession of them. And let me tell you, Lindamor,
that even this uneasy state of Separation, is sweetened with as much allay as
is consistent with its being a Grief. For, the Divine Evidence and teacher of
Gods love, pronouncing a thirst after perfection to be a Title to it (according
to those Scriptures, Mat. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness: for, they shall
be satisfied. Rev. 22.17.
And, Let him that is a thirst come and whosoever will let him take of the
water of Life freely) and the Joys of Heaven being so vast, that they diffuse
their Nature to all the grounded Hopes, men have to enjoy them; each new
Assuranc is a new Degree of them, and is acceptable to our hope though uneasy
to our desires. And these baitings at complete felicity should not be more
unwelcome for the present disquiet they suppose, than the Contrary for the Zeal
they argue, and the Felicity, they promise: For, this production of the Spirit
in our hearts may be justly termed, at the Spirit himself in Scripture, is, An
earnest; 2 Cor. 5.5
which though by being such, it confesses it self not to be the Entire sum,
yet is not only a Part of it, but a Pledge: And, Lindamor, how Supportable is
this thus-qualified Allay of the Joys of Seraphick Love, in comparison of the
Disquiets and the Torments, that are wont to attend sensual Love? I shall not
lose time to enumerate, how many it is supposed to have sent to their Graves:
because, though I find those Tragical stories rife enough in Romances, yet I
find them rarities every where but in those Fabulous composures: and though I
have had the Curiosity to visit some of those warmer Regions, where the Flames
of Love are thought to burn with more violence, yet (bating by Duells and the
Pox) I remember not to have observed Love to have ever been the Death of any
man: unless, speaking like Philosophers, who make Reason the Essential
Constituent Form of man, we will affirm that Love by dethroning Reason, though
it leave the Lover alive, does kill the Man. But though I am loath to put so
bad a Complement upon mankind, as to say, that Love is wont to destroy men's
lives; yet I think it would be no Calumny to say, It much disquiets them. I
could ask you, How long many a Lover must continue a Servant to purchase the
honor of being taken notice of to be so? And I could recruite that Question
with pretty store of others of the like nature: but that I suppose, your memory
will save my Pen the labor of representing to you the Torments of Love, which
they that feel them, would little less justly, then they do frequently style
Martyrdoms, if the Greatness only, without the Cause and Object of Men's
sufferings sufficed to make them Martyrs. And though the Condition of Lovers be
in Romances so dexterously and delightfully described, that not only Sanguine
Readers are transported, but even I my self have been surprised into
Inclinations to admire and envy their Felicity; yet when some I was concerned
for, have been really concerned and engaged in such adventures, my Envy quickly
turned into Pity. For the repulses, the regrets, the jealousies, the fears,
the absences, the despairs, and the rest of the afflicting disquiets of Lovers:
though in handsome Romances, they are soon read over by the diverted peruser;
yet they are not so soon weathered out, nor so easily supported, by the
disconsolate Lover: whose infelicities, though they may be perhaps so handsomely
deplored, as to delight the Reader; yet, trust me, Lindamor, It Is a much
happier condition to be free from misfortunes, than to be able to complain
eloquently of them. And as I have with delight beheld a storm, excellently
drawn by some rare Artist's Pensill; but when I was this Spring tossed by the
rude winds, that blew me out of Holland, I found a real Storm, a very
troublesome and uneasy thing. So the condition of a Lover, (whose happiness
depends on the constancy, of what, perhaps, you have found as fickle, as either
Winds or Seas, a woman's Heart) though drawn by a smooth Pen, it is wont
strangely to affect and please us; yet when men are really engaged in it, they
find it full of hardships and disquiet. It Is a much better condition to be
looked on, than embraced; and Experience gives men of it much (sadder and) more
unwelcome notions, then Description did. Nor phancie, Lindamor, that the
troublesomenesse of your sufferings in love, proceeded but from their not being
acceptable to her, for whom you endured them; for, had your Mistress crowned
them with Myrtle, and proved as kind to you as Hymen could have made her; yet,
I fear, she could have Recompensed you but by Disabusing you, and could not
have freed you from the Need of happiness, but only from a Mistake of it. For
methinks, Lindamor, most of these transitory Goods that we are so fond of, may
not unfitly be resmbled to the Sensitive Plant, which you have admired at
Sion-Garden; for, as, though we gaze on it with attention and wonder, yet when
we come to touch it, the coy delusive Plant immediately shrinks in its
displayed leaves, and contracts it self into a form and dimensions,
disadvantagiously differing from the former; which it again recovers by
degrees, when touched no longer: So these objects, that charm us at a distance,
and whilst gazed on with the eyes of expectation and desire; when a more
immediate possession has put them into our hands, their former luster
vanishes, and they appear quite differing things from what before they seemed;
though after deprivation or absence has made us forget their emptiness, and
we be reduced to look upon them again at a distance, they recover in most men's
eyes their former beauty, and are as capable as before to inveagle and delude
us. I must add, Lindamor, that when I compare to the Sensitive Plant most of
these transitory things, that are flattered with the title of Goods, I do not
out of that number except most Mistresses. For though I am no such enemy to
Matrimony, as some (for want of understanding the Raillery, I have sometimes
used in ordinary discourse) are pleased to think me; and would not refuse you
my Advice (though I would not so readily give you my Example) to turn Votary to
Hymen; yet I have observed so few Happy Matches, and so many Unfortunate ones;
and have so rarely seen men love their wives at the rate they did, whilst they
were than Mistresses, that I wonder not, that Legislators thought it necessary
to make marriages Indissoluble, to make them Lasting. And I cannon fitlier
compare Marriage than to a Lottery; for in both, he that ventures may succeed,
and may miss; and if he draw a prize, he has a rich Return o^ his Venture:
But in both Lotteries, there lie a pretty store of Blancks for every Prize. And
for your particular, Lindamor, the world is much mistaken in both your humors,
if Hermione's and yours be not so unsuitable, that (to make haste from so nice
a subject) had she justified your expectation of her kindness, you would have
possessed the Person without possessing the Happiness you expected: And might
have found your self, as sensibly disappointed by her Grant, as you were by her
Change.

But I forget, Lindamor, that I resolved, not to insist on Parallels, and
therefore, instead of prosecuting the discourse my Pen has slip't into,
concerning the advantages of Seraphick, compared with ordinary Love; I shall
venture to encourage you to the former, by showing you, that your past
addictednesse to the later, may prove serviceable to you in it: Yes, Lindamor,
I shall not scruple to tell you, that your strong Passion for Hermione, may not
a little facilitate your Devotion, by breaking all the Chains, excepting one,
that fastened your Affection to unsatisfying Objects, and restrained it from
soaring to the sublimest, and by exalting your Passion to a Height fit for
Seraphick flames. For, Love has this of Noble, that it makes us divest our
selves of selfishnesse; slight fortune, quiet, safety, honor, life, and all
our own Concernments, when their coming into Competition with the Loved
partie's Interests, may render their sacrifice acceptable to Her: and to think
Goods or Ills deserve those names, but as they come to us from, or through Her.
You could scarce have learned a better Lesson, even from a much better Master;
for, Love having thus accustomed you, to (what is thought most difficult in
that virtue) the Acts of self-denial, you need almost, but Transfer your
flames from an Inferior, and mistaken, to their True and Noblest Object, and
you will have exalted and refined your Love into Devotion; to the latter, of
which, a sublime Elevarion of the first, is such a disposition, as the having
formerly by looser Aires, and (perchance) wanton Songs, learned to Improve and
to Command ones voice, is to the skill of Singing, those devour Hymns and
heavenly Anthemes, in which the Church-Militant seems ambitious to emulate the
Triumphant, and Echo back the solemn Praises and Hallelujahs of the
Celestial Quire. And, as by Hunting, though (possibly) we follow but some
poor fugitive Hare, or some such trifling game, we gain that Vigor, that
Sufferance, and Agility, that fit us for the Toils, and Military hard-ships,
that are exacted in the pursuit of Glory, and of Empire: so though in Love,
(Devotion's Prentice-ship) the Courted Creature be often inconsiderable enough,
to make our Elections fit to be numbered amongst such, as those that made Love
be painted Blind; yet in the Progress and Conduct of our passions, we contract
such dis-interests and resigned Habitudes, as, being preferred to serve
Celestial Objects, do excellently qualify us for Devotion. And, in effect, a
fervent Love seems little else, then Devotion mis-addrest, where our own very
expressions may serve to disabuse us; For, when you give your Mistress the
style of Goddess, and talk of nothing to her, but Offering up of hearts,
Adoring, Sacrifices, Martyrdomes; does not all this imply, that, though it be
said to her, it is meant to a Divinity: which is so much the true and genuine
Object of men's Love, that we cannot exalt that passion for any other, without
investing it with the Notion and Attributes of God? As Children disclose the
inbred kindness they have for those Persons, by calling the Babies, they most
dote upon, by their dear Mothers, Exodus 32. verse. 4, 5. In the latter of which
it is expressly said, that the Feast was proclaimed, (...), To Jehovah, the
peculiar Name of the true God.
or loved Nurses Names. And as Aaron, and the revolting Jews, by justifying to
themselves their Adoration of the Idols they had set up, by attributing the
Title of God to what they adored, did tacitly acknowledge Adoration to be due
only to the Deity: so, does a Lover by naming what he Worships, a Divinity,
tacitly confess the Deity to be the proper Object, of that highest and
peculiar strain of Worship.

And this truth, Lindamor, for what men call and think, Inconstancy, is nothing
but a Chase of Perfect Beauty, which our Love fruitlessely follows, and seeks
in several Objects, because he finds it not entire in any one; for, Creatures
have but small and obscure fragments of it, which cannot fix nor satisfy an
Appetite, born for, and (though unknowingly) aspiring unto God: who is
proclaimed the true and proper Object of our Love, as well by men's fickleness
to women, as the Angels constancy to Him. Just as the trembling restlesnesse
of the Needle in any but the North point of the Compass, proceeds from, and
manifests its Inclination to the Pole, its Passion for which, both its wavering
and its rest, bear equal witness to. That unsatisfi'dnesse with transitory
fruitions, that men deplore as the Unhappiness of their Nature, is indeed the
Privilege of it; as it is the Praerogative of men, not to care for, or be
capable of being pleased with Whistles, Hobby-horses, and such fond Toys as
Children dote upon, and make the sole objects of their Desires and Joys. And
by this you may, Lindamor, in some degree imagine the unimaginable suavity,
that the fixing of ones Love on God, is able to bless the Soul with, since by
so indulgent a Father, and Competent a Judge, as God himself; the decreed
uncontentingnesse of all other goods is thought richly repaired by its being
but an Aptness, to prove a Rise to our Love's settling there.

And hitherto, my dearest Lindamor, Seraphick Love, by mentioning some of its
Properties, which seem to relate more to the Love it self, then to the divine
Object of it. But I fear you will think, I have too long entertained you with
Considerations, which besides, that they are not altogether the importantest,
that belong to this Discourse; I have been by haste reduced to Pen in the
unaccurate Order, wherein they offered themselves to my thoughts, not the
Method wherein I should have presented them to yours.

And therefore, Lindamor, Devotion to us) than those of ours to him: The former
not only moving God to Kindle in us, but to Cherish and Foment, and, if our
own wilful extinction interpose not, to Crown the latter: for both these
reasons, I say, Lindamor, I doubt not, but you will think it seasonable for me to
proceed, to consider that higher sort of Motives to Devotion; and to evince,
that the several things, which are wont most to Engage and Heighten our
affections, do, in a peculiar and transcendant manner, shine forth, and
constellate in God: That, you know, which enamored you of Hermione, I need not
prove to you, to have been your supposing her full of Loveliness and
Excellencies in her self; and your believing, that the Love she vouchsafed you
was Great, Free, Constant, or Advantageous to you. And that all these
properties do not only eminently exist, but illustriously concur in God, and
in his Love; I must now, Lindamor, (with strong desires of doing it
Prosperously) attempt to manifest.

First then, Lindamor, when (necessitated by a Method, exacted by the nature of
this discourse) I find my self engaged to say something, by way of celebration
of Gods Perfections: I am very sensible, I can but Detract from what I desire
to Praise, and must unevitably appear unable to speak worthily of a Theme, to
which even Seraphims themselves cannot do right. And if, as the Scripture
assures us, those things neither fell under the Senses nor entered the Thoughts
of men, 1 Cor. 2.9.
which God has reserved for those that love him; how ineffable and
incomprehensible must those things be, which he has reserved for himself; the
infinite Superiority of his Nature above all Created Beings, placing a vast
disparity betwixt his greatest communicated Vouchsafements, and his Boundless,
and therefore to creatures Incommunicable, Perfections.

Wonder not therefore, Lindamor, that my weak eyes dare not dwell long upon an
Object, which they cannot steadfastly gaze on long, without being dazzled: And do
not marvel, that I scruple not, to use seeming Hyperbolies in the mention of
perfections, which make the highest Hyperbolies but Seeming ones. Both Gods
Nature and his Word declaring him to be exalted above all blessing and praise,
Neh. 9.5.
If it were seasonable, Lindamor, to entertain our selves but with those
attributes of God, which are Legible or Conspicuous in the Creation, We might
there discern the admirable Traces of such immense Power, such unsearchable
Wisdom, and such exuberant Goodness as may justly ravish us to an amazement
at them and admiration of them. And I must needs acknowledge, Lindamor, that
when with bold Telescopes, I survay the old and newly discovered Stars and
Planets that adorn the upper Region of the World; and when with excellent
Microscopes I discern in otherwise invisible Objects the unimitable Subtlety of
Nature's Curious Workmanship; And when, in a word, by the help of Anatomicall
Knives, and the light of Ch^micall Furnaces, I study the Book of Nature, and
consult the Glosses of Aristotle, Epicurus, Paracelsus, Harvey, Helmont, and
other learned Expositors of that instructive Volumne; I find my self oftentimes
reduced to exclaim with the Psalmist, Ps. 104.24
How manifold are thy works, O Lord? in wisdom have thou made them all. And
when I have been losing my self in admiration of what I Understand but enough
to Admire, and not to Comprehend; I am often obliged to interrupt or break off
my Enquiries by applying to the works of Gods Creation, the Expression used by
St. Paul of those of his Providence, O the Depth of the Riches both of the
Wisdom and knowledge of God! Romans 21.33.
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways untraceable: And
Exclamations of this Nature may the attentive Consideration of any other of
Gods Attributes deservedly produce. But having elsewhere treated of this
subject in a Peculiar Discourse: I shall now, Lindamor, invite you to consider
with me how much You, and those that are Conscious to their having Virtue
enough in themselves to make them prize it in others, are in Love with Cato,
Scipio, and those other Hero's that did enoble and almost exceed mankind upon
the bare knowledge of their virtues; although, from them we derive no
Personal advantage (their Death having numerous ages preceded our Nativity.)
Since then we pay so much disinterest-Love to some few faint and ill refined
Virtues, that never did profit us: how much on such a Score, and at that Rate,
should we Love him, who so possesses All perfections, that each of his
Perfections is Infinite? Were you and I our own Creators, Lindamor, and wholly
Independent upon God, without either Need or Hope to taste his Bounty; his
native Excellencies, and what he has done for others, should surely ravish us
and enamour us of Him. Though his Benefits to us did not entitle him to our
Love, his Essence (the Source and only Motive of those Benefits) would give him
a right to it; and though we owed him naught for what We are, we yet should owe
him Love for what He is. He is that glorious Sun From whom (as beams) all
created-perfections flow, and In whom they all concenter. To omit God's
Sovereign Majesty (which places him so high, that but to own for him so
familiar and levelling an affection as Love much more to expect to be re-lov'd
by him, were not the least saucy Presumption man could be guilty of, did not
his own Commands make it a Duty.) Not to insist on this, I say; Let us a while
consider that proper and peculiar attractive of Love, his Loveliness; which is
such, that, did we but once see it, all Creature-competitions (even we being
Judges) would then be as Impossible, as they are now Unjust. In the fifth
Evangelist's prophetic Vision, Esa. 6.7.
the Scraphims themselves, those glorious Ornaments of the Celestial
Hierarchy, are represented as covering their faces in Gods presence, either
blushing at their Comparative Deformity, or unable to sustain the unqualifi'd
Spl^edor of so Divine a Brightness; whence perhaps it became of old the Jewish
fashion (as some frequent Expressions in their Writers intimate) when they went
to Pray, to Veil their head and faces: (though now I have in their Synagogues
seen them only cover their heads, not their faces, with those white Garments
they wear, at their public devotions:) And, Lindamor, if Moses's face by but a
few days converse with God, reflected such a light as dazzled mortal eyes; and
if his swift posts, the Angels, when sent on Errants to us here on Earth, even
when they may be supposed (if I may so speak) to wear their Traveling
Clothes, and stoop as much to our frailty in the Form, as in the Region, they
appear to us in, do, in spite of that darkning Condescension, so much
Transcend all Objects here on Earth, that the Scripture often mentions, That
even those that Aspired to imitate their Virtues, were confounded at their
Presence: And if, in this vailing Habit they appear so Glorious, that their
thus disadvantag'd Beauty is made the Complement and Hyperbole of that Quality:
what may we, or rather what may we not, conclude of God himself, of whom the
Scripture says, He that planted the Ear shall he not hear? Psalm. 94.9.
He that formed the Eye shall he not see? That is, he that imparts a faculty or
an Excellence to the Creature, shall not he himself much more eminently
possess it? And in effect, the most unblemished Created Beauties are but faint
Shadows (or trulier, Foyles) of His. Those drops of Prettiness scatteringly
sprinkled amongst the Creatures were designed to defaecate and exalt our
Conceptions, not to inveagle or deteine our Passions; for, God did never intend
them to terminate our Love, but only by our Eyes to exalt our Faith above them,
and by the beauties, our sight can apprehend, to raise us to a Confidence, that
there is in their Author more than we can either see, or comprehend. 2 King.
2.11.
Like Elijahs fiery Chariots, though they be Pure and Bright and consist of the
refulgentest materials, they are meant by God but to carry us up to him. And
as the Patriarch's Steward was furnished with so sumptuous an Equipage, Genesis
24.10.53.
to court Rebecca, not for himself, but for Isaac, so all the Loveliness
imparted to the Creature, is lent it, but to give us some more enlarged
conceptions of that vast Confluence and Immensity that exuberates in God. To
make the rightest use of Fadeing beauties, you must consider God and them, as
you were wont to do your Mistrisse's Picture, and its Crystal Cover: where
though that native Glass were pure and Lovely, and very richly edged; yet to
gaze on it, was not the Chiefest Business of your Eye; nor did you in it
Terminate your sight, but greedily look through and Beyond it, upon th'd adored
Image, that solid vail betrayed. Methinks, Seraphick and our common Lovers
behold exterior beauties with a Difference resembling that, where with
Children and Astronomers consider Galileo's Optic Glasses, (with one of which
Telescopioes, that I remember I saw at Florence, he merrily boosted that he
had, Trovato la Corte a Gione) which the one prizes most, for what they Appear;
the other, for what they Discover. For Children contenting themselves to wonder
at the Length, and fall in Love with the Workmanship, and Gildings of the Tube,
do thus but Gaze Upon them, whereas Astronomers Look Through them, and, scarce
taking notice of the unusual Ornaments, or the shape, employ them to find out
unknown Lights in the Sky, and to descry in Heaven bright Stars, unseen
before, and other Celestial Novelties and Beauties.

I deny not, Lindamor, that God has been pleased to adorn some of his Creatures
with Hints and Impresses, as well of His Loveliness, as his other
Excellencies; But they do much more faintly and imperfectly resemble him, than
the Counterfeit Sun, we sometimes see in a Cloud, aemulates the True one, by
whose Refracted or reflected Beams, some acute modern Naturalists suppose it
to be produced. For though, this Derivative Sun shine with a not-inconsiderable
Luster, comparatively to the rest of the dark Cloud it ennoble's, yet is it not
only as much inferior to the true Sun in Brightness, as in Height; but it
enjoyes alone, a Precarious, Dependent, and almost Momentany Being, which often
it loses in a very Short time, and never attains to preserve a very Long one.
And therefore, to neglect that supreme Resplendency, that shines in God, for
those dimm Representations of it, that we so dote on in the Creatures, is as
praeposterous and absured; as it were for a Persian to offer his Sacrifice to a
Parhelion, (as the Greeks call that Meteor) instead of adoring the Sun. And
certainly, Lindamor, if our dim sight, like that of the Prophet's Servant, 2
King 6.27.
who saw the Mountain near Dothan covered with Horses and Chariots of Fire,
were priviledg'd to discern Invisible Objects; our ravished Eyes would behold
Loveliness enough in God, to make us incessantly exclaim, in the Language of
the Prophet; How great is his Goodness, Zach. 9.17
and how great his Beauty? Agreeably whereunto, we may observe, That as the
Lodestone, does at tract most powerfully the brightest Needles, made of the
purest Steel, and those that most approach it; so Angels, who of all Created
Beings enjoy the uncloudedst light and the most clear knowledge of their Maker,
do love him with a Constancy so fixed, that in five thousand and some odd
Centuries of years, (efflux't since the Creation) they could never see any
thing, either in God, or out of Him, Capable to seduce them to a Change. Gods
Loveliness, (which is such, that the eternal Fruition of himself, Create
sev'n His faelicity) is like rare Music, which though it do delight all its
partakers, the knowing'st Artists still do highliest value, and are most
ravished with; The Transports it produces, being proportioned to the degrees
of the Skillfulnesse of its admirers. The Apostate Spirits indeed deserted
their first Station, not frighted thence by any blemish they descried in God;
but probably fell by a saucy affectation of a Parity, and (as Divines tell us)
a Sacrilegious aspiring to Perfections, which they were criminally unable to
behold, without wishing them their own. And for their present separation from
God, it is their Curse and Punishment: And I shall ingenuously confess to you,
Lindamor, that by the advantageous Idea's I entertained of Gods Perfections, I
have been sometimes inclined to think, that the reason, why God tells Moses,
Exodus 33.20.
Thou can not see my face, for there shall no man see me, and live, might be,
that (as Transcendent Objects destroy the Sense) so Lovely and Glorious a
sight, (whose Continuance shall make our Happiness in Heaven) would let in
Joys, and would create Desires, too mighty for frail Mortality to sustain; the
ravished Soul, being shown such Game, as That, would bate so eagerly, that she
would break those Leaches that tie her to the Body, (and thereby, hinder her
flight to that wished union) and the glad Heart, (too narrow a Receptacle for
so much Joy) to make room for such Guests, would stretch unto a Rupture.
Longing or Joy, have sometimes singly reached Degrees, that have made them
Fatal; And why then should their Union in such Extremes, be thought incapable
of producing the like effect? Nor is it perchance more a Privilege of the next
Life, that we shall then see God; than, that we shall survive that glorious
Sight: which is too dazzling an Object for Mortal Eyes, till (to use St. Paul's
Expression) our mortal Part have put on Immortality. 1 Cor. 15.54.
But I must no longer lose my self in a Theme, on which it is so easy to speak
Much, and so impossible to say Enough. If I be not very much mistaken, they are
so; who presume to give us satisfactory Definitions of Gods Nature, which we
may perhaps more safely define, by the Impossibility of its being accurately
defined; And I must confess, I do the least expect the best Description of the
Divine Nature from those, that are most forward, to take upon them to explicate
it: For our Words being but the Representations of our Notions, and they being
necessarily Finite, as our Being; few men are (methinks) more likely to be
mistaken in the Nature of what is Infinite, (and consequently of Gods
Attributes) than those that think Descriptions can comprize it. Nor will an
Assiduity and Constancy of our Speculations herein relieve us; For too fixed a
Contemplation of Gods Essence, does but the more Confound us. As I remember,
St. Paul tells the Jews, Act. 22.6, 11.
that he could not see for the Glory of that light, that shone from Heaven
about him at his Conversion. And this the famous Simonides experimentally
found, who being ask't, What God was, took a days time to consider of it;
after, being called upon for his answer, he desired two days longer to think
upon it; and, when they were expired, demanded four days longer; and so
continued a great while, each time increasing his Demands for Respite: till,
being pressed to give an Account of such a Dilatory way of proceeding, he
ingenuously acknowledged, that the longer he Considered Gods Nature, the less
he Comprehended it. And indeed, Experience teaches us, that they, that gaze
stedfastliest on the noon days Sun, can least of all discern what it is,
being rather Dazzled, then Instructed by so confounding an Object; Nor is it
only, Lindamor, a task of too great Difficulty for a mere man, perfectly to
Explicate that Incomprehensible Nature of God, to which nothing but his own
Infinite Understanding can be adequate. But, methinks, even to Celebrate Gods
perfections, cannot be soberly attempted without a very deep sense of a man's
own Unworthiness and Incapacity. For, the same Excellencies that furnish us
with Praises, do transcend them. And the fruitfulness of the Subject may as
well deterr, as invite our Pens; since, as we are sure we shall not Want Theme,
so we are certain, we cannot Dignifie it. And for my part, Lindamor, though my
Subject exacted of me, the Praises I have endeavored to ascribe to God, yet I
should have thought it requisiite, rather to decline the Laws of Method; than
be reduced to derogate from what I would extol: if the Necessity of Detracting
from God's Perfections, were not equal to that of Mentioning them; and if that
Necessity were not as Glorious to God, as greater Praises than we are able to
ascribe him, could be. But, Lindamor, having thus done right to my Method,
though I could not to my Theme, I shall only invite you to imitate with me
those Persians, that adored the Sun, though the light he lent them served but
to make the source of it admired, and not to pry into his abstruse Essence with
it. And though I might say much more concerning God's Perfections, I must
henceforth think Silence the properest Language I can now employ; for it is
Silence that best expresses our wonder: and, sure, wonder is never more
seasonable, then when God is the Object; A prostrate Veneration being the
safest Apprehension of Him, that is Incomprehensible.

Having thus considered, Lindamor, how fit an Object God is,

But for the first Attribute, we have assigned his Love (the Greatness of it)
it being a General property, diffused through all the rest, and conspicuous in
them, it requires not to be treated of apart.

We shall then proceed to the Freeness or unmeritednesse of God's love; To
believe which, strangely vast, we need but consider, that we so little could at
first Deserve his love, that he loved us even before we had a being: And our
Felicity, in his Decrees, preceded our Existence in this world. God loved you
numerous ages before you were; and his Goodness is so entirely its own Motive,
that even your Creation (since when alone, you can pretend to merit his love)
is the Effect of it. This Benefit alone were sufficient, to render God the
Object of our Love, though We were that of his Aversion. For (as the Persians
adored the Sun, even when it schorch'd them) we esteem our selves obliged to
Love and honor our Parents, in spite of their being wicked and unkind; though
they be but God's Instruments in our Production, and made us what we were born,
not Arbitrarily, but in virtue of his Ordination. But God, to confer on us, in
the most excellent and endearing manner, the blessing promised to his ancient
People, when he vouchsafed to assure them, Hos 14.4.
that he would love them freely, was pleased to love us, not only when we were
not at all, but when we were his Enemies: If when we were enemies (says St.
Romans 5.10
Paul) we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, etc. Our inexistence
indeed was a condition, wherein nothing in us was capable of being a Motive of
God's Love: but our Enmity proceeded further, and made us Worthy of his
Detestation; as if his Love were nothing, unless it Vanquished Obstacles, as
well as Wanted Motives. This gave the Apostle a just cause to say, Romans 5.8.
that God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners
Christ dyed for us: That is, when we wanted all Motives to invite his Love,
unless our very Want of them should pass for one. And how did God express
his Love unto us? Even by the Gift of the Son of his love; For God so loved the
world, Joh. 3.16.
(says the divine Token of his Love) that he gave his only begotten Son. And
how did that Son love it? He (says the Apostle) being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation,
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8.
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross. That is, That he would love at no
less Rate than Death; and from the supereminent height of Glory, stoopt and
abas'd himself to the sufferance of the extremest of Indignities, and sunk
himself to the bottom of Abjectednesse, to exalt our condition to the contrary
Extreme. Isa. 53.5.
He was wounded ^or our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed,
says the Prophet. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8.9.
that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through
his poverty might be made rich, says the Apostle. Men having displeased God,
and consequently forfeited all right and Natural Possibility to happiness;
even whilst they completed the Forlornnesse of their condition, by the
Lethargy of not being sensible of it, and were as careless to seek means of
recovery, as they had been unable to devise them of themselves: Even then, his
restless Love would never be at quiet, till it had set his Omnipotence on
work, to contrive Expedients, and find out a way to reconcile his Justice and
his Mercy, in reconciling Sinners to Himself. And this merciful Design, by
the Incarnation of his Son, he prosecuted in a way so Worthy of Himself, and so
Advantageous to us, that our just wonder at it may keep us from having any, to
find that, as St. Peter informs us, the very Angels (prompted questionless, by
a Religious Curiosity) ardently desire to look into those Divine Mysteries. 1
Pet. 1.12.
I find it hotly disputed amongst Divines, (not only betwixt the Socinians,
and the Orthodox, but betwixt Orthodox and Orthodox) Whether or no God could,
without violating his Justice, have devised any other Course for the Expiation
of Sin, than the Passion and Death of Christ. But, without venturing to
Determine, whether or no God Could, to Redeem us, have chosen any other way, We
may safely think, that he Has chosen the most obliging and most endearing way,
displaying in this Divine Manner of rescuing us, the severest Justice, and the
highest Mercy; the greatest Hatred of Sin, and the greatest Love to Sinners:
Since by those unequald' and unvaluable Sufferings, to which he delivered up
for us that Son, who is so near unto him, that he truly said, I and the Father
are one, He at once manifested both how much he Hated Sin, which he so heavily
Punished in the Person, he most Loved, though that Surety but adopted it, to
free men from the Insupportable vengeance of it; and How much he Loved Sinners
by giving up what he so loved for a Ransom of those, that were guilty of what
he so hated. And therefore our Savior, though he did such great things to
satisfy the unbelieving and contumacious Jews of his being their promised
Messiah, would not decline death to convince them; And, though he had not
seldom done so much to make himself the Object of their Faith, would not be
invited from the Cross, though the chief Priests and Scribes themselves said,
Mat. 23.7.
at his Crucifixion, Let him him now come down from the Cross, and we will
believe on him: And Christ, to convince the World of their unablenesse to
emerge and recover out of that deep Abyss, wherein the Load of sin (which in
Scripture is called a weight) had precipitated fallen Man, Heb. 12.1.
came not into the World until well nigh 4000. years of sickness had made the
Disease Desperate, and the cure almost Hopeless. So inveterate an obstinacy at
once widening the Distance betwixt God and Man, and proclaiming the latter's
Disability, to find by his own wisdom Expedients of Reunion: Thus Christ
healed and dispossessed a dumb person, Mat. 9.32.
who was able to make entreaties but by the Disability of pronouncing them; and
might truly say to the secure World, Isa. 65.1.
I am found of them that sought me not: And when our Savior Was come into the
wretched World, of all the numerous Miracles recorded in the Gospel, he scarce
did any for his own private Relief: And to show, that, as he endured his
Sorrows for our sakes, Isa. 53.5.
that by his stripes we might be healed; so were the Joys, he tasted in
Relation to Us. We read not (which is highly observable) in the whole Gospel
that ever he Rejoiced but once; and that was, when his returned Disciples
informed him, that they had Victoriously chased Devils and diseases out of
oppressed Mortals, Luk: 10.
and that by his Authority men had been dispossessed of both the Temptor and
Punishment of Sin. He converst among his Contemporaries with Virtues as well
attesting, what he was, as Prophecies or Miracles could do; and, to teach Man,
how much he valued Him above those Creatures, that man makes his Idols, he
often altered and suspended the Course of Nature, for man's Instruction, or his
Relief, and reversed the Laws, established in the Universe, to engage Men to
obey those of God, Mat. 12:24.
By doing miracles so numerous and great, that the Jews Unbelief may be almost
counted one. Yet were those wonders wrought for a Generation that ascribed them
to the Devil, Mar. 3.12.
and Returned him with so unexampled an Ingratitude, that it is not the Least of
his wonders that he would vouchsafe to work Any of them for such blasphemous
wretches: who were indeed, as some of the latter Jews have too truly styled
themselves, in relation to their fathers, Chometz ben ya yin, Vinegar the Child
of Wine, a most degenerate Offspring of Holy Progenitors. He suffered so much
for them, that made him do so, that he suffered the addition of Misery of being
thought to suffer Deservedly, and he was numbered with the Transgressors. Isa.
53.12.
And though he Lived as much a Miracle as any he Did, yet did his condition
sometimes appear so Despicable and forlorn, that men could not know his Deity,
but by his Goodness, which was too Infinite not to be long Incommunicably to
God. And though 'twere once a saying of our Savior's, Greater Love has no man
than this, Joh. 15.13
that a man lay down his life for his Friends; Yet is not, what is said of the
Love here mentioned, to be understood of Love Indefinitely or generally
considered, but only of the single Acts or Expressions of a man's love to his
friends Compared betwixt themselves. And so the alleged passage seems to mean
but this, that among the single Acts of kindness to a man's friends, there is
not any One more highly expressive of a real and sincere Love, than to part
with ones Life for their sakes. This Text therefore would not be indefinitely
applied to the affection of Love it self, as if it could not possibly be
greater then is requisite to make a man Content or Willing to dye for his
friends; for he that sacrifices besides his Life, his Fortune also, his
Children and his Reputation, does thereby express more Love to them than he
could do by parting with his Life only for them, And he that is forward to dye
for those that Hate him, or, at least, know him not; discloses a more
plentiful and exuberant Stock of Love, then he that does the same kindness,
but for those that Love him. And thus our Savior would be understood, unless
we would say, that he Out-practis'd what he Taught: for, he came to lay down
His life even for his Enemies, and (like the kind Balsome Tree, whose
healing-wounds weep Sovereign Balm to Cure those that made them) he refused
not to Dye for those that Killed him, and Shed his blood for some of them that
Spilt it. And so little was his injured Love to the ungrateful World
discouraged or impaired by the savage Entertainment, he met with in it, that,
after he had suffered from wretched men, for whose sakes he left Heaven to
become capable of suffering such barbarous Indignities, as might have made bare
Punishments appear Mercy, and even Cruelty it self seem no more than Justice;
when I say, to hope for so much as his Pardon were Presumption; he was pleased
to Create Confidence of no less than his Love, A virtue. Nor think it,
Lindamor, impertinent to our present Theme, that I insist so much on what
Christ has Done and Suffered for us, since he himself informs us; See also
Joh. 14. v. 9, 10, 11.
that He and his Father are one. And some of the Texts already mentioned have
taught us, that 'twas an effect also of God's love to the World, Joh. 3.16.
That He gave his only begotten Son to Redeem it; and, Romans 5.8.
That God commends his Love toward us in that, while we were yet Sinners,
Christ dyed for us. Wherefore I shall without Scruple proceed to observe to
you, That so free is Christ's Dilection, that the grand condition of our
Felicity is our Belief, that he is disposed to make us Happy on Terms, not
only so Honorable to him, but so Advantageous to us, that, I was about to
say, That possibly Faith it self would scarce be exacted, as Requisite to our
happiness, but that the Condition does increase the Benefit, by vouchsafing us
bold and early Anticipations of it: For, Heb. 11.1
Faith being (as the Apostle terms it) the substance of things hoped for, and
evidence (or, conviction) of things not seen, wafts our Joys to this side of
the Grave, bows Heaven down to us, till our freed Spirits can soar up to
Heaven; and does us such a service, as the Jewish Spies did to their
Countrymen, Numb. 13 23, 27.
by bringing them over, to this side Jordan into the Wilderness, some of the
pleasant and delicious Fruits of the blessed Land of Promise. I said, Lindamor,
that Faith was the grand Condition required, in God's free Grant of Eternal
Life. Not that I would ascribe any thing to a Lazy, Speculative, and Barren
Faith, in opposition to that lively and active one, which is called by the
Apostle, (...), Gal. 5.6.
Faith operating by Love; Jam. 2.26.
since I am informed by St. James, that the Divorce of Faith and Works is as
Destructive to Religion, as that of Soul and Body is to Life: But that I was
willing to mind you, that though true Faith (which cries like Rachel, Give me
children or else I die) be ever the pregnant Mother of good Works; Genesis 30.
yet are not those Works the Cause, but the Effects and Signs of God's first
Love to us, (however afterward the Children may Nurse their Parents.) As,
though the Needle's pointing, at the Poles be, by being an Effect, an Argument
of its having been Invigorated by the Loadstone, or received Influence from
some other Magnetic Body; yet is not that Respect unto the North the Cause,
but the Operation of the Iron's being drawn by the attractive Mineral. Thou
art good, Psalm. 119.68.
and do good, says the Psalmist to his Maker. The Greatness of his
Goodness is that which makes it Ours; nor does He do us good, because that We
are good, but because He is liberally so; as the Sun shines on Dunghills, not
out of any Invitation his beams find there, but because it is his Nature, to be
diffusive of his Light; yet with this difference, that whereas the Sun's
Bounty, by being rather an Advantage to us than a Favor, deserves our Joy, and
not our Thanks, because his Visits are made designlesly, and without any
particular intention of address, (by such a bare Necessity of Nature, as that
which makes Springs flow out into Streams, when their Beds are too narrow to
contain the renewed water, that does incessantly swell the exuberant Sources:)
God, on the contrary, for being Necessarily kind, is not less Freely or
Obligeingly so, to you or me; for, though some kind of Communicativenesse be
Essential to his Goodness, yet his Extension of it without Himself, and his
Vouchsafeing it to this or that particular Person, are purely Arbitrary. To
omit his Love to the numberless Elect Angels; the strict Relations betwixt
the persons of the Blessed Trinity, supplying God with internal Objects, which
employed his Kindness before the Creation, and Himself being able to allow his
Goodness the Extent of Infinity for its Diffusion. But (having glanced at this
only by the By) we may yet further admiringly observe, That, whereas men
usually give freeliest, where they have not given before, and make it both the
Motive and the Excuse of their desistance from Giving any more, That they have
Given already: Gods bounty has a very different Method; for he uses to give,
because he Has given, and, that he May give. Consonantly to which, when the
revolting Israelites had broken the Contents, whilst Moses was bringing them
the Tables of the LAW; and had thereby provoked the Incensed Given of it, to
thoughts of a sudden Extirpation of so ungrateful and rebellious a People, we
may observe, That, whereas God, as unwilling to remember his former Goodness
to them, speaking to Moses, calls them, Thy People which thou broughtest out of
the land of Egypt: Exodus 32.7.
Moses, on the other side, to engage God to the new Mercy of a Pardon,
represents to God his former Mercy to them, and calls them God's People, which
he brought forth out of the land of Egypt, with great power, verse. 11.
and a mighty hand. And so conspicuous in the Eternal Son was this Property of
the Merciful Father, that when sick Lazarus's Sisters implored his Rescue for
their exspiring Brother, the Motive they employ, and which Prospered their
addresses, was, Lord, behold, (not, Joh. 11.3:
he who loves thee, but) he whom thou love, is sick. And as he takes the
first Inducements of his Bounty from Himself; so do his former Favors both
invite and give rates to his succeeding Blessings. And there is reason for it:
for his pure love being all the Merit, by which Man can pretend to the Effects
of his Bounty; it is but just, that the degree of his Love should proportion
those Favors, which it is our only Title to; and that God's Liberality should
as well afford Measures as Motives to it self.

Nor is Gods love less Dis-interess'd, Col 1.12.
fit us for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. We being made (as St. Peter
speaks) Partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through Lust; So that these
things, wherein the noblest of the Philosophers placed their Faelicity, serve
but to Qualify and Prepare Christians for that Higher Blessedness, that is
reserved by God for those that love Him; and cannot, but be heightened and
endeared by the Value, which Graces and Virtues had given men on Earth for such
a Noble and Rational kind of Happiness, as is apportion'd to them in Heaven.
What ends can he have upon us, whose Goodness and his Blessedness are both
Infinite? He was unconceivably Happy (in his own Self-sufficiency) before the
Creatures had a Being; and sure that felicity that needed not Themselves to be
supreme, needs nothing, that they can Do. Nor was it his Indigence, that forced
him to make the World, thereby to make new Acquisitions, but his Goodness,
that pressed him to manifest, and to impart his Glory; and the goods, which he so
over-flowingly abounds with. Witness his Suspension of the World's Creation,
which certainly had had an earlier Date; were the Deity capable of Want, and
the Creatures of Supplying it. St. Paul in his Epistle to Timothy, styles God,
1 Timothy 1.11.
(...) which we translate, The Bessed God, but may perhaps more properly be
rendered, The happy God: and elsewhere in the same Epistle, he truly calls him,
The Happy, 1 Timothy 6.15.
as well as Only Potentate. God (says the Apostle) That made the World and
all Things therein, Act. 27.24 25, and 28.
seeing that He is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not etc. As though He
needed any thing, seeing that He gives to all, Life and Breath, and all
Things. And, In Him, we live, and move, and have our being. And indeed, so
coherent in the mind of a mere Man, that does but Consider and Understand the
Import of his own Notions, is the belief of Gods Happiness, to that of His
Being, that I remember the Epicurean, Lucretius himself, even in that impious
passage, where he denies divine Providence; and in a seeming, but injurious
Complement, would under the pretense of Easing God, Deprive Him of the
Government of the World; does yet confess, that the Divine nature must
necessarily enjoy a supreme and endless Tranquillity, adding, (to bring this
to our present purpose) that it is, -- Privata dolor omni, privata periclis;
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri. Whereby he acknowledges, That
from all griefs and dangers of them freed,
Rich in it self, it has of us no need.
Or, if you will have him speak of the gods in the Plural, like a heathen
Poet, that Far above griefs and danger, those blessed Powers,
Rich in their Native Goods, need none of ours.


A much Nobler Poet tells us, That the Earth is the Lord's, Psalm 24.1
and the fulness thereof, the World, and they that dwell therein; Agreeably
whereunto, Prove. 26.10.
that Great God that formed all things, (as, in our Translation the Scripture
calls him) says in one of the Psalms, If I were hungry, Ps. 50.12.
I would not tell thee, for the World is mine, and the fulness thereof. His
Ubiquity excludes all wishes of Remoove, by making his Essence incapable of
Exclusion; For Whither should he desire to Transport himself, that is Every
where, and can wish himself in no place, where he is not already? His
Sufficiency is such, that he can see no goods, but what he Gives, or Has (or
rather both bestows and possesses) his Plenty being so unexhausted a spring of
goods, that his liberality does less impoverish God, than the Suns light does
him; or imparted knowledge, impairs the Teacher's stock. And therefore, though
St. James do very justly call God, That Father of Lights, Jam. 1.17.
who is the bestower of every good and every perfect Gift; Jam. 2.23.
yet the Friend of God, (as the Scripture calls Abraham) and that Royal
Priest, Heb. 7. per totum.
(whom the Writer to the Hebrews teaches us to have been so illustrious a Type
of Him, whom he calls The high Priest of our profession) do both of them in the
same Chapter style him the Possessour of Heaven and Earth. Heb. 3.1.
Genesis 14.18, 22.
No, no, God needs not beg From, or covet, In the Creatures shallow streams,
those goods, of which he not only Has, but Is the Source. Our greatest
Services to our Creator must be to Discharge our selves, not to Advantage him,
nor as thinking to add any thing to a Felicity, which were not Infinite, could
it admit Increase; Our highest Performances, though they be Dues, amount not
unto Tributes, but are rather like those pepper Corns of Rent, which
Freeholders pay, not with hope or with intent to enrich their Landlord, but
to acknowledge, that they hold all from him. When we admire the Sun, our Seeing
of his light does not Increase it, it makes it not Greater, but only it makes
it Ours; and when we turn away or shut our eyes, that glorious Planet suffers
no Eclipse, and is not at all darkn'd or impaired, nor does He thereby lose his
light, but We: The Easiness of the application requires, and excuses its
Omission. If thou sinnest (says Elihu in Job) what do thou against him? if
thou be righteous, Job 35.6, 7, 8.
what give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thy wickedness may
hurt a man, as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son of man. In
effect, the wicked's spite against God, is but like a mad man's running his head
against a wall, that leaves the Wall unshaken, but dashes his own Brains out.
God inhabits a Felicity (as well as Light) inaccessible to all inferior
attempts: His sovereign Tranquillity is so sublimely placed, that it is above
the reach of all Disquieting Impressions; and, like the Stars, that feel not
the diseases, their inauspicious Influence produces, He does not Resent the
Torments, he Inflicts. Gods justice is no less Essential to him, then his
Mercy; Witness that, (the numbers of the Saints, and the Reprobates
considered) thousands fall Sacrifices to the severer Attribute, for one that
proves Capable of the milder. He said, Exodus 14.17, 18.
he would get himself honor upon Pharaoh, and all his Host; when he designed
their ruin in the Red Sea: and Moses said, Ex. 15.1.
He has Triumphed gloriously in effecting it. And in Ezekiel he says, Behold
I am against thee, Ezekiel. 28.22.
O Sidon, and I will be glorified in the midst of thee, and they shall know
that I am the Lord, when I shall have executed my judgments in her, and shall
be sanctified in her. Thus, when a Flash of Gods Indignation (kindled by that
strange fire, they presumed to offer before him) had blasted the two
presumptuous Sons of Aaron, God is said To have been sanctified in them, Levit.
10.3.
that come nigh him, and to have been glorified before all the people; such
eminent and exemplary Instances of Severity, manifesting him to be so Holy in
his Laws, and so Concerned for them; That even the Ministers of his Altars
shall not violate them with Impunity, Heb. 12.29.
but find Him (what the Writer to the Hebrews calls him) A consuming fire; Who
will be Glorified before all his people, either by the Obedience of those that
approach him, or by their Destruction: So to evidence, that God can derive
Satisfaction as well from the Exercise of his provoked Justice, as from that of
his for ward Mercy; The sacred Orator uses this remarkable Antanaclasis, Deuteronomy.
18.63.
And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you good,
and multiply you; so will the Lord rejoice over you to destroy you, and bring
you to naught. Thus, though it be truly said of God by the Prophet Jeremiah,
that he does not afflict willingly, Lam. 3.33
nor grieve the children of men: And therefore the determined Consumption of
the whole Land, which our Bibles English, God's work, Isa. 28.21.
his strange work; other Translators render, Opus alienum saum: Yet when the
Sins of incorrigible offenders are grown to that provoking Height, that his
Mercy intercedes no more, to avert or suspend the inflictions of his Justice;
then how much he can satisfy himself in destroying those, that would not be
preserved, may be guessed at by that formidable Expression in Ezekiel; where
having foretold what havoc the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence should
make, amongst the intractable and dispersed Israelites, he adds, (as a kind of
(...)) Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, Ezekiel. 13.5.
and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted. The
Houlings of the Damned as well sound forth his praises, as do the Hallelujahs of
the Saints; they both do sing to him an everlasting Canticle of praise; only
in this great Consort of his whos^ Intelligent Creation, the designlesl^
conspiring Voices are as Differing, a^ the Conditions of the respective
Singers. Hell's darkness does as well contribute to God's Glory, as Heaven's
Eternal Splendor: As Shadows, judiciously placed, do no less praise the
Painter, than do the livelier and brighter Colors. And as when the Earth does
send black, noisome, and sulphurous Exhalations up toward the Sky; alas, they
reach not Heaven nor discompose the Spheres; but all the Storms and Thunders
they produce, fall on that Globe they came from, and there do all their
mischief* So, the wicked may Wrong God indeed, yet do they really Harm but
themselves, by all their greatest sins, which trouble him chiefly, but because
they necessitate Him to punish them: for the transgressions, that do most
Provoke God, do him not the least harm. An impious person may (as Elihu lately
informed us) hurt a man, as himself is; not that supreamly blessed Deity: the
Result of whose Infinite Perfections is a resembling Happiness, which is as
inseparable from Him, as his Essence. Our offenses may derogate from his
Accessionall Glory, not from his Essential Faelicity; or rather the most
desperate Sinners, by their greatest Crimes, can but Change the Attribute they
should bring honor to, and but oppose the glorifying of his Goodness, to
occasion the glorifying of his Justice; Since he will be infallibly glorified,
soon or late, either by men's actions, or their sufferings; by their Practice of
Duties, or Punishment for Sin. Thus you see, how little God is beholden to
you for your declining Hell: Nor will the score be very much increased by your
addresses and attempts for Heaven. Can a man, Job 22.2, 3.
(says Eliphaz) be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable
unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or,
is it gain unto him that thou make thy ways perfect? Congruously to which
sense the Psalmist says, Ps. 16.2.
My Goodness extends not to Thee; The fire that we kindle on God's altars,
heats and enlightens Us, but warms not Heaven at so distant a remove, nor is
wanted in the Sun's residence. We have all the Redolence of the Perfumes and
Incense, we burn upon his Altars; the Smoke does Vanish ere it can reach the
Sky, and whilst it is undisperst, but cloud's, and but Obscures it: Alas, our
Best Performances are as useless Services to God, as the Heir's bringing Wax
to his departing Father is to him; which adds not any thing to the rich man's
store, and is by him desired and accepted, only to Sea^ away a Fortune to his
Son. Though therefore it be true, that God is Pleased with our performances,
yet is that Welcome he vouchsafes to give them, so far from enabling us by
them, to Requite his Love, that it increases the Unrequitednesse of it; Since
he is delighted with them, as they afford him just Rises to reward them. How
far from Mercenary is then Gods Bounty? since he accepts our Acknowledgments of
his former blessings, (chiefly), to make them Opportunities of conferring fresh
ones; as good old Isaac desired his Sons venison, that from the rellishing of
that savory meat, he might take an opportunity to bless him.

And, own, (nor, Heaven knows, all that neither); and both the Will and Power
to serve Him are his, upon so just and many Scores, that we are unable to
Retribute, unless we do Restore; and all the Duties we can pay our Maker, are
less properly Requitals than Restitutions. When David and his Officers had
offered toward the Structure of that Magnificent Temple, which they seemed
Ambitious to make a Mansion inferior to Heaven only; the King himself gave
three thousand Talents of Gold, and seven of refined Silver: and the Heads of
the People, five Thousand Talents, (besides Ten Thousand Drachms of Gold) ten
Thousand Talents of Silver, eighteen thousand of Brass, and a hundred thousand
of Iron, (a Treasure, of which, I scarce remember to have read the like in any
History); besides a number of all manner of precious Stones, capable of
impoverishing the very Indies: They perfumed this noble and unequaled Offering
with a solemn Confession, which perhaps, in God's esteem, was much more
precious than It: Thine, O Lord, (says the Royal Prophet in the name of all)
is the greatness, and the power, 1 Chro 29.11, 1 13, 14, 1 16
and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty; for all that is in heaven and
in earth is thine. Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art exalted as head
above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou reignest over all. And
in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy
glorious Name. But who am I? and what is my people, that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine
own have we given thee. For we are strangers before thee, and soiourners, as
were all our fathers. Our days on earth are as a shadow, and there is none
abiding. O Lord our God, all this store, that we have prepared to build thee an
house, for thy holy name, comes of thine hand, and is all thine own. Romans
11.35, 36.
Who (says the Apostle, in a Question that imports its own Negative) has
first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? For of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things: Nay, even our Love it self, (that
poor-man's Surety and Exchequer, that does pay all his Debts, by supplying him
with the Prerogative to Coin his Desires and Wishes of an Arbitrary value) is
here unable to discharge our Debts: our Love is too much the Effect, to be
capable of being the Recompense of God's. And surely, 1 John 4.10.
the Divine Amorist had cause to say, that herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us. And, as the same Apostle elsewhere speaks, We love
him, because he first loved us. If, 1 John 4.19.
in effect, we look upon the unworthy Contest, betwixt God's Mercies, and most
men's Ingratitude, and but reflect upon the small Return of Love, that the
greatest Disbursments of His, do usually bring home; we cannot but acknowledge,
(as David, in the lately mentioned Scripture, did) that our loving God for his
Favors, is one of the greatest Favors that we love him for; so Unrequitable
is God's love and so Insolvent are we, that that love vastly improves the
Benefit; by which alone we might have pretended to some ability of Retribution;
And so unlimited is this Impotence of ours to recompense or repay God's
Dilection, that it extends to, and fetters our very Wishes. For God enjoys an
Affluence of Felicity, so perfect and entire, that even our Wishes can aim at
nothing for him Worthy of him, unless instructed by what he already actually
Possesses. And the Sense of this same very Impotence, to some of the greatest
Proficients in Seraphick Love, appears not the least uneasy Property of it. It
grieves us sensibly, to see our selves reduced to be only Passive, and
Receivers in this Commerce. We would fain contribute Something, and cannot
always refrain from devoting our Wishes to increase His Happiness, to whom we
owe all Ours. And some Holy Persons (particularly St. Austind) have by the
Exuberance of their Gratitude and Devotion, been transported to make Wishes,
and use Expressions, wherein their Affections had a greater share than their
Reason, and which argued them much better to apprehend, How much God deserved
of them, than How little he needed them But, upon second thoughts, we shall
find, that the cause of our Grief ought to turn it into our Joy, since the
Desires we would frame, aiming at God's being infinitely happy, are all
Fulfilled before they are Conceived, and that in the most Advantageous and
Noblest way: For could God's happiness admit Accession by our accomplished
Wishes, there were then a possibility of his Wanting something to render it
Complete. And sure, It Is a more Supreme felicity, to be by Nature
transcendently above All increase of Blessedness, than to receive the Greatest
that men can wish.

To proceed now to the Constancy of Gods Love: Having loved his own which were
in the World, Joh. 13.1.
he loved them unto the end, says the Evangelist: and when St. James had told
us, That every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, Jam. 1.17.
and comes down from the Father of Lights, he adds (to complete our
Consolation) with whom is no variableness neither shadow of turning. Of his
own Will begat he us of the word of Truth; and, in effect, since God takes the
Motives of his Love to us from Himself, not from Us, the unchangablenesse of
his Nature seems strongly to infer that of his Charity and our Happiness in
it. For, I am the Lord, I change not; Mal. 3.6.
therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed, says God by the last of his
prophets. And in Jerem ah he tells his people, I have loved thee with an
everlasting Love: And what God once said to the generous Josuah, Josh. 1.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, is by the Writer to the Hebrews
applied to believers in general: Heb 13.5
for the gifts and calling of God (says the same Author elsewhere) are without
repentance. Romans 11.29.
Nor do those Crosses that seem due to his Anger, destroy the Immutability of
his Love, since even that Anger is an Effect of it, proceeding from a Fatherly
Impatience of seeing a Spot unwip'd off in the Face, he loves too well to
suffer a blemish in it; and from a Desire to see his Child an Object fit for a
larger Measure of his Kindness; as when we beat the dust out of a Suite we
fancy, we strike not out of Anger, but only to remove that which does sully
it, and hinder us to take that delight in it, which our fondness would be
pleased with a just Cause to find. As many as I love, Rev. 3.19.
I rebuke and chasten, (says our Savior) And, I know, Psalm. 119.75.
O Lord (says the Psalmist) that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness has afflicted me. The Furnace of Affliction being meant but to
Refine us from our earthly drossinesse, and Soften us for the Impression of
Gods own Stamp and Image. The great and merciful Architect of his Church (whom
not only the Philosophers have styled, but the Scripture it self calls, Heb.
11.10.
(...) an artist or Artificer) imploys not on us the Hammer, and the Chizzell,
with an intent to Wound or Mangle us, but only to Square and fashion our hard
and stubborn Hearts into such living Stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.
as may both Grace and Strengthen his heavenly Structure. Nor is God only thus
Constant to his Love, but to his Loveliness. Our female Beauties are usually
as fickle in their Faces as their Minds, and more certainly in the former:
because, though Casualties should spare them, Age brings in a necessity of a
Change, nay, a Decay, leaving our doters upon Red and White, incessantly
perplexed, by the incertainty both of the Continuance of their Mistrisse's
Kindness, and of the lasting of her Beauty (both which are necessary to the
Amorist's Joys and quiet): for, sometimes, when the Mistresse's humor does not
change so much, as to prove guilty of the fault of Inconstancy, her face alters
enough to make her Lovers wish Inconstancy no fault; Or, that she had committed
it, that her Fickleness might afford them the Excuse of Imitation or Revenge:
But in Devotion, we are equally secure from both these Dangers. Since God nor
does desist from blessing us with his Love, nor ceases ever from deserving the
Height of ours: Nor is he only constant in making us the Objects of His Love,
but also in bending and inclining us to make him the Object of Ours: so that he
not only persists in continuing to us both the Offer and the Value of his Love,
but perseveres to give us a receptive Disposition to Welcome it to us, and
reflect it up to Him. The want of this last mercy lost Adam Paradise and Satan,
Heaven; there being to the Objects, that must Secure our love, such a Nature
requisite in reference to our Affections; as Philosophers are pleased to
ascribe to the world's Center in relation to Heavy bodies, which, they teach
us, that Magnetic point has the double Faculty not only to Draw thither, but
to Keep there: for so Untoward and Crossegrain'd are we, in point of our own
Good, and so unfit to procure, and ready to desert, our own Felicity; that
neither its Excellency is a sufficient Motive to carry our addresses to it,
nor its possession a competent Tie, to intercept in us all designs of Revolts
and Divorces: but we must be used as peevish Children are, who (on the one
side) when their mouths are out of taste, and they refuse to take what is
necessary for them, must have it not only Offered them, but Forced upon them,
and be (as it were) Made to receive it; and who (on the other side) must be
restrained from gadding, when the Beauty of the Mansions, they live in, cannot
invite their stay, but they would gladly leave the proudest Palaces,
Architecture can boast, to Run into the Street and Dabble in the Kennel: All
these three properties of Divine Constancy are not ill shadowed in the
operations of the Lodestone, a Mineral, in which I have made too many
Experiments, not to be by you allowed to make some Comparisons to it. For,
first, it never forsakes its Inclinations for the Steel: next, being united to
it, it retains so constantly its Attractive qualities, that it gives not the
Needle any Motive of deserting it: and thirdly, it does never rightly touch the
amorous Steel, without leaving an Impression, which ever after disposes it to a
Conversion to that Magnetic Posture, which best fits it to receive fresh
Influences. To which, let me add this other resemblance, betwixt God's work on
Us, and the Load-stone's on the Iron; that the Kind Stone attracts a Needle to
it, not to Advantage it self by that Union, but to Impart its Virtue to what it
draws. Besides, Absence and Rivalls, those frequent Ruiners of other Lovers
happiness, can threaten nothing of formidable to yours: For Absence (which so
divorces us from that which animates us, that Lovers do not so improperly style
it Death, if Death be but the Separation of Soul and Body) by God's Ubiquity we
are secured from; He is ever present With us; or rather In us. You that not
long since so highly valued the Opportunities of conversing with your Mistress
for some few Moments, shall here find your Privileges improved to a Permission
(nay, an Invitation) of entertaining the Object of your Love at all times; no
hour renders your visits Unseasonable, nor no length Tedious: he is rather
welcomest to God, that comes to him Oftenest and stays with him Longest. What
favors were vouchsafed to that ancient Prophetess (who was likewise one of
the first Evangelists) who for many years departed not from the Temple; but
served God with Fastings and Prayers, Luk 2.37. etc.
Night and Day, the beginning of St. Luke's Gospel may inform you. The
midnight-Hymns of Paul and Silas did not only not disturb or Offend him they
praised, Act. 16.25 26, etc.
but procured the visit of an Angel to bring them miraculous and unexpected
Liberty, as a proof of the Acceptablenesse of their not-Canonicall Devotions,
Genesis 5. 22, 23, 24.
When Enoch had walked with God as many years as the year has days, God was so
far from being Importuned or Tired by that lasting assiduity, that
vouchsafing him an unexampled exampled Exemption from death, he was pleased by
a new and nearer Cut to Heaven, to admit him to a yet Closer, more Immediate,
and more Undistracted Communion with himself. And when Moses had spent no less
than forty days and forty nights in conversing (if I may use so Familiar a
term) with God in the Mount, Exodus 34.30.
he brought down thence instead of a Penance for his Importunity, so signal
and radiant a Testimony of Gods peculiar Favor, that his dazzled Countrymen
were as much Disabled, as Invited to gaze on an Object of so much wonder. And
then, How proud do we see many Lovers of their Sufferings; when she but Knows
of them, for whom they are endured? But in Seraphick Love, there is not the
least good Wish or privatest Suffering; nay, not a whispering Sigh, or closer
Thought, that silently Groans or Aspires in the Amorous Soul, but He both sees
and hears, that Puts his Servant's tears into his Bottle, Ps. 36.8.
sweetning and recompencing the greatest Misfortunes that his Love occasions,
with such Support and Joys, as hinder us to feel them; and make them deserve a
contrary name. Each amorous Soul may say to God with David: Thou know my
down-sitting, Ps. 139.2, 3.
and my up-rising, thou understandest my thoughts afar off, thou compassest my
path, and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. And Christ also
himself has so attentive an Eye upon the Amorous Soul, that he is held forth,
in the Apocalypse, as telling the Ruler of the Church of Smyrna, Revel. 2.8, 9.
I know thy works, and tribulation, and poverty; And saying to the Angel of
the Church of Pergamus, Revel. 2.12.13.
I know thy works and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and thou
hold fast my name, and have not denied my Faith even in those days, wherein
Antipas was my Faithful Martyr who was slain among you, where Satan dwells.
So that no endearing Circumstance of our Love, scapes unobserved by Him, who
has done and suffered so much to engage us to it. God remembers not our
Endeavors to serve Him, the less, for Our having forgotten them. Matthew.
25.37, etc.
When saw we thee any way distressed, and relieved thee? will be the Question
of those, to whom Heaven it self will be at the last Day awarded, as having
ministered to their Redeemer. Those, that in Degenerate times, such as ours,
Lindamor, did, like Lot in Sodom, mourn for their Sins, that mourned not for
their own, and condol'd among themselves, the Spreading Wickedness of the
times they lived in, though probably the dangers, threatened them by the very
Sinfulness they deplored, made them affect such Privacyes in their Conferen^s,
as freed them from the Thoughts of being overheard; yet the Scripture informs
us, (and it is a Comfortable, as well as Memorable Passage) that the Lord
hearkened, Mal 3.16, 17.
and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for them that
feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name. Then shall he return, and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not. I know, says Christ (not only to the Angel of
Smyrna, but to each true sufferer for Him) thy works, Rev. 2.9, 10.
and tribulation, and poverty: Fear none of these things, that thou shall
suffer: Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. God
is often pleased to accept those good thoughts and Intentions of his Servants,
which never arrive at actual Performances, Though David built not the Temple
he designed, yet his Son, that did it, informs us, that God said unto him, 2 Chronicles. 6.8.
Forasmuch as it was in thine heart to build an house for my Name; Thou did
well in that it was in thine heart, etc. And it is the Epithet our Savior gives
God; Mat. 6.6.
Your Father which sees in secret, etc. Nor need we fear, our Rivalls should
supplant us, since we can have none in Devotion, whose Prayer and Endeavor it
is not, that God would love us more. For his Love to you being (as the chiefest
Merit) the strongest Motive and Title unto theirs, they cannot but Wish him
well whom God does Love so; and cannot Wish him better, then by imploring for
him, fresh Additions both of that Love of God, and grateful Dispositions to
return it. Our Saviors assures us, that there is Joy in the Presence of the
Angels of God over one Sinner, Luke 15.7, 10.
that repents. And the sole Hymn (except a visionary one) I find recorded of
the Celestial Quire, Luke 2.13, 14.
was sung for a Blessing to mankind, wherein (for ought I know) their Love and
Sympathy alone concerned them: Isa. 9.6.
For unto us (men) the Child is born, and unto us the Son is given. Heb. 2.16
Who took not upon him the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham. So Noble
and so dis-interess'd, does Divine Love make ours, that there is nothing
besides the Object of that Love, tha^ we love more, then our Concurrents i^ it;
perhaps out of a Gratitude to their assisting us, to pay a Debt (of Love and
Praise) for which (alas!) we find ou^ single selves but too Insolvent.

Perhaps I need not mind you, Lindamor, that diverse Passages of the fore going
Discourse, suppose the truth o^ Their Doctrine, who ascribe to God, i^ relation
to every man, an Eternal unchangeable and Inconditionate Decre^ of Election,
or Reprobation; Yet concerning the Controversies betwixt the Calvinists and the
Remonstrants, about Praedestination and the cohaerent Doctrines, it were
Improper to give you here my sense: The Godly of both Parties are perhaps
otherwise looked on b^ God, then by one another, as contending, which of Gods
Attributes should be most Respected, the one seeming t^ Affirm irrespective
Decrees, to magnifi^ his Goodness; and the other to Den^ them but to Secure
the credit of hi^ Justice. And even in Honoring the sam^ attribute his
Goodness, these Advensaries seem Rivalls, the one party supposing it best
Celebrated by believing it so Irresistible, that to whom soever it is intended,
he Cannot but be happy; and the other thinking it most Extolled by being
believed so Universul, that it will make Every man happy, if he pleases: the
one party electing to honor Freegrace, by assigning it (as to men) an
unlimitedly-vast Extent; as the other does, by ascribing it an
infallibly-victorious Degree. But though my haste, and the nature of my Theme
make me decline the Controversies about Praedestination; yet since the
Doctrine, that maintains it, is not only by almost all the rest of Mankind,
but by the rest of the Protestant Churches themselves, the Lutherans, and
diverse learned Divines of the Church of England, not only Rejected, but
Detested as little less, than Blasphemous, (as indeed they, that judge it an
Error, cannot but be tempted to think it a Dangerous one, and of very
pernicious Consequence, so far forth, as its Sequels are permitted to have
Influence on men's Practice) I think it not amiss to advertise you, that the
Doctrine of Praedestination is not Necessary to Justify the Freeness and the
Greatness of Gods Love. For, so conspicuous and Refulgent a Truth is that o^
God's being the Author of man's Felicity, that the dispute betwixt the
Calvinists and Arminians, is not so much concerning the Thing, as concerning
the Manner of its being proffered; the former affirming Grace to be
Irresistibly presented; the latter, though they deny it to be Irrejectable, yet
granting, not only that it is altogether Free and Undeserved, but also, that
the proffer is made both with a Power enabling those, to whom it is tendered, to
accep^ it, and with such engaging Invitations that man at his first Conversion
need contribute nothing to his Faelicity, but the not-wilfully Refusing it, and
may more properly be said to owe it unto God, then the Beggar to owe his Alms
to his Reliever, though he open his hand to receive it, which he might have
declined to do, if he would have wilfully courted his own Prejudice; Christ
paid a ransom to redeem us, it is true, and he is therefore called, The Lord
that bought us: 2 Pet. 2.1.
but it was God's free Goodness, both to provide us That Christ, and to accept
of That Ransom, neither of which he was Obliged to do; and therefore, the
Scripture ascribes it not to the Justice, but to the love of God to the world,
John 3.16.
that He sent His only begotten Son to redeem it: and St. Paul in the same Text
tells us both, Romans 3.24.
that we are Justified, (...), freely by his Grace, and yet that it is, (...),
through the Redemption, (purchased for a Ransom; the Original word englished
Redemption, relating to the Price, paid for the Redeeming of Captives) that is
in Jesus Christ. It Is confessed on all hands, that Merit must be disclaimed, and
those that seem to expect some thing from God as a Due, acknowledge, that if
his Promise did not, their Actions could not, make it so; and that it is to his
Mercy, they owe the right they have to confide in his Justice. St. Paul, who, 2 Timothy 4. v. 7, 8.
having fought the good fight, finished his Course, and kept the Faith, expected
a Crown of Righteousness from the Lord, under the Notion of the Righteous
Judge; yet tells us that by grace we are saved, through faith, Ephesians. 2.8
and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of God. Whose Promises, now they
are made us, allow us indeed to expect Heaven from his Justice; (...)
but the making us those great and precious promises, (as St. Peter justly
styles them) must be acknowledged the pure Effect of his free and undeserved
Goodness; which to believe Infinite, we need but consider the Disproportion
betwixt such a Recompense, as Eternal Glory and the least Imperfect
Performances of ours: which, though they Needed not Pardon, could not at least
Challenge any Reward, from Him, who, as our Creator, has such a Right to exact
of us what services he pleases, without proposing us any Recompense, that our
exactest obedience to all his Commands, would yet leave us to confess our
selves unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10.
who have done, but what it was our Duty to do, and what if we had not done, we
had given God, who had the Power, the Right and provocation to punish us. And
indeed, so conscious are men Generally, (if not Naturally) to their being
beholding to God for their Felicity, that even those, that mistake or oppose
his way of doing them good, will yet be sure to find out some Notion or other,
under which they may conceive themselves God's Debtours for his Blessings. That
the more sober sort of Romish Catholics themselves, ascribe not so much to
Merit, (properly so called) nor so little to Gods Grace, as the more
Quarrelsome Writers of their Party, have given the more eager Disputants of
ours, occasion to reproach them; were perhaps no difficult task to manifest, if
my haste would give me leave. That the Arminians own the Freeness and
Unmeritednesse of Gods grace, The Remonstrants especially Chap. 17. Number, 5, 6
Confession, and Apology, are very careful to satisfy the World. And even the
Socinians, (how prosperously, I determine not) are not a little, nor
un-industriously sollicitous to free their Erroneous Doctrine of Justification,
from the objected guilt of its tendency to draw the Imbracers of it to
Sacrifice to their own Nets, and thank themselves for their Faelicity; Which
brings into my mind a passage, that I lately read in one of the chief modern
Up-holders of that Sect, Schlichtingius, Who is wont, in my opinion, where his
Subject will bear it, to discourse as Fairly and as Rationally as almost any
Writer, that I have met with of his Persuasion; and who labors to reconcile
Socinus his Doctrine with the Freeness of Gods Grace, by Considerations,
which, not to injure him, I shall present you with in his own words. -- Ad
retundendam vero (says he, disputing against the Learned Meisnerus)
arrogantiam justificatorum, and ne dicant se meruisse Gratiam, non est necesse,
servum in homine arbitrium inducere; non debet virtus tolli ut tollatur
arrogantia. Sufficit, 1. Quod nec velle nec perficere possint, nisi Deus and
voluntatem excitet and vires augeat 2. page 97.
Quod ea, quae divinis adjuti viribus faciunt, nullo modo dignitate and pretio
divinae gratiae respondeant, sed infinito intervallo ab ea absint. Nay, though
the modern and degenerate Jews be, upon the Score of being the great Patrons
of man's Free Will, not causlesly esteemed the great Oppugners of Gods Free
grace; yet both from their famous Rabbi, and my learned Acquaintance Menassah
Ben Israel, and from diverse others of their most eminent Writers, has the truth
sometimes extorted Confessions, which though made upon Erroneous grounds, were
not very far short of Orthodox. To which purpose I remember, that a Jewish
professor of Hebrew, (who assisted me in my studies of that mysterious tongue)
being, as the rest of his Nation, an eager and peremptory Champion of
Free Will, conceived that even that Liberty, which to us seems least to Indebt
men to their Creator, did transcendently oblige him unto God. For, one day
that we were privately and freely discoursing together of matters of Religion,
he told me, he thought Men owed more to Gods Goodness, then the very Angels
do. For, said he, whereas God, without any good work of theirs, but purely out
of his Goodness, conferred on them that blessed Condition, they enjoy; by giving
Man a free Will, by the good Use of which he may Glorify his Maker, when by
Abusing it, it is in his power to Dishonor him, he allows man that highest
Satisfaction, and Privilege of Cooperating to his own Felicity.

And now, Lindamor, we are arrived at the last Property, which qualify's God
the fittest Object for our Love, which is, the Advantagiousnes of His to us
both in the Present and the Future Life. And first even in this World we owe
God no less then All the goods we possess, we owe him both What we have and
That we are: for we may truly say of God with the Psalmist, It is he, th^^ has
made us, and not we our selves. (...) we were not only in his hands, (...)
clay in the Potter's, Isa. 64.8.
that he might have made us any thing; but we were so purely that Negative,
from whence we were extracted, that He, (if he had pleased) for ever might have
left us to our first Nothing. His Love is the Original and Fountain-blessing;
all the rest are but as Pipes (and Instruments) to convay it, and serve but to
hand it to us. Your Wit wins you applause, Your Industry heaps you up
Treasures; be it granted. But who gave you that Wit? and did both Give and
Prosper that boasted Industry, Certainly, God as much Gives us all the goods,
we Possess, as he, that gives a beggar a Thousand Pounds, gives him the
Clothes and Meat and all the Bravery, it helps him to. But, besides these more
obvious Presents of Gods Bounty, we enjoy other Effects of his Goodness, which
though by the Customarinesse of their being possessed, they prove less
Conspicuous, than the other; yet grow no less Prized, when the Want or Loss of
them, make us sensible of the true value of them. Had I the leisure, Lindamor,
to lead your thoughts with me to the Galleys, and show you there those wretched
Captives, that are chained to the Oars they tugg at, and though exposed to all
the Miseries and Hardships of a Tempestuous Sea, have oftentimes cause given
them by their Barbarous Usage ashore, to fear the Ocean less then any Port
save Death. Could I draw for you the Curtains of sick and dying men, and open
to you that sad Scene, where some pine and languish away by Distempers, that
deprive them of all the Joys, Advantages, and (what is more considerable) Uses
of life, before they ease them of life it self; others Breathe, rather then
Live, perpetually Tormented either with their Diseases or Physic to protract a
wretched Life, upon terms that turn it into a Trouble: And others struggling
with the rude Pangs of Death, are yet perchance less tormented by Them, then
by the sad Prospect of their former Life, and the remembrance of those
Criminal pleasures, which yet it perhaps less troubles them, that they must
now fore-goe, then that they once enjoyed them. Should I, Lindamor, bring you
into Hospitalls, and show you there the various Shapes of Human Misery, and how
many Souls, narrowly lodged (if I may so speak) in Synecdochicall bodies, see
their earthen Cottages moulder away to Dust; those miserable persons by the
loss of one Limb after another, surviving but Part of Themselves, and living
to see themselves Dead and Buried by piecemeal. Should I, to dispatch,
Lindamor, show you all the several Companies of Mourners, that almost make up
Mankind, and disclose to you how copious showers of Tears do almost every where
water (not to say overflow) this vale of Miseries; You would perchance see cause
to think, that God's Privative may contend with his Positive Favors; and that
you owe little less for what you are Not, then for what you Are, to that
discriminating Mercy of his, to which alone you owe your Exemption from
miseries, as great as the Blessings it conferrs on you: 1 Cor. 4.7.
For, Who makes thee to differ? is a Question, that may be as well asked in
reference to our external, as to our Spiritual Condition. Which invites me to
mind you, Lindamor, that you are yet more engaged to Gods Love, for Protecting
you from those gross Vices, that Disfigure most men's minds, than from those
less Dangerous, though more resented, Diseases that Distemper their Bodies.

For, Ambition, Lust, Avarice, Revenge, and even that vain Conversation which
young Gentlemen are generally pleased to think so Innocent, are really more
Formidable and pernicious Diseases and Calamities, than those that reduce men
to take Physic, or thrust them into Hospitalls. To evince the truth of which
Paradox, I hope I shall not need to mind you of judging of the Dangerousnesse
of Diseases by the Nobleness of the part affected, since I can tell you, that
He that cannot err, seems daily to justify our Assertion, by inflicting
Sickness and the sharpest outward Calamities on his own Dearest Children, to
preserve them from the Contagion of Sin, or Cure them of the unfilial
habitudes of it. And therefore, since, when we see a tender Mother apply a
painful Caustic to the neck of her Favorite-Infant, threatened by the
Apoplexy; we scruple not to conclude that she thinks the trouble of an Issue
an Evil inferior to Convulsion-fits. So when we see our Heavenly Father send
Infirmities and Crosses to rescue those he Loves from the Contagion or the
Dominion of Sin; we may safely conclude, he thinks Affliction a less Evil
than Guilt, since he is too Wise and indulgent a Physician to Cure with a
Remedy worse than the Disease. In the 8th of Deuteronomie there is a Caution
given the Israelites, least Prosperity (which is wont to be a kind of Lethe,
that makes men Forget all, but their Enjoyments) should make any of them say in
his heart, Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18.
My power and the might of my hand has gotten me this Wealth. But (says the
Text) they shall remember the Lord their God: for it is he, that gives them
power to get wealth. It is not the revolting Israelites only, of whose
Ignorance of his Bounty God may complain as he did by the Prophet, by whom he
said, I taught Ephraim to go taking them by their arms, Hos. 11.3.
but they knew not, that I healed them: and there are but too many, of whom he
might say, as he did by the same Prophet; For she did not know that I gave her
Corn and Wine, Hos. 1.8, 9.
and Oil, and multiplied her Silver, and her Gold, which they prepared for
Baal: Therefore will I return and take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my
Wine in the Season thereof; and will recover my Wool and my Flax given to cover
her Nakedness. And this will make way for the Design I had to recommend the
Advantagiousnesse of Gods Love, by saying, That as for Spiritual Goods; he
gives us in this life so rich an Earnest of expected Joys, that even the
Earnest is a Stock large enough to subsist with Comfort on, and really
out-values and transcends all those Momentary Pleasures, it requires us to
forsake, to keep up a Title to Eternal ones. But to particularize God's
mercies to us in This very life, would certainly take up a considerable part of
it; And yet the Love, God bears us, dies not with us, nor does (as men's
Affections) either endure a Funeral in our Tombs, or survive only in an
useless Grief (or an Esteem as bootlesse:) No, Gods Love is so far from
resembling the usual sort of friends, who, when they have accompanied us to
the Grave, do There leave us; that, like the Angels, that carried Lazarus's
Soul to Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22.
its Officiousness begins then most to Appear, when our dark eyes are Closed,
and is the^ Truest to the beloved Soul, when she Forsakes the Body, giving each
blesse^ Saint cause to say of God, what Na^^mi did of Boaz: Ruth 2.20.
That, He has not le^^ off his kindness to the Living, and to the Dead. 1
John 3.2.
Now, indeed (says our Saviour'^ Favorite) are we the Sonns of God, an^ it does
not yet appear what we shall be* but we know, when he shall appear, we sha^^ be
like him, This blessed Expectance mus^ be now my Theme, because the narrow
Limits, which my Design has placed to this Discourse, (of the Advantages
accruing from Gods Love) will leave no more room untaken up by Heaven.

But, Lindamor, before I proceed to set forth to you the Greatness of the
Felicity reserved for us in Heaven; It will, I fear, be requisite to mind you
of the Lawfullnesse of having an Eye on it. For many not-undeservedly applauded
Preachers, have of late bin pleased to teach the people, that to Hope for
Heaven is a Mercenary, Legal, and therefore Unfiliall Affection. Indeed, to
hope for Heaven, as Wages for Work performed, or by way of Merit, in the proper
and strict Acception of that term, were a Presumption, to which none of the
Divines, we dissent from, can be too much an Enemy, nor perhaps more so, then
I am. But to take in Gods Blessings among the Motives of Loving God, is but to
do as he did, who said, I love the Lord, because, Psalm. 116.1.
he has heard my voice, and my Supplications; and to look upon the Joys of
Heaven, to comfort and support us in the hardships and losses, to be undergon
in our Journey thitherward, is to imitate no worse a man than Moses, of whom it
is said, Hebr. 11.26.
that he esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches, than the Treasures in
Egypt: for he had respect, or turned his Eye (...), unto the recompense of the
reward. It is indeed, Lindamor, a happy Frame of mind, to be able to love God
purely for Himself, without any Glance at our own Advantages. But though, I
dare not deny, that it is possible to attain to so High and disinteress'd a
kind of Love, yet I think, that that Excellency supposed to be Vouchsafed to
some men, is not by the Scripture Exacted as a Duty from All men. Were all the
recompense of Piety of a worldly Nature and to be Here received, the Actions
invited to, by the Intuition of it, might pass for Mercenary. But when Heaven
is chiefly hoped for, as it will admit us unto the Fruition of God himself in
Christ, and that the Other Joye^ expected there are so far from being of a
Sensual or Worldly nature, tha^ they are known not to be attainable till by
Death the Senses and Body themselves and all the merely Anima^ Faculties be
abolisht; for a Heaven s^ considered, I say, to forgo readily al^ the Pleasures
of the Senses, and undergo cheerfully all the Hardships and Dangers, that are
wont to attend a Holy life, is, Lindamor, such a kind o^ Mercenarinesse, as
none, but a resigned Noble, and believing Soul, is likely to be guilty of. If I
should say, that Fear it self, and even the fear of Hell may be one
Justifiable Motive of Men's Actions, though I should propose, wha^ those I am
reasoning with, would think a Paradox; yet I should perhaps hold forth therein
no more than the Scripture does, Hebr. 4.1.
Let us therefore fear, (says the writer to the Hebrews,) lest, a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come short
of it. And no less eminent a Herald of the Gospel, than St. Paul, who so
successefully maintained the Evangelicall against the Legal Spirit, thus
professes of himself, I keep under my body, and bring it into Subjection, 1
Cor. 9.27.
lest by any means, when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway. And 'twas not to Slaves or Hirelings, that Christ directs this
Admonition: I say unto you, my Friends, Luke 12.4, 5.
Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that
they can do: But I will forwarn you whom you shall fear, Fear him, which after
he has killed, has power to cast into Hell; Yea, I say unto you (a
gemination, which the present Controversy shows, not to have been Causeless)
Fear Him. Where the paraphrase given of God, is not barely Descriptive but
Ratiocinative (to borrow those terms of the Schools) informing us not only Who
we should, and should not fear: but Why, we should fear the one and not the
other. As when St. Paul says, I know whom I have trusted, he means what manner
of Person, 1 Pet. 4.19.
how Faithful (as St. Peter elsewhere calls God) and how Omnipotent: whence
immediately he adds, And I am persuaded, 2 Timothy 1.12.
that he is able to keep that, which I have committed unto him against that
day. More Texts of the same Import might be added, if the Design of those
already alleged were other, than to Facilitate the Admission of the more
Plausible truths we have been making out, and which to us seems very clearly
held forth in those and the like Scriptures, which are therefore cited out of
the new Testament, that they might have the greater authority with one sort of
our Antagonists. Phil. 3.14.
I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus. Revel. 22.14.
Blessed are they, that do his Commandments that they may have right to the
Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City. 1 Timothy 6.19.
Laying up in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold of Eternal life. Romans 2.17.
To them who by patient Continuing in well-doing, seek for ((...)) Glory and
Honor, and Immortality, eternal Life. And of Christ himself, whose love to God
is questionless Filial and unequallable, it is said, Heb. 12.2
looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that
was set before him endured the Cross, despised the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the Throne of God. Nor see I, why it should be Unfiliall for
a Child of God to further the Raising of those Passions, which his Heavenly
Father intends to have raised in him, upon the same Grounds and Motives, that
God is pleased to employ to Excite them. And since the Scripture seems plainly
to invite our Hopes by recording St. Paul's having said, 1 Cor. 9.25.
Every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things; now they
do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible: And by
representing our Savior himself as saying in one place, Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad; Mat. 5 12.
for great is your reward in Heaven: In another, Be thou faithful unto Death,
Rev. 2.10.
and I will give thee a Crown of Life; And in diverse others, speaking to the
like purpose: Since, I say, the Scripture seems thus to Allure our Hopes, Would
it not be kind of accusing it of an aptness to delude and ensnare us, To teach
that it proposes us the powerfullest Objects to Incite our passions, if it be
sinful to cherish and harbor the Passions naturally belonging to those
Objects. And certainly, Lindamor, since God, who as our Creator knows the
Frame and Constitution of man's Soul, incomparably better than he himself; is
pleased to deal with our Hopes and our Fears, to engage us to his Service: It
very ill becomes Us, either to quarrel with his Methods of working on our
Spirits, or to reject any help, which he has been pleased to afford a piety,
which, for ought ever I could observe, does even in the Best men find
resistance enough to keep any Help that can be employed to promote it from
being Superfluous. And truly, the animating or discouraging Influence, that
Hope or the Want of it, is wont to have upon our Endeavors, makes me very
apprehensive, that since the enlivning hopes of Heaven are not able to make
most men's Endeavors other than very Languid, the forbidding those supporting
hopes would soon weaken and decrease our Endeavors into none at all.

But, Lindamor, though I may perhaps have taken some Pains in studying
Controversiall Divinity, yet I take so little Pleasure in writing of it, that
though not only a Seasonable Duty to truth, but a Necessary one to the ensueing
part of this Discourse, have pressed me to serve in this cause; yet I shall
perhaps obtain Your pardon sooner than my own, for having thus long suspended
the discoursing to you of the Advantagiousnesse of Gods love to us, as it gives
us Here a Right, and will Hereafter givs us Admission to Heaven. Heaven, the
bright Seat of so much happiness, that we shall scarcely count amongst our
Joys, that Heaven is the Seat of them: There the Excellency of the possessed
Goods, shall as much disappoint our Expectations, as in other fruitions, the
Emptiness is wont to do. The Apostle tells us, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, 1 Cor. 2.9
neither have entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has prepared
for them that love Him. Such pure refined Delights, not only stoop not unto
Sense, but are sublime enough even to transcend Imagination. When Fancy has
formed and shaped the perfectest Ideas, that its abstractions can make, of
Blessedness; our own more happy Experiences of greater, must disabuse us,
when we come to Heaven, which is a Soil, whose Fruitfulness is so confined to
Joy, that even our Disappointments and mistakes shall there contribute to our
Happiness, which does so much partake of his Immensity, whose Gift it is, that
you see the Apostle gives it a Negative Description: and to create in us
Apprehensions, underogatory from what we shall possess, not only removes our
thoughts from all we Do Enjoy, but exalts them above all that we Can Fancy. At
which way of proceeding, that you may the less wonder, Lindamor; be pleased to
consider, that in Heaven our Faculties shall not only be Gratified with
suitable and acceptable Objects, but shall be Heightn'd and Enlarged, and
consequently our Capacities of happiness, as well Increased as Filled; A child
not yet released out of the homely Prison of the Womb, cannot there possibly
frame Ideas of those delights, which will be afforded him by the pleasing
Noises and the glittering Objects, that will present themselves to him after
his Birth. And the same Child whilst he continues in his Nonage, though he may
with delight look upon Emblems finely drawn and Painted, and may take some
pleasure in beholding the neat and surprising Characters, and florishes of a
Greek and Hebrew Bible, curiously Printed, yet he cannot then Imagine the
Pleasure, the same Objects will afford him, when Age and Study shall have
ripened and instructed his Intellectualls, and made him capable both of
Understanding, and Rellishing the excellent Moralities, couched in those
ingenious Emblems, and the profound and saving Mysteries, wherewith that divine
Book, the Scripture, especially in its Original Tongues, does to an
Intelligent and religious Peruser, appear replenisht. Such a double advantage,
Lindamor, among others, the Admission into Heaven brings those, to whom that
blessing is vouchsafed: for, besides that Set of Objects, (if I may so speak)
so New and so Peculiar to Heaven, that their Idea's could never enter into men's
thoughts before their Admission there; Besides this, I say, our then enlarged
Capacities will enable us even in Objects, which were not altogether Unknown to
us before, to discern things formerly Undiscerned, and derive thence both new
and greater Satisfactions and Delights. Wonder not, Lindamor, that in
mentioning the Joys of Heaven, I use the Expressions I find least Detractory
from a Theme as much above our Praises, as the Heaven they are enjoyed in, is
above our Heads. For, though such Expressions may seem somewhat tumid and
aspiring; and fitter much for one, that Celebrates, then for one, that but
Asserts: yet cannot I scruple, to use Seeming Hyperboles in the mention of
Felicities, which make the highest Hyperboles but Seeming ones; For these
joys, Lindamor, are like the Stars of Heaven, which by reason of our
Remoteness from them appear extremely Little, though really in themselves they
are so Vast, that a less than the largest, is by Odd Greater then the biggest
Object upon Earth, nay then the whole Earth i^ self. And therefore, as if I
were to take you with me to contemplate the Planets, I would show you the^
through such a Telescope, as by greatning those bright Objects in comparison of
what to the unassisted Eye the^ appear, does somewhat lessen the Disadvantage
of Remoteness, and show them with less Detraction from their true Magnitude;
So mentioning to you the Felicities of Heaven, I think it not Unlawful, or
Improper, to endeavor by representations, transcending what they Appear, to
give you Notions less inferior to what they Are.

In Heaven, then, Eclipse theirs, which among the Heathen Deify'd less
deserving Heroes those excellent Persons that did as well Ennobles as Instruct
Mankind, giving us cause to Glory, and to Blush that we are Men, and whose
Stories have the unparalled Honor of being recorded by Inspired Pens; Those
Spirits, I say, of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.23.
as the Scripture terms them, shall be our Constant and familiar Company, into
whose blessed Society we shall not only be Welcome, but Increase it. In Heaven,
we shall have a blessed and familiar Conversation with those same glorious
Spirits, whose Nature does invest them with such a Luster, that all the
Disadvantage of their Disguizes, when they Appear to us, does scarce suffice to
confine our Raptures to Respects below Idolatry, and darken them into Objects
for our Wonder, not Adoration. There we shall see (a sight worth dying for)
that Blessed Savior, of whom the Scripture does so Much and so Excellently
entertain us, and who having done and suffered so much for us, does so highly
deserve of us both upon the score of his Infinite Perfections, and upon the
account of his Inestimable Benefits. Yes, there shall we see that Holy and
Divine Person, who when he vouchsafed (as his Favorite-Disciple speaks) to to
pitch his Tent among us, (...). Joh. 1.14.
and dwell with men on Earth, to fit them by his Merits and Example to dwell
with him in Heaven, did so admirably mix an awefull Majesty with an humble
Meekness, and the assumed Infirmities of his humane Nature with the seasonable
Coruscations of his Divine; expressing in his whole life, so Perfect and
Exemplary a Virtue, and yet so much Sweetness and Gentleness, toward those
Aspirers to it, that were the most Short of it, that the Jews themselves could
say of him, That he had done all things well; and his very Enemies, that were
employed to apprehend him as a Malefactor, confessed to those, that sent them,
That never man spoke like him. Joh. 7.46.
And his Apostles, who had most Opportunity to Pry narrowly into his Actions,
and were of a Condition and Breeding very unlike to infuse into them Heroic
Resolutions, did, in Spite of the frequent Reproofs their failings extorted
from him, and of the Hardships that attended his Service, think even Death it
self in his Company, more Elegible, Joh. 11.16
then Life led out of it; Let us also go that we may dye with him, (says even
the distrustful Thomas, to his fellow-Disciples.) But, Lindamor, we shall there
see the Son of God, not in that Form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7.
which he put on that he might Suffer for us, and exercise his Priestly and
Prophetic Functions here below; but in that Regal State and Condition, which
belongs to him by virtue of his Kingly office, on whose score he is styled in
the Scripture, Rev. 19.16.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, All power or authority being (as himself
speaks) given Him both in Heaven and in Earth. Matthew. 28 18.
And how Nobly attended may we suppose this Divine Monarch to be in his Exalted
Condition in Heaven, when in his state of Humiliation on Earth, Mar. 1.13
whilst he was in the Wilderness among the wild Beasts, the Angels are
recorded to have ministered unto him; and, whilst he lay swathed in a homely
manger, Luke 1.
the multitude of the Celestial host were heard to solemnize his miraculous
Birth according to that passage of the written to the Hebrews, Heb. 1.6.
When he brings in the first begotten into the World (he says) And let all
the Angels of God worship him! And yet such considerable and Noble Creatures,
those Immateriall Intelligences called Angels, are, 2 King. 19.35.
that One of them in One night was able to destroy above a hundred and
fourscore thousand men, in the blasphemous Senacherib's impious Camp. And so
much Majesty, and Superiority, does their Nature give them, in reference even
to the eminentest of Mortals, That, when the undaunted Josuah had boldly
challenged one of them, that appeared to him in the likeness of a Man, and
demanded, Whom he was for? when he knew him to be an Angel (unless he supposed
him to be that promised Messiah, who is elsewhere called the Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3.1.
as it is in the Original, and in the same Text, the Lord) he alters his
Address unto him into this Submissive one, Josh. 52 13, 14.
What says my Lord unto his Servant; and even wise and holy Daniel himself,
who was the Second person of the World for Power, and the First for much nobler
Attributes, Wisdom and Understanding, who saw so many Governors of vast
Provinces, and Professors of admired Magic, inferior to himself, yet
confesses to the Angel, that appeared to him, That he was confounded and
disanimated at his presence, and adds, How can the Servant of this my Lord,
Dan. 10.17.
talk with this my Lord. We may safely therefore expect that we shall then
behold our Savior not in those Disguises, which disfigured him in their Eyes,
that only considered his Sufferings; but in that triumphant Condition,
wherewith they are now Rewarded. The Thorns of his (now no more Galling, but
Adorning) Crown will appear upon that radiant Head of His, more glorious, than
those of the flaming Bush, Exodus 3.2
wherein God appeared to Moses. And we shall not see, that despicable form,
which made the Prophet say (personating the Generality of the Jewish Nation
contemporary with the Messiah) -- He has no Form, Isa. 53.2.
nor Comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no Beauty, that we should
desire him. But we shall see him Encompassed with so much Majesty, and Shining
with so much of his genuine Splendor and Beauty, that we shall deservedly
esteem him N^phle, Isa. 9.6.
the admirable. And our ravished Souls shall by the more attentive Contemplation
of him, but find more cause to imitate the Spouse in Solomon's mystic
Epithalamium; who having dwelt upon the Beauty of the several parts, that
concurred to the accomplishing the divine Bridegroom, exclaims in an
Epiphonema, very contrary to the Expression lately mentioned in the Prophet, He
is altogether Desires, or, Cant. 5.10.
by an Hebraism, Most desirable, which our English renders, He is altogether
lovely. His eyes will there appear, as St. Rev. 1.14.
John represents them, of active Fire, and will into the willing Breasts of the
Ravished beholders shoot Flames as Pure, as Holy, and as Deathlesse, as those
Fathers of the Church, who believed not the Angels altogether Incorporeall, may
be supposed to have conceived the Seraphims to consist of. Certainly, since (as
the Scripture informs us) It never entered into the Heart of Man, what God has
reserved in Heaven for those that love him; That Glory can be but Imperfectly
expressed by the bare Epithet of Inconceivable, with which God rewards the
meritorious Sufferings and Obedience of that Only begotten Son of his love; For
whose sake, he is pleased to confer on so many Thousands of men, unimaginable
Glories. He that vouchsafes even to many of his Servants a brightness like
that of the Stars, Dan. 12.3
will sure communicate a more radiant Luster to the Sun of Righteousness, Mal.
4.2.
that Only Son of His, whom (to borrow inspired Expressions) he has appointed
Heir of all things by whom also he made the worlds: Heb. 1.2, 3.
Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his person,
and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself
purged our Sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, far
above all Principality, Ephesians. 1.21
and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name, that is named not only in
this World, but in that which is to come, Thereby exalting him not only above
all Earthly Princes and Potentates, but even above the Highest Orders of the
Spirits of the Celestial Hierarchy.

But apprehend not, Lindamor, that this sublime Exaltation of Christ will make
him Despise the meanest of his Saints, or disdain communion with him; For, St.
Paul assures us, That he was in the form of God, when he vouchsafed to take
upon him the form of a Servant, to make us Free; and, sure, he that
condescended so far, and stooped so low, to Invite and Bring us to Heaven, will
not refuse us a gracious Reception there. In the days of his flesh he was
pleased to own Lazarus, even ^n the Dishonours of the Grave, and vouchsafed him
in that despicable Condition the Glorious Title of his Friend. And when he
descended the Mount of Olives, all the loud Acclamations of the glad Multitude,
that ^ung Hosanna's to him, and strow'd his way with their Palms, Luke 19.37,
38 -- 41
their Vestments and their Praises, could not divert him from Deploring, even
with Tears, Jerusalem's approaching Fate; and expressing in the midst of his
Triumphs a Concern, for the very worst and stubbornest of his Enemies. And,
lest ^t should be thought, that he was thus concerned for worthless Mortals,
on^y whilst he shared and felt the mise^ies of their Condition; Give me leave
to observe to you, Lindamor, that ^mmediately after his Resurrection whilst the
Sense of the sudden and unexampl'd Change of his Condition was Fresh upon him,
and the Remembrance of the Apostles Ingratitude in deserting him, almost as
Recent; he sticks not to give those very Disciples that forsook him, the
glorious Title, and that a more familiar one then we find him to have allowed
them on Earth, O^ his Brethren; Mat. 28.10.
and particularly shows himself Sollicitous for that Peter, who, in spite of
all those empty Boasts, Mar. 16.7
wherewith he not only seemed to defy Death, but Christ's Prediction too, did
not only Forsake his Master, but Denied him. He can in Heaven be so concerned
for his distressed members here on earth, that not only he can take Notice of
expiring Stephen, Act. 7.
through that cloud of fatal Stones, that battered down his Prison; and can,
when Saul was persecuting the vulgar Christians, cry out unto him, Saul, Saul,
Act. 9.4.
why persecutest thou Me? as if He, and those, that Love him, were but One: But
in the messages, In the 2d and 3d chapters of the Apocalypse.
he sends to the Angels or Governors of the seven Churches, he sufficiently
manifests, That single Christians may be as particularly in his thoughts, as if
they had no other Object: His Greatness will not make his Kindness less
Familiar, but only more Obligeing; He disdains not even after his Ascension to
say; Behold; I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, Rev. 3.20
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with
me. That King, in the Parable, by whom Himself is represented, Matthew. 25.
is pleased himself to welcome each Individual trusty Servant with a peculiar,
Euge bone Serve; And in another Parable he scruples not, to represent the great
Condescensions and Familiarity, wherewith the Lord shall remunerate the
faithful and watchful Servants, by telling his Disciples, Blessed are those
Servants, Luke 12.37.
whom the Lord, when he comes, shall find so watching. Verily, I say unto
you, that he shall gird himself, and will make them to sit down to meat, and
will come forth to serve them. At which Expression, you will the less Admire,
if you Consider, that besides that it is Parabolicall, and probably
Hyperbolicall, and therefore not to be taken (as the French speak, au pied de
la lettre) in a strict sense: We find in the Evangelicall Story that our
Savior disdained not to converse familiarly with Publicans and Sinners, nor
even to Wash the Feet of his own Disciples. And since he condescended to such
familiarity to those frail Mortals, so many of whom were apt to turn the
Favors of God into Want onnesse, we may the less admire his gracious
Condescensions to those, the Sinlessenesse of whose Condition will keep them
from turning his Vouchsafements into any thing, but Occasions of Joy and
Gratitude. Marvel not, Lindamor, as at an Impertinencie, that I appear so
Sollicitous to possess you with high Apprehensions of the super-eminent
Dignity and Felicity of our exalted Savior; And, that in the Loftiest and most
magnificent Expressions, the Scripture affords me, I have endeavored to make
out to you, that the bright Sun of Righteousness is now grown incapable of
suffering Eclipses, but shines with unclouded and unequalled Splendor, and
that we shall in Heaven (as the Writer to the Hebrews speaks) see Jesus who was
made a a little (or for a short while, Heb. 2.9.
(...)) lower than the Angels, for the suffering of Death, crowned with Glory
and Honor. For it will make Heaven more Heaven to us, to find Him reigning
there, who has Suffered so much for us; and for whom, if we e're come thither,
we shall have so much Suffered. For, since our Love will, as the rest of our
surviving Graces, be perfected, and grow Complete in Heaven; The ineffable
Happiness of our Dear Redeemer, must needs bring an Increase to ours,
commensurate to the Ardency of our Love for him, and we shall relish no
Happiness more than That; which is therefore Ours, because He is happy, and
Supposes in Him, what it Conferrs on Us. Besides that, since the Regal
Dignity, wherein (as Mediator) he is Instated, may make us owe our Salvation to
his Sentence, as well as to his Merits; Heaven it self will be inestimably
endeared to us, by our Enjoying it upon his Account. I need not tell you, what
a value Lovers are wont to set upon the least Favors, that can be bestowed on
them by their Mistresses, and that oftentimes a worthless Ribband, a Bracelet
of Hair, or some such Trifle that nothing can make precious but Her presenting
it, is highlyer valued by the transported Lover, than the richest Presents of
Nature, or of Fortune. How great a Blessing must it then be, Lindamor, to owe
Joys, that need no endearing Circumstances to merit the name of Happiness, to
a Person so beloved, that even Heaven it self will bring more Felicity to the
amorous Soul, as it is a Proof of his Love, than as it is a Donative of his
Bounty: As passionate Brides do incomparably more value the Wedding-Rings,
which their glad Lovers give them, as Pledges, than as Gold. It Is said of the
persecuted and disgraced Apostles, that they rejoiced ^o have been counted
worthy to suffer shame for his name. Act. 5.41.
But if they deservedly Rejoiced, to be allowed to Suffer for him; of how much
Joy shall they have just cause, that are admitted to Reign with him. His having
supported the Hardships and the Toils (for I must not now call them Evils) to
which our afflicted Condition of Mortality is Exposed, does so much alleviate
them, and refresh us under them, that in this sense also it may be truly said,
Isa. 53.5.
That the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his hurts we are
healed. But he that Relieved us even by his Cross, will sure do more for us by
his Crown; when he shall Admit, and even Invite, each faithful Servant to no
less a Blessing, than, Matt. 25.21.
to enter into his Masters joy. So rich a Source of Happiness did Christ
design, to make himself to us in all his Capacities and Conditions, that in
Heaven and in Earth, it Was, and Will be, his gracious and constant Employment,
to Share our Griefs, or Impart to us his Joys; and either Lessen our Miseries
by his Sufferings, or Increase our Happiness by his Felicity.

Expect not, Lindamor, Lindamor, that in Heaven, we shall not only see our
Elder Brother Christ, but probably also all our Kindred, Friends, and
Relations, that Living here in his Fear, Died in his Favor. For, since onr
Savior tells us, Luke 20.36.
that the Children of the Resurrection shall be (...), equal to, or like, the
Angels; who yet in the Visions of Daniel and St. John, appear to be acquainted
with each other; Since in the Parable of the miserable Epicure, and the happy
Beggar, Luk 16.
the Father of the Faithful is represented, as knowing, not only the Person,
and present Condition, but the past Story of Lazarus. Since the Instructor of
the Gentiles, confidently expects his Converted and Pious Thessalonians, to be
his Crown at that Great Day; 1 Thessalonians. 2.19, 20.
When the having turned many to Righteousness, shall, as the Scripture
foretells, Dan. 12 3.
confer a Star-like and Immortal Brightness. Since (which is chiefly
considerable) the Knowledge of particular Actions, and, consequently, Persons,
seems requisite to the attainment of that Great End of God, in the Day of
Judgment; the Manifestation of his Punitive and Remunerative Justice: Since, I
say, these Arguments, besides diverse others, are afforded us by the Scripture;
we may safely conclude it Probable, that we shall Know each other in a Place,
where, since nothing requisite to Happiness can be wanting, we may well
suppoe, (at least, if we can Imagine Here, what we shall think There) that we
shall not want so great a Satisfaction, as that of being knowingly Happy, in
our Otherselves, our Friends. Nor is this only Probable, Lindamor, but it is
not Improbable, that those friends that Know us in Heaven, shall Welcome us
thither. For, since Christ assures us, that the very Angels (though they be so
far from being Related to our Persons, that they are Forrainers to our very
Nature) receive accession of Joy for a relenting Sinner, Luke 15.7.
that by Repentance Begins to turn toward God; You will not think it Absurd,
that in a Place, where Charity shall not only continue, (as St. Paul speaks)
but grow perfect: 1 Cor. 13.8.
Our dear Friends should rejoice to see us, not only Being to Turn toward
God, but Come home to him. Nor is it unlikely, that our transported Souls shall
mutually Congratulate each other, their having now fully escaped the numerous
Rocks, and Shelves, and Quicksands, and threatening Storms, and no less
dangerous Calms, through which they are at length arrived at that Peaceful
Haven, where Innocence and Delight (which are here so seldom Matched) are
inseparable Companions, both of each other, and each blessed Resident. With
those friends we here Lamented, we shall there Rejoice. And 'twill be but need,
that the Discovery of each other's Virtues, should bring us to a mutual
Knowledge of our Persons; for otherwise, we shall be so Changed, that we should
never know our Friends (and should scarce know our Selves, were not an eminent
Increase of Knowledge a part of that happy Change) For those departed-Friends,
whom, at our last Separation, we saw disfigured by all the ghastly Horrors of
Death, we shall then see assisting about the Majestic Throne of Christ, Phil.
3.21
with their once vile bodies transfigured into the likeness of his glorious
body, mingling their glad Acclamations with the Hallelujah's of Thrones,
Principalities, and Powers, and the most dignified Favorites of the
Celestial Court. I need not tell you, Lindamor, that we shall be more justly
Transported at this Meeting, than was good old Jacob at that of his son Joseph,
whom having long mourned for dead and lost, he found not only alive, but a
great Favorite, ready to welcome him to an unknown Court: For, whereas the
Patriarch said to his son, Now let me dye, Genesis 46.30.
since I have seen thy face; The seeing of our Friends in Heaven will assure
us, that we shall for ever Live with them there. The Reunion of Friends being
there as priviledg'd from Divorce, as that of Soul and Body, (which scarce will
be more Strict and Satisfactory) For, here indeed, if our Friends do not allay
our Love or Affection by unwelcome Actions, or their contagious Sufferings, we
commonly dote on them to a Degree, that, as it were, Reduces God to deprive us
early of them, and Snatch our Idols, and his Rivalls, from us. But there, our,
on both sides, compleated-Graces, will not only Deserve, but Allow a higher
Strain of Friendship. The near Contemplation and Fruition of the infinitely
transcendent Perfections of the Creator, keeping all our Kindness to the
Creatures, not only Subordinate To the Love we owe to God, but Grounded On it;
as Excited Needles, when they stick fastest to each other, owe their Union to
their having both been touched by the Lodestone; to which they have therefore
both of them incomparably stronger Inclinations, than either to the other.

There, those obscure passages of (That Divine book incapable of flattery) The
Scripture, which, for all that Bold Critics and Learned Expositors have
Attempted to Illustrate it, does still continue obscure. There, discerning how
exquisitly the several Parts of Scripture are fitted to the several Times,
Persons, and Occurrences, wherein their all-foreseeing Author intended most to
use them, we shall discern not only a Reconcileablenesse, but a Friendship,
and perfect Harmony betwixt those Texts, that here seem most at Variance, and
shall discover not only the Sense of the obscurer passages, but the
Requisitnesse of their having been written so obscurely. That strange and
peculiar, as well, as otherwise Crypticall Method and Style of Scripture, which
often costs us so much Study to find it Rational, we shall there discover to
be Admirable, and worthy of its Omniscient Author. There, I hope, we shall have
clearly expounded to us those Ridles of Providence, which have, but too often,
Tempted even good men, to question Gods Conduct in the Government of the World;
whilst the Calamities and Persecutions of Virtue, and Innocence seem Approved
by him, who Accumulates Prosperities on their Criminal Opposers. There, we
shall be convinced, that all these Seeming Irregularities, which the Heathen
thought fit to impute to the giddy Whimsies of a Blind femall Deity, are not
only Consistent with Gods Justice and Goodness, but are Productions of it.
And though such a Belief do here to Intelligent Persons, seem perhaps a
greater piece of Self-denial, then to refrain from Wine, or Gold, or
Mistresses; yet in Heaven it will appear as Reasonable, as here we find it
Difficult. For, as Bildad speaks in Job, Job 8.9.
We are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon Earth, are
but a Shadow. And the Shortness of our Transitory lives, not permitting us to
Continue long enough Spectatours here, to see above a Scene or two at most of
that great Play, acted by Mankind upon the Stage of the World, it is no wonder,
we are apt to harbor sinister thoughts of the Contriver of a Plot, whose
neither Beginning nor End we are acquainted with: which is no less injurious,
than it were to Censure the lofty Tragedian Seneca, or some other matchless
Artist, having perused but a Piece of some Tragedy, whereof the Latter part
never arrived at our view. But, when once Gods whole Plot (if I may so speak)
and Conduct in the Administration of the World, shall come to be Disclosed; all
those Revolutions and Occurrences of Empires, States, Families, and Particular
Persons, which men are here so prone to Quarrel with, will there appear so
Just, so Requisite, and so Seasonable, that those very things, which Here
tempted us to Deny God, shall There engage us to Praise him; and we shall not
so properly be Satisfied with his Providence, as Ravished. But especially, we
shall be Transported with Wonder and Gratitude, when God shall vouchsafe to
discover to his particular Servants, the Reasons of his Dispensations toward
them, and make out to them not only the Necessity and Justice, but even
Mercifulness of those very Afflictions, that were most imputed to his
Severity, (no Stroke from Gods Paternall Hand, either lighting Sooner or
falling Heavier, or staying Longer, than the occasion, that Extorted it,
exacted) and convince them, that their Hopes were never Disappointed, but to
Secure their Title to Better things, than those they hoped for; nor their
Inferior Interests prejudiced, but for the advantage of their Supreme ones.
Yes, all that unwelcome Darkness, that here surrounded our purblind
Understandings, will vanish at the dawning of that bright, and (as St. 2 Pet.
3.18.
Peter's expression may be interpetted) eternal day, wherein the Resolution of
all those Difficulties, (...)
which here Exercised (and perhaps Distressed) our Faith, shall be granted us
to Reward it. And I must profess to you, Lindamor, (as Unfashionable as such a
Profession may seem in a Gentleman not yet two and Twenty) that I find the
study of those excellent Themes, Gods Word, and his Providence, so Difficult,
and yet so Pleasing and Inviting, that could Heaven afford me no greater
Blessing than a clear Account of the abstruse Misteryes of Divinity and
Providence, I should value the having my Understanding Gratified and Enriched
with Truths of so Noble and precious a Nature, enough to Court Heaven at the
rate of renounceing for it all those unmanly Sensualities and trifling
Vanities, for which inconsiderate Mortals are wont to forfeite the Interest,
their Savior so dearly bought them in it.

Nor shall we only converse with Saints and Angels, 1 John 3.2. 1 Cor. 15.28.
and see Him as he is, who (as the Scripture tells us) shall then be all in
all: Comprising all the goods, we value in the Creatures, as eminently and
fully, as the Sun does the Light, that Twinkleth in the Stars.

If one, Anaxageras.
that was none of the least of the Philosophers, scrupled not to tell the man
that asked him, What he was borne for, that, It was to contemplate the Sun; If
our best Naturalists themselves, though the darkness that is here cast upon
things, and the dimnesse of our Intellectual Eyes, (which I remember Aristotle
fitly compares to those of an Owl) permit us to discern but very little of
that Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, which he has expressed in the Creation, are
yet often transporeed and ravished with a just Admiration of the Perfections,
He has displayed in his Workman-ship. If the wise Queen that came so far to
visit Solomon, was put almost into an Ecstasy, by the sight of his, though
Wise, yet Human, Ordering of things; And if the Angels themselves (as St. Peter
informs us) desire to look into the mysterious contrivances of God, in order to
Man's Redemption: How great a Satisfaction, Lindamor, may we justly conceive it
must needs be, to be admitted to See so much of God, as Heaven will Discover to
us? Especially, since so much of our future Happiness will consist in that
Beatifick Vision, (as the Schoolmen justly call it) that St. John concluded,
that we shall be like God, because we shall see Him as He is. And our Savior
himself paraphrases our Celestial felicity by this blessed Vision, Matt. 5.8.
where he says, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: As on
the other side the Writer to the Hebrews imployes the being denied the sight of
that Divine Object, as a Description of extreme wretchedness, in that Text,
where having exhorted those to whom he writes to follow peace and holiness; he
adds, Heb. 12.14.
as the formidablest Menace which he could make useof to Deterr them from
sleighting his Exhortation, without which no man shall see the Lord. And by
this Vision our Savior seems to describe the happiness even of Angels; where,
forbidding the Scandalizing of any of those little ones that believe in him, he
adds, to enforce what he had said, that their Angels do always see the face
^f his Father in Heaven. Matt. 18.10.
We shall ^e so taken up with the Contem^lation and Fruition of that Glorious
Object, (in whose Infinity all goods are ^ncluded and Dilated) that Ages
num^erlesse as the Joys That Beatifick Vision abounds with, will scarce afford
us leisure for a Diversion to any other Pleasures, than those it self creates;
which are so Numerous, and so Entire, that we shall there Desire nothing, that
we Have not, except more Tongues to sing more Praises to him, or at least a
Capacity to pay him greater Thankss, for what we Have; And even those Desires,
Gods gracious Acceptance will make, in being Conceived, Accomplished: for,
otherwise Heaven's Residents scarce know any other Want, then that of Need to
Wish; The Complete Blessedness of their Condition, reducing them to a happy
Uselesnesse of Wishes, by affording them a full Prae-possession of all the
Objects of Desire. There Time, like Fire, having destroyed What ever it could
prey on, shall at last Dye it self, and shall Go Out into Eternity. Whose
Nature is such, that though our Joys, after some Centuryes o^ Years, may seem
to have been grow^ Elder, by having been enjoyed so many Ages, yet will they
really still continue New, not only upon the score^ of their Welcomenesse and
Freshness, but by their perpetually Equal (because Infinite) Distance from a
Period. There, our felicity shall always be the Same, yet ever New. Weariness
arguing Imperfection, either in the Object, or the Appetite; the Former of
which is Impossible in God, and the Latter shall Cease in Heaven; Where our
Felicity shall be so Great, that Variety (it self) shall not be needed as a
part of it. And if Heaven do admit Variety, it may be supposed such a one, as
shall consist in a Further Knowledge of the First Object (God), not a forsaking
of it; and such as arises from the fixed Beholding of the changingnecks of
Doves, or such as we may see in the diversisi'd Refractions of the same
sparkling Diamond. In God, there is such a various Identity, that the Fruition
of Him both Satisfies and Creates Desires: though That, without Satiety; and
This, without Disquiet. Other Delights, like the usual Clothes we wear,
quickly grow Stale, and are soon Worn out; where as Coe^estiall Pleasures
participate the Prerogative of the Jews Garments in the Deuteronomy 29.5
Wilderness, of not Impairing by being used Long. But as the amorous Needle,
once joined unto the Loadstone, would never, uncompell'd, forsake the
enchanting Mineral; but, after ages, cling no less closely to it than at the
first moment of their Union: So do the Saints in Heaven, with the same
undiminisht Freshness, ever possess their Joys, as if each moment were the
First that they possessed them in. And if their Happiness do not improve by
lastinger Enjoyment, it is perhaps but because it was at first incapable of
Increase. Or, if our Pleasures do admit Accession, they shall receive it from
our Assurance, that we shall taste them Ever, and perpetually repeat (or rather
continue) the same renewed Fruitions to an Eternity, endeared by nothing more,
than by the quiet leisure it will afford us, undistractedly to employ it, in
Celebrating of the Author's Praises; and in a Condition, happier in that by it
we grow past Doing, than past Suffering Ill. In Heaven, (in a word) our
inexhausted Joys will be so numberless, and so immense, that we shall need
(as well as have) Eternity it self to taste them fully.

But, Lindamor, Canaan; but only in a few words to let you see, that it is, a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey, And though I acknowledge, I have given you but
dark Descriptions (and sometimes, rather Poetical than Chorographicall) of
what the Apostle styles, Col. 1.12.
the Inheritance of the Saints in light. Yet since, to whet our Longings for
Fruitive (or Experimental) Knowledge it is reserved among the Prerogatives of
being in Heaven, to know how happy we shall be, when There: And since what the
Scripture has revealed of Paradise, seems meant rather to Quicken our
Obedience, then Satisfy our Curiosity; I may for those purposes, have perhaps
tolerably performed that task (of Heavenly Topographie) by the acknowledgments
of my Disability to do it worthily. I shall now only add this Property of our
expected Bliss, that the vast Multitude of Partners does detract nothing from
each private Share, nor does the Publicknesse of it lessen Propriety in it.
This Ocean of Felicity being so Shoarlesse and so Bottomless, that all the
Saints and Angels cannot exhaust it, it being as impossible for any Aggregate
of Finites to comprehend or exhaust one Infinite, as it is for the greatest
number of Mathematick Points to amount to, or constitute, a Body. Our
neighbour-regions do all enjoy the benefit of light as well as we; yet we
enjoy not Less, than if they enjoyed None. Indeed, there is this difference
between the Sun of Righteousness, and that of Heaven; that, whereas the later
by his presence Eclipses all the Planets (his Attendants); the former, though
radiant with a much mightier Splendor, will by his Presence Impart it to his
Saints: according to that of the Apostle; Coll. 3.4.
When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him
in Glory. So that the Elect, in relation to this Sun, shall not be like
Stars, which his shining obscures and makes to disappear; but like polisht
Silver, or well glazed Arms, or those vaster Balls of burnisht Brass, the
topps of Churches are sometimes adorned with, which shine not till they be
shined upon, and derive their glittering Brightness and all the fire, that
environs and illustrates them from their being exposed (unskreen'd) to the
Sun's refulgent beams. Cant. 6.3.
I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine, says every Saint (with the Spouse
in the Canticles) to her Redeemmer. David says of them that put their trust in
God, Psalm. 36.8.
That he shall abundantly satisfy them with the fatness of His house, and
make them drink of the River of his pleasures: As if he meant to insinuate,
that, as when a multitude of persons drink of the same River, none of them is
able to exhaust it, and yet each of them may have the full liberty of drinking
as much as he can, or as much as he could though none but himself should be
Allowed to drink of it: so whosoever enjoyes God, enjoyes him wholly, or at
least does enjoy him so entirely, in Relation to that man's capacity that the
Fruition of whatsoever rests unenjoy'd of God, is forbidden by the Immensity of
the Object, and not the Praepossession of his Rivalls. The Angels, though of a
Nature Differing from our's, and thereby placed above the personal Experience
of our sufferings, and infirmities, do yet so sympathize with us, that (as our
Savior informs us) they rejoice at the repentance of a sinner.

And though, the members of the Church Militant, and those of the Triumphant,
live as far asunder, as Heaven is from Earth, and are not more Distant as to
place, than Differing as to Condition; yet St. Paul reckons all the Saints to
be but one Family in Heaven and Earth. Ephesians. 3.15.
If then the disparity of Residences, of Qualities, and of Conditions, cannot
Now hinder the Lovers of God, from being so concerned in one another; how much
of endearing Kindness may we suppose, that they will Enterchange, When both
their Love shall be perfected, and all those other Graces, that are proper to
cherish and increase it: For, the same Apostle, who, to assist us to conceive
the strictness of the Union both betwixt Christ and his Saints, and the Saints
among themselves, tells us, that He is the Head, 1 Cor. 12.
and they are his Body, and Members, in particular; teaches us to make this
inference That, (to express his Doctrine in his own words) If one Member
suffer all the Members suffer with it; v. 27, 28.
and if one Member be honored, all the Members rejoice with it. Yes, Lindamor,
in that blessed Condition, our wills being perfectly conformed unto our Maker's,
no Saint nor Angel can enjoy his Love without possessing a proportionate Degree
of ours. And then, since perfect Friendship appropriates to each Friend the
Crosses and Prosperities of the other (as good Barzillai could not be highlier
obliged by David, 2 Samuel 19.37.
than by the Kings kindness to his Son) each several Beatitude in Heaven,
shall (in some sort concern the whole Society, and) be Ours. As the Earth
receives Addition of Light by the Sun's Beams bestowed upon the Stars, and
from the Moon reflecting upon Her. And because our personal Capacities are too
too narrow, to contain all that Joy, we are (by the strange Arithmetic of
Friendship) multiplied into as many Happy Persons, as there are Saints and
Angels blessed in Heaven. Our perfect Union to Our Common Head, and mutual
Communion with each other, applying and bringing home every Felicity of theirs
to us. This Friendly and reciprocal Sympathy, reaching us each Glorified
Saint's Blessedness, and Him ours, by a blessed Circulation, which makes us
increase, by our resenting them, those Joys (of others) whose Increase we
resent. But my Thoughts are engaged in so good Company, Lindamor, that they
keep me from considering, how fast the Hours pass, and have almost made me
forget, that the Time which my Occasions allow me for Scribbling to you, is so
far spent, that not now at last to Reprieve you from the Persecutions of my
blunt Pen, were to be almost as Injurious to my own Affairs, as to your
Patience. Hereafter yet, I may possibly make you some amends for this, with
Riper Discourses of the Nature and Duties, or (if you will) the Properties and
Returns of this Love, to which I have hitherto presented you some Motives. To
(the last of) which, I might add; That, our Love to the Creature is an Earnest,
but to God it is a Title; the One makes Us the Object's, but the Other makes the
Object Ours: That, since there is in Love so strong a Magic, as to Transform
the Lover into the Object Loved; We ought to be extremely careful of the
Dedication of a Passion, which, as it is placed, must either Dignifie our
Nature, or Degrade it. And not to Address to any Lower (or, which is all one,
to any Other) Object, the highest Intensity of a Love, which cannot Stoop
without our Degradation. And these I might Exspatiate on, and Recruit them with
many other Motives, additionall to those already insisted on; but that I may
more properly reserve them to the Treatise of the Properties of that Love,
whose Nature so partakes That of its Object, that there can hardly be produced
more powerful Motives to it than the Conditions of it. Since then (as I
freshly intimated) I cannot but fear that your tired Patience, as well as my
urgent Occasions (though these will recall me to morrow Morning to my own
Western Hermitage) does at present summon me to leave you: and since I cannot
do so in a happier place, than Heaven, I shall suspend my Farewells, only to
beg you to believe, that so Noble a Motive of Exalting-Friendship, as the
Ambition of rendering mine a fit Return for yours, has so Improved my Kindness
that my Affection without wronging its own Greatness, could not Express it
self by any Less Attempt, then this of gaining you the Greatest and the most
Desirable of all Goods, by elevating (that Noble Harbinger of your Soul,) your
Love to Heaven: Whose Joys alone are not Inferior to those which the Being
made Isntrumental to procure them you, would really Create in,

SIR, Your most Faithful, most Affectionate, and most Humble Servant, ROBERT
BOIL.
From Leese this 6th of Aug. 1648.

