A DISCOURSE ABOUT CHRIST AND ANTICHRIST: OR, A DEMONSTRATION THAT Jesus is the
Christ, From The Truth of His PREDICTIONS, Especially, The Coming and the
Seduction of ANTICHRIST. To which is added, A TREATISE about the RESURRECTION.

BY Edward Bagshaw Stu. of Chapter Chapter in Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Simon Miller, at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1661:

INSIGNISSIMIS ET Fidaei Christianae Studiosissimis Viris, HUMPHREDO WYNCH,
Equiti and Baronetto, ET JOHANNI BROWN, Armigero; Opellam hanc, De JESU and
RESURRECTIONE, Religionis nostrae Fundamenta confirmantem, ET Piis, uti sperat,
omnibus non inutilem futuram AUTHOR Sui amoris ac observantiae ergo D. D. C. Q.

Edwards Bagshawe.

The Preface to the Christian and Candid Reader.
ALthough the Disputes and Controversies in Religion, have multiplied
themselves into many large and tedious Volumes, yet, I believe, Christian
Reader, thou will easily agree with me, that were but one Question rightly
stated, and thoroughly believed, most other might safely be neglected by us, as
Useless and Impertinent. And the Question is this, Whether the Scriptures be
the Word of God; or, to use an Expression, which will give no Party offense, A
full and perfect declaration of Gods Will. Were this but once really assented
to, who does not see, that all Additionals are either Impious, or, else, at the
best, but needless and unnecessary Appendixes: much like rotten and painted
Posts, affixed unto a stately Edifice; which do not only deface the Beauty of
the Building, but likewise make the strength of it to be suspected. Since
Scripture, if it indeed it did come from God, does best alone, without the
least mixture of Humane Inventions to underprop it.

This therefore is that great thing, which in this following Treatise I have
undertaken to demonstrate, in a Method, if my Reading and Observation fail me
not, which none have attempted before me: For whereas there are two ways, by
which men ordinarily do come to be ascertained of the Truth of Scripture: The
one, by an Inward Experimental Assurance; the other, by an Argumentative and
Rational Evidence; The first of these I have altogether waved, because though
Experience be an Infallible Argument to him that has it, yet it is not a
Demonstration that can be improved to the Conviction of another; And therefore
I have applied my self wholly unto the second way of Proof; wherein dealing
with men as men; and enlarging upon those common and known Principles of
Reason, that all acknowledge; the Unbeliever, must find some stronger
Arguments, than any I have yet met with, to justify himself by; or else, with
me, be won over to the Obedience of the Faith of Christ. I do not speak this,
as if I thought it possible for any Endeavor or Art of Man to persuade another
to believe: but because this (...), or Poize, to which the mind is brought by a
sober and calm debating the matter on both sides, is that way by which the
Spirit of God in Inquisitive men does usually prepare an Entrance for Faith;
for the strong man must first be cast out, and every Objection singled out and
disarmed, before a stronger than he can enter in. And this, Christian Reader,
is the very utmost design of this small Treatise, which I had never published,
but that I thought it my duty, to impart unto others that satisfaction which I
my self have received. If there be any that make another Interpretation, and
from what I have spoken concerning Antichrist (wherein I have used the very
Language, and, so far as I understand it, the sense of Scripture) will infer,
that I am either for, or against any of the Parties, who now contend about
their several Forms of Worship: They will wrong me very much, but themselves
more; since the misjudging of others is an Uncharitable Presumption which is
incompatible with a Christian Temper. What my Judgment is concerning
Episcopacy, and how suitable to right Reason and Scripture that Order is, I have
already asserted? And I think none are greater Enemies to Bishops than those
who seek to establish them, by pleading a Necessity of Ceremonies, which
whether they may at all be used, is a Question: but that they may very sasely
be disused, is no Question at all. It is therefore liberty in small things
alone that I have formerly and do yet plead for; and that upon this single
Argument, because I think Christ came to set his Church free from all
unnecessary Yokes; and therefore it does not lie in the power of any man to
bring them into bondage again: And let but any sober disinteressed person
convince me once that the Church ( i.e. where the State is Christian the civil
Magistrate) has power to impose in Religious Worship, and I shall then so far
alter my Judgment, as instead of being troubled that we are gone thus far, be
very sorry that we go no farther in our conformity. But till then, it is my
constant Prayer, That, if our Rulers will stretch their Power, to make some
Harmony between the Christian and the Civil State, all men may quietly suffer
for what they cannot cheerfully submit to; without making any more noise in the
World, than what a calm and dispassionate debate of Truth may amount to. Had
this Course at first been taken, we should not have had some cry down Dagon,
and set up Baal-Berith, i.e superstitiously, if not worse, displace
superstition; and exercise a greater Tyranny than that which they complained
of. But I leave this sad Argument, and entreat thee, Christian Reader, to look
upon me as one, that, by the goodness of God, can call himself a Christian in
the most large and comprehensive Notion of the Word, according to our Saviors
explication, Whoever is not against Christ, is for him; and wherever I see the
least appearance of sincerity and uprightness, though in Persons differing from
my self in Judgment, I can preserve my own opinion, without the least
prejudice to that Charity I ow Mankind in general, or that endearedness of
Affection which is particularly due to all sorts of Zealous, though mistaken,
Christians. With this Confession I close my Preface, and dismiss thee to the
Book it self; which I desire may be read, as it was writ, with a single and
unprejudiced mind. And if thou find anything of satisfaction by it, give God
the glory, who has made use of a very unlikely Instrument to do thee good by:
But if in any place thou find my Resoning does not seem Close and Pertinent,
let me know my Error, and I shall think my self more obliged to thee for thy
serious reproof, than for thy partial and unweighed Commendation. Farewell.

EDW. BAGSHAWE.
Christ Church in Oxon. May 21. 1661.
A Demonstration that JESUS is the CHRIST.
JOH. 13.19. Now I tell you of it before it come to pass, that when it does
come to pass, you may know that I am.


THese are the words of our Savior, spoken by way of Inference or Use from the
Prediction he had made concerning the Treachery of Judas; for, as we find, v.
2. (...).
The devil having already put, or cast, it into the heart of Judas to betray
him, our Savior warns his Disciples of it, even while they sat at Supper with
him; and first he tells them in general Terms, that they were not all clean, v.
10. (to which the Evangelist adds by way of Comment, for he knew who should
betray him, therefore he said, ye are not all clean, v.11.) and then more
particularly our Savior explaines what this Uncleanness was, and wherein it
did consist; that it was, not a Ceremonial, but a Moral Uncleanness; not a
Filthiness of the Flesh, but an Impurity of the Spirit, for, says he, He that
eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against me, v. 18. i.e. shall
betray me, as in express words is declared, v. 21.

This Crime, which had been strangely horrid if a professed Enemy had done it,
appeared to the Disciples much more incredible, in that it should be attemped
by one of them, who knew him to be the Son of God, who had confessed, preached,
and done Miracles in his Name; and now, in token of perfect Amity and
Friendship, were all sat at an Holy Banquet together; and therefore that any
of their Number should consent to, nay, promote so great a Villainy, seemed a
thing almost Impossible: And therefore we find the Apostles did dispute and
enquire among themselves, and were so much surprised with wonder, that they
even questioned the Truth of their Masters Prediction.

Our Savior knowing their Thoughts, and being willing to appease and settle
their Inquietudes; in this Verse he seems to grant that such a thing was scarce
imaginable, that one so related to Christ, should yet harbor such bloody
designs against him: But yet, says he, as strange and as incredible as it
seems, it will certainly come to pass; and therefore I acquaint you with it
before hand, that when it does come to pass, you may know that I am.

These words, I am, are capable of a twofold Interpretation.

1. I am God. 2. I am the true Messiah.
First, These words, I am, may signify, I am God; so when Moses enquired after
the Name of God, this short Answer is returned unto him, Exodus 3.14.
tell the people, to whom you go, that I am has sent thee. And therefore in
the Song which David sung for the Triumphant entry of the Arc this Name is
recorded, Extol ye the Lord by his Name Jah, i.e. I am; which implies and
contains in it all the parts of successive Being, Apoc. 1.
and therefore it is rendered by God himself, He that is that was, and that is
to come, i.e. that has one Fixed, Entire, Immutable Being. Now what God by
Moses does barely assert, by Isay he does challenge, and demonstrate to be his
due, by those two Incommunicable Properties of the Deity, viz. his Power, and
his Preseience. Isa. 41.23.
And therefore when he dispures his Right with the Heathen Idols, Show, says
he, the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods.
And in other places, he tells his people that such and such Judgments, which
he had threatened, should come upon them; And then, says he, ye shall know that
I am the Lord. So our Savior here, being to take his leave of his Disciples,
and foreseeing how shrewdly their Faith would be shaken, seems to tell them:
You have indeed confessed me to be the Son of God, and therein One with God the
Father; this, if you judge of me by my outward appearance, or by the vile and
cruel usage I shall shortly undergo, must needs appear to be a strange and
irreconcilable contradiction. And therefore I leave you this Prediction, that
when you see it fulfilled, ye may believe that I am God indeed. And thus I am
is to be understood, in those words of our Savior, where he does expressly
assert his Divinity. Joh. 8.38.
Before Abraham was, I am, i.e. According to my Divine Nature, by which I am
from Everlasting: Of which Nature it is that our Savior speaks to Nicodemus,
None has ascended up into heaven, Joh. 3.13.
but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man who is in heaven, i.e.
who is now there as God, though, as man, he be circumscribed and limited to a
place on Earth.

Secondly, These words, I am, may be rendered, I am the Christ, or the true
Messiah, the Savior of the World; whose coming was so long ago foretold and
prophesied of. This will appear by comparing two places of Scripture together,
Acts 13.25. with Joh. 3.23. In Act. 13.25. the Apostle Paul, repeating the
words of John Baptist, says, As John fulfilled his Course, he said, whom think
ye that I am; I am not, which the Evangelist John relating, c. 3.28. makes up
the sense thus: Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said I am not the
Christ. Thus I am is to be understood in those words of our Savior to the
Jews, If you do not believe that I am, Joh. 8.24.
you shall dye in your sins; i.e. If you do not believe that I am that Messiah
who is to dye for the sins of the World, you shall dye in your sins, and take
the guilt of them upon your selves.

And thus I take the words in this place.

From the words thus explained arise two Observations:

Doct. 1. That our Savior is the true Messiah.

Doct. 2. That the way for us to be infallibly assured that our Savior is the
true Messiah, is impartially to weigh the truth of his Predictions.

our Savior is the true Messiah; and this will be of easy dispatch, because
it is the first known Article of our Faith. I shall only briefly explain it.
That which in Hebrew is called Messiah, in Greek Christ, in English signifies
Anointed: And implies the solemn designation of our Savior by God unto that
great Work of Redeeming Mankind. For as in the Old Law, all that were called
out unto any eminent Employment, either in Church or State, Exodus 30.23, etc.
had an Oil of a peculiar composition poured out upon them, which was a sign of
their Inauguration and Installment from God into their Office. Thus Saul and
David were anointed to be Kings; Aaron and his Successors were anointed to be
Priests; Elisha and some others were anointed to be Prophets; Psalm. 105.15.
(whence is that of the Psalmist, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm, where the latter part of the Verse does explain the former;) so our
Savior, who was in a spiritual sense to discharge all these Offices, was
Anointed, i.e. filled with the Spirit of God, the gifts and graces of which
were Typified by the Clearness and Fragrancy of Legal Oil, Ver. 7.
whence that in Psalm. 45.7. He has anointed thee with the Oil of gladness
above thy Fellows, is by all the Jewish, as well as Christian Expositors
understood of the plentiful effusion of the Holy Spirit, which was to be upon
the Messiah; for that of him, and not of Solomon, that Psalm was written is
clear from the foregoing Verse, where speaking of the same Person, he says,
Ver. 6. Heb. 1.8, 9.
Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. And therefore by the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews is rightly applied unto our Savior; Joh. 3.34.
of whom John Baptist gives this Testimony, That God gave unto him the Spirit,
(...); i.e. not in that stinted and limited measure, wherein formerly it was
dispensed, but suited to the Largeness of an Immence Donor, and to the Capacity
of an Infinite Receiver; who was God as well as Man; and by that near Union did
infuse into his Manhood whatever is conceiveable of Power, Purity, or
Perfection.

And that this is the meaning of Jesus being the Christ, i.e. anointed with the
Spirit, two places, amongst many other, will clear, one is that of our Savior
in his Sermon, Luke 4.18. wherein he applies unto himself that passage in the
Prophet Isay, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, wherefore he has anointed me;
i. e. By putting his Spirit upon me he has abundantly fitted me for my
employment. Another place is that of the Disciples, in their Prayer to God,
Act. 4.27. where applying David's words in the second Psalm unto our Savior,
Herod, say they, and Pilate, together with the people of Israel were gathered
against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed; i. e. as Peter explains
it in another place, Whom thou have anointed with the Holy Spirit and with
Power; Act. 10.38.
thereby enabling and qualifying him for so great and weighty an undertaking.
And so much for the first Observation.

That the way infallibly to prove that our Savior is the true Messiah, is
impartially to weigh the truth of his Predictions.

Before I address my self to the proof of this, I must answer an Objection,
which many may be ready to make, viz. That this is a thing sufficiently
believed already, and therefore it will be only lost labor to go about to
prove it. To which I answer:

1. That the greatest part of those who call themselves Christians are not so
indeed: For as the Apostle says of his Thessalonians, so may we say of most in
our respective Auditories, 1 These. 3.2.
All have not Faith. There being, in all places, many, too many, whose
Conversation should the Apostle have seen, he would have told them, as he did
the Philippians weeping, That they were enemies of the Cross of Christ, for
their belly was their God, and they gloried in their shame. Phil. 3.18, 19.
For let us not deceive our selves, as if Viciousness and Pravity of Life,
could be reconciled with Sincerity and Truth of Faith; but rather let us argue
with David, The wickedness, says he, Psalm. 36.1,
of the wicked, says in my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes;
i.e. when I see the Actions of wicked men, I do as evidently perceive, that
inwardly they fear not God, as if they did in express terms proclaim and avouch
it. So may we, without any uncharitableness, conclude from the Lives of most
Christians, that their hearts are full of Unbelief: For there is so necessary,
so inseparable a Connection between Faith and Obedience, that they can no more
be severed than Fire and Heat. And therefore, since the fruits of Unbelief are
so apparent every where, it is our duty, not only to Preach, but to Prove Jesus
to be Christ, that so we may root out those innate and soul-destroying Seeds.

2. My second Answer to that Objection, is, That the firmest and best rooted
Faith is yet capable of an Increase and Progress. He that believes a little,
ought to believe much; and he that believes much, may believe more; and
therefore Arguments which do enforce grounds of Faith can never be
unseasonable; for which reason it is, that though these Disciples did believe
on our Savior, had confessed him, and, in token of firm affiance, did promise
to dye with him, rather than to forsake him; yet our Savior thought fit to
fortify and strengthen them by yet more urging this new Motive, Sc. the event
of his Predictions.

Having thus cleared my way to the Doctrine, and showed the necessity of
preaching it, I affirm, That the way to be infallibly assured, that our Savior
is the Messiah, is to observe the Event of his Precitions; Because

First, Judas, I tell you, says he, before it comes to pass, that when it does
come to pass, you may believe that I am. And again, when he had told them of
his own departure, Joh. 14.29.
and that he would send the Comforter, that is, the Holy Spirit, to supply his
room, and to make up their Joys, he adds, And now I tell you before it come to
pass, Joh. 16.4.
that when it does come to pass, ye might believe. Again, when he had told his
Disciples of that violent and inhumane Usage they should meet with, These
things, says he, have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them; i. e. And from thence gather a full and
peremptory assurance of my Truth and Veracity. So in those many Predictions,
which we have in Mat. 24. our Savior subjoyns (...), Mar. 13.23.
but you look to it, behold I have foretold you all things. So that our
Savior, so often urging and insisting upon his Prophesies, seems to intimate,
that he was not unwilling to venture his whole Cause upon the force of that
single Argument.

Secondly, Moses, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren,
Deuteronomy. 18.18.
like unto thee, and I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him. This Prophecy our Savior has a peculiar
respect to throughout all this Gospel of John, as Chapter 5.46. Had ye believed
Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; And Chap. 6.38. I came
down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me. And
Chap. 7.16. My Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me, which he oftentimes
repeats, from whence many of the people, Ver 40.
who heard him, conclude, This is of a truth the Prophet; i. e. That Prophet,
whose coming Moses had foretold. So in that last Prayer which our Savior made
on earth in behalf of his Disciples, Joh. 17.6.8.
he uses these words, I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou
gave me out of the World. For I have given unto them the words which thou
gave me; wherein our Savior uses the very expressions that are in the
Prophecy of Moses.

Now if any should object, as the Jews did, Joh. 8.13.
that our Savior bore record of himself, and therefore his Record was not
true: At least we ought to have some more convincing Arguments to prove his
Truth, than barely his own Testimony. God has, in that Prophecy of Moses,
both made and answered that Objection: If, says he, Deu. 18.20, 21.
thou say in thy heart, how shall we know the word, or the Prediction, which
the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if
the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has
not spoken. From whence it follows by the Rule of Contraries, that if a thing
be spoken in the name of the Lord, and does come to pass, it is a certain sign
that the Lord has spoken it: According unto that of Jeremy, When a Prophet
Prophecieth of peace, Jer. 28.9.
(and so consequently of any thing else) when the word of the Prophet shall
come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has truly sent
him. So that while we are upon this way of enquiry after the truth of our
Savior, by seeking whether his Predictions have been fulfilled or not, we are
in Gods way, and have his advice to warrant us.

Lastly, The fulfilling of Prophecies is a much more sure and satisfactory
proof than the doing of Miracles. As in Natural things, an Argumentative and
Rational evidence is more convincing than a sensible one; for the one depends
upon an alterable Principle, that is, the temper of the Body, which is subject
to many changes and mistakes; but the other is bottomed upon an Eternal and
Immutable Principle; i.e. Right Reason, which never varies, but, like Light, is
always in every place the same. Hence many Philosophers have doubted whether
Fire be hot, or, Snow be white in their own Nature, or not; because were man's
body less patible, or his Eye of another Figure, he would not feel that force
in the one, nor discern that color in the other. But none ever yet doubted,
whether Three Angles in a Triangle were equal to two right; nor, whether all
Lines drawn from the same Center unto the same Circumference were equal; with
many such like Propositions, because they are capable of such a Demonstration
as passes from the Eye into the Understanding. So is it in spiritual things,
those who believe any thing merely upon the Credit of Miracles, have no firm
Basis to ground upon; because (in spite of that received distinction, that the
devil can do Mira, but he cannot do Miracula) our Savior tells us, that
Antichrist should do great Miracles, for sure (...), i. e. Prodigies and
Wonders, comprehend as much strangeness in them, as the word Miracle amounts
to; And in the Law God cautions his People, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
that if a Prophet did give a sign or a Wonder, yet if he taught false
Doctrine, he should not be hearkened to; which plainly implies, that a false
Prophet may do Miracles; so that he who relies wholly on them, is not certain
but he may be deceived. Our Savior therefore though he did many Miracles, yet
he does not bottom his plea to be the Messiah merely upon them, Luke 16. ult.
Joh. 5 31.
but appeals altogether unto Moses and the Prophets; and so did his Apostles
after him; and therefore the Apostle Peter, after he had related that he had
heard a voice from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.19.
whereby God owned Christ for his beloved Son, and commanded all to hear him,
yet he concludes, that we have (...), the Prophesies recorded in the Old
Testament, and fulfilled by our Savior, (...), a more firm and stable
foundation of Faith than that Voice: Because that was a Transient, whereas the
fulfilling of Prophecies is a standing Miracle. Therefore as some argued about
John Baptist, Joh 10.41.
John, say they, did no miracle, but all things that John spoke of this man
were true; whereupon many believed on our Savior; So now, upon supposition
that Miracles were ceased, (which I will never grant so long as I see daily
supernatural effects of the Word in working Conversion, which when I was last
here I did demonstrate to be as great a Miracle, as the raising of Christ from
the dead, and the Apostle Paul does every where cite that, as the greatest
which ever God did) but if Miracles were ceased, yet if we find that all things
which our Savior said are true: That what he foretold should come to pass, is
come to pass, then have we an undoubted Evidence that he was the True Messiah,
and therefore to be believed and trusted in.

The Use I make of this, 2 Pet. 1.16.
as the Apostle Peter speaks, (...), Artificially devised and well plotted
Fables; but that they may say with Paul, 2 Timothy 1.12. Joh. 6.14.
We know whom we have believed; we have searched and tried, and we find that
this is indeed that Prophet which should come into the World. And this scrutiny
I earnestly recommend especially to two sorts of Persons.

1. To Preachers of the Gospel; how unfit they are to convert others (which is
the only duty and end of Preaching) who are not yet converted themselves I need
not mention. And therefore it ought to be presumed of every Gospel Minister,
that he himself is abundantly satisfied with the truth of what he delivers; and
that he bespeaks his Hearers, in David's words, Come unto me, Psalm. 66.16.
all ye that are yet in your doubts, and I will tell you what God has done for
my soul; i.e. What means God has used to free me from the same unbelief which
is natural to all. Such an one, who is thus furnished, must not only barely
Preach, but he must Prove: He must not only Instruct, but he must Convince
Gainsayers, and leave the Unbeliever without excuse, that he may have no
retreat to defend his Disobedience, but merely his Obstinacy. Act. 9.20.
Thus did the Apostle Paul, who as soon as ever he was converted, went and
preached Jesus in their Synagogues, that he is the Son of God; And again, Ver.
22.
says the Text, The more they raged, the more confident he grew, (...),
Arguing or strongly proving that Jesus is the very Christ. Act. 28 23.
And thus he dealt with those who came to him at Rome, He expounded unto them
the Kingdom of God, (...), Testifying, or vehemently urging (as the word
signifies, Act. 20.21.) and persuading the things of Jesus from morning until
evening out of the Law and the Prophets. Thus likewise Apollos, he taught the
things of the Lord, Act. 18.25.
(...), with great exactness; and (...), He convinced the Jews with great
earnestness, Ver. ^8.
proving publicly that Jesus was the Christ. These ought to be our Patterns,
and it is, without doubt, one Reason, why the Gospel makes so slow a progress,
because we do not begin at the Foundation -- We take no Notice, that that which
men's hearts most rise up against, is against Jesus being the Christ, and
therefore here we should aim our Battery, where the Enemy of our souls is most
deeply entrenched. For our Obedience to the Commands of Christ cannot rise
higher than our belief of the truth of Christ; and according as this persuasion
is more or less wrought in the hearts of men, so will their practice be.
Therefore as in Practice, Faith must precede Repentance, so in Preaching, the
Doctrine of Faith must precede the Doctrine of Repentance: Or else we build
without a Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11.
and throw about our Hay and Stubble, our own Idle Fancies, which will never
reach, much less pierce the Conscience: for all the while the heart is
unconvinced it is unconverted. Now to convince others, there cannot be a better
way than that which Paul constantly used, to relate the manner, and to enforce
the mediums by which we were convinced our selves.

2. I recommend this to Unbelievers, because all the while they are so they lie
under the danger of many sad and dreadful Predictions. Deuteronomy. 18.19.
He that hears not the Prophet, says God by Moses, I will require it of him.
And I fear the greatest Unbeliever of us all would at that time, upon such a
Summons, be utterly unprovided of an Answer. Joh. 3.36.
He that believes not the Son, says our Savior, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him; i.e. He shall bear his own burden, and shift for
himself as well as he can, when he is to grapple with Eternal Vengeance, since
there is nothing interposed to fence and to keep off that stroke; For me, says
Christ, who am ready to do it, 2 These. 1.8.
he scornfully rejects and refuses. Hereafter, says the Apostle Paul, Christ
will appear in flaming fire, to take vengeance of them who know not God, and
who obey not the Gospel of his Son. I know very well that these will be derided
by the Unbeliever, but if it shall appear, that other things every whit as
incredible (nay, more incredible, since men naturally have some apprehensions
of future punishment) have been foretold by our Savior, and are already
fulfilled; If this, I say, can be proved, then I hope the Unbeliever will be
persuaded to shaked out that devil which does blind and possess him; and
speedily alter his opinion, before his Case be desperate, and he find by
experience, that all these things were sad Truths, though his Lust, and not his
Reason, would not suffer him to hear them.

To direct you in this Enquiry, take notice of, and weigh especially these
three Predictions of our Savior, because we are all living witnesses of the
truth and fulfilling of them.

I. Concerning the preaching and spreading of the Gospel. II. Concerning the
Destruction of Jerusalem, and dispersion of the Jews. III. Concerning the
coming and seduction of Antichrist.
The first remarkable Prediction is, the Preaching and spreading of the Gospel.
There are two places wherein our Savior prophesies that his Gospel should be
preached all over the World. One is in defense of the woman, who poured a
costly ointment upon his Head, Where ever, says he, this Gospel shall be
preached, Mat. 26.13.
(...), In the whole world, there what this woman has done shall be spoken for
a memorial of her. Another place is in express terms, speaking of the
destruction of Jerusalem: And, says he, Mat. 24.14.
this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached, (...), in the whole inhabited
world, for a Testimony unto all the Gentiles, and then shall the end, i. e. of
Jerusalem, come. For the understanding of which Prophecy we must take notice of

1. The thing which was preached. It is called the Gospel of the Kingdom; and
what that is our Savior explaines in his last words to his Disciples when he
sent them to preach it: Thus it is written, Luke 24.46, 47. Act. 13.38, 39. 1
Cor. 15.1, 3.
and thus it behoved the Messiah to dye, and to rise again the third day; and
that in his Name should be preached Repentance and Remission of sins unto all
the Gentiles, beginning from Jerusalem. So that it was a Doctrine very
incredible, it being, as the Apostle observes, 1 Cor. 1.23.
unto the Jews a stumbling block, (that he should save others who did not save
himself) and to the Greeks Foolishness; who could by no means endure to hear of
a Resurrection, as we find by Paul's entertainment at Athens, as soon as ever he
mentioned it, (...), Act. 17.31, 32.
they mocked and slighted him. So that there was little hopes of the Gospels
prevailing by any Quallifications or Innate Dispositions that were in men's
minds to receive it.

2. The second thing considerable in this Prophecy is, the time when it should
begin, viz. after our Saviors death. Had our Savior sent his Apostles to
preach this Gospel in his lifetime, the Reputation of his Miracles, and the
unexampled Holiness of his Person, might have given some credit and countenance
to this Doctrine, and have facilitated its entrance; but to stay so long, till
he himself was so shamefully put to death, and while the Fact was yet fresh in
memory, then to send his Disciples forth; this seems, to the Eye of Reason, a
Time very unseasonable. Yet, to show how ill Judges we are of Divine
Proceedings, and, how infinitely beyond our shallow capacities Gods designs are
ordered, this was the time which our Savior both chose and foretold: When,
Joh. 8.28.
says he, ye have lift up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am; And
again, When I am lift up from the Earth, I will draw all men unto me; Joh.
12.32.
i. e. When you have executed the utmost of your malice against me, in nailing
me up to the Cross, then shall I manifest, what you do not now believe, that I
am the true Messiah, by drawing and gathering Followers unto me; whereupon he
compares his Death to the falling of Grain into the Earth, Ver. 24.
which does not hear forth fruit until it dye; intimating, that what course
they took to extinguish and hinder his Doctrine he would order for its
Advantage and Increase. And yet in humane probability this was not a proper
time to preach up the Messiah, when, with the utmost of virulency and scorn, he
was so newly crucified.

3. Consider the manner of propagating this Gospel, (...), it shall be
preached; he allowed his followers none but spiritual Weapons; and sent them to
subdue a gainsaying, resisting, contradicting world: being armed only with
Preaching, and with Patience; and therefore what is here called, The Gospel of
the Kingdom, Apoc. 3.10. Apoc. 1.9.
our Savior calls in the Revelation, The word of my Patience; and John joins
the Kingdom and the Patience of Jesus Christ together; as signifying the same
thing. And yet this, how improbable soever it seems, it then was, now is, and
ever will be the way wherein Christ's Kingdom, i. e. his Gospel, is to thrive
and prosper in: And whoever uses any other Force, but the Force of Reason; or
any other Art, but the Art of sound Persuasion to gain others, he strives to
set up Christ the wrong way; and makes our Saviors Kingdom to be that, which
at his death he denied it to be; viz. Joh. 18 37.
A Kingdom of this World; against which I have elsewhere spoken * Sain ship no
ground of Sovereignty.
.

Lastly, Consider the great Progress which the Gospel made, together with the
short time wherein it was to make it: For a Doctrine so strange in it self, and
so little advantaged by Humane Power, one would have thought, that an Age would
have been little enough to settle it in any one Country; but that, in the space
of forty years, it should be carried throughout the World; and in every place
where it came, gather a considerable number of Proselytes; this exceeds every
thing, but our utmost wonder. And that the Gospel was thus spread, even before
the Destruction of Jerusalem (which was the time allotted for it) we have the
Testimony of the Apostle Paul, Romans 10.18.
who asking this question concerning the unbelieving Jews: Have they not heard?
i. e. Can they lay the blame of their unbelief upon their not having heard?
Verily, says he, their sound is gone out into all the Earth, and their words
into the ends of all the habitable World. Wherein he applies the words of David,
concerning the Sun, unto the Gospel; which by the public preaching of it, was
then become like the Sun, in diffusive Heat, Col. 1.5, 6. v. 23.
and Universality of Influence. Again, in his Epistle to the Colossians, he
minds them of the Ho^e which was laid up for them in Heaven, whereof they had
heard before in the word of the Gospel of Truth: Which, says he, is come unto
you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth fruit, as also it does among
you. The same is yet more plain from the Epistles of the Apostles, from whence
it appears, that among all the Jews, not only in Judea, but throughout the
world, in all Greece, in Rome, in Asia, etc. there were Churches of
considerable numbers gathered to the Faith of Christ, and that according to our
Saviors Prophecy, before Jerusalem was destroyed. To which I might add the
Testimony of Josephus, Suetonius, Tacitus, and other foreign Writers, but the
cause needs them not.

So that put all this together, a Doctrine concerning Salvation by a crucified
Christ, and therein contradictory to all Humane comprehension. 2. A Doctrine
enjoining all possible strictness and severity of life, and therein little
grateful or pleasant to Humane Desires. 3. A Doctrine excluding all force and
violence, and leaving its Followers at perfect liberty, whether they would
submit to it or not, and therein quite contrary to worldly Arts and politic
Contrivances. 4. A Doctrine, by which nothing was to be gained, but only
Heaven, nothing being more certain from an enraged, because unbelieving world,
than the same calamity which befell the Author; and therein a Doctrine
dangerous in Profession, as difficult in Practice. And yet in spite of all
these disadvantages that it should run through the World, and have Trophies and
Monuments of Victory, i.e. Churches behind it, in fewer years than some have
taken barely to survey and travel it; This shows that the Power which conducted
it was as great as the Prescience which foresaw and foretold it; that is, that
they were both, Supernatural; both, Divine.

Arm of God to Salvation, and needs not the Arm of Flesh to back it. All the
while the Christians were a divided Body from the Men of the world, Phil. 2.15.
they shone like Stars in the midst of Darkness; and those who came not in to
them, confessed it was for want of Courage, and not for want of Conviction. But
as soon as ever God suffered the World to come into the Church, and that
Religion grew the way to Preferment: presently what it got in power, it lost in
purity; and quickly was dispirited, and worn out by that, which can act a part
much better, and that is, Hypocrisy. To wish that Religion may again thus
thrive and prosper, is to pray that it may be undone: For our Religion was not
calculated for any thing, but to save our souls; and where ever sound
convincing Preaching is protected, there is Religion sufficiently countenanced.
Isa. 49.23.
For that Prophecy, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy nursing
Mothers, does not signify any Authoritative or Imperious enjoining even of the
true Religion, but an Humble and Reverential submission to it, as it follows in
the next words, They shall bow down to thee with their face toward the Earth,
and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the Lord. Let
Christian Magistrates do but that part of their Duty, which is to punish Vice
and Immorality; and where the Gospel is planted, God will effect the ends of
that without any farther assistance.

The second Prediction of our Savior is, Predict. 2.
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the Jews: which
is at large described by three of the Evangelists in their Chapters preceding
our Saviors Passion. And though the present posture and state of the Jews, is
a sufficient Comment upon those Chapters, and may seem to prevent any
Enlargement, yet to make the Truth more apparent and forcible, I shall insist
upon two or three particulars.

1. That the City, and particularly the Temple should be laid even with the
ground; concerning the City we have this Prediction in Luke, Luke 19.42.
that when our Savior saw the City, he wept over it, for the days shall come,
says he, that the Enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and shall lay thee
even with the ground, and thy Children within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another. Concerning the ruin of the Temple, Mat. 24.2.
in Matthew we read, that when the Disciples came to show our Savior the
buildings of the Temple, which, according to the description of Josephus, for
the State, Magnificence and strength of them, were the goodliest buildings in
the World; our Savior replies to them: See ye not all these things? Verily I
say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another, which shall
not be thrown down. And accordingly Josephus tells us, Lib. 6 7. (...).
that the first thing which was burnt down to the ground, and that utterly
against the will of Titus, was the Temple, upon that very month and day, as he
observes, wherein it was formerly burnt by Nebuchadnezzar. And concerning the
City, (...), says he, (...), i. e. Destroying the rest of the City, and
digging down the Walls, Titus left only two Towers standing to be monuments of
the Roman Prowess. And that that Prophecy might to a scruple be fulfilled,
our Historians tell us, Socrates, lib. 3. c. 20.
that in the Emperor Julians time, when the Jews upon his entreaty went to
rebuild their Temple, that they might offer sacrifice again, an Earthquake in
the night tore up the very Foundations of it, and made them leave off their
Enterprise.

2. The second particular is, the terrible slaughter of most of them, and the
utter dispersion and captivity of the rest. When ye shall see, Luke 21.20, 24.
says our Savior, Jerusalem compassed about with Armies, (which explaines
that, that in Daniel and Matthew is called, The abomination of desolation; i.
e. the abominable destroying Army of the Romans) then know that the desolation
thereof is nigh. For these are the days of vengeance. And they shall fall by
the edge of the Sword, and shall be led away captive into all Nations. Lib. 6.
c. 17.
Which slaughter the Historian relates, (...), says he, (...), i. e. The
number of the slain exceeds all Humane or Divine Vengeance; which though it be
Hyperbolically spoken, yet he reckons up a Million and ten Thousand, which were
killed in that year of the Siege; a number great, enough to justify his
Passion, at least abundantly sufficient to verify our Saviors Predictions;
and for the other part of the Prophecy, namely, their Captivity, this was
partly fulfilled by Titus, who carried away and sold near an hundred thousand
Prisoners; but more particularly by Adrian, in whose time the Jews rebelling,
under the conduct of an Impostor, who called himself Barcocheb, or the Son of
the Star, they were then most miserably slaughtered, and an Edict made by the
Emperor, that the whole Nation should be banished, that, says my Author, none
of them, Eusebius. l. 4.6.
(...), not so much as at a distance, might see their Native Country. Then
which a more cruel and barbarous, as well as unpolitick Law, I think was never
made; to dispossess a whole Nation at a time, without distinction of Innocent
and Criminal, or any Provision to guard those Frontiers. But the more harsh and
extraordinary the proceeding was against them, the more clearly does our
Saviors Truth shine forth, who had foretold that this should befall them.

Lastly, The last and greatest evil that was prophesied of them, That the
Kingdom of God should be taken from them; Mat. 21.43.
Thus our Savior, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a
People that bring forth the Fruits of it. This I call their greatest evil: for
if when the Arc was taken, which was but a sign of Gods presence, 1 Samuel 4.21.
Elie's daughter called her child, Ichabod, saying, the glory is departed from
Israel; How much more may we call that Nation now Ichabod, for the Gospel is
departed from them; there is among them no Vision, Psalm 74.9.
nor in the Psalmists words, none that knows how long? Nay, as if they had lost
their Reason, with their Religion, they are so miserably blinded, and given up
to such ridiculous follies, as we cannot but both pity and smile at them. Adv.
Cells. l. 2. p. 60.
Origin said of them long since, interpreting this Prophecy of our Savior,
This, says he, we may now see verified, for all that is among the Jews, is
only (...), Tales and Trifles, for they have not the light of
Scripture-knowledge. Adv. Jud. c. 13.
And Tertullian, Now, says he, they have left the Fountain, they have hewed to
themselves broken Cisterns, i. e. Synagogues among the Gentiles where they are
scattered, in which the Holy Spirit does not recide, which alone is the true
Temple. And in this condition they now are fit objects only for our Prayers and
Compassion; and I wish that all Unbelievers would lay it to heart, that to
slight the Gospel is not a sin that will be expiated with a little Vengeance:
For I shall be bold to say, that it was not the killing of our Savior, though
a murder of a most execrable composition (for that our Savior prayed might be
forgiven them, Luke 23.34.
who, we are sure was heard in whatever he requested) which brought down all
that storm of wrath upon them; but their peremptory and obstinate Neglect of
offered Mercy after it. This shall come upon them, Luke 21.44.
says our Savior, because they have not known the time of their Visitation,
i. e. they would not lay hold upon mercy while it might be had. And therefore
our Savior graciously passing by all offenses, after his Passion, sends his
Disciples first to them, and bids them begin at Jerusalem, and showed how ready
he was to pardon all, by his acceptance of some, and waiting long for the rest.
It was necessary, says the Apostle Paul, Act. 13.46.
that the Gospel should first be preached to you; but seeing you put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, i.e. think your selves too
good to stoop unto Gods method of saving you, lo we turn to the Gentiles. And
when their malice stopped not there, but what they refused themselves they
envied unto others; Who, as the same Apostle observes, 1 These. 2.15, 16.
killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets; and likewise persecuted us,
forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved; then God
could hold no longer, but gave the reins to his Justice, and now, says he, the
wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. So then, that I may conclude this
Prediction with the Apostles exhortation, They were broke off by Unbelief, and
we stand by Faith, Romans 11.20.
let us not be high-minded, but fear; For if God spared not the Natural
branches, much less will he spare us; And as Gods severity to them sets off his
mercy to us, so the Conclusion is infallible, that unless we continue in that
mercy, we shall likewise be cut off. What was their Fate must needs be ours, if
we consent to, and approve their sin; as all the while we continue in, or fall
back into unbelief, we own and defend that Crime of the Jews, and publicly
proclaim that Jesus was not the Messiah, but that he was justly put to death;
and this is it which makes Infidelity a sin of so deep a dye, in that it does
(...), Undervalue and disesteem the blood of the Covenant; Heb. 10.29.
and conceives, that it was shed by Christ not for the Remission of our sins,
but for the Expiation of his own. He then that dares not say, that Jesus was
justly put to death, let him forthwith believe that he was the Christ, i.e. the
Eternal Son of God; for, for the defense, and in the maintenance of that
Assertion he died.

And so much for the Second Prediction.

The third and last Prediction of our Savior, Predict. 3.
which I shall insist upon, is concerning the coming and seduction of
Antichrist: The words of the Prediction are, Then, if any say unto you, Mat. 24
23, 24.
lo here is Christ, or lo there, believe them not: For there shall arise
False Christ's, and False Prophets, and shall show great Signs and Wonders,
insomuch as they shall deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect. In which
Prediction there are these things considerable:

1. The Title which our Savior gives to Antichrist: he speaks of him in the
plural Number, False Christ's, and False Prophets; implying, that there should
not be one single Person, but a Corbination and Conspiracy of Deceivers. And
though the Apostle Paul, 2 These. 2.3.
speaking of Antichrist, calls him, The Man of sin, and (...), that lawless
one. And John calls him by a single name, (...), The Antichrist; yet I suppose
that can be no more understood of one man, than the word Satan of one Devil;
for in those words of our Savior, Mar. 3.23.
How can Satan cast out Satan? And, If Satan rise up against himself and be
divided, he cannot stand; Satan signifies the whole Commonwealth, if I may so
call it, or Regiment of evil spirits, under some one Chief, Luke 11.15.
called in Scripture, Beelzebub: Or as the Apostle Paul, in those words, For
even as the Body is one and has many members, 1 Cor. 12, 12.
but all those members of that one body, though they be many, make up but one
body: even so is Christ; where the Apostle called the whole Church, as it
contains both Head and Members, by the name of Christ. So is Antichrist, a
collective body of many False Christ's and False Prophets, united under some one
head, for the better managing and carrying on their designs; order being so
necessary, that, as our Savior observes, Hell it self, which is otherwise a
place of Confusion, cannot for the present subsist without it. But there is a
twofold Order, an Order by force and constraint, and that is the Order of Hell
and of Antichrist; and there is an Order by Consent, and that is the Order of
Heaven and of Christ.

2. The second thing observable in this Prophecy, is the way wherein Antichrist
should discover himself, viz. by being a False Prophet, so v. 11. Many false
Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many: So that a False Christ and a
False Prophet is the same thing; the latter word being explicatory of the
former. And this name of False Prophet is ascribed to Antichrist by the Apostle
John both in his Epistle, 1 John 4.1, 2. Apoc. 19.20. 2 Pet. 2.1.
and Revelation. It signifies in English a False Teacher, and so Peter expressly
mentions: There were, says he, False Prophets among the People, so there shall
be false Teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them. In which words the Apostle cannot mean, that
they should deny the Person of our Savior, (for then we could not have had any
sufficient (...) to distinguish Antichrist by, since the whole Jewish Nation,
and almost all the Gentiles, both then did, and still do they deny him;) but as
among the Jews, those who were False Prophets, pretended highly to honor God,
but yet taught lies in his Name, and secretly withdrew men from his service: So
should these False Christ's and False Prophets cry up Christ in words ( for,
says our Savior, Mat. 24.5.
they shall come in my Name, and he tells us that at the last day some shall
plead for themselves, Have we not prophesied in thy Name?) Mat. 7.22.
But yet both in their Doctrine and Practice they should directly oppose him;
and set up a Religion, which should have nothing in it of Christian, but the
Name.

To find out what kind of Doctrine it would be that Antichrist should preach;
and what kind of Practice he should follow; the best way will be to look in
Scripture, what it was that our Savior and his Apostles did most inveigh
against; for those very things Antichrist would set up and defend.

1. In Doctrine, you will find these three Opinions principally condemne^.

First, Justification by works; which the Apostle Paul spends almost two
Epistles in confuring; The sum of what he says, is contained in this Position:
We know, says he, Gal. 2.16.
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but only by the Faith of
Jesus Christ; and we have believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified
by the Faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the works of
the Law no Flesh can be justified. And whereas many captious men were apt to
asperse this Doctrine, as if it did open a way to looseness of life, the
Apostle proves by his own example, Romans 6.1, 2.
that if rightly understood, it had a quite contrary effect; since nothing can
more effectually kill sin, than to behold it as killing Christ; from thence he
concludes, (...), I abolish, Ver. 21.
or disanul not the Grace of Good for if Righteousness be by the Law, (i. e.
can be attained by the observance of the Law) then did Christ die in vain; for
what men might have got, without any satisfaction made in their behalf, that
Christ needed not have died to purchase: And therefore he urges again, (...),
Ye are brought to naught from Christ, Gal. 5.4.
i.e. Christ is become vain to you, if you are justified by the Law, ye are
fallen from Grace; i.e. Ye do declare ye have no need of Grace or free Pardon,
because you appeal to the sentence of that Law, from the rigor of which
nothing but Christ's Death could free you. So that Justification by Works, as
evacuating the Death of Christ, and rendering men's Salvation as hazardous, and
uncertain, nay, Impossible as before our Saviors coming, is a Doctrine
persectly Antichristian.

Secondly, The second Doctrine recorded to us for Antichristian, is the
Mediation of Angels; this it seems, under the color that it was too bold and
presumptuous a thing for frail Man, to address himself immediately unto God;
some false Teachers at Colosse did advise them first to pray unto the Angels,
and make use of their Mediation to be the Internuncii and carriers of their
Requests. This, how seemingly holy and modest soever the pretense were, the
Apostle sharply rebukes, Col. 2.18, 19.
(...), says he, (...), let no man Lord it over you (or, deprive you of the
Prize,) (...), being self-willed, or wilful in humility, and worship of Angels,
(...), Thrusting or climbing into things that he has not seen; being rashly
puffed up by the understanding of his Flesh; and not holding the head; where
there are three Reasons given against that Opinion: First, that it was not
Humility, as they pretended, but a wilful, stubborn, and fleshly Pride which
occasioned that conceit; they presuming to be wise above what was written.
Secondly, That they rashly and without warrant entered into things, which as
they had not seen, so neither ought they to have meddled with. Thirdly, And
chiefly, that this Doctrine did detract from Christ, and lessen the sufficiency
of his Mediation, 1 Timothy 2.5.
who is the only Mediator between God and Men; and therefore that Doctrine,
which brought in Angels as Partners with Christ, in that Incommunicable
Prerogative, was Antichristian.

Thirdly, The third and last Doctrine which I find insisted upon as
Antichristian, is the abridging of Christian Liberty; by obtruding upon the
conscience of weaker Brethren, the observance of things either Unnecessary, or
else very Inconvenient; such were the observation of Days and Months, and
Times and Years, i. e. the old Legal Festivals, or some others like them, by
way of Analogy, among the Galatians; Gal. 4 9. Col. 2.16.
which the Apostle sharply reproves; first, calling them Weak and beggarly
Elements or Rudiments, not fit to be always pored upon by Christians of any
growth or stature; and then tells them, that he fears he had lost his time and
pains among them; for he preached up Liberty, Gal. 5.1.
at another Rate, which they were not to slight and undervalue, it being a part
of our Saviors purchase. So when some, Col. 2.21.
among the Colossians, began to preach up and prescribe an uncommanded
strictness and singularity of Life, in those words, Touch not, taste not,
handle not, laying a great stress of Piery in outward Abstinence; he blames
them, (...), Why are ye loaded and burdened with these new Rites and
Ordinances? which are after the Doctrine and Commandments of Men; and
therefore, as they ought not to be enjoined, so need they not to be any farther
practiced by you than suits with your own Convenience. Nay, in his Epistle to
Timothy to command Abstinence from Meats, 1 Timothy 4 1.
and to forbid Marriage; though he himself, and common experience tells us,
that (...), i.e. it is much more convenient to be free, than bound in Wedlock,
yet he calls that Doctrine, the Doctrine of Devils, and therefore I need not
scruple to call it Antichristian.

Besides these three, I do not remember that in the New Testament I find any
Tenet branded as Antichristian; for though there are many other things, as
Free Will, Merit, Worship of Images, Not sanctifying of the Lords day, or one
day in seven; and the like, which are severely condemned as False and Impious;
yet I call that only Antichristian which directly opposes Christ in some of his
Offices, or in his Purchase and Acquisition for believers.

And so much for that which was to be the Doctrine of Antichrist.

2. The Practice of Antichrist is recorded to discover it self in these three
things:

First, Pride, whereby he opposes our Saviors Humility and self-denial. For
thus our Saviors stinting that Ambitious strife of his Disciples, concerning
who should be greatest: The Rulers of the Heathen, says he, do exercise
Lordship over them; Mat. 20 25.
but it shall not be so among you; but he that will be (...), affect the
Primacy amongst you, let him be servant of all; and to enforce this, our
Savior urges his own Example, Even, says he, as the Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister. And as for Power, so for Titles of Honor; our
Savior forbiding his Disciples, to imitate the practice of the Pharisees, who
were puffed up and swelled with those Airy and Empty names of Honor amongst
men. Be not ye, says he, called Doctor, or Master, or Father, or Teacher, i.
e. Mat. 23.8.
Affect not to be so called, for you have one Teacher, which is Christ: Ye have
one Father which is in Heaven; but all ye are Brethren. And therefore take heed
lest by taking upon you such glorious styles, you forget that Equality which
should be amongst brethren. Thus Christ. But Antichrist thinks no Power too
great, no Name too good for him: 2 These 2.4.
And therefore the Apostle Paul gives this Character of him that he is one who
opposes himself (i.e. against Christ) and exalts himself above all that is
called God, or (...), (which word I take to signify the Emperial style, Act.
25.21.
for the Emperor in Latin was called Augustus, in Greek (...), and then it
signifies, that Antichrist should advance himself above all Princes and
Emperors) So that he shall sit as a God, in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God; i. e. assuming unto himself the exercise of Divine Power and
Honor, as if he were a God on Earth; which whoever does must needs in that be
Antichrist, i. e. oppose the Humility both practiced and prescribed by Christ.

Secondly, The second thing, wherein the Practice of Antichrist was to discover
it self, is Pomp, as it is opposed to Christian Poverty. I know very well that
Poverty and Riches are res mediae, that in themselves neither state does make
us more or less accepted to God: But yet such has been and is the Fate of true
Religion, that Riches, most commonly, are the Portion of the men of this world,
out of which Christianity calls its followers but Disgraces, Losses, and
Poverty are most usually the Attendants on strictness and Holiness: Thus our
Savior affirms the condition of Beasts of the Earth, and Birds of the Heaven,
to be, in outward respects, much better than his, Mat. 8.20.
For the one, says he, have holes, the other have nests, but the Son of man
has not where to lay his head: And thereupon calls his Followers to leave every
thing, Luke 14.26, etc.
i.e. to be in a readiness to hazard all rather than to quit their profession,
or else they were not fit to be his Disciples. But Antichrist, quite contrary,
proposes worldly wealth, and Temporal Rewards unto his Followers; and seeks to
reconcile Piety and Preferment, i. e. self-denial with that which does directly
contradict it. For which reason, I suppose, it is, that the Apostle John, 1 John 2.16.
having premised that the Love of the World was Enmity unto God; for, whatever
is in the World, the desire of the Flesh, ( i. e. Pleasure;) the desire of the
Eyes, (i. e. Riches;) and the pride of Life, Ver. 18.
( i. e. outward State and Magnificence,) they are not of God, but of the
World. To which he immediately subjoyns, Little children, it is the last hour,
and as you have heard, that Antichrist shall come, so now there are many
Antichrists: Plainly intimating, that there were some, who, by immersing
themselves in the Delights and Excesses of the World, did abundantly discover
their Antichristian temper. And accordingly in the Revelation, Apoc. 12.
that Woman, which figured the true Church, as so on as ever she had brought
forth, i. e. received and embraced the Faith of Christ, she is said to flee
into the Wilderness, where she was to abide for a long time in a disconsolate
and afflicted condition; where it is observable, that the time, viz. of 1260.
days, which is allotted unto the woman's abode in the Wilderness, is the very
same time, in which the Witnesses were to Prophecy, (...), being arrayed with
sackcloath; Apoc. 11.3.
to show their indigent and needy state, as likewise the Temple, or true
worshippers of God, was so long to be trampled under food, which likewise is
the time limited for Antichrists Reign and Persecution. Thus the true Church,
like Christ her Head, finds no peace on Earth, but is fain to seek shelter in a
Wilderness. But that woman, which is the Emblem of the False Church, Rev. 17 3.
is represented to sit in goodly Array upon a scarlet-colored Beast: And the
woman was clothed with Purple and Scarlet, and adorned with Gold, and precious
Stones, and Pearls; i. e. Tricked up and set out with the utmost circumstances
of outward Glory and Magnificence, by which she does allure and entice her
Followers; making her Religion as pompous, Theatricall, and specious as may be,
that so it might be taking. But we have not so learned Christ, who was himself
poor, and his Doctrine strict and severe; so that to take off from the end of
Religion, which is to withdraw men from Earth, that they may mind Heaven; and
to change the Spirit and Purity of Worship into the splendor and pomp of
Service, this is not of Christ, therefore it is Antichristian.

Thirdly, The third and last thing in the practice of Ancichrist, by which he
may be descried is Persecution of all that dissent from him, though never so
holy or Religious otherwise; which is an infallible Note of Antichrist, as
being directly contrary to the Meekness, Mercy, and Moderation of our Savior.
For when the Disciples desired that they might call down for Fire from Heaven,
to punish those Barbarous and Inhumane Samaritans, who would not so much as
allow him a lodging in one of their Villages; Luke 9.55.
Our Savior sharply reproves them, Ye know not, says he, of what spirit you
are; i. e. the Christian spirit is not a bloody, a self-avenging: but a tender,
a compassionate spirit; For the Son of man came not to destroy men's lives, but
to save them. And again, Ib. v. 50.
when some of his Disciples told him, that they found some doing miracles in
his name, but they forbade them; because, say they, they followed not us.
Forbid them not, says our Savior, for he that is not against us, is for us.
Thus the Apostle Paul, Let every man, says he, (...), Romans 14.
be fully assured in his own mind, i. e. of the Necessity and Lawfulness of
that which he does; 16.
And judge not one another, but judge this rather, that none do put a stumbling
block, or a cause of offense before his Brother. And again, 2 Cor. 1.24.
We, says he, (...), do not Lord it over your Faith, or Conscientious
Persuasion in things indifferent; but if any be otherwise-minded God will
reveal this to him; Phil. 3.15.
with many hundreds of Scriptures more to the same purpose, which show, that
nothing does more savor of the spirit of Christianity than Mutual Forbearance
and Toleration. And that nothing is more repugnant to it, then Harshness,
Rigor, and Imperious Exaction. But Antichrist, quite contrary, is all made up
of cruelty and unmercifulness; The false Prophets, Mat. 7.
says our Savior, which come in my Name, they wear sheeps-cloathing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves; i.e. They seem mild and gentle, but indeed
are Furious, and bloodthirsty men; and therefore in the Revelation, Antichrist
is compared unto a Beast which has horns like a Lamb (i. e. in outward
appearance seems to act for Christ) but speaks like a Dragon, Rev. 13.16, 17.
i.e. in his Decrees and Impositions is Outrageous and Bloody; Insomuch, that
he causes all, great and small, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a
mark in their Foreheads, or in their hands; That no man might buy or sell, save
he that had that mark, i. e. They were either to join with him in his public
Worship, and by some outward Testimony manifest their Conformity, or else they
should not buy nor sell, i.e. not so much as exercise any civil Commerce or
Society with men: Nor is that all, that he will exclude such from the benefits
of Life, But, says the Text, R. v. 18.13.
if men will not worship the beast, and that Image which he has set up, (...),
he causes that they be slain; which is the utmost expression of Inhumanity: and
therefore among the Merchandise of the False Church, here are reckoned, (...),
the souls or lives of men, either bestained and poisoned with their Inventions,
or destroyed by their Butchery. So infinitely different is Antichrist from
Christ. Christ would not have the least of those offended that believe on him;
Antichrist does nothing else but offend them. And so much for the second thing
in our Saviors Prediction, viz. The way how Antichrist or the False Prophet is
to be destroyed; in the decyphering of which, I have purely followed that
Method, Rev. 19 10.
which the Spirit of Prophecy, which is called the Testimony of Jesus in
Scripture, has chalked out to me, without mingling the least of my own
Inventions and uncharitable Presumptions with it.

3. The third thing observable in our Saviors Prediction, is the Time when
Antichrist should arise; which is implied in the word (...), then, i. about the
Time that Jerusalem was destroyed; which that it was a very proper time for
Antichrist to arise in, will appear from these two Reasons.

1. Because then the Apostles, and others, who planted Christianity, and were
infallibly inspired by God, were all dead; and therefore when these Suns were
Set, it is no wonder if Darkness and Night did speedily overspread the World.
This is plainly intimated by our Savior, where he tells his Disciples, that
before Jerusalem was destroyed, They shall, says he, Mat. 24.9.11.
deliver you up unto Tribulation, and they shall kill you; whereupon
immediately he adds, And many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive
many. As when the Banks and Bounds are broken down, the River presently does
overflow the Valleys, so when the Apostles were gone, who were to stand in the
Breach, and to resist the Torrent, Corruption and Will Worship did, like a
deluge, overrun the World; as Hegesippus, Eusebius, and other Ecclesiastical
Writers, do both mention and sadly complain of.

2. Because I take the Spirit of Antichrist, as I find it discovered in
Scripture, to consist in (...), i. e. An ambitious affectation of Sovereignty
or Dominion, or in a word, A Love of Primacy. This the Apostle censures in
Diotrephes, that he was (...); i. e. He loved to be first or chief, and took
upon him (...), i.e. the sole power to excommunicate. Now while Jerusalem was
standing in its glory, no Church could vye with that for superiority, as being
undoubtedly the Mother Church, from whence all the rest did proceed: But as
soon as ever the (...), i.e. the Jewish state was removed, then the biggest
City laid claim to be the best Church, and never rested till it had fixed in it
self a spiritual, as before it had done a temporal and earthly Dominion.

I know very well that the (...), or (...), i.e. He which withholdeth, or
binds, i.e. Keeps Antichrist from appearing, is commonly understood of the
Civil Empire of Rome, Apol. c. 32. and ad Scap. c. 2. P^ae^cr, adv. Hae^c 27.
so Tertullian in his Apology, and other of the Ancients; but for the former
Reasons I think it is rather to be meant of the Jewish State; as likewise,
because the Apostle in the same place says, that the Mystery of Iniquity was
then working; and John says, 2 John 2. etc 4.
that Antichrist was then come; whereas there was no considerable change in the
Empire of Rome, for some hundreds of years after. But Jerusalem was destroyed
within few years after the Apostle Paul's Dearn, and he seems to intimate that
he saw some evident Sympromes of, and Preparations o it, even in his own name,
in those words of his, 1 These. 2.
The wrath, i. e. threatened by our Savior, is come upon them to the uttermost.
But John did survive the ruin of that City, whereupon he ^^ies, that
Antichrist was then come; the (...), mentioned by the Apostle Paul, being in
his time removed.

Having thus fixed the Rise of Antichrist upon the destruction of Jerusalem, we
must take notice that there is a threefold Epoche or account of time, from
whence we may date the ruin of that City: The first was in the time of
Vespatian, about forty years after our Savior, and then Antichrist was
working, being then in his seeds and beginnings. The second was under Adrian,
about 150 years after our Savior; and then Antichrist was come to some
consistence and maturity, for to pass by the False and Unsound Doctrines and
corrupt Practices of that Age, as their enveighing against the Marriages,
especially the second marriages of Ministers; their Use of the Cross, and
counting it a kind of Charm; their voluntary Fasting and Penance, and placing
some kind of holiness in the unmarried state, as may be seen at large in
Tertullian, Cyprian, and others. But to pass by these, about Adrians time it
was, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 24.
that Victor, the Bishop of Rome, did take upon him to excommunicate all the
Eastern Bishops that did not solemnize Easter at the same time with him; by
which Irregular and Presumptuous Decree, he did not only take that for granted,
which I think is very questionable, viz. the keeping of Easter, I mean upon a
Religious account, but likewise he assumed a power which did not belong to him;
and sufficiently shows that that Church was then aiming at Empire and Rule
rather than Religion. The third and last date of Jerusalems Ruin was in
Julian's time, when the Temple was torn up by an Earthquake, and that Prophecy
of our Savior literally fulfilled, that there should not be left there one
stone upon another. And about this time, it would be endless to recount the
infinite abuses and errors which were not only crept into, but had credit and
countenance in the Church. The Doctrine of Merit and Justification by Works;
the Worship of Angels; the forbidding of Marriage, and Abstaining from Meats,
being publicly owned, and this last so rigorously pressed, that Socrates, a
learned and moderate Historian, observes, (...), Socr. l. 5. c. 22.
(...). They count, says he, Fornication and all uncleanness an indifferent
and dispensable fault; but about their Feast and Fast days, they contend as
for their lives, he adds, (...), quite perverting the Commands of God, and
giving Laws unto themselves. At the same time likewise were appeals made unto
Rome, Socr. l. 2. c. 8. etc. 17.
to Julius the Bishop there, as the Judge of Civil Controversies; and a Decree
either made or tacitly assented to, that no Act of a Council should be valid at
which the Bishop of Rome was not present; which shows that Antichrist, i.e.
that proud, aspiring, overweening Spirit was well grown, and arrived almost to
its full stature. (...), says my Author, i.e. Socr. l. 7.11.
now of a long time had the Bishopric of Rome advanced it self (...), beyond
the Sacerdotal unto a Tyrannical Power, and therefore would not permit those
who were of the same Orthodox Faith with them to meet and assemble quietly in
their Jurisdiction. And this was written by Socrates, before the style of
Universal Bishop was yet thought of; which within a hundred years after was
challenged, and then was the Mystery of Iniquity complete and perfect.

4. The fourth and last thing in our Saviors Prediction, is the way how
Antichrist should rise, together with the Progress he should make; They shall
show, says our Savior, great signs and wonders, to deceive, if it were
possible, even the Elect. And this note either of pretending to, or really
effecting of Miracles is mentioned both by the Apostle Paul, and John in his
Revelation. 2 These. 2 9.
Paul says of him, that his working is according to Satan, in all power and
signs, and (...), not lying wonders in this sense, as if their Miracles were
all forged and false, but (...), wonders done in defense and maintenance of a
lie, i. e. His Doctrine should be so false, that it should have nothing to
uphold it but merely the Reputation of Miracles, whether true or false. So the
Apostle John says, that the Beast, who had horns like a Lamb, Rev. 13.13.
does great miracles, so that he makes even fire to descend from Heaven; what
he there calls a Beast, in another place he calls, the false Prophet who does
signs and wonders. Rev. 19.20.
So that our Savior and his Apostles do both grant that Miracles may be done
by a false Power; and likewise affirm, that whoever has nothing else to
allege for his Religion, but merely Miracles, that same is Antichrist. For
Truth stands not in need of such outward Circumstances to underprop it; and,
according to the Scripture, Miracles are not to prove the Doctrine, but the
Doctrine is to prove the Miracles, whether they are from God or not. But yet,
says our Savior, with those Arts and ways he shall so far prevail, as even
almost to stagger the belief of the very Elect; Many shall follow their
destructive Doctrines, 2 Pet. 2.2. Rev. 13.
says Peter; the World shall wonder after the Beast, says John, and he shall
deceive the Inhabitants of the earth, etc. all which places do note an almost
Universal seduction. And if any ask, how it comes to pass that Corruption, so
contrary to the received Tenets and Maxims of Christianity should be so
generally embraced, 2 These. 2 10, 11
the Apostle Paul has given it, Because men have not received the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved, therefore shall God send upon them the strong
working of deceit, 2 These. 2.9.
that they should believe a Lie, i.e. Men being unwilling to give themselves up
to the guidance of Truth, which shines clearly by its own Light, both in
Scriptures, and in their own Understandings; therefore shall God suffer them to
be so brutish and Sottish, as to quit their Reason, and to be led up and down
by any fond and ridiculous Error, as those Impostors shall guide them.

I have done with the Prediction of our Savior concerning Antichrist, V.
Canenes. Council. Trident.
and if upon your enquiry you find, that there is that Religion in the world
which has espoused and embodied into their Confession of Faith all the
Opinions of Antichrist: If there be that Church in the world, which still
pretends to do, and, for ought I know, does real Miracles, upon which they
bottom their Plea to be the true Church; if they maintain Persecution,
Violence, and Fraud; if they have dispirited and disenvigoured Religion by
their worldly Pomp and Gallantry; and make thriving in this world a sign that
God does love and favor them, all which are Antichristian Tenets and
Practices. If there be that Person in the world, who has assumed the very
style of Antichrist, who has trampled upon Kings, and trod upon the Necks of
Emperors; who in his Canon Law is called God; and, like God, does dispense
with all, both Divine and Humane Laws; then first, certainly Antichrist is
already come; and to deny it, is to deny as great evidence and notoriety of
fact, as to deny it is day when the Sun shines. And secondly, He which
foretold that Antichrist should thus come, with all these Circumstances that I
have summed up, he was undoubtedly a true Prophet, the true Messiah; for to
repeat the Argument in my Text; He told us these things before they came to
pass, and we find that they are come to pass; and therefore he is.

The Use that I shall make of this whole Discourse is: 1. To convince the
Unresolved. 2. To confirm those who are already settled.


to convince the Unresolved; I have already spoken something to awaken those
that are resolute and peremptory Unbelievers; but there are many, who may be
yet in their enquiring, doubting, and disputing state; who are not unwilling to
embrace the Faith of Christ, but they find it to be so repugnant to every thing
of natural Reason within them: and likely to be attended with so much hazard
and danger, that they are either ashamed or afraid to own it, but yet are not
fixed in positive denial of it, but through uncertainty they are always
Anxious and wavering. Such as these ought to be tenderly and gently dealt with;
and two things I shall propose to them, which may help to alleviate and to
abate their Prejudices.

1. That Christian Religion is in no part of it unreasonable; for, since the
Proof of it in general depends upon the clearest Demonstration, viz. The
fulfilling of Prophesies, then the belief of it must needs be rational. I know
very well, that the things contained in the Scriptures, viz. The Incarnation of
the Son of God, three Persons of the Godhead, the Immediate Acting of the Holy
Spirit upon the heart of Believers, and the like, are all Mysterious, and no
ways reconcilable to Humane Apprehension; but then we must consider, that
these things are not proposed to our Understandings to comprehend them; but
merely to our Faith to believe them; which where there is a firm and
demonstrable ground of Belief may be done, even to many things that we
understand not. And the great hindrance that has kept Christian Faith from
entering into the minds of men, is want of attendance to that distinction, for
many have both confounded themselves, and subverted the Faith of others by
pressing upon them a comprehension of what is no ways by us Intelligible. And
therefore all those Disputes about Predestination, Trinity, Resurrection,
Incarnation, and the like, are for the greatest part of them unprofitable and
dangerous; because they are not content barely to assert the Truth, (which is
then best done when it is put into the plainest and most unscholastick Language
of Scripture) but our Arguers do over and above enquire de modo, and labor to
give reasons for those stupendous and amazing Mysteries, which the Apostle
Paul cries out (...) upon, and, for the most part, ends the Dispute with a
Reproof of the Disputer. And therefore such of you as are not yet fixed in your
belief; set your selves purely upon this Article, viz. to enquire whether Jesus
be the Christ; and never give it over till it has pleased God fully to confirm
you in it. And my Reasons for this Advice are these three.

1. Because this is the most effectual and ready way to prove unto you the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures. Those who set upon this work by
endeavoring to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God, as they lie in
gross, and in their diffused Bulk, proceeding by Chapter and Verse, do
undertake a Tedious and Impossible Task; for there those ordinary and trivial
Objections of mistakes, and variations in Copies, mistranslations, and the
like, are never to be assoiled; but if you draw the several lines in Scripture
into their Center, and contract them into Christ, as you use to do the
Sunbeams into a burning-glass, then do they cast a quick and vigorous luster,
sufficient to enlighten and warm even the most stiff and rigid Opposer. He
that would demonstrate the Providence of God, would not, I suppose, begin with
the Minutiae mundi, the lesser things of the World, as Flies and Insects, but
he would fix, as David does, upon the Sun, or some noble and conspicuous part,
whose Use is undeniable; and thence conclude, that if Providence has a respect
to any one part of the world, it cannot be imagined but it should have an
Influence over all; for else it must either be Finite or Partial, which is
absurd. So in the asserting of Scriptures, begin with that which they all point
at, and which if one place be questioned, thousands of the same kind will
evince, viz. That the Messiah was to come, which is the great design of the Old
Testament. That the Messiah is come, which is the sum of the New; and then all
the other parts of Scripture will be owned, as suited to the Divine and
Heavenly Nature of our Messiah; who took a body, not only that he might dye our
Price, but that he might live our Pattern. And almost each Line of Scripture,
especially in the New Testament, describes either his Life, or his Language.

2. Here the Doubter must begin, because this is the readiest way to ascertain
himself whether he be guided by the Spirit of God, or not. So the Apostle Paul,
2 Cor. 12.3.
None can call Jesus the Lord but by the Holy Spirit; and John, 1 John 4.2.
Every Spirit that confesses Jesus the Messiah to be come in the flesh, is of
God. They do not mean, that saying this in words is a sign of the Spirit, for
what is more easy? but the owning it in heart, this whoever does, may be sure
he has the Spirit. And the reason is plain, because where the Object proposed
does exceed any natural power, there must be a new power given, by which that
Object is to be received. Thus the Apostle John argues concerning future glory,
Hereafter, 1 John 3.3.
says he, we shall be like him, i. e. Christ, because we shall see him as he
is. There will be a proportion and similitude between Christ's body and ours,
because our visive Faculty shall be so exceedingly advanced, as that we shall
be able to perceive him in his utmost radiance of Glory. So in belief, since
the soul when it does it, is heightened beyond any native Virtue of its own, it
is a sign that Gods Spirit has illuminated and enlarged its Capacity. Thus the
Apostle, We are saved by Grace through Faith, Ephesians. 2.8.
and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God; i. e. that very Faith, by
which we apprehend Christ, is as much the gift of God as Christ himself that is
apprehended by it. I know very well this seems harsh to many who are willing to
boast in themselves; but if ever you come to believe indeed, you will find the
Difficulties, your Natural Reason does urge and vex you with, to be
insuperable, until the Spirit of God, by infusing new light, does explain and
solve them.

Lastly, Begin with enquiring whether Jesus be the Christ, because upon this
depends the whole course of your future Obedience. Our Savior required no more
of any that came unto him, but to believe that he was the Son of God; not that
he did exclude good works, but he knew that this was the only way to facilitate
and expedite them. All the while we are either uncertain that our past sins are
pardoned, or our present services accepted; how lamely, how untowardly do we
set about our duty? But when once we believe on Christ all that care is over,
and the firmer our Faith is, the higher and more ardent will our Love be;
which, like a flame, shoots through the soul, and carries it out with an
heavenly quickness and ardency. Therefore, says the Apostle, Romans 10.9, 10.
If thou confess with thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, i.e. If thou obeyest
him) and believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, (i.e.
that he is the true Messiah, of which his Resurrection is an infallible proof,)
thou shall be saved. For with the heart men believe unto righteousness; (i.e.
unto the justification of their Persons,) and with the mouth is confession made
unto Salvation. But to think of making confession, or doing any act of
Religion, without Faith (desire at least, and the desire of Faith is Faith)
this is only to mock God, and to undo our selves by our foolish and
hypocritical presumptions, in presenting unto him a Sacrifice which he abhors;
For without Faith, i. e. reliance upon him for mercy, and out of Christ, God is
nothing else but Justice, it is impossible to please him.

When the Doubter has gone thus far, as to find that if he will be satisfied,
here he must begin; his next course will be to run over in his mind those
Arguments which our Savior uses to evince his being the Messiah; such are the
heavenliness of his Language; Joh. 8.43.
Why do you not, says our Savior, know my speech? i.e. Why do you not
perceive, even by my manner of discourse that I am come from heaven, full of
that God in whose Name I speak? Joh. 10.21.
For, as some of the Jews said, these are not the words of him that has a
devil: These are not the words of one that came to deceive the world, and to
boast of himself to be that which he was not. Another Argument our Savior
urges, is the holiness of his Life; Joh 8.46. Joh. 10.32.
Which of you, says he, does convince me of sin? and many good works have I
done amongst you, for which of them do you stone me? An holy, humble,
self-denying man, who forbad even his Miracles to be published, cannot, without
intolerable malice, be supposed to assume a title which did not belong to him.
Add to this the God-like Patience and Resolution of his Death, dying in defense
of this very Tenet; unprovoked with injuries, breathing out his soul in charity
to men, Father forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do; at the same time both praying and pleading for
his bitterest Enemies; and then giving up himself unto his Father with perfect
Affiance. Father, Ibid. v. 46.
into thy hands do I commend my Spirit. Add yet farther, the Testimony of his
Followers, who saw him after he was risen; the success of his Doctrine in spite
of Persecution; and above all, the fulfilling of Prophesies, as I have already
mentioned; Truly then if he that doubted be not satisfied; if he that was
almost, does not become altogether a Christian, he is strangely wanting to
himself, for God is not wanting to assist those who do but begin to enquire
after him: every doubt that arises being nothing else but a Motion of Gods
Spirit, whereby he would draw us unto himself.

Having thus cleared, that to believe is not unreasonable, as the Unbeliever
supposes; the next thing I shall propose is this: That

2. To obey is not dangerous; for though we may lose our Lives, yet sure we
shall be sufficient gainers if we save our souls. And therefore let the Doubter
strengthen himself with representing Heaven in its fullness of Joy always
before his eyes. That Doctrine which teaches, that we are not to have an eye
to the recompense of reward, it is false and dangerous; It is false, because it
contradicts the Command and the Example of Christ, who for the joy that was set
before him despised the Cross. Heb 12.2.
Thus Moses, thus Paul did both eye the Reward themselves, and enjoin it as a
duty upon others. 2. It is dangerous, first, because it begets infinite
scruples, especially in young Converts, whose first inducement must either be
from their hopes, or their Fears, and which way soever they begin they have
our Savior sometime using Threats, otherwhiles mingling Promises, to justify
their being wrought upon by either. 2. It makes the greatest and most
comfortable part of the Word useless, and that is the Promises; and if men may
live above the Promises, it will quickly follow, that they may live above the
Precepts too; and what the end of such Doctrine may be, is too apparent. I say
therefore to the yet Doubting Christian, fetch new strength and vigor from the
Promises; for if thy Belief be Reasonable, I am sure thy Obedience, though it
brings suffering, is highly so; for no momentany pressure, 2 Cor. 4.17.
how grievous soever, can countervaile that full and everlasting weight of
happiness which is laid up for Believers and Obeyers of the Gospel. And that is
a Theme so obvious, that I need not insist upon it.

So much for the first Use.

He that stands, 1 Cor. 10.12:
says the Apostle, and Faith only is the cause of a Christians standing, let
him take heed lest he fall; And take heed, says he to the believing Hebrews,
Heb. 3.12.
lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, to Apostatize from the
living God. Nothing does undo the greatest part of Christians, but their
Confidence; whereby, presuming upon their present stock of Faith, they lay in
no fresh recruits, and so fall, if not finally, (for that no elect Person can
do) yet foully, as Peter did: whose security betrayed him into that which cost
him many bitter Tears. This kind of Bread is to be begged and received new
every day from Heaven, or else we have no certainty that it will continue with
us one moment. And therefore whatever we do, let us take care that our Faith
fail not; a breach there, is like a wound in the head, for the most part
mortal; and if at any time there have been Ruptures and Intercisions made in
that Grace, repair them presently by quickening and feeding your Faith with new
Arguments; New, if not for Subject and Matter, yet for Light and for Discovery.
Now this often reflecting upon our Saviors Prediction, is the best expedient
you can provide: For that was it which confirmed the Apostles, who were of as
slow, incredulous, and uneasy a temper to believe as any of us can be; when
our Savior had told the Jews, Joh. 2.22.
that in three days he would destroy the Temple and raise it up again, meaning
the Temple of his Body; The Evangelist John observes, That when he was raised
from the dead, his Disciples remembered, that he had said this unto them; and,
he adds, they believed the Scripture, (which foretold this of the Messiah) and
the word which Jesus had said; (who foretold it of himself,) where he makes our
Saviors foretelling his own Resurrection to be a medium by which the Disciples
did strengthen their Faith, even after they had seen him risen. And when they
ran to the Sepulcher in the midst of their Despairs and Fears, as now imagining
that their Master was utterly gone, and all their Faith ungrounded; the Angels
tell them, Remember, say they, how he spoke unto you, while he was yet in
Galilee, saying, Luke 24.8.
the Son of man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be
crucified, and be raised again the third day. And, says the Evangelist, they
remembered his words; i.e. Reflecting upon them, which their present sorrow and
impatience made them to forget, they did a little moderate and appease their
sorrow. By the example then of those Apostles, often mind your selves of our
Saviors Predictions, and they will be of great advantage and comfort to you in
these three Cases:

1. In case of Heresies, which are already come.

II. In case of Persecution, which may come.

III. In case of Future Glory, which though it be now delayed, yet we have a
promise that it will come.

1. The reflecting upon our Saviors Predictions will be of great use to
comfort Believers, in respect of the Heresies which already are come; I know it
is a sad and troublesome thing unto a true Christian to see the Divisions and
Contentions of Brethren; to have the Peace of the Church disturbed by Schism,
and the Unity of Faith divided by Error; but as our Savior said to his
Disciples concerning the Destruction of Jerusalem, Luke 21.9.
When you see Wars, and Tumults, be not troubled, for all these things must
come to pass. So say I, when you see Heresy and Error spreading it self, and
Parties, and sidings, under pretense of advancing Truth, miscalling Faction by
the name of Religion; be not amazed, for we know who has told us, That there
must be Heresies, 2 Cor. 11.29.
that (...), those whose Faith is approved or tried may be made manifest. As
mists and vapors serve to set out the Sun, so do Errors in some make the
Truth that is owned by others more conspicuous and apparent. I know the common
cry of Ignorant or self-designing men, is Put down Preaching, keep the People
from reading the Scriptures, etc. which is all one as if they should say, Pull
down the Sun, that we may prevent the rising of Clouds and Mereors; The
Scripture is like the Sun, and where it shines vigorously, the dull Earth, i.e.
Natural Ignorance in men, which conceives and apprehends it not, must needs
send forth mists and vapors. But, God forbid that the Children should be
deprived of their Bread, because the Dogs are ready to snatch it from them, and
abuse it. To Imprison the Scripture in a dark and unknown Language, is indeed
the ready way to prevent Heresies, for what people cannot know they will be
sure not to contend about: So to extinguish the Sun, is the ready way to hinder
Clouds, but then we shall be encompassed with the Horror of Eternal Night: And
to put out the Candle, that so all colors may agree in the dark, is a device
as Politic as the devil himself that invented it, whose kingdom cannot
subsist, unless the World do lull themselves asleep into a dull, stupid,
irremediable Ignorance. When the Light of the Scripture is gone, I am afraid
the Light of the Spirit will go with it; And I am sure the Light of Reason
leads us to nothing, but to Atheism, or to worse, to sottish and impertinent
superstition, i.e. it makes us either so cunning, as to deceive others; or so
foolish, as to be willing to be deceived our selves. Therefore instead of such
dismal contrivances, let Heresies be suppressed by the same way by which they
were raised, and that is by Preaching; and in the mean while, let not the
Believer be troubled that many Errors are commonly vented now, for he
understood not the Nature of his Religion, nor the vainglorious and yet
foolish Pride of man, if he did not expect them. For the Scripture is
difficult, exceeding difficult and hard to be understood; and man is foolish,
and so apt to mistake; Proud, and so apt to presume; Vainglorious, and so apt
to publish his Conceits; which in the end prove Heresies. But convince men once
that it is their duty to be Humble, then they will cease to vent; that they are
to be charitable, and they will forbear to contend for their singular Fancies;
and unto this Posture of mind nothing but the blessing of God upon Preaching
can bring them.

2. This likewise will comfort Believers in respect of Persecutions which may
come. That the Church of Christ is a Ship which does best in a Storm, and that
Faith must, like Gold, be tried in the Fire, is so known a thing that I need
not insist upon it. All that I infer is, that the having Afflictions foretold
should keep us from grieving at them when they do come. They, Joh. 16.1.
says our Savior to his Disciples, shall put you out of the Synagogues, and
when they kill you, think they do God good service. And I tell you these
things, that you might not be offended, but remember that I told you of them.
Thus the Apostle Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.3, 4.
Let no man be moved by his Afflictions, for ye know that we are appointed unto
this; And even when we were with you, we told you before that we should be
afflicted, even as also it is come to pass. Those who are forewarned of
approaching Evils, are usually armed against them: And therefore I have often
wondered at that timid and abject Spirit which is in many under their
Afflictions; which is a certain sign that their Fear is above their Faith, and
that they inwardly distrust their Cause, or doubt of their Reward. If ye are
reproached, says the Apostle Peter, for the sake of Christ, 2 Pet. 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.7, 8.
happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. And Paul to
Timothy, We have not received the spirit of Fear, but the spirit of Power,
therefore be not ashamed of the Testimony of Christ. So that I conceive no
condition is more joyous to a true Christian, than to be endued with courage to
suffer; for as in Winter the Fire does redouble its hear, so God at that time
of trial does pour into the soul a more abundant supply of Comfort. However he
that suffers is on the surer side. For though one may suffer, and yet not be in
the Right, yet he that persecutes is certainly in the wrong, as doing a thing
which he has no warrant for. So that as the Apostle Peter advises, 1 Pet.
4.19.
Let them who suffer according unto the Will of God, not be solicitous about
the Event, but, go on in their Duty, though the World frown, and commit their
souls unto him, in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator.

3. Lastly, The reflecting upon our Saviors Predictions, and the fulfilling of
them, will be a great Comfort unto Believers, in respect of Future Glory, which
is yet delayed, but will certainly come. I make no doubt, but every serious
resolved Christian does often wish with the Apostle Paul, To be dissolved,
Phil. 2.
and to be with Christ; which certainly is a condition much better than to
struggle with the difficulties and uncertainties of Life, or to be clogged with
a decaying, sinful, and enticing body of Flesh. We that are in this Tabernacle,
2 Cor. 5.
says the Apostle, do groan being burdened; we would fain be stripped and
disrobed of this Cleg of Flesh, and be put into present possession of our
Inheritance. But as Heirs must wait patiently, (...), until the time appointed
by their Father, so must we. Let us hold fast, says the Apostle, Heb. 10.23.
the Profession of our Faith without wavering, for he is faithful that has
promised; i.e. God will be as good as his word, and he has shown it, by
fulfilling so many things already. So that, Ib. v. 36, 37.
as he adds, Ye have need of Patience, that when we have finished the will of
God, we may receive the Promise, For yet a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. Life it self is but of a very short date,
stretched out to its utmost span; but what a nothing is it, if compared to
Eternity? And cannot we wait some few years to do our Masters business on
Earth, but we must cry out for our wages before we have done our work? And
because Unbelief is ready to creep in, and to make that Objection which some in
Peter do, 2 Pet. 3.
Where is the Promise of his coming? Why does Christ seem to neglect his
Church, as if he had no regard unto his Vineyard? If these thoughts arise, as
do what we can, come they will, 2 Pet. 39.
silence them with that of Peter, God is not slack concerning his Promise, as
some men count slackness, but he is longsuffering toward us, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come unto the knowledge of the truth.
God has yet some Jewels to gather out of the Worlds Rubbish, and it is for
their sakes that the present frame of things is so long continued; for when
their Number is accomplished, the Heaven shall be wrapped up, as a Scroull, and
the Earth shall be removed as an useless Scene. Wherefore, that I may conclude
in the Apostle Peter's words, Ibid. v. 18.
Believers, Ye knowing these things before, beware that ye be not led away by
the seduction of ungodly men, and so fall from your own stedfastness; but grow
in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To whom be
glory now and for ever.

AMEN.
The Resurrection of the Body Asserted and Cleared.
ACT. 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the Dead?


THese are the words of the Apostle Paul, spoken by way of Apology, in defense
of himself, and of that most questioned and contradicted part of his Doctrine,
viz. the Resurrection of the Dead. This being in it self, and so accounted by
him, the chief Foundation of a Christians Hope, where ever that great Apostle
came, he first lays, and then builds upon it. At Athens, among the learned
Greeks, Act. 17.18.
we find him, by their own confession, preaching but two things, Jesus, and the
Resurrection. Afterward, when he was empleaded by the Jews, he does openly
avow his Faith. I am, says he, a Pharisee; i. e. Act. 23.6.
I do with them hold and maintain the Resurrection of the dead, for, as it
follows, of the hope and resurrection of the dead I am called in question.
Again, when he was convened before Felix, the Roman Deputy, he insists upon the
same Argument; for whereas he was charged by Tertullus with being an Heretic
(which word is still continued, Act. 24.5.
as that name of Obloquy, whereby men are wont to disgrace all new Discoveries
of old Truths) Paul does, in despite of that opprobrious Name, own that, which
they called Heresy, Ver. 14.
and aloud proclaims, that he believed, as all the Jews either did, or else
had reason to do from their writings, there should be a Resurrection of the
dead, Ver. 15.
both of the just and of the unjust. And now again, being brought forth before
a mixed Auditory, both of Jews and Romans, he does not only assert the Doctrine,
but likewise in these words offers to dispute the Case, and to prove the
Resurrection by the dint of Reason.

The words themselves, which are proposed by way of question, contain three
parts:

1. A Proposition: that God will raise the Dead; for these words, Why should it
be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the Dead? Imply,
that God will certainly raise them.

2. An Opposition: that this is judged very incredible; for these words, Why is
it judged incredible with you, that God should raise the Dead? Implies, that
this is ordinarily esteemed and reputed as a thing incredible.

3. A Demonstration or a Conviction; that though this was judged incredible,
yet indeed in it self it was not so. For this question, Why is it judged
incredible, etc. implies, that in the opinion of the Questioner, there was no
sufficient Reason why it should be so esteemed.

And these three Parts afford us three Doctrinal Conclusions:

1. That God will raise the Dead.

2. That this Doctrine, concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, seems to
natural men very incredible and very unreasonable.

3. That the Resurrection of the Dead, however it be judged incredible by
natural men, yet is in it self highly credible, highly rational.

Dead, here I mean that part of man which dies, viz. his Body; for the soul
dies not, but when the body returns to its dust, the soul returns to him that
gave it. And fear not them, says our Savior, Eccl. 12.7. Mat. 10.28.
which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; with this part of our
selves, as soon as ever we dislodge from the Body, in the Apostle Paul's
Language, we do (...), i.e. 1 Cor. 5.8.
dwell and cohabite with the Lord, as in our proper Fathers house; for Heaven
is the Souls Native and Original home: and therefore the reunion of that at
last with the Body, is rather a return than a Resurrection. To speak properly,
the Body only rises; thus our Savior: The hour is coming, says he, Joh. 5.25.
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they who hear, shall
live; where, that we might not be mistaken, who he meant by dead, he adds by
way of Explication, the hour is coming, when all who are, Ver. 28.
(...), in the Tombs or Monuments, shall hear his voice. Now what else are
Monuments but as one calls them, Tertul.
Cadaverum stabula; The stalls or receptacles of our corrupt and perishing
bodies. And therefore, when our Savior envites all to come unto him, he uses
this by way of motive, that whoever came to him, he would not lose (...), i.e.
any thing that belonged to him, For, says he, Joh. 6.39.
I will raise him up at the last day. And again, He that believes on the Son,
he shall have Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Implying,
not only that if the body were not raised, something which did essentially
belong to man would be lost and perish; but likewise that without this raising
of the body, Eternal Life would not be a state of happiness; because it would
be nothing else but an Eternal separation from that part unto which the soul
always desires to be joined, and from which it is unwillingly severed, as the
Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 5.1. and following verses.

But does our Savior, do his Apostles say this only? Say not the Prophets the
same? Is not this Article of our Faith, as well as all the rest, to be proved
out of the Old Testament? Volkol. l. 2^
It will concern us a little to enquire into it, that we may stop those men's
mouths, who traduce our Religion, when they tell us, that it is wholly new; for
if our Savior had taught any thing which was either contrary to, or not
eminently contained in the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, the Jews would
have had juster Reason to disbelieve his Doctrine than as yet they can pretend.
For to insist only upon this of the Resurrection (which of all other Divine
Discoveries seems to have least footing in the Old Testament.) It is plain that
the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection, are charged by our Savior with
Ignorance of the Scriptures, Ye err, says he, not knowing the Scriptures; i.
e. not reflecting upon those places of Scripture wherein the Resurrection is,
though not directly spoken of, yet, plainly and by good consequence implied.
And thereupon he interprets one place, which, though not minded by them, yet,
did verify his Assertion. The Place is, Exodus 3.
that style which God, in his Apparition to Moses, did assume, Mat. 22 31, 32.
when he calls himself, The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; this, says our Savior, does demonstrate the Resurrection, For God is
not God of the dead, but of the living; which words conclude two things: 1.
That the fouls of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were then living with God. 2. That
the living of their souls did necessarily infer that their bodies should live
too; since God is not God of this or that part only, but of the whole man.
Another place in the Old Testament which did imply the Resurrection, is the
promise God made to Abraham; Genesis 12.1.
that he would bring him to a Land flowing with Milk and Honey. But by this
Land, as the Apostle excellently argues, Heb. 11.8, 16.
was not meant Canaan, for there Abraham had no possession, but confessed of
himself that he was a Pilgrim and stranger in it; which manifestly shows, that
he desired a Country, not that which he left, but a better, even a heavenly
one; and that he looked after it, as a Place of Happiness not only for his
Soul, but likewise for his Body, is plain from what the Apostle says
afterward, concerning the undaunted Constancy of the Primitive Martyrs, i.e.
such as died in bearing their witness for the Truths of God, before the coming
of our Savior in the flesh. They would not, Ver. 35.
says he, accept of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection.
Besides these places which do imply this Doctrine, there are some that do
expressly mention it; As that of Job, Job 19. Ver. 25.
whose words, however controverted by many Learned men, yet out of the
Original, are exactly thus, For I know that my Redeemer (i.e. promised Messiah,
unto whom this Term of (...) is most ordinarily applied, as Isa. 59.20. (...),
i.e. the Redeemer shall come to Sion, and unto them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, which no Interpreter but must needs understand of the
promised Savior) lives, and at last he shall arise (or stand, i.e. as Judge)
over the Dust, (i.e. either upon Earth, as our English Translation has it; or,
over all men, Ver. 26.
though now for the present they lie in the dust.) And, after my skin, when
they (i.e. the worms, or the diseases he was then afflicted with) have pierced
through this (i.e. body of mine) yet out of my flesh shall I see Jehovah, whom
I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold, Ver. 27.
and not a stranger; which does so clearly manifest his belief of the
Resurrection, that, as the words cannot possibly be made sense without it, so
the Greek Translation, by using the word (...), which signifies, To raise up
again to life, in that sense I speak of, does plainly favor it. This likewise
was the Faith of David, where he says, Thou will not suffer thy Holy one to
see Corruption: Psalm. 16.11. Act. 3.
For though (as to the Rising on the third day, i. e. before the natural
Humors were resolved and Corrupted) it was literally fulfilled by our Savior,
and so applied to him both by Peter and Paul, Act. 13.
yet it is plain, that he who spoke those words did likewise believe a
Resurrection of his own Person, therefore he says, My flesh shall rest in
hope. But most plain is that of Daniel, who, Dan 12.2.
speaking of Michael, i.e. Messiah the Prince, (and we know it was the Charge
against our Savior, that he made himself (...), i.e. Messiah the Prince)
says, that in his time, Many (i. e. the multitude) of them that sleep in the
dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt; which is so clear a Prophecy of the Future Resurrection, and in so
express Terms, that our Savior in his Declaration of it seems to allude to
these very words of Daniel, and to have had them in his eye; only what Daniel
calls everlasting contempt, our Savior explains, by calling it, the
Resurrection of Condemnation: And those, says he, Joh. 5.29.
who do good, shall go forth to the Resurrection of life; but those who do
evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation. So that from hence it evidently
appears, that we Christians, in this particular, do own no more than what other
holy men among the Jews did before us; and our Apostle did very well understand
what he said, when in the words foregoing my Text, he tells them, that he was
then judged for the Promise (i. e. of Future life and happiness not to be
attained, but after the Resurrection) made by God unto the Fathers; whereupon
he proceeds to make that query, Why should it be judged incredible, that God
should raise the dead?

And so much for the first Observation.

Act. 17.18.
so it appeared to the Learned Philosophers at Athens, who called Paul (...),
Prater, or Trifler for preaching it: And they did so little understand what the
word (...) meant, that they took it to be the name of some Demon; for thus
some said of Paul, That he was a publisher of strange Demons, because he
preached unto them Jesus and the Resurrection; which last word should have been
left untranslated, for they took (...), which Paul spoke so much of, to be the
name of some New Goddess. So likewise in this Chapter, when Paul makes a
Relation of his Conversion, which yet was very miraculous, Festus heard him
patiently, but when once he began to mention how Christ was raised from the
dead, Act. 26.23, 24. (...).
Festus could hold no longer, but cried out with a great deal of impatience,
Paul thou art mad, too much learning has quite unhinged thy brain, and
overturned thee into madness. 2 Cor. 15.
Hence the Apostle, in that Chapter where he does most elegantly dispute it,
brings in an heathen asking this question, Ver. 35.
But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? Which is not an How of
enquiry, into the manner and Method of the Resurrection, in what order it shall
be accomplished; but an How of doubting, concerning the whole thing: Joh. 3.9.
Like Nicodemus's How, How can these things be? And therefore in the Primitive
Persecutions, the enemies of Gods People never showed more witty cruelty in any
thing than in devising ways how to elude the Resurrection; and that not only
by mangling, torturing, and burning their bodies, but by scattering their Ashes
in the Rivers, ^nseb. l. 5. c. 1.
(...), says mine Author, (...), etc. As if they had been able to conquer God,
and deprive the Saints of their Resurrection. Neither was this only the
persuasion of the Heathen world, but we see oftentimes in Scripture, those who
owned higher Principles, yet manifesting their doubts and despaires of this. c.
7.9.
Thus Job, notwithstanding his so excellent confession, in a fit of impatience
cries out, As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, c. 14.7.
so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more. And again, There is
hope, says he, of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will sprout again, and
that the tender branch thereof will not cease. But, if a man dye, shall he live
again? Ver. 14.
By which words he seems to conclude, that by death at least the Body is
utterly lost. So Ezekiel, when God, to try his faith, asked him this question,
c. 37.3.
Son of man, can these bones live? That holy man durst not affirm it, but uses
an answer which shows that he was altogether uncertain and at a loss about it:
O Lord God, says he, thou know; i.e. I am not able to resolve thee; that
dry bones should live, belongs as much to a Divine knowledge to comprehend, as
to a Divine Power to effect it. Thus in the New Testament the Apostles, though
they knew their Master to be the Son of God, and the Messiah, (which was a
great masterpiece of Faith) yet they did not at all understand the
Resurrection; Mar. 9.
for when our Savior after his Transfiguration did charge them, that they
should not tell any what they had seen, until the Son of man were risen from
the dead; The Evangelist adds, that they kept the matter private to themselves,
but questioned or disputed with one another, what the rising from the dead
should mean: at which time, it seems, they were so utterly ignorant of the
thing, that they scarce understood the meaning of the word. Hence was it, that
even then when the Resurrection of our Savior had cleared the Point, 1 Cor.
15.12.
and left scarce room for the least umbrage of suspicion to enter; yet there
were some in the Church of Corinth, who utterly denied it; and other, 2 Timothy
2.18.
of the Sect of Hymenaeus and Philetus, who affirmed, that it was past already;
So hard a matter was it for this Doctrine to get ground in the world; 1 Timothy
13.6.
and therefore the Apostle when he sums up the Mystery of Godliness, i.e. as it
is revealed by our Savior, he makes this to be one great part of it, that
Christ was not only risen from the dead, but believed on in the World. The
subduing of the world unto the persuasion and credence of our Saviors
Resurrection being every whit as miraculous as the raising him.

The Reasons why this appears so to incredible, to natural men, are

1. Because naturally men do doubt the Immortality of the Soul. I know very
well, that there are many excellent Discourses about this in the Heathen
Writers; and Plato, Phade.
in a certain Dialogue of his, brings in his Master Socrates, disputing about
it, with as much strength of Reason, and clearness of Expression, as the wit of
man can possibly invent; but after all his fine sayings he concludes, (...);
But expressly to affirm, that the matter is indeed so, as I have discoursed of,
does by no means become an understanding man. And so makes it at the best only
a probable opinion, without daring to think, as our modern Demonstrators do,
that he had fully and satisfactorily cleared it. And therefore his so much
magnified Socrates, when he was now to be led unto execution, takes his
farewell of the Judges in these words, which discover nothing but his
uncertainty, Apol.
I go to dye, and you to live, and which of us do go unto the best estate,
(...), De Senect.
none knows but God alone. So Tully, the most Learned of the Romans, calls
Immortality an Error, which he will by no means part with, because he is
pleased and delighted with it. Wherein he discovers his Wishes, De Anima.
rather than his Hopes; For as Tertullian excellently argues, to suppose the
soul Immortal, it was in the Heathen nothing else but a bold and vain
presumption, since it always lay in his power to destroy the Soul, who made
it; and whether he would or not, he had not, as to them, revealed his pleasure.
And indeed the words of Job in his despair are the highest reasoning of most
Philosophers, c. 14.10.
Man, says he, dies, and wastes away; yea, man gives up the Ghost, and
where is he? And Solomon, in the person of a natural man, asks a question,
which he challenges the World to answer, Eccl. 3.21.
Who knows the spirit of a man that goes upward, and the spirit of a beast
that goes downward to the Earth? Who knows? i.e. upon the principles of mere
Reason, and Research of Natural Causes, who is able to resolve it? Whereupon
among the Jews, Act 23.8.
the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection, denied likewise both Angel and
Spirit, i. e. the surviving of the soul, as well as the restoring of the body.
So that since men do naturally doubt of the less, it is no wonder if they
despair of the greater? They who are apt to give the soul it self for lost, how
can they imagine that the body should ever be recovered?

2. The second Reason, why natural men are so apt to disbelieve the
Resurrection, is, because they make a wrong estimate of Gods Power. We see in
this World nothing better, and therefore we are ready to measure God by our
selves; and believe no more of his Power than what falls within the compass of
Humane probability; which is the true and fixed ground of all that Atheistical
Distrust, which in all times does so much abound among men: Who is the Lord,
said Pharaoh, Exodus 5.2.
that I should let Israel go? And, Who is Jehova, says Insulting Senacherib, 2
Reg 18.35.
that he should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand? Nay, not only these wicked
men, but the Saints of old have most stumbled, when they have been put to Act
Faith upon Gods Omnipotency; Genesis 18.11.
Thus Sarah when she heard the promise of a Son, she laughed, What, says she,
now I am old shall I have pleasure, my Husband being old also? Wherein she
musters up Arguments to make her Distrust seem Rational. So Moses finds out
many excuses to avoid being sent upon Gods Errand, I am not Eloquent, faith he,
Exodus 4.10.
but slow of speech, and slow of Tongue; And at last, in plain terms, he
entreats that God would find out a fitter Messenger to go upon his Embassy,
And whence did this proceed, Ver. 13.
but from his distrust of Gods Power to Qualify him first, and to Protect him
afterward? Thus David, Jeremy, Zachary, nay, almost all, when a stress or
difficulty has been laid upon their Faith, they have been ready to cry out,
with Nicodemus, How can these things be? Thus it fares in the Case of the
Resurrection; Men do first confine the Omnipotence of God to their own Notions,
and then deny what otherwise they would never have doubted of. Mat. 22.29.
Our Savior therefore tells the unbelieving and gainsaying Sadduces, Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God; not knowing the Scriptures,
which declare the Resurrection; nor the Power of God, which is able to effect
it.

3. The third Reason of this Unbelief is, because Natural men are guided only
by sensible Impressions; what they see, that they believe, and are not, without
a great deal of difficulty, carried one jot farther. Hence were the Jews so
importunate with our Savior to show them a sign from Heaven; Mat. 16.1.
And when our Savior told foam of his Followers, in answer to their Demand,
that it was the work of God, (i.e. well-pleasing to, Joh. 6.30, 31.
and required by him) to believe on him, whom he had sent. They presently reply
upon him, What sign shewst thou then, that we may see and believe thee? So
those Scoffers in Isaiah, when the Propher had denounced terrible things
against them, Let him make speed, say they, and hasten his work, that we may
see it. That is, you speak much to us of what shall come hereafter, but we see
no danger near, and therefore we will not believe you. Thus those wretched
Pharisees, when they had nailed our Savior to the Cross, Let him now, say
they, come down from the Cross, and we will believe him. Vain men as well as
Cruel! Vain, in that they conceived it lay in their own Power to believe when
they pleased; Cruel, in that they did insult over a man, whom they had so
inhumanely murdered: Both Vain and Cruel, in that they could imagine our
Savior, after the Miracles of his Life, and more than miraculous Patience of
his Death, fruitlesly shown amongst them, would now descend at last merely to
satisfy their Impious Curiosity. We are all of the Tormented Persons mind;
Luke 16.30, 31.
though Preaching can do no good upon us, yet we think, if one came from the
dead and taught us, we should then certainly be converted; But our Savior has
resolved the Case clean otherwise, If they, says he, hear not Moses and the
Prophets (who speak in the Name of God with that Authority, as becomes his
Power; and with that Purity, as becomes his Holiness; if these men, thus
speaking, be not listened to) neither will men be persuaded, though one rose
from the dead. So that our Savior (who best understood all the Topics and
Methods of Persuasion) has left it as an Eternal and Experienced Truth, That
no Miracle can convince them whom the Word will not work upon; that
Illustrations of Faith are infinitely more satisfying than Impressions from
sense; since the one perish presently, and decay by using, but the other soak
into the soul, and grow up into a kind of Connaturalness with it, moulding and
fashioning the mind unto their own temper, and every day adds fresh life and
vigor to them. But a Natural man going not further than his Eye of natural
Reason can carry him; having never seen any thing like to the Resurrection, no
wonder if he does not believe it.

4. The last and true Reason, why Natural men do not believe the Resurrection
of the dead, is, because they are unwilling to believe it. It is harsh and
severe Doctrine; It lays the Axe to the Root of the Tree of Self, and cuts off
all our Fantastic Enjoyments; It is the Fan that blows away our Husky and
Chaffie Pleasures, and leaves us to fix upon nothing, but a solid and
substantial Good. And therefore when one comes, and presses this closely upon
us, we are ready to cry out, as the woman, when she had lost her Son, did to
the Prophet, What have we to do with thee, O thou man of God, art thou come to
call our sins to remembrance, and to slay our Son, i.e. To kill and destroy our
Pleasures, which are the Darlings of our Soul? Hence it is, that either we
fortify our selves with Objections against the Resurrection, as the Heathen
world did, and take a great deal of pains to strengthen our Unbelief; or else,
like Felix, Act. 24.25.
we run away from the sound of it, for fear it should put us into a fit of
trembling. Should a man come and preach, as some among the Jews did, Let us eat
and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; Isa. 22.13.
such an one as this we should welcome into our house, and thank him for his
Poison. But let them call to us to repent, for the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand; they will fare as John and our Savior did; though they may escape with
their Lives, yet they shall not escape our Censure. Let a Paul teach us, that
now God commands all men every where to repent, because he has appointed a
day in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness, by that man whom he
has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead. This Doctrine so sober in it self, of so great
concernment to the Party that hears it, and of so little to him that speaks it,
will yet be entertained with scorn and obloquy; Take him away, he is not fit to
live, Act. 22.22.
says the enraged Jew; He is a Babbler, and an impertinent Prater, says the
learned Athenian: A mere Fanatic, says Festus; in short, without enquiring
whether the Resurrection, thus declared, be possible or not; we hastily
conclude that it is impossible; and upon that undoing Presumption rashly
venture upon our own Damnation.

And so much for the second Observation.



1. It is Possible, it may be; God can do it.

II. It is necessary, it must be; There is no Providence without it.

III. It is evident and certain that it has been; and so has been, as withal
it demonstratively proves that it shall be.

The First Argument, How of natural men, who think it implies a contradiction,
that a body so scattered and dispersed (one man sometimes feeding upon another,
and so confounding the Integral parts of both) should ever be restored again,
Orig. l. 2. and 7.
and thence conclude it impossible; as Celsus the Epicurean Philosopher, and
others.

Now the Resurrection will appear possible, upon a twofold account.

1. In respect of God, who raises the Body. 2. In respect of the Body, which
is raised by him.
1. The Resurrection is possible, in respect of God who raises the Body; he is
able to do it; which is intimated here by our Apostle, Why, says he, is it
judged incredible with you, that God should raise the dead: As if he had said,
did we affirm, that the body of man, like Plants, did rise by any Seminal and
Prolifick virtue of its own, then none would wonder if you did deride and
disbelieve us: But we teach no such Doctrine, we only affirm, that God will
raise the dead by an immediate Act of his Omnipotence: And then, why should
this appear incredible to you? For cannot God do whatever he pleases? What
should hinder him, that he cannot as well raise the Dead, as make the Living?
It is with this, that God himself does silence Sarahs scruples: Genesis 18.14.
Is any thing too hard for the Lord? With this he does repress Moses
Diffidence, Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes the deaf or dumb, the
seeing or the blind? Is it not I the Lord? As if he had said, I that have done
the greater, am I not able to do the less? I who have made man's mouth, am not I
able to dispose and fit it for what ends I please? With this the Angel does
relieve Mary's surprise and wonder, Luke 1.37.
when (upon the promise that she should conceive a child, without the knowledge
of a man, which certainly was every whit as impossible as that I am treating
of) she began to stagger and Hesitate a little, With God, says the Angel,
nothing shall be impossible; and for a further strengthening of her Faith, Ver.
45.
Elizabeth encourages her from her own experience, Blessed is she that
believes; for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her
from the Lord. For, who is there that will presume to set limits to Gods Power?
Or, that dare say to an Almighty Agent, hitherto can thou come, but no
farther? He that dares be guilty of so bold and blasphemous an Assertion, must
likewise allow this contradiction, that a Finite Agent can conceive the utmost
of an Infinite and Incomprehensible Perfection. As therefore in the Question,
concerning Man's Freewill, and Gods Predetermination of Future Contingencies, I
have by experience found it, that the best way to reconcile these two, is to
deny neither, but to charge all doubts upon Gods Omniscience: For it is, and
will be a doubt, which none but a Divine and All-knowing Understanding can
resolve, How Man should Act Freely, (as we are conscious to our selves that we
do) and yet not the least Action we do, but was Predestined by God from all
Eternity; which not only plain Texts of Scripture, but the Truth of Philosophy,
and the bare series and subordination of Causes does clearly demonstrate. Here,
instead of tiring out our selves with vain Reasoning, and Uncharitable
Reviling; the safest and most prudent way is, to shelter our selves under Gods
Omniscience, for it is dignus Numine Nodus; and we cannot better discover our
own Humility, or give God the glory of his Knowledge, than if we confess, that
there are some things which only he can understand. So in the dispute
concerning the Resurrection, when doubts arise, as too often they will; and the
more we think of it, the stronger and the more puzling will the Objections be;
here the best way will be to have recourse to Gods Omnipotence, and to believe
firmly, that God is easily able to do more than Man can conceive. Thus did the
Apostle Peter answer those Scoffers, who began to question whether our Savior
would make good his Promise in coming to judge the World: This, says he, 2
Pet. 3 5.
they are willingly ignorant of, that by the Word of God the Heavens were made
of old. As if he had said, These men have no reason to look upon Christ's
judging the World, and destroying it by fire, as so incredible a thing; for
when God made it out of nothing, he did produce a greater Wonder. So let us not
doubt but God is able to recover our scattered Dust, where ever it is lodged in
the bowels of the Earth; who did extract this admirable Frame of all things out
of the womb of Nothing.

2. The Resurrection is Possible, in respect of the Body which is to be raised,
for that has already passed a greater change than the Resurrection does amount
to: Since to pass from nothing to something is a much greater change, than
barely to pass from Death to Life: Yet one we have already experimented, and
why should we then doubt or despair of the other? This Holy men in Scripture do
often reflect upon, c. 10.10, 11, 12, etc.
Have thou not, says Job, poured me out as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese;
thon have clothed me with Skin and Flesh, and have fenced me with Bones and
Sinews; Thou have granted me life, etc. So that what he speaks a little before,
Ver. 9.
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have made me as the clay, and will thou
bring me into dust again? may be inverted thus, God has made us as the Clay,
Psalm. 139.14.
and cannot he bring us out of the dust again? So David, I will praise thee,
says he, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made; my substance was not hid
from thee, when I was made in secret, when I was curiously wrought in the
lowest parts of the Earth; wherein he eloquently describes the wonderful Art
whereby God had made him: And cannot he repair these buildings of flesh and
blood with the same ease with which at first he reared them? Let him that
doubts ask himself this question, Was there not a time when once I was not! As
David, My members in continuance, or successively, were fashioned, when as yet
there was none of them. And as God, without my taking care, without the expense
so much as of a Miracle did join and cement these pieces; did call for his
Wind, and breath life into them; did put in a portion of his Spirit into them,
and give them understanding: So when they are severed, cannot he recall and
reunite them? Especially, since the Parts of our dissolved earth they are
scattered only, they are not lost; Thrown up and down, in a seemingly careless
manner, but still they are under the eye of an All-seeing Providence, and laid
up like sacred Relics, (...), in Gods storehouse, to be fetched out thence
when the Heavens shall be no more; which is an Answer to Job's Melancholy; ^.
14.12.
Man, says he, lies down, and rises not till the Heavens be no more they
shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. Now we are taught, that the
Heavens shall be no more; 2 Pet 3.
and that is the time appointed for this Resurrection.



1. It demonstrates Gods Mercy. 2. It demonstrates Gods Justice.
1. The Resurrection demonstrates Gods Mercy: For God has appointed this order
in the World, that every thing should have a kind of Resurrection. The Sun,
says Solomon, arises, Eccl. 1.5, 7.
and the Sun goes down, and hasteneth to the place where he arose. And, Unto
the place from whence the Rivers came, thither they return again. Thus Day dies
into Night, and Night rises into Day: Winter is the Death of the Year, and
Spring is its Resurrection. And many more such like instances there are in
Nature. Now it would not be suited to the Grace and Mercy of our God, that
every thing should suos patimanes, have its Turns and Returns, and the Noblest
Creature of all, Man, should be altogether exempted! That every thing else
should have alternate changes, and be repaired by dying, and Man's body only
should be huddled up in the Horror of Eternal Night! Sure that merciful
Father, who showed so much curious Architecture in contriving this Body, did
not intend it should Act a Part only upon this short Scene of Life; for then
certainly he would not have conjoined it with a Guest which looks and breaths
after nothing but Immortality. Our Savior, Joh. 12.24.
prophesying of that Progress his Gospel should make after his decease,
compares himself to a Corn of Wheat, which if it fall into the ground,and dye
not, it abides alone: but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit. 1 Cor.
15.36.
And the Apostle, when that question was asked, How are the Dead raised up?
Replies presently, Thou Fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened except it
dye; implying it to be nothing else but direct Folly, to question that which in
a thing so obvious as the sowing of Corn, might be concluded not only Possible
but Necessary: Since Man is beyond many grains, and more especially the Object
ofGods care and Compassion: For whose Instruction he has scattered about the
World so many Preludiums and Rudiments of a better Resurrection.

2. The Resurrection is necessary, because it demonstrates Gods Justice. Were
it not for Future Judgment, nothing would be so full of Confusion and Disorder
as the World. This Earth, in the present Polity and Frame of it; is nothing
else but a mere Chaos, where Vice and Iniquity thrive, as in their own soil,
but Virtue and Piety do find neither Place nor Protection. It must be (...),
That day of Reckoning to be revealed in Fire, which must absolve Providence,
and scatter those Mists wherewith the beauty of it is now obscured and stained.
It is this that must stop men in their Carier of sin, and keep them honest in
the dark: For in that sacred Irony of the Wise man, Rejoice, Eccl. 11.9.
O young man, in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart. and in the
sight of thy eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment; which is all one as if he had said, Go young man, sin if thou
dare, for thou must hereafter come to judgment. Eccl. 9.2.
In this world, All things come alike to all; God scatters his good things with
an undistinguishing hand, tanquam Missilia Coeli, as his Largesses, and signs
of his promiscuous Bounty, rather than marks of his especial Love. But future
Judgment is Gods severing time, called by the Apostle, the time (...), Act.
3.21.
i.e. of setting all things right; of placing every thing upon its proper
Basis, and giving all their due. Now to this the Resurrection of the body is
necessary, For we must all appear, 2 Cor. 55.10.
says the Apostle Paul, before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil. In the Law we find, That the soul that sins
must dye; and it is most just, that the body which did join in the sin, should
likewise partake in the punishment. Those dear Allies were not separated in
their good or evil doing, and therefore there is no reason they should be
distinct in their Reward. I carry about me, says the Apostle. the dying of the
Lord Jesus, (i.e. I lead a kind of dying and Calamitous life for his sake) that
so the life also of Jesus might be manifested in my mortal Flesh. In requital
of all our Indignities, 2 John 8.
Imprisonments, Fastings, etc. if the soul only should be glorified, we should
not have a full reward; which it is our duty to look after. And therefore this
Hand, this Tongue, this Eye, This, whatever it is, whereby God has been either
provoked or honored, shall be quickened again, and put into the possession of a
never-dying life, and fitted for the enjoyment of eternal either Joy or Torment.

Thirdly, 1 Cor. 15.14.
Now if Christ be preached, as the Apostle argues, that he rose from the Dead,
how say some among you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead? V. Garbut.
Remonst.
As if he had said, If you barely considered the Resurrection in it self, you
might then have something to plead in the excuse of your Unbelief, but since
Christ is Risen, there is no longer any room left for the least dispute about
it. For Christ is risen, either as a Judge, or as an Head; and therefore all
must rise, the wicked, to be condemned; the faithful, to be saved by him.

The Use of this may serve to demonstrate two things: 1. The Reasonableness of
Christian Faith. 2. The Necessity of Christian Life.


strong Reasons, and to prove their Cause by Arguments: Show, Isa. 41.23.
says he, the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are
Gods; yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, i.e. If ye are
indeed, as your Worshippers suppose, Gods, then show it by those infallible and
unalterable signs of a Diety, viz. Your Prescience, and your Power. So may a
Christian say in this Case, he may and ought to challenge the unbelieving World
to produce their strong Reasons to declare their Cause, and to see whether they
have so much to say, even in point of Reason, for the most clear and un
questioned part of their Opinion, as we have for the most contradicted of ours.
For a Christian should not satisfy himself with a bare and naked Faith,
grounding himself either upon Tradition, or the credit of his Teachers, but he
should labor for himself If to know both what, and why he believes. It is a
general Rule the Apostle Peter gives, 1 Pet. 3.15.
Be ye always ready to give an account of your Faith to every one that asks
you. And our Savior though he did press his Followers to believe on him; yet
he never did require from them, Orig. lib. 1.
(...), as the Heathen falsely objected: i.e. An unreasonable and Untried Faith;
but where ever he gives the Command, he alleadges at the same time Reasons
sufficient to convince the most obstinate gainsayer, such are the heavenliness
of his Language, Joh. 15.22.
Had I not, says he, come and spoke unto them, they had not had sin; but now
they have no cloak for their sin; For his words, by their own confession, were
such as never any man spoke, and carried a clear Resemblance to the body he
took, as being most humble in style, and most sublime in sense. Joh. 3.
And therefore he complains of them, Why, says he, do ye not know (...), i.e.
discern who I am by my manner of discourse amongst you; for certainly such
words could not proceed from one who came to deceive the world; as those
replied, These are not the words of him that has a devil. Joh. 10.21.
Another Argument our Savior uses to induce them to believe was his Works,
which Nicodemus confesses were such as never any man did. Joh. 5.36.
And our Savior does often appeal to their Testimony, as where he says, I
have a greater witness than that of John, for the works which the Father has
given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me. And again, If I had not done among them the works which no
other man did, Joh. 15.24.
they had not had sin. But, that which our Savior most insisted upon was the
Scriptures, to them he refers the Jews; out of these do the Apostles altogether
argue; and to the search of these are all conjoined; and still we can ground
our belief upon their Testimony, whatever we boast of is not Faith but Fancy,
and will not hold out in a time of Trial. Then the soul can only sit down
satisfied, when by comparing the Predictions of the Old Testament with the
fulfillings of the New, it can subscribe probatumest, I have examined, and find
it true.

Now, because this is a matter of very great importance, and yet too much
neglected, therefore I shall press it upon these Considerations:

1. This will sweeten our Obedience. Till we are satisfied as Men, we can never
obey as Christians: For Faith is nothing else but another kind of Reason, whose
Basis and Foundation is laid in humility: Therefore the Apostle calls that
great Action of a Christian, when he does not, as in the Old Law, sacrifice an
Ox, but himself up to God, (...), a service suiting us as reasonable
Creatures. In things of Art, the hands will not do what the head does not
direct; so in spiritual things, we quite mistake our way, if we think of going
blindfold and hoodwinck'd to Duty. Ignorance and Implicit Obedience is a fit
Sacrifice for the devil, whose kingdom is founded in darkness, when as
Regeneration is nothing else but renewed Light: And the clearer Discoveries are
made to the Understanding, the more pliant and obedient is the Will, 1 Cor. 14.
and the more easy does it find the Yoke. For this end, is Preaching and
Prophesying in a known Tongue commanded, that there might be a Race of knowing
Christians. And Paul would not so much as Sing, or Pray, or do any other Act of
Religious Worship, with his Spirit only, but with his Understanding also. There
cannot be a greater brand cast upon any ones devotion, than to worship they
know not what; Joh. 4.22.
for that is that which our Savior does especially blame the Samaritans for.

2. This is the best way to win upon others. And this principally concerns
Ministers of the Gospel; whom I may ask, in the Apostles words: Thou that
teach another, Romans 2.20.
will thou not teach thy self? Thou who command another to believe, will thou not give him a Reason, why he should believe, and so leave him without
excuse? 1 Timothy 4.12.
Thus the Apostle bids Timothy be an example to the Faithful, (...), i.e. in
reasoning: and gives this general charge, that a man of God must be apt to
teach, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves. There are indeed
some men of diseased minds, who have quenched in themselves all Principles, by
which they may recover and be enlightened. But there are in the World many
sober Dissenters, who stand off from embracing Christianity, merely from the
apprehensions they have, that the Tenets of it are Absurd and Unreasonable;
Act. 17.20.
such as these must be won by Argument. Thus Paul dealt with the Athenians,
who, when they desired to be better informed of his Doctrine, he makes a most
excellent discourse to them concerning Providence, and clears by unanswerable
Reason, that their way of Worship was false, because it begot in men's minds low
and mean opinions of the Deity, as if he were confined to Place, or did take
delight in outward Representations. Thus did our Savior deal with Nicodemus.
In short, Ignorance in a Gospel-Teacher is a capital crime; for our Savior,
when ever he preached, he did it with this Preface, Hear and Understand; and
when his Disciples, were somewhat dull of Apprehension, he sharply reproves
them, (...), What are you, whom I design to be Lights and Guides of the World
without Understanding.

3. The want of this, is the cause why Christians stand so much at a stay, and
make no better Progress. Total Ignorance is a certain sign of Perdition, ^ Cor.
4.3.
If our Gospel, says the Apostle, be hid, it is hid to them that are lost.
Partial Ignorance is a sign of weakness, for there is that Light, that Evidence
in our Religion, that if it be followed, it will always fill the mind with
fresh Discoveries. They who first read the Scriptures, are like such that see a
glorious Palace at a distance, it is wrapped up in a Mist, and the Beauty of it
lies concealed; but the nearer we approach, and the more intently we view it,
the more is the Luster of it manifested. The World, i.e. Carnal men, do count
the Gospel (...), an Idol, and a Foolish thing; but Paul tells us, and all
true Believers find it to be the Wisdom of God, a Plot laid from all Eternity;
for the effecting of which the World was made; and when the Mystery of
Salvation, there declared, is perfected, the World shall be laid aside as an
useless Scene. Christ, to invite our Study, does style himself the Light of the
World; and who does not see, that all who are not enlightened by him are covered
with Darkness, Uncertainty, and doubting? But John calls our Savior (...),
i.e. in the proper signification of the word, Reason, he being that Eternal
Fountain, from whom true Reason sprung; and by whom our lost and ruined Reason
is repaired. 1 Cor. 2.
The Spirit, says the Apostle, searches the depths of God; i.e. the Spirit of
God in man, makes him unquiet and restless in his search, till he has sounded
those depths, which the Ignorant and Lazy World pass hastily over. How easily
by this light would those Mists, about Incarnation, Providence, Resurrection,
etc. which to this day perplex the disputing world, be all dispersed and
scattered? As to this last, the Apostle here is very Positive, that he would
venture all upon a Dispute, and that the best reason should carry it.

If the Dead rise not, 1 Cor. 15.32.
the consequence which Paul brings in wicked men making is very Natural, Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But if the dead rise, then Peter
has made a Rational Inference, 1 Pet. 4.7.
The end of all things is at hand, let us be sober, and watch unto Prayer. For
the time is coming, when the hidden things of our shame shall be brought to
light; 1 Cor. 4.5.
this certainly, if once believed, would keep us honest in the dark; one Sermon
about it made Felix tremble, though, being a Roman, his Unbelief made him
careless; and his calling valiant. Did but men once give themselves leave to
think of it, they would not so spend their days, as if they had nothing but
this Inch of time to provide for. For as our souls are always on the wing; so
our bodies are not entirely our own; but hereafter to be resumed again, and
made either Cages for Unclean, or Mansions for Clorified Spirits. And therefore
that unchangeable state, into which they shall once pass, is by all wise and
knowing men most to be secured. So that I shall conclude in the words of the
Prophet Hosea: Who is wise, Hos. 14.9.
and he shall understand these things? Prudent, and he shall know them? For the
ways of the Lord are right, and the Just shall walk in them: but the
Transgressour shall fall therein.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 16. Line 2. by yet more, r. yet more, by. p. 13. l. 24. doctrine
dangerous, r. doctrine is dangerous. Ib. l. 26. have, r. leave. p. 18. l. 7.
Regimen^ r. Reg^men p. 24. l. 34. destroyed, r. descryed. p. 25. l. 13 Bounds
r. Mounds. p. 27 l. ^. (...) r. (...). p. 32. l. 19. desire r. desired. p. 56.
l. 28. still r. till.


