A Brief ENQUIRY INTO THE Grounds and Reasons, Whereupon the INFALLIBILITY OF
THE POPE and CHVRCH OF ROME Is said to be Founded.

By Edward Bagshawe St. of Chapter Church.

Luke 19. Why do you not of your selves judge (...) is right?

Ephesians. 5. Let no Man deceive you with (...) words.

LONDON, Printed by A.M. and are to be sold by the Book (...).

To the Right Honorable the Earl of ANGLESEY, one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
I Believe your Lordship in your Search and Survey of the Mysteries of
Providence, with which you entertain your Privacy, have often with great
amazement considered, how many strange and admirable Effects, do daily proceed
from small and ignoble Causes; for not only Thunder, Rain, Lightning, and other
common Phenomenon, which do astonish the World, have their whole Make and
Composition, from a seemingly casual and undesigned Concourse, of Light and
Fleeting Clouds; but likewise largest Rivers are fed by secret and concealed
Springs; and the World it self, if traced and resolved into its most visible
Original, is framed of Atoms; and the Earth, which is vulgarly conceived to
be the Basis and Center of the Universe, is, as God himself is pleased to
express it, hung upon Nothing; and yet, by that Almighty Hand which fixed it,
it is made stable and firm enough, to endure unmoved all that Hurry and Variety
of Mutation, wherewith the rolling Motion of the Heavens, do daily threaten it.

What wonder your Lordships Contemplation, has begot in viewing the Works of
Nature, I doubt not but has been continued, when you descended from them to
behold the Works of Art; especially the Civil Policies of States and Kingdoms;
in which, as your Lordship has been always most knowingly conversant, so you
can from the deepest and best grounded Experience evince, that though Earthly
Empires, (I mean such as are not guided by Christian and truly-Religious
Principles) have an Outward Semblance of a Substantial and Lasting Greatness,
yet the Basis which does support the whole Political Frame, is but some
State-trick or other, some little Expedients found out to amuse the Vulgar,
whose Folly must be pleased, or else they will never be governed.

But how far the Wit of man, can advance it self, to imitate the Works of God,
even those of a Creative Power, the making Something out of Nothing, is in no
Policy more discernible, than in that deep and wise contrivance of subtle men,
the Papacy; the Body of which has a pleasing Aspect, and is set out with a
very specious Gloss; all the Parts do seem extremely well-proportioned; there
is a strange Linking and Confederacy of all its Principles; and to the Eye of a
Superficial Beholder, it presents nothing but a beautiful and comely Outside.
But if any be so curious, as to look beyond its Varnish and first Appearance;
should we pry into the Foundation of this Goodly Structure, we shall find it,
like the Island of Delos, always Floating; or rather, like the Earth, to hang
upon nothing; For the Pope's Infallibility, or the Churches Authority, or some
such fond Chimera, is all the Basis which does under-prop this Building. Things
that are so confidently asserted, and yet upon trial so shamefully begged,
that were not the world, in Gods just Judgment, given over to a vicious and
Lazy Credulity, all that is built upon such thin and empty Fallacies would not
subsist one moment; but for the present, the Arts of planting a devout
Ignorance, have so far prevailed, that the world does hug its Bondage; and
men finding a great deal of ease in being quietly deceived, they are content to
worship the Beast, and are angry that any should fright them from embracing a
Religion, which has made the way to Heaven so very plain and easy, that,
whatsoever becomes of the Seeing, they that are Blind enough shall be sure
never to miss of it.

It is now, My Lord, some scores of Years since we of this Nation have by
Scripture Light discovered all the Frauds and Cheats of this Mystery of
Iniquity; and yet it seems all men's eyes are not opened, for some of late have
pleaded for Popery, and for that which is the chief Bulwark of it, the Popes
Authority, with as good a grace (if Railing and needless Rhetoric may deserve
that name) as if they had never been answered. Rushworth Dial. 1.
One in his great heat of zeal, or something worth, does tell us, That
Questions about the Popes Authority over Bishops, of Bishops over Priests, and
of Priests over the Laity, are of no small moment. But he that goes about to
destroy this Hierarchy, aims at nothing less then an Utter overthrow of
Religion. Which are but Bellarmines words in English, Bellar. Praef.
and, if in stead of the word Religion they had said Popery, they had spoke
nothing but the Truth, since that is bottomed only in the Popes Authority.
Fiat Lux -- dedicated to the Countess of Arundell, and twice Printed.
Which a late namelesse Author so far cries up, that he ventures to speak
words, which no sober man would own. In my Judgment, says he, Christ our
Lord has no less shown his Divinity and Power, in the Pope, than in himself.
And again, All things considered I may truly say that Christ in the Pope and
Church, Page 376, 377, etc.
is more miraculous than in his own Person. And yet farther, as if those
expressions were too modest Blasphemy, and not barefaced enough, he goes on,
The first great Fundamental of Christian Religion, which is the Truth and
Divinity of Christ, had it not been for the Pope, had failed long ago in the
world. Whereupon enlarging himself, he adds whence I may truly say, that
Christ is the Popes God, for if the Pope had not been, and proved so resolute
an Assertour, Christ had not been taken for any such person as he is believed
this day. And so in a boaste concludes, This I will boldly say and am assured
of, that if the Pope be not an Unerring Guide in affairs of Religion, all is
lost. For a man once rid of the Control of his Authority, may as easily deride
and as solidly confute the Incarnation, as the sprinkling of Holy Water, nor
could the reason of the world confute them. While I relate such kind of
Passages as these which I tremble to mention, I hope your Lordship will pardon
my zeal, if I complain a little, that Treatises of a far more innocent
Nature, are sharply censured, while these open Impieties do escape unpunished;
as if our Laws were keen only against the Asserters of Christian Liberty, but
had no edge at all against the Broachers of Antichristian Blasphemy.

Since then the Pope's Infallibility, is that Name of Blasphemy, which makes
all its Patrons so bold and Irreligious; since that is the Bottomless Pit, out
of which all this Deadly smoke does issue: I have here, according to your
Lordships commands, endeavored to show the Vanity and Ridiculousnesse, as well
as Impiety of that opinion. In which if I have not answered your Lordships
expectation, as to the exactness of my style and strict manner of my
Reasoning, I shall not wonder: since no Industry of mine can be sufficient to
satisfy your Lordships accurate and unequalled ability in Judging: But if I
have showed my diligence, and left no Argument unanswered, how plainly and
inelegantly soever, I hope then your Lordship will let my willingness to obey,
compound for the failings in my Obedience; since, if the Enemy be killed, it is
all one, as to the truth of the Victory, whether it was done by a Rough Stone,
or by a Polished Sword; nor was David's conquest the less esteemed, because he
vanquished Goliath only with a sling.

And now, My Lord, before I conclude, I should crave leave to tell the world,
how Good, as well as how Great, you are. I should borrow so much Language from
Common Fame, and the General Voice as to declare that for Wisdom, to Direct;
for Eloquence, to Express; for Diligence, to Execute; very few equal, and
none exceed your Lordship. But since what is truth in it self, and would be
Justice in others, in me, because of my Relation, may be esteemed flattery; I
shall turn my Praises of, into Prayers for you, that your Lordship may be
always fixed upon the Rock of Ages, and in all your walkings acknowledge that
God, who only is Infallible; That Christianity may ever steer your actions,
and all your other Political and Moral excellencies may still vail and do
Homage unto a knowing Piety; that with your truly Religious and Excellent Lady,
together with your most Hopeful and Virtuous Children, you may be long
preserved a Good and Great Example, is and shall be the constant Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged and most Obedient Servant and Chaplain
Edward Bagshawe.
Drury Lane April 19th. 1662.
The Preface.
THere are none who allow themselves any liberty of Enquiry, so little skilled
in the Controversies and Disputes between the Papists and Us, but must needs
perceive, that when they are driven out of all the Subterfuges and little
Policies (which they call Distinctions) by which they labor to defend their
Errors, then their last resort is, to the Infallibility of their Church; which
as they handle it, is a (...), a Plaster large and broad enough, though not to
cure, yet to palliate and hide their noisome and diseased Doctrines. And
therefore unless we can take from them this Refuge also, it will be to as
little purpose to combat their other Tenets, how false and erroneous soever,
as it was for Hercules in the Fable, to wrestle with Anteus; who as often as be
was thrown down upon his Mother the Earth, rose up again with new and redoubled
vigor: So till we are able by plain force of Argument, to convince the Papists
of their folly, in believing that (...), their Mother, the Churches
Infallibility, no industry can be so quick in cutting off and destroying their
Errors, as that pregnant and fruitful womb will be, in conceiving and
bringing them forth again. As they tell us, that young Vipers when they are
assaulted, run into their Mothers mouth, and from thence seek shelter in the
poisonous womb that bare them; so all those Prodigies, rather than Opinions of
Transubstantiation, Supererogation, Image-Adoration, and the like, when they
are pursued home, and pressed beyond the strength and support of their own
proper Principles; then to defend themselves, they take Sanctuary in
Infallibility, and under the protection of that, they lie, though not concealed
from the eye, yet safe from the edge of their opposers. For to instance in the
vast use of it, what if all the senses we have, and the Apostle too, do assure
us that the Bread in the Lords Supper, even after Consecration, remains true
and real Bread still, yet if that Church, whose judgment is supposed to be
Infallible, tells us there is no such matter, but that under that Form,
whatever we think, there is contained our Lord Christ both in his Divine and
Humane Nature, we must then in spite of all contradiction, either believe her,
or else vindicate our selves from so unreasonable and so absurd an opinion, by
disproving her Infallibility.

Leaving therefore other parts of the Romish Religion, which are either bold
additions to the Word of God, or else so gross falsifications of it, that they
deserve not a particular confutation, I have here endeavored to set upon that
Man of sin, where his strength lies, since by our Saviors example, to break
the Serpents head, is not only the most ready way to dispatch him, but the most
safe way too to prevent any infection by his venom.

In prosecution of this Design, that I might not out of too much eagerness and
heat mistake my Adversary, I took this Method.

1. I labored fully to inform my self of the Church of Romes Doctrine,
especially in those points, wherein we as Protestants do differ from them. And
this I did, not by studying the Collections of others, or by adhering to some
one Author of their Party, whose Writings they are not bound universally to
own, but by diligent perusing the Canons of their most magnified Councels,
particularly that of Trent, which I read only in such Editions, as are approved
and attested by themselves.

2. Since the Popes Infallibility, how tamely soever our Modern Papists swallow
it, was anciently a great Dispute amongst them, and in the Schools among their
learned men is not yet decided: some attributing it to the Pope (which seems to
have been the judgment of the Junto at Trent) others preferring a Council, of
which opinion were the two Councels of Basil and Constance, as appears in their
Decrees yet extant. Hereupon I carefully perused Cardinal Bellarmine upon this
Subject, who is the Popes Principal, and most avowed, I will add, and most
learned Champion. And because I think he has spoke fully the sense of the
Court of Rome, and left nothing unsaid which might justify his Cause, I made
it my business in the following Treatise to answer his Arguments.

3. Though they infer it from different Principles, yet since both Papists
and Protestants do agree in this Conclusion, that the Scripture is the
undoubted Word of God, I have from that Armory fetched all my weapons, by which
I fight against this Monster of Infallibility: for since Bellarmines best plea
for it is from some few Texts, by him miserably wrested and mistaken, I thought
it my duty to take this sword of the Spirit out of that Gollans hand, and not
only sonite off his head with it, but likewise use it my self thronghout my
whole Discourse. For though the Papists are so bold as to deny the Scriptures
to be a Sufficient Rule, yet for so much as there is of them, they dare not
deny them to be Infallible: and therefore

Lastly, Whatever Testimonies I might have alleged, either in behalf of the
Scriptures Sufficiency and Divine Autherity, or against the perpetual
Infallibility of any man, or number of men whatever, (of which kind of
Citations I have collected many, and observed more in the ancient Writers,
especially before Constantines time) yet I purposely omitted them, because 1.
In Questions, wherein the Right of any thing is controverted, to call in
Witnesses is altogether impertinent. 2. No Authority of man ought to prevail,
unless it has the Authority of God, and the consent of mankind, i.e. Scripture
or Right Reason to back it. 3. Many Writers of our own, as Mounsieur Daillee,
Chillingworth, the Lord Falkland, the Lord Digby, now Earl of Bristow, etc.
have already showed the vanity and uselesness of such Allegations: and because
it is possible that the example of the last Honorable Person I named, may be
urged against me, since his present practice does contradict his former
principles; I will only add this, that since his Book is not yet answered by
himself, I hope he thinks it unanswerable, and will not long continue in
communion with that Church, whose Foundations he has so well overthrown. 4.
This way of writing by Quotations, makes every Controversy uncertain,
dilatory, and endless: for as the possessed person said to the Exorcists, Jesus
I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? so may the common Reader say of
Authorities and Fathers, Scripture I know, and Reason I know, but who are ye?
for any farther than they speak according to the Dictates of the two former,
these latter must not be heard, much less believed or followed.

That this little Treatise, thus curtailed of all Authorities, and deplumed of
those Sentences from Fathers (with which others do not think they stuff, but
rather adorn their Writings) is like to be little read, and less esteemed by
the men of a contrary persuasion, I easily foresee; but yet the Question is so
very useful, that I could not omit to handle it. For

1. If it shall appear, that the Church and Pope of Rome are not Infallible,
then I hope all those who have unwarily embraced their Errors, upon the
account of their unerring Authority, will be induced to shake off their
laziness, and address themselves strictly to enquire into the Grounds of what
they Believe; and according to the advice of the Apostle Paul (who was
undoubtedly Infallible in that direction) Prove all things, and then hold fast
that which is good. The greatest Truth, while it is untried, may for ought we
know be an Error; and all that while if we entertain it, we fall upon our
Religion only by chance; and serve God, as the Samaritans did, for which our
Savior blames them, we know not why.

2. If the Pope and Church of Rome be not Infallible in their Judgment about
Religious matters, then it follows, that they ought not to impose upon the
Judgment of others; there being nothing more unreasonable then this, that they
should Lord it over the Faith, or, Conscientious Persuasion of other men, who
are not certain but they may Err and be deceived themselves.

This last Consideration, how far it may be improved, to moderate the great
Fierceness and Rigor of too many among our selves (who in things of so poor,
so trivial, so needless and so unmanly a nature, will have their will to be a
Law) I mention only, it being too sad a Theme to insist long upon. But if
Religion, which is in it self the firmest lie; if the Law of Christ, which is
a Law of Love; cannot make us agree and live together as Brethren, yet let
fear of the common Enemy, prevent our separation. When Abraham and Lot fell
out about their Pastures (and I wish much of our Church-quarells now were not
of the same nature) the spirit of God remarks upon it, the Canaanits and the
Perizzites were then in the Land. Hereby intimating, that it was a most
unseasonable time for them to disagree and to divide from each other in, when
they were surrounded in the midst of Enemies. This passage perfectly agrees
with our Case, and on the very same motive bespeaks a mutual Reconcilement;
for certainly the Canaanites are in the Land, the Philistines are, if not upon,
yet Among us, who watch our Halting, and hate Conformists and Non-conformists
(if these must be once more the Unhappy Terms to distinguish us) both alike;
the one they hate for going so far from, the other, for not coming nearer to
them. If God in just Judgment upon our unchristian Animosities, should make us
a Prey to those Incircumcised Philistines, Polyphemus courtesy to Ulisses, of
devouring him last, would be the greatest favor that he can expect, whoever he
be that is now most eager in denying his weak, but yet Christian Brother, that
Liberty which he thinks Christ has purchased; and none but Antichrist will
seek utterly to bereave us of. Should we ever fall into the Papists hands
again I cannot expect they should use us more mildly, then their predecessors
did Samson, i.e. put out our eyes, and make us grind in their Mills, Or as they
afterward served the Israelites, take away our Weapows of War; our
Scripture, and the best, if not the only Interpreter of it, Enligtned Reason;
and so leave us Naked and Defencelesse, to the Assaules of Ignorance first, and
if that will not prevail, to the Fury of a Merciless Inquisition. Which last,
will be found the strongest and most forcible Engine, rather then Argument, by
which they defend their Infallibillity.

But how ill an opinion soever I have both of the Papists Religion, and of the
unchristian ways they take to propagate it, yet far be it from me to wish,
that amongst us they may suffer the same hard measure, which I know by their
principles, they are always ready to inflict. For so much do I desire their
Conversion (which can never be sincere unless it be voluntary and
unconstrained) and so little fear their Power of seducing (since their
greatest strength lies in the Ignorance of their followers, rather then in the
cunning of their Guides) that I heartily wish all Penal Laws against them
were utterly taken away: For I never yet saw any Argument that could clearly
evince, why any sort of men, who would profess a peaceable subjection unto the
Civil Government, might not in all their Civil Rights, be protected by it.

I must confess there are two things, which do much difference the case of the
Papists, from that of any other Religious Sect this day in the World, and which
renders the toleration of them very unsafe, if not unwarrantable. One is, their
depending upon, and owning of a foreign Power, and that such a Power too,
which according to the Opinion of their Teachers, can when he pleases dispense
with them for, and release them from their most sacred Engagements, so that a
State can have no security, but that whenever they have opportunity, they will
endeavor a Change; Lib. 5. de Pontif. Romans c. 7. Quod si Christiani non
deposuerunt Neronem and similes, id fuit quia deerant vires temporales, nam
alioqui jure id poter ant facere, etc.
and their present peaceableness may justly be attributed merely to their want
of strength: which Bellarmine is not ashamed to say, was the sole cause why the
Primitive Christians were coment to suffer without Resistance: from which
Position what can follow, but that it concerns the wisdom and policy of every
State, to keep those under, whom as to tempor all Subjection, it cannot confide
in. But could our Papists in England give sufficient evidence of their hearty
disowning such an irreligious Tenet, yet there is another thing practiced by
them, which makes it highly questionable whether a Kingdom professing
Christianity ought to tolerate them in, and that is their Worship of Images,
which is a sin so contrary to the express letter of the divine Law, and so
repugnant to the common sense and reason of all sober men, that God punished it
severely even in the Heathen Caldeans, Jer. 50.38.
as well as in his own people the Jews. But bating these two indefensible
Crimes, rather than Errors, their other opinions of Merit, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, etc. may for ought I see be charitably born with, since in
themselves they create no prejudice to the public Peace, which even Christian
Magistrates, so far as they are Magistrates, ought principally, if not solely,
to provide for.

If any think that such Indulgence, like warm Air, will ripen these monstrous
Births too fast, and prove the ready way to increase Popery, they are utterly
ignorant either how that Religion first began, or by what Arts it is still
upheld. For till the world was asleep in sensuality, and blinded with
Ignorance, the Enemy could not sow these Tares; and had they not afterward
maintained by force, what they gained by fraud, those Tares could never have
prospered into so large an Harvest. In opposition, therefore to that conspiracy
of Ignorance and Malice, which goes to compound the Roman Religion I shall not
scruple to say, that if his Majesty (whom God, I doubt not, has designed for
some such great and generous work, as now I mention) be pleased still to
continue to countenance the free Preaching and Reading of the Scripture, and to
disalow the imposing of any thing, which either is contrary to or besides it;
It will then be as impossible for Popery to prevail, as for dust to resist the
Wind, or for Airy Clouds to Eclipse the Sun. The Errors of Popery, for want of
Divine Warrant, have in them such a Fundamental and Inherent weakness, that
unless they are upheld by a Coercive power, they will sink and fall of
themselves; as thin and emty vapors, if they have but room enough in the
Air, will disperse themselves, without the help of any wind to scatter them.
To endeavor therefore the weakening of Popery, by any thing which looks like
Persecution, does indeed give it strength and Reputation, as if it had reason
on its side and therefore stood in need of force to suppress it. And besides
it only fills the Church with Hypocrites instead of Converts; who by mingling
with, and masking themselves under the Name of Protestants, do what they can
secretly to dispirit and undermine our Religion, the power of which they never
felt, since they were only frighted to the Embracing of it.

But perhaps I need not plead so zealously for the not persecuting of Popery,
when too many of our unwary Gentry begin already to be taken with the outward
Pomp of it; and some that yet profess themselves to be of our Church, and
those of good Note too, are not afraid to plead for something more then its
Toleration. Mr Thorndike. Just Weights and Measures.
Since by telling us in Print, that the Pope is not Antichrist; that Papists
are not Idolaters; nay by affirming, that All are Schismatickes, who upon that
score do refuse Communion with them. They not only blemish the Virtue and
Piety of our first Reformers) who all built upon that Foundation, but likewise
show how willing they are upon any Terms how wretched and unworthy soever, to
return into Egypt, and bring us to our Brick and Bondage again. If this be
not the intent of some I cannot imagine what means the crying up of that great
Diana of the Papists, the Churches Authority, and making that the sole
Interpreter of Scripture. The Preaching up of Lent, Dr Gunning upon Mat. 9. the
Lent Fast. -- Eliz. 5. Mr Thorndike. ut supra.
and other Political Fish-dayes, as Religious Fasts, and of Apostolical
Institution, quite contrary both to express Scripture and an Act of
Parliament. The insinuating that we may Lawfully pray for the Dead, and likewise
expect some benefit by their Prayers, which in time may easily be improved to
our Praying unto them. These with some other Opinions of the like nature, so
far degenerating from our Primitive Protestancy, do show that if the Age is
willing to be deceived, there are not wanting Learned men, who are willing
enough to deceive them.

The design therefore of this small Treatise, is not only to depose the Pope
from his usurped Title of Infallibility, but to keep all persons else, whether
Churches, or Church Rulers, from taking the Chair and succeeding into his
room. For since our Lord Christ has given every Believer, Reason to judge
with, and a Rule to judge by: since over and above he has promised his spirit
to all that ask it, which serves to assist the one, and to explain the other;
he has thereby appointed every man, in matters of Faith and Godliness, to be
a Judge for himself, though not of another. And he who uses those means which
our Savior has left, and seeks to him in them, may Infallibly be assured,
that though in some things he may Err, as a man, yet he shall never finally
miscarry. Whereas he that leanes upon a Church, of what denomination soever,
cannot be sure that he shall not be deceived: since any number of men, are as
fallible in their Judgment as one (especially when they are all sworn, as in
the Papacy, to uphold the Authority, and to defend the dictates of one) This
consideration alone will I hope prevail with all Impartial and disinteressed
persons to take the safest side, and with David, to choose to fall into the
hands of God, whose word duly searched into never deceived any, rather then to
fall into the hands of men, who being Blind themselves, do first take care to
Blind their Followers and then lead them into a Ditch.

Edward Bagshaw.
Drury Lane, April 16. 1662.
THE GREAT QUESTION ABOUT The Infallibility of the Pope AND Church of Rome.
Quest.
Whether there be any sufficient Ground from Scripture or Reason, to believe
the Pope and Church of Rome to be Infallible?

FOr the better understanding, and clearer stating of this Great Question, I
will premise these three things;

1. By the Pope, I mean the Bishop of Rome, not in his Personal capacity, as
he is a Man (for so, the prodigious and monstrous Lives of many of their Popes,
which are obvious in Story, Multi Pontifices fuerunt minu^ probi. Bell. Prafat.
cannot but force them to acknowledge, that he is liable to Error) but in his
Political, or, which is all one, his Ecclesiastical capacity; as he is the
pretended Head of the Church; and vested with all those Immunities and
Privileges, which his Favorers suppose to be due unto the Universal Bishop.

2. By the Church of Rome, I mean, not the diffused and scattered Body of the
Papists, but, according to their own Sense, how Absurd and Insignificant
soever, the Bishops and Doctors of their Church, assembled together in a
Council; where, they may be supposed to meet, with the greatest Advantage and
Opportunity, for the Disquisition and Search of Truth.

3. By Infallible, I mean, to have a certain, fixed, and unerring Judgment in
Religious matters; which things alone do properly belong to the determination
and cognizance of a Church, as it is a Church. And, in this sense of the
Question, thus explained, in as great a Latitude as any Papist can possibly
understand it in, I deny the Pope, whether considered as apart from, or
conjoined with, as a part of, a Council, to be Infallible.

For the proof of which Assertion, though I might find out great variety of
Arguments, from the express and direct contradictions which have been among the
Popes themselves, some reversing that which others have ratified; and others
establishing that, which their Predecessors under the severest Penalties have
forbid. Yet since the proper and direct way of Arguing, lies in showing the
weakness and insufficiency of those Arguments, which are brought in defense of
the Popes Infallibility, that is the Method which I purpose altogether to
insist on. For since this great and so much admired Diana of the Papists, is no
(...), i. e. a thing to be discerned by its own Light, and to be credited
merely for it self; as the testimony of the Spirit is, when it bears witness
unto the truth of Scripture; and besides, it being generally denied by all the
Protestants, who make the Errors of the Church of Rome, the ground of their
separation from them, hence it cannot be expected, that we should tamely give
up out Assent to believe this Infallibility, unless there be some evident and
concluding Reasons to enforce it from us. If therefore it shall appear, that
whatever Bellarmine (and when I mention him, I mean the strength of the whole
Popish Party) has said, is altogether impertinent and unconcluding, indeed
nothing else but a plain begging the thing in Question; my Deduction from
thence will be Infallible, viz. that we have as yet no Reason to believe the
Popes Infallibility.

To clear up this, the best way will be to take a short view, of those
Arguments which Bellarmine alleges, in his Books De Pontifice Romano; and
they are briefly these three.

1. Some Texts of Scripture in the New Testament.

2. Some Analogicall Inferences out of the Old.

3. Some Absurdities and Inconveniences which would follow in the Church of
God, should we not allow the Pope and Church of Rome to be Infallible.

1. The Texts of Scripture which Bellarmine, and all Writers since him, do urge
to prove the Popes Infallibility by; are these three, Mat. 16.18, 19. Luke
22.31, 32. Job. 21.15, 17. From which they draw these three Conclusions. 1.
That in those forementioned places, our Savior did confer upon Peter some
special Privileges, above and beyond the rest of the Apostles; and they were
1. Supremacy, in Matthew. 2. Infallibility in Luke. 3. Universal Episcopacy in
John. 2. They Assume, that whatever was bestowed upon Peter, was not confined
unto his Person, but was promised likewise unto his Successors: since what was
granted unto Peter, was given for the good of the Church, and therefore ought
not to die with him. 3. They take for granted, that the Pope was Peter's
Successor, both in the Bishopric of Rome, and also in all his other
Privileges; and for the last, they allege nothing but the credit of that,
which they call, Apostolical Tradition.

Whether or no these Deductions are clear in the Texts, or violently haled and
wrested from them; with so much impudent and shameless Sophistry, as a wise
and disinteressed Person, would blush to be guilty of, will best appear by
examining the places themselves; and if, when they are put upon the Rack, they
can be forced to confess so much, as Bellarmine, and the Popes Parasites
conclude from them; I shall then consent to dethrone Scripture from its
plainness and Perspicuity; but till then I must take leave to think, that
that Church does very wisely, which makes Ignorance and Implicit Faith, the
Mother of Devotion: for nothing less then an overawed and Religious
stupidity, would make any man submit unto such Impossible and far fetched
interpretations.

1. The place in Mat. 16.18, 19. runs thus, And Jesus answered and said unto
him, i. e. to Peter, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood has
not revealed this to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: And I say also
unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church; and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: And I will give unto thee the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and, whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in Heaven. Which place they thus interpret; 1. By the Rock, upon which
Christ says he will build his Church, is meant the Person of Peter; and the
Church's being built upon him, signifies, say they, that the care and
government of it was committed to him; and thus they understand likewise his
Having of the Keys. 2. By the power of Binding and Loosing; they understand,
the power of commanding and punishing; of making and repealing Laws; with all
such things as belong to a Sovereign and Legislative Power. 3. They tell us,
that whatever Peter had here, was likewise granted to the Pope, who is his
Successor; and therefore he being the Rock, and the Foundation of the Church,
cannot be tossed about with every wind of Doctrine, and therefore is
Infallible. But I answer,

1. Upon supposition that Peter here was constituted, as they call him, Head
and Prince of the Apostles; yet, how would this Personal Privilege, any more
belong to the Bishop of Rome (if he were Peter's Successor) than what our
Savior elsewhere says to Peter, Why did thou doubt, O thou of little faith!
does note the Pope's uncertainty and instability in Believing? Or, Mat. 14.31.
what our Savior presently after speaks, Get thee behind me Satan! does
signify, that every Pope is an Incarnate Devil; or, to take the mildest
Interpretation, an Adversary to Christ, and to the good of mankind? For what
Reason can be assigned, why the Pope may not as well succeed in Peter's
Personal Defects, as into his Privileges? since the Scripture is utterly
silent, either that he had, or that he was to have a Successor in either? But

2. I deny the Supposition, upon which all this Babel is built; that our
Savior did confer any Preeminence of Power and Authority upon Peter, above the
rest of the Apostles; because

1. These words, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, cannot without
blasphemy, be affirmed of the Person of Peter; who himself was built upon the
Rock, Christ; and was not the Foundation, but only a Workman at the Building.
Indeed in the Figurative Description of New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.14.
which John makes in his Vision, he compares it to a City, which had twelve
Foundations, upon which were written the Names of the twelve Apostles. Rev. 21.
So that if the Papists will needs call Peter a Foundation, I hope they will
take in the rest of the Apostles, to be sharers with him in that Title. But
since the whole Description in John, City and all, is only Figurative and
Metaphorical, the Foundation there mentioned, must be like the City; i. e. so
called, not in a Real, but only Metaphorical Acception. For to speak
properly, as Paul does, No other Foundation can any man lay, 1 Cor. 3.11.
than what is already laid, and that is, Ephesians. 2.
that Jesus is the Christ. And therefore when we are said to be built upon the
Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; the meaning is not, that we are built
upon their Persons, but upon their Doctrine; the sum of which, is contained
in Peter's confession; upon which Rock, our Savior has so built his Church,
that the Gates or Powers of Hell, however they may rage, and strive to ruin
it; yet they shall never be able finally to prevail against it; but Christ will
have a Church, in some place or other, unto the end of the world.

2. If Peter was the Rock, so as all Christians, even the Apostles themselves,
were to depend upon his guidance; what a wretched and tottering condition would
the Church have been in, when this Rock, so soon after was shaken, and almost
removed out of his place? For within some few minutes, he is rebuked by our
Savior, in no milder language than this, Get thee behind me Satan! The Story
of his denying, and that with Oaths, his Master, is too notorious to be
palliated, and too sad to be insisted on: Even after our Saviors Resurrection,
when they pretend this promise of Infallibility was inseparably annexed to him,
Act. 10.
we find him unresolved in that part of his Commission, which concerned his
preaching the Gospel unto the Gentiles; and therefore had the assistance of a
particular Visiton, more fully to inform him of it; and afterward at Antioch,
we read that he was of so inconstant and unequal a carriage, in that great
point of Christian Liberty, complying herein more than he ought, Gal. 2.
with the Jewish rigor and austerity, that Paul was forced openly to reprove
him for it, and so prevent the contagion of his ill example. So that if he, who
in the Court of Rome's style, is called Prince of the Apostles, in matters of
so great moment, was thus subject to Error and Fallibility, I wonder with what
face, the Pope, upon the account of being Peter's Suceessour, can plead any
exemption.

3. These words, I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, do
not denote any peculiar power, that Peter had over the rest of the Apostles;
for then, how came it to pass afterward, that there were so many, and so
fierce contentions amongst them, Who should be greatest? Which our Savior, at
two several times, silences, not, by commanding them to obey Peter, as their
Chief; but by utter prohibiting any desire of Sovereignty? If they answer us,
as Bellarmine does, that the Apostles did not clearly understand, that Peter
was to be Supreme Head, till after our Savior's Resurrection, (which by the
way, is nothing else but a bold playing with sacred Scripture) Then I demand
farther, when there was a new Apostle to be chosen into the room of Judas, why
did not Peter, by his sole Authority, Act. 1.
design him? or at least when the multitude of Disciples (for so we read that
all of them were concerned in the choice) had appointed two, why did they not
present them both unto Peter, that he might choose one, rather than suffer the
matter to be decided by Lot: sure had Peter had any paramount and extraordinary
Power, and withal a peculiar infallible spirit, he could not have better
exerted it, than in that emergency. For the Head of the Church, in so
concerning a business, first to permit all the multitude, to have a voice in
choosing an Apostle, (for if our modern Arguments are good, he might justly
fear, that they being for the greatest part unlearned, would choose one like
themselves, and so prejudice the reputation of Apostolical Authority) and
afterward to leave the matter unto the uncertain casualty of a Lot, whereas
the choice seemed properly to belong to Peter's Jurisdiction; this argues
either that his Power, or his care of the Church, was very little; of which
last, I hope the Papists do not doubt; and therefore must needs deny the
former. For what is it else but to tempt God, to have recourse unto casting of
Lots, when a way of choice, more prudent and Infallible, by referring the
business to Peter's single Decision, was opened for them. But it seems the
Apostles understood nothing of Peter's Supremacy, either then, or afterward,
when they went to choose Deacons, which by all the Apostles, Peter not being so
much as particularly mentioned, was committed to the Mulitude; and after the
choice, Imposition of hands was performed, not by Peter alone, but as the Text
expressly says, by all the Apostles. Will they tell us, that this was a thing
below him; Act. 6.
and that it did not become Peter's Authority, to interesse himself in a matter
of so petty concernment? This plea is taken from them, because we read that the
Twelve, and among them sure Peter was one, did not think it below them: and
besides, it will appear, a strange kind of conceated and useless Authority,
which they ascribe to Peter; which in matters, neither of the greatest, such as
was the choice of an Apostle; nor of the least moment, such as was the choice
of a Deacon, would ever so particularly exert it self, that we might once take
notice of his Prerogative. But what kind of Equality Peter stood in to the rest
of the Apostles, he showed, Act. 8.
in submitting to be sent with John, unto Samaria; to finish that work of the
Gospel, which Philip had begun there; for sure our Saviors Argument is
Infallible, Joh 15.
that He who is sent, is not greater then he who sends him. And it would have
been a strange boldness (I believe the Pope would call it by a worse name in
his Cardinals) should the Apostles, have thus presumed to send their Prince,
had he indeed been so constituted over them. Yet further, when there was a
Question started about the use of Jewish Ceremonies, and a Synod convened about
it, Act. 15.
why did not Peter then Preside as chief? Why did he suffer the business to
be disputed, after he had declared his own Judgment? Why does James, who spoke
after him, give him no more Honorable style, then plain Simeon? and seems
himself, in saying My sentence is, to give the whole solution of the Query, as
also the Form of the Future Decree, without taking any notice of Peter's
decision? Whence comes it, that after a strict Debate, the result was in the
Council, It pleased the Apostles, and Elders with the whole Church; and the
superscription of the Letter runs, The Apostles and Elders and Brethren; and
the decree, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us; without any mention of
Peter at all, whose Supremacy and Infallibility, ought not to have been thus
silently passed over, that the Churches afterward, might know whether to to
have recourse for satisfaction of their scruples. How comes it to pass, that
we hear no News of Peter after, but the story is continued wholly about Paul as
if the Primacy had been transferred to him? sure the Holy Penman, who mentions
so many of Paul's travells, that were of far less moment, would not have
omitted Peter's Journey to Rome, his sitting Bishop there for eighteen years,
and fixing the Succession, and Infallibility to boot, upon that See, had he
understood any thing of it. Afterward when Paul meets Peter at Antioch, Gal. 2.
Why did he not veil to him, but Irreverently stand upon his Terms, and
Openly reprove him? Lastly, For Instances are infinite in this kind, why does
that blessed Apostle Peter himself, 1 Pet. 5.
disclaim any such kind of Jurisdiction, stiling himself (...), a
Fellow-Elder, and utterly forbiding any pretentions of Lordship and Sovereignty
even over the Flocks they fed, much more over their Fellow Ministers. Certainly
none of these things, can consist with that grant, which Bellarmine fondly
supposes, was here made to Peter, and therefore we may justly conclude, that
the words have another Interpretation, which is plainly this: Our Savior
asking his Disciples, what men thought of him, and whom they took him to be;
after he had heard the various opinions of others, he continues to ask them
theirs; whereupon Peter, in the name of the rest, replies thou art the Christ
the Son of God; which being the Article, that then was oppugned, our Savior
pronounces him Blessed for it, not, as if other Believers were not equally
blessed, and did not obtain this Faith by Revelation too (for so the Apostle
Paul says expressly, 1 Cor. 12.
that none can call Jesus Lord i. e. Christ, but by the Holy Spirit) but those
words are spoken exclusively, as to any outward means, whereby he might attain
that knowledge. For that no less power, than the Imediate action of the Spirit
of God, can make a man to Believe on Christ, is not only evident from the
nature of the thing, which exceeds all created ability; but likewise from those
perpetual contradictions and doubtings, which Beleivers themselves have,
before the Spirit of God has explained and solved them. The promise therefore
which our Savior makes to Peter, of giving him the Keys; etc. concerned all
the Apostles, since they were Believers and Disciples as well as he; and so our
Savior enlarges it after his Resurrection, in that general Commission, Whose
sins soever you retain they are retained i. e. By your Preaching, whom you do
declare to be under the power of sin, if they Repent not and Believe the
Gospel, their sins are retained. i. e. Bound and tied fast to them, for God
will never pardon such; but others that embrace the Gospel, are remitted i. e.
loosed and absolved. So that the result of all is this: From this place, cannot
be inferred either. 1. That Peter is that Rock, upon which Christ will build
his Church; but rather, Christ himself confessed by Peter. Or 2. That Peter
here had any Preeminence of Power, Authority and Infallibility, above the rest
of the Apostles; he receiving this Promise only, as a Prolocutor of the
Apostles, in whose names he spoke, and they being afterward joined all equally
in the same Commission. Much less can it be deduced, 3. That the Pope, who is
not once mentioned, was Peter's Sucessour, or has the least pretension to
claim any thing from him, unless it be his Errors and Fallibility.

2. The second place of Scripture, which is brought for the Patronage of Peter's
first, and then of the Popes Infallibility; is that which if they had searched
the whole Scripture, they could not have found one that does more directly make
against it: The place is Luc. 22.31, 32. Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat: But I have prayed for thee,
that thy Faith fail not; and when thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren.
Here, though by a most miserable instance, we find how frail and fallible
Peter was; yet Bellarmine draws from hence two privileges, that were conferred
upon Peter. 1. That Peter might never fall from the Faith, how much soever he
was tempted of the Devil. 2. That none of his Successors should ever teach any
thing contrary to the truth. The First of these I grant; and acknowledge that
it was by virtue of this Prayer of our Saviors, that Peter recovered his
station again, after so great a shaking, but withal I add, that this was no
peculiar Privilege to Peter, but in common to all the rest, as is more clear
in Joh. 17. v. 9. and the Reason why Peter was particularly spoken to, was
because our Savior foresaw he should more foully miscarry: and therefore stood
in need of this Cordial to relieve him. But the second, is so little to be
gathered from the Text viz, that the Pope, as Peter's Successor should never
teach false Doctrine, that it would be an extreme vanity in me, to go about to
confute it: Only one fetch of Bellarmines is not to be omitted; when we
object, that if this place be to be understood of Peter's Successors, then it
must presuppose, that all the Popes (who will needs intrude into that Title)
must first deny Christ, and after that be converted, before they can strengthen
their Brethren, or be confirmed in the Faith themselves. To this Bellarmine
replies, that (...) does not signify, Peter's being turned from sin; but his
turning himself to the weak Brethren, to discourse with them, which is a piece
of so merry Sophistry, that it only serves to show the wretched boldness of
Partial and self-designing men, when they make use of Scripture to shore up
and to underprop their ill got greatness; the plainest places then shall not
escape their perverse and irregular fancies; as this, wherein there is a
gracious Promise made of Peter's Recovery and Conversion, is made to signify
just nothing, but the Impiety of those men, who dare thus abuse it.

3. The Third and last place, which is urged in this Controversy, and most
insisted on, though to as little, or if possible, less purpose, than either of
the former; is Joh. 21.15, 17. Where our Savior repeats no less then three
times. Peter feed my Lambs; and feed my sheep. Bellarmines Comment upon these
words, is very admirable. 1. By Feed, which in the Scripture dialect signifies
only to Teach, and compassionatly to care for; he understands to Rule and
Govern, as Prince, because the word (...) is sometimes so rendered. 2. By
Lambs and Sheep, he says are understood Christians of all sorts and sizes.
Lambs signifying the weak in Faith; and Sheep the Apostles and Teachers, which
are to other Christians, as Sheep are to their Lambs, i. e. the bringers of
them forth in the Faith of Christ; over whom Peter is here constituted
Universal Bishop, and none who belong to Christ, as one of his sheep, but must
by virtue of this Commission, be obedient unto Peter's Rule and Direction. Had
Bellarmine stopped here and streined this Scripture no farther, he might have
had some commendation for his Wit, though very little for his Honesty, but when
he goes on, and Infers, 3. That whatever here is granted to Peter, was intended
likewise for his Successor; and 4. That the Bishop af Rome did succeed him: I
cannot but observe how ill an Interpreter of Scripture, Prejudice and
Prepossession is; for who that reads this place without looking upon it,
through the Spectacles of the Popes Infallibility, can make any other sense of
it, than this; that Peter having denied our Savior thrice, is here thrice
minded of his Duty, to humble him under the sense of his former miscarriage,
and to direct him, that he could not better demonstrate his Love to Christ,
then by showing a care over his little ones; which our Savior had before
enjoined him, when he said Thou being converted, confirm thy Brethren; which
is all one with what is here commanded him, Feed my Lambs and Sheep: i. e.
Teach, Instruct, Reprove, exhort them, and therein perform all the Acts of a
Faithful Minister; as Paul to the Elders of the Church of Ephesus; bids them
to Feed the Church of God; Act. 20.28.
and Peter to the Elders of the Believing Jews, in that very place, where he
forbids them all manner of Sovereignty and Coercive Jurisdiction, commands them
to Feed the Flock of God, which was among them. 1 Pet. 5..2
And what the word Feed signifies, God himself has already explained, when he
promises by his Prophet, that he would give unto his People, Pastors according
to his own heart, who should Feed his people, Jer. 3.13.
with knowledge and with understanding. So that the word cannot be rendered to
Rule and Govern with Force and Authority, and making all men submit, unto his
Infallible Dictates; for this is that which God condemns in the Shepherds of
Israel; who ruled over them with severity, Ezekiel. 33.4.
and with Rigor, and Cruelty; but with all gentleness and condescension to
accommodate themselves unto the weak and infirm state of their Flocks; (...).
40.11.
as God describes himself. He shall Feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall
gather the Lambs with his Arm, and shall gently lead those that are with
Young. Ezekiel. 34.15.16
And again I will Feed my Flock, and cause them to lie down; I will seek that
which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up
that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. This is the
part of a good Shepherd, and this is the sum of what here is enjoined Peter.

After this plain and clear vindication of these Scriptures, had I a mind to
make my self, and my Reader sport; I could not find a better Subject, than by
enlarging and descanting upon those excellent Arguments, that Bellarmine
alleadges to prove. 1. That Peter was Bishop of Rome; and 2. That the Pope did
succeed him, not only into that Bishopric, but likewise into all his other
more than Apostolical Privileges. The first he proves, from the dignity of
that See, which, says he, could no otherwise arise, but because Peter was
Primate there: but who does not see, that the dignity of it, might easily arise
from other causes, as particularly from this, because it was the chief seat of
the Roman Empire; which is the Reason assigned, why the Bishop of
Constantinaple was to have the second place, Council. Constantinop. Can. 5.
because he was Bishop of New-Rome. 2. He proves it, because Peter died and was
buried there, as, says he, is apparent from his Sepulcher, yet to be seen. As
if it was not as easy for the Popes to make specious Tombs, for men who never
died in Rome, as to Canonize, and make prayers to Saints, who, it is to be
feared, have no place in Heaven. His Reasons to defend the Pope's succession
unto Peter, are of the same nature; as 1. Because Peter ought to have a
Successor; there being, says he, as much reason for an Universal Bishop,
now, as then. Which I easily grant, and return it thus, But there was no Reason
for an Universal Bishop then; for then sure the holy men, whose business it
was to write all things absolutely necessary unto faith, and godliness, would
not have omitted a matter so very important, unto the peace and unity of
Christians; and therefore we may safely conclude, there was no such Universal
Bishop; but admitting it were so, how will it appear, that the Bishop of Rome,
more than any other Bishop, was to be his Successor? Yes, says Bellarmine. 2.
None ever did yet pretend to be Peter 's Successor, but only the Bishop of
Rome, and therefore undoubtedly he was the man; Which is all one, as if an
Usurper, who had gained a Crown by force, and destroyed all the lawful Heirs,
should say, none does now pretend to the Crown, but my self, and therefore
undoubtedly I have a true Title. I believe this is the first case, wherein a
confident and peremptory claim, was ever thought to give a rightful possession.

But I will no longer fight with a shadow, or pursue an Enemy, who has a Bog
for his retreat; for so I account all Arguments taken from unwritten Tradition;
which is Bellarmine's last refuge: for what can be more unreasonable, than to
allege old Stories, (which serve only to the advantage of the teller, and
therefore may justly be suspected to be forged by him) and to use them as
Motives, to persuade us unto the belief of that, which in Reason is ridiculous;
and in Scripture, the most authentic and allowed Tradition, is not so much as
once mentioned. The sum thereof of what I have to say is this; 1. It does not
appear, in any of the forementioned places, that Peter had any peculiar
Privilege of Infallibility, or Authority granted to him, above the rest of the
Apostles. 2. It does much less appear that ever he was at Rome, or sat as
Bishop there. 3. Upon supposition that the two first could be as clearly
proved, as it is clear they cannot, yet that any of Peter's personal
Privileges, should be communicated to another, who will needs usurp his Name,
and style himself his Successor, can as little be maintained, as that his
power of Miracles, his gift of Tongues, etc. should be continued, which the
Pope as yet does not pretend to. I conclude therefore, that Bellarmine's first
Plea from Scripture, is so far from Demonstration, that it is scarce tolerable
Sophistry, and so much in Answer to his first Argument.

Secondly, the Popes Infallibility, Bellar. de s^^mo Pontif. l. 4, 1
is taken from the Analogy and Resemblance, that ought to be between the Jewish
and the Christian Church. For in the Jewish Church, says Bella, mine, there
was an High Priest, which was Infallible; unto whom they were commanded to have
recourse, in all difficult Causes, and to abide by his Determination; as
appears Deuteronomy. 17.8, 14. And therefore in the Christian Church, there being the
same, if not greater necessity, because of the extent of it, it follows that
there must likewise be some visible Infallible Judge, for the ending of
Controversies, which will daily arise among Christians, and this can be no
other than the Bishop of Rome.

To this Argument from Analogy I answer;

1. That the similitude and resemblance between the Jewish and the Christian
Church, does not consist in having the same outward Economy, and Forms of
Administration; as in a visible High Priest, with other Rites and Ordinances
answerable to such a Visibility; but in the spiritual and inward performance,
of what heretofore was materially and outwardly represented. He Is 9.10.
So that the Jewish Sacrifices did not import, that they should always be
continued, but, as the Apostle tells us, they were to last only, until that
great Sacrifice was offered, of which all the others were only faint and weak
Preludiums. The like is declared concerning their meats and drinks, their
washings, and bodily purifications, Heb. 7.18.
with other carnal and on side Ordinances, which were only imposed, until the
time of Reformation, and after that, were not, that we read of, to be continued
with new names, and under another form, but utterly to be abolished, Heb. 7.18.
because of their weakness and unprofitableness. The like the Apostle observes
concerning the High Priest, into whose room our Savior succeeded, who is
called a Priest for ever, after another order than that of Aaron, even after
the order of Melchisedeck; who can supply all defects of his Church, without
appointing a visible Head in his place, by his own immediate Energy, since he
lives for ever, Heb. 7.25.
to make intercession for them. So that if any upon earth now, will pretend to
bear the same place in the Christian Church, that Aaron did in the Jewish, he
must be able to show the same divine warrant; for as the Apostle observes, Heb.
5.4, 5.
No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron; so also Christ did not glorify himself, to be an High Prist, but he that
said to him thou art my Son this day I have begotten thee. Let then the Pope of
Rome, but deal above-board, and show us some such plain place of Scripture,
which does Authorize his plea, and then let them be Anathema that will not
submit unto his Dictates; but since this is not so much as once offered, we
cannot be faithful to the Honor and Prerogative of out Great and only High
Priest, if we do not look upon this pretended Vicar of his, as a bold and
unwarrantable Intruder. But

2. It does not appear, that the High Priest among the Jews, was at all
Infallible, nor does the place alleged evince so much; Deuteronomy. 17.11.
for there Moses speaks not of Religious, but of civil causes; and commands
that the Parties litigant, should do according to the sentence of the Law,
which they shall teach thee; so that the High Priests were not to pronounce
according to Tradition, or private fancy, but according to the Law of God,
which whosoever consulted, might speak Infallibly; not as if the High Priest,
merely by virtue of his Office and Place, was more privileged from Error,
than the common Jew, but because God did give his Law for an Infallible Rule,
and in all parts that concerned his own Worship, had made it so plain and
particulat, that unless they would, they could not mistake it. But for want of
taking heed to it, we find that in David's time, both himself and all the
Priests did Err, in conceiving that the Arc might be carried upon a Cart,
which was expressly commanded to be carried upon the Priests shoulders;
whereupon when God smote Uzzah, Numb. 4.
David acknowledged that a breach was made upon them, 2 Chronicles 15.13
because they sought him not in the due order. Besides in the general Apostasy
of the people, which the Prophets so sadly complain of, and so much enveigh
against, we have no reason to imagine, 2 Reg 16.10.
that the High Priest continued steadfast in Religion; since in all probability,
Uriah the Priest, whom Ahaz employed in building an Idolatrous Altar, was the
Chief Priest at that time, and not only a partaker in, but a promoter of that
wicked King's abominations. We read likewise, that none were more fierce
against Jeremy, and other of Gods Prophets, than the Priests; and to put the
matter out of Dispute, we have it plainly told us, that there was for many
ages, none in that Church that could Infallibly guide them; so the Psalmist,
Psalm: 74.9.
We see not our Signs, there is no more any Prophets, neither is among us any
that knows how long. And in Ezra we find, that the Tirshatha, or Governor,
as some think Nebemiah, Ezra 2.63.
commanded that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there stood
up a Priest with Urim and Thummim; who was to enquire of the Lord in difficult
cases, according to the command given to Joshua, Numb. 25.21.
that he should consult with Eleazar the Priest, who was to ask counsel for
him, according to the judgment of Urim: which in Ezra's time, was utterly
ceased, and we do not read that ever it revived again. Just as much
Infallibility therefore, as the High Priest and Sanhedrim had, in our Saviors
time, when they put him to death; I am content to allow unto the Pope, and a
Council of his calling; and more than that, this Argument from Analogy will
not amount to. For if they were so fatally deceived, in so important and
evident a truth, who had, as Bellarmine supposes, a clear promise of being
Infallibly assisted; how much more liable to Error is the Bishop of Rome, who
has no promise nor pretense of Plea, but only an usurped and unjust
possession. Since then, 1. the High Priest of the Jews, was only a Type of
Christ, and did not figure any other person in the Christian Church, who was to
bear a Resemblance to him: And 2. since he was not Infallible, but in the most
concerning business that ever happened, and that was the acknowledgement of the
Messiah, most miserably mistaken: And lastly, since the whole Argument does no
more concern the Infallibility of the Bishop of Rome, than of any other Bishop
whatever; nothing can be concluded from hence, but that the Prophecy of the
Apostle, that God would give some up unto strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, 2 These. 2 10.
by men's taking pains to urge such kind of empty and frivolous Reasonings as
these, is abundantly fulfilled. And so much in Answer to the second Argument.

The third and last Argument, to prove the Pope's Infallibility, is taken from
those Inconveniences, which would follow in the Church of Christ, were there
not some unerring Judge appointed, to determine Controversies. For since our
Savior foretold, that there would be false Christ's and false Prophets; since
the Apostles tell us, that Heresies and Errors would be vented; it would argue
that our Savior had small care of his Church, should be have left it without a
Guide, unto whom all might have recourse: As if a Master of a Ship, should be
at pains to rigge up a Vessel, and put it to Sea, if he did not appoint a
Pilot that might steer it through the Waves, and secure it from the Rocks, he
might justly be taxed as very improvident. So says Bellarmine, it will lay a
great Imputation upon our Saviors Wisdom, if, amongst so many prodigious
Errors, which, like Waves, are ready to overwhelm the Truth, he should not
have provided some such known and visible Pilot, who can guide the Ship of the
Church, through all storms, and preserve it safe, from those Rocks and Shelves,
by striking upon which, it is otherwise liable to miscarry. Some one therefore
is requisite to be the Judge of Controversies, which by Confession of all Ages,
is no other but the Bishop of Rome.

I have enlarged this Argument, and put some kind of stourish upon it, because
this is indeed the Papists Achilleum; and upon all turns, the supposed
Inconveniences, which will follow, if we admit not of their groundless
conceits, are alleged to authorize their Unscripturall Institutions.
Therefore I answer,

1. That Arguments drawn from Inconveniences, are so liable to mistake and
Error, and, for the most part, do so much savor of Passion and Interest, as
well as shortsightedness, in the Arguer; that, in all Disputes, concerning the
Truth of any thing, they are of very little weight. It is no hard matter, to
fasten some seeming Absurdities, upon the most plain and clearly revealed
Truth, as we know the Socinians do upon the Doctrine of the Trinity. The Jews
heretofore conceived our Savior to be a Blasphemer, and thought it would be
very prejudicial to their state, to suffer him to live; and afterward both
Jews and Romans did agree, in striving to suppress his Doctrine, because of
some Political Inconveniences, which they imagined would follow the spreading
of it. Yet all the while, our Savior was really the Son of God, and his
Doctrine, the Power of God unto Salvation for all Believers. So that unless the
Papists can clear to us, by some better Motives, than any they have yet
produced, that their Bishop is Infallible, the Inconveniences, which they
suppose will follow our denying it, ought not to sway with us.

2. Among Persons, who own the Scriptures to be the Word of God, certainly it
is much more rational to argue, such a thing, (as for example the Popes
Infallibility) is not once mentioned there, and therefore undoubtedly was never
divinely appointed; than to say it is divinely appointed, because otherwise it
would be very Inconvenient. It would have been much more convenient, it all
Mankind had been as Infallible, as the Pope is presumed to be; if we had all
retained our Innocence, and been exempted from Possibility of offending; one
would think, this might have made more for the Honor of God, and the Peace of
Mankind, than our present erring and sinning Condition. But we must not measure
Gods Appointments, or the Real Being of things, by our own Rules of
Convenience; nor affirm a Thing to be so, because we conceive it would be very
Convenient, if it were so. It is therefore but lost labor, for the Popish
Writers, in a great deal of Plausible Language, to declare and set out the
great Convenience of Infallibility, when they should first prove to us the
Truth and the Existence of it. We may easily fancy, many things to be very
Advantageous and Useful to the World, which yet never, either were, or will
be: And amongst these goodly Chimera's, wherewith fond persons please
themselves; for ought I yet see, this Dream of Infallibility may claim a
Chief place.

3. Those Terrible stories and Tragical outcries, about the danger of
Herisies, for the suppression of which, this expedient, of having some one
Visible Unerring Judge, must be found out; they are, for the most part, as Mr.
Hales well observes, but so many Theological Scarecrowes, set up to fright us
from the Disquisition and search of Truth. I know very well, that to teach
Heresy i. e. any False and Unchristian Doctrine, is a very great sin; but yet,
to prevent this, we must not in all haste run into a greater: Supremum in
Terris Numen and Dominus Deus noster Papa.
For to set up a visible God upon Earth (according to the Court of Romes style)
to cry up a man, that is like our selves, to be Infallible; and then to fall
down and worship him; to bring him for an offering, not those worthless
Creatures, as Sheep and Oxen (which only were required of Old) but to
Sacrifice our souls, to bind over our Reasons and Understandings unto his
Oracular Dictates; this is so dull, so stupid an Idolatry, that we may wonder,
any learned man would ever go about to defend it, had not the God of this
world blinded their eyes; and did they not by this Craft, as that Ancient
Father Demetrius the Silver-Smith subtilty argued, get their Livings; and
divide the spoils of the deluded world, by this gross and Palpable Cozenage.

Lastly, In answer to all their Allegations from Fathers and Authority, I need
say no more than this, that as, though all the world did consent to believe a
Lie (as that the Sun was really no bigger then it seems to be, which was the
opinion of Epicurus) yet this Conspiracy would never make a Lie to be Truth;
so, upon supposition, that all Antiquity did acknowledge this prerogative of
the Bishop of Rome, yet could we not from thence infer the Justice and the
Legallity of it; because the most that such Testimonies amount to, is merely
this, to show us, not what really was, but what they conceived to be True: I
need not therefore be much concerned in examining Bellarmine's Quotations. But
yet that I may do Justice to the Christians of former Ages, and vindicate them
from being so Unwise, as the Pope's Champions would make us believe they were;
I must affirm, that this Doctrine, is so far from being owned by any of
them, for many Centuries, that we have upon Record, many pregnant Instances,
which do evince that they did not so much as Dream of it. To draw up which, I
shall select only two or three famous Cases, which Bellarmine is pleased to
take no Notice of.

1. Eusebius. l b. 5. c. 23, 24, 25.
The first Instance shall be from that doughty dispute which was raised about
the year 160. concerning the day when Easter was to be kept, the Churches of
Asia kept Easter Day precisely upon the 14th of March; at which time the Jews
did solemnize their Passover; but the Western Churches. after many meetings
to settle this weighty Controversy, did agree that the day of our Saviors
Resurrection, should be celebrated only upon the Lords Day. (...).
The Asian Bishops, notwithstanding this Decree, did persist in their former
custom, in which they were defended by Polycrates, who alleged that Philip
the Evangelist, John the Apostle and many others, did transmit that
Traditionall Observance to them. Upon this, Victor the Bishop of Rome, in great
heat ((...), Socrat lib. 6.
says my Author) did take upon him to excommunicate all the Churches of Asia,
but being sharply writ against for it, and st^ffely opposed in it, he was
forced to revoke his sentence. Which story might afford us very many
Observations, as 1. That Superstition and Needless Observation of Days. 2.
That Imposition and Abridging of Christian Liberty in things Indifferent. 3.
That the Bishop of Rome's Usurpation and exceeding the Bounds of his proper
Jurisdiction, did begin to work very early. But I wave these, and only note,
that had the Churches of Afia then thought the Bishop of Rome to be Infallible,
they would not so peremptorily, in so small a thing as the Retaining of an Old
Custom, have refused to submit unto his Judgment.

2. My second Instance shall be from that Controversy, which for many years
was very eagerly managed; viz. Whether such as had received Baptism from
Heretics, upon their Return to the Church, Cyprian. Epis. 92. Edit. Fam.
should be Baptized again or not? Cyprian and all the African Bishops
maintained the Necessiry of Re-baptizing; and in their Letter to Stephen the
Bishop of Rome, after they had at large given the Reasons of their Opinion,
they conclude, So much Dearest Brother, have we informed you of, not doubting
because of the Truth of your Religion, but such things will please you, which
are both Religious and True. But yet we know, that some are very unwilling to
lay down any Opinion, which they have once took up; but preserving that
mutual agreement which ought to be amongst Brethren, they retain the Customs
which they have once been used to. In which matter, we neither Force nor give a
Law to any; since in the ordering of the Church; Prapositus.
every Governor has absolute power of his own will, as being to give unto God
alone a Reason of his Actings. From which passage written by Cyprian and all
the Bishops of Africh (who mer together in a Council for that purpose) it
sufficiently appears. 1. That they did not understand any thing of the Bishop
of Rome's Infallibility, since they profess to retain their own Judgment,
without subscribing to his. 2. That in the outward Regimen and Government of
the Church, every Bishop has equal Power, and ought not Authoritatively, to
prescribe and impose Laws upon another. Ibid. Ep. 73.
As the same Cyprian, in another Letter; These things, says he, according to
my weak Ability, have I writ, not Imposing upon or Pre-judging any; as if it
was not lawful for every Bishop to do as he thinks fit, since he has free
Power of his own Will. And afterward, when Stephen had declared his Judgment,
that he would have none baptized again, whatever Herefie they came from; but
that the ancient Custom should be preserved, whereby such Converts were
admitted into Church Communion, merely by laying on of Hands. Ibid. Ep. 74.
Inter catera vel superba, vel ad rem non pertinentia, vel sibi ipsi contraria,
quae improvide atque imperite scripsit.
Cyprian, in stead of yielding to his Determination, does tax his Letter of
Pride, Folly, and Impertinence; and, in Answer to those words of his, wherein
Stephen commanded that nothing should be varied, from the accustomed Tradition;
Whence, says he, was that Tradition? Did it descend from the Authority of our
Lord and his Gospel? Did it come from the Commands and Epistles of the
Apostles? For God testifies in his Commands, both to Joshua and others, that
those things only should be done which were written. And our Lord Christ, when
he sent his Apostles into the World, commands them to Baptize, and to Teach all
Nations, that they might observe and do all things, which he had Commanded. If
therefore any such Custom, (meaning that of Stephen's) be contained, either in
the Gospels, or in the Epistles and Acts of the Apostles, then let sach an Holy
and Divine Tradition be observed. But what Obstinacy, what Presumption is it,
to prefer Humane Tradition, before a Divine Appointment? What Folly is it not
to consider, that God is angry, as often as Humane Tradition does lessen and
discountenance Divine Precepts; as he testifies by the Prophet Isay? And our
Savior likewise, in his Gospel, rebuking and chiding the Pharisees, Ye reject
the Commands of God, that ye may keep your own Tradition. Of which words, the
Apostle Paul being mindful, he likewise advises and instructs us, saying,
If any man teach otherwise, and rest not in the sound words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and in his Doctrine; he is puffed up, knowing nothing; from such turn
aside. Neither ought Custom, which has privily crept in amongst some, to
hinder Truth from prevailing. For Custom, without Truth; Consuetudo sine
veritate vetustas Erroris est.
is nothing else but the Antiquity of Error. And it arises only from Pride
and Presumption, that one is apt to defend his own Practices, how False and
erroneous soever, rather than consent to that, which is True and Right in
another. For which reason, the Apostle Paul writing to Timothy, Docibilem Gr.
(...).
advises a Bishop not to be Contentious, but Meek and Apt to Teach. But he is
Apt to Teach, who is Gentle, and endued with Patience to Learn: for a Bishop
ought not only to Teach, but to Learn; since he Teaches best, who continually
grows and profits by Learning. Which the Apostle Paul likewise declares, when
he admonishes, That if any thing be revealed to another which sits by, the
First should hold his Peace. Religious and sincere Minds are always prepared
to lay aside Error, and to search for Truth; for if we return unto the Head
and Original of Divine Tradition, Hamane Error cease; and when the Reason
of the Heavenly Appointments, is once thoroughly discerned, whatever lay hid in
Obscurity, is cleared up, and brought to Light. As if a Pipe, that formerly
conveyed a great Quantity of Water, should suddenly fail; we would the a have
recourse unto the Fountain, to learn the true Conse of such a Stop and
Intercision, that if the fault was in the Pipe, it might be repaited, and
fitted to receive the Streams of Water, in the same Abundance and Purity, that
they issue from the Fountain: so likewise ought all the Ministers of God, in
their Observance of Divine Commands, to do: that if the Truth seems wavering
and uncertain in any Point, Ad Originem Dominicam, and Evangelicam, and
Apostolicam Traditionem.
we may have recourse unto the Original, to wit, the Tradition of our Lord, in
his Gospel, and by his Apostles: that so the Ground of our Acting may proceed
thence, whence the Order and Original of it did first arise. I have at large
quoted these words out of Cyprian, both to show how little the Bishop of Rome's
Authority was then valued; and likewise to manifest, what that Holy and Learned
Man thought to be the only way, whereby all Controversies in Religion ought to
be decided: not to depend upon Uncertain Traditions, which at the best are but
the Inventions of Men; but to have Immediate recourse unto the Scriptures, and
to go no further in any part of Divine Worship, than as their Rule does guide
us. And this Testimony of his, the Papists cannot in Justice refuse, since
Cyprian is a Saint in their Calender, and yet died without ever retracting his
Judgment.

3. My Third and Last Instance shall be, that notable Speech of Pope Gregory,
about six hundred years after our Saviors time; who having had great contests
for Superiority, with John the Patriarch of Constantinople; when at sast, John,
having the Emperor on his side, did endeavor to gain the Title of Universal
Bishop, Greg. lib. 4. Ep. 32, 33.
Gregory did fiercely oppose him in it, and in many of his Epistles, affirms
that whoever should Assume that Style, he was the Forerunner of Antichrist, a
Child of the Devil, an Apostate from the Faith; with many other sharp, but
true, sayings to the same Purpose. It pleased God that within few years after,
An. 606, Pope Boniface, little minding the Predictions of his Predecessor, did
not only claim, but likewise actually take to himself that Name, which, as a
Badge of Antichrist, and an Infallible Mark to know him by, he has ever since
transmitted to his Successors. Now I ask, whether Pope Gregory, was Infallible
in that Opinion of his, which he does so often, and so earnestly insist upon?
If they tell me he was, then we need not dispute any farther, Whether the Pope
be Antichrist, for we have Gregorie's own Confession, that whoever would
arrogate to himself, the Name of Universal Bishop, was undoubtedly so; but, if
they say, he was not, then their Conceit of Infallibility vanishes, as
amounting to no more than this, that the Pope is Infallible, when he Speaks and
Acts, for the Advantage of his See; but very Fallible when he speaks any thing,
though never so deliberately, which in after Ages may make against it.

I have forebore to Urge, that many of the Popes have actually fallen into
Heresy, as Honorius, by Name, who by the sixth Synod, was condemned for an
Heretic, and his Epistles commanded to be burnt; and the very express words of
some of their Canons are, That the Pope cannot be judged by any, unless he be
found to have crred from the Faith; which does suppose, even in the Judgment
of his own Canonists, that there is a Possibility of his Erring. Neither do I
insist upon the Decrees of the Councels of Basil and Constance, which were both
assembled, for the deposing of two Popes that were unduely Chosen; and in them
it was Enacted, that A Council was above the Pope, which they strictly command
all to believe as an Article of Faith: Which Instances, though they strike
sufficiently at the Pope's Infallibility, and Paramount Authority, yet because
the Answer of some of the most Moderate and Ingenuous Papists, is, that Though
the Pope be not Infallible in himself, yet in and with a Council, he is. I
shall therefore speak a little to this Conceit; and then conclude.

I demand therefore of those, who maintain the Infallibility of the Pope, and a
Council conjunctim; what Divine Warrant have they for such an Opinion? and
where has God promised Infallible Assistance, unto a Council of the Pope's
Calling? For those Texts, that are commonly made use of, as Hear the Church;
and, The Spirit shall lead you into all Truth; and, It seemed good unto the
Holy Ghost, and to us; with some few others to the same sense, are as
impertinently alleged in behalf of a Council, as those forementioned, are
in behalf of the Pope. For

1. That Command, Tell the Church, does not signify an Appeal unto a Synod of
Bishops, ^at. 18.
(who are all of the Pope's Creation, and therefore must needs be Partial for
him) but Church there signifies, that particular Congregation, to which we
relate as Members; neither do our Savior's words concern Articles of Faith,
and Matters of Opinion, but merely Civil Injuries, as is plain from the
Context; for our Savior having commanded them to forgive one another, he then
goes on to tell them, what course they should take, in case a Brother should
offend them; first, to reprove him privately; and if that prevailed not, then
to take two or three, as witnesses of their proceedings: But if notwithstanding
this, the Injurious Person still continued Obstinate, then to tell it Caetui,
or to the Congregation; 1 Cor. 5.
as the Apostle Paul advises the Corinthians, that being all met together,
they should proceed to censure; 1 Timothy 5.20.
and to Timothy, Them that sin, rebuke before all, i. e. all of that Church, or
Congregation, to which they belong, that others also may fear. And this sense,
besides that it is the proper meaning of the word (...), or Church, (which
often in Scripture signifies the Congregation, distinct from their Officers;
but never the contrary) it likewise fully agrees with our Saviors Scope, who,
as the Offense arises, would have the Remedy to arise proportionably, and
therefore he uses this Gradation, that first one should reprove an Offending
Brother, then two or three, then the Church, or more; according to what we find
practiced in the Church of Corinth, who it seems had agreed to censure the
Incestuous Person, according as the Apostle had commanded them, 2 Cor. 2.9.
and therefore he tells them, Sufficient to such a one is the Reprehension by
many, i. e. even by all the Members of that Christian Assembly, to which he did
relate; and if the Offender would not hearken to them, then he was to be thrown
out of Communion, and to be accounted as a Stranger to the Church; even as an
Heathen, and a Publican. And such Determinations of every particular Church,
our Savior says, should be ratified in Heaven; For, says he, where two or
three (not Bishops, but Believers) are gathered together in my Name, there I
will be in the midst of them: i. e. When any Number of Believers, how small
soever, though but two or three, are met for those Holy Ends of Discipline, and
in those Ways, which I by my Commands have warranted, I will be with them to
Assist and to Guide their Councels, and to Execute their Sentence. Chap. 49.
Accordingly we find in Tertullian's Apology, that in all Christian Meetings
upon the Lord's Day, together with Prayer and Preaching, there was likewise
Censura Divina; i. e. the Sentence of Excommunication, pronounced against all
refractory and stubborn Sinners: according to this, our Saviors Institution.

If any object, that if Christ will be with two or three, then in all probabily
he will be with a Council of many Hundreds, much more. I answer, No doubt he
will, if they meet in his Name i. e. according to his Command and Institution;
for it is not the Assembly, though, of never so many Thousands, but the End and
Manner of Assembling, which has the Promise of Assistance. And when I can see
such a Council, which professes solely to follow Scripture, according to that
sense which (not the fancy of men, whether Fathers or Counsels, but) the
Spirit of God enlightening their understandings, does give unto it; I shall then
with all Reverence embrace their Decrees. For I know that such a Council
cannot Err, because they will Command nothing, but what is already commanded
by God; which every true Christian ought to obey, without the Sanction of any
other Authority. But such a Council as this, I am hopeless of ever seeing
under the Papecy; since all their meetings, for some hundreds of Years, have
been designed, not to search but, to smother Scripture; and to Emprison that
Light, which if looked into, would detect and manifest their Errors. So that
they come together, not in Christ's but; in the Pope's name; or rather in the
name of that God of the world, who is Prince of the Power of Darkness; and
whose Kingdom is founded and upheld by the Artifice and cunning of their
Teachers, and by the Ignorance and Implicit Faith of their Hearers. Fallere
and Falli To deceive and to be deceived, is the best Motto which can be set
upon all the Church-doores in the Papal Territories; but Heaven is a place of
Light, and the True Church is full of Knowledge, because (...) are all taught
of God, not to obey or to Believe in (...), but in him alone.

2. That Promise of our Savior, I will send the Spirit, John. 14. etc. 16.
which shall lead you into all Truth, was spoken Personally to the Apostles:
And those words, Act. 15.
It seems good to the Holy Spirit and to Us, were spoken by them, after the
accomplishment of that Promise; so that without great presumption, they cannot
be wrested to any other; nor such wresting, without great vanity, be confuted:
since barely to deny ungrounded suppositions, is a sufficient Confutation.

If any ask me, since neither the Pope nor a Council is Infallible, as having
no peculiar Promise for that purpose, then how shall the Church determine
Controversies, or, How shall Heresies be suppressed? I answer, that if the word
of God is clear, and the Heresy be Notorious; than every Particular Church
has Power within it self, to excommunicate all obstinate Heretics. But,
where the Scripture, is either Dubious or Silent, Phil. 3.15.
there charitably to bear with dissenters, and to wait till God shall reveal
it to them, is the best way to win them. And this was the only method, which
the primitive Christians did take for three hundred years together, to
preserve and maintain the Truth of our Religion. Having no Communion with
such, as hold manifest and destructive Errors; and in things of lesser moment,
Forbearing one another in Love; These will at last be found to be the safe
ways of God; whereas to pretend to Infallibility in determining, or to
practice Tyranny in Imposing, these are only the ways of Ambitious and
self-seeking men, found out not so much to promote Truth (which stands not in
need of such Arts) as to Augment a party; which makes all Articles of Faith, to
be merely like the Civil Laws of a Land, where most Voices do carry the
Cause. Such a kind of Universality as this, True Piety never had, and therefore
we need not be sorry, that Popery does make its boast of it.

And thus I have, with as much Brevity and Plainness, as the subject would
bear, enquired into the Grounds, whereupon the Popes Infallibility is said to
be grounded, and after the most Impartial search, can pronounce of them all
Mean Tekell that being weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, they are found
too light. Neither have I diverted my self, in confuting their worship of
Images, their Blasphemous Figment of Transsubstantiation, their mingling of
works in Justification, their Invocation of Angels, Col. 2.19.
which the Apostle says, is not to hold the Head, i. e. to Err fundamentally.
Their forbidding of Marriage and commanding to abstain from meats. Which he who
prophesied of them, 1 Timothy 4.1.
calls the Doctrine of Devils. I have omitted likewise their Furious and Bloody
Tenets of Persecuting and Killing all, who do not worship the Image of that
Beast which they have erected; Rev. 13.15.
for these things, how plainly soever the Scripture speaks against them, will
not much concern them to answer, as long as they are fenced about with the
Doctrine of Infallibility; whereby they are privileged to put what sense upon
Scripture they please: but if the Christian Reader finds that conceit to be
clearly disproved, then I hope he will make use of the other Arguments, to
satisfy himself, that we have but too much reason to suspect the Pope to be
that Antichrist, that (...) or Lawless one, who sits in the Temple of God, and
declares that he is God: For in the Church, which is the Temple or House of
God; for any man to make Laws, which do oblige the Conscience; For a sinful
man to style himself the Head and Bridegroom of the Church, and above all, to
affirm that he is Infallible, this is nothing else but to say that he is God;
and therein to fulfill the most clear Prediction that can be, concerning The
Man of sin; whose way of Rising was to be, by the Deceiveablenesse of
Unrighteousness, and his Dominion to be Established by Miracles and Lying
Wonders; Which no Church in the world does more confidently boast of than the
Roman. And therefore till her unhappy and much mistaken Followers have cleared,
that She is not Antichristian, we have little reason to believe that She is a
True Church; much less, to think that She is Infallible.

FINIS.

