SOME RECEIPTS OF Medicines. For the most part PARABLE and SIMPLE. Sent to a
Friend in America.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1688.

The INTRODUCTION.
THE following Prescriptions being but part of a Collection of Receipts and
Processes, that had from time to time been recommended to me, either by the
Experience of the Imparters, or by my Own: I did not think it so Expedient to
premise, to so small a Number of slight Receipts, the several Medicinal
Cautions and other Considerations, wherewith it might be fit to usher in a
larger Writing of this nature; as to reserve those Prolegomena for the whole
Collection, whereof that which now appears makes but a Part, and that not the
greatest. Which Intimation will, I hope, Excuse my leaving unmention'd the
Names of the Imparters of several of these Receipts: Since all of them are
transcribed from the Collection; And the Reason of the Omission is given in the
Preamble, together with diverse Advertisements about the Work it self, which
dispense me from giving any Others at present, than those very few which seemed
requisite to be sent about the following Paper, to the Inquisitive Dr. W. A.
practicing Physic in New England: who earnestly desired of me some Receipts,
that, being Parable or Cheap, might easily be made Serviceable, especially to
the Poor, in that Country; where European Books of Physic are too great
Rarities, and several Remedies here known are not in use.

The Beginning of my Letter to Dr. A. consisting mainly of things that regarded
his peculiar Circumstances, it is Needless, if not Improper, to transcribe it
hither, and consequently it ought not to keep me from proceeding without delay,
to the next part of the same Letter, which gives him the three following

Advertisements.
I. 'T Would be a great Mistake of my Design in sending you the following
Receipts, if you should think that I at all pretend them to be Infallible Ones;
or at least of very Extraordinary Efficacy: Since all that I told you of them,
was, That, for Medicines so Simple, and for the most part so Cheap, I have
found several of them, and take all of them, to be good in their kind. And though
I think most of them Safer than many other Medicines that are in great request,
yet I do not pretend, that these should play the part both of Medicines and
Physicians too; but only that they may be Usefully employed, by One that, like
You, knows how to administer them Discreetly. In short; I say not that these
Medicines are the Best I have, but only some of the most Parable, or Simple:
Both which I here mention together, as if the latter were referable to the
former; not only because Medicines that are Simple or but very little
Compounded, are ceteris paribus more easy to be procured; but because I am
willing that this short Collection should furnish you with diverse Instances to
confirm the Paper, to which I desire you would subjoyn it, of the Usefulness of
Simple Medicines.

II IT may somewhat assist you, to make a Comparative Estimate of the following
Receipts, if I distinguish them into three Classes or Orders, and annex to the
Title, or Description, of almost each particular Medicine, one of the three
first Letters of the Alphabet. Whereof A signifies that the Remedy it belongs
to, has been, either by the Affirmation of the Physician, or other Credible
Persons that imparted it to me, or by Trials that I caused to be made of it;
recommended as very Considerable and Efficacious in its kind. A therefore is
the Mark of a Remedy of the highest Classis of these. B denotes, that That
which it refers to, is of a Second or Inferior sort, but yet considerable for
its good Operations. And the Letter C belongs to those Remedies that are of the
Lowest Order, though good enough not to be despised.

And because I presume it may be expected, that I should give you some short
Character, of those whereof I have had some kind of Experience; whether by the
Relations of such as have been Cured, or much Relieved by them; or by my own
Exhibiting or Prescribing them; or by Reports received from those that engaged
to try them, or that employed them upon my account: For this Reason, I say, and
for Brevity's sake, and avoiding Repetitions, I thought fit to accompany almost
each of the three forementioned Alphabetical Letters, that refers to a Receipt,
of which I can say any thing upon some kind of knowledge of my own, with one of
the three following Marks: Whereof the First, which is the small Figure of One
(1) denotes that I have known but a single Trial made of it; the Other, which
is a simple Cross (x) imports that the Trials have been made two, or some few
more times; and the Third, which is an Asterisk (consisting of several Lines
crossing each other in one Point (*) signifies that the Trials wherein it has
been found useful, were many, if not very many.

III. THere will easily be observed a Disparity of Style in the following
Papers. For those Receipts that were my Own, were expressed in my Own Terms;
and so usually were those that I received from Others but by word of Mouth: And
These, I hope, will be found clearly enough delivered. But as to those Others,
that were imparted to me by Empyricks or Unlearned Persons, in Writing; though I
would not in diverse places have worded them as they did that I had them from,
yet I oftentimes made a scruple to Correct or Alter their Expressions; though not
suitable to the current Style of the Formulary's of Receipts: Being more
concerned that the Meaning should be close kept to, than the Style rectified.
And sometimes too, when I received things by word of Mouth, and committed them
to Paper in the Authors presence, haste obliged me to make use of Expressions,
(and made me afterward forget to mend them,) that were rather the Shortest
than the Best: And sometimes forced me to employ words of the Latin, French,
or some other Language: especially if I wrote after the Instructions of
Foreigners, being less careful to express things in the Fittest way I could,
than in the most Compendious.

You will receive by this Ship but five Decads of Receipts of Parable
Medicines, because I think that Number sufficient to be sent at once. But if,
when you have Tried them, the Success that God shall vouchsafe to give them,
shall invite you to press for a Recruit, I shall thereby be encouraged to draw
some other Decads of Receipts (some of which will perhaps be preferable to most
of These) out of a Collection, wherein they have long lain mingled with
Receipts and Processes of Remedies of a less Simple Nature, or more difficult
to be Procured.

DECAD I.
I. For Coughs, especially such as proceed from thin Rheumes.
B. REcipe of choice Olibanum finely powdered from j. to ss. and mix carefully
with it, an equal weight of Sugar Candy (white or brown,) or, in want of that,
of fine Sugar; and let the Patient take it at Bedtime in the Pap of an Apple,
or some other proper Additament, for several nights together: If it be found
needful, it may be taken at any other time, when the Stomach is empty.

II. To give Ease in the Pains of the Stone, even that of the Bladder.
A the transparent Sparr that grows upon the Veins of Lead-ore, and having
reduced it to fine Powder, give from ss. to j. of it at a time, in a moderate
draught of some convenient Vehicle. N. B. Though there be (at least in most of
our English Mines) two Teguments, as it were, of the Veins of Lead, that grow
close together; yet that which the Diggers name Cawk, which is White and
Opacous, is not the Medicine I mean, but the Transparent, or at least
Semi-Diaphanous; which easily breaks into smooth Fragments, and in the Fire
cleaves into several pieces, that are wont to be smooth, and prettily shaped.

III. For Sharpness of Urine.
B of the dry stuff that divides the Lobes of the Kernerls of Walnuts, beat
them to Powder, and of this give about ss. at a time, in a draught of
Whitewine, or Posset Drink made with it, or in any other convenient Liquor.

IV. To Appease the Violent Pains of the Tooth ach.
B. Make up j. of Pillulae Mastichinae, and half a grain of Laudanum, into two
or three Pills for the Patient to take at Bedtime.

V. For Agues.
A. Salt of Card. Benedict. and Salt of Wormwood ana 15 grains, Tartar
Vitriolate ss. Mix them, and give them in a few spoonfuls of Rhenishwine, or of
some other convenient Vehicle, either before the Fit, or at some other time
when the Stomach is Empty.

VI. For the Yellow-Jaundice.
B. j. of Castle-Soap (the Elder the better,) slice it thin, put it into a pint
of Small-beer cold, set it on the Fire, let it boil gently half away, after
boiling some time, scum it once. Then strain it through a small Sieve, warm it,
and drink it all in a Morning, fasting; take a small lump of Sugar after it,
and fast two or three hours. The Party may walk about his Business, and eat his
accustomed Meals. If at any time he drink Wine, let it be Whitewine. N. B. If
he be far gone in the Distemper; two or three days after, he may take it once
or twice more, and no oftener. Refrain all other Medicines; It will keep a Week
or longer.

VII. For the Jaundice.
B. ij. or iij. of Semen Cannabis (Hempseed) and boil them till the Seeds (some
of them) begin to burst, and a little longer, in a sufficient quantity of New
Milk, to make one good draught; which the Patient is to take warm, renewing it,
if need be, for some days together.

VIII. For the Dysentery.
B. Pigs-dung, dry it and burn it to gray (not white) Ashes; of these give
about ss. for a Dose, drinking after them about three Spoonfuls of Wine-Vinegar.

IX. For the King's Evil.
B. Cuttle-bone uncalcin'd, and having scraped off the outside or colored
part, dry the white part; and of this, finely powdered, give ss. for a Dose in
Aqua Malvae.

X. A Safe and easy Medicine in Fits of the Stone.
B. Sack, or, in want of that, Claretwine, and by shaking or otherwise mix with
it as well as you can, an equal quantity of Oil of Walnuts; and of this Mixture
give from 4 or 6 to 8 or 10 ounces at a time as a Glyster.

DECAD II.
I. For Convulsions, especially in Children.
B. Recipe Earthworms, wash them well in Whitewine to cleanse them, but so as
that they may not die in the Wine. Then upon hollow Tiles, or between them, dry
the Worms with a moderate heat, and no further than that they may be
conveniently reduced to Powder; to j. of which add a pretty number of grains of
Ambergrise, both to Perfume the Powder, (whose scent of it self is rank) and to
make the Medicine more Efficacious. The Dose is from j. to jss. in any
convenient Vehicle.

II. For the Pyles.
B. the Powder of Earthworms prepared as in the former Receipt, (but leaving
out the Ambergrise,) and incorporate it exactly with as much Hens-grease, as
will serve to make it up into an Ointment. Apply this to the Part affected,
whose Pains it usually much and safely mitigates.

III. To make Limewater Useful in diverse Distempers.
C. one pound of good Quicklime, and slake it in a gallon of warm Water, and
let it stand till all that will subside be settled at the bottom, and
(Separation being made) the Water swim clear at the top. (At which time it will
often happen, that a kind of thin and brittle substance, almost like Ice, will
cover the Surface of the Liquor;) As soon as the Water is thus sufficiently
impregnated, delay not to pour it off warily, and keep it very well stopped for
Use.

IV. A Limewater for Obstructions and Consumptions.
B. a Gallon of Limewater made as above, and infuse in it cold, Sassafras,
Liquorice, and Anyseeds, of each iv. adding thereto lbss. of choice Currants,
or the like quantity of sliced Raysins of the Sun: The Dose of this compound
Limewater is iv. or v. to be taken twice a day.

V. An Amulet against Agues, especially Tertian.
B. a handful of Groundsil, shred and cut it small, put it into a square
Paper-bag of about four Inches every way, pricking that side that is to be next
the Skin, full of large holes; and cover it with some Sarcenet or fine Linen,
that nothing may fall out. Let the Patient wear this upon the Pit of his
Stomach, renewing it two hours before every Fit.

VI. For Women in Labor to bring away the Child.
B. about j. of choice Myrrh, and having reduced it to fine Powder, let the
Patient take it in a draught of Rhenish-wine or Sack; or, if you would have the
Liquor less active, White Wind, Posset Drink, or some other temperate Vehicle.

VII. For Strengthening the Bowels.
B. Cloves or Chives (not Bulbs) of Garlic, and let the Patient from time to
time swallow one or two, without chewing.

VIII. An Amulet against the Cramp.
A. the Root of Mechoacan, and having reduced it to Powder, fill with this
Powder a little square Bag or Sacket of Sarcenet, or some such slight Stuff;
which Bag is to be about three Inches square, and to be hung by a string about
the Patient's Neck, so as that it may reach to the Pit of the Stomach, and
immediately touch the Skin.

IX. For stanching of Blood, especially in Wounds.
A. those round Mush-rooms that Botanists call Crepitus Lupi, (in English
Puffe-balls,) when they are full ripe, (which is in Autumn;) and breaking them
warily, save carefully the Powder that will fly up, and the rest that remains
in their Cavities: and strew this Powder all over the Part affected, binding it
on, or proceeding further, if need be, according to Art.

X. For the Tumors and Pains of the Hemorrhoides, not too much inflamed.
B. Let the Patient dip his Finger in Balsom of Sulphur made with Oil of
Turpentine, and with his Finger so besmeared anoint the Tumors, whether
External or Internal, once or twice a day.

DECAD. III.
I. For the Dysentery and other sharp Fluxes.
A. REcipe the Stalks and Leaves of the Herb called in Latin Coniza Media (in
English Flea-bane) dry it gently, till it be reducible to Powder; of this
Powder give about j. at a time, twice or thrice a day, in any convenient
Vehicle; or else incorporate it in Conserve of red Roses.

II. To Sweeten the Blood, and Cure diverse Distempers caused by its Acidity.
B. Coral, the clearest and reddest you can get; reduce it, (by exactly
grinding it on a Porphiry, or Marble Stone,) to an impalpable Powder. Of this
Magistery made without Acids, give the Patient once or twice a day (as need
shall require) a large Dose, viz. ordinarily about j. at a time, or from ij. to
v. N. B. Let him long continue the use of it.

III. To clear the Eyes, even from Filmes.
A. Paracelsus's Zibetum Occidentale ( viz. human dung) of a good color and
consistence, dry it slowly till it be pulverable: Then reduce it into an
impalpable Powder; which is to be blown once, twice, or thrice a day, as
occasion shall require, into the Patients Eyes.

IV. For Convulsions in Children.
A. Give the Patient from 2, 3, or 4, to 5, 6, or 7 gr. according to the
Child's Age, of the true Volatile Salt of Amber, in any proper Vehicle. N. B.
It Is not near so Efficacious in full grown Persons.

V. To bring away the Afterbirth.
B. Give about 30 drops, or any Number between 25. and 35. of good Essential
(as Chemists call it) Oil of Juniper, in a good Draught of any convenient
Vehicle.

VI. To Strengthen the Stomach, and help the Want of Appetite.
B. Make the Roots of Gentian (sound and not superannuated) pulverable, with no
greater waste of their Moisture than is necessary. Reduce these to Powder; of
which let the Patient take from 12 or 15 gr. to double that quantity (or more
if need be) twice or thrice a day. N. B. It may be taken on an empty Stomach,
or, if that cannot conveniently be done, at Mealtimes. To Correct the
Bitterness, one may add to it power'd Sugar, or make it up with some fit
Conserve, or mix it with a Syrup. It is very good not only for Want of
Appetite, but for Obstructions.: And I (R. B.) have usefully given it in
Vertiginous Affections of the Brain, and to lessen, if not quite take away, the
Fits of Agues, and even Quartans. But in this last Case the Dose must be
considerably augmented. One may also, if one pleases, instead of the Powder,
give the Extract drawn with fair Water, and, for those that like that form,
made up into Pills with a s. q. of powdered Tumeric, or the like proper
Additament; to which I have sometimes added some grains of Salt of Wormwood
with very good success, in Fluxes that proceeded from Crudities and
Indigestion. Where the Winter-Season or the Patients Cold Constitution invite,
or the Medicine is to be long kept, I choose rather to make the Extract with
Wine moderately strong, than with Water.

VII. For Ulcers in the Breast and elsewhere.
A. Millepedes (in English by Some called Wood-Lice, by others Sows,) and
having washed them clean with a little White Wind, and dried them with a Linen
Cloth, beat them very well in a Glass or Marble Mortar (for they ought not to
be touched with any thing of Metal) and give the first time as much Juice, as
you can by strong Expression obtain from five or six of them. This Juice may be
given in Small-Ale or White Wind, in which the next time you may give as much
as can be squeezed out of eight or nine Millepedes; and so you may continue,
increasing the number that you employ of them by two or three at a time, till
it amount to twenty five or thirty; and if need be, to forty or more, for one
taking. And Note, that if upon the Pounding of these Insects, you sind the Mass
they afford too dry, as it now and then happens; you may dilute it with a
little White Wind or Ale, to. be well agitated with it, that being penetrated,
and so softened, with the Liquor, the Mass may the better part with its Juice.

VIII. For taking off the Fits of Agues.
B. good common Brimstone (not Flores Sulphuris) and having reduced them, by
passing them through a very fine Sieve, to the subtilest Powder you can; give
of this Powder iss. or ij. either made up into a Bolus with a little good
Honey, or else in any appropriated Vehicle; let it be given at the usual times,
and reiterated once or twice, if need be, especially if the Fits should return.

IX. For Fluxes, especially accompanied with Gripings.
A. of Crude Lapis Calaminaris sinely powdered ij. of white Chalk j. mix them
exactly, and give them in a spoonful or two of New Milk twice, or, if the case
be urgent, thrice a day.

X. For the Pains of the Piles.
B. of Myrrh, Olibanum, and common Frankincense, of each a like quantity;
having powdered them, mix them very well, and let the Patient receive the Fume
of this Mixture, cast upon a Chaffen-dish with Embers, in a Close-stool, for
about a quarter of an hour, (less or more, as he needs it, and is able to bear
it.)

DECAD. IV.
I. For an Outward Contusion.
C. APply to the Part affected, skim'd or purified Honey spread upon Cap-Paper,
to be kept on with some convenient Plaster, or the like Bandage, and shifted
once or twice a day.

II. Another for the same.
B. Beat Aloes Succotrina (or else Hepatica) to fine Powder; then pour on it as
much Rose Water as you guess may dissolve a great part of it. This done, stir
them well for a while, and when the Mixture is settled, pour off the Liquor, and
in it dip Linen Rags, which being applied to the Part affected, will soon
stick to it, and seldom need be removed till the Patient be relieved; and then
to get them off, the Rags must be well wetted with warm Water, which will
soften and loosen the adhering Aloes.

III. For a slighter Excoriation.
B. Melt Mutton-Suet taken from about the Kidneys, and freed from its
superfluous Fibers or Strings, and to about ij. of this add little by little
about 16 or 18 drops (sometimes 8 or 10 may serve) of Oil (not Ethereal
Spirit) of Turpentine; spread this Mixture on a Linen Cloth, and by binding or
otherwise, keep it upon the Part affected.

IV. For an Excoriation, when the true Cutis is affected.
B. Prunella (in English Self-heal) and having pounded it very well in a Marble
or Glass Mortar, (not one of Metal,) apply it to the Part affected, renewing it
but seldom, and not without need.

V. To take off the Pain and Inflammation of Ulcers in the Legs and elsewhere.
B. In a quart of Water boil about so much White-bread, as in ordinary years
may be found in a Halfpenny-Loaf; then add to it ij. of good Sheeps Suet cut
very small; and when that is boiled a little, add to it j. of finely powdered
Rosin, and a little well searc'd Brimstone: Of these make a Cataplasm, which is
to be kept constantly on the Part affected, and shifted once or twice a day, as
need shall require.

VI. For a Cough, especially accompanied with a Tickling Rheum.
B. equal Parts of finely powdered Olibanum and Venice Treacle; incorporate
them exactly, and of this Mass from Pills of what bigness you please. Of these
let the Patient take about ss. at Bedtime, or, if need be, j. (or more) twice
a day.

VII. To prevent the Toothache, and keep the Teeth sound.
B. Let the Patient frequently rub his Teeth moderately with the Ashes that
remain in Tobacco-pipes, after the rest of the Body has been consumed in
Smoke; sometimes after washing (if need be) his Mouth with fair Water not too
cold.

VIII. For a Rupture, especially in a Child or Young Person.
A. of that Geranium or Cranesbill that is commonly called Columbinum, reduce
the Root and Leaves to fine Powder, and of this let the Patient take about half
a spoonful Night and Morning for three or four Weeks together, washing it down
each time with some spoonfuls of red Wine.

IX. For the Heart-burning, as they call it.
B. from 15. or 20. to 30. or 40. grains of Crab's-eyes (known commonly in the
Shops by the name of Lapides Cancrorum) reduced to very fine Powder, and either
take it alone, or in any convenient Conserve or Syrup. It Is for the most part
best to take this Medicin, when the Stomach is empty.

X. For a Strain.
B. the strongest Vinegar you can get, and boil in it a convenient quantity of
Wheat-Bran, till you have brought it to the consistence of a Poultess. Apply
this as early as may be to the Part affected, and renew it when it begins to
grow dry.

DECAD V.
I. For a Recent Strain.
B. REcipe Wormwood and pound it very well in a Mortar of Stone or Glass; then
put to it as much of the Whites of Eggs beaten to Water, as may serve to make
it up into such a Consistence, as may be applied like a Poultess to the Part
affected.

II. A Strengthening Plaster after a Strain, or when there is any Weakness in
the Joint.
B. Melt down together, and incorporate very well, two parts of Diapalma, and
one part of Emplastrum ad Herniam; spread this Mixture, but not very thick,
upon Leather, and lay it to the Joint to be strengthened.

III. For Loosnesses.
C. Boil a convenient quantity of Cork in Spring Water, till the Liquor taste
strong thereof: Of this Decoction let the Patient drink a moderate draught from
time to time, till he find himself sufficiently relieved by it.

IV. For Obstructions, and diverse Diseases proceeding thence.
B. Let the Patient drink every Morning fasting, a moderate draught of his own
Urine newly made, and (if it can conveniently be,) whilst it is yet warm;
forbearing Food for an hour or two after it.

V. For Difficulty of Hearing, from a Cold Cause.
B. Out of a Bulbe or Root of Garlic, choose a Chive of a convenient bigness;
then having passed a fine piece of Thread or Silk through one end of it, that
thereby it may be pulled out at pleasure, crush it a little between your
Fingers, and having anointed it all over with Oil of Bitter ( or in want of
that, Sweet) Almonds, put it into the Cavity of the Patients Ear at Bedtime,
and draw it out the next Morning, stopping the Ear afterward with Black Wool;
but if need require, this Operation is to be reiterated with fresh Garlic for
some days successively.

VI. For Ruptures in the Belly, especially in Children.
A. Having well cleans'd the Roots of Sigillum Salamonis, scrape j. of them
into a quart of Broth, and let the Patient take a Mess, or a Porringer full of
it for his Breakfast; or else give ss. or ij. of the Powder of it at a time,
in any convenient Vehicle.

VII. To give Check to Fits of the Gout, and in some measure to Prevent them.
B. iij. of Sarsaparilla sliced and cut thin; to these add an equal weight of
Raisins of the Sun, rubbed very clean, but not broken. Put both these
Ingredients into three quarts of Springwater, and let the Vessel stand in a
moderate heat, that the Liquor may simper for many hours, yet without bursting
most part of the Raysons; keep this Decoction well stopped, and let the Patient
use it for his only Drink, till he need it no longer.

VIII. A Water for Vleers and Sores.
B. a Solution of Venetian Sublimate, and having made with very good Quicklime
as strong a Limewater as you can (so that, if it be possible, it may bear an
Egg) drop this upon the dissolved Sublimate, till it will precipitate no more
reddish stuff at all; (which will not so soon be done as One that has not
tried, will imagine:) As soon as you perceive that the Liquors act no longer
visibly upon one another, pour the Mixture into a Filter of Cap-Paper, which
retaining the Orange colored Precipitate, will transmit an indifferently clear
Liquor: Which is to be in a Glass Viol kept stopped for its proper Use; namely,
that the Part affected may be therewith washed from time to time, and, if need
be, kept covered with double Linen Cloths wetted in the same Liquor.

IX. A Plaster to Discuss Tumors, or Ripen them if it cannot Discuss them.
B. of Yellow Wax, Frankincense and Rosin, of each iv. (or q. s.) melt them
together gently, and being strained, make up the Mass into a Roll for Use.

X. For the Black-Jaundice it self.
A. a spoonful of Honey, boil it gently, and scum it, till it come to a good
Consistence; then add of Wheatflower and Saffron (reduced to a Powder) as much
of each as you may take up upon the point of a Knife; and having mixed all well,
put it over the Coals again, until it lose its Smell: Afterward you may put it
into a little Stone or Earthen Pot, and keep it for Use; which is, that the
Patient take the quantity of a Pea, and anoint the Navil, and fill the Cavity
thereof with it; repeating the Application for some days together, when the
Stomach is empty, and abstaining from Meat and Drink about two hours after the
Medicine is used.

The End of the Fifth Decad.

