AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST Mr. Baxters Palliated Cure of Church Divisions. OR, An
account of several Weighty and Just exceptions against that book.

Having a form of Godliness. but denying the power from such turn aside, 2 Timothy
3. 5. I would thou were either hot or cold, Rev. 3. 15. It was not an enemy
that reproached me, then I should have born it, but it was thou, mine equal,
my guide, and my acquaintance, We took sweet counsel together, and walked unto
the house of God in company. Ps. 55. 12. 13. Printed in the Year, 1670:

A Brief account of several things to be excepted against in Mr. Baxters book,
Styled, The Cure of Church Divisions.
THe whole Design of this Book being to make such as at this day are careful to
keep themselves Pure from all defilements in False Worship, Except. 1.
Odious, it may well be affirmed, that this was neither Seasonable, nor Honest,
since the crying Sin this day, is not Separation; but Injust and Violent
Persecutions which Mr. Baxter speaks very little against, although it be
without any Comparison, a greater Sin then the other: Since Separation in many
Cases, is a Duty, which Persecutions never can be.

In the Preface, Except. 2.
and in other places of his book, p. 25. 6.
Mr. Baxter mentions with much bitterness, what was formerly done in the time
of the War; which is in him a most unbecoming practice, because (First) Mr.
Baxter was as guilty of stirring up and fomenting that War, as any one
whatsoever; and none ought to blame the Effects, who gave rise and
encouragement to the Cause. (Secondly) There is an Act of Oblivion already past
for all actions of that kind, which none, that pretends to an Healing and
Peaceable Spirit should dare to think of Violating: (thirdly) There is daily
much greater profaneness, and the consequent of Profaneness, Immorality acted
by those, whom yet Mr. Baxter never mentions but with Honor, as if no Sins or
miscarriages were to be blamed, but theirs, who are unable to defend themselves.

He speaks much against telling Except. 3.
others of their sins in furious words; Pref. Par. 12
and yet allows himself a great and masterly Liberty in using them; For to call
his brethren as he does often in his Book p. 153.
Fierce, self Conceited Dividers, Feavorish Persons, and p. 141.
A Dividing hot brained Party, This argues that he little understands a Spirit
of Meekness; but rather that he loves all devouring words, and a deceitful
Tongue, Ps. 52. 4. But when he closes that Paragraph, with such an expression:
If this exhortation and advice seem injurious or intolerable to you, The Lord
have mercy on your Souls; He uses the very same frothy and unsavory words,
that others often profane Prayer and the Name of God by; and which at the
best, is that foolish talking or jesting, which we are commanded not so much as
to mention, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4.

He does very often and needlessly insist upon many things, Except. 4.
that may tend to advance and heighten his own Reputation, As Pref. Pec. 3. 3.
It is not an unexperienced Person that speaks this. And p. 142.
That the disi^genious and unthankful World have had a very high opinion of
him; That p. 143.
The censures of him in his presence, are as gentle as Lambs, or as quickly
silenced (or worse) as the Owls at the approach of daylight: That p. 182.
He has been counseled since he was silenced, to compose Sermons himself, and
to give them in writing to some weak Minister, that has an excellent voice and
Utterance and to let him preach them. That p. 193.
It is twenty times harder to him; to remember a form of words. then to express
what is in his mind without them. That p. 358.
He has been forced to rebuke an abundance (he knows not how many) of good
people of the darker sort, for their overvaluing him and his understanding.
That p 383
Reproofs have been patiently born from him, because he was looked upon as not
aiming to depress the honor of true and serious Religion. These, with many
expressions of the like import, do abundantly discover that Mr. Baxter is full
of great thoughts concerning himself, and out of that abundance his mouth
speaks: Which, together with his bold and rash censure of other Ministers, whom
he calls ignorant, empty, harsh* self-conceited* and the like, shows how little
either of Christian or Moral Ingenuity, he has yet learned; And if to deny our
selves, and to (...) of little account in our own thoughts, is the first Lesson
of Christianity, whoever so plainly shows himself unskilled in that, is most
unfit to be a teacher of it to others, I am sure the Scripture Presidents do
instruct in another kind of modesty. Prove. 30. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 12 11.

He reproacheth the Papists, Excep 5.
for their impossible terms of Unity and their engine of tearing and dividing
impositions: Pref. s. 2^6.
But ought he not to have considered, that this is the Case and crime of those
from whom his brethren separate; And when those Engines are once removed, We
shall quickly make it appear, that we did not hold communion, because we would
not, but rather were not suffered to do it, unless we would sin by subscribing
an Assert unto what we knew was sinful, so that we may say in our defense, what
Mr. Baxter alleges against the Papists, p. 83.
we disown them, (i. e. The Bishops and the imposing party) only as neighbor
churches, that never were there lawful subjects, but bear our testimony against
their sin.

That command in 2 Cor. 6. 12, 13. Excep. 6. p. 31. 32.
Come out from among them, and be ye separate, as also, Rev. 18. 6. Come out of
Babylon, He says are abused by abundance of ignorant professors, as if they had
commanded us to separate from the colder and common sort of Christians, and to
come out of the Church whereof they are members this he calls a profaning of
Gods word, and a gross and palpable contradicting of its plain expressions, and
taxes such of Ignorance Uncharitableness and Passion.

It were easy to return these ill words, but we will allow Mr. Baxter a
Privilege to use them, and to his argument we answer, That it is no
profaning, but a sober and Religious Interpreting of Scripture, to take the
words of it, which were spoken concerning one thing. and by way of proportion
and anology to apply them to another; and therefore though the forementioned
Texts do properly and directly concern only the Infidels and Idolaters there
mentioned, yet proporti^^^^ly they belong to others, that under the Name of
being Christians, are guilty of the same crimes, And therefore we are commanded
strictly to separate from every one that is called a brother, of he be
covetous, or a Railer, or the like, if any Church, will receive such for their
Members, and notwithstanding all admonition; will still retain them, we are not
to own such a Church, as a Spouse of Christ, and therefore must come out of it,
least we partake of her sins, and if this way of arguing from Analogy, be not
good and safe, we doubt whether Mr. Baxter, has any thing to defend
Infant Baptism with; since the best argument, that all learned men have ever
defended it by, is the proportion it has to Circumcision, from whence they
conclude by a parity of Reason, that what was used to Infants before, in order
to their admission unto Church privileges, may be continued now to them under
a New administration, and the very same manner of reasoning will hold in the
present case, which is not an effect of Ignorance, and Rashness, but of
Spiritual Soundness, and Sobriety.

He does at large recite the Corruptions, Excep. 7.
that were in Former Churches and thence would infer the unlawfulness of
separation, Dir. 5. p. 33.
where such corruptions are still continued; But this he does very
Impertinently, For though many errors, both in Doctrine and Life, were formerly
admitted, yet none of them were imposed as Conditions of Communion, which is at
this day the complaint and grievance of all the Separate, and of which they
have frequently desired redress, but in vain, in order to communion.

He relates, Excep. 8. p. 55.
that he has met with many conscientious professors, who would not communicate
with the Parish Churches, because the people were ignorant, who when he had
examined them, have proved ignorant of the very substance of Christianity, It
is hardly possible to believe that he has met with many such, or if he had,
yet ought not such things to be concealed? are not we commanded not to reveal
the secret of another, which pious and prudent Rule Mr. Baxter has not
scrupled to sin against, and therefore may justly fear what follows in the
text, That, He who hears it will put him to shame, and his infamy shall not
turn away, Prove, 25. 9. 10.

They are very unweighed and rash words, Excep. 9. p. 93.
when he says, Show me in Scripture, or in Church History, that either there
ever was De facto, or ought to be De Jure, such a thing in the world as the
Papists call the Church, and I profess, I will immediately turn Papist: We
think none can write thus, but declares a great unsteddiness in his Religion,
for none that knows Church History, but can prove that such a Church, as the
Roman, has been near 1300. years, actually in being, and we much wonder that
any Protestant, should be found, though but by the by, equalling of Church
History to Scripture as if the uncertain tradition of the one, were to be as
much accounted of and followed, as the divine and infallible Revelation of the
other.

Having profecuted the grounds of our departure from the Church of Rome, p. 84.
he concludes insolently, if this answer seem not plain and full enough to you,
it is because you understand not Christian sense and Reason; But certainly it
can be nothing else but intolerable Pride, that dares charge another with want
of Christian sense and Reason, who does not understand the force of a
consequence of Mr. Baxters making sense he too often fails in the truth and
evidence of his deductions.

When he says, Excep. 10. p. 116.
We may have local presential Communion, with that particular Church, where we
are present, unless they hinder us by Unlawful terms, this, bating that
insignificant Jargon of Local Presential Communion, is no more then we all
affirm. Only we add, that at this day unlawful terms are imposed upon us, and
because of them we are necessitated not so much to separate, (for we never yet
were of them) as to forbear Communion.

Among the sects which charge one another, Except. 11. p. 132.
he reckons the Papists and Protestants, but this is a very New and odious
Nickname, to call the Protestant, by the title of a Sect, and to make it part
of their guilt, that they conclude, A Papist cannot go beyond a Reprobate, nor
a worshipper of the Beast be saved? Which being the express words of Scripture,
Rev. 14. 9, 10, 11. And mentioned in so slight and abusive a manner by Mr.
Baxter, makes us judge that he may in time, be brought to a compliance with
them, of whom he is pleased to write more favorably then the Scripture allows
us (that are in his sense the plainner and duller sort of Christians) to speak
or conceive.

He speaks something but very triflingly about scandal, Except. 12. p. 135.
and shows how little he understands the true Notion of it, when he dares
affirm, Many times I have the rather gone to the Common Prayers of the Public
assemblies, for fear of being a scandal to those same Men, that called the
going to them a scandal: But the Apostle Paul would not eat flesh, (which
certainly is far more Lawful, then to go to those prayers, which are of a
suspected, if not Idolatrous Original) rather then he would offend his weak
brother, whose practice we wish Mr. Baxter, would have condescended to conform
unto, And then all such expressions as these would have been forborne.

He reports, Excep. p. 140.
that many a faithful Minister he has known, who have freely confessed to him,
that pievish self-conceited Christians, inclined to separation, were a far
stronger temptation to them, to forsake or over run their own understandings,
then all the offers of Honors or Riches could be on the other side. We may
well doubt of the truth of this story, for we can hardly think that any, much
less many a faithful Minister, would so reproach their people, and their
Honorable Name which is upon them, as to call them pievish and self conceited
Christians, But if some have indeed formerly complained of the too great
proneness to separation, when there was no such evident and pressing
necessi^ies for it, we doubt not but they expected so much prudence and
faithfulness from Mr. Baxter, as to conceal their complaints; and not vent them
now, when the state of affairs is so wholly altered, I ho^e hereafter all that
fear God, will be very careful how they make any complaint unto a Person, who
will take the next worst occasion to revile a whole Innocent and Godly (and
likewise suffering and afflicted) Party, by a malicious and unworthy publishing
of it.

He compares odiously the Separatists to the Quakers, Excep. p. 152.
and affirms of them, that as the Quakers by the very terror of their words
did frighten many women and boys into their s^ct, before they understood at all
what it was that they were against or for, so do the Separatists declaim
against our sinfulness of Parish assemblies and Communion, till they have
frightened the ignorant into their mistaken Zeal. And as if this were not enough
to make them all absurd and ridiculous He does in another p^ace endeavor to
render them Perverse and malicious, by saying uncharitably as well as falsely
every Separatist* p. 201.
Anabaptist Antinomian does too willingly put his errors into his Prayers:
Where by mentioning the Separatist, as a distinct body of Men, from the
Antinomian, Quaker, and Anabaptist, it is evident he can mean no other, but his
Presbiterian and congregational brethren, of whom to affirm, that they all too
willingly put their errors into their Prayers, and preach merely to fright the
ignorant into their mistaken Zeal: this is to do what he can to make that
Character be believed concerning them, which only Papists, and the more carnal
sort of the Episcopal party, have ever ventured to give them, We must therefore
appeal to God against this sl^nde^er, and eatnestly pray that he would please
to rebuke him.

He speaks very slightly of Prayer, Excep. p. 158.
in comparison of study, for the attaining of wisdom, calling it too cheap a
way; which shows you how little he understands the Nature of True Prayer, which
is a travail of the spirit, and calls for the whole attention of mind, and
inward workings of thoughts in a far more intense and earnest manner, then any
study can, nor does Solomon direct to any other way principally when he
commands us to lift up our voice for understanding Prove 2. 3. so the Apostle
James if any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam, 1. 5. Which when we
call to mind, we cannot but wonder that any dares so expressly go against the
very letter of Scripture, and likewise the reason of the command, since it is
not study, but the blessing of God (which is obtained by Faithful and diligent
prayer) that makes either ^ich or knowing, but we have done with wondering at
Mr. Baxters boldness, for what follows in justification of his unwarrantable
conceit, exceeds all ordinary bounds of sobriety, I^ is considerable says he,
not only that Christ increased in wisdom in his Youth, p. 158.
but also that he would not enter upon his public Ministry till he was about
thirty Years of age, when it had been more easy for Christ to have go: all
knowledge by two or three earnest prayers thou for any of us Whether will not
Pride and overwening carry a man! he that had so trampled upon his brethren
without any regard to their innocence or snfferings now speaks but slightly of
our Lord Christ himself! For does he think (or, if he does not how dares he
insinuate it!) That our Savior staid till he was 30 years old, before he
entered upon his ministry that he might be more perfect in wisdom, was it not,
that he might in all respects fulfill the Law that time of Life being ordained
for the Priests of old to enter upon the Tabernacle-service, Numb. 4. 2, 3.? Or
may we suppose, that that Lord Christ, in whom dwelt all the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily, and who was infinitely perfect, as God and Man, in the fiast
moment he was born, had any adition of Grace, or wisdom (except as to the
manifestation of it in his Humane Nature) upon his earnest prayers! Was he not
rather herein a pattern to us, that we should be instant in prayer, since he,
who needed it not for himself, did so constantly use it! so that to speak so
lessingly of prayer and Christ; to undervalue so much the unspeakableness
usefulness of one, and the incomprehensible majesty of the other, becomes very
well the Spirit that Mr. Baxter writes with, but not at all that which hitherto
he has pretended to.

He calls them Poor Fanciful Women, Excep* p. 167
and melancholy persons, that ordinarily receive comfort by suggested Texts,
of Scripture, and would abuse their piety herein, by using a Phrase more
beseeming a Jester, then a Judicious Divine, If a Text of Scripture come into
their minds, they say, says he, this Text was brought into my mind, and that
text was set upon my spirit: If this be not to sit in the chair of scorners,
what is? For is not this the very language of Holy men, that Mr. Baxter would
expose to scorn! In the multitude of my perplexed thoughts, (for so the Hebrew
word signifies) within me (says Holy David) thy comforts delight my soul, Ps.
94. 19. Where by Comforts, he means some Scripture promises, at that very time
suggested, in which he found satisfaction, as is plain; Ps. 119, 50. 52. And is
not this the ordinary safe way of receiving comfort^ for what the word speaks,
that the spirit speaks, and he is promised by our Savior for this very end to
bring Scripture to his peoples remembrance, John 14. 26. And indeed, when a
soul oppressed with sorrow before, shall suddenly find ease, by having some
Scripture brought to their mind, which before they thought not of if this be
not the Spirits work, as a Comforter, we shall be always doubtful, how and
when he performs that office? which way of Doubting Mr. Baxters Divinity leads
into, which sufficiently shows it is not of God. For God calls us to Hope
perfectly, and to rejoice in that Hope.

But as if he could never speak meanly enough about Prayer, Excep. p. 176.
he adds further, It is a wonder how they that believe Scripture, can make
themselves believe, that God makes such a matter as they do of their several
fo^m^ and words of Prayer, But does not God regard the manner of our addressing
to him? must not we pray in the Spirit! and does not God seek such to worship
him? so that we rather wonder how any that believes Scripture, can be guilty of
such crude and ungrounded assertions, And were we as forward to pass a censure,
as Mr. Baxter is we should quickly conclude every such Trifler, that in defense
of Humane Inventions and impositions in Prayer, will affirm rashly, that the
Pharisees had a Lithurgy, and our Sa^iour and his Apostles of enjoined with
them in it, does neither believe Scripture, nor himself; but tries to abuse the
credulity of his Reader, by his weak and peremptory assertions.

It is well Mr. Baxter is grown so scruplous and tender that he is offended,
Excep. p. 187.
if any break jests upon Common prayer, We must in charity believe he is
serious, but then he should have given us occasion to think that not many years
ago he was delighted in such kind of things himself, for we must appeal to all
unprejudiced Readers whether any thing could be more Ironically spoken then
what he (or at least those, from whom he did not descent) writ in the Savoy
dispute, p. 9.
Cold prayers are like to have a cold return and therefore even for peace sake
let us pray more heartily and copiously then the Common Prayer Book will help
us to do: And whether this be the cause, or whether it be that the
Common Prayer book has never a prayer for it self, we find that its prayers
prevail not to reconcile many sober, serious persons to it, that live in
Faithful Fervent prayer: Thus being High Priest for that Year he prophesied,
but since he is so much better informed, that he has much ado to forbear
making Homilies, and pleads strongly for them, though at that time he was
afraid of them least they should make us Ruffians p. 21.
which Reason still continues in force against them, though Mr. Baxter has
either left or lost it.

We pass by his profane story, p. 188.
as fitter for Ranters, and the persons he pleads for Communion with, then for
separatists, and we challenge him to tell us the names of those that used such
Ruffian like expressions (which we judge Mr. Baxter did greatly sin in
repeating) or else let him not take it ill if we think he invented them (as he
did the Pharisees (...),) on purpose to make his brethren odious, and to
justify the persecution against them. Nor can we imagine any other endin that
strange Prayer, p. 192.
O Lord pity thy p^or Church, whose Pastors themselves are so pievish in their
ignorance, and tempt other men by their f^llies to justify all their
severities against them and others.

But Mr, Except. p. 193
Baxter being once got into the chair of the ^^^rnful will not easily out, and
therefore goes on. It is (...) odious sound to ^ear an ignorant rash
self-conceited person, especially a Preacher, to cry out Idolatry, Idolatry,
against his brethrens prayers to (...) because they have something in them to
be amended: Whereas we do not therefore think any thing to be guilty of
Idolatry, because it has something in it to be amended; but because it is used
in the worship of God, without any command from God to make it lawful, and this
we must tell our Dictator is a species of Idolatry, and ^orbid in the second
command, and if he will not receive it so, It is, to use his own arrogane and
imperious words, p. 84.
because he understands not Christian sense and Reason.

That what is unlawful ^ commanded* Excep. p. 194. 195.
may be lawfully obeyed, he asserts, but, according to his usual manner,
neither proves, nor at all pertinently urget^ it: Since the question is about
the worship of God, and not about the matters of little importance, In which
for peace sake we would part with our right though in the matters of God, we
may not, and when Mr. Baxters adds, some accidents may make even an indifferent
thing so great an evil: at no man's command can preponderate and make it
lawful: He leaves the question as he found it, and overthrows the design of
his own assertion: For we say such accidents do at this day attend the things
imposed on our practice, that no command can proponderate and make them lawful,
so that we have Mr. Baxter at length, though very unwillingly; defending those
that he endeavors to traduce and condemn; which is not the only time (so great
is the force of truth) that we find him so doing. For in showing what Pastors
we are to join with p. 203.
. In venturing to tell us, that by Separatists p. 240.
he means only those that account true Churches of Christ to be no Churches, or
that account it unlawful to hold Communion with those Churches, whose Communion
is not unlawful, and lastly, when he calls them Church-dividers, who fly from
the ancient simplicity and primitive terms of Church Communion, and add their
own little Novelties, as necessary things; He has hereby discharged us from
being either Separatists, (who are willing to communicate with all true
Churches so far as they are true) or Church-dividers, since we impose nothing,
but are at this day violently imposed upon, of which we have often, though
without any hope of redress, complained in order to Communion, and we hope the
Bishops will no longer reproach us with Mr. Baxters authority.

He says, Except. p. 196
Our presence at the Prayers of the Church is no Profossion of consent to all
that is (...) in those Prayers, but since the Apostle thought otherwise in a
like case of sitting at Meat in an Idols Temple, 1 Cor. 8. 10. And yet in
defense of that ungrounded assertion, Mr. Baxter speaks boldly, if not
blasphemously, How does foreknowing the pastors faults make them mine? p. 200.
take (...) you make not God the greatest sinner and the worst being in all,
the world, we tremble to read this passage, for how God concurrs, even to sin
it self, as it is an action, and hinders not that (yet without sin in himself)
which he foreknows will be ill done by others, this we profess is a M^stery
which we fathom not, but cry out concerning it, as the Apostle Paul did, Oh
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding ^t, Romans 11. 33.
and this relieves ns in all those perplexing enquiries, that God has tied us
to a known Rule, but his own sovereign will is that by which he himself acts,
and for which he cannot be to us accountable, and therefore for any to argue,
from men who are under a Law, to God, who is infinitely above it, is an
unjustifiable Rashness, nearly bordering upon Impiety and profaneness.

When he says, Excep. p. 207.
it is she opinion of injudicious furious spirits, that no truth is to be
silenced for Peace, besides the bitterness of his spirit, discovered in the
phrase he uses, we have this to observe, that we wish he had observed his own
Rule, and then this injuditious furious peace of his had been spared, It being
very true, what he afterward dictates ( a) Who are impatient of holding in
their opinions, do but proudly esteem their own understandings precious, we
hope Mr. Baxter will apply it to himself, and he humbled for his proud
impatience.

It were easy, Excep. p. 210.
says he, to instance in unseasonable and imprudent words of truth spoken to
Princes, which have raised persecutions of long continuance, but it is not more
easy to instance in Princes ruined by Flatteries, or by the sinful silence of
those whose duty it was to reprove them? and, secondly, were not those Princes,
who could not bear truth, much more to be blamed, then those, who (how
imprudently soever speak only truth to them! or thirdly, does Mr. Baxter think
that Elijah and Micajah, did well in reproving Ahab; and John Baptist in
reproving Herod, though it is certain that it caused persecution, and the last
was imprisoned, and afterward lost his head upon it, Luke 3 19. 20. And
fourthly, may not Gospel Ministers, follow these holy men's example, since all
Scripture is written for our instruction! If indiscretion and fear of
consequences, may discharge from doing so necessary a duty, whoever hear of
their sins; yet Princes never shall, but must be left by our desperate and
forbidden silence, Isa. 58. 1. unto an hopeless state of impenitence.

He has found out a new cause of separation and such as we doubt not the Pope
will thank him for when he says, Excep. p.212
almost all our contentions and divisions are caused by the ignorance and
inj^diousnesse of Christians: For it is evident that our contentions at this
day, are principally if not wholly, caused by the Pride, impertinence, and
tyranny of imposers, which guilt Mr. Baxter would ease them of, by charging it
upon the ignorance and injuditiousness of Christians, but who thus justifies
the wicked and condemns the righteous, must expect the punishment threatened to
such an undoing practice Is. 5. 20. Besides, we cannot understand the meaning
of such phrases, is Dull Christians, Ignorant and injuditious Christians, for
whoever are Christians indeed, have received an a^ointing, by which they knew
all things, 1 John 2. 20, 27, and should not have such vile epithites affixed
to them, which only tend to expose even Christianity it self, as if it did not
cure those which sincerely embraced it of their ignorance and injuditiousnesse.

It is not, Except. p. 214.
says he the least pity that many good people, especally youth and women,
should be so weak as to value an affectionate tone of speech above a juditious
opening of the Gospel; and again, ( a) it grieveth my very soul to think what
pitiful, raw, and ignorant kind of Preaching is crowded most after is many
place, p. 215.
for the mere affectionate manner of expression and lowdness of the (...)
voice: What could Parker or his Brother the Dialogist have spoken more
reproachfully against that Preaching, which God does ordinarily own as his
instrument in working conversion by! And indeed we may easily forgive those
Shimei^s^ from whom we had no reason to expect better, when one from our own
bowels does thus seek our Life! But is Mr. Baxter grieved indeed that ignorant
preaching is crowded after? we hope then he will ease himself, by discovering
who they are that deceive such Multitudes.

But if he continus silent, and leaves the charge at random, we must think it
concern, all that are at this day engaged in a Gospel Separation, and then, not
so much to right our selves, whose work is with the Lord that knows us, as to
make this proud man know his sin and folly, we must tell him, that for depth
and variety of Learning, skill in the Languages, knowledge of Scripture,
Sobriety of Life, and (which, in preaching, is equal to any of these) an
affectionate and zealous earnestness in expressing the truth of God for the
salvation of Souls, very few exceed those Preachers, whom (for some foolish
stories that in former days he knew) Mr. Baxter does not fear to contemn and
villifie: If we shall be accounted fools in this glorying, we can sincerely
say, He has compelled us, 2 Cor. 12 11. But we had rather glory in our
infirmities, and among others, in this very reproach that we suffer, that so
the excellency of the power, whereby God is pleased to work in such weak
instruments, may more evidently appear to be of God, who we doubt not, as he
has, so will continue to own the affectionate and earnest Preachers of his
free Grace, when such juditious selfesavers, as Mr. Baxter, who have left off
the Lords work, and instead of helping it forward with us, are weakening our
hands and disgracing us before the builders, Neh. 4. 2. 5. shall be ashamed of
their envy.

It is altogether a new (...), Excep. p. 216.
to affirm Dictator like, (...); which are of necessity to (...) you must ever
keep company with the Universal Church, (...) who shall tell us what is the
Universal Church, and where we may find it? or how comes the Scripture not so
much as to be mentioned; from which alone the Nature and (...) of a (...)
Church is to be taken? But what he adds, is much more conceited and singular,
In (...) of high and difficult speculation; the judgment of one man of
extraordinary understanding and clearness is to be preferred before both the
Rulers and the Major vote, we suppose Mr. Baxter hopes, as Haman did in a like
case, (...) 6. ^. that he shall be the man, or else he would not have advised
us to prefer the judgment of any one man whatever, when he know^ we believe
that the Scripture is both perfect and plain, and for his matters of high and
difficult speculation, such as are the Reconciling the absoluteness of Gods
decree with the freedom of Man's will, and the like, which Mr. Baxter troubles
himself and his Readers about, we know we may be safely ignorant of them, since
they are things we are not able to understand: and for other points, which
possibly Mr. Baxter may think too plain and easy for his profound
understanding, we are already taught by a greater then (...), that if an Angel
from Heaven (...) any thing against them, we are to wish an Anathema to him,
which sad imprecation we desire Mr. Baxter to be very careful he does avoid the
occasion of deserving.

He seems to us very much to dispurage the reputation of honesty, Excep. p. 219.
when he scruples not to affirm, It often falls out, that honest people are
like straying sheep, if one leap over the Hedge the rest will crowd and strive
to follow him. This we think is enough to make people afraid of being honest,
if indeed when they are so, they are so apt to go astray; and we hope it will
be a warning to those that are truly Honest, to take heed how they follow Mr.
Baxter in these his Out-leaps.

But as if his enmity was against strictness, Excep. p. 221.
as well as honesty he tells us, Sometimes the (...) after one opinion, and
sometimes after another, and therefore (if we may think one who dares write
(...)) he advises, study well what is, the common error of the Religious party
in the times and places where you live, that you may take a special care to
escape them. We believe such counsel was never given to Christians before, we
are indeed commanded not to conform our selves to the World, nor to have any
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but first to suppose that the
Religious party have generally some common error among them, and then to advise
that we should carefully study that to escape them; This counsel we think Mr.
Baxter may be the Father of, nor do we envy him the honor of it; But he that a
few pages before bids us keep to the Universal Church, and to agree with the
generallity of Christians, should not so soon have forgot himself, and made
both that Doctrine and his present advice ridiculous.

It is a pretty odd expression, Excep. p. 220.
If any sect should rise up in England, who should deny Christ, or the
Scripture, or the Resurrection, or the Life to come: This we look upon as very
soft words to call open Impiety and profaneness, by the name of a Sect, but
yet very well agree with the Spirit of one who had given so many worse to them
that are innocent, and careful to please God by a Gospel Separation.

Notwithstanding he makes slight of that Argument, Excep. p. 220.
that has been often urged against the Common Prayer, How many says he, do
take a form of Prayer or Liturgy to be unlawful, (...) because most of the
worser sort are for it? And have they not reason, for may we not justly suspect
that to be had in the worship of God, which the wickedest sort do love; and
does not the Apostle John warrant us thus to argue, 1 John 4. 5. They are of
the World therefore they speak of the World, and the World (...) them: we
desire Mr. Baxter to read that Scripture upon his knees, and then we hope he
will retract what he has written.

He flies upon all sides, Excep. p. 232, 233.
that are for Order in any kind, without expressing himself whether he is for
Papal, Presbyterian, or Independent Government in the Church. And as if this
was not crime enough to seem unsettled in so necessary a point, which so nearly
concerns the honor of Christ, who is Lord of his House Heb. 5. He does
likewise write very dubiously about justification* whether we are to take it to
be by faith or by Works, and we fear he is not sound in that point, since we
find him calling it, The presumptuous boast of being Righteous, by Christt
imputed Righteousness: The Lord we hope, in mercy to his Church, and
particularly to those who have been deceived into a good opinion of him, will
bring this Man upon his knees, that he may make a public acknowledgment of his
folly, in venturing to use such daring expressions, and in pretending to be
wise, especially in so fundamental a point, as justification, above what is
written, For if there is possibility for us to be saved any other way in any
sense, but by the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by Faith,
not only the Scripture was written, but likewise Christ died in vain, Gal. 2.
16. 21. and 5. 3. 5.

Let them; Except. p. 138.
says he, that think they can never speak bad enough of nature, take heed
least they run into excess, this is strange counsel to them that have learned
from Scripture, That every imagination of the Heart of Man is evil, only evil,
and that continually; That, The Natural Man cannot receive the things of the
spirit of God; That, The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God, and the
like, so that we do not see, if we will allow the Spirit of God to be the best
counselor, how we can speak bad enough of corrupted Nature, as the Nature of
every man now is. And had not Mr. Baxter told us before; that he understood by
Flesh, only the sensitive appetite, (when the Apostle means the whole corrupt
Nature, even the Understanding, Col. 2. 18. as well as the affections) we
should have wondered at this passage, but now we see one firm reason to deny the
least allowance of Free Will in the things of God, since those that hold it in
any degree, are strongly inclined to deny Original sin and corruption, which if
Mr. Baxter has not felt, yet we see daily occasion to complain of, and to
abhor our selves for.

I find: Excep. p. 241.
says he, many surly proud professors, much proner to Reproof, then to
exhortation; Their Pride and self conceitedness makes them forward: But Mr.
Baxter would have done well to have spared himself, for he is doing the very
same thing throughout his whole book, and therefore we hope he is content to be
accounted, a surly proud Professor.

Christian Magistrates are a blessing for believers: Excep. p. 244.
which is a Truth we doubt not of, but when he adds by way of Reason, for if
they persecute some, yet they usually protect more, we think we ought to reply,
That if they persecute any (...) they contract a Guilt upon all: The whole Land
of Israel suffered for Manass^^s sinful persecution; and we think they do a
very ill office to Magistrates, that insinuate, it is possible for them to
persecute some, and yet be innocent.

That the spirit of separation, Excep. p. 254.
is the same with that of persecution, is a most ungrounded, as well as
unchristian assertion: For in many cases we may, and ought to separate in love,
2 These. 3* 14. 15. but Persecution in no case can consist with it; which, after
many virulent and unhandsome expressions upon this subject he is forced at last
himself to confess p. 262.


He asks many questions, Excep. p. 265.
about Church Communion, but he knows the Proverb, and let that answer him.

He takes it ill that we should think the Church of Christ, Excep. p. 267.
to consist but of a few, but when he says the belief of this, is the next way
to Infidelity, he casts the reproach upon the, word of God which affirms this
expressly, and not upon us who from thence have received it.

I have, Excep. p. 268.
says he, much (...) to forbear naming some high Professors, who died Apostate
Infidels, deriding Christianity and the immortality of the Soul, who once were
Separatists. And cannot he name many of the Church of England who daily do the
same? or might not the Heathen have thus reproached the Primitive Christians
because many went out from among them 1 John 2. 19. Thus to reproach a whole
party, for the miscarriages of some few, without taking notice how many more
and greater Fau^ts are in those whom they wou^d defend, is the usual artifice
of such that think themselves concerned, upon any wretched terms whatever to
maintain an ill cause, and have prostituted their consciences to defend an
Argument.

In defense of Forms of Prayer, Excep. p. 281.
which he would seem very tender of, he says, Restore the same Spirit unto the
former words and they will be as good as they were at the beginning, which is
very true, but impertinent: For therefore we say The same words ought not to be
used, much less imposed; because no man can Restore the same spirit to them,
and we cannot believingly expect that God will do it, because we have no
promise for it; nay it would be a tempting of God to expect any such thing in a
worship which he has not commanded.

He compares Cromwell unto the Tyrant Maximus, which may be true, Except. p.
374.
but is most unbecomingly done in Mr. Baxter, who dedicated a flattering book
to his Son.

We have many more things to except against, Excep. p. 393.
but we confess we are tired in gathering so many noisome weeds, and therefore
shall relieve our selves and the Reader, and conclude all with the Comical
Description of some, whom Mr. Baxter calls an ignorant sort of Ministers, that
have clumsie wits, unlearned Sots, that should be conscious of the dullness and
ignorance of their f^mbling and unfurnished Brains, silly Souls, and the like,
which had Been. Johnson of old, or Hudibras writ now, we might have passed it
by, as a piece of Wit and Drollery and only blamed the Poet, but for Learned
Mr. Baxter, Mortified Mr. Baxter, judicious Mr. Baxter, one that thinks himself
many removes from those that he styles the younger and emptier sort of
Ministers) to fall into such levity, will I hope warn all, to take heed how
they overvalue themselves, least God in judgment does leave them to
themselves, as he has evidently done this poor man, whose recovery we can
sincerely pray for, and should much rejoice if taking a review of what he has
writ, from these exceptions of ours, he might be stirred up to give
satisfaction unto the Churches of Christ, by a second and more seasonable
Retractation.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 2. line 23. for sensures read sensurers, p. 3. l. 3. for rash r. rush, p.
3. l. 13. for cime r. crime, p. 3. l. 21. for there r. their, p. 5. l. 28. for
sense r. since, p. 8. l. 3. r. ^ou p. 8. l. 20. for go r. got, p. 11. l. 27.
for arrogance r. arroganst. p. 12. l. 4. for that r. at, p. 12. l. 30. for
surely r. since. p. 13. l. 19. r. peace, p. 13. l. 20. r. but it is.


