THE DOCTRINE OF FREE GRACE, NO DOCTRINE OF LICENCIOUSNESSE. OR, That Gods Free
Unconditionall pardoning of Sin, is the best way to Mortify the Power of
Sin in Believers. Asserted and Cleared, By Edward Bagshawe Student of Chapter Chapter

LONDON, Printed by Abraham Miller for the Author, and are to be sold by the
Booksellers in Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

THE PREFACE.
AMong those many False and Dangerous Opinions, which in this Age are let loose
upon us; there is none that is either more Destructive of the True Nature of
Christian Religion, or more likely to be embraced by some seemingly zealous and
devout men, than the Doctrine of Free Will: whereby the Grace of God is rendered
either altogether Needless, or at best only a Coadjutor and partial Assistant
to Men's Salvation.

Were not men Naturally willing to follow that which serves to puff them up,
and begets an opinion in them, that they are like Gods: I should wonder how the
Opinion of Free Will could ever find any Learned Assertour; since the Reasons
against it, ever upon a Philosophical account, are such as no Wit of man is
able to answer. For the subordination of Causes, and the Necessity that every
Effect, should have a Cause, which did produce it, is so strong an Argument,
that the Will of man is subject to the enforcing influence of the Causes which
move and determine it; that the most Learned of the Heathen, did upon this
score altogether reject Free Will; and yet this supposed. Fatality in every
Action, did not at all lessen or abate their strict adherence to, and
prosecution of Virtue: None having been more famous in this kind than the
Stoics, which were the Known Assertors and Maintainers of Necessity.

But without entering into any such kind of Dispute, the Apostle having already
forbidden us to medale with things which we have not seen, and it being
according to him plain folly to affirm too positively about things we know not:
I shall not scruple to admit that, as to things of merely Civil Con^^^ment, God
has endued the will of every man, with a Liberty (...) justify himself; and
that we are not so tied up by the Concurrence of Causes, but that a man has
power over his own Will, to embrace or to refuse any thing tendered to him, with
or without Reason, as he himself pleases. While I say I am content to admit
this, my meaning is not that I understand how this can be done (for I must
profess it is to me altogether unintelligible) yet because it contradicts no
Article of Faith, and likewise serves best to demonstrate the Equity of Humane
Laws, which are all founded upon that supposition; I think it altogether a
Needless thing to dispute about Free Will in Moral Actions, and a very Absurd
thing to deny it. Since in matters which are capable of Contrary Reasonings, to
follow the Vncontradicted and Universal Assent of Mankind, is much more Safe
and Prudent, than to tread in New paths; there being but little difference, as
to the Effect, between an Apparent Error, and a Suspected, because Unnecessary
Truth.

But how desirous soever I am to comply with the Common Prolepsis and Inbred
Notion of Free Will, as to Humane Actions; yet as to the things of God, I must
altogether deny it. For it is so clear, That the Things of God, none can
understand, and consequently not Practice, but the Spirit of God, and those, to
whom that Spirit makes them both Plain and Easy; that the Apostle urges that
Sentence, not as a Truth then newly discovered to him, but as a Principle
founded in Nature, and apparent by its own Equity and Reasonablinesse: And what
the Scripture every where mentions concerning the Actings of the Spirit upon
Believers, the Experience of all Believers that ever were in the World, is able
to evidence; since such must needs confess, that there cannot be a more
dangerous Enemy to the Truths of God, then the Understanding; nor more
Rebellious to the Precepts of God, than the Will of Man; until the Spirit of
God has enlightened the one, and by his own Immediate Work, mightily
overpowred the other.

For the proof of this, I might content my self with what I find contained in
the bare letter of Scripture, to which, if we are what we profess, we ought to
captivate our own Reasonings; but since many men, and those not of least Note
even in our own Church, plead for that Idol Free Will, from the many
Absurdities which would follow, should it not be granted; I shall undertake to
demonstrate, that much more pernicious Consequences will follow, should it once
be admitted. For

First, It totally destroys all belief of Gods Power and Providence, in his
ordering and guidance of Actions according to his own Will: For who is there,
that understands any thing of Gods Sovereignty, but must needs acknowledge,
that he foresaw and predetermined every thing long before it was actually in
being; but were there such an Independent and Absolute Free Will in Man, as
some contend for, how the motions of his Will could be foreseen is altogether
Inconceivable: Socinus therefore, who saw how much this Argument did press
him, did make no scruple to deny Gods Prescience: thereby doing that very
thing, which Austine complained of in Tully, Dum fecit liberos, fecit etiam
Sacrilegos: While he made Men Free, he did most sacrilegiously rob God of his
chief Prerogative, and that is, his Omniscience: The Arminians therefore, who
grant both Prescience in God, and Free Will in Man, do admit both parts of the
Contradiction to be True; and so not only thwart the express Revelation of
Scripture, which every where inculcates Gods Absolute and Irrespective
Election, but likewise speak that, which, in Reason (to which they pretend so
much) neither themselves nor any one else can possibly understand.

Secondly, The Opinion of Free Will utterly cuts off all manner of Prayer: For
whereas the greatest Argument of Prayer ought either to be for Pardoning or
Preventing Grace; with what face can he ask for Pardon, who by owning himself
to have a sufficient Power to do Gods Will, does thereby acknowledge all his
sins, not to proceed from Surprise, Inadvertency or Weakness; but to be sins
of his Will, and therein himself to be a Wilful and a Malicious Transgressour?
The Saints of old did use to plead for themselves, their Rashness and Haste, as
David; their Ignorance and Unbelief, as Paul; their Incogitancy and
Unmindfulness, as John; but he that holds Free Will; makes all those Apologies
to be vain and useless, since every offense in such an one must needs arise
from his own Resolved and Designed Pravity; and sins of Infirmity in others, in
him are sins of strength; because he might have avoided them, and would not.
which discovers so gross an Enmity and Opposition against God, that all the
while, that sentence remains upon Record, If we sin wilfully after we have
received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin;
it will be impossible for such an one to look up with Faith, and believingly to
sue out his Pardon. And as with Pardoning, so likewise will it sit with
Preventing and strengthening Grace; Free Will makes the one Desperate, and the
other Vselesse. For what need I pray for that, which I have already by me; nay,
which I am sure shall never, so long as I am a man, be taken from me. No man
prays for the Money that is in his Chest; nor for those goods, that he stands
possessed of: So neither can we, without being guilty of Vain-babling, pray for
strength to do Gods will, if we think every man Naturally has a power to do
it, I will pray (said one of the most learned Assertors of Free Will, Tully.
for Fortune and Riches, for these are in Gods Gift; but not for Virtue, for
that I can give my self. Whereas he that knows he stands by Grace; that he
cannot do any thing well, but as the Spirit of God does act him: and that the
Actings of the Spirit, are Arbitrary, not at ours, but at his own Disposal; he
will find a Necessity upon him, to be often begging for that strength, which he
sees he wants, and God alone can furnish him with.

Thirdly; Another Inconvenience of this Opinion of Free Will is, that it must
needs betray poor Sinners to a delaying and putting off their Repentance: For
he that finds it written, how ready God is to pardon upon Repentance; and is
told withal, that it lies in his power to Repent, whenever he pleases; cannot
be wrought upon by any Argument that I know of, to forbear his sinful
pleasures for the Moment. At least, why he should make such haste, as the
Scripture does press us to, there can be no Imaginable Motive. For if I live
according to this Doctrine, I shall be sure to give my self Repentance; because
I have a Natural Ability to do it; and that any man now living should be so
suddenly struck, as not to have time enough for that Work, (which whenever it
is done, it is done in a moment, though it may perhaps not be evidenced so
soon) is so much ods, that any Sinner may safely venture to try a little longer
the pleasures of Sin, before he resolves by too sudden a Repentance to leave
them. Whereas he that owns every good Motion inviting that way, to be, not the
Impulse of his own Heart, but the Calling of Gods Spirit; which, like light,
may shine for a time, and suddenly be withdrawn again; he will find himself
engaged to Answer at the first Call; least, while he tarries, God leaves off to
call him, and gives him over as unworthy of Mercy, because of his Stubborn
Refusal.

4. It is impossible but those who are leavened with this Doctrine, must needs
be swelled with Pride; and puffed up with conceit of themselves, above all
other men: since they imagine all their Graces, to be purely the result of their
own well managing and improving their Natural Abilities. This was the Temper
of the Pharisees heretofore, who justified themselves and despised others; for
as Josephus tells us, they were extremely addicted to the Opinion of Free Will;
and it appears in that they so much overvalued their own Power, that they would
needs be more Holy and Righteous than the Law of God commanded; and therefore
found out. New Ceremonies, and many self-invented Forms of Devotion, which were
their Works of Supererogation: which Humor still reigns, as a Natural Effect
of it, among all those several Parties, where the Opinion of Free Will is
entertained. Whereas the Acknowledging that Gods Grace only fills the Soul,
and we, like Empty Vessels, have nothing but what we daily receive, will keep
the Mind humble and Thankful as to God; and likewise Tender and Compassionate
toward others, who may for the present want the same Mercy which we enjoy.

Lastly, I might add, that the whole Practice of Will Worship, whether it
relates to the Inventing of uncommanded Methods in Divine Worship, or to the
Imposing of such usages upon others, is altogether founded upon a supposition
that every Man has Free Will; and therefore Magistrates conceiving it does not
arise from Tenderness of Conscience, but merely from an Affected Obstinacy,
that Men submit not to their Injunctions, it makes them more Harsh and Rigorous
in exacting Obedience, than otherwise they would ever attempt to do; which
thing alone makes the Belief of Free Will in Religious matters, altogether
inconsistent with and destructive of the Peace of Christian societies; as every
age, wherein there has been the least dawings of Spiritual Light does
abundantly evidence. All the sufferings of the Saints, having been inflicted
upon them upon this single account, in that when they refused to Worship the
Beast or his Image, their Persecutors thought, it lay in their Power, to do
him that Homage; whereas indeed it did not, it being impossible for any to
avoid or forbear acting according to the Dictates of a Well-grounded and
Conscientious Persuasion.

But when as in opposition to all this, the maintainers of Free Will, do urge
that the Contrary Doctrine of Free Grace does open a door to all manner of
Licentiousness, since by leaving nothing in man's power, it leaves them free to
do nothing; and likewise, that it makes void and Ineffectuall all Gods
Commands, which suppose a Power of Obeying in us, or else they had been given
in vain: which Objections being managed by persons of much Rhetoric, and
outward Sanctity, do make a great Impression upon a Slight and Unwary Reader:
I have therefore in this Treatise, fully, at least to my own satisfaction,
answered both those Objections; and have as I hope sufficiently demonstrated,
that nothing does more incline the soul to a Cheerful Obedience, than a right
Understanding of the Doctrine of Free Grace; which because it is the business
of this Book to evidence, I will no longer detain the Reader from it, but
recommend It, for its Success and Issue, to the same Grace, which first gave it
Birth and Beginning.

June 11 1662. Edward Bagshawe.

Errata.
Page 4. line 24. dele but. p. 19. l. 28. read but by the. p. 30. l. 23, 24.
dele () p. 35. l. 4. r. Affections. ib. l. 17. r. (...).

THE Doctrine of FREE GRACE no Doctrine of Licentiousness.
Romans 6.1, 2. What shall we say then? shall we continue in sin that Grace may
abound? Far be it: How shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein?


THese are the words of the Apostle Paul, brought in by way of Objection,
against; and of Answer, for, that Doctrine of Free Grace, which he does in this
Epistle expressly handle: For the understanding of his Discourse, we must have
recourse unto Chap. 3. where after a long and accurate handling of this
Question, verse. 28.
How a man comes to be Justified in the sight of God? the Apostle concludes
(...), We infer therefore, or, Argue from the Premises (as the word
signifies) that a Man, is justified by Faith, without the Works of the Law. The
reason and ground or which Assertion is this, verse. 20.
Because by the Law is the knowledge of sin, i. e. A strict and impartial
view of the Law, in its latitude and spiritual significancy; and comparing of
our Lives with it, is so far from discovering the Rectitude of our Nature and
Actions, that it rather serves to manifest the Obliquity and sinfullness of
them both: And therefore there must be some other expedient found out to Acquit
or Justify men in the sight of God, verse. 27.
than an appeal unto the Law of Works; and that is, the Law of Faith, as the
Apostle speaks, The Righteousness of God, (i. e. which avails before God, verse.
22.
and is accepted by him) is by Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all
them that believe; for there is no difference. For all have sinned, and come
short of the Glory of God, (whereby is meant, either the Graces which God
requires, or the Happiness which he promises: Men were not of themselves able
to perform the one, and therefore had no Right or Title unto the other)
whereupon it follows, that all such as are Justified, are Justified Freely by
his Grace, through the Redemption, that is in, or by Jesus.

This Doctrine, which does so level the Pride of man, by putting his Salvation
quite out of himself and therein is utterly contradictory to humane conception,
the Apostle foresaw, would meet with great opposition, and therefore that he
might Assert and Clear this Fundamental Truth from all possibility of Cavil,
he urges and answers three of the main Objections, which either are or can be
alleged against it.

Abraham, concerning whom the common opinion of the Jews was, that he was
Justified by Works; which they gathered from Gods renewing his Blessing upon
him, after his signal obedience in attempting to offer his son. For now I
know, Genesis 22.12.
says God, that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son,
thine only son from me. And again, Because thou have done this thing, verse.
16, 17.
and have not withheld thy son, thine only son; In blessing I will bless
thee. Whereupon the Apostle James seems clearly to Affirm, that Abraham was
justified by his Works, in that Question, Was not Abraham our Father Justified
by Works, when he had offered Isaac his son upon the Altar?

To this Instance, Answ.
the Apostle answers by directly denying that Abraham was Justified by Works;
for proof of which, he quotes a place out of the Old Testament, Genesis 13.6.
That Abraham believed in God, and it, i. e. that Faith of his, was imputed to
him for Righteousness. Which was spoken of Abraham, long before he had received
Circumcision, and done that Signal and Heroic Action, by which the Sincerity
and Truth of his Faith was evidenced. So that the Apostle James words cannot be
understood, as if he intended to decide whether Faith or Works did Justify;
but only that he determins what kind of Faith it was which Justified, viz. not
a Naked and Barren, but an Effectual and Working Faith: And that Abraham's was
such a kind of Faith, he manifested afterward, in undertaking so Perilous and
Dangerous a Task, merely in obedience to Gods Command. From whence it follows,
that if Abraham, who is styled, the Friend of God, did attain to the esteem of
being reputed Righteous before God, merely upon the account of his Faith; then
all others, whose highest commendation is only to be the Followers and
Imitators of Abraham, have no other way of obteining True Righteousness, but by
treading in the same footsteps of Faith, which the Patriark Abraham walked in:
as the Apostle concludes, Romans 4.23, 24.
It was not written for him, i. e. for Abraham alone, that it was imputed to
him: But to us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him, that
raised up Jesus our Lord from the Dead.

Wickedness of the Wicked, Ezekiel. 18.20.
but likewise that the Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him.

Answ. 2.
To this Objection, the Apostle excellently answers throughout the whole fifth
Chapter of this Epistle, by drawing a parallel between Adam and Christ; who
were the two great Heads and Representatives of all Mankind, in their several
Estates. Now if it shall appear that Adam destroyed his Race, by the Imputation
of his sin; then it cannot be Unreasonable to believe, that Christ may save
his Race, by the Imputation of his Righteousness. But that Adam destroyed his
Race, by the Imputation of his sin, appears clearly from hence, in that
Death, which is the Wages of sin, verse. 14.
does actually ceaze those, who never Actually sinned, and therefore could be
but liable to it, only upon the Account of Transmitted, Derivative and Imputed
sin; as he Argues, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression, i. e. over Infants.
From whence he inferres, As by one man's disobedience, Many (i. e. All who
descend from him by Natural Generation) were made sinners: so by the obedience
of one man, Many (i. e. all who are related to him by Faith, and supernatural
Regeneration) shall be made Righteous. Nay by how much Christ is a greater
Person than Adam, (the one being formed from Earth, the other: 1 Cor. 15.47.
being the Lord from Heaven) by so much shall the Obedience and Righteousness
of that One, more avail to Save, than the Unrighteousness and Sin of the
other did to Destroy. And this the Apostle clears in two Particulars:

1. In Extent of the Pardon; which is to many sins, whereas the Condemnation
was only for One. For, says he, the Judgment, or (...) Guilt was by one. i.
e. Offense, to Condemnation; but the free-gift is of many Offenses, verse. 16.
unto Justification. In Adam, one sin, and that of the lesser sort, styled
(...) a slip or so, was sufficient to undo a World. But in Christ, Many sins,
how aggravated and circumstanced soever, shall not be sufficient to destroy one
Soul,

2. In the Excellence of the purchase: Adam, by his Sin, purchased Death and
Damnation; which is, like a Motion down-hill, very Natural and easy to be
conceived: For that a Creature, should die; that a Sinner, should be sentenced,
may without any Difficulty be imagined: But Christ purchased Life Eternal,
which is like a Motion up-hill, very Hard and exceeding Difficult to be
comprehended. From whence the Apostle concludes, that where Sin, i. e. the
Guilt or Demerit of Adams Sin, abounded, there Grace, or the Gift of Life by
Christ, did much more abound. The word in the Original, signifies something
more than enough; something, (...).
that was above and beyond what was sufficient, to Antidote and to Expel the
Contagion of Adams sin: Just as if a Man should let in a Sea to cleanse a
sink; so abundant was the Overflow of Christ's Righteousness, for the Purifying
of those Natures, which Adams sin had infected.

Christ's Death, does so infinitely transcend the Demerit of Adams Sin, as the
word (...) imports; then, will it not follow from hence, that the Gospel will
be a Rule of Strictness and Severity of Life, no longer; but rather set open a
door to all manner of Impiety, since this Conclusion may easily be drawn: Since
Gods Goodness is so Free, as well as full; since Christ, in the most proper
acception, did die for Sinners; will it not follow, the greater Sinners we are,
the more acceptable we shall be to Christ; and the more Offenses we commit, the
better will his Goodness in pardoning them appear: As to run upon the Score, is
the best way to set out and to adorn a Creditors Munificence. Come on then,
will wicked men say, Let us sin that Grace may abound.

Answ.
To this Odious and Unworthy Inference, which yet, so corrupt and disingenuous
it our Nature, most men are ready, not only to Reason, but to Live by, the
Apostle returns a double Answer:

1. In a Phrase of Abhorrency, (...): He seems, as it were, to start and to
blush at the bare mention of such a supposall,; and therefore hastily cries
out, Far be it, that any should be such a Wretch, as to make Rich and
Undeserved Mercy, a Motive of his Contumacy; that any should therefore presume
to Offend, because God is Willing to Pardon; that any should therefore spurn
their Heavenly Father on the Bowels, because they are Tender and Yearn toward
them: This does not use to be our manner of dealing with Men, and therefore
Far be it, that any should thus deal with God.

2. He answers by instancing in the Life of Himself, and those Believing
Romans, to whom he writes; As if he had said, Far be it that any should make
such Impious Conclusions, from so Holy, and so Gracious Premises; that any
should presume to Poison themselves, because there is an Antidote so near them:
If any do so, it is their own Fault; for we have experimentally found this
Doctrine of Free Grace, to have had a clean contrary Effect and Operation upon
us; and instead of Exciting us to Sin, even to cut up and root out in us, not
only the Acts, but even the Habit of Sinfullness: How then, says he, shall we
that are dead to sin, live any longer therein? Which being the Full scope and
Design of the Apostles whole Discourse, it affords us this useful Observation:

That the best and most effectual way to mortify the Power of In-dwelling
sin, is to consider how free, how Absolute, how Unconditionall Gods Grace is
in pardoning it.

Before I proceed to handle this, I must needs take notice of the Objection,
and from thence observe;

That Corrupt and Curious Wits, do usually draw pernicious and destructive
consequences from the most Precious and soul-saving Truths. For Instance; What
Doctrine can be more Winning, to a Desperate; or more comfortable, to a
Despairing Sinner; than to hear, that Christ has already fully satisfied for
Sin; that God is willing to be reconciled; that, notwithstanding his
Greatness, he even woes us to be at Peace with him; and, in token of his
Readiness, he offers us Peace and Pardon, unclogged with any Condition; he
requires nothing but Faith, i. e. a Naked and an Empty hand, to take what he is
willing in Bounty to bestow. Yet the Disputer in my Text, labors to make this
Sweet, appear to be very Unsound Doctrine; and would fright men from embracing
their Cordial, lest by accident it should heighten and increase their
Distemper, Thus it has fared with all the Abstruse and most Mysterious Points
of our Religion; the Incarnation of the eternal Son of God, the Resurrection
of the Body, the Assistance of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts of Believers, have
been all attaqued and set upon by men's Irregular Fancies, and each Age has
produced some Sect or other, who have made themselves Famous by direct
opposition unto those forementioned Truths. But to omit them, I shall content
my self with those Instances which the Apostle makes in this Epistle, Chap. 3,
He lays down this Conclusion: That God in the Wisdom of his Providence, so
orders and manages all Events, as that out of Evil, he does extract Good; and
makes even our Unrighteousness, verse. 5.
to set off and to illustrate his Righteousness: From whence one presently
inferres, then is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance, i. e. who punishes
men for that, which at last does redound to the Advantage of his Glory; and
then goes on, Let us do Evil, that good may come of it: i. e. Let us Sin,
that Gods Glory may be promoted. Which Impious Deduction, whereby Gods
Providence is made to countermand his Precepts, the Apostle confutes in that
sharp Expression, Whose Damnation is Just, i. e. such who will not actively
Glorify God, by their Obedience unto his Revealed Will, God will get himself
Glory of them, by Punishing their Disobedience. Again in that Great Business of
Gods Absolute and Unconditionall Electing of some unto Eternal Life, Romans 9.
the Apostle instanceth in the Examples of Jacob and Esau; who, when as yet
neither of them had done Good or Evil, yet one was preferred before the other;
or which the Apostle gives no other reason, but this; That the Purpose of God,
according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that calls.
Against which Unmerited and Irrespective choice, verse. 14.
there is One in that place objects, Is there not then Unrighteousness with
God? i. e. Is not God Partial and Unequal in his determinations concerning
Man, thus to choose and prefer one before another, when as by Nature, All are
Equal? To this he answers, by alleging God's Sovereignty, verse. 15.
who in the case of Pharaoh, affirms of Himself, I will have Mercy on whom I
will have Mercy; and the Apostle inferres from thence, and whom he will he
hardens, i. e. he shows no Mercy to, but leaves them in their Natural
Hardness and Impenitency. And when the Objector is not satisfied with this, but
cries out, Why does he then find fault? i. e. why does he reprove and seem
Angry against sin and sinners? for who has resisted his Will? The Apostle
then in stead of answering any further, asks a Question, which the Bold
Disputers of our times will never answer, and that is, Who art thou O man who
disputest against God? by which way of Procedure, he sufficiently shows, that
in the opening of Divine Mysteries, nothing is more hard, than to stop a
Disputers mouth. And the Reasons are

Natural Reason: There is indeed a Reason given to man, which is capaable of
the Highest Mysteries; this in Philosophy, is called Right; in Scripture,
Enlightened Reason; i. e. such a Reason as stoops and submits to Faith, and
dares believe God in spite of all contrary suggestions. But all the while our
Reason, is in its Native and Unreclaimed estate, like a Bullock unaccustomed to
the Yoke, it kicks at every thing which it cannot comprehend. Thus even the
most Holy men, while they did quit their safe Rule, which is Gods own
manifestation of his Ways in Scripture, and ventured in their own Reasons to
argue about Divine Providence; Psalm. 73. Jer. 12. Hab. 1.
the Prosperity of the Wicked, was so Obvious, and withal so Great an
Objection, that they were unable to resolve it; as appears by the Complaints
and Inquietudes of David, Jeremy, Habakuk, and others upon this Subject. That
alone which silenced Job, in the midst of his bold Expostulations, did likewise
satisfy them; and that was, a distinct and clear Discovery of Gods
uncontrolable Sovereignty and Dominion over all his Creatures; which ought to
be admired at a distance by us, and not too curiously pried into, least so
Wonderful and Amazing an Object do strike us Blind. Those Tenets, wherein
Gods Honor is mainly concerned, such are, His managing of all Events, Act.
1.16. and 3.28.
even the Sins of Man (as the Scripture tells us he did pre-ordain the
Treachery of Judas) without any Imputation to his Holiness: His disposing of
all Persons, absolutely to their respective Ends, and without any Imputation to
his Justice -- Such things as these, the Apostle has taught us to call (...)
Untraceable Paths, Rom 11.33.
in which only an Humbled Soul can walk. Here if we will go, we must go
grovelling, with our Faces in the Dust, least if, like Moses, we draw near to
pry with too much curiosity, his Dread do fall upon us, and his Terrors make
us afraid. Till Humane Wisdom be thoroughly abased, and all the Pride of
Earthly Knowledge be purged out, the more we strive to understand the things of
God, the more we are entangled; till at last we come, not only to Reject, but
likewise to Revile them.

Spirits, and apt to range abroad, in quest, not of Truth, but, as those at
Athens, of something that is New; Act. 17.
without pursuing those firm grounds, whereupon to bottom and to fix a
Persuasion. It is therefore the most common cause of all Practical Errors in
the World, that Men do usually fasten upon that part of a Tenet, which favors
them in their Lusts, without taking notice of the whole Compass and Latitude of
it. Thus when a Sinner hears that God is Merciful, he presently cries out,
This is good News for me, for I am already, and resolve still to be a Sinner;
never considering, that Mercy leads to Repentance; and it can no farther be
pleaded, or pretended to by any, then as it does influence us to return from
Sin to God. So perhaps some may argue, If I am predestined to be saved, I
shall be saved; and what need I then trouble my self with Holiness? Whereas the
End is never designed by God, but with Respect of and Subordination to the
Means: And all the several Stages in our Journey to Heaven, are appointed in
the same Eternal Register, wherein the place it self is designed for us. In
short, as in a Chain, when men catch hastily at the Link that is next them,
without taking notice of the connection and series whereby many are joined
together, the whole chain is apt thereby to be disordered and discomposed: so
is it in Divine Truths, if we look not at the whole contexture of them, and
that admirable dependence which each part has upon the other; we are apt to be
led away by our own Prejudices, and to draw Absurd and Monstrous Consequences,
which, had we leisure to take a View of the Whole Body of Sacred Truth, we
should not have adventured to do. Herein mainly consists the Difference
between Truth and Error: Error is then strongest, when it is considered Single;
but the strength of Truth lies in its standing linked and confederated unto
other Doctrines: Therefore to single out any one Opinion, how true soever, and
handle it apart, is, like the cutting of Sampsons Hair, it makes it less
strong, and more liable to mis-construction: It robs it not only of its
Strength, but likewise of its Beauty.

Scriptum est, wherewith our Savior answered the Devil, with stand like a
Rock, and abide all those Waves of Opposition, which don't so much Batter
Scripture, as Dash and Break themselves upon it. And if ever this Advice were
necessary, certainly this Age, wherein we live, does most of all require it; in
which, whatever may lessen and undervalue Scripture is let in and broken loose
upon us. For what by Humane Additions, on the one side; and by Pretenses to
more Immediate Revelations on the other; the Scripture, which is the undoubted
Word of God, is robbed of its Sufficiency and Perfection; and harder Conditions
are required of us, for the attaining of Eternal Life, than those which our
Savior has enjoined us, viz. To Believe, and to Obey him alone. Let us
therefore bring both our own, and all other men's Opinions, unto this
Touchstone; and when we have found a Sic dixit Deus, the Mouth of the Lord has
spoken it, for any thing in controversy, let us stick to that Declaration,
without ever troubling our selves with Consequences, which are but so much Dust
thrown in our Eyes, to keep us from discerning our Duty. Should we ever quit
this hold, I can see nothing before me but Sea and Air, i. e. a Wide and
Endless Labyrinth of Inextricable Error: But while we stick fast to this Rule,
we may indeed err in the Comment, but we are sure the Text is Infallible. And
the more Submiss and Silent our Reason is, in things which may at first blush
appear Strange and Contradictory, the more, I will not say Meritorious, but
Pleasing and Acceptable is our Obedience.

Having thus dispatched that Observation which the Objection in my Text did
lead me to, I come now to the Doctrine which I first raised, and which takes in
the whole Scope and Design of the Apostles arguing, viz. That the Best and most
Effectual Way to mortify the power of Indwelling Sinue, is rightly to
consider how Free, Absolute and Unconditionall, Gods Grace is in pardoning it.
In which there are these three Points to be explained.

1o That, Gods Grace in pardoning Sin, is Absolute, Free and Unconditionall.

A Considerate and fixed Belief of this, is the best way to mortify the Power
of Indwelling Sin.

3c That, A Believer, must never think he has arrived to the Truth of his
Profession, till Sin is mortified in him: or, in the Apostles words, Till he
is dead to Sin.

Gods Grace in pardoning Sin, is Absolute, Free and Unconditionall. I mean,
respecting nothing in, requiring nothing from the creature, as that which may
merit and deserve such Favor. Thus all the Promises run, I will take them,
says God speaking of the New Covenant or Gospell-Times, to be my People, and I
will be their God: Jer. 31.33.
For I will Forgive their Iniquities, and I will remember their Sins no more.
So speaking of the same Covenant by the Prophet Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 36.25.
I will, says he, sprinkle clean water upon you, and from all your Filthiness
will I cleanse you. Which gracious Promise, least it should seem to respect any
thing in them as meritoriously exciting it, God does expressly premise, I do
not this for your sake, verse. 22.
O house of Israel, but for my holy Names sake. And again concludes it thus;
Not for your sakes do I this, verse. 32.
says the Lord God, be it known unto you. Therefore in that Form of Words,
which God prescribes unto Returning Backsliders, he commands them to say, Hos.
14.2.
Lord take away all Iniquity, and receive us graciously. To which God presently
replies, verse. 4.
I will heal their Backslidings, I will love them Freely. But besides what may
be deduced from the whole Tenor and Current of Scripture-Promises, this will
yet farther appear from these three Considerations:

Paul, Romans 11.33.
Who has first given unto him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? or,
as the words are in Job, from whence the Apostle took them, Job 41.11.
Who has prevented me, sc. by doing for me, that I should repay him? Hereby
intimating, that none has or is able so to do any thing for God, as that he
should thereby challenge any thing from him, by way of Recompense: As the words
following in that place imply, For whatever is under the whole Heaven is mine.
When therefore the Holy Men do beg pardon of Sin, their final resort is
to Gods Mercy or Power; as Moses when he intercedes for Israel; And now let the
Power of my Lord be great, Numb 14.17.
according as thou have spoken, saying, the Lord is long suffering and of great
Mercy, forgiving Iniquity and Transgression. And so he goes on, Forgive I pray
thee the Iniquity of this People, according to the greatness of thy Mercy. Mic.
7.18.19.
So the Prophet Micah, Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity,
and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage, because he
delights in Mercy. Whereas did consideration of any thing in the Creature,
move God to show Compassion; Forgiveness from him, would no longer be Grace but
Debt; and God in pardoning Sin, would not exert an act of Power, but an act
of Justice: and Men might challenge not only Pardon of Sin, but likewise,
Heaven it self, as a Reward of their Performances. Which is quite contrary to
the whole Current of Scripture, and to all those Conceptions, which the Majesty
and Greatness of God, together with the Vileness and Despicable meanness of the
Creature, must needs enforce upon all Rational and Considerate Men. Since
therefore the Promises of God run Absolutely, since the Nature of God is
Inalterably, i. e. Freely Gracious; they neither consult Gods Honor, nor the
Comfort of doubting Christians, who interpose the Clog of any preceding
Condition. They are very unfaithful Ambassadors to the King of Heaven, who
streighten their Commission; and speak Peace and Pardon in Terms less general,
than they have received.

Freely, in reference to us, since we neither did nor could deserve it; yet it
was not Free in reference to our Surety; by Christ this was dearly bought, and
whatever we enjoy thereof, was first sealed, and comes down streaming to us, in
the Blood of the Mediator. Now to know the Greatness of the Price, the best way
will be to consider the Greatness of the Person, who paid it. Joh. 1.
In the beginning of John's Gospel, we read of one, whom he there styles (...),
i. e. Reason or the Eternal spring of Wisdom, of him it is said, that he was
with God, nay that he was God; and as God did make the World. If we look a
little farther, we shall find that this very Person, this (...), i. e. became
Flesh, or frail Man, and laying aside the Glory of his Divinity for a time
(...) Tabernacled, or pitched his Tent among the sons of Men. It was this
(...), this assumed Nature of his, which he sacrificed as a Victim to appease
his Fathers Anger, and to expiate the sins of the world; according as he
speaks himself. The Bread that I will give you, Joh. 6.51.
is my Flesh, or my Humane Nature, which I will give for the Life of the World.
Where by World is not, nor cannot be meant, the Generality of Mankind, of
which the greatest part perish, which could not possibly be, had Christ
actually shed his Blood for them: but, as our Savior explains himself in
another place, Joh. 10. etc. 11. v. 52.
His Sheep, or the Generality of Believers scattered throughout the world: so
that the word World, is of the same Extent with the word Many, Mat. 20.28.
which our Savior elsewhere uses. As in Matthew, (...). Mat. 26.28.
the Son of Man came to give his life a Ransom for, or, in stead of many.
And afterward, This is the Blood of the New Covenant, which was shed for Many,
for Remission of Sins. That we may know the inestimable value of this Blood,
it is called by the Apostle Paul, and that without a Figure the Blood of God,
Act. 20.28.
i. e. which the Son of God shed in that Humane Nature, which he had united
unto himself. Who is there then that will not think such Blood sufficient
Ransom? For as the Apostle argues excellently, Heb. 9.13.
If the Blood of Bulls and Goats sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh; How
much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit, offered
himself up to God, purge our Conscience from Dead Works, i. e. Cleanse our
Souls both from the Leprosy and Guilt of Sin? So that to eek out this
Sacrifice, by mingling with it any Vain Oblations of our own, is nothing else
but to lessen its value, as they, who light up their Candles at noonday, do
only Affront and Prejudice the splendor of the Sun. When such a Price is
already paid, for any to appear Nice and Dainty, to cry out they are not
Humbled, not Sorrowful, not Thankful Enough, and therefore neglect to make
use of it, this is nothing else, but either Peevishly, to refuse offered
Comfort; or else Proudly, to think we are able by our delay to make our selves
worthy of it.

Repentance it self is to be repented of; as being infinitely short of that
Perfection which the Law requires. Besides, upon supposition that such a
measure of Humiliation, Sorrow, Contrition, or other such like Acts, were
prerequired to capacitate and make us fit for the receiving of our Pardon; what
infinite disquiets must this needs beget in every Sinner, that is now upon the
point of his Conversion; for who shall be able to fix a just Proportion? or
assuredly tell him, that he has grieved and mourned enough? since there can be
no Proportion between our Sin and our Sorrow, and likewise our Bodies may be
wasted with Grief, and our Eyes fail us with weeping, and yet all our Fears,
prove only an Idle and a Fruitless Expense, as Cains and Judas did. There can
be therefore no better or more warrantable Advice be given unto a poor
lamenting Creature, than to bid him leave off his Works, and throw himself
immediately into the Arms of Mercy: since who so rests upon his own Endeavors,
labors in the very Fire, and undertakes a Task beyond his manage, in thinking
to Fit himself for Mercy; whereas it must be Mercy, already in some measure
apprehended, which must qualify and fit us for the receiving more.

Mar. 16.
He that believes, shall be saved; and the Command by the Apostle is, Acts 3,
19.
Repent that your sins may be blotted out. From whence it may be gathered,
that Faith and Repentance are required as Conditions to Remission; and that
Pardon of Sin is not so Absolute on Gods part, but that still something must
be done on ours, to qualify us for the receiving it. But I answer

Answ.
1. For Repentance, that is no distinct and separate condition of it self,
because it always follows Faith, and can no more be severed from it, than
Motion from Life: whence it is that the Apostles do promiscuously use one for
the other; as Peter, to those who were wrought on by his Sermon, and came to
him for Direction, he bids them Repent; Acts 2.37.
but Paul, to the Jailer who was in the same case, he commands him to Believe;
and our Savior joins them both together, in that Epitome of his first Sermon,
Repent and believe the Gospel: Mar. 1.13.
thereby intimating that one could not be without the other. -- Therefore

2. Though Faith be required as a Condition to the receiving of Christ and
Pardon by him, yet it is such a Condition, as takes nothing at all from the
Freeness of Gods Gift; no more than Emptying the Hand, and taking an Alms,
does lessen his Bounty that bestows it. For Faith is nothing else but a Naked
Hand, and has no influence at all upon Gods Gift, to make it more or less
Free; but all its influence is downwards, by applying and appropriating of that
Gift, to make it Ours. And therefore in Scripture Language, to Believe in
Christ, and to Receive Him, is the same thing: As John speaks, Joh. 1.12.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God,
even to as many as believe on his Name.

As a Medicine may be given gratis by a Physician, he may ask nothing for it,
yet except the sick-man take it, it will not cure him: So God offers Christ and
Mercy freely, but unless we Believe i. e. Receive him, he will not profit us.
And in this, and no other sense is Faith a Condition. But

3. Even in this signification, as Faith signifies not a power of Acting, but
merely a power of Accepting, yet so it is a Condition, only of Gods bestowing,
and not of Man's procuring. Thus our Savior: Joh. 6.44. verse. 35.
None can come unto me (i. e. believe on me, as he there explains) except the
Father which has sent me draw him. And again, He that has heard, and learned
of the Father, he comes unto me; so, No man can come unto me, verse. 45.
except it were given to him of my Father. All which places show, that Faith,
which is a coming to Christ, verse. 64.
is not wrought in any but peculiar Power and Influence of God. And
accordingly, the Apostle Paul, By Grace, says he, are ye saved, Ephesians. 2.8.
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God, i. e. That
Faith by which ye are enabled to receive Christ, is as much the Gift of God, as
Christ himself who is received by it. Therefore he prays, that they may be
strengthened by the Spirit of God, c. 3.16, 17.
in the Inner Man, that so, Christ might dwell in their Hearts by Faith:
intimating, that, without such Supernatural Assistance, they neither could nor
would Believe.

Believe and to Repent, for this presupposes a Power in the Creature to Obey,
or else the Command would be in vain.

Answ.
I answer, That Gods command does not always presuppose a Power already
existing in the Creature, but being a Word from God, it gives that Power which
was not there before. As when God said, Let there be Light, there was no
activity in that Dark Chaos, sufficient of it self to produce it, but God by
his Word at the same time created what he did command. To which Action of Gods,
the Apostle compares his bringing any to the Knowledge of Christ; 2 Cor. 4.6.
God, says he, that commanded Light to shine out of Darkness, has shone into
our Hearts, to give unto us the Knowledge of his Glory in the Face of Christ. So
in the New Testament, when our Savior commanded the Sea to be still, the Blind
to See, the Dead to Rise, etc. there was no Ability in those Creature to Obey
his Commands; but his Command, going out with Divine Authority, gave unto them
Power: so when the Ministers of the Gospel command Sinners to Believe, and to
Repent, the word goes out in the Name and in the Strength of God, and,
wherever it is effectual, it conveighs that Power, which was not there
before. And this is it, which makes Preaching necessary unto the worlds end,
because the Spirit of God does cooperate with it; as the Apostle has it, when
he commands a Minister to be Meek, and ready to Teach even those that set
themselves to oppose the Truth: if, says he, 2 Timothy 2.24.
peradventure God will give them Repentance: We Preach to, and Pray for
Sinners, only with a Peradventure; perhaps, God may work some good by us: but
if God does not work, our Words cannot, and the Sinner himself will not.

Fasting, Penance, Uneasy Postures of Prayer, and the like, which are at the
best but Bodily exercise, 1 Timothy 4.
which Profits little, because it reaches not to the Core of Sin, that lies
within. Such kind of Methods as these, do only prune and lop the Branches of
Corruption, but leave the Root entire; Men may in a needless Rigor starve
their Bodies, and all the while do nothing else but feed their Pride. My
advice rather is, to a disconsolate Sinner, that he would presently lay hold
upon his Pardon: And my grounds for this Advice are these two.

Cain cries out, Genesis 4.
that his Sin was greater than could be forgiven; the next News we hear of
him, is, That he went out from the Presence of the Lord. Thus when God summoned
the People by his Prophet Jeremy; Jer. 18.12.
to return from the Evil of their Ways, he brings them in saying, There is no
Hope; and then it presently follows, but we will walk in the Imagination of our
own Hearts. The Apostle Peter therefore exhorting those to whom he writes, to
make a Progress in Holiness, by adding one Grace to another, -- But he, says
he, who wants these things is blind, 2 Pet. 1.9.
forgetting that he was cleansed from his old sins; thereby intimating, that
as Presumption begets Confidence, so Despair begets Carelessness in Sinning. As
we read of some, who have died for fear of Death; so is it in this case, when
men dare so much wrong Gods goodness, as to imagine, that he will not make good
his Promise to them, though it runs Indefinitely, they run so far in Sin,
till at last they dare not think of Returning; which seems to have been David's
case, when he cries out, Innumerable Evils have compassed me about, mine
Iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up, they are
more than the hairs of my head, therefore my heart fails me. While he stayed
and forbore to pass the Ford which Mercy had shallowed for him, his Sins like
a Torrent, began to overwhelme him with horror and amazement.

never severs his Gifts, but compleats the work of his Redemption, by Purifying
and strengthening Grace at the same time. As he speaks by the Prophet, Ezekiel. 36.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: then he presently
adds, A new heart also will I give you, and I will put my Spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my ways, and you shall keep my Judgments and do
them. And the reason of this is clear, because when a Sinner has once received
his Pardon, he may boldly go to God and Christ, and by Prayer engage their
Power in his behalf; but till then, he is not able to do any thing; he cannot
pray in Faith, because he has no Assurance that he shall be heard; he cannot
act in Faith, because he has no Promise that he shall be assisted; but when
once he has taken, what God offers, he has a certainty of both.

But some may object, That were their Sins less, Object.
then there was some Hope; but their Sins have been so many, and so strangely
aggravated, that they must needs sit down under the sorrow, as being in an
hopeless condition.

For answer, I wish all those who make this Objection, Answ.
(as indeed none ever thinks of returning to God but he meets with this Lion in
his way) would seriously ask, whether they find themselves as Willing to
forsake their Sins, as they pretend to be sorry for them. And if they do,
then let them consider these three things:

1. The Latitude and Extent of Christ's Death; I do not mean as to the
Universality of the Persons (for I find no ground for that) but as to the
Qualifications of those for whom Christ died: And we shall find it was for
Sinners, for the Ungodly, for Enemies; Romans 5.6, 8, 10
from whence a Repenting Sinner may thus argue; If Christ died for Sinners,
then certainly he will not refuse me because I have been a Sinner: If he died
for Enemies, then sure he will not cast me off, if I am ready to lay down my
Weapons, and be reconciled unto him. This was it which comforted Paul, It is,
says he, a Faithful saying, 1 Timothy 1.15.
that Christ came to die for Sinners; among which I am chief: he confesses as
much Guilt, as could possibly stick to him, and yet takes comfort in that
general Truth, that Christ came to die for Sinners: And then proposes his own
Example, For this cause I obtained Mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might
show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe on him to life everlasting. We must take heed how we frustrate the
Grace of God, for, as the Apostle argues, If Righteousness, or Justification
had been by the Law, then had Christ died in vain: So if Sinners, who are
desirous above all things to come unto Christ, should therefore be driven out
from him, because they have been Sinners, then would Christ have died in vain.

2. Consider the Freeness and Liberality of the Invitation: There is no
condition so sad, but there is some word of Invitation or other, which
particularly concerns that condition: Prove. 9.4, 5. Isa. 55.1. Mat. 11.29. Rev.
22.17.
The Foolish and simple, in Proverbs: The Hungry and Thirsty, in Isay: The
Weary and Heavyladen, in Matthew; and, which is beyond all, Whoever will, in
the Revelations; Whoever will, let him come and drink of the Water of Life
freely. There cannot be any thing more free and more inviting than this, that
whoever will, may be sure of Well-come, I do not say, that any Man has this
will of or from himself; but this I say, that he who has a Will, has a
Warrant; and may boldly come to Christ, and claim the benefit of his Promise.
Especially since Justification depends not at all upon our Working, but upon
our Willing; as the Apostle has it, to him that works not (that is, that
brings no meritorious works along with him) but believes on him that
justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness,

Lastly, Consider the Tender and the Compassionate Nature of Christ, how he
never refused any that came unto him: And therefore Lepers, the Blind and Lame,
Publicans and Sinners had on earth most both of his Presence and Power: The
same Promises which, brought them, he has left to encourage us -- when he
says -- Every one that my Father gives me will come unto me; and He that
comes to me, Joh. 6.37.
I will in no wise cast out. He that says of himself, He came, not only to
save, but likewise, to seek that which was lost; will not be harsh to any, who
are now upon the point of returning to him. Hence we read that Peter, who
denied; Paul, who persecuted; the three thousand in the Acts, who crucified
him, were all upon their Repentance received by him. Our Savior has the same
Bowels still, and though he has changed his Place, yet he has not changed his
Nature; Heb. 4.15, 16.
-- Wherefore, in the Apostles words, since we have not an High Priest, which
cannot be touched with our infirmities: Let us come with boldness unto the
Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a time of
Need. And so much for the first Point.

Nothing is more effectual to mortify the power of In-dwelling Sin, than to
consider how Free and Absolute Gods Grace is in pardoning it. By Free here,
that I may repeat what I mentioned a little before, I do not mean Free, as
excluding Christ, in consideration of whom, God is thus Free to Pardon (as the
expressions run, 2 Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. And, Romans 3.24.
We are justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus.
And, In whom, i. e. in Christ, we have redemption through his Blood, the
forgiveness of Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace. But I mean Free,
as excluding our selves, or any thing we can do, either as a Cause procuring,
or as a Condition qualifying us for receiving this Grace. In this sense, that
the Freeness of Gods Grace, is the best way to mortify the Power of
In-dwelling Sin, will appear 1. From Instances. 2. From Reason.


1. For Instances; here is one occurres in the Text, How shall we, i. e.
Believers, who are dead to Sin, live any longer therein? i. e. In us, this
Doctrine, being rightly understood, has wrought to the killing of Sin; since
we now learn how much we are indebted to Christ, and therefore something must
be done to express our Thankfullness; which he prosecutes throughout the
following Chapter; and uses an Argument to draw them off from sinning, which at
first sight may seem Harsh and Inconsequent, but indeed is most demonstrably
efficacious: Ye shall not sin, or sin shall not have dominion over you; for
ye are not under the Law (which like Pharaohs Taskmasters, requires the whole
tale of Brick, and allows no straw) but ye are under Grace (ye now stand in
those terms with God, that he gives strength, and accepts of what you do in
proportion to that Ability which he bestows) and for this Reason Sin shall
not have dominion over you. So again the Apostle in his Epistle to the
Galatians, handling the same subject, he lays down this Position, Gal. 2.16.
That a man is not justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus
Christ: Against which he brings an Objection, But if, says he, while we seek
to be justified by Jesus Christ, we our selves also are found sinners, is
therefore Christ the Minister of sin? i. e. If we, who profess to be
justified by Christ alone, do notwithstanding sin daily, will it not thence
follow, that this Doctrine makes men careless, as if thereby they might take
occasion to sin more freely. To this the Apostle answers as he does here,
first (...), Far be it! and then he urges to the contrary his own example --
I am crucified together with Christ; Gal. 6.14.
and in another place, Far be it, that I should glory in any thing save in
the Cross of Christ, by which the World is crucified unto me, and I unto the
World. And what he affirms of himself, we find him, in another place, ascribing
unto all Believers -- of (...) -- They who are Christ's, Gal. 5.24.
i. e. who by Faith have received and are united to him; have crucified the
Flesh, (i. e. their corrupt and sinful Nature) with the Affections and Lusts,
i. e. have rooted up as it were the very Fibers and lesser particles, by which
sin was fastened and incorporated into them. And the Reason of this is clear
--

in Christ, i. e. who has rightly apprehended him, forthwith becomes a New
creature, as the Apostle argues; Christ, says he, 2 Cor. 5.15, 17
died for All i. e. Believers, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them: From whence he inferres,
Therefore if any man be in Christ be is a New Creature: i. e. he is altogether
another kind of person than he was before. What the meaning of those words New
Creature are, will best appear, by comparing two places of Scripture together:
In one place it is, Gal. 6.15.
In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision,
but a New Creature; which in another place runs, In Jesus Christ, Gal. 5.6.
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which
works by Love. From whence it appears, that, in the Apostles sense, to be a
New Creature, is nothing else, but to have a Faith working by Love, which, our
old Nature, is no more capable of, than Darkness is of Light; but as soon as
ever the Spirit of God begets Faith in the Heart of any, that Faith presently
produces Love, as Fire begets Heat, and then Love enflames and quickens to
Obedience. As the Apostle Paul found it in himself, when he says, The Love of
Christ constrains us; 2 Cor. 5.14.
since none can apprehend such an Excess and Overflow of Undeserved Love, but
must needs think himself obliged to return all Acts of Love, whereby he may
express his complacency in, and desire of a streighter Union. As the Apostle
John argues, we love him, i. e. God, because he loved us first. 1 John 4 19.
Since then our Lord Christ is pleased with nothing more, then with the
Crucifying of those Lusts, and Mortifying of those Sins for which he died, it
must needs follow from hence, that every Believer, and therein a Lover of
Christ, will find himself sensibly stirred with the Hatred of Sin, as often
as he reflects upon the death of Christ; as men use to detest and abhor the
sight of those Weapons by which their Friends were Murdered. For since every
Believer must needs know that he has no otherwise any Title to Pardon, than as
he is purified by the Blood of Christ, Heb. 9.
without the shedding of which there would have been no Remission: hence he
dares not, nay he cannot go on to live in Sin, because by so doing, he shall
add New Wounds, New Sorrows, New Marks of Dishonor to Christ, by whose
Stripes alone he must expect to be healed. Add to this, that the Spirit of
God, which, by quickening the Immortal Seed of the Word, Psalm. 51.
begets Faith, is a clean Spirit, and will not suffer Sin to cohabit with it
self, but Mortifies, Subdues and Quels it, according to that of the Apostle,
Romans 8.9.
Ye are not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit, i. e. Ye walk not after the Flesh,
but after the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of Christ dwells in you: and again,
If Christ, verse. 10.
i. e. his Spirit, be in you, the Body is dead, by reason of Sin, verse. 13.
i. e. it dies to sin: And, if by the Spirit ye mortify the deeds of the
Flesh, ye shall live: All which places imply, that it is the Spirits proper
business to Mortify Sin, there is no True Life without it. So that put all
this together; Since 1. Gods pardoning Sin for the sake of Christ, is the
highest expression of Love imaginable; 1. Joh. 4.10.
as the Apostle John cries out, Herein is Love! i. e. Love to an Hyperbole,
Love beyond any degree of comparison; not that we loved God, but that he loved
us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation of our Sins. 2. Since this
expression of Love on Gods part, cannot be embraced by Faith on ours, but it
must needs beget Love again; as the Sun beams cannot fix themselves directly
upon the Earth, but they will conveigh Warmth and Heat together with
themselves. 3. Since wherever Love is engendered, it is always Active, carrying
out the Soul with unquiet longings after Union with, and till that can be
compassed, of Likeness to the Object it loves. As the Earth no sooner conceives
Heat, by the Action of the Sun, but presently returns and reflects it back
again. Lastly, Since the Spirit of God, which dwells in a Believer, is always
actuating and blowing up this Love, and improving the strength of it,
especially in the subduing of Sin, upon this consideration, because Sin is
contrary to the Nature of God, and to the Merit of Christ; from hence it
demonstrably follows, -- that the best way to Mortify Sin, is rightly to
conceive of the Freeness of Gods Grace in pardoning it.

Justifying Faith: To think, as perhaps some careless men do, that Faith is
nothing else but a Confident Persuasion, that our Sins are pardoned for the
sake of Christ, without any other notable Effect upon us; this is, at the best,
an Ungrounded Fancy, which will in the end deceive us. From what I have said,
it may appear, that True Justifyfying Faith carries along with it these two
Inseparable Effects;

1. It pacifies the Conscience, it begets a Calm within. When a Sinner first
begins to be troubled for Sin, there must needs be a kind of Earthquake and
Tempest in the Soul; as God says of the wicked, that he has no Peace, but he
is like a troubled Sea, which cannot rest. Isa 57.19.
A wicked man is not more Eager and Impatient to commit Sin, than he is
troubled and disquieted after it, for whenever he cools and can be at leisure
to consider what he has done, he can propose nothing to himself but matter of
Anguish and Vexation; without, there is the Law complaining, and God
sentencing; within, Conscience accusing, and Sin condemning. In this Tumult
and Hurry of Thoughts, if there be but dropped into any, so much strength of
Faith, as to lay fast hold upon Gods general Pardon (like Easther catching at
the Golden Scepter, when it was stretched out to her) presently the storm is
laid, and a mavelous calm ensues. As the Apostle has it, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. I do not speak this, as if I thought that Faith did exclude all manner
of Doubting; but that it does expel Distraction. For to doubt is so much
consistent with Faith, that I take it for granted, there never was, nor
ordinarily can be, any True Faith without it. As at the Creation, Night did
precede Day, so in Conversion, Darkness and Ignorance did precede the
Enlightnings of Faith; and Doubting, like a Mist, does still attend it, because
our Faith, like our Knowledge, in this life neither is nor can be perfect, for
then it would no longer be Faith but Fruition. Yet this Doubting, which, like
an Allay, God suffers to be mixed (with the strong Wine of Faith,) need not at
all disturb our Peace of Conscience, but rather is left, as the Canaanites
were, to teach Israel to war, Jude 2.
to quicken our endeavor, and to make us diligent in the use of those means,
whereby we may be yet more confirmed and settled.

2. True Faith, as it Pacifies the Conscience, so it Purifies the Heart; Acts
15.9.
as the Apostle Peter speaks, that God did put no difference between the Jews
and Gentiles, because he purified their Hearts by Faith. Which is so
inseparable an Effect of True Faith, that though Justification be not
Sanctification, yet it is never without it; and therefore they are sometimes
put one for the other, as he that is just, (...), let him be justified still.
i. e. let him go on to be more Holy. Rev. 22.11.
And to the Corinthians -- Ye are washed, ye are Sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11.
ye are Justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.
So -- By his mercy he saved us, Tit. 3 5, 7.
by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost; That being
justified by his Grace, we should be made Heirs. Where Holiness, which is an
Effect and Fruit of Justification, is made to precede it; only to show the
Fixed and never-failing union betwixt them. Now Faith produces Holiness, not
only because it is begot by the Spirit of God, which is a Spirit of Purity;
but because it entitles us to all the Promises, which are always urged as
Motives unto Purity. Ye are clean, says our Savior to his Disciples, through
the Word i. e. of Comfort, Joh 15.3.
which I have spoken to you: and the Apostle having alleged the Promise of
God, wherein he said, 2 Cor. 7 1.
he would walk and dwell in his People; from thence he inferres, having
therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of
Flesh and Spirit. So Peter, God has given to us many Rich and Precious
Promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
that thereby we might be partakers of a divine Nature, having escaped, or fled
from that corruption which is in the world through Lust. And John telling us
that hereafter we should be like to Christ, because we should see him as he is,
i. e. in his utmost radiance and luster of Glory, -- He then, says he, that
has this Hope, 1 John 3.3.
purifies himself as he is Pure. A right Believer enters into Heaven with
Christ, and labors to live as a Citizen, not of that world he is in, but of
that to which he belongs; and prepares himself for the Reception of Glory, by
cleansing his Soul with the Infusions of Grace. Jac. 2.
Let every one then, who would pass for a Believer, follow the Apostle James
Advice, and try his Faith by his Works; for as Water savours of the Vessel, so
all our Actions have a Tincture and Relish from Faith; if that once be True and
Sincere, it influences all we do; and he that indeed believes in Christ, lives
only in and to him. But if our Faith be False and Counterfeit, then we have
crooked Ends, we presently vary our Walking according to the worlds Compass,
and lie at catch for such Gales to drive us, Rev. 3.1.
as are blown upon us by Popular Applause. In short, like the Church of Sardis,
we have a name to live, but indeed are dead. So that where we see one Unholy in
his Life, we need not to dispute, but he is an Unbeliever in his Heart, and all
the while he is so, he ought to conclude himself Unjustified. And so much for
the second Point.

a Believer must not think he has arrived unto the Truth of his Profession,
until he is Dead to Sin. What it is to be Dead to Sin, the Apostle
explains afterward, verse. 6.
when he calls it a crucifying of the old man together with Christ, that the
Body of Sin may be abolished; Col 3.6.
and in another place, a Mortifying of our Earthly members: the importance of
which Phrases amounts to this; that a Believer must keep no truce with, nor
give any Quarter to Sin; he must not only not hearken to its Motions, but
strangle them in the Birth; and labor to bring himself unto that Temper, that
he may have as little appetite to Sin, as a Dead man to do any Action of
Life. And the Reasons are,

Christ, and a true Christian; As all the parts of our Saviors life, are
written for our Example, so his Death too ought to be Ours, in Resemblance and
Imitation; we must, in the Apostle Paul's language, Romans 6.5.
be planted together into the likeness of his Death; and that is by crucifying
our Old man, i. e. by gibbeting those Lusts, which are the shame and Ignominy
of our Nature; Phil. 3.10.
Paul therefore tells us, that he labored for nothing more, than to attain
unto a Fellowship in Christ's sufferings, being made conformable to his Death:
which consists not only in suffering for him, but in dying with him, in that
Part, which is only our Clogge and Hindrance; and, as a Mudwall keeps off the
light of the Sun, so does this Flesh only stop the Entrance, and hinder
the actings of a Spiritual Life: Therefore the Apostle, Romans 6.10.
drawing a Parallel between Christ and a Believer, enforces it thus; As Christ
died and rose again, so reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed to Sin, but
alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord. So that the Death of Sin, is the
Life of the Soul; and therein a fit resemblance of a Risen Savior.

To him that overcomes, Rev. 3.21.
will I give to sit with me on my Throne: Now to Conquer, is not to fight or
skirmish a little, but to renew the combat, and pursue it, till we have got
the Enemy within our Power: So our Duel with Sin, should be ad
Internecionem, to the utter ruin and extirpation of it: Since the Price is our
Souls, which we have no way to save, but by killing this Adversary. Heb. 13.4.
The Apostle therefore exhorting the Hebrews to endure Afflictions, uses this
as a Motive, Ye have not as yet resisted unto blood, fighting against Sin. As
if he had said, Ye have as yet done just nothing, for this Warfare against
Son, is never to be ended, but with the Death and Destruction of one of the
Combatants.

Sin will still be in us. Romans 7.20.
So the Apostle Paul found, when he complains, that it is no longer I which do
these things, but Sin which dwells in me: And then presently cries out in
great passion, like a man half distracted, who shall deliver me from this Body
of Sin and of Death? verse. 24.
meaning thereby those Relics of Original Corruption, which like a Fatal
Poison; will not in this life be so totally emptied out of the Soul, but still
some drops will remain behind, to embitter our Lives, and to exercise our
Graces, The most we can do, will be to disarm this Enemy, for we cannot (...)
him; to pull him from the Throne, since we cannot cast him out of the House.
For it always lies within, like Leaven, spreading its infection; or like Fire;
if not watched, enflaming our whole man, being it self first inflamed of Hell.
Sin may lie quiet in the Soil, like sparks raked up in Ashes, which, upon the
Addition of new Fuel, only rages the more There is says Job, Hope of a
Tree, Job. 14.7.
when it is cut down, yet if the Root abide in the Earth, by the Sent of Water
it may flourish and spring afreshe, so there is fear of Sin, because the
(...) of the ^^^^ter abides in us, and is always restless and importunate in
its Actings. As a Cloud, however Thin and Empty at first, yet if there be a
rough Wind to scatter it, it soon over spreads the whole Face of Heaven; so
Sin in the Soul, has always a Furious and Eager Spirit to blow it up, which
should make us careful to throw out the evil Firment least it should sour the
whole Mass, and by its corrupt quality, infect whatever it mixeth with.

modum peccandi, to regulate our vile Actions, and to preserve a mean in
sinning, this would not at all be hard; such a measure is atteinable by mere
Morality: The Heathen, whose Lives we read of, had many of them this degree in
great Perfection; whose best virtues were only vitia temperata, well mingled
and Allayed Vices. Their light, how glorious and great soever it seems, was
nothing else but Colored Darkness; and their best Heats, only rebuted cold;
sufficient to satisfy the world, and to get Applause with Men; but as for
Inward Purity, and Heart-Mortification, that was a thing they never dreamt of;
this was a task reserved for our Saviors followers. He has not minced the
matter, when he tells us, that the way to Heaven is a Straight and (...), i. e.
a squeezed, pressed and Narrowed way; so pent up, Mat. 7.
and very straight, that no Wind of Ambition, no Tumor of Pride, no
running-Sore of Lust will enter there; he tells us plainly, that we may take
our choice, either cut off our Hands, i. e. abridg our selves of our most
Useful and Profitable Sins, or else into Hell fire; it will certainly be
very dreadful to endure the one, and it must needs be painful to do the
other. Hence Fear and Trembling. Watchfullness and Solicitude are so often
called for; we must be always upon our Guard, because ever in a fighting
posture, which is a very uneasy service. And these being the Terms, upon
which we are to follow Christ; it is very sad to consider, what a Liberty, both
in Life and Language, even Professors of Religion do take, as if they had a
mind to try, how near they could come to Sin, without actual Sinning. We use
to be afraid of the shadow of a Lion; and in a bodily distemper, none willingly
would venture upon a little Poison, least by accident it should prove Mortal.
Why we should not be as careful to avoid those Sins, which none but fools
count Little, is a Question we cannot assoil, if we either value our Souls, or
prize our Peace with God, with whom to break in little things, is great
Presumption. It will be to no purpose to escape greater Corruption, if less may
be sufficient to damn us. Romans 6.14.
One Chain ties the Slave as fast to his Oar, as if he had a thousand; so does
one Lust bind up the Sinner unto Satan's service; since all the while it reigns,
it proclaims that Sin is our Master.

Believers to set upon this Duty; as for others, they have no skill in it; it
is a peculiar Task for such, as have the Life of Faith; and this they ought so
much the more earnestly be excited to, in that, all the while they allow
themselves in any one Sin, they are Estranged from the Life of God; 1 John
1.7.
if we expect to have fellowship with him, we must walk in the Light, as he is
in the Light: As Darkness, is nothing else but the Absence of the Suns Light;
so Sin, which the Apostle calls Spiritual Darkness, is nothing else but the
Absence of the Light of Gods Countenance, which while it shines upon the soul,
it preserves it not only from Discomfort, but likewise from Dangerous
stumblings. It is indeed very possible, for a True Believer, through
heedlesness and inadvertency, to fall into some Gross Sins, as David,
Hezekiah and Peter did, but yet as while they lie in them, their condition
seems little to differ from that of Reprobates; so when they begin to recover
out of them, we may learn from the Practice of those forementioned Saints, that
their Peace with God, and Assurance of his Favor is not recovered without
great Expense of Tears and Sorrow. Every Sin therefore is to be mortified, if
for no other respect, yet for this, in that any one allowed and countenanced in
the Soul, will cast a cloud upon all our Graces, and hinder us for the time
from discerning the Truth and Sincerity of any. As we therefore prize our own
Peace, and Sense of Communion with God, so must we bestirre our selves, to keep
every Corruption from breaking out and prevailing. For the effecting of which,
the observing of these Rules will be very necessary.

1. Distinguish carefully between the Natural and the Sinful Desires of the
Soul. There are some Desires, viz. of Food, of Rest, of Raiment, etc. which as
they are Natural, so they are Innocent too; Our Savior himself was not
without them, the Apostle says, Heb. 4.15.
He was tempted in all things as we are, i. e. with Hunger, with Cold and
Nakedness, yet without Sin. The Body, as it is a creature of God, is good and
must be provided for; and therefore the Mortification of the Body, consists
not, in denying it the Necessaries of Life, but in Abridging it of its
Irregular and Sensual Appetites. 1 Timothy 6.8.
Having Food and Raiment, says the Apostle, let us be therewith content: from
whence it follows, that either through Want, to be Destitute; or through Will,
to deprive our selves of Food and Raiment, is our Misery, and not our
Mortification. They that are in the Flesh cannot please God: Romans 8.8.
The meaning is not, they that are in the Body, cannot please God; for so it is
our duty to please him; but, they that walk in the Vanity and Sensuality of
their Fleshly Mind, cannot please God: Such as commit those Actions that the
Apostle has branded with the Name of Works of the Flesh; as, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Gal. 5.22.
Drunkenness, etc. these cannot please God, because they walk in Ways directly
contrary to the Holiness and Spirituality of his Commands. But where the
Appetite is hedged in and bounded within those limits, that God has appointed,
there to come Eating and Drinking, as our Savior did, may more redound to the
Glory of God, in our thankful Using of his Bounty, than any Forced and
uncommanded Abstinence. So that all those Ways of Mortification, which are now
prescribed in the Church of Rome, and too much doted on by men that love to be
talked on for their Sanctity, are but the Old, Needless and Sinful Methods of
the Pharisees, revived with greater Rigor and Austerity; which consist, as the
Apostle has it, (...), Col. 2.23.
in Unmercifullness to, and not sparing of, the Body; and seem to have a Face
of Wisdom and True Holiness, but indeed are mere Folly; as neither reaching to
(pull out the Core of Sin, which lies within; nor being able to keep the
practisers of them from Exchanging a Carnal Lust for Spiritual Pride: and so
instead of right subduing the Body, they only swell and puff up the Soul.

2. Pray for the Spirit of Christ; without which we shall be too Weak to set
upon and conquer this Inbred Enemy. Whatever is born of the Flesh, is Flesh,
i. e. both Prall and Sinful: and Flesh will never be able to subdue Flesh; the
Spirit, which always acts in Believers, must be set awork about it. Romans 8.13.
If by the Spirit, ye mortify the deeds of the Flesh, faith the Apostle, ye
shall live, i. e. ye shall live indeed, for it is this Spirit alone that
quickens. And whoever thinks of mortifying his Corruptions, without this
supernatural Assistance, begins a Combat wherein he is sure to be foiled;
since not only his own Nature, but likewise the Powers of Hell are violently
bent against him; and how shall he escape the Malice and Wickedness of those
Evil spirits; unless the Spirit of God, which will always reside where his
presence is solicited, does secure the soul and give us strength for the
Victory.

Lastly, Labor for the Assurance of the Pardon of your Past Sins: As he that
runs a Race, must first put off his Fetters; so whoever engages against the
Violence of his Lusts, must first be satisfied, that his past offenses are
forgiven; or else the sense of Sin unpardoned will lie, like a Weight upon
him, and instead of exciting him to strive against it, betray him to its
Assaults.

For the Attaining of this, besides what the Spirit of God may immediately
work, (which case falls not under any Rule, since the Spirit blows where and
when it pleases) there is no Method can be given better, than that which I
have hitherto been insisting on, and that is to cast our selves upon Gods
Free Grace in Christ; which who so does, is as certain never to miscarry, as
the Word of God, and the Experience of all the Saints now Triumphing in Heaven,
can make him.

FINIS.

