A DEFENSE OF THE ANTIDOTE AGAINST Mr. Baxter's Palliated Cure of Church
Divisions WHEREIN Mr. Baxter's Contradictions and Inconsistences, with the
Truth, and with Himself, are clearly discovered: And the great question about
Conformity briefly stated, In a Letter to Mr. Richard Baxter.

By Edward Bagshaw.

How long do ye halt between two Opinions,

1 Kings 18.21. Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a Man
full of Talk be justified?

Job 11.2. Thou can not bear them which are evil, and thou have tried them
which boast themselves to be Apostles, and are not, and have sound them Liars.

Rev. 2.2. Printed in the Year 1671.

TO Mr. RICHARD BAXTER, Health, Peace, and a Sound Mind.
SIR,
I Perceive you take it for granted (without any particular enquiring from my
self about it) that I wrote those just and weighty exceptions, which were
lately published against your (Pretended and Palliated) Cure of Church
Divisions; and notwithstanding any necessary Sharpness which I was forced to
use in that seasonable Antidote, yet I find you still are pleased to call me
Brother, which is a Civility I should have thanked you for, had the rest of
your style been answerable to the mildness of that expression; but since you
take that Unbecoming liberty, as to revile when you should repent, and instead
of Confessing and Forsaking your Errors, charge me with crimes, which I bless
God I dare not allow in my Words, (much less in my Writings which are more
deliberate.) This makes me suspect that your Pretense of Friendship, and
allowing me the title of Brother, was only done with the same design, that Joab
had when he thus saluted Amaza, to make the Sword in your right Hand to be the
less observed, and my wound thereby the more deadly and unavoidable; so that
till my Truth and Innocence be cleared, and your Repentance (for wronging me in
both) manifested, it will be a Favor if you look upon me as one, who neither
desires, nor (if you believe what your self has writ) Deserves, any such
expressions of your familiarity.

To show how much you are for the Middle-way (tha is in other words, neither to
be Hot nor Cold, or neither to be altogether for Truth nor altogether for
Error, but to hang Laodicea like, in a Lukewarm, and Neutral indifference
between both) you have taken pains to find out a Middle name, between a Mistake
and a Lie, which you wittily call an untruth; and this you are pleased to
charge upon me, as a very soft word, and one that I would not be offended with:
But Sir, this frothy complement might have been spared, for I hope you are not
to learn that every untruth is a lie (John 1.62.2.2) and you needed not have
been so scrupulous of speaking your thoughts in Scripture language; but this I
ought not to wonder at, since you are not afraid to dethrone the Scripture from
being a Perfect Rule, Part 1. p. 99, 100, 101.
and therefore would manifest by this Invention, that you thought it not
sufficient to teach us the right way of speaking, and so was not a Perfect Rule
of good manners.

But leaving your Phrase, I rather choose to speak unto the Thing you mean by
it, and whether I have been so guilty as to wrong you, either by a Mistake, or
a Lie, or an Untruth, or whatsoever fine word else you please to use, remains
now to be examined, in this brief review and defense of some of the principal
Exceptions, that I have already urged against you, upon the clearing of which,
the whole cause, that is in controversy between us, will depend.

My first Exception was, That the whole design of your Book was to make your
Brethren (that have not your latitude, and cannot reach the subtilty of your
Distinctions) Odious. This you tell me, is a Fundamental Untruth, which
animates all the rest for it was not your Design at all: Truly Sir, I am so
unwilling to charge either you, or any else, with more then. I have grounds to
think is justly your due, that I would gladly take your word in this matter,
and so pass it over; but I hope you will pardomme if I cannot; because, First,
Many hundreds of sober, impartial, and unbiassed persons, have carefully read
your Book, as well as my self, and they all make the same judgment of it; and I
think in reason, that is to be esteemed the design of a Book, whatever was the
secret and unknown intention of the Writer, which the words themselves, and the
manner of writing (without any streining) do offer unto every serious and
inquisitive Reader: Secondly, This use has already been made of your Book, to
render such as cannot Conform much more criminal then before, in that your Name
and Credit is urged against them; and this not only in discourse by many, but
by a late Author in Print, who quotes your Book to justify his Treatise
against Toleration. Thirdly, in your very next Paragraph, (and likewise
elsewhere in this last Book) Page 2. p. 7. part 1. p. 60, 61.
You call Separation a crying Sin, nay the crying sin; and you scruple not to
insinuate that all the judgments, which in this Nation we do either feel or
fear, were to be changed upon separation as the principal procuring cause. Pray
Sir, consider this, and then tell me, what can make your Brethren more Odious,
and more expose them to the peoples fury, and to the Rulers Revenge, then thus
to make them the Causes of the Nations Calamity: If in separating from the
public Forms of Worship (which we therefore account false, because God has
not commanded them) our sin is so great, that the place where we live cannot be
held Innocent, but must suffer from the Hand of God for our sakes, we are
certainly a people who deserve to be hated of all, and the Confiscations,
Imprisonments and Deaths, which some of us have already felt (and possibly may
yet remain in greater extremity to be our portion) are no longer to be bewailed
and grieved for as Persecutions of the Innocent, but rather to be rejoiced and
gloried in, as due punishments of Noxious Offenders; so that either you must
retract and blot such passages out of your Book (and thereby testify your
Repentance of them) or we are confident both God and the World will justify
us, if we still retain our Opinion of the ill meant and unworthy design of your
Book against us.

Your next attempt is to free your self from being looked upon as an Earnest
and Active Instrument in the late War; I mean (since you press me to speak
plainly) in the Parliament's War against the King: I said, It became not you to
mention with so much Bitterness what was then done, Par. 2. p. 10, 11. p. 1. p.
26, 27.
because you were as guilty of stirring up and fomenting that war, as any one
whatsoever: This you absolutely deny, and boast much of your Loyalty, and seem
to be greatly offended that such a thing should be charged upon you, and I am
again reproached with Untruth for it: Sir, I am not willing to take up former
matters, nor do I at all delight to expose you union the scorn of your enemies,
and to the pity of your friends, but I cannot help it; you have confidently
made the challenge, and will not be beholding to an act of Indemnity, but stand
upon your Innocence, and therefore you must endure what follows. I must confess
your bold and resolute disclaiming any Activeness in that war, did so much
stagger me, that I began to question the truth of all the Reports that I had
heard; but your own books (which I have since read) do so fully prove my
charge, that nothing but your hopes that all is forgotten as well as pardoned,
which is past, could ever embolden you to so peremptory denial? What Sir, were
not you as Active in that War as any? whcn, in your Holy Commonwealth p. 486.
you tell us, That, when you engaged in the Parliaments war against the King,
You thought it the greatest outward service that ever you performed to God;
And, That you encouraged many thousands to it. And, that, Though many things
fell out otherwise then you expected, yet you were so far from repenting of
what you had done, that did the same circumstances occur, you would do it
again, or else you should be guilty of Treason or Disloyalty against the
Sovereign power of the Land, and of persidiousness to the Commonwealth, etc.

Can you read Sir these passages, and still deny, that with your utmost
industry you did promote the War? or can you think you dealt uprightly in
blaming those, who did much less then you, though they have since suffered
more? and because you declaim so much against the changes which followed upon
the War, and ask me, (who had nothing at all to do with it) many malicious and
ensnaring questions about them. This I must tell you does as little become you
as the other; for how can you, with any appearance of integrity, reproach
others for Changing the Government, when, (in your writings) you do highly
approve of that, which was the worst part of the Change, the setting up of
Cromwell to be Protector? what is this else but to cry out loudly against the
Treason, and yet to hugg and to embrace the Traitor? For you greatly commend
that absurd tool, The Humble Petition and Advice, (which was Cromwells
instrument of Government) And you say of it Holy Commonwealth, pa. 257, 258.
A more excellent Law has not been made for the happiness of England,
concerning Parliaments, at least since the Reformation, And of Cromwell himself
(though he dyed in his sinful usurpation, without manifesting any Repentance)
you give this Saint-like Character, in your Preface to the Army, The late
Protector did prudently, Piously, faithfully ( to his immortal honor, how ill
soever you used him) exercise the Government. Sir, could you say all this of
him then, and do you think your most partial friends can justify you now,
when you compare him to the Tyrant Maximus, and make him in effect to be
nothing else but a page 374. last book part 2. page 140, 141.
Murderous and a Bloody Usurper? which although it may (in the mouth of another
who never flattered him) be perhaps received as his True Character, yet it
became not you (who had so officiously before brought your Odours to embalm his
memory) thus to bespatter and disgrace him.

As for your Flattery to his Son, which I also charged you with, and you (with
a strange, but not to your self unusual, boldness) do deny, what can be more
apparent? In your Disputations about Church Government.

You thus address your self to him, I observe that the Nation generally
rejoices in your peaceable entrance upon the Government, and many are
persuaded you have been kept from blood in our late wars, that God might make
you a healer of our breaeches, and employ you in the Temple-work, which David
himself, though he earnestly desired it, might not be honored with: And then
you advise him to cherish Union among his own Pastors; for This, say you, would
be the way to lift him up highest in the esteem and love of all his people, and
make them see, that he was appointed of God to be a Healer and a Restorer, and
to glory in him, and to bless God for him, as the instrument of our chiefest
peace; you also tell him in the Dedication of your Key to Catholics, that you
are one who bless God for him, and who rejoice in the present happiness of
England, and concur with the common hopes of yet greater Blessings under his
Government, which there you pray for, and so subscribe your self his Faithful
Subject.

Now Sir, If you please, find out a Middle-word between Falsehood and Flattery,
and think to excuse your self by that, while I take leave to say, that such
kind of Language, (to one who in no sense could be accounted a lawful
Governor) does too rankly savor of both: Go if you please, and boast your
self of your present Loyalty, and seem to take it ill as you pretend to do,
Part 1. page 26, 27
if any think otherwise of you, but still remember, that even you who now (in
that respect) so much boast and exalt your self above your Brethren) telling
them, that Cure page 257. Commonwealth p. 483, 484.
God in justice has put them down) did also say (when you thought you might do
it safely) That you were satisfied in two things, First, That [ i] God in
Justice had put down the former Governors (meaning the King and his Party) for
their Persecution and scorning of Piety. Secondly, That you thought your self
bound to submit unto the present Government (which was then in the hands of
Rich. Cromwell) as set over us by God, and that you would obey for conscience
sake, and behave your self as a Loyal Subject toward them. Sir, you that
professed your self to be so Loyal then, cannot in reason be supposed to be
conscienciously Loyal now, and the least you can expect, is neither to be
believed nor trusted.

I have done, Sir, with my Defense of this Exception, and now if you please,
charge me with Untruth; for affirming, You were as active as any, in the late
War; and deny if you can, the consequence I gathered from thence; that, It
became not you to blame the effects; who gave such Rise and Encouragement to
the Cause: I mean, unless you repent of the Cause; which it is evident, you
have not yet done; and if I may not be believed in this Opinion of you, I doubt
not but the Bishop of Worcester will; who, for this very thing did formerly
accuse you of Rebellion Bish. of Worcest. Letter.
From which charge, he that Animad versions on Bishop of Worc. Letter.
defended you then, leaves you to acquit your self now as well as you can. And
now, Sir, for a close of this, I should ask your pardon, for thus venturing to
break the Act of Oblivion, but your Importunity did force me to it; and I could
not otherwise clear my self from your slanderous Imputation of Falsehood, but by
bringing Truth to light, and by stripping you of your Disguise (under which,
for so many years you have been masked and covered) leave you naked and
defenseless to the judgment and censure of every Impartial and Unprejudiced
Reader; and if any thing is written here, which you will be ashamed to read,
and afraid to give an answer to, pray thank your self, who would not be quiet,
nor let your Brethren alone, till you were thus brought forth to an open
Discovery.

Your mentioning, with so much scorn, the Doctrine of the Temporal Reign of
Christ, which you, in derision, call the Part 2. p. 55.59.4.110.
Fifth-Monarchy-way, and your endeavoring to expose all that you think favor
that Opinion, (and in particular Mr. Brown) is another Evidence, that you dare
not look any Truth in the face, which brings present danger with it; no, though
formerly you were as earnest, and open an Asserter of it, as any: For not many
years ago you told us, that Holy Commonwealth, p. 221, 222.
you were perfectly Neutral, as to the point of Christ's Visible and Personal
Reign upon Earth, and you did not know which way your Judgment did most
incline; But the Theocrotical Policy, or Divine Commonwealth ( which is the
unquestionable Reign of Christ upon Earth.) This, all Christians are agreed,
may justly be sought, and the Temporal dignity of the Saints, which would
undoubtedly much bless the World. Sir, I have been very curious to enquire
into the Doctrine of the Fifth Monarchy; and most of my Converse is with those
that do in Faith expect, and in Pationce wait for such a time; and I never knew
any of them (however they are misrepresented) carry the Notion farther than
you have already done. It will become you therefore to enquire, what is your
real ground, why such, who still retain those Principles which you once laid
down, should now be mentioned by you, with so much scorn and slighting: Till
you have found out and declared a better Reason, pray give me leave to think
this is the Chief; because you dare not own any Hazardous and Persecuted Truth;
and you find it far easier (in your Notional Divinity) to recant all that
formerly you were convinced of, than to bring your heart unto a willingness for
Martyrdom; and this alone, I take likewise to be the true Cause, why so
weakly, and so unlike a Minister of the Gospel, you inveigh against Page 73,
74, 75. part. 2
Sufferings; For you have never yet experienced either the Comfort or the
Cleansing of them; and therefore venture rashly to speak evil of what you know
not, and which I fear you have neither Courage nor Integrity enough to venture
the Trial of. I speak it to your shame, since the Scripture often recommends
Afflictions as the necessary Exercise of our Faith, and the chief matter of our
Christian Joy and Triumph.

But how ill soever you had used the Living, methinks you should have spared
the Dead, and not disturbed the dust of my Fellow-Prisoner Mr. Powel, Part 2 p.
60.74.80.
by reproaching his memory with so abusive and disgraceful a mention of him, as
if he were a False Prophet, and acted by a deluding spirit: For you lay to his
charge, that many years ago, he prophesied of some things, which we do not yet
see fulfilled: But, First, may not a Good man, nay a true Prophet, be sometimes
mistaken? Was not Samuel so, when he took Eliah to be the Lords Anointed; was
not Nathan deceived, when he encouraged David to build the Temple? and did ever
any yet suspect them to be False Prophets for that? Secondly, may not many
Prophets truly foretell things to come, and yet those things be a long time
suspended and delayed because of the sins of a people? Is not this condition to
be understood in most Scripture Prophecies, which we find expressed in Zech. 6
15. And this shall come to pass, if you will diligently obey the voice of the
Lord your God? This and much more may be said in defense of that diligent and
Faithful Servant of the Lord, whom I knew to be truly Religious and Worthy, and
therefore thought it my duty to vindicate him from your Unchristian Calumny.
And pardon me Sir, if I put you in mind (for you seem to have forgot) how in
this the Lord favored him, in that after much exercise of Affliction, he was
taken away in Peace, and Buried in Honor; when I fear such as you will be
suffered to our live your own Fame, and your Memory shall dye before you. For
God will resist the proud, and such as exalt themselves shall be Abased and
Humbled; Which Prophecy is true, whatever Mr. Powels was.

I am sorry that I am forced to speak thus plainly, but the Pride of your
heart, discovered by your Writings, is so apparent, that it cannot but be Known
and Read of all men; to go no farther for instances then your last book; what
needed you have told the World in Print, That Part 1 page 40.
You chose once an Easter Day to communicate in a very populous Church in
London; purposely that it might be the farther known: Is not this like the
Hypocrites, to blow a Trumpet before you, and to do your actions that you may
be seen of men? what other end could you have, in doing that so publicly then
or in declaring it now, but a vainglorious Hope, that doubting and unsatisfied
Christians might look upon your Example, as their Pole Star, and accordingly
direct their motions? I look upon it also as a strange piece of Boasting, when
you tell us that men of all judgments have written against you: As to reckon
them up in your own words part 1. page 26.
some Infidells, diverse Quakers, Papists, Antinomians, some Arminians, some
Anti-Arminians, Anabaptists, Seperatists, Levellers, Diocesans, etc. What Sir,
is it possible that men of these several persuasions, which you have expressed,
have all written against you, and does there remain yet a greater number
concealed in the gulf of a bottomless etc.? Is it indeed true, that you offend
all, and please none? and can you glory that you are counted the Ismael of the
Age? Pray Sir remember what became of him; He was cast out of Abraham's house,
that is, out of the Church of God, for Scorning, and when you do a little
better consider of it, that those worthily famous and honored men Mr.
Rhotorford, Mr. Burges, Mr. Blake, Mr. Crandon (besides some living of equal
repute for learning and piety) have all written against you, and solemnly
warned others to beware of your books (as containing much leaven of false and
dangerous Doctrine in them) did I say, You seriously consider this, you would
be grieved for grieving them, and not put it in among your Triumphs, that you
had provoked so many able and Worthy Pens to oppose and antidote the infection
of your Writings: To conclude this Point (for it is a sore place, and I would
not handle it so roughly, but in order to healing) when I said in one of my
exceptions, that I feared you were not sound in the Doctrine of Justification
by Faith alone, without works; instead of answering directly and satisfying my
scruple (which you might have done in few words) you referr me to Five part ^
p. 127.
or more Treatises, which you say you have written upon that Subject: and in
another place part 2. p. 18.
you tell me that you have written the better part of above Fifty Books against
the Profane, the Jews, and the Mahumedans. (I will not enquire to what purpose,
for I am very confident none of those did ever read what you have written
against them.) But add to these your several other Treatises, as about
Baptism, Confirmation, Church Government, Commonwealth, etc. Your Books will in
all amount to as many Volumes as Tostatus writ, concerning whom, (and all such
kind of Writers) you once gave this true Character, (though since you have most
unhappily forgotten it,) Premonition to the Saints rest
I cannot but account all those Tostatus's impudently proud, who think the
world should read no Bodies Works but theirs. Pray Sir, read this passage
again, and compare it with what you have already writ, (and what as I hear you
do yet farther intend to write;) and then tell me in earnest what you think of
your self; for here, according to your own Words, part 2. page, 25.
Evidence must decide the Case.

I think Sir, I may say to you with every whit as much truth and candor, what
you dis-ingeniously reply upon me, part 2. page 91.
I have no mind to make you odious, nor to open your sin to others; but you
have opened it to the world, and I must open it to you, if possibly you may
repent: and therefore having said this to your self, (that by setting before
you some few of your many failings, you might be Humbled, and come to a more
sober understanding of your self and way.) I come now to speak something, and
that very briefly, to the Question about Conformity, which has occasioned all
this heat betwixt us: and in the handling of this, I think I may also say, as
you sometimes did Premonition to the Saints rest.
I approve not Tautologies, nor a tedious style, nor the heaping up of useless
matter and words; which Rule in writing, though you forget to observe, yet I
shall keep close to; for Truth needs not many words to defend it.

In the stating of this Question, you do your self grant so much, that you
scarce leave any thing, to be either disputed or denied by those whom you
pretend with so much vehemence to oppose; For,

First, you grant part 1. p. 8.9, and 74, 75.
that we are not to have Communion with a Diocesan Church, as such, and that we
are not to own Diocesan Bishops.

Secondly, You allow that we are not to have Communion with Persecutors, nor
with such as have consented to our Silencing,

Thirdly, You affirm that we are not to communicate with Parish Churches only,
nor with all of them, and particularly, not with such whose Pastors are,
through insufficiency, Heresy, and Impiety, Intolerable. And this you tell us,
was your own Practice, For, you say part 1. p. 36.
you resolved, if you lived where was an intolerable Minister, you would not
hear him, nor come near him, so as to encourage him in his undertaking of that
Sacred Office.

All this, and more of this nature (which you assert) being granted, I scarce
see what it is that you contend for, or so earnestly declaim against; since
from these Grounds Separation at this day may easily be justified: For,

First, every Parish Church is a Part of the Diocesan; and if a Diocesan
Church, as such, is not to be communicated with, then a Parish Church, as such,
is to be separated from; since there is the same Reason of the Parts as of the
Whole: And you must find out a new Logic, before you can prove, that if the
Whole be Corrupt, any of the Parts are clean and fit for our Communion.

Secondly, a Parish Minister is (in that station and office) but a Servant of
the Diocesan Bishop, and therefore rightly called a Curate, and if we may not
own, (as you grant) the Bishop, I think it will necessarily follow that his
Substitute and Curate has no reason to expect any Respect from us. We do not
use, in other cases, to Regard the Man, when we think it a duty to despise the
Master.

Thirdly, If Persecutors are not to be communicated with, nor such as have
consented to our Silencing, which you also allow, (though I could wish you had
proved it better then by the obscure and disputable Example of Martin) part 1.
p. 76,
then I think very few, if any of the Parish Ministers, but must even upon this
account also be separated from; since either by Open Consent, or else by an
Undoing and Pernicious silence, they have all made themselves guilty of that
grievous sin: There being but little difference in the sight of God, between
the persecuting of Brethren ourselves; and (by not sharply reproving it,)
seeming to approve of it in others.

Lastly, admitting there are some Worthy and able men among the Parish
Ministers (which for my own part, I believe never a whit the more because you
affirm it,) yet this we must say, that their sin is great in submitting to so
undue a way of entering into the Ministry; and therefore we both forbear our
selves, and warn all others not to hear them, because we cannot think our Lord
Christ ever sent such to Preach in his Name, who directly and by a solemn Oath
have Renounced their Christian liberty, under pretense of Preaching Christ; and
are indeed nothing else (as to the whole discharge and exercise of their
Office) but Servants of men, which we have already fully learned from the
Apostles, is altogether inconsistent with being Servants of Christ, Galatians
1.10. 1 Corin. 7.23. and therefore as such we cannot own them.

For the question is not (as you weakly and insignificantly word it.) Whither
part 1. p. 78.
a Defective, Faulty, True Church may ordinarily ( or at least sometimes he
joined with; but whither a defective faulty imposing Church is not to be
separated from; This we affirm; Because, First, we know not how else to
preserve our Christian Liberty (which it is an indispensible duty to maintain)
but by separating from those who would unduly take it from us: Secondly, Being
present where those things are used in the Worship of God, which God has not
commanded, This would involve us in the guilt and contagion of them; nor do we
believe (however we have your Word for the contrary) the Lord will otherwise
interpret it, since he has so strictly charged us, To keep far from a false
matter; and not to partake in other men's sins: Lastly, whatever pretenses may
be used (as it is easy to write Declamations) for the keeping of Peace, yet
(to speak strictly and so as to satisfy conscience) Peace is but ill bought,
if we must purchase it at so dear a rate, as with the loss of Truth: And this
Truth concerning the sole Sovereign power of our Lord Christ, in appointing all
matters of his Worship (He being the Lord of his House, and Faithful in all
things as Moses, Heb. 5.) this is a point so necessary to be maintained, and so
utterly inconsistent with the supposing that any thing is to be Obtruded, which
he has not Commanded, that we dare not allow our selves in the practice of any
thing, which may prejudice that Fundamental: And we judge we have sufficient
warrant from what the Apostles did in a like case, Acts 15.24. For if they
reproved such as Preached up Circumcision, and other Legal Ceremonies, at that
day, when as the Apostles had given them no such Commandment; saying of them,
that they subverted (or spoiled) the souls of the Disciples; then may we affirm
the like of those now, who, in things equally indefensible do act with every
whit as little authority, from whom upon that very account, we think it our
duty to separate.

I am not ignorant that you (after many others, who have formerly much better
pleaded this cause) do insist upon two Arguments by which you labor to defend
your irregular way of Communion.

The first is, that in the Primitive Churches there were many Corruptions,
which the Apostle writes against, but does not advise any, because of them, to
separate: But I answer, that in this Instance^ as well as in your State, you do
wholly (I will not say ignorantly) mistake the Question: For it is not
Corruption or Error, barely considered as such, that we account to be a
sufficient ground of Separation; but the imposing of that error with an high
hand, and making a submission to it (at least in our practice and outward
observance) the very condition of Communion, this, we say, is a thing which
necessitates us to make a Separation, and that for the Reasons I have already
urged; To which I will add only this, that, however the presenting our Bodies
at a Worship which we do not inwardly approve of, may render us excusable and
justify us among men, yet we are sure it will not in the sight of God, who
hates hypocrisy in his service, and values every offering by the heart of him
that brings it.

I might content my self with urging thus much, but because the Corruptions
that were in the first Churches, are often pleaded in this Case, I will
therefore examine the argument drawn from them a little farther, and First,
this is clear in Scripture, that our Lord Christ (who was himself Holy and
separated from sinners) did never Call nor design his Church to be an impure
mixed body of Holy and Unholy, without any distinction blended and hudled up
together; but we have it frequently mentioned in Scripture, that he called his
people out of the world, to be an Holy separate people; an habitation, and
house for himself by his spirit to dwell in; with many expressions to the same
purpose, whereupon every one who names the Name of Christ, is solemnly
commanded to depart from all unrighteousness. Secondly, though through the
Corruption of men, and negligence of Church Officers (for which they are blamed
Rev. 2.14.20.) many Ungodly Profane Formalists and Hypocrites, did (and daily
do) creep in, yet there is a strict command given to put such out of the
Church 1 Cor. 5. 2 These. 3, Rev. 2. And all are commanded to turn aside from
them, 2 Timothy 3, 5. Romans 16.17. which commands do strongly and convincingly
imply, that if such are to be with drawn from, then if any Church who is
admonished concerning them, shall still maintain, abet and countenance such;
that Church also is thereby defiled, and become unfit to be communicated with:
For a little leaven leavens a whole lump, 2 Cor. 5.7, and one sinner destroys
much good, Eccl. 9.18. and many are defiled by the contagion of one, Heb.
12.15. All which places show, that a Church, which after admonition and
discovery of Offenders, will not use her authority in casting them out, does
partake of their sins, and becomes as guilty as they, and therein as unworthy
of Communion, Lastly, which will fully answer the scruple, it is to be
considered, that the Primitive Churches were settled by the Apostles, and
constituted according to the divine pattern, having all the Ordinances of
Christ, and true Officers, rightly established amongst them; so that though
many scandalous sins did break out, and were visible among some of the Members,
yet a power was still retained in each Church for the keeping themselves pure,
by casting out Offenders; whereby they were kept to the Institution and Orders
of Christ, without any universal Innovation or degenerating in those Essentials
of Order as well as Doctrine, which they fell into in the ages after; and when
Anti-Christianism (which was then working) did manifestly show it self not only
in rejecting the Truth, 2 These. 2. but in imposing error, Rev. 13.16.17. then
was Separation necessary to be made; which is implied in measuring, (as it were
circumscribing and enclosing) the Altar-Worshippers, and casting out the
others. Rev. 11.1.2, and likewise in the sealed ones that had a mark upon their
Foreheads; whereby is meant some outward note of distinction from Antichrists
Followers, Rev. 7.1.2. and 14.1. This necessity of Separation which began then,
continues still; since our Churches, though Reformed from Popery* (that is,
from Anti-Christianisme) in some points, yet are not restored unto the
Primitive pattern and purity: so that more may be said for separation now (when
whole Churches are out of Order and Corrupt) then could be at that time, when
Corruption had infected only some particular members, for it is not, as I said
before, Corruption barely, no nor Imposition barely, that is a sufficient
ground for any to separate (for where some lesser errors are held but not
imposed, or where only Necessary things are imposed, we shall not forbear
Communion) but when Error is once imposed, and by a strong hand forcibly
maintained, (notwithstanding all admonitions and endeavors of Reformation)
here we must separate or consent to sin, which is our present case; and till
you draw your Parallel exact, and suit it in all respects to what it was
before, your instances, from the practice of former times, are but impertinent
and unconcluding.

The second Argument that you do with much vehemence press, is the example of
the Former Non-Conformists, who you say were all against separation, and why
should we be wiser then they? To which I answer in Learned and Judicious Mr.
Hildershams words, and the rather because I find you quote his Name in favor
of your opinion.

Lecture 59 on John 4.
First, It has been an old trick of Hypocrites to pretend great Reverence and
respect to the Servants of God that are dead, when their credit might serve to
the disgrace of Gods servants that now live and are their Teachers: so did the
Jews speak gloriously of Moses and the Prophets, Mat. 23.29. Whereas on the
other side, the Faithful are described by this Note, They embrace and are
established in the present Truth, 2 Pet. 1.12. that is in the truth that is now
taught them.

Secondly, admit that the Servants of God, whose judgment and practice these
men do seem to stand so much upon, had been never so Learned and Godly men, yet
we may not build our Concience upon the credit of any man, neither of them that
have taught us heretofore, nor of them that teach us now, but only upon the
Word of God: If any (though far, inferior to them in Piety and Learning) shall
bring you the word of God, the manifest word of God, against such or such an
abuse? and you say you will not receive it, because such a Learned and good man
was of another mind, you sin in an high degree against God, for you oppose the
credit of man to the Authority of Gods word, In this case, we must remember
what the Apostle says. Gal. 8, 9.

Thirdly, we are not to rest in the judgment and practice of those good men
that have lived before us; for as it is with the particular members of the
Church, so it is with the whole Church, it must grow and increase in grace and
knowledge. Though Asa was a good King, and Reformed much in his first days, yet
Jehosaphat Reformed more, 2 Chronicles. 17.6. and Josiah went further, then either
Jehosaphat or any other that had been before him, 2 Kings 23.25.

And whereas you mention the Holiness and Learning of those Non Conformists,
thereby to deterr us from going beyond their Line and Measure, I may reply, in
that same worthy Authors words -- Lecture 8 on John 4.
Though they were Holy and Learned Men, yet it may well be, that the Lord has
revealed that to his servants now, which they saw not, for the Lord has often
done so; David had more understanding than his Teachers had, Psalm. 19.99. and
the Disciples of Christ, saw many truths, which many of the Prophets (though
they were it may be holier then they) did not see, Luke 10.24. Many points of
Gods Truth are revealed now even to Babes, what the Patriarchs and Prophets,
(though Holy Men and highly in Gods favor) saw not: He advises therefore,
rest not so much on the Judgment, advice, and example of the best men, but
examine them by the Scriptures, for good men have often proved Satan's instruments
to deceive others, as Peter's example misled Barnabas, Gal. 2.12.14. Thus far,
and much more to the same purpose says that excellent Author, (whose words
because I thought they might be of weight to you,) I chose to transcribe at
large, rather then to say the same things in other words of mine own.

To the same purpose Mr. Gee, when he was urged with the authority of Calvin,
Bucer, Pareus, etc. who all give an other interpretation then that which he
follows in his exposition of Romans 13. Replies thus, -- The opinion or averment
of man, (even of the best for Learning and Piety,) in a Case of Conscience, or
in the enquiry, what is the sense of such and such a Scripture, or such a
Divine Precept is not an Oracle neither, will it pass for such in any
controversy. The truth is we are very prone to attribute some authority to it,
and to urge it upon others, so far as we find it concurrent with our own
persuasions, but who is he that will be prejudged or concluded by it, contrary
to the opinion that he has received, or in what he is otherwise doubtful? The
words of that Learned Man may be applied to the present Case, for Sir, you know
how much you have departed from the Doctrine of those Famous Non-Conformists in
many the most material points of Religion, and therefore cannot justly be
allowed; in this, to make use of their Authority: It will I suppose be easily
granted that it is a very improper thing for any to seem to magnify so much
the Opinion of those worthy men (as to press it now upon their Brethren) in the
business of Ceremonies and Conformity, when they themselves refuse to follow
them in their other more sound and substantial Doctrines.

To give you a few Instances, First, The former Nonconformists held
Armenianisme (that is, the Doctrines of of Free Will in the things of God, of
Universal Grace, and Universal Redemption) to be so Fundamental and dangerous
an Error; that they have called it a Beelzebub-Error, and Another Gospel. But
you do not only speak favorably of it, but also proudly tell us, that of you
are very confident, Part 1. p. 6, 7.
not one of many hundreds, who speak against Communion with Arminians, do
understand what Arminianisme is; As if the difference were either so small,
that it was not worth the while to oppose it, or else so abstruse and
difficult, that plain Christians could not easily come to know it. Truly Sir, I
acknowledge my self the meanest of my brethren, and yet I think, who
understands the necessity of being born again, and renewed by the Spirit of
God, must needs understand his own Free will has not the least power to
receive the things of God, and whoever does this, knows very well what
Arminianisme is, though perhaps he may be ignorant of the Name, which is not at
all material in the Controversy: and indeed I wonder you can so confidently
plead for Communion with Arminians, and that with an etc. too; when you
formerly told us, Preface to the 5 Disputations.
That, in the points of Predestination, Redemption, Free Will, Effectual grace,
Perseverance, and Assurance of Salvation; the Jesuits and Arminians do teach
the same Doctrine. Sir, I hope you do not intend to enlarge your Communion so
far, as to take in the Jesuits also; if you do, pray deal clearly with us, and
tell us so, and do not delude us with an unlimited and untelligible etcetera.

Secondly, The former Nonconformists did so fully hold that the Scripture was
to be believed upon it is own authority and Testimony, that they all unanimously
affirm, It is a dangerous thing not to rest in the authority of Scripture, not
to count it, (...). But you, Jesuite-like, for I am sorry ^ cannot give it a
milder term, are not afraid to say, The Scripture tells us not sufficiently and
particularly which Books in it self are Canonical, part 1. p. 100. Part 2. p.
35.
nor what various Readings are the right, nor whether every Text be brought to
us incorrupted: So that in effect, you do resolve the credit of the Holy
Scripture, into the Truth of Church History; which words are so contrary to the
true Protestant Doctrine, so derogatory from the Self-evidencing Light, and
Divine Authority of the Word of God contained in the Scripture; and so fully
agreeing with the Doctrine of the Jesuits in this Point, that all which you
have writ (pretendedly for the Defense of the Scripture, when indeed you betray
it) is not able to make any tolerable satisfaction.

What need I mention more, as that the Former Nonconformists thought there was
no possibility of Salvation for the Papists, no more than for a Samaritan, or
an Idolater: but you tell us, that Part 2. p. 38.
you confess you affect not the Honor of that Orthodoxousness. And in one of
your Books, if I am not mistaken in my Collections, you seem to affirm, at
least strongly imply, that a man may be saved in any Religion, that lives
morally, though he knows not Christ; which is, as Mr. Hildersham calls it, a
damnable conceit; since it renders the whole mystery of Salvation by Christ
alone, vain and ineffectual. Add to this, the Former Conformists said, The
filth of Nature cannot be sufficiently spoken of; nay, no Angel can
sufficiently point out the mystery of sin, and filthiness of nature. But you
advise us, to take beed, least in speaking against the corruption of Nature, we
run into Excess: which are the very words in English, of Andradius the Jesuit
in Latin, to whom the learned Chemnitius answers, as I do to you; that
whosoever thinks slightly of the silth of Natural corruption, must needs
overvalue himself, and undervalue the Grace of Christ.

I shall conclude with mentioning one thing more; I affirmed, that by Flesh you
had told us was only meant the sensitive Appetite; this you reply, is an
untruth, and a mere fiction, b for you never said so. Sir you had need have a
good memory; for you have writ many Books, in which, as containing many words,
there cannot want much sin and vanity; and indeed had you meditated strictly
upon a quarter of what you have writ, you could not be guilty of so strange
forgetfulness: for in your Premonition to the Saints Rest, you have these very
words, Many think that by Flesh is meant only In-dwelling sin; when, alas! it
is the sensitive Appetite, that it charge us to subdue; for which you quote
Romans 8.3, 4, 5. which of all the places, where the word Flesh is named, does
(...) ^^vour your conceit: and indeed sir, that I may confess a secret you,
this very Passage of yours, I looked upon as so conceited and singular, and
many years ago it gave me so great offense, that I threw away your Book upon
it, and never would read it over; as not thinking it possible that one, who
erred in the very entrance, in so plain a Truth, was able to instruct me in any
thing that was worth my knowing. I believe many will think I concluded too
rashly and hastily; but I am much confirmed in that judgment of your Book,
since a Person yet living, and one worthy of credit, acquainted me, that when
the learned and judicious Mr. Herle had read that cried up Book of yours, he
told him, It had been happy for the Church of God if your friends had never
sent you to School. Mr. Cawdrey had the same opinion of it, and another person,
as knowing in the mystery of Godliness as either of them, told a friend of
mine, that notwithstanding the noise about you, you would end in flesh and
blood: which Prophecy, if you go on to write as you have done, will certainly
be fulfilled.

I know Sir, you have very angerly promised me (as the Bishop of Worcester did
you) that you will make no reply Part. 2d. p. 145.
But you are so apt to forget your self in greater matters, and have such an
itch to be in print, that I will not take your word: and therefore when you
write next (for I presume you cannot be silent) I entreat only two things from
you; First, that you will be short, for I am quite tired out with your tedious
multitude of words, and then, that you will be significant: I mean

First, That you will not mistake the thing you write about, but labor clearly
to understand the question. Do not ramble, and talk of Nature, as it is Pure,
when you should write about Nature corrupted. Do not discourse about Free Will
at large, Part. 2d. p. 133.
when you should only handle Free will in the things of God: and because many
Professors of Cristianity are Ignorant and Injudicious, do not think that
therefore you do well to call Christians, considered as Christians so. These
are evident and apparent Sophismes, which abound in your last Treatise, and do
discover that your Logic is every whit as ungrounded as your Divinity.

Secondly, Pray take a little pains to express your sense in plain and
intellegible Language; and do not love to jumble absurd and insignificant
Phrases together, as to say, Part. 1. page 78.
A defective, faulty, true Church: To mention Part 1. page 8.
A Political, Spiritual, Consititutive Head. And do not think to excuse your
self from writing of Nonsense, by saying you meant a thing Part 1. p 36.
Objectively and not Subjectively I And do not make Philosophy Ridiculous, as
you do when you tell us part 1. p. 52.
That our acts of knowing exterior things are, as Philosophers affirm,
objectively organical, though not efficiently and formally. Sir I am sure no
wise man talks thus, and it Philosophers do, it is time we left them, for they
do not speak according to the common sense and reason of mankind, and it must
be merely their obscurity that makes them considerable.

Lastly, when truth is to be examined, and the Nature of a thing strictly to be
considered, do not argue against it, because of some ill consequences, which
you fancy will follow: This is a common practice of Papists, Socinians, and
your beloved Friends the Arminians, whose steps you tread in, and therefore may
justly be suspected to own their doctrines, and this ill temper you have
discovered, as in other things, so in particular in what you desperately urge
against the Scriptures being part 1. p. 99, 100.
a Perfect Rule; which Foundation of Faith and Practice you labor to
overthrow, by Tragically insisting upon the consequences that will follow,
which is just to as much purpose, as if I should deny the Revelation of God,
concerning Himself, his Son, his Decrees, etc. because I understand them not,
and cannot reconcile them to that which I call reason; Sir, This in the end
will be found perfect Folly and Madness, and therefore pray leave it in time,
least the Lord repove you, and you be found a Liar.

I have now done, and you may see Sir, by this brief taste, how easy it is for
me to defend my self throughout my whole Antidote, but I do not see it will be
worth my while; for it is not a lessening of your Reputation, that I mainly aim
at; much less at the advancing of mine own upon the ruin of yours; but I
thought the Truth of Christ was worth my vindicating: And when I saw that your
Name did stand in the way of it, and that your Suffering-Brethren had their
Burden made heavier, in that your hand helped to lay it on, I thought it my
duty to reprove you, and to set your sin (and error herein) in order before
you: And if (after all this admonition) you will still go on, and under
pretense of Writing for Love, do what you can to keep up a mixed, disorderly,
persecuting, and Imperfect Church state, leaving us no hope nor possibility of
Reformation (unless it shall please God by some sudden and unexpected miracle
to convert the whole Nation at once) I must then look upon you as one of our
greatest dividers and so much the more dangerous, as your pretensions outwardly
are the more fair and plausible. The whole design therefore of this Letter, is,
(as to others) to persuade all to look upon you, not only as a Fallible, but as
a Mistaken man, whose Name and Authority is not fit to be urged when the appeal
is made to Scripture: and likewise (as to your self) my end is, to do what I
can to recover you unto the Right Primitive Spirit of Christianity (if indeed
you have as yet received it) or at least to press you to be looking after it;
and then I am you sure will (with us) contend earnestly for the Faith, and
strive for Purity of Communion, as the only way to settled Peace. You will then
make a vast difference between Unavoidable Imperfections (which attend us even
in your best and most commanded Duties) and unwarrantable (because imposed)
Corruption, which is all at present that we separate from; and however our
Rulers may deal with us for this (who think their Laws are to be obeyed) yet we
could not but let you know, that from you we deserved better usage; since you
are in the same condemnation, and as much break the present Laws in some
things, as we do in others. There is therefore one thing that I will confess my
Error in; it was my miscalling you Learned, Judicious, and Mortified Mr.
Baxter. Sir pray pardon me this, for it is a great untruth, indeed the only one
(though you take no notice of it) which you can justly charge me with; I will
promise not to offend in the like kind again, but yet remain,

Sir, Ready to serve you in all Christian Offices of Love. Edw. Bagshaw
Tuttle-street. first month, or March, 26, 1671.
A POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
SInce the finishing of my Letter to you, I received the two following Papers,
the one written by Mrs. -- of Worcester, the other from my Brother Brown, whom
you unhandsomly and untruly reflect upon in your last Treatise; I entreat you
to read what they say in defense of themselves, which I have taken liberty
without their knowledge to send to you, that whatever you do to me, yet to
them you might not deny this just satisfaction, of making a Recantation for the
unseemly abuses you have put upon them -- Your words are these,

Part 2d. p.
I entreat you and the Reader to get and read a book published by Mr. Brown, (as
is uncontrouledly affirmed, who lately wrote against Mr. Tombs against the
lawfulness of Communion in Parish Churches) concerning the experiences and
strange work of God on a Gentlewoman in Worcester, whom I will not name,
because yet living, and God may recover her, but is there well known; This
Gentlewoman having been long vain, and a constant neglecter of public worship,
was suddenly moved to go into the Church while I was there Preaching on Rom,
6.21. The very Text struck her to the heart; but before the Sermon was done she
could hardly forbear crying out in the Congregation: She went home a changed
person, resolved for a holy life. But her affection or Passion being strong,
and her Nature Tender, and her knowledge Small, she quickly thought that the
Quakers lived strictlier then we, and fell in among them. At last perceiving
them vilify the Ministry and the Scripture, her heart smote her, and she
forsook them, as speaking against that which by experience she had found to do
her good; and desiring to speak with me, who lived afarr off, opened thus much
to me. But all these deep workings and troubles between the several ways, did
so affect her, that she fell into a very strong melancholy; insomuch that she
imposed such an abstinence from meat upon her self, that she was much consumed,
and so debilitated as to keep her bed, and almost famished. Mr. Brown and
others were her instructers, who were very zealous for the way called The Fifth
Monarchy, and having instructed her in those opinions, published the whole
story in Print, (which else I would not have mentioned) I shall say nothing of
any thing which is otherwise known, but desire the Reader that does but
understand what Melancholy is, better than the Writers did, to read that book,
and observe with sorrow and pity, what a number of plain effects of melancholy,
as to thoughts, and Scriptures; and Actions: are there ascribed to mere
Temptations on one side, and to Gods unusual or notable operations on the other
side! Some Passages out of Mrs. -- of Worcesters Letter to a Friend in London.
Dear Brother,
AS touching Mr. Baxter, I refer you to my Brother Browns Letter unto Mr.
Bagshawe, with this intimation, that as it relates to my self, I am perfectly
unconcerned; it is a small matter for me to be judged of man's day; yet I cannot
but wonder that one of Mr. Baxters Profession should dare to open his mouth
against the operations of the Holy Spirit in the Soul, the remembrance of which
is still sweet to me, and causes me to cry out, Oh! how exceeding excellent is
thy loving kindness, thou God of grace, what was I poor silly Nothing, polluted
dust, that thou should choose me, bring me to his Foot, give me to find shadow
against the scorching beams under Christ, and fill me with joy and peace
through believing. And if this be the effect of Melancholy; I would tell Mr.
Baxter, it is such an effect, as I must magnify the Grace of the Lord for ever
for. And this confirms me, that the Lord comforted and lifted up, my lost,
forlorn, castdown, and almost overwhelmed soul, in that usual path, in which he
walks, administering comfort to his poor benighted ones, viz. the sealing his
love by his spirit in a word of promise, which I am sorry Mr. Baxter should be
found deriding of. But God will vindicate the work he has wrought, though men
pour contempt upon it, unto whom I commit it: but that Brother Brown was the
Author of that book, that I was suddenly moved to go to hear Mr. Baxter, that
ought of his Sermon had any impression upon me (which I could not attend to,
because I was so terrified with the words of the Text, Romans 6.21. that I went
away resolved upon a holy life (when indeed I came into company, thinking
thereby to ease and deliver my self from the trouble which had seized me, which
I mention with self abhorrence and admiration of the rich Grace of God) That
Brother Brown instructed me in the Fifth Monarchy Principle (whereas he then
opposed it) That I imposed abstinence upon my self as to meat (when I would
gladly have eaten but durst not, because I apprehended I had no right to the
Creature, being out of Christ) This is all False and Untrue, and I am
astonished that Mr. Baxter should with so much confidence affirm these things;
The Lord Pardon and Humble him.

Some Passages out of Mr. Brown's Letter.
Dear Brother,
I Have some time since perused Mr. Baxters two last Treatises, which (to speak
modestly) give great Occasion to the adversaries of Truth and Purity, to
reproach and blaspheme God and his People, and have caused great grief of heart
to many that truly fear him; and this is no more (for the substance of it) than
some of Mr. Baxters own Disciples have suggested to me. In his last (Entitled,
A defense of the Principles of Love) He severely charge you, but you need not
be over solicitous, for those that know the complexion and temper of the man,
who writes thus, will wait to see your defense, before they believe you guilty
of so many gross Untruths; especially since I can prove Mr. Baxter (even while
he thus condemns you) to be guilty himself of uttering many Falsities both of
my self and of others.

I will not conceive my self concerned with what he speaks Part. 2. p. 31.
touching his Dispute with Mr. Brown, An Army Chaplain (which I never was) about
the Godhead of Christ [which I ever owned.] That Person was another of the same
name, whom I never knew, and his Principles, so far as I have understood them,
opposing the Doctrine of the Gospel, I utterly detest; so that all wherein I
may by any be supposed to be concerned, is, what he mentions, page 58, 59.
Part. 2 d.

First, That I am the Author of that Treatise [mentioned by him, as written
against Mr. Tombe] against the lawfulness of Communion with Parish Churches:
this is more than Mr. Baxter or any of his Informers can prove: and were he
able, yet I think his mentioning of it, when in that place, there is not the
least occa Wsion for it, is scarce becoming those Principles of Love and
Charity he is so great a pretender to. Whether I writ the Book or not, I
conceive it not requisite to give him an account; for I should be unwilling to
trust one with a secret, who will, it seems, when the humor takes him, publish
to the World, what he cannot, dares not, swear is true, although occasion be
thereby given, to such as are no backward to lay hold upon every such
opportunity, utterly to ruin the Person of whom he reports it. I shall only
add, that, whoever the Author was, I see no cause to disown any thing
considerable in that Book: and when Mr. Baxter shall undertake a through
discussion of the Arguments contained in it, not like a Dictator, but as an
humble modest Christian, I will either publicly Recant what I have now
affirmed, or in meekness debate it with him, provided he does more heartily
represent Arguments, than he has done many of yours, and particularly, that
about Idolatry, in which you give the general sense of all the Protestants,
almost, that have writ upon the second Command, who do universally reduce to
it, as Forbidden there, whatever is added, or devised by men in the worship of
God. So that how the present Conformises can be excused from some degree of
Idolatry, remains to be better proved, than to call all those, that fear this
of them Ignorant, Rash, and self-conceited. This in another would be Railing;
perhaps Mr. Baxter thinks it Rethorick, Religion I am sure it is not; nor will
it be accounted so by those that conceive of God, as Holy and Jealous, and
therefore dare not join in any thing which he has not commanded, lest he
should charge folly and sin upon them for doing ignorantly they know not what.
More may be said, but in this Point, I shall leave Mr. Baxter to you, and if
you do not take notice of his perverting his Adversaries arguments, and
imposing upon them a strange new sense of his own, if you do not reprove him
for his vanity, in making men of straw, and then unmercifully fighting against
them, as if he took a pleasure in demolishing the work of his own hands; if you
do not observe and call him to an account for this, you will much wrong your
Cause, and deceive my expectation of you.

To come more closely to my self, He informs us, that I am the Author or
Publisher of a Book, concerning the Experiences and strange work of God, upon a
Gentlewoman in Worcester, and that I am uncontrouledly affirmed so to be. Give
me leave to tell you Sir, that I cannot but wonder at the unparalled
confidence of the man; should he be any longer suffered to take this liberty
without control, I might be supposed, for ought I see, to cumber the World
with as many Books, (and perhaps to as little purpose) as some body else: For
indeed Sir, in two lines, there are no less than two untruths. (I may I hope
use Mr. Baxters word) published to the World concerning me. The First, That I
am the Author and Publisher of that Book, which is affirmed by him against the
most notorious evidence in the World to the contrary. The Author Mr. Timothy
Jordain, a precious servant of the Lord, and now at rest with him, subscribed
his Name to the Book, and in the Epistle prefixed, owns, and avows himself to
be the Author and Publisher of it; and all that I did, was (being desired) to
write an Epistle, wherein I acquaint the Reader that I am not the Author of it,
but only did join in Testimony to signify what was Recorded in the ensuing
Treatise was true. The second Untruth is, That I am uncontrouledly affirmed so
to be, when I believe Mr. Baxter has never a second in the World, that either
will or can affirm it.

As for the Book it self, and the matter of fact contained in it, I never yet
met with any judicious, sober Christian, (that has seriously perused it) who
durst adventure to pronounce either of the whole, or any considerable part of
it, that it was an effect of Melancholy. Sir, one of the great designs of the
Devil at this day, seems to be to drive men into direct Atheism,; and there are
many too just complaints of its prodigious increase in the Nation. Whether this
decrying of experiences, this slighting the work of Gods Spirit in the soul,
the crying out that these things are but the effects of Melancholy, be not the
ready way to make all supernatural conversion derided, and the whole Mystery of
Godliness contemned, I leave it with you to consider.

That I was this Gentlewomans Instructor in the Fifth Monarchy Principle, and
that I was very zealous for it, are two more untruths; For I was neither
zealous for that Principle, nor her Instructor; but I did at that time
(ignorantly) oppose her in it; though indeed now it is my opinion, that there
is a Glorious State of the Church yet to come (before the last end of all
things) when all Oppression and Oppressors shall cease, and every thing of man
shall be laid down in a subserviency io the interest of Christ, and the
Kingdoms of the World shall become his; which point I am ready to discourse
with Mr. Baxter, when ever he shall think fit to do it.

He is also lamentably mistaken in the account he gives of the Lords dealing
with the Gentlewoman, of which I shall give you a few remarks, He tells us --
First, that she was suddenly moved to come to hear him Preach, whereas she
went (having been long sick after Child bearing) in the accustomed formal
manner that others were wont to do.

Secondly, That she had such convictions from his Sermon (for so he seems to
intimate) that she went home resolved for an holy Life; whereas she heard
little or nothing of his Sermon, it was the Reading of the Text, Romans 6.21.
that struck her heart; yet she wrestled against her convictions, and would
gladly have got from under them, and for that end went into the Company of some
friends, thinking to forget them.

Thirdly, that she desired to speak with him is another untruth (a Mistake is
too soft a word) For she was hardly prevailed with to go to a Neighbors house
to discourse with him.

Fourthly, that she did impose upon her self an Abstinence from Meat; She would
gladly have eaten, and attempted it several times, but being under the sense of
her own vileness and unworthiness, supposing she had no interest in the Lord,
and so no right to the Creature (through the cunning of him that lies in wait
to destroy) she durst not eat.

Lastly, she never fell in so among the Quakers as to be one of them; though it
is true, through the Power of Temptation, she was somewhat inclined to them.
But from them was marvellously recovered, as is intimated in the forementioned
Treatise; and now she remains at as great a distance from them and their
principles, as Master Baxter himself; nay (if I understand his principles) at a
far greater: being fixed in following after the Lord and his Teachings in and
by the Scriptures: And I hope, and am persuaded, that, after all her shakings,
trials and temptations, God will for ever establish her here.

Dear Brother, I am sorry that I have given you this trouble, but Love to the
Truth, to the interest of the Lord, and to Mr. Baxters soul (whom I pray the
Lord to forgive and humble) has compelled me; I leave it to your wisdom to
make use of it, as you judge may be most conducing to those forementioned ends,
etc.

An Advertisement to the Christian Reader.
IT will I believe easily pass for a Commendation of Mr. Baxter's Wit (though
but little of his Honesty) that after he has writ so much against both the
King and Bishops, he has yet such easy access now to the Licensers and Press,
that he can Print Two books, before another can Publish a few Sheets in answer
to One; but his last book about the Sabbath, (besides that it might have wholly
been spared (Dr. Owen having judiciously, and accurately handled that Question
before him) does make so full a discovery of Mr. Baxters spirit, in pleading
for Saints-days, (that is, for Will Worship) and in Atheistically arguing
against the Divine and Self-evidencing Authority of the Holy Scripture, (which
he does for many Pages together p. 60. to 69.
) that, henceforth I hope he will no longer be a Snare, but justly be Rejected
of all, as one of the worst sort of Heretics; since under the Notion of being
a Christian, and a Protestant, he does with his utmost Industry and Cunning
labor to overthrow our Foundation, in that he, puts the Credit of Scripture,
upon the Truth of History, and denies any Certainty, but what may be gathered
from that; which dangerous Doctrine I could not but warn thee, Christian
Reader, as thou love thy Peace and Comfort, as well as the Truth of Christ,
that thou will diligently beware of; and I must leave it to thee to judge,
whether that Conformity, which such a Person pleads for, is not justly to be
suspected.

Edw. Bagshaw.
3d. Month, or May 15, 1671.

