The Good Old Way, OR An Excellent and Profitable Treatise of REPENTANCE MADE
By that Precious man of God and faithful Martyr of Jesus Christ Mr JOHN
BRADFORD in the year 1553. Now published with two Prefaces, relating the life
of the Author, and the excellency of the WORK.

Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.5. The times of this
Ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to Repent. Act.
17.30. OXFORD, Printed by LEON. LICHFIELD Printer to the University 1652.

To all faithful Mnasons, old Disciples, and all those who desire and
endeavor to walk in the good old Gospel-way of Faith and Repentance.
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our Father, and from our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
IT is a common Proverb that good Wine needs no lvy bush, No more does this
good old Wine, this excellent Treatise of that Saint of God, Mr Bradford need
any letters of commendation. Yet it will be requisite to speak something, and I
hope it will be interpreted a deed of charity if I interpose as an Advocate for
the truth of this Orphan Tract, whose Father was a Saint on earth, and now
reigns as a glorious Saint in heaven. The work is legitimate, transcribed
after an exact Copy: and it is suitable to the style, and savours of the Authors
spirit. The many choice breathings in his letters, and this Treatise are all of
a piece, good old gold, more precious then that of Ophir.

Something I shall briefly speak of the Author, and then of this Tract. For
the Author, what his learning was is upon Record, how solid and sinuous his
disputations were with the Popish Prelates, Spanish Friars, and others that
visited him in prison, and how dexterously he managed all his Disputations, with
Wisdom, judgment, and zeal, you may read largely in Mr Foxes Martyrology. He
was a man of an acute wit, penetrating judgment, and had the approbation and
advice of Martin Bucer to enter into the Ministry.

His piety was rare and eminent. As was the man, so was his communication, holy
and useful. Who so reads his spiritual breathings, (I might almost call it a
transcendent style) in his Epistles, must needs confess, that he was one of
the holiest men that ever lived since the Apostles time. Take a taste of him in
these few characters,

1. He was a zealous, plain, profitable Preacher of Gods word, He knew how to
divide the word aright, and walk accordingly. He had those two rare
Qualifications of a Preacher (...). He was a Boanerges a son of Thunder, to
impenitent, obdurate sinners, but a Barnabas, a son of consolation to the
children of God.

2. He was of an humble selfe-denying spirit. I never read of any, that had a
meaner opinion of himself, then he had. You shall find the subscription of
his letters, Miserrimus peccator, a very hypocrite, the most hard-hearted
unthankefull sinner, a very painted hypocrite, John Bradford. So cheap an
esteem had he of himself. This humility is an adorning grace, next to the
garment of Christ's righteousness, none like to it, wherefore the Apostles
phrase is Emphaticall 1 Pet. 5. (...): Be ye clothed with humility: Let it be
your uppermost garment; Cyprian says, Fundamentum sanctitatis est humilitas.
This holy man's example is worthy of our imitation.

3. He was much acquainted with God, and enjoyed a holy communion and
familiarity with him, in Prayer and Meditation. He meditated much, and
Meditation is the spiritual digestion of the soul. It Is a divine ruminating
upon the word read, or Preached: when we meditate seriously on the Promises,
Attributs, or such choice subjects, we are up in the Mount with Moses, we soar
aloft, even to heaven, being carried by the wings of holy meditation. This
meditation is an uphill duty, Isaac, Moses, Paul, and other Saints of God,
have found sweet consolation flowing from it: And he joined prayer to
Meditation, he was frequently upon his knees, and he would not rise up, till he
felt something coming in, some spiritual illapse darted upon his soul. His
practice was suitable to Bernard's resolution, Nunquam Domine discedam a te sine
te. He studied usually upon his knees, and prayed much in his study; and indeed
he studies well who prays well. And he can take the most comfort of his study,
who reaps the fruits of his pains, as Returns of his prayers.

4. He was of a melting tender heart. He wept much and mourned, that he could
not bring his dull heart to love Jesus Christ more. At table as he sat at
meat, he usually pulled his hat down before his eyes, and poured forth
abundance of tears upon his trencher. He had a tender heart, bowels opened to
the Prisoners, he had a tender care both of their bodies and souls. When he
was in Prison, he visited frequently his Fellow Prisoners, and spent much time
in praying for them, exhorting of them, and contributing liberally out of his
purse unto them.

I need add no more, for what I can say is too little and beneath the Authors
worth, of whom the World was not worthy: He lived a Saint, and died a Martyr.

Now, for this work which I here present to the Reader, I am assured, that its
not spurious, but the genuine issue of this worthy Author. Herein is handled
The Doctrine of Repentance, with many moving considerations thereunto. Perhaps
his plain Phrase may not suite this curious age, which is too too much given
to affectation of words, Sed distinguenda sunt tempora. Those times were not
used to set forth or garnish their dishes as now they are, yet, the food is
wholesome, plain and profitable. And if our palates cannot relish such food, I
fear there is some distemper in them, and it is our duty to pray for the
removal thereof, I shall not make a Panegyric on the Treatise. The work will
abundantly commend it self. Here Is Evangelicall Repentance, pressed home unto
the Conscience, with many cogent convincing Arguments. It was then spoken in
season, and it is a Doctrine that can never be pressed our of season: These are
Gospel days. The Kingdom of heaven is at hand, and of all times Gospel times
are peculiar times of Repentance. The Lord calls upon all ranks of men,
Magistrates, Ministers, People, Repent, Repent. Various dispensations call on
us to repent, some times God speaks in the Thunder of judgment, sometimes in
the Music of mercy: Both by mercies and judgments we are called to
Repentance. The last words of this holy Martyr were Repent England: And truly
the words of a dying man should be much set by, Especially of a dying Saint,
who bequeaths this Legacy to England in his last breath.

Now whoever thou art, that read this book, and art hereby won, to think on
thy ways, and turn unto God, give God the glory, and look on it as a special
hand of providence, in bringing this book to thy sight. I will not detain thee
longer from reading this ensuing Treatise; Read it, and read it again, with
prayer and Meditation, and the Lord teach thee to profit by it. And so I
commend thee to the grace of God, and bid thee heartily Farewell; entreating
thy prayers for him, who in love to thy soul, has revived this Treatise, and
remains

Thy servant for Christ's sake H. W.

To the Reader.
BEing over entreated to Preface something to this Piece, I crave a little
patience, whilst I speak a little both to the Work and Workman; In the Work,
there is, 1. The Matter, 2. the Frame or composure considerable, the subject
matter is Repentance, and that's a thing, which will never be out of season,
till sin, which never is in season, be out of men's hearts and lives. Some men
(indeed) have thought (in temptation only I hope) this a work (for some at
least in these days) too legal, and below their Gospel privileges, but if it
be rightly stated and understood, it will be found a Gospel both duty and
privilege beyond the mercy of Law, and never more seasonable then in times of
Grace Act. 17. 30, much pressed by the Lord of Preachers and his forerunners,
by his Apostles, and their successors down to our Authors time, who frequented
no one doctrine or duty more. For the form and manner of handling this Theme,
we refer thereunto, his method, his style or phrase. In the first, we must
allow a latitude to him, to others, according to each man's gift and genius, so
long as curiosity and confusion be avoided, and the capacity of the hearer
considered. Much I know is written about the Method of Preaching, and it must
be granted, that nothing contributes more to the memory both of the speaker and
hearer, then method does: Howheit, the rule holds that the greatest art is to
dissemble art, and that Preacher who studies himself and his people most,
usually speaks most to the heart, and to edification; a Workman may fetch his
stuff from another shop, but if he will make the suit fit, he must apply
himself to the party concerned, and take measure of him; I mean this, a
Teacher must fetch all his materials from the word, but his application from
the Auditory, and herein this good man was his crafts master.

Nor will his Method (I am confident) be quarrelled by any true Artist, he
begins with a description of the Term, of the Thing, and that done, he casts it
into the parts, vindicating them from false glosses and mistakes, and restoring
them to their proper sense; and the way thus cleared, he bears down all before
him with strength of argument and application, wherein lies the life of this,
of any Sermon.

For his Phrase, that's suited to the times wherein he lived, and to the matter
that lies before him, and whilst it is so, it was not needful, either to alter
a term unless it were super annuated, or to add a word, unless it were to
make up a gappe where the Copy seemed defective: It is confessed on all hands
(his persecutors not gainsaying it) that the Author was (in those times) a
master of speech, Marc. 4.33 Lumen orationis perspicuitas.
but he had learned of his Master, not to speak what he could speak, but what
his hearers could hear, he knew that clearnes of speech was the excellency of
speech and therefore resolved with a good Orator to speak beneath himself,
Aug. who would call a bone ossum to avoid the ambiguity in os. in Psalm. 138.
secundum Aug.
rather then above his Auditory, and with the nurse to speak broken words
rather then obscure and doubtful, otherwise, his eloquence was confessedly
great, that is, Native, Masculine, Modest, in one, Heavenly, for if you mark
him, he savours and breaths nothing but Heaven, yea, he sparkles, thunders,
lightens, pierces the soft, breaks only the stony heart.

The blessing of God has been signally eminent upon this land in her
Preachers, I had almost said beyond all lands since the Reformation, the Lord
make us sensible of it, and really thankful for it to the encouragement of
all such. Amongst these, I have in my time met with four mighty men upon this
very argument, now all with God, for I forbear to instance in the living, the
men are, John Bradford, John Udall, Arthur Dent, Dan. Dyke, and (if I might be
pardoned for for comparing dead men, which I do not practice toward the
living) I should think that as Mr Bradford is before them all in time, so not
behind any one of them in this way of Preaching he was of a most sweet,
humble, and melting spirit, who (I know not how) will be in a man's bosom ere
he be aware, and willingly win him from himself to Christ. Many years are
now past since I first read this Tract, and it is not to be stranged if still I
affect it, it is the first Printed Sermon that affected me to purpose, and I were
to blame, if I should be unwilling to carve and convey it to others, which
whilst I do, it is not to be expected, that I should engage either for or
against every punctilio in it, he shall show little ingenuity and less
Charity, who cannot look upon such a Brother dissenting in some opinion or
expression, without some abatement of affection or respect. It was the frequent
profession of my ever honored Predecessor, where I see most of Christ, there
will I love most, whether the party be of my opinion or of a different
judgment, so he, so I, but of the Work enough; shall I speak a little of the
Workman? This blessed Martyr, who beautisied his sufferings with his meekness
and humility, was (doubtless) one of a thousand, whether a better Preacher or
Scholar, is to me a great question, after his conversion, his whole life was a
continued Sermon of Repentance, in his addresses to the University, to the
City, to his Country men and kinsmen, he Preached Repentance, he lived
Repentance, and in his last farewell to this land, he breathed out his last
thus: O England, England Repent Repent of thy sins.

I am much ashamed, when I read his works and life penned by many, and cannot
without sad reflections upon my self, consider how far our means, helps,
opportunities are beyond his times, and how infinitely I, to censure none but
my self, fall short of him in the practice of godliness and power of
exhortation. Truly if Luthers three engredients, 1. Prayer, 2. Meditation, 3.
Temptation, make up either Preacher or Christian, you may find them all in him,
who was a man of prayer, of meditation, of temptations, as his works speak
him, and they found him, who have made use of him, in their temptations and
desertions: The man who most (in my mind) resembled him in Preaching,
conference, prayer, temptation, every way, was the man whose society I
sometimes enjoyed: this blessed man, now with Christ, has often told me, that
he himself (whose ability and dexterity in settling and satisfying troubled
spirits was certainly great) has been at one time, so overwhelmed with
temptations, and at another, so becalmed into a flatnesse and listlesnes of
spirit, that he has been enforced to adopt M. Bradfords meditations,
ejaculations, and expressions, and to spread them before God as his own, upon
this account, because M. Bradford had in his writings (as he thought)
represented his case, said more for him, and done his errand better then he
could for himself. This passage I the rather publish, (because upon this
occasion) I would stir up men of parts and experience to impart their
experiences and sufficiencies in this kind whilst they live, as little knowing
how many drooping and desponding souls their surviving works may help, when
themselves sleep in the dust. It is a thing that long since I bewailed, that so
little is this way done by able, Orthodox, experienced Casuists, but they who
(for ought appears) know least of the mystery of godliness, and methods of
Sotan, undertake the work. I do not mean such as Gerson, Parisiensis,
Savaorola, etc. who speak as if they had met with something of God in their
lives and consciences; but certain Jesuits and Canonists, who resolve all into
a blind, and (upon the matter) an humane credence, and show more wit then
grace; as 'twas once said of a Rabbin in their resolves. There be not (I
believe) more able men for case divinity and all practicalls in the World, then
in this Nation, would they apply themselves accordingly, some yet living, have
given undeniable proofs of their ability in this errand, I forbear to name
them, because I would decline the suspicion of flattery, I may more freely
speak of our Greenhams, Dods, Perkins, Ameses, Baineses, as also of our
Randals, Boltons, Bals, etc. who are now out of hearing, but not out of memory;
Oh that others behind them in time, but not in abilities, would take up the
work where they left, and carry it on, at least, that that brother, who owes
so much to God for temptations, and can say (out of his observations) so much
for God in the case of temptation and desertion, would at last perfect his
Tract of Temptations so happily begun. Mr R. Ca. of Tentat.


But I have made the Porch too wide, I conclude where I began, with humble (and
when I say humble I say all) Mr Bradford, I have had some other Works of his,
but War has Plun. dred me of many Books. This piece, a godly Brother (who is
never weary of doing good) has recovered out of the dust, and once more made
public, under God, thank him (Reader) if thou be the better for it, and
better thou may be, if thou will lay down pride and prejudice, and take this
up in humility, and with purpose of amendment, read it, think on it, pray for a
blessing, and if thou find little at first, read again, pray again, apply
again, and I miss my aim, if thou do not meet with more at last, then, it
seemed to promise at first. I commend both it and thee to the blessing of the
Great God, and having answered the importunity of my friend in saying thus
much, I rest

Thine in Christ R. H.

A prositable Treatise of Repentance, made by that holy and Constant Martyr of
Christ Mr. JOHN BRADFORD. 1553.
MAT. 4.17. Amend your lives for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.


THe life we have at this present, is the gift of God, in whom we live move and
are; and therefore he is called Jehovah, for the which life, as we should be
thankful, so, may we not in any wise use it after our corrupt fantasies; but
to the end for which it is given and lent us, that is; to the setting forth of
Gods praise and glory, by repentance, conversion and obedience to his good will
and holy laws; whereunto his long-suffering does, (as it were) even draw us,
if our hearts by impenitency were not hardened. And therefore our life in the
Scripture is called a walking; for that, as the body draws daily more and
more near its end, that is the earth: even so our soul draws daily more and
more near unto a period, that is, salvation, or damnation, heaven or hell.

Of which thing, in that we are most careless, and very fools, (for we alas,
are the same to day, we were yesterday, and not better or nearer to God, but
rather nearer to hell, Satan and perdition; being covetous, idle, carnal,
secure, negligent, proud, etc. I think my labor cannot be better bestowed then
with the Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his Apostles, to harp on this string, which
of all other, together with faith, is most necessary, and in these days most
seasonable. What string is that? says one? Forsooth brother, the string of
Repentance, the which Christ our Savior did use, first in his Ministry; and as
his Minister, at this present I will use unto you all: Repent for the Kingdom
of heaven is at hand.

This sentence thus pronounced, and Preached by our Savior Jesus Christ,, as
it does command us to repent, so to the doing of the same, it shows us a
sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto; namely, for that, The Kingdom of
heaven (which is a Kingdom of all joy, peace, riches, power and pleasure) is
at hand, to all such as do so, that is, as do repent. So that the meaning
hereof is, as though our Savior might thus speak presently: Syrs for that I
see you all walking the wrong way, even to Satan, and unto hell fire, by
following the Kingdom of Satan, which now is colored under the vain
pleasures of this life, and foolishness of the flesh, most subtly, to your
utter undoing and destruction: behold and mark well what I say unto you: The
Kingdom of Heaven, that is, an other manner of joy and felicity, honor and
riches, power and pleasure, then you now perceive or enjoy, is even at hand,
and at your backs: and if you will turn again, that is repent ye, you shall
most truly and pleasantly feel, see and inherit. Turn again therefore I
say; that is Repent, for this joy I speak of, the Kingdom of heaven is at
hand.

1. Here we may note, first the corruption of our natures, in that to this
commandment. Repent you, he adds a cause, For the Ringdome of heaven is at
hand: For by reason of the corruption and sturdinesse of our nature, God unto
all his commandments, commonly, either adds some promise to provoke us to
obedience, or else some such sufficient cause, as cannot but stir us up to
hearty laboring for the doing of the same: as here, to the commandment of
acting repentance, he adds this Aetiologe or cause, For the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand.

2. Again, in that he joyneth the commandment as a reason, saying: For the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. We may learn that of the Kingdom of heaven,
none (to whom the Ministry of Preaching does appertain) can be partaker, but
such as repent and do amend. Therefore, dearly beloved, if you regard the
Kingdom of Heaven, in that you cannot enter therein, except you repent: I
beseech you all of every estate, as you desire your own peace of conscience to
repent and amend. The which thing that ye may do, I will endeavor my best now
to help you, by Gods grace.

But first, because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through ignorance,
and for lack of knowledge, and false teaching: I will (to begin withal) show
what Repentance is. Repentance, is no English word, but we borrow it of the
Latinists, 1. Resipiscentia.
to whom it is an after thinking in English: in Greek, a being wise
afterward: in Hebrew, 2.(...)
a conversion or turning; the which conversion or turning, cannot be true and
hearty, 3.(...)
(unto God especially) without some good hope or trust of pardon, for that
which is already done and past, is therefore (after hearty sorrow) an earnest
purpose to amend, and to turn to God with a trust of pardon.

This definition may be divided into three parts.

1. First a sorrowing for our sins. 2. Secondly, a trust of pardon, which
otherwise may be called, a persuasion of God's mercy, by the merits of Christ,
for the forgiveness of our sins, 3. And thirdly, a purpose to amend, or a
conversion to a new life. The which third or last part, cannot be called so
properly a part, as an effect of that repentance we now speak of, as toward
the end ye shall see by Gods grace. But yet lest such as seek for occasion to
speak evil, should have any occasion, if they tarry not out the end of this
sermon: I therefore divide repentance into the three foresaid parts. 1. Of
sorrowing for our sin. 2. Of good hope or trust of pardon. 3. Of a new life.

Thus you may see what the thing is; a sorrowing for sin, a purpose to amend,
with a good hope or trust of pardon.

This penance not only differs from that which men commonly take to be
penance, in saying and going over our enjoined Ladies Psalters, seven
penitential Psalms, superstitious Fastings, Pilgrimages, Almsdeeds, and
such like things; but also from that which the more learned have declared, to
consist of three parts: namely, contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

Contrition, they call a just, and a full sorrow for their sin. For this
word, just and full, is one of the differences, between Contrition, and
Attrition,

Confession, they call, a numbering of all their sins in the ear of their
ghostly Father: for as (say they) a judge cannot absolve without knowledge of
the cause or matter; so cannot the Priest, or ghostly Father, absolve from
other sins, then those which he does hear.

Satisfaction they call amends making unto God for their sins, by their undue
works, Opera indebita, works more then they need to do, as they term them:
This is their penance which they Preach, Write, and allow: But how true this
stuff is, how it agrees with Gods word, how it is to be allowed, taught,
Preached written, let us a little consider.

If a man repent not, until he have a just and full sorrowing for his sins
(dearly beloved) when shall he repent? For in as much as hell fire, and the
punishment of the Devils, is a just punishment for sin: In as much as in all
sin, there is a contempt of God, which is all goodness, and therefore there
is a desert of all illness: alas; who can bear or feel this just sorrow, this
full sorrow for our sins, this their contrition, which they do so discern
from their attrition? shall not man by this doctrine rather despair, then come
to repentance? If a man repent not until he have made confession of all his
sins in the ear of his ghostly Father: if a man cannot have absolution of his
sins, until his sins be told by tale and number in the Priests ear, in that
(as David says) none can understand, much less then utter all his sins:
Delicta quis intelligit? Who can understand his sins? In that David complains
of himself elsewhere, how that his sins have overflowed his head, and as a
heavy burden do oppress him; alas shall not a man by this doctrines be
utterly driven from repentance? Though they have gone about, something to make
a plaster for their sores of confession or attrition, to assuage this stuff;
bidding a man to hope well of his contrition, though it be not so full as is
required, and of his confession, though he have not numbered all his sins, if
so be that he do so much as in him lies: dearly beloved, in that there is
none, but that herein he is guilty (for who does as much as he may?) think ye,
that this plaster is not like salt to sore eyes? Yes undoubtedly, alas when
they have done all they can, for the appeasing of consciences in these points,
this is the sum, that we yet should hope well, but yet so hope that we must
stand in a mammering and doubting, whether our sins be forgiven. For to believe
remissionem peccatorum, that is, to be certain of forgiveness of sins, as
our Creed teaches us, they count it a presumption. O abomination, and that not
only therein, but in all their penance as they paint it!

As concerning satisfaction, by their Opera indebita, undue works; that is by
such works as they need not to do, but of their own voluntarinesse and
willingness: (wilfulness in deed) who sees not monstrous abomination,
blasphemy, and even, open fighting against God? For if satisfaction can be done
by man; then Christ died in vain, for him that so satisfies, and so reigns
he in vain; so is he a Bishop and a Priest in vain. Deuteronomy. 6.2. Mat. 22.
Gods law requires love to God with all our heart, soul, power, might and
strength: so that there is nothing can be done to Godward, Mark 20. Luke 10.
which is not contained in this commandment: nothing can be done, over and
above this. Ioh. 3.
Again, Christ requires to man-ward, that we should love one another as he
loved us. And think you, beloved, that we can do any thing to our
Neighbourward, which is not herein comprised?

Yea, let them tell me, when they do any thing so in the love of God, and their
Neighbor, but that they had need to cry: Remitte nobis debita nostra, Mat. 6.
forgive us our sins. So far are we off from satisfying. Does not Christ
say: Luke 17.
When you have done all things that I have commanded you, say: that ye be but
unprofitable servants? Put nothing to my word, says God, Yes, Apoc. 22. Deuteronomy.
4.1.
works of supererogation, (yea, superabomination) say they. Whatsoever things
are true (says the Apostle Saint Paul) Whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things
pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue,
Phil. 4.
if there be any praise: have you them in your mind, and do them, and the God
of peace, shall be with you. Beloved this lesson well regarded would pull us
from Popish satisfactory Works, which do deface Christ's treasures and
satisfaction.

In heaven and in earth was there none found that could satisfy God's anger
for our sins, or open heaven for man, but only the Son of God Jesus Christ,
the Lion of the Tribe of Juda, who by his blood has wrought the work of
Satisfaction; and he only is worthy all honor and glory, and praise; for he
has opened the book with the seven seals, and done all.

Dearly beloved, therefore abhor this abomination, even to think that there
is any other satisfaction to Godward for sin, then Christ's blood only.
Blasphemy it is, and that horrible, to think otherwise. The blood of Christ
purifieth (says St John) from all sin. And therefore he is called the Lamb
slain from the beginning of the World, because, there was never sin forgiven
of God, nor shall be from the beginning until the end of the World, but only
through Christ's death: Prate the Pope and his Prelates as please them, with
their Pardons, Purgatory, Purgations, Trentalls, Diriges, works of
supererogation, superabomination, etc.

I am he (says the Lord) which puts away thine offenses, Isai 45.
and that for my own sake, and will no more remember thine iniquities. Put me
in remembrance (for we will reason together) and tell me what thou have for
thee, to make thee righteous. Thy first father offended sore, etc. And thus
writes St John, If any man sin, we have an advocate (says he) with the
Father, 1 John 2.
even Jefus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation, or sat is faction
for our sins.

As in the fourth chapter he says; that God has sent his son to be a
propitiation, or satisfaction for our sins: According to that which Paul
writes, where he calls Christ a merciful and faithful Priest, to purge the
peoples sins. So that blind Bussards and perverse Papists they be, which yet
will prate, that our merits or Works do satisfy for our sins, in part or in
whole, before Baptism or after.

For to omit the testimonies I brought out of John and Paul, which the blind
cannot but see: I pray you remember the Text out of Esaias, which even now I
rehearsed, being spoken to such as were then the people of God, and had been a
long time, but yet were fallen into grievous sins, after their adoption into
the number of Gods Children. It is for mine own sake (says God) that I put
away thy sins. Where is your parting of the stake now? If it be for Gods own
sake, if Christ be the propitiation: then recant, except you will become
Idolaters, making your works God and Christ. Say as David teaches: not to us
Lord, not to us, but to thy name be the Glory.

And it is to be noted, that God, does cast in their teeth, even the sin of
their first Father, least they should think that yet, perchance, for the
righteousness and goodness of their good Fathers, their sins might be the
sooner pardoned, and so God accept their works.

If they had taken satisfaction, for that which is done to the Congregation
publicly, by some notable punishment, as in the Primitive Church was used to
open offenders, shadows whereof, and some pore Traces yet remain, when such
as have sinned in Adultery, go about the Church with a Taper in their shirts;
Or if they had taken satisfaction for restitution to Man ward, of such goods as
wrongfully are gotten, the which true repentance cannot be without: or if by
satisfaction, they had meant a new life, to make (as it were) amends to the
Congregation thereby, as by their evil life, they did offend the Congregation;
in which sense the Apostle seems to take that which he writes in 2 Cor. 7.
where the old interpreter calls Apologian, satisfaction, which rather
signifies a defense or answering again. If I say, they had taken satisfaction
any of these ways, then they had done well, so that the satisfaction to God
had been left all only to Christ.

Again if they had taken confession, either for that which is to God
privately, either for that which is to the Congregation publiqucly, either for
that which is a free consultation with some one learned in Gods book, and
called thereunto as first it was used and I wish were now used among us, either
for that which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had been something;
yea, if they had taken it for faith, because it is a true demonstration of
Faith. as in Paul we may see, when he calls Christ the Captain of our
Confession, that is of our Faith (and so confessors were called in the
Primitive Church) such as manfully did witness their faith with the peril of
their lives: if, I say, they had taken it thus, then had they done rightwell.

And so Contrition, if they had left out their subtle distinction, between it
and Attrition, by this word just or full, making it a hearty sorrow for their
sins, then we would never have cried out against them therefore. For we say,
repentance has three parts; Contrition, if you understand it for a hearty
sorrow for sin; Confession, if you understand it for faith, of free pardon in
Gods mercy, by Jesus Christ; and Satisfaction, if you understand it not to
God-wards (for that only to Christ must be left alone) but to man-ward in
restitution of goods wrongfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindered by our
slanders, and in newness of life: although (as I said before) none will show
more plainly by Gods grace that this last is not so much a part indeed, as a
plain effect or fruit of true repentance.

I might here bring in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to be
embraced: but let the example of their grand-sire Judas serve, in whom we see
all the parts of their penance, as they describe it; and yet notwithstanding
he was damned. He was sorry enough, as the effect showed: he had their
contrition fully, out of the which he confessed his fault, saying, I have
betrayed innocent blood: and thereunto he made satisfaction, restoring the money
he had received. But yet all was but lost, he hanged up himself, his bowels
burst out, and he remained a child of perdition for ever. I would wish that
this example of Judas, in whom ye see the parts of their Penance, contrition,
confession, and satisfaction, would move them to repentance, and to describe it
a little better, making hope or trust of Gods free mercy a piece thereof, or
else with Judas they will mar all.

Perchance these words, contrition, coufession, and satisfaction, were used as
I have expounded them at the first, But in that we see so much danger and hurt
by using them without expositions; either let us join to them open expositions
always, or else let us not use them at all, but say as I write, that
repentance is a hearty sorrow for our sins, a good hope or trust of pardon,
through Christ, which is not without an earnest purpose to amend, or a new
life. This repentance is the thing, whereto all the Scripture calls us. This
repentance do I now call you all unto: this must be continually in us, and not
for a Lent-season, as we have thought: this must increase daily more and more
in us, without this we cannot be saved.

Search therefore your hearts all, all swearers, blaspheamers, liars,
flatterers, lewd, or idle talkers, jesters, bribers, covetous persons,
drunkards, gluttons, whoremongers, thieves, murderers, slanderers, idle
livers, negligent in their vocations, etc. All such, and all other as lament
not their sins, as hope not in Gods mercy for pardon, and purpose not
heartily to amend, to leave their swearing, drunkenness, whoredom,
covetousness, idleness, etc. All such I say, shall not, or cannot enter into
God's Kingdom, but hell fire is prepared for them, weeping, and gnashing of
teeth: whereunto, alas, I fear me, very many will needs go, in that very
many will be as they have been; let us even to the wearing of the tongue to
the stumpes, Preach and Pray never so much to the contrary, and that even in
the bowels of Jesus Christ: as now I beseech you all; all and every Mothers
Child, to repent and lament your sin, to trust in Gods mercy, and to amend
your lives.

Now me thinks ye are somewhat astonished: whereby I gather, that presently
you desire this repentance, that is, this sorrow, good hope, and newness of
life, The which that you may the rather attain, and get to your comforts, as I
have gone about to be a mean to stir up in you (by Gods grace) this desire of
Repentance, so through the same grace of God, will I go about now to show you,
how you may have your desire in this behalf.

And first concerning this part, namely, sorrow for our sins, and hearty
lamenting of the same: For this; if you desire the having of it, you must
beware, that you think not that of your selves, or of you own free will, by
any means you can get it. You may easily deceive your selves, and mock your
selves, thinking more of your selves then is seemly. All good things, and not
pieces of good things, but all good things, says St James, come from God the
Father of light. If therefore repentance be good (as it is good) then the parts
of it be good. From God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It
is the Lord that'mortifieth, that brings down, that humbles, says the
Scripture in sundry places: After thou had stricken me (says Jeremy) I was
ashamed, Lo he says After thou had stricken me: and therefore prays he,
even in the last words almost, he writes, Turn us O Lord, and we shall be
turned, The which thing David used very often.

Wherefore first of all, if thou would have this part of repentance, as for
the whole, because it is Gods gift; so for this part go thou unto God, and
male some little prayer, as thou can, unto his mercy for the same, in this or
like sort.

Merciful Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I have sinned and done
Wickedly; yet, through thy goodness, have received a desire of repentance,
whereto, this thy long-sufferance does draw my hard heart: I beseech thee, for
thy mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance in me; and by the
spirit, Power, and Grace, so to humble, mortify, and fear my conscience for my
finnes, that in thy good time thou may comfort and quicken me again through
Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son.

AMEN.

After this sort, I say, or otherwise, as thou think good, if thou will have
this first part, Contrition or sorrow for thy finnes, do thou beg it of God,
through Christ, And when thou have asked it, as I have labored to drive thee
from trusting in thy self; so now I go about to move thee from flattering of
thy self, from sluggishnesse, and negligence, to be diligent to use these
means following. Unto prayer, which I would thou should first use as thou
can: Secondly get thee Gods Law as a glass to look in: for in it, and by it,
comes the true knowledge of sin, without which knowledge there can be no
sorrow. For how can a man sorrow for his finnes, which knows not his finnes?
As when a man is sick, the first step to health, is to know his sickness:
even so to salvation, the first step, is to know thy damnation due for thy many
sins.

The law of God therefore must be gotten, and carefully looked in; we must look
in it spiritually, and not carnally, as the outward word or letter does declare
and utter: and so our Savior teaches us in Matthew, expounding the sixth and
seventh Commandments, not only after the outward deed, but also after the
heart, making there the anger of the heart, a kind of murder; lusting after
another man's wife, a kind of adultery.

And this is one of the differences between Gods Law and man's Law; that of
this (man's law I mean) I am not condemnable, so long as I observe outwardly
the same. But Gods Law goes to the root and to the heart, condemning me for
the inward motion, although outwardly I live most holily. As for example; if I
kill no man, though in my heart I hate, man's law condemns me not: but
otherwise does Gods Law. And why? for it sees the root from whence the evil
does spring. If hatred were taken out of the heart, then loftiness in looks,
detraction in tongue, and murder by hand, could never ensue. If lusting were
out of the heart, curiosity in countenance, wantonness in words, loathsome
boldness in body would not appear.

In that therefore this outward evil springs out of the inward corruption.
James 2.
seeing Gods Law also is a law of liberty, as says St James, and spiritual as
says St Paul, Romans 7.
perfectly and spiritually it is to be understood, if we will truly come to
the knowledge of our sins. For of this inward corruption, reason knows
little or nothing. I had not known (says Paul) that lusting (which to reason,
and to them which are guided only by reason, is thought but a triste) I had not
known (says he) this lusting to have been sin, if the Law had not said, Non
concupisces, thou shall not lust.

To the knowledge therefore of our sin (without which we cannot repent, or be
sorry for our sin) let us secondly get us God's law as a glass to look in:
and not only literally, outwardly, or partly; but also spiritually, inwardly
and thoroughly. Let us consider the heart, and so shall we see the foul spotts
we are stained withal, at lest inwardly, whereby we the rather may be moved to
hearty sorrow and sighing. For as St Augustine says, it is a glass which
fears no body, but even look what a one thou art, so it painteth thee out.

In the Law we see it is a foul spot, not to love the Lord our God, with all
(I say) our heart, soul, power, might, and strength, and that continually.

In the Law it is a soul spot, not only to make to our selves any graven image
or similitude, to bow thereto, etc. but also, not to frame our selves wholly
after the word and image whereto we are made.

In the Law we see that it is soul spot, not only to take Gods name in vain,
but also not earnestly, heartily, and even continually to call upon his name
only, to give thanks unto him only, to believe, to publish, and live in his
holy word.

In Gods Law, we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
prophaner of the Sabbath day, but also not to rest from our own words and
works, that the Lord might both speak and work in us and by us; not to hear
his holy word, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to give occasion to
others to holiness, by our example in Godly works, and reverent esteeming of
the Ministry of his Word.

In Gods Law, we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
disobayer of our parents, Magistrates, Masters, and such as be in any authority
over us; but also not to honor such even in our hearts, not to give thanks to
God for them, not to pray for them, to aid, to help, or relieve them, to bear
with their infirmities, etc.

In Gods Law, we see it is a foul spot in our souls, not only to be a
man-queller in hatred, malice, proud looks, brags, backbiting, railing, or
bodily slaughter: but also not to love our neighbors; yea, or enemies, even in
our hearts, and to declare the same in all our gestures, words and works.

In Gods law, we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be a
Whoremonger in lusting, in our hearts, in wanton looking, in unclean and
wanton talking, in actual doing unhonestly with our Neighbors Wife,
Daughter, servant, etc. But also not to be chaste, sober, temperate in heart,
looks, tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others thereunto accordingly, etc.

In Gods Law, we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only in heart, to
covet, in look or word to flatter, lie, color, etc. in deed to take away any
thing which pertains to another: but also, in heart, countenance, word and
deed, not to keep, save and defend, that which pertains to thy neighbor, as
thou would thine own.

In Gods Law, we may see it a foul spot, not only to lie and bear false
witness against any man; but also, not to have as great a care over thy
Neighbors name, as over thine own.

Sin in Gods Law, it is we may see, and a foul spot, not only to consent to
evil lust, or carnal desires, but even the very carnal lusts and desires
themselves, are sin, as self love, and many such like. By reason whereof I
think there is none that looks well therein, but though he be blameless to
the World, and fair to the show; yet certainly, inwardly his face is foul
arrayed, and so shameful, filthy, pocky, and scabbed, that he cannot but be
sorry at the contemplation thereof, and that so much more, by how much he
continues to look in this glass accordingly.

And thus much concerning the second mean, to the stirring up of sorrow for our
sin, that next unto Prayer we should look in Gods law spiritually. The which
looking, if we use with prayer, as I said, let us not doubt, but at the length
God's spirit will work, as now to such as believe; for to the unbelievers all
is in vain, (their eyes are stark blind, they can see nothing) to such as
believe (I say) I trust something is done even already. But if neither by
prayer, nor by diligent looking into Gods law spiritually, as yet thy hard,
unbelieving heart feels sorrow, nor lamenting for thy sin. Thirdly, look
upon the tagge tied to Gods Law: for to his Law there is a tagge tied, that is,
a penalty, and that no small one, but such an one, as cannot but make us cast
our currish tails between our legs, if we believe it; for all is in vain, if
we be faithless, not to believe before we feel.

This tagge, is Gods malediction or curse. Maledictus omnis (says it) qui non
permanet in omnibus quoe scripta sunt in libro legis, ut faciat eam. Lo,
accursed (says he) is all, no exception, all, says God which continues not
in all things ( for he that is guilty of one is guilty of the whole, says St
James) in all things therefore (says the Holy Ghost) which are written in the
book of the Law to do them, He says not, to hear them, to talk of them, to
dispute of them, but, to do them.

Who is he now that does these? Rara Avis, few such Birds, yea none at all. For
all are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or deed, yet inwardly
at the least by default, and wanting of that which is required: so that a child
of one nights age is not pure, but (by reason of birth-sinne) in danger of Gods
malediction: then much more we, which alas, have drunken in iniquity, as it
were water, as Job says; but yet we quake not. Tell me now, good brother, why
do you so lightly consider Gods curse, that for your sins past you are so
careless as if you had made a covenant with death and damnation, as the wicked
did in Esais time? what is Gods curse? At the Popes curse, with book, bell, and
candle; O! how trembled we which heard it, although the same was not directed
to us; yea, hanging over us, all by reason of our sinnfs: alas, how careless
are we? O faithless hard hearts! o Jesabels guests, rocked and laid asleep in
her bed! O wicked wretches, which being come into the depth of sin, do
contemn the same! O sorrowlesse sinners, and shameless harlots.

Is not the anger of a King death? and is the anger of the King of all Kings, a
matter so lightly to be regarded as we do regard it, which for our sins are
so wretchlesse, that we slugge and sleep it out? As wax melts away at the
heat of the fire (says David) so do the wicked perish at the face or
countenance of the Lord.

If, dearly beloved, his face be so terrible and intolerable for sinners, and
the wicked: what think we his hand is? At the face and appearing of Gods anger,
the earth trembles: but we, earth, earth yea, stones, Iron, flints, tremble
nothing at all. If we will not tremble in hearing, woe unto us, for then shall
we be crushed in pieces in feeling. If a Lion roar, the beasts quake: but we
are worse then beasts, which quake nothing at the roaring of the Lion, I mean
the Lord of Hosts. And why? because the curse of God, hardness of heart, is
fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and tremble for our sins: If
not for the shame and foulness thereof; yet, at the least, for the
malediction and curse of God, which hangs over us for them.

Lord be merciful unto us for thy "Christ's fake, and spare us in thine anger,
"remember thy mercy toward us Amen.

And (thus much for the third thing for the moving of us to sorrow for our
sins! that is, for the tagge tied to Gods Law, I mean, for the malediction
and curse of God. But if our hearts be so hard, that through these we yet feel
no hearty sorrow for our sins: Let us fourthly set before us, examples past
and present, old and new; thereby the holy spirit may be effectual, to work
in his time this work, of sorrowing for our sin.

Look upon Gods anger for sin in Adam and Eve, for eating a piece of an
apple, or some such fruit. Were not they the dearest creatures of God, cast out
of Paradise? Were not they subject to mortality, travail, labor, etc. Was not
the earth accursed for their sins? Do not we all, men in labor, women in
travailing with child, and all in death, mortality and misery, even in this
life feel the same? And was God so angry for their sin, and he being the
same God will he say nothing to us for ours (alas) more horrible then the
eating once of one piece of an apple?

In the time of Noah and Lot, Genesis 6. Genesis 19.
God destroyed the whole world with Water; and the Cities of Sodom with
Gomorrah, Seboim and Adama, with fire and brimstone from heaven for their
sins namely for their Whoredoms, pride, idleness, unmercifulness to the
poor, tyranny, etc. In which wrath of God, even the very babes, birds, fowls,
fishes, herbs, trees, and grass perished: and think we that nothing will be
spoken to us much worse, and more abominable then they. For all men may see, if
they will, that the Whoredoms, pride, unmercifulness, tyranny, etc. of
England, Genesis 19.
far passes in this age, any age that ever was before, Lots wife looking
back was turned into a salt stone: and will our looking back again, yea our
turning back again, to our wickedness, do us no hurt. If we were not already
more then blind Beetles, we would blush; Pharaoh his heart was hardened, so that
no miracle could convert him: if ours were any thing soft, we would begin to
sobbe. Josua and Caleb.


Of six hundred thousand men only two entered into the Land of promise, because
they had ten times sinned against the Lord, as he himself says; Number. 14.
and think we, that God will not swear in his wrath, that we shall never enter
into his rest, which have sinned so many ten times, as we have toes and
fingers; yea, hairs on our heads and beards (I fear me) and yet we pass not.

The man that swear, Lev. 24a Number. 13.
and he that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day were stoned to death, but we
think our swearing is no sin, our bribing, rioting, yea, whore-hunting on the
Sabbath day, pleases God, or else we would something amend our manners.

Elies negligence in correcting his sons, 1 K. 5.
nipped his neck in two: but ours which pamper up our Children like puppets,
will they put us to no plunge? Elies sons for disobaying their Fathers
admonition, brought over them Gods vengeance: and will our stubbornness do
nothing.

Saul's malice to David, 3 Reg. 21.22.
Acabs displeasure against Naboth, brought their blood to the ground for dogs
to eat; yea, their Children were hanged up and slain for this cause: 4 Reg.
21. 4 Reg. 10.
but we continue in malice, envy and murder, as though we were able to wage
war withthe Lord.

David's adultery with Bathsheba was visited on the child borne, on David's
daughter, defiled by her brother, and on his children one slaying another, his
Wives defiled by his own son, and himself driven out of his Realm in his
old age; and otherwise also, although he most heartily repented his sin: But me
thinks we are more dear unto God then David, which yet was a man after God's
own heart, or else we could not but tremble, and begin to repent.

The rich glutton who insatiatly delighted in gluttony; what did it avail him?
it brought his soul to hell, and have we any pre-eminence that God will do
nothing to us.

Achans subtle theft provoked Gods anger against all Israel: and our subtilty:
yea, open extortion, is so fine and politic, that we think God cannot epsy it.

Gehezi his covetousness, brought it not the Leprosy upon him, and on all his
seed? Judas also hanged himself. But the covetousness of England is of
another cloth and color: Well, if it were so, the same Tailor will cut it
accordingly.

Ananias and Saphyra, by Lying, linked to them sudden death: but ours now
prolongeth our life the longer, to last in eternal death.

The false witnesses of the two Judges, against Susanna, lighted on their own
heads, and so will ours do at length.

But what go I about to avouch ancient examples, where daily experience does
teach? The sweat the other year, the storms the Winter following, will us to
weigh them in the same balances, Men hanging and killing themselves, which are
(alas) too rife in all places, require us to register them in the same roules.
At the least, Children, Infants, and such like, which yet can not utter sin
by word or deed; we see Gods anger against sin, in punishing them by
sickness, death, mis-hap, or otherwise, so plainly, that we cannot but groan
again, in that we have poured out these sins in word or deed more abundantly.

And here, with me, a little look on God's anger, yet so fresh, that we cannot
but smell it, although we stop our noses never so much; I pray God we smell
it not more fresh hereafter, I mean it forsooth (for I know you look for it)
in our dear late Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, you all know he was but a
child in years defiled he was not with notorious offenses: Defiled, said I, nay
rather, adorned with so many good gifts, and wonderful qualities, as never
Prince was from the beginning of the World. Should I speak of his wisdom, of
his ripeness in judgment, of his learning, of his Godly zeal, Heroical
heart, Fatherly care for his Commons, Nurse-like solicitude for Religion? etc.

Nay, so many things are to be spoken of Gods exceeding graces in this Child,
that, as Salust writes of Carthage; I had rather speak nothing, then too
little, in that too much is too little

This gift God gave unto us Englishmen, before all Nations under the Sun, and
that of their exceeding love toward us. But alas, alas; for our
unthankfulness sake, for our sin sake, for our carnality and profane
living, Gods anger has touched, not only the body, but also the mind of our
King, by a long sickness, and at length has taken him away by death; death,
cruel death, fearful death, O, if Gods judgment be begun on him, which as
he was the chiefest, so I think the holiest, and godliest in the Realm of
England, (alas) what will it be on us, whose sins have overgrowne so our
heads, that they are climed up to heaven? I pray you (my good brethren know,
that Gods anger toward us for our sins cannot but be great: yea, too fell,
in that we see it was so great, that our good King could not bear it. What
befell Jewry, after the death of Josias? Lord save England, and give us
repentance: my heart will not suffer me to tarry longer herein: I hope this
will cause some repentance.

If therefore the prayer for Gods fear, the looking in God's glass, and the
tagge thereto will not burst open the blockish heart, yet hope I, that the
repetition of these examples; especially of our late King, and this troublesome
time, will move some tears out of thine heart, if thou will pray for Gods
Spirit accordingly. For who art thou (think always with thy self) that God
should spare thee more then them, whose examples thou have heard? What friends
have thou? Were not of these Kings, Prophets, Apostles, learned, and come of
holy stocks? I deceive my self (think thou with thy self) if I believe that
God, being the same God that he was, will spare me; whose wickedness is no
less, but much more then some of theirs. He hates sin now as much as ever
he did. The longer he spares, the greater vengeance will fall: the deeper he
draws his Bow, the sorer will his shaft pierce.

But if yet thy heart be so hardened, that all this will not move thee; then
surely art thou in a very evil estate, and remedy now I know none. What, say
I, none? Know I none? Yes, there is one, which is suresby, as they say, to
serve, if any thing will serve: You look to know what this is forsooth, the
Passion, and Death of Jesus Christ. You know, the cause, why Christ became man,
and suffered as he suffered, was the sins of his People, that he might save
them from the same.

Consider the greatness of the sore, I mean sin, by the greatness of the
Chyrurgion, and the salve. Who was the Chyrurgion? no Angel, no saint, no
Archangel, no power, no creature in heaven nor earth: but only he, by whom all
things were made, all things are ruled also; even Gods own Deareling, and only
beloved son, becoming man.

Oh what a great thing is this, that could not be done by the Angels,
Archangels, Potentates, powers, or all the creatures of God, without his own
son? who of necessity must come down from heaven, to take our nature, and
become man. Here have ye the Chyrurgion: great was the cure, that this mighty
Lord took in hand.

Now, what was the salve? certainly of an unestimable value, and of many
compositions: I cannot recite all, but rather must leave it to your hearty
considerations, Thirty three years was he curing our sore: he sought it
earnestly, by fasting, watching, praying, etc. The same night that he was
betrayed, I read how busy he was about a plaster in the Garden, when he lying
flat on the ground, praying with tears, and that of blood not a few, but so
many as did flow down on the ground again; crying on this sort, Father (says
he) if it be possible, let this cup depart from me. That is, if it be possible,
that else the sins of man kind can be taken away, grant that it may be so.
Thou heardest Moses crying for the Idolaters: thou heardest Lot for the
Zoarites: Samuel, David, and many other, for the Israelites. And, dear Father,
I only am thine own Son, as thou have said, in whom thou art well pleased:
will thou not hear me? I have by the space of thirty three years, done always
thy will: I have so humbled my self, that I would become an abject amongst
men, to obey thee. Therefore (dear Father) if it be possible grant my request,
save mankind, now without any farther labor, salves, or plasters. But yet
(says he) not as I will, but as thou will.

But Sir, what heard he? Though he sweat blood and water, in making his
plaster for our sore of sin, yet it framed not. Twice he cried without
comfort; yea, though to comfort him God sent an Angel, we know that yet this
plaster was not allowed for sufficient, until hereunto, Christ Jesus, was
betrayed, forsaken of all his Disciples, forsworn of his dearly beloved,
bound like a Thief, belyed on, buffeted, whipped, scourged, crowned with
thorns, crucified, racked, nailed, hanged up be, tween two thieves, cursed and
railed upon, mocked in misery, and had given up the ghost; then bowed down the
head of Christ, then God the Father which is the head of Christ; allowed the
plaster, to be sufficient and good for the healing of our sore, which is
sin. Now would God abide our breath, because the stink, damnation,
guiltiness, was taken away, by the sweet savor of the breath of this Lamb,
thus offered once for all.

So that here, dearly beloved, we as in a glass may see, to the bruising of
our blockish hard hearts, Gods great judgment and anger against sin. The
Lord of Lords, the King of Kings, the brightness of Gods glory, the Son of
God, the dearling of his Father, in whom he is well pleased, hangs between
two Thieves, crying for thee and me, and for us all; My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me.

Oh hard hearts that we have, who delight in sin. Look on this, see the very
heart of Christ pierced with a fpeare, wherein thou may see, and read Gods
anger for sin. Woe to thy hard heart that pierced it.

And thus much for the first part of Repentance, I mean, for the means of
working contrition. First use Prayer. then look on Gods Law: thirdly, see his
curse: fourthly, set examples of his anger before thee: and last of all, set
before thee the precious death of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

From this and prayer cease not, till thou feel some hearty sorrow for thy
sin. The which when thou feel, then labor for the other part, that is,
faith, in this sort.

As first in contrition I willed thee not to trust to thy free will, for the
attaining of it: so do I will thee in this. Faith is so far from the reach
of man's free will, that to reason it is plain foolishness. Therefore, thou
must first go to God, whose gift it is; thou must I say, get thee to the
Father of mercy, whose work it is, that as he has brought thee down by
Contrition, and humbled thee, so he would give thee Faith, raise thee up, and
exalt thee.

In this manner therefore, with the Apostles, and the poor man in the Gospel
that cried, Lord increase our Faith; Lord help my unbeleefe, pray thou and say,
O merciful and dear Father, of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whom, as
thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him. for as much as he
often bids us to ask of thee, and thereto promises that thou will hear
us, and grant us that which in his name we shall ask of thee. lo, gracious
Father, I am bold to beg of thy mercy, through thy Son Jesus Christ, one
sparkle of true and certain persuasion of thy goodness and love toward me
in Christ, where through, I being assured of the Pardon of all my sins, by
the mercies of Christ thy Son, may be thankful to thee, love thee and serve
thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

On this sort, I say, or otherwise, as God shall move thee, pray thou first of
all, and look for thy request at Gods hand, without any doubting, though
forthwith thou feel not the same; for oftentimes we have things of God given
us, long before we feel them as we would do. Now unto this prayer, use thou
these means following.

After prayer for Faith, which I would should be first; Secondly, because the
same springs out of the hearing, not of Mass, Mattins, Canons, Counsels,
Doctors, Decrees, but out of the hearing of Gods word, get Gods word; but, not
that part which serves specially to Contrition; that is, the Law: but the
other part, which serves specially to consolation and certain persuasions of
Gods love toward thee, that is, the Gospel or publication of Gods mercy in
Christ, I mean the free promises.

But here thou must know, that there are two kinds of promises; one, which is
properly of the Law, another of the Gospel. In the promises of the Law, we may
indeed behold Gods mercy, but so, that it hangs upon the condition of our
worthiness, as if thou love the Lord withal thy heart, etc. thou shall find
mercy. This kind of promise though it declare unto us Gods love, which
promises where he needs not: yet unto him that feels not Christ, which is
the end of the Law, they are so far from comforting, that utterly with the
Law they bring man to great despair; so greatly we are corrupt, for none so
loves God as he ought to do, From these therefore get thee to the other
promises of the Gospel, in which we may see such plenty, and frank liberality
of Gods goodness, that we cannot but be much comforted, though we have very
deeply sinned. For these promises of the Gospel do not hang on the condition
of our worthiness, as the promises of the Law do; but they depend and hang on
Gods truth, that as God is true, so they cannot but be performed to all them
which lay hold on them by Faith; I had almost said, which cast them not away by
unbelief.

Mark in them therefore two things; namely, that as well they are free
promises, without any condition of our worthiness, as also that they are
universally offered to all (I say) which are not so stubborn, as to keep still
their hands, whereby they should receive this alms in their bosoms, by
unbelief. As concerning Infants and children, you know I now speak not; but
concerning such as be of years of discretion, and under the Gospel. And now you
look that I should give you a taste of these promises, which are both free and
universal: except none but such as except themselves. Well, you shall have one
or two for a say.

In the 3d of John says our Savior! So God the Father loved the World, that
he would give his Deareling, his one only son, that all that believe in him
should not perish but have everlasting life. Lo, Sir, he says not, that some
might have life? but all says he. And what all? all that love him with all
their hearts? all that have lived a good life? Nay all that believe in him.
Although thou have lived a most wicked and horrible life, if now thou believe
in him, thou shall be saved, Is not this sweet grace?

Again, says Christ: Come unto me all ye that labor and are laden, and I
will refresh you. Let us a little look on this letter, Come unto me, Who shall
come? Lords, Priests, Holy men, Monks, Friars? yea, Cobblers, Tinkers, Whores,
Thieves, Murderers also, if they lament their sins. Come unto me (says he)
all ye that labor and are laden; that is, which are afraid and weary of your
sins. And what will thou do, Lord? And I shall refresh you says he.

Oh what a thing is this: And I will refresh you? Wot you who spoke this? He
that never told lie: He is the truth, there was never guile found in his mouth:
and now will he be untrue to thee (good brother) which art sorry for thy
grievous sins? No forsooth, heaven and earth shall pass, and perish, but his
word shall never fail.

Saint Paul says, God would have all men saved. Lo, he excepteth none. And to
Titus: the grace of God brings salvation to all men. as from Adam, all have
received sin to damnation; so by Christ all have grace offered to Salvation,
if they reject not the same. I speak not now of Infants, I say, nor need I
enter into the matter of Predestination. In preaching of repentance, I would
gather where I could with Christ.

As surely as I live, (says God') I will not the death of a sinner. art thou a
sinner? Yea: Lo, God swears, he will not thy death. How can thou now
perish? Consider with thy self, what profit thou should have, to believe
this to be true to others, if not, to thy self also: Satan does so. Rather
consider with Peter; that the promise of Salvation pertains not only to them
which are nigh, or to such as are fallen a little: but also to all, to whom the
Lord has called, be they never so far off.

Lo, nowby me, the Lord calls thee, thou Man, thou Woman, that art very
far off. The promise therefore pertains to thee, needs must thou be saved,
except thou with Satan say, God is false. and if thou do so, God is faithful
and cannot deny himself: as thou shall feel by his plagues in hell, for so
dishonouring God, to think that he is not true. Will he be found false now? The
matter hangs not on thy worthiness, but it hangs on God's truth. Clap hold
on it, and I warrant thee, Christ is the propitiation for our sins; yea for
the sins of the whole World, of Jew and Gentiles; believe this, Man; I know
thou believe it: say therefore in thy heart still, Domine adauge mihi fidem,
Lord increase my faith: Lord help my unbeleefe. Blessed are they which see not
(by reason) this but yet believe: Beloved, we must hope above hope, as Abraham
did.

And thus much for a taste of the promises, which are every where, not only in
the new Testament, but also in the Old. Read the last end of Leviticus 26. The
Prophet Isaiah 30. Where he says, God tarryeth looking for thee to show thee
mercy. also the 40, and so forth to the 60. Read also 2 Kings 24. Ps. 33. Joel
2. etc.

Howbeit if all this will not serve, and if yet thou feel no faith, no
certain persuasion of Gods love; then prepare thy self unto Prayer, and
diligent considering of the free and universal promises of the Gospel. Thirdly
set before thee those blessings which heretofore, and at this present, God has
given thee. Consider, how he has made thee a Man or a Woman, which might have
made thee a Toade, or a Dog; And why did he this? Verily, because he loved
thee. and think thou, if he loved thee when thou wast not, to make thee such
a one, as he most graciously has; and will he not now love thee, being his
handy work? Does he hate any thing that he made? Is there unablenesse with him?
Does he love for a day, and so farewell? No, beloved, God loves to the end,
his mercy endures for ever. Say therefore with Job. Operi manum tuarum,
porrige dextram, that is, to the work of thy hands, put thy helping hand.

Again, has he not made thee a Christian Man or Woman, where if he would he
might have made thee a Turk or Pagan? This thou know he did of love, and
do thou think his love is lessened, if thou lament thy sin? Is his hand
shortened for helping thee? Can a Woman forget the child of her womb? and
though she should, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord. He has given
thee limbs, he has given thee wit, reason, discretion, etc. to See, hear,
go, etc. He has long spared thee, and borne with thee, when thou never
purposed'st to repent: and now thou repenting, will he not give thee mercy?
Wherefore does he grant thee to live at this present, to hear him to speak
this, and me to speak this but of love to us all? Oh, therefore let us pray
him, that he would add to this, that we might believe these love tokens, that
he loves us, and indeed he will do it. Lord open our eyes in thy gifts, to
see thy gracious goodness, Amen.

But to tarry in this I will not. Let every man consider Gods benefits, past
and present, public and private, spiritual and corporal, to the confirming
of his faith, concerning the promises of the Gospel, for the pardon of his
sins.

I will now go about to show you a fourth mean to confirm your faith in
this, even by examples. Of these there are in the Scriptures very many; as also
daily experience does diversely teach the same, if we were diligent to observe
things accordingly; wherefore, I will be more brief herein, having respect to
time, which steals fast away.

Adam in Paradise transgressed grievously, as the painful punishment, which we
all as yet feel, proves, if nothing else. Though by reason of his sin, he
displeased God sore, and ran away from God, (for he would have hid himself;
yea, he would have made God the causer of his sin, in that he gave him such a
Mate, so far was he from asking mercy) yet all this notwithstanding, God
turned his fierce wrath, neither upon him nor Eve, which also required not
mercy; but upon the Serpent Satan: promising unto them a seed, Jesus Christ;
by whom, they at the length should be delivered. In token whereof, though they
were cast out of Paradise for their nurture, to serve in sorrow, which would
not serve in joy; yet he made them apparel to cover their nakedness; a visible
document, and token of his invisible love and grace, concerning their souls.
If God was so merciful to Adam, which so sore brake his commandment, and
rather blamed God then asked mercy; Think thou, O man, that he will not be
merciful to thee, which blamest thy self and desire pardon?

To Cain he offered mercy if he would have asked it, What have thou done, says
God? the voice of thy Brothers blood, Cries unto me out of the earth. O
merciful Lord (should Cain have said) I confess it; But a las he did not so,
and therefore, said God; Now, that is, in that thou desire not mercy; Now, I
say, be thou accursed etc. Lo, to the reprobate he offered mercy, and will he
deny it thee, which art his child?

Noah did he not sin and was drunk? good Lot also, both in Sodom dissembled a
little with the Angels, prolonging the time; and out of Sodom he fell very
foul; as did Judah and the Patriarks against Joseph; but yet I ween they found
mercy. Moses, Myriam, Aaron, though they stumbled a little, yet received they
mercy: Yea, the people in the wilderness often sinned and displeased God, so
that he was purposed to have destroyed them. Let me alone (says he to Moses)
that I may destroy them. But Moses did not let him alone, for he prayed still
for them, and therefore God spared them. If the people were spared, through.
Moses prayer, they not praying with him, but rather worshipping their golden
Calfe, eating and drinking, and making jolly good cheer: Beloved, why
should thou doubt whether God will be merciful to thee? having as indeed
thou have, one much better then Moses to pray for thee and with thee, even
Jesus Christ, who sits on the right hand of his Father, and prays for us,
being no less faithful in his Fathers house, the Church, then Moses was in
the Synagogue. David, that good King, had a foul foil, when he committed
Whoredom with his faithful servants wife, Bethsheba; whereunto he added also
a mischievous murder, causing her husband, his most faithful Soldier Vriah
to be slain, with an honest company of his most valiant men of war, and that
with the sword of the uncircumcised.

In this sin though a great while he lay asleep (as many do now adays, God
give them good waking) thinking that by the Sacrifices he offered, all was
well, God was content: yet at length, when the Prophet, by a Parable, opened
the offense, and brought David in remembrance of his own sin, and in such
sort, that he gave judgment against himself; then quaked he, his Sacrifices
had no more taken away his sins, then our Sir John's Trentals, and wagging of
his fingers over the heads of such as lie asleep in their sins (out of the
which when they are awaked, they will see, that it is neither Mass nor
Mattins, blessing nor cursing will serve) then I say, he cried out, saying,
Peccavi Domine, I have sinned (says he) against my Lord and good God, which
has done so much for me; I caused indeed Vriah to be killed, I have sinned, I
have sinned, what shall I do? I have sinned, and am worthy of eternal
damnation. But what says God, by this Prophet: Dominus transtulit peccatum
tuum, non morieris; The Lord has taken away thy sins, thon shall not dye. O
good God, he said, but Peccavi, I have sinned: but yet from his heart, and not
from his lips only, as Pharavh and Saul did, and incontinently he hears; Thou
shall not dye, the Lord has taken away thy sins: Or rather, has laid them
upon the back of his son Jesus Christ, who bare them, and not only them, but
thine and mine also, if that we will now cry but from our hearts, Peccavimus,
we have sinned, good Lord we have done wickedly, enter not into judgment with
us, but be merciful unto us after thy great mercy, and according to the
multitude of thy compassions, do away our iniquities, etc. For indeed, God is
not the God of David only: Idem Deus omnium, He is the God of all: so that,
Quicunque invocaver it nomen Domini, salvus erit. He or she, whosoever they be
that call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In confirmation whereof,
this History is written, as are also the other which I have recited, and many
more which I might recite. As of manasses the wicked King, which slew Esaias the
Prophet, and wrought very much wickedness; yet the Lord showed mercy upon him.
being in prison, as his prayer does teach us. Nebuchadnezzar though for a time
he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found much mercy,

The City of Ninivie also found favor with God, as did many other, which for
brevity I will omit, and will bring forth one or two out of the New Testament,
that we may see God to be the same God in the New Testament, that he was in the
Old.

I might tell you of many, if I should speak of the Lunatic, such as were
possessed with Devils, Lame, Blind, dumb, deaf, lepers, etc. but time will not
suffer me, therefore, one or two shall serve. Mary Magdalen had seven Devils,
but yet they were cast out of her: and of all others, she was the first that
Christ appeared unto, after his resurrection. Thomas would not believe Christ's
resurrection, though many told him, which had seen and felt him: by reason
whereof, a man might have thought that his sins would have cast him away.
Except I should see and feel (says he) I will not believe. Ah wilful Thomas;
I will not, says he, but Christ appeared unto him, and would not loose him,
neither will he thee, beloved, if with Thomas, thou will keep company with the
Disciples, as Thomas did. Peter's fall was ugly he accursed himself, if ever he
knew Christ, and that for fear of a Maiden, and lied not once, but three
several times, and that in the hearing of Christ his Master; but yet the third
time Christ looked back, and cast on him his eye of grace, so that he went out
and wept bitterly. And after Christ's resurrection, not only did the Angels will
the Woman to tell Peter, that Christ was risen, but Christ himself appeared
unto him; such a good Lord is he.

The Thief hanging on the Cross, said thus; Lord when thou come into thy
Kingdom, remember me; And what answer had he? This day (says Christ) thou
shall be with me in Paradise. What a comfort is this, in that he is now the
same Christ to thee and me, and to us all, if we will run unto him? for he
is the same. Christ to day and to morrow, until he come to judgment, Then
indeed, he will be inexorable; but now is he more ready to give then we to
ask. If thou cry, he hears thee even before thou cry.

Cry therefore, behold, man, Isai 31. Mat. 7.
he is not partial. Call, says he, and I will he are thee; ask and thou
shall have; seek and thou shall find; though not at the first, yet at the
length. If he tarry a while, it is but to try thee. Nam veniens veniet, and non
tardabit; Heb. 10.
He is coming and will not be long.

Thus have you four means, which you must use to the attaining of faith, or
certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward you, which is the second part of
repentance; namely, prayer, the free and universal promises of Gods graces,
the recordation of the benefits of God, past and present, the examples of Gods
mercy. Which although they might suffice, yet will I put one more to them,
which only of it self, is full sufficient; I mean, the death of the Son of
God, Jesus Christ; which if thou set before the eyes of thy mind, it will
confirm thy assurance; for it is the great Seal of England, as they say; yea,
of all the World, for the confirmation of all Patents and perpetuities of the
everlasting life, whereunto we are all called.

If I thought these, which I have before recited, were not sufficient to
confirm your faith of Gods love toward such as do repent, I would tarry
longer herein. But because I have been both long, and also I trust, you have
some exercise of conscience in this daily (or else you are to blame) I will but
touch and go, consider with your selves what we are, misers, wretches, and
enemies to God. Consider what God is, even he which has all power, majesty,
might, glory, riches, etc. perfectly of himself, and needs nothing, but has
all things. Consider what Christ is, concerning his Godhead, coequall with his
Father, even he by whom all things were made; he, I say, by whom all things are
ruled and governed. Concerning his Manhood, the only Deareling of his Father,
in whom is all his joy. Now Sir, what a love is this? that this God which
needs nothing, would give wholly his own self to thee, his enemy, wreaking
his wrath upon himself, in this his son: as a man may say, to spare thee, to
save thee, to win thee, to bye thee, to have thee, to enjoy thee for ever.
Because thy sin has separated thee from him, to the end thou might come
eftsoons into his company again, and therein remain; he himself became, as
a man would say, a sinner; or rather sin it self, even a malediction or
curse: that we sinners, we accursed by our sin, might by his oblation or
suffering for our sins, by his curse, be delivered from sin and from
malediction. For by sin he destroyed sin, killing Death, Satan, and sin,
by their own weapons; and that for thee and me (man) if we cast it not away by
unbelief. Oh wonderful love of God. Who ever heard of such a love? The Father
of Heaven for us his enemies, to give his own dearly beloved Son, Jesus
Christ, and that not only to be our brother, to dwell among us: but also, to
the death of the Cross for us? Oh wonderful love of Christ to us all, that
was content and willing to work this deed for us. Was there any love like to
this love?

God indeed has commended his charity and love to us herein, that when we were
very enemies unto him, he would give his own son for us, That we being men,
might become, as you would say, Gods; God would become man, That we being
mortal, might become immortal, the immortal God would become mortal man.
That we earthly wretches might be Citizens of Heaven, the Lord of Heaven would
become, as a man would say, earthly. That we being accursed, might be blessed,
God would be accursed. That we by our father Adam, being brought out of
Paradise, into the puddle of all pain, migh be redeemed, and brought into
Paradise again, God would be our Father and an Adam, thereunto. That we having
nothing, might have all things; God having all things, would have nothing. That
we being vassailes, and slaves to all, even to Satan the Fiend, might be Lords
of all, and of Satan: The Lord of all would become a vassaile, and a slave to
us all, and in danger of Satan. Oh love incomprehensible. Who can otherwise
think now, but if the gracious good Lord disdained not to give his own Son,
his own hearts joy for us his very enemies, before we thought to beg any such
thing at his hands; yea, before we were? Who, I say, can think otherwise, but
that with him, he will give us all good things. If when we hated him and fled
away from him, he sent his Son to seek us: who can think otherwise, then that
now we loving him, and lamenting, because we love him no more, but that he will
for ever love us? He that gives the more to his enemies, will he not give the
less to his friends? God has given his own Son, then which nothing is
greater; even to us his enemies: and we now being become his friends, will he
deny us faith and pardon of our sins? which though they be great, yet in
comparison they are nothing at all to the price given, Christ Jesus would give
his own self for us, when we willed it not: and will he now deny us Faith, if
we will it? This will is his earnest, that he has given us truly to look
indeed, for the thing willed. And look thou for it indeed: for as he has given
thee to will, so will he give thee to do.

Jesus Christ gave his life for our evils, and by his death he delivered us. O
then, in that he lives now, and cannot dye, will he forsake us? his heart
blood was not too dear for us, when we asked it not: what can then be now too
dear for us, asking it? Is he a changeling? Is he mutable as a man is: Can he
repent him of his gifts? Did he not foresee our falls? Paid not he therefore
the price? Because he saw we should fall sore, therefore would he suffer sore.
Yea, if his suffering had not been enough, he would yet once more come again.
God the Father, I may say, if the death of his son incarnate. would not
serve, would himself and the Holy Ghost also become incarnate, and dye for us.

This Death of Christ therefore look on, as the very pledge of Gods love
toward thee, whosoever thou art, how deep soever thou have sinned. See, Gods
hands are nailed, they cannot strike thee; his feet also, he cannot run from
thee; his arms are wide open to embrace thee: his head hangs down to kiss
thee: his very heart is open, so that therein look; nay even see, and thou
shall see nothing therein, but love, love, love, love to thee: hide thee there,
lay thy head there with the Evangelist.

This is the clift of the Rock, wherein Elias stood. This is for all aching
heads a pillow of down.

Anoint thy head with this oil, let this ointment embalme thy head, and wash
thy face.

Tarry thou on this firm rock, and I Will warrant thee. Say with Paul, What can
separate me from the love of God? can death, can poverty, can sickness,
hunger, or any misery, persuade thee now that God loves thee not? Nay, nothing
can separate thee from the love, wherewith God has loved thee in Christ Jesus;
whom he loves he loves to the end. So that now where abundance of sin has
been in thee, the more is the abundance of grace. But to what end? Certainly,
that as sin has reigned to death, as thou see, to the killing of Gods
Son; so now Grace must reign to life, to the honoring of Gods Son, who is
now alive and cannot dye any more.

So that they which by faith feel this cannot any more dye to God, but to
sin, whereto they are dead and buried with Christ.

As Christ therefore lives, so do they, and that to God, to righteousness
and holiness, The life which they live, is, In fide Filii Dei: in the faith of
the Son of God, whereby you see that now I am slipped into that, which I made
the third part of repentance: namely, newness of life, which I could not so
have done, if that it were a part of it self indeed, it is an effect or fruit
of the second part; that is, of faith, or trust in Gods mercy. For he that
believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, sin to be such a thing, that is
the cause of all misery, and of it self so greatly angreth God, that in Heaven
nor in earth, nothing could appease his wrath; save only the death and
precious bloodshedding of the Son of God, in whom is all the delight and
pleasure of the Father: he, I say, that is persuaded thus of his sin; the
same cannot but in heart abhor and quake to do or say; yea, to think any
thing willingly, which Gods Law teaches him to be sin.

Again, he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded, Gods love to be so
much toward him, that where through sin he was lost, and made a firebrand of
Hell; the eternal Father of mercy, which is the omni-sufficient God, and
needs nothing in us, or of any thing that we can do, to deliver us out of
Hell, and to bring us into Heaven; did send even his own most dear Son out
of his bosom, out of heaven into hell (as a man would say) to bring us, as I
said, from thence into his own bosom and mercy, we being his very enemies: he
I say, that is thus persuaded of Gods love toward him, and of the price of his
redemption, by the dear blood of the Lamb immaculate, Jesus Christ, the same
man cannot but love God again; and of love do that, and heartily desire to
do better, the which might please God.

Think you, that such a one knowing these things by Faith, will willingly
insist and wallow in his wilful lusts, pleasures and fantasies? Will such a
one as knows by Faith, Christ Jesus to have given his blood to wash him from
his sins play the Sow to nuzle in his puddle of filthy sin and vice again?
Nay, rather then he will be defiled again by his wilful sinning, he will wash
often the feet of his affections, watching over the vice still sticking in him;
which as a spring, continually sends out poison enough to drown and defile
him, if the sweet water of Christ's passion in Gods sight, did not wash it, and
his blood satisfy the rigor of Gods justice due for the same.

This blood of Christ shed for our sins, is so dear in the sight of him that
believes, that he will abhor in his heart to stamp it, and tread it under
his feet.

He knows now by his belief, that it is too much, that hitherto he has set
too little by it, and is ashamed thereof. Therefore for the residue of his
life; he purposes to take better heed to himself, then before he did. Because
he sees by his faith, the grievousnesse of Gods anger, the foulness of sin,
the greatness of Gods mercy, and of Christ's love toward him, he will now be
heedy to pray unto God to give him his grace accordingly; that as with his
eyes, and tongue, hands and feet, etc. he has displeased God, doing his own
will: even so now with the same eyes, tongue, etc. he may displease his own
self, and do Gods will: Willingly will he not do that which might renew the
death of the son of God. He knows he has too much sin, unwillingly in
him, so that thereto he will not add willing offenses.

This willing and witting, offending and sinning, whosoever does flatter
himself therein; does evidently demonstrate and show, that he never yet
indeed, tasted of Christ truly. He was never truly persuaded or believed, how
foul a thing sin is, how grievous a thing Gods anger is, how joyful and
precious a thing, Gods mercy in Christ is, how exceeding broad, wide, high, and
deep Christ's love is: Perchance he can talk and Preach of Faith, but yet
truly in heart he never felt it effectually, for if he did once feel this
ravishing consolation indeed, then would he be so far from continuing in
sin, willingly and wittingly, that wholly and heartily he would give over
himself to that which is contrary, I mean to a new life, renewing his youth,
even as the Eagle does. For as we, being in the servitude of sin, demonstrate
our service, by giving over our members to the obaying of sin, from iniquity
to iniquity: even so we being made free from sin, by faith in Jesus Christ,
and endued with Gods spirit, a spirit of liberty, must needs demonstrate this
freedom and liberty, by giving over our members to the obedience of the
spirit: by the which we are lead and guided from virtue to virtue, and all kind
of holiness. As the unbelievers declare their unbeleefe, by the working of the
evil spirit in them, in the outward fruits of the flesh: even so the believers
declare their faith, by the working of Gods Spirit in them outwardly the fruits
of the Spirit. For as the Devil is not dead in those which are his, but
works still to their damnation: so is not God dead in them which be his, but
works still to their salvation: The which working is not the cause of the one
or the other being in any; but only a demonstration, a sign, a fruit of the
same: As the Apple is not the cause of the Apple tree, but the fruit of it.

Thus then you see briefly that newness of life, is not indeed a part of
repentance, but a fruit of it, a demonstration of the justifying faith, a sign
of Gods good spirit possessing the heart of the penitent: as the old life is a
fruit of impenitency, a demonstration of a lipfaith, or unbelief, a sign of
Satan's spirit, possessing the heart of the impenitent, which all those be,
that be not penitent.

For mean I know none; He that is not penitent, the same is impenitent; he
that is not governed by Gods spirit, the same is governed by Satan's Spirit.
For all that be Christians are governed with the spirit of Christ, which spirit
has its fruits. All other that be not Christ's, are the Devils. He that
gathers not with Christ scatters abroad.

Therefore my dearly beloved, I beseech you to consider this, and deceive not
your selves. If you be not Christ's, then pertain you to the Devil; of which
things the fruits of the flesh does assure you, as whoredom, adultery,
uncleanness, wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, envy, strife, contention,
wrath, sedition, murder, drunkenness, gluttony, blasphemy, slothfulness,
vain talking, slandering etc. If such like fruit as these grow out of the
trees of your hearts; surely, surely, the Devil is at Inn with you, you are
his birds, whom when he has well fed, he will broach you, and eat you, chaw
you and champ you, world without end, in eternal woe and misery. But I am
otherwise persuaded of you all. I trust you be all Christ Jesus his people, and
his children; yea, and his brethren by faith.

As you see your sins in Gods Law, and tremble, and sigh, sorrow and sob for
the same: even so you see his great mercies in his Gospel and free promises,
and therefore are glad, merry and joyful, for that you are accepted into Gods
favor, have your sins pardoned, and are endued with the good spirit of God,
even the seal and sign Manuel of your election in Christ Jesus, even before
the beginning of the World.

The which spirit, for that he is the Spirit of life, is given to you, to work
in you, with you, and by you, here in this life sanctification and holiness,
whereunto you are called, that so ye might be holy even as your heavenly father
is holy. I beseech you all by admonition and warning of you, that you would
stir up the gifts of God, given to you generally and particularly, to the
edifying of his Church, that is; I pray you that you would not molest the good
Spirit of God, by rebelling against it, when it provokes and calls you to
go on forward, that he which is holy, might yet be more holy, he which is
righteous, might be more righteous; as the evil spirit moves and stirs up
the filthy to be yet more filthy, the covetous, to be more covetous, the wicked
to be more wicked.

Declare you now your repentance, by works of repentance, Bring forth fruits,
and worthy fruits.

Let your sorrowing for your evils, demonstrate it self, departing from the
evils you have used.

Let your certainty of pardon of your sins, through Christ, and your joy in him
be demonstrated, by pursuing of the good things which Gods word teaches you.
You are now in Christ Jesus, Gods workmanship, to do good works which God has
prepared for you to walk in.

For the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and
teaches us, that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godlily, in this present world; looking
for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our
Savior Jesus Christ, which gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself, fervently
given unto good works.

Again; Titus 3. For we our selves also were in times past unwise, disobedient,
deceived, serving lusts, and diverse pleasures, living in maliciousness and
envy, full of hate, and hating one another. But after that the kindness and
love of God our Savior to manward, appeared, not by the deeds of
righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy he saved us by the fountain
of the new birth, and with the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior; that we once justified by his
grace, should be heirs of eternal life, through hope. This is a true saying.
But I will make an end for I am too tedious.

Dearly beloved, repent your sins: that is, be sorry for that which is past,
believe in Gods mercy for pardon, how deeply soever you have sinned, and both
purpose, and earnestly pursue a new life, bringing forth worthy and True fruits
of Repentance.

As you have given over your members from sin to sin, to serve the Devil; your
tongues to swear, to lie, to flatter, to scold, to jest, to scoff, to beastly
talk, to vain jangling, to boasting, etc. Your hands to picking, griping,
idleness, fighting, etc. Your feet to skipping, going to evil, to dancing,
etc. Your ears to hear Fables, lies, vanities, and evil things, etc. So now,
give over your members to godliness, your tongues to speak, your ears to
hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to taste, your hands to work, your feet
to go about such things as may make to Gods glory, sobriety of life, and love
to your brethren, and that daily more and more, diligently: for in this way to
stand you cannot, either better or worse you are to day, then you were
yesterday. But better I trust you be, and will be if you mark my Theme; that
is; repent you. The which thing that you would, as before I have humbly
besought you: even so now, yet once more I do again beseech you, and that for
the mercies of God in Jesus Christ our Lord: Repent you, repent you, for the
Kingdom of heaven (that is a Kingdom full of riches, pleasures, mirth,
beauty, sweetness, and eternal felicity) is at hand. The eye has not seen
the like, the ear has not heard the like, the heart of man cannot conceive
the treasures and pleasures of this Kingdom, which is now at hand to such as
Repent; that is, to such as are sorry for their sins, believe Gods mercy,
through Christ, and earnestly purpose to lead a new life.

The God of mercy, through Christ his Son, grant us his holy spirit, and work
in our hearts this sorrow, faith, and new life; which through his grace I have
spoken of, both now and for ever.

AMEN.

FINIS.

