A Brief TREATISE ABOUT THE Spiritual Nature OF GOD AND OF HIS WORSHIP.

By Edw. Bagshaw, Student of Chapter Chapter

LONDON, Printed for C. G. Anno, 1662.

A Prefatory EPISTLE Dedicated to the Right Honorable The EARL of ANGLESEY.
One of his Majesty's most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
THose who owe great sums of Money, and withal have any thank-ful esteem for
the civility and kindness of their Creditours, do seldom come to ask any longer
time of forbearance, but they bring a Present in their hands, not so much in
part of payment, as to give a Test and Evidence of their Gratitude, and to show
how willing they are to deserve a Favor. Thus, my Lord, I having now some
months been indebted to your Lordship, for a Work of another Nature, and by
those many Intervenient Businesses (which this Town is but too full of, and
which as I could not prevent, so your Lordship was not willing I should decline
them) foreseeing that I shall not presently be in a capacity of satisfying my
own Desires, which shall always be commensurate to my Obedience unto Your
Lordships Commands; I made have therefore, together with my request for some
longer time, to bring along with me this small Offering, not only as part of
the Tribute Iowe, but likewise to prevent all sinister suspicions, as if, while
I omited to do that which your Lordship principally enjoined, I had altogether
idled away my time, and done just nothing at all; which, besides the sin of it
to my self, would be too unhandsome a return of your Lordships Nobleness, in
affording me so full convenience and opportunities of study.

And though some of those things I have writ, since this Engagement was upon
me, may seem to be Casual and undesigned in their Choice, yet I must humbly
leave it to your Lordships Judgment (whose thorough knowledge of that
Controversy makes you the fittest person to decide it) to resolve, whether my
late Treatise about Heresies, and this about the Spirituality of Gods Nature
and Worship, were not antecedently necessary to be published, before I
proceeded to meddle with the Popes Infallibility; which, as your Lordship has
often most judiciously observed, is the Atlas and Principal Column to support
all that Babylonish Building; and could it but once be removed out of the way
(which sure is no great Mastery, in a thing that is so Airy and so
defencelesse) all that is built upon it, would, for want of a Foundation,
tumble down to the Ground. And this employment, of laying my Ax to the Root of
that Tree, your Lordship, who could have done it much better, was pleased long
since to lay upon me, and thereby (that you might be free to serve the Public)
denied your self that Honor, which, in so famous and concerning a Cause, Your
Lordships own more able and learned Pen would have justly gained you.

But how impatient and eager soever I was to perform this Task, and thereby
give your Lordship a sudden Proof of my obedience, yet I had not waded far
into it, but presently my edge was taken off; for the Arguments I met with to
maintain that Opinion, were so very Weak and Fallacious; there was so large a
train of Non sequitur's, and such a series of Impossible Suppositions, that I
grew quickly tired, not so much with the length and difficulty of the Journey,
as with the Noysom Dirt and mere Tediousness of the Way: And I immediately took
it for granted, that none of those Authors I read, did believe the Popes
Infallibility themselves, since they took so little pains to convince others.
And here, my Lord, for want of finding something that might deserve a
Scholar-like confutation, I have stuck ever since, and though my Papers wanted
but one day to perfect them, yet the Absurdities I oppose, are so gross and
open, and the Conquest so very easy, that I am almost ashamed of my victory,
and therefore have not yet been at the pains to complete it.

Whilst I did thus delay to perfect my First Design, I thought Writers of
Controversies ought to do, like Generals of Armies; before they sit down before
the Capital City, they summon in every petty Garrison, which might either impede
their March, or prove a Retreat for the vanquished Enemy: So before the Main
Question in any Controversy be handled, every Objection that lies perdue in
the way, must be answered, that so those stumbling blocks being removed, we may
have a better prospect into the Strength or Weakness of any Point, as it stands
by it self, without the Enterfering of those Additional Appendixes. In this,
the Kingdom of Christ and Antichrist agree, that to the Destruction of the
one, as well as to the Establishing of the other, the way must be first
prepared and levelled, and before their Fort of Infallibility be taken, all the
snares they scatter in the way, all their Mists and undermining Polices, all
their Ambushes and little Hiding-places, and lastly every thing, which may
render the Victory insecure and hazzardous must be discovered and prevented.

Since then the Papists do commonly use two Masks, under which they cover their
Dark and Divilish Doctrine; the one of a terrible and frightful appearance,
(which is their vehement urging the great Inconveniences that follow separation
from them; in which the multiplicity of Herisies is most Tragically insisted
on: And for which our Church is still reproached by them as Schismatical) The
other of a more benign and pleasing Aspect; which is the outward gaudery, and
curious dress of their Religion, wherewith that Spiritual Whore attires her
self, and strongly fascinates her unwary beholders. In opposition to the first,
before I had the honor to attend your Lordship, I pleaded for Christian
Liberty, in the just extent and latitude of it; I have already showed that
those ill consequences so much talked of, do not flow from Liberty, (which no
Rational, much, less Spiritual agent can be without) but from the abuse of it;
which if it breaks out into Civil or Moral misdemeanors, the Civil Laws ought
to punish, unto which our Outward Man is subject; but if it terminate and rest
in speculative errors, which may otherwise be called Heresies, such Tares ought
to grow together with the Wheat; for an un answerable reason, which Christ has
given, though Antichrist approves it not, for fear the rooting up of them by
violence, should prove the Destruction of the good Corn also; for since every
Heretic, thinks his own Opinion to be true; if he finds nothing used to
suppress him, but such force, as no Scripture does countenance; what will
hinder him, when he gains Power, from using Legem Talionis, and endeavoring
the same violent ways of suppressing dissenters? and then it will be in vain
to plead for Liberty, which by appearing first in persecution of Heretics, we
denied to others. And this, my Lord, is the sum of what I have lately
published, and dedicated to your Noble Kinsman, who is most Dear to your
Lordship, Sir J.V.
not more by the nearness of his Relation unto your Excellent Lady, then by
his Resemblance and Imitation of the same Virtuous and Noble Qualities. Unto
whose endeavors on my behalf, I have me thinks made but too faint a return,
since by his means I have been made partaker of one of the greatest Temporal
Happinesses I could ambition, and that is an acquaintance with, and a Personal
Relation to your Lordship and Family; in which who ever fails of living
virtuously, must fall inexcusably by his own Fault, since he is every day
taught the contrary, and that by Eminent and Illustrious Examples.

As for that other Mask of a Glittering and Pompous Worship, which makes the
Roman Religion so taking with Vulgar and Injudicious Observers; and by which
their eyes are so dazzled, that they are unwilling to admit of any thing, which
may undeceive them; I did conceive nothing could better take them off from
doting upon that Painted Carcass of Devotion, then to make a discourse ahout
the Inward purity of Gospel Worship, which depends upon and flows from the
consideration of Gods Spiritual Nature; which were it but once thoroughly
understood, men would presently spurn and trample upon all that Devised and
Fantastic Beauty of the Romish Dagon; and when true worshippers felt, how much
the Splendour of service, which feeds the eye, is short of the Spirituality of
it, which satisfies the soul; they would no longer feed upon Husks, or let
their senses lead them in the choice of their Religion. Since it may be found
by experience that Thretrical Pomp, Delightful Aires, Weltuned Orisons and the
loud Insignificant Jargon of Latin Payers, do only glut and sat the appetite,
but leave the Understanding unfruitful; like Rich and Poinant sawces, they
gratify the Flesh, but perish with the Using, and after all the Immoderate
care about them, their end must be to be cast out into the Draught.

I have therefore in this short Treatise endeavored to raise the Soul, that it
might understand the True Height of Religious Worship, by fixing an intent eye
upon the Author of it, which may be of great Use in this Age we live in, as
equally opposing the Bold Atheism of some, and the mean-spirited Superstition
of others; and because I entend it as an Introduction unto my following
Discourse against the Pope and Church of Romes Infallibility, I humbly beg
your Lordship's acceptance of it, which is the only way to make both It and the
Author Considerable. Since, to omit your Lordship's other Excellencies, even in
this very part of Learning (which argues a great and universal insight) of
Accurate and close writing as well as speaking, your Lordship has gained such
a General and Deserved Esteem, that if this piece does pass into the World,
under the Countenance of your Lordships Approbation, it will be a sufficient
passport, without any other Recommendation.

But I shall forbear to urge, what, though it may become me to speak, because I
speak knowingly, yet your Lordship may be unwilling to hear, since you care not
for living in the Air of your own praise; I shall conclude therefore, with
desiring that your Lordship may be long preserved to do, what you have always
hitherto done, things truly great and Noble; that while others begin to scorn
Religion, you may still go on to practice the Truth and stricktness of it; That
with Your Honorable and Virtuous Lady and Family, You may shine in the
brightest Sphere of Honor here, and of Happiness hereafter, this is and shall
be the Constant Prayer of

Drury Lane Feb. 15. 1661. My Lord Your Lordships most Obliged and most
Obedient Servant and Chaplain Edw. Bagshaw.

John 4.24. God is a Spirit, and be will be Worshipped in Spirit and in Truth.
IN this Chapter is contained the Substance of a Discourse, between our Savior
and the Woman of Samaria; Prophet, because he had told her a thing, which she
thought concealed from all the World; thereupon she presently desires
satisfaction, in that great and famous Controversy, which at that time was
handled with great Animosity, Namely, Whether God was to be Worshipped on Mount
Gerizim, according to the Samaritan; or on Mount Moriah, which was Sion,
according to the Jewish Institution. She, It seems, thinking it absolutely
Necessary, that God should be served in one of those two places, and in no
other: and to defend her self in her present way of Worship, she makes use of
that common Asylum, of Lazy and Ignorant Superstition; I mean, Tradition and
the Practice of her Fathers; Our Fathers, says she, Worshipped in this
Mountain;

To this Demand, our Savior is graciously pleased to return a double Answer.

First, In general, whereby he takes away the ground of her Scruple; for
whereas she erroneously thought that God must necessarily be served in one of
those two places; our Savior tells her, that the hour or time was approaching,
when neither on this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, ye shall worship the
Father, i.e. that God would no longer have his Worship limited and fixed to
this or that peculiar place; Mal. 1.11.
but as all places were in their own Nature Equal, so in every place, where men
met together to serve God, pure Incense, viz. of Prayer and Praise should be
offered up to God; and that it should not be material, where, but how, men
served him, as to his acceptance of them.

Secondly, And more particularly, our Savior refutes her fond Argument,
whereby she nuzled up her self in her own Superstition; Ye i. Samaritan^,
Worship, says he, ye know not what: i. e. However ye plead prescription, and
Custom of your Ancestors; yet in Religious Worship, ye ought not to be guided
barely by the Example of your Fathers, nor draw over you the Mask of Antiquity,
to countenance an Error; for trace up your Opinion to the Top, and let it run
as high in Antiquity, as you please; yet as long as you have no certain and
infallible Rule to walk by, but devise forms of your own Heads, and serve God,
not according to the Word of God, but your own Inventions; the Older your
Opinion is, the worse it is; as being nothing else but Gray Headed Ignorance,
and Dotage made incureable by Time. But, says he, We know what we worship: i.
We Jews have received from God himself Ordinances and Rites of Worship,
according to which we serve him; not weakly confining God to a Place, as you
do; but obediently worshipping him in that place which he himself has
appointed; and of which many glorious things are spoken, as that this Mountain
shall be exalted above all Mountains, Isa. 2.2.
and all Nations shall flow in unto it; And that, a Law shall go out from Sion,
and the Word of God from Jerusalem: M^cah 4.1.
with many other special Privileges, which long since have been prophesied of
in reference to Jerusalem, our place of worship; by which we know, and are
infallibly assured, that Salvation is of the Jews; i. e. the saving Doctrine is
only to be found amongst us, and you Samaritans have nothing to show, that any
such thing is committed unto you.

Our Savior having thus fully satisfied this Woman's Scruple, and rectified her
Erroneous Practice, by bringing of her unto a Rule of Worship; which alone can
be a comfortable ground of any Religious Action; since God looks not only
after the Matter, but the Manner of our Worship; and disdains to be served by
the Inventions of Men; since by their Adding to his Word, they only presume to
be Wiser and Holier then he; Therefore our Savior repeats and enforces again
what he had mentioned before; and tells her plainly, should no longer be
confined to a certain place, by way of Special Holiness; so neither should it
be clogged with those Outward Forms and Ceremonies as before. No such things as
Pompous Garments, Legal Washings and Fleshly Rites, should be required any
longer; but the True Worshippers should worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth: Which alone is the True Worship, because all those External Rites, were
only Shadows and Representations of it. As if our Savior had said, it is no
longer your Temples, nor your Altars, nor your Outward State and Magnificence,
which God now looks after; but (...), he seeks with earnestness, and approves
with Delight and Complacency, only such as worship him in a Spiritual and
Inward Manner.

The reason of which our Savior gives, in the words of the Text, because God
is a Spirit, and, therefore he expects a Worship altogether suitable to his own
Nature: They that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

In the words, there are two things considerable. 1. What God is. God is a
Spirit. 2. What kind of Worship must be paid unto him. They that Worship him,
must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. From whence arise two Observations;
the first of which I shall handle as a Doctrine, the other as an Use or
Inference from it.

1. God is a Spirit: or, a Being altogether Spiritual. 2. The Spiritual Worship
of God, is the only True Worship.
For the understanding of the first, there are two things to be explained. 1.
What is a Spirit. 2. In what sense, God is said to be a Spirit.

For the first, viz. what is a Spirit; the Schools define it to be an
Immaterial or Incorporeal Substance; where, if in stead of the word Substance,
(which is a Term very few understand) they had put the word Essence or Being
(which answers to the Greek (...), and to the Hebrew (...)) they had spoke
some, but not all the Truth. For thus our Savior likewise defines a Spirit, in
opposition to a gross and palpable Body. Luke 24.39.
A Spirit, said he, has not Flesh and Bones as you see me to have. Which place
though some have made use of for the definition of a Spirit; yet it is clear
our Savior speaks there only of a Spirit, in that sense that we call a
Phantasm or an Apparition, a Spirit; and therefore Ignatius in one of his
Epistles, instead of the word (...) reads (...) A bodiless Demon or Ghost.

But in the word Spirit, is implied something more Positive, then barely to
tell us, what it is not; and as in the Definition of a Man, it would but little
satisfy us, to tell us, that he is not an Horse, nor an House, etc. because
these Negative Descriptions would never lead us to those Essential Characters
and Properties, by which the Nature of man might be discerned. So nakedly to
tell us as the Schools do, that a Spirit is Incorporeal, i. e. not a Body; will
give but very little satisfaction, to the Enquiry, What it is.

To find out therefore more positively what a Spirit is, I shall lay down this
Ground; The Nature of every thing is to be discerned by its manner of
Operation; as, though we can see neither Fire nor Air, yet we may justly
conclude, they have Different Natures, because they produce Diverse and
Contrary effects. So that if there be some Things or Beings in the World; which
have such kind of Operations, as are no way applicable to or produceable by
Bodies; then They have a Distinct Nature from Bodies; i. e. They are Spirits.

What those Operations are, every man may observe in the Actions of his Soul;
And I shall instance only in these three. 1. Power. 2. Presence. 3. Knowledge.

1. The first Action by which the Nature of the Soul of man may be discerned to
be Spiritual, is Power; I mean that (...): Or self-moving-virtue; by which it
can move, not only it is self, but the Body too, to which it is conjoined. And
this no mere Body is capable of, for motum movetur; No Body can otherwise move,
then as it has an Outward Principle to move it; but the Soul has no other
Motive of it is Actings, but it is own Will and Pleasure. And though there be
some who affirm, that the Will does always follow the last dictate of the
understanding; yet this is Demonstrably false, by the experience of all men in
the World; as well as of the Apostle Paul who cries out of himself, Romans 7.
The things I like not, these do I. And it is a very true saying of one, to
whose writings the Christian world is little beholding; As often as Reason is
against a man, so often will a man be against Reason. For which no cause can be
given, but merely the Power of the Will, to move i. e. to determine it self, in
spite of all contrary suggestions from the Understanding. Solomon therefore
speaking of dying man, divides him into his two distinct, and seemingly
inconsistent Natures; The dust, says he, i. the Body, returns to the Earth, as
it was; but the Spirit i. Eccles. 12.7.
the the Soul, returns to God who gave it. It is the Spark of Divinity within
us, which puts Life and Motion into the Dull and Unactive piece of Earth about
us; and so enlivens it, for the doing of such Actions, as Flesh alone could not
compass, without the Influence and Conduct of some more Heavenly and Spiritual
Principle.

2. The second Operation which demonstrates the Soul of man to be a Spirit; is
Presence. We know that every Body is tied and limited to a place, out of which
it cannot stir; and whenever it is moved, it moves only one way, and with one
kind of Motion at once; making a dull leasurely progress; First how, then there
by steps, without any Variety at all. Herein therefore does the Spirituality of
the Soul of man most convincingly appear, in that at one instant it can attend
so many different Employments; and without any distraction at all, wheels about
in so many Contrary and Repugnant Motions; not only Seeing in one place,
Hearing in another, Feeling in a third; but it runs over Innumerable Idea's; it
ranges infinitely distant places, it admits of all manner of Contraries; and
yet remains still the same by one Entire, Absolute, Indivisible Act,
influencing every Part of the Body, and Animating the whole, which were it not
a Spirit, it could not do.

3. The last Operation of the Soul, which shows it to be a Spirit, is
Knowledge. The utmost perfection of a Body, is Motion; and let a Body be vested
with whatever Circumstances to set it out, yet Figure and Motion, do answer and
resolve all it is Phenomena. But to reflect upon it self, to move, so as to know
that it moves, to understand, and to be Conscious of it is own Actings; to take
in all manner of Idea's and Species of things, and to Spiritualize them in its
Apprehension; these with many millions of such kind of Actions, which are daily
performed by the Soul of man, in the faculties of its Understanding and Will,
are all beyond the Possibility of a Body; and therefore the Principle which
produces them is not a Body, i. e. It is a Spirit; And indeed, what ever our
Modern Sadduces may argue (who are not afraid to tell us, that there is neither
Angel nor Spirit) Yet when a man has wearied himself with contemplating his
Inward Frame, and in seeking to Unriddle those Mysteries, which he is always
privy to in himself; he will at last find it, not the most safe and pious
only, but the most reasonable way to conclude, Job 32.8. Prove. 20.17.
that there is a spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
Understanding; as Job says; or as Solomon, The Mind of Man, is the Candle of
the Lord, i. e. a Light placed in us, and to be used by us, but springing from,
and savouring of its Divine and Unconceiveable Original.

Having thus, by those Actions of the Soul which every man is conscious to in
himself, demonstrated, at least abundantly to my own satisfaction, that there
is some Being or Nature in the World which is not Corporeal; I define a Spirit
thus; A Spirit is a Being created by God, and endued with Qualities, whereby it
is enabled to move its self, and to reflect upon its own actings; and therefore
Incorporeal, since neither of those Properties, are conceivable how they can be
performed by any Body, in the most Subtle and Abstracted Consideration. And so
much for the first Querie, viz. What is a Spirit.

2. Secondly, The next thing to be explained was, in what sense God is said to
be a Spirit; And I answer, in all those senses, wherein a Spirit can be
conceived or expressed by us.

1. Negatively, God is a Spirit, i.e. He is not a Body, but infinitely removed
from, and incapable of those Imperfections, which do arise from Matter:
according to that Definition of the Apostle John, God is Light, 1 John 1.5.
and in him is no Darkness at all; i. e. No mixture of any thing, which might
be an Allay to his Ineffable Purity and Perfection.

2. Comparatively, By way of Proportion or Resemblance to the Soul of man;
Thus, God is a Spirit. i. e. what ever Excellence or Perfection we find in our
selves, that is to be ascribed unto God, in a more Absolute and Perfect manner;
Psalm. 94.8.
as the Psalmist, He that made the eye, shall not he see? He that made the ear,
shall not he hear? etc. 1 Cor. 2.12.
And the Apostle, As none knows the Things of Man, but the spirit of Man,
which is in him; so none knows the Things of God but the Spirit of God. For
since God made man after his own Image, there can be no Divine Quality in the
Soul of man, but it is in the Arch-Type or Pattern in a more Supreme and
Inexpressible degree. And therefore

3. God is a Spirit, Transcendentally, i. e. In a way of Eminency and
Superlativenesse of Perfection. Therefore God who does often compare himself to
man, thereby to familiarize himself unto our Apprehensions, does as often take
us off from dwelling too long upon those Thoughts, least we should thereby
lessen God, and think him to be altogether like unto our selves. For this
reason, we are frequently called upon, to consider that God is in Heaven, and
we are on Earth; that, The Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain Him;
whereas Our Foundations are in the Dust, with many Expressions to the same
Purpose; So that as Shade to Light; as the Picture of the Sun in water, unto
the Real Globe in the Firmament; as Painters Flame, unto a Burning Fire; or
whatever else are most distant from the things they Figure; so is the soul of
Man if compared to God. So that when we say God is a Spirit, the meaning is,
God is a Being, Infinitely Perfect and Pure in himself, but altogether
Incomprehensible and Inexpressible by us. And so much for the second Query, in
what sense God is a Spirit.

The Use or Inference from hence is that Spiritual Worship is the only True
Worship,

For the understanding of this, we must take Notice, that the principal thing
which keeps a Man, in his Dark Estate of Unbelief and Unregeneracy, Ephesians 2.12.
is a secret Thought, that there is no God at all; and this is the condition of
all Natural men in the World; as Paul affirms of the Ephesians, that, before
their receiving of Christ, 1 These. 4.5.
they were (...) without God, or plain Atheists in the World; and in another
place, The Gentiles knew not God, know nothing of him; for as he argues, how
should they know, of whom they had not heard? i. e. though God has imprinted
upon his Creatures certain legible Characters of his Power and Divine
Goodness; yet very few can spel the meaning of them; or from the works they
see, be brought to acknowledge a Power whom they do not see; as the Apostle
elsewhere testifies, The world by wisdom knew not God. But when, 1 Cor. 1.21.
by the Power of some conviction, arising either from an Intent view of the
Frame and Make of the World; or from the observation of some remarkable turn of
Providence, a man is brought off from his Atheism, he presently is apt to fall
into another gulf as dangerous, and as fatal; and that is, of thinking God to
be like Man; full of the same passions, and pleased with the same things, which
we imagine are most taking with men like our selves. And this conceit lies at
the bottom of every man's Nature, and is the Foundation of all that
VVill-VVorship, and Devised Service, which heretofore was entertained in the
Gentile or Atheistical; and, at this day reigns, in the Papal or Antichristian
World; when men do measure God by themselves, and go no higher in the
contemplation of his Infinity, then what they conceive is ascribable unto the
highest strain of Humane Excellence.

This Erroneous and slight opinion, we are by all means to be armed and
fortified against; for besides the mean and poor esteem it begets of God in our
Thoughts; it does necessarily draw along with it this conceit, that God is
beholding to Man, and that we do oblige him by our Service. And therefore the
Scripture is very express in declaring, Psalm. 16.2, etc. Job 35.7.
that, our Righteousness is nothing to him; and that when God requires to be
worshipped, he challenges it only as the Devout Homage of an Humble Soul; and
not thereby in the least to encourage the Vanity and Pride of Boasters, since
his greatness, is incapable of any Addition; God indeed does in Scripture
describe himself by such Names, as are of greatest Esteem and Reverence with
men; such as are King, Lord, Father, Master, and the like, yet herein he is far
from prescribing a mere Bodily and Outside Worship, such as those would have,
who are as yet far from knowing, or at least from considering, that God is a
Spirit; But the meaning of all those Expressions is this, that what kind of
Outward Reverence we show unto persons, to whom we are so related, as a Subject
is to his Prince, or a Son to his Father, or a Servant to his Master; the same
by way of Analogy and Proportion, we should show to God, in the Inward Frame
and Deportment of our Spirits, when we appear before him in any solemn way of
Worship.

Now to advance and raise up the mind unto this necessary pitch of Devotion,
there can be no better expedient given, then fixedly to contemplate the
Spirituality of Gods Nature, unto which our worship must bear some proportion;
and that will be, by fastening upon those Attributes which do most represent his
Spiritual Nature unto us. What those Attributes are, from what has been said,
may easily be gathered; for since Power, Presence, and Knowledge, are these
Actions of the Soul, which do demonstrate it to be a Spirit; it will follow
then, since God is a Spirit, the Attributes which do most declare him to be so,
are these three. 1. His Omnipotence, 2. His Omnipresence. 3. His Omniscience;
which ought most intently to be eyed by us, in our Worship of, and Addresses to
Him.

1. First, The first Attribute we should fix upon in our Worship of God, is his
Omnipotence; which is in many and several Forms expressed in Scripture, all
which, like so many lines pointing at one Center, do but speak this Truth, that
God can do what he will, and that nothing can withstand his Will; because the
Will of the Creature, is only Gods Creature; it is his Wheel in the VVatch,
and moves only as he will turn it; And the Potter cannot have more absolute
power over, or less resistance from the Clay then God our Maker has, if he so
please to order it, from us his Workmanship.

The consideration of this, at that time when we come to Worship God, besides
that it gives God the Honor of his Power, which he desires should be
Magnified; will be of Infinite use to us, in all the Course of our Lives, and
in those several scenes of Providence we may fall under. As

1. This will be a wonderful encouragement unto us, to put up our Prayers to
God, and to attend with Comfort the Success and Issue of them. For what should
we despair of, if we can engage Omnipotence on our behalf? If therefore we miss
of what we Petition for, if we Ask and Have not; It is not, because God is not
able to do even more then we Ask, but because we Ask a miss, and not with that
Faith, which is requisite to so Sacred an Action. It is our Unbelief of Gods
Power which ties his hands; for did we pray with Full Assurance, that he whom
we deal with could answer our most Labored and Intense Requests, that he could
satisfy our most Enlarged and Heightened Expectations; we should not depart so
often as we do, without a Blessing. But God scorns a Suitor, that has low
thoughts of him; For what do we else but tacitly contemn God, if we think that
it lies in a poor Creatures power to Ask, what the Great Creator cannot do? Yet
this, as easy a matter as it may be supposed to be, has been the great
miscarriage of the Saints of Old; Genesis 18.12.
What made Sarah laugh, i. e. Inwardly make a sport and jest of the Promise God
made to give her a Son in her Old Age, but her doubting of this Attribute.
After I am waxed Old, says she, shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also?
In which words, she musters up all manner of Arguments to augment the
Difficulty; and therefore the Lord to satisfy her, is fain to have recourse
unto his own Omnipotence; Is any thing, says he, too hard for the Lord?
Intimating that, whatever she pretended, yet indeed, that was the Fundamental
Article she doubted of. Exodus 4.1^, 11.
So what made Moses raise up so many Scruples, and urge so many Objections
against his being sent to Pharaoh, alleging that he was not Eloquent, but
slow of Speech, and slow of Tongue; intimating, that God could certainly do no
great matter, by him who was laden with so many Imperfections; and withal
insinuating, that God might do well to make a better choice, thereby laying a
secret imputation upon Gods Wisdom, as well as his Power; as if God had not
chose a fit Messenger to do his Errand. God therefore does answer all his
Objections, by raising him, from looking down upon himself that was sent, to
look up to him that sent him; Who, says he, has made Man's mouth, or who makes
the Dumb, or Deaf, or Seeing, or Blind, is it not I the Lord? i. shall God do
the greater, and shall not he do the less? Shall he be able to make man, and
shall he not be able afterward to fit him for what Ends and Uses he pleases? In
the very same manner we find afterward, that David and Zachary, and the
Disciples of our Savior did often miscarry. So that as our Savior tells them,
They could not cast out the Devil, Mat. 17.20.
because of their Unbelief; but if they had the least grain of Faith in God,
they should presently be able even to remove Mountains, and nothing should be
impossible for them; so say I, the great cause why we thrive so ill in our
Prayers and Supplications to God, it is because we are faint and timorous
Askers; We do not by Faith set Gods Omnipotence on Work; but in a Dubious and
Unresolved manner, we pray according to the Compass of what we see, and can
Naturally hope to. And whilst we do so, it is no wonder if we obtain no great
Matters from the Hands of God; for as we undervalue a Prince if we ask Trifles
of him, so does he disesteem God, who asks any thing below the Immediate Work
of an Almighty Power; such as is Preservation from Danger, or support under it;
Pardon of sin, and strength against it, and the like, which are Petitions that
God loves to hear, for since when ever he Answers a Prayer, he would be known
to do something, which only he is able to bestow; and therefore by way of
Prerogative and Excellence, he styles himself, A God Hearing Prayer.

2. The consideration of Gods Omnipotence, will take off all Despondency of
Spirit, when Matters go otherwise with us, then we would have them. When we are
put to a plunge, and are run into a wild Maze and Labyrinth of Perplexities,
not knowing how to resolve, what will be the issue of such or such a Providence
that crosses us; a Belief of Gods Omnipotence will fix us again, and make us
see clear day in the midst of our Doubts. It was the Impious Triumph of those
Ungodly men, who had beset and surrounded David. 1. That they had left him no
probable way to escape: Psa. 3.2. Mat. 27.43.
Many there be, says he, that say to my Soul, there is no help for him in God.
As if they had said, we have now made sure work with him, and so ordered the
matter, that Omnipotence it self cannot rescue him. As those wicked Pharisees,
when they had nailed our Savior to the Cross, they cut him yet more to the
Heart, with this Reviling Speech, He trusted in God, let him deliver him now,
if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of God. Which Speeches uttered
with so much contumely and bitter Scorn, Psalm. 69.20.
did as our Savior complains, break his Heart; and no doubt pierced deeper
into his Soul, then either the Thorns or Spear did into his Body. But what did
our Savior, what did David in that Extremity? For David, we find him in the
same Psalm, notwithstanding all this, appropriating God unto himself, and
boasting of him, as his Shield, his Glory, and the lifter up of his Head; and
to show how much he slighted those proud boasts of his Insolent Enemies, and
how much they were mistaken in their Triumph: I laid me down, says he, and
slept, i. e. I quietly reposed my self in the midst of all these shakings; and
that we might wonder at this his Calmnesse and Security, he adds, For the Lord
sustained me. Thus likewise did our Savior, just after those words uttered by
the Pharisees, which were so long before prophesied of, that they should be
spoken, our Savior adds, But thou O Lord art my God, from my Mothers Belly;
Psalm. 22.10.
Be not therefore far from me, for trouble is near. As if he had said, Times of
deep discouragement, and Amazing distractions are thy Times, therefore now
appear vigorously, when thou alone can have the glory. When a Creature is
wholly forsaken as it were, when it is hung round with Terror, and even
fainting for want of Inward supply and succor; then if a soul can but say to
God, Thou art the Lord, the Lord Almighty; and by an Act of Faith, redouble,
Thou art my God; what should it fear, or what can it tremble at? For if God be
for us, who can be against us? the World has not in it Terrors or
Discouragements enough to fright such an one, whose God is the Lord; and who has
Omnipotence it self for his shield and Protection.

3. Lastly, the consideration of Gods Omnipotence, will Quiet and Pacify the
Soul, under its Afflictions; where by Afflictions, I mean Spiritual and Inward
Griefs; such as are sense of sin, fear of wrath, Despair of Mercy, and the
like: For as for other things, viz. Want, Poverty, Di grace and the like which
pass with the World for Afflictions, and are the ordinary Themes of Declaimers
in Divinity, if we do ill, they are our Wages, as due to us as hire is to the
Labourer: if we do well, they are Marks of Honor, and ought to be triumphed
and gloried in, as our Choicest and most Signal Privileges. But when God has
put his Terrors into the Soul, when he appears our Enemy, and by an Immediate
Act of his Power, speaks Despair and Anguish unto a Wounded Conscience; a soul
in that Case has no possibility of Relief, but what it can gather from acting
Faith upon Gods Omnipotence. For it is upon this score that we may beg for
pardon, as Moses did for the Israelites, Numb. 14.17.
and now let the Power of my Lord be great, as thou have said, I am a God
long-suffering, Therefore forgive the sin of this people, according to the
greatness of thy Mercy. For great Power is always accompanied with great
Mercy, Psalm 103 1, 1^. Psalm 3 35.
for such an one, will consider our Frame, will remember that we are but Dust,
as David speaks, or as the Church, He will not Afflict willingly, nor grieve
the Children of Men. God who is infinite in Power, does not delight to show it
in troubleing his poor Creature, who always lies under his Lash, and cannot
bear with the Effects of his Anger. Therefore when Job complained so grievously
that God hedged up his way, with Afflictions, as with Thorns: that he did find
occasions against him, and counted him for his Enemy; with many such
expressions, as the bitterness of his Soul did cause him to utter: Elihu
answers him in Gods stead; First, Job. 33.12.
in minding him that God was greater than Man, and therefore it was in vain, to
reply against God, since he gave not any Account of his Matters. And least this
Answer should only serve to keep Job from Complaining, but not from Repining;
least it should only make him silence his Discontents, but not totally
suppress them: Elihu reproves that Consideration with adding this, That God
can do no wrong, and the Almighty cannot commit Iniquity. Job 34.10.
The Force of which Reason, consists, not only in this, because Sovereign or
Almighty Power, makes all his Actions Just, who ever has it (which is a
Curious and an Unprofitable Notion in this Case) but because God, in his Word,
has tied himself to Rules; he has been pleased to Oblige himself to be
Gracious, and to attend his peoples good, in the Exercise of his Power. And
therefore in stead of those bitter Complaints against God, wherewith persons
Mouths are usually filled in such Cases, let them rather be opened in
thankfulness, since God does in very Faithfulness correct, and has designs
of Mercy, when he plungeth us into the Depth of Misery. Heb. 12.10.
For the End of all is to purge out our sin, that we may partake of his
Holiness.

So much for the first Attribute, viz. Gods Omnipotence.

2. Secondly, The other Attributes, which do belong to God, as he is a Spirit;
and which in our Approaches to him, are most to be reflected upon by us: are
his Omnipresence, are his Omniscience; I join them both together, because they
are both but one Act, and in Scripture Language are never several; In which to
see and to know is all one. Thus God is said I see all things; that nothing is
concealed from him; that, All things are vain and naked (...) Anatomized or
Diserted, Heb. 4.
their Inside as it were turned out before him. That there is no Possibility
for any Action, no not for a Thought, to be hid from God. Now with many other
Expressions to the same purpose; because he fills all Places, he is present to
all things, he is Intimate and Inward with all the Actions of his Creatures.

The understanding of this the Psalmist does acknowledge to be very difficult,
such knowledge, says he, Psalm. 1 9 6. Psalm. 94.9, 11
is too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain unto it; but yet he gives
a Reason which does unanswerably prove it, He that formed the eye shall not he
see? he that teaches much knowledge, shall not he know? Yes, says he, the
Lord does know the Thoughts of Man that they are vanity. Psalm. 139
David therefore does most excellently describe the All-searching virtue of
Gods Omniscience, when speaking in the person of one, that would fain shut
himself out of Gods View, and retire from his Inspection, he asks Whither
shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? And then
he reckons up every thing, which a vain man would imagine to be a sufficient
place of Secrecy. If I go to Heaven, thou art there; If I make my bed in Hell,
thou art there also. If I think to travel and to quit (...) ner, nothing else
but a calling of God to take Notice that we dare neglect him. So much of
Outward Deportment, as may demonstrate we are Inwardly affected with what we
are doing, is without doubt necessary; but then it must be paid, not to the
Place, but to the Ordinance; Not to the Enclosure of Walls, but to the Divine
Administrations in it; for when the Public Duties are Ended, the Place is as
Common, Exodus 19.13.
( I mean as any special Holiness) as that Mount was, when the Trumpet ceased
from sounding. Let us then consider Gods Omnipresence, that we may learn to
feel him with our Hearts; and then our Bodies will quickly be supple and pliant
enough, but till then we offer only an Unclean thing; a Carcass only, which
will be so far from being accepted, that it will be imputed to us for sin. The
Apostle does exhort the Corinthian Women, to have a Care of their Head; i. 1
Cor. 1.
to be veiled, because of the Angels; which may be understood either of Good
Angels, who would make use of their Beauty, as Baits, to tempt others unto
Unclean and Lustful Thoughts, or else, of good Angels who love comeliness of
Behavior in Public Assemblies; the Rule of which comeliness, in Men, is what
ever is Manly; in Women, whatsoever is Modest. Others perhaps will draw (...)
for Outward Decency, in (...) whom that only (...) the Church (...) portune
and solicit? this should take up our souls, and fill us with Thoughts,
suitable to the Majesty and purity of him, before whose Eyes, and to whose
view, we do present our selves; and then indeed we Honor him.

2. Lastly, This Consideration that God is Omnipresent, i.e. always beholding
and observing us, will put the heart into a Religious, Careful and Obediential
Frame, even after Public Duties are ended. The same Posture of Mind, we had at
Church, we shall carry along with us, if we think that we are still in the
presence of God; It is indeed too true, that most men's Devotion does end with
the Ministers last Prayer, then, like a Watch wound up too high, we break the
string, and let all unravel again, etc. As Cain is said to go out from the
Presence of the Lord; so do we, thinking perhaps, that God is no where but when
we last spoke to him. But Holy men we find did act clean otherwise; Job. 31.1.4.
Job said, He made a Covenant with his Eyes; he would not so much as look upon
a Maid; what was it that made him so watchful and sollicitous? Psalm. 16.8.
Does not, says he, he see all my Ways, and count all my Steps? This Thought
did make him strangle sin in the Birth, and stifle it in its first Conception.
So David, I have set the Lord always before me, says he, and it follows,
therefore I shall not be (...) in my Resolves for (...) if Omnipoten^ (...)
Offend (...) 2 Cor. ^. 1.
Holiness in the fear of God. Gods Indwelling and Nearness to us, is the most
Potent Motive to persuade to Heart-(...) and ^^rf^^^ion of Holiness. To
conclude therefore, Did men think, that if they went to their Chambers, God was
there; if to their Studies, God was there; if to their Beds, God was still
there; Within, Without, About them; curiously marking their steps, and with his
Balance weighing their Actions; they would not, they durst not think that
Darkness could hide their sin, or that a Closet can conceal Iniquity. Thou
Fool! what ever thou art, who sinnest, because, as thou think, no Eye
beholds thee, does not God see? and will not thy Conscience witness? What
wilt, what can thou say, when God calls thee to Judgment! when he shall
charge upon thee, at such a Time, in such a Place, upon such an Occasion, thou
said in thine Heart, Tush God does not see it, and on this Motion did not
fear to do that which had thy Father, or thy Friend been by, thou would have
been ashamed of. Let us not then dare to satisfy our Lusts, or please our Vain
and Irregular Desires, till we can bribe God to turn away his Eyes, and not to
behold our Folly. Till then to be Secure, is to be Desperate; and to sin, is
nothing else, but to Affront God unto his Face, and to tell (...) see, or that
he cannot (...) Attributes which (...) ^long to God,


