A SPEECH made by Master BAGSHAWE IN PARLIAMENT Concerning the Trial of the
Twelve Bishops on Monday the Seventeenth of January, Anno 1641.

AS ALSO, The Articles, now in agitation, objected against them.

London, Printed for T. T. 1642.

A Speech made by Master Bagshawe in Parliament, concerning the Trial of the
twelve Bishops on Monday the seventeenth of January, Anno 1641.
M. Speaker,
WE are now upon the Grand business the Bishops Trial expected of all men,
and much desired their* crimes for which they are accused are two fold.

1 The first consisting of misdemeanour and great offenses committed by them
against their Country, whereof they have been but unprofitable members.

2 The second consisting of Crimes of the highest nature and most dangerous
consequence that can be committed by any subject, and that is Treason in the
highest degree, both against their lawful Prince his rightful power and just
prerogatives, and against the whole body politic of this kingdom. Upon the
first of these we have proceeded against them by Legal charge* proving them
guilty of the same, and by vote of this House, condemned them in a premunite
and misprission of Treason. Upon the last we are now in agitation, which is our
Accusation and Impeachment of them of high Treason.

M. Speaker.
I do verily believe that this is a thing marvelled at and taken notice of
even over the Christian World, not their occusation, for it is an ordinary
thing in Commonwealths to accuse and punish misdoers in the same, but the
number of delinquents at one time accused never in myreading can I show
president of the like of onesocietie linked all together in one Function and
Profession joined in one cause bent, and I conceave Covenanted together to
work mischeife: Bishop that have been heretofore many of them (though one or
two perchance have been retrograde*) have been glorious lamps in the Church
that have sealed the truth of God with the shedding of their most precious
blood in those times, you see there were some good ones, nay of the greater
number; but sithence universally corrupted and stained with all manner of
pollutions even all of that function and Office Books a general falling away
from the truth, a general endeavor to seduce others to do the like, It is
ordinary for all Kingdoms and States whatsoever to have amongst them some
wicked and perverse wights, yoa and of the greater account and worth in the
same, but for the most part their Prophets Priests and other Religious and holy
men that have been as they conceaved their spiritual Pastors and Teachers of
them in their Religion, have been free and clear from all attempts and
enterprices that might prove dangerous and destructive to their several places
of Nativitie wherein they ^r^ subjects or inhabitant^, nay shall I bring forth
as examples the lives of the very He^then whose wisdom and understanding was
merely naturally void of all heavenly and spiritual light, that never heard
or believed the word of God concerning Christ and his Gospel, only believe a
He^ven and a Hell, pl^ce be t^eir interpretation containing everlasting
felicity or perpetu^ll misery after the dissolution and ending of their
natural lives these men I say which do know nothing but by the instinct of
nature, yet ever held and taught that piety and virtue in their lives and
conversations was the only means to obtain after Death everlasting
selicitie, and that wickedness impiety and ungodline^ produced perpe^u^ll
misery: what then shall we s^y M. speaker. of t^ese Prelates that have not
only by nature knowledge and understanding as these heat^ens had, but have the
knowledge of the truth and pure word of God revealed unto them that have
obtained favor of God, to be dispensers and destributers Teachers and
Preachers of the same that have turned this truth of God into a lie, the grace
of God into wantoures and perverted the ways of godliness by their own
vitions and ungratious live have led in ignorance and blindness the Flock of
Christ over which they have been placed as Shepherds, thereby permitting and
suffering them to walk in strange ways, according to their own inventions, how
think they that they will answer these things to their Master Christ, when
they shall be called to an account for the same, before his Tribunal. But to
leave this discourse concerning their abuses in Religion, as they ought to have
been the only servants and M^ssengers of God, for the building up of his
Kingdom and the overthrow of the Kingdom of Antichrist, and come to their
abuses and misdemeanour in this Kingdom as they have usurped to themselves
Temporal power and jurisdiction in offices of civil Judicature for which they
stand now accused and charged and proceeded against by vote of this House upon
the said accusation and charge, and their desperate and malicious attempt, in
presuming to petition his Majesty, and protest in the same against our
proceedings, to bring them to deserver punishment for their offenses, upon
which they now stand accused of high Treason: and our charge proving the same
now made complete, and exhibited to them for their speedy answer thereto; which
is this days business to consider of.

M. Speaker, The answer they have put in to our charge, is now to be taken into
our considerations whether the some be sufficient, or no, which I conceive is
insufficient, for these Reasons.

First, their Impeachment is for matter of Fact, which cannot be answered, as I
conceive by any circumstance whatsoever, though never so pregnant and
impertinent.

Secondly, Although never so clear and perspicuous to answer Treason by way of
Plea and demurre, I conceive to be contrary to the rules of Parlimentary
proceedings.

Thirdly and lastly, To answer jointly together when their charge is particular
and several, is not agreeable to Parliament proceedings.

And thus much, Master Speaker, concerning this our present business, which I
humbly desire may be expedited, and no longer procrastinated by any dilatory
plea of the Bishops* but that we may proceed with all convenient expedition to
their final sentence.

FINIS.

