THE DOCTRINE OF THE Fathers and Schools CONSIDERED: Concerning the ARTICLES of
A TRINITY of Divine Persons, AND The UNITY of GOD.

In ANSWER to the Animadversions on the Dean of St. Paul's Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Holy and Ever Blessed TRINITY.

IN Defense of those Sacred ARTICLES Against the Objections of the SOCINIANS,
and the Misrepresentations of the ANIMADVERTER.

PART the First.

By J. B. A. M. Presbyter of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for W. Rogers, at the Sun against St. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. M.DC.XCV.

A Preface to the READER, Concerning TRITHEISM Charged, etc.
HAsty Births commonly are imperfect: If so, I have reason to fear the
Imperfections of the following Papers, which come out without the Second and
most Essential Part, concerning the Unity of God.

My distance from the Press denies me the Privilege of Correcting one single
Sheet with my own Eyes, or indeed of comparing them since their Printing, with
my own Copy.

Since the Printing of more than half the following Papers, a Second Part of
the Animadversions came to my hands, under this Title, viz. Tritheism charged
upon Dr. Sherlock 's New Notion of the Trinity, etc. By the Contents I
presently saw that the Animadverter had resumed the Debate: I first consulted
those Places which I judged most nearly to concern me, and since read over the
whole: I was sorrowful that the Press was so far gone, and in so much haste to
finish by the end of this Term, that I could not add an Appendix to those few
things which the Animadverter has added: However I was on the other hand
pleased, that as yet I found no reason to recant one sentence of what I had
advanced in my Answer to the Animadversions.

The Debate betwixt the Reverend Dean and the Animadverter, as the Animadverter
often states it, is concerning the Truth of these Three Articles:

1st. Whether Self-Consciousness be the formal reason of Personality in Finite
and Infinite Persons?

2dly. Whether Mutual-Consciousness be the formal reason of Unity of Nature in
the Divine Persons?

3dly. Whether the Three Divine Persons may in an Orthodox Sense be styled
Three Infinite Minds?

The Animadverter resolves these Three Enquiries in the Negative, and charges
the Affirmative upon the Reverend Dean.

I agree with the Animadverter, that the two former ought to be resolved
Negatively.

I further declare my opinion, That the Reverend Dean never intended the
Affirmative Solution of those Questions, in a strict and rigorous sense of the
Terms; so that I am not directly concerned in that part of the Dispute: Though
in my Passage I could not forbear noting, 1st. That this Assertion of the
Animadverter's, See chap. 3. n. 2.
viz. That Self-Consciousness is a Personal Act, does in its just consequence
infer, That the Divine Persons are Three Absolute Persons, Three Absolute
Beings; nay, according to his Principles, that they have Three Absolute
Omnisciencies or Divine Natures, and consequently are Three Infinite Spirits,
in an higher sense than ever the Reverend Dean intended; and this Consequence I
still challenge him to clear that Assertion from, if he can.

See chap. 3. n. 3, 4.
Secondly, That the same Argument which himself calls a Demonstration against
what he supposed the Reverend Dean's Assertion, viz. That Self-Consciousness
could not be the formal reason of Personality, because it was a Personal Act,
was equally strong against his own Hypothesis, viz. That Generation was the
formal reason of Personality in the Person of the Father; and this still stands
unanswered, and upon the Animadverter's Principles is, I am satisfied,
unanswerable.

See chap. 2. n. 4, etc.
Thirdly, I discuss at large that Philosophical Question, Whether the Soul is a
Person? which I affirm, and leave him at his leisure to overthrow if he can. As
for that weak Objection, Tritheism, etc. p. 150.
That then the Soul may be said to be Incarnate, let me tell him, that this is
an Heretical, Arian Sense of this Term Incarnate, as if the WORD assumed only a
Body, and not a Human Soul; this Term Incarnate signifies both.

Fourthly, Ibid. chap. 2. n. 4, etc.
I vindicate the Sacred Article of the Incarnation from the Socinian Objections
of the Animadverter, which, in terminis, he brings against the Personality of
the Soul only, but in reality overthrow the Personality of the WORD, had they
been of any force.

Fifthly, I explain that Subtilty of the Schools, See chap. 3. n. 3, 4.
concerning the Relativeness of the Divine Persons; and show the Animadverter's
Mistakes in this Article, the Novelty of this Opinion, not asserted, as I
verily believe, by any one single Ecclesiastical Writer for more than a
Thousand Years after Christ; and give, as I am fully satisfied, unanswerable
Arguments against the Truth of it.

Sixthly, I enquire into that Question, See chap. 3. n. 5.
Why the Divine Persons are Three and no more; and give a just Solution of it
from Revelation.

Seventhly, See chap. 3. n. 6. etc.
I discuss that Important and Fundamental Enquiry in this Mystery, viz. What it
is which determines the Singularity or Plurality of the Predication of any
Attribute concerning the Divine Persons? Where I first give the Predications
themselves, which are to be solved. A very necessary matter to be known by all
who pretend to give us an Hypothesis to solve the Sacred Mystery of the
Trinity. [To do otherwise, is to make a Key for a Lock, by the Keyhole only:
Such a Key is a mere show, it is Ten thousand to one that it never fits the
Wards:] Secondly, I consider the Answers of the Schools, and show their
Insufficiency. Lastly, I endeavor to give the true Solution my self.

It is very weak to make an Outcry about a single Phrase, how unusual soever,
to charge it in the Title of a Book, with the odious name of Tritheism, and in
a Preface to the Two Universities with Paganism, with being a New Christianity:
Determine the General Question first, and this latter concerning the Phrase of
Three Infinite Minds, will be solved of course. Chap. 3. n. 2. See chap. 6. n.
20.
[If Self-Consciousness be a Personal Act, if the Term Deus be a terminus
communis], Both which the Animadverter has affirmed in express Terms; then I do
here aver and engage to make good against the Animadverter, that according to
his own Principles, he cannot avoid the Charge of Tritheism, but he must at the
same time clear that expression of the Reverend Dean, of Three Infinite Minds,
from the same severe and unjust Charge: For so I am not afraid to call it.

The Three Divine Persons may be orthodoxly styled Three Infinite Minds or
Spirits.

I plead not for the Use, but the Orthodoxness of the Phrase; and this I prove,

Chap. 4. n. 4.
First, From the Adjective Form allowed by the Schools; viz. Tres Infinitam
Spiritualem naturam habentes.

Ibid.
Secondly, From the Authority of the Learned Genebrard, to whom this
Proposition, Tres sunt Spiritus Aeterni, quorum quilibet per se Deus, is,
Propositio vera ac fide recepta ab Ecclesia Catholica omnibus temporibus.

Chap. 6. n. 2, etc.
Thirdly, From the unanimous Opinion of the Ancient Fathers, That the Unity of
the Trinity was in their judgment a Specific Unity: Where I vindicate the
Testimony of Petavius and Dr. Cudworth, who have both positively asserted the
thing; as also the Opinion it self, from the weak Objections of the
Animadverter.

Chap. 7. n. 10.
Fourthly, from the Distinction betwixt the Divine Persons, which is a True,
Real, and not Modal Distinction; a Distinction of Three Beings, and not of One
simple Being, with, or under Three Modes.

Chap. 7. n. 4, etc.
Fifthly, From the falsehood of the Animadverter's Hypothesis, of One Being
under Three Modes: For that there neither are, nor can be any proper Modes in
God, or in any Divine Person. Secondly, For that Three Modes are insufficient
to explain the Doctrine of the Trinity; that requiring Three Subjects of Three
Modes or Relations.

Upon the whole I cannot see any necessity of Answering the Animadverter's
Second Part, His Tritheism Charged, etc. What is material will be considered in
my Second Part concerning the Article of the Unity of God: But if I find that
others are of a different Opinion, or that the Animadverter himself would
desire to see it answered, so far as it concerns my Hypothesis, I am ready to
oblige him at a very short warning.

Nay further, to convince the Animadverter that it is Truth and not Victory
which I contend for, my Hypothesis is, That the Divine Persons are Three
Distinct Beings: His, That they are only Three Modes of One Being. I give him
free leave to choose any one Argument which he thinks the strongest for his own
Hypothesis, and which is sufficient for a determination of this Controversy;
and I faithfully promise him, That if I cannot satisfactorily solve it to any
unprejudiced Person, I will not only stop my Pen for the future, but openly and
plainly Recant what I have already Published to the contrary. Errare possum,
Haereticus esse nolo: Which I speak not to curry-favour with the Animadverter,
in his own words, to creep under his feet, while I am Writing against him.

I freely acknowledge, That my Genius (my Education, or my Negligence) never
led me to Study Criticism in words, even in my native Language, less in the
Learned Languages.

I give him therefore not only the right hand as to these Accomplishments,
(that would be a very poor praise) but allow him the Honor the World gives to
an University Orator, to Dr. S -- th, whom most think near of Kin to the
Animadverter.

But Humility is an excellent ballast to great Accomplishments: Non omnia
possumus omnes, is a Rule excepts very few. If the Author of the
Animadversions, and of Tritheism Charged, etc. be the same, as I verily
believe, the Animadverter's Criticism in Philosophy, and mine in Philology, may
be put in the balance together.

The Socinian Historian has extravagantly commended those Animadversions, and
the Author of them, for his great Skill in the Doctrince of the Schools,
particularly he doubts not that His Explication would be approved by most of
the Chairs of our European Universities or Schools of Learning.

It Is dangerous to praise some Persons, their Heads will no more bear it, than
others can a Precipice. Our vain Animadverter is for making a trial, and
therefore dedicates his Tritheism, etc. to all the Professors of both
Universities; he calls often and loud for a Decretum Oxoniense in the
Controversy; For a Theological Censure from both the Universities; For a
Censure of the Church: Nay, threatens in the Book, a Publication of these
Errors in a Learned Language, to obtain, without doubt, an approbation of His
Accurate and Learned Works, from the European World: To smooth his way, he had
honored Bellarmin with the Title of Orthodox and Unquestionably Learned, and
compares the Defender to a profound Dotard, Tritheism, etc. p. 256.
for excepting against Bellarmin's Orthodoxy in this Controversy, Because,
forsooth, he was a Papist; adding, surely the Romish Writers are as Orthodox
about the Article of the Trinity, as any Protestant Writers whatsoever. That
some of the Romish Writers are more Orthodox than some Protestant Writers in
this Sacred Mystery, cannot be denied; particularly, I am not afraid to commend
Genebrard and Petavius, even before Calvin and his Followers, who denied the
Nicene Faith of God of God. But then it is as certain, that other Romish Writers
took part with Calvin as to the Doctrine, though the severity of the
Inquisition tied up their tongues, as Bellarmin himself.

In a word, I never knew any one Popish Author, whom I have had the fortune to
consult, Orthodox in the Point of Christ's Mediatorship; which has a greater
influence on the Orthodox Faith of this Mystery, than is commonly considered:
But this will more properly fall in, when in my Second Part, I come to treat of
the Divine Worship paid to the Son and Holy Ghost. I will at present only give
the Reader the words of the Learned Dr. Bull: Defensio Fidei Nicaenae sect. 4.
cap. 3. n. 14. p. 482.
[Obiter notandum contra Bellarminum aliosque Pontificios, diserte affirmare
Hilarium, (quod and communiter docuisse veteres liquet) servatorem nostrum
etiam in legislatione and ante (...) mediatorem fuisse; proinde non humanae
tantum naturae, utpote quam nondum assumpserat, respectu mediatorem esse; quod
tamen isti acriter contenderunt.

It Is no wonder, if the Animadverter, whose head is so full of a Decretum
Oxoniense and Cantabrigiense in his favor, who expects a Complement from the
Gentlemen at Lipsick who write the Transactions, if not the Pope and Cardinals,
to declare in favor of his Animadversions as soon as they can cross the Alps
by his Learned Pen, to have the Orthodox enough in these Points, and otherwise
unquestionably Learned, returned to himself from the Vatican: I say, it is no
wonder, if, thus big with expectation, he looks down with great contempt upon
the already, in his thoughts, despised Dean of St. Paul's, and affords him no
better Complements than these, profound Dotard, a Man of Words and not of
Sense, Sir Scorn and Ignorance, etc. If you have no Logic, have some Shame.
Which last has a deadly sting in it, coming especially from a Person of so
profound Judgment in this Science, I will give the Reader one instance of it in
his Tritheism Charged, etc. and so conclude this Epistle, which is already
longer than I designed.

Reading over the Contents in the Fifth Page I found these very remarkable ones.

[A Syllogism very Learnedly formed by this Defender for his old Friends the
Socinians, with Two Terms and no more.] p. 229.

Bless me! thought I, a Syllogism with Two Terms and no more, is a Triangle
with two sides only, or a Square with three. I turned over with great speed to
p. 229. where in the front of the Page, in Italick Characters, I found this
innocent Syllogism.

Tritheism, etc. p. 229.
[Three Distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons are Three Gods.]

But there are not Three Distinct Gods; and therefore there are not Three
Distinct Infinite Intelligent Persons in the Godhead.

The Major of this Proposition is false; but what other fault to find with it,
was past my Skill in Logic; I therefore consulted the Animadverter in the
following words.

Ibid.
[In which Syllogism we have these two Terms, viz. [Three Distinct Infinite
Intelligent Persons] and [Three Distinct Gods.] But as for the third Term, I
desire this Author to show it me, for I must confess, I cannot find it.]

Alas! Who can help the Animadverter's blindness; the Reverend Dean's Son at
the University, The meanest Sophister of a years standing (in the
Animadverter's own words), could have solved this riddle for this profound
Logician and Philosopher.

In all Syllogisms there is a Major, and Minor, and Medius Terminus. It is
clear that [Three Distinct Gods] is the middle Term as not entering the
Conclusion. So that if any Term be wanting, it must either be the Major, or
Minor Terminus, that is, either the Predicate, or Subject of the Conclusion.

Now let me ask this great Logician, Can there be a Conclusion, a Proposition,
(as this is) without a Subject and Predicate? that is, in other words, Can
there be an Affirmation, and nothing affirmed; a Negation, and nothing denied?
Can there be a Proposition of one Term? Can there be a Term and Copula, and yet
nothing coupled? [Will not that be a Marriage of a Man to himself?] Is there
any thing denied of Three Distinct, Infinite, Intelligent Persons in the
Godhead, in the Conclusion, or not? But I am ashamed to spend the Reader's
time, and abuse his patience, to teach this great Dictator in Philosophy and
Divinity, the first Rudiments of Logic; the Verb substantive est or sunt in
Latin, is in these Cases resolvendum hoc modo, says Dutrieu, Logica Dutrieu.
p. 3.
est existens, sunt existentes; and the Conclusion in the Reverend Dean's
Syllogism is resolved into this, and therefore Three distinct infinite
intelligent Persons in the Godhead are not existing, which term existing is the
third term in this Syllogism, and to be supplied in this Syllogism both in the
Minor Proposition and Conclusion; and none but a person of no Logic could have
been ignorant of it.

The Animadverter adds, Ibid.
[I know well enough how this Socinian Syllogism must be supplied and
perfected; and therefore (though it is not my business to correct his Blunders,
but to expose them) I shall set it right for him thus. Three distinct infinite
intelligent Persons are three distinct Gods; but Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
are not three distinct Gods, and therefore Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are not
three infinite intelligent Persons. Thus I say this Socinian ought to proceed,
etc.

First, The Animadverter has changed the whole Syllogism; the Conclusion was
universal, or equivalent to universal in the first form; in this last it is
particular; in the former it was simply, universally denied, that there are any
infinite, etc. Persons in the Godhead; in the latter, it is only particularly
denied, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are infinite intelligent Persons.

Secondly, In the Conclusion of the last Syllogism, not the Subject, but the
Predicate was to be supplied; Three infinite, etc. Persons in the former
Syllogism was the Subject, and not Predicate of the Conclusion; whereas in the
Animadverter's Syllogism, he has made three infinite Persons the Predicate;
From whence it is plain, that this profound Logician, who so often upbraids
others with the want of Logic, does not yet know the Subject and Predicate of
a Proposition; the Subject commonly precedes the Verb or copula, and the
Predicate commonly follows; but let me tell this great Critic, that this Rule
is not Universal, and I find that he cannot yet tell when it fails. And now let
the Animadverter jeer others of their mistakes in Orthography, and the like
slips more tenderly for the future, since I persuade my self, that a Syllogism
with two terms, and a Proposition with one term, (which is included in the
former) will not easily be forgotten or pardoned to such an insulting Adversary.

Shall I be pardoned, if I add one Error in Divinity out of the same Book?
Error, did I call it? it is too mild a name, I esteem it a downright blasphemy,
p. 230. The Animadverter notes this for an absurd and illogical Proposition, to
say, that God is the Father.

How often do the sacred Scriptures tell us, that God sent his Son, gave his
only begotten Son? Are these Expressions absurd and illogical? I blush to
relate such blasphemous stuff, since I challenge the Animadverter any other
ways to expound them, than by the term of the Father, viz. The Father sent his
Son, gave his only begotten Son.

Our Savior, Truth it self, says, I am the Son of God. Is this an absurd and
illogical Expression? since the undoubted meaning of these words are, I am the
Son of the Father.

St. Paul tells us, That to us there is one God and Father; Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Are all these absurd and illogical?

Does not Scripture, all the Creeds, use the Expression of God the Father? Had
the Animadverter that skill in Logic he so often upbraids others with the want
of, he would have known, that God the Father is equivalent in Logic to this,
that God is a Father, and if a Father, the Father: He would have understood,
that if this Proposition be true, The Father is God, it is by the Rules of
Logic capable of a conversion, of putting the Predicate in the place of the
Subject, and of the Subject in the place of the Predicate, without any
alteration of the signa Logica, [omnis, nullus, aliquis, etc.] where the
Subject and Predicate are both singular, as I believe them in this Proposition,
The Father is God, and I have the consent of the Schools on my side. And where
the Predicate is a terminus communis, as the Animadverter contends that God is,
there a particular sign is to be added to the Predicate when it becomes the
Subject, as Peter is a Man, some Man is Peter: And now I leave it with the
Animadverter to consider, whether he will speak with the Scriptures, the
Catholic Church, the Schools, in saying, that God is the Father, or condemn
all these for absurd and illogical Dances, and declare that we ought to say,
that some particular God is the Father, as some particular Man is Peter. I
challenge him to avoid one of these Phrases, if he can, by the Rules of Logic,
unless he denies the Divinity of the Father, denies that the Father is God.

The same Expressions of Scripture confute what the Animadverter tells us,
Tritheism, etc. p. 130.
that the term [three intelligent Persons] is adequately and convertibly
predicated of [God.] For whatever is adequately and convertibly predicated of
any term, may in all Propositions be put in the place of that term, according
to which Rule we may say, that three intelligent Persons sent his Son, gave his
only begotten Son; That our Savior is the Son of three intelligent Persons.
Blessed be three intelligent Persons, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
There needs no words to expose or confute these Expositions.

Is this the Person who calls so loud for a Decretum Oxoniense, for a
Theological Censure from both the Universities? Is this the Person who is to
vindicate the Reputation of the Church of England to Foreigners? Is this the
Man who is to warn us, that our Religion, our old Religion lies at stake? If it
does, it is from such Heterodox Expounders of it as himself.

To conclude, This Proposition, viz. God is the Father, which the Animadverter
[with so much ignorance of the received language of the Church, and in the
consequence Blasphemy] charges with Absurdity and Illogicalness, was, in the
judgment of the greatest Man, as to this Controversy, next to the Divinely
inspired Writers, whom the Church ever enjoyed, the Learned Athanasius, (...),
the most sacred and venerable Article of the Church of God. But this belongs to
my Second Part concerning the Unity of God.

ERRATA.
PAge 9 l 6. f. sive, r. sine. p. 11. l. 10. f. by it, r. by it self. l. 29. r.
Praeter. p. 15. l. 25. r. (...). p. 18. l. 27. f. part of, r. co-part with. p.
42. l. 23. r. (...). ibid. Marg. r. denominari. p. 44. l. 15. after prius and
posterius, add, in the Divine Nature. p. 46. l. 15. r. Principle. p. 47. l. 15.
f. such, r. each. p 48. l. 9. r. judicarunt. p. 71. l. penult, r. according. p.
73. l. 23. f. personallity r. personally. p. 88. l. 29. r. vindicates. p 92. l.
2. f. senses in, r of. p. 98. l 13. r dicunt, and place the Quotation after the
following Sentence. p. 109. l. penult, f. these r. three. p. 110. l. 28. f. as
one, r. in one. p. 114 l. 7. f. but therefore, r. so that. p. 116. l. 17. r.
(...). p. 120. l. 5. f. Apostasit, r. Hypostasis. p. 129. l. 21. r. (...). l.
25. (...). p. 137. l. 27. r. praeter. p. 148. l. 24 r. believes. p. 153. l. 8.
r. Hypothesis. p. 155. l. 21. f. assent to, r. assert. p 163. l. 4. r.
subsistit. l 5. gignit. l. 9. seipsam; the same mistake in some other places.
l. 23. (...). p. 165. l. 21. r. subsistit. There are some other literal
mistakes, as Logicks for Logic, Hypostases for Hypostasis; and several
mispointings, which will not much disturb a judicious Reader; and the
Animadverter, if he pleases, may correct them himself, if this Book does not
find him other employment. The Pages are mistaken from 132, to 137.

INDEX.
A Preface to the Reader concerning Tritheism charged, etc. i. An Introduction
by way of Letter to the Animadverter. Page 1 The Socinian Historian's Encomium
on the Animadversions, etc. ibid. The Animadverter's Treatment of the Dean of
St. Paul's. 2 The Hypothesis of Three Infinite Minds, and Three Modes, compared.
4 My Design, and Surprise, in four particulars. ibid. The Faith of the Church
as to several Extra-scriptural Terms, and several Scriptural Expressions. 5 The
design of my First Part, to state the Doctrine of the Trinity: the Reason of my
proceeding by way of Animadversions on the Animadverter. 6 The design of my
Second Part, to state the Article of the Unity of God. ibid.
CHAP. I.
N. 1. THE absolute necessity of the Scholastic Terms; their usefulness at
this time. 8 N. 2. Whether Accidents are distinct Beings from Substance? 9 N.
3, 4. Of Substance and Accident. 10 N. 5, 6. Of the Nature of Modes; of the
reason of inventing Modes, the Animadverter's mistake. N. 7. Of Modal
Difference. 13 N. 8. Of the Animadverter's definition of Essence. 14 N. 9.
Whether Existence be a Mode? 15 N. 10. Of Subsistence; of the Animadverter's
addition to the common definition of Subsistence. 16 Whether the Human Nature
of Christ be barely an adjunct to the WORD. 18 N. 11. Of one singular Existence
of the Trinity. 19 N. 12, 13. More Considerations about Subsistence. 20 N. 14.
Of Modal Composition; of the reduction of Modes. Whether a Divine Person is
compounded. 21 N. 15. Whether things formally different be affirmable of one
another? 25
CHAP. II.
N. 1. OF the Debate betwixt the Reverend Dean and the Animadverter, concerning
Self-consciousness and Mutual-consciousness. 27 N. 2. Whether Personality be
the Principle of Action? N. 3. Whether the Human Nature of Christ be a Person?
And of some of the Subtilties of the Schools relating to the Incarnation. 28 N.
4. Whether the Soul of man is a Person? and of the illustration of the
Incarnation from this similitude. Whether Christ is a compound Hypostasis? 30
N. 5. Whether the Soul can be a Part and Person both? 33 N. 6. Whether the
(...) and man be Unum per Accidens, or Unum per se? 34 N. 7. Whether the Soul
be the same Person with the Man? and whether the WORD be the same Person with
whole Christ? How a whole and compound Being or Person differ? 36 N. 9. A
Retortion of the Argument against the Socinians and the Animadverter. 40 N. 10.
What denominates any Being a distinct Person? 41
CHAP. III.
N. 1. OF a Prius and Posterius in the Trinity. 44 N. 2. Whether
Self-consciousness be a Personal Act? 46 N. 3, 4. Whether to be a Person be a
Relative Attribute in this Mystery? 47 N. 5. Why we believe Three Divine
Persons, and no more? 52 N. 6. Of the Singularity or Plurality of the
Predication of any Attribute concerning the Divine Persons. Of the Distinction
of Personal and Essential Predicates. Of the distinction of Nouns Substantive
and Nouns Adjective in relation to this Mystery. Of the distinction of Absolute
and Relative Predicates in relation to this Mystery. St. Augustin's Axiom of
quicquid ad se Deus, etc. confuted. Of St. Augustin's Opinion in this Article.
A Character of the Schoolmen by Mr. Dodwell. The Answer to an Arian Objection.
Of the true Rule of Singular and Plural Predications in the Trinity. That the
Articles of the Unity of God, and the Unity of the Trinity, are distinct
Articles. 55
CHAP. IV.
N. 1. OF Orthodox Forms of Speech in relation to this Mystery. 65 N. 2.
Whether Three Persons in God? 67 N. 3. Of the Reason of using Extra-Scriptural
Terms in this Controversy. Of the Schoolmens Principles. 69 N. 4. Of the import
of this Phrase of Three Infinite Minds. Why this Phrase so rare? Of the Phrase
of One Infinite Mind in relation to the Trinity. Genebrard justifies the Phrase
of Three Infinite Minds. Of the Phrase of Three Gods. 70 N. 5, 6. Whether God
and Infinite Mind are Terms equipollent? 72 N. 7. Of the Animadverter's Answer
to the Objection of Polytheism from the Assertion of Three Divine Persons.
Three Relatives not one simple Being under Three Relations. 73 N. 10. Whether
the Ternary Number belongs only to the Personalities? 78 N. 11. Whether the
Divine Nature sustains Three Modes of Subsistence? 79 N. 12. Of the Phrase of
Three Substances. N. 13. Whether two Substances necessarily differ in
substance? Of Bellarmin's Orthodoxness in relation to this Controversy. 80 N.
16. Whether one Infinite Mind can be Three Infinite Minds? In what sense the
Trinity One God? 82 N. 18. Of the God of the Heathens and Jews. In what sense
God Three Persons. 83 N. 19. In what sense the Father is the only True God? 85
N. 20. Of the Father's being the Fountain of the Deity. 86
CHAP. V.
N. 1. WHether the Ancients believed the Divine Persons to be Intelligent
Beings? 89 N. 2. How the Son is the Wisdom of the Father? Of the Particle of in
this Mystery. God of God. Whether Three Persons infer Three Gods? 90 N. 3.
Whether the same Wisdom can be both unbegotten, and begotten? 92 N. 4. Of the
Distinction of the Divine Persons. 95
CHAP. VI.
N. 1. OF a double Care in Mysterious Articles. What is fundamental in this
Mystery? Three Hypotheses concerning the Trinity. In what sense I affirm the
Universality of the Common Divine Essence? Of the Blasphemy of the Modern
Socinians compared with the Ancient Socinians. Of the Antiquity of both parts
of my Hypothesis. 96 N. 2. Petavius and Dr. Cudworth's Assertion, That a
Specific Unity of the Trinity was the dogma of the Nicene Fathers, considered
as to its Historical Truth, and vindicated from the Animadverter's Exceptions.
102 N. 10. The same discussed Problematically betwixt the Animadverter and my
self. 118 N. 12. How far a Specific Unity is notional? 119 N. 13. Whether a
Specific Unity implies a Multiplication in the several Individuals? Lombard
the first who denied that the Divine Persons differ in number. Two Corollaries,
1st, That a numerical Unity, and a specific Unity, are not according to the
Philosophy of the Ancients inconsistent. 2dly, That it was no such Paradox in
the Ancient Fathers to deny, that three Human Persons ought to be called three
men, as it is commonly esteemed. 121 N. 16. The Principles of Individuation
according to the Schoolmen. 128 N. 17. The Opinion of Philoponus, and the
Tritheit Heretics. 129 N. 18. How far a Multiplication of the Divine Nature
may be allowed. 130 N. 20. Whether the term Deus be a Terminus Communis. 131 N.
21. The Divine Attributes no Modes. 132 N. 22. Of the Animadverter's definition
of the nature of God. 138
CHAP. VII.
N. 1. SCripture the only Rule of Faith. 139 N. 2. The Unity of God an Article
of natural Riligion. Heb. 1.3.141. Not the Warrant of Three Hypostases. 142
What Three Personalities are. Of the Subtleties of the Schools in relation to
Three subsistences. Of the sense of (...). 143 The Trinity one Suppositum to
Cajetan. 217. The Godhead sustains not the modes of Subsistence. 218. Of
Personal acts according to the Schoolmen. 219 N. 3. A Deity diversified.
Whether the Personalities are Modes? 223 N. 4. Whether Modes in God? Modes
according to the new and old Philosophy. 150 N. 6. Three Modes not sufficient
to explain the Trinity. The principal inquiry in this Mystery, what the Three
Persons are? 155 N. 10. Of Real and Modal Distinction. Whether the Divine
Persons differ Modally. 159 N. 11. Whether Personality is a personal property?
161 N. 15. Three kinds of Sabellianism. Confusion of Persons. Contraction of
the Deity to the single person of the Father. The Compounding of the Trinity.
163 N. 18. Rufinus acknowledges trinitatem in rebus. 167 N. 19. Boethius for the
Universality of the common Divine Essence. N. 20. Peter Lombard. 168 N. 21.
Thomas Aquinas. N. 22. Of a Relative subsistence, and a subsisting relation.
The Conclusion, Containing a summary Account of the whole. 170
AN ANSWER TO THE ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE Vindication of the TRINITY, etc. By
way of LETTER to the Animadverter.
SIR,
I Make bold to follow your own Example, and offer the following Papers to your
Admirers, your self, and the late Socinian Historian and Considerer.

This last Person has given us his judgment, Considerations of the Explications
of the Doctrine of the Trinity, etc. P. 12, 13.
That you are the only Writer, since the revival of these Controversies, who
has indeed understood what the Church means by a Trinity in Unity; that your
Explication is a true and orthodox Explication of what the Church intends to
say. That your design being only to declare and explain the Doctrine of the
Trinity, that is, to notify in what sense and manner it is held by the Church.
In reference to such design, We [this great Author and his Party, the English
Socinians] must say, That his Performance is an accurate and learned Work. Thus
this Socinian Historian, like a Second Celsus, pretends to know all the poor
Orthodox are able to say in Defense of the tottering and falling Ark, Ibid. p.
20.
as he Blasphemously calls the Doctrine of the Sacred Trinity. You, you, Sir,
have without question laid down the very Explication of the Schools, Ibid. p. 4.
the Doctrine or Explication generally received in Universities, which he
doubts not would be approved by most of the Chairs of our European
Universities, or Schools of Learning; you verily have acquitted your self like
a Man of Learning and Wit. All must bow before you, but his own greater Self.
In your Person, he slays his ten thousands. When Goliath is defeated, the
Philistines must fly. This Euge concludes that Pamphlet, Ibid. p. 35.
-- And indeed he [this Considerer] and all others, that have labored in this
Controversy, may surcease their Pains henceforth, and leave what they have
already said, to the Judgment and Conscience of all considerate and sincere Men.

How much you are an Admirer of your own performance, may be more than surmized
from several Passages in your Book, and especially from your scornful treating
of your Reverend and Learned Antagonist. In your Preface you tell us, That you
neither Reverence nor Fear him; and in the same Preface you charge him, P. III.
With defying the Church with so bold a Front; P. II.
with being so very Rude, Scandalous, and Provoking, P. IV.
that it is impossible for the Tongue or Pen of Man to reply any thing so
severely upon him, which the foulness of his Expression will not abundantly
warrant both the speaking and writing of. And in the same page, with peculiar
Modesty, you call his Vindication, Stuff, (if his Stuff should live so long.)
Nay, not content with this Censure upon his own Person, you add in the same
place, concerning the Governors of our Church, whom you vouchsafe only the bare
Title of Churchmen to; None then opposing them, [The Reverend Dean's Notions
concerning the Trinity] most overlooking them; and some countenancing and
advancing the Author of them, and perhaps for them too. This is truly the Case.
Is not this in your own words, To throw your Scurrility at high and low,
Preface, p. III.
at all about you, and below you, at an unsufferable rate? Is this the
Character of so Learned, and every way Excellent a Clergy, not to oppose, most
to overlook, nay, some to countenance and advance the Author of the worst of
Heresies Tritheism it self? You explain your self ( p. 361.) (when you call the
late Learned and Worthy Archbishop of Blessed Memory, his Great Lord and
Patron) whom you here designed by those words, and advancing the Author for
them too. I need add but one place more at present, p. 379. where you tell the
Reader, how thin a Bottom the Reverend Dean has to support him. But it seems
Coward-like, in my apprehension, to accuse the Reverend Dean as a Person of so
thin a Bottom, and yet immediately in the same page to declare, That if any one
besides him, shall attempt an Answer to your Discourse, you shall not in the
least trouble nor concern your self about him, whosoever he be: You mean
probably, that you will not in Print Answer any such Discourse; but it is not
always in our power to avoid being troubled or concerned.

However, if that will do you any kindness, I design not an Answer to your
Animadversions so far as they are personal betwixt the Reverend Dean and your
self. The Reverend Dean needs not so weak a Pen as mine to defend him: His own
is best able to chastise you, if that Learned Person were not better employed,
more to the Glory of God, and the Service of the Church of England.

If the Novelty of the phrase of three infinite Minds, startled many of our
Clergy; I do assure you, That yours of three Modes has displeased more; not
one, whom I have had the honor to consult, but are better reconciled to three
infinite Minds, since the reading of your eighth Chapter, than they were
before. They believed the Article without enquiring into the Modus: But if they
must determine the Modus; if they must choose to profess three infinite Minds,
or only three Modes; The former is an intelligible Notion: There is a
difficulty indeed how to reconcile this with the Article of the Unity of God;
but the latter is to most mere Metaphysical Cant. They believe, and can readily
understand that each distinct Divine Person is an infinite Mind; from whence
the Consequence lies fair, that three distinct Divine Persons are three
distinct infinite Minds: But they cannot in the least comprehend, how a Divine
Person can be a Mode, which you expressly affirm, p. 121. A Person here [in this
Mystery] imports only a Relation or Mode of Subsistence, etc.

My design is, by God's assistance, to vindicate this great Article of a
Trinity in Unity against the Socinians. The Church, by God's Providence, has
overcome the Arian Heresy, a much more subtle Heresy than that of the
Socinians; which persuaded me, that treading in the steps of the Ancients was
the best way to defend the Orthodox Faith at present. It was a great surprise
to me in my Enquiry, to find, 1st, that those things which at this day are
esteemed as the greatest Objections against this Sacred Article, had a quite
different import in the Judgment of the Ancients. 2dly, That all these
Subtilties which the Schools have taught us in this Mystery, were utterly
unknown to Antiquity; nay, in many of them the direct contrary Conclusion most
expressly maintained by the Fathers of the Church. 3dly, That the Subtilties of
the Schools were little studied by the Moderns; these Animadversions were no
small confirmation of this point; the Animadverter having in so many places,
and in the most material Articles, not understood the Hypothesis of the
Schools, which yet at the same time he would be thought to embrace, and shelter
himself under. 4thly, That the Article of the Trinity is safe, without
recurring to the Scholastic Subtilties.

I am very sensible, that to clear all this, is a difficult Province; and I
heartily wish this Lot had fallen to an Abler Hand: I am so conscious of my own
Defects, that nothing but Zeal for that Eternal Truth of this Article, in the
Belief of which I hope to be saved, could have tempted me to expose my self and
my own Deficiencies to the Censure of the world. It often pleases the Divine
Providence by weak means to bring to pass great effects. If it shall please his
Infinite Wisdom to use so weak an Instrument as my self to illustrate this
great Truth, or at least to incite by me some Abler Person to adorn this Great
Mystery as it deserves, To God and his Great Name be all the Glory; and I shall
then sit down contentedly, joyfully, with the Shame which any Mistake or Error
of mine may bring to my self.

The Faith of the most Learned Fathers of the Church, if I aright apprehend
them; that Faith at least which I embrace and propose, is, That the Extra
Scriptural Terms used by the Church in this Great and Sacred Article, viz.
Trinity, Person, Hypostasis, Consubstantial Essence, are to be received and
understood in the most proper, native, and genuine Sense of those Terms; that
is, in the same Sense in which they were understood, when by the same Fathers
they were applied to Angelical or Human Persons: And this, I conceive, in Sense
to imply no more than what the same Fathers declared concerning the following
Scriptural Expressions, viz. That Father, Son, Spirit, Begotten, Proceeding,
Son of God, Spirit of God, Begotten Son of God, etc. are to be properly
expounded, and not in some improper, uncouth, figurative, or Metaphorical Sense.

I shall divide my Design into Two Parts. In the First I shall endeavor to
give an Account of all the Metaphysical Terms used in this Mystery, and as far
as is necessary, of the Subtilties which the Schoolmen have introduced in their
Explication of them; and this I have chosen to do by way of Animadversion upon
our Animadverter, from a double Reason: First, in relation to himself, to
convince him, if possible, of his Barbarous Treatment of a Worthy and Reverend
Person, for barely venturing on a new Expression in a Vindication of this
Sacred Article: The Piety of the Design, with all Candid and Ingenuous Lovers
of the Article, would have attoned for a much greater Erratum. Three Infinite
Minds or Spirits is capable of an Orthodox Exposition, even in the mouth of a
Schoolman. However, the Animadverter, of all persons, ought to have been
silent, or the last to have found fault with it, who has so often been guilty
of greater Slips both in Philosophy and Divinity. Secondly, In relation to the
Socinian Historian, who by his Commendation of the Animadversions has adopted
them for his own, and from his own words is bound to defend them for an Acurate
Account of what the Church and Schools have taught in this Mystery; or else
confess, that he has opposed (possibly, forsook) the Faith of the Church (and
Schools) before he understood either.

In my Second Part I intend to enquire more carefully into that uncontested
Article of The Unity of God; especially since I am verily persuaded, that most
of the Subtilties, not to say, Perplexities, wherewith this Article of the
Trinity is too often obscured, arise from want of a just stating of that First
Article of Natural Religion, the Unity of God.

It will be an ease both to my Reader and my self, to divide my First Part into
Chapters and numbered Sections, and be more ready in case of any occasion of
Reference or Comparison.

My design will also apologize for me, if I sometimes take occasion to digress
much farther than a bare Answer to the Animadversions seems to require; since
my desire is to bring, as far as I conveniently can, all Metaphysical or Nice
Disputes into this First Part, that my Second Part may be more suited for the
use of those persons who are less acquainted, or less delight in these Terms of
Art.

I also crave leave to acquaint the Reader, that for the avoiding of
unnecessary Disputes, I judge it sufficient at this time to reduce the Question
to what is owned and professed on both sides. As for instance: Both Jews and
Socinians acknowledge one Divine Person: Both also acknowledge God's relation
to his Creatures. If therefore the Divine Relations within the Trinity are
capable of the same Solution with the Relation of God to his Creatures; I mean,
in respect of their Real Existence, that suffices for my purpose. So if the
Suppositality of Three Divine Persons be capable of the same Solution with the
Suppositality of One Divine Person; whether that Suppositality be a Mode or
Negation, I need not in my present Design strictly determine.

CHAP. I.
Animadv. etc. chap 2 p 30. 2d. Edition.
N.1.
BUT because the Subject I am about to engage in, is of that nature, that most
of the Metaphysical and School-Terms hitherto made use of by Divines upon this
occasion, will naturally and necessarily fall in with it, I think it will
contribute not a little to our more perspicuous proceeding in this Dispute, to
state the Import and Signification of these Terms, Essence, Substance,
Existence, Subsistence, Nature, and Personality, with such others as will of
course come in our way, while we are treating of, and explaining these, etc.]

The Method is extremely judicious, and ought to be commended; but if we state
the Import of these Terms falsely or imperfectly, we shall obscure and perplex
our selves and our Readers, instead of assisting them to understand things more
perspicuously.

The simple Faith of this Sacred Article to pious and docible minds needs not
any of these Metaphysical or School-terms; accordingly the divinely-inspir'd
Writers have used none of them: But the subtle Equivocations and Objections of
the Arians on one hand, and the Sabellians on the other, together with the
great Veneration paid to the Conclusions of the Schoolmen in this Mystety, have
made it necessary to enquire into the just signification of these and other
School Terms and Distinctions.

N. 2.
[And here first of all, according to the old Peripatetick Philosophy, which
for ought I see (as to the main Body of it at least) has stood its ground
hitherto against all assaults; I look upon the division of Ens, or Being, (a
summary word for all things) into Substance and Accident, as the Primary and
most Comprehensive.]

I see no necessity from this Mystery to concern our selves with this
Metaphysical Dispute, Whether Accidents are distinct Beings from Substance. The
Ancient Fathers denied any Accidents in God, or in a Divine Person, because God
was immutable; whereas an Accident, potest adesse aut abesse sive subjecti
interitu, is separable from its Subject, is changeable. So St. Augustine, lib.
5. de Trin. cap. 4. Nihil itaque accidens in Deo, quia nihil mutabile aut
amissibile. But not one of them, so far as I can find, ever gave this
Metaphysical Reason, that it would compound God, or a Divine Person of two
Beings. All the new Philosophers, who are neither a small nor contemptible Body
of Men, explode this Division of Ens; they do all deny, that Accidents are
distinct Beings from Substance. Ens is not Vnivocum, but Analogum to Substance
and Accident, that is, an Accident is not properly a Being, but Analogous, or
like to a Being; not properly Ens simpliciter, but Ens entis, an affection of
Being, Lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 9. S. 15. p. 391.
rather than a Being. Accidens (says the Learned Petavius) proprie non est
(...), sed (...) affectio quaedam. Sola vero substantia esse dicitur, and (...)
vocatur.

Transubstantiation (as I verily believe) first persuaded the Schoolmen to
teach, That Accidents are distinct Beings from Substance, as being capable to
exist separate from Substance: Nay, this monstrous Doctrine cannot persuade the
new Philosophers of the Romish Church to believe these real Accidents; they
rather choose to affirm, that God by a perpetual Miracle causes the appearances
of Bread and Wine to all our Senses, than to acknowledge that Accidents are
distinct Beings from the Substance they affect.

Aristotle himself appropriates (...), Essence, to Substance, if therefore
(...) and (...), are Relatives; if that only be (...), or a Being which has
(...), an Essence, nothing but Substance, according to that Philosopher, can be
such.

P. 31. N. 3.
[As for Substance, I define that to be a Being not inhering in another, etc.]

A Division rather than a Definition of Substance is necessary in this Mystery.
Aristotle divides Substance into first and second Substance. And it is no such
contemptible Enquiry, as possibly the Animadverter may imagine, whether the
Ancient Fathers of the Church, when they so often say, that Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are of one Substance, are not to be interpreted of a second
Substance.

P. 31. N. 4.
["Accident, I define a Being inherent in another.]

This I have already spoken to, N. 2.

P. 31. N. 5.
[But now, besides these two Terms of Substance and Accident, there is another
assigned by Logicians, Metaphysicians, and Schoolmen, called a Mode of Being,
viz. such a thing as Being added to another, does not make any addition of
another Being, or degree of Being to it, but only restrains and determines it,
etc.]

All the new Philosophers deny real Modes, equally with real Accidents: Nor can
I see any necessity to recur to such a nice Metaphysical Debate to explain this
sacred Mystery. Neither Jews nor Socinians fly to this Metaphysical Notion to
explain the Suppositality of One Divine Person; nor need Christians so nice a
Speculation to defend the Suppositalities of Three Divine Persons. If there are
any real Modes in the Creatures, I approve of the Animadverter's description of
them, that they are adjuncts, or added to the Being; that they restrain or
determine the nature of the Being. But from this very description of a Mode, I
am satisfied there can be no proper Modes in God, or a Divine Person; but of
this afterward. When the Animadverter adds in the same page, That a Mode is not
a mere Ens rationis; Ibid. p. 31.
he seems to me to contradict himself, that it is in some sense an Ens
rationis, and consequently not real. So, when he tells us, That Modes were
invented to prevent an infinite progress in Beings, Ibid.
upon a supposition, that Accidents are distinct Beings from Substance; he
gives us the right reason, the Union of Substance and Accident could not be an
Accident, that is, a Third Being, for then that would want another Being to
unite it to Substance, and so in infinitum. But there never was so strange an
Explication of this reason as that given by the Animadverter. Ibid. p. 31.
[For since every thing is capable of being defined or described, and yet
nothing can be defined merely by it (an identical proposition, being no
definition) it must needs be defined by somewhat or other distinct from it
self; but if that be also a Being, then that likewise must be defined by
another Being, and that by another, and so on in infinitum; which would be most
absurd. Whereas, if this definition or description of a thing be made by some
Modus of it, which is not strictly and properly a Being it self; the thing
presently stops here, without any necessity of proceeding to any more Beings.]

There are few mistakes, but they have some plausible color or ground; but
this is so extremely extravagant, that I cannot conjecture in the least what
the Animadverter aimed at. None ever put the Modus of any thing into a proper
Definition. What Logician ever affirmed that Definitio constet ex genere,
differentia and modo? A proper Definition contains only the Essence, the
quiddity (as the Schools speak) of any Thing or Being; but a Mode, according to
the Animadverter, is a thing added, or an adjunct, that is, quod alicui preter
Essentiam adjungitur, what is besides the Essence, and consequently ought not
to be put into the proper Definition of the Being.

[But perhaps it will be here said, Ibid. p. 32. N. 6.
If these Modes are not so many mere nothings, or entia rationis, what order or
rank shall they be placed in? since those ten Heads of Being, which we call
predicaments, cannot seem the proper Receptacles of things, which we own not to
be properly or formally Beings. I answer, That tho they are not Beings properly
so called, and so not directly, and upon their own account placeable under any
of the ten forementioned Heads of Being; yet, since they are appendages of
Being, as cleaving to it, and depending upon it; they are accounted under, and
reduced to those respective Heads, or Genera of Being, to which the Beings
modified by them do directly belong]

It is a common saying, That a Fool may ask more Questions, and raise more
Difficulties in an hour, than a wise Man can answer, or satisfy in a day; but
certainly he is not overwise, who without any necessity will be starting
Difficulties which himself cannot unfold. The Faith of this sacred Article, as
I said before, needs none of these Metaphysical Disputes; and if it did, the
Reader would be strangely deceived, who should rely upon our Animadverter's
skill in Metaphysics.

First, He has confounded Predicamental and Physical Accidents. Even those
Metaphysicians and Schoolmen, who asserted Accidents to be distinct Beings from
Substance, never understood that assertion in large of all the Predicamental
Accidents, but only of quantity and quality. He himself is pleased to tell us,
p. 241. that posture is a Mode of the Body; and I believe he has not confidence
to deny, that posture properly belongs to the predicament of Situs. All
predicamental Relations are by the said Schoolmen esteemed Modes, and not
distinct Beings.

Secondly, To differ in predicament, is not a certain sign of differing so much
as in Mode, much less to be two distinct Beings or Accidents, according to the
Animadverter, who calls them ten Heads of Being. Action and Passion differ in
predicament, yet are by Aristotle himself esteemed but one Motion, which as it
proceeds from the Agent, is called Action; as it is terminated upon the
Patient, is called Passion.

Thirdly, Nor are all Modes to be reduced to those predicaments, to which the
Beings by them modified do directly belong. Figure and proportion are Modes of
quantity, and yet are reduced to the predicament of quality.

Fourthly, This reduction of Modes is what, I believe, the Animadverter did not
in the least understand; but of this, when I come to speak of the composition
of a Divine Person.

[Now the nature of these Modi being thus accounted for, P. 32. N. 7.
we are in the next place to take notice of the difference resulting from them,
which we call Modal, and that is, between two or more such Modes differing from
one another, as the Personalities belonging to several Persons differ amongst
themselves; or when a thing or Being differs from the Mode affecting it; or
lastly, when several things thus modified or affected, do by virtue of those
Modes differ from one another: And thus the Persons in the Blessed Trinity may
be said to differ amongst themselves.]

No Divine had ever more reason to have informed himself aright of the nature
of these Modi, and of modal difference: For, I believe, no man before himself
ever laid so great a stress upon both these Points. Hear his own words, p. 285.
[If Modes of Being should not be allowed in God, then I affirm it to be
impossible [mark those words, I affirm it to be impossible] for any
distinction, and consequently for any persons to be in God.] What is this but
to tell the world, that whoever does not understand the Metaphysics of Modes,
and yet believes the Trinity, believes what the Animadverter affirms to be
impossible in Reason? Now this Assertion shall in due time be examined.

So p. 246. He affirms, that the Divine Persons which the whole Christian
Church professes to differ by a real difference, I say, he affirms, that they
differ by a modal, or lesser sort of real difference, of which Assertion also
in due place. Now we are to examine, how well this great Dictator in Philosophy
and Divinity understands a Modal difference. He names three kinds of Modal
difference, two of which are false, and all three impertinent. First, two
Modes, when they belong to one Being, differ indeed by a Modal difference; but
when we speak of them indefinitely, as they belong to different Beings, they
differ by the same difference by which the Beings themselves differ, that is,
by a strictly real difference. The personalities of different persons always
differ by the same difference by which the persons themselves differ, that is,
by a strictly real difference. The second, of a Being, differing from its own
Mode, is acknowledged to him. The third, viz. the difference of several things
modified or affected, is peculiar to the Animadverter, never any Philosopher
dreamed, that several things differ by a modal difference, they always differ
by a strictly real difference. However the Animadverter has here spoke a very
great truth, That the Divine Persons differ as several things, but this utterly
overthrows the Animadverter's Hypothesis: According to him, the Divine Persons
differ not as several things; but as one and the same Being under one Mode
differs from it self under another Mode, this is the only modal difference the
Animadverter's Hypothesis requires, and this with great profoundness of
judgment he here omits. The other three are nothing to the purpose, had they
been all never so true in Philosophy.

P. 33. lin. 4. N. 8.
[Essence may be truly and properly defined, That by which a thing is what it
is, that is to say, by which it is constituted in such a kind or order of
Being.]

By Essence in this place the Animadverter understands, what Metaphysicians
call the Ratio Formalis of a thing, that is, he takes this term Essence in a
transcendental sense; in so large a sense, that not only Substance, Accident, a
mode of Being, but even an Ens Rationis may be said to have an Essence; for
there is a ratio formalis of every one of these, by which each of them is
constituted respectively a Substance, Accident, Mode, or Ens rationis. Now to
talk of truly and properly defining a Transcendental, is the same blunder in
Logicks, as he would be guilty of in History, who should enquire for the Father
or Grandfather of Adam. Every Novice in Logicks knows, that a true and proper
definition consists of a Genus and Difference, and consequently that nothing
but a Species is capable of a true and proper definition. The supremum Genus in
each predicamental scale, is not capable of a strict Logical definition, much
less a transcendental Term, that is, transcendental to all the predicaments.

But this is the least part of the mistake; according to this description of
Essence, there are at least Four Essences in the Trinity. The Divine Relations
of Paternity, Filiation, Procession, have each their proper distinct ratio
formalis, by which each of them is constituted a relation of such a kind; nay,
these Essences of the Divine Relations would differ Specifically, for so
Paternity differs from Filiation; and all Divines acknowledge, That the
Absolute Divine Nature is a true proper Essence.

Aristotle appropriates (...), Essence, to Substance, First or Second: So did
the Fathers of the Church, so do all the Moderns, Translating (...) by
consubstantial, of one Substance. Of which more hereafter.

[As for Existence it self, it may be defined, P. 33. lin. 27. N. 9.
that Mode or Affection of Being, by which a thing stands actually produced out
of the Power of its Causes; or at least not actually included in any cause, in
which sense God himself does exist.]

Some few Schoolmen, who have supposed that the Human Nature of Christ wanted a
Proper or Created Existence, have asserted, That Existence is a Mode in Created
Beings; that is, something added to the Thing or Being, and consequently
capable of being Subtracted. But these are very few, and the Animadverter is
of a contrary Opinion, p. 35. The generality believe that Existence, is only
the Actuality of the Thing or Being, and that all it adds to the Being is only
a Negation, in the Animadverter's words, that the Being is not actually
included in any Cause.

But not one single Divine, I firmly believe, before his own dear self, ever
affirmed that Existence was a proper Mode in God: His very next words confute
this assertion, p. 34. that Existence is necessarily included in his very
Essence, but a Mode, a thing added to the Essence, cannot be included in the
Essence. Again, in the same page he ascribes one single undivided Existence to
the Three Divine Persons; which, if Existence were a proper Mode, would be very
difficult to be conceived, How Three distinct Persons can be modified or
affected with one single undivided Mode.

P. 34. lin. 6. N. 10.
[The next Term is Subsistence, which is a Mode of Being, by which a thing
exists by it self, without existing in another, either as a part in the whole,
or an Adjunct in the Subject. I say an Adjunct, not an Accident, for a
Substance may be an Adjunct.]

Subsistence is strictly a Mode of Existence; that is, it modifies the
Existence of a Substance, and distinguishes the Existence of a complete
Substance, from the Existence of an incomplete Substance or Part. Two things
are therefore implied in this term, Subsistence. 1. That the Being which is
said to subsist, is a Substance, and not an Accident, not a Quality, etc. 2.
That it is a whole and complete Substance, and not a part of some whole. This
is plain and easy, and that which Subsistence adds to Existence, may be only a
negation of Incompleatness.

The Animadverter is not satisfied with the common definition of Subsistence,
but to show us his profound skill in Philosophy and Divinity at one time, has
added to the vulgar description of Subsistence those remarkable words, or an
Adjunct to the Subject; and lest we should not sufficiently take notice of it,
he repeats it with an Emphasis, I say an Adjunct, not an Accident; for a
Substance may be an Adjunct. Now I must profess, that I have always a prejudice
against new Definitions, both in Philosophy and Divinity; commonly they only
proclaim the mistake of the Inventer of them.

First, He needed not have cautioned us against an Accident, the former part of
the Definition had secured sufficiently against such a mistake; a Thing
existing by it self can never be an Accident, except our Animadverter believes
Transubstantiation.

Secondly, What a mighty Secret has he instructed the World in, viz. That a
Substance may be an Adjunct! I would fain know one person that understood the
meaning of the terms, who ever doubted of it. However I will endeavor to
requite his kindness, and inform him, That a Suppositum may be an Adjunct; nay,
which is more, every substantial Adjunct (unless Hypostatically united) is a
Suppositum, or subsisting Being. If the Animadverter ever saw a Woman with
Child, or a Nurse carrying a Child in her Arms, he might have been convinced of
the truth of this Assertion, That a Suppositum may be an Adjunct.

Nay further, Had this Paradox in Philosophy been never so true, it is of no
use in reference to the subsistence of the Three Divine Persons.

Well, but it would explain the mysterious Incarnation of the Second. [And, I
think, if we would assign a way, Ibid.
by which the Humane Nature of Christ exists in the person of the (...), we
shall hardly find a fitter, than to say, that it exists in it, as an Adjunct in
the Subject. For it is certain, that it does not exist in it, as a Part in the
Whole; since by this means the Second Person in the Trinity must, till his
Incarnation, have wanted one part of his person. But I shall not be positive in
the application of this term here.]

This Sacred Article of the Incarnation of the Son of God deserves a particular
Treatise by it self: However I could not in the Interim forbear to vindicate it
from those Misrepresentations the Animadverter has unwittingly, I charitably
presume, put upon it.

The Animadverter did not understand, or not consider the relation of an
Adjunct to a Subject, or he would never have made this Application in reference
to the Hypostatic Union of the Humane Nature of Christ to the Person of the
WORD. Where a Substance is an Adjunct, the Adjunct is predicated of the
Subject, more Accidentis, after the nature of an Accident. This the predicament
of Habitus might have informed the Animadverter. We say not that a man is his
Clothes, but that a man is clothed; so that if the Humane Nature of Christ be
barely an Adjunct to the Person of the WORD, we could not say that the WORD
was, or became Man, but only that he was externally clothed with Humanity.

Secondly, The Animadverter confutes himself, when he tells us, That the Humane
Nature of Christ exists in the Person of the (...). A substantial Adjunct can
never exist in its Subject, but only an accidental Adjunct, as a Quality, etc.
If the Humane Nature exists in the Person of the (...), it must in some sense
be a part of the Person of the WORD.

Thirdly, Nor is there any Absurdity in acknowledging the Humane Nature to be a
part of the (...). Nay, very learned persons have not scrupled to call the
Person of the WORD a Part of Christ, taking that term Part in a large sense,
and abstracting from the imperfections which are included in the common
acceptance of it. The Person of the WORD is not an imperfect Part, nor the
Humane Nature a Part in such Sense, that the Person of the WORD wants such Part
to complete it. In an Hypostatical Composition, the Inferior Nature is in some
Analogy a Co-part; in other respects, an Adjunct, and of necessity imperfect;
but to be the superior Nature in such Composition infers no Imperfection: But
of this more hereafter.

[One and the same undivided Existence, P. 34. lin. 28. N. 11.
as well as one and the same Essence or Nature, belongs to all the Three
Persons equally; whereas yet every Person has his own distinct Subsistence by
himself.]

There is not a more intricate Dispute amongst the Schoolmen, than this which
the Animadverter argues from as a Principle.

To assert above one singular Existence in the Trinity, [tho the Sacred
Scriptures expressly multiply this Attribute, I and the Father are One, these
Three are One] was to give up the Hypothesis of the Schools of the singularity
of the common Divine Nature. But the Schoolmen were at a loss, -- Probabilius
tamen ac verius existimamus illam substantiam singularem, quae communis est
tribus personis, ut sic subsistentem esse ex se and essentialiter, habereque
unam subsistentiam absolutam and essentialem tribus personis communem: haec
enim sententia communiter recepta est a Theologis utriusque Scholae, D. Thomae
and Scoti, and ab aliis etiam. Suarez. Metaph. Disp. 34. Sect. 1. N. 3.
when they came to enquire into the Modus of this singular Existence. There are
but two Modes of a substantial, singular Existence, incomplete which belongs to
a substantial Part, complete which belongs to a Suppositum. Complete Existence
is but another Phrase for Subsistence, and so there will be but One undivided
Subsistence of the whole Three Persons, and this the whole Party of the
Thomists and Scotists affirm, and call it an absolute essential Subsistence; so
little did the Animadverter understand these Disputes. The acute Petavius could
not here keep pace with the Schoolmen; all Antiquity knew nothing of this
Essential Subsistence; he embraces the former, and attributes one singular
incomplete Existence to the Divine Nature. Now, certainly this Learned Person
strained very hard to ascribe something incomplete to the Divine Nature. I will
give the Reader his own words. Petav. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 12. Sect. 13. p.
421.
Non enim de tali Existentia hic agimus, quoe perfecta, and completae
substantioe propria sit, sed quoe formis and imperfectis Rebus, ex quibus quasi
componitur quippiam, congruit.

P. 35. lin. 11. N 12.
[Now, whatsoever Being or Nature this Mode of Subsistence does belong to, that
is properly called a Suppositum. -- And the consequence of this is, That as
Subsistence makes a Thing or Being a Suppositum, so Suppositality makes it
incommunicable.]

This is worse Heresy to the Schoolmen, than the phrase of three infinite Minds.

They acknowledge this in finite Beings or Natures, but affirm the quite
contrary in the Divine Nature.

Not (the Absolute Essential) Subsistence renders the Divine Nature a
Suppositum; but the Divine Relation, whether it be Paternity, Filiation, or
Procession, according to the Schoolmen, constitutes the Divine Nature a Person,
or Persons. Secondly, Not the Subsistence with a relation, renders the Divine
Nature incommunicable, but only the Divine Person incommunicable. Subsistence
in finite Beings, renders that particular Nature as well as Person
incommunicable; but in the Divine Nature, only the Person.

P. 35. lin. 30. N. 13.
[So that as a Suppositum is substantia singularis completa per se subsistens;
so the Ratio intellectiva, being added to this, makes it a Person, which is a
farther perfection of Suppositality.

I only ask the Animadverter, Whether he acknowledges three Suppositums in the
Trinity? And whether the Objection of three Substances, is not as strong
against that Confession from this Definition of a Suppositum, as himself brings
against the phrase of three infinite Minds? 2dly, Ratio intellectiva is a
farther perfection of a Suppositum, but not of Suppositality. A Beast as truly,
as perfectly subsists by its self, as a Man. Rationality is a Perfection, a
Mode (taking that term in a large sense) of Animality, but not a Perfection or
Mode of Subsistence.

[If it be here asked, P. 36. lin. 3. N. 14.
Whether Subsistence or Suppositality added to bare Nature, does not make a
Composition? I answer, That in created finite Persons it does, but not in
uncreated and infinite: And the reason is, because tho all Composition implies
Union; yet all Union is not therefore Composition, but something higher and
transcendental: So that in the Divine Persons of the Trinity, the Divine Nature
and Personal Subsistence coalesce into one, by an incomprehensible, ineffable
kind of Union and Conjunction. And if this does not satisfy (as it rationally
may) I must needs profess, that my Thoughts and Words can neither rise higher,
nor reach further.]

This difficulty is not peculiar to the Asserters of a Trinity of Divine
Persons: They who acknowledge but one Divine Person in the Godhead, are equally
concerned in this question, Whether the Subsistence (of one or more Divine
Persons) added to the Divine Nature, infers a Composition in a Divine Person?

The Animadverter confesses, That in all finite Persons, Subsistence and Nature
infer a Composition; he means a modal Composition, a Composition of Substance
and Mode: This manifestly increases the difficulty, how a Substance and Mode
should not be a modal Composition in a Divine Person. He tells you, indeed it
does not; if we please, we may take his word; if not, his thoughts and words
can reach no higher. But by his leave, I shall consider this point more
carefully.

All Composition is Distinctorum Vnio, so as to constitute some whole, that is,
in Composition there must be an Union, and also the several things united, must
in some sense be component parts, otherwise we could not distinguish
Composition from a bare local Union. Now, according to the Animadverter, the
Divine Nature or Substance is one thing, and the Mode another, (a Mode is to
him a thing added) and a Divine Person a whole; so that it is manifest,
according to him, that there must be a modal Composition in a Divine Person, in
God, in a pure simple act which is void of all Composition.

Nay, further, those Schoolmen who assert these real Modes, reduce some of them
to Substance, some of them to the accidental Predicaments. Those Modes which
intimately adhere to Substance, as Existence, Subsistence, they reduce to the
predicament of Substance; those Modes which complete Substance it self, cannot
be any thing accidental, of a different kind and nature from Substance; and yet
they cannot be perfect Substances, for then they would want other Modes to
perfect them; but they suppose each of these Modes a substantiale quid, a
substantial thing, tho not so perfect as Substance. So again, those Modes which
perfect an Accident, are each of them accidentale quid, something accidental,
tho not a perfect Accident. Now I freely profess, that I have no Notion of this
substantiale quid, which is not a perfect Substance; nor of an accidentale
quid, which yet is not a perfect Accident. However, from this Explication of
these Philosophers minds, it is manifest that a Substance and Mode in finite
Persons, infer a Composition of a Substance, and a distinct substantiale quid.

To apply this to the Opinion of the Schoolmen, concerning the simplicity of a
Divine Person.

The Subsistence, as I have already declared, they believed to be one, absolute
Essential; the Divine Relations (which they call Modes of Subsistence, because,
according to them, they constitute the Divine Persons, and render each Person
incommunicable, which a Mode of Subsistence does in finite Persons) I say, the
Divine Relations of Paternity, Filiation, and Procession, they first declared
to be no predicamental Relations; for then they must have been esteemed proper
Modes; Modus non potest non esse quid imperfectum, cum non attingat absolutam
rationem entis. Suarez. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 4. N. 11. p. 410.
and the Schoolmen were never so silly, as to believe there was any thing so
imperfect, as a Mode in God; they never believed a substantiale quid, which was
not so perfect as a Substance in God. They call the Divine Relations,
transcendental Relations; which in our imperfect way of Conception, are but as
so many substantial Modes, perfecting the one absolute Subsistence of the
Divine Essence; they believed each distinct Divine Relation to be not a bare
substantiale quid, but a most perfect infinite Substance with a Relative Form,
or as they often speak, a Relative Substance: (And here I must again
acknowledge, that I am as little able to conceive a Relative Substance, as a
substantiale quid before. J am substantia non erit substantia, quia relativum
erit. -- Absurdum est autem, ut substantia relative dicatur; omnis res ad
scipsam subsistit, quanto magis Deus? St. Austin lib. 7. de Trin. cap. 5.
) But will not this Notion of the Schoolmen infer an higher Composition in a
Divine Person, viz. of two Substances, an Absolute Substance, the Divine
Nature; and a Relative Substance, the Relation? They answer, That the Absolute
and Relative Substance are not united, but identified one with another, this
being an Axiom to the Schoolmen, Suarez lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 2. N. 3. p. 407.
In Divinis omnia sunt Vnum, ubi non obviat relationis oppositio; but there
cannot be pretended relationis oppositio betwixt an Absolute and Relative
Substance; and by the same Axiom they endeavor to show, how these three
Relative Substances may be one absolute Divine Nature, one God. But then comes
the grand Difficulty of all; If each distinct Relative Substance be the same,
or identified with the one singular absolute Divine Nature, are not the three
Relations from thence identified one with another? Is not this an infallible
Axiom in reason, Quae sunt eadem uni tertio, sunt eadem inter se. This is the
Gordian Knot, which almost every Schoolman gives a different answer to; but at
last they are generally obliged to cut it, and deny the truth of the Axiom in
the Divine Nature. I thought it necessary to give this account of the Opinions
of the Schoolmen, to show the Animadverter, how little reason he had to lay so
great a stress upon the Metaphysics of Modes. Nothing was farther from the
thoughts of the Schoolmen (with whose Names he flourishes so often) than to
believe that there were true Modes in God. The Divine Relations, according to
them, were only Modes in Name, or in our imperfect Conception of them.

As for my own private Opinion, with all submission to better Information, I
conceive, That Existence in a finite Person or Being, much more in a Divine
Person, is only the actuality of a Person or Being. That Subsistence adds only
a Negation of incompleteness to substantial Existence even in finite Persons,
and consequently infers no sort of Composition in them; and therefore much less
infers a Composition in a Divine Person.

Again, I do believe that all predicamental Relations amongst the Creatures,
are no positive Modes, but only external Denominations; the same which the
Schoolmen are obliged to affirm of the Relations of the Divine Persons to the
Creatures: Nor can I see any Absurdity of extending the same conclusion to the
Internal Relations, as the Schoolmen call them. As for instance, The Relation
of Paternity may justly (as I conceive) be styled an extrinsical Denomination;
extrinsical (I say, not to the sacred Triad, but) to the Person of the Father,
who is denominated by it; and (in the same sense) Filiation extrinsical to the
Person of the Son, and Procession extrinsical to the Person of the blessed
Spirit. This naturally and easily defends the Simplicity of a Divine Person;
this frees us of endless and inextricable Questions, which fill up every page
of the Scholastical Writers. This forces us not to hide our selves in a Cloud
of Words, which signify nothing. A Substance, and a Mode, says the
Animadverter, infer not Composition in a Divine Person, because in him the
Substance and Mode coalesce into one by an Union and Conjunction, that is, in
other words, they infer not Composition, because they are compounded.
Composition and Coalescing into One by an Union and Conjunction, differ no more
than Definitum and Definition: It is truly therefore incomprehensible and
ineffable, that a coalescing into one by an Union and Conjunction should not be
a Composition.

[Mind, Wisdom, Power, Goodness, P. 39. lin. 6. N. 15.
etc. are formally distinct from one another, and so not affirmable of one
another; and in speaking of things, the formal differences of them must still
be attended to. Gods Justice, and his Mercy, are one pure simple Act in him.
But he that says, His Justice is his Mercy, speaks absurdly for all that, etc.]

Whatever differs really, differs also formally; but here by formal difference,
the Animadverter understands that difference which is only formal and not real:
Now in this sense of the term, the express contrary Conclusion is true, That
whatsoever things are (only) formally different, are therefore affirmable of
one another. The Conclusion the Animadverter ought to have deduced from his
Premises, is, That Mind, Wisdom, Goodness, ( viz. in God) are not formally
affirmable of one another: But it is Fallacia a dicto secundum quid, ad dictum
simpliciter, to put the first Conclusion in place of the second, to say, That
Mind, Wisdom, Goodness, are not (simply) affirmable of one another, because it
will be acknowledged, that they are not formally affirmable of one another.

Secondly, Whereas the Animadverter tells us, That in speaking of Things, the
formal Differences of them must still be attended to; We need no other
Confutation of this Proposition, than his own immediate following words, viz.
That God's Justice, and his Mercy, are one pure simple Act in him. His Justice,
and his Mercy, are formally (or in our way of Conception) two distinct, nay,
two opposite Acts; it is only in the Reality, that we affirm them to be one
pure simple Act in him.

Thirdly, If things only formally different, are not affirmable of one another,
there could be no Propositions but identical ones, or at most, where the
Subject and Predicate are synonimous Terms. No man could say without absurdity,
That the Father is God, because these two terms, Father and God formally
differ; and therefore according to this wise Rule of our Animadverter, are not
affirmable of one another.

Has the Animadverter never heard of the Distinction of Sensus Identicus, and
Sensus Formalis? This Proposition, God's Justice is his Mercy, is true Sensu
Identico, tho not Sensu Formali.

We are cautioned indeed by the Learned, that we avoid Conclusions which are
only true Sensu Identico, when such way of speaking is against common Custom,
or when the formal Sense carries a formal Opposition, as in the Divine
Attributes of Justice and Mercy; and the reason they give, is, because in such
instances the Propositions lead to a formal Sense, in which Sense they are
false. But if we add Sensu Identico, that is, in what sense we understand these
Propositions, then they are true, and consequently not absurd, unless a Truth
can be absurd.

CHAP. II.
I Shall crave leave of the Reader, N. 1.
to say thus much in general of the Animadverters Third and Fourth Chapter,
wherein he endeavors to prove, That Self-consciousness is not the Formal
Reason of Personality in the Divine Persons, nor Mutual-consciousness the
Formal Reason of their Unity of Nature. That all this is said, as I verily
believe, without an Adversary. The Reverend Dean of St. Paul's does not once in
his Vindication of the B. Trinity, expressly affirm either the one, or the other
of these Propositions. He asks no more of his Reader, if I misunderstand him
not, save to acknowledge, That a distinct Self-Consciousness is a firm proof of
the Distinction of Persons in this Sacred Mystery; and that a singular
Mutual-Consciousness is an equal proof of the Singularity of the Divine Nature.
I conceive, That the Reverend Dean never intended to deny, that the Distinction
of Persons is in order of Nature before their distinct acts of
Self-Consciousness, or that their Unity of Nature is in the same degree of
Priority before their singular Mutual-Consciousness; but only intended that
quoad nos, or in our way of Knowledge or Conception, their distinct Self
Consciousness proved, or was known to us before their distinct Personality, and
their singular mutual Consciousness in order of our Knowledge, before the
Knowledge of their Unity of Nature.

In the Animadverter's Third Chapter, N. 2.
he endeavors to prepare the way, by denying that Self-Consciousness is the
formal reason of personality in finite, created Persons. A Conclusion none
affirms, who understands the meaning of the terms. It is impossible that a
personal Act, an Effect, should any ways be the proper, formal cause of its
efficient, a Person.

Animad. etc. P. 71. lin. 10.
But when he tells us, That [Personality is the ground and principle of all
Action, wheresoever it is] he is guilty of a great Paradox in Philosophy, and a
greater in Divinity.

Personality is properly the Principle of no Action; a Person is the Principium
quod, the Principle which acts; Nature is the Principium quo, the Principle
by which the Person acts. Personality is but a necessary condition of a Being
to enable it to act, a causa sine qua non, which is equivocally called a Cause
or Principle.

Secondly, Not the Personality of the WORD, but the Humane Nature of Christ
exerts the acts of Self-Consciousness, Ibid. P. 72. lin. 12.
and other Humane Personal Acts; the Humane Nature of Christ has all the
Principles and Powers of Self-Reflection upon its own Acts, otherwise Christ
would not be a perfect Man.

P. 72. lin. 21. N. 3.
[That the Humane Nature of Christ is not a Person, is no less evident: Since
it is taken into, and subsists in and by the Personality of the Second Person
of the Trinity, and therefore can have no distinct Personality of its own.]

1. Never was so obscure an Argument brought to prove so acknowledged a
Conclusion. Self-Consciousness is not the formal reason of Personality in
finite Persons, because the Humane Nature of Christ in the Hypostatical Union
is Self-Conscious, and yet not a Person; nay, this latter no less evident than
the former.

2. It Is a received Article of the Church, That the Human Nature of Christ is
not a Person; but how to reconcile this with the Subtilties of the Schools, is
above my skill. The utmost their Hypothesis will allow them to pretend to, is,
That the Humane Nature of Christ is not a distinct Person from the Person of
the WORD. According to the Schoolmen, the Humane Nature of Christ subsists, and
is a Principium quod of all its own Actions, equally with the Humane Nature of
any other Humane Person; they seem to me to strive to disguise the Heresy of
Nestorius, by saying, That the Humane Nature of Christ is not a distinct Person
from the Person of the WORD, because it subsists by the Subsistence or
Personality of the WORD. To explain this a little.

The Schoolmen, who under pain of Heresy, assert but one singular absolute
Substance in the Trinity, found a great and almost insuperable difficulty so to
explain the Incarnation, that only the Person of the WORD, and not the whole
Trinity, was incarnated, or became Man. This is an obvious enquiry, What it is
which was immediately united to the Humane Nature of Christ, so as to
denominate Christ both God and Man? To assert, that the singular common Divine
Nature was immediately united to the Humane Nature, was to assert the
Incarnation of the whole Trinity, since whatever belongs to the common Divine
Nature immediately, belongs equally to the whole Trinity; it remains therefore,
according to them, that only the Mode of Subsistence of the WORD was
immediately united to the Humane Nature. This Answer has visibly many
difficulties in it, which may be considered hereafter: Now I am only to
enquire, how it denies the Humane Nature of Christ to be a distinct Person from
the Person of the WORD. The Humane and Divine Nature of Christ have, say they,
but one singular Mode of Subsistence: Well, grant that possible; What follows?
The Schoolmen say, that then they are not two distinct Persons. I cannot for my
life see the Consequence. That Maxim of the Law, Quando duo jura concurrunt in
una persona, oequum est ac si concurrerent in duobus, may be, as I conceive,
applied here. If we suppose it possible for one Personality to constitute two
distinct Natures, each a Person, it is a mere wrangle of a term, to deny these
two Natures to be two distinct Persons; they have all the Properties of two
distinct Persons, they are two distinct Principia quoe, equally with two other
Persons.

The Animadverter does not barely allege these (to me unintelligible)
Subtilties of the Schools, as the only defense of the sacred Article of the
Incarnation against Nestorianism; but in his third and next Argument, (to prove
that Self-consciousness is not the formal Reason of Personality in finite
Persons) He (unwittingly, I charitably presume) has endeavored to overthrow
the defense which the most Learned and Orthodox Fathers of the Church have
given us of this sacred and mysterious Article.

P. 73. N. 4.
The Soul of man is Self-conscious, and yet not a Person; therefore, etc.

P. 74. lin. 22.
If the Soul be a Person, [then the Body must be joined to it, by being assumed
into the personal subsistence of the Soul, as the Humane Nature of Christ is
assumed into the personal subsistence of the (...). Whereupon the composition
and constitution of a man, will be an Hypostatick Union between Soul and Body;
which, I suppose, no Body will be either so bold or absurd as to affirm; all
Divines accounting an Hypostatical Union so peculiar to Christ's Person, as not
to be admitted in any other Person or Being whatsoever. [For an Hypostatick
Union, and an Hypostatick Composition, viz. such an one as makes a compound
Hypostasis, are quite different things: and this Author shall in due time be
taught so much, if he has any thing to object against it.]

The Compiler of the Athanasian Creed has in this spoke the sense of the
Catholic Church, [For as the reasonable Soul and Flesh is one man; so God and
Man is one Christ, that is, One, not by Confusion of Substance, but by Unity of
Person.]

I hope, no True Son of the Church of England, nor indeed Candid Lover of the
Article, but will pardon my digression, (if it deserve to be called such) to
vindicate this Similitude, whereby the most Learned Fathers of the Church have
endeavored to illustrate and defend this Article against all its Heretical
Opponents.

The Animadverter first objects, That then the Constitution of a Man will be an
Hypostatick Union. Alas! Obj. 1.
How extremely afraid are some persons of having the Articles of their Faith
found agreeable to the common Principles of Reason! If by an Hypostatick Union,
he means that the Soul and Body of Man only subsist by the same singular Mode
of Subsistence, and that nothing but the Mode of the Subsistence of the Soul is
immediately united to the Body, I do assure the Animadverter that I believe not
a Syllable of this; I do not believe that one Mode can modify two Subjects, or
that a corporeal Body can be terminated, perfected by a Mode of an incorporeal
nature, such as the Soul is. Figure is a Mode of quantity, and yet to me it
seems unconceivable, that a Giant should be terminated by the figure of a
Dwarf, without any alteration of his quantity; or that a Dwarf should have the
figure of a Giant, and yet not altered in quantity: Less am I able to conceive,
that the Humane Nature of Christ should be terminated by a Mode of Subsistence
which belongs to a Divine Nature.

Secondly, Obj. 2.
If the Constitution of a Man be an Hypostatick Union, then an Hypostatick
Union and an Hypostatick Composition, viz. such an One as makes a compound
Hypostasis, will not be quite different things; then the Hypostatick Union in
Christ will be also an Hypostatick Composition, and then the Person of Christ
will be a compound Hypostasis. Well, and what follows from all this? why
nothing but a threatening of the Animadverter's, That in due time we shall be
taught the Falsehood of all this. But not to await his due time, I answer, that
to say, that the Hypostatick Union in Christ is also an Hypostatick
Composition; or which is the same, that Christ is a compound Hypostasis, is so
far from being a Paradox, that it is the received Language, not only of the
Greek Fathers, but of the Councils. Syn. 5a. Constantin. Can. 4. -- Sancti
Patres docuerunt, unitatem Dei verbi ad carnem animatam anima rationali and
intellectuali secundum compositionem. Theodori autem and Nestorii sequaces,
divisione gaudentes, affectualem unitatem introducunt. Sancta Dei vero Ecclesia
utriusque perfidioe impietatem ejiciens, unitionem Dei verbi ad carnem secundum
compositionem confitetur. Vide Can. 7um. hujus Concilii. Lib. 3. de Trin. cap.
3. sect. 12. p. 232.
Hear Petavius's Confession, [Christi Domini Hypostasin, sive personam a
plerisque Patribus dici compositam ex naturis duabus, ut ab Cyrillo, Damasceno,
Maximo and aliis.] To which add what the Learned Suarez has observed, Suarez
de Incarn. Q. 2. Disp. 6. sect. 4. p. 194. Ibid. p. 193.
[Alii Patres licet non aperte utantur nomine compositionis, aliis tamen, quoe
perinde esse videntur, utuntur, ut adunationis, copulationis ex duobus,
conjunctionis, etc. -- Illa vero particula, ex, plane designat compositionem.

The phrase of the Hypostatick Union is most opposite to the Heresy of
Eutyches, who believed that there was not an Union of Two Natures, but a
Confusion of One of them: But the phrase of the Hypostatick Composition is most
opposite to the Nestorian Heresy, who asserted a kind of Hypostatic Union, that
is, an Union of Two Persons, and denied that Christ, God and Man, was One
Person, compounded of Two Natures.

The Animadverter shows his skill in this Controversy to oppose these two
phrases, and to condemn that phrase of an Hypostatick Composition which the
Church has received. As great an Opiniator as the Animadverter is, I believe he
will scarce have the confidence to say, that he can teach these great Fathers
of the Church how to speak in this Mystery; I promise faithfully to attend him,
when ever he begins.

The Soul being a Part, cannot possibly be a Person. P. 75. lin. 4. N. 5.
Forasmuch as a Part is an incomplete Being, and therefore in the very nature
of it, being designed for the completion of something else, must subsist in and
by the subsistence of the Whole. But a Person imports the most complete Degree
and Mode of Being, as subsisting wholly by it self, and not in or by any other,
either as a subject of inherence or dependence; so that it is a direct
Contradiction to the very definition and nature of the thing, for the same
Being to be a Part and a Person too. And consequently that which makes the Soul
a Part, does irrefragably prove it not to be a Person.]

I answer, That to be a Part, and a Person, in a simple Person, in a Person
consisting of one Nature, I confess to be contradictious and impossible. 2dly,
To be the inferior part in a compounded Person, to be in any Actions an
Instrument, a Principium quo (as the Body in the mixed Actions of Sense is to
the Soul) is contradictory to the Notion of a Person. A Person, as such, is the
Principium quod of all the Actions which proceed from it; but to be the
superior Part in such Composition is very compatible with the Personality of
such superior Nature; For such superior Nature may very well retain its own
proper Mode of Subsistence, (if we explain Personality with the Schools) such a
superior Nature retains all the Perfections, all the natural Perfections of a
whole and complete Being, is a Principium quod, not only of its own natural
Actions, but of the mixed Actions of the whole compounded Hypostasis. Such a
superior Nature may be a Person, and at the same time in a large acceptance of
the term, a Part, that is, a Part as Aristotle defines that term, Arist 4. Met.
cap. 25.
(...)* that into which any thing is divided, or of which that consists, which
we call a Whole; in which sense of the term Part, the Learned Petavius is not
afraid to call the Divine Nature of the WORD, a Part, laxius sumpto partis
vocabulo. Petav. lib. 3. de Trin. cap. 3. sect. 12. p. 232.

[I must pass over the Animadverter's boldness in determining, That a Part
subsists by the subsistence of the Whole, which is very near asserting an
Hypostatical Union of every substantial part: Others who embrace these
Scholastical Subtleties, choose rather to assert, That a Part subsists by a
partial subsistence, and that the subsistence of the Whole is compounded of the
subsistence of the Parts.]

[So when the Animadverter tells us, that a Person does not subsist in any
other as a subject of dependence; I must crave his pardon; for I thought
before, that every Creature had subsisted in God as a subject on whom we
depended, that in him we live, and move, and have our Being.

P. 75. lin. 16. N. 6.
[If the Soul in the composition of a man's Person, were an entire Person it
self, and, as such, concurred with the Body toward the constitution of the
Man, then a Man would be an imperfect, accidental, and not a perfect natural
compound. He would be that which Philosophy calls Vnum per Accidens, that is, a
thing made up of two such Beings, as cannot perfectly coalesce into one.]

Mutatis mutandis, this is the Great Socinian Objection against the Incarnation
of the Son of God, That Infinite and Finite cannot perfectly coalesce and unite
into One; that God and Man, (...), is the name of the most unnatural compound
and mixture.

The same Answer will satisfy both Objections.

To confound the two Natures of God and Man, or of Soul and Body, would
confessedly make the most unnatural compound and mixture: But we maintain an
Union in both Cases, and not a Confusion.

The Divine Nature retains all the Perfections of a Divine Person in the
Composition; and the Human Nature by the Composition loses none of the natural
perfections of the Human Nature. It cannot indeed properly be called by the
metaphysical name of a suppositum, as becoming an Instrument, a principium quo
to the superior Divine Nature; but then thereby it becomes capable of being an
Instrument in the noblest Acts of the Mediatorial Office, which subsisting by
it self, it was incapable of.

So the Soul in the Constitution of Man retains all the Perfections of a
separate intellectual suppositum; nor did any Philosoper ever assert that an
Human Body was more imperfect than a Stone, notwithstanding this latter is a
suppositum, and the former not. The Human Body by the Composition is an
Instrument, a Principium quo to the Soul, an Instrument in the mixed Actions of
Sense, which of it self, it was incapable of. And if a Stone could speak, it
would never complain, if God should miraculously change it into an Human Body,
notwithstanding the compleatness of a suppositum, and the incompleatness of an
Inferior Nature in an Hypostatick Composition.

Secondly, The Animadverter mistakes, that which Philosophers call Vnum per
Accidens, for that is, when two Beings which differ toto Genere (as Substance
and Accident) are united. Such an Union, say they, is accidental, and
consequently the Compositum, not Vnum per se, but Vnum per Accidens: Or, when
two Complete Beings are united, as in all Artificial Works, where each part is
a distinct suppositum, which is more properly called Aggregatum per Accidens.

But the Divine and Human Nature, the Soul and Body, differ not toto Genere;
each are Substances, and so are capable of a substantial Union, which suffices
to denominate the Compositum, Vnum per se, and not Vnum per Accidens.

Again, The Divine Nature is, and remains complete in the Composition; the
Humane Nature subsists ad modum partis, in the nature of a part of an
Instrument in the Composition.

So is the Soul complete, and the Human Body the Instrument, or incomplete in
the constitution of Man; so that according to the strictest Rules of
Philosophy, both the (...) and Man, are Vnum per se, not Vnum per Accidens.

Thirdly, As little can I allow the Animadverter, that every Vnum per Accidens
must be an unnatural Compound. According to these Philosophers, a Learned Man,
a Pious Man, is Vnum per Accidens; ought we therefore to avoid Piety and
Learning, that we may not become an unnatural Compound?

Fourthly, The Union of a Subject and its Adjunct is, according to all
Philosophers, an accidental Union; the Adjunct, as I observed before,
predicated of the Subject more Accidentis: This Objection therefore falls
strongest upon his own Head, who denied the Human Nature of Christ to be a part
of Christ; and affirmed, That it was an Adjunct to the Person of the WORD, [
Cap. 1. N. 10] which is in consequence to affirm, that the (...), is Vnum per
Accidens.

P. 76. lin. 4. N. 7.
If the Soul in a state of Separation from the Body, be a Person, then it is
either the same Person, which the Man himself was, while he was living, and in
the Body; or it is another Person: But to assert either of them is extremely
absurd, and therefore equally absurd, that the Soul in such a State should be a
Person, etc.]

This also is a Socinian Objection: The Animadverter may be satisfied, That no
wise Man will choose the later part of the Disjunction, viz. that the Soul in a
state of Separation is a different Person from the Man himself, or that the
WORD before the Incarnation is a different Person from Christ, God and Man, or
the WORD incarnated. For the Objection is equal against both Articles, as by a
small variation of the immediate following words will appear.

And first it is absurd to affirm it to be the same Person. For a Person
compounded of Soul and Body, as a Man is, and a simple uncompounded Person, as
the Soul (if a Person at all) must needs be, can never be numerically one and
the same. For that differing from one another, as Simple and Compound, they
differ as two things, whereof one implies a Contradiction and Negation of the
other. A Compound as such including in it several Parts compounding it. And a
simple Being utterly excluding all Parts and Composition. So that if a Man,
while alive, be one Person, and his Soul after Death be a Person too; it is
impossible for the Soul to be one and the same Person with the Man.

And first it is absurd to affirm it to be the same Person. For a Person
compounded of the Divine and Human Nature, as Christ is, and a simple
uncompounded Person, as the WORD is acknowledged to be, can never be
numerically one and the same. For that differing from one another, as Simple
and Compound, they differ as two things, whereof one implies a Contradiction
and Negation of the other. A Compound as such including in it several Parts;
and a simple Being utterly excluding all Parts and Composition. So that if
Christ, God and Man, be one Person, and the WORD before his Incarnation be a
Person too, it is impossible for the Word before the Incarnation to be one and
the same Person with Christ, God and Man.

Now thanks be to God, this formidable Objection of the Socinians, and the
Animadverter, is founded upon a mistake in Philosophy, viz. That those things
which differ from one another, as Simple and Compound, differ as two things;
whereof one implies a Contradiction and Negation of the other. There may be a
thousand instances brought to confute this pretended Axiom. A Man learned, is
the same Man with himself before he was learned, and yet in the Confession of
all Philosophers, A Man, and a Man learned, differ as Simple and Compound. A
Man learned, is an accidental Compositum, an Vnum per Accidens. So a Man
clothed is the same Man with himself naked; and yet a Man clothed, and a Man
naked, differ as Simple and Compound. A Soul in a state of Separation, is the
same Soul with the Soul clothed with an Human Body. I am ashamed to be obliged
to prove so plain a Conclusion: In an Hypostatical Union, the inferior Nature
is so far an Adjunct to the superior Nature, that what the WORD was before the
Incarnation, or the Soul before its clothing with a Body, the same each
remains after the Union or Conjunction. It is in some sense a Part, otherwise
the Union could not be substantial, but accidental. The WORD could with no more
propriety be said to be a Man, than a Man may be denominated an evil Angel,
because he is possessed of such.

Had the Divine and Human Nature of Christ been confounded, or the Soul and
Body of Man so mixed, as to have denominated the Compositum of a different
Nature from the component Parts; then the WORD, and the (...) could not be one
Person, nor the Soul and the Man the same Person. But we maintain an
Hypostatical Union, and not a confusion of Substance or Nature.

That which has obscured the Analogy betwixt the Union of the two Natures in
the One Person of Christ, and of the Soul and Body in Man, is, for that in this
latter instance, Custom has prevailed with us to say, That an Human Person has
but one, viz. an human Nature. Whereas an Human Person properly consists of two
unconfounded Natures; (the Nature of the Soul and Body are not confounded in
the Hypostatical Composition of Man.) The Learned Damascen, Vide Damasc. lib. 3
de Ortho. fide cap. 3.
(if I remember aright) gives the reason of this form of Speech, Because we see
many distinct Persons possess the same common Nature; whence we say, That two
or more Human Persons are of one and the same nature. As also, That if the Holy
Spirit had been incarnated equally with the WORD, we might have said that the
WORD incarnate is of the same nature with the Holy Ghost incarnate.

To conclude, All Philosophers assert, That a totum differs only ratione from
all its parts united; if therefore it be possible for the superior part in an
Hypostatick Union to retain all the Natural Perfections of a suppositum in the
composition; and for an inferior part to be united to the superior, without
confusion of its Nature, and yet not as a distinct suppositum, but as an
instrumentum or principium quo to the superior part: It will then evidently
follow, That the whole compositum, is but one suppositum, but one Person, and
the very same Person, which the superior part was before the composition, and
that a simple and compounded Person is in such instance not two Persons, but
one and the same Person differing (not really, but) modally from himself, by
such difference by which a Learned Man differs from himself before he was
Learned.

[And here I suppose some will object, P. 78. lin. 1. N. 8.
That the Soul in a state of separation is not properly a Part, for as much as
it exists not in any Compound, nor goes to the composition of it. To which, I
answer, That an actual inexistence in a Compound, is not the only Condition
which makes the thing a part, but its essential relation to a Compound; which
relation is founded partly upon its original designation, and partly upon its
natural aptitude to be an ingredient in the constitution of a Compound.]

This Objection lies very obvious, That the Soul in a state of separation is a
Person as subsisting by it self, neither being a part in any Whole, nor an
adjunct to any Subject, Animad, etc. p. 34.
which is his own Definition of subsistence or personality. The Animadverter
answers, That the Soul is then a part notwithstanding it exists in no whole.
Now in Logicks, totum and pars, whole and part, are Relatives, and mutually
infer one another. There can no more then be a Part without an actual Whole,
than a Son without a Father. Adam was originally designed by God to be a
Father, and had a natural aptitude to become such; What then? Will the
Animadverter, or any one else affirm, That he was a Father before he had a Son,
as the Animadverter here tells us, That the Soul in a state of separation is a
part, tho there is no whole to which such part can belong?

However, Secondly, I confess that there is more of truth in this Answer than,
I believe, the Animadverter was aware of, viz. That when to be a Part and a
Person are opposed as Contradictions, We do not take this Term Part in a nice
Logical sense of the Term, but in a Physical sense, for an incomplete Being,
which naturally requires to be completed, perfected by some other Copart. And
thus his own Answer will be strongly retorted against himself, viz. That an
actual Inexistence in a Compound, is not that which absolutely denies any thing
to be a Person, but its existing incompleatly in the Composition, its Existence
ad modum adjuncti instrumenti, vel principii quo, to some superior nature. Now
in this sense the WORD is not a Part, the WORD is not perfected, completed by
the Composition. The Soul of Man is indeed completed, perfected in its
Operations by the Composition, is capable of the actions of sense by the
Composition; but yet the Soul is not perfected in its (Metaphysical)
Suppositality; the Soul is not less a principium quod of its own actions in the
Composition, than in a state of Separation.

N. 9.
Thirdly, This Socinian Objection falls as heavy upon the Socinians and the
Animadverter, in the instance of a Human Person. Both will confess that the
Soul is a Part, and Man a Whole: From whence in the Animadverter's words, I
argue:

A Whole, compounded of Soul and Body, as Man is, and a Simple uncompounded
Part, as the Soul is, can never be numerically one and the same Being; for that
differing from one another, as Simple and Compound, they differ as two Beings,
whereof one implies a Contradiction and Negation of the other. A Compound
Being, as such, including in it several Parts compounding it; and a Simple
Being utterly excluding all Parts and Composition. So that if a Man while alive
be one Being, and his Soul after Death be a Being too, it is impossible for the
Soul to be one and the same Being with the Man]. And from these Premises I can
also add, P. 77. lin. 1.
[That wheresoever there are two distinct Beings, we do and must by all the
Rules of Grammar and Logic say, that one of them is not the other; and where
one is not the other, we cannot in Truth or Justice say, that one ought to
account for what was done or not done by the other, etc.]

Let the Animadverter answer this, and he answers himself. A Simple and
Compounded Person may as well be the same Person, as a Simple and Compounded
Being be the same Being. These two differ modally, and not really.

And now to return from the Mystery of the Incarnation, N. 10.
to that of the Sacred Trinity, and to the Question the Animadverter is
considering as preparatory to it; viz. What is the Formal Reason of Personality
in Finite Created Persons? This is, I confess, a very proper Enquiry; but there
is another as proper, that is unfortunately omitted by most who treat of this
Sacred Mystery; viz. Not what that is which strictly and formally denominates
any Finite Being a Suppositum or Person; but, What that is, which denominates
it this particular Person? These are two Questions, What strictly and properly
denominates Adam a Person? And what that is which denominates him the singular
Person of Adam? To be a Human Person is a common, indefinite, universal
Attribute; but to be the Person of Adam, is proper to the first Man.

That which strictly and properly denominates Adam a Person, is a Mode of
Subsistence, totale Attributum, the being a complete Whole, as the Fathers
often speak.

That which denominates Adam the particular Person of Adam, is unknown to us;
that which the Schoolmen call Haecceity, cannot be defined. Ancients and
Moderns supply the place of the Individuating difference, by a Collection of
Accidents (says Porphyry); by the (...), the Personal Properties, say the
Ancient Fathers. It is, says the Author of Expositio Fidei, the (...) of Adam
to be immediately formed by the hands of God, to be the Husband of Eve, the
First Man, the Father of Cain, Abel, Seth, etc.

Again; since the Formal Cause of any thing denominates that thing, -- Res
omnes communiter denominavi a suis formis, sicut album ab albedine, and homo ab
humanitate; quare omne illud, a quo aliquid denominatur, quantum ad hoc, habet
habitudinem formae. Ut si dicam, iste est indutus vestimento, iste ablativus
construitur in habitudine causae formalis, quamvis non sit forma. Aquin. 1.
Par. Q. 37. Art. 2.
of which it is the Formal Cause; hence from what any thing is denominated,
that thing is conceived by us in the similitude of a Formal Cause, nay, and
often so styled. In which sense Porphyr. Introd. ad Arist. Organon. cap. 2.
Porphyry says, (...). That Singulars or Individuals are so called, for that
each is constituted by (certain) Properties, the Collection of which is in no
other Individual. Not that a Property, or Proprium, is a Form, or Differentia,
but because it supplies the place of such, in the imperfect description of
Individuals.

To apply this to the Divine Persons, it is a double Enquiry, What denominates
the Father a Person; and what denominates him the Person of the Father.
Subsistence, totale Attributum, denominates the Father a Person, which is a
common Attribute to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Paternity, to be unbegotten,
to send his Son, etc. denominates him the particular Person of the Father.

This last Question is what the Fathers were chiefly concerned in. The
Noetianists, the Patri-Passianists, rarely disputed the Personality of Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. None who understand the meaning of the Term, can deny,
that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are each of them a proper Person, if he
acknowledges that each of them is properly God. None can imagine that that
Being which is God, is either an Accident, a Part, or, to please the
Animadverter, an Adjunct to any other Being. Those only deny the Personality,
who esteem the Son and Holy Spirit, that is, each of them, not properly God,
but something in God, the Personal Word or Wisdom of God the Father, or his
Personal Power.

This was the great Controverted Debate, Whether the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, that is, whether Each of them was a Distinct Person? and consequently
whether they were Three Persons? Now Paternity, say the Ancient Fathers, in
this sense constituted the Father a distinct Divine Person: The Schoolmen
change the Question, and say, That it constituted him a Person: In the same
sense, Filiation, according to the Ancients, constituted the Son a distinct
Person; and Procession, Sanctification, constituted the Holy Spirit a distinct
Person from Father and Son.

This Observation will be of great use to any one who shall read the Ancients
concerning the Personality of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

CHAP. III.
P. 93. N. 1.
[ COnsideration 5. When the terms [Cause, formal Reason, constituent or
productive Principle, and the like] are used about the Divine Nature and
Persons, they are not to be understood, as applicable to them, in the strict
and proper signification of the said Terms; but only by way of Analogy, as
really meaning no more than a causal or necessary dependence of one Notion or
Conceptus Objectivus upon another; so that it is impossible for the Mind to
conceive distinctly of the one, but as depending upon, or proceeding from the
other.] Compare this with his first Consideration. P. 92.
[That the natural Order of Prius and Posterius, founded in the universal
Reason of things (according to which, the Conception of one thing presupposes
and depends upon the Conception of another) makes no Prius or Posterius, and
yet is by no means to be contradicted or confounded in our discoursing of God.]

This the Animadverter lays down as a Rule to guide our Discourses concerning
the Divine Persons. To which I answer.

First, That these Considerations contain a direct Heresy, the express Heresy
of Sabellius.

Secondly, That the Animadverter himself notoriously breaks these Rules, even
where he ought to have kept them.

First, It is the direct Heresy of Sabellius to assert, That there is no Prius
and Posterius between the Divine Persons.

The Compiler of the Athanasian Creed denies a Prius or Posterius in the
Trinity, in reference to Duration or Time; they are all three Coeternal. But
to deny a Prius and Posterius in Original, is to deny that there is a Father
and Son in the Trinity.

Again, it is very pleasant for the Animadverter to tell us, That this Prius
and Posterius is founded in the Universal Reason of things, and yet denies it
in the Divine Nature. As if Universal Reason did not reach infinite as well as
finite Nature. I suppose he means, That there is a natural Order of Prius and
Posterius founded in the particular reason of finite Natures, which makes no
Prius or Posterius in the infinite Divine Nature.

And it is as pleasant to hear him telling us, That this natural Order of Prius
and Posterius must not be contradicted in our discoursing of God; when in the
very immediate preceding words, himself had contradicted it, and affirmed, that
there was no Prius and Posterius in the Divine Nature.

Secondly, Himself most shamefully confounds this Natural Order of Prius and
Posterius, when he asserts p. 98. That the Father is formally constituted a
Person by his own personal Act of Generation. P. 249. That personal Properties
are properly Personalities. P. 250. That the Relation and Mode of Subsistence
make but one single indivisible Mode of Being: Yet, says the Animadverter in
the next immediate words, according to the Natural Order of conceiving things,
we must conceive of the Subsistence as precedent to the Relation: For as much
as Human Reason considers things simply as subsisting, before it can consider
them as related to one another.

The meaning of all this is, That these are Rules, when he hopes that he can
confute the Dean of St. Paul's. Self-Consciousness cannot be Subsistence,
because according to the natural Order of conceiving things, we must conceive
of the Subsistence before the Self-Consciousness. Self-Consciousness cannot be
the formal Reason of Personality; for as much as it is a Personal Act, one
property of the Person already constituted. These are Demonstrations against
the Dean of St. Paul's. What pity was it, that the Dean of St. Paul's never
asserted this once in all his Book, for then it would have been allowed the
Animadverter, that in one single Article, he had been too hard for the Dean.
But why are not these Rules to himself? Is not Generation as much a personal
Act, as Self-Consciousness? Is not the Attribute of being a Father, one
property of a Person already constituted? Is not this Relation founded upon,
and posterior to a personal Act of Generation? Can any thing, according to
human Reason, be related before it is? I believe the Animadverter in this point
must borrow his own words, and tell us, That his Thoughts and Words can reach
no higher.

Lastly, The Animadverter denies a Prius and Posterius in the Divine Nature to
purpose, when he tells us, That even Productive Principles, when used in
reference to the Divine Persons, that is, Father and Son, are not applicable to
them in the strict and proper Signification of the said term. With his leave,
the Father is strictly and properly the productive Principle of his Son, or
else he cannot be strictly and properly the Father of his Son, or else he did
never strictly and properly beget his Son. The Arians deny a proper Generation,
and assert, That the Father is an Adoptive, Creative, and not Generative Father
of his Son. The Sabellians on the other hand adulterate both the Divine
Generation and Mission, and expound them in a figurative improper Sense.
Against both these Heresies, the Church has ever professed a true and proper
Generation amongst the Divine Persons.

P. 94. lin 25. N. 2.
[Self-Consciousness is a personal Act, and therefore Self-Consciousness cannot
be the formal reason of Personality in the Person, whose Act it is, and to whom
it personally belongs.]

The Consequence I allow the Animadverter; I only enquire, Why it concludes not
against Generation, which is as confessedly a Personal Act as
Self-consciousness?

Secondly, To affirm, that Self-consciousness is a Personal Act, is the
greatest Heresy to the Schoolmen. A Personal Act is an Act proper and peculiar
to some one Divine Person, as Generation is a Personal Act proper and peculiar
to the Person of the Father, and distinguishes the Father from the Son and Holy
Spirit. Now Self-consciousness is an Absolute Attribute, and upon that account
cannot be esteemed Personal by the Schoolmen. Self-consciousness is but one
conception of Omniscience, and will the Animadverter say, That the Father has a
distinct Personal Omniscience? If he does, he multiplies Omniscience with the
Persons, that is, he multiplies the Divine Nature in such Person.

Self-consciousness, as well as Mutual Consciousness, to the Schoolmen is an
Essential Act: Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to the Schoolmen, as they
have but one singular Divine Nature, so they have but one singular Omniscience,
but one singular Self-consciousness, and one singular Mutual Consciousness.

Every Act proceeds not only from some Agent, but by virtue of some power to
produce that Act: Therefore a Personal Act must have a Personal Power, a
Personal principium quo. The Personal Act of Generation by the Father supposes
a Personal Power to generate peculiar to the Father: A Personal Act of
Self-consciousness therefore will imply a Personal Power to exert such Act,
that is, a Personal Omniscience, or a Personal Divine Nature.

Not therefore the Phrase of Three Infinite Minds, but the asserting that
Self-consciousness is a Personal Act, does, in the Judgment of the Schoolmen,
unavoidably infer Three Gods.

The Personality of every One of the Divine Persons is purely and perfectly
Relative; P. 98. lin. 12. N. 3.
and therefore nothing Absolute [as Self-consciousness is] can be the Formal
constituent reason of their Personality]

The Conclusion and Consequence are granted to the Animadverter.

The Antecedent, viz. That the Personality of every one of the Divine Persons
is purely and perfectly Relative, is also the General Assertion of the
Schoolmen, as Petavius observes, Lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 10. sect. 6.
Paucissimi quidem e Schola Theologi vel opinati sunt, vel probabile judicant,
personales proprietates absolutum non-nihil habere; a quibus merito dissentiunt
coeteri.

How universally soever this Conclusion is embraced by the Schoolmen, and from
them by the Animadverter, I can scarce persuade my self that the Animadverter
understood the meaning of the very Conclusion; this I am sure of, That his
pretended Arguments to prove this Conclusion, are the greatest Objections
against the truth of it, and that he all along betrays the grossest Ignorance
of the Schoolmens meaning. I will give the Reader his own words, and then
examine them. And that the Persons in the Blessed Trinity are purely Relative
to one another, and consequently that their Personalities are so many
Relations, is no less evident from this, that two of them relate to one
another, as Father and Son, and the third to both, as proceeding from both; and
it is impossible for one thing to proceed from another, especially by a
continual act of Procession, without importing a relation to that from which it
so proceeds; so that the very Personal Subsistence implies and carries in it a
formal Relation. For the Father subsists Personally as a Father, by that
Eternal Communication of his Nature to his Son; which Act, as proceeding from
him, is called Generation, and renders him formally a Father; and as terminated
in the Son, is called Filiation, and constitutes him formally a Son; and in
like manner the Holy Ghost subsists personally by that Act of Procession, by
which he proceeds from, and relates to both the Father and the Son. So that,
that proper Mode of Subsistence (by which in conjunction with the Divine
Essence always included in it, each of them is rendered a Person) is wholly
Relative, and so belongs to one of them, that it also bears a necessary
reference to another. From all which it undeniably follows, that the Three
Persons in the Blessed Trinity, are in the formal Constitution of them Relative
to one another; and consequently, that the Three Personalities, by which they
become formally Three Persons, and are so denominated, are Three Eternal
Relations.]

The Ancient Fathers confess, That the Divine Relations constitute each of them
a distinct Person; that they enable us to conceive them distinct; this
therefore is not the question. The question is, Whether the Relations
constitute each of them a Person indefinitely? Spiration is a Relative
Attribute in the Father, relates the Father to the Holy Spirit; but yet
Spiration is not properly a Personality, not properly the subsistential Form,
but a subsistential or personal Property. A little to examine the
Animadverter's proofs.

First, The Persons in the Blessed Trinity are purely Relative: This is too
much, more than ever any asserted before him. A Person in the Blessed Trinity
is God, an infinite Mind; but to be God, to be an infinite Mind, are
confessedly absolute Attributes. The Schoolmen say, That the Persons in the
Blessed Trinity are purely Relative in their Personalities, that is, purely
Relative, secundum quid, or in one Respect. The Animadverter turns the
Proposition into a simple Affirmation, that they are (in all Respects) purely
Relative.

Secondly, The Divine Persons are purely Relative, because two of them relate
to one another, as Father and Son; and the third to both. The Animadverter
knows not the difference betwixt a Relative Person, and a Person who sustains a
Relation. Adam is related to God, to Eve, to Seth; yet none ever styled Adam a
Relative Person. The Personality of Adam is not a Relation, but a proper Mode
of Subsistence, which can never be conceived otherwise than Absolute.

Thirdly, The Father subsists personally, as a Father. This is the question it
self, and by the Rules of Logic ought to have been proved, and not supposed:
The sole Enquiry is, Whether to be a Father, and to be a Person, or subsist
personally, be formally the same?

Paternitas [sc. Divina] rationem fundandi non postulat, ut in rerum natura
sit; nam si aliquam talem fundandi rationem haberet, maxim generationem
activam: Illam autem non respicit, ut rationem sui esse, sed potius est in suo
genere ratio, cur ipsa sit. In quo etiam Paternitas illa aeterna antecellit
omnem aliam Paternitatem, quae in coelo and in terra nominatur. Omnis enim
alius Pater, ideo est Pater, quia generat: Pater autem aeternus ideo generat,
quia per Paternitatem est constitutus in suo esse Personali. Suarez. lib. 5. de
Trin. cap. 8. N. 8. p. 437.
Fourthly, The Father subsists Personally by an Act of Generation. How can a
Personal Act, which supposes the Person already constituted, be the formal
Cause of Personality in the same Person? The Schoolmen were wiser in their
Generation; they confess, that if the Father is denominated a Father from his
Act of Generation, it is impossible that the Father's Paternity should be his
Mode of Subsistence; since it is impossible not to suppose a Person subsisting,
before we can conceive of him acting. The first Person of the Trinity, say the
Schoolmen, is not therefore a Father, because he generates; but therefore
generates, because he is a Father.

Fifthly, Filiation constitutes the Son formally a Son; that is not the
question: But does Filiation constitute the Son a Person? that is the thing in
debate, and which the Animadverter ought to have proved.

Sixthly, The very Personal Subsistence of these Persons implies and carries in
it a formal Relation. This is not sufficient to imply a Relation, to carry in
it a Relation, except the Animadverter means, that the Personal Subsistence is
it self a Relation.

Again, Subsistence in relation to a productive Principle, (which is all the
Relation the Animadverter here mentions) is a quite different thing from
Personal Subsistence. Every Human Person subsists relatively in Relation to
God, his Creator; but what is this to his Personality? This does not denominate
an Human Person relative in his Personality. The Son and Holy Spirit relate to
the Father as their productive Principle; but how does this prove them Relative
Persons?

[It is certain, That to be a Father, P. 101. lin. 3. N. 4.
is a Relative Subsistence.]

A Father (as understood in this Mystery, viz. as implying the property of
being unbegotten) can have no Relation to a productive Principle. A Father has
indeed a Relation to a Son; but the natural Order of conceiving things obliges
us to conceive of a Person as subsisting, before we can conceive him capable of
the Act of Generation, or of the Relation of a Father. The Schoolmen therefore
call this not a thing certain and evident, but a Mystery; and confess, that
unless the Father be so denominated antecedently to his Act of Generation, it
is impossible that the Father's being a Relative Subsistence or Person should
be so much as true.

And having said thus much from the Animadverter concerning this Subtilty of
the Schools, viz. the Relativeness of the Divine Persons in their
Personalities; give me leave to consider it more generally.

And, first, it is no small prejudice with me against the Scholastic
Subtilties, that in this material Article, all Antiquity for above a thousand
Years have affirmed the quite contrary, viz. that to be a Person, is an
absolute Attribute. Petrus Abelardus, Peter Lombard, Council of Trent examined
and disproved, etc. p. 79. August. lib. 7. de Trin. cap. 6.
Hugo de St. Victore, (who first showed the way to School Divinity, says the
Learned Bishop of Worcester) all agreed with St. Augustine, That Pater dicitur
ad se persona, that the Father was absolutely, and not relatively, called a
Person. Indeed St. Augustine has given us an unanswerable Argument against this
Assertion of the Relativeness of this Attribute of being a Person in this
Sacred Mystery. August. lib. 7. de Trin. cap. 6.


If to be a Person, be a Relative Attribute, as to be a Friend is; then,
according to the nature of all Relatives, the Father when denominated a Person,
must be defined by his Correlate, and so of the other Persons; that is to say,
that this Phrase, viz. The Person of the Father cannot signify the Father, but
the Son: And this Phrase, viz. The Person of the Son, cannot signify the Son,
but the Father; for so it is in all other Relatives. The Friend of James cannot
be James, but must be Peter, or some other Person. This is a just Consequence
of this Scholastic Subtilty; I need not note the Paradoxicalness of it.

To which I add as an Argument ad homines, to the Animadverter, and those who
follow the Schools, That to be a Person is as common to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, Animadv. p. 113.
as to be God is common to the Three. If therefore this be a sure Rule, that
whatever Attribute is communicable, is absolute; to be a Person will be an
absolute Attribute, Si enim tres personae, commune est eis id quod persona est.
St. August lib. 7 de Trin. cap. 4.
as certainly communicable. And they strain very hard to maintain this
Scholastic Subtilty, who deny that this Attribute of being a Person is common
to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, save only in Name or aequivocally; and yet this
is a just consequence of asserting the Relativeness of this Attribute.

That which drove the Schoolmen to this novel and unintelligible Subtilty,
shall be considered hereafter.

P. 101. N. 5.
[ Argument III. If Self-Consciousness be the formal reason of Personality in
the Three Divine Persons, then there is no repugnancy in the Nature and Reason
of the thing it self, but that there might be Three thousand Persons in the
Deity, as well as Three, P. 102. lin. 1.
etc. -- Because this repugnancy (if there be any) must be either from the
nature of Self-Consciousness, -- or from the Nature of the Godhead. -- But it
is from neither of them. For, first, there is nothing in the Nature of
Self-Consciousness to hinder its Multiplication, etc. -- Nor, in the next
place, is there any repugnancy on the part of the Godhead, that Three thousand
Self-Conscious Spirits should subsist in it any more, than that Three should:
For the Godhead considered precisely and abstractedly in it self (and not as
actually included in any Person) is as able to communicate it self to the
greatest number, as to the smallest.]

This is an old Socinian Objection, and were it of any force, it would conclude
universally against the Faith of Three Divine Persons, viz. that if we once
acknowledge a plurality of Divine Persons, we can give no reason why we stop at
the number Three; we might equally assert Three thousand, as well as Three.

For to suppose a Socinian retorting the Animadverter's own Argument against
himself.

[If Three distinct Modalities or Modes be sufficient to constitute Three
Divine Persons, then there is no repugnancy in the Nature and Reason of the
thing, but that there might be Three thousand Persons in the Deity, as well as
Three. Because this repugnancy (if there be any) must be either from the Nature
of a Mode, or from the Nature of the Godhead: But it is from neither of them;
for, first, there is nothing in the Nature of a Mode to hinder its
Multiplication into never so great a number of particulars; but that there may
be Three thousand, or Three millions of Modes, as well as Three. Nor in the
next place, is there any repugnancy on the part of the Godhead, that Three
thousand Modes subsist in it, or be sustained by it, any more than that Three
should. For the Godhead considered precisely, and abstractedly (and not as
actually included in any Person) is as able to communicate it self to the
greatest number of Modes, as to the smallest.]

Now there is not a surer sign, that an Author does not understand the Subject
he writes upon, than his bringing an Objection, which is so plainly and easily
retorted upon his own Hypothesis.

The Animadverter cannot answer this Objection in the mouth of a Socinian, but
in the same words he will answer himself.

The Faith of a Trinity of Divine Persons is owing to Revelation alone; and
from thence ex posteriori, we learn, that a Trinity (that is, neither more nor
fewer) of Divine Persons, is necessary.

Three Divine Persons are necessary, because no Person can be Divine, and not
have necessary Existence. Again, we believe, that there are no more than Three,
because God has revealed the existence but of Three, and commanded us to
worship but Three, viz. Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

The Schoolmen pretend to prove the number of a Trinity of Divine Persons, not
from the formal Reason of Personality; for what Reason can we give, why a
fourth Divine Person might not have proceeded from the three first, a fifth
from the first four, and so in infinitum, but from these two Maxims:

First, That there can be but one unproduced Divine Person. This to me is a
sacred Article by no means to be contradicted; and in this I agree with the
Learned Henry de Gandavo, That those Arguments which prove the Article of the
Unity of God, demonstrate this Proposition.

Secondly, That there can be no more than two distinct Processions, viz.
Generation, and Spiration.

If the Schoolmen understood this Proposition, That the Scriptures have
revealed but these two Processions, I entirely agree with them: But they argue
ex priori; A Spirit, say they, can substantially produce only by his
Understanding or Will; the former, they tell us, is proper Generation; the
latter, Spiration. Animad. etc. p. 116.
But I cannot keep pace with these Gentlemen, whom the Animadverter commends
for venturing so little: It suffices to my Faith, that the quod sit of this
Mystery is expressly revealed in Scripture, viz. That the Son is begotten, and
that the Holy Ghost proceeds. But what either the One or the Other is, how they
differ, or why God might not have had two Sons, or two Holy Spirits, or have
produced a fourth Divine Person by a different sort of Procession from either
Generation or Spiration, are things above my thoughts and words.

I approve of that Ancient Anthem of the Church, [Quid sit gigni, quid processus
Me nescire sum professus.]
far beyond the Modern Subtilties of the Schools.

[For this is a received Maxim in the Schools, P. 113. lin. 10. N. 6.
with reference to the Divine Nature and Persons, Repugnat in Divinis dari
absolutum incommunicabile. Greg. de Valen. Tom. 1. p. 874. And it is a sure
Rule, whereby we may distinguish in every one of the Divine Persons, what is
Essential, from what is Personal. For every Attribute that is absolute, is
communicable, and consequently essential; and every one that is purely
relative, is incommunicable, and therefore purely Personal, and so e converso:]

I shall crave leave to put this Question more largely than the Animadverter
has done; and enquire, What it is which determines the singular or plural
predication of any Attribute concerning the Three Divine Persons?

The Schoolmen commonly give the same Answer with the Animadverter, viz. That a
Personal Attribute may be plurally predicated; an Essential Attribute may be
predicated singularly of the Three Divine Persons. Secondly, That a Relative
Attribute is a Personal Attribute; and an Absolute Attribute an Essential one.

To whom I answer, That the first distinction concerning a Personal and
Essential Attribute is true, but insufficient for the difficulty. Secondly,
That the second distinction of an Absolute and Relative Attribute is not
necessarily, universally true. I say, the former part of this Rule I confess to
be true, but answers not the difficulty. A Personal Attribute may be predicated
plurally, if common to more than one Person. For all such Predications are
reduced to this received one of the Church, That there are Three Divine
Persons. All Essential Attributes may be predicated singularly, being
equipollent to this, that there is but one Essence of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost. But this will not give us satisfaction in our present Enquiry. As for
instance.

It is the received Language of the Church, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
may be truly styled Vnus Deus, Vnus Dominus, Vnus Creator; as also the allowed
Phrase of the Schools, that Father and Son are Vnus Spirator; and that it is
Heresy to assert that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are Tres Dii, Tres Domini,
Tres Creatores, or to say of Father and Son, that they are Duo Spiratores.

I know the Schoolmen assert, that Deus, Dominus, Creator, are Essential
Attributes, but they cannot pretend this of Spirator; to be the Spirator of the
Holy Ghost is confessedly a Personal Attribute; Attributa Divina positiva
adjective sumpta, recte praedicantur in plurali de Divinis Personis. -- Suarez,
lib. 3. de Trin. cap. 11. n. 12. p. 401.
how comes that under pain of Heresy to be predicated singularly of Two Divine
Persons, viz. of Father and Son?

Secondly, -- Sic enim Tres Personae recte dicuntur Divinae and Dominantes ac
Creantes, and Pater and Filius dicuntur Spirantes Spiritum Sanctum, licet sint
unus Spirator. N. 12. p. 401.
It is confessed by the most rigid of the Schoolmen, that it is lawful to say,
That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are Tres Deitatem habentes, Tres Dominantes,
Tres Creantes; That Father and Son are Duo Spirantes. How shall we extricate
our selves out of this difficulty? Is Deus an Essential Attribute, and Deitatem
habens a Personal One? What difference is there in sense betwixt Deus and
Deitatem habens, Dominus and Dominans, Creator and Creans, Spirator and
Spirans? Can the Concrete term Deus be better explained than by its abstract,
Deitatem habens?

It Is manifest from these Examples, that the distinction of an Essential and
Personal Attribute will not solve this difficulty.

The Schoolmen confess this, and therefore give us a second distinction of a
Noun Substantive and Noun Adjective, viz. That an Essential Attribute, when
expressed by a Noun Substantive, is always to be predicated singularly; but when
the same Attribute is expressed by a Noun Adjective, then it may be plurally
predicated of the Divine Persons.

But I enquire, How comes this Rule also to hold in the Personal Attribute of a
Spirator? Can a Criticism of Grammar make a Personal Attribute to be predicated
as an Essential one, and an Essential Attribute to be predicated in the nature
of a Personal Attribute?

Secondly, This is the very Question, Why two Phrases in Sense, and according
to all the Rules of Logic equipollent, should be so differently interpreted
merely from a Criticism of Grammar, that the one of them should be Orthodox*
and the other Heretical?

It Is also manifest from these Instances, that the second Rule of an Absolute
and Relative Predicate is false. Deus, Dominus, Creator, Spirator, are
manifestly Relative Attributes: There can be no dispute of the three last; and
the Scripture Expressions of my God, thy God, our God, your God, prove the
Relativeness of this term God. Besides, that an absolute Attribute put into an
Adjective Form, may, as I have showed, be plurally predicated.

Nay, if it were unlawful to predicate plurally an absolute Essential
Attribute, the Whole Church has hitherto erred, which has never scrupled the
Phrase of Three Divine, Holy, Omnipotent, etc. Persons; or in the Phrase of the
Athanasian Creed, (which all the Schoolmen esteemed to be genuine) Three
Coeternal Persons.

The Schoolmen indeed were infinitely perplexed how to reconcile the Author of
that Creed to himself; that it was lawful to say, Three Coeternal Persons, and
yet at the same time forbidden to say, Three Eternals in the Masculine Gender.
Here Thomas Aquinas, their Leader, helped them at a dead lift; and when he
could not bring the Rule [concerning the Distinction of Nouns Substantive and
Nouns Adjective] to this Creed; he brought the Creed to the Rule: And as
Petavius somewhere observes, contrary to all Rules of Grammar, he interpreted
all those Adjective Phrases Substantively, that is, he taught that they ought
to have been put into the Neuter Gender; it ought to have been non tria oeterna
sed unum oeternum, etc. which Construction the Athanasian Creed will very well
bear in our English Translation.

But I must here acknowledge to my Reader, that this Distinction of an absolute
and relative Predicate, as the adaequate Reason of a Plural or Singular
Predication in this Sacred Mystery, is much Ancienter than the Schoolmen,
claims the Authority of the Latin Fathers, who all received it from St.
Augustine.

Augustine lib. 5. de Trin. cap. 3.
That Learned and Acute Father pinched with an Arian Objection [which himself
calls calidissimum machinamentum;] first, as I believe, invented this
Distinction, and gave us this Maxim in relation to this Mystery. [Quicquid ad
se dicitur Deus, Ibid. Cap. 8.
and de singulis Personis and simul de tota Trinitate, singulariter, non
pluraliter, dicitur.] His great Name gave this Axiom Authority with the
succeeding Latin Fathers, from whom the Schoolmen borrowed it.

First, I balance St. Augustin's Authority with his own words, August. Lib. 7.
de Trin. cap. 6.
["Pater ad se dicitur persona] with his own argument formerly mentioned [N. 4.
of this Chapter] which demonstrates that this term Persona is an absolute
Attribute; Ibid.
the same he says of Hypostasis [ Omnis res ad seipsam subsistit, quanto magis
Deus?] And yet the undoubted Faith of the Church is, that this term Hypostasis,
or Persona, may be plurally predicated, that we may say, That there are Three
Divine Hypostases or Persons.

If the Reader shall enquire, Whether St. Augustine saw not this obvious
Objection against his own Axiom?

I Answer, That he did see it, and that he chose rather to forsake the
universal Faith and Language of the Church, than to part with an Axiom, he
thought so serviceable against that Calidissimum Machinamentum, that subtle
Objection of the Arians. [Magna inopia Humanum laborat eloquium, dictum est
tamen tres personoe, August. Lib. 5. de Trin. cap. 9.
non ut illud diceretur, sed ne taceretur omnino.] which words, if we strip
them of that Rhetoric wherewith that Eloquent Father has clothed and
disguised them, carry this plain sense, That though the universal Language of
the Church has called Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons; yet, to speak
the truth, the Phrase ought not to be used, the thing ought not to be said; we
must say somewhat, therefore we say Three Persons; Non ut illud diceretur, sed
ne taceretur omnino.

I speak not this to derogate from the Honor of that deservedly Great and
Learned Father, but to Vindicate the Truth of this Sacred Mystery. Amicus S.
Augustinus, magis Amica fides. When St. Augustine departs from the received
Faith of the Church, it can be no fault to observe it, or to depart from him.

That Learned Father confesses, That he understood not the distinction of
Hypostasis and Essence in this Sacred Mystery. Augustine. Lib. 5. de Trin. cap.
8.
[Dicunt quidam, and illi [Groeci] Hypostasim, sed nescio quid volunt interesse
inter Vsiam and Hypostasim.

That Learned Father confesses the unhappy reason of these mistakes; he wanted
the assistance of the Greek Fathers, the most accurate Writers in this Mystery
of the Trinity, as the Latin Fathers are judged the most accurate in the
Pelagian Controversy. Augustine. Lib. 3. de Trin. praefatio.
[Graecoe autem linguoe non sit nobis tantus habitus, ut talium rerum libris
legendis and intelligendis ullo modo reperiamur idonei, quo genere literarum ex
ijs, quoe nobis pauca interpretata sunt, non dubito cuncta quoe utiliter
quoerere possumus, contineri.]

II. Letter of Advice, etc. S. V. P. 148. P. 149.
The Learned Mr. Dodwell has laid the same Charge to the Schoolmen, viz. That
they were Ignorant of the Greek Fathers, and necessitated to rely on Ignorant
Translations; that they were Unskilful in Critical Learning, that they were not
ingenuously Rational in the proof of their Principles: P. 151.
That most of Lombard's Principles were for the much greater part Transcribed
from St. Augustine, that is, originally from the Authority of one private
Person, from whom it was derived by the rest without any new Examination.

All I would observe from hence is, That there is no necessity of concluding
the Sacred Articles of the Trinity and Incarnation indefensible, because the
Subtleties of the Schools (built for the much greater part upon the sole
Authority of St. Augustine) seem so to most.

St. Augustine himself confesses this Axiom of [ quicquid ad se dicitur Deus,
etc.] false in relation to this Term Person, or which is worse, That the Phrase
of Three Persons ought not to be used.

A second Argument which I shall bring against this Axiom of St. Augustin's,
(Quicquid ad se dicitur Deus, etc.) I shall take from the Attribute of
Existence.

Existence is an absolute Predicate: We say, that God is, that the Father is,
that the Son is, that the Holy Ghost is; yet we cannot say that Father, Son and
Holy Ghost is, but are; I and the Father are one, these Three are One. Now
every Novice in Logic can inform us, that Deus est, is the same with this Deus
est existens; Pater est, the same with Pater est existens; and consequently Hi
tres sunt, the same with Hi tres sunt existentes.

Here also again, I may plead St. Augustin's Authority against his own Axiom.
He once ventured to change our Saviors words, and to say, [Qui gignit and quem
gignit, unum est.]. But upon second thoughts, he put this passage into his
Retractations, and in his Books of the Trinity, he affirmed it to be
Sabellianism, Heresy, to change the Verb. [Pluraliter dictum est, ego and pater
unum sumus. Augustine. lib. 5. de Trin. cap. 9.
Non enim dixit unum est, quod Sabelliani dicunt, sed unum sumus.]

Thirdly, Unity also is an absolute Attribute. We say, that God is One in the
masculine gender, (...). Gal. 3.20.
We say also, that the Father is One, (...), That the Son is One, that the Holy
Ghost is One, in the masculine gender: But we cannot say of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, that they are (...), unus, One in the masculine gender, but (...),
unum, One in the neuter gender, [(...).] that is, we cannot deny, that Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost are truly Three.

I esteem these two last Arguments the more, because they are grounded on the
express words of Scripture; they are each singly, and much more conjointly,
sufficient to overthrow the universality of that Axiom of St. Augustine,
["Quicquid ad se dicitur Deus, etc.]

But what will then become of the Arian Objection?

I answer, That I conceive that Objection a weak Sophism, and capable of an
easy Solution.

Augustine. lib. 5. de Trin. cap. 3.
I will give it in St. Augustin's own words, [Quicquid de Deo dicitur vel
intelligitur, non secundum accidens, sed secundum substantiam dicitur
Quapropter ingenitum Patri secundum substantiam est, and genitum esse Filio
secundum substantiam est: diversum est autem ingenitum and genitum, diversa est
ergo substantia Patris and Filii.] To this sense, All the Predicates concerning
God or the Divine Persons, are either substantial or accidental Predications.
Not the latter, because nothing is mutable in God; if the former, then to be
unbegotten is a substantial Predicate of the Father, and to be begotten is a
substantial Predicate of the Son: But to be unbegotten, and to be begotten, are
contrary one to the other; therefore the substance of the Father and Son are
diverse or different.

St. Augustine seems not to acknowledge an accidental Predication concerning
God; and it is confessed, that to be unbegotten, or to be begotten, are
necessary, and not accidental Predications of the Father and Son.

St. Augustine answers to the Objection, That there was a middle Predication
betwixt these two, substantial and accidental, which was a relative Predication.

Now it is very true, that there is a middle Predication betwixt these two, an
essential Predication, and an accidental one. Secondly, it is as true, that in
the Objection of the Arian, this middle Predication was a relative Predication:
But, with all submission, it was error non causoe pro causa, to assign the
relativeness of the Predication, as the reason of its being a middle
Predication.

The Objection is a plain Sophism, equivocating in the phrase Substantia, which
has a double sense in this Mystery; sometimes it signifies the same with Person
or Hypostasis, sometimes the same with Essence: in the former sense, the
Conclusion is sound and orthodox, that the Substance, that is, Hypostasis of
the Father and Son is different.

And the Solution of this Objection is plain and easy; A personal Predication
is a middle Predication, betwixt an essential and an accidental Predication,
and that a personal Predication may be as necessary as an essential one amongst
humane persons; the difference of Sex is a personal, yet necessary Predication.
Amongst the Divine Persons, to be unbegotten, to be begotten, to proceed,
distinguish the Persons, but divide not the Essence. Paternity is necessary to
the Person of the Father, but not essential to Him; for then Paternity would be
common to the whole Trinity.

St. Augustine could not have failed of this true Answer, had he read the Greek
Fathers, and from them learned the true Distinction of Hypostasis and Vsia.

Lastly, What Rule can I my self give concerning the plural or singular
Predication of any Attribute concerning the Divine Persons?

I answer, First, That all plural Predications are either equipollent with, or
reducible to this one allowed Proposition, That there are Three Divine Persons.
This is plain, and needs neither Illustration nor Proof.

Secondly, That all singular Predications are equipollent with, or reducible to
this other allowed Proposition, viz. That there is but One God.

Is not this the same Distinction of an essential and personal Predicate, which
I have before declared insufficient?

I answer, That so indeed the Schoolmen expound it. To them this fundamental
Article of Natural Religion, there is but One God, is the same with this, that
there is but One Divine Essence. But I conceive that these are distinct
Articles.

The Unity of the Divine Essence, is but the Explication of the Unity of the
Trinity, and is not a question to any one to whom the Doctrine of the Trinity
is not in some measure revealed: Whereas the Article of the Unity of God is an
Article of Natural Religion; no Mystery, but capable of being found out by
Natural Reason alone.

One great occasion of this mistake, was the expressing the Article of the
Unity of God, and of the Unity of the Trinity, by the same Phrase: The Unity of
the Trinity is often expressed by this Phrase, that the Trinity, or Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are One God. But tho they are the same Words, they have a
different import, when predicated of the whole Trinity conjointly, and when
they are part of that fundamental Article of Natural Religion, that there is
but One God.

A just Exposition of this prime Article of Natural Religion will, as I
conceive, give a Rational Account of these hitherto esteemed insuperable
Difficulties; of which, by God's Grace, in my Second Part.

CHAP. IV.
IN reference to the sacred Articles of Religion, N. 1.
we ought to have a double care, not only to think, but speak inoffensively; to
take care, that our Words as well as our Opinions be Orthodox; and especially
ought we to be thus cautious in the Mysterious Articles of the Trinity and
Incarnation, where a word disordered, I had almost said a Comma misplaced, may
render us, in the judgment of the warm contending Parties, guilty of no less
than Heresy.

It Is St. Augustin's Observation concerning the Mystery of the Trinity, that
[Nec periculosius alicubi erratur, Lib. 1. de Trin. cap. 3.
nec laboriosius aliquid quoeritur.] It is no where more dangerous to Err, nor
more difficult to apprehend than in this Mysterious Subject.

A Wise Person will have a great care therefore to keep the beaten Path, to
speak in the received Language of the Church.

The Learned Calvin gives us his own Experience [Expertus pridem sum, and
quidem soepius, Calvin's Instit. lib. 1. cap. 3. n. 5.
quicunque de verbis pertinacius litigant, fovere occultum virus.] That they
who obstinately quarrel against the Phrases of the Church, are Heretics in
their Hearts. It were to be wished, that himself had sufficiently considered
this, when in the same Section, he wishes, [ Vtinam sepulta essent hoec nomina,
viz. Trinitas, Persona, Hypostasis, Essentia, Consubstantialis, etc.] That the
Ecclesiastical phrases were all buried or laid aside, upon certain conditions
he there mentions.

But there is one thing here especially to be noted, that several Expressions
are rejected by the Fathers of the Church, not that they are absolutely
incapable of an Orthodox sense, but because they are apt to lead to a false or
Heritical sense; as for instance, [In Trinitate datur alius and alius sed non
aliud and aliud.] The rigid'st of the Schoolmen allow, aliud and aliud
suppositum in Trinitate, the Axiom is understood of aliud in an Arian sense, of
aliud natura.

Again, If ever it be lawful to use a new Phrase in this Mystery, it will then
be lawful, when the ancient allowed Phrases are rendered in a manner
insignificant: when three Persons are Expounded by three somewhat's, or are
declared to be Metaphorical.

This seems to me to be the case of the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, by three
Persons in this Mystery, says he, are to be understood three intelligent
Beings, Vindication of the Trin. p. 66. l. 24.
three distinct Infinite Minds [to say, they are three Divine Persons, and not
three Infinite Minds] is Heritical and absurd; that is, contains the Heresy of
Sabellius, and contradicts the Scripture; which, as the Reverend Dean observes,
represents Father, ibid.
Son, and Holy Ghost, as three Intelligent Beings, not as three Powers or
Faculties of the same Being, which is downright Sabellianism.

The Animadvertor laying hold on the Novelty of the Phrase of three Infinite
Minds, took occasion to Write and Publish one of the most spiteful and
malicious Books, that perhaps ever saw the Sun: For he is not content to note,
That this is a Phrase difused by the Church; but he calls it, a silly Heretical
Notion, Pref. p. 3. ibib. p. 2.
solely of his own invention, a notion immediately and unavoidably inferring
three Gods; and p. 376. [a Monstrous Assertion, by which he holds and affirms,
the three Divine Persons to be three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits; which
I, [the Animadverter] show unavoidably and irrefragably inferred them to be
three Gods.]

Now that I may render these Papers more useful to my Reader, I shall enquire
into the reason why the Church refused several Phrases in this Mystery, in what
sense the same Phrase was allowed, and in what other it was disallowed; and
more particularly have an Eye to the Animadvertor's Objections against the
Phrase of three Infinite Minds.

[It being certain, both from Philosophy and Religion, P. 116. l. 5. n. 2.
That there is but one only God or Godhead, in which Christian Religion has
taught us, that there are three Persons.]

It is ominous to stumble at the Threshold; these two Terms God and Godhead,
are formally distinct, and therefore ought not to be Confounded. Every thing
which may be affirmed of one of these Terms, cannot with equal Truth and
Propriety be always affirmed of the other. The Christian Religion has taught
us, That there are Three Persons in the Godhead; or, in the words of the first
Article of our Church, in the Unity of the Godhead: For the Unity of the
Godhead, and the Unity of the Trinity are equipollent Articles, and there are
certainly Three Persons in the Trinity, in the Unity of the Trinity.

But if we take this term God, as distinct from Godhead, we can by no means
say, That there are three Persons in God, or in one God: The Christian Religion
compels us to acknowledge, that each distinct Person is God; which would be
impossible, if there were three Persons in God. For how can that Person be God,
which wants something which is in God; for each distinct Person has not three
Persons in him. Hence the 11th Council of Toledo; [Nec recte dici potest, ut in
uno Deo sit Trinitas] with the Animadvertor's leave, the Heretic Sabellius,
and not the Christian Religion taught this Article, that there are three
Persons in one God.

[It had been to be wished, P. 116. l. 12. n. 3.
(I confess) That Divines had rested in the bare Expressions delivered in
Scripture concerning this Mystery, and ventured no farther by any particular
and bold Explication of it: But since the Nature or rather Humor of Man, has
still been too strong for his Duty; and his Curiosity (especially in things
Sacred) been apt to carry him too far; those however, have been all along the
most Pardonable, who have ventured least, and proceeded upon the surest
grounds, both of Scripture it self and Reason, Discoursing upon it.]

Does the Animadvertor consider the import of those Words, of resting in the
bare expressions delivered in Scripture? If I understand them, they forbid the
shortest Paraphrase, they except not the most necessary Vindication of the
Scripture Expressions from the false interpretations of Heretics.

Again, Is this the best Defense the Animadvertor can give for the Fathers of
the Church, who have not only exceeded the bare Expressions delivered in
Scripture, but expressed their Faith of this Mysterious Article, by Sundry
extrascriptural terms, such as Trinity, Person, Hypostasis, Substance, Essence,
Consubstantial, etc. Was this only a wanton Humor in them, an Humor too strong
for their Duty, a Curiosity which carried them too far? Was this a fault and
crime, tho a pardonable one? When it served the Animadvertor's design against
the Reverend Dean, these extrascriptural Terms were neither ambiguous, faulty
nor improper, Animadv, etc. p. 147. l. 3.
but much the contrary, though now he condemns the Inventors of them, as acting
contrary to their Duty. All are in some measure faulty, even those who have
ventured least: those who have proceeded upon the surest grounds, both of
Scripture it self and of Reason, discoursing upon it; which, I am satisfied, is
his own notion, and not an overwise one; that we cannot escape a fault, even
where we proceed upon the surest Grounds, not where we proceed upon the surest
Grounds, both of Scripture and Reason.

The Arians of old, and the Socinians of late, and some favorers of them, or
who otherwise, occultum virus fovent, in the words of Calvin, have embraced
some False and Heretical Notion of this Mystery, are very angry with the extra
scriptural Terms used by the Church in this Mystery. But the Apology which the
Nicene Fathers made for themselves was, That the Arians and other Heretics
were the occasion of it; these Heretics Equivocated in the sense and meaning
of the bare Scripture Expressions, and the more ancient and simple Phrases of
the Church; so that the Church was obliged to use new Expressions, to detect
the Frauds of subtle and cunning Heretics. The Church chose not these Terms to
express a new Faith by, to say more than the Scripture had said, but to say
that in short which the Scripture had scatteringly delivered in several places.

[And such I affirm the ancient Writers and Fathers of the Church, Ibid.
and after them the Schoolmen to have been, who with all their faults (or
rather infelicities, caused by the times and circumstances they lived in) are
better Divines and soberer Reasoners, than any of those pert, confident, raw
Men, who are much better at despising and carping at them, than at reading and
understanding them; tho wise Men despise nothing, but they will know it first,
and for that very cause very rationally despise them.]

First, I believe, that the Animadvertor is the very first Person, who
commended the Schoolmen for venturing little, or for proceeding upon the
surest Grounds, both of Scripture and Reason.

The Boldness of the Schools is known to a Proverb; he that has but cast his
Eye upon Aquinas his Sums, must from his own Experience confute the
Animadvertor, this Character of the Schoolmen, that they ventured little, puts
me in mind of a certain Person I once knew, who commended Aristotle for Writing
excellent Latin; I leave the Application to the Animadvertor himself.

The second part of their Character is almost as proper; they, and the
Animadvertor proceed upon the surest Grounds of Scripture, much alike. This
last in his Eighth Chapter, wherein he professedly endeavors to state the
Doctrine of the Trinity, quotes only one single place, Heb. 1.3. and even that
he has mistaken.

The School-men's Principles were for the most part St. Augustin's Authority,
as to the first Schoolmen; for the latter generally Transcribed one from
another.

A wise Man will no more praise than he will despise any thing, till he first
knows it, and for that cause rationally praise it; and not as the Animadvertor
has done, praise them for venturing little, and for proceeding upon Scripture
Grounds, when it is notorious, that they were guilty of the contrary faults.

After all, Praising the Schoolmen is Dispraising himself and his own
Hypothesis. The Modes of the Schoolmen are only such in name; in our imperfect
Conception of things, the Animadvertor's Modes are such in reality, but of this
hereafter.

P. 119. n. 4.
[Argument I. Three distinct infinite Minds or Spirits, are three distinct
Gods, etc.]

Here I shall enquire into the import of these two Phrases, Three infinite
Spirits, and Three Gods: An Explication of these two Phrases is sufficient to
solve this Objection, and indeed the whole difficulty.

The rigid'st of the Schoolmen allow, That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are,
Tres infinitam Spiritualem naturam habentes; nor can there be any dispute,
either from Grammar or Logic, that infinitus Spiritus, and infinitam
Spiritualem naturam habens, are in sense exactly Equipollent, and if these two
are Equipollent in the singular number, I would fain know a reason, why the
plural Number of these two Phrases should not be Equipollent, that is, why tres
infiniti Spiritus, should not signify the same with tres infinitam Spiritualem
naturam habentes.

If any shall object the distinction of the Schools, concerning Nouns
Substantive and Nouns Adjective, that Spiritus is a Noun Substantive, and
therefore according to them implys a multiplication of the form, viz. the
Spiritual Nature, whereas Spiritualem naturam habens is an Adjective, and only
implys a multiplication of the Suppositum.

First, I Answer, That the distinction is groundless in it self, and needless,
in respect of the difficulty it pretends to solve.

Secondly, Allowing it to be true, It only causes the Phrase to be less
accurate, not as the Animadvertor pretends absolutely Heretical; the Phrases of
the Athanasian Creed non tres aeterni, etc. observe not this rule; yet the
Schoolmen charge not Athanasius with Heresy, with denying a plurality of
Persons, but choose to say, that he understood those Phrases Substantively: the
same favorable Construction ought a School-man to make of this Phrase, viz.
that Spiritus in this Phrase ought to be taken Personally, Adjectively for
Spiritualem naturam habentes, and then it is Orthodox.

But if I will not allow this Criticism of the Schools, concerning Nouns
Substantive and Nouns Adjective, how came no Man to venture upon it before the
Dean of St. Paul's?

I Answer, First, That there is a very good reason why this Phrase is not to be
found in Antiquity, the reason the Reverend Dean himself gives, viz That though
there are three Holy Spirits, yet not three Holy Ghosts, in the Trinity, that
is, (...) or Spiritus, was by the Ancient Fathers Appropriated to signify the
Third Person of the Blessed Trinity, and consequently (...), or tres Spiritus
would accordingly to them have employed Three Holy Ghosts, strictly so called.

And for the same Reason the Phrase of one Spirit in reference to the whole
Trinity, is not that I know of above once to be found in all Antiquity, and
that in that bold Father St. Augustine, Lib. 5. de Trin. cap. 11. Hom. 5. in
Jerem.
who was not afraid to say of the Phrase of Three Persons, Non ut illud
diceretur.

Secondly, I find Origin quoted for the very Phrase, [Tres Spiritus David in
Psalmo confessionis postulat.]

Amongst the Moderns the learned Genebrard, a Man of great Note in his Time,
and of great Skill in relation to this Mystery, Genebrard, Resp. ad Scheghium.
p. 52.
not barely justifies the Orthodoxness of the Proposition, but declares that it
was [Propositio vera ac fide ab Ecclaesia Catholica omnibus temporibus
recepta,] a true Article, nay, an Article of Faith, and received as such by the
Catholic Church of all Ages: The Proposition is thus set down by Genebrard,
Tres sunt Spiritus oeterni, quorum quilibet per se Deus; there are three
Eternal Spirits, whereof every single Spirit is God, with much more to the same
purpose in the same place.

The same Answer will serve in reference to the Animadvertor's Objection, That
three Infinite Spirits are three Gods.

Tres Dei, when it signifies the same with tres Deitatem habentes, with tres
Divinae Personae, is Orthodox.

Genebrard, lib. 2. de Trin. p. 155
Hear the learned Genebrard, [ Si mavis dicere tres Deos, id est, tres Divinas
Personas, possis dicere atque interpretari. Nam vocabulum Deus aliquando
sumitur Hypostatice, ac ultro citroque commeat, cum Divina Persona sive
Hypostasi, ut cum in Niceno Symbolo legitur, Deum de Deo, etc.]

But this Objection of Polytheism against the Doctrine of the Trinity, I
reserve to be handled at large in my Second Part.

p. 119. lin. 29. n. 5.
[My Reason for what I affirm, viz. That three distinct infinite Minds or
Spirits are three distinct Gods, is this, that God and Infinite Mind or Spirit
are terms equipollent and concertible.]

Every Page of the New Testament confutes this assertion. This term God is a
thousand times in Scripture appropriated to signify the Person of the Father,
as in these and the like Phrases: The Son of God, the Spirit of God, God sent
his Son, etc. But this term Infinite Mind or Spirit, is not capable of such
Appropriation, any more than the Phrase of a Divine Person can be appropriated
to that signification. Infinite Mind or Spirit is therefore more properly a
term equipollent and convertible with a Divine Person, than with the term God.

[As it is true that one and the same God or Godhead is common to, p. 120. l.
6. n. 6.
and subsists in all and every one of the three Persons; so it is true, that
one and the same Infinite Mind or Spirit, is common to, and subsists in the
said three Persons.]

This Fallacy is easily answered. One Godhead, and one Infinite Spiritual
Nature in abstracto is common to the three Persons: The Animadvertor must prove
that this Rule holds of one Infinite Spirit in concreto.

God the Father is not God the Son; God the Father and God the Son are not the
same God in Person or Personality, in the words of the learned Petavius, Petav.
lib. 3. de Trin. cap. 9. S. 3. p. 282.
[Non est igitur Filius idem ille unus Deus qui Pater.] Can the Animadvertor
believe that Petavius would have scrupled to say, Non est igitur Filius idem
ille unus Spiritus qui Pater? The same one Godhead by being common to three
Persons becomes Deus trinus in Personis; in which Phrase Trinus agrees with
Deus, and not with Personis, nor is it capable of that common, but groundless
Interpretation of Tri-une. God is three, and not tri-une, in Persons. Had
Trinus ever signified tri-une, which yet it never did to the Ancients, nor by
any Rules of Grammar ought it to signify so now.

[If it be here objected, p. 120. n. 7.
that we allow of three distinct Persons in the Godhead, of which every one is
Infinite, without admitting them to be three distinct Gods; and therefore why
may we not as well allow of three distinct Infinite Minds or Spirits in the
same Godhead, without any necessity of inferring from thence, that they are
three distinct Gods.]

This Objection is every way to the purpose; this is the Plea of the Reverend
Dean, To say, they are three Divine Persons, and not three Infinite Minds, was,
what the Reverend Dean could not understand.

Secondly, This is the great Objection of the Socinians, three Humane Persons
are three Men, three Angelical Persons three Angels, therefore three Divine
Persons three Gods. They esteem God and a Divine Person terms equipollent and
convertible, they esteem the Consequence from three Divine Persons to three
Gods necessary, immediate, and unavoidable. Not one Socinian who understands
himself, but will confess that he can as soon believe three Infinite Minds as
three Divine Persons reconcilable with the Article of the Unity of God.

If the Animadvertor can give an Answer to this Socinian Objection from the
Phrase of three Divine Persons, which is not equally applicable to his own
Objection against the Phrase of three Infinite Spirits, I will yield him the
Point he contends for.

[One thing I must note, which to me betrays the Animadvertor's fear, I mean
his not representing the Objection fair. The Dean's Phrase is put down three
distinct Infinite Minds, why did he not equally say, three distinct Infinite
Persons? Why must this last be expressed by a Circumlocution, three Persons, of
which every one is Infinite? How often has the Animadvertor used the Phrase of
three Divine Persons, which is the same with three Infinite Persons? Is not
this to make a distinction without a difference?]

p. 120. n. 8.
[I Answer, that the case is very different, and the reason of the difference
is this, because three Infinite Minds or Spirits are three absolute simple
Beings or Essences, and so stand distinguished from one another by their whole
Beings or Natures: But the Divine Persons are three Relatives (or one simple
Being or Essence under three distinct Relations) and consequently differ from
one another, not wholly and by all that is in them, but only by some certain
Mode or Respect peculiar to each, and upon that account causing their
distinction.]

This Answer puts me in mind of a certain Respondent, who being at a great
loss, cried, Nego id, not determining, whether it was the Major, Minor, or
Conclusion, which he denied. And I believe most Readers will be equally at a
loss, whether the Animadvertor applies this Answer to the Premises or
Conclusion.

The Animadvertor's Argument against the Reverend Dean's Assertion of three
Infinite Minds is this: One Infinite Mind is one God, therefore three Infinite
Minds are three Gods. The Socinians Objection mutatis mutandis the same, One
Divine Person is one God, therefore three Divine Persons are three Gods. The
Consequence of each Argument the same, viz. That three Infinite Minds, three
Divine Persons must be thrice what one Infinite Mind, or one Divine Person is.

The Consequence is a Mathematical Conclusion, that three of any kind must be
thrice what one of the same kind is.

Will the Animadvertor deny the Antecedent, that one Divine Person is one God?
Or will he deny that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are three Persons?

This Objection depends not immediately upon the Relativeness or Absoluteness
of a Divine Person: If one Mode, one Accident, one Relation be one God, how
shall we avoid the Conclusion, that three Modes, three Accidents, or three
Relations are three Gods?

The force of this Answer, if it has any, must lie in this, that there are not
properly three Divine Persons: the Divine Persons are not three, as three
Infinite Minds are three: to speak the truth, the ternary number belongs not to
the Persons, but to the Personalities, to the Modes, to the Relations. We use
the Phrase of three Relatives, but we mean only three relations of one simple
Being; and with equal Justice, the Animadvertor might have said, that we use
the Phrase of three Persons, but we mean only three Personalities of one
absolute Person.

The Animadvertor entirely begs the Question, if he takes three Relatives and
one simple Being under three Relations to be equipollent. Adam had three
relations, of a Creature, an Husband, and a Father, yet he is but one Relative.
A Relative is not the Relation, but that which has the Relation, the Subject of
the Relation. The Person of the Father is one simple Being, God, under two
Relations (of Generation and Spiration) is therefore the Person of the Father
two Relatives, two Persons?

Again, the Divine Persons are three Relatives. Why did not the Animadvertor
speak out? Are they three Relative Substances, three Relative Accidents, or
three Relative Modes?

Further Genebrard (and the same I believe of the Reverend Dean) would have
told him, that three Infinite Minds or Spirits have but one singular,
individual, Spiritual Nature or Essence, and therefore, according to Genebrard,
three Infinite Minds differ no more than three Divine Persons.

Lastly, the difference of the Divine Persons is not the difference of one
simple Being under three Relations: For one simple Being under one Relation
cannot be simply denied of it self under another Relation. Adam the Father is
Adam the Husband, Adam the Creature: the Person of the Father is the Spirator
of the Holy Ghost, though as he is one, he is not the other; this latter is a
Modal, not simple Negation. But the Animadvertor himself tells us, That
wheresoever there are Two distinct Persons, we do and must by all the Rules of
Grammar and Logic, say, Animadv. etc. p. 74. l. 1.
that one of them is (simply) not the other: Which single passage, overthrows
our Animadvertor's Hypothesis, that the Divine Persons differ by a Modal
difference. We have no way from Logicks of knowing when Two Beings differ
wholly, but from such simple negation; a Negative Sign in Logicks distributes
all which follows it in the same Proposition: but of this more hereafter.

[And therefore to argue from a Person to a Spirit here is manifestly
sophistical, P. 121. N. 9.
and that which is called Fallacia accidentis, or (since several fallacies may
concur in the same proposition) it may be also a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. For so it is to conclude, that three Persons are three distinct
Gods; since the difference of Persons is only from a diverse respect between
them; but three Gods import three absolute distinct Natures or Substances.]

Where are we now? this is a perfectly new Topic. To argue from a Person to a
Spirit, is manifestly sophistical, it is fallacia Accidentis, and fallacia a
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. Grant all this for once, how is this
a consequence from the former? why is this ushered in with a therefore? The
former Answer obscurely denies that there are Three Persons; this denies, that
a Divine Person, or a person in this Mystery, is a Spirit or God; and asserts,
that a Divine Person is only ex accidenti, or secundum quid, a Spirit or God.
This will make strange Divinity, if we apply it to the Father, Son or Holy
Ghost. The Father is a Divine Person, or a Person in this Mystery: Will the
Animadvertor himself have the Confidence to deduce the Conclusion, that the
Person of the Father is only ex accidenti, or secundum quid, a Spirit or God?
If the Animadvertor does not already know it, let me inform him, that the
Catholic Faith is, That every single Divine Person is essentially
(quidditative, as the Schools speak) a Spirit, or God: as fully as every single
Angelical person is essentially a Spirit or an Angel. And therefore when the
Animadvertor tells us in the same page, [That a Person here imports only a
Relation or Mode of Subsistence, in conjunction with the nature it belongs to]
he is guilty of two absurdities.

First it is unintelligible cant, a singular nature or substance in conjunction
with the Mode, or a singular nature sustaining a Mode is usual: but to put the
cart before the Horses, to put the Mode before the Nature, the Adjunct before
the Subject is new Philosophy peculiar to the Animadvertor.

Secondly. A person in this Mystery is not in recto a relation, or Mode, but
the subject of the Relation or Mode, a Divine Person has a Relation or Mode,
the Father has a relation or Mode, but the Father is not a relation or Mode.

Animad. etc. p. 321.
The Animadvertor himself tells us, that a Person as such is a Substance, and a
complete substance, therefore not a Mode.

Ib. p. 121.
Every Spirit has a Mode, a proper Mode of subsistence belonging to it, and yet
in the same place, the Animadvertor tells us, that a Spirit is not a Mode of
Being.

Ib. p. 121. N. 10.
[The ternary number all the while not belonging to their infinity, but only to
their personalities.]

Will the Animadvertor stand by this Conclusion, that the ternary Number
belongs only to the Personalities? if he does, I am satisfied he gives up the
Catholic Faith; for that asserts, that the ternary Number belongs to the
Persons, as well as Personalities.

If the Animadvertor will confess to the Socinians, that there is but one
Person in the Trinity, I believe they will scarce think it worth their while to
dispute, whether there are Three Modes or not, or whether these Modes are to be
called Personalities or not?

[One and the same Nature may sustain several distinct Relations or Modes of
Subsistence. P. 121. N. 11.
]

A Mode of Subsistence in the sense of the Animadvertor, for a Subsistential
form or Personality is improperly said to be sustained. Personality is the
constituent form of the Person, and not an adjunct of the Person.

Again, Nature when distinguished from the Suppositum or Person, is not the
Subject of the Relations or Modes: The Suppositum or Person is the proper
Subject of the Relations or Modes sustained by that Person.

Further, The common Assertion of the Schools is not barely, that the Divine
Nature sustains three distinct Relations, or three distinct Modes; but that it
sustains three Relations of the same kind, three distinct Personalities, which
is the great difficulty. One and the same Person may be twice a Father, if he
has Two Children, that is Natural: But can we conceive, that a Man can be twice
a Father of one and the same Son. This is the question, how, according to the
Schools, one and the same singular Nature, when it is become one Person in the
Father, by one subsistential form, can receive a distinct subsistential form
without losing the first, and also a third, without losing the first or second.
I freely acknowledge, that this is to me an insuperable difficulty; and
therefore, I bless God, that to me, the Faith of Three Divine Persons, needs
not so nice a speculation.

[Argument II. Three distinct Minds or Spirits, P. 122. N. 12.
are Three distinct Substances, etc.]

Tres Substantiae, signifies no more than Tres Substantialem naturam habentes,
which is allowed by the strictest of the Schoolmen.

Secondly, The Phrase of Three Substances has been more or less allowed in all
Ages of the Church, to be predicated of the Three Divine Persons. Calvin 's
Instit. lib. 1. cap. 13. n. 5.


St. Hillary calls them so, says the Learned Calvin, plus Centies, more than an
hundred times.

The Greek Fathers understood the same by the term (...) in the Plural Number.

St. Augustine confesses this of the Greek Fathers, and that he knew no other
signification of the term Hypostasis.

In Monologia. cap.
Anselmus very plainly, Hoec nomina (sc. Persona and substantia) aptius
eliguntur ad designandam pluralitatem in summa essentia, quia Persona non
dicitur, nisi de individua rationali natura: and Substantia principaliter
dicitur de individuis, quoe maxim inpluralitate subsistunt.

Suarez. lib. 1. de Trin. cap. 2. n. 11. Suarez. Metaph. Disp. 34. s. 1. n. 6.
The Schoolmen acknowledge Tres substantias incommunicabiles.

Ita D. Thom. 1 Part, quoest 30. artic. 1. ad 1. dicit juxta consuetudinem.
Eclesioe non esse absolute dicendas, tres substantias propter nominis
oequivocationem: addendo vero aliquid, quod determinet significationem, dici
posse, ut si dicamus, tres substantioe incommunicabiles seu relativoe.

Lib. 3. de Trin. cap. 6.
The Learned Suarez acknowledges the Divine Persons to be tres res, tria entia
[but he thinks it better to add tria entia relativa] to be tria aliquid.

No Protestant Writer can deny them to be tres per se subsistentes, and in that
sense tres substantias.

Indeed there never had been any scruple of this Phrase, had not this term
Substantia been ambiguous, and sometimes signified the same with (...),
Essence. Whence the warm St. Jerome, Quis ore sacrilego tres substantias
proedicabit? Whence himself says, that there was Poison in the term Hypostasis;
whereas there is neither Poison in the one or the other term, if rightly
Interpreted.

P. 123. l. 13. n. 13.
[And Bellarmin, a Writer Orthodox enough in these Points, and of
unquestionable Learning otherwise, in his second Tome, p. 348. about the end,
says, that to assert, that the Father and Son differ in Substance, is Arianism.
And yet, if they were two distinct Substances, for them not to differ in
Substance would be impossible.]

Authority is very low with the Animadvertor, when he takes shelter in Orthodox
Bellarmin, and lays hold on a dubious Expression in a plain case.

Every one knows that the Arians asserted that the Substance of the Son was not
barely different in number, but different in kind, specifically different from
the Substance of the Father: and how impossible soever the Animadvertor judges
it for two Substances not to differ in Substance, the Fathers of the Council of
Chalcedon did expressly assert, That Christ in his Humane Nature and we Men (who
are confessedly two Substances in number) were consubstantial, (...): And I am
persuaded, that the unquestionably Learned and Orthodox Bellarmin, if he were
now alive, nor the Animadvertor for him, will have the Boldness to say, that
this term (...) signifies to differ in Substance.

Again, the Orthodox Bellarmin justified Calvin, who ventured to Condemn that
Expression of the Nicene Council, that the Son was God of God, and affirmed
that the Son was (...), God of himself. Dr. Bull. def. fidei Nicaenae. S. 4.
cap. 1. n. 7. p. 439.
Bellarmin thought this only a Dispute of a Phrase, Verbi solum and locutionis.
Such an Orthodox Person, who can thus easily part with the Nicene Faith, may
easily find out a new sort of Arianism. For to believe Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, three coequal, coeternal Substances, Hypostases, was not the Arianism
which the Nicene Fathers opposed.

[Since for one and the same Substance to be common to all three Persons, p.
124. lin. 4. n. 14
and withal to belong incommunicably to each of the three, and thereby to
distinguish them from one another, is contradictious and impossible.]

This is the Faith of the Schools, that one and the same Substance, one and the
same singular Nature is common to all three Persons, and withal belongs
incommunicably to the Father, quatenus ingenita; incommunicably to the Son,
quatenus genita; incommunicably to the Holy Spirit, quatenus spirita. See
Animadv. etc. p. 160.
This Faith the Animadvertor declares to be contradictious and impossible;
which is, in his own words, not to be able to forbear Writing, and yet not know
when one writes for, and when against an Opinion.

p. 124. lin. 8. n. 15.
[On the other side, to assert two distinct Substances in each Person is
altogether as absurd; and that, as upon many other Accounts, so particularly
upon this, that it must infer such a composition in the Divine Persons, as is
utterly incompatible with the Absolute Simplicity and Infinite Perfection of
the Divine Nature.]

The Schoolmen, who assert an Absolute Substance, and a Relative Substance in
each Divine Person, deny a composition from hence; for that the Absolute and
Relative Substance are not united but identified one with another.

The Ancient Fathers asserted, that the common Divine Nature and each single
Hypostasis differed not really, but only ratione from each other; as Homo and
Petrus, Angelus and Michael; in which cases there is no composition: and
therefore a majori there is no composition in a Divine Person.

p. 124. n. 16.
[ Argument III. One Infinite Mind cannot be three Infinite Minds; Nor three
Infinite Minds one Infinite Mind: Therefore the Divine Persons, who are one
Infinite Mind (as they are one God) cannot be three Infinite Minds.] This is
the sum, in short, of his Third Argument, which to swell up his Book and make a
show of, he repeats backwards and forwards.

This Argument is a mere Fallacy, equivocating in the term Mind or Spirit,
which is to be interpreted in a concrete, or in an abstract sense.

When the Schoolmen say, That the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God, they
do not take this term God in a concrete sense, but in an abstract sense.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are not habens Deitatem, which is the concrete
sense of this term God, but either habentes Deitatem in the Plural Number, or
Deitas, the Godhead it self in the Singular Number.

So the learned Genebrard, Lib. 2. de Trin. p. 154
Nota Dei nomen aliter accipi in his enuntiationibus, Pater est Deus, Filius
est Deus, Spiritus Sanctus est Deus; aliter in hac, Pater and Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus sunt unus Deus. Nam in primis, Deus idem quod habens Deitatem,
quod quidem Personae congruit; in postrema non simpliciter habentem Deitatem
sonat, sed ipsam potius Deitatem.

Now, the Animadvertor himself will not say, that tres habentes Deitatem,
cannot be one Essence; nor that tres habentes infinitam spiritualem naturam,
cannot be one Infinite Spiritual Nature; one Infinite Mind or Spirit in the
abstract sense of the term, in which only the Divine Persons are said to be one
Infinite Mind or Spirit. It is in a different sense of this term Infinite Mind
or Spirit, viz. in the concrete sense, that we multiply it, and say, that three
Divine Persons are three Infinite Minds.

And this Answers the Animadvertor's Fourth Argument drawn from the Athanasian
Form, p. 128. n. 17.
which is grounded upon a false Supposition, viz. That this term Infinite Mind
is necessarily a Predicate perfectly Essential; whereas, p. 130. lin. 17.
when it is taken concretely, it must be understood as a Personal Attribute,
viz. for habens infinitam spiritualem naturam, which, in the words of
Genebrard, personoe congruit.

The Animadvertor's Overplus, p. 131. lin. 2. n. 18.
That the Heathens believed God to be one Infinite Mind, cuts deeper than he is
aware of. For these same Heathens did as certainly believe that God was one
single Person as well as one Infinite Mind: Nay, which is a far greater
Objection, the Jews, God's own People, not only did, but to this day do most
firmly believe, that God is one Divine Person, and plead those Sacred words of
their Law, I am the Lord thy God, Thou shall have no other Gods before me: That
all their Doctors for the space of two thousand Years interpreted those words
in their Natural sense, viz. as spoke of one Divine Person. What shall we say
to this Objection? Did God suffer the wisest of the Heathen Philosophers, the
most Pious Persons of the Jewish Religion to believe an Heresy of him for so
many Ages? Did God speak of himself in the most Sacred part of the Law in such
words which Naturally lead to Heresy? For I and me Naturally lead to the
belief of one Person speaking.

This is the great Objection with which the Socinians flourish: An Answer to
which would be of more worth than a thousand such Books of Inadversions [as the
Socinian Considerer calls these Animadversions. Considerations on the
Explications, etc p. 23.
]

For my own part, I cannot be so fond of the Subtilties of the Schools, as for
the sake of them to confess so harsh a Conclusion.

I do most firmly believe, that the Faith of a Trinity of Divine Persons and
the Article of the Unity of God [as it was believed by the wisest of the
Heathens and the Jewish Church] are by no means inconsistent.

The whole Truth was not revealed to the Jewish Church, or at least so very
obscurely, that very few of them understood it. But yet I verily believe, that
what was revealed, was a most Sacred truth.

I believe, that the God, whom the Heathen Philosophers by the Light of Nature
worshipped, was one Divine Person. I believe, that the same one Divine Person
spoke of Himself in those Sacred words of the Law, I am the Lord thy God, etc.
I also believe, that this One Divine Person was the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Nor does this contradict that common Article of the Christian Faith, viz. That
God is Three Persons, as the Socinians vainly pretend, and some others unwarily
grant them.

God is not three Persons, as he is Just, or Good, or Holy, as if three Persons
were Essentially included in the Divine Nature: For then no one single Person
could by himself be God; then there could not be a Son of God, or a Spirit of
God.

When God is said to be three Persons, the term God is taken in a Logical
sense, equivalent in Predication to a terminus communis, or a Species, and
signifies that the Divine Nature subsists in three Persons, that this term God
is truly predicable of three distinct Persons: But a further disquisition of
this Difficulty belongs to my Second Part.

[The Animadvertor accuses the Reverend Dean of giving a scurvy stroke at the
Trinity, p. 135. lin. 7. n. 19.
p. 89. where he [the Reverend Dean] affirms, that the Expression of the one
true God, and the only true God, cannot properly be attributed to the Son nor
Holy Ghost. Ibid. l. 19.
-- and consequently, if he asserts, that these terms cannot with equal
Propriety be attributed to, and predicated of the Son and Holy Ghost, we have
him both Arian and Macedonian together in this Assertion.]

First, The Reverend Dean never asserted that the Son or Holy Ghost could not
properly be called the one God, or only true God; only, that they could not so
properly be styled so, as the Father.

The Fathers of the Nicene Council, indeed of the whole Eastern Church, did
expressly appropriate the Title of One God to the Father, and God of God to the
Son; by which Opposition it appears that by One God in the first Article of the
Creed, they meant a God of himself, which is a Personal Attribute, and peculiar
to the Father.

Our Savior appropriates this Title of Only true God to the Person of the
Father; Hilary. lib. 3. de Trin.
and St. Hilary (who was never hitherto esteemed either an Arian or Macedonian)
expressly asserts this to be Debitum Honorem Patri.

St. Paul has patronized this Appropriation, Ephesians. 4.6. To us there is one God
and Father.

Now for my part I had rather be esteemed an Heretic [ Arian and Macedonian]
with my Savior, St. Paul, St. Hilary, all the Oriental Fathers, than Orthodox
with the Animadvertor and Bellarmin.

I do assure him, that I am neither afraid of him nor the Socinians, I crave no
Favor at either of their Hands for this Profession of my Faith, That the Title
of one God, only true God, is a Proper, Personal Prerogative of the Father
alone.

p. 138. lin. 21. n. 20.
[And as for the Father's being the Fountain of the Deity, I hope, he looks
upon the Expression only as Metaphorical, and such as ought not to be stretched
to the utmost of its Native sense, for fear the Consequences of it may engage
him too far, to be able to make an handsome Retreat, which I assure him, if he
does not take heed, they certainly will.]

Oration contra gregales Sabellii prope initium.
Athanasius tells us, that we might rightly call the Father the only God,
[(...),] because he only is unbegotten, and he only is the Fountain of the
Deity.

This learned Father has hitherto been esteemed the very Test of Orthodoxy in
this Mystery. The Reverend Dean's Notion and Phrase is borrowed from him, who
would not have thought himself safe under so Venerable a Name?

But alas, the World is strangely altered, Athanasius himself must come to
School to the Animadvertor to learn how to speak.

I hope, he [that poor Novice Athanasius] looks on the Expression as
Metaphorical, and such as ought not to be stretched to the utmost of its Native
sense.

I hope also, that I may be allowed to vindicate this Phrase of that great
Light of the Church from the Exceptions of a bold Animadvertor.

May I in the Name of Athanasius, enquire of this great Critic, which of these
two words, Fountain or Deity, are to be interpreted Metaphorically.

That of Fountain is plainly Metaphorical. Athanasius was never so weak as to
believe that the Deity was a River of Waters, and the Father the Fountain of it.

If the Animadvertor means that this term Deity is Metaphorical, I must require
his Proof, and not his Affirmation.

Again, neither Athanasius, nor any of the Ancient Fathers ever intended by
this Phrase, that the Father is the Fountain of the Deity, that he was the
positive Fountain of the Divinity in his own Person, any more than Philosophers
and Divines mean, that God was the cause of Himself, when they say, that God is
of Himself. Athanasius added, to avoid the suspicion of such an absurd sense,
that he was unbegotten as well as the Fountain of the Deity.

What then is the fault of this Phrase of Athanasius? Why alas, poor Athanasius
was unacquainted with the subtilties of the Schools: He said plainly and
bluntly, that the Father was the Fountain of the Deity; whereas he ought to
have said, Animadv. etc. p. 191. lin. 10.
That he was the Fountain of the two other Divine Persons.

To say, that the Divinity has a Fountain, is to say in other words, that the
Divinity is begotten, which can neither be affirmed in truth or propriety of
speech. p. 159. lin. 18.


The Divine Persons may properly be said to be begotten, but not the Divine
Nature.

But with the leave of the Animadvertor, all Antiquity (before Peter Lombard,
and the Oxthodox Lateran Council) not considering the Consequences of
Expressions, did venture thus far, and used the Phrase of Begotten Wisdom,
speaking of the Divine Nature of the Son. Nay* which may possibly sway more
with the Animadvertor, he himself has allowed it to be very true, p. 156. l. 10.
that the Son is an Eternal begotten Mind and Wisdom; and I am sure then the
Son must be an Eternal, Begotten, Divine Nature, and the Father the Fountain of
the Deity to the Son.

For my part, I like the Subtilties of the Schools never a whit the better for
charging those Expressions with Falsehood or Impropriety; which so many great
Lights of the Church thought both true and proper. I fear not his Consequences,
nor his Threats; I do believe with Athanasius, that the Father is truly the
Fountain of the Deity to the Son and Holy Ghost, and that he has no Fountain of
his own Divinity; and that his being thus the Fountain of the Divinity is the
reason of appropriating the Title of one God to his Person alone: And that
though the Son and Holy Spirit are each of them truly, Essentially God, yet
they cannot with any more Propriety be called the One God, the only true God,
than each of them may be styled unbegotten, the Fountain of the Deity, or God
of Himself.

The Socinians say, That the Person of the Father is the only true God; so say
the Ancients, so says the Animadvertor, so say I: But the Socinians say, that
this Title of Only true God, is an Essential Attribute, distinguishing the
Essence of the Father from the Son and Holy Spirit: I say, that it is only a
Personal Attribute and Prerogative, distinguishing the Person of the Father
from the Son and Holy Ghost, but not dividing their Essence. The Animadvertor
declares, That it is an Essential Attribute in common to Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; which of these Interpretations best Vindicate the Christian Faith, will
be more fully discussed in my Second Part.

CHAP. V.
n. 1.
THE last Chapter was chiefly spent in considering the import of several Plural
Predications and Phrases concerning the three Divine Persons, and particularly
of the Phrase of three Infinite Minds.

In this the Animadvertor enquires into the Historical truth of this Assertion,
whether the Ancients believed the Divine Persons to be Intelligent Minds or
Beings. This the Reverend Dean thought an uncontested Article to all who
professed the Faith of a Trinity of Divine Persons. The Reverend Dean was of
the learned Genebrard's Opinion before quoted, viz. That this was Propositio
vera ac fide ab Ecclesia Catholica omnibus temporibus recepta; and therefore,
as it is usual in uncontested Articles, was less curious in Collecting the
Proofs of an undisputed Opinion; which yet I speak not, as if I thought the
Proofs of this Assertion brought by the Reverend Dean insufficient.

One thing however I can by no means omit, that the Animadvertor has disjoynted
the fairest Proof of the Fathers Opinion in this Debate, and treated of it in
his next Chapter, viz. That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost were esteemed so
certainly to be three Infinite Minds by the Ancients, that they asserted
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be one by a Specific Unity.

Now, though I should grant to the Animadvertor, that the Fathers did not
understand such Assertions in the strictest sense of such Phrases, but only by
way of Resemblance (of which afterward) yet this must be allowed, that the
Ancient Fathers could have had no shadow or pretense for such an Assertion,
unless they had believed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be three Intelligent
Beings, which is but another Phrase for three Intelligent Minds.

It never entered into the Mind of any one Man, who understood what a Specific
Unity means, that One simple Being under three distinct Relations (which is the
Animadvertor's Hypothesis of the Trinity) was one by a Specific Unity.
Animadv. etc. p. 120. lin. 32.
But of this more in its proper place.

p. 154. lin. 29. n. 2.
[The Son is the Substantial WORD and Wisdom of the Father, and that this can
be nothing else but to say, That he is an Intelligent Being or Infinite Mind.

And he is so, I [the Animadvertor] confess: But does this infer, that he is
therefore a distinct Intelligent Mind or Being from the Father? This we deny*
and it is the very thing which he ought to prove. And it is not come to that
pass yet, that we should take his bare Affirmation for a Proof of what he
affirms.]

It seems the Animadvertor is one of those who do not know a Proof, unless it
be put into Mood and Figure for him.

There is a Personal Word and Wisdom of the Father, so there is of the Son and
Holy Ghost; that is to say, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are each of them
Personally Wise, and Personally Act. The Personal Wisdom of the Divine Persons
is an Attribute, the Personal Word of every one of the Divine Persons is an
Act, and not a Person. But the Person of the Son is the Substantial WORD and
Wisdom of the Father; such a Wisdom which is an Infinite Mind, and not the
Attribute of an Infinite Mind; such a WORD, who is a Person, and not a Personal
Act. And it is absolutely impossible that both these Characters of being an
Infinite Mind, and also the Wisdom of the Father can belong to the Son, unless
he be a distinct, a Personally distinct Intelligent Mind from the Father.

This little Particle of is the same in this Mystery with proceeding: Of the
Father, is the same with proceeding from the Father. God of God the same with
God proceeding from God. Light of Light the same with Light proceeding from
Light. The Son is the Substantial WORD and Wisdom proceeding from the Father.
Now as the Procession of the Divine Persons from one another is the allowed
Proof of their Plurality; so if there be a Substantial Wisdom proceeding from
the Father, there must be the same distinction between this Substantial Wisdom
and the Person of the Father.

But here comes the mighty Objection, Obj. p. 156. lin. 27.
That if Wisdom of Wisdom proves two Wisdoms, or Light of Light imports two
Lights, then by the same Reason God of God, very God of very God, will and must
infer two distinct Gods, two distinct very Gods; which, says the Animadvertor,
is most monstrous blasphemous stuff.

I Answer, That the Phrase God of God, Sol.
does necessarily imply a multiplication of this term God in some sense or
other.

One and the same Numerical God (in concreto) can never be God of God, and also
not God of God. To be God of God, and also not God of God, are contradictious,
and therefore can never be verified of one and the same Subject, of one and the
same God in concreto, of one and the same God in Person.

Nor is this any Blasphemous stuff, it only proves that one sense of the term
God is equipollent with a Divine Person, in the words of Genebrard before
quoted; Chap. 4. n. 4.
Vocabulum Deus aliquando sumitur Hypostatice, ac ultro citroque commeat cum
Divina persona sive Hypostasi, ut cum in Niceno Symbolo legitur, Deum de Deo,
etc.

It is the Faith and has been the Language of the Church before the Nicene
Council, that Deus est Trinus in Personis, that God is Three in Persons.

And this is the just and easy Answer to that (dreadful) Objection of the
Socinians, that three Divine Persons infer three Gods, as three Angelical
Persons infer three Angels, viz. That if by three Gods the Socinians mean that
there are three Divine Persons, that there are tres Deitatem habentes, that
Deus est trinus in personis, in these senses in the term God, we acknowledge
and embrace the Conclusion as an Article of our Faith, and despise the weak
Sophistry of their Objection, which only equivocates in the term God.

Ask a Socinian, what he means by God, in that Phrase of three Gods? He will
readily Answer, that he means a Divine Person; and consequently this Formidable
Objection amounts to no more than this, That three Divine Persons are three
Divine Persons. Therefore, etc.

Just so does the Animadvertor deal with the Reverend Dean: He declares, that
he takes God and Infinite Mind to be equipollent; and I will assure him, that
none will deny that three Infinite Minds are three Infinite Minds. And so the
Reverend Dean is eternally confuted, or rather the Animadvertor ought to be
ashamed of so weak a Sophism.

If the Animadvertor, or any Socinian will deal like a Scholar, and not like a
Sophister, let either of them produce those Arguments which deny a Plurality of
Gods, and show that they are equally strong against the Faith of three Infinite
Minds or three Divine Persons, and they shall not fail of an Answer by God's
assistance, as soon as I can finish it; but this more properly belongs to my
Second Part.

It is a mere begging of the Question to say, that this term God is not capable
of Multiplication, when it signifies equipollently with a Divine Person, or any
other equivalent Phrase, as an Infinite Mind or the like.

p. 160. lin. 3. n. 3.
[It is one and the same Wisdom, which is both ingenita and genita, though as
it is one, it is not the other.]

The Animadvertor, [ p. 156. lin. 9.] had declared it to be very true, that the
Son is a begotten Mind and Wisdom; and in the same place denies, That the
Eternal Mind or Wisdom begetting, and the Eternal Mind or Wisdom begotten, are
two distinct Minds, but only one and the same Mind, or Wisdom under these two
distinct Modifications of Begetting, and being Begot.

In this place the Animadvertor advances one step higher, and tells us, that
unbegotten Wisdom and begotten Wisdom are not two Wisdoms, but only one Wisdom
under two several Modifications; as also that Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are
one Infinite Spirit under three distinct Modalities.

Now, say I, if this be a fair Solution of this difficulty, it is impossible
for the wisest Person to be certain that he can count two.

For ought any one then can tell, the Reverend Dean and the Animadvertor may
not be two Persons, but only one Person under two Modifications.

The highest Proof that can be brought in such Enquiry, is, that Contradictions
may be verified concerning the Reverend Dean and the Animadvertor, that what
the one is, the other is not. Now there cannot be a plainer, fuller
Contradiction than to be begotten, and to be unbegotten.

Again, this Answer undermines the Faith of the Catholic Chuch, the Faith of
three Divine Persons. The Sabellianist asserts that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
are not three Persons, but one Person under three distinct Modalities; which
Modifications diversifie and distinguish the Person they belong to, but not
multiply him. The same Person is both the Father and the Son, but as he is one,
he is not the other. Now the allowed Proof of a Plurality of Divine Persons is
from the contradictory Predicates, which may be verified of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in the words of the Athanasian Creed; The Father is made of none,
neither created nor begotten; the Son is of the Father alone, not made, not
created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and Son, neither made,
nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.

If this be a good Argumument to prove a Plurality of Divine Persons, I desire
to know, why an unbegotten and begotten Wisdom are not equally two Wisdoms?

The Moderns, who follow the Schoolmen, say indeed the same thing with the
Animadvertor, that it is one and the same singular Wisdom which is both
unbegotten and begotten; that is, one Wisdom under two distinct Modifications:
But then they understand themselves better, than to say, That it is very true,
that the Son is a begotten Wisdom. They say, that Begotten Wisdom is to be
understood in an improper sense, and consequently that the Contradiction is
only in words, and not in reality.

According to the Schoolmen, the Son is unbegotten Wisdom. The Wisdom of the
Son is equally unbegotten with the Wisdom of the Father, and that Proposition,
the Son is begotten Wisdom, is only true according to them, sensu
reduplicativo, viz. That the Son who is begotten, is also Wisdom.

Now certainly unbegotten is a very improper sense of being begotten.

The Phrase of Begotten Wisdom was used without scruple by the Ancients, and
though Lombard and the bold Lateran Council condemned this Phrase Hand over
Head, yet the more Prudent Persons of the Romish Church thought it more
elegible to allow the Phrase in compliance with Antiquity, and strive to evade
it by a stretched Interpretation, by a sensus reduplicativus.

The Animadvertor has here borrowed the words of the Shoolmen, but without
understanding their meaning.

Nay, it is very observable that the Animadvertor, who here in p. 156. tells
us, That it is very true, that there is a begotten Mind or Wisdom, is of a
quite different Opinion, p. 159. lin. 18. viz. That this cannot be said in
Truth and Propriety of speech: For God cannot properly be said to beget Wisdom,
etc. I leave him at his leisure to reconcile these two places.

[His [the Reverend Dean's] Allegation is this, p. 166. lin. 4. n. 4.
That it is usual with the Fathers to represent the three Persons in the
Blessed Trinity as distinct as Peter, James, and John.]

The Animadvertor Answers, That [the term as distinct is ambiguous: For it may
either signify, 1. as Real; or, 2. as Great a distinction. As for the first, I
grant, that the three Persons in the Blessed Trinity differ as really as Peter,
James, and John -- But Secondly, if by real distinction be meant as great a
distinction, so we utterly deny, that the three Divine Persons differ as much
as Peter, James, and John.]

I Answer, that this Phrase as really signifies in the same degree of real
distinction; as this Phrase as Wisely imports the same degree of Wisdom.

Again, it is an idle Enquiry to dispute by what Name we must call the
distinction of the Divine Persons. If they were three Infinite Minds, they can
but be simply denied one of the other; we could then only say, that the Father
is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy Ghost either Father or
Son; and this I shall hereafter show is not a Modal, but a strictly real
distinction.

CHAP. VI.
n. 1.
THERE ought to be a double care in treating of Mysterious Articles of Faith, on
the one hand not to debase them to avoid the difficulties which attend the
Article in its Native sense; and on the other hand not studiously to seek out
for Mysteries (which possibly God never intended) nor to refuse such
Illustrations of the Article from Natural Examples which readily offer
themselves, especially if they have the Suffrage of the most Pious and Learned
Fathers of the Church.

The Sabellian Heretics have adulterated the Divine Generation, because they
could not explain how God, an Immortal Spirit, can generate.

On the other Hand, the Schoolmen are not satisfied, that the Articles of the
Trinity and Incarnation in the general contain great Mysteries in them, but
they will have every Conclusion throughout both the Articles to be so.

These two Articles are delivered with so much plainness and simplicity in the
Sacred Scriptures, and with so much subtilty in the Writings of the Schoolmen,
that a stranger to the Christian Faith upon the comparing of them both
together, could hardly be persuaded, that the latter were pretended to be an
explication of the former.

The Sacred Writings contented themselves to teach us that the Father and Son
are (...), one, that these three are one.

The Fathers of the Church justly explained this Unity, that they are (...),
one in Nature, one in Godhead; the Unity of a Father and a begotten Son is an
Unity of Nature.

The Shoolmen advance one step higher; it is not sufficient with them, for any
one to acknowledge the Divine Persons to be one in Nature, Essence, Divinity,
unless, he adds, in one singular Essence, in one singular Nature, in one
singular Divinity, and that under pain of being guilty of the worst of
Heresies, Tritheism it self.

The Animadvertor keeps pace with the warmest, not only contends against the
admission of a Specific Unity in the Trinity, but calls it a Traducing of the
Fathers to assert that they held this Specific Unity.

As to the Question it self, I wish from the bottom of my Heart, that we might
learn to distinguish betwixt the Primary Conclusions of our Faith and disputed
Articles; that they who contend for the singularity of the common Divine Nature
with the Schools, would not overthrow the received Faith of three Divine
Persons; and that the Article of the Unity of God be esteemed infinitely more
Sacred than any seeming Advantages that the Assertion of a Specific Unity of
the Trinity might afford us in the maintaining the Faith of three Divine
Persons.

The Christian Faith professes an Unity in Trinity, and a Trinity in Unity: He
therefore who asserts an Unity to destroy the Trinity, or a Trinity in
derogation of the Unity, offends against the Christian Religion.

I shall much rather choose my self, and recommend to my Orthodox Reader the
Belief, that the Divine Nature is above these terms of Art, above these
distinctions of Logic of Singular and Universal, that it is transcendental to
those Rules, by which we judge of created inferior Natures; than any ways
weaken either of those Fundamental Articles before mentioned, either of the
Unity of God, or of the Trinity of Divine Persons.

The learned Petavius seems to me to incline to this Opinion, where speaking of
the Unity of the Divine Nature, Petav. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 1583.
he has these words; Speciei unitate constituta, etiam individua and singularis
sequitur: And in that Famous Objection of the Greeks against the Procession of
the Holy Spirit from the Father and Son, viz. that then Father and Son are one
Principle of the Holy Spirit either specie sola or numero. Lib. 7. de Trin. c.
16. n. 1. p. 156.
To which Petavius Answers, That they are [Vnum revera and numero and specie
Principium, quatenus in Deum convenire ambo ista possunt.] Where he expressly
asserts that a Specific Unity and an Unity of Singularity are consistent in
the Divine Nature; nay, that the latter follows from the former; as also that
the vis spiratrix [which to Petavius and the Schools has the same Unity with
the common Divine Essence] is one both in specie and in number.

Suarez. Metaph. Disp. 5. S. 1. n. 6.
Non desunt Theologi, qui dicant, Divinam essentiam nec singularem nec
universalem esse. And in the Margin, Vide Durandum and alios in 1. D. 35.

To the same purpose I understand those Divines who assert that the common
Divine Essence is neither a first nor second Substance; that is, neither
strictly Singular nor Universal, but in some measure partaking of both,
transcendental to both.

However it must not be dissembled, that, since every created Nature is either
strictly Singular or Universal, we want a medium to prove that the Divine
Nature can be transcendental to both these; and therefore how Modest and
Peaceable, and otherwise Eligible such an Assertion seems to be, yet when we
contend with an obstinate Adversary, with a subtle Socinian, it will be
hazardous to found the Defense of so Sacred an Article upon what he will be apt
to style a Precarious Hypothesis.

The common Opinion of Philosophers is, that Singular and Universal are
contradictorily opposed in Finite Creatures, and consequently that there can be
no medium betwixt them; and it is not easy to give a Reason, why the same Rule
should not hold in the Divine Nature, especially since we cannot in this
Conclusion plead the Authority of express Revelation, as we can in that
Mysterious Article of a Divine Generation and Procession.

There is no need of this Precaution in reference to the Animadvertor, my
Debate with him is rather Historical and Problematical than Dogmatical

Historical, as whether the Ancient Fathers held this Opinion of the
Universality of the common Divine Essence?

Problematical, whether those Reasons which he has brought against the
admission of a Specific Unity of the Trinity, prove such Notion to be
unphilosophical?

Nay, I do here disclaim all Dogmaticalness in this Conclusion; I shall not in
the least contend with any Orthodox Divine, who agreeing in the Fundamental
Articles of this great Mystery, [ viz. That the Father is truly, Essentially
God, that the Son is truly, Essentially God, that the Holy Ghost is truly,
Essentially God; that one of these Persons is simply not either of the other
two: And that there is nothing in this Faith which contradicts that Fundamental
Article of Natural Religion, That there is but One God; or more briefly in the
received Language of the Church, that there is One God and Three Divine
Persons] shall choose to explain the modus of the Unity of the common Divine
Nature by singularity with the Schools, or shall profess that this Unity wants
a Name in our present Logicks.

It is Truth not Victory, I contend for; he therefore who grants my Conclusion,
why should I quarrel with him concerning the Premises by which he arrives at
the Conclusion?

The Impudence and Blasphemy of our late Socinian Writers extorted this Essay.

The Head and Mouth of the Party, the Unitarian Historian, in one short Section
has amassed together this Charge against the Faith of the Ever Blessed Trinity,
viz. That the Faith of the Trinitarians is absurd, History of the Unitarians,
p. 9. n. 7.
and contrary to Reason and it self, false, impossible -- an Error in numbering,
most brutal, inexcusable, which not to discern, is not to be a Man; nonsense,
that it does impose false Gods on us, that it robs the one true God of the
Honor due to him.

A Letter of Resolution concerning the Trin. etc. p. 6. n. 1.
Another of the same Party is pleased to style the Son and Holy Ghost, Gods of
our own devising.

Were such Blasphemies as these ever suffered before in a Christian State?

Crellius was a Zealous Socinian, and wrote one of the subtilest Books which
was ever published against the Orthodox Faith, his Book of One God the Father:
These Gentlemen have translated and published this Piece in the English
Language; I will send these Persons to learn better Manners from him. He in his
Preface to that Book expressly expounds those words of St. Paul, Romans 9.4. of
Jesus Christ, viz. that He is over all God Blessed for evermore. And in the
first Chapter of that Book, speaking of those words of our Savior, John 17.3.
wherein he calls the Father the only true God, Crellius has these express
words; [For neither do we hold, that Christ is by virtue of these words wholly
excluded from true Godhead. Crellius of one God the Father p. 4.
] I quote their own English Translation.

I am not for Persecution, no, not of the Socinians. I disallow not of a modest
Representation of their Opinions, or of the Reasons why they embrace not the
Catholic Faith of the Trinity and Incarnation: Heresies are often the occasion
to clear the truth it self. But in so Sacred Articles it becomes all Persons to
use modest Expressions, especially those who want not only present Authority,
but are confessedly contrary to the Voice of the Catholic Church for more than
Twelve Hundred Years, and most of all, since the Articles of the Trinity and
Incarnation are in their Primary Conclusions the express words of Scripture.
Christ is called God, says Crellius, John 1.1. and Romans 9.4. I doubt not that
Crellius himself would have condemned with the greatest abhorrence the stiling
of Christ a false God, a God of Men's devising.

There can need no Apology to vindicate the Mysteries of the Christian
Religion, when they are thus barbarously attacked.

I have this to plead for my self and my own Hypothesis, that as the Socinians
confess, so I verily believe, that it was the Eaith of the Nicene Fathers, and
embraced by the most learned Fathers of the Greek Church from Athanasius to
Damascene, and so far as I know, to this day. Nor do I know that there is one
Expression in the Articles of our Church that is not fairly reconcilable with
it.

I have the same Plea in reference to my Second Part, my Exposition of the
Article of the Unity of God, that it is of the Ancient Fathers; they are both
Venerable for their gray Hairs.

All I pretend to, is only my weak Endeavor to set these two Ancient
Expositions of the Articles of the Unity of God and the Trinity in a fairer
Light, to prove that they are very consistent one with another, and liable to
no just Exception by a Socinian.

After all, I adjure my Reader that he will not judge of the truth of this
Article by the strength of my Defense: My Hypothesis may be true, I only faulty
in the explication of it. Or if my Hypothesis of the Modus of this Unity be
disallowed, the Article concerning the Unity it self stands firm upon the
Expressions of Scripture.

On my self let all the shame of any mistakes fall: But let the Truth of God be
unshaken, and the Gates of Hell never prevail against the Faith of the Church;
the Faith I mean, of one God and three Divine Persons.

[He [the Reverend Dean] tells us, That Petavius and Dr. Cudworth have
abundantly proved, That the Nicene Fathers did not understand the word (...) of
a Numerical, but of a Specifical sameness of Nature, or the Agreement of things
Numerically different from one another in the same common Nature.]

This is the First Part, whether the Ancient Fathers asserted a Specifical
Sameness, Unity, Identity of Nature, or a Numerical Unity, or rather a
Singularity of the Divine Nature.

The Dean quotes two very learned Persons, Petavius and Dr. Cudworth, and tells
us, that they have proved the Specifical Unity of Nature to be the Opinion of
the Nicene Fathers; nay, that they have abundantly proved it.

Had two such able Judges of Antiquity barely said it, it would have weighed
very much with considering Persons: But the Dean tells us, that they have not
barely said it, but proved it, abundantly proved it, which cannot be otherwise
understood, than that they have quoted several Sayings of the Nicene Fathers,
which plainly and undeniably evince, abundantly prove this to have been their
Judgment.

This was very full to the Dean's Design to prove that three Divine Persons are
three Infinite Minds; that is, that the Nicene Fathers judged them so. For I
dare say, p. 215. l. 10.
that no Man besides himself will deny, That three distinct Infinite Minds or
Spirits are Specifically one, if not by an higher degree of Unity. No one who
understands the meaning of the terms, can deny that this term Infinite Mind is
predicated of three Infinite Minds, as a Species is predicated of its
Individuals. No one surely will say, that three Infinite Minds differ Specie or
in their definition. If three Finite Minds are Specifically one, are one in
Specie, such an Unity (or an higher) cannot be denied to three Infinite Minds.
Again, according to his own Argument, a Specific Unity implies a
multiplication of the Nature. And since all acknowledge that each Divine Person
is an Infinite Mind, if their Unity be only a Specific Unity, according to the
Animadvertor they are three Infinite Minds in the highest sense.

The Animadvertor charges the Phrase of three Infinite Minds with the grossest
Tritheism (it immediately and unavoidably infers three Gods.) Preface, page II.
The Reverend Dean pleads the Authority of the Nicene Fathers, that they had
said as much, nay, more than he; they had asserted a Specific Unity of the
Trinity, which in the Animadvertor's Judgment implies a multiplication of the
Divine Nature; that is, three Infinite Spiritual Natures; whereas three
Infinite Spirits in the bare Phrase implies no more than that there are three
possessing one Infinite Spiritual Nature.

Now I presume, if the Dean, or rather if Petavius and Dr. Cudworth were not
mistaken, the Animadvertor will abate something of his Confidence, he will
hardly have brow enough to say, That the Notion of the Trinity, which the
Nicene Fathers advanced, was a silly, Heretical Notion, immediately and
unavoidably inferring three Gods.

The same Request I make to all my Orthodox Readers, that they will be pleased
to lay aside their Prejudice against the Admission of a Specific Unity in the
Trinity, till this Historical Truth be fairly determined.

The Nicene Fathers Judgment is not indeed the Rule of our Faith; but it
deservedly demands a Veneration from all Modest and Pious Christians, and is
infinitely to be preferred before the bare Authority of the Schoolmen or
Moderns.

The Animadvertor Answers, n. 3. p. 174. lin. 16.
[I must confess my self very unfit to take such great and truly learned
Persons to task, and that upon comparing this Author [the Reverend Dean] and
Petavius together, I find much more Reason to believe that he mistook the
meaning of Petavius, than that Petavius could mistake the meaning of the
Fathers.]

If the Animadvertor is unfit to take two such learned Persons to task, why
does he contradict their Judgment? Why does he call it a traducing,
misrepresenting the Fathers? Why does he so confidently aver, That the Fathers
never [mark that word never] used the Example of three or more individual Men
agreeing in the same Nature as a parallel instance of the same sort or degree
of Unity [He should have added, p. 175. lin. 5.
of Nature] with that which is in the three Divine Persons. The Fathers never
believed indefinitely, universally the same Unity betwixt Humane Persons as
betwixt the Divine Persons, nor is that the Question; but whether they believed
the same Unity of Nature betwixt the latter as is confessedly betwixt the
former. A Specific Unity of the Divine Nature (if we for once only suppose
such an Unity) has quite different Consequences from what a Specific Unity of
a created Humane Nature implies, which yet alters not the Unity of each Nature.

Well, but the Animadvertor has compared the Dean and Petavius. May I ask him,
why he did not also consult Dr. Cudworth? He gives him a Complement in the
foregoing Lines, his Piece is not so rare but it might easily have been
procured. He was a Protestant Divine, a Person of great and deserved Repute for
Learning and Skill in Antiquity, and which is more, gives judgment against
himself: He himself embraces the Platonic Hypothesis, which infers a
Generical, not Specifical Unity of the Trinity. He lays a very severe charge to
this Notion of a Specific Unity, [It seems plain that this Trinity [of St.
Cyril, and such who believe a Specific Unity] is no other than a kind of
Tritheism, and that of Gods independent and coordinate too.] The Platonic and
Nicene Hypothesis of the Trinity both agreed in this, that the common Divine
Essence was an Universal. They differed in this, that the Platonists held the
Divinity to be a genus, and consequently capable of admitting degrees, (...) in
the distinct Divine Persons. The Nicene Fathers held the Divinity to be a
Species, capable of no degrees, of no essential degrees, but that Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, are perfectly equal touching the Godhead in the words of the
Athanasian Creed, The Godhead of the Father Son and Holy Ghost is all one, the
Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

I say the Testimony of this learned Person is of the more weight, as being
against his own Judgment: We naturally in such cases weigh the words of an
Author with more exactness when his Authority makes against us, than when it
agrees with us. Him therefore we have left us as an unanswered Witness.

What does the Animadvertor say to Petavius? Has the Reverend Dean
misrepresented Petavius or not? Why does not the Animadvertor speak plain? Why
does he keep a muttering between his Teeth, That he finds more reason to
believe, that the Reverend Dean mistook the meaning of Petavius, than that
Petavius could mistake the meaning of the Fathers? We want a categorical
Answer, whether Petavius did represent a specific Unity of the Trinity to be
the meaning of the Fathers; and if he did so, whether in so doing, he mistook
their meaning and sense? This question which was too hard for the Animadvertor,
I will answer for him, but I cannot promise to his good liking. The Reverend
Dean did not mistake the meaning of Petavius, as might be proved from
innumerable places of Petavius. I shall content my self with two only. Petav.
l. 4. de Trin. cap. 7. S. 2.


In hoc uno Graecorum proesertim omnium judicium opinionesque concordant,
(...), id est, essentiam sive substantiam sive naturam, quam (...) vocant,
generale esse aliquid and commune ac minime definitum; (...) vero, proprium,
singular, circumscriptum.

Ibid. c. 9. S. 1.
Again, Antiquorum plerosque dicentes audivimus (...) sive naturam, commune
quiddam esse multis, quod universale vocant; Hypostasim vero, idem atque
individuum sive singular.

These words are capable of no Evasion, Petavius in express terms declares,
that according to the Judgment of all the Greek Fathers, the common Divine
Essence is Generale quippiam, as opposed to singular, is commune quiddam
multis quod Universal vocant.

Thus Petavius, as well as the Reverend Dean, takes (in the subject before us)
Common Nature and Specific Nature to be all one.

Had the Animadvertor consulted the seventh and ninth Chapters of this fourth
Book of Petavius concerning the Trinity, he could neither have doubted of
Petavius's Judgment, nor well of that of the Ancient Fathers.

Well, the Animadvertor has a Refuge for himself, if Petavius has given his
Judgment against him, in the immediate following words.

n. 4.
[But however I shall lay down this as a Conclusion, which I take to be
undoubtedly true, p. 174. ib.
viz. That the Ancient Fathers, as well the Nicene as those after them, held
only a Numerical Unity of the Divine Nature: That is, in other words, They held
and acknowledged one Numerical God and no more. This Conclusion I hold, and
have good reason to believe, that neither Petavius nor Dr. Cudworth shall be
able to wrest it from me.]

I must put this into form, and then the weakness of it will evidently appear.
The Argument of the Animadvertor is to this purpose, If the Nicene Fathers held
and acknowledged one Numerical God and no more, then they held only a Numerical
Unity of the Divine Nature; and if they held only a Numerical Unity of the
Divine Nature in the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, then they could not hold a
Specific Unity of the Divine Nature in the Persons of the Blessed Trinity.

But the Nicene Fathers, and those after them, held and acknowledged one
Numerical God and no more, etc. that is, A Numerical Unity of God, infers a
Numerical Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons; and a Numerical Unity of
Nature in the Divine Persons, is inconsistent with a Specific Unity of the
Divine Nature in the Divine Persons.

Now grant this last to be true in the Animadvertor's Sense, what follows, That
the Nicene Fathers who held the Antecedent, must also hold the Consequent: By
no means. This indeed follows, that they ought to have held the Consequent, if
they embraced the Antecedent; not that they actually did.

It is a very weak Argument, that such Persons embrace such a Conclusion,
because they hold such Premises, from whence another believes, that such a
Conclusion does necessarily follow.

Secondly, I must examine his Antecedent: The Nicene Fathers held and
acknowledged one Numerical God and no more. This is ambiguously expressed.

The Nicene Fathers, the whole Catholic Church, holds and acknowledges one
God, and in what Sense God is one, it is impossible he should be more: For one
and more than one are contradictorily opposed, and therefore impossible to be
verified of the same Subject in the same Sense.

But neither the Nicene Fathers, nor the Catholic Church, do so hold God to be
one, but they also hold God to be Three, that is, In a different Sense of the
term God, viz. God is Three in Persons, that is, When this term God is taken as
equipollent with a Divine Person, for undoubtedly the Catholic Faith is, that
there are Three Divine Persons.

The Jews, Socinians, Mahometans, do indeed hold, that there is but one
Numerical God, but one in Person; that there is but one Divine Person; but the
Christian Faith is, that Deus est unus and Trinus.

Again, The Numerical Unity of God does not determine the Modus of the Unity of
the Trinity, does not determine that there is a Trinity of Divine Persons, and
much less of what kind their Unity is.

Lastly, It is a mistake, though a common one, that a Numerical Unity of the
common Divine Essence, and a Specific Unity of the same Essence are
inconsistent: A common Essence must of necessity be Numerically One, even in
Three Humane Persons, the Common Humanity, the Species of Humanity is
numerically One; there is as strictly one Species of Adam, Eve and Seth, as
there is one Person of Adam. The Moderns indeed say, that there are three
singular Humane Natures of Adam, Eve and Seth; but it is a Contradiction to
say, that the singular Nature of Adam is common to Eve. It is the Objection of
the Animadvertor, that a Specific Unity in the Trinity, would imply three
singular Divine Natures in the three Persons, of which afterward: But be that
so, still the common Divine Essence would be numerically One, that is, the
Species of the Divinity would be but one; or which is the same, the common
Divine Nature would be an Universal.

Petav. l. 4. de Trin. c. 13, 14.
This Observation alone will answer the greatest part of two Chapters, wherein
Petavius has endeavored to impose upon his Reader, as if the Nicene Fathers
had believed a Singularity of the common Divine Essence, whereas his proofs are
only concerning a Numerical Unity of the common Divine Essence: But there was a
very good reason for the thing, he was a Jesuit, and those of his own Order,
and of his own Church, would never have suffered his elaborate Work of the
Trinity to have been published, if he had not made a seeming Defense for the
Faith of the Schools, the Singularity of the common Divine Essence, and that
was impossible upon his Principles, viz. The Authority of the Ancient Fathers;
he therefore shamm'd this of the Numerical Unity in the room of it.

St. Ambrose, St. Augustine, St. Hilary, and others even of the Latin Fathers,
in express terms reject the Singularity of the Divinity.

There is one single passage of Maxentius, which ascribes Singularity to the
Divine Nature; and another I have seen quoted from Anselm tending to the same
purpose, and these two are all I have ever met with, which would have made a
poor show, had they stood alone; whereas for the Numerical Unity of the common
Divine Essence, Petavius might have transcribed half the Fathers; but this I
shall have occasion to mention again.

The Animadvertor's next refuge is, n. 5. p. 175. lin. 5.
only his own positive ipse dixit, that the Fathers always [mark that word,
always] alleged the Example of three or more individual Men agreeing in the
same Nature, either by way of Allusion or Illustration, as it is the nearest
resemblance of, and approach to this Divine Unity, of any that could be found
in created Beings; or else a minore ad majus.

To which I reply, First, that these two ways are really but one way; what is
only a near resemblance, must in this debate be a minore ad majus.

Secondly, The Animadvertor's Phrase is universal, they always alleged it
thus, which supposes, that not one single Father, in any one single passage,
ever alleged it otherways; and that the Animadvertor has examined every single
passage, and upon his own Experience finds it so.

Thirdly, The Unity of three Humane Persons, of three distinct proper Beings,
of three Substances, of three Natures, can never be the nearest resemblance of,
and approach to, the Unity of one simple Substance or Being under three
Relations. An Unity that is barely Notional, can never be the nearest
resemblance of an Unity that is properly Real. There are a thousand Instances
in Nature, of one simple Being under these Relations, the single Person of Adam
has three Relations.

The Animadvertor (p. 167.) calls it a jocular Argument, an Argument fit to be
answered by Laughter only, to argue from three Humane Persons, from Peter,
James and John, to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to the three Divine Persons, yet
here to serve a turn, he acknowledges it to be the nearest resemblance of, and
approach to, the Divine Unity, that can be found in created Beings. I am sure
upon the Animadvertor's Principles I may well borrow the Poets words, Risum
teneatis amici? since it is in Sense, as if he had said, that three Substances
is the nearest resemblance of, and approach to, one Substance, that can be
found in created Beings.

Fourthly, This is so far from being an Argument, a minore ad majus, upon the
Animadvertor's Principles, that it is justly esteemed by all the Moderns who
follow the Schools, one of the difficultest Objections against the Faith of the
Trinity, viz. that if three Humane Persons have three singular Humane Natures,
and consequently are so many Men; why three Divine Persons should not also
infer three singular Divine Natures, and consequently be three Gods. And the
Answer that the School men and Moderns give is, that the case is vastly
different, that the Unity of three Humane Persons is only Notional; the Unity
of the Divine Persons strictly real.

The Animadvertor himself (p. 300.) can tell you of a better Allusion and
Similitude to the Union of the three Divine Persons, The Union of
Understanding, Memory and Will, as one and the same Soul: One simple Being,
with three Faculties, is a nearer resemblance of one simple Being under three
Relations, than three simple Beings.

n. 6.
But let us hear the Animadvertor himself explain this Argument, p. 175.
a minore ad majus. [If several individual Men could not properly be said to
have more than one Nature, much less could this be said of the three Divine
Persons.]

To which I answer, First, Does the Animadvertor really believe that three Men
cannot properly be said to have more than one Nature or not? If he believes it,
What will become of his Objection, that a Specific Unity implies a
Multiplication of the said Nature in the several Individuals? What becomes of
that famous Passage of his P. 270. that Substantiis Consubstantialibus will
neither be Truth nor Sense? I suppose he will not deny, that several individual
Men are Substantioe, Substances in the plural Number; nor yet that
Consubstantialibus signifies of one Substance, of one Nature. I entreat him to
answer this Question, Are several Men Consubstantial or not? Is Christ,
according to his Humanity, Consubstantial with us Men, or not? Will he dare to
say, that the whole Catholic Church has neither spoke Truth nor Sense? For the
whole Church has ever professed a Belief of Christ's Consubstantiality with us
Men.

If the Animadvertor shall plead, that it was the Sense of the Fathers, that
three Men could not properly be said to have more than one Nature; even that is
sufficient for my purpose, who am now enquiring only into the Judgment of the
Fathers.

This is sufficient ad Hominem, to the Animadvertor; but for my Reader's fuller
Satisfaction, I answer to the Point, that so far as this Allegation is true,
it is Impertinent, and that so far as it is pertinent it is false.

It Is an acknowledged Truth, that the strictest Union that can be betwixt
Humane Persons, is but a resemblance, an Allusion to that inseparable,
incomprehensible Union betwixt the Divine Persons. But this is not the
question, concerning the Union of the Divine Persons indefinitely, but
concerning the Unity of their Nature: The Fathers maintained, that the Unity of
the common Divine Nature was of the same kind and degree with the Unity of the
common Humane Nature.

There is certainly a greater Union betwixt two Humane Persons who are dear and
intimate Friends, than betwixt two who are mortal Enemies: There is a greater
Union betwixt two Saints in Heaven, than betwixt the best Friends on Earth: And
yet two mortal Enemies have the same Unity of Nature with the Saints in Heaven.

The Union of the Saints in Heaven, is by our Savior himself resembled to the
Union of the Father and the Son, John 17.22. That they may be one, as we are
one. But these words no more denote an illimited equality, than those other
words of our Lord, Matt. 5.48. Be ye perfect, as your Father in Heaven is
perfect, denote an equality in Perfection.

If we suppose three unbegotten, unproduced Divine Persons, three Fathers, I
cannot see how we can deny such to be Consubstantial, since we acknowledge
three Angelical Persons to be of one Nature and Substance; yet three unbegotten
Divine Persons, three Fathers are to all the Ancient Fathers, three Gods. They
did not therefore believe, that a Specific Unity was the only Unity of the
Divine Persons, that they were one upon no other account; but if we can know
their meaning by their words, they did certainly believe a Specific Unity: And
this I persuade my self the Animadvertor's Heart misgave him.

n. 7.
He therefore comes in with a third Salvo, p. 176. [That he does not in the
least deny, but several Expressions may have dropped from the Fathers, which if
we looked no further, might be drawn to a very inconvenient Sense.] That is, in
plain English, several Expressions have dropped from them, which assert (if we
look no further) a Specific Unity. What from those Fathers who never alleged
this Example as a parallel Instance, but always used it by way of Allusion, or
a minore ad majus? It seems the Animadvertor's always and never will bear an
exception. What Salvoe has he for this? He gives it us in the following words,
[But then also it is as little to be denied, that the same Fathers professedly
and designedly treating of the same Points here, declared themselves in such
terms, as are very hardly, if at all reconcilable to those occasional and
accidental Expressions. And therefore, since their meaning cannot be taken from
both, it ought much rather to be taken from what was asserted by them
designedly, than what was asserted only occasionally.]

Now it is well contrived to take the conclusion for granted, he is to prove.
It seems that the Animadvertor would have things come to that pass, that we
must take his bare affirmation of a thing for a proof of it. Petavius, Dr.
Cudworth, the Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, have asserted the quite contrary,
they have already equivalently denied it, and the Animadvertor gives us his own
ipse dixit, that it is little to be denied.

Again, the Animadvertor pretends no more than a difficulty, or a doubt,
whether these designed expressions may not be reconciled to the occasional
expressions. The Animadvertor makes an if of it, to him, these latter are
hardly, if at all, reconcilable with the former; which is no great wonder,
since he believes tribus substantiis consubstantialibus to be neither truth nor
sense, since he believes a numerical Unity absolutely inconsistent with a
Specific Unity.

Lastly, Why is the conclusion stronger than the premises? Why does he make the
conclusion positive? Their meaning cannot be taken from both, is the
conclusion; whereas the premises mentioned only a difficulty, or a doubt. They
are hardly, if at all, reconcilable.

The Animadvertor was, I believe, n. 8.
in some measure sensible of the weakness of these answers; and therefore, He
provides a fourth Salvoe, Ib. p. 176.
viz. that the Orthodox Writers of the fourth and part of the fifth Century,
were chiefly exercised with the Arian Controversy. And the Arians would not
allow so much as a specific Unity of Nature between the Father and the Son,
but instead of an (...) or sameness, held only an (...) or likeness of Nature
between them, but therefore we have the less cause to wonder, if there be
defects in some of their Arguments; if some of their reasonings about the
Trinity, seem to look no further than a specific Unity of Nature in the Divine
Persons.

This is as little to the advantage of the Animadvertor's cause, as the former
allegations.

The Arians would not allow so much as a specific Unity between the Father and
the Son, Nicepho. Callist. Eccles. His. lib. 18. cap. 47.
I would fain know what Heretics ever did allow it: Nicephorus Callistus
charges indeed this Opinion upon Philoponus and his followers, who are commonly
called the Tritheit Heretics; but he is a later and fabulous Writer, wrote in
the fourteenth Century, long after the prevailing of the School Divinity:
Philoponus and his followers the Tritheit Heretics of the seventh Century
inclined nearer to Sabellianism, than to a belief of a specific Unity of the
Trinity; that hard name of Tritheit Heretics was given them by reason of some
uncouth Phrases which they used, of which hereafter.

Secondly, what consequence will the Animadvertor draw from the Arians not
allowing a specific Unity between the Father and the Son? This is what he aims
at, that it sufficed to maintain a specific Unity, to confute the Arian
Heresy. I desire to know why the same Plea might not have served the Reverend
Dean in his learned Vindication of this Article against the Socinians, who no
more allow a Specific Unity of the Trinity than the Arians of old. The
Socinians deny them to be three infinite minds; why will not that Apologize for
the Reverend Dean? Why is not this molified, and called only a defect in the
Reverend Dean, as the Animadvertor here Styles it in the Ancient Fathers.

Thirdly, the Arians objected Tritheism against the Orthodox Faith, as the
Socinians do to this day: So that had the Ancient Fathers believed this Heresy
a consequence of asserting a specific Unity in the Trinity, they would as
carefully have avoided the asserting of it, as the Schoolmen and Moderns do on
all occasions.

Fourthly, The answer of the Ancients to this Objection of Tritheism by the
Arians, is the clearest demonstration of their judgment; this is the Objection.
Peter, James and John are three Men; therefore, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
are three Gods. The general answer of the Ancients is by denying the truth of
the Antecedent; that Peter, James and John are improperly, abusively called
three Men, that it is contrary to the rules of Philosophy, to call them
otherwise than one Man and three Human Persons, as we say in the Blessed
Trinity, there are three Divine Persons and one God. Now not one School-man or
Modern, as I believe, ever gave such an answer. Not one of them ever imagined,
that the affirming Father, Son, and Holy Ghost to be one God, did in the least
enforce them to affirm Peter James, and John to be one Man. The Animadvertor
thinks this Objection only Jocular, only fit to be Laughed at, which the
Ancients thought so weighty, that to get rid of it, they endeavored, says the
learned Dr. Cudworth reflectingly, with their Logic, to prove that three Human
Persons ought not to be called three Men. I shall consider their Logicks
afterward, at present I declare, that is a manifest conviction to me, that
they did conceive the Unity of Nature between Human and Divine Persons,
parallel equal.

n. 9.
Fifthly, those words are very remarkable in our Animadvertor, [but instead of
an (...) held only an (...) or likeness of Nature between them,] which
insinuates, as if the debate of the Catholics and Arians in the Nicene Council
were only about a Title, whether the Son be (...) or (...) to the Father, but
this is to misrepresent the Fathers of that august Assembly.

The Arians liked neither the (...) nor the (...). God and a Creature, are
improperly said to be (...), but (...).

Again, the Catholics approved of the (...), provided it were understood
without equivocation, if there was (...), or (...) added to it, that is
perfectly alike in their Essence, is to the Catholics the same with (...) or
Consubstantial.

The Arians never consented to (...) but when their Party was too weak, and
they were obliged to dissemble with some Catholics, who were otherwise
favorable to their Persons, and cause.

It must be confessed, that (...), or (...) will not without great force suit
with the Hypothesis of the Schools, of the Singularity of the common Divine
Essence. A Singularity will not admit of a Comparison of likeness, so says
Ricardus de S. Victor. Lib. 6. de Trin. c. 20.
Siquidem ubi est simplex Vnitas and summa simplicitas, quid ibi facit qualis
and talis?

It is less wonder, therefore, if the Schoolmen charge (...) with Arianism or
Semi-arrianism; Vid. Petav. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 6 per totum.
whereas it is capable of an Orthodox Exposition.

I thought it necessary to follow the Animadvertor thus closely in the
examining of this Historical Truth, viz. whether the Fathers of the Church
believed the Modus of a Specific Unity of the Trinity. Two very great and
learned Persons have said it, have abundantly proved it, says the Reverend
Dean. Their Assertion has never yet been confuted. They were not drawn into
this Assertion by the heat of Disputation, or to favor their own Hypothesis,
neither of them approve of a Specific Unity of the Trinity. The Reverend Dean
rightly judged, that those places they had already produced, abundantly proved
their conclusion, and yet Petavius gives them but as an Essay, and pronounces
this Opinion to be the judgment of all the Greek Fathers especially. Shall I
ask the Animadvertor- a few Questions? Was not Petavius as capable of judging
betwixt occasional and designed Expressions as himself, as capable of judging
betwixt an Allusion or an Argument a minore ad majus as himself? Did not
Petavius know that the Arians denied a Specific Unity of the Trinity? Shall I
ask the Animadvertor, whether he ever consulted St. Basil's 43d. Epistle, and
if he did, whether he can have Brow enough to say, That that Epistle was not
designedly wrote of the difference of (...) and (...), or whether St. Basil has
not in the fullest manner, delivered his judgment in this point? I particularly
mention this Epistle, because our Animadvertor quotes a passage out of it,
[Pag. 149. of his Animadversions] under the name of Greg. Nyssen de differentia
(...), to whom, in the Printed Editions, it is also ascribed, and because this
Epistle, being both in the Works of St. Basil and Gregory Nyssen, the Reader
may more easily consult it, and there from his own Eyes be satisfied, that this
was the judgment of that most learned Father St. Basil. This Epistle is the
first Authority Petavius quotes in the aforementioned seventh Chapter of his
fourth Book of the Trinity. I do not desire of the Animadvertor to traverse and
examine all Petavius's Allegations, much less all the Greek Fathers. I am
content to stand or fall, by this single Epistle, if this does not assert a
Specific Unity of the Trinity, I am content that it pass for a Traducing,
mis-representing of the Fathers, to say, That any one of them ever held such a
Notion.

And now, I hope, with the leave of the Reader, I may add, that Petavius, as
well as Dr. Cudworth, stands as an unanswered witness, and that in the Mouth of
these two Witnesses, till better Testimony appear, the Historical Truth of this
disquisition stands at present unshaken.

n. 10.
I in the second place descend to the Problematical part, whether the Reasons of
the Animadvertor are so cogent, as to forbid the Admission of a Specific Unity
of the Divine Nature.

The Animadvertor gives us five Reasons [p. 181. etc.] the three first of which
are dispatched in a word.

His first, That if a Numerical Unity, [the Animadvertor means a Singularity,]
in the same Divine Nature, be sufficent to make the three Persons one God, then
a Specific Unity of the same is not necessary. I answer, those who admit of a
Specific Unity in the Trinity, strictly so called, do it upon this account,
That they are afraid that a Singularity, a Numerical Unity in the Animadvertors
sense, will make Father, Son, and Holy Ghost one Person, as well as one God:
They conceive, that three, truly three, distinct three, can have no other Unity
of Nature, save a Specific Unity; and those who admit of both, mean it only in
our imperfect conception of things; otherwise they believe that the Unity of
the Divine Nature is above both these terms of Art, that in our imperfect
conception, it partakes of some properties of both these Unities, but strictly,
and really, it is neither Singular nor Universal.

The same answer solves the Animadvertor's second Reason, n. 11.
that a greater and less degree of Unity are not to be admitted in the Divine
Nature: They who admit of a Specific Unity, deny a Singularity: They who in
words admit of both, do not in reality believe two Unities in the Divine
Nature, but only one Transcendental Unity, in our imperfect Conception,
partaking of the properties of both these Unities.

His third has been already answered, See cap. 3. n. 5.
that a Specific Unity may agree to ten thousand Individuals, as well as to
three; so may one simple Being have ten thousand Relations or Modes, as well as
three; this Article is wholly owing to Revelation.

His fourth is, that a Specific Unity is principally, n. 12. p. 182.
if not absolutely notional, and therefore cannot any ways properly belong to
the Divine Persons, nor is by any means necessary to make the three Persons one
God.

First, The Animadvertor brings in his Conclusion with an if, if not absolutely
notional, and yet argues from that Conclusion, as if it were the most allowed
Maxim.

Secondly, The Distinction of the Divine Attributes, of Justice and Mercy, is
confessedly notional, and yet the Animadvertor formerly pronounces it to be
Absurd, to contradict that Distinction.

Thirdly, The Unity of Nature betwixt Christ and his Mother, is certainly a
Specific Unity, according to the Animadvertor, a notional Unity; and yet it is
Heresy to deny, That Christ and his Mother are of one Nature or Consubstantial.

Fourthly, The Relations of likeness, equality which are betwixt the Divine
Persons, though founded on the express words of Scripture, [Christ thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, the Image of the Invisible God, the express
Image of his Fathers Apostasis] are by all the Schoolmen confessed to be
relationes rationis, that is, Notional; and yet I hope the Animadvertor will
not hence deny, that they ought not properly to belong to the Divine Persons,
nor necessary to make them one God.

Fifthly, The Unity of the Divine Nature, is also a Relation, (...),
Consubstantial unius substantioe, of one Substance, implies a relation in
Substance: We cannot say, That the Father, and the Spirator of the Holy Ghost,
are Consubstantial, (...), unius substantioe. This term is as contrary to the
Sabellian Heresy, as it is to the Arian; and therefore, according to the
School-mens own Principles, this Relation of Unity of Substance must be relatio
rationis, that is notional.

Sixthly, those Fathers who assert a Specific Unity of the Trinity, do not
believe, that the Divine Persons are said to be one, upon no other account,
save a Specific Unity, or that they are denied to be three Gods from a
Specific Unity alone; this Unity they conceive necessary, but not of it self
sufficient.

Seventhly, Even a Specific Unity has a sufficient fundamentum in re. A
Specific Unity is indeed a Logical Notion, but the Foundation of it is
something real, viz. a real agreement of the distinct Persons, or individuals
in the same reason of Nature. The Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost
is God, as really as Peter is a Man, and James is a Man, and John is a Man;
Peter, James, and John, are not notionally each of them a Man, nor Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, notionally, each of them God. From this real agreement in Human
Persons, we Form in Logicks the notion of a Specific Unity: and the Ancient
Fathers applied the same notion to the agreement of the Divine Persons.

The Animadvertor's fifth and last Argument is, n. 13.
That a Specific Unity of Nature implies a Multiplication of the said Nature
in every one of the particulars, to which it belongs; therefore, such an Unity
cannot be admitted in the Divine Nature.

The Argument put into due Form, is to this purpose.

If a Specific Unity of Nature in Created Persons or Beings, implies a
Multiplication of the said Nature, then a Specific Unity of Nature in the
Divine Persons, implies a Multiplication of the Divine Nature. But a Specific
Unity of Nature in Created Persons or Beings, implies a Multiplication of the
said Nature; therefore a Specific Unity of Nature in the Divine Persons,
implies a Multiplication of the Divine Nature. But the Conclusion is Absurd,
the Divine Nature being incapable of Multiplication, therefore a Specific
Unity in the Divine Nature, is not to be allowed from whence such Conclusion
follows.

Now in this Argument, as it stands betwixt the Animadvertor and my self; I
deny the consequence of the Major, because I am satisfied the Animadvertor
would do the same if I should retort the same Argument, mutatis mutandis
against his own Hypothesis, as for Instance, if I should thus urge.

If a Singularity of Nature in Created Persons or Beings forbids a Plurality of
Persons, or denies a true Generation, then a Singularity of the Divine Nature
forbids a Plurality of Divine Persons, and denies a true Divine Generation,
etc. But a Singularity of Nature in Created Persons or Beings, certainly,
confessedly forbids a Plurality of Persons, possessing the same Singular
Nature, is certainly inconsistent with a true Generation, therefore a
Singularity of the Divine Nature, forbids a Plurality of Divine Persons, denies
a true Father and Son.

The Animadvertor would quickly tell me that this was a weak Sophism, to argue
from a consequence in finite Nature, to the same in the Divine Nature: And I
desire to be informed, why I may not make the same reply to his Objection from
the consequence of a Specific Unity in finite Nature.

Again, I do not positively contend for a nice strict Specific Unity of the
Trinity, but for such a Transcendental Unity, which in our imperfect Conception
of things, is either a Specific Unity, or else wants a name in our present
Metaphysics.

I have the same Plea of the incomprehensibleness of the Divine Nature, of the
Mysteriousness of this Sacred Article, which is given by the Moderns to the
Socinian Objections, against the Singularity of the common Divine Nature.

n. 14.
This is sufficient to answer the Animadvertor, but because it will give
occasion to Vindicate the ancient Fathers from the mis-representations of the
Moderns; I shall also consider the Minor. Ib. p. 183.
[As for the Minor Proposition, That a Specific Unity of Nature consists with,
and implies a Multiplication of the said Nature, in the several Individuals
which it belongs to; I refer him to all the Logicians and Metaphysicians, who
have wrote of Species and Specific Unity of Idem and Diversum, whether they do
not give this account of it.]

Our Animadvertor is very confident of his Point, He refers to all the
Logicians and Metaphysicians, who have wrote of Species and Specific Unity,
etc. But his confidence in quoting all, is only the more remarkable, since I do
not know one single Logician, who ever determined for the Animadvertor; indeed
this Question is not proper for a Logician; but this is not the first time, the
Animadvertor has confounded the two Sciences of Logicks and Metaphysics, and
thereby given us a Proof, that He understands neither.

This is the common Definition of a Species in Logicks* [Species est id, quod
de pluribus differentibus numero tantum hoc ipso quid est predicatur.] That
which may be predicated of many, differing only in number, in answer to the
Question, what each single Individual is? I never met with one single Logician,
who ever changed this Definition of Porphyry, into pluribus natura
differentibus, who ever affirmed that a Species may be predicated of many
differing in Nature.

I shall ask the Animadvertor, whether Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, differ in
number or not? Or how they can be said to be three, if they differ not in
number?

He must contradict all Authority, both Ancient and Modern, if He shall deny,
that this term God, is Essentially predicated of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
that is, in answer to the Question, what is the Father, or the Son, or Holy
Ghost?

I desire the Animadvertor to consider this Point carefully, before He
determins that this term God is not a Species [at least in our imperfect
Conception of things] since the Definition of a Species agrees to it.

Lib. 1. Senten. Did. 19. I find since that, he learned this of his Master
Petrus Abelardus. Genebr. Resp. ad Schegkium. page 121. Damas. lib. 3. de orth.
Fide c. 6. lib. 1. c. 9.
Peter Lombard is, so far as I can find, the very first Person who ever
scrupled the Phrase, that the Divine Persons differ in Number. The most Learned
of the Greek Fathers, audacter and libere illa vocula utuntur in distinctione
Personarum, says the Learned Genebrard, and quotes St. Basil, Justin Martyr,
Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Cyrillus, and Justinus Imperator; Damascen is quoted by
Peter Lombard, His words are remarkable to my purpose, so I shall give them.
[(...).] For Hypostases, or Persons are said to differ in Number and not in
Nature. So the same Damascen, speaking of Adam, Seth, and Eve, says, (...).
They differ not in their Nature, for they are all Men. Again, lib. 3. c. 8.
(...). As Peter and Paul are not Numbered in what they are United, or one, For
being United, or one, in the same Reason of Nature, they cannot be called two
Natures; But differing in Hypostasis, lib. 3. c. 6.
they may be called two Hypostases. More fully, (...). For every Essence is
common to all the Hypostases contained under it, and there is not to be found
any Particular or Singular Nature or Essence; otherwise it were necessary to
call the same Hypostases Consubstantial, and yet of a different Essence; As
also to call the Holy Trinity of the same, and of a different Essence,
according to the Divine Nature: Wherefore the same Nature is beheld in every
distinct Hypostasis. If Damascen were now alive, He could scarce deliver his
Opinion more clearly. According to him, there is no such thing as a Particular
or Singular Nature, [And no Philosopher ever dreamed that the Universal
Specific Nature was Multiplied in the distinct Hypostases.] This was his
judgment, which is what we are chiefly inquiring into: The learned Damascen
adds his Reason; For that, if we allow a Singular Nature in each distinct
Hypostasis, the same Hypostasis must be both Consubstantial and not
Consubstantial, which to him was an Absurdity in Philosophy: Secondly, if we
allow a Singular Nature in each distinct Hypostasis, we must also allow it in
the Sacred Trinity, the Divine Persons must be Consubstantial and not
Consubstantial, which latter is Arianism, Tritheism, the worst of Heresies:
Wherefore the same Essence, says this learned Father, is in every single
Hypostasis. The learned Damascen knew no way to avoid the consequence in the
Sacred Trinity, if he allowed it in a Trinity of Human Persons, which is to me
a Demonstration, that He esteemed the Unity of Nature in both instances
Parallel: And whether Damascen was mistaken in his Philosophy or not, it
manifestly appears; First, That we cannot argue from his Assertion of the
Numerical Unity of the Divine Nature, that He disbelieved a Specific Unity of
the same Nature, He believed not a Multiplicity of Human Nature in Human
Hypostases, where there is confessedly a Specific Unity, His denial therefore
of a Multiplicity of the Divine Nature in the Divine Hypostases, is no
Argument, that He believed not a proper Specific Unity of the common Divine
Nature.

Vnitas Formalis is common with the Moderns, either to Vnitas Vniversalis, or
Vnitas Individualis, as the Form may, according to them, be either Universal,
that is, the Specific Form, or else a Singular or Individual Form: And every
Unity is an Arithmetical, Numerical Unity; the bare Phrase of it self,
therefore is not inconsistent with a Specific Unity, even according to the
Moderns; and much less with the Ancients, according to whose Philosophy, a
Specific Unity implied a strictly Numerical Unity of Nature, in all the
several Individuals.

It is an easy thing to say, That the Ancients were mistaken in their
Philosophy, but not so easy to overthrow the learned Damascen's Reason, viz.
That then properly two Human Hypostases would not be Consubstantial. Vrsin.
Expli. Cate. Quest. 33 n. 4. p. 196.
This Conclusion the learned Vrsinus embraces, Duo homines sunt (...), qui
tamen non sunt (...). But this is contrary to the Language of all Philosophers,
contrary to himself, who a little before Determins that Christ, Ib. Quest. 33.
p. 183.
secundum humanam naturam habet multos fratres ejusdem naturae, according to
his Human Nature, had many Brothers of the same Nature, or Consubstantial.

Again, the Definition is justly supposed to contain the Essence of any thing,
but a true and proper Definition contains only the Genus and Difference, that
is, only the Species. If we ask what is James or Peter? We answer, by the
Difinition or Species, that each of them is a Man or animal rationale; but if
according to the proper Rules of Philosophy, the Essence of Peter and James is
Singular; We ought to add Singular to animal rationale, that is, We must
confound what is Personal in Peter and James with what is Essential; the Notes
of Singularity with the Genus and Difference.

A Second Corollary I shall deduce from the Philosophy of the Ancients in this
Point, is, n. 15.
That their denying Peter, James, and John, to be properly called three Men, is
not so great a Paradox, as some of the Moderns represent, or rather mistake it.
They never doubted, whether Peter, James, and John had three Souls and three
Bodies, they never denied them to be three distinct Substantial Beings, three
(...), that is, three Subjects in which the common Humanity did subsist, they
believed them properly three Hypostases, which is all the vulgar mean by three
Men: The Debate is solely about a Phrase, whether Peter, James, and John are
more properly called three Hypostases in one Human Nature, or three Men. The
Former Phrase, even the Moderns allow, as also they confess, that all Concrete
terms, such as Man is, do Primarily signify the Form; and Secondarily
assignifie the Subject in which such form subsists; Thirdly, the Schoolmen
themselves give this Rule concerning Deus, Creator, Dominus, etc. that because
the Form signified by those Concrete terms, cannot be Multiplied, [neither
Deitas, vis creatrix, nor potentia Dominatrix are according to the Schoolmen,
capable of Multiplication,] therefore, neither are the Concrete terms Deus,
Creator, Dominus, capable of a Plural Predication. Now by the same Rule, this
term Man ought not to be Plurally Predicated, since according to the Philosophy
of the Ancients, Humanity, the Form, was not Multiplied in the several Human
Hypostases. Nor see I, what a School-man can reply upon his own Principles,
save his own ipse dixit, that the Ancients were mistaken, when they asserted
that Humanity was not Multiplied in the several Human Individuals. For my own
Part I esteem this one Reason, why thase terms, Deus, Creator, Dominus, etc.
are not Multiplied, but neither the sole nor chief Reason of the Singularity of
their Predication; nay further, That the chief Reason why the Fathers of the
Church from before the Nicene Council, have Religiously observed a singular
Predication of those Attributes, is by no means applicable to the term Man in
respect of several Human Hypostases; so that I can very well comply with common
Custom which calls Peter, James, and John three Men, and yet believe, that
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, ought not to be called three Gods, three Creators,
three Lords; but this belongs to my Second Part of the true Notion of the Unity
of God.

n. 16.
A Second thing I shall crave leave to observe, is, that the Schoolmen
themselves, that is, the chief Leaders of them, Thomas and Scotus were not
averse to this Philosophy of the Ancients in immaterial Beings, they
determining that the Angelical Nature was not capable of Multiplication in the
several Angelical Persons, and consequently that the several Angels differed
Specifically, and that there could not according to some, even by the
Omnipotence of God, be created two Angels in the same Species. This, several of
the Schoolmen thought more Eligible than to Parallel the Unity of the Divine
Persons with Angelical Persons: Common Custom, Authorizing the Phrase of
different Angels, as well as of different Men.

The Foundation of this Assertion of the Schoolmen, concerning the
impossibility of different Angels, within the same Species, arose from their
belief, that Matter was the sole Principle of Individuation, which is now
generally disapproved: However from Hence a fair Reason appears, why none of
the Schoolmen embraced this notion of the Ancients of the Specific Unity of
the Trinity; Si ergo Angeli non sint compositi ex Materia and forma, sequitur
quod impossible sit esse duos Angelos unius Speciei. Aquin. sum. Quest. 50.
they thought such Unity impossible between immaterial Persons; and it was
downright Arianism, to assert a Specific Essential difference betwixt Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and a worse Heresy to assert that Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost had Bodies.

A Third thing I shall crave leave to observe, is, That Philoponus the famous
Ringleader of the Tritheit Heretics, was the first of the Ancients, who
asserted that a Specific Unity implied a Multiplication of the said Nature in
the several Individuals of the same Species, n. 17.
and that consequently* not only three Human Persons had three distinct Human
Natures, [which according to the Ancients was an Error in Philosophy,] But also
the three Divine Persons had three distinct Natures. For which uncouth Phrase,
of three Natures in the Trinity, and not for holding a Specific Unity of the
Trinity, were Philoponus and his followers, Styled Tritheit Heretics.

Philoponus himself, as I believe, His followers more certainly, if we may
Credit Eulogius, were nearer Sabellius than the Faith of a Specific Unity of
the Trinity.

(...). -- (...).

Eulogius, Photii Biblioth. Cod. ccxxx. p. 879.
to me has cleared this obscure Part of the Ecclesiastical History. These
Monophysitae Heretics, these Tritheist Heretics [for both these Heresies are
charged upon Philoponus] distinguished (...) and (...), betwixt Nature and
Essence, and none but some of the Maddest asserted three Essences in the
Trinity, but only three Natures; But the Othodox esteeming (...) and (...) as
equivalent, gave the Name of Tritheit Heretics to both; Otherwise those who
distinguished betwixt (...) and (...), were so far from believing three Gods,
that they did not as Eulogius there tells us, believe that either Father, Son,
or Holy Ghost were, (...), properly God, and in the next words, gives us their
positive Faith, that they esteemed the Personal properties to be the Persons
themselves; There may be a (...) of a Personal property, of what we conceive in
the Nature of an Accident, (...) is by Aristotle appropriated to Substance.
Again, a Personal property, an Accident or Mode can never be properly God: So
that these Heretics as the Church then judged them, believed one Essence with
three properties, they believed these properties to subsist, or to be
Hypostases. How near the Animadvertor comes to them, when he tells us, Animadv.
etc. p. 121. Ibid. p. 275.
that the ternary Number belongs only to the Personalities, that a Person here
[or in this Mystery] imports a Mode or Relation, etc. that the Relations
subsist, I leave to Himself upon cooler consideration. Pholii Biblio. Cod.
ccxxx. p. 866.
If he desires to see these Notions confuted; He may please to consult Eulogius
in the same place, where He will find, that Eulogius thought them scarce in
their Senses, that could imagine a Relation or Personal property could subsist
or be a Person.

I was the more willing to explain this obscure Heresy, since this is the
eternal Harangue of the Socinians, that the Faith of three proper Persons was
condemned by the Ancients, in the Person of Philoponus, when yet at the same
time they confess that the belief of a Specific Unity of the Trinity, was the
Faith of the Nicene Fathers, which two Opinions are inconsistent, that they
should condemn that for Heresy, the worst of Heresies in Philoponus, which
they esteemed Orthodox in themselves and their own Party.

n. 18.
Fourthly and lastly, Though I see no necessity of Multiplying the Divine
Nature, if we assert a Specific Unity of the Trinity, and less, if we assert
it in the Sense I only contend for, that is for such a transcendental Unity
which in our imperfect Conception of things, must either be called a Specific
Unity, or confessed to want a Name in our present Philosophy, yet ex abundanti,
I am not afraid to declare to the Sociniuns, that I would sooner acknowledge
three Singular Divine Natures in the Trinity, than deny the Faith of three
Divine Persons: A Singular Nature or Essence, if we admit such a Notion in
Philosophy, is also a Personal Nature or Essence, and whatever is Personal in
the Divinity it self, may be Multiplied; nor have the Ancients sometimes
scrupled the Phrase of (...) nor Petavius that of Trina Deitas, no more than
Trinus Deus, and genita, and ingenita sapientia, etc. is of the same Import.
All I will say at present of these and the like Phrases is, that they are
fairly reconcilable with the true Notion of the Unity of God, and no ways
contradictions to Reason that I know of: Both which I hope to evince in my
Second Part, where I shall also endeavor to explain the sense, in which the
Ancients used these different Expressions of (...) and (...).

[It is evident, that He [the Reverend Dean] makes Specific sameness of
Nature, p. 186. lin. 20. n. 19.
and the Agreement of Things Numerically different in one and the same common
Nature, to signify convertibly the same thing.]

Well, and what follows? In this, says the Animadvertor, Ibid.
He is guilty of a very great mistake, by making those things the same, which
are not the same.

With the Animadvertor's leave, the mistake lies wholly at his own door. The
Agreement of Modes Numerically different in one and the same common Nature, and
a Specific sameness of Nature are vastly different: But the Reverend Dean's
words are, the Agreement of Things Numerically different, and it is the sense
of all Philosophers, that Things Numerically differing, can only agree in one
Specific Nature.

The term [Deus] indeed is neither a Genus nor a Species. p. 186. lin. ult. n.
20.
Nevertheless, all Divines and Schoolmen allow it to be a terminus communis.

This great Dictator in Philosophy, I find, is yet to learn the first Rudiments
in Logic. A terminus communis in Logic is the same with a terminus
Vniversalis, with a terminus predicabilis, and all Logicians I have had the
Fortune to consult, speak but of five Predicables, Genus, Species, Differentia,
Proprium, Accidens. It is too great an absurdity for the Animadvertor to be
guilty of, to affirm that the term Deus is either Differentia, Proprium, or
Accidens. Besides that, all the Arguments himself has brought against the
Admission of a Specific Unity of the Divine Nature, are equally levelled
against the Admission of the Universality of the common Divine Nature, that is,
against this Assertion, that Deus is a terminus communis. Animadv. p. 154.
Essentia habet se per modum termini communis, quia licet singularis sit tamen
vere est in pluribus suppositis, quare in praedicationibus fungitur munere
vocis Vniversalis. Bellarminus de Christo, l. 2. c. 18.


Well, but do not all Divines and Schoolmen allow it to be a terminus
communis? Shall I borrow his own words, and answer that by this expression, it
would more than seem that He has read them all: But by the conclusion, that he
has read none of them. For not one single School-man or Modern, who follow
them, do, I verily believe, allow this term Deus to be a terminus communis.
That famous Objection against the Faith of the Trinity which the Schoolmen and
Moderns are so much concerned to answer, viz. That if the Father is God, and
the Son is God, the Father must be the Son, grounded upon this Axiom, Quoe sunt
eadem unitertio, sunt eadem inter se, shows the judgment of the Schoolmen and
Moderns, that they take this term Deus to be a terminus singularis, for that
Axiom holds not in a terminus communis.

This indeed the School men and Moderns do hold, that this term Deus is a
terminus singularis communicabilis, communicable by Praedication, as a terminus
communis, but in it self a terminus singularis.

p 217. lin. 2. n. 21.
[In God, besides Essence or Substance, we assert, that there is that which we
call Mode, Habitude or Relation.]

We cannot contemplate God as he is in himself, a pure simple Act; but to
assert the existence of Modes in God from our imperfect Conception of things,
is peculiar to the Animadvertor, but this falls in naturally in the next
Chapter, where we are to enquire whether the Personalities are proper Modes.

One thing I cannot omit; the Animadverter tells us, Ibid.
That by one or either of these in Conjunction with Essence or Substance, we
give account of all the Acts, Attributes, and Personalities belonging to the
Divine Nature.

What do we give account of the Divine Attributes by Essence and a Mode? is
this, in his own Words, Ibid.
The constant, unanimously received Doctrine of Divines, Schoolmen, and
Metaphysitians in their Discourses upon God?

Can a Reader unacquainted with these Debates, believe that by the constant,
unanimously received Doctrine of Divines, Schoolmen, and Metaphysitians; we
are to understand the single Aninmadverter alone, and yet that is the truth. So
( p. 51. l. 3.) he with the same confidence and something else, tells us, [That
all Divines hitherto have looked upon, and professedly treated of the Divine
Nature and Attributes as different and distinct from one another, still
considering the first as the Subject, and the other as the Adjuncts of it.]

What must we say, when a Person shall set up for a Critic in the most
mysterious Article of our Religion, and himself understands not the first
Elements of Divinity? Did any Divine before himself compound God of Subject and
Adjunct? Did any Divine before himself assert that Holiness, Goodness, Truth,
Knowledge, Eternity, etc. were Adjuncts in God? Does he know what an Adjunct
is? Quod alicui preter essentiam adjungitur, something added, conjoined to the
Essence of a Being: Do not all Divines teach, That the Divine Attributes may be
predicated in abstracto of God, God is his Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, but
a Subject cannot be so predicated of its Adjunct? But I am ashamed of confuting
so weak a Notion, yet our Animadverter has the Face to say, That without this
Notion, it is impossible to discourse intelligibly of the Divine Attributes.
Ibid. p. 217.


P. 223 Qu. 3. n. 27.
[What is the Substance or Nature of God? I answer, It is a Being existing of
and by it self Incorporeal, Infinite, Eternal, Omniscient, Omnipotent, etc.]

The Animadverter triumphs over this and some other questions the Reverend Dean
had made, as easy and trifling, for that is the natural Sense of calling them
not so very formidable, etc. But I conceive, that he mistook the Reverend
Dean's Mind in asking this question, which (probably) was, What Notion we can
frame in our Minds of the Substance of God, of an infinite, immaterial
Substance? However, I shall wave that, and tell him, That he has extremely
failed in the answer of this easy Question.

First, When he tells us, that the Nature of God is a Being. God is properly
called a Being, but his Nature ought to be styled an Essence and not a Being,
when we speak properly, and according to the formal Conception of things.

Secondly, To be a Being existing of it self, is not of the Nature or Essence
of God, otherwise the Son and Holy Spirit are not each of them God, for
certainly neither the Son nor Holy Spirit exist of themselves; to be a Being
existing of it self, is a personal property of the Father alone.

Thirdly, Existing by it self is but an explication of being an Hypostasis or
Suppositum, which indeed agrees to Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but yet by the
Consent of sober Divines, is not esteemed an essential Predication, and
consequently ought not to be put into the Definition of God.

Fourthly, Incorporeal, Infinite, etc. are Attributes, that is, according to
the Animadverter, Adjuncts to the Essence or Nature of God, how come they
therefore to make up part of the Definition of the Nature of God? But I am
tired, and have reason to believe my Reader so with the observation of the
Animadverter's Mistakes, and therefore I have omitted very many I did observe,
and doubtless a more attentive Reader would find many which escaped my notice.

The Animadverter in this Book has concerned himself chiefly with three
Articles, Christ's Satisfaction, His Incarnation, and the Doctrine of the
Trinity; and I do not find upon the strictest Search, that he understands any
one of them. Concerning the last of these Articles, the Reader cannot have a
clearer Proof than by Examination of the Animadverter's eighth Chapter, wherein
he professedly endeavors to lay down the positive Faith of the Church
concerning this Article.

CHAP. VII.
[I judge it neither improper nor unusefull to represent what the Church has
hitherto held and taught concerning this important Article of the Trinity, p.
240. l. 2. n. 1.
as I find it in Councils, Confessions, Fathers, Schoolmen, and other
Church-writers both ancient and modern.]

Make room for this mighty Man, keep silence and learn what Councils,
Confessions, Fathers, Schoolmen, and other Church-writers both ancient and
modern have taught in this important Article. Goliath himself was not more
completely armed Cap-a-pee, but Goliath wanted little David's Sling; he came
not in the name of the Lord. And it seems this great Opiniator has forgot his
Bible behind him, quite forgot Christ and his twelve Apostles in the Crowd of
Fathers, and Schoolmen, and other Church-writers both ancient and modern.

Shall I need to remind this great Critic, that if Councils, Confessions,
Fathers, Schoolmen, and other Church-writers both ancient and modern have
determined, I will not say against, but, without a sufficient Foundation of
Scripture, their determination is no rule of a Protestant's Faith?

Article 8.
Our Church receives the Creeds themselves, because they may be proved by most
certain Warrants of Holy Scripture.

I acknowledge it a great Confirmation of my Faith, as to this Article, that
Councils and Fathers have explained the Scriptures in the same Sense in which I
believe them.

The Ecclesiastical Phrases and Forms of Speech are very useful to detect
aequivocating Heretics, or as they speak in short what the Scriptures deliver
in several places, or as they are Arguments ad homines, to those who
acknowledge their Authority.

p. 240. l. 14. n. 2.
[Now the commonly received Doctrine of the Church and Schools concerning the
Blessed Trinity (so far as I can judge, but still with the humblest Submission
to the Judgment of the Church of England in the Case) is this, That the
Christian Religion having laid this sure Foundation, that there is but one God,
and that there is nothing ( i. e. no positive real Being strictly and properly
so called) in God, but what is God: and lastly, That there can be no
Composition in the Deity with any such positive real Being distinct from the
Deity it self; and yet the Church finding in Scripture mention of three, to
whom distinctly the Godhead does belong, it has by warrant of the same
Scripture, Heb. 1.3. expressed these three by the Name of Persons, and stated
their Personalities upon three distinct Modes of Subsistence allotted to one
and the same Godhead, and these also distinguished from one another by three
distinct Relations.]

First, The Complement is very high to the Church of England, that he will
submit the Faith which he finds in Councils, Confessions, Fathers, Schoolmen,
and other Church-writers both ancient and modern to the Judgment of the Church
of England; but whom does the Animadverter mean by the Church of England? this
is his Character of the Churchmen, the Clergy of the Church of England in 1690
[when the Reverend Dean published his Vindication of the Trinity.] And the
second Edition of his Animadversions are printed in 1693, viz. That none then
opposed the Reverend Dean's Notions, most over-looked them, and some
countenancing and advancing the Author of them, and perhaps for them too; this
truly is the Case; and by those some, he especially understood the then Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Animad p. 361.
so that this is a mere Complement, if not, as a Friend hinted, put in, in
hopes of more Preferment.

Secondly, This Article, that there is but one God, is an Article properly of
Natural not the Christian Religion. The Christian Religion does repeat and
acknowledge it. This Article is the Foundation of the Christian Religion, and
not a Foundation laid by the Christian Religion; of which Distinction in my
second part, when I come to explain the Unity of God.

Thirdly, That Proposition, that there is nothing in God but what is God, is
true without his exception of a Mode, which the Animadverter intends by his
Parenthesis, but the whole relates to the Simplicity of a Divine Person, and
not of the Trinity.

Fourthly, There is no Composition in the Trinity, not because there is no
Plurality in the Trinity, for then there could be no Trinity; but because
Father, Son and Holy Ghost are not parts nor any ways analogous to component
parts of God, but each distinct Divine Person is as completely, perfectly God,
as each distinct angelical Person is a complete, perfect Angel.

Fifthly, the Christian Religion does declare not only, that there is but one
God, but also that there are three, to whom distinctly [mark that word
distinctly] the Godhead does belong, which is in other Words, that God is one
and three; neither of which Articles are to be contradicted.

Sixthly, Heb. 1.3. was not the Warrant why the Church styled Father, Son and
Holy Ghost by the Title of Persons; the term in that place is (...),
Hypostasis, and not (...), Person; secondly, (...) is in the singular, not
plural Number. The Enquiry is not whether Father, Son and Holy Ghost be each an
(...), but whether they be Hypostases in the Plural Number; thirdly, (...) was
in that very place from before St. Jerome's time in all the Authentic
Translations of that Epistle, so far as I know, till Beza's Translation,
constantly renderd by substantioe, Substance; fourthly, The place it self
requires this Translation, (...) signifies there not the Person of the Father,
but something which the Father in our Conception has. See Petav. lib 6. de
Trin. cap. 6. per totum.
The Son is not the Image of his Father's Subsistence in the Sense of the
Animadverter, that is, of his Paternity, but of his Father's Substance or
Nature. Hypostasis answers to Glory, by which is certainly meant the Father's
essential Glory; fifthly, The Fathers who in their private Comments expounded
(...), by Person, as our Translation also renders it, did it to express a
further Similitude between the Father and Son, viz. That the Son is a Person as
well as the Father, which is a true Exposition, but perhaps not intended in
this place; however, it overthrows the subtleties of the Schools, that the
Relations constitute each a Person, for then the Son could not be the Image of
the Father in Personality, as he is not his Image in Relation, is not a Father
but a Son.

Sixthly, And stated their Personalities upon three distinct Subsistences
allotted to one and the same Godhead.

First, This is a secondary and less principal Enquiry, about which there would
be little or no difficulty if the great difficulty in this Controversy were
first determined, viz. What the three Divine Persons are.

A Person in this sacred Mystery is that to which the ternary Number belongs.
Three Persons, as a late Reverend Author expresses it, are three Somewhats,
Anim. p. 120.
three Relatives, says the Animadverter. Agree but what we must add to
Somewhats, to Relatives, and there needs not a word to determine what the three
Personalities are.

If we say with the Ancients three Hypostases, that is, three Substances, and
neither St. Augustine, St. Hierom, nor St. Hilary knew any other Sense of the
term Hypostases. Every complete Substance is a Suppositum, and has a proper
Mode of Subsistence, and then there is no more difficulty in conceiving three
Hypostases to have three Modes of Subsistence, than for the Socinians or Jews
to explain, how God, whom they believe one Person, one Hypostasis, has one Mode
of Subsistence.

Secondly, To allot three Modes of Subsistence to one and the same singular
Godhead is quickly said, but it is such a Choke-pear, that the several Parties
of the scholastic Tribe have not known how to swallow.

1. The Foundation of it is a Mistake, viz. a false Translation of that noted
Phrase, (...). For that Phrase signifies not, as the Schoolmen from their ill
Translations mistook it, modes of Subsistence in the Abstract, but the Modes or
Properties of the subsistent Being or Person in the Concrete; this Phrase
signifies not the personal Forms or Personalities, but the Properties of the
Person already constituted, which two differ as a Form and an Adjunct,
Personality is the Form, a personal Property is an Adjunct, and supposes the
Person already constituted and formed.

Justin Martyr, or rather the Author under his Name, whom our Animadverter
quotes, Anim p 252.
after those remarkable words so often imitated by the succeeding Greek
Fathers, (...)* For the Terms unbegotten, begotten, proceeding are not Names of
the Essence, but Properties of the subsistent Being or Person, and before that
latter place, viz. that these Terms are (...), but (...), that is, not denoting
the Essence, but signifying the Hypostases or Persons. [Hypostasis signifies
the Person in concreto, and not the Subsistence in abstracto, as the
Animadverter has falsely translated it.] I say, that Author has in the middle,
between these two places a Passage that undeniably evinces the Sense of the
Phrase in Dispute. That Author illustrates the former Phrase by the example of
Adam, whose (...), whose personal Property was to be immediately formed by the
Hands of God. (...). The Formation (of Adam) gives us his personal Property,
for it declares how he was produced. I believe the Animadverter himself will
not have the Confidence to pretend, that the Formation of Adam by the hands of
God was the Personality of Adam, that which properly constituted Adam a Person,
but only a Property of Adam considered in our Conception, as already
constituted. This Sense of the Phrase was undisputed in the learned Damascen's
time. Damas. lib. 1. de ortho. fide cap. 9.
(...). Wherefore all things that the Father has are also his, [that is, the
Son's] except Innascibility, [or the property of being unbegotten,] which
notifies not a difference of Essence or a [different essential] Dignity, but a
personal Property, even as Adam being unbegotten, (for he was immediately
formed by God) and Seth begotten, (for he was the Son of Adam) and Eve
proceeding out of the side of Adam (for she was not begotten) differ not in
Nature, for they are all Men [or human Persons] but in a [distinct] personal
Property.

These words need no Comment, Seth's Birth and Eve's Procession of the Rib of
Adam are not their Personalities, not their Modes of Subsistence, but their
personal Properties, not that which constituted them Persons, but that which
distinguished them in our Conception one from another, that which constituted
them distinct Persons one from another.

Besides the Phrase (...) is not of it self capable of any other
Interpretation: to be unbegotten, a negation, See Chapter 2. n. 10.
can never be the Father's Mode of Subsistence, his Personality, (...), says
the Animadverter, is a term not importing in it any positive Relation, but only
a mere Negation of all Producibility by any superior Principle. Anim. etc. p.
248.
This term therefore cannot signify causally, and consequently not (...),
which (...) is here styled contrary to the Animadverter's Observation.

I acknowledge to the Animadverter, that every Person, Ibid p. 250* 251.
and consequently the Divine Persons are formally constituted such by a Mode of
Subsistence, or what we are obliged to conceive of as a Mode of Subsistence,
that is, each distinct Person has a distinct Mode of Subsistence, and the three
Divine Persons have in our Conception three distinct Modes of Subsistence. Nay,
I will add further, that I believe that no Man, who understands the meaning of
the term Hypostasis, and uses it without Aequivocation, will or can deny any
part of this. The Reverend Dean expressly acknowledges this truth. A Beast is a
Suppositum, Vind. of the Trinity. p. 262.
-- that is, a distinct living subsisting Being by it self. But I do here deny
to the Animadverter, that the Ancient Fathers did ever assert, that the Divine
Relations were in this proper, formal Sense, Modes of Subsistence, or that That
Phrase, (...), when applied to the Divine Relations, and much more when applied
to (...) was by them understood in the proper formal Sense, of which we are now
enquiring.

Secondly, If the Animadverter could get over the first Difficulty, Anim. etc.
p. 120.
he would find a second behind, how one simple Being (which is the
Animadverter's Hypothesis of the Trinity) can have three Modes of Subsistence.
The whole School of the Thomists and Scotists assert an absolute essential
Subsistence, and consequently one Subsistence of the whole Trinity, they esteem
the three Divine Persons to be unum subsistens; unum suppositum aut personam
incompletam, says Cajetan, (one of the most famous Commentators upon Aquinas)
to which Suarez only replies, Suarez de incar. q 3. Act. 1. disp. 11. S. 5. p.
285.
Cavendus est hic loquendi modus, utpote alienus a modo loquendi conciliorum,
Patrum and Theologorum: that is, have a care lest Heretics hear us, and take
advantage at such a novel Expression; otherwise, Suarez finds no fault with the
Doctrine: and indeed to say, That Existence or Subsistence by it self is
Relative, is a contradiction to the very Phrase, Subsistence by it self denies
all relation to any other. So that according to the Thomists and Scotists, the
three Personalities are not three Modes of Subsistence, not three Subsistences,
but one essential absolute Subsistence with three Relations, or three relative
Modes, or three Modes of Incommunicability. But of this I have already spoke,
Chap. 1. n. 11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, To allot three Subsistences to the Godhead, is to contradict the
Ancients, (...), these Properties are not Names of the Essence, of the
Godhead, but of the Persons. The God head does not properly subsist, but the
Divine Persons subsist. Cajetan may inform the Animadverter, what is the
consequence of ascribing Subsistence to the Godhead, even the same with
calling it a suppositum or incomplete Person; where the term incomplete is only
added to avoid the grossness of the Phrase; otherwise they ascribe all the
Divine Acts to this unum subsistens, unum suppositum, and call them essential
Acts; whereas the Notion of Philosophers is that actiones non (...), sed (...)
attribuuntur, that Actions ought not to be attributed to the Nature but to the
Person endowed with such Nature. The Person is the principium quod, Nature only
the principium quo, the power by which the Person acts.

The Schoolmen retain in words the personal Acts of the Divine Persons, that
Generation is the personal Act of the Father, Incarnation, the personal Act of
the Son, Sanctification, the personal Act of the Holy Spirit. Active Spiration,
the personal Act of the Father and Son. But these are mere words. Generation,
according to the Schoolmen, is the reflex Act of the Divine Understanding,
whereby it knows it self; and this singular individual Act they ascribe in
common to Father Son and Holy Ghost. So every thing that is an Act in
Incarnation, is according to them, the Act of the whole Trinity: they pretend
indeed, that the same singular reflex Act of the Divine Understanding only
generates, as it proceeds from the Person of the Father: and that the
Incarnation is only terminated upon the Person of the Son. But what Pretense to
invent for Sanctification, I do not find that they are yet agreed. The sacred
Scriptures give Sanctification for the distinguishing Character of the third
Person; he is so called in the very Form of Baptism: to deny this
distinguishing Character was Sabellianism to the Ancients. Yet this the
Schoolmen have undeniably done in the Act of Sanctification. The Maxim of the
Ancients was, that Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa: They have not only
misconstrued indivisa for confusa, but in reality, left out the Exception ad
extra and confounded the Actions ad intra as well as those ad extra. So
Spiration to the Schoolmen is that Act of the Divine Will, whereby it loves it
self, and this singular individual Act they also ascribe to the Holy Spirit
equally with the Father and the Son. Only say they, The Divine Will's loving it
self is not Spiration in the Person of the Holy Ghost, but only in the Person
of the Father and Son. How much better is it with the Ancient Fathers to
confess these to be inscrutable Mysteries, than to expose the sacred Article by
such bold and abstruse Definitions, and yet these are the Gentlemen whom the
Animadverter commends for venturing little, for preceding upon the surest
grounds of Reason and Scripture.

Again, Sanctification, which the divinely inspired Writings give us, as the
peculiar (...) of the Holy Ghost, relating to the Creatures, to a temporal Act,
can never be the Personality of the Holy Ghost, but only a personal Property of
the third Person of the Blessed Trinity.

The Schoolmen take shelter in the Term Spirit, [which of it self is common to
the whole Trinity,] and call the Procession of the Holy Ghost by the Term,
Spiration But the whole Greek Church believe the Holy Ghost the Spirit of the
Son, and yet denies the Eternal Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son; and
whatever may be said for the pious Credibility of this Article in the Sense of
the Western Church, yet I find, that our greatest Divines, Laud, Stillingfleet,
Chillingworth, etc. have denied that this is an Article of Faith, or that the
Greek Church is guilty of Heresy in denying of it. Further, from St. Augustine
we learn that this Sense of this Term, Spiration, was unknown to the Latin
Church in his time. Lib 5. de Tr. cap 11.
[Ille spiritus sanctus qui non Trinitas sed in Trinitate intelligitur, in eo
quod proprie dicitur spiritus sanctus relative dicitur, cum ad patrem and
filium refertur, quia spiritus sanctus and patris and filii spiritus est, sed
ipsa relatio non apparet in hoc nomine.]

Nor has the Mission of the Divine Persons (which to the Ancients was a sacred
proof of the Plurality of Persons in the Blessed Trinity) fared better in the
Exposition of the Schoolmen than the internal personal Acts. According to their
Master, they affirm, that the Son was sent not only by the Father, and the Holy
Spirit, Lib. 1. Sent. Did. 15.
[which last may be allowed in an improper Sense] but also by himself. So true
is that ancient Observation of Athanasius, Athan. graecolat. apud comel. Tom.
1. p. 516.
(...). They who assert the Trinity to be a Monad [with the Animadverter a
simple Being] will find themselves obliged to adulterate the Divine Mission and
Generation.

[The Personalities by which the Deity stands diversified into three distinct
Persons, P. 241. l. ult. n. 3.
are by the Generality of Divines both Ancient and Modern, called and accounted
Modes, or at least, something Analogous to them, since no one thing can agree
both to God and the Creatures by a perfect Univocation.]

I entreat the Animadverter to inform me, where he learnt that new Phrase of a
Deity diversified. Many have scrupled the Phrase concerning the Divine Persons,
are afraid of asserting that the Divine Persons differ or are diverse. Himself
tells us, Anim. etc. p. 175.
that they are distinguished from one another and no more. But to tell us of a
singular Deity diversified (which is the Animadverter's Hypothesis) is to me
new Divinity.

Secondly, The Personalities are called and accounted Modes, etc. Does the
Animadverter know no difference betwixt these two in our treating of God or a
Divine Person? The former I allow, the latter I as positively deny; and I find
the Animadverter's heart failed him, Modes or at least something analogous to
Modes. I desire the Reader to compare these words with what he lays down, p
285. l. 13. That it is equally absurd to deny Modes of Being to belong to God:
where equally absurd from the foregoing Line is the same with grossly absurd,
and this explained, p. 284. To be a gross Absurdity and no small proof of
Ignorance. Now this gross Absurdity, this no small proof of Ignorance was the
Assertion of the Reverend Dean, That there are no Accidents or Modes in God.
Himself allows no Accidents, nor do the Reverend Dean's Words in the least deny
a Distinction of Modes and Accidents, but rather confirm it: As to the
Animadverter's Distinction of them, I have already spoken to it, Chap. 1. n. 2,
5, etc. and shall only repeat that all the new Philosophers despise it, and
leave him to harangue by himself, P. 284.
that none of them have any skill in Logicks or Metaphysics, that they are
grossly absurd Philosophers, and have given no small proof of their Ignorance by
such their opinion.

The same Absurdity the Animadverter lays to the charge of this other
Assertion, That there are no Modes in God: and this the Animadverter will prove
both from the manifest Reason of the thing, P. 285.
and from unquestionable Authority.

Ibid. n. 4.
[First, for the reason of the thing. If Modes of Being should not be allowed
in God, then I affirm it to be impossible for any distinction, and consequently
for any Person to be in God.]

This Argument, as he has framed it, is built upon a mistake in Divinity. If we
take this term God, in a Concrete Sense for habens Deitatem (in the singular
number) there is no Distinction nor any Persons in habente Deitatem. See Chap.
4. n. 2.

The Argument ought therefore to run thus: If Modes of Being should not be
allowed in the Trinity, then I affirm it to be impossible for any Distinction,
and consequently for any Persons to be in the Trinity; and even thus framed, I
take it to be the boldest Assertion I ever met with in Divinity. Another Person
would certainly have worded the Argument thus, Then I conceive it to be
impossible, or it seems to be impossible, but this pleases not our positive
Animadverter; he affirms the thing to be impossible. I deny the consequence
[which the Animadverter proves thus: If there be any Distinction in God or the
Deity, [or the Trinity] it must be either from some distinct Substance, or some
Accident, or some Mode of Being. (For I desire Him or any Mortal breathing to
assign a fourth thing beside these.) But it cannot be from any distinct
Substance, for that would make a manifest Composition in the Divine Nature [or
Trinity,] nor yet from any Accident, for that would make a worse Composition;
and therefore it follows, That this Distinction must unavoidably proceed from
one or more distinct Modes of Being.]

To which I answer briefly, That three distinct Substances make no Composition
in the Trinity: Three distinct Substances make no Composition in a Trinity of
Angels. Every Plurality is not a Composition, but when the Plurality is by way
of component Parts. But the Father, a Divine Person, is not a part of God,
[that is, the Heresy of Sabellius.] The Father, a Divine Person, is perfectly,
completely God.

An Accident would make a Composition in God, because it is impossible, that a
Divine Person should solely consist of an Accident. A Divine Person is
certainly a Substance, if therefore we add an Accident, we compound a Divine
Person of Substance and Accident.

By the same Argument, a Mode of Being inferrs a Composition. A Divine Person,
the Father, can never be solely a Mode, but must consist of Substance and Mode,
See cap. 1. n. 14.
and become a modal compositum, as Substance and Accident infer an accidental
compositum.

Secondly, A Mode is in its own Nature imperfect, as Suarez quoted before,
Chap. 1. n. 14.
says, Modus non potest non esse quid imperfectum, cum non attingat absolutam
rationem entis. But I will ask no other authority but his own to confute this
singular Assertion of the Animadverter's, that there are Modes in God. This is
his own Definition, p. 31. [A Mode of Being is such a thing, as being added to
another, does not make any Addition of another Being or Degree of Being to it,
but only restrains and determines it.] I have already showed that such an
Addition would make a Composition; Chap. 1. n. 14.
now I argue from the latter words, that a Mode restrains and determines the
Being or Nature it belongs to: And will the Animadverter say, That the Divine
Nature can be restrained or determined? If he dares, I desire to know the
difference betwixt a Nature restrained and determined, and a finite Nature; or
whether the Animadverter will say, That the Divine Nature can be Finite? Or
whether our acute Animadverter (to borow his own words) will distinguish
betwixt terminus and finis, and say that the Divine Nature may be determined,
but cannot be Finite? p. 55. the Animadverter tells us, That the Divine Nature
is that, of which there neither are nor can be any Bounds, Limits, or
Determinations, and therefore, I hope, I may say, [from his own Definition of a
Mode,] not any Modes. And this may suffice at present to answer his manifest
Reason.

N. 5. Anim. etc. p. 286.
His unquestionable Authority is no less than all Divines, Metaphysicians and
Schoolmen, they do unanimously concur in this thing, they universally affirm
Modes of Being to be in God, and to belong to him. Nay, (and which is more)
they do in these very Modes state the Ground and Reason of the Personalities,
etc.

Now I do confess that the Phrase of three Modes of Subsistence in the Trinity
is used by most Divines, by most who treat of the Trinity: so is the Term of
Modes used by the new Philosophers, that is not the question: But whether all
Metaphysicians, Schoolmen and Divines do assert Modes of Being in the Trinity,
in the Sense in which the Animadverter has defined them. A Copernican
Astronomer uses the Ancient Terms of Art of Epicycles invented by the
Ptolemaists, and uses the Phrases of the Sun's rising and setting, etc. does he
therefore embrace the Ptolemaick Hypotheses? All wise men understand Phrases
according to the known principles of the Speaker. The Schoolmen believed that
three finite persons had three proper real modes of Subsistence in the sense of
the Animadverter, they declare that the modes of Subsistence which constitute
the Divine persons are in our imperfect conception analogous to the former, but
in the reality not Modes but perfect infinite relative Substances. Holiness,
goodness in the creatures are proper adjuncts, nor can our imperfect minds
conceive of them otherwise in God, and therefore we call them Attributes in
God. But our judicium correctivum tells us, that this is only the weakness of
our conception of things, and that the Divine simplicity will not admit of any
proper Attributes in God.

The same mistake has the Animadverter made in those words of the Reverend Dean
which he quotes p. 287. viz. That the same numerical Essence is whole and
entire in each Divine Person but in a different manner. [By which words it
appears, that he grants that of the Manner, which he had before denied of the
Modus, it is a shrewd temptation to me to think, that certainly this acute
Author takes Modus for one thing and Manner for another.]

The oftener I read these words, the more I admire at the presumptuous
confidence of him that wrote them; I am sure no man can give a more convincing
argument of his utter unacquaintance with the principles of the new Philosophy
than these words, nay indeed with the principles of all Philosophy and Divinity.

There is a mode, habitude or relation whereby God is related to and respects a
created Being. God as a Creator is related in one manner, and God as a
Governor or Judge, is related in another manner. What then are the Relations
of a Creator and Governor or Judge true and proper modes in God? The
Animadverter will himself determine the contrary, p. 242. they derive, says he,
only an external Habitude and Denomination consequent from it upon the Deity it
self.

A Posture of the Body according to the Schoolmen is a real Mode, a distinct
accidentale quid from the Body it self: according to the new Philosophers, a
different posture is only a different circumstance, a different external
habitude of the parts of the Body, or of the whole Body in respect of the
different situation of the parts, yet not one of them would scruple the phrase,
that the Body standing is in a different manner from the Body sitting. I am
really ashamed of spending the Readers time in confuting so weak objections.
Modus is Latin for Manner, therefore he that uses the one or the other phrase
must necessarily assert Modes of Being in the sense of the Reallists, [for I do
more than conjecture, that the Nominalist Schoolmen did not believe these Real
Modes, but my distance from Libraries will not give me leave to determine any
thing positively concerning their opinion] Risum teneatis?

n. 6.
Thirdly, if we should grant the Animadverter a triplicity of proper Modes, if
we confess the three Personalities to be three proper Modes, nay if we allow
that the three relations of Paternity, Filiation, and Procession, and the three
Personalities in the reality make but three Modes, notwithstanding the
distinction that natural reason conceives betwixt proper modes of Subsistence
and relations resulting from Beings constituted; I say, all this, if liberally
granted to the Animadverter, would avail him very little. For first, it would
only increase the difficulty, what we must do with the fourth Relation of
Active Spiration: Four Modes in the Trinity would be new even to the Schoolmen
themselves. But of this afterward. Secondly, this would leave us as much in
the dark, what the three Persons are. A Person is not Personality, but the
Subject of Personality. The Father is not Paternity, but the Subject of
Paternity. Paternity is a personal Property; but will any one dare to say, that
God the Father is a Personal Property. Paternity according to the Animadverter
is a Mode, not [so perfect, as] a Being: It is boldness to ascribe a Mode to
God the Father, but to say that the Father is in recto a Mode, not a Being, is
the height of folly and madness. This is the constant language of the Ancient
Fathers, that the Divine Persons are distinguished (...) in subject. Lib. 4. de
Trin. cap. 2.. 9. p. 324.
Hence Petavius speaking of the Divine Persons according to the opinion of the
Ancient Fathers, says, Non unum and simplex habere (...), that the Phrases of
the Ancient Fathers denied them to have one simple subject; Vt visum est
Sabellio sed diversitatem illam and multiplicitatem in subjecto esse revera. To
assent to the ternary number to be only in the Modes or Properties is the
Sabellian Heresy: the Catholic Faith is that there are three Persons as well
as three Personalities, three Subjects of the Divine Relations.

It is no contradiction that the same (...), the same Subject should be Father
and Son, the contradiction is that the same Subject should be Father and Son to
it self. These Properties cannot have relation to the same Subject. Otherwise
they are consistent in the same Subject, in the same Person, in the same finite
Person: the same Man is both Father and Son.

The Divine Person of the Son, according to the Western Church, is produced
himself, and does produce the Holy Spirit, which are opposite Relations, as
well as Paternity and Filiation. But the contradiction vanishes since those
opposite relations respect distinct Subjects. He is produced by the Father, he
does produce the Holy Spirit. This therefore is the principal enquiry in this
sacred Article what is the Subject of Paternity, not what is Paternity? [that
is but a secondary Article of less moment] what is the Subject of Filiation,
not what Filiation is? What is the Subject of Procession, not what Procession
is? in other words, what is the Father, what is the Son, what is the Holy
Ghost? The Subject of Paternity is not the Subject of Filiation, for then the
Father would be the Son: Nor is the Subject of Procession the Subject either of
Paternity or Filiation, for then the Holy Ghost would either be Father or Son,
or both.

To say that the Divine Nature is the Subject of Paternity, Filiation and
Procession is not only contrary to the Ancients who assert these Properties,
not to be the Names of the Essence; but renders the Sabellian Heresy impossible
to be confuted, since an infinite Person is as capable of sustaining these
three distinct relations as an infinite nature; and makes one and the same
Subject Father and Son to it self; lastly contradicts our formal conception of
these sacred Articles. The Divine Nature is according to our conception the
essential Form of the Divine Persons, is predicated of the Divine Persons in
obliquo, Father, Son and Holy Ghost have each of them the full, whole, and
entire Divine Nature in them. We are enquiring what it is, which may be
predicated in recto of them, and which may be multiplied with them; what is the
Subject to which the essential form, in our imperfect conception of these
things, is joined, and which we conceive as the proper subject of the Divine
Relations: And after the strictest enquiry I can make no better Answer than the
Church has done before me, Father Son and Holy Ghost are three Hypostases,
three Substances, [when that term is not understood as equipollent with
Essence] three infinite Substances [so say the Schoolmen, only they add,
Relative] three infinite spiritual Beings, which is all the Reverend Dean
understood by three infinite Spirits: That is, that they are not three
Faculties or Affections of one Being, but three proper Beings [Both Accidents
and Modes are affections of Being.]

[And moreover, P. 242. l. 5. n. 7.
as every Mode essentially includes in it the Thing or Being of which it is the
Mode, so every Person of the Blessed Trinity, by virtue of its proper Mode of
Subsistence, includes in it the Godhead it self, and is properly [and
formally, p. 293.] the Godhead it self, as subsisting with and under such a
certain Mode or Relation.]

This is a very fruitful Period of Paradoxes. A Mode, according to the
Animadverter, is an Abstract, not concrete Term, to be understood as a simple
Form, as the Affection of a Being [as Himself defines it, p. 31.] and not a
Being affected. The Concrete of a Mode includes the Being as well as the Mode:
Album includes the Thing that is white, as well as whiteness; but Album is not
formally the Mode, not Whiteness, but that which has Whiteness, the subject of
Whiteness. Whiteness the Affection; the Mode is an Abstract, and by the Term
abstracts from the Subject.

Secondly, The Father is Essentially God by his Nature, this all confess; but
who ever said that the Father is Essentially God by his Personality, by his
Paternity?

Thirdly, There can be no such Heresy as that of Sabellius, if every Mode of
the Deity essentially includes the Deity: the Rankest Sabellianist never denied
that Father, Son and Holy Ghost, signified three Modes of the Deity.

Fourthly, I cannot but ask this great Master of Language, why he uses those
Terms its and it, speaking of a Divine Person? He was pleased to condemn this
Language as improper and absurd when used of Human Persons; Anim. etc. p. 341.
is there more respect due to Human Persons than to Divine Persons? Had it been
any fault to have expressed it thus? So every Person of the Blessed Trinity, by
virtue of his [not its] proper Mode of Subsistence, includes in Him (not it)
the Godhead it self. Far be it from me to pretend to be a Critic in Words or
Phrases; I rather crave the Reader's, even the Animadverter's pardon, for much
greater slips than this: However, it is some comfort, that I find Homer Himself
may nod sometimes.

P. 242. l. 17. n. 8.
[And accordingly, as these Relations are three, and and but three, so the
Persons of the Godhead, to whom they belong, are so too, viz. Father, Son and
Holy Ghost.]

Some Persons take a privilege to speak and write what they please. The
Animadverter might almost as well have said, that the Persons of the Godhead
are but two, as that the Relations are but three. Nothing is more notorious
than that there are four Relations in the Trinity; if the Relation of the
Father to the Son, and of the Son to the Father, infer two Relations, there
can be no shadow of pretense, why the Relation of the Father and Son to the
Holy Spirit, and of the Holy Spirit to the Father and Son, should not make two
more.

P. 243.
There are, says the Animadverter, four internal Acts, Generation, Filiation,
Spiration, Procession, [though by the By two of these are not Acts, but
Passions, viz. Filiation and Procession,] upon which the Divine Relations are
founded, and from which they flow. And in the same Page puts the Objection,
That four Relations infer four Persons, which he endeavors to solve in the
following Words: That is one Difficulty, and unanswerable upon the
Animadverter's Principles, that one singular Divine Nature is the Subject of
these four Relations. The Second is, What this Relation of it self is, whether
a Mode or not; an infinite relative Substance or not? The Schoolmen are obliged
to confess this a Property of a Person already constituted, and not a Mode of
Subsistence: Whereas, if with the Ancients we assert the Divine Persons to be
three substantial Beings, three Hypostases [in the proper and genuine Sense of
the Phrase] the Modes of Subsistence, the Divine Relations are capable of an
easy and fair Solution, as I have formerly hinted, chap. 1. n. 14.

[Upon the whole Matter, in discoursing of the Trinity, P. 245. l. 19. n. 9.
Two things are absolutely necessary to be held and insisted upon. One, that
each and every Person of the Blessed Trinity, entirely contains and includes in
himself the whole Divine Nature. The other, That each Person is incommunicably
different and distinct from the other.]

This one Sentence is a truly Golden one, contains the fundamental Truth of
this Article of the Trinity: But to speak the truth, it stands like a
Parenthesis, or like a forged Passage in an Author; it has no connection with
what goes before it, and the latter part is confuted by what follows. These are
the Animadverter's following Words.

[And here, if it should be asked, How they differ, P. 245. n. 10.
and whether it be by any real distinction between the Persons?]

What need of this Question which the preceding Words had so positively and
orthodoxly determined; each Person is incommunicably different and distinct
from the other. What ever is incommunicably different, is certainly really
different by a true, real, and not modal Difference.

The Animadverter answers, P. 246.
[That the Divine Persons really differ, and are distinguished from one
another, viz. by a Modal, or lesser sort of Real difference; according to which
the Divine Nature subsisting under, and being determined by such a certain
Mode, personally differs from it self, as subsisting under, and determined by
another.]

What is this but to tell us, that he did not understand those former Words,
that each Person is incommunicably different from the other. Can any thing be
incommunicably different from it self? He tells us that two Persons are the
same self; how is it possible, that they can be more communicably the same? The
Person of the Father is Modally different from the Person of the Spirator, but
not incommunicably different. The Person of the Father is the Divine Nature,
subsisting under the Mode of Paternity, which Modally differs from it self
under the Mode of Spiration. But all this arises from a mistake of the Nature
of Real and Modal Difference. In a real Difference we say simply, that the one
is not the other, according to the Animadverter, p. 77. [That wheresoever there
are two distinct Persons, we do, and must by all the Rules of Logic and
Grammar say, that the one is not the other.] And the Rule is as true e
converso, that where we can say, one is (simply) not the other, there we must
count two, we must acknowledge a strictly real Difference. Thus we say that the
Father is not the Son; that is, the Subject of Paternity is not the Subject of
Filiation.

In a Modal Difference, the Negation is Modal, secundum quid, in some Mode or
Respect. The Person of the Father, as a Father, is not the Spirator.

But there needs no proof in so allowed a conclusion. Not one Schoolman, whom I
have met with, but is a better Divine and soberer Reasoner; I will add, and a
sounder Philosopher, than to affirm, that the Divine Persons differ Modally, or
that a simple Negation can arise from a Modal Difference. The first Rudiments
in Logicks teach us, That Negative Propositions are of a malignant Nature, and
universally remove the Predicate from the Subject, and not under a certain Mode
only.

The exactly learned and solid Forbesius, as the Animadverter styles him, p.
251. in the same Chapter which he there quotes S. 19. declares that the Divine
Persons differ really, as that is distinguished from the greatest Modal
Distinction.

Inter -- personas in Divinis est realis distinctio, Forbesii Instr. hist.
Theol. lib. 1. cap 35. S. 19.
non tamen essentialis aut absoluta; sed tantum Hypostatica, seu personalis and
relativa, secundum oppositionem personarum inter se internam relativam realem.

To whom I will add the words of the learned Suarez; Lib. 3 de Trin. cap. 1. n.
3. p. 385.
Vnaquaeque divina Persona in se spectata, est vera res per se subsistens, and
una non est alia. Ergo est distinctio realis inter ipsas, nam realiter
distingui, nihil aliud est, quam esse veras res, quarum una non est alia.

Again, Distinctio modalis nunquam invenitur, Ibid. n. 4.
nisi intra eandem rem, quae componitur vel aliquo modo coalescit ex illis
rebus, quae ita distingui dicuntur. Vnde, quod ita ab aliqua re semper est
tanquam modus vel affectio ejus, ut inductione facile constet and ideo in Deo
non habet locum hic modus distinctionis, quae vere and actualiter fit in re
ipsa, quia in eo non habet locum compositio nec modificatio, vel affectio per
aliquid a seipso actualiter in re distinctum a substantia Dei: ergo sola
superest distinctio realis, quae inter divinas personas esse possit.

These words are very full, and deny not only a modal Distinction betwixt the
Divine Persons, but any Modes in God, for that Modes would infer a Composition
in God.

[In the former abstracted Sense they are properly Personalities or personal
Properties. P. 249. lin 9. n. 11.
]

By the Animadverter's Favor, Personality and a personal Property are distinct
Things. Differentia and Proprium are different Species of predicables. Where
the difference is unknown to us, as in all Individuals in all singular Persons,
we use the Properties, or a Collection of Accidents in the Definition instead
of the Difference; but this alters not the Nature of the Properties or
Accidents: Thus the Ancient Fathers described the Divine Persons by their
Personal Properties. These are the Animadverter's own words, Anim. p. 88.
Self-consciousness is one property of a rational or intelligent Being; suppose
of an Angel, then it will be a Property of a Person or Personal Property: Will
the Animadverter grant, that therefore it is properly in an Angel a
Personality? no, the Argument holds the other way, therefore it cannot be
properly a Personality.

P. 249. lin. 20. n. 12.
[For neither would the Latins at first admit of three Hypostases in God, as
taking (...) and (...) for the same thing; for that they had no other Latin
word to translate (...) by, but substantia; by which also they translated
(...).]

First, The Animadverter falls into his old mistake, that the Faith of this
Article is, That there are three Hypostases in God, there are three Hypostases
in the Trinity, in the Unity of the Divine Nature, but not in God.

Secondly, St. Augustine scrupled, nay condemned the phrase of three Persons, as
well as of three Hypostases.

Thirdly, The Distinction of (...) and (...) requires us to distinguish betwixt
first and second Substance. So says Thomas Aquinas in his own quotation: Anim.
p. 272.
Hoc nomen [Hypostasis] apud Graecos significat tantum substantiam
particularem, quoe est substantia prima; sed Latini utuntur nomine substantioe
tam pro prima quam pro secunda.

P. 249. lin. 24. n. 13.
[(The word Subsistentia being by them looked upon as barbarous and not in use.)

St. Augustine manifestly derived Substantia from Subsistere, St. August. lib.
7. de Tr. cap. 4.
and in that Sense translated (...), and yet argued against the Plurality of
the Phrase. Nam si hoc est Deo esse, quod subsistere, ita non erant dicendoe
tres substantioe, ut non dicuntur tres essentioe. -- Si autem aliud est Deo
esse, aliud subsistere, sicut aliud Deo esse, aliud Patrem esse vel Dominum
esse -- relative ergo subsistet, sicut relative gignet and relative dominatur.
Ita substantia non erit substantia, quia relativum erit. Sicut enim ab eo quod
est esse appellatur essentia, ita ab eo quod est subsistere, substantiam
dicimus, absurdum est autem, ut substantia relative dicatur omnis res ad
seipsum subsistet, quanto magis Deus? Nothing is more evident, than that St.
Augustine thought relative subsistere to be a great Absurdity, which is his
Objection against the Phrase of three Hypostases, and also three Persons, that
they signified absolutely; Ibid. cap. 6.
yet the Animadverter has the Confidence to quote St. Augustine (p. 267.) As
stating the divine Personalities upon Relation, for founding Personality in and
upon something relative.

[Nor on the other side, P. 249. lin. 29. n. 14.
would the Greeks acquiesce in a (...), nor admit of the (...) for fear of
falling thereby into the contrary Error of Sabellius.]

I doubt not that the Sabellian Heresy was the cause why the Greeks were not
content with the (...), (for they did not refuse to admit of the Phrase, but
thought it alone insufficient) but required afterward either (...), or the
Addition of (...) to (...), Vide Pet. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 2. S. 9. N. 15. I.
that is, (...).

There are three kinds of Sabellianism: The first is the most common, the
confounding the Persons of the Blessed Trinity, which was otherwise called the
Patri-passian Heresy, which asserts, That Father, Son and Holy Ghost are only
three Names or three Offices of one Person, and consequently that the Father
suffered; this is properly the Heresy of Noetus and not of Sabellius.
Sabellius, Petav. lib. 1. de Trin. cap. 6. S. 5.
says Epiphanius, expressly denied the Father to suffer. However, the Latin
Fathers scarce knew any other Species of Sabellianism, which, with Submission,
I conceive, to be one cause why they are less accurate in treating of this
Mystery than the Greek Fathers.

II.
A second Species of Sabellianism, is the Contraction of the Trinity to the
single Person of the Father, acknowledging the Father to be a true proper
Person, asserting the Word or Son to be not strictly and formally the Person of
the Father, but an Attribute of the Father. His personal Wisdom, in the same
Analogy as Wisdom is an habit of Man; in like manner asserting the Holy Spirit
to be the personal Power of the Father. This Sabellius himself embraced and
explained the Trinity by the Similitude of the Body of the Sun, its Light or
Ray and its Heat. The first, Epiphan. Hoer. 62.
he resembled to the Father, the second to the Son, the third to the Holy
Ghost, this the ancient Fathers called Judaism, that is, such a Trinity which a
Jew would own, and by the same reason it may be styled a Socinian Trinity. No
Socinian in this Sense will scruple a Father, Vide Sti. Basilii Ep. 64.
a Word, and an Holy Spirit.

A third Species of Sabellianism is the compounding the Divine Persons, which
is contrary to a Confusion of them; this asserts a real distinction betwixt the
Divine Persons, but then it makes Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be (as) three
parts of some whole. Petav. Addenda ad Tom. 2. de Trin. p. 866.
So Petavius, varius and a seipso discrepans videtur Sabellius fuisse, ut
interdum personas tres quasi parts alicujus totius esse diceret, ut ex
Epiphanii loco colligitur. Petavius undoubtly alludes to that other Similitude
of the Trinity mentioned by Epiphanius. Epiphan Haer. 62.
That the Trinity was by Sabellius sometimes compared to the Body, Soul and
Spirit in one Man. These three are but one Hypostasis. These three are
Co-essential Parts of one Man, (which possibly moved Sabellius to invent this
Hypothesis, to have an evasion to assert (in some Sense) an Homoousian Trinity.
Vide Pet. lib. 1. de Tr. cap. 6. S. 3.
) This kind of Sabellianism was by some of the Fathers called Atheism. This
Hypothesis in reality ungodding Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Not the Body alone,
or the Soul alone, or the Spirit alone, but all three conjoyntly are one Man,
so not the Father alone, or Son alone, or Holy Ghost alone, but all three
conjoyntly are God: whereas the Catholic Faith is, that each distinct Person
is God. The Father is God the Father, the Son is God of God, the Holy Spirit is
(in the Language of the Church) God the Holy Ghost. See both these kinds of
Sabellianism condemned by Athanasius in his Oration contra gregales Sabellii.

Now the Phrase of three Hypostases is contrary to all the Forms of the
Sabellian Heresy: Of the first there is no doubt; the second is as plain; to be
an Hypostasis, and to be an Attribute are inconsistent and contradictory. So
also to be an incomplete Part, a component Part and an Hypostasis are
inconsistent: It is essential to an Hypostasis to have totale attributum, to be
a complete and perfect whole; so the Words of the first Article of the Augustan
Confession (quoted by the Animadverter, p. 278.) Et utuntur nomine personae ea
significatione, qua usi sunt scriptores Ecclesiastici, ut significet non partem
aut qualitatem sed quod proprie subsistet. That which properly subsists, can
neither be as a Part of any Whole, nor as a Quality or Attribute of any Being.

The Scripture (says the Reverend Dean of St. Paul*s) Im sure represents
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Vindication of Trinity, p. 66.
as three intelligent Beings, not as three Powers or Faculties of the same
Being, which is downright Sabellianism. The very Dreggs of Sabellianism, as I
take it, worse than Sabellianism; for as the Reverend Dean adds, Faculties are
not Persons, no nor one Person neither. A Million of Faculties and Attributes
will not make one Person, A Million of Qualities will never make one Substance,
and a Person is a Substance and a complete Substance too. Again, a Million of
Qualities, Attributes, Faculties, can never make one God; so that if Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, signify three Faculties, three Attributes, three Modes, not
only each single Person is ungodded, but the whole Trinity conjoyntly cannot be
God. The Sabellians acknowledge the Divine Persons to be Deum unum; the
Catholics Deum unum and trinum; but this opinion neither unum nec trinum.

And hence we may see with what Prudence the Church chose the Phrase of three
Hypostases, and what danger there would be to change it with a late Reverend
Author for three Somewhats.

P. 247. lin. 2. n. 16.
[Which three Persons superadd to this Divine Nature or Deity, three different
Modes of Subsistence, founding so many different Relations.]

Three human Persons add to the common [universal] human Nature, three
different Modes of Subsistence, according to the Schoolmen and the
Animadverter. What then? would the Animadverter take this Answer for a Solution
of this question, what three human Persons are? The same reply may justly be
made to himself. This is the difficulty, what in the Deity the ternary number
can belong to, which a Divine Person, is? not, as the Animadverter has mistaken
it, what in the Deity the ternary number can belong to, which a Divine Person,
has. The Schoolmen answer, that the ternary number belongs to an infinite
relative Substance. I agree with them, that a Divine Person is an infinite
Substance, or (which I like better, as freer from Ambiguity) an infinite
substantial Being, and that this may be multiplied as well as Divine Person
with the Trinity.

N. 17.
The design of the Animadverter in quoting so many places of the ancient
Fathers, is very vain to prove a Conclusion, which none denies, that the three
Personalities are (in some Sense or other) three Modes of Subsistence.

However in respect of the Greek Fathers, I have formerly observed, that (...),
does not signify a Mode of Subsistence, nor (...), Subsistence in the Abstract,
but a subsistent Person or Being in concreto.

Ruffinus believed Trinitatem in rebus ac subsistentiis, N. 18. Anim. p. 268.
and not with the Animadverter, Trinitatem in modis ac subsistentiis.
Subsistentia to the Ancients signified concretely the same with (...).

Boethius of all the Latin Fathers of those times seems most acquainted with the
Writings of the Greeks and therefore most expressly determins for the
Universality of the common Divine Essence; N. 19.
he defines a Person in common to God, Angels and Men, to be rationabilis
naturoe individuam substantiam; he uses Subsistentia afterward, which shows,
he looked upon the terms as equivalent. Secondly, He gives us these remarkable
words of the Greek Fathers. (...) which Boethius thus translates, [Id est,
essentioe in solis universalibus quidem esse possunt, in solis vero individuis
and particularibus substant, -- Quo circa cum ipsoe substantioe in
universalibus quidem sunt, in particularibus vero capiant substantiam jure
substantias particulariter subsistentes (...) [groeci] appellaverunt.] These
words are capable of no Evasion, that (...) was in Universals, (...) in
Individuals and Particulars, that the Greeks, whose very words he quotes,
understood it in this Sense, and by (...) understood Substantias particulariter
subsistentes, and this jure, not improprie, not by a Fetch (as Thomas Aquinas)
Anim. etc. p. 272.
afterward [Secundum quod Divina verbis humanis significari contingit:] This
Caution is necessary to reconcile the Subtleties of the Schools and the Faith
of three Hypostases; But Boethius had no need of any such Caution, and therefore
he used it not, and it is the more remarkable, that these words I have quoted
out of Boethius are in that very Book of two Natures in the one Person of
Christ, which the Animadverter quotes; so that either the Animadverter never
read Boethius, or read him at a very careless rate.

N. 20.
Peter Lombard is express against the Relativeness of this Term, Lib. 1. Sent.
Did. 23. n. 1.
Person. Est unum nomen, etc. Persona, quod secundum substantiam dicitur de
singulis Personis and pluraliter, non singulariter in summa accipitur, etc. and
Did. 25. That this Term, Persona, is to be taken in one Sense, when we say
that the Father is a Person, the Son is a Person, etc. and in a different
Sense, when we say, that Father, Son and Holy Ghost are three Persons; in this
last Phrase, it only signifies three Personalities, in the former a proper
Person. Now this to me is a betraying of the Catholic Faith; a Confession,
that we ought not to say, three Persons, if we speak properly, if we understand
this Term Person in the same Sense, in which we say that the Father, etc. is a
Person.

N. 21. P. 273.
The Animadverter quotes these words of Thomas Aquinas, [Hoc nomen persona in
divinis significat relationem per modum rei subsistentis, sic and hoc nomen
Hypostasis.]

I wish our great Critic had translated these words, I take this to be the
meaning of them, viz. That this Name, Person, in the Trinity signifies a
relation conceived by us after the Nature of a Substance, and not after the
Nature of a Mode, which the Animadverter has all along with so much confidence
pretended. I cannot define Substance better than by res subsistens.

N. 22. P. 275. lin. 9.
[Only I think fit to remark this; That whereas I have alleged some of the
Schoolmen, (and particularly Durandus, Thomas, and Suarez) expressing the
Divine Personalities by Relations, as well as by Hypostases or Subsistences, as
they do in both these mean but one and the same thing, viz. a Relative
Subsistence or a subsisting Relation, etc.]

If the Animadverter means that a Relative Subsistence and a subsisting
Relation are, according to the Schoolmen, materially, identically the same
thing, it is no News. The Schoolmen hold, that the Relation and the Divine
Essence in each single Person are thus identically the same: each single Person
being God, that is, a pure simple Act. But if he means, that they are formally
the same, it is manifest that he understands neither of the Phrases, nor what
the Schoolmen meant by them.

Subsistence (which himself very justly calls ( p. 97.) Self-subsistence) is an
absolute Attribute, and can no more be relative, than Self-Consciousness. By a
relative Subsistence the Schoolmen mean, that the Relation in each single
Person modifies the one, common, absolute, essential Subsistence, and renders
it incommunicable, which of it self, as being infinite, it was not. But a
Divine Person being as Ruffinus observed, Hoc ipsum quod extat and subsistit,
and consequently the Divine Persons being three Somewhats subsisting, three
Hypostases in concreto, and not three Personalities with Peter Lombard; Thomas
Aquinas and the other Schoolmen found out a relative Substance, a relationem
per modum rei subsistentis, a Relation subsisting, and affirm that the three
Divine Persons are three Relations subsisting. But to this I answer: First,
That this will assert four Subsistences in the Trinity, one absolute and
essential, and three relative ones, by which the Relations subsist, which is
contrary to all Antiquity. Secondly, This is but a subtler Disguise for what
the Master of the Sentences spoke more plainly, viz. That there are not three
Persons in the same Sense in which we say that the Father is a Person. For the
Father is not Paternity, and therefore not Paternity subsisting: The Father is
not a Relation subsisting, but formally properly God, an infinite Mind. Lastly,
A Mode, a Relation subsisting is perfectly unconceivable and contrary to the
known rules of Philosophy. And now it may be time to put an end to this First
Part, and to my Animadversions upon the Animadverter, first taking a short
review how far I have proceeded.

My first Chapter is chiefly spent in explaining the Metaphysical Terms used in
this Mystery, such as Substance, Accident, Mode, the Nature of modal
Difference, Essence, Existence, Subsistence, modal Composition, etc. How much
reason there was to re-examine the Animadverter's Definitions and Distinctions
of these things in Relation to the Subject of the Trinity, I must leave to the
Reader to judge, when he has perused the Chapter.

My second Chapter is chiefly spent in defending that ancient Illustration of
the Incarnation, the Conjunction of the human Soul and Body in one Person, from
the Objections of the Animadverter, one Question of which was briefly touched,
Chap. 1. n. 10. In the close of this Chapter I give the Reader a very necessary
and useful Distinction concerning the formal reason of Personality, in
reference not only to Finite Persons, but to the Divine Persons.

My third Chapter enquires how far a Prius and Posterius may be admitted in the
Trinity; whether Self-Consciousness be a personal Act? explains at large that
Subtlety of the Schools concerning the relative Personality of the Divine
Persons, and shows the Animadverter's great mistakes therein; as also that
Question of the number of the Divine Persons, why we believe a Trinity neither
more nor fewer? As also that difficult Problem concerning the Singularity or
Plurality of the Predication of any Attribute concerning the Divine Persons,
where I first give the Predications themselves, which are to be solved, and
show the Insufficiency of the Schoolmen's Solutions from the Distinction of
essential and personal Attributes, from the Distinction of Nouns Substantive
and Nouns Adjective, from an absolute and relative Predicate. Lastly, I lay
down the true rule my self, which at persent I only vindicate from a
Mis-interpretation of the Schoolmen by distinguishing betwixt the Articles of
the Unity of God and the Unity of the Trinity, which the Schoolmen confound.

My fourth Chapter treats of the import of these Phrases, viz. Three infinite
Minds, three Gods, three Substances, one infinite Mind, one God, and how far
they are allowed or disallowed in speaking of the Trinity; of the
Animadverter's Answer to the Objection of Polytheism from the Phrase of three
Divine Persons: and occasionally of the Notion of the Unity of God, and of the
Appropriation of the title of Only True God to the Person of the Father, and of
his being styled the Fountain of the Divinity.

My fifth Chapter is chiefly Historical of the Opinion of the Ancients, whether
they believed the Divine Persons to be three intelligent Beings? Of the import
of that Phrase, that the Son is the substantial WORD and Wisdom of the Father,
of the Particle OF in this Mystery, and occasionally I give an answer to the
Socinian Objection from the Phrase of three Divine Persons, and enquire whether
the same Wisdom can be both begotten and unbegotten?

My sixth Chapter treats of what is Fundamental in this Mystery, of the
different Hypotheses of explaining the Unity of the Trinity, of the Blasphemy
of the Modern Socinians compared with their Predecessors; of the historical
Truth of Petavius and Dr. Cudworth's Assertion, that the specific Unity of the
Trinity was embraced by the Nicene Fathers, which I largely vindicate against
the Animadverter's Exceptions: the same discussed problematically betwixt the
Animadverter and my self; Whether a Specific Unity of the Trinity and a
Numerical Unity were in the judgment of the Ancients inconsistent? Why
Philoponus and his Followers were called Tritheit Heretics?

My last Chapter treats of Heb. 1.3. Whether that place was the Warrant of the
Phrase of three Persons or three Hypostases? Of the Divine Personalities,
according to the Schoolmen, of the Sense of (...) to the Ancients, of Cajetan's
calling the Trinity one Suppositum; of essential and personal Acts according to
the Schoolmen, Whether there are true Modes in God? Of the Insufficiency of
three Modes to explain the Trinity, Whether the Divine Persons differ modally
or really? Of three different Species of Sabellianism; Of the Distinction of a
Relative Subsistence and a subsisting Relation.

There are several other material Enquiries in the Explication of these, and
others which are less material, which I leave to the Reader's own Observation.

This, I hope, I may say of this present Essay, that there are very few of the
material Disputes of the Schoolmen concerning this Article of the Trinity,
which the Reader will not find either explained in this Essay, or at least a
sufficient Key given to him, who shall desire to consult the Schoolmen
themselves.

The many and great mistakes of the Animadverter convinced me of the Usefulness
of such an Explication; he often swallowed without chewing, what they strained
very hard to believe, and at other times sheltered himself under their Name and
Authority, when his opinion was contradictorily opposite to theirs, and which
is more, forgot or omitted the principal and most material Enquiry in this
Article of the Trinity, viz. What the three Divine Persons are, that is, What
Suppositum, Persona, Hypostasis signifies, when these terms are predicated
plurally of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The Animadverter defines Suppositum
in the singular number, Anim. etc. p. 35.
Substantia singularis completa per se subsistens, but this according to the
Animadverter only increases the Difficulty, since he dare not deny a
Multiplication of the Definitum, of Suppositum. He cannot deny, that there are
tria supposita in the Trinity, yet with earnestness he contends that the
Definition cannot be multiplied, that there are not tres substantioe singulares
completoe per se subsistentes in the Trinity; but how unsatisfactory soever the
Scholastic Subtleties in this Article appear to me, I am satisfied, that I had
contented my self with a private Proposal of my Hypothesis to some of my
Friends, if the unmeasurable Blasphemy, and boasting of our Socinian Writers
had not over-perswaded me.

I plainly saw that nine par^s in ten of the Objections of the Socinians are
not levelled against the Fundamental Truth of this Article, the true Divinity
of each single Person and their real Distinction, but against the particular
Hypothesis of the Schools, the Singularity of the common Divine Essence; these
Objections are of no force against the Nicene Hypothesis, and therefore we meet
not with them in the Writings of the Ancients, of the most learned Defenders of
the Orthodox Faith against the Arians.

The Sophistry of those few Socinian Objections, which remain, appeared no less
evident to me; and I doubted not by God's Grace to be able to make them appear
so to any unprejudiced Reader, that is, I doubted not by God's Assistance
satisfactorily to any unbiased Person to reconcile the Nicene Hypothesis, and
the Article of the Unity of God.

I was fully persuaded, that I could clearly answer all the Socinian Harangues
of Nonsense and Contradiction, which they so confidently charge upon this
Article of the Trinity, and thereby reduce the debate to this single Question,
Whether the Article be revealed or not?

The Article of the Trinity will still be a Mystery, that is, it will still be
unfathomable to us, Why there were a Trinity of Divine Persons neither more nor
fewer? How God an immaterial Spirit can generate or beget a Son? Why but one
Son? Why the Holy Spirit is not also a Son? Wherein his Procession differs from
Filiation?

The Economy also of the Divine Persons will be a Mystery; How Father, Son and
Holy Ghost concurred to the Creation of the World? In what manner they jointly
acted in the natural Kingdom of Providence? How they will govern after the
surrender of the mediatorial Kingdom of the Son of God?

In these, and the like Questions did the Ancient Fathers place the Mystery of
this sacred Article; in these the Nicene Hypothesis, that I mean, which I
propose as the Nicene Hypothesis, still places an unsearchable Mystery.

The Schoolmen can decide you these with the greatest ease, if you believe
them, with the greatest exactness; but then instead of these which they pretend
to solve, they have given us many others ten times more difficult.

These Mysteries claim express Revelation for their Foundation, viz. That God
has an only begotten Son and a Blessed Spirit proceeding from him; That God the
Father made the Worlds, That the Son laid the Foundations of the Earth, That
the Spirit moved upon the Face of the Waters at the Creation. For these we have
the Authority of the Ancient Fathers, these are manifestly Difficulties only in
the Modus, we cannot indeed tell how they can be, nor can the Socinians prove
that they cannot be. And I hope, these great Adorers of Reason, the Socinians,
will esteem God's Word a sufficient proof for an Article of Faith, against
which they have no solid Objection; at least, I presume, they will pardon the
Orthodox, if they take not the Mysteriousness of an Article, for an Objection
against the truth of it; but this will be more proper, when I have finished my
Second Part which relates to the Article of the Unity of God, which if God
grant Life and Health and Ability shall be performed with all convenient speed.
To God the Father Almighty, and his Eternal Son, and ever Blessed Spirit, be
all Honor, Praise, Glory, Dominion and Power, now, henceforth* and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and are to be Sold by William Rogers.
ARchbishop Tillotson's Sermons and Discourses, in 4 Vol. 8 vo. -- Discourse
against Transubstantiation, 8o. alone. Price 3 d. stitcht. -- Persuasive to
frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. 8 vo. stitcht 3 d. In
12o. bound, 6 d. -- Sermons concerning the Divinity of our B. Savior, 8 vo. --
Six Sermons. I. Of Stedfastness in Religion. II. Of Family-Religion. III. IV.
V. Of the Education of Children. VI. Of the Advantages of an early Piety. In 8
vo. Price 3 s. In 12o. 1 s. 6 d. Bishop of Worcester's Doctrines and Practices
of the Church of Rome truly represented, etc. 4 to. -- Doctrine of the Trinity
and Transubstantiation compared, in two Parts, 4 to. Bishop of Norwich's Two
Sermons of the Wisdom and Goodness of Providence, before the Queen at
Whitehall, 4 to. -- Sermon preached at St. Andrews Holborn, on Gal. 6.7. -- Of
Religious Melancholy. A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, 4 to. --
Of the Immortality of the Soul, preached before the King and Queen at
Whitehall, on Palm Sunday, 4 to. Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's Answer to a
Discourse entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant Popery, 2 d. Edit. 4
to. -- Answer to the Amicable Accommodation of the Differences between the
Representer and the Answerer, 4 to. -- Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend
Dr. Calamy, 4 to. -- Vindication of some Protestant Principles of Church-Unity
and Catholic Communion, etc. 4 to. -- Preservative against Popery, in 2 Parts,
with the Vindication. 4o. -- Discourse concerning the Nature, Unity, and
Communion of the Catholic Church, First Part. 4 to. -- Sermon before the Lord
Mayor, November 4. 1688. 4 to. -- Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, 3
d. Edit. 4 to. -- Case of Allegiance to Sovereign Powers stated, etc. 4 to. --
Vindication of the Case of Allegiance, etc. 4 to. -- Fast-Sermon before the
Queen at Whitehall, June 17. 4 to. -- Practical Discourse concerning Death, In
Octavo, Eighth Edition, Price 3 s. In Twelves, Price 2 s. -- Practical
Discourse concerning Judgment, Third Edit. 8 vo. -- Sermon before the House of
Commons, Jan. 30. 1692, 4 to. -- Sermon preached before the Queen, Feb. 12.
1692 4 to. -- The Charity of Lending without Usury, in a Sermon before the Lord
Mayor on Easter Tuesday, 1692, 4 to. -- Sermon at the Temple Church, May 29
1692, 4 to. -- Sermon preached before the Queen, June 26. 1692. 4 to. -- Sermon
preached at the Funeral of the Reverend Dr. Meggot, late Dean of Winchester,
Dec 10. 1692, 4 to. -- A Discourse concerning the Divine Providence, 2 d. Edit.
4 to. -- Apology for writing against Socinians, 4 to. -- A Sermon at the Temple
Church, December. 30. 1694. upon the sad Occasion of the Death of our Gracious
Queen, 4 to. Dr. Claget's Sermons in Two Volumes, Octavo. Dr. Wake's Sermons
and Discourses on several Occasions, 8 vo. Mr Elis's Necessity of serious
Consideration and speedy Repentance 8o. -- Folly of Atheism demonstrated to the
Capacity of the most Unlearned Reader, 8 vo. -- A short Scripture-Catechism,
12o. A Defense of the Dean of St. Paul's Apology for writing against the
Socinians, 4 to. A Defense of Dr. Sherlock's Notion of a Trinity in Unity, 4
to. Mr. Wilson's Discourse of Religion; showing its Truth and Reality; or the
Suitableness of Religion to Human Nature, 8 vo. -- Discourse of the
Resurrection, showing the Import and Certainty of it, 8 vo. Mr. Blackali's
Sermon at Brentwood in Essex, October 7. 1693, at the Visitation of Henry Lord
Bishop of London, 4 to. A Sermon upon the Resurrection, preached before the
Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, at St. Bridget's Church,
on Monday in Easter-Week, April 9. 1694. 4 to. A Commentary on the Five Books
of Moses: With a Dissertation concerning the Author or Writer of the said
Books; and a General Argument to each of them. By Richard, Lord Bishop of Bath
and Wells. In Two Volumes, 8 vo. Mousoleum: A Funeral Poem on our late Gracious
Sovereign Queen Mary of Blessed Memory. An Elegy on his Grace, John late Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury. both by N Tate. Mr. Dryden's Translation of C. A. du
Fresnoy's Art of Painting, with an original Preface containing a Parallel
betwixt Painting and Poetry, etc.

