HOLY Father Bradfords Exhortation to his Children.

depiction of burning at stake

(...) Description of the manner of the Murder of Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.

Printed for T. Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1683.

The Godly Exhortation OF HOLY Father Bradford, Which he gave to his Wife,
Children, and Friends, a little before his Death: Who dyed a Martyr for the
Gospel in Q. Mary's Days. Wherein is plainly shown the Excellency of the
Protestant Religion, and the Happiness of those that profess and live the same.

As also the Damnableness of the Romish Religion, with their Bloody and
Rebellious Crimes laid open.

With the Relation of the Murder of that Just Justice Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey.

Revelations 6. 10. And they cried with a loud voice, saying, How long Lord,
Holy and True, do thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth.
With Allowonce.

London, Printed for T. Passenger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge. 1683.

An Exhortation Which a learned Father of the Church gave to his Friends and
Relations a little before his Martyrdom.
The Words, or Advice of a Person departing, are generally very taking.
NO Wife so wilful, no Son so stubborn, or Daughter dull, in my apprehension,
but would willingly watch for the words of him that is leaving the World, more
specially they would, or at leastwise should be attractive and attentive to
the sententious Speeches of a sober sollid suffering Servant of Jesus Christ;
But although Godliness be the greatest gain, it has few followers, because so
many Fools. Persecution is the Thorn in you, ye Messengers of Satan; must Piety
be punished? what a pity is it; that which is the Garland of Glory, the Gate to
Heaven, should be so slighted, it increases my sorrow: But why should I be
singular? Solomon says, and what he said was true, that there is no new thing
under the Sun, for since Sin entered into the World, by consequence there must
be sorrow and suffering. Persecution is not only a Legacy, but is entailed on
the Godly and to their Heirs, whilst Godly, so long as Sun and Moon shall
endure, for all that will live Godly must suffer Persecution; Therefore my dear
Friends, wonder not at the Prosperity of the Wicked, for they have only theirs
here, but not hereafter; and though there be no Bonds in their Death, yet are
they Curses from the Cradle, and their punishment will be perpetual.

My advise to you is, if you love me, your selves, and your Souls, strive with
all your strength to secure that good part which can never be taken from you;
so shall you be blessed, and your Prayers be presented as sweet perfumes in the
presence of him who rewards every Man according to his Deeds.

I who was once zealous for the Papists, have through Grace my Eyes enlightened
and, see my Errors and sorrow for my simplicity, and am now ready to offer my
self as a sweet Sacrifice to and for my dearest Savior.

depiction of Father Bradford speaking

Father Bradford's last Speech, or Sayings in Prison, and at the place of
Execution, to his Wife and Children, and his Friends, fit to be remembered.
GIve ear my Friends, Relations dear,
whom in the Flesh I love;
Of all things whatsoever, Sin fear,
and trust in God above.
My dying words hark well unto,
let each of them conduce;
And highly be esteemed by you,
observe for a good use.
Since I must suffer for the Truth
in furious Flames of Fire:
I you advise from lusts of Youth,
you strive now to aspire.
In these distracting times provide,
and save your selves from Sin;
Your Souls securely, safely hide,
beware of Satan's Ginn.
He waits and watches to devour,
it is his whole delight;
To that intent each day and hour,
his bait hides from your sight.
Sit not admiring at Worlds splender,
nor bear it in esteem;
For in the end 'twill no more render,
then does the vainest Dream.
Pleasures and Treasures all are vain,
no comfort could I find:
They nothing but distract the Brain,
likewise perplex the mind.
If that you would hark unto me,
i would learn you somewhat more;
The which would profitable be,
which you never heard before.
Now therefore unto me attend,
and let my dying words prevail;
In that I draw unto my end,
and from this World lanch with fresh gall.
In ways of Piety proceed,
and fear not frowns of Popish Party;
And so shall you be blessed indeed,
if that you love Gods Laws most hearty.
The word of God take that for Rule,
there lies the Touchstone for to try;
Learn therefore by no other School,
that shows the faults of Popery.
And furthermore I advise you,
if that you mean your Soul to save;
Never to trust that Bloody Crew,
to do with them, O never have.
If that before them you they call,
to give a ransom of your Faith;
Be fearful not in Iudgement-Hall,
but tell them thus the Scripture says.
And if that reason will not take place,
and she persist in acts of ill;
By cheerful countenance let your face
declare that you your blood will spill.
Rather than that you any way
the Laws of God for to condemn;
Or Heavenly Master disobey,
you value not the wrath of Men.
Fear not the furious flames of Fire,
therein to broyl be well contented;
Of Heavenly Honors none there is higher,
of Martyrdom none e're repented.
To seal the truth with dearest blood,
flinch not nor fearful be at all;
I it esteem as chiefest good,
and Glory in that God does call.
Me unto Martyrdom that those,
who love the truth and live therein;
And likewise to confute my Foes,
which in dark ignorance live in.
When that unto the Stake I come,
I trust that fear will take its flight;
I hope converted will be some,
although it be a fearful sight.
Christians to see in fire to fry,
disdaining pardons which they bring;
Away with them, will then say I,
I fear not Death, no, nor his Sting.
I have a life to lose it is true,
and I must breath in truth resign;
What though it be by wicked crew,
the breath I have is none of mine.
My loving Friends, Relations who
have heard these words of mine;
You Will likewise such a pattern show,
declaring a power Divine.
The time is short I must live in,
therefore my words pray mark;
Of all things fearful be of Sin,
and mind Gods word to hark.
So shall you in the end attain
to perfect bliss and joy;
Although it be through fiercest pain,
the which will seem a toy.
When to your Masters House you come,
and a Royal Throne attain;
Repent you will not the work you have done,
no sufferings, with great pain.
For there all Tears are wiped away,
and sorrows they are fled;
No Night is there, but always day,
with bliss to be bestead.
Therefore me follow, nothing fear,
disdain the Worlds grand Glory,
For Gospel promises shall cheer,
and mind not lying Story.
THus have you Reader, by my scant Capacity, a Catalogue of very choice Sayings
and Expressions, the which you should lay up in your heart, that you may be
able to lay it out in your Life, when such sad occasions shall call you to it:
It is usual with the World to wonder at every thing that is not wicked; But
alack poor Souls, when they shall, as I hope they will come to have a sense of
their Sin, which is the cause of sufferings here and hereafter to all Eternity;
I heartily wish that that word Eternity was more minded, and more made of then
it is at this Day. To tell you what is minded, which you cannot but mind; the
Pride of your Looks, the Pride of your Locks, the Pride of your Gate and
Gesture, the Pride of your Garb and Vesture, the Pride of your outward
Enjoyments, the Pride of your inward Indowments, and what follows, Poverty, a
punishment who has no pity.

This good Man met with many Conflicts in the World, yet waded through the
worst of them all, and is now launcht into the Ocean of Eternal bliss, the
which is possible for you likewise to enjoy, following his Directions. And as
they are the advice of so Grave a pattern, I hope they will not be slighted,
but seriously sought for by all serious, sober, sollid Servants of our Savior
Jesus Christ.

A Song of these present Times, SHOWING
The bloody Villainies of the Papists, by their contriving of the ruin of the
King and Kingdom: As also their bloody cruelty on the body of that worthy
Knight, Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey, as is now made appear by one of that wicked
Crew, affirming that two Jesuits running him into a House in the Strand, fell
upon him, and with a Handkerchief choked him; it is reported that they laid him
under the Altar the space of two days, and then conveyed him in a Coach to the
place where he was found with his own Sword run into his Body: thereby thinking
to Stigmatize his Name with the Infamy of slaying himself.
HEarken my friends to what I have to say,
For it relates unto this present day
Wherein we live, and daily we may see
The Plots and Practice of impiety.
Therefore I you advise for to take care
Of such that would entrap us in a snare:
The Popish Party wicked have designed,
Our ruin they most cunning have combined,
Never to trust them I would you advise,
Who wickedly against King and Country rise,
And that you may behold their cruelty,
The murder mind of Edmond Godfrey.
That worthy Knight, whose Blood does daily cry
For vengeance for their grand impiety;
And as they served him, so would they do,
If that they could, unto the best of you.
Their malice, wrath, and rage, indeed is such,
To murder Prince with people they not grutch;
How can you trust them therefore, who conspire
Death of our persons, and our houses fire?
Take my advice the which I am sure is just,
And in them have no considence or trust;
but pray that God would frustrate their concealings,
And bring to light their horrid wicked dealings.
Stand up for truth, and steadfastly proclaim,
That unto Death you will maintain the same,
As Loyal Subjects unto Charles your King,
Declare and show you are in every thing.
And for his welfare pray most zealously,
That God would save him from all destiny:
And with him those that love and fear his Name.
And Church of Protestant preserve the same.
Pray likewise that the Popish party may
Be intrap'd in the snares the which they lay
For those who wish our King and Country well,
And whose demeaners us the same do tell.
Pray for the downfall of that Man of Sin,
And those likewise who have Combiners been,
Against the welfare of our English Realm,
And of our Sovereign sitting at the Helm.
Loud as a Trumpet lift up voice and cry
To the all-seeing God that dwells on high:
For nearer never were to destiny,
Then now; record it to Posterity.
That after ages having intimation,
May banish Popery from out this Nation;
And as your Prayers, so let your praises be
Ascribed to his gracious Majesty.
Who has took care to seat his Crown upon,
Over hateing Popish superstition:
Sure 'twas the mighty work of God indeed,
That him unto so worthy act should lead.
Great Charles thy goodness to extol and praise,
We must and will, and wish thee happy days:
And as we wish and pray for daily bread,
So that thy Crown may flourish on thy head.
Thus let your Prayers be pouring night and day
A Remedy like this there is none I say:
To blast and bring to naught such acts of evil,
Which have assistance only from the Devil.
Therefore my words to mark and mind I would
And my directions follow that you should:
And if that to my words you do address,
Expect you may that God he will you bless.
And save you as he has unto this day,
If that in faith you humbly to him pray;
Craving of him his mercy to obtain,
Whereby a Crown of Glory you may gain.
Advised be, and choose the ways of truth,
And that especially in time of youth:
And so I leave you unto his protection,
Who wont your suit deny, or give rejection.
FINIS.

