A Serious MEDITATION UPON The Dealings of God with England, and the State
thereof in general.
O England! thy day of visitation from the Lord, has been exceeding large, and
his dealings with thee exceeding wonderful, when thou wast in distress and
cried unto the Lord, he heard thee, and delivered thee from thy oppressors; but
Oh how quickly have thou forgotten the loving kindness of the Lord, and the
Dealings of thy God! Remember the days that are past when thou wast in bondage
and slavery, and desired freedom to Worship the Lord, and the Lord heard, and
granted unto thee thy desire, and also made known the way of his Worship within
thy Borders, in thy Towns, in thy Streets, in thy Assemblies, has the Lord
proclaimed the Way of Life and Salvation, by his Children and Servants: But oh
how have thou required the Lord for his loving kindness! How have thou
entreated his Servants with Prisons, Whippings, and Revilings! who bare their
Testimony against thy Wickedness, against thy Pride and Covetousness, and
Idolatry; but oh how have thou rejected the Counsel of the Lord! and has
chosen thine own ways, and followed thine own Counsel, and hardened thy heart,
and stiffned thy neck: even like a Rebellious people, that would none of the
Law of the Lord, and therefore thou must eat the fruit of thy own doings, and
confess that the Lord is just in all his ways, and Righteous in all his
judgments; for thou have sinned against the Lord, in that thou have not
performed thy Promises, which thou made in the Day of thy Distress; and
therefore Distress must come upon thee again, to bring thee to remember those
things and repeat, which if thou do, the Lord will have mercy upon thee, and
heal thy backslidings, but if thou do not, but continue in thy Rebellion, the
Lord will continue his Judgments upon thee: Should not the long-suffering of
the Lord lead thee to Repentance, and his gentle dealings with thee by
correction, cause thee to understand that he loves thee? but if thou will not
receive instruction, by all his gentle dealings, but wilt go on in thy
wickedness; What can thou then expect, but the Indignation of the Lord to
fall upon thee? What do thou think if thou continue in persecuting the
Servants of the Lord, (to wit) those that tell thee of thy Wickedness, thy
Pride and Covetousness; do thou think that that will turn the Judgments of
God from thee? surely nay, that will but hasten Woe and Misery upon thy own
head; Oh what a day of visitation have thou had! How many times has the Lord
delivered thee! and now it may be said by thee, as it was once concernig Israel
of old; yea they turned back and tempted God, and limited the holy one of
Israel; they remembered not his Hand, nor the Day when he delivered them from
the Enemy: Is not this thy condition oh England? although indeed the Lord has
a remnant in thee, that do not bow their knees to Baal, nor pour out
drink offerings to the Queen of Heaven; and this remnant are those which thou
calls TROUBLERS OF THY PEACE, which trouble thee much, like as Elia troubled
Israel, and this remnant that Woman Jessabel, (I mean thy false Church that
paints her self) would have destroyed, that so her false Prophets which feeds
at her Table, might not be Troubled, but Trouble must come upon them, and their
peace must be broken; and although Jessabel cause a Fast to be Proclaimed, yet
God will execute his judgment in thee, and if thou say in thy heart, wherefore
come these things upon me? for the greatness of thine Iniquityes are thy skirts
discovered, and thy heels made bare, for the Lord has seen thy Adulteryes, and
thy Neighings, the Lewdness of thy Whoredoms, and thine Abominations on the
Hills, in the fields; Woe unto thee oh England! Will thou not be made clean,
when shall it once be?

Oh! What a large profession has been made in thee? What a talk of Godliness
and Christianity, but alas what is found in thee? Does not Pride and Envy
abound in thee? and has not these things greatly displeased the Lord? and for
this cause is the anger of the Lord kindled, which will devour the Briars and
Thorns in one day, and in that Day whether will you flee? and where will you
leave your glory? you that have gloriyed in professing the Gospel and
Ordinances, and even made this a Covering for your Wickedness and Abomination,
who under a pretense of seeking the Glory of God, have sought honor to your
selves, and to make your Names great on the earth: Is it not even thus oh
England? and, Has not thy Prophets that divine for money, and thy Priests that
preach for hire, have not they flattered thee in thy Iniquities? Have not they
cried, Peace to thy Rulers, even until the finger of the Lord has broken forth
against them, and they have been confounded? And will thou not for all this
receive instruction ^or correction, but still go on in thy Wickedness and
Rebellion against the Lord? What will thou revolt more and more, and show more
and ^ore Cruelty to the Servants of the Lord; surely then more and more of the
Indignation of the Lord thou must feel: What is it now become a trouble to thee
to have sin reproved in thy gates? Do thou make him an offender that speaks
the truth? And do those men that testify against thy Wickedness, break thy
Peace, the peace of thy Rulers, and the peace of thy Priest? And do thy
Prophets, that divine for money, and Priests that preach for hire, do they tell
thee, that it would be a happiness to thee, if thou were rid of those men that
reprove thee for thy Wickedness? Do not they even thus oh England? And do not
many of thy People think and say the same? What would it be thy happiness to
sin without reproof? surely, nay; for if once they whose souls are vexed with
thy filthy conversation, were driven out of thee; then would thy misery come,
and the Lord would make thee desolate, even like Sodom, and Gomorrah, which was
overthrown, for an example of his Righteous judgments unto all that would not
receive Instruction.

Oh how is thy SILVER become Dross! And thy LIBERTY become bondage! Oh how art
thou gone Backward, and not Forward! even doting upon thy old Idols, and not
content that they should worship them that have set their minds thereupon; but
thou would also Compel that remnant in thee, that are followers of the Lamb,
for whose sake the Lord has long spared thee, and yet thou art so foolish, and
unwise, (as much as in thee lies) to hasten on thy own Destruction: What may
wickedness be tolerated in thee, and not be reproved? Is this the Liberty that
thou now seeks after? Would thou have Wickedness established by a Law, and
the reprovers thereof be condemned? Is it not even thus within thy borders? And
yet for all this thou will lean upon the Lord, and say, is not he amongst us,
no evil can come unto us? and cry peace, peace, even till destruction come upon
thee from the Lord: Oh how often has the Lord invited thee! and even with his
Love sought to draw thee unto himself; but thou have refused his loving
invitation, and grieved his holy Spirit from time to time: so that if the Lord
say, as he once said, concerning Ephraim, it is but just; England is joined to
Idols, let it alone; and then desolation and misery will come upon it. When I
would comfort my heart against sorrow, it is even faint within me, to consider
what WARNINGS, from Time to Time have thou had, and this thou have, and do
account thy trouble: But greater trouble shall come upon thee from the Lord,
except thou repent: Oh how have thou chosen thy own Ways and followed thy own
Coun^els, and would have Ministers of thy own making, and Prophets which would
flatter thee in thy Wickedness, and Prophesy smooth thing unto thee, even the
deceit of their own hearts, and this thou have loved rather than plain and
honest dealing; and now what shall the Lord do unto thee for those things?
Shall not he recompense thee according to thy ways and doings? and in that day
thou shall confess to his Righteus judgments. How have thy Priests stirred up
thy Rulers against a harmless people? even like as Amazia the Priests of Bethel
did, who complained against Amos the Prophet, saying, Amos has conspired
against the King, the Land is not able to bear his words; is it not even thus
among thy Priests, Oh England! and alas, What have this People done against
thee, I mean the despised remnant which are called QUAKERS? What evil have they
done, that thou art so mightily troubled? What do thy Priests say concerning
them, do they say they are Heretics, and such like? But How, When, or Where
did they prove it against them, within thy borders? it is good for all thy
Inhabitants, Oh England, to consider of this matter, and not Imbrue their hands
in the Bl^^^ of the Innocent; for of a truth the Lord has raised this People
up within thy borders, to make thee a happy and a blessed Nation, for even in
HIM, in whom they have believed, the Nations comes to be blessed, even in
JESUS CHRIST the Covenant, the Light which is given for salvation to the ends
of the earth, of whom they have born, and do bear their Testimony within thy
borders, of which Testimony they need never be ashamed; which if thou should
always reject, and go on in thy Rebellion, thou will be most Unhappy and
Miserable, even the worst of the Nations: and therefore it is my desire in the
bowels of love, as being one of thy Inhabitants, who wishing thy welfare, and
happiness, that thou may seriously Meditate upon the dealings of God with
thee, and upon his loving kindness which has been, and yet is Tendered unto
thee; and that thou may return to the Lord, is the earnest desire of my
soul; lest it be said to thee, as Christ once said to Jerusalem; O ENGLAND
ENGLAND, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee; how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers
her Chickens under her wings, but you would not? Oh that thou had known in
this thy Day, the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from
thine eyes.

JOHN BRAITHWAIT.

THE END.

