ANASTASIS BRITANNICA and HIBERNICA, GREAT BRITAIN and IRELANDS Resurrection.
Or the happy Turn upon his Majesty's happy MESSAGE and happy RETURN.

The first Part upon occasion of the Thanksgiving, May 24. 1660. which was for
his Majesty's gracious Message from beyond Seas to the two Houses, delivered
upon 2 Samuel 19.14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man, so that they sent this word to the King, Return thou, and all
thy servants. The second Part upon occasion of the Thanksgiving, June 28. 1660.
for His Majesty's safe Return to His Kingdoms, delivered on Verse 15. So the
King returned, and came to Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal to go to meet the
King to conduct the King over Jordan.
By JOHN BRADSHAW Pastor of Etchingham in Sussex.

(...). Hom. ss. Iliad. Omnis autem Rex ut de Theodosio Chrysostomus (...).

Isa. 47.9. But these two things shall come to thee in one day, loss of
Children and Widdowhood, etc.

Rex enim reipublicae est quasi maritus, and respublica de mortuo est quasi
vidua.

A Lapid. in loc. e Cyrillo. London, Printed for John Rothwel at the Bear and
Fountain in Cheapside in Goldsmiths Row, Anno, 1660.

VIRO VERE ENDOXOTA'TO DOMINO GEORGIO STRODE EQUITI AURATO, JUSTITIAE
PIETATISQUE CULTORI ASSIDUO, FILIO ECCLESIAE GENUINO, PRUDENTI FELICIQUE
LIBERORUM PARENTI, DIGNITATIS REGIAE, ECCLESIAE ORTHODOXAE, PATRIAE TAM
FELICITATIS QUAM INCOLUMITATIS ASSERTORI STRENUO FORTIQUE PROPUGNATORI, QUI
FIDELITATIS REGI DEBITAE ET FORTITUDINIS CICATRICES IMPRESSAS ETIAMDUM GERIT,
USQUE AD ARAS GESTURUS, PATRONO SUO BENIGNO ET BENEFICO SAECULI EXEUNTIS FERREI
ET RENASCENTIS AUREI GAUDIUM CONGRATULATUR, BONORUM OMNIUM SUMMITATEM IN SUMMO
BONO COMPRECATUR, CONCIONESQUE HAS EUCHARISTICAS, I. B. CLERICUS.

D.D.D.

THE EPISTLE TO THE Reader.
GOod Reader, Pilati ille Simia and Antichristi aemulu^, qui se non ita pridem
exaltavit supra num'n terrestre, a subditis su^s non judicandum, sed
honorandum. Quis enim judex regum n^si qui rex regum.
I shall request thee, if a stranger to me, not to stumble at my name. Truth it
is, I have never written my name but with some degree of sadness, ever since
One, that bore the same, but none of my kindred, nor of my Principles, has
cast a sad blur upon it. But this is some comfort, that though one Judas was a
Traitor, yet the other Judas, who was not Iscariot, was a loyal Disciple.
Dionysius the Sicilian Tyrant, was odious to posterity for his brutish Cruelty;
yet was not the Logic of another Dionysius, the less rational, nor the
Areopagite, Paul's hearer and convert less Christians; nor another Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth, so eminent for Learning and Holiness, the less acceptable,
or the more suspicious, because a Dionysius. Good carriage and honest
Principles perfume and season bad names: but bad names cannot canker good
Manners. We may, and must help our ill Manners, but we cannot help our ill
names; the Surname descending by birth of the flesh, and the Christen name by
birth of the Spirit, and both before we know any thing of either. And if one
person amongst 500. that are Cognomines, shall be guilty of some odious or
audacious Crime, if any will argue for guilt upon all for his sake, he makes
himself guilty of a Sophism in Voce, called Homonymia. Nor shall I grant mine
to be bad, but only abused by one that had a share in it, but then he abused
but his own share, and not mine. Osporco the Roman, when he was made Bishop of
Rome, supposing his name to be somewhat homely, caused himself to be called
Sergius, from which time (as a Writer says) the Popes still changed their
names at their entrance into the Sea. I would many years since have changed
mine, not so much for the sound, but the reason aforesaid, only three things
let. 1. The danger I might have incurred in the late times. 2. The
censorious temper of too many, who would have voiced it a mere humor. 3. I
find that anciently, especially in holy Writ, names were changed, not by the
parties themselves, but by others; and those either Angels or Kings. Thus
Abraham, and Sarah, and Israel were alterations, at least additions by Angels.
This also seemed usual with the Chaldean Monarchs, 2 Kin. 24.17. Or such as
were great under them, Daniel 1.7. Thus did Pharaoh, King of Egypt, call
Joseph, Zaphneth Paaneah Genesis 41.45. And now before I take my leave, I shall
declare in as few words as I can, what reasons there were that swayed me to the
Kings side, contrary to the earnest persuasions, and importunate solicitations
of many men, who deserved well of me, and some of them generally well-beloved
in the Country, contrary afterward to all hopes of Peace and Safety, much
more of advantage or advancement. And besides those obvious arguments, which
are in every man's way (if they will but open their eyes to see them) drawn from
Scripture-Precepts, both of the old and new Testament. The Example of the best
men in Scripture histories adhering to their Kings, and the worst making a
defection from them; David's tenderness of touching Saul, though appointed of
God for his immediate Successor; the express and known Laws, and Statutes of
our Realm, which require all Loyalty, Duty and Obedience? The Oaths of
Allegiance, and I think of Supremacy also taken by me twice, if not thrice in
one University, and as often again in the other, and twice at least besides
upon other Occasions, besides all these obvious, and more general inducements,
there were four more, which did exceedingly prevail with me. 1. The Kings
Moderation, Charity, Clemency, Candor, and Earnest thirst after Peace, and his
desire to give satisfaction, even in things very hard and unreasonable to be
defired of him, appearing in his Remonstrances and Answers. 2. The Power of the
sword being by their seeming humble petitioning for it of him therein granted
to be his, I thought it worthy of a worse name than violence by force to wring
it out of his hand. 3. Whereas I had learned from my Parents, Teachers, and
such as were ancient, when I was young, that it was a foul Blur to any Family
to be false to the Crown. (the expression then much used) I after also found it
was a main Argument Protestants had against the Jesuited Romanists, viz.
Seditious Practices against Princes. And whereas that Argument seemed in this
case to be null, because it was observed, that the most powerful Preachers,
the most zealous Professors, the most exact Reformers, did adhere to the
contrary Part, and that many persons slack in Religion, and loose in manners
did side with the King; To this I still answered: 1. That the King had many
truly godly with him, that did not show so to all, and the other party, many
seemingly godly, which yet were not so. 2. That the King had also a
considerable number of Professors and Well-wishers to a thorough Reformation,
and the contrary party a considerable number of lewd debauched men, void of
Religion. 3. That of those many which seemed religious, and friends of
Reformation, there were two sorts, some that discovered themselves to be
persons, either far gone, or falling into Schism, and these were to me no
stumbling block at all, because their way is not the way of Christ: For I know
such as made no conscience of making a breach in the Church, would make no
bones to make a breach in the State, and that having rebelled against Christ in
that great Law of love, they would probably not regard the Law of Allegiance to
their King, would afterward, did in the face of the Sun. But for the other
sort of godly men and Well-willers to true Religion, I looked upon them, many
of them, as men merely galled and surprised, verily believing, that as they did
abhor separation from the ordinances, so they never desired, but did abhor the
destruction of the King, and his family, only they went on in the War at first
upon the old score of bringing the King to his Parliament, etc. and yet taking
up of Arms against the King upon any occasion, is flatly against the Judgment
and the old printed Protestation of Nonconformists, that lived in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, and King James of blessed Memory, who were absolutely against
any taking up Arms against the King; and sure such as lately have done so,
cannot tell how to open their mouths against those men. But I must not make the
Porch too large for the house. My aim in short, is, (though a weak and unworthy
instrument) to do my duty as formerly in suffering, so now by acting within
mine own Sphere toward the service of the King, the Peace of the Kingdom, the
honor of the Church, and the glory of God. To whom be glory for ever, Amen.

Thine more than his own, J. B.
July 17. 1660.
AT THE THANKSGIVING. MAY 24. 1660.
2 SAMUEL 19.14. And he bowed the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the
heart of one man, so that they sent this word to the King, Return thou and all
thy servants.


THis day is a day of Thanksgiving, and such a day as deserves a day of
Thanksgiving, that after so many improper counterfeit days, in which every
honest, just and intelligent heart had more cause to make them days of
mourning, we have now a true real and royal day of praise: the very thought of
them and mention is enough to smut this true rejoicing day. And yet as
Physicians make use of poisons to cure distempers, and Jewellers Foils to set
off Diamonds, and Limners Shadows to set off beauty, so perhaps those days
will serve to illustrate this day. Those days were often kept for the
dishonor that was done the King and his true friends, and for the prosperity
of his enemies; this day is kept most for the King, and for all true Patriots,
and for Parliaments in a right true constitution. Those days were kept in the
behalf of violent usurpation; this in the behalf of just legal possession:
Those days were kept in the behalf of something soaring alo^^ upon Iod^^ his
wings of divine success by divine permission; this day is kept in the behalf of
true subjection and loyalty, soaring upon the Eagles wings of Law and Religion.
Those days were kept upon the shedding of blood; the blood of men, and so ours
from the first Adam; the blood of Christians, and so ours again from the second
Adam, the blood of our own Contrymen, and so ours by humane association; the
blood of conscientious and loyal Patriots, and so ours by Sympathy and true
affection: This day is kept, and deserves annually for ever to be kept for
restoring the King to his own, and their people to their own in restoring him,
and all this without one drop of blood. This Victoria incruenta, bloodless
victory, bringing more honor to the King, than all the bloody victories ever
brought to others. Those days were by armed violence, upon pain of a fruitless
ruin obtruded, enforced on us; this day is willingly, nay cheerfully, nay
thankfully embraced by us, and we heartily thank God this day for this
Thanksgiving day. And to conclude this Preface, and not to stand too long at
the door; when we kept those, our hearts and consciences forced us to balk the
particularities, only to give thanks for general Mercies, because finding the
way laid out for us too foul and impossible, we made bold to leap over into the
open Common; but the particularities and specialities of this, are such, as if
we should go out of the rode, we should deserve to be sued by the whole Nation
upon an action of high Trespass. O the unspeakable goodness of God to an
ungrateful, stiff-necked, self-willed, proud, divided, backsliding people!
Ungrateful, as despisers of bounty; Stiff-necked, as despisers of Instruction;
Proud, as Contemners of lawful Authority; Divided, as Contemners of Peace,
Unity and Charity. After all our Thanksgiving days, by which God has been
rather provoked than honored; in which God has been rather mocked, than
praised, as some did manage them. God has given us a day indeed; which to
stumble at, would not be tenderness, but rather guilt of conscience; and this
Text I have read to you, sets before you in Text-Capital Letters, the true
matter and occasion of this Festival; and I desire my heart may indite a good
matter, whilst I speak of this matter; and speak of things touching the King,
and that my tongue may be as the Pen of a ready Writer.

This verse in the Buxtorf Hebrew Bible is the fifteenth, (...), He, that is,
David, etc. (...) The King by his gracious message, by Letter or Declaration,
bowed, that is, so wrought upon the hearts of the men of Judah, that all of
them, probably the Elders or Representatives, every one, Nemine contradicente:
As one man, no man dissenting. Sent to the King, over the water, the flood
Jordan; Return thou; we humbly submit to thy Kingly power, we are your
Majesty's loyal Subjects, return back to your Kingly office, and all thy
servants; we exempt none, every one with thee is welcome for thy sake. Come
with all thy Retinue, and with all the honor that possibly can be.

How clear and full is the Parable betwixt the history of the Text, and the
History of the day! as if these things mentioned in the Text, had been in some
sort Types or Shadows (which yet they were not) of those things we see this
day.

Yea, here is every thing in the Text that we rejoice for in the day. We
rejoice in a King, and here is a King in the Text; He, that is, King David; We
rejoice in the Kings prevalency, and here is David's prevalency, he bowed or
inclined: we rejoice in such a prevalency as is without compulsion, without
force or blood, and so it is here, He bowed the hearts. We rejoice in the
Subjects hearty subjection, and in the peoples hearts to their King; and here
is the peoples hearts, He bowed the hearts of the men of Judah. We rejoice to
see Allegiance and Loyalty bound close together in Unity, and here you read, He
bowed their hearts as one man's. We rejoice that after so long a distance there
is now an intercourse; here is the same, they sent to the King; We rejoice that
there is not only an intercourse, but a fair correspondency, nor that only, but
an humble and hearty invitation, a clear and full reconciliation, a ready and
cheerful subjection and submission, Return thou and all thy servants with
thee, so it is here.

So that I cannot divide my Text, but I must also dissect the day. The
distribution of the first must needs be the description of the second.

To me there seems in both a fourfold complication of a wonder and a blessing,
of something very strange, and something very good.

1. Misi and vici as strange as vidi and vici.
Here is a bare message conquering: a blessed kind of Conquest, and a strange
kind of Conquest; there is the complication of both together in the happy and
strange operation of the Kings Message or Letter.

The second Complication of wonder and goodness is in the hearts bowed: the
hearts of all men are by nature stiff, since the fall: The Jews are especially
noted for hardness of heart, and after Apostasy from God, or Defections from a
King, men's hearts are still harder, yet the men's hearts were bowed, yea the men
of Judahs hearts, yea, after defections from David.

The third strange, but happy fold or complication is of diversity and unity;
the men of Judah were several and many, and yet their heart was one, their
principles, their apprehensions, and no doubt their affections were diverse, and
perhaps contrary, but now on a sudden upon this message, though perhaps some
might come with clashing thoughts, all are bowed, all resolved one way.

The fourth Complication is of an humble invitation after a stubborn defection,
and sometime a seeming impossible reconciliation, Return thou and all thy, etc.
I may make but two general parts.

1. THe peoples conversion to their King, and he bowed, etc. 2. The Kings
reversion to his people, Return thou, etc. Both these are set out by the cause:
of the conversion, the cause is the Kings Message to the people; the cause of
the reversion is the peoples message to the King. And here first we see how
like the Kings Method in converting his Subjects, is to Gods in converting
sinners.

I speak here of a resemblance only, and that at a great distance. For
Creatures resemble not God to use the distinction of Petrus de Aliaco in
essendo and in perfectione quidditativa, but in repraesentando and ratione
repraesentativa; or as Bonaventure distinguishes, it is not similitudo
aequiparantiae, but imitationis. Lib. de Gratia, and lib. arbit. c. 7.
As therefore in divine grace Austin distinguishes betwixt operating and
cooperating grace: Deus says he, co-operando perficit quod operando incipit.
And betwixt preventing and subsequent Grace, Dei (says the same Father) gratia
nolentem praevenit ut velit, Enchir. c. 32.
volentem subsequitur ne frustra velit. Prosp. epugr. 45.
And as there is a distinction of gratia ducens and concomitans, gratia
excitans and adjuvans, which makes Ber. say, Conatus nostri and cassi sunt si
non adjuventur, and nulli si non excitentur. In like manner we may say, De
gratia and li^ arbit.
but in a lower sphere, King David by his preventing, leading, exciting,
operating grace (for we do ascribe to Kings Grace and favor) does begin the
work of political conversion and reconciliation. He strikes the first stroke
toward the fastening the King and people together. Yet not working as God does
by any supernatural power over the will, by any inward infusions, but
extrinsically as man works upon man by moral persuasion. Only as Kings are
called Gods because they are like God in Supremacy, as higher than others; in
power, as stronger than others; Gods in honor, as more noble than others; so
herein they are like God, who loves us before we love him, and woes us before
we seek to him, 1 Pet. 2.17.
giving before we ask, yielding to us before we seek to him. Thus does King
David in the Text; he first sends to them, before they send to him, and woes
them to send to him, before they send to him to come to them. He is not only
first in dignity, but first in benignity: His is not only precedence in Honor,
but precedence in kindness. And what King David does in the Text, King Charles
the Second does in the day. The first open and visible tender is his. He
prevents his Subjects with gracious tenders of Peace and Love. He knows that
Amor is magnum satellitium, and that timeri oportet Caesarem, sed plus diligi.
He that said Agree with thy enemy quickly in the gate, has taught his Majesty
to begin timously the work of pacification, and to be first at the gate for
entrance before others could be ready to open them. And as he imitates God the
Father in an antecedent love, so God the Son in an antecedent Call. He stands
at the door, and knocks. He must needs be a very Sot, or an envious man that
will not say, that the Kings Wisdom, Favor and Goodness is much to be
honored, therefore let his Majesty have his due honor, but according to his
religious and self-denying desires, let God be chiefly magnified in all this. A
magnetical touch from him is the first and principal cause of the King and the
Parliaments mutual and sweet attractions of, and tendency toward one another.
It is the God of love and peace that has made love and peace to abound betwixt
King and Subjects. It is the Lords doing, and is marvelous in our eyes.

Abigail was a very prudent woman, and to be commended highly for her prudence;
and David wanted not for language to do it, yet he chose to ascribe all
principally to God. 1 Samuel 25.32. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which has
sent thee this day to meet me. God by an occult hand and a still voice sends us
upon many errands, and we perceive it not. What is certainly true of all men,
is most signally and emphatically true of Kings. Prove. 21.1. The Kings heart is
in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of waters, he turns it whither soever
he will. God has a special hand on the heart of a King, as he has a special
hand in the erecting a King, and a special hand in saving a King, which is not
done by the multitude of an host, Psalm 33.16. and therefore by the Lord of
hosts, so also in guiding of a King. He turns it as the rivers of waters; that
is, he draws a Channel for it. So that it shall go such a way, and yet go by
its own natural inclination too. A similitude, which to my thoughts, does to
the life set out to us Gods Providence, and overruling hand concurring with
the freedom of our Wills, and activity of our minds and spirits, For the
waters runs in a declining trench, the weight and the fluid humidity carries it
on, but a previous hand prepares the trench. So here.

Well, Blessed be that immortal and wise Engineer in heaven that thus guided
the Kings heart to bow his Subjects hearts; and next, Blessed be the Kings
prudence and innate goodness, who has saved the shedding of so much Christian
blood, as else had been shed, had it not thus been prevented. And let us
imitate these two Princes in their imitation: Let us strive to be first in
offices of love, mercy and peace. The feet of some of the Kings enemies were
swift to shed blood, Prove. 1.16. Their feet did run to evil, and did make haste
to shed blood. The King that does truly patrizare for his royal Father, did not
desire war or bloodshed, but was the most earnest suitor for peace to his
own Subjects that ever was. I say the King, his feet are swift to save shedding
of blood. Let us learn to be swift to save and deliver our Neighbors and
brethren; let us be quick to offices of Justice, and offices of mercy. Let our
feet to do good be as Hynds feet, Hab. 3.19. We often read in Scripture of a
Nunc ergo; Now therefore, that is now presently, speedily, 1 Samuel 6.7. Nunc
ergo arripite, as the vulgar Latin. Venite, Genesis 11.3. Faciamus lateres, go to,
let us make brick. (...). Psalm 95. Oh come let us worship. Beda renders it
Festinate. See what haste Abraham made in the way and work of hospitality. Genesis
18. v. 6. Abraham hasted to the Tent to Sarah, there was haste expressed in his
motion: make ready quickly three measures of meals, there was haste in his
command. And again Abraham runs to the heard, there was haste in expedition,
and the young man hasted to dress it: there was haste in the preparation. And
David sends word to the men of Judah, why are ye the last to bring back the
King to his house? Pudeat esse postremos, let us not be last in offices of
piety, offices of mercy, of hospitality, much less in offices of duty,
fidelity, allegiance, loyalty. In these let us both take and give example.

PART 1.
WE come now to the first Complication of a wonder and a blessing, and that is,
a victorious message sent from King David to his subjects the men of Judah. A
message full of grace, as taking no notice of their defection from him. A
message full of love and compliance, as seeking reunion and reconciliation
with them. There were eight ingredients that made this overture so effectual.

1. It was but a message, it was not an army to invade and to enforce; and yet
sure David that was so beloved of God, that his very name signified beloved,
could not be so ill beloved of men, but he might either for love, or money, or
both have obtained a sufficient force amongst the Gileadites, yea perhaps
amongst the Ammonites. He that was not only more safely but more kindly
entertaind on the other side of the water, amongst strangers of another tribe:
He that had such gifts and presents sent him, for the sustenance of himself and
his people with him, could not he have obtained an armed power? But he makes
use rather of words than of swords, and to send out his declaration than to
shoot out his arrows, or make provision of Ammunition. He chooses rather
dul^ia verba than dura verbera. And this was one ingredient, which puts me in
mind of that speech of Euripides (...), sick minds, whether sick of grief, or
anger, or hate, or fear, are often cured by words. Sure he that brought this
message was a good man, and came with good tidings, and deserved of the men of
Judah a good reward.

2. As it was no worse than a message, so it was a gracious message, not
thundering out revenge and destruction; He might have sent a message of terror,
and he that brought it might have been the messenger of death, and have entered
the Sanedrim with his clothes rent, as 2 Samuel 1.2. The Amalekite came to David.
But it was (...), good tidings.

It was not like Rehoboam's harsh answer, my little finger shall be thicker than
my fathers loins, and I will make your yoke heavier, and I have rods in brine
for you, I will whip you with snakes or scorpions, every stripe shall be a
sting too. He considered not, that to make himself so thick and heavy was the
way, not only to be quickly out of breath, both he and his family, but to catch
a fall; He should rather have hearkened to gray then green heads, who could have
told him, that acerbitas imperii brevitate saepe compensatur. But David was
much wiser in his message than Rehoboam in his answer: For the return to his
message was [Returne thou and all etc.] the return to Rehoboam's was quite
contrary, but no way justifiable, what portion have we in David? to your tents,
O Israel; an undutifull answer bespeaking an ungodly and unrighteous rebellion.

3. It was not only a gracious message, as free from indignation, but also a
loving message, as free from contestation, scarce an expostulation, but such a
one as covers kindeness. q. d. I hope you will not be the last in loyalty that
are first in Consanguinity.

4. It was a message from a King, not from a fellow-subject, and who knows not
that majesty carries efficacy? For where the word of a King is, there is power.
The words of him that is the anointed must needs, like oil, sink into the
hearts of the people, if they be not harder than an adamant. Yea if hard, yet
it prevails, Erasmus says a Kings word is like lightning, it melts not wax,
but melts and dissolves the steel.

5. Their own King, their own liege Lord, not a forraigner, though in a
foreign country; not a stranger, though exiled from his own home. Thus is He
pater patriae, and shall not the words of a Father prevail? Thus is he a
terrestrial God (I have said ye are gods) and shall not his word as well carry
a semblable efficacy, as well as his person carry a semblable majesty?

6. Their innocent and blameless King, of whom it might have been said, as it
was after of his Antitype, but not so infallibly and absolutely, Why? What evil
has he done? what color had Absalom for the snatching the sword by violence
out of the hand of David? If the Militia was truly David's, why does Absalm by
violence and fraud wrest and wring it from him? And if it was Absaloms, how
then was David King, except he voluntarily quitted his power, and left himself
only a naked Title.

7. Their afflicted King; the Message of an innocent Prince must needs carry a
great stroke, but much more if under affliction. We often read of the best
Princes that they have been some part of their reign, either in the beginning,
o^ in the end thereof much afflicted. And besides Princes, many other renowned
persons, Cosmo de Medicis, who next after his father Johannes, was the
foundation of a great and renowned family, was the most honorable and famous
Commonwealths man that ever had been in any memory before his time for
Authority, Wisdom, Justice, Riches, Liberality and Magnificence; the first
part of his life was full of troubles, he was exiled and frequently in danger
of death, but after lived and governed most happily: He was happy in his son
Petrus de Medicis, and in his Grandchild Laurentius de Medicis: And I hope a
branch of that family will flourish for ever. The greater the person, the
greater the affliction, and the greater that is, the more should their words
move affection.

8. Their injured King, injured by Absalom his natural son; injured by the men
of Judah, his Political sons; injured by his chief Counselor, Achitophel;
basely used by Shimei; yea injured after many acts of Grace and favor, after
great deliverances wrought for the people: Ver. 9. And all the people were at
strife throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying, the King saved us out of
the hand of our enemies, and he delivored us out of the hand of the Philistines,
and now he is fled out of the land for Absalom, etc.

These eight ingredients mixed together in the Kings message, the body of the
people being before well prepared by consideration, wrought very effectually to
the removing of any Scirrhus from the hearts of the men of Judah, and to make
them so soft and tender, as to bow and yield to this healing touch of the Kings
hand in his message.

Application. And have I not all this while been speaking of things pertaining
to our King and Country? I shall only crave this clemency of you, that whilst
I make up the parallel, which I shall do as briefly as I can: you would not
either imagine that I disparage you, as if your minds were so dull, as that you
had not done it already, or that I flatter the King, in whose presence, as I do
not now speak, so neither do I speak besides Truth, or beyond sobriety; nor
would I have you to imagine, that I detract from, or neglect in my speech the
Worthies assembled in this most honorable, free and happy Parliament, which
shall be as famous to posterity for this wise, just, pious, loyal work of
inviting home the King with so much love and duty, as the Bran of another
Parliament has been, and will be to all ages infamous for destroying the
gracious Father, and expulsing the hopeful Son. I call them Bran, because they
had been often sifted, and the worst was still left in the sive. I pray you
also let us bless God, as we go along, for that it is the work of the day, as
the parallel is work for the day: Verbum sapientibus, a little to the
intelligent is enough.

And blessed be God for the Kings Message, that it was no worse than a Message.
Had the Kings heart been set upon revenge, he would have sent in another
strein. Let us not flatter our selves, or undervalew this favor. The peace of
those two great Nations full South of us, might have begotten War against us;
nor would the Swordmen of two such rich and populous Nations have been willing
to receive a Quietus est, or to sit down as Reformadoes, when so just a cause,
and such good booties, and so well beloved a play master had given encouragement,

2. A gracious message, Blessed be our gracious God, and blessed of God be our
gracious King. For he declares he neither desires the blood, nor damage of his
people: that he is ready to pardon, nay, to remove the reproaches of them that
have been reproachers.

3. Which sufficiently makes good the third thing, that it is message of love
and comfort, declaring a readiness, not only to pardon, but to bestow, not only
to forgive, but to give.

4. It was a Kings message, and whatever of late years has been acted or
spoken in a tendency to eclipse the dignity of that high office, yet the
Scriptures, the Laws and customs of all Nations have ever been to honor it
with the highest degree of humane honor. To speak of regal dignity deserves a
day and a Text by it self. This is enough to show why this message should be so
sovereign in operation, they are next to God, and I will only mention that of
Tertullian: Reges in solius Dei potestate sunt: a quo sunt secundi, post quem
Primi, ante omnes and super omnes Deos and homines.

5. Our own Kings message, True indeed; driven out by means of a subtle,
traitorous Absalom, a political son, yet a politic rebel, and so forced to
be as a stranger to his own people, and to go over Jordan for succor and
safety.

6. Our blameless King, and yet (to take in the two last) our afflicted
injured King. I would speak much upon this part, and my heart would indite
with more life and affection then yet it has done: and oh that I had leave
from his Majesty to limb out his and His Fathers sufferings. But his very
goodness seems to take me off, who in his letter to the noble General wishes
that the memory of what is passed may be buried in the world, and who heartily
seeks the reconciliation of all.

PART II.
I Therefore come in a few words to the second Complication. Here are hearts
bowed, and the hearts of such as had been, if not active against David, yet not
active for him, and however the hearts of the latter sort might be and were
flexible, yet no doubt the other were more stubborn.

Obser. That even stubborn hearts, when before prepared and wakened by
consideration, may at last be bowed. v. 9. they were startled and began to
consider what they had done in setting up Absalom, and now when the message
comes, it setts them right, this warm message, proceeding from an heart in
which was kindled love and piety, thawed their hearts, and made them begin to
be more gentle.

Application.

Observe. Secondly, gracious, loving and pious Prince by his own people, works
strongly upon men's hearts, when seriously considered.

1. The injuries of others cannot but somewhat affect us. A man would be loath
to see a Turk wronged. Though man be fallen, and through his fall becomes
injurious to men, by being first injurious to God, and though men are often
injurious themselves, either through passion or covetousness, yet they love not
to see others to be injured by others, but will ordinarily either whisper or
exclaim against it.

2. But Secondly offered to a person of quality and desert, especially to a
King is very intolerable in the thoughts of men, if men. Yea suppose he were
flagellum Dei, as many tyrants we read of in Scripture were; yet they had
honorable titles given them, to show they were to be exempted from contempt,
and consequently from all other indignities and injuries: who more wicked then
Nebuchadnezzar metamorphosed, at least degraded by a divine hand down to
bruitishnes, deposed by God and none but God, not only from his throne, but his
very reason, yet is he called more than once the servant of God, Jer. 25.9.
Jer. 27.6. which title is given him not from his piety, but from his dignity,
not from his grace, but from his office. One asks the question how David in
those hot countries should be so cold, when old that no clothes could keep him
warm, 1 Kin. 1.1. Several reasons are given by authors, as because he was
borne of ancient parents or lost much blood in the wars, but Lyranus from Rabbi
Solomon says it was for cutting off the skirt of Saul's garment. But we need
not seek any farther for a reason, than the Scripture leads us to, which was
old age; and for the other his heart smote him, he was troubled in conscience
for what he had done, and if David was troubled in mind for cutting off but a
skirt, how would his conscience have terrifyed him, if he had cut off his life.

3. But then thirdly who can with patience see injuries offered to a gracious
and religious King, gracious toward men, and religious toward God? It was
enough not only, to bow, but to break the heart of the men of Judah to think
that David, who had been their Deliverer, should want a Deliverer, and he that
saved them so often from flying and exile, should now flee, and become an
Exile, that the sweet Singer of Israel should be a sad Mourner out of Israel.
That he who by his sweet touch upon the harp was able to drive away the Devil
from Saul, should himself be driven away by the devil of rebellion. It could
not but pierce their hearts to think, that so noble a Champion as slew Goliath,
the glory and confidence of the Philistines, and in cutting off his head, did
quite cut in pieces, or break their body, should being the head, be divided
from the body of his people by an Absalom, the sword indeed of Gods wrath
against him and them. That he that was so good natured, as to bewail the death
of Saul, 2 Samuel 1.12. his implacable adversary, and the death of Absalom his
traitorous son should not be sooner thought on, nor find so much good nature
amongst his own people, as to be sooner sought to for a return, yea, yet more,
so religious, as he was, even one of the most excellent and glorious
instruments of God, in penning a part of the holy Scripture. In so much, that
along in the Title of his Psalms it is Mismor le David, a Psalm to David, so
the (...) ordinarily and primarily is used, and the LXX. still render it (...).
To show they were not Psalms of David tanquam aucloris, but tanquam
Scriptoris, and that they were dictated to him by the Holy Ghost. That a man so
acquainted with God, that he was one of the most special Receptacles of the
spirits in-breathing, should not find a Receptacle to breath in within his own
territories.

Application. I can think no other, but that the sufferings of Charles the
First of glorious memory, and the sufferings of Charles the Second, our present
muniment and ornament next under God and Christ, have made a deep impression
upon the hearts of all that are men. But let us still acknowledge to the glory
of our good God, that as the bowing of hearts is the impression, and both his
Majesty's and his royal Fathers sufferings are the seal, so the divine hand is
that chiefly which has both set to, and so set home the seal, that the
impression is made so deep upon all men's hearts. And seeing it is so, that the
I call him the greatest of Martyrs, because others suffer only in defense of
Religion, he in defense both of Religion and moral Justice, and humane society.
greatest of Martyrs, the first that ever reigned over us of that name, is not
only out of the reach of his enemies malice, but out of the reach of his
friends gratitude, who can as little now do any thing for him, as the other can
do against him. The Lord give to all men that spirit of ingenuity, that besides
what allegiance and love they pay our dear Sovereign for his own sake, they
would also pay that to him, which could they reach him, they would think due to
his glorious Father. It being all the reason in the world, that he who so
justly and happily inherits his Fathers Throne, should also receive his Fathers
debts owing to him.

I come to the third Complication of Diversity and Unity, Many men, and yet
unanimous. They were all as one man, because not one dissented. After the
bowing and melting of nearts, follows knitting and sothering of hearts. And
considering what way they had stood under, it was a wonder: considering what
good produced, it was a Blessing, a Mercy. And to speak but as it is, there is
no sothering without melting, nor will men's hearts be easily joined in unity,
that are not first melted by humility. As Pride is the cause of Contention, and
Separation and Division, so Humility is the cause of union and conjunction. And
thus I have an opportunity to make a transition from the cause of the King to
the cause of the Church. But I doubt whether there can be any transition, since
the cause is the very same, or at least so nearly connext that either the fall
or rise of the one, must be the fall or rise of the other. Unity, whether in
Church or State, is, in my eye, the most glorious and happy thing that is upon
earth. This makes the Psalmist cry out. Psalm 133.1. Quam bonum and jucundum!
good and pleasant. Many things are good that are not at present very
delightsome, as fasting, weeping, mortification, self-denial, suffering. And
many things are pleasant which are not good, as many things pleasing to the
flesh which please not God, but Unity is both: so greatly good, and so greatly
comely, that the Psalm mist cannot express it; How good! this was the praise of
the primitive Christians. Acts 4.32. The multitude were of one heart, and one
mind. Vnus communis Christus, and unus communis Sumptus, as Ambrose says.
Origin observes out of 1 Cor. 9.24. That though in an earthly race all run, and
only one of all obtains the prize; yet in the heavenly race, all that run,
obtain: and yet these are in the Protasis called One. Origin in Hom. There is
none so fit to bear rule as they to whom God has given both ability and
faculty to make peace with a desire to do it. Moses that did keep rule betwixt
the two Hebrews, did afterward bear rule over the Hebrews. Blessed is that
land like to be, whose King is a Peacemaker, that has much practiced it in
foreign Kingdoms and States, whose delight is to bow men's hearts to unity.
Who so fit to be a Moses in Israel? and who so fit to govern the Church, as
they that are true Shepherds and not wolves, and keep the flock from being
scattered, and torn in pieces, or use endeavors so to do? There is so near a
Tie betwixt ens and unum, that when any thing looses its unity, it hazards it
entity, especially then when much of the being is aggregative, and consists in
the closing of severals into one. And were it so that Christians had the true
love of God in their hearts, there would be a far greater union of hearts one
with another than there is. And this is that, Tit. 144.
that excellent Writer Raymundes de Sabunde does clearly demonstrate: For love
(says he) changes the will into that which is chiefly beloved. And if that be
some one thing which is common to all, and beloved of all, then all those loves
are united in one. And so there would be perfect unity amongst men, and no man
would have his own will, but Gods Will. But when every man loves his own will
primarily, he then seeks that chiefly, opposes what opposes it. When men meet
not in the common love of God, but love themselves firstly and chiefly, they
oppose all that stand in their light, and hence come strifes, and wars, and
animosities. And so says Solomon, from Pride comes Contention. But if all men's
hearts were bowed, they would sweetly close and clasp together, as trees bowed,
meet together and make one Arbor. Oh how glorious were Christianity, if the
hearts of Christians were as the heart of one man! If we had all, not only the
same Confession, as indeed we have in the Apostles Creed, as to pure
Fundamentals, but the same Catechism, the same form of Worship, and Rule of
Discipline, and all set free both From homely rudeness in one extreme, and vain
superstition in the other: sure I am, it was ecumenical Unity of all persons
and all ages our Savior prayed for to continue in his Church.

1. There is a fourfold Unity, say the Schools: The first and greatest is,
that which denies all divisibility, and so nothing divisible is one. And thus
the divine nature is only one

2. Is the Unity of composition, when several things are compounded together:
as water and earth make one lump, soul and body make one man, and this may be
divided and severed.

3. Unity of Aggregation; as many things meeting together in one: so many
grains of wheat, or any other grain makes one heap. Many people in one House
make one Company; in one Church, make one Congregation.

4. Is Unity of Conformity, and this is threefold:

1. Unity of Nature and Species, and so all individuals of the same Species are
one. So Plato, Socrates, Peter, Paul, James, John, are all one.

2. Of Will, to will and wish the same things.

3. Of Action and operation, to join in the same work: as when many Soldiers
join in fighting, many Laborers in reaping, etc. The first Christ prayed not
for, which is impossible to be in any Creature, nor properly for the second.
For the third he did, that we may be, as in Heaven we perfectly shall be, one
collected body. The fourth, he chiefly aimed at, in the two last branches of
it, that we might will and wish, judge and speak the same things. And would
Christ pray for any thing that is not glorious and excellent? What Nation is it
that can subsist without this? What Army can conquer without it? This we shall
find perfectly observed by the Saints Triumphant in Glory, and it should be
sought by Saints Militant in the way to Glory.

The fourth fold or complication of a wonder and a mercy, is their invitation,
implying both submission and a desire of reconciliation: It was strange, but
well they did so, yea, the most probable way of their felicity. The Kings
return was very probably the return of their settlement in peace and all
prosperity. This word, Return, implies, 1. Their sense of his absence. 2. Their
desire of his presence. 3. The security given of his safety and honor upon his
Return. For no doubt, the most bloody and treacherous enemies he had, desired
his presence, not to deliver him, but to destroy him. So that this Message, was
as much as to say, Return and fear not, Return and welcome; yea, thou and all
thy servants.

But 1. Here is his absence employed, and the occasion worthy our enquiry; What!
David gone from his people? Little do wicked people consider, and as little
able are any to express, how great their folly, and how abominable their
practice is, who drive and keep away a gracious, just and loving Prince? Is not
this to quench out the light of Isra l? 2 Samuel 21.17. To drive the Sun out of
our Horizon, and to draw upon our selves darkness and confusion? Ever since we
have been without our King, we have been but in the dark, neither knowing where
we are, or where to be. How have we stumbled and fallen over every new
Government laid before us! Is not he called the breath of our Nostrils? Lam. 4.
and what have we been all this time, such especially whose hearts are with the
King, but as so many dead men, out souls being as it were sequestered from our
bodies, whilst our King was driven from his Kingdoms?

2. Here is his presence desired: Return thou, we desire to see you upon your
Throne, and in your Presence Chamber; we will see your Palaces, and Royal
Mansions shall be ready prepared and furnished for you.

3. Here is his safety and Honor provided: not only safely, but honorably,
cheerfully, joyfully received and welcomed home again. And this is that, which
when we considered the strength of the enemy, and the success of their Forces,
and the continual blasts of all undertakings for the King, we thought, in the
sight of flesh and blood to be impossible, at least improbable; but when we
considered the Piety, Charity, Humility, Meekness, Clemency, and the frequent
Prayers, Tears of the late good King, and how many ungrateful injuries, base
affronts and cruel usages were offered to him, we hoped then that so many
prayers and tears would not be unheard, and so may injuries would not be past
by; and the rather, because his Son, our gracious King, was esteemed of sober
intelligent men, as a Son treading his Fathers steps: Only here was the
mistake, in the manner, we thought God would cut the way of the Kings Return by
the sword; but our gracious God has done it in a far more happy, glorious
way, than we did imagine and could conceive. The King is sent for, and all his
servants, a true sign of their love who sent to the King to Return, that they
loved his servants: For, if I love the King, I cannot hate, persecute, or seek
the destruction of such as I believe, have been true and faithful servants to
him. Yea, God has granted the King his own in his own way, and according to
his own and his Fathers desires: that is, with love, and without bloodshed.
And, though I never yet was at his Majesty's Closet-door, nor ever saw his
Royal Face; yet I do verily believe, and am fully persuaded, it has been his
constant and ardent prayer for many years together, that God would restore him
to his own again without the shedding of blood, and that God would bow the
hearts of his Subjects to him. And, we may now say with joyful hearts, as it
is, Psalm 21.1 -- 7. The King shall joy in thy strength, O Lord, and in thy
salvation how greatly shall he rejoice! Thou have given him his hearts desire,
and have not withholden the requests of his lips, etc. Yea, it now appears
that God did file up the prayers, and bottle up the tears shed in
Carisbrook-Castle, and in other places by that King of Martyrs and most
precious of Saints, whom my tongue could hardly ever mention without tears:
and who is he that will not now give thanks? Surely, an evil spirit from the
Lord has their hearts in Fee-simple, that will not be removed by the sweet
Music of this Day; For it may be said of almost the whole body of the Nation,
as it is, Esaias 9.3, 4. They joy before thee according to the joy in harvest,
and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil. For thou have broken the yoke of
his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the Rod of his oppressor as in the
day of Midian. The joy of harvest is for what labor has brought in, the joy
of dividing the spoil, i^ for what hazard and victory has brought in; But our
joy is for a strange Providence, and an incomparable blessing obtained without
pains or hazard. A blessing dropped down from Heaven into our lapps and bosoms.
And now what shall we render to the Lord for all his benefits! Salvation
belongs to the Lord, Psam 3.8.
and his blessing is upon his people. The King cried to the Lord with his
voice, verse 4.
and he heard him out of his holy Hill, and thou only make him and us to
dwell in safety. Do thou, O Lord, Psalm 4.8.
bless the righteous, with favor do thou compass him as with a friest. O let
the wickedness of the wicked come to an end, (...)
but establish the just. Thou have maintained the Kings right and his cause,
thou satest in the Throne judging right. verse 9.
Thou have been a Refuge for the oppressed, a Refuge in times of trouble, he
that knows thy name will put his trust in thee, verse 10. Psalm 144.9.
for thou Lord have not forsaken him that sought thee. And for this new mercy,
will we sing a new song to thee, yea, to thee will we sing praises. Thou alone
give salvation to Kings: Thou did deliver Charles the second, thy servant
from the hurtful sword. Thou did preserve him here at home all along those
sharp Wars against his Royal Father; and when he was forced to fly into
foreign parts for safety, Psalm 11.1.
as a bird flees to the Mountains, the wicked bending their bow, and making
ready their arrow on the string, thou have kept him safe in a strange land.
Blessed be thy holy Name, that when he was called home unto his Northern
Kingdom, that neither the malice or filthy lucre of any evil persons made a
prey of him, Psalm 21.3.
but that thou did prevent him with the blessings of goodness; thou did
set a Crown of pure Gold upon his head. And when his straights forced him into
his Native Kingdom, thou did preserve him in those sharp and dangerous
encounters at Worcester, and when after that he was hunted as a Partridge in
the Mountains, Psalm 27.5.
and was forced into the Woods and Wilderness; in the time of trouble thou
did hide him in thy Pavillion, in the secret of thy Tabernacle did thou
hide him, and did set him up upon a Rock. And now is his head lifted up above
his enemies round about him: therefore will we offer up in thy Tabernacles
sacrifices of joy. The Lord was the Kings strength and his shield, Psalm 28.
his heart trusted in him, and he is helped. Therefore his heart greatly
rejoices, and with his song will he praise thee, the saving strength of his
anointed. For thine anger endures but a moment, Psalm 30.
in thy favor is life, sorrow has endured for a night, but joy is now come in
the morning, and thou have turned his mourning into dancing, thou have put off
his sackcloath, and girded him with gladness. Great were his dangers and
straits indeed, Psalm 31. Psalm 31.13.
but thou have not shut him up in the hand of the enemy, but have set his feet
in a large room. We have heard the slander of many, fear was on every side
whilst they took counsel together against him, they devised to take away his
life: But he trusted in the Lord, and said, my times are in thy hand, Psalm
55.18. Psalm 64.1.
etc. He has delivered his soul in peace from the Battle that was against him:
The Lord hid him from the secret Counsel of the wicked, and from the
insurrection of the workers of iniquity; Thou, O Lord, which did show him
great and sore troubles, Psalm 71.20.
have quickened him again, thou have increased his greatness and comsorted him
on every side. Thou did seem indeed to cast off, and to abhor, Psalm 89.38.
and to be wroth with thine anointed; thou did profane his Crown by casting
it to the ground: thou have broken down all his hedges, thou did bring his
strong Holds to ruin. But thou have given him the shield of thy salvation,
Psalm 18.35.
and thy right Hand has holden him up, and thy gentleness has made him great.
Praised be God.

AT THE THANKSGIVING. JUNE 28. 1660.
2 SAMUEL 19.15. So the King returned, and came to Jordan; and Judah came to
Gilgal, to go to meet the King, to conduct the King over Jordan.


EVery day indeed is, or should be a Thanksgiving day. Psalm. 145.2. Mirum est
quod Deum homo non semper laudat, cum omnis creatura ad Deum laudandum semper
cum invitat.
Every day will I bless thee. Greg. says, That it is strange man should not be
almost always praising God, when the Creatures are always inviting him to
praise God.

Physicians observe, that a man has as many parts or members in his body as
there are days in the year, that no day should pass without praise to our
Maker. But then we must distinguish, that every day is a day for Thanksgiving,
but not a day of Thanksgiving. For if every day were a day of Thanksgiving,
there could be no appointed selected days: of which selected days we have
lately enjoyed one, and now God has called us to another, and it is like the
other, a good day, and a day of much gladness. Yea this day is even as that
day, and much more abundant. For that day was kept upon the coming of the Kings
Message, this day upon the coming of the Kings person. That for an happy
settlement hoped, this for an happy settlement begun. That for the bowing of
the peoples hearts to his Majesty's return, this for the bowing the peoples
knees to his Majesty's presence. That lastly for the Kings and people meeting
by Letters and Message, this for their meeting in presence and reality. That
Thanksgiving was kept for the peoples invitation made to the King to return,
this Thanksgiving is for the Kings return upon his invitation. So the King
returned and and came to Jordan, and Judah came to Gilgal, Parts.
etc,

1. Or thus,

1 King David his Regress, Returned

2. His progress, To Jordan.

3. The peoples Egress, They went out to Gilgal.

4. The congress, which was their end, viz. To meet the King to conduct Him


Kings David's return, so the King returned. 2. His Retirement, the stay thought
fit to be made in the way for a little time, and came to Jordan, i. e. he
stayed a little time on the other side Jordan. 3. The honor of his return, and
Judah came to meet the King. 4. The safety of his Return, and Judah came to
meet him to conduct him over Jordan. 5. The place of Iudahs meeting, and that
at Gilgal, a place of greatest recept on this side Jordan, and nearest to
Jordan, the place so called from Gods rouling away the reproach of Egypt from
Israel.

Obs. 1. Here first we learn the wisdom and piety of David. and what should be
in all good Princes, which is in an amicable and peaceable way to close with
their people submitting to them, although they have gone astray formerly from
their duty. Yea, though they had the power of revenge in their hand, and could
probably even by dint of sword cut their way home, David might, had he gone
this way to work, have stayed from returning, till he knew he had power enough
with him to overturn and overtop the strength of Judah, but, as he says in the
Psalms, he was for peace, and that is a far better way, than the way of war,
either for Prince or People. I think Cicero spoke both truly and nobly, when he
said, Nihil hoc cive, nihil hoc homine tetrius, si aut civis aut home habendus
est, qui bellum civil concupiscit. Nothing is more fowl and hideous, than that
inhabitant of a Nation, or that man (if it be fitting to term him either an
inhabitant or a man) that does lust and wish for a civil war. Se malle unum
servare civem, quam mill hosts occidere.
This was the good temper of Antonius Pius the Roman Emperor, who used to say
as Scipio, he had rather save alive one true subject, than destroy a thousand
of his enemies.

David chose rather to return in peace, than return with war. When Neptune and
Minerva both contended about dignity, Neptune said he invented water, a most
useful Element: Minerva that she invented the Olive, a most fruitful tree,
and the Emblem of fertility, and of peace, and she carried it from Neptune.
There may be, I doubt not, many just causes of war in the world, but there is
no greater calamity can be imagined than a civil war: And I doubt whether there
can be any just cause alleged of such a broyl. The gates of Cities were
formerly the Courts of Justice, Genesis 34.20. Deuteronomy. 22.24. Amos 5.10. Nicetas
amongst others, gives this reason, Vt civitatis populus esset pacificus, in
quam discordes ingredi non liceret. And some think, that the cause why God
would have the Israelites choose a King of their own native Country, Deuteronomy.
17.15. and not a stranger, was, that there might be a more firm peace betwixt
King and people upon their (if I may so term it) consanguinity. It is witty,
that of Lyranus, who gives the reason why Exodus 15.17. In Elim the people had
by providence offered to them twelve wells of water; Dantur fontes secundum
numerum 12. trib. etc. Mendoz.
and he says, it was answerable to the twelve Tribes, and sic qualibet Tribus
habuit fontem per se, every Tribe had his own well, that there might be no
falling out, as if God had no less in his providence taken care to quench the
fire of discord, than the heat of thirst. Lib. 4. Antiqu^cap.
That of Josephus also is not to be slighted, who gives this the cause why
Exodus 16.16. God would have the people to gather every man an omer, and no
more, because if men had been left to gather as much as they would, the weakest
would have wanted, and so there would have been some scuffling and discord
about the Mannah. Our Savior, Mat. 24 7. gives this as a sign of the worlds
ensuing destruction, that kingdom should rise up against kingdom, and Nation
against Nation: and no doubt it is a sign of a Nations destruction, when one
party and power thereof shall rise up against another.

Applica. 1. Blessed be God therefore, and praised be his holy name, that our
King is returned, and so returned, i. e. without any more trouble or difference
returned in peace, yea, returned with peace, bringing with him affections of
peace; yea, commands of peace.

The dove is come back into the ark with the Olive branch of peace, but the
ravenous vulture or raven, the bird of the prey, we hope is quite flown, and
never shall return again. We hope the waters are now well abated from off the
face of the earth, and that the overflowing scourge of usurpation and Tyranny
is driven back, and oh that the Lord would be pleased to set the bow in the
clouds, that he would give us some token for good that we shall be overrun no
more. And to me there does appear a very glorious rainbow, which Christ the
Sun of Righteousness casts by the beams of the holy Gospel, upon the following
showers of his own word, men's hearts every where being elevated beyond their
ordinary pitch, and setting forth the Magnalia Dei beyond ordinary expression.

2. Let us also make our return, let us return to our former Laws, by
observing them, to our former good customs by using them; to our former
obedience and all allegiance by continuing in them, but let us not return with
the dog to the vomit, lest as such, we be turned out of the door of heaven, for
without shall be dogs.

We come now to King David's retirement or stay by the way, and that was at
Jordan; Judah made to meet him and conduct him over Jordan; partly peradventure
to stay for Amasa's coming with his forces to guard him to his royal palace in
Jerusalem.

Learn we hence, David stayed on the other side, to see if Jordan would be
driven back, and a way cut through the water for his passage: As for Joshua, no
doubt David might have had a Convoy there to have conducted him over Jordan,
but he liked much better to have a Convoy of his own native Subjects, whose
faces no doubt he thirsted to see.

David was before hand with his Subjects in a message of peace, for he sends
first, so is he before hand in his return in peace, for he comes first to
Jordan, before Judah comes to Gilgal. The motion of the King being like the
Primum mobile, which being above the orbs, moves them with its motion. King
David moves forward first toward the men of Judah, and then the men of Judah
move forward toward King David.

That Nation is like to be a blessed and happy Nation, where the Prince and
Princes are most forward to peace, and most forward to piety. Regis ad exemplum
totus componitur orbis, Ps. 148. The Psalmist makes a catholic motion to all
the creatures to praise God. Well, but what creatures must lead the way? The
high and most honorable creatures must first move: amongst animate creatures
he names angels, they are thrones and dignities, v. 2. praise him all ye
angels, and what after? Men. And what men first? Princes first, and then all
people, v. 11. Kings of the earth and all people. Thus is it in the other rank
of creatures which are without life. First sun and moon, and then the middle
region, v. 3. and 4. and then lower than that, the earth, and then lower than
that, the deepes, v. 7. Indeed no house joined so near to the temple as the
Kings house, to show that as they are nearest God in dignity, they should be
nearest God in sanctity. Yea, to come nearer to our instance here, the first in
offices of kindness and love. More ready to bless then curse. Deuteronomy. 27.12.13.
what tribes were the blessing tribes? such as descended from the free woman,
the other from the servants mostly, Mendoz
to show that the work of blessng is most suitable to the most noble and
ingenuous, and the work of cursing to the meanest. Ambrose tells us, the
master Be is larger then the rest, but he never stings, so ready is true
majesty to clemency.

Application. There is no difficulty to draw this to our present occasion. The
Text and day falling in together almost in every part; We have a King in both,
and here is a water betwixt the King and his people, the King in the Text stayed
beyond the water for the conduct of Judah, and the King in the day stayed
beyond the water for the conduct of his people in the navy, yea stayed for a
time upon the water, till Amasah and the rest came to meet him; He sets himself
both inoffensively and prudently, yea lovingly in the way of his peoples
joyful reception of him. As he was first in the message, so was he first in
the motion toward a meeting. Our business and duty is to bless God for the
least stirrings, and the very first procedures toward an happy closing. It is
some matter of joy to the mother, when the child begins but to stir in the
womb, though the full rejoicing is not till the child be borne. These
day-breakes and dawnings of settlement were praiseworthy in the Kings coming
to the seaside, expecting a loyal and an honorable waftage over, in his
setting forward to us; and blessed be God that our hopes were not stifled in
the womb, but that there was a passage on forward; and to lay that forth, I
must pass on in my Text to the third general part, the men of Judahs Egress,
and Judah came to Cilgal, etc.

Judah came to Gilgal: that is, Part 3.
either the most of the people, or the best of the people which are before
called the men of Judah; that is, the Nobility and Gentry of Judah with many of
the chief Citizens of Jerusalem, and that nothing may be wanting to the
remarkable fullness of the parallel, these were they that dwelt in the
South-east of Palestine, which was the seat of Judah, and the place of
Jerusalem, the chief Metropolis of the whole Land; happily there might be some
out of other tribes or counties, but the maine body that appeared in the
meeting of David, was of personages inhabiting the South-east, at least there
were more Southestern men than of any one quarter. The very explication of this
saves me the labor of application afterward; I hope there is but few so
ignorant of the coasts, as that I should need to spread a map before them.

Nay, yet more, I shall before I have done, find out a Gilgal in our
South-east borders; for that City in Jewry was so called of the Lord, because
he had there rolled away the reproach of Egypt, Josh. 5.9. And that reproach of
Egypt was twofold, one that they had been slaves there, and bondmen, and
therefore it was called the house of bondage; the other, that they had not been
circumcised in the wilderness, and herein were become like to Egyptians
uncircumcised; now both these reproaches were ^owled away, the former by their
coming into Canaan, the latter by being circumcised, the former is implicitly
laid down and to be under stood, the latter is expressly set out to be read. And
truly wheresoever it was near the seacoasts, that this late great appearance
of English subjects met there liege Lord, it may well be called a Gilgal, as it
puts us into possession of one prevailedge, and puts us in hope of another
corresponding to the two former.

For first I hope, the reproach of our worse than Egyptians slavery, is rolled
a way, whose misery was almost like Canaans curse, a servant, of servants shall
he be, we were subjects unto subjects, yea to very servants, that having got
up, tyrannized to some purpose. Yea, whereas for the sakes of a few the land
lay under the reproach of base disloyalty and treachery to the King, I trust
that is rolled a way in this meeting; and as for the other, I hope every one
will do their part that it may be done away, that we may not be looked upon any
longer as on an unbaptized nation in any part of it, which I look upon as a
reproach to us.

Now for observation, this coming of Judah to Gilgal, teaches us first.

Genesis 28. The angels upon Jacobs ladder were always ascending or descending,
none standing still: Bern. sic necesse est spiritum nostrum aut proficere, aut
deficere. Christ chose to do good works on the Sabbath; to show, that though we
should rest from secular works on the Sabbath day, yet never should rest from
doing good, 1 Cor. 13.8. Charity never fails: Duties likewise of humanity and
humility should never fail.

David had been much injured and provoked by a considerable party in Judah.
They could not therefore in common civility or common policy do less than go
to meet their King; nay doubtless, what they did was to express their love and
hearty alacrity in receiving home their exiled Prince. But of this afterward.

They chose Gilgal as their general rendezvouse to put themselves into a fit
Posture to meet the King.

We come now to the fourth part, Gilgal, and that is congressus, to meet the
King, and to testify their readiness and joyfulness in their reception of his
royal Person.

And indeed this was not only a very splendid, but an happy, and not only an
happy, but a fruitful meeting. And whilst I unfold it, and put you into a
window to behold it, carry along in your thoughts the meeting of our King and
his subject, and suppose that what is said of the one is spoken of the other:
And in this one meeting I see seven very happy meetings, and very handsome
Congresses.

1. A meeting of strength and Magnificence. 2. Of safety and Honor. 3. Of
lawful Government and true Subjection. 4. Of Pardon and submission. 5. Of
Mercy and Truth. 6. Righteousness and Peace. 7. Rejoicing and Praising.
1. Strength and Magnificence. You may imagine by what has lately been at
home, the strength that was at Gilgal when Judah the strongest Tribe was there;
and sure, if they be clothed with soft Raiment that are in Kings Houses, they
would not offer to meet the King, as the Gibeonites did with old clouted
shoes, or threadbare patcht Coats; it is very probable there appeared at
Gilgal the very bravery of Judah, therefore there was a meeting of strength and
magnificence: strength in the multitude, and magnificence in the Attire and
accoutrement.

2. Upon this, here is a meeting of safety and Honor. The King is safely
received from the number and loyalty of his people, and he is honorably
received from the number and quality of his people: so that as strength and
magnificence, so safety and honor waited upon him. And this we are commanded
to praise God for this day. For there was a time when he could not come for
diverse years into his own Kingdoms, but with danger to his life, and in fear
to have his honor laid in the dust, Psalm. 31.13. They took Counsel together
against him, they devised to take away his life. But now (God be praised for
it) he has preserved his life from fear of the enemy, Psalm. 64.1. God has
showed him the path of life, Psalm. 16.11. He asked life of the Lord, and he
gave it him, whilst he preserved his life in former years when dangers were
round about him, Psalm 18.4. verse 5. Psalm 21.5.
when the sorrows of death compast him, and the floods of ungodly men made him
afraid. In his distress he called on the Lord, and cried unto his God, and he
heard his voice out of his Temple. His Glory is great in thy salvation (O Lord)
Honor and Majesty have thou laid upon him.

3. Meeting of lawful Government and loyal subjection. Absalom was no lawful
Governor, and Judah, when they set him up, or did acknowledge him, were no
loyal subjects, for the alliegance they did owe was to David, not to Absalom.
For a people with activity, approbation and contrivance to set up a false
power, cuts the very sinews of true Alliegiance, and such possibly a
considerable part of Judah had been. But now, here is an happy meeting of
recovered true Supremacy and true Allegiance. What before was lawless, is now
not only lawful, but joyful, not only warrantable, but very righteous. And
God be blessed, that our eyes have lately seen such a meeting, that true and
faithful subjects, and a true and lawful Prince have met together.

The fourth meeting, is of Pardon and submission. Both, though not expressed, yet
to be supposed, who can otherwise than imagine but that the people did humbly
submit themselves in this day of his power; and who can think other, but that
the King who pardoned Shim^i, and granted him his life for his own life,
granted also a pardon to the men or Judah, who had not done after the
similitude of Shi^^'s transgression, who was pardoned for the time past for
what he had done, not for what he should after do, if he should offend again,
and this only for his own life and Reign. Nor was it against David's oath made
to Shimei, to give order to Solomon to put him to death: for no doubt David did
know his disposition and principles, as one likely on the like occasion to be
as impudent and insulting as ever; nor did David order Solomon directly to put
him to death for that offense, for then Solomon had done it without any further
delay, but Solomon did not, only confined him to the line, granting him a
tether long enough. This leads me to the fifth meeting of Mercy and Truth which
were here met together, that is, mercy and faithfulness.

For, as Gods mercies to David were sure, and therefore are called the sure
Mercies of David, and in that sense Mercy and Truth now met: so David's mercies
to his people and his enemies were sure mercies, and so they met again.

6. Righteousness and Peace met in this great meeting: for, as in Wars civil,
especially all unrighteousness, cruelty, outrages do prevail, so that we may
say, war and unrighteousness meet together, so Peace and Righteousness meet
together. For, inter arma non solum silent leges, sed virtutes, but in peace,
vigent leges, vigent virtutes: and we know that moral Virtues are concatenated,
as Pindar in Olymp. (...). As there is not only peace but a League amongst the
Virtues, so this peace is confirmed by peace. Oh blessed is that meeting when
King and people meet together in peace, especially after a time of distance,
and a time of broi^es.

Therefore in the seventh and last place, there was in this meeting a congress
of rejoicing and praising God; and this I conjecture, though I find it not
written, by what our eyes have lately seen, in which there was as much joy and
praising God by sober and religious persons, as ever was seen upon any
occasion. We read, 1 Chronicles. 12.40. there was joy in Israel when David was
inaugurated King, and why not when he was restored; There was occasion, there
was place for joy any blessing God. The end of this meering is our Text to
conduct the King over Jordan: that is, to bring him with honor into his native
Kingdom. No doubt, it was a welcome conduct to him to be brought in by them,
whom he styles his Brethren, his bones, and his flesh. If he had had the
conduct of all the valiantest men and most honorable personages of all the
Nations round about, it could not have pleased the soul of David so well, as to
have the men of Judah to fetch him home.

Prove. 11.27. He that diligently seeks good, procures favor, yea, and procures
honor, and service, and attendance, if God see it meet for him, Proverbs
14.28. In the multitude of people is the Kings honor, how much more when they
shall meet together purposely in multitudes to present honor to him, Prove.
21.21. He that follows after Righteousness and mercy, finds Life,
Righteousness and Honor. David, no doubt, did set his heart to do works of
remarkable righteousness and remarkable mercy, and he finds life, God preserves
him in the midst of most urgent and imminent dangers, when his life was hunted
and sought for, and when they laid snares privily, saying, who shall see us.
Secondly, He finds Righteousness, which is Suum cuique tribuere, he has his
Own given him again, of which he was unrighteously deprived. Thirdly, He finds
honor, to have as much given him as possibly could be given at so short
warning. Righteousness found, seems to be the suitable reward of Righteousness
done, and honor conferred, seems to be the reward of Alliance to mercy
bestowed; and life seems to be the common reward of both. He follows
righteousness, and finds life, and he follows mercy, and finds life, for life
is defended by Justice, and saved by Mercy.

David was basely and unworthily forced to fly out of the land, now therefore
they bring him back with honor. He was forced to slip away privately over
Jordan; now they make for him an honorable conduct at his return. Nil ^am nisi
vota supersunt. My Application of the Premises shall be supplication with
Thanksgiving.

The Kings glory is great in thy salvation; (O Lord) Majesty and Honor have
thou laid upon him. Thou have given him safety after danger, boldness after
fear, joy after grief, gain after loss, establishment after exile, restitution
after persecution, honor after dejection, test after perturbation, a Throne
after a thorn, a Crown after a cross. He fled away over this Jordan with little
more than his staff, and now he is become according to thy grant and his Right,
the King in actual possession of more than two great Kingdoms. What shall we
render unto thee for what thou have done for him? Praise is comely, but it is
too little; we can give nothing to thee, but what is thine own; but alas! what
can such poor beggars as we are give thee; Blessed Lord, thou give us the
grace to beg, that thou may give us the grace we do beg. Now for Jesus his
sake, grant to our gracious King, increase of all Grace, perseverance in all
good, Wisdom in all difficulties, Courage in all his noble enterprises,
Moderation in all prosperity, Patience in all adversity, Success in his
undertakings, Honor in his achievements, Joy in his Crown and dignity. Bless
him (O Lord) with an obedient people, a learned, pious and painful Clergy, a
religious and loving Gentry, a loyal and gracious Nobility, a just and
courageous Magistracy, a wise and faithful Counsel. Bless the two royal
Brethren, through thy Mercy here with us, and the two royal Sisters beyond the
water. Let thy blessing rest upon this honorable and happy Parliament, and
upon those wise Commanders and loyal Subjects that have been instrumental in
this great work. Finally (O Lord) Bless his Majesty with a long life, and an
happy Reign; and when he must no longer reign over us, let him for ever reign
with Christ,

Amen and Amen.
FINIS.

