To all These that OBSERVE Days, Months, Times and Years; This is WRITTEN,
That they may see whether they follow the Example and Doctrine of the Apostle;
Or whether they are such as the Apostle testified against.
TO keep a Day Holy to the Lord, is not displeasing, but acceptable to him; and
therefore he that regards a Day, let him regard it to the Lord, and not judge
him that does not regard it; For the Apostle says, one man esteems one Day
above another; another esteems every Day alike, let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind, this was the Apostles Doctrine, who had the spirit
of God; he did not judge the one nor the other, but said, let every man be
fully persuaded in his own mind: (Mark that) all you that observe Days and
Times; and consider well whether you regard the Day to the Lord, or you observe
it to the satisfying of your lusts; for such observation of Days, is not
acceptable with the Lord, to wit, to observe them to satisfy your lusts, and
live in pleasures and vain delights; this is not a keeping the Day Holy, but
rather profaning it; and against such observation the Apostle writes, when he
says, How turn you again to these weak and beggarly Elements, where unto ye
desire again to be in Bondage; Ye observe Days and Months, Times and Years, I
am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain. So here you may
see, though the Apostle did not judge him that regarded a Day to the Lord, yet
he reproves those that had known God, or rather were known of him, who turned
again to those weak and beggarly Elements, and he was afraid lest he had
best^wed Labor in vain: And therefore all you that observe Days and Times,
take heed that you are not in bondage to your lusts. You that observe a Day for
Christ's Nativity (as you say) take heed that you spend not away your time in
vanity and the pleasures of the flesh, for they that do so, will Crucify the
Just and Holy One, much like those who built the Tombs of the Prophets, and
garnished the Sepulchers of the Righteous, and said, if we had been in the
days of our Fathers, we would not have slain the Prophets; and yet those put
Christ to death, of whom the Prophets prophesied; And so you say now, You would
not have Crucified Christ, nor put Stephen to death; and you observe a Day for
him; but consider, if one come in the Name of the Lord, and bear a Testimony
against your Temple and Worship, as Stephen did against theirs, and tell you,
that you are stiff-necked, and uncir cumcised in Heart and Ears, etc. Would not
the same Spirit of Wrath and Envy arise in you as it did in them? And so ye
would make it manifest you are of that Generation that put Stephen to death,
though you keep his Day. But what do you keep it for? Do you keep it in
remembrance of his Martyrdom? If so, how dare you Feast and Rejoice as if you
were glad of his Death? Do you not herein justify the deeds of that Generation
who slew him? And why do you keep a Day for the Innocent Children whom Herod
slew, or caused to be slain? And why do you feast upon it, and make merry? Do
you not herein justify Herod's fact, and so become guilty of innocent blood?
Consider well upon these things, and who it was that first commanded these
Days to be kept: Was it not the Pope? For the Apostle does not command Saints
Days to be kept; but says, He that regards a day, regards it to the Lord,
he does not say he regards it to Saints, and so it is manifest that the
observation of Saints days is come up in the night of Darkness and Apostasy
since the Apostles, and not by their command or example. And further it is
manifest, That he who is farthest from a Saints life, will contend most for a
Saints day; even the Drunkard, Swearer and most profane, will be ready to do
mischief to the man that does but follow his lawful employment upon such a day
as they call Holy. Now, whether is it more unholinesle for a man to follow his
lawful employment, or for a man to be Drunk, Swear, Game, and follow the
pleasures of the flesh? Consider well upon these things, and dishonor not the
Lord God by doing wickedly, while you profess you honor his Saints. Oh the
abomination that is committed in this Nation and throughout Christendom, under
pretense of keeping Saints Days and Christimas! (as it is called) and where
had you that name but from the Pope? If you had it not from him, tell us where
you had it, and who was the first Author of it, and of the penalty for not
keeping it? And whether is not the inflicting penalties or punishments for not
observing it, clean contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, Let every man
be fully persuaded in his one mind; here was no penalty put upon one nor other
(but this) and they were not to judge one another about Days, nor Meats, nor
Drinks, (as you may read) Romans 14.

And is it not a causing the People to sin, to impose things upon them as
Meats, Drinks and Days, (in which the Kingdom of God does not stand) seeing
the Apostle says, he that doubts is damned if he eat, (Mark that) because he
eats not of Faith: For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. And Faith is the
gift of God, which gives victory over the World; in which we have unity with
the Father, and the Son, and with the Saints, and keep the Day to the Lord Holy
( Mark that) in the Faith which purifieth the heart the Day is kept Holy; which
faith stands in Christ the Power of God, by whom all things were Created. But
if thou doubtst, and keep'st a Day because it is imposed upon thee, then thou
sinnest, and so have not unity with God nor the Saints. And therefore You who
are in Authority, take heed that the observation of Days be not imposed upon
any (especially those called Saints Days) least thereby You cause the people
to sin, And why do You forbid working upon those Days, and not Gaming, as
Cards, Dice, Dancing, Sporting, and all other vain Pleasures? Do not those
things more dishonor the Lord, then for a man to be Digging, Planting, or
following any other lawful employment whatsoever. Consider well upon these
things, that prophannesse may be stopped, and the abuse of the good creatures of
God in this Nation by excessive Eating and Drinking may be prevented; least the
Judgments of God fall upon the Nation as in the days past; for such like
wickedness Gods Judgments came: And let the Saints life more appear, and the
fruits of the Spirit in all Meekness, Gentleness and Patience, and Brotherly
love; that the Day of Christ you may see, which Abraham saw and was glad, and
Simeon waited for and departed in Peace, who saw the Salvation of God, A LIGHT
to lighten the Gentiles (as the Prophets foretold) and to be the glory of
Israel; And if you are against this Light, Gods Covenant, though you profess
Abraham to be your father (as the Jews did) and observe Days and Times for the
Saints, while you are against the Saints life (Christ who lived in them) who is
the end of the Law and Prophets, all your Performances and Observation of days
and times, are abomination to the Lord, and are Idolatry and Superstition, and
are testified against with and by the Spirit of Truth; which Spirit convinces
you of sin, which leads the Saints into all truth; in which Spirit the God of
Heaven and Earth is to be Worshipped, served and obeyed; in which Spirit there
is Unity, Fellowship and Peace with God, and one with another, and Holiness is
known; Without which, no man shall see the Lord.

This is Written, that all People may take heed, that while they are
professing, they honor Christ and the Saints by keeping Days for them, they
do not dishonor the Lord, by Profaneness, Idolatry, Superstition, in
observing Days not commanded by God, Christ, nor the Saints, but by the Pope
in the night of darkness, who has killed the Saints and Witnesses of Jesus;
and then to cover himself, has Observed and Commanded the Observation of
Saints Days.

By one that loves Righteousness and Peace, John Braithwait.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.


