THE MINISTERS OF ENGLAND Which are called, the Ministers of the Gospel,
Weighed in the Balance of Equity: By way of Consideration, whereby it plainly
appears, whether they be the Ministers of Christ, or of Antichrist. And also,
Whether to bear a Testimony against a settled Maintenance, either by Tyths or
any other way which may be invented to uphold that Ministry, be any way
dangerous to destroy the Gospel of Christ; Resolved. With a Serious Meditation
upon the dealings of God with England, and the State thereof in general.

Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know
them: for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them, but
transgressors shall fall therein, Hos. 14.9. Published for the satisfaction of
such as desire to prove all things, and are willing to hold that fast which is
good; By a Friend unto the faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, John
Braithwait.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Blackspread Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le grand, 1660.

THE MINISTERS OF ENGLAND Which are called Ministers of the Gospel, weighed in
the balance of Equity.
WHen I began to consider of these things, and weighed them in the balance of
Equity and Truth; my soul within me was troubled, to hear the cry amongst the
People concerning the Ministers, and the Gospel; some crying this is a Minister
of the Gospel, another that; and while I was meditating on these things, the
Lord God, that made Heaven and Earth, by his Spirit said unto me, Weigh them in
my balance of Equity, compare them with my Servants and Ministers in former
ages, and see whether they be in their Call, Practice, and Doctrine, agreeable
to my Servants; which if they be not, let the People understand and know
thereof, that so many as desires after the way of life, and salvation, may be
deceived no longer, and the rest may be left without excuse.

Then I began to consider how the Ministers and Servants of the Lord, were sent
forth in former ages, whether they were sent to the Schools to learn, that they
might be fitted to do the Lords work, or be his Ministers; Amos 1.1.
and I could not find in all the Scriptures of Truth, that the Ministers of
Christ were sent to the Schools of Learning, with an intention thereby to be
made Ministers of the Gospel, Mark. 1.16 17.
but they were called forth from their labors and employments, and were endued
with power from on high, by him that sent them, to perform the service they
went about.

But they who are commonly called the Ministers of the Gospel in England, are
sent to the Schools to learn the Tongues, and Languages, and that they say fits
them to be Ministers of Christ; which many Tongues and Languages came in since
transgression, Gen 11.7, 8, 9.
and the justice of God was executed upon them, who thought to make themselves
a Name, and build a Tower whose top might reach unto heaven; and now those men
called Ministers, glory in their Tongues and Languages. Do they not glory when
they say he is an able Minister, he has the Tongues? here the Tongues makes
them able, (as they say) here they take the glory from Christ, and ascribes it
to the Tongues, which Tongues Christ redeems out of, Rev. 5.9.
and so they glory in that which Christ redeems out of, which glory the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth will stain, and shame and confusion shall come upon
them.

Object. But says the People, they may be Ministers of Christ, though they
learn the Tongues; was not Paul a Minister of Christ, and was not he brought up
at the feet of Gamaliel? and had not the Apostles the gift of Tongues?

Answ. Yea, Paul was a Minister of Christ, but the bringing up at the feet of
Gamaliel, Acts 22.3. to the 22.
did not make him a Minister of Christ is apparent, for after that he
persecuted the Church of God, until such time as the Lord met with him, and
called him by his grace, to be a Minister and a Witness for his Name. Then if
it be the Lords work, to call and make Ministers, then those men who believe or
think, that Tongues or Languages can make Ministers of Christ, are in an error,
and are ignorant of the power of God; and ascribe that to the Tongues and
Languages (which at the best are but a gift) which is only due to God; though
we do not forbid to speak with Tongues.

Object. But then they say, you mistake us, we do not ascribe the glory to the
Tongues, we use them but as a means.

Ans. But if you use that as a means, after such a manner as God never ordained
(to wit) that none without it can be made Ministers of Christ, then you ascribe
that to the means which properly belongs to God: and so would limit the holy
one of Israel to your means, and helps, your tongues and languages, Which
tongues the Beast had power over, Reve. 13.17.
that so none might be called Ministers of Christ, but such as you approve of,
who at the least will give some honor to your tongues and languages; which
makes the people idolize you, and wonder after you, but now you are weighed and
found too light, your glory will the Lord God of Heaven and Earth lay in the
dust, and he will call forth Servants and Ministers by his Spirit, as in former
ages, whom he will endue with his power from on high, that will glorify him
for ever.

But further, when I began to consider the life and practice of those men,
whether it might not be agreeable to the life and practice of the Ministers of
Christ; and when I had considered the life of the Prophets of the Lord, and
Ministers of Christ, they were holy men, and meek men, just and sober, Tit.
1.7.8. Mat. 10: Mark. 12. 38, 39, 40.
and were not to be called of men Master, nor have the chiefest place in the
Assemblies, nor stand praying in the Synagogues; for the Scribes and Pharisees
did so, which was against Christ, which Christ cried woe against; and when I
had diligently considered this matter, I found them (to wit) those pretended
Ministers of the Gospel, in the steps and practice of the false Prophets,
preaching for hire, and divining for money, and more unjust than ever I read
that the false Prophets were in former ages, Mich. 3.11.
in hailing men to prison, and spoiling their goods, and in the steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees which is before mentioned; and when I saw them so clean
contrary in their call, life, and practice, to the holy men of God, my heart
began to pity the people, whereupon it came presently into my mind. But
nevertheless though it be thus with them in life and practice, for all this may
not their Doctrine be good? Mat. 5.48.
and then I began to consider their Doctrine and compare some few of them with
the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles; Christ said, Cor. 2.6.
be ye perfect as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect; and the Apostle
said, Rom 8.2.
we preach wisdom among them that are perfect; mark that, (are perfect) was
not that in this life? but do not these learned men say that none can be
perfect in this life? the Apostle said, the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death: Has made me free, mark
that, was not that in this life, or while the Apostle was in the body? John
1.9: and 8:12:
but do not they say, none can be made free from sin in this life? John said,
that was the true light that lights every man that comes into the World; was
not Christ that true light? who said, I am come a light into the World, that
whosoever follows me should not abide in darkness, but should have the light
of life; but do not they say that every man is not lighted, Tit: 2:11:
except it be with a natural and a created light; the Apostle said, the grace
of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men; but is not their
Doctrine, that it has appeared but to some men?

And when I began to weigh these Doctrines of theirs, in the equal balance, I
found them very unsound and contrary to the Scriptures, Matt 7:16:
and then came into my mind that saying of Christ, By their fruits ye shall
know them, or, every tree is known by its fruits; men do not gather grapes of
thorns, nor figgs of thistles; and when I had thus considered the state of the
tolerated Ministers, or pretended Ministers of the Gospel in England, and
found them clear contrary to Christ and his Apostles, in these and many more
things which I might mention, then I saw it was the Lords righteous judgments
upon them to strip them naked and bare, and stain their glory; for as much as
they have sought honor to themselves, and have dishonored the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, who is now risen in his power, which they have denied, and in
effect they have said, his arm is shortened that it cannot save (as in former
ages) and revelations is ceased, and is to be expected no more, and so the day
has been dark over them, Prove. 29:18.
and there has been no vision, and where there is no vision the people perish:
and for this cause will the Lord God let them know the revelation of his
righteous judgments, which shall shortly come upon them, though they would put
it far away, and though they cry peace, peace, yet shall sudden destruction
come, both upon them, and all that willingly do uphold them.

And then I began to consider upon the settled or rather forced maintenance,
which as it appears does uphold them, whether to bear a testimony against it,
be any way dangerous to destroy the Gospel of Christ yea or nay? and when I had
considered well upon this matter, I could not see nor find, that Christ had
laid a settled, or forced maintenance for the foundation of the Gospel; but did
send forth his Ministers freely; Freely they had received, Mat. 10.8.
freely they were to give; and he that preaches the Gospel may live of the
Gospel; here the Gospel was to maintain them, and not a forced maintenance to
maintain it; 1 Cor. 9.14.18.
for the Gospel is the power of God to Salvation, says the Apostle; whose care
was not to make the Gospel chargeable; but as it does appear those men which
are called Ministers of the Gospel now in England, strive to make that which
they call Gospel chargeable, and that not only to them, who receive their
doctrine; but also to them who deny it; which is a most unrighteous thing; what
can be more unrighteous than that one Congregation, or Assembly of people,
should be forced by a law to maintain the Minister and meeting place of another
Church, or Assembly, which are clean contrary the one to the other in their
Judgment, in things appertaining to the worship of God? and if it may be
unrighteousness in the one, is it not so in the other? Seeing they both
believe, or at least they say, the way which they walk in, is the way of God.

Object. But if it could be certainly judged which of them is in the right way,
might not they that are in the right way, compel and force them that are not,
to maintain them?

Answ. Nay, he that is in the right way, must do as he would be done unto, and
that is just and right, and that is the royal law, Jam. 2.8.
the Law of Christ; now if thou would not willingly maintain the Minister of
an assembly that differs from theein judgment, then thou must not desire,
much less force a mantenance from them; but if thou keep a flock eat the milk
of the flock, Cor. 9.7
if thou plant a Vinyard, eat the fruit thereof; mark, he that plants a
vinyard, may eat of the fruit thereof; he does not say, thou may eat of that
thou have not planted; for how could that convince men, or convert them unto
God. To eat them, and to devour them, would rather set men's hearts against
thee, and that way which thou do profess; and therefore as in this respect
to bear a Testimony against Tithes, or any other forced maintenance, to
maintain Ministers, is no way dangerous to destroy the Gospel of Christ.

Object. But if there be not a law to compel men to pay to the Ministers,
People are so hard hearted and Covetous, they will not pay toward their
maintenance; and then preaching will go down, and people will become heathens.

Answ. It seems then, that for all the Preaching that has been in England,
people are yet hard hearted, and Covetous; what reason is there then, that
those that are yet hard hearted, and covetous, should pay or maintain those
men, that they have not profited by; when I consider this thing, it appears
to me, to be greater covetousness in those men called Ministers, to desire to
have a maintenance from those people, that have not profited by them; than it
is for the other to detain it; And as for Preaching going down, and people
becoming Heathens; this I say, that Preaching which is grounded upon
covetousness, let it go down, let their Preaching go down, for they rather keep
people in heathenisme, then bring any to the true knowledge of God, who
themselves dare not trust God for their maintenance; after which things the
Gentiles seek.

Object. But though those learned men have been Covetous and proud, and made an
evil use of their maintenance, nevertheless is it not convenient, that the law
remain which compels men to pay to the Ministers, for peradventure God may
raise better men in their places, as gifted men, and such like.

Answ. Let the Law of Christ remain, let him that preaches the Gospel live of
it, but let not any law remain which compels men, Was not the first Law for
payment of Tithes since Christ came in the flesh, made in the time of Pope
Innocent the 3d. In the year 1215. and was not that in the time of Apostasy and
night of darkness? and is not that a bad foundation for the Ministers of the
Gospel to stand upon and an uncomfortable Maintenance for them to live on?
contrary to their freedom, to maintain a Ministry, for while any such Law
does remain, it drawerh covetous men to be Ministers; is not the hope of a good
maintenance, as it it is called 100 l, or 200 l, Per annum; that moves the
Father to set his Son to the University to be made a Minister? cannot many in
England tell this by experience; and is not this Covetousness, the root of all
evil? and is not this maintenance that which causes the Jesuits, and Papists,
desire to be in this land again? hoping that the law, which their Father the
Pope made will maintain them, which law if it were once made null, and void,
their hopes would be frustrated; for if the people be once clearly freed from
that yoke of bondage, they would not easily be brought under it again: and as
for these gifted men (so called) has it not been a snare unto them, and the
love to the money, or maintenance, has enticed them to receive (orders) the
Popes orders? and have not many of them become as Cruel in prosecuting the
Popes law, for a forced maintenance, as the learned. Well this I must say from
the Lord God, unto you who say you are gifted men; and have thus betrayed your
Testimony; Gods hand is stretched out against you above all other men; for as
much as you have professed to have the gift of his Spirit, and that freely, and
now go to sell it, and compel people to buy it; O wicked abomination! Was not
the time once that you cried against oppression, and are you become oppressors?
are you so quickly gone in the way of Balaam for gifts, and rewards, the wages
of unrighteousness, and would have this burden always to remain upon the
people, O grievous wickedness! the Lords anger is kindled against you, and it
will be more tolerable in the day of judgment, for the Pope and his company
(I mean the university men) than for you; because the Lord has showed more of
his loving kindness unto you, than he has done unto them, and yet you have not
prized it.

And when I had dilligently considered upon these things, I saw it no way
dangerous to destroy the Gospel of Christ, To bear a Testimony against Tithes;
or to bear a Testimony against any other maintenance, which may be settled upon
Ministers by a Law, which compels men to maintain a Minister, which they
believe is not a Minister of Christ; But rather to bear such a Testimony, and
to take away the Law, that compels men to maintain those men, Do not they make
a settled Maintenance the foundation of their Ministry and Gospel? and is not
the greatest striving by them about the greatest Benifices? and the most
preaching where their is the greatest gifts?
which they do not believe are the Ministers of Christ, is dangerous to destroy
the ministry of Antichrist, if the matter be considered well; for have they not
from one age to another, from time, to time, throughout the dark night of
Apostasy, made this (to wit) a settled maintenance, the foundation of their
Ministry? and where there was no settled Maintenance, no Minister, no Preaching:
may not England experience this? But the Ministers of Christ, that are so in
deed and truth, will be contented with what Christ has alloted to them: for a
necessity is laid upon them, and they must preach the Gospel, or else woe unto
them: and he that preaches the Gospel, let him live of it; and let every Church
(so called) maintain, their own Minister, or Ministers, so long as they think
or believe him, or them to be Ministers of Christ; but if any man in the said
Church, or Assembly, be not willing, let him not be compelled any otherwise
than by love; Let people do as they would be done unto, and show themselves to
be Christians indeed; throughout all Christendom, Let their be no compelling
of men to believe, seeing Faith is the gift of God; and let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin; and let there
be good Laws to punish Wickedness, as murder, stealling, whoredom,
drunkenness, cozening, false witness, 1 Timothy 17, 8, 9. ver.
or any other thing which deserves punishment by the Law of God, and let it be
done without partiallity or respect of persons, or of the Religion they
profess, and let not Gods Spirit be stoped by a Law, in neither male, nor
female, but let that have freedom in all, for Gods righteous Judgments will
fall upon them, that seek to hinder or stop that; and therefore let there be
liberty for one Society of people to dispute or discourse with another (though
different in their judgments,) concerning the things of God; provided, there be
no violence used by one party to another, with their hands, or with weapons, or
with any other thing, that may do hurt to the body, or life of man or woman,
old or young, and let there be moderation; and if any pretend to be led by the
Spirit of God, and yet do wickedly, let them be punished, as their transgession
does deserve; but let not that be called wickedness, which is not so indeed,
but let every thing be weighed in the Balance of Equity, that judgment and
Justice may be set up, and righteousness, and peace may run down, that violence
be no more heard in the Land.

For the day of Gods everlasting love is come, and he is visiting the people in
his tender mercy, Luke 1.78.
in causing his light to spring from on high, and his day to dawn, and he is
discovering the skirts of the Whore, and the hour of her judgment is come; and
all that do, or seek to uphold her, a day of woe, and desolation is coming upon
them, a day of Sorrow and misery; and therefore all people be advised, to prize
the loving kindness of the Lord, who by his light does, and will let you see
your states and conditions, and the intents of your hearts are known to the
Lord; Is it not he that searches the heart, and tries the reins, Amos 4.18.
and declares unto man what is his thoughts? Is not this Testimoony true, that
Light is come unto you? and if it become to you, why will ye not walk in it?
what can you expect if you prize not this loving kindness of God in Christ? who
comes a light unto you, and lets you see how it stands between God, and
your own souls.

And therefore all people consider of your ways and your doings, and while you
have a time and a day of visitation from the Lord, prize it, and weigh things
in the Balance of equity, and see whether these things be not so: consider, if
the pretended Ministers of the Gospel in England have not been Antichristian?
what was the Bishops who received their Ordination from the Pope, or at the
least did derive their succession from him? If the root be unholy, what can the
branches be? If the Pope be Antichristian, what were the Bishops? And if the
Bishops were Antichristian, what can the pretended Presbytery be? do not they
derive their succession from the Bishops? would not they be heirs of their
Inheritance? would not they rule over the Conscience? what is the meaning of
all this covetousness and pride amongst them? what is the meaning of this envy
and stirring up the Magistrates to cast men into prison, and spoil their
goods? what do they think this is the way to convert people unto God? or
convince people that they are Ministers of Christ? surely nay, people may
rather by all these things, judge that they are Antichristian Ministers; and so
this does but discover their folly and madness unto all men, who have
understanding; But what is the matter they cry up the Gospel so much? do they
that out of the integrity of their hearts? or is it not rather out of the
deceit of their hearts? is it not because of their hire? would not those which
are called Independants turn to the name of Presbyters, rather than deny their
wages? and the Presbyters turn to Episcopacy, rather than deny theirs? nay,
would not the greatest part of all those men, if the Magistrate so commanded,
and they have that liberty granted them, turn to say, or sing mass, and call
that Gospel, and cry it up too, rather than deny their hire, the Popes wages?
so that of all that may be said, or seen concerning them; 1 Timothy 6.10.
the love of money (which is the root of all evil) is the foundation upon which
they stand; and that is the main thing they cry up in effect; for say they,
take away the maintenance, and the Gospel will down; and as one of them said,
(being asked if he preached for hire) This is the great quarrel of all, they
have against us, to pull down the Ministry of the Word. What is this but to
make it the Foundation? yea, and the chief thing that does uphold them: But the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth is risen, who will not only discover, but also
shake their Foundation, and dread and terror, and amazement shall come upon
them from the Lord God, who searches the heart, and tries the reins.

Oh what a snare has this Settled or rather forced Maintenance been! it has
not only enticed the Independants and Presbyterians, but the Baptists also have
been partakers thereof; it is even but a remnant that have escaped drinking of
this Cup of Abomination; and these few are set even as a mark for all the rest
to shoot their arrows of envy and malice against: And when I considered,
whether the People were clear and innocent as touching this matter; Alas nay,
the People love to have it so; and therefore they cry for Laws to compel
(themselves) to pay to their Ministers; and my heart pitied them that they
should be so blind and ignorant, and I said, were it not better for them if
they have a mind to maintain their own Ministers, that they did it freely, and
of their own accord? Alas, what foolish people be those, who call for a Chain
to be bound in, and a Rod to whip themselves, that so him whom they call their
Minister may bind them, and whip them, and hail them to Courts and to Prison,
and spoil their Goods when he pleases; But alas the ground of all this is
Ignorance, 2 Cor. 4.6.
for the People have been kept from the light, which should give unto them the
knowledge of the glory of God; and who has kept them from it but these
Merchants of Babylon? have not they called it natural? have not they said, that
that which reproves for sin is a natural Conscience? and the Scriptures does
say, John 16, 7, 8.
it is the Spirit of truth; and so the People have been so foolish to give
their money to be made blind, and to be led into the ditch, and so perish; But
when I considered, that those Priests were in a great measure the cause of all
these Abominations, and Wickedness (I mean those that go in Balaams way) Then I
began to admire the long-suffering and forbearance of God, who has spared them
thus long, and given them so many warnings, and visits by his Servants, that so
they might return from their wickedness, and the evil of their doings, that he
might have mercy upon them, and do them good; but yet for all this, they will
not return, but will do despite unto the Spirit of grace, and will cleave unto
their Idols; it is not long ere the Lord will say, Genesis 6.3.
(as he once said concerning a People) My Spirit shall not always strive with
man; and then VVo and desolation shall come upon them, and all that partake
with them; Wherefore you Rulers, and all People, take heed that ye do not
uphold them, after you see this their abomination, If you do ye shall not
prosper, nor escape the judgments of God; and also take heed that you do not
stop your ears against that which would let you understand and see their
wickedness; for if you do stop your ears, ignorance shall not excuse you in the
day of the Lord God.

Object. But says the People, our Ministers they Christen our Children, and
does not that make them Christians? and it is possible if we do not hire them,
they will not Christian our Children, and will they not then be Heathens?

Answ Then it seems your Ministers do that which the Ministers of Jesus Christ
did not do (to wit) Sprinkle Infants, and call it Cristening or Baptism, an
Ordinance of the Popes making, and for which all the great sums of Money is
given to the Pope and his Ministers, that you may have the name of Christians,
which name as it appears to me, is derived from Sprinkling with Water, which
some People call Cristening; and indeed it is possible if the Popes Wages be
taken away, then they will cease to Sprinkle the Children; but however this is
my Testimony, that they have no right in equity and conscience to demand, (much
less to force) a maintenance from those that do not hire them, nor approve of
their Doctrine, as their Cristening, and such like things, which is not at all
necessary to Salvation; but this is the thing that is necessary to Salvation,
that Children be informed to the Light, Gods Covenant, which is given for
Salvation to the ends of the earth, which if they walk in it; Isa. 42.6. and
49.6.
they will come to know God, and Jesus Christ, which is life eternal, (though
they never be Cristened) and if they be Cristened and know not him, they are in
the state of Heathens, for the Heathen know not God.

Object. But if every man may do as he will in those things, will not this
bring all into confusion? do not we see that the granting the liberty of
Conscience, has brought much distraction in this Nation of England? and
therefore we judge it best that all People be brought into a Conformity again,
at the least let there be limits, and Laws, that no man may question our
Ministers.

Answ. Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind, Read Rom 14. Ephesians.
4.13.
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin; and the unity is in the faith; and
whatsoever is out of the faith, is in the Confusion; and it is not the
compelling of men, that brings into unity and fellowship, but the love of God
does, whose arm and power is stretched over this Nation, through whose love,
Liberty of Conscience has been proclaimed, which was long waited for; and this
has done no hurt to any but the Whore, and the Merchants of Babylon; and
distraction and desolation is coming upon her from the Lord God, Read Rev. 18.
for strong is he that judges her. And so you that would have People brought
into a Conformity again, and have Laws to limit the holy one again; this I say,
you are such as have drunken of the Whores Cup of abomination, and must drink
of the Cup of the indignation of God, poured out without mixture: What have you
forgotten since you your selves desired Freedom, you that are called
Presbyters? would you not have been from under the yoke of Episcopacy? and
would you desire that your selves, which you are not willing to grant to
others? O ye hypocrites! how can you judge and speak against the Whore of Rome,
Rom 2.21, 22.
and you your selves guilty of the same thing; who would rule over the
Consciences, Psalm 78.41, 42.
and conform People to your faith, limit the holy one, that none may speak or
question your Ministers; what does the Whore of Rome more? she may laugh to see
your folly and madness; what are you and your Ministers afraid of? that they
may not be questioned: what have they done, that they are ashamed of? if they
have done evil, is it not just that they should be confounded? and if they have
done well, they need not be afraid; Isa. 33.14.
but fear surpriseth the hypocrites; and the sinners in Zion are afraid, for
the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his jealousy burns like fire, and the
torment of the Whore is begun, and her Merchants have cried, Alas, that great
City, etc. and both they that help, Isa. 31.3.
and they that are helped, shall fall together; for the Lords Decree is sealed
against Babylon and her Merchants, and his purpose is to exalt his own Name in
righteousness, and break the peace of the wicked.

Resol.
And having thus viewed and compared the Ministers of England, (I mean the
Parish Teachers) with the true Ministers of Christ, in their Call, Practice,
Doctrine, and Maintenance; and finding them clean contrary in all those things
to the holy men of God; Therefore in the fear and dread, and presence of the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, I bear my Testimony, they be Antichristian
Ministers, and their forced Maintenance is Antichristian, for if it was such a
great sin, in the Sons of Eli in the time of the Law, to force Maintenance,
much more now in the time of the Gospel; And it is said concerning them, 1 Samuel
2.16, 17.
because of this thing, (to wit) because they said nay, but thou shall give it
me now, and if not I will take it by force; wherefore the sin of the young men
was very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the offering of the Lord; and
besides Christ is come, who is the end of that Priesthood, who had a
Commandment to receive Tithes, and the Priesthood being changed, there is
made of necessity also a change of the Law; Heb. 7.12.
and therefore this forced Maintenance by Tithes is not to be upheld, but
testified against by the true Christians, who worship God in the Spirit and in
truth; And to take away this forced Maintenance, is no way dangerous to destroy
the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ, because he unto whom the Gospel of God
is committed to Preach, must Preach it, 1 Cor. 9:16:
or else woe unto him, (it is not then, I will Preach unto you, if you will
give me such a price by the Year) for a necessity is laid upon him, and he must
Preach, or give in his Testimony, whether People will hear or forbear, he must
not then confer with flesh and blood, but as Paul said, (so the Ministers of
Christ should do) when it pleased God who separated me from my mothers womb,
Gal. 1.15.16.
and called me by his grace to reveal his Son in me, that I might Preach him
among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood.

And therefore all People upon the Earth, who understand and knows those Parish
Teachers in England, are Antichristian Ministers, and their Cristening, and
many such like things are of no necessity as to the Salvation of the Soul, but
are inventions and institutions of the Pope in the dark night of Apostasy: 2
Cor. 6.17
Come out from amongst them, and be you separated, wherefore do you spend your
money for that which is not bread, Isa. 55.1, 2, 3.
and your labor for that which does not satisfy? Come buy wine and milk
without money, and without price, hearken diligently that your Souls may live,
eat that which is good, and let your Souls delight in fatness; mind the
Testimony of Gods Spirit, whether that be for you or against you, and weigh all
things in the just Balance which God loves, and slight not the day of your
visitation, Prove. 11. i. and 16.11.
wherein God proffereth his love unto you, to draw you unto himself with his
loving kindness, who is come to gather his sheep together with his everlasting
Arm, Ezekiel 34.
and to stretch out his hand against those Shepherds that have fed themselves
and not the Sheep; his Indignation is kindled against them, because they have
ruled over the Sheep of his Pasture with force and cruelty; therefore will he
deliver his flock out of their hands, and they shall be a prey to them no
longer, he himself will gather them together as a Shepherd does his Sheep, and
lead them into good Pastures, and feed them upon the Mountains of Israel by the
rivers; and he will make all the places round about them a blessing, and they
shall rejoice in his goodness for evermore: Many shall run too and fro, Dan.
4.12 Isa. 15. ^. J^. 3.23.
and knowledge shall be increased, and it shall even be fulfilled that is
written, the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the waters cover
the Sea, and Israel shall be saved in the Lord with an everlasting Salvation:
and then shall people say, Salvation is not in the Hills or Mountains, but
Salvation comes from the Lord, and upon him will we wait; and then shall
righteousness run down like a mighty stream, Ier. 25.5, 6
and judgment and justice be established in the Earth; and Christ shall reign
as King, and in his days shall Judah be saved, Isa: 25:8, 9
and Israel shall dwell safely: and the name whereby he shall be called, is the
Lord our righteousness, and he will destroy death for ever; and the Lord God
will wipe away tears from all faces, and the rebuke of his people will he take
away out of all the earth; and in that day shall men say, lo this is our God,
Isa: 35:7, 8, 9, 10.
we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his Salvation for
evermore: and then the dry ground shall be as a pooll, and the thirsty as
springs of water; in the habitations of Dragons where each lay, shall be a
place for reeds and rushes; and the redeemed of the Lord shall come to Zion
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; and they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away: and then shall salvation,
honor, and wisdom be ascribed, and given to the Lord our God, and to the
Lamb, who alone is worthy, both now and for ever, Amen.

A Serious Meditation upon the dealings of God with England, and the state
thereof in general.
O England! thy day of visitation from the Lord, has been exceeding large, and
his dealings with thee exceeding wonderful, when thou wast in distress and
cried unto the Lord, he heard thee, and delivered thee from thy oppressors; but
Oh how quickly have thou forgotten the loving kindness of the Lord, and the
dealings of thy God! Remember the days that are past when thou wast in bondage
and slavery, and desired freedom to worship the Lord, and the Lord heard, and
granted unto thee thy desire, and also made known the way of his worship within
thy borders, in thy Towns, in thy streets in thy Assemblies has the Lord
proclaimed the way of life and Salvation, by his Children and Servants; but oh
how have thou requited the Lord for his loving kindness! how have thou
entreated his Servants with prisons, whipings, and revilings! who bare their
testimony against thy wickedness, against thy pride and covetousness, and
Idolatry; but oh how have thou rejected the counsel of the Lord! and has
chosen thine own ways, and followed thy own counsel, and hardened thy heart,
and stiffned thy neck: even like a rebellious people, that would none of the
Law of the Lord, and therefore thou must eat the fruit of thy own doings, and
confess that the Lord is just in all his ways, and righteous in all his
judgments; for thou have sinned against the Lord, in that thou have not
performed thy promises, which thou made in the day of thy distress; and
therefore distress must come upon thee again, to bring thee to remember those
things and repent, which if thou do the Lord will have mercy upon thee, and
heal thy backslidings, but if thou do not, but continue in thy rebellion, the
Lord will continue his judgments upon thee; should not the long-suffering of
the Lord lead thee to repentance, and his gentle dealings with thee by
correction, cause thee to understand that he loves thee? but if thou will not
receive instruction, by all his gentle dealings, but wilt go on in thy
wickedness, what can thou then expect, but the indignation of the Lord to
fall upon thee? what do thou think if thou continue in persecuting the
Servants of the Lord, (to wit) those that tell thee of thy wickedness, thy
pride and covetousness; do thou think that that will turn the judgments of
God from thee? surely nay, that will but hasten woe and misery upon thy own
head; Oh what a day of visitation have thou had! how many times has the Lord
delivered thee! and now it may be said by thee, as it was once concerning
Israel of old; yea they turned back and tempted God, and limtted the holy one
of Israel; they remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from
the enemy: Is not this thy condition oh England? although indeed the Lord has
a remnant in thee, that do not bow their knees to Baal, nor pour out
drink offerings to the Queen of heaven; and this remnant are those which thou
calls troublers of thy peace, which trouble thee much, like as Elia troubled
Israel, and this remnant that woman Jessabel, (I mean thy false Church that
paints her self) would have destroyed, that so her false Prophets which feeds
at her Table, might not be troubled, but trouble must come upon them, and their
peace must be broken; and although Jessabel cause a Fast to be proclaimed, yet
God will execute his judgment in thee, and if thou say in thy heart, wherefore
come these things upon me? for the greatness of thine iniquities are thy skirts
discovered, and thy heels made bare, for the Lord has seen thy adulteries, and
thy neighings, the lewdness of thy Whoredoms, and thine abominations, on the
hills, in the fields; Woe unto thee oh England, will thou not be made clean,
when shall it once be?

Oh! what a large profession has been made in thee; what a talk of Godliness
and Christianity, but alas what is found in thee? does not pride and envy
abound in thee? and has not these things greatly displeased the Lord? and for
this cause is the anger of the Lord kindled, which will devour the briars and
thorns in one day, and in that day whither will you fly? and where will you
leave your glory? you that have gloryed in professing the Gospel and
Ordinances, and even made this a covering for your wickedness and abomination,
who under a pretense of seeking the glory of God, have sought honor to your
selves, and to make your names great in the earth; is it not even thus oh
England? and has not thy Prophets that divine for money, and thy Priests that
preach for hire, have not they flattered thee in thy iniquities? have not they
cried, Peace to thy Rulers, even until the finger of the Lord has broken forth
against them, and they have been confounded; and will thou not for all this
receive instruction nor correction, but still go on in thy wickedness and
rebellion against the Lord? what will thou revolt more and more, and show more
and more cruelty to the Servants of the Lord; surely then more and more of the
indignation of the Lord thou must feel: what is it now become a trouble to thee
to have sin reproved in thy gates? Do thou make him an offender that speaks
the truth? And do those men that testify against thy wickedness, break thy
peace, the peace of thy Rulers and the peace of thy Priests? And do thy
Prophets, that devine for money, and Priests that preach for hire, do they tell
thee, that it would be a happiness to thee, if thou were ridd of those men that
reprove thee for thy wickedness? do not they even thus oh England? And do not
many of thy People think and say the same? what would it be thy happiness to
sin without reproof? surely, nay; for if once they whose souls are vexed with
thy filthy conversation, were driven out of thee; then would thy misery come,
and the Lord would make thee desolate, even like Sodom, and Gomorrah, which was
overthrown, for an example of his righteous judgments unto all that would not
receive instruction.

Oh how is thy Silver become dross! And thy liberty become bondage! Oh how art
thou gone backward, and not forward? even doting upon thy old Idols, and not
content that they should worship them that have set their minds thereupon; but
thou would also, compel that remnant in thee, that are followers of the
Lamb, for whose sake the Lord has long spared thee, and yet thou art so
foolish, and unwise, (as much as in thee lies) to hasten on thy own
destruction; what may wickedness be tolerated in thee, and not be reproved? Is
this the liberty that thou now seeks after? Would thou have wickedness
established by a Law, and the reprovers thereof to be condemned? Is it not even
thus within thy borders, and yet for all this thou will lean upon the Lord, and
say, is not he amongst us, no evil can come unto us? and cry peace, peace, even
till destruction come upon thee from the Lord: Oh how often has the Lord
invited thee! and even with his love sought to draw thee unto himself; but thou
have refused his loving invitation, and greived his holy Spirit from time to
time: so that if the Lord say, as he once said, concerning Ephraim, it is but
just; England is joined to Idols, let it alone; and then desolation and misery
will come upon it; when I would comfort my heart against sorrow, it is even
faint within me, to consider what warnings, from time to time have thou had,
and this thou have, and do account thy trouble; but greater trouble shall
come upon thee from the Lord, except thou repent: Oh how have thou chosen thy
own ways and followed thy own Counsels, and would have Ministers of thy own
making, and Prophets which would flatter thee in thy wickedness, and Prophecy
smooth things unto thee, even the deceit of their own hearts, and this thou
have loved rather than plain and honest dealing, and now what shall the Lord do
unto thee for those things? shall not he recompense thee according to thy
ways, and doings? and in that day thou shall confess to his righteous
judgments. How have thy Priests stirred up thy Rulers against a harmless
people! even like as Amazia the Priest of Bethel did, who complained against
Amos the Prophet, saying, Amos has conspired against the King, the Land is not
able to bear his words; is it not even thus among thy Priests, Oh England! and
alas what have this People done against thee, I mean the despised remnant which
are called Quakers, what evil have they done, that thou art so mightily
troubled? what do thy Priests say concerning them, do they say they are
Heriticks, and such like? But how, when or where did they prove it against
them, within thy borders? it is good for all thy Inhabitants, Oh England, to
consider of this matter, and not imbrue their hands in the blood of the
innocent; for of a truth the Lord has raised this people up within thy
borders, to make thee a happy and a blessed Nation, for even in him, in whom
they have believed, the Nations comes to be blessed, even in Jesus Christ the
Covenant, the light which is given for salvation to the ends of the earth, of
whom they have born, and do bear their Testimony within thy borders, of which
Testimony they need never be ashamed; which if thou should always reject,
and go on in thy Rebellion, thou will be most unhappy and miserable, even the
worst of the Nations: and therefore it is my desire in the bowels of love, as
being one of thy Inhabitants, who wishes thy welfare, and happiness, that thou
may seriously meditate upon the dealings of God with thee, and upon his
loving kindness which has been, and yet is tendered unto thee; and that thou
may return to the Lord, is the earnest desire of my soul lest it be said to
thee, as Christ once said to Jerusalem; O England, England, thou that killest
the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
wings, but you would not? Oh that thou had known in this thy day, the things
that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes.

The End.

