THE CONVICTION Of JAMES NAYLOR, and his black spirit, demonstrated from his
own confessions, lies, evasions and contradictions in the maine points of
Doctrine by him held forth against the truth.

In answer to a Book of his called Wickedness weighed.

The which was writ in answer to a little Treatise called The Quakers quaking
Principles examined and Refuted, written by ELLIS BRADSHAVV. This Treatise is
therefore directed by way of appeal to all the truly Judicious, to be weighed
in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and to see in which end of the scales the
wickedness lies, his end or mine. And also some Rules held forth whereby to try
the spirits, whether they be of God yea or no, in case of visions or
apparitions, yea dreams, or voices, whether speaking within or without. As
also some Scripture Rules for discerning the motions and lustings of the spirit
and flesh, each from the other, that so we might not be led blindfold to
destruction by any deluding spirits within us or without.
Written by ELLIS BRADSHAVVE.

Acts 13.9, 10, 11. Then Saul who also is called Paul, filled with the holy
Ghost, set his eyes on him, And said, Oh full of all subtlety and all
mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all goodness, how long will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord; And now behold the hand
of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shall be blind, not seeing the Sun for a
season. etc.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. for Lodowike Lloyd, at the Castle in Cornwall. 1656.

THE CONVICTION of JAMES NAYLOR, and his black spirit, demonstrated from his
own confessions, lies, evasions and contradictions in the maine points of
Doctrine by him held forth against the truth.
READERS; James Naylor asserteth in his Title page concerning my book that it
is dedicated as (I say) unto his Highness the Lord Protector, etc. The which I
say is true; but what of that? he says nothing, and therefore needs no
answer.

But further he says, that it is much boasted off by the Author, but as little
worth, as the boast is great.

I answer; I did commend it to engage his Highness to the reading of it, least
his multitude of buisinesse should cause him to neglect it. And what of all
that? does not James Naylor commend his Doctrines, and Teachings, and
Judgments, and Censures, and tells us it is by the eternal light and Spirit
of God that he holds them forth, as you may see in any of his Books: wherein
we know he lies; But it will appear, I therein speak the truth, and nothing
more.

And as for the worth of that Treatise when it is weighed in the Balance of
the Sanctuary, it will appear I did not overvalue it in my commendations of
it, but of that let the readers judge.

Again, he says also; that it was my envy that carried me with such envy
against the innocent, till I spoke I knew not what concerning the Father, and
the Son, the Word, the Light, and Spirit.

I answer; though he Judge so of me, whom in derision he calls (the man) yet
the truth is, I care not to be Judged of James Naylor, Nor for ought he knows
not of man's Judgment; But he that Judges me is the Lord; Nor would I change
my condition with James Naylor. nor for ought he knows not with any man
living on the earth. And how then can James Naylor know that it was envy that
carried me: And how can I envy those I account off to be wicked and destinate
to destruction for ought I yet see in them, that in my apprehension are far
from innocence in the sight of God. And how dare I then be envious against
them, or choose any of their ways; see Psalm. 37 1. and Pro. 23.17. and 24.1. I
shall not envy them till they be more innocent, then I yet see them. And
therefore his censure of me that I speak I know not what, does not trouble
me at all; for I expected no better f om his lying spirit. Though he cannot
nor does not in the least prove it so in any of his Answers; And why should I
believe it upon his own testimony, who begins with lies in his Title page.
Again he says, That here is also some marks and maintenance of the true
Ministers set down, and also of the false, their fruits differing them,
accoring to Christ's Rules in Scripture, with diverse other things to keep the
simple from deceit. All which when weighed in the balance, let the truth
appear, for so I wish of God, whether they be or no true or false, according
to Christ's Rule in Scripture: yea whether they be in deed to keep the simple
from deceit; or clearly and really to deceive the simple, and to make them
also deceivers of others. And again, he tells us it is by a friend to the
work of God, but an enemy to the Devils work where it is found and pleaded
for, called of the world James Naylor. To this I answer, that if this were
true, what then should be the reason that he blames me in his second page for
asking Why should not I whiles I am in the world endeavor to destroy the works
of the Devil, seeing he says of himself that he is an enemy to the work of
the Devil; and if he be so, he will labor to destroy it; for it is doubtless
lawful and a following of Christ as much as in us lies, to destroy the works
of the Devil; and none but Devils and their instruments will blame any man
for so endeavoring, nor call it a setting of himself to the stead of Christ;
for no man can either do it or endeavor it, what in him lies, but through
his grace and assistance, and the power of his Spirit; as so I never spoke
otherwise in all my life. And he can and will for ought Naylor knows, enable
me in some measure by his strength to do it. But if I be an exilted wretch,
and seek to set my self in the stead of Christ, as so he calls me; I know
he will not, and therefore it is in vain to endeavor it; for he gives his
grace to the humble. And beholds the wicked as a far off; and as having no
mind to Employ them in any such service, nor any such as are settled in their
wickedness, and dare take the office of Christ, and attribute it to
themselves; But the Quakers look for such amongst themselves they are easily
found; And it is the Quakers spirit, and not the Spirit of God, that ever did
or shall puff men up to any such conceits or apprehension of themselves; And
what James Naylor may conceit of himself I well know not.

For something or other he would intimate unto us when he puts that
preamble before his name, as in many of his Books, to wit, Called of the world
James Naylor. Now whether he would have us think that he is the Christ the
son of the living God; and that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem was but a type
of him; as their brother John Toldervie was persuaded by their spirit but was
deceived; I shall not Judge: Or whether he would Intimate to us that his Name
was changed when he was converted; and called as Paul (by an Immediate voice of
Christ, or his Angel Michael at least, who is his Representative) And that to
the Ministry; as so he writes of himself that he was called to the
Ministry by an Immed are voice: I shall not determine, nor do I much care.

But if his name was changed, I know no reason why he should conceal it, but
might make it known, as Paul also did his; so that many of the world know how
Paul was called. But it may be James Naylor is loath to declare it, least he
should declare the true signification of his name to others; not knowing it
himself; for it may be some great Scholars that are better learned then he;
in that kind of learning, would discover him by it, and for who^^ service he
was intended, and so obstruct his work who is his Master; For if he should be
known properly by his name, he might possibly be thereby known whose servant
he is: For we read of a kind of Locusts, Revel. 10th, a strange kind of
creatures; who yet had a King over them, who is the Angel of the bottomless
pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek tongue his
name is Apollyon: Which is to say, a destroyer, see verse. 11. And so we read
their business was no better. Now if his new name being interpreted should
discover him to be one of these Locusts, he might well be avoided that he could
not destroy according to his end, and name, and nature. And therefore it is his
policy in all likelihood to keep it secret. Now it is evident for all his
closeness and policy to hide his design, that if it lies in his power, or
the spirit that acts him, that all the Ministers in the world that allow not
his doctrine, nor follow his ways, but preach in our old public meeting
places, which he calls Idoll-Temples, and the people also that hear and
maintain them must all be destroyed and come to naught, and that in a short
time, else his spirit deceives him; yet we fear not his Prophesies if he
and such Locusts will but hold their hands; for we have a promise they shall
only hurt those men that have not the seal of God upon their foreheads: Yet
do but spiritually parallel the case of these people with those Locusts there
spoken off, and you will certainly conclude, there was never any so like them
since the Revelation was given forth that we can read of in Histories. But the
paralells would swell this Treatise to a great volume: And to produce any
paralells in opposition unto them is but accounted with them as a vain piece
of work, and not worth answering, as I find by experience; For not one
parallel that ever I produced against James Naylor is answered by him, but he
slights them as not worth answering, or taking notice off. As for instance in
this last Treatise I proposed Gal. 5.22, 23. to wit, the fruit of the Spirit,
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance, against which there is no law. Upon which I told them that I saw
not so much as a show of any of these in them, but the quite contrary, to wit,
hatred, sadness of spirit and countenance, no peace with any man, no
long-suffering, but hasty rage, no gentleness, but severe austeritie, and
imperious bitterness; no goodness, but clear malignitie against all goodness,
no faith in God, but in a lying spirit within them, whom they obey and serve
and worship as God, no meekness, for they are hasty, and angerie, and
revengefull; no temperance in their tongues and pens. And therefore every Law
of God is against them; see this in page 59.

But this he does not answer at all, but when he has made a Catalogue of such
things as he calls lies in my book, he says, Many more such might be
gathered out of this little Treatise (confessing) it has much in it of such
stuff, fit for the fire, yet he warns me that I shall not conclude that he
owned the Rest which he did not mention; saying that many more untruths are in
my book, not worth naming, nor answering: So that this I suppose is one that
he meant; But I rather believe that he durst not mention them, having no
ground at all for contradiction of them. And least it should be a means to
undeceive the simple, and let them see themselves, and at what a great distance
that spirit in them is from the spirit of God; which are best discerned by
their different fruits; And few of the Quakers but they buy his books, though
they regard not others; for the most of his books are bought up by the
Quakers, and so take the business as he represents it, as though there were
nothing valuable in any against them but what he specifieth, and so he deludeth
the poor simple souls, and keeps them blind, Reciting part of a sentence,
and concealing the Rest, to make it untrue to their apprehensions, like a
Juggling Cheater; as so he has done in some parts of this his answer, which I
hope to discover, and his Ignominious baseness in that respect, to render me a
liar and deceiver, and sott, etc. As so he calls me without any real or
rational cause, like his black father.

And again in his title page he cites a Scripture, which being paraleld with
their blasphemous practices, includes themselves as copartners with the beast
that had seven heads, and ten horns, that had upon his heads the names of
blasphemy, and opened his mouth in blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his
Name, and his Tabernable, and them that dwell in heaven: All which he does both
by word and writing as is clearly proved in my little Treatise; And yet he
brings this Scripture, as something applicable to us: oh subtle Serpent!
this is the old Serpents policy, to apply that to others which he fears will
be brought and applied to himself: and this he frequently uses in his books
to bring such Scriptures as his very Conscience cannot choose but tell him are
properly applicable against himself, yet he bringth them against others; that
he may prevent them, by giving them first; and then he commonly puts some
cloud, or gloss upon them, merely sophistical.

Again in the Frontespice of his answer, he calls me Friend, which when I
began to consider, what he meant by it in regard that spirit by which he is
acted, seldom uses any such loving appellations to its opposites; I wondered
having not to my remembrance found the like in all his writings: But
considering his words before and after to have nothing like any love in them, I
was satisfied that he meant it no otherwise but as Christ did to Judas, who was
going to betray him with a kiss, yet I thought it not proper to me in regard
I am not going to betray him, nor did not intend it in my Treatise, but only
to discover him and his false doctrines, and pernicious ways, nor did offer
him either a kiss or any thing else that showed any love or respect to his
ways. And therefore in this sense I disowne it, and if he mean it otherwise,
the Rest of his book makes it a lie.

For then he begins in his old manner, and tells me how I boast of my
book, and what honor I seek in owning what has been done already against a
poor despised scorned helpless people, and that there is a lamentation for
us, especially though we see it not, and that we will see it in the end, and
tells us this is not the way to honor, against whom we are joining, yet some
of us will not be warned.

To which I answer, that I did commend my Treatise, but not my self, and that
to engage the reading of it; And as for seeking of honor to my self, I am not
conscious to my self of any such thing, and know by that James Naylor is
guided by a lying spirit, which is not of God, for the Spirit of God would
never have taught him any such false furmises and such absolute lies. Wherein
he goes on, telling me that I said in my last the Spirit of God taught me to
let other men praise me, and not my own mouth, strangers and not my own
lips: but, says he, thou have forgot that teaching or rather never knew it;
to which I answer;

That my words are these, to wit, that through the grace of God here are
diverse arguments and doctrines for provoking to good works, which have never
yet that I know off been published before, either by word or writing from
Gospel foundations, but in this Treatise

And this I affirm again, that it is a truth, let James Naylor or any man
else, produce any thing to the contrary if they can.

But this is all nothing in commendations, or praising of my self, but of the
Treatise only, and that not as mine but through the grace of God, and
therefore this may be set amongst the Rest of his manifest lies.

Again, says he, in thy book there is four things which thou would stand
for and prove if thou could.

First, That the Letter is the Word.

Secondly, Against the light of Christ being sufficient.

Thirdly, A large maintenance for those thou calls Ministers.

Fourthly, Creature-Worships, and national customs, thou would bind us too.

To the first I answer as I did then, that if he mean by the letter any part
of Scripture, I did assert and do so again, and did prove it to be the word
of God, as so if he mean it as he has printed his answer; for page 3. he
says, that I go on to prove that there are many words of God, and that what
God has spoken is his word, and what Christ has spoken is the word of God,
and that the Scriptures given by inspiration of God are words of God, and that
every word of God is pure.

All which he says are things never by James Naylor denied.

Now he having confessed too all these assertions; first, that there are many
words of God, and that what God has spoken is his word, etc. And yet
immediately after contradicting himself, he says; And yet I say the word is
but one, which is the word whether spoken or not spoken.

If this be not a clear contradiction, to confess first that there are many
words of God, and that all Scripture given by inspiration of God are words of
God; and yet deny that there is any word of God but one; Sure he imagines that
none but simple deluded Quakers will read his assertions, who thinking him
infallible, can believe any thing that he asserteth; as Papists do the Pope.

For suppose one should ask him whether the word he speaks of is God, yea or
no, I suppose he would answer (yea) he is God; for Christ is the Word, and
Christ is God.

Now he has confessed that there are many words of God, and such as are so
called in Scripture

But is every word in Scripture that is called the word of God, and that
properly, because God has spoken it, I say, is it God, because it is the word
of God. How many Gods would James Naylor reckon, for many words of God he has
owned, and if every such word of God is God, there must needs be more Gods then
one, though with us there is no God but one; nor did we ever say that the
Scripture is God, but the words and word of God, and that he here confesses,
that all Scripture given by inspiration of God is the words and word of God; as
is proved in my Treatise, and here confessed by him. But if all Scriptures are
the words of God, and yet he affirms the word is but one, and that word is
Christ; Then by his Logic it must needs follow, that there is no Christ but
the Scriptures; nor any God but the Scriptures; nor any word of God but the
Scriptures; and so he denies the eternal essential word, which is Christ,
or else makes the Scriptures to be he, and so confounds himself, and his
maine assertion, to wit, that the Scripture is not the word of God; against
which assertion is all our quarrel; For we do not nor never did deny that
Christ only is the essential word, and not the Scripture, and this essential
word is God, yet we say as so he confesses that the Scripture is also the word
of God, and is properly so called in Scripture, in regard it is spoken by his
inspiration. And that it is not blasphemy to call the Scripture the word of
God, but the blasphemy is theirs that so assert. Nor can all his wicked
evasions help him to evade the dint of these arguments As when he further
says, that a man may have all the letter either in his hand, or in his brain,
and yet have not the word.

I answer, suppose we grant it that a man may have all the Scripture in his
hand, and yet not have Christ, which is the essential word, yet he cannot have
the Bible in his hand, but he has the Scripture, and that Scripture is the
express word of God, and properly so called, and that in Scripture; and this
is confessed also by him for there is no writings which we call Scriptures,
but in the Bible, and all those Scriptures are given by inspiration of God, and
all Scriptures that are given by inspiration of God, he has acknowledged to be
the words of God, and it is not properly called Scripture, that is not written.
And that which was written aforetime, was written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: And woe unto
such as cannot find comfort in them for strengthening of their hope; for there
is little hope of such men, but how much less hope is there of such who are at
enmity with the Scriptures, and cannot afford them a good word, nor such as
love and own them as the word of God, but seek by all means to disparage
them, by calling them a dead letter, and carnal, and vain, till men have them
inspired by the Spirit of God. As though it were wholly in vain to read them,
or search them, or hear them preached and opened, till they be inspired by the
Spirit of God into their minds.

Rea: For in his 5th page he ownes that Scripture, 2 Timothy: 3.16. To wit, that
all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine,
for reproof, for correction, for instruction, that the man of God may be
perfect, etc. Saying that to whom they are given by inspiration they are so,
but what is this to the Devil, and false Prophets, who steal them, and have
them not given by inspiration, are they so to them?

I answer, Here he discovers his old fathers policy and serpentine craftines;
this wisdom is herein manifest, not to be from above, but earthly, sensual
and devilish; for it proceeds merely from envy and strife; see James 3.14,
15, 16 etc. And where envying and strife is, there is sedition and every evil
work.

But suppose we ask James Naylor, whether we may not lawfully read the
Scriptures which were written for our learning, till they be inspired into us,
and that we have them by inspiration without reading them? What he would answer
is a great question, but in all likelihood he would make some evasion, and not
answer properly, either yea or no least the Serpents head should be too
visible, and so in danger to be broken by the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God; yet we may guess at his mind, to wit, that he accounts it in
vain, at least if not unlawful to read the Scriptures; For he tells us
plainly, that there is nothing gotten from Scripture but brain knowledge; and
that the famine is greatest of hearing the word of the Lord, where men trade
most with Scripture, see page 7.

And he would gather from that Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16. that because men that
are unlearned and unstable wrest some things contained in the Scriptures to
their own destruction; Therefore it is a way for men to destroy themselves, to
use the letter of the Scripture, or expect any help thereby as a way to God,
whereof I forewarning them, says he, and bidding first mind the light of
Christ, and his Spirit to lead into the truth of thee. I am hated (says he)
and all the Devils instruments, who says I may as well exhort them to look
to the Devil himself for teaching, or leading, as to the light within.

I answer, Yea and this I said, and say it here again, that such in whom the
Devil rules for the present, as so he does always in the children of
disobedience, if they turn their minds inward, and follow such light and
motions as he suggesteth, and do but once get persuaded that it is no other
but the Spirit of God, their condition is sad, but how much sadder is his
condition, that so persuades them; as if the light of Christ, and that only
were in every man: oh wicked doctrine! what wisdom is that before specified
then, that comes not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish: and
is therefore marked out by the Apostle that it might be known, whence such
wisdom comes, and be avoided.

But though there is a wisdom that comes from above, I never read in all
Naylors writings that he noted that out from Scripture as the Apostle James
does but tells us further that the Devil had much rather keep people doing
in the letter, that with the fallen wisdom they might wrest them then to be
lead into the truth that the Scriptures declares of by the Spirit of truth,
which leads into all truth, without which no truth is known, alleging John
16.13.

I answer; Oh devilish doctrine! Nay rather a Doctrine of Devils: This makes
me Recant that ever I charged such doctrines upon James Naylor, for he was but
an instrument; this is most manifestly a doctrine of Devils; I mean the
Devil writes, and teaches, and speaks such doctrines by him as an
instrument.

For what mind has the Devil or ever had that men should read, or hear, or
obey the Scriptures; does not the Devil know, that faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God, I mean by the essential word, who is pleased
to open men's understandings, that they might understand the Scriptures, and
that they might attend to the things that are spoken by the Ministers of God,
and by the Lord himself in his holy Word, as he opened the heart of Lidia,
that she attended to the things which Paul spoke. And shall we think that it
is of the Devil, and pleases him, when men frequent the preaching and hearing
of the Word, and the reading and searching of the Scriptures? Is there any
Scripture in all the Bible that so much as hinteth such a doctrine? And how
shall men know what the Scripture declares, if they do not read or hear
them? And what is that to the matter, because some hear and read them, and
do not understand them, nor receive or believe and obey the same; must that be
charged on the Scripture, as the cause, and must the Scripture be called
carnal, and a dead letter, because it does not quicken, and give life to all
that hear it. Is it not purposely sent and made known to some, that it might
convince them of sin, for their greater condemnation; and might be the savor
of death unto death to such as perish. But it always is the savor of life
unto life unto them that believe. And as faith comes by hearing of such as are
sent, so faith, etc the Spirit are ministered together, for he that has faith,
has a measure of the Spirit, for the Spirit is ministered by the hearing of
faith preached. One would have thought all the Devils in hell could not have
devised such a devilish doctrine to keep men from hearing and reading the
Scripture. If James Naylor would ask that lying spirit by which he is acted,
how he may certainly know, the spirit of truth from the spirit of error, the
Spirit of God from the spirit of Satan, especially when he is transformed as
an Angel of light, and comes with fair shows and pretenses. I verily believe
he would never bring him such texts of Scripture, as the Apostles have
proposed to be as certain rules and marks of trial, but would rather tell
him those marks and rules are too carnal for them to observe that have
already such measures of the Spirit, and have been so proficient and active
thereby, and so endeavor to put them out of all doubt, nor will he suffer
them to hold forth any such marks unto others, but only engage them to
obedience unto him, as he shall move and act them, and to believe and obey such
particular Scriptures as he brings to their minds, and applies and wresteth
for his own ends. The Devil never brings Scriptures, but to deceive
thereby, always wresting them from their genuine sense and proper meanings; as
James Naylor might see if he were not blind, or had not sold himself for the
Devils service.

And again whereas he says that one may have the letter of Scripture, and not
have the word, and that the letter without the Spirit is dead, page 4.

I answer as before, that the letter of the Scripture is the word of God,
though it is not Christ.

And that the letter of the Scripture is no where in Scripture called a dead
letter, but it is words of spirit and life, to them that believe and receive
them in love, nor is the Spirit of God at any time withdrawn from his own
words, nor do they return void, but always accomplish what he pleases, and
do that for which he sent them: And it is not the Resisting of his Word or
Spirit, nor both jointly, that can disparage the validity thereof, whether it
be set home by the finger of his Spirit, or that men's hardened hearts still
remain obdurate; Nor will James Naylors Directorie to a light within be
effectual to any for the saving of their souls that do not believe the
Scriptures and receive them in love, but have pleasure in unrighteousness, but
will rather endanger them to be deluded with a lying spirit, and acted by it in
stead of the Spirit of God, and to be carried blindfold to their greater sin
and condemnation.

And therefore what is that to the matter, though Satan have the Scripture, and
have no good by it, there being no promise therein for him; or what if James
Naylor has it, and find no life in it, but a mere dead letter, in his
apprehension, in regard he wresteth it, and does not love it, and therefore
cannot afford it so much as a good word, having an enmity against it, not
caring much if it were all burnt, as it is very likely, because it condemns
him in something or other that he loves or desires, and will not part with,
in obedience thereunto but will rather run the hazard of loosing all, or he
will disparage and make void the Scripture, that has touched him; Nay, he
seems to me rather to prefer his own words and his own writings above
any in Scripture, commending his own as words that proceed immediately from
the eternal Spirit, full of life and power, but the Scriptures carnal and
dead and vain, yea vain he accounts them to such who have not the Spirit
already: Though he cannot but know they are appointed of God as the chief
means for ministration of the Spirit, and of life and power, for what life and
power can be communicated or administered to any man by ministration of men, but
from Scripture-grounds, and those precious promises therein contained, through
Christ Jesus, in whom all the promises are yea and Amen, and through whom only
we have interest in them; being all finners, and so excluded from life, as
well as the Devil, were it not for him that has merited our salvation. And
therefore what a devilish doctrine is this to dehort all men from reading the
Scriptures, till they first obtain the Spirit of God; What other end can this
doctrine aim at, but to keep them still under a spirit of bondage, as sure
there are none that are set free and have the spirit of life in them, through
the hearing of faith preached, That will own this doctrine to be of God, but a
doctrine of Devils.

And again, he tells me that he might show my blindness in all other
Scriptures that I quote, were it needful, as instance that 2 Pet. 1.19. We
have a more sure word of prophecy, to which you do well to take heed, as to a
light that shines in a dark place, till the day dawne, and the day star
arise in your hearts. Now it is true I quoted this Scripture as one amongst the
rest against his assertion in his answers to Baxter, to wit, (that the
Scripture houlds out but one light and word) the which I there denied, and
proved it first from Mat. 5.14. and 16. To wit, Ye are the light of the world;
and John 5.35. that John was a burning and a shining light; and Psalm. 119.130
The entrance of thy words gives light, it gives understanding unto the
simple; and then this of Peter.

Upon which, I say, that I suppose James Naylor will not acknowledge that he
ever received any light from that sure word of prophecy, as from a light
shining in a dark place, but only some little brain knowledge of the bare
letter, else he would not so reproach and disparage those, that do take heed
to the sure word of prophecy, till they be enlightened thereby in what they
were dark and did not understand. Now to all that I say in these words, he
answers not at all by way of contradiction, but does as much as confess that
he was mistaken, nor can he possibly make that his assertion good against
these Scriptures.

But he here undertakes to show my blindness in quoting this Scripture to
this purpose before-named to wit, And this (says he) you would have to be the
letter of the old Prophets, which shines in a dark place; And so says he, by
thy doctrine the letter of the old Testament, and in a dark place too, is a
surer word then what Peter heard God himself speak, and were eye witnesses of
his Majesty. And this is all thou know of the spirit of prophecy, the
testimony of Jesus, or the Scriptures that declare it.

To which I answer, that I appeal to the Judgments and Consciences of all
that know any thing of the spirit of prophecy, or the testimony of Jesus, or
the Scriptures that declare it.

Whether the Apostle does not mean it of the old Prophesies of the old
Testament, when he thus speaks; yea I say, the letter he meant when he so
advises them, and not the spirit only, of which the letter declares; for the
letter declares of the spirit, and the spirit is the author and opener of the
letter; and that by the letter as an isntrumental means, comparing Scripture
with Scripture, and spiritual things with spiritual things. The Prophet
Daniel himself understood by book that the time of their captivity was
accomplished.

And James the Apostle produced the words of the Prophet Amos, to Resolve that
great doubt and difference amongst them, Act. 15.15. To wit, And to this agree
the words of the Prophet, as it is written, etc. Observe as it is written, and
so he Recites the very written letter, for he knew by the letter what the words
of the Prophet were because they were written: And how else should we have
known the words of the Prophets, if they had not been written, and we had
seen or heard them read or recited, those Prophets themselves being dead long
since: were they not written for our learning, and what good will their being
written do us, if we will not read them, but stay and wait till they be
inspired into us, as so Naylor owneth the Scripture to be profitable to whom
they are given by inspiration: Implying that else they are not, if we have them
first by reading; see in this his answer, page 5. What an absurd doctrine is
this, and how loath is he to own that the Scripture in books is worth
reading; This discovers what spirit he is acted by, and how bitterly malicious
and full of devices against the Scriptures.

And again observe the Apostle Peter and he are fallen at odds, and he has
given him the lie, for writing this Scripture; it has so angered him that the
Apostle should stand in such direct opposition to his false doctrine.

For the Apostle calls it a more sure word of prophecy, then either visions,
or voices, which he had in the Mount: But this James Naylor denies and blames
me exceedingly for believing such a thing, as that the letter of the old
Prophets should be a surer word, then what Peter heard God himself speak, and
were eye witnesses of his Majesty.

Ans: I answer, this voice and vision might seem a surer word unto Peter, and
others, then the old prophesies it according with them; and so was a further
confirmation of what the Prophets had spoken. But those to whom he writes this
Revelation of such things, did not hear that voice, nor see his Majesty, but
had it written unto them as well as the Prophesies, and so had it but in the
letter from Peter as a testimony unto them: And therefore it was that the
Apostle called it a more sure word of prophecy; for words of prophecy given
by inspiration of God, if we know them to be such, are more sure words to me,
then visions and voices that are heard by others, and seen and Related; For
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. And this he would have them
to know that the prophecy in old time came not by the will of man, but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the Spirit of God. And therefore he
says (we) including himself, have a more sure word of prophecy, the which
though the confirmation thereof to Peter, testifying of Jesus to be the Christ,
therein specified, was surer to him, yet that sure word of prophecy was a more
sure word to build their faith upon, in regard it foreshewed the coming of
Christ, and that that Jesus was he; giving notice beforehand of the place of
his birth, and of his life and death, and all such things which came to pass.
Which clearly demonstrateth that all those prophesies were by inspiration, for
who else but God could foreshew such things so long before: And therefore there
cannot be a more sure word, then that sure word of prophecy; for what can be
surer then the words of God, and those proved to be his words by the truth and
success in the events thereof, that were thereby foreshewed.

And therefore it is that in case the people desired to know of any Prophet,
whether the Lord had sent him with such a Message, or he had spoken it
presumptuously; He referres them to the success and events thereof, and
whether the thing came to pass or no; see Deuteronomy. 18.21, 22. To wit, When a
Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to
pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has
spoken it presumptuously, thou shall not be afraid of him.

But the prophesies of old time are confirmed to us to be a sure word of
prophecy; and therefore we cannot but believe them. And that a great deal
better then the prophesies of James Naylor, though he tells us he has them
by Immediate voice, and visions likewise, and that he has them from God by
Immediate inspiration. For till we see them confirmed by the events thereof,
we shall rather believe that more sure word of prophecy, that was spoken in
old time, and also those sure words of prophecy, and Rules and directions
given by Christ and his Apostles, then those given by James Naylor, though he
call himself, and others account him, the Messenger of the living God.

But though we do believe in regard we find it in Scripture, and that in
many places, and are in expectation daily to see the downfall and shame and
confusion of such who presume to preach in the Name of the Lord, and he has
not sent them, see verse 20. Yet we dare not believe the prophesying of Naylor
in that respect, nor can we expect or desire, either the downfall, and shame
and confusion of any that is godly and faithful; Nor dare we condemn all
that preach in public (in our public places which he whickedly calls our
Idol Temples) to be carnal and hirelings, as he blasphemously does, for we
know the contrary, and therefore know him to be a liar, and not a true Prophet;
and so we fear him not, nor regard his prophesies; but as false and frothie
presumptuous lies; and therefore if it come not so to pass he will be
discovered to those seely people that for the present believe him, as so he is
to us already.

Again, I produced a Scripture to prove the various and different
dispensations of the Lord to his Prophets, and to Rebuke the pride and
insolency of James Naylor, the which, as I suppose, because he could not
oppose any deductions from it, nor evade the charge upon himself, to wit, of
despising the Word; He makes as though he understood not my meaning, and as
though I had brought it for another end the which I never meant; And makes use
of it for prooving that they are no Prophets who have no word but the letter:
The which I shall easily grant; so he will not deny that the letter of
Scripture is the word; also nor did I ever deny it, but owned Christ as the
essential word; and the Scripture also is the word; and therefore he needed
not fetch any arguments to prove it. But I made another use of it, to wit,
that I find but little of this meekness in James Naylor, that was exemplified
in Moses; But on the contrary, that he counts himself the highest, and all
below him either dwarfes or nothing like Christians; in so much as if they have
need of a book, either the Bible, or any other, they are despised by him as
litterall men in his book against Moore. Though Paul advised otherwise, as to
give attendance to reading, and to exhortation and doctrine, and not only to a
light within; and more to that purpose: Which is so quite contrary to his
Directorie, that having nothing to answer, he turns the dease ear and
falls upon other business discussed before.

Again he says my second thing is to deny the light of Christ to be
sufficient.

I answer, it is most false, I told him that we must confess that Christ is
able to inlighten little children, and to make them capable of comprehending of
it, and that so he does to his Elect that depart this life in their childhood
and minority; for Jeremiah was sanctified in the womb; and John Baptist
filled with the Holy Ghost from his mothers belly; and that Christ himself was
qualified with the blessed Deity in the very seed of the woman.

And yet considered as man he did not in his minority comprehend that light
which dwelt in him bodily, but increased in wisdom, and stature and favor
with God and man, as Luke 2.52. Yea though considered as God he thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, yet as man he was ignorant of the times and
seasons which the Father had kept in his own power.

Nay after he was ascended and sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on
high, when he gave forth the Revelation of Saint John, he had it but at the
second hand considered as man, for it is called the Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him to show unto his servants things which must shortly
come to pass, and he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his servant
John: so that John had it but at the third hand, though he had Christ the light
Recident in him; as so had also the seven Churches of Asia, and the Angels
thereof, yet they had but this Revelation at the fourth and fifth hand;
therefore means are good.

From all which it is evident, that though God can and does when he sees it
good and necessary, communicate his light Immediately by his blessed Spirit
unto whom he pleases.

Yet his ordinary way where means is to be had is by the foolishness of
preaching (as so the world accounts it) to save them that believe.

And therefore such doctrines as these which tend so directly contrary to the
use of means, are as absurd and wicked, as if they should teach their children
not to eat any meat, because God is able to preserve them without. Nay it is
so much worse by how much the soul is better then the body.

And this and many more such like things I did assert in my Book.

But is there any thing here against the sufficiency of the light of Christ,
or so much as intended, save only I plead for the use of means, to get his
light mediately or immediately, against which he has nothing to answer, and
therefore falls to cavil against a manifest truth, to wit, That after Christ
was sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on high, he had the
Revelation, considered as man, but at the second hand; And makes great ado as
though he did not understand what I mean by having it at the second hand; and
yet he remembers I said he Received it of God, and yet is stumbled to know
which was the first hand.

I answer, God had it first, it was in his hand and power before Jesus Christ
had it given to him; so that he had it not first but at the second hand; and
this is plain in the Text, for all his blind cavills: And then again that
John had it but at the third hand, I say it again; And he says, is not this
strange doctrine of thine, and he had it from the Alpha and Omega, the
almighty; or did he not speak true who said he was so, Rev. 1.8.

To which I answer; And did not he speak true that said of Jesus Christ, that
he sent and signified it by his Angel unto his servant John; And is not Jesus
Christ in heaven; And must not the heavens contain him till all things be
restored?

Therefore it was not Jesus Christ, considered as man, but his Representative
Michaell the Archangell, who Representatively vissibillified the Invisible
essence of the blessed Deity of the Son of God, the Lord Jesus Christ in
like manner, as also before his Incarnation, the Lord always Represented
himself in the similitude of a man when he spoke unto the Prophets in vision,
as Ezekiell 1.25, 26. To wit Upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness
as the appearance of a man above upon it; And from thence came the voice, see
verse. 25. From the firmament that was over their heads. But these were only
likenesses and similitudes showed in vision by Angels, as the most proper
similitude of the presence of the invisible God; And therefore it is said this
was the similitude of the glory of the Lord; clearly showing that it was but a
similitude of his glory, and when the Prophet saw it he fell upon his face, and
a voice of one that spoke, saying, etc. see verse. 28.

See also Dan. 7. What he saw in his visions by night, verse. 9.13. He saw one
live the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven. But this was not the Son of
Man, for he was not then visible in the world.

And so I say of this Alpha and Omega, it was not the visible body of Christ,
but only a Representation of the essential word, who is every where present
in spirit at one and the same time, and does sometimes vocally express
himself to the capacities of his Prophets by the ministration of Angels: As
so he did also to John in this place, see Revel. 1.13. He is said to be one
like unto the son of man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and
girt about the paps with a golden girdle, his head and hairs were white, like
wool, as white as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of fire, verse. 14.

And without all question Christ was present in spirit, and so expressed
himself, as the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end; and to be he that
lives and was dead, and is alive for evermore, Amen. I say Christ was present
even there in spirit, for so he is always, and that every where to the end of
the world; see Mat. 28.20. But the spirit of Christ is invisible, whom never
man saw, neither can see; but through an eye of faith. Therefore this
vissibillitie that appeared unto John was not properly the essence of the
Deity which is invisible, but God was there present, causing such appearances
and voices by the ministration of Angels; For it is said, He sent and
signified it by his Angel unto his servant John, verse. 1.

And so it is both true that the Alpha and Omega was there by vision; and yet
that it was but signified by voice and vision by an Angel, and so the Alpha
and Omega did not lie, nor the Apostle neither.

Neither was it any thing but truth which I asserted, to wit, that Christ
considered as man, had it given him of God, and he sent and signified it by
his Angel to his servant John, which communicated it to the seven Churches,
but first to the Angels.

And therefore the use I made of it is nothing but proper and true, nor can
James Naylor deny the truth thereof with any reason, nor the propriety of the
use I made of it, which is before related.

But then again he tells me that I said in my Epistle; One thing I dare
say through the grace of God, here are diverse arguments and doctrines which
have never yet that I know off been published before.

To which he answers: I say it seems so, and that this is one and the same I
say too, that I never knew this published before.

To which I answer, that this one by his own confession, that he never knew
before, and he cannot deny the truth thereof, nor the propriety of the uses
of it that I make against him: And if it be a truth, he has learned something
that he knew not before out of that little Treatise so undervalued by him, as
fit for nothing but the fire; so that this piece of knowledge is come but
mediately to him; for his light within did not teach it him before, nor would
he own it now if he could evade it; such enmity he has against the truths
of God, when they oppose his doctrines, and then he murmurs extremely, and
merely cavills with what I never denied; For I never denied the light of
Christ to be sufficient, if we have a sufficiency of it; But only plead for
the use of such means as God has appointed to communicate it by; so that his
grumbling and quarrelling is but as with his own shadow.

And whereas I question him where the Scripture directs to give heed to a light
within, and to desert all teachings of men; in answer whereunto he produces
Luke 11.35, 36. where he tells me, I may see the counsel of the only
Teacher. Now the words of the Scripture are, Take heed therefore that the
light which is in thee be not darkness.

If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part dark, the whole
shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle does give thee
light.

Now these Scriptures are good and true, but I appeal to the Reader, whether
there be any one word or syllable in them that requires us to desert the
teachings of men, as a means to get translated out of darkness into his
glorious light.

And again I question him where the Scripture says, that he that is the
light of the world, and lighteneth every one that comes into the world, does
inlighten all sufficiently, and so as to guide them infalliby, or that he
inlightneth all alike, and that Immediately without the knowledge of the
Scriptures, or the teachings of men, so as they need not to teach one another,
saying, know the Lord, because all do know him from the greatest of them, even
to the least of them. Is the case so now that all know him, what need is there
then of the teachings of James Naylor, and his accomplices. If their light within
them be sufficient, it can teach them all that he does, and all that he
knows; and how to eye it only, and to look within for light, and to desert
and despise the teachings of men, as so he does, and what else does he teach
which is not taught by men from sacred Scripture, and with more spirit and
power then he teaches any thing, and far more rationally and convincingly,
in the clear evidence and demonstration of the Spirit: And does he not herein
teach men to despise his teachings also. etc.

To the first part of which question he answers, to wit, I say, Joh. 8.12. to
wit, I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. And there (says he) thou may
read that he that is the light of the world, his light is sufficient to all
that mind and follow it.

I answer, I never denied the sufficiency of his power and light to them that
have sufficient of it. But the question is, whether he does and will do it to
all or no, of all which this Scripture speaks not one word, nor that men
ought to desert the teachings of men.

And therefore as I told him, page 19. the question does not lie, whether the
Spirit of God be an infallible guide, yea or no. But whether James Naylor and
others be infallibly guided by that infallible Spirit yea or no, in all things
that they do: But to this he turns the deaf ear, and says most falsely,
that I plead against the sufficiency of the light of Christ; But I suppose he
is ashamed to meddle with an argument that he cannot answer, least discovering
his weakness, should prove him fallible amongst the Quakers, and that he has
very little of the light of Christ, but of that which comes from another spirit.

And again, he blames me because I say that Satan is willing to cloth us
with good works and doctrines, and that his Ministers are transformed into
Ministers of righteousness, and thou say thou cannot but rejoice to see him
play that card.

To which he answers, cease thy babbling, and see thy confusion. Is he Satan
with thee, who clothes with good works and doctrines, and whose Ministers are
Ministers of righteousness, Satan is not so divided against himself, nor his
Ministers against their own kingdom, though as to righteousness they
pretend; but a righteous life, good words and good doctrines, he that brings
these forth was ever counted a Devil with thy generation.

To which I answer, that he has not transcribed my words aright, for I say
that without question Satan is willing to cloak them with any (external)
righteousness, and with good words, and doctrines, and fair speeches, to
deceive the hearts of the simple, and especially on condition that he may but
stablish their doctrines, and draw men off from the use of means and
ordinances, and from the teachings of men, and to neglect the Scriptures.

For this would still continue and increase his kingdom unto all generations,
etc. As it is further discussed and argued with Reasons that he can never
evade: But being in a passion, like an angerie Curre, he must needs show his
teeth, though he cannot bite. And let any rational man judge, whether he
does not show his teeth against the Scripture it self; which says plainly,
And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light,
therefore it is no great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the
Ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works; see
2 Cor. 11.14, 15.

Does he not plainly contradict these Texts, when he says Satan is not so
divided against himself, nor his Ministers against their own kingdom.

How manifest is the hand of Satan in this clear contradiction to the spirit
of truth, by whom he will not deny but the Apostle spoke; And yet he dares be
his instrument in writing for him.

And again he says, thou would compare us to the Papists, who keep people
from the letter in their mother tongue; to which he answers, that the Devil
did so as long as he could, who now would keep in the letter.

I answer, we are like to take his word for it, in regard he has no proof
but his own testimony; yet I believe he tells true in that which
follows, to wit that Satan would keep us from the Spirit what he can, in
regard he would keep us from the means whereby to obtain it, and have it
administered.

And again he tells me, I say, where the Scriptures are known and counted
for the word of God, the Devils kingdom must down in the heart.

I say true, but I added in the hearts of the Elect; these words (of the Elect)
he leaves out, that he might have something to say. And he leaves out also
the Reasons there rendered, one whereof is our experience. What blindness and
darkness and sottish ignorance is in all places where the word is not
preached, nor the Scriptures minded and searched and known, so that give him
but the reception of this doctrine, and it is the best foundation for his
kingdom that can be laid; (and I say) it is like to that of the Papists, and
has the same tendency, to wit, that Ignorance is the mother of devotion.

But the Scripture would teach them how to obtain the spirit and wisdom,
namely, to ask it of God, which is none of Naylors directions in all his
books, but quite the contrary, as to eye that light already within, as if
every man had the Spirit already.

And again, says he, thou calls it a gross directory, to advise to take
heed to a light within, and says I might as well bid them follow the Devil.

I answer, yes, I did say so, but he leaves out my reason for it, to wit, in
case where the Devil rules, and keeps them in darkness, as that he does
in all the children of disobedience.

But he charge me in anger, and tells me he says I shall one day know I
have blasphemed against the spirit and gift of God herein: Was that, says he,
a gross directorie of Christ, Luke 11.35. and 17.21.

I answer, no, the first of these I have recited before, and the words of the
other are these; Neither shall men say, lo here or lo there, for the
kingdom of God is within you.

To which I say, here is never a word yet in any of these Scriptures that
tends to persuade men to look only to a light within, and desert the
Scriptures, and the teachings of men. But let any man judge whether the
kingdom of God, and the kingdom of Satan, can rule in the heart at one and
the same time; is the kingdom of God come too and within such a man whiles
Satan rules? must he not first bind or cast out the strong man, before he
spoil his goods? Can any serve two Masters? If the spirit of God and the
spirit of Satan can live quietly together in the same soul, and not fight and
quarrel and contradict each other in their motions and commands, Christ was
deceived.

It may be he thinks the case is so with every man, as it was with
Toldervie, who was tossed with cross commands of two several spirits, and
knew not whether to obey, James Naylor might have taught him of all that time
whiles he continued his Disciple, to have known the voice of the Spirit of
God from the voice of Satan if he had known it himself; for he was long
enough with them; But their skill is wanting to discern of spirits; so that if
it be a spirit within, they obey it as God, though he has forewarned them if
they would heed the Scripture; not to believe every spirit, but try them
whether they be of God. And if they would learn of me, I could give them
Scripture Rules, to know for certain what spirits they are of; but I am almost
weary with striving with them; and Scripture Rules are so slighted by them and
so little regarded, that in respect of them I account it almost vain, yet for
the sake of others, I shall name some few.

And first to try the spirits whether they be of God in case of visions or
apparitions, yea dreams, or voices, whether speaking within or without.

First, Such who find their hearts ambitious in seeking after visions and
Revelations, to get a fame and respect amongst men, let such suspect all
visions or Revelations or apparitions whatsoever, that appear to them, as but
delusions of Satan, sent of God, either purposely to deceive them, or at least
to try them with, whether they do more regard his holy and sacred word, or the
Revelations, visions, or words of Angels.

Yea though an Angel from heaven should teach us another doctrine, then what
we have received from the word of God, we are commanded, and therefore ought
to let him be accursed.

Yea though he brings us many good messages, and persuades to many good
things, yet if any part of his message does not really correspond with the
sacred Scriptures, yea though he be an Angel of light, an Angel of God, an
Angel from heaven, and appear in such a shape as the holy Angels were
accustomed to appear in old time; yet believe him not, but rather let him be
accursed.

Secondly, But observe also whether they appear not to have cloven feet; For
if so they may well be suspected to be unclean spirits, because the holy
Angels were never accustomed so to appear, but for the most part in the shape
of a man when they brought any message mediately from God.

Thirdly, Observe whether they bring any message of weight and Importance, and
of necessity, yea or no, such as it much concerns us to know, that we either
cannot or have not learned or known before, or such as cannot be known from
Scripture, it being either silent therein, or that we have not understanding
to conceive it thence.

Rea. For Idle and vain messages are not likely to be from God, who forbids
all vanity, yea so much as an Idle word.

Fourthly, And much more, observe well their message whether it be lawful to
obey it yea or no, and try it by Scripture, and not only by the doctrines of
men, the Quakers, nor others, for all may err; but the Scripture in its proper
genuine sense is infallible, true and cannot be broken.

Fifthly, Observe whether their message hang properly and rationally together;
For the Spirit of God and all his messages accord rationally together, and he
likewise gives understanding and rationalitie to such to whom he sends them
to conceive them so.

Sixthly, Whether they inhibit any thing lawful to be done, and that upon any
penalty, without a necessary cause or satisfactory reason for such inhibition;
For God is not unreasonable in any thing he requires, but convinces the
Judgment in any such a case.

Seventhly, Observe whether their message tends to puff us up with pride and
high conceits of our selves, as some choice men, when as yet we find no such
things in us above other men, especially in respect of wisdom and holiness.

Rea. For God does not usually commend any in such an express manner, nor ever
any at all but such who are really holy and wise and faithful.

Eighthly, Whether their message tends not to bring us into spiritual
bondage; As to such and such ways and forms, or ceremonies and practices,
under pain of damnation, which do not appear to be absolutely necessary, and
that from Scripture grounds; But rather suspect that they go about to destroy
our faith, by bringing us under a Covenant of works, and so to keep us in
bondage, that we can never attain to a full assurance of faith, but as it
were a doubtful case depending wholly upon our good behavior.

For God requires a full assurance of faith, and that in God, through Christ
Jesus, that so our Joy might be full, yea such as is unspeakable and full of
glory.

For if our faith and assurance be not full, there is likewise a defect in our
love, and so by consequence in our Joy in the Lord.

Ninthly, And above all things observe whether their message and business
tends to provoke us unto love and good works, or unto wrath and bitterness,
or some displeasure against our known brethren.

Rea. For he that bids us provoke one another unto good works, never does
provoke us to the contrary himself, nor ought we to obey if an Angel from
heaven should so provoke us, but let him be accursed.

And that we might know how to discern the motions and lustings of the spirit
and flesh each from the other, that so we might not be led blindfold to
destruction by any deluding spirits within us nor without; take these Scripture
Rules, to wit, see Gala. 5.16, 17. says the Apostle, Walk in the spirit, and
ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh: For the flesh lustech against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the
other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. And on purpose that
we might be Resolved how to know the one from the other, he points them out
by their fruits, that so we might know their tendency in the first motions or
lustings of them, and be lead by the spirit and not by the flesh, to wit, see
verse. 19, 20, 21. says he, Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, Adultery, fornication, uncleannes, lasciviousness, Idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, sedition, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like: of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Now it is easy to discern if we do observe even the lustings of our
spirits in the first motion; whether they tend to the producing of any of these
or such like effects, yea or no, And so by the strict observation of these
Rules we may Resist them in their first motions, and mortify such evil and
corrupt affections, in their first Rise through the gracious assistance of the
Spirit of God, whose fruits are also noted out for that purpose also that we
might know them and cherish and obey them, and be lead thereby, to wit, Love,
joy, peace, long-suffering gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance,
against which there is no Law; see verse. 22, 23. To all which we may join the
wisdom which comes from above, which is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
and without hypocrisy; and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of
them that make peace; see James 3.17, 18. And further the Apostle says in
another place, that the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and
Righteousness, and truth.

And see also 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. The nature or properties of love or
charity, to wit, Love suffers long, and is kind, it envyeth not, vaunteth
not it self, is not puffed up, etc As so I might be large in showing the
nature of that love which is a fruit of the Spirit, from every one of these
properties. And likewise of the contraries; for the Scripture is full of such
directions and notes: As see on the contrary, for it is not the Spirit of God,
but Satan and our own flesh, that makes men lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, etc.
see 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. But I must not enlarge so far as to descant upon all
these, and it is easy for any that will to try the spirits, and the tendencie
of their motions, whether they lead us to good or evil, by which we may
easily know from whence they proceed. I shall therefore let these suffice for
the present, and follow him a little further, to wit;

He says again page 11 And thou says, then what need the teaching of James
Naylor, if this light within be sufficient: I say, says he as a means to
turn people to this light I am, which the Devil uses all means he can to
turn them from.

To which I answer, that it is herein evident, that he exalts himself above
the light of Christ, and clearly disowneth the sufficiency of that light for
turning men to it, without the help of James Naylor, whom he ownes to be a
means to turn them to that light. For as I said before, so I say again, that
if all do know the Lord already, what need is there then of the teachings of
James Naylor, and his accomplices, if their light within them be sufficient, it
can teach them all that he does, and all that he knows, and how to eye it
only; and to look within for light, and to desert the teachings of men, and
despise them too, as so he does

And I say, does not James Naylor teach that the light of Christ is sufficient,
and that without the teachings of men, or of the Scriptures; And yet confesses
himself to be a teacher and a means to turn men to that light, should he
not have added himself to that light for making it up sufficient, if it be not
sufficient without him, as a means to turn people to it self, and direct
them to eye it only as the only light, as so he calls it. And how is it
the only light, if it cannot inlighten people with so much light as to turn
to it, and eye it only, without James Naylor as a means.

Now if James Naylor and his writings and teachings be a means, and if he
also brings Scriptures to persuade and turn men to eye that light; Why may
not Scriptures be brought also by others besides the Quakens, to turn men from
darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Where says the
Scripture, that James Naylor, and his accomplices, must needs be added as a
means for turning men to God, and no body else, nor any other doctrine, but
what James Naylor teaches, must be used as a means, nor any Scriptures
alleged but what he brings, nor any exposition, or meaning of the
Scriptures given forth, but what he gives or approoveth: I appeal to all
Judicious men that reads these things, whether he does not clearly
contradict himself, and show his own conviction in this point by this his
own confession and practice; and whether his own conscience can for shame
deny it, that he is condemned out of his own mouth, and his folly made
manifest to all that read or hear his words; a child of seven years of age
may discern his folly and contradiction here, even to his own doctrine. And
then he tells me that I say there are some that are a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them will have no mercy on them. (And
says he) thou art he who art reasoning against the light of Christ being
sufficient, and yet thou says is not the manifestation of the spirit given to
every man to profit withal; have thou not lost thy understanding herein?

I answer, let all men Judge whether he or I have lost their understandings in
these things; he that has manifestly contradicted and convicted himself in
his own words, and blamed me here for producing such grounds from Scripture,
and arguments, as he cannot answer with any reason at all, by way of
contradiction, but by asserting me to be he that is without understanding,
not showing in the least any Reason at all why he so calls me. But tells
me that yet I have got the Serpents subtlety, to thrust in my words to abuse
the Scriptures.

I answer, how can a men that has lost his understanding get the Serpents
subtlety, I never knew that any man could be subtle without understanding.
And where I have thrust in any of my words to abuse the Scriptures; I cannot
tell, nor James Naylor neither, and therefore this is one of his many lies: But
he must say something, else the Quakers will suspect him that he has lead
them wide, as if they will but read his and mine, they may see who it is that
has got the Serpents subtlety, to make evasions where he cannot answer, and
make lies and shifts that are very poor; What a poor shift is it to rail and
revile, in stead of Rational answers.

I said in my book also that some men are sensual, having not the spirit; And
is not the manifestation of the spirit given to every man to profit withal;
and whom shall they profit, if all be alike qualified, and need no teaching?
And is there not diversities of gifts of that self same spirit, and all for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all grow up to a full stature,
which is not yet attained, no not by Naylor himself, for all his boastings of
infallibility and pureness from sin.

To all which he answers not a word, but what is before Recited, which is
nothing at all to the questions proposed, but a poor Rationles evasion, nor
can James Naylor, nor that lying spirit by whom he is acted, with all his
serpentine wisdom and policy, evade the dint of these Texts of Scripture, but
they quite overturne all his maine doctrines against the use of means.

For if these diversities of gifts and manifestations of the spirit are given
of God for the edification of the body of Christ, and for the work of the
ministry, and to profit withal.

Then they ought to be employed for that very end; and not to be put under a
bushel, nor hid as the talent.

But if the wisdom of God has thought it fit to give gifts unto men for
edifying of the body, and for the work of the ministry, and always has done
and does still by isntrumental means communicate light and knowledge of
spiritual things to all his people, and that by times and measures as it
pleases him, and by whom he pleases.

Is it not a high presumption in James Naylor, and his accomplices, to deny such
means and Instruments to be of any use in the Church, and go about to
persuade all men to neglect and despise and disparage such means and
instruments what in them lies, and only direct them to turn their minds
inward to what light they have within, and that already.

Do they not herein manifestly contradict the ways and wisdom of God, as
accounting themselves wiser then he, and as if his gifts were given in vain,
and not to be used or employed for any such ends; as to the use of edifying, and
as accounting it needless that all things should be done to the use of
edifying, and that of the body, yea that men should edify one another in their
most holy faith, yea after they have faith they may be built up further, and
increase their faith, and walk from faith to faith, till they be tall and
strong, and full of power by the spirit of the Lord, if they use such means as
the Lord has appointed them.

But if all have light, and that sufficient light already within, what need is
there then of edifying one another, of the work of the ministry, yea of those
diversities of gifts, and administrations and operations given forth by the
same spirit; does not he that prophesies, speak unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort. And ought we not to covet earnestly the best gifts:
And are all Prophets, or all Teachers, to whom then shall they prophecy, or
whom shall they teach? If all were one member, where were the body? If all were
an eye, where were the hearing? so if all were teachers, where were the
hearers, who must learn? If the ear should say, because I am not the eye, I
am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? So say I, if the hearers
should say, because we are not teachers therefore we have not the spirit;
have they therefore not the spirit? If James Naylor say so, I will not believe
him; Because I know that the wisdom of God has so tempered the body together,
as that the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; neither the
head to the foot, I have no need of you; And this he has done purposely, That
they might be no schism in the mystical body, that are all baptized into one
spirit; see 1 Cor. 12. Cha. But if there be need one of another, then we need
help one of another, both the hearers of their teachers, and the teachers of
their hearers: Teachers are as the eyes for guidance and lighting of the body,
and hearers are as the ears which receive their teachings, and light, and
directions for understanding and practical obedience, as from the mouth of the
Lord.

And therefore till I shall be persuaded that the wisdom of James Naylor is
above the wisdom of the Lord himself, I shall never believe that it comes of
wisdom to direct men only to a light within as their only guide, and to
neglect the ministrations and teachings of men, and of the Scriptures, as James
Naylor does: And that without the least warrant or ground from Scripture, or
reason either, as has been showed before. Nor has he yet done, nor can he
ever show any the least Scripture that so much as tends to such a doctrine,
nor his spirit neither: But these evading, shifting, reviling answers, in stead
of rational and proper answers, do clearly hold forth his conviction and
obstinance against the light it self, concerning this maine point so much
controverted: I shall therefore follow him to some other point; to wit, he
tells me page 15. that I ask in what part of Scripture is the Gospel
called the letter, or the preaching of faith, the preaching of the letter; I
say, thou should ask thy self this question, who would make the letter the
Gospel, and the preaching of faith litterall; which I say are both spiritual,
and spiritually preached. And I ask thee again, where did ever I call the
Gospel letter, or the preaching of faith letter, and so take thy challenge
back again.

To which I answer, that I told him that I find it in a little book written
by Thomas Polard in answer to Richard Farnworth, that they call the Scriptures
carnal, and a dead letter, and say it will never bring a man to the knowledge
of God, but that all that is gotten from the Scripture, is but brain knowledge.

And that I find in a book of Naylors against Thomas Moore, how he answers
this, to wit, being asked by Moore whether the writing of the Prophets and
Apostles be a dead letter; he answers, that without the Spirit it is; see in
my book page 4th. And it is clear in the 12 page of this his answer, where
he says, speaking of the Devil that he would keep in the letter, but from
the spirit, of which the letter declares. And says also to us and the rest of
the world, you have long counted the Scriptures to be the word of God; but the
Devils kingdom is standing still in the heart, and so must be till there be
account of the word, that is nearer then the letter.

From all which expressions it is clear, that that which we call the
Scriptures, he calls the letter, and a dead letter.

Now we call the contents of the Bible, both the old and new Testament, the
holy Scriptures, and so he will not deny but they are. Now these Scriptures
he owneth but as carnal and a dead letter; we call them spiritual, and the
words of God.

Therefore he calls all the Scriptures, the letter. And the Gospel being
contained in the Scriptures, which is glad tidings and good news, that shall
be to all people; the which was therefore called the Gospel. And it was
written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope; the which Gospel was also preached from the
beginning, yea even to Adam and Eve, that they might have hope and comfort
thereby, to wit, that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head.
And we shall not deny that the Gospel is spiritual, and so is the Law also.
But we must not deny, but both this Law and Gospel are written for our
learning. And if they be written, it must needs be legible to us, or it will
not serve for our learning, if we want it for the present, and have it not
written in our hearts; for if faith come by hearing, and so by reading, as so
it does sometimes, then it enters first by the ear, to wit, by hearing, or
else by the eye, to wit, by reading. And if we cannot read what is written in
the hearts of one another (not being omnitient) but by hearing them speak, or
seeing them act, or reading an express of their minds in writing: how can we
learn what is the mind and will of the Lord, from that which is written, if
it be not legible, and that in letters: Suppose us as ignorant for the present,
not having either Law or Gospel as yet in our hearts; how shall we believe in
him, in whom we have not heard? Implying that it is not a thing to be
expected, that all should have it by Immediate inspiration, but by the hearing
of it preached, which is the ordinary means whereby the Lord conveyeth it to
the soul, as has been showed before, and that from Scripture grounds. Now
that which he calls the letter, we call the Scripture, and so it is, for it
was written, and is therefore Scripture, because written; yet we dare not call
it a dead letter, but lively Oracles, a spiritual word, a word in which there
is spirit and life to such as believe and receive them in love; yea we do
call the Scripture the word of God; And do but ask James Naylor what else
that is which is called by the Apostle, the sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God: If it be not the Scripture, yea that which is written in the
Bible, which he calls the letter; see Ephesians. 6.17. Ask him I say, whether
this sword of the spirit, which the Apostle calls the word of God, be meant
of Christ, who is the essential word, and who is the spirit, or it be meant of
the Scriptures, which are the express word of God, and so as a sword or weapon
in the hand of the spirit, both defensive and offensive against our adversaries
upon all occations; yea Christ himself used it against the Devil, when he
tempted him, and against the Scribes and Pharisees, and that as the best and
fittest weapon to encounter them with.

But if this sword of the spirit be not the spirit it self, but the sword or
instrument in the hand of the spirit, and yet is called the word of God: Then
it is not blasphemy but good Scripture language to call the Scripture, the word
of God; but the blasphemy is theires, who call it carnal, and a dead letter,
as has more largely been showed before in this Treatise.

Now in these expressions of James Naylor, he denies to call any thing
Gospel but the spirit, or any thing Scripture but the spirit, or any thing the
word of God, but the spirit; And so the Scripture with him, and the glad
tidings of the Gospel contained therein, must of necessity either be called
the spirit, and so also God; or but a dead letter, and not the word of God, and
so not the sword of the spirit; wherein how clearly contradicts himself,
and his own confessions, as has been showed before, and also the plain
express Scripture, as any Rational man may easily perceive, that will but
read and consider, so that his conviction is clear from his own confessions,
concerning these two maine points of his doctrine, which I may well call the
maine substance of that Gospel which he preaches, and of all his books
which he writes, namely, to teach us to eye that spirit, and word, and light
within, and desert the Scriptures, and the teachings of men, as a dead and
vain and fruitless means for leading into and guiding in all the ways of
God, etc. The which Gospel I now leave to the Judgments of all that are
truly Judicious whether it be not another Gospel then the Gospel of Christ,
yea or no see Gala 1.8. And if he does not repent, his Judgment is passed
already by the spirit of truth who cannot lie.

And then again he begins to charge me for pleading for Reverent gestures
to worship God in, as well as in spirit: The which I confess I did; For page
27. I asked where it is said in Scripture that God is not to be worshipped with
reverend gestures of the body, as well as in spirit and truth.

To which he answers; And whereas thou art pleading for reverend gestures to
worship God in as well as in spirit, I say, in at that door came your Altars,
your bowings, your surplices and conformities, wherein the teachers of this
Nation was leading back to Rome, the mother of these witchcrafts, if God had
not stopped the way by his hand: And now have you got a little peace, and thither
are you turning again, even in bloody persecuting against all who witness
against you, who testifies against these false ways, etc.

To which I answer, that for ought I know there is no man enforced to worship
either with Reverend gestures or without, nor any man persecuted or troubled
for any such things by any of the powers of this Nation. And therefore this is
a lie and a slander against those in Authority, as is well known, I need not
prove it.

But I only asked whether the Scripture forbid Reverend gestures of the body,
as well as in spirit and truth.

To which he does not answer properly, but shows his dislike thereof, and
that they testify against such false ways and gestures set up by the man of
sin. In which he clearly condemns the practice of Christ himself, Luke
22.41. And of Poter, Act. 9.40. And of Paul. Chap. 20.36. and Chap. 21.5. and
Ephesians. 3.14. And of Daniell, Dan. 6.11. And of Solomon, 1 Kings 8.54. and 2 Chronicles. 6.13. And that as unlawful, and the pleading for the lawfullnesse of it
an opening of a door to Altars and bowings, Surplices and conformities, etc.
and a making way for an unparalelld persecution, and a hasting on to
destruction, which he sees, says he, to be the end of our Reverend gestures.
And says he, will not the gestures of the Saints serve your worship, that
which looks so much out, neglects that within, so you plead against the Spirit.

Oh profane and ungodly spirits! It is not enough with them to slander the
Magistrates, and all that are in authority, but they will slander the
footsteps of the Lords anointed, even the Lord Jesus himself, and all his
anointed ones, from the beginning of the world, who have all practiced such
Reverend gestures in their worshipping of God: And then he says, will not the
gestures of the Saints serve your worship? Oh damnable hypocrisy! are they
Saints that reproach the practice and footsteps of the Lords anointed; see
Psalm. 89.51. see whose enemies they are. And do they not therein Reproach the
footsteps and ways and gestures of all the Saints that ever lived on the
earth: And yet they will call themselves Saints, as so always did the Popes
and Papists, that were Devils incarnate, and as absolute enemies to the Saints
of God, and so by consequence to the Lord himself, as any in the world: But
for all his scorns it is the practice of the Saints that will serve our
worships, and all the Saints gestures that were Saints indeed, we cordially
approve and account it lawful to follow their stepps, as occasion requires;
But as for the gestures of Saint James Naylor, nor these his doctrines and
slanders, they will not serve our worships to approve or practice, because the
Spirit of truth and holiness Ingageth us otherwise, we are naturally engaged by
the Spirit of God out of Reverend Respect to his glorious Majesty, to serve
him with Reverence and godly fear; knowing that he that is our God is a
consuming fire; see Heb 12.28, 29.

But if he that privily slandereth his neighbor, shall be cut off; see Psalm.
101.5. Of how much sorer punishment shall he be counted worthy that slandereth
and Reproacheth even the son of God and his Reverend gestures in his prayers
unto God. Can this be any less then clear despite unto the spirit of grace,
see Heb 10.29. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God; see verse 31.

It is no strange thing to me to read his scorns, and reproaches, and
slanders, and censures, that in all his books he houldeth forth, and fumeth
out most bitterly and maliciously against others, or my self, considering his
fulness of venom and malice cannot be kept in, but must burst forth like
filthy vomit against the Lord of glory, as in this appears: I shall not
therefore much care, nor take any great notice what he says by me, but shall
as briefly as possible answer his maine points, and refer the Reader to the
books themselves for Resolution where the wickedness lies; for I desire no
more but that they read them both, and then let them Judge.

Again, Page 15. he falls to work about the Ministers, which is the third
maine head, saying, Thy third thing is for thy maintenance, and for thy
Ministry.

I answer, as for my maintenance, there is not one word in all my book, as the
Reader may see, and that he makes lies his Refuge, when he has nothing to
answer that is like the truth.

And as for Ministers maintenance, and for the poor, I have pleaded it, and
prooved it also, and that from diverse grounds and arguments from Scripture, yea
and Gospel foundations, such as James Naylor never heard before, nor have they
been published before, that I know off, either by word or writing, as I said in
my Epistle, the which he calls boasting, but does not, nor cannot make it
appear to the contrary in the least; neither can he contradict the truth
thereof, nor blame them justly, by any Rational or spiritual argument, though
he recites many of them, as though he intended a confutation, but in the end
comes off with a fail; perverting both my words and meaning, that he might
find breadth for a Reproof, which are but poor shifts, for so eminent a
Quaker.

For says he, and that thou may get something, or make a show for this
Religious work thou art about, and that thou may seem to be a charitable man,
as Judas did, thou putst in the poor with them, but seeing there is as much
difference betwixt them and the poor, as betwixt Masters and beggars, I shall
therefore set the poor by themselves, concerning whom, I say, be as liberal
to them as thou will.

I answer, that for my ends in this he must not be Judge. But for what cause
he should set apart the poor by themselves, who were ever joined together by
the Lord himself; when tithes were commanded, they to have part, as see. And
whom God has joined together, I dare not separate: neither did the Apostles in
the primitive times, but what was given was distributed to all as every one had
need. But James Naylor dare, though he has his ground to seek, for he
shows no reason worth mentioning. I suppose he was afraid with Judas, least
he should not seem charitable to the poor, for under pretense of the poor,
so he could keep it from the Ministers of Christ, and so from Christ
himself; he would have it for himself, and the Quaker-Ministers, to fill
their baggs, though they are thieves and Robbers spiritually, as Judas was
carnally; For it is evident that he accounts no poor deserving, nor no
Ministers deserving, but the Quakers poor and Ministers.

Though he says, if they be found Ministers of Christ, far be it from me
to hold from them that maintenance which Christ ever allowed his Ministers.
But that he allows none to be found his Ministers, but the Quaker-Ministers
is evident; for as for all such as preach in our public places, which he
call (...) our Idol Temples; are condemned by him as Ministers of Antichrist,
and not sent of God. So that he and I are at a great distance from accordance,
though he seems to grant to all that I plead for, or ever intended it, to
wit, such as are found to be Ministers of Christ. Nor have I in the least
pleaded for any other, if they be known to be such. And therefore though he
Imperiously commands me when I write again first to prove them so, and then
call them so.

I answer, I called not any by name, nor do I know but few of very many that
are known faithful laborers in Gods harvest, therefore I cannot enter into
any particulars, it would be too large to prove every particular Minister of
Christ sent of God, by the particular grounds and Reasons to clear every man
that yet is clear in the sight of God. But I am not so omnitient; yet if I
hear them preach in the clear evidence and demonstration of the spirit and of
power, by that I can know them, though I cannot demonstrate the same unto James
Naylor, as such I know many, that preach in our public places, which yet are
but a few in comparison of what there is that I know not, nor ever saw; Nor
will I go about to decipher them out by their marks, so as to condemn all as
he has done, yet if they be Wolves that come in sheep clothing, or mere
hirelings, or clearly Antichristian, or if by any of their fruits I can
certainly know them to be thieves and Robbers, and such as are carnal and
worldly, and proud and vain boasters, or heretics, or schismatickes, and
such like, I shall and do disowne them as much and more then James Naylor does.

But amongst the Rest I disowne James Naylor in particular, for being so much
as like any Minister of Christ that ever was in the world. But dare maintain
him for one of the primest of all that ^athan has, and the most audacious in a
bad cause.

Now he tells me further, that another argument I use, saying, we ought to
account them as spiritual Fathers, And says, that if any so do whom they
have not spiritually begotten, such account of a lie, and thou teaches them to
it.

I answer, That is one of James Naylors lies; for if they be fathers to others,
and I know it, though they did not beget me, yet I ought to account them so,
else I account of a lie above the truth: oh shameless liar! who but will know
this to be a lie at the first reading; If they be fathers they are so, though
not to me.

But for all those marks that James Naylor has given to know them by, I will
not follow him throughout, Because that this I know, That if they be such who
have the manifestation of the Spirit, and preach in the evidence and
demonstration thereof, and that with power, Though I see in them many humane
frailties; and that they be subject to like passions as other men are, nay
though Jonas-like they should show themselves angerie with the Lord himself,
and that for showing mercy, and say, they do well to be angerie, even to the
very death; yet I shall not deny but they are sent of God, and ought to be
maintained as his faithful Ambassadors, and he that denies them denies
Christ, and he that condemns and Judges them as no Ministers of Christ,
because of such passions and frailties; does also condemn and Judge himself
for the same censure that he casts upon them, if he does the same or worser
things; It Redoundeth to himself by the Judgment of the Lord; for says he,
With what Judgment ye Judge, ye shall be Judged. And therefore James Naylor
has cause to fear that Judgment attends him, and will befall him, and that
ere long, if he does not repent; especially after Conviction in his own
Conscience, of his injurious Censures and blasphemous Reproaches, cast like a
flood out of his mouth and penn, to make them all odious amongst the people of
God: But I must not stand any longer upon this third particular, but shall fall
to answer briefly, his Catalogue of lies that he would father upon me, but
may keep them himself, as more properly his own: For

1. Says he Thou says our spirit teaches us to pull down men's faith and
hope they have in God.

Ans. True, and that by calling men carnal and damned, when you cannot prove
any such thing.

2. That we give no honor or worship, either to God or man.

Ans. Not that I know off, let them show wherein.

3. That we have no knowledge of God at all, but a wicked lying malicious
spirit, that is an enemy to all goodness.

Ans. And so I verily believe, and that for those reasons rendered in the book.

4. That our wicked lying spirit teaches us to speak evil of all men, that
embrace not our lying doctrines and ways.

Ans. The truth of this I Refer to the Judgments of all that know their
Railing and Reviling of the Ministers and professors of all sorts, the Quakers
excepted, who only embrace their ways.

5. That the Elect may be so far lead away with the error of the wicked, as
to fall from their own steadfastnesse.

Ans. I say, from their own (proper) steadfastnesse they may, which word
(proper) he leaves out, to deceive the simple; And so I say, they may, else
the Apostles exhortation was needless, 2 Pet. 3.17.

6. That the case is Just with us deluded Quakers, as it is with Witches.

Ans. And so it is in those Respects therein mentioned, as I could have prooved
it by examples of some of those people.

7. That we bitterly Revile and Reproach all the Saints and servants of God,
almost over all the world.

Ans. And I said true; for they Revile and Reproach all professors but of their
own way, and those are no Saints, but more like Devils.

8. That our pleading for so many good things, and sharply reprooving of evil,
and our coming to the light with the deeds, can be no other but from a deluding
spirit.

Ans. I say it is true; for that is but done to delude the simple through
hypocrisy, to make their lies more feizible, as so the Ministers of Satan are
sometimes transformed as if they were Ministers of Righteousness, as has been
showed before, and so are they.

9. That our directing to observe the light in the Conscience, is nothing else
but to advise them to obey Satan.

Ans. I say true in such cases wherein I instanced, to wit, to them in whom he
Rules; it is no better but so.

10. That we direct people to eye and observe that lying spirit that is in
them.

Ans. So they do by such directions to all those whom they so direct, in whom
he reigns.

11. That Naylors doctrine is quite contrary, that any that lack wisdom
should ask it of God.

Ans. I say in my book Just so, and show my Reasons for it, because I find it
not in any of his books: But only a direction to seek it within before they
have it: And if they have it not already, then they want it, and ought to ask
it of God, and not to seek it where it is wanting, and not to be found; but it
is a gross directorie so to advise them as so I call it in my book.

12. That Satan has got a Commission to be a lying spirit in my mouth.

Ans. Very true, and if he call this a lie, he must father all these lies
himself, and so be a Devil, and the father of lies; for it is not God, he
cannot lie.

13. That James Naylor is sent with strong delusions to some that they might
believe a lie

Ans. True, and that to very many of those that believed not the truth, but had
pleasure in unrighteousness; as so I say it again, and showed reasons for it
in my book.

14. That I would needs be accounted some great Prophet, and to have some
extraordinary revelations that no man else had known before, and yet teaches
us nothing except lies, etc.

Ans. I say it is true, he that teaches us nothing (except lies) but what we
knew before, now this (except lies) he leaves out, and puts in etc. as was
usual in the Bishops times when they were ashamed to declare all.

15. That James Nayor utterly denies the manhood of Christ.

Ans. So he does by clear consequence from his doctrine, as is prooved in the
Treatise, for that he blames us for owning a Christ without, and at a
distance, to wit, his body being in heaven as well as he is present with us in
spirit.

16. That I blame men for praising and singing of Psalms in spirit unto God,
as the Apostles did.

Ans. In spirit and with the mouth and voice he does, calling them Devils
Rymes, most wickedly and profanely, as is showed, but not answered yet.

17. That I often produce the non-proficiency of the people as a ground of
disparagement to the word it self.

Ans. So he does as a disparagement to the Scripture it self, which I call
the express word of God, and as a disparagement to the teachings of men also;
which he cannot deny, and therefore this is his lie.

18. That James Naylor counts himself the highest, and all below him either
dwarffes, or nothing like Christians.

Ans. And this is true, for Reasons therein showed, but is his Recital he
leaves out those words, to wit (either like dwarffes) and also the reasons
which he cannot answer.

19. That I Reproach and disparage those that take heed to the sure word of
prophecy.

Ans. True; for so he does all that take heed to the Scriptures, which the
Apostle meant when he so called it.

20. That how the word was made flesh, James Naylor understands not.

Ans. True; I said so, let him prove the contrary, by showing it if he can.

21. That James Naylors Directorie is quite contradictorie to the directorie of
Scripture.

Ans. True; and it is so prooved in the book.

22 That I Naylor requires Scripture grounds for what he asserteth, which he
never yet gave.

Ans. It is I that require Scripture grounds of him for what he asserteth, the
which he has not yet, nor cannot give; and that makes him to put it in the
quite contrary sense, as I suppose, least the simple should discern him.

23. That we have no faith in God, but in a lying spirit within.

Ans. It really appears that spirit within them is a lying spirit, and yet in
that they believe: but the Spirit of God is not a lying spirit, therefore their
faith is not in God.

24. That we would make the blood of Christ of none effect.

Ans. It is true, your doctrine does so, what in your lies, as it is prooved
in the Treatise, and not yet answered.

25. That our spirit teaches us not to put off our hatts when we pray.

Ans. I was so informed by those that have seen you pray, that your practice
is so, and then I suppose your spirit so teaches you: so that if it be not
true, yet it not my lie, because I was so informed.

Thus his twenty-five lies that he would father upon me, I Return back to
himself in this short dress: And shall pass over his language he gives
me, as grounded hence; because it wants footing, and come to his last maine
charge.

And lastly, says he, thou goes on to plead for a deal more of thy Masters
stuff, wherewithal he houlds up his kingdom, of pride and partiality, and
such like stuff as none ever pleaded for, but the Devil and his Ministers,
who is afraid that his kingdowne should go down.

And thou says Satan tells us that it is our duty to observe the language
held forth in Scripture, and the example of Christ, and his Apostles, and upon
pain of damnation not to vary from it: And this thou brings to plead against
speaking the word (thou) to a particular.

I answer, If it be laid upon us as an injunction, and that upon pain of
damnation: And no such injunction to be found in Scripture, it must needs be of
Satan.

But James Naylor knows there is no such Injunction upon that penalty in all
the Scripture, as to threaten damnation for using the custom of the Country
wherein there is no sin, though they vary from the customs in old time. As
so If James Naylor should tell me, that in Regard Christ wore a coat without
seame, therefore I may not wear any but such, and that upon pain of
damnation: I should also say, that it came from the Devil, nor do I think
that James will teach the Quakers to follow the example of Christ in this thing.

But he says, have thou been all along crying up Scriptures in thy book for
a Rule, and is now the language of it, and the examples of Christ and his
Apostles therein become a persuasion of Satan with thee; have thou not here
showed what brood thou art one, who preferres the Devils pride, and the
worlds fashions, before the examples of Christ, and his Apostles, and would
render it a persuasion of Satan for us to follow it, art not thou he the
Apostle speaks on, 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.

I answer, that if James Naylor have any Scripture Rule that binds us to it,
I will observe it, and confess my error in pleading against it: But this
Scripture he brings has nothing in it to this purpose, but against it, the
words are these which he cites, but in part, least it touch himself, to wit,

If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
he is proud, knowing nothing, but doting about questions and striffes of
words, whereof comes envy, strife, Raylings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth: supposing that
gain is godliness, from such withdraw thy self.

Now I know nothing by my self, but I do consent to the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the doctrine which is according to godliness.

But is this doctrine according to godliness, to bind us up to the word thee
and thou, because it was the ordinary language of Christ and his Apostles;
when there is no such obligation in any of their words, and yet they told us
all things that pertained to life and godliness, and kept back nothing, but
declared even the whole counsel of God: see Job 18.2, 3. for the word you to
a single person. How long will it be ere you make an end of words? mark, and
afterward we will speak. Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile
in your sight?

But if this were intended, then we must not vary in our prayers from the
words of the Lords prayer, or the prayers of the Apostles upon pain of
damnation. But carnal men make carnal interpretations: such as Nicodemus did,
not knowing what it meant to be borne again, unless he should enter into his
mothers womb first. Nor no more does James Naylor what that doctrine is which
is according to godliness, and therefore makes this carnal use of it, which
was never intended by the Holy Ghost, and therefore it is he that is doting
about questions and striffe of words, which produce no better fruits, but as
the Apostle relates, and yet he is puffed up with pride, and triumphs as if
he had got a great conquest.

But does James Naylor consent to the doctrine which is according to
godliness; why then does he make such a carnal interpretation, which was
never intended. I say it was never intended, let him prove it to the contrary:
if he can let him prove any unwholsomnesse or ungodliness in using the word
(you) to a single person from any Scripture ground, else he but doateth, and
befooleth poor simple people, and brings them into a suare without a cause.

I refer the Reader to my book for further satisfaction by reason.

Again, he says, thou pleads for bowing unto men, and putting off the hatt,
and says the Spirit of God teaches it, wherein thou belyes the Spirit of God.

I answer, a very heavy charge if it were true; but the liar is one of the
Quakers, who might have quaked to have writ this charge, Considering I told
him this courtesy is included under that command, to wit, Be ye courteous and
tenderhearted toward all men.

And that it were easy to prove that bowing of the body was the customarie
Reverence in old time; But I rather asked them what courtesy at all they show
to any man upon any occasion.

And that taking off the heart is a proper Reverend duty to those whom we
honor and do and ought to reverence, is easy to prove: And that we are
commanded to honor all men, so that if we know them to be duties, either of
love or honor, we are bound to use them.

Nay, that if they be proper expressions, either of love or honor, and that
we have any spirit of love or honor in us, it will naturally engage us to use
such expressions one to another, if we were not so commanded.

Now for bowing of the body, this is clear from examples; and those unrepeald
by the coming of Christ.

For as the Apostle advises women that profess the fear of God, to follow
the examples of Sarah, and other holy women; So I think I may from the same
ground advise to follow the example of Jacob, and other holy men: my ground is
from.

Now it is well known, that before Jacob met his brother Esau, he bowed
himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother. And
so also did his wives, and children, and maids; see Genesis 33.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Now this bowing and calling him Lord was but to his brother, and that profane
Esau, and yet the Spirit of God engaged him to this humble and courteous
demeanor, and to such humble appellations, calling him My Lord. Now this being
cordial, was no honor but such as comes of God. Nor do I seek either
honor from James Naylor, nor any other, neither care I for it.

And therefore I said that by my consent they shall never be persuaded to use
them at all, till their cordial love and respects engage them sincerely to it;
I only pleaded for the lawfulness and engagement that lay upon us to use it,
for it is not proper for them till the spirit of love and honor be in them,
for they should but deceive us, as so I said in my book.

And for courteous and honorable and respective appellations see Luke the 1.3
to Theophilus, most excellent Theophilus; and Paul to Aprippa, Oh King Agrippa;
and to Festus, though he thought him to be mad, Most Noble Festus: see Acts
26.19.25. This was not like that spirit in the Quakers, by which they were
guided.

And for putting off the hatt when we express any courtesy, or honor, or
Reverence, either to God or men, it is clearly Required of men by the Apostle
Paul, 1 Cor. 11.7. For, says he. a man ought not to cover his head for as much
as he is the Image and glory of God. That is to say, he ought not to cover
the Majesty of God, which appears in his face, but unvaile his countenance,
which is much in show upon any occation, according to the temper of the heart
and mind, whether it be tempered with love or anger; love makes the
countenance amiable and cheerful, and an honorable Respect is much seen in
the humble fear of the countenance; And so is anger and scorn on the other
part, for the temper of a man's spirit will appear in the forehead and eyes,
and can scarce be dissembled.

And therefore, if there be any love or Respect and honor in the heart, it
will naturally engage us to uncover it; neither need we be ashamed of it, for
such affections are Real fruits of the Spirit of God, which ought not to be
veiled but discovered and expressed, according to the truth and sincerity
thereof, they being lovely in themselves, and much inducive to the like
Returns of Reciprocal Communication of love and honor where it is sincere;
For the looking forth of the spirit of love through the eyes and face, is as an
invitation to the same spirit, if it be in another, to look forth also, and
salute each other, being not two but one and the same spirit, though in two
persons by operation in both their spirits, to show its oneness and make them
so likewise if they do apply, yea that they may be one as God is one; for
nothing but love can make two one, as God is one, and there is no spirit of
love but one, and that is God; I mean of love that is true and lawful.

Now this spirit of love is the same spirit in us which was in the Patriarchs
before the Law was given forth, and did engage them to such humble, honorable,
and amiable affections, and to such expressions as are natural to it; And if
we have any little measure of the same spirit, it will engage us also to do
the like, if we do not resist it, and we are forbid to resist the spirit.
Now it sometimes ingageth those in whom it dwells to lift up their eyes, or
their hands toward heaven, and sometimes both, according as it ingageth the
heart and affections, the which if we resist we resist the spirit. And it is
easily discernable through the eyes, whether such their motions come from the
heart, or they are but fained, especially by such who are also acquainted with
such ejaculations of their own hearts, and of their eyes and hands, as they
are affected. And I do believe that many of the Quakers have resisted the
spirit, and quenched it also, before they could get their hearts to comply with
such uncourteous carriage, as not to put off their hatts, and bow their bodies,
and use the word (you) to such whom they formerly had been so accustomed. So
that now they are grown to such hardness of heart and searednesse of spirit,
that nothing can be seen in them of natural affection, but more like brute
beasts, made to be taken and to be destroyed; see 2 Timothy 3.3. 2 Pet. 2.12. as
was prophesied of them in these last days.

And whereas he tells me that I belie the spirit of God, for, says he, the
spirit of God forbids it, James 2. even that which setts up pride, and respects
persons.

I answer, so do I also forbid pride and respect of persons in that sense
there meant, and in many other, and I can love and honor the poor that are
virtuous, more then the rich, that are either wicked, or not so virtuous, nor
would I debase or depresse the poor, because he is poor, to exalt the rich in
partial respect. But I must honor all men, and give them due respect, and
shall I hope as I know what it is: but to show no respect to any at all, as so
the Quakers do, is to show plainly, that I have not any love or Respect in me.

And again says he, Christ himself says, How can you believe that Receive
honor one of another, John 5.44. And if they could not believe that received
honor, how much less can you believe that seek it and grudge if you have it
not.

I answer, let them that seek it or Receive it either, that which comes but
from men answer for themselves; I seek it not, nor receive it neither, but
that which comes of God only, if I know it from the other: Now that which
comes of God is really cordial, and I must receive it, and Return the like,
as so I am naturally engaged by the love and honor which is of God in my own
soul; nor do I dissemble any more then they.

Now there is a common love, and a common respect and customarie honor, to
which I am bound by that command, to wit, honor all men, but there is a nearer
and more particular love, and honor, and courtesy, which will induce me to a
fuller expression, both in word and deed, and I am so engaged by the same
spirit, and in all this there is no partiallitie, or respect of persons, but as
I ought to do; And so his comparison of me to Haman, and Saul, I have good
ground to deny.

And again, says he, not having any Scripture to plead for these things,
thou would plead for them under the pretense of love, and being courteous,
and tenderhearted. I say, says he, silence deceit, you have set up these
things, till you have lost all love but what is selfish, etc.

I answer, I did produce diverse Scriptures, but they are none it seems, with
him; is there no Scripture that commands love, and to be courteous, and
tenderhearted? What spirit is this but a lying Devil, that proceeds on upon
this lying foundation, to railing and reviling, and prophesying the destruction
of all our fading glory, because we maintain the lawfullnesse of these
customarie Civilities, but because his books are so full of lies. I do not
much regard either his railing or prophesying, but to clear up the truth:
which the Lord assisting me, I have in some measure done; and do commit the
same to his blessing, and disposal, to whom be all the honor, and glory, and
praise, for ever and ever, Amen, Amen.

The End.
A Postscript to fill up a sheet that wanted,
being a Catalogue of some of James Naylors lies, gathered out of his book in
five or six hours time, to let the Reader see he is none of those children
that will not lie; but when he can no otherwise shift off the dint of a
Scripture, or argument, he makes lies his Refuge, and under vanity would
hide himself, if such coverings were not too narrow, but that he could wrapp
himself. How feign would he appear to be all in sheep clothing, though
Inwardly he is ravening and Woolffish.

A Catalogue of some of James Naylors lies.
1. HE says, my book is much boasted off by the Author, but as little worth
as the boast is great.

2. He says, it was my envy that carried me with such envy against the
Innocent, till I spoke I knew not what.

3. He says, he has set down some marks and maintenance of the true
Ministers; and also of the false, their fruits differing them according to
Christ's Rules in Scripture; with diverse other things to keep the simple from
deceit.

4. He says, it is by a friend to the work of God, but an enemy to the
Devils work, where it is found and pleaded for, called by the world James
Naylor.

These four lies are in his Title page, and are answered, page 1, 2, 3.

5. He says, I have boasted much of my work.

6. That I have forgot that teaching, to let other men praise me, and not my
own mouth.

7. That I have prooved nothing against James Naylor, but against my self.

These three are in his first page.

8. That I have writ against the light of Christ being sufficient.

9. That I would bind them to creature-worships, and National customs.

10. That I should blame him for producing that Scripture, Romans 10.8.

11. That I bring not one Scripture that says the letter is the word.

12. That I set my self in the stead of Christ.

These last five are in page 2.

13. He calls me an exalted wretch.

14. That I confound my self in what I would disproove the truth; these page 3.

15. That he denied but that the Scriptures given by Inspiration of God, are
words of God.

16. That the Jews had all the Scripture in their hand, or in their brain,
and yet had not the word.

17. That I deny the letter it self, and the letter denies me.

18. That I bring those Scriptures, Romans 7. to wit, the Law is spiritual; and
Prove. 3.1. to oppose the new Covenant, and the Law in the heart; these page 4.

19. That all the Scriptures I bring, turn against me, and for the truth.

20. That I steal Scripture words out of Scripture, to plead for pride, and
vainglory, and creature worships, and an Idol Ministry, contrary to
Scripture, set up in will and inventions of men, in my book; these page 5.

21. That of the words of God there is a famine, and greatest amongst such as
trade with the letter.

22. That I increase in mischief, and know not the plant of Gods renown how
it grows, nor what the increase of God is.

23. That they know what it is to grow in Christ, and that Christ is in them;
these page 7.

24. That I bring Scriptures to prove the light of Christ Insufficient; page 8.

25. That mine eye was so much abroad to discover errors in James Naylor, till
I could not see mine own.

26. That I have drunk deeply of the Cup full of abominations and errors from
the mother of confusions.

27. That the means I am pleading for is come through so many several hands,
till it have lost both life and power; these page 9.

28. That I love mine iniquities, and am pleading for them, pride,
Imperfection, and fulse worships; page 10.

29. That I am he who turns the Scriptures as a nose of wax, to plead for
such things as the Scripture condemns.

30. That as a means to turn people to that light within James Naylor is.

31. That I am one of those people that are of no understanding, therefore he
that made me will have no mercy on me.

32. That I have got the Serpents subtlety, to thrust in my words to abuse the
Scriptures, page 11.

33. That I shall one day know that I have blasphemed against the spirit and
gift of God; page 12.

34. That now we have got a little peace, we are turning back to Rome.

35. That we plead against the Spirit; page 13.

36. That I am he who am leading forth from the kingdom of God within.

37. That the Ranters are my brethren, all of one kingdom in the flesh, and
the lusts thereof; page 14.

38. That by reviling the works of Righteousness and teachings of the Spirit,
and spiritual light, I have made it odious for any man to follow, as the
Devil himself.

39. That my third thing is for my maintenance, and for my Ministers.

40. That I put in the poor with the Ministers, that I might seem charitable,
like as Judas did; page 15.

41. That I have set a stint for Ministers maintenance, and for the poor,
though before I denied it; page 16.

42. That accounting such spiritual fathers, who have not begotten us, is to
account of a lie, and that I teach them to it; page 20.

43. That my book has a heap of confusion in it fit for the fire.

44. That I prefer the Devils pride, and the worlds fashions, before the
example of Christ and his Apostles.

45. That such as I prefer the words of pride, before the words of Christ.

46. That I belie the Spirit of God for the Spirit of God forbids bowing unto
men, and putting off the hatt.

47. That we seek honor of men, and grudge if we have it not.

48. That the demeanor of Christ and his Saints is become a Reproach, and not
manners and courtesy to give us content.

49. That we are seeking for that honor which God is laying in the dust.

50. That there is much more such stuff in my book, not worth reading, nor
answering, which rises out of the corruption of mine own heart and busy
mind, and that Ishmaell-like my hand is against every man, and eyes abroad,
but cannot see mine own folly, but am boasting of it; page 27.

51. That we have found out so many words in our inventions, and so many
lights, and all without us, that we are become heart-blinde.

52. That the Lord God and the Lamb will they worship for ever.

FINIS.

