THE Poor Man's Help: BEING, I. An Abridgement of Bishop Pearson on the Creed;
showing What he is to Believe. II. A short Exposition of the Lord's Prayer,
directing him What to Beg of GOD. III. The Ten Commandments Explained; teaching
him his Duty both to GOD and Man.
With Some Additional Helps for his Private Devotion.

The Lord makes poor, and makes rich; he brings low and lifts up.

He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the
dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the Throne of
Glory,

1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. London, Printed for R. Clavell, at the Peacock, in Paul's-
Churchyard. 1689.

TO THE PARISHIONERS OF St. Mildred's IN THE City of CANTERBURY.
My Friends,
COnsidering how convenient and beneficial little Books are for such as cannot
reach the Price of bigger; I here present you with an Explication of the Creed,
Lord's-Prayer, and Ten Commandments, as small as the Subject will permit: And
being that (in my Judgment) the Creed cannot be better or shorter Paraphrased
than the most Learned and Judicious Prelate Dr. Pearson has done it; I have
transcribed mine from thence, that those most sound and necessary Truths might
not be confined to those alone who are able to purchase that most Learned Work.
And that the meanest capacity might not lose the Knowledge of such a safe and
wholesome Exposition; I have changed the more Eloquent and Difficult Words, for
such as are more Plain and Obvious. The Lord's-Prayer is the same in Substance
that I delivered to you Three Years ago, when I Catechized the Children; which
I have now Expounded in the Form of a Prayer, that the Poor Man may upon any
pressing occasion, know how to Express himself at large upon any Petition. The
Precepts of the first Table, you know I Expounded to you all the last Summer
till Advent; the Heads of which (bating the Points in Controversy) I here
present you with: And those of the second I shall in due time Treat of, if God
prosper my Studies; in the mean while (to complete the Exposition) I here give
you the Substance of them. And being that in several Discourses immediately
after Christmas last, I did press the necessity of a daily Service to God from
the Words of Zacharias, Luke 1.74, and 75. I have added a short Morning and
Evening Form to be used before and after your daily Work, A Prayer against the
Temptation of the Flesh, to any particular Sin, to keep your Bodies in
subjection to your Reason. Another for your use in the time of Sickness. And
when at other times you shall have particular occasion for other Services, I
have given a short Direction where to be furnished in the Psalms. And this I
did, not to hinder any that are able from buying Books of more peculiar use,
but to comply with the necessities of those that are not; of which I am very
sensible there is too great a number. I had no other inducement to meddle with
this, but my Charity to the Souls of the Poor, for whom Christ died as well as
for the Rich: And if hereby I shall gain but one Soul, I shall thank God for
making me an Instrument of so much good: And if none be bettered by it, yet I
have this satisfaction, that I have endeavored for God's sake, and your own,
to show my self

Your Affectionate Pastor, and Servant, Hump. Bralesford.

The Poor Man's Help: OR, A SHORT DIRECTION What he is to Believe.
The Creed.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the
Uirgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, He
descended into Hell; the third day he rose again from the Dead, he ascended
into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty; from
thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic Church; the Communion of
Saints; the Forgiveness of Sins; the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life
everlasting. Amen.

Article I. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.
ALthough these Articles of my Faith which are contained in the Creed, are not
apparent to my sense, though they are not of themselves evident to my
understanding, nor appear true to me by any Natural or Necessary Cause; yet
being they are contained in the Scriptures, the Writings of the Blessed
Apostles and Prophets; being that those Apostles and Prophets were Endued with
miraculous Power from above, and immediately inspired by the Holy Ghost, and
consequently, what they delivered, was the Word of GOD, and not of Man; being
that GOD is of such universal Holiness, and infinite Wisdom, that it is
impossible he should be deceived; of that perfect Holiness, that it is not
imaginable he should intend to deceive me; and consequently, what he has
delivered for a Truth, must be necessarily and infallibly true. I readily and
steadfastly assent unto them, as most certain Truths, and am fully and
absolutely, and more concernedly persuaded of them, than of any thing I see and
know. And because that God who has revealed them, has done it not for my
benefit alone, but for the advantage of others; nor for that alone, but also
for the Manifestation of his own Glory, being that for these Ends he has
Commanded me to profess them, and has promised an Eternal Redemption upon my
Profession of them; being that every particular person is to expect the
Justification of himself, and the Salvation of his Soul, upon the Condition of
his own Faith: As with a certain and full persuasion I assent unto them, so
with a fixed and undaunted Resolution I will profess them, and with this Faith
in my Heart, and Confession in my Mouth, to the whole body of the Creed, and to
every Article and Part of it, I sincerely, readily, and resolvedly say, I
believe.

I believe in God.
Forasmuch as the Eternal Power and Godhead is made known by all the things
that are Created, and the dependency of the Creatures proves, That there must
be an infinite Being that depends on nothing; whereas all things are made for
some End, and all their Operations are directed to it, though they cannot
understand the Reason why they are, and why they work; therefore both their
Creation and their Work must be guided by some Universal and Overruling
Wisdom* Seeing that God is not only revealed in his Creatures, but has
frequently declared his Deity by most infallible Predictions, and supernatural
Operations; therefore I freely acknowledge, clearly profess, and fully Believe
that there is a God.

Again, seeing that there is one Being that depends upon nothing, that does
suppose that all other Beings must depend upon it; seeing that the entire
Fountain of all Perfections cannot have a double Head, and the most perfect
Order of the World declares the supreme Dominion of one absolute Lord; upon
this Account I believe, that God is but one: And that there neither is, nor can
be any more. And thus I believe in God.

I believe in God the Father.
I believe that this one God is the Father of all things, of Men and Angels,
because they are his Off spring by Creation, and that he is in a more peculiar
manner, the Father of all those whom he regenerates by his Spirit, whom he
adopteth in his Son as Heirs and Coheirs with him; whom he crowns with the
Reward of an eternal Inheritance in the Heavens. But far above all this,
besides his general Offspring and peculiar People to whom he has given power
to become the Sons of God, I believe him in a more eminent manner, to be the
Father of one singular and proper Son, his own, his beloved, his only begotten
Son; whom he has not only begotten of the Blessed Virgin, by the coming of the
Holy Ghost, and the over-shadowing of his Power; not only sent with special
Authority, as the King of Israel; not only raised from the Dead, and made Heir
of all things in his House; but before, and in order to all this, has begotten
him from all eternity in the same Divinity and Majesty with Himself, whereby I
acknowledge him to be always a Father as much as always a God. And in this
Relation I believe, That as he is the Original Cause of all things, because
they were Created by him, so he is the Fountain of the Son begotten by him, and
of the Holy Ghost proceeding from him.

Almighty.
I believe, that this Father is not subject to the Infirmities of Age, and that
there is no weakness attending the Ancient of days; but on the contrary, I
believe that Omnipotency is part of the Being of the Godhead; and that thereby
he has not only power to work or do any thing, but Authority; and an eternal
Right, both of making what, when, and how he pleases, and of possessing
whatsoever he makes; and of using and disposing all things which he thus
possesses. I believe that this power is most absolute, because he that has it,
depends upon none, neither is he to give any account for the Use and Exercise
of it; that it is infinite for largeness, as being a power over all things,
without exception; that it is full and perfect, as being over every thing
without limitation; to be Eternal, as having neither Beginning nor End.

Maker of Heaven and Earth.
I believe, that both Heaven and Earth, and all things contained in them, have
not their Being of themselves, but were made in the beginning; that there was
nothing at first but God, who produced most part of this World out of nothing,
and the rest out of that which was formerly made out of nothing. This I believe
was done by the most free and voluntary Act of the Will of God, of which no
Reason or Motive can be given, but his Goodness. And that this was done by the
determination of his Will, at what time he pleased, probably within an hundred
and thirty Generations of Men, most certainly within six or seven thousand
years. I acknowledge this God, who is the Creator of the World, to be the same
God, who is the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. And thus I Believe in God the
Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

Article II. And in Jesus Christ his only Son, our Lord.
I Believe that there was, and is a Man, whose Name by the Ministry of an
Angel, was Called Jesus. I believe this Jesus to be the Savior of the World,
in that he has revealed to the Sons of Men, the only way for the Salvation of
their Souls, and has wrought out this Salvation for them, by his own Blood,
obtaining Remission for Sinners, making Reconciliation for his Enemies, paying
the price of Redemption for Captives, and that he shall at last actually confer
this salvation which he has revealed and procured, upon all those that
unfeignedly and steadfastly believe in him. I acknowledge, that there is no
other way to Heaven, than this which he has shown us; that there is no other
means that can procure it for us, but his blood; and that there is no other
person that shall confer it on us, but himself.

And in Jesus Christ.
I believe, that there was a man promised by God, foretold of the Prophets to
be the Messiah, the Redeemer of Israel, and the expectation of the Nations. I
believe that this Messiah is already come; that the Man born in the days of
Herod, of the Virgin Mary, who by an Angel from Heaven was Called Jesus, is
that true Messiah, so long, and so often promised; that as he was the Messiah,
he was also the Christ, that is the Anointed of God; and that he was anointed
to three special Offices belonging to him, as the Mediator between God and Man;
that he was a Prophet revealing to us the whole Will of God for the Salvation
of man; that he was a Priest, and has given himself a Sacrifice for Sin, and
so has made an atonement for us; that he is a King set down at the Right hand
of God, far above all Principalities and Powers, whereby, when he has subdued
all our Enemies, he will confer actual, perfect, and eternal Happiness upon us.
I believe, that this Unction by which he became the true Messiah, was not
performed by any material Oil, but by the Spirit of God, which he received as
the Head, and conveyeth to his Members.

His only Son.
I believe, that Jesus Christ the Savior and Messiah is the true, proper, and
natural Son of God, begotten of the substance of the Father; which substance
cannot be multiplied or divided, and yet it is so totally communicated to the
Son, that he is of the same Being with the Father, God of God, Light of Light,
very God of very God. And as he is the Son of God, so he alone was begotten of
God by a proper and natural Generation; all God's other Sons which are said to
be begotten, being Sons only by Adoption.

Our Lord.
I believe, that Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, is the true
Jehovah, whose Being is of it self from all eternity, and on whom all other
things do depend; and therefore he has an absolute, supreme, and universal
Dominion over all things, as he is God; and is invested with all Power in
Heaven and Earth, as he is Man. That he has this Power, partly for the
completing our Redemption, and the Destruction of our Enemies, that this Power
is to continue to the end of all things, and then to be resigned to the Father:
That he has this Power also, partly because the Godhead and Manhood is united,
or it was due to him for suffering so obediently; and therefore this Power must
be eternal, because it belongs unto that Kingdom which shall have no end: And
though he is thus Lord of all things by right, of the first Creation, and
constant Preservation of them, yet he is more peculiarly the Lord of us, who by
Faith are Consecrated to his Service: For through the Work of our Redemption,
he becomes our Lord, both by the right of Conquest, and of Purchase; and by
making us the Sons of God, and providing heavenly Mansions for us, he acquires
a further Right to us, which Right, considering the Covenant we all make at our
Baptism to serve him, is at last completed, because we have bound our selves
there under a voluntary Obligation to serve him: And thus I believe in Jesus
Christ his only Son, our Lord.

Article III. Who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, Born of the Uirgin Mary.
I Believe, that the only begotten Son of God, begotten by the Father before
all Worlds, very God of very God, was Conceived and Born, and so made Man,
taking to himself the humane Nature, consisting of a Soul and Body, and joining
it with the Divine Nature in the Unity of his Person: I believe, that the Word
was in this manner made Flesh, that he was really and truly Conceived in the
Womb of a Woman, but not Conceived as the Sons of Men are; not by Carnal
Copulation, not by the common way of humane Propagation, but by the singular,
powerful, invisible, immediate Operation of the Holy Ghost, whereby a Virgin
was, beyond the Law of Nature, able to Conceive; and that which was Conceived
in her, was originally and completely sanctified.

Born of the Uirgin Mary.
I believe, that there was a certain Woman known by the Name of Mary, espoused
unto Joseph of Nazareth, which before and after her Espousal, was a pure and
unspotted Virgin, and continuing in the same Virginity, did, by the immediate
Operation of the Holy Ghost, conceive within her Womb the only begotten Son of
God; and after the natural time of other Women, brought him forth as her
Firstborn Son, continuing still a most pure and immaculate Virgin; whereby the
Savior of the World was born of a Woman under the Law, without the least spot
of Original Corruption, that he might deliver us from the Guilt of Sin; born of
that Virgin which was of the House and Lineage of David, that he might fit upon
his Throne, and rule for evermore. And thus I believe, that Jesus Christ was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Uirgin Mory.

Article IV. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead, and Buried.
I Believe, that the only begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father, and of
the same Divine Nature with the Father, did, for the Redemption of Mankind,
really and truly suffer; not in his Divinity, for that could not suffer, but in
his Humanity, which in the days of his Humiliation, was subject unto our
Infirmities: That as he is a perfect Redeemer of the Whole Man, so he was a
complete Sufferer in the whole; in his Body by such grievous Infirmities, as
arise internally from humane Frailties, and by such Pains as are inflicted by
external Injuries; in his Soul, by fearful Apprehensions, by unknown Sorrows,
by Anguish unexpressible.

Under Pontius Pilate.
I believe, that the eternal Son of God did suffer for the sins of Men, after
the fifteenth Year of Tiberius the Roman Emperor, and before his Death, in the
time of Pontius Pilate, who was Tiberius's Deputy, Governor of Judea; who, to
please the Jews, did condemn him whom he had pronounced innocent, and delivered
him according to the Custom of that Empire; and in order to the fulfilling the
Prophecies, To dye a painful and shameful Death upon the Cross.

of such as do dye; and being he dyed in the similitude of a Sinner, his Soul
went to the place where the Souls of Men are kept, who dye for their sins, and
so did wholly undergo the Law of Death: But because there was no sin in him,
and he had fully satisfied for the sins of others, which he took upon him,
therefore as God suffered not his Holy One to see Corruption, so he left not
his Soul in Hell; and thereby gave sufficient security to all those who belong
to Christ, that they should never come under the Power of Satan, nor suffer in
the Flames prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

He rose again.
I believe, that the Eternal Son of God, who was Crucified, and dyed for our
sins, did not long continue in the State of Death, but by his infinite power,
did revive and raise himself, by re-uniting the same Soul which was separated
to the same Body which was buried, and so rose the same Man: And this he did
the third day from his death; so that dying on Friday, the sixth day of the
Week, the day of the Preparation of the Sabbath, and resting in the Grave on
the Sabbath day, on the Morning of the first day of the Week he returned to
life again, and thereby did consecrate the first day of the Week to be
religiously kept holy until his coming again. And thus I believe, that Jesus
Christ descended into Hell, and rose again the third day from the Dead.

Article VI. He ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, the
Father Almighty.
I Believe, that the only begotten and eternal Son of GOD, after he rose from
the Dead, did, with the same Soul and Body with which he rose, by a true and
local Translation convey himself from the Earth, on which he lived, through all
the Regions of the Air, through all the Celestial Orbs, until he came into the
Heaven of Heavens, the most glorious presence of the Majesty of God.

And sits on the right hand of God, the Father Almighty.
I believe, that Jesus Christ ascending into the highest Heavens, after all the
Troubles and Sufferings he endured here for our Redemption, did there rest in
everlasting Happiness: He, who upon earth had not where to lay his Head, did
take up a perpetual Habitation there, and sit down upon the Throne as a Judge,
and as a King, according to his Office of Mediator, unto the end of the World;
which Right Hand of God, the Father Almighty, signifies his Omnipotent Power,
whereby he is able to do all things without Contradiction. And thus I believe
in Jesus Christ, who ascended into Heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God, the Father Almighty.

Article VII. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead.
I Believe, that the only begotten and eternal Son of God, in that humane
Nature, in which he dyed, and rose again, and ascended into Heaven, shall
certainly come from the same Heaven, into which he ascended, and at his coming,
shall gather together all those which shall be then alive, and all which ever
lived, and shall be before that day, dead: When causing all to stand before his
Judgment Seat, he shall judge them according to their Works done in the Flesh;
and passing the Sentence of Condemnation upon all the Reprobates, he shall
deliver them to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels; and pronouncing the
Sentence of Absolution upon all the Elect, he shall translate them into his
Glorious Kingdom, of which there shall be no end: And thus I believe in Jesus
Christ who shall judge the Quick and the Dead.

Article VIII. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
I Believe, that besides all others whatsoever, to whom the Name of Spirit, is,
or may be given, there is one particular and peculiar Spirit, who is truly and
properly a Person, of a true, real, and personal Subsistence, not a Created,
but an Uncreated Person, and is therefore the true and one eternal God: That
though he be God, yet he is not the Father, nor the Son, but the Spirit of the
Father and the Son, the third Person in the Blessed Trinity, proceeding from
the Father and the Son: I believe that infinite and eternal Spirit to be not
only of all perfect and infallible Holiness in himself; but also to be the
immediate Cause of all Holiness in us, revealing the pure and undefiled Will of
God, inspiring the Blessed Apostles, and enabling them to lay the Foundation,
and by a perpetual succession to continue the Edification of the Church,
illuminating the Understandings of particular Persons, rectifying their Wills
and Affections, renewing their Corrupt Natures, uniting their Persons unto
Christ, assuring them of the Adoption of Sons, leading them in their Actions,
directing them in their Devotions, by all ways and means, purifying, and
sanctifying their Souls and Bodies to be fully and eternally accepted in the
sight of God. This is the eternal Spirit of God, and must consequently be Holy:
And thus I believe in the Holy Ghost.

Article IX. The Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
I Believe, that Christ, by the preaching of the Apostles, did gather unto
himself a Church, consisting of thousands of believing Persons, and numerous
Congregations, to which he daily added such as should be saved, and will
successively and daily add unto the same unto the end of the World; so that by
the Virtue of his all-sufficient Promise, I believe, that there was, has been
hitherto, and now is, and hereafter shall be, so long as the Sun and Moon
endure, a Church of Christ, one and the same. This Church I believe to be Holy
in general, in respect of the Author, the End, the Institution, and
Administration of it; and in particular, in the Members, whom I acknowledge to
be really (though but imperfectly) holy here, and shall be perfectly holy
hereafter: I look upon this Church not like that of the Jews, limited to one
People, confined to one Nation; but by the Appointment and Command of Christ,
and by the Efficacy of his assisting Power, to be spread over all Nations, to
be extended to all places, to be propagated to all Ages, to contain in it all
Truths necessary to be known, to require absolute Obedience from all men, to
the Commands of Christ, and to furnish us with all Grace necessary to make our
Persons acceptable, and our Actions well pleasing in the sight of God.

The Communion of Saints.
I believe, that such Persons as are truly sanctified in the Church of Christ,
while they live among the Crooked Generations of men, and struggle with all the
Miseries of this World, have Fellowship with God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost, as dwelling with them, and taking up their Habitations in
them: That they partake of the Care and Kindness of the blessed Angels, who
take delight to minister for their benefit; that besides the external
Fellowship, which they have in the Word and Sacraments, with all the Members of
the Church, they have an intimate Union and Conjunction with all the Saints on
earth, as the living Members of Christ; nor is this Union separated by the
Death of any one, but as Christ, in whom they live, is the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the World; so they have Fellowship with all the Saints, which
from the Death of Abel, have ever departed in the true Faith, and Fear of God,
and now enjoy the presence of the Father, and follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes: And thus I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Article X. The Forgiveness of Sins.
I believe, that whereas every Sin is a Transgression of the Law of God, upon
every Transgression there remains a Guilt upon the Transgressor, and that Guilt
brings an eternal Punishment; so that all men being concluded under Sin, they
were all obliged to suffer the punishment of eternal Death; yet it pleased God
to give his Son, and his Son to give himself to be a surety for this Debt, and
to release us from these bonds: And because, without shedding of blood, there
is no Remission, he gave his Life a Sacrifice for sin; he laid it down as a
Ransom, even his precious Blood, as a Price by way of Compensation, and
Satisfaction to the Will and Justice of God; by which Propitiation, God, who
was by our sins offended, became reconciled, and being so, took off our
Obligation to eternal punishment, which is the Reward of our sins; and
appointed in the Church of Christ, the Sacrament of Baptism for the first
Remission, and Repentance for the constant Forgiveness of all following
Trespasses: And thus I believe the Forgiveness of Sins.

Article XI. The Resurrection of the Body.
I believe, that as it is appointed for all men once to die, so it is also
determined, that all men shall rise from Death, that the souls separated from
our bodies, are in the hand of God, and live, that the bodies dissolved into
dust, or scattered into ashes, shall be gathered together again in themselves,
and reunited to their souls; that the same Flesh which lived before, shall be
revived; that the very same bodies which shall fall, shall rise; that this
Resurrection shall be universal, no man excepted, no flesh left in the Grave;
that all the just shall be raised to a Resurrection of Life, and all the Unjust
to a Resurrection of Damnation; that this shall be performed at the last day,
when the Trump shall sound. And thus I believe the Resurrection of the Body.

Article XII. And the Life everlasting.
I believe, that the Unjust, after their Resurrection and Condemnation, shall
be tormented for their sins in Hell, and shall be kept there in Torments for
ever, so as the Justice of God shall never cease to inflict them, nor the
Persons of the wicked cease to be, and suffer them: And that the Just, after
their Resurrection and Absolution, shall, as the Blessed of the Father, obtain
the Inheritance; and as the Servants of God, enter into their Masters joy,
freed from all possibility of death, sin, and sorrow; filled with all
imaginable, nay, inconceivable fullness of Happiness, confirmed in an absolute
security of an eternal Enjoyment of this blessed state, and so they shall
continue with God, and the Lamb for evermore: And thus I believe the Life
everlasting.

The LORD'S PRAYER Expounded in a Prayer.
The Order of the Petitions.
O Father of Mercies, and God of all Pity, who by thy eternal and only begotten
Son, Jesus Christ, have taught us to pray; lend a gracious Ear to the Petitions
of (...)

Creatures; and grant, that thy Holy Name may be worshipped, and called upon by
all men in the earth.

Petition II. Thy Kingdom come.
BEat down the Power of Satan, and exalt thy Dominion amongst us; do you reign
more and more, by thy ruling and reforming Spirit, in the hearts of thy chosen
Servants, and let the number of Believers be daily increased; do thou rule and
govern the hearts of all the Members of thy Church Militant in this thy Kingdom
of Grace, that in the World to come, we may be Members of thy Church
Triumphant, and obtain an everlasting Inheritance in the Kingdom of Glory.

Petition III. Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
O Heavenly Father, direct and govern our Wills by thy holy Spirit, that we may
as voluntarily, as readily, and as cheerfully submit to thee, as thy Creatures
in Heaven do; and to that end, correct our untamed Affections, that they lead
us not astray, and drive away the darkness of our Understandings, that we may
see and know the true way wherein we ought to walk. Give us grace to forsake
our own perverse, and wicked Wills, and to frame our selves wholly according to
thy Good and Holy Will; lest in Prosperity, we grow proud and secure; or in
Adversity, murmur or despair.

Petition IV. Give us this day our daily Bread.
O Thou Giver and Preserver of all our lives, bestow upon us what thou see
convenient for our sustenance and support. Give thy Blessing also along with
it, or else, though we abound never so much, we confess it is not able to nourish
us. We are daily asking bread of thee, but, O Lord, we are not distrustful of
thy loving Providence, and therefore we ask but for this day, and depend upon
thee for the next: And we put up this Petition to thee in the Night also,
because our whole life time is but one day, wherein our frail bodies have
continual need of thy sustaining and upholding them. But as we implore thy Care
for our Bodies, much more ought we to do it for our Souls: Give us such a daily
Measure of continual Grace, as shall enable us to go through the Remainder of
our War-fare. Feed our Souls with the Graces of thy Holy Spirit, that our
Understandings may be enlightened, our Wills and Affections rectified, our
Corrupt Natures renewed, and our Souls and Bodies purified and sanctified, that
both our Souls and Bodies may be now and ever precious in thy sight.

Petition V. And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us.
FOrgive us our Trespasses, our spiritual Debts, which bind us to an eternal
Payment. Alas! The best of us is not able to satisfy thee, for the least
Trespass he commits; and therefore with bended knees, and prostrate souls, we
adore thy Goodness, in sending thy Son to cloth and cover us with Holiness,
Innocence, and Justice. And as we can never hope to obtain this, unless we also
freely and heartily forgive others, let this be the Token to know whether we
desire Forgiveness of thee or not; keep us from thinking that we deserve
Forgiveness at thy hands, for forgiving others; yet by being merciful, as thou
art merciful, lest this qualify us for thy Pardon.

Petition VI. And lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil.
DEliver us, O Lord, out of those snares which the Devil, our Lusts, or the
World have laid for us. Our Enemies, O Lord, are mighty, and vigilant, and the
best of us unable of himself to withstand the least of their Assaults: Leave us
not, O God of our strength, to be overcome by their Wiles, or Power; and suffer
us not to be tempted above what thy Grace does enable us to bear: And though in
those Temptations that thou permittest us to be led into, thy favor may seem
to be shadowed from us for a time; yet teach us so much spiritual Wisdom, as
not to despair of Deliverance, but to be satisfied, that thou have appointed
them their Limits, which they are not able to go beyond.

The Doxology, or giving of Glory to GOD.
For thine is the Kingdom.
FOr thou art he that rules and governs all the World, therefore we submit and
surrender up both our bodies and souls, to be wholly and solely at thy disposal.

The Power.
Thine is the Power, therefore we sue to thee, the Fountain of All Sufficiency
for Grace, Strength, and what ever else thou see convenient for us.

And the Glory.
And to thee we acknowledge the Thanks, the Honor, and the Glory due for what
we are, and for all that we have.

For ever and ever.
And thy Kingdom, Power, and Glory, is from everlasting, and shall continue,
world without end.

Amen.
So be it.

The Ten Commandments EXPOUNDED.
The Preface.
God spoke these Words, and said, I am the Lord thy God.
I Am here assured, that the Lord my God is the Author of all these Laws; and
that I may gather from their duration, from the trouble of my Conscience, when
I break them, and from the Purity of the Laws themselves. I am sure that he has
Power to require my Obedience to these Laws, and therefore I ought in duty to
observe them; that he has all Justice (as my Lord) to punish me if I transgress
them, and all Love (as my God) to reward me if I keep them; and therefore, the
Fear of his Anger, and the Hope of his sweet Love, should make me obedient to
them. O Lord, give me Grace and Strength to do what thou Command, and then
Command me what thou will.

The Order of the Precepts.
THese Laws are divided into Two Tables. One tells me my Duty toward God, and
the other my Duty toward Man. Now it is but Reason (as well as my Savior's
Precept) that my Duty toward God, should be set first. And as the first
Precept that relates to God, bids me worship him, and none but him, that made
me; so the first Precept that concerns Man, is to respect him first that begat
me. O God, without thy help, I am not able to keep the least Commandment,
therefore I am bound to pray unto thee by the first, that thou may give me
Spiritual Power and Abilities to observe and keep the rest.

Commandment I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.
THere is a God above, who influences all inferior Beings; and this God is but
one, and there is none besides him. And therefore I am bound, first,

To love him above all; and all other things that I love, must be beloved,
either as they come from him, or as they are helpful to us, in performing our
Duties to him. I may know whether I have this Love, or not, by examining
whether I endeavor to keep his Commandments, whether I love to frequent his
Ordinances, give Respect to his Ambassadors, pity and help Christ's distressed
Lambs, and desiring the Company of none but good Men.

Secondly, I am obliged by this Precept, to fear him above all, i. e. be afraid
to offend or anger him; and this Fear should be induced by his Precepts, his
Mercy, his Omniscience, his Omnipresence, and the Consideration of my own
Weakness, and God's infinite Protection: Such a Fear brings me Spiritual
Wisdom, Protection, Blessing from God, Joy in my Soul, Pardon of my Sins past,
and Grace to withstand Temptations, for the time to come.

Thirdly, I must pray to him, and to none but him; and this is a sign that I
love and fear him. My Savior has bid me serve him only, and God is jealous of
his Honor. I must not say, O Saint, pray to my Father to help me; but, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc. If I be a penitent Sinner, God has promised to
hear me; if I be impenitent, the Saints will not pray for me. To obtain God's
Ear, I need no Spokes-man, but a Devout Mind. He alone can help me; he will
help me when he sees fit; he knows the fittest time to help me in; my Prayers
do certainly reach his Ears; he knows what I want better than I do; he alone
corrects me, and I am sure he loves me.

Fourthly, I must acknowledge him to be the sole Governor of all things in the
World, and therefore I must trust in him. He gave me all that I have, and
therefore I ought to be thankful to him.

Lord have Mercy upon me, and incline my Heart to keep this Law.

Command. II. Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, etc.
HEre I am told, that no Images of God are to be made. I may make an Image or
Picture of my King, or my Friend, for a civil Use; but I must neither represent
God by any likeness, nor make any use of any Picture or Image, in my Devotion.
I must not bow down to any Image that I make; for the Gentiles could say, We do
not adore these Statues which are made of Brass, Iron, Wood or Stone, but by
them we do honor to the invisible Gods; yet the goodness of their intention
did not excuse the Wickedness of their Act: For, he is the Lord my God,
therefore I must serve him after the manner that he directs me. He is a jealous
God, and will not suffer the least part of his Honor to be given to any other
Being. He will punish me to the Third and Fourth Generation, A Finite Number is
used for an Infinite.
if I obey him not; and if my Posterity continue to do the same; and he has
Mercy in store for Thousands of such as love him, and keep his Commandments.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. III. Thou shall not take the Name, etc.
AFter God has confined my Heart to him alone, he here claims Reverence from my
Tongue. I must not take his Name in vain. His Essence, his Mysteries, his
Words, his Commands must be reverenced, not used foolishly, rashly,
fallaciously, or falsely; which implys that they may be used upon a Solemn and
Lawful Account. I must forbear all Blasphemies, Tavern-Oaths, Street-Oaths,
Shop-Oaths, and all Forged Oaths, and Cursing, and Banning. And if these be so
odious, to be sure, all deliberate Perjuries must be abundantly worse. If I
keep not up the Honor and Majesty of his Name, I shall not be held guiltless;
all my sins shall be imputed to me, and then I am sure to be damned; and
therefore, Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day, etc.
I Must publicly, as well as privately, give Worship and Honor to the Name of
my God; and that on all days, but particularly on the Sabbath day (because God
rested on that day, from the Creation of the World) that I may admire the
Handiwork of God, praise, and honor him first, and give my self that day
wholly to him, in hearing his Word, praying to, and praising him, and receiving
the Sacraments; these are the public Duties of the day; but there are also
Private ones to be done, such as Private Examination, and Prayer, calling our
Families to an Account, Meditating on what we have heard, Catechizing our
Servants or Children, Reading the Scriptures, and making Charitable Visits to
the Sick. If I thus call all to an Account once a Week, I may keep my Family
(as well as my own Soul) in Order; though indeed, my private Reckonings should
be oftener made. The Jews kept it Saturday, but I, on the Lords day, because
that day was honored with my Saviors Resurrection. If I have no Calling, I
have the more time to serve my God, and to do good to others; but if I have
one, God (who has a Right to all my time) has left me six days, in seven, to my
particular Employment; and yet any one of these six, may be sanctified to God
upon any particular Occasion; but the Sabbath is his, and therefore I must do
none but his Work on that day; none, but what Necessity compels, Charity
enforces, Piety commands, or Duty to God enjoins.

Lord have Mercy upon us, etc.

Command. V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, etc.
BEsides my Duty to God, I owe a Duty to man, whether I am a superior, equal,
or inferior. The Words, Father and Mother, include all superiors, as well a
Civil Parent (the King and his Magistrates, a Master, a Mistress, or an
Husband) and an Ecclesiastical Parent, (the Bishop and Ministers) as the
natural Parent that begat and bore thee: To all these I owe Reverence and
Obedience, Service and Maintenance, Love and Honor: And I must have from my
Natural Father, Maintenance, Education, Instruction, Correction and Blessing:
From my King, Justice, Reforming Abuses in Religion, Encouragement to the Good,
Punishment to the Bad: From my Husband, Love, Direction, Maintenance and
Protection: From my Master (or Mistress) Instruction, Food, Correction, Wages:
From my Minister, a good Example, and wholesome Administration of Spiritual
Things. I must observe to do all this, according to my station, that God may
give me long Life in the Land. And though there are many Good Persons who have
but short Lives, yet if this Precept be true for the most part, it is
sufficient: And he that is the soonest taken out of this Life, loses nothing,
because he is translated to a better.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. VI. Thou shall do no Murder.
GOD having secured my Superior, now he takes care of my Equals or Inferiors.
I am to kill no body; neither in mind by Anger, Envy, Hatred, Malice; nor in
deed, either by my Tongue, by Murdering their Reputation; or by my Hand,
directly striking them to death, or indirectly, by Usuring, Oppression, keeping
harmful Cattle, committing Bastard Children to such as will take no care of
them, or the like. But on the contrary, my mind must be peaceable, ready to
prevent Mischiefs, apt to forgive Wrongs, Long-suffering, etc.

The punishment due to the Breach of this Precept, is, Eye for Eye, Tooth for
Tooth.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. VII. Thou shall not Commit Adultery.
HEre I am Commanded to abstain from defiling my Neighbor's Wife; and indeed I
am forbidden all kind of Uncleanness, either in Act, or in Thought, the sins
whereof I shall not here reckon up. And here I am Commanded all Chastity,
Sobriety, and Temperance, least I fall into them. In short, I must banish all
Wanton Desires, use all sober Means to keep my Body Chaste; and whenever I am
tempted, never to give way to it.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. VIII. Thou shall not steal.
THis Precept secures every man's Goods to him; and therefore I must neither
keep, nor sue for that which is another Man's. I must not cheat, steal, rob, or
borrow with an intent never to pay again; but must be content with my own
Estate, suffer every one to enjoy his own quietly, pay every Man his full Due,
be just in my Dealings, frugal in my Expenses (lest I spend that which is not
mine) restore what I have unjustly gotten, and strive to do good with what I
have.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. IX. Thou shall not bear false Witness, etc.
ANd as I must not wrong my Neighbor in his Estate, so I am not to take away
his good Name, but in all things I must speak the Truth; nay, I am bound to
speak Charitably of my Neighbor; and when I am called to be a Witness before a
Lawful Magistrate, I cannot be too cautious of what I say. See the Third
Commandment for a Larger Exposition on this.

Lord have Mercy upon me, etc.

Command. X. Thou shall not Covet, etc.
THis Commandment strikes deeper than all the rest; it plucks up the Root, and
destroys the Seed of all Injustice and Uncharitableness. As I must not take, so
I must not desire any thing that is my Neighbor's; and if I never desire it, I
shall never wrong any Person. What was hinted at before, is now plainly spoken:
Here God reaches my Thoughts, and most inward Intentions. I must not covet nor
desire other Men's Goods: I must subdue all my Craving Lusts, and mortify all
the secret Inclinations of my perverse Nature.

Lord have Mercy upon me, and write all these thy Laws in my Heart, I most
humbly and heartily beseech thee.

DEVOTIONS.
A Prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Most Gracious and Loving Father, I the vilest of Sinners, do acknowledge
mine Unworthyness, either to ask any thing of thee, or to appear before thee.
For, O Lord, as I was conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, so ever
since, as thou have multiplied the number of my days, I have increased the
measure of my sins, that if thou enter into Judgment with me, to me belongs
nothing but Shame and Confusion, both of Body and Soul; yet, O Gracious Father,
since thy Loving Mercy has granted me so long time of Repentance, and given
thine only Son to suffer for me, and to reconcile me unto thee; Lord, grant
that I may feel the Comfort of the one, and enjoy the Benefit of the other. And
though my Heart is so hardened with a constant Custom of sinning, that I am not
able to think a good Thought, much less, to turn heartily and penitently unto
thee; yet I humbly beg of thee to lay before mine Eyes such a sight of my Sins,
and such a Prospect of thy Judgments, that I, loathing the former, and standing
in awe of the latter, may be drawn unto thy Son Jesus Christ, who has most
graciously promised* Rest and Refreshment to those that are heavy laden with
the Conscience and Burden of their Sins. O Lord, I beseech thee accept the
Death of thy Son, as sufficient Satisfaction for all my Sins; and grant, that I
may feel the same effectually working in me a Death unto Sin, killing in me the
Lusts of the Old Adam: Seal up in me the Truth of his Resurrection, by raising
me up to the Life of Righteousness, that I may give my Soul and Body an holy,
living, and acceptable Sacrifice unto thee, which is but a reasonable Service.
And because, that whilst I carry about me this earthly Tabernacle, this body of
Sin, my whole Life is nothing but a continual Rebellion against thee, I
earnestly implore such a Measure of thy good Spirit, as may work a Newness of
Life in me, and drive away the darkness of my Understanding, that I may see the
Way, wherein I ought to walk; subdue the Rebellion of my Will, that it may
submit to thy Commandments; and correct my untamed Affections, calling them
from Hunting after Vanities, to delight in thy Testimonies. Give me also an
Hope of thy Promises, a Love of thy Majesty, a tender Affection toward my
Brethren, a Care of my Duty, and what other Graces thou know needful for a
Member of Christ, that thus I may live in thy Fear, to the Honor and Glory of
thy Name, I may die in thy Favor, to the Comfort of my Conscience, and may
receive the end of my Faith, which is the Salvation of my Soul, through the
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Savior.

Furthermore, O Lord, I give thee most hearty Thanks for all thy Benefits
bestowed upon me from the beginning of my days to this present time; namely,
that thou have Elected me before the Foundations of the World were laid,
Created me after thine own Image and Similitude, Redeemed me by Jesus Christ's
Death and Resurrection, Sanctified me by the inward working of thy Holy Spirit,
and in due and convenient Time, called me to the Knowledge of my Election,
Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, by the Preaching of the Gospel. O
Lord, increase (...) day unto my years, so grant that in the same I may grow in
Grace and in the Knowledge of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In whose name,
for these, and for what ever else thy infinite Wisdom knows to be convenient
for me, I humbly Pray as he, in compassion of mine infirmities, has taught me
saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done, in Earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us: And
lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from Evil, for thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

A Prayer to be said in the Evening.
O Most Gracious and Loving Father, I the vilest of Sinners, do acknowledge
mine Unworthyness, either to ask any thing of thee, or to appear before thee.
For, O Lord, as I was conceived in Sin, and brought forth in Iniquity, so ever
since, as thou have multiplied the number of my days, I have increased the
measure of my sins, that if thou enter into Judgment with me, to me belongs
nothing but Shame and Confusion, both of Body and Soul; yet, O Gracious Father,
since thy Loving Mercy has granted me so long time of Repentance, and given
thine only Son to suffer for me, and to reconcile me unto thee; Lord, grant
that I may feel the Comfort of the one, and enjoy the Benefit of the other. And
though my Heart is so hardened with a constant Custom of sinning, that I am not
able to think a good Thought, much less, to turn heartily and penitently unto
thee; yet I humbly beg of thee to lay before mine Eyes such a sight of my Sins,
and such a Prospect of thy Judgments, that I, loathing the former, and standing
in awe of the latter, may be drawn unto thy Son Jesus Christ, who has most
graciously promised Rest and Refreshment to those that are heavy laden with the
Conscience and Burden of their Sins. O Lord, I beseech thee accept the Death of
thy Son, as sufficient Satisfaction for all my Sins; and grant, that I may feel
the same effectually working in me a Death unto Sin, killing in me the Lusts of
the Old Adam: Seal up in me the Truth of his Resurrection, by raising me up to
the Life of Righteousness, that I may give my Soul and Body an holy, living,
and acceptable Sacrifice unto thee, which is but a reasonable Service. And
because, that whilst I carry about me this earthly* Tabernacle, this body of
Sin, my whole Life is nothing but a continual Rebellion against thee, I
earnestly implore such a Measure of thy good Spirit, as may work a Newness of
Life in me, and drive away the darkness of my Understanding, that I may see the
Way, wherein I ought to walk; subdue the Rebellion of my Will, that it may
submit to thy Commandments; and correct my untamed Affections, calling them
from Hunting after Vanities, to delight in thy Testimonies. Give me also an
Hope of thy Promises, a Love of thy Majesty, a tender Affection toward my
Brethren, a Care of my Duty, and what other Graces thou know needful for a
Member of Christ, that thus I may live in thy Fear, to the Honor and Glory of
thy Name, I may die in thy Favor, to the Comfort of my Conscience, and may
receive the end of my Faith, which is the Salvation of my Soul, through the
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ, my only Lord and Savior.

Furthermore, O Lord, I give thee most hearty Thanks for all thy Benefits
bestowed upon me from the beginning of my days to this present time; namely,
that thou have Elected me before the Foundations of the World were laid,
Created me after thine own Image and Similitude, Redeemed me by Jesus Christ's
Death and Resurrection, Sanctified me by the inward working of thy Holy Spirit,
and in due and convenient Time, called me to the Knowledge of my Election,
Creation, Redemption and Sanctification, by the Preaching of the Gospel. O
Lord, increase these Blessings in me, and my Thankfulness for them, that I may
grow from Virtue to Virtue, from Strength to Strength, from Faith to Faith,
till I come to that perfect Age that thou have appointed me to grow in Christ
Jesus. I thank thee also, O my God, for all the temporal Blessings which thou
have bestowed upon me; I have been cast upon thee ever since I was born, thou
art my Portion, and the lifter up of my head: I have none in Heaven but thee,
and there is none upon Earth that I desire, in comparison of thee: And now, O
Lord, pardon the weakness of my thankfulness, and grant that the meditation on
these, and all other thy Benefits, may draw me to a true and hearty Repentance:
Grant, that I seeing thee by so many, and so great Testimonies to be my most
dear and loving Father, may at length cease to be an obstinate and rebellious
Child.

And now (O God) having passed through the Works of this day, being that the
Frailties of my Flesh must needs have offended thy Majesty, and I had fallen
into most grievous sins, if thy Grace had not prevented me: I beseech thee, O
Lord, let not the Sun go down upon thy wrath, but as the darkness of the Night
covers the face of the Earth, so let my sins be hidden under the Veil of my
Savior's Flesh, and buried in his Death, that they never rise up again either
here to shame me, or hereafter to damn me: That my Soul and Conscience being
freed from the accusation of sin, may partake with my body in quiet rest. Let
thy Gracious Providence, O God, watch over me for my Defense this Night; and
make me remember that as I lay down my body to rest, so it shall be laid down
in the Grave to be consumed to Earth from whence it was taken; that Meditation
may drive from me all vain Dreams, all idle Fancies, and wicked Imaginations;
that I may enjoy thine Ordinance of sleep soberly and quietly for the
refreshing of my weak body; and that I may rise again in the Morning to serve
thee in the station wherein thou have placed me, walking always as becomes a
Child of Light, and as one that looks for the coming of my Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: In whose Name, for these Mercies and what ever else thou know
to be convenient for me, I humbly Pray as he in compassion of my infirmities,
has taught me saying,

Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer against the Temptation of the Flesh, to any particular Sin.
O GOD, by whose only Power it is that Man Triumphs over all the Adversaries of
his Salvation: I acknowledge the Frailty of my own Nature, that it is not only
prone to the pleasures of sin, but leads my Soul also captive to commit it,
though it be contrary to that Conscience or Spiritual Light that thou have given
me, my weakness being too easily overcome. I beseech thee (whose strength
appears in our infirmities) to show thy might in saving me from mine Enemies
who have pitched their Tents round about me. My Soul, O Lord, lies as among
Lions, hungring and thirsting after my Blood, who have whet their Teeth and
opened their Mouths to devour me. But thou, O God, who art of more Honor and
Might, awake for my defense: Make haste, O God, to help me, and hide me under
the shadow of thy Wings until that Tyranny be over-past. I am afraid of Satan,
that subtle and old Serpent, with whom the World and the Flesh have conspired
against me. They have enticed away my outward senses, and have won my corrupt
affections, so that they fight against me with my own weapons.

Whither then shall I flee for succor? The World is spread abroad like a Net
to ensnare me, the flesh is an Iron Chain to bind me, and my senses and
affections are confederate with sin to betray me; thus the Gates of Hell are
prevailed against me, and my sins have taken such hold upon me, that they say,
Surely there is no help for him in his God. Nevertheless, I have lifted up mine
Eyes unto the Hills, and will hope still in thy Salvation. Though the Serpent is
subtle, yet the Son of God is Wisdom: Though the World does entice me, yet
Heaven is my Inheritance: Though the Flesh strives, yet in the Cross of Christ I
shall overcome: Though mine Affections are unruly, yet his Death will tame them:
And though Hell rage against me, yet a steadfast and true Faith in Christ Jesus
shall Triumph over it. Vouchsafe, O God, that Faith unto thy Servant, that I
may be enabled by the fellowship of his Death and Resurrection to Crucify the
old Man and Mortify the whole body of sin. Make me strong, O God, in the Power
of his Might, that all the days of my Life I may be defended from all
adversities, and (in the evil day, the day of my death) strengthened in the
inner Man: That having finished my course, I may (with those that have overcome
through the Blood of the Lamb) arrive at those Blessed Mansions that thou have
prepared for all those that fight the good fight of Faith. Grant that in the
hopes of that, I may victoriously fight under my Savior's Banner, against all
the assaults of Sin, the World, and the Devil. Hear me, O Lord, in these my
requests for Jesus Christ his sake, in whose Name and Words, I further Pray as
he has taught me saying,

Our Father which art, etc.

A Prayer to be said in time of Sickness.
O Most Gracious and Merciful Father, thou Lord of Life and Death; in whose
hands is the power of Sickness and Health; Thou who woundest and healest whom
thou will. Unto thee, O God, I commit my self, beseeching thee for thy love in
Christ Jesus, to be merciful unto me: O my God, I confess that I have many ways
offended thee, and provoked thy wrath and indignation against me; but as I have
been disobedient, so now I return Penitent, and heartily Submissive. Remember,
O Lord, that I am but dust; and let not thy Spirit strive with me, seeing thou
have promised that at what time soever a sinner does Repent from the bottom of
his heart he shall live and not die: Fulfill this Gracious word unto thy
servant, that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice. My Flesh, O Lord,
dries up, my Strength fails me, and my Life draws near to an end; in all
this thou art Just in chastiseing my disobedience, and Merciful in not
suffering me to run on any longer in the course of my sins; and without such
Fatherly admonitions, how prone are we to forget thee! O Lord I am comforted
when I remember that thou love every Son whom thou Chastenest, and scourgest
every Son whom thou do receive; that when we receive correction, God deals
with us as with sons, and if we be without it (whereof all are partakers) then
we are bastards and not sons: Lord I believe all this, help thou mine unbelief;
I see that Job, Daniel, Hezekiah, and all thy holy Children have drunk of the
cup; that thou have made their bed easy in their sickness, and delivered their
Souls out of trouble: I therefore hope, that as I am made partaker of their
sufferings, I shall also be a partaker of their Comfort and Refreshing. O Lord,
let the Meditation of these and such like examples be always present with me,
and make me firmly believe that I shall receive the like deliverance as they
did. Add unto that Faith Patience, that I may quietly undergo whatever thy
hand shall lay upon me, and may receive this thy Fatherly chastisement with
thanksgiving, knowing that though this outward man perish, yet the inward man
shall be in the hands of its most faithful Creator. O Lord the Spirit is
willing to be dissolved and to be with Christ, but the flesh is weak; pardon
the weakness of my flesh, and forgive the infirmities of my froward Nature,
which looks back to the world and is loath to be separated, but fills me with
impatience and murmuring: Strengthen me with Faith, which is the Victory
whereby I shall overcome the world; strengthen me with Patience, wherein thy
children possess their Souls; strengthen me with Hope, which is the true and
firm Anchor of the Soul; and strengthen me by thy Comfortable Promises in
Christ Jesus my Lord and Savior, that thus I may wait for the Issue of thy
Gracious Providence; that if I live, I may live to thy Glory; if I die, I may
die in thy Favor; receive the end of my Hope, Patience, and Faith, which is
the Salvation of my Soul in thy Everlasting Kingdom of Glory, through Jesus
Christ my only Savior and Redeemer, in whose Name and Words I conclude these
my weak Prayers, for whatever thou see convenient for me, saying,

Our Father which art, etc.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
AS Man is subject to many alterations and changes in his Actions, so he has
need of different forms of Devotion suitable to every Case that he shall happen
to be in; but because I will not swell this little Book, beyond the reach of
the poor man's pocket (for whose use I design it) therefore I direct thee to
the Prophet David, a Person who had variety of Turns in his Life, and has
expressed himself to God in such Excellent and Proper Words, as nothing but the
Spirit of God could inspire into his mind. Read therefore these following
Psalms frequently over, and thou will the more readily know which of them best
suit thy present Circumstances.

Psalms of Prayer against Spiritual and Temperal Enemies, are the 3. 5. 6. 12.
13. 17. 21. 31. 35. 38. 44. 51. 64. 69. 70. 74. 77. 79. 84. 86. 88. 90. 130.
139. 140. 141. 142. 145.

Psalms of Thanksgiving for Deliverance from them, are the 8. 9. 30. 66. 67.
75. 81. 92. 96. 98. 100. 103. 106. 113. 116. 117. 124. 138. 144. 145. 146. 147.
148. 149. 150.

Psalms of Comfort in Trouble, are the 11. 27. 37. 40. 42. 46. 56. 63. 73. 85.
93. 94. 102. 107. 118.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Books Printed for Robert Clavell.
THE Reflections of the Reverend and Learned Mounsieur Jurieu, upon the Strange
and Miraculous Ecstasies of Isabel Vincent the Shepherdess of Saou in Dauphine;
to which is added a Letter of a Gentleman in Dauphine, containing the
Discourses and Prophecies of the Shepherdess. The Golden Rule, or the Royal Law
of Equity Explained, by the Reverend Dr. Goodman. Advice to a young Gentleman
for his more safe and profitable Conduct in three great Instances; of Study,
Moral Deportment, and Religion; by a true Son of the Church of England.

