THE LAST CONFLICTS and DEATH OF Mr THOMAS PEACOCK, Batchelour of Divinity, and
fellow of Brasen-nose College in Oxford:

Published by E.B. from the Copy of that famous Divine, Mr Robert Bolton, late
Minister of Broughton in Northhampton shire.

LONDON, Printed by George Miller dwelling in Blackfriars. 1646.

THE PREFACE TO the READER.
Christian Reader,
I Had not performed a trust, had not I published this ensuing Narrative; and I
had not paid a debt which I do and shall ever owe to the Public, had not I
made it common. Mr Bolton (a man of precious memory, and famous in his
generation) desired me upon his deathbed, to publish such of his papers as I
thought fit for the Press, which I have already done. This copy being found
amongst them, (though penned by another hand) I durst not withhold, being to my
knowledge intended by him for the press, in memory of his familiar friend, and
spiritual father, Mr Thomas Peacock; who was a very Godly Minister of Christ,
and of rare example for humility and holiness of life; for a Religious care in
educating his scholars, and for exceeding charity to the bodies and souls of
poor distressed Christians. And yet this godly man, that for piety had in him
the root of an Oak, when God cast him upon his bed of sickness, and suffered
Satan to winnow him, he was no more in his hands then a leaf tossed too and fro
with the wind. Gods dealings with him in these his last conflicts, are of
singular use in these present times, in which the ends of the world, and the
dreggs of schism and sin are come upon us at once.

First, for caution to the true servants of God, to take heed of small sins;
for from the lesser sins and infirmities of Mr Peacock, the Devil did thence
take a rise to cast him into the most bitter spiritual desertion that we shall
lightly read of: under which he had sunk, had not God wonderfully pat to his
hand, by making the issue of his afflictions more glorious and comfortable,
then the combat was grievous and terrible. It was a memorable saying of
Francis Spira, which he spoke to his mournful children and friends, beholding
that sad spectacle of his final despair, earnestly wishing them to take heed
of committing the smallest sins against conscience; By this means, says he,
I fell into greater sins, till I came to deny the Gospel of Christ, and after
that to renounce it in writing, and deliberately to subscribe to it with my
hand, though (says he) I heard a voice in my conscience telling me, Spira, do
not subscribe it; after which I thought I heard the voice of Christ whom I
denied before men, to pronounce the sentence of death upon my soul, and to
exclude me from salvation. And thus he dyed.

Secondly, for confutation of sundry sorts in Religion, in these unhappy days
of Civil war, as naturally producing them as mud and filth do toads and
vermin. Some there are that quite abrogate the Law, which Christ came to
fulfill, and so make the gate of Heaven wider then ever our Savior made it, by
admitting lawless persons into it. Holy Bradford was of another mind, who was
wont to say, that the gate of Heaven was so strait, that he which halted could
not enter into it; and the way so narrow, that he which reeled could not walk
in it. Others there are, when though they do not wholly destroy the law, yet
they cast it into a dead sleep, thinking it unlawful in the children of God to
be sorry, or to mourn for sin, contrary to the Doctoine of the primitive
Fathers, teaching this lesson, Semper doleat paeniten^; and de dolor gaudeat;
Let the penitent person always mourn, and rejoice in that mourning; agreeing
with the rule of our Savior, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be
comforted.

Nay, I lately heard it not without horror; that some men, in outward
appearance of great sanctity, do hold an opinion, that it is a fault in godly
men to pray for pardon of sin, (all sins being pardoned in Christ before they
pray) contrary to the prayer of our Savior, Forgive us our trespasses. Neither
Mr Peacock, nor any of those godly Divines that came to comfort him, knew this
kind of Doctrine; neither we, nor the Churches of God, till within these few
late unhappy days.

What will become of our reformed Religion, streaming down to us in the blood
of so many Martyrs, if God by a miracle of mercy should not shorten these our
miserable days? For whiles some are taking from us the Ten Commandments,
others, the Lords Prayer, there is scarce any thing left us of Christianity but
our Creed, and how long we shall enjoy this, the Lord in Heaven knows. For so
long as the civil sword of war devoures so much Protestants blood from
without, and a worse civil war of sin and separation, destroys so many
Protestant souls from within, we may justly fear that we shall either want
sound Orthodox Protestants to maintain it; or we shall want a Creed for them to
maintain.

I shall, for conclusion, desire that Reader into whose hands this ensuing
discourse shall fall, to observe three things concerning Mr Peacock, a man whom
I well knew, and bless God that ever I knew him.

1. That the sorest and sharpest afflictions do very often befall the dearest
and choicest servants of God: I mean, not outward and temporal afflictions,
common to good and bad: but inward and spiritual afflictions, and the heaviest
of these spiritual desertions, whereby God withdrawes his glorious countenance
from his children: and Satan in liew thereof, shows them his ugly visage,
thereby convincing a secure world. That it is no easy matter to go to Heaven,
and that the safest and surest way to it, is to sail by the gates of Hell. If
the righteous can scarcely be saved (says the Apostle) where shall the wicked
and sinner appear? 2. That the deepest humiliations of Gods children, do
usually determine in the highest consolations. And hereby the wicked, who like
ravening wolves hunt after such opportunities, do miss of their prey, and
return ashamed when they consider what end God has made. And thus it fell out
with Mr Peacock here. 3. Lastly, Though a spiritual desertion be the highest
affliction that befalls Gods child; yet it discovers in him the greatest
sincerity of an upright heart; For at such a time he is so far from hiding
his sins, that he cares not what shame he puts upon himself, so God may have
glory. For in a spiritual desertion, though the soul of a Christian be
extremely distressed through the terror of sin; yet at the same time has it
a true touch of grace, though not of the comforts of it: like iron touched with
the Lodestone, it stands directly Northward, though with much trembling: So
does the soul of a Christian stand directly Heavenward in this hellish agony:
and the absence of God and of his consolations, is the cause of those bitter
convulsion-fits in the soul. And as soon as ever the comforts of grace shine
upon it, those former tremblings of heart for grief, are presently changed into
leapings for joy; just as the same wrinkles of the face, which serve for crying
when the heart is grieved, serve for laughter when it is filled with joy. This
was the case of Mr Peacock, in this manner he grieved, in this manner he
rejoiced, and this happy issue God made of his bitter afflictions. So that
amidst the numerous and various afflictions of Gods dear Saints and Children,
this conclusion of the Prophet David remains sure and firm, Mark the upright
man, and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace. So I rest,
Thine in the Lord E.B.


Mr PEACOKS Visitation.
MAster Peacock, the servant of God, in the beginning of his visitation, for
the space of two weeks and four days, was full of most Heavenly consolations;
showing by sweet meditations, and gracious ejaculations, the entertainment he
found with his God in his sickness, with whom he so much desired to be
acquainted in his health. We are (says one coming to visit him) miserable
comforters: Nay (says he) Ye are good, for this is the privilege even of Gods
children, that their very presence affords comfort. Sometimes he craved pardon
for his actions, and for the circumstances by them badly observed: otherwhile
he desired to have some matter given him to meditate upon. Finally he said, his
hope was firmly settled on the rock Christ Jesus. He hoped that the Lord would
give him a place, though it were in the lowest room of his Saints. And he
thanked God he had no trouble of conscience, the Lord did not suffer Satan to
vex him; In so much that some seeing his great comfort, feared left he would be
overtaken with sorrow before his death: he much rejoiced that the Lord had so
disposed of him, that he had seen his friends in the Country. Here first was
his yielding unto death suspected, and his hoped recovery doubted. Calling some
of his friends aside, I thought (says he) I had been in a good estate, but I
see it now far otherwise: For these things my conscience lays against me:
First, I brought up my scholars in Gluttony, letting the^ eat their fill of
meat, when they mealed with me. This some endeavored to pull out, by putting
into his mind, 1. The preventing of many inconveniences. 2. His well known
moderation. 3. The great care he took for good conference, when they were at
table with him. But (says he) while I was talking, they did undo themselves.
And further, I did unadvisedly expound places of Scripture at the table many
times; and for these I feel now a Hell in my conscience. Again, I have procured
my own death, by often eating like a beast, when I came jostling up and down to
my friends in the Country; And now I see before my face those dishes of meat
wherewith I clogged my stomach. Well (says one to him) If all the things you
accuse your self of were undone, would you do them again? Nay: why then doubt
not but a Reprobate would desire to be saved, if a desire would serve the
turn: indeed he may have a desire, but of bare willingness, not with an intent
and purpose in using of the means. Another time a worthy friend of his asking
him how he did: he cried out, Sin, Sin, Sin: What does any lie on your
conscience? Yea. What? My unconsideratenes, I did eat too much of such meat to
breakfast such a morning: my self being an eye-witnes of his great abstinence,
could not choose but admire the tenderness of his self-accusing conscience. Well
(said he) God be thanked there is no greater. As we must not extenuate our
sins, so neither must we too much aggravate our sin. Let drunkards and
gluttons have those terrible horrors. I thank God I never continued in any
known sin against my conscience. He was willing that he should pray with him:
kneeling down he said, he was then incapable of prayers. Afterward he kneeled
down of his own accord: shortly after he broke out into such speeches, A
damnable, wretched etc. these are nor your words (says one) you cannot deny
but you have had good experience of Gods mercies. I cannot. Then be comforted,
for whom he loves once, he loves to the end. Yet Satan took such advantage of
his infirmities, that though he could find some comfort, yet no particular
assurance. You have lived profitably (said one) I have endeavored. You are now
humbled, and the Lord looks that you should ask mercy. M. Dod was sent for, who
being come, they were private awhile, afterward we coming in to them, M. Dod
put him in mind of Gods kindenes: whereof he showed to him four parts. 1. To
take small things in good part. 2. To pass by infirmities. 3. To be easily
entreated. 4. To be entreated for the greatest.

Sir, there is now in you the image of the old Adam, sin and sorrow: there
shall be in you the image of the new, holiness and happiness. The life to come
may be set out by three things. 1. The estate of itself, happiness, holiness, and
glory. 2. By the the company, every one shall love you better then any one,
even the best, can love you here. 3. The place.

There are three differences between the afflictions of the good and of the
bad. 1. In the cause, for they come to the good for Gods love. 2. In the
measure, as far as they need, and are able to bear. 3. In the end, for their
good.

Of those former doubts we afterward heard not a word from him. Upon the
Sabbath Day he desired to be alone: after noon he was fearfully troubled. In
his countenance appeared evident tokens of a sorrowful mind, born up with a
weak body; his spirit was wounded, Satan had foiled him. Those his terrible
wrestlings with tentations, gripes of conscience, and restles terrors, none
can understand, (much less express) but he which felt them. Satan had
winnowed him, and showed him nothing but chafe. His tender conscience was
goared with the fiery darts of the Devil, pointed with the edge of sin, and
sense of Gods heavy wrath. As through a false glass, the dazzled eye of his
astonished and amazed soul, could see nothing but hideously appearing sin,
and the terrible image of death and damnation. He had drunk deeply of the cup
of the dreggs of Hell. His adversary had represented unto him his once most
gracious God, now as a most severe Judge displeased, angry, and chiding with
him; yea yielding him up into his claws: that so by this deadly stratagem, he
might take from him all hope of help that way, and so not only stop the
sensible flowing of Gods grace, and cut the chains of Gods love, whereby he had
tied him, and would draw him after him, but finally break his Christian heart.
Oh that you had seen, or that we that were present had had eyes to have seen
his seeming forlone soul. What with barkings of conscience, and with the too
heavy burden of sin, waves of fearful thoughts, blustering blasts, and
surging storms of Gods heavy displeasure, he was tossed, turmoyled, dashed
against the rocks of despair, and more then in danger of his souls shipwreck:
happy were we if neither through frowardnes, nor blindenes of judgment, we did
inconsiderately pass by, or profanely deride Gods judgments, by thinking
that they either happen casually, or by forgetting of them suddenly. If we
could but rightly discern it, we should find nothing more profitable, then to
have the Image of this gracious (though now afflicted) soul in our hearts.
Hereby we may see that the righteous being scarcely saved, there is no place
for the wicked and ungodly to appear. And truly we may think that God sent it
even for our sake, that we (with whom it is too usual to dally with the Lord)
might know that it is a fearful thing to fall into his hands. Our faith is
then tried in earnest, when as the Lord hides his face from us. For if we love
God above all things, it cannot be but upon the loss of the relish of his
favor, or taste of his displeasure, our souls should be in bitterness, pricked,
tormented, wounded, thrust through, yea, and swallowed up with desolation. It is
a wonder of the world, how we carefully will seek physic, use diet, by any
means to avoid a bodily pang, and how careless we are of the unsupportable fits
of the souls mortal sickness. It is not in our power to apprehend grace when we
will, and a harder matter is it then we can conceive, to lift up a poor soul
cast down with the sense of Gods wrath. If a violent passion may so far
transport the mind, what may we think of this restles trembling, when the soul
after long tossings, sees it self drowned, and wholly overwhelmed with the
deluge of sorrow, proceeding from the everlasting threats, and shame, and
confusion of face in the presence of the Almighty? Consider the body laden
with a burden, neither portable nor evitable; and thence gather the
stranglings of an overladen soul. Consider a man ready to fall from an high
Tower unto the Earth; and thence gather the estate of another falling from
Heaven to Hell with a spiritual ruin. Consider a child, when the mother
hides her face from it, and terrifieth it with a Bugboe; and herein take view
of the estate of a poor Christian (whose chiefest happiness having therein
consisted, (to wit) in being joined, and united to his Heavenly Father, having
now lost his presence, or being affrighted with the Devil, as if he were ready
to lay hands on him. Consider the estate of a debtor, cast off by his best
Creditours: and gather that of a Christian being banker-out with his God.
Consider the estate of a man, once in favor, afterward adjudged to death by a
Prince, without hope of pardon or repriving: and gather that of a Christian,
who after his citation and arraignment at the Tribunal seat of God, stands
condemned, and is wholly deprived of obtaining pardon, and delivered into the
hands of the Devil. The Lord needs not to seek wild beasts to punish us, or
such like cruel executioners of his wrath to torment us, he may find enough
within us; all the furyes and Devils cannot invent a more grievous torment: One
by it apprehended needs not more accusers or tormentours. His many
never-thoughts of sin (as if he stirred a nest of wasps) come buzzing about
his ears, and as a man indebted once laid hold of, make him faster daily: his
loving friends may stand by the prison and call him, but he being fast
fettered, cannot stir forth. You shall see him now in his purgatory, (not
that papisticall sinne-satisfying fiction, the Popes jayle) but that hot fiery
furnace wherein the Lord tries his metal, whether it be good or reprobate.
And suppose that he had died at the worst (as in the Lords justice he might, to
the hardening of those that will not be softened) As no man should rather judge
him by the inch of his death, then the length of his life; so I for my part
neither did in him, nor do in my self so much fear his death, as I did, and
do desire his life. You may observe the courses which God takes in visiting
his children to be diverse: some are comfortable and without any great admixture
of discomfort: others heavy, but without horror: others horrible, yet all of
them are in the issue gracious. But to leave any further digression, and to
come again to the matter in hand.

When one came unto him, he brake out into these words, Oh how woeful and
miserable is my estate, that thus must converse with hel-hounds! He being with
these words strangely moved, went to call some of his best able friends to
comfort him. To them he complained, that the Lord had cursed him. Being
demanded how he knew it: he answered, Why! the event shows it. It being
replied, Then such and such were cursed* he answered, I have no grace. How do
those then? they once had none. I was a foolish glorious Hypocrite; It is
against the course of Gods proceeding to save me, he has otherwise decreed, he
cannot. Put your trust in God. I cannot, no more then an horse. Do you desire
to believe? No more theen a post, then an horsshoe. I know you cannot deny but
that you have sought Gods glory. Not sincerely. There is a secret mixture of
pride and hypocrisy, even in the best. I have no more sense of grace then these
curtains, then a goose, then that block. Let the testimony of your life past
comfort you, especially in the calling of a Tutour. I did the business thereof
perfunctorily, when I handled hard Authors, I came often unprepared, and read
shamefully. Be of good courage, and the Lord will comfort your heart. 'It is
ended, there is no such matter. Why do you think so? You shall see the event,
God will yet bring it to pass. Tush, tush, trifles. What do you think of your
former Doctrine? Very good. Let it comfort you. It cannot. You desire it could.
If it might. There is nothing unpossible to God. Which stands with his decree:
Oh, oh, miserable, and woeful, the burden of my sin lies heavy upon me: I
doubt it will break my heart. Behold your comforts. Nothing to me, I pray you
hold your peace, do not trouble your self idly, you vex me, your words are as
daggers to my heart. Another time some of the younger sort said to him,
Remember, Sir, the good counsels that you have given us heretofore. Those were
ordinary. You may see many others in the like estate. Not such as mine. See
David. What do you speak to me of David? Good Sir, endeavor to settle your
mind; Yes, to play with hell hounds. Will you pray? I cannot. You were wont
heretofore. Yes, by a custom and vain glory. Suffer us to pray for you. Take
not the name of God in vain, by praying for a Reprobate. Here you may see the
glory of God preferred before his own salvation, rather willing to have the
means of his salvation neglected, then the Lord dishonored. Suffer us to pray
for our selves. Look to it, you would now show your faculty in praying. Can you
say, Amen? No, but in a certain gerall fashion. One prayed, and in the mean
time he rested most quietly. I pray you (says he, when prayer was ended) Go
hence to bed, do not trouble your selves in vain. Let not the Devil delude
you, abusing your mind and tongue, I know you speak not these words. I wonder
that intelligent Scholars should speak thus. We are persuaded you are in as
good estate as our selves. Look how it is with your selves in truth. One that
watched with him, asked him, Sir, how can you discern this change by the
absence of God, if you never enjoyed his presence? I thought I had it once, but
now I see it is far otherwise. But God deals with you, as he dealt with the
Church, Isa. 54.7. He forsook it a while, and hid his face from it, but he
returned to it again, and so (no doubt) the case stands with you. Never, add
not affliction to the afflicted; Oh me wretch! groaning pitifully. Hope no
worse of your self, then we do of you. All of us have seen clearly which way
your carriage was still sent, after the spirit: and we are assured that you
will come to the spirit, howsoever you seem to have lost your way. To all
particulars he would answer, I desire grace generally, I did good outwardly,
all hypocritically. One asked him, Do you love such an one? his most dear, and
worthy to be dear friend. Yes. Why? For his goodness. Why then you are Gods
child, for by this we know we are translated from death to life, because we
own the brethren. Many like forcible proofs he would shift off with his former
evasions, and afterward became more wary against himself, either loath to grant
any thing, or granting it staggeringly, or, what then? fearing lest he should
be pressed, he wished, that some were put in mind, 1. Of their great care for
building, and too small care for Scholars in them. 2. Their giving so long
leave of absence from the College, and desired amendment.

After noon came a worthy Governor of a College in our University, Dr Air
Provost of Queens College.
and requested him to be of good comfort, and to pluck up his spirit. I cannot.
Why can you not? Because I have no grace, no more then a Backstock. Why do you
think so? By this affliction. Do you desire grace? I cannot. (He spoke most
strongly) I can as well leap over the Church. But are you not sorry that you
cannot desire it? I cannot. Would you not be in Heaven? I would not. One
standing by, said, The Devil himself would, if he could. "By the way, you shall
have the opinion of a much respected Minister apposite hereto, which he gave in
private. A proud man, says he, will scorn to seek any good from his enemy: so
the Devils pride will not let him think himself beholding to God for Heaven, if
he might get it." You have (said one) the testimony of faith, you love the
Brethren. I did not. Do not you love us? No. This conclusion was tasteed on
him before, which now he ^^^fts off.
The Devil now sees he should be cast into straits, if you should grant this;
what is it that does most trouble you? I undertook too much upon me foolishly:
I had gotten a little Logic and Greek, and meanly instructed in the rules, did
set my self to read to Scholars; and afterward undertook other business, which
distracted my mind and body from them, I have destroyed a thousand souls. You
may see the falsehood of him that suggesteth this unto you: you never had a
thousand: he puts a false glass before you. The good effects of your pains
appears in many of your Scholars. Oh they were of themselves capable. Name one
in whom they do not? There is one. (pointing at a Master of Arts there
present) He justified his care of him, and gave thanks to God that ever he came
to him. It is not so, I did foolishly. You confess you did foolishly,
therefore not of malice. Again, consider what would have become of many of them
if you had not taken them. Better, far better. All in the College know the
contrary. But I feel it. It is false, believe not the Devil. It is too true.
When will you make amends? God will give you your hearts desire. Never. Are
you sorry that he will not? No, there is no grace in my heart: it is dead.
Such was David's case. What do you compare me with him? Behold Christ himself.
Nothing to me. God can make his death available. He cannot. He is omnipotent.
In me he cannnot, because it stands with his purpose. Whom God loves once, he
loves to the end. But he did never love me. You have tasted of his love. I
deceived my self in a certain vainglory: I exposed my head to many things,
outwardly all. You could say the Lords Prayer, and therein call him Father.
Hypocritically I was wont to enquire of Master Mason, what was meant by
Abba-father; rather in curiosity, then truly to be edified. God will give a
good issue. Never, I have no sense. We will pray with you. Do not dishonor
God. It is well that you will not have God dishonored: here he sticked,
saying, I pray trouble me not with distinctions. After came one, who with
vehement action of body, pressed and urged him to trust in God. I cannot (said
he) I cannot, he will not have me saved, his sentence is passed. Do you desire
to be saved? No. Do you desire to desire? No. Would you be damned? No. Look at
the sins of other men as great as yours, and yet they are saved. They were
good and godly, they found grace: here is the difference, my sins are
horrible: he repeated that toward his Scholars. All of us know you took pains.
Outwardly you did your best. No. I see now what it is, you strictly look back
to your own actions, as a Justiciary, who will none of Gods mercy, and now he
has justly met with you, your judgment is just. These words affected him
strangely: another willed him to look to it, it seemed near Popery. Do you
hope to be justified by your merits? I fear to be damned for my sins. The
other asked, whether he could say, Amen? No. Have you no tongue? What is that
to the purpose? Name Jesus, I cannot. If I had your tongue in my hand, I would
make you speak. Turning his speech to a friend present, Oh (says he) if you
did but feel my grief but an hour, you would have compassion. The other
replied, If you were in the fire you would wish to get out. I had rather be in
the fire then here. I will pray for you. Sin not. Let the fault be mine.

Although my purpose was barely to relate the passages of this gracious man's
visitation, and to refer to your spiritual eye what you could tracke and
find therein, yet let your gentle construction withhold from me the deserved
censure of bold blindness, in that now and then I point at some things which
your quick sight may sooner or better apprehend. The Devils malicious policy
was great toward him, in that he assaulted him most strongly in that, which
might and ought to have been his greatest comfort. Again, I saw that the
opinion of the Physician helps somewhat in bodily maladies or diseases, whereas
in that his estate, his soul remained as it were incapable of comfort from the
souls Physician. He much respected some few. He dolefully poured out his soul
in the bosom of a well willer, on this manner; I took upon me too proudly many
things, and being negligent, performed nothing: cursed be the day when I took
Scholars. If I had not taken them, I had been happy; with a great flourish, I
was stirring many ways, and in the mean space left the essence of my calling,
teaching Scholars. What, says the other, what shall I now do, when I see you
thus tossed? Well, for I was an Hypocrite, and now therefore there is no hope
of comfort for me in Gods presence: I have no sense of it. The sun is in the
firmament, though it may be hid in a cloud. This comparison agrees not to me.
What then would you counsel me to do? Abide within the bounds of your
calling: take not too much on you, and the Lord will bless you. Will it avail
me to hear sermons. Yes, if you mean to be saved. What good shall I reap
thence? Nothing from the bare hearing. Oh, this heavy lumpish fear has
ofttimes shaken me, and now it has broken out. Another said, you know the poor
in spirit are blessed. I am not such. You see you are empty of all good, you
feel your burden. I pray you go your ways. He turned his head aside, and
stopped his ears: what though you have done but little good, if you have but
given a cup of cold water, etc. He thrusted him away with his foot, either (as
some thought) being troubled with his shrill voice, or (as he replied) through
the Devils subtilty. That evening he was grievously afflicted. Suddenly he
brake out; Oh if God! The standers by endeavored to cherish this good motion,
and said to him, He will give you grace. I doubt it. Then presently after he
uttered this prayer, Oh God, give me a spark of grace, and enlarge my heart
that it may apprehend it. He asked a friend, how he might give satisfaction for
some speeches.

Mr Dod, although he departed on Saturday, and had then an unseasonable
journey, yet being requested by letters, returned on Tuesday following. He at
the first sight started up, as desirous to meet him, Oh Mr Dod, and in friendly
sort complained, I have no grace. I will not (says Mr Dod) believe every one
that says he has grace, nor every one that says he has none: Answer the
Devil as Christ did. A man must not always be led by sense; Let us enquire by
the effects, and it may suffice, if we can find but one, yea the least it is
enough. You forgive your enemies, and love them, and would do them no hurt if
you could? Yes. Then your sins are forgiven. An Hypocrite may give alms and
fast, but this he cannot. That is a small matter. I think it to be a great one,
yea, such an one that I had need to pray for; That is put for a reason in the
Lords Prayer, and if Christ had thought any more forcible, he would have given
it. Sir, that is true, but in those that are elected. Do not you put an
exception, where God has not. I would not handle you as I do, but that I know
your estate: I come hither to cherish you, you love your good friends? I
cannot. Had you rather that bad or good men should be with you? Good. Yet you
say, you do not love them: A sow will be with swine: There is no fellowship
between light and darkness. Would you believe your self, or the Physician
touching the estate of your body? The Physician. Believe not your self then,
now you are sick, yet shall be restored. It is impossible. Why so? If you had
sinned so much as you could, you could not have sinned so much as Adam, yet he
is in Heaven. It repented him. Does it not you? No. Does your sickness or sin
more trouble you, or had you rather have grace, or health? Grace. Well then.
But it cannot be. God will wash you. I have no water. God will bring it with
him. He has denied it. He has offered it by his Ministers, which are as the
buckets to draw and pour it. You must not look now that God should come to you
himself. Do you think it a small favor of God that so many good friends come
to you? God did send none to comfort Cain or Ahithophel. Think of that saying
of Manoahs wife, If the Lord would kill us, he would not have showed us all
these things, Judge. 13.23. Behold the properties of Christ's sheep: They are 1.
Weak, 2. Sick, 3. Broken, 4. Driven away, 5. Lost, Ezekiel. 34.4. You are such,
see therefore your comfort, he will 1. strengthen, 2. heal, 3. bind up, 4.
bring again, and 5. seek you. You find your self a great debtor: the Lord has
pardoned: only he looks that you should come to him for an acquittance. This
fight is not yours, but the Lords, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. put your trust in him. If
you ask me, how may I? it follows, Believe his Prophets, and you shall
prosper. You may remember that Christ did pray for Peter, that his faith might
not fail, but it failed afterward. How came that to pass? That failing did
rather strengthen it. For whereas he gloried that if al should deny Christ, yet
he would not: had he been asked, Do thou promise this by thine own strength,
or by mine? he must have answered, Mine, for otherwise he would have requested
his help, making him hereby to seek to Christ for the strengthening of his
faith. This happens to you, because you credit the suggestion of carnal
reason, and not the word rather. Oh the cunning of the adversary! deal not with
him by cunning, but hold him to the Word, seek for strength in God to resist
him. You may see the Apostles in the tempest, it was from their weakness that
they distrusted, yet of God that they prayed. I cannot pray. Here what St James
says, Is any man sick, etc. afflictions further prayer, but most sicknesses
hinder: wherefore behold your friends, whose minds as the Lord has stirred up
to pray for you: so will he also stir up himself to hear them. Their prayers
are yours, yea, you have the prayers of many which never knew you. And as God
said to Cain, sin lies at the door, ready as it were to do him an ill
turn: so his promised blessing does as it were expect you. If your salvation
were now in your own hands, it is likely you would yield up all: but your name
is written in the heart of Christ. Sir, let me watch with you this night. No.
Why? because it would hurt you. He (fearing the conclusion) said, Here is a
snatching argument: nay rather, I will not suffer you, because you would
trouble me. In the morning M. Dod came again to him, and asking him how he did,
he answered, wretchedly, lamentably, abhominably, no stamp of grace in me. Do
you desire to be eased? Infinitely. Oh if God would give me a drop: I was so
foolish that I would always be doing something, but did nothing well. I pray
you tell me what was the calling of the good thief upon the cross? Do not you
think that God can put a distinction between his grace and our corruptions?
Behold the Church sometimes helples and hopeles, and Jonah in that his bed, God
sees you, though you see not him. But I feel horror. Where misery is, there
is grace much more: Then especially appears the excellency of the Physician,
when health is least hoped. The Devil does abuse your mind and tongue against
your self: but doubt not, the Lord will cast down the strong holds of carnal
reason. Only do not suppress that grace of God, which although it appears
but small, as big as a man's hand, yet it shall be increased into a mighty rain,
by which your dry soul shall be moistened. Christ rising again, did first
appear to Mary Magdalen that sinner, after commanded her to tell it first to
Peter, which had denied him. See thence his mercy. The godly in their
afflictions do but forget their comforts; God helps their memory, helps all.
The godly losing his sense of Gods favor, is like to a man that has lost his
purse, which if he could find, he were rich enough. But the wicked cannot be
brought to remembrance, because they never knew it. Thus he suffered him to
rest a while, afterward returning with others, prayed. Then he was asked, how
he did. Miserably. Do not you search into the secrets of God. It is too true
and manifest. Sir, do not always be digging in at your sins. A wound
continually rubbed cannot be cured. Suffer the plasters of the Word of God to
rest upon it, that it may be helped. Oh, if I had! Oh, if it would please God!
I had rather then any thing in this or other three thousand worlds. Who now
gives this desire unto you? Of our selves we cannot think a good thought: God
gives both the will and the deed. A desire is a sure token. But I cannot truly
desire. You do not desire falsely, therefore: truly what do you dissemble?
Here is a trick. You must needs distinguish between unperfect desire and
hypocritical. Will you know whether your desire be true? There are two signs
thereof: Constancy, and a conscionable using of the means: You have found these
in you, does this argument hold? You do not feel, therefore you have it not? I
know when you would have denied such an argument: If that did follow, it should
fare well with the Reprobate, he has no sense of the wrath of God, therefore
he is not under it. Elizabeth said, Whence is it that the mother of the Lord
should come unto me? surely from their Christian heart. Truly I could hardly
have come to you, but that I thought I was bound in conscience, because I know
you to be the servant of the Lord: When you were well, if we should have come
with proofs out of the Word of the Lord, you would have believed us. Yes. Why
not now when your judgment is blinded? Oh, the Judgment of God! Call it as he
calls it, Corrections. Oh, my insensible heart! Oh, dead! A dead man cannot
perceive himself dead, and God quickneth the dead. Oh, if he would enlarge my
heart! This desire is good; But it is without savor. God in mercy will yield
you a comfortable relish: Consider I pray you; whereas man may object, The
Lord is strong and terrible. It follows, Merciful withal. But I am backward
in seeking it. He is gracious, more forward then thou can be backward: but I
have provoked. Him; he is slow to anger: but my sins are great, but he is
abundant in goodness and in truth. The Lord has promised that he on his part
will be our God, and we on our part shall be his people. For a while he
commended him to God: shortly after returning, he prayed with him. Cast your
burden upon God. He has rejected me. Who made you his counselor? Secret
things belong unto God, but revealed things unto us: will you make Almanackes?
He does manifest it: Oh mine abominable bringing up of youth! he withal
groaned most deeply. If you had done as well as the justest man, you should
stand in need of the merits of Christ. I, or another may bring arguments, but
it belongs to the Lord to fasten them on the heart. I say to you as Noah did to
Iaphet, God persuade Iaphet, etc. What if your sins were as crimson, God can
make them as snow. That is true of those that are capable. Behold, we make your
estate our own, we have part in your sorrow: who has thus (think you) disposed
our hearts? God. And do you think that he which causes us to love you, does
not love you himself? I fear I did too much glory in matters of private service
to God. The nearer we come to God, the more we see our own vileness. This is
the use which I make of it, blessed be God which has not put our estate in our
own hands, but kept it in his. The Devil has now winnowed you, and you think
all is gone out, but God holds what is his. An Artificer can distinguish
dross from the metal, cannot God his from yours? Well, with Job lay your hand
on your mouth, and hold your peace, and so good rest have you: Only consider
your comfort, though it be but small, whence it came, even from Gods Word and
servants, no otherwise.

M. Dod.
When he returned again to take and give farewell, he began to complain: Oh,
great and grievous! The Lord knows what power he has given you: A father
will put a greater burden upon a stronger son. But see the difference. When
an earthly father or master sets his on wo^k, they must do it with their
own strength; but the Lord sets on work, and gives strength to be not
discouraged. You are now in your calling: Oh, mine heart is miserable! What
then? A father loves his son as well when he is sleeping, as when he is
waking. Sir, I have known you heretofore, and although, if I were in your case,
I might do as you do, yet I remain the servant of God, as you certainly are.
The Holy Ghost calls to your remembrance what you have heretofore taught, and
now heard: And although I shall be absent in body, yet shall I be present in
mind. Be not too covetous to seek abundance by and by. If Jacob could say to
Es^u, I have seen thy face, as though I had seen the face of God, much more
should you think so of the children of God that come to you. I thank God (says
he) he has begun to ease me. He will in his good time. God grant. Thus he took
his last farewell. Although we depart from our friends in the way, yet we
shall meet at the end. One told Master Dod that he had uttered such words. Now
the Lord has made me a spectacle. Whereupon he counseled one that attended on
him, to be sparing in admitting comers in, or speakers, left his brain should
be too much heated. A friend of his coming to him, asked him, Dare your
murmr and repine against God? Why should I so? God be blessed. It is a sign
of grace. But I have no means. You have had them offered. But not given with
effect. They shall, I doubt not. God grant: but I do not feel it.

He received a letter from a friend very respective, M. Bolton.
and much respected of them both: wherein were written these very words: "I
heard, I know not how true, that our dear Christian friend Mr Peacock is in
great danger: which has much greived and afflicted my heart, and vvrung from
me very bitter tears. If his extremities be such, his tentations are very like
to be fore. Tell him from me (as one who did ever, with dearest intimatenes
know and converse with him) that I can assure him in the word of life and
truth, from a most just and holy God, whose Minister I am, That he is
undoubtedly one of his Saints, designed for immortality, and those endless joys
in another world." When it was read to him; at those words I can assure him,
etc. (he said) Oh, take heed, take heed; do you think he would or durst
assure you, unles he knew on what grounds? I did deceive my self, now God has
revealed more. Another time one requested him, that he would make his friends
partakers of the least comfort that the Lord bestovved upon him, as they had
been partakers of his grief. If I had it, I would willingly communicate it.
Search and take notice of the least. How should I have any, since God denies
the means? do you think sense is a fruit of faith? Yes, at this season,
although the husbandman has sown much, yet he sees nothing above ground.
Applications do not prove, hold your peace, my heart is broken. Then the
promise is yours. I would gladly ask you one thing, Now you will ask twenty.
Do you seek for grace in your heart? I cannot. How then can you know whether
it be there or no? It is dead. The Lord in whose hand the disposing thereof is,
dispose it for your good and his glory. I thank you. What do you think of that
place, Whose sins you remit, they are remitted, etc. You know how far they
may go. Howsoever, Sir, the bargain is not now to be made between God and you.
Shortly after came one whom he much esteemed. Oh I love (said he) your company,
for the graces in you, and much more to the same purpose. Suddenly he brake
out into this ejaculation, Oh God, reconcile me unto thee, that I may taste one
dram of thy grace, by which my miserable soul may receive comfort. One
secretly willed that man to desire him to repeat it again. Do not trouble me
with repetitions. There being a sermon, he bade them about him go thither.
After he called one, and asked him whether the preacher (being acquainted with
his course of preaching) did use his accustomed divisions. He told one, Satan
had borne him in hand, and had deluded him: to who^ the other answered, I hope
that God will restore you as before, to glorify him here. No. No. Yea, if you
were weaker, I would hope notwithstanding. I desire nothing more. God be
thanked, you have labored carefully for his glory. I would labor after
another fashion. In the night he prayed and repeated his belief. And after
resting a while, he called these that watched with him, Bear witness, I said
not, I believe, but in general, and as desiring that I might believe. One
coming to visit him, asked him, How is it with you? My mind was grievously
puzzled with sundry distractions this night, but now I feel my burden more
light, I thank God. He was put in mind of that place, Isa. 54.8, 11, 12, etc.
Oh thou afflicted and tossed with tempests, and not comforted; behold, I will
lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundations with Saphyrs; And I will
make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles: and all thy borders
of pleasant stones, etc. For a little while I hid my self from thee, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee. He lifted up his eyes: thereupon
being asked what the Lord did say to his soul, that had long refused comfort?
Take heed, be not too bold, look to the foundation. And then prayed. Lord grant
me the comfort of thy deliverance, and forgive me my foolishnes, that I may
praise thy name. Then he complained of his idle speeches. Upon the Sabbath day
one came to him, willing him to put his hand to a note of certain debts. This
is not a day for that. We will go to Sermon. God speed you. Now you cannot go
to Church to serve the Lord, I pray him to come to you. Amen. He hardly
suffered any to stay with him. At evening one did read something to him in
Master Downams warfare, and asked him, do you think it to be true? Yes.
Therefore you must not trust your sense: What not such as mine are? But I will
not now dispute. When they were helping him up and putting on his clothes;
upon some occasion one said to him to this effect: A child will not much
grieve at the laying aside of an old coat, when he has a new made, When you
shall put on that, there shall be no longer nakedness, the resurrection will
amend all. To those that die in the Lord. No doubt you will dye in him, having
lived in him. I have answered you before. But I would not believe you in that
case. The next day a friend of his being to go forth of town, asked him,
whether he would have any thing with him, for he was to leave him, and knew not
whether ever he should see him again here. Look to your calling, that it be as
well inward as outward. He counseled another; To be stirring for the glory of
God. To one standing by, he said. I am thinking. What? On a form to get grace.
Put your trust in God. So I do. I omit how, and tell you that with great
patience, he continually submitted himself to advise in any means for his good:
In putting his temporal estate in order; he dealt mercifully with his poorest
debtors, yea, with some which might well pay it. His worthy patron (for so he
often called him) whom for honors sake I name, Sir Robert Harley, sent his man
to him with some aurum potabile, together with a book which a Doctor had made
in the praise thereof. Coming to him, and asking him how he did, Oh (said he)
if it would please God that I might live with him. Anon after he said to one, I
have been thinking of arguments by which I might plead my cause with God, and
I have found: But what if dying thus, I should be judged an Apostata? Man is
not the Judge at whose Tribunal you must stand or fall. There came in many of
our chief Fellows. One of them requested him to make confession of his faith
willingly. But I would think of it first. Musing awhile, he called them. Truly
my heart and soul have been far lead, and deeply troubled with tentations and
stings of conscience: but I thank God they are eased in good measure: Wherefore
I desire that I be not branded with the note of a forlorn or Reprobate: Such
questions, oppositions, and all tending thereto, I renounce: Now help me, and
put me in mind. What do you think of your former doctrine? Most true: In it I
have lived, and will dye; I have not dealt hypocritically in it. Are you
willing to die? Truly I will tell you: my Patron who of late sent me potable
gold, has taken order that I might live with him contentedly in the Ministry:
but I submit my self to the will of God. Do you desire the glory of God, and
the salvation of your brethren? Most: Help my memory, what mo^e? Do you
forgive all wrongs? Yes, and desire that mine may be: And now I thank you. Sir,
I remember a thing wantonly done toward you, pointing at one present. You sent
me a knife for a new-years-gift; and I tied two verses to it, and sent it back:
I pray pardon me if any thing -- For mine unconsiderate speeches in the time of
my tentations, I heartily and humbly ask forgivenes. You did then (says one)
seem to rely somewhat upon inherent righteousness, as if you sought in your self
whereby you should be saved: Indeed we knew your conversation to be
unreproveable: No I dare not affirm it: I trust in nothing but in the name of
Jesus. Have you any certainty in him? I would not be pressed to a particular
assurance in this grievous agony. We desire you to inform them that shall come
unto you of your estate. My unability is great: They then prayed, 1. Giving God
thanks, that whereas before they had craved his mercy for his servant, he had
heard them, and manifested to his glory, how he never forsakes his: And
besought him, because he knew the malice of the enemy, to perfect his good
work, and not suffer him to be tempted above his strength. Now, Sir, we tell
you one thing to your comfort, We never heard you speak any thing against God
or man, thorowout the time of your visitation, but wholly against your self. I
have been bold thus to argue with God, If he has showed mercy to such and
such, why should not I likewise have hope? He complained once, how, while he
was visiting the sick, (In which work many poor souls found the ready
mercifulnes of his heart, and now feel a great want) he lighted upon doubts;
which that he might more fully satisfy, when the like might be moved, he
studied too earnestly. One brought him a note book which he had lent. (Always
willing to communicate what he had most private) Here is a book (said he) of
great pains, etc. To a stranger, a worthy gentleman that came to visit him, he
said, The Lord is merciful to me, and I have cause of rejoicing, etc.
Afterward a reverend Governor came to him, Dr Ayery.
to whom he complained of his sin and misery. You look not (said he) for any
thing in your self. No, for nothing. You would amend if you had space. Oh if I
had -- Certainly -- Think on this. As the Lord has heard the ejaculations and
groans of your spirit in your infirmity, so he will now. If he will be
glorified by your life, you shall live; Submit your self to him, let him choose
for you. My faith is weak. All, you know, are here but in part, you desire
notwithstanding to run to that which is perfect: So you may see how low many
have been brought, some (said he) have been Idolatours, was not Manasses such
an one? Yes. And behold Gods servants from the beginning of the Bible to the
end, they have slipped. Lot had shrewd slips, but yet here the testimony of the
Apostle of him; he was just and righteous. You have been wearied and heavy
laden. Yes. For such is the end of Christ's coming: your desire is a token of
favor: For by how much the nearer we come, the more we thirst. Think now on
his loving kindness; he has begun, and he will finish whom you have served. I
did endeavor, but vile imperfections, etc. It is our greatest perfection here
to see our imperfections. Shortly after came to him many young Gentlemen, to
whom he said, Live in Gods fear, that you may die in his favor: Otherwise the
Ox and the Ass will condemn you; I spent my time foolishly and prodigally.
You have (said one) remembered that sufficiently; Remember also Christ. That is
true, Christ is to be remembered, and our sins to be remembered also.

The night following, which was Wednesday night, the Sun of Righteousness spread
gracious beams at his setting, which were comfortable tokens of a glorious
rising. His last swanlike song, as he uttered it, was penned by some as he
uttered it. One comforting him by his bead-side some two hours or more before
his death, he brake out into these speeches; Quid de salute mea sentiam
expectatis ut explicarem: usque adeo indulget Deus ijs quos semel dilexerit, ut
eos nunquam deserat, atque ideo me in coelos transiturum pro certo habeo:
Felicissima sunt ea vincula in quae me conjecit Deus benignissimus; You all
expect that I should declare what I think of my own salvation: God is so
indulgent to those whom he has ever loved, that he never forsakes them, and
therefore I am assured I shall go to Heaven: Most happy are those fetters into
which I was cast by a most merciful God. One telling him, You have fought a
good fight, etc. he said, Expetit, expedit ut contendam ad coelum; Tollite,
Tollite, Eripite, Eripite, ut coelum adeam: Deus indulget ingenuitati bonorum.
It is requisite, it is requisite that I should contend for Heaven: Take me up,
take me up, carry me hence, carry me hence, that I may go to Heaven; God does
cherish the ingenuity of the good. Being put in mind of Gods mercy toward
him, he made answer: Oh, the sea is not so full of water, nor the Sun of
light, as God is of goodness, his mercy is ten thousand times more. Being
likewise remembered of Gods goodness toward him, in filling his heart with such
comforts, after so great tentations, he said: I do (God be praised) feel such
comfort from that: What shall I call it? Agony, says one, Nay, that is too
little: That had I five hundred worlds, I could not not make satisfaction for
such an issue. Being moved to lift up his heart in token of thankfulness unto
his God, he uttered these words: What, shall I extol the magnificence of God,
which is unspeakeable, and more then any heart can conceive? Nay rather let us
with humble reverence acknowledge his great mercy: What great cause have I to
magnify the great goodness of God, that has humbled, nay rather exalted such a
wretched miscreant of so base condition to an estate so glorious and stately!
The Lord has honored me with his goodness: I am sure he has provided a
glorious Kingdom for me. The joy that I feel in my heart is uncredible. He made
likewise protestation of that which he always before taught against
justification by inherent righteousness, and appealing to the knowledge of some
there present, what he continually maintained, in that (says he) I still
remain a Protestant. After three chapters read to him, Revel. 19. Revel. 21.
Romans 8. Oh, (says he) They be glorious comforts: Will you have any more read?
Yea, a Psalm, if you please, and named the 23. One beginning to read it, he
desired that it might be sung: One asking him, Will you sing? Yea, said he, as
well as I can. The Psalm being sung, afterward the 17. of John was read unto
him: One comforting him by applying to him that in particular, which Christ in
general performed for the good of the faithful, he said, Blessed be God, very
often, I am a thousand times happy to have such felicity thrown upon me, a poor
wretched miscreant. After a little rest, Lord Jesus (said he) unto thy hands:
Lord receive my soul, Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me,
and be merciful unto me. Then very weak he repeated the Lords prayer twice,
and his Belief once very plainly, and distinctly with a strong voice, to the
great admiration of the hearers: so he slept in the Lord.

December 4. Anno 1611.
The Postscript to the READER.
THis copy of M. Boltons, and intended by him for the press, was by M. Edward
Bagshaw (overseer of M. Boltons Will, and specially entrusted for the printing
of it) delivered about nine years since to M. George Miller, Printer of M.
Boltons works, to be by him printed, as he had done his other books, M. Miller
carried it to the Licenser, who kept it long in his hands, and at last refused
it, as too precise for those times: while it was in the Licensers hands, one M.
Milburne of intimate acquaintance with him, got a copy of it, and printed it
about five years since: but upon examination, the transcribed copy was found
imperfect, and by that means the book proved unsaleable. When this present copy
was almost printed, M. Miller had notice of such a book, and not before. This
is thought fit to be made known, that the Reader might understand that this
present copy is the only true approved copy, and Licensed by an eminent Divine
of the Assembly, as a fit and useful book for these present times.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.


