COncionem banc perlegi, and cum nihil in ea aut Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut
bonis moribus contrarium reperiatur, Publica Luce donandam censui.

Edm. Diggle, S. T. P. Reverendissime in Christo Patri, ac Dom'. Dom'.
Archiepisc', Eborac. a Sacris Domest.
Datum, Episcopo-Thorpae, 16. Calend. Septem 1663.
A SERMON AD CLERUM: At the Visitation of the DEANE and CHAPTER there, holden
the 19th. day of November, Anno Dom. 1662.

By the most Reverend Father in God ACCEPTUS By Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of YORK his GRACE, Primate of England and Metropolitan.

Preached by Thomas Bradley, D. D. one of his late Majesty's Chaplains, and
Praebendary of the Church aforesaid.

Can thou stay the sweet influences of the Pleades? or loose the bands of
Orion, Job 38.31.

The Sauffers, and the Snuffe-dishes, shall be of pure Gold, Exodus 25.38.

York, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Francis Mawbarne at
the Minster-Gates, 1663.

Cum Privilegio.

Revel. 2.1. And to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Write, These things
says he, which holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and walks in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks.

Ver. 2. I know thy Works, etc.


IN the precedent Chapter, we have the Description of a wonderful Person, One
like unto the Son of Man, walking in the midst of seven Golden Candlesticks,
clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a Golden
Girdle, ver. 13. His head and his hair as white as wool, or snow, and his
eyes as a flame of fire, ver. 14. And his feet as five brass, burning in a
furnace: and his voice as the sound of many waters, ver. 15. etc. which is none
other, but the description of Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, in his
glorious capacities of King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church. In these two
Chapters, the second and the third, are contained seven Epistles, written from
him to the seven famous Churches of Asia: To every Epistle there is prefixed a
several Preface; and every of those Prefaces taken out of some part of that
glorious description: As for instance; The Preface to this first Epistle, is
taken out of those parts of this description which are found, verses 13. and
16. Verse the 13. I saw one like unto the Son of Man in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks: And in the 16. ver. He had in his right hand seven
Stars, thus the Description: The Preface to the Epistle thus, Thus says he,
which holds in his right hand the seven Stars, and walks in the midst of
the seven golden Candlesticks. The Preface of the Epistle to the second Church,
the Church of Smyrna, is taken out of those parts of the Description which are
found ver. 11. and the 18. ver. the 11. thus, I am the first and the last: And
ver. the 18. thus, I was dead, and am alive, thus the Description; the preface
to the Epistle thus: Thus says he which is the first and the last, which was
dead, and is alive; and so of the rest: The Preface to every one of them is
taken out of such part of this glorious Description, as represents Christ unto
them in such a form or posture, as is most suitable to that Churches State, or
Condition, such as may add a greater authority to the whole Epistle, such as
may make the deeper impression into them, and procure the greater reverence and
obedience to that which is written and contained in them. But our business is
with the Church of Ephesus, the most famous of all the rest; Famous for this,
that it was the Metropolis of all the rest; Ephesus was the Metropolis of all
Asia: Famous for the University there, it was an University as Atheus was, but
it seems they studied much the black Art; for when by the Preaching of St. Paul
among them, they were convinced of the vanity of those Studies, in testimony of
their Repentance, They brought their Conjuring Books, and burnt them before all
men, but first they were prized, and upon the valuation, they came to fifty
thousand pieces of silver, Acts 19. Famous for the magnificent Temple of Diana,
in it the statelyest Fabrique in the world, two hundred and twenty years in
building, as some Histories relate; Famous for the Preaching of St. Paul there,
Acts 20. and for that Divine Epistle which he Wrote to that Church, inserted in
the sacred Canon, and one of the largest among them, the Epistle to the
Ephesians; But much more famous for this Epistle written unto them, more
immediately from our Lord himself, whereof our Text is a part: Other Churches
had the Honor to be written unto by the holy Apostles of our Lord: but this,
more immediately by our Lord himself; for he it is which here dictates to his
sacred Penman, and amanuensis, John, Unto the Church of Ephesus Write.

So then, It was St. John's Charge to write this Epistle; It is our Business
now to Read it, and to consider of the Contents of it: For not unto Ephesus
alone; but unto us does it belong, Let him that has an ear, hear what the
Spirit says unto the Churches: To us therefore, as directly does it belong, as
if the Epistle were superscribed, To the Angel of the Church of York, write,
These things says he, that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, and
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks: Novi opera tua, I know
thy works.

For the opening of this Letter, at the first view, it divides it self into
these three Parts:

1. The Person to whom it is directed here, represented to us under the name
and Notion of an Angel, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.

2. The description of the Person, from whom it is sent, as he is here
represented to us in two wonderful postures; 1. Holding in his right hand
seven Stars. 2. Walking in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; These
things says he, which, etc.

3. The special notice that he took of their state and condition, the carriage
and behavior of that Church, in these words, Novi opera tua, I know thy works.

And now, oh for the Tongue of an Angel, to speak of so Angelical, so Heavenly
a subject, Angels, Stars, Golden Candlesticks! A Chrysostom here, to set them
forth in their luster, and in their brightness, would well suite with such a
subject; but we must do as we may.

The Text is of Show bread all along, and that belongs properly to the Priests.
And in the Tabernacle where the golden Candlestick was set, it was commanded,
That the Table there should be furnished with such Bread; and so it is here.
And that I may break to every one of you a morsel of it, and give to each of
you his portion in due season: Let us take a second view of the Text in the
particulars of it, branching themselves out of these more general Parts: And
here out of the first part, The Person to whom the Epistle is directed, The
Angel of the Church, we are to consider.

1. What is meant by this Angel? 2. Who in particular this Angel was? 3.
Whether under that Name he understand some one particular Person only? or
whether there were any more included under that name? 4. Why he is represented
under the name and notion of an Angel? To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.
Then out of the next part of the Text, The Person from whom the Epistle is
sent, we are to consider out of the first part of his description, Holding the
seven Stars in his right hand; what? or who are meant by these seven Stars?
whether it may not be literally understood of that famous Constellation clearly
visible in our Horizon, in dorso Tauri, called by Astronomers, the Pleyades; by
our vulgar people, in plain English, the seven stars? Or, if not them? then
who? or what else is meant by them. And thirdly, Why represented under the
similitude of the seven Stars? And next, What is meant by his holding of them
in his right hand?

Then out of the next part of his Description, as he is represented, Walking
between the seven golden Candlesticks, we are to enquire, What these golden
Candlesticks are? who they are that are represented by them? and why? And
lastly, what is meant by his walking in the midst of them? not sitting, nor
standing; but walking: Non in angulo, sed in medio, in the midst of them.

Out of the third part, The special notice that he takes of their works; We
are to consider, what works he means, and how, and why he is so exact in
observing them, and taking notice of them? All these things clearly offer
themselves to our consideration and enquiry. And if I should methodically, and
exactly treat of them all, I might well continue my Discourse as large as Paul
did his Sermon, which he Preached to this very Church, Acts 20. till
Starr-light, and till we should have occasion to make use of these Candlesticks
here before us, to finish it. But I am commanded brevity, and I will observe
it, as well as I can, in so copious a subject as this is, in which, Creed mihi
labor est, non levis esse brevis: But I have heard of four sorts of Preachers,
The Quoter, the Noter, the Taunter, and the Flaunter: Amongst all these, upon
this account, I shall fall in with the second sort, I shall neither Taunt nor
Flaunt, nor fill the Margin with Quotations; but only note, as it were with an
asterisme, and point with the singer at those things which are most remarkable,
and tanquam Canis ad Nilum, hint and away. And first of the Person unto whom
this Epistle is directed, here represented to us under the Name and Notion of
an Angel, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.

First, What was this Angel? Pererius tells, and generally the current of
Interpreters, that by the Angel here, is meant the Bishop of the Church of
Ephesus; Per Angelum hunc, non alium intelligimus, quam Episcopum Ecclesiae
Ephesinae; By the Angel here, we understand none other but the Bishop of
Ephesus. And reason it self suggests it, for it is clear by that which we
Read, Acts 20. and in the Epistle written by Saint Paul to Timothy, That there
were many Pastors and Teachers in that Metropoliticall Church; yet our Lord,
writing unto the Church, does not direct his Epistle indifferently to them all;
but to one more eminent then all the rest, one that was Superintendent over all
the rest, whom here he styles, The Angel of that Church; though there were many
Pastors and Teachers in that great and populous City; yet they are not all
indifferently styled Angels, although they might all, in a way of resemblance,
be styled Angels; yet not all, nor any of the rest (...), the Angel: But to
this Person he writes as to one more eminent then all the rest, to one that had
power, authority, and jurisdiction over the rest, whom here he styleth by an
Emphasis, and (...), by an excellency; (...), the Angel, To the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus.

Titus 1.5. Saint Paul authorizes Titus, to Ordain Elders in every Church. That
the Elders were Teaching Elders, it appears by their Ordination. But can any
man imagine, that these Elders Ordained by Titus, and Titus Ordaining, and
Saint Paul authorizing Titus to Ordain them, were all of an equal authority in
the Church, Ejusdem Ordinis, ejusdem Dignitatis, ejusdem Potestatis? Reason it
self speaks the contrary; In Heaven above there is an Hierarchy: we Read of
Angels, and Archangels, etc. And why should it seem so strange that there is
such an one here below? and that we should hear of Bishops, and Archbishops,
etc. If it be useful in the Church Triumphant? surely in the Church Militant
much more. So it was here in this Church of Ephesus, there were many Pastors,
many Priests, or Ministers belonging to it, and Ministering in it; yet among all
the rest one more eminent then the rest, of greater Dignity, Power, and
Authority then the rest, here styled, The Angel of the Church: To the Angel of
the Church of Ephesus.

The second Quaery is, Who in particular this Angel was then Bishop in that
See: And it is generally noted to be Timothy: Sure we are, that Timothy was
Bishop there, and that much about this time; We have Scripture for that, in the
Close of the second Epistle to Timothy, where Paul Dates, and Directs his
Epistle thus, The second Epistle to Timothy, Ordained the first Bishop of the
Church of the Ephesians, Written from Rome, when Paul was brought before Nero
the second time. After whom, Saint John himself that writ this Epistle,
Succeeded him in the same See, where he lived many years, and at last ended his
days, a very old Man, and dyed in Peace in his Bed, and so did none of the
Apostles, but he; all the rest being Crowned with Martyrdom: For the latter of
these, we have the History of the Church: But for the former, we have the
Canonical Scripture it self to confirm it: So that you cannot cast Bishops out
of the Church Root and Branch, (as the cry goes among some of you) except you
will burn your Bibles.

3. But why does he write in the singular number, To the Angel of the Church,
as to one? Were there no more concerned in it? Surely yes, all the Clergy at
the least; so Rupertus, Dum ad Angelum scribit, ad totum Clerum scribit: When
he writes to the Angel, or Bishop of the Church, he Writes to the whole body of
the Clergy of that Church. Lyra goes further, In Angelo Ecclesiae, totam
affatur Ecclesiam; In the Angel of the Church, he speaks to the whole Church,
however most especially to the Pastors and Ministers of it. But why in the
singular number, as to one? but because he was their Chief, he was their
Governor, he had the oversight of all the rest, he had the Charge of them, as
they had of the Flock of Christ, and of the Congregations under him; he was to
give them their Charge, to set them upon their Duty, and to see that they did
discharge it accordingly; and therefore, as if they were all involved in him,
and included in him, whatsoever is found good in them, is imputed unto him, and
he is commended for it; whatsoever is found reproveable in them, is charged
upon him all along throughout the whole Epistle, and he is blamed for it. Judge
you then if he, and all his Successors in the like Charge, have not reason to
look into the Carriage and Behavior of those which are so immediately under
their Government, and under their Charge; if they have not reason as their
(...), to Oversee them, to Visit them, to take an Account of them how they
carry in their Places, and discharge their Duties in their several Charges.
Surely it is but reasonable, and necessary, that he should take an Account of
others, which is to give an Account for others unto God; and such is the Case
in the Text, To the Angel of the Church is the Epistle directed, of him is the
Account required for all that are under his Charge and Government, especially
his Clergy, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Write.

But the main thing offered out of this superscription of the Epistle to be
inquired into, is this; Why it is Directed to the Bishop? (or who ever else are
included in it) under the Name and Notion of an Angel, To the Angel of the
Church. And Saint Augustine gives the Reason in a word; Propter similitudinem,
for the likeness that is between them, and for the many properties wherein all
Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church should resemble the Angels; and
the resemblances between them for which they are called by that Name, are
principally these five.

1. Propter Dignitatem, For the Honor and Dignity that God has put upon them;
God has Clothed them with Honor and Dignity above their Brethren, and has
Anointed them with the Oil of Grace and gladness above their fellows; Has
Dignified them with the highest Titles that Men can be capable of, Spiritual
Fathers, Pastors, Rulers, Ambassadors, Stars, Angels, that they may be
Honorable in the Eyes of the People; it is much for his own Honor that it
should be so; it is for the Honor of his Service that it should be so; it is
much for the advantage of their Ministry that it should be so; it is for the
Honor of the People that it should be so; and therefore has he Commanded,
that we should account them worthy of double Honor, if not for their own sake,
yet for their works sake, and for their Masters sake, we should not think much
to Honor them whom God does Honor: And let them whom God has thus Honored,
take heed they do not dishonor him, nor themselves. Remember the Item given
to Elyes Sonns in this very case; Those which Honor me, I will Honor; but
those that despise me, shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2.30. made good Malach. 2.9.

2. Propter Ministrationem; Pastors, and Ministers of the Church, are called
Angels, for the likeness of their Ministration with that of the Angels: Angels
are Ministering Spirits, sent out for the good of those that shall be the Heirs
of salvation, Heb. 1.14. Pastors and Ministers are such for all the world,
called, commissionated, and sent out for the good of those that shall be the
Heirs of Salvation, to Preach unto them the Gospel of Grace; To Publish and
Declare unto them the Mystery of Godliness; To Proclaim the glad tidings of
Salvation; To Instruct them in the way of Life; To Comfort, to Confirm them,
to strengthen them, and every way to Build them up upon their most holy Faith,
and so to fit and prepare them for the Glory that is intended them: their very
Name imports their Duty, Angels, Messengers from God to Man; And the Message
that they bring is good, it is (...), good news, tidings of Peace, and of good
things: How beautiful therefore ought their very Feet to be upon the
Mountains, which are shod with the preparation of such Gospel.

3. Angels, Propter Scientiam, and Sapientiam, for their wisdom and knowledge;
Angels are wise, and knowing Spirits; As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the
King to discern good and evil, says the widow of Tekoah to David, 2. Sam.
14.17. And verse the 20. My Lord the King is Wise, as an Angel of God, to know
all things: Angels are wise, and knowing Spirits; such ought Pastors and
Ministers of Churches to be, Wise, and Knowing: The Priests Lips must preserve
Knowledge, and the people shall seek the Law at his Mouth: for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Malac. 2.7. The Roman Orator was wont to say of
the Lawyers House, that it was Oraculum Civitatis, the Oracle of the City: I am
sure it ought to be so of the Divines: The Divines Residentiary House ought to
be, Oraculum Civitatis, from whence any of the People ought to fetch
Instruction, Direction, Resolution, Satisfaction in all their Doubts, and
Difficulties; Tanquam ab Oraculo, as from an Oracle; and this requires much
knowledge, wisdom, and prudence: He must not be a Novice, says Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 3.6. He must be as a Steward, says our Savior, plentifully furnished,
that may bring out of his Treasury things New and Old. God will not send a
Message by the Legs of the Lame; nor make Blind men Seers, nor Dumb men his
Orators: Vbi desinit Philosophus, ibi incipit Medi^us. It was wont to be said,
Where the Philosopher ends, there the Physician begins: I am sure it ought to
be so with the Divines: Arts and Sciences, Knowledge in the Learned Languages,
Histories, and all other kinds of Humane Learning, were wont to be accounted
the Stayres into the Pulpit, the Handmaids to Divinity: But how ordinary has
it been in these latter and looser Times for young Neophytes to skip over all
these at one jumpe into the Pulpit, and there with great Confidence and
Impudence, the only Armor of Ignorance, to vent their own raw Fancies, or
such things which they have taken up upon Trust, from such Authors as they have
light upon, or what they have taken from the Mouth of their admired Teachers,
by Brachygraphie, and so Communicate them unto the people, apt to take any new
Impressions, and fill them with variety of Fancies and Innovations.

The fourth property wherein the Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of Churches
do resemble the Angels, and for which they are so called, is, Propter
Celeritatem, for their readiness, cheerfulness, and swiftness in Executing
the Commands of Almighty God. Angels are represented to us Winged, and those
Wings not let down, and clapped to their sides; but raised up, expansit and
stretched out, to show their readiness to execute the will of the Heavenly
Father; they stand in his presence, their Eye is upon him, they do but watch
for the word of Command, and presently they are upon the Wing: They do not
go, but run; not run, but fly, such should be our readiness in doing the
will of our God: we must not run before we be sent; but being sent, we must
not linger, delay, nor make excuses, we must not Drive heavily in his Service,
the wheels of our obedience, must be oyled with Cheerfulness and Alacrity,
that we may move swiftly in all our Duties and Performances; as we daily Pray,
so we must daily Practice That his will may be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven; and we see how the Angels do his will, with winged Cheerfulness and
Swiftness; Go thou and do likewise.

The fifth resemblance for which Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church
are styled Angels, is, Propter Puritatem, for their Holiness and Purity:
Angels are pure Creatures, so had they need be that stand in the presence of
the holy God, and are admitted so near unto him, in this respect we must be as
the Angels, and that upon the same account. Moses tells Korah, Numb. 16.9. That
the Lord had taken him near unto him, to do the service of the Tabernacle:
Even so we that are the Lords Priests set a part to do the service of the
Tabernacle, and to Minister before him in holy things, are taken near unto the
Lord: And he has said, He will be sanctified in them that come near him,
Levit. 10. Oh what a hateful thing it is to God and Man, to see a profane
person, polluted and besmeared with all manner of impiety, impurity, and
uncleanness, to draw near to God in holy Services, with his polluted Heart,
polluted Lips, polluted Life, and polluted Hands, to pollute all that he
touches? it is a wonder that in such cases, the holy God does not break out
upon them, to strike them through with a Thunderbolt, or by Fire from Heaven
avenge himself upon their presumption, as he did upon Nadab and Abihu, in the
like Case, and for the same Sin, Levit. 10. And how hateful it is to Man, we
may perceive by that which Ely his Sonns are Charged with, in the same Case, 1 Samuel 2.17. You make the Lords People to abhor the Sacrifice of the Lord. Woe
be to us, if through our profannesse, or irreverent handling of holy things, we
make the Lords People to abhor the Sacrifice of the Lord; take heed we handle
holy things in a holy manner, that we put off our Shoes when we approach the
burning Bush, and stand upon holy Ground, that we wash our Hands in innocence,
before we compass the Altar: All the washings and purifyings under the Law,
did but Typically Teach us, how holy we ought to be: Our very Garments that we
wears, read unto us Lectures of holiness and purity. In the Consecration of
Aaron to the Office of the Priesthood, among other Religious Ceremonies, it was
Commanded, That the Blood of the Sacrifice should be Sprinkled upon his right
Ear, and upon the Thumb of his right Hand, and upon the great Toe of his
right Foot; And what did all this signify? but that the Lords Priests must be
Sanctified throughout, and from Top to Toe Consecrated as holy unto the Lord.
The Motto of the Highpriests Miter, was, Holiness to the Lord; It should be
the Motto of every one of our Hearts, our Lips, our Lives, and all our Service
should Proclaim, Holiness to the Lord. We are here styled Angels, to show,
That we should walk before the Lord even in Angelical purity and holiness.

We should now come to speak of the Person from whom this Epistle is sent: But
by the way, we may not omit the Charge here given to Saint John, concerning the
things to be signified unto the Church from him; and that is, To Write them
down: To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Write.

Saint John had been an Authentic Messenger to have delivered Viva voce,
byword of Mouth, a Message from Christ to the Church: But Christ does not think
that sufficient, but he must Write: The Reason was, Those things that he there
wrote to that Church, did concern all other Christian Churches to the worlds
end, He that has an Ear must hearken unto them. And therefore that they may
come to the knowledge of them, it was necessary they should be written.
Secondly. Things delivered by word of Mouth, and so transmitted from Mouth to
Mouth by Tradition, are subject to be corrupted, misreported, to admit of
Addition, Diminution, Alteration, there can be no certainty in them, but Litera
Scripta manet. Away then with all your Popish Traditions, Anabaptisticall
Revelations, Fallacious (...), Unwritten Verities, as they call them, when you
speak of the Canon, whereby we should be directed in matters of Faith and
Manners in order to our Eternal salvation. God has better provided for his
Church then so, By giving us a more sure Word of the Prophets and Apostles, and
our Lord himself, all in Writing, unto which we shall do well to take heed, as
to the Lights shining in a dark place, to guide our Feet in the ways of truth,
life, and peace.

We now come to consider of the Person, from whom the Epistle is sent.
Intererit multum Davusne loquatur, berusne: It adds much to the luster and
authority of that which is written, to consider from whom it is written; And
that is here, from this wonderful Person described in the Text, by Holding the
seven Stars in his right hand, and walking in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks. As the Prophet Isay once asked the question, Isay 63.1. Who is
this that comes from Edom, with Garments died red from Bozrah? So here, Who
is this wonderful Person, which here we see walking in the midst of the seven
Golden Candlesticks? Why; It is none other but the Son of God, the Lord of
the Candlesticks, and the owner of them, the very same which we saw before,
bolding the seven Stars in his right hand. But has he no Name? Yes: But the
Spirit thought it more fit to represent him here in a Glorious Vision, to set
him forth in such a Heavenly Description and Periphrasis, as might strike in
the Church an awful reverence of so Divine a Majesty, to tremble at his Word,
and carefully to heed it; in the promises, the Threatenings, the Instructions,
the Admonitions, the Reprehensions, and all the several dispensations of it,
as the Word of the Mighty God, and not of Man, the King. Chief Priest, and
Prophet of the Church, and one that was perpetually in the midst of them, and
had a continual Eye upon them, and would take a strict account of them;
therefore is he set forth not by his Name, but by a description.

In this Description here, are two parts, we must consider of them both in
their Order: The former of them represents him to us, Holding the seven Stars
in his right hand. First then, What is meant by these seven Stars? Secondly,
What is meant by his holding of them in his right hand? As to the first, It is
no injury to truth to understand them in a Literal sense of that famous
Constellation in Heaven, which in a clear Night is visible in our Horizon, in
dorso Tauri, which our Vulgar People call, the seven Stars; Astronomers, the
Pleyades, and by a Synechdoche, for the whole number of the Starts in the
Firmament; all which, this wonderful Person holds in his right hand: He
tells the number of the Stars, and calls them all by their Names; He
Created them at the first; He assigned to them their Places in the Firmament,
their Constellations, their Motions, their Virtues, their Influences which he
can cause them to send forth when he pleases, and when he pleases restrain
them: Can thou stay the sweet Influences of the Pleyades? or bind the Hands
of Orion? thou cansts not; But he that made them, and gave them their
Influences, can. Astra regunt Homines, sed regit astra Deus: The Stars have a
strong Influence upon Men, and upon the substellary Bodies: but he that made
them has a stronger Influence upon them; He holds them in his right hand,
guides them, moves them, orders them as it pleases him; and therefore fear not
the signs of Heaven, Jer. 10.2. but fear the God of Heaven; Look not so much
at the Stars, as at the Hand, and at him that holds them in his right hand.
Thus if we understand these Stars in a Literal sense, the words will bear it
well enough; the Exposition is true, but not so genuine; it is sure enough our
Lord did allude unto those Stars we speak of in this Expression? But in the
genuine Interpretation of them, he leads us another way, to a Metaphorical
sense, Revel. 1. and the last, and by these seven Stars, understands, the
seven Angels of these seven Churches; and by those Angels, the Bishops, and
Chief Pastors of those Churches; and under them, all the other Ministers,
Pastors, and Teachers, which here he styleth, so many Stars: But what is it
that the Spirit would say unto the Churches, by this Metaphorical Expression?
Surely this is that which he would say,

That all Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church should be as Stars in
the several Churches, and Charges wherein they are fixed, and that in a
six-fold resemblance, for which they are there so styled.

1. Propter Lucem, for the Light that ought to be in them, and by which they
ought to shine unto others: It is the property of the Stars to shine, and to
give light to the dark places of the Earth, and that in the Night time when
there is most need of it; Remember we are Stars, and Stars must shine: We are
the Light of the World, and must not be put under a Bushel, but set up on a
Candlestick, that we may give Light to all that are about us. It is a high
Testimony that our Savior gave John the Baptist, That he was a shining Light.
It Is said of the Fathers, met in the Council of Nice, that they were, Totius
Orbis Lumina: It was said of Saint Basil, That he was in his Pulpit as Thunder;
and in his exemplary Conversation, as Lightning. We must shine by our Doctrine,
and shine by our Works, and shine by our Exemplary Conversation; by all these
we must so shine before Men, that they may see our good works, as well as hear
our good words, that so they may be moved, to glorify our Father which is in
heaven.

2. But Light without Heat, is but a kind of Ignis fatuus; there must be Heat
within, as well as Light without, heat of Love, and heat of Zeal; John was a
shining and a burning Light; he shined in his Doctrine, and exemplary life
without, and he burned within with Love and Zeal. Remember we are Sacrificers,
and those Sacrifices were ever most acceptable which were offered by fire unto
the Lord; without this holy fire to quicken, and to warm us, we shall be but
cold in our performances, perfunctory in our services, we shall Drive heavily
in the ways of God, and do the work of the Lord but negligently: Zeal is the
wings of the soul that lifts it up, and carries it on swiftly in holy
performances, the oil of the wheels of out obedience that makes them run
cheerfully; it will put us upon all our Duties with earnestness, fervency,
devotion, affection, and that which we do for God, or to God, it will make us
to do it heartily and thoroughly; of all others we had need to be fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord, from whose Zeal, all our People are to take Fire.

3. Stars, Propter Influentiam; Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Church
are called Stars, by reason of the influence that they have upon the people,
and the Congregations depending upon them: Radius est vehiculum lucis, caloris
and influentiae; The Stars and other Luminaries of Heaven, do by the Rays
and Beams which they send forth, convey not only Light and Heat, but strong
influence also into the inferior Bodies. Can thou stay the sweet influences
of the Pleyades, says Job, speaking of those very seven Stars unto which the
Text does allude: Even so the Pastors and Ministers of the Church, the
Church-Starrs do convey unto the people under them, strong influence, good or
bad; if they be benign Stars, then the influence Flowing from them is good,
saving, healing, comforting, reviveing influence: But if they be malignant
Stars, the influence Flowing from them must needs be like unto themselves,
blasting and disasterous. There are some Astronomers tell us, That unto every
Creature here below in this inferior world, there is assigned a Starr, from
whose influence it does receive Vigor, Life, and Vegetation: Not much unlike
the Opinion of the Papists, That assign to every Man borne into the World, an
Angel to be his Guardian: And of the Manichees, Which assign to every soul a
good Angel and a bad; the one drawing him to that which is good, the other to
that which is evil. I leave them to defend their own Opinions; this is sure,
That from every of us Church-Starrs, there Darts out a Beam, or a Ray, which
derives influence from us, good or bad, to every soul that lives under our
aspect; if we prove malignant Stars, and that influence from us be Killing,
and Destructive, woe unto us; How many souls shall we have to answer for in
that case, perishing through us? Remember we are Stars, see the influence
which we send forth to those that depend upon us be good influence.

4. Propter Ordinem. Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Churches, are
styled Stars, for the Order that is among them, and which they ought with all
due care, to keep and observe. The Stars in their Order fought against Sisera,
Judge. 5. We have Sisera's to fight against, and if ever we will fight
prosperously, we must fight in Order. In all Order there is subordination, as
well as Ordination; and there are Degrees, Secundum sub, and supra. There are
several Magnitudes, and one Starr differs from another in Glory. The most
Reverend Fathers in God, the Lords Archbishops, and Bishops, they are Stars
of the first Magnitude. The Reverend Prelates and Dignitaries in Cathedral
Churches, they are Stars of a second Magnitude. We Country Priests, we are
Stars too, but of a lesser size, that move in a lower Sphere; Minores Nobiles
Coeli inferioris, the Minors of the Inferior world; we must all be content
with our Stations, and with our Standings, and every one move in that sphere in
which Providence has placed and fixed him. Those that are of the greater
Magnitudes, must not despise those that are lesser; those that are of lesser,
must not envy those that are greater, but every one must move in his own
sphere, every one Act in his own Place, and in that Constellation wherein he is
fixed; there he must shine, and there he must send forth Light, and Heat, and
Influence, and do all the good he can: If the Stars of Heaven should change
their Courses, Cross their Motions, and justle one with another? what must
needs follow, but a Conflagration in Heaven? And if the Church-Starrs here
below, shall do the like, they must needs threaten Combustion on Earth. If
Aarons Bells once begin to jangle, become out of Tune, and Ring Cross? what
do they cry, but Fire in the Church, which will soon take hold of the Kingdom
too, and ruin all together? But remember we are Stars, and we must keep our
Course, move in our own sphere, and keep in Order; that is the fourth
Resemblance, for which we are called Stars.

5. The fifth is, In respect of our Fixednesse and settlement in our Charges;
The Stars in the Firmament are Fixed Stars; those seven more particularly
(unto which this Scripture seems to allude) in a famous Constellation: such
should the Church-Starrs be, Fixed Stars; Non stellae erraticae, non cadentes;
Not wandering Stars, not falling Stars, not Meteors, suddenly appearing, and
as suddenly disappearing: But fixed Stars, settled in that place of the
Heaven, of the Church here below, which Providence has assigned unto them; and
there being disposed of, they must fix, there they must reside, there they must
shine, thence they must send forth their influences, to the enlivening,
comforting, and refreshing of all those that are under their influences, and
their aspect, suitable to their several Positures, Capasities, Privileges,
and Honors.

6. The sixth Resemblance between the Stars, and the Pastors and Ministers of
the Churches, is in their borrowed Light; the iniate Light of the Stars is but
weak; the best Light by which they shine, is but mutuatitious, derived from the
Sun, the Fountain of Light: Even so it is with our Church-Starrs, the Light
that is in us, is not our own, it is a borrowed Light that comes down from the
Father of Lights, and is derived from the Son of Righteousness, arising over
us, with healing under his Wings, the Fountain of Light, out of whose fullness
we all receive Grace for Grace. And this Consideration should teach us two
things. First, Humility: Here Is no ground for boasting: Saint Paul pricks the
Bladder of that swelling pride, and makes it fall, when he puts us in mind of
our Poverty and Dependency, What have thou, which thou have not received? And
if Men will be boasting, let them boast of that which is their own; The Light
that we have, is not our own, be the gifts and parts in thee never so great,
the Light that is in thee never so clear, so illustrious; yet say of it all, as
the Son of the Prophet did of the Axe which he let fall into the water, Alas
Master, it was but borrowed; the glory of them is due to the Lender, not to the
Borrower; to the Giver, not to the Receiver; But of him, and from him, and by
him are all these; therefore to him be the glory of them all, for ever and
ever, of him the Father, from him the Son, and by him the holy Ghost are they
all; And therefore to him the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, in the Unity of
the Trinity, be the glory of them all for evermore. Secondly, This should teach
us Charity, in the communicating of this Light to others, which is committed
unto us for that very end; And therefore we are Charged with this Duty, not
only upon the account of Charity, but of Justice, and Faithfulness in our
trust: As every one has received, so let him distribute, as Stewards of the
manifold graces of God: Stewards are to give Accounts, as well as to take them;
and the greater their Receipts are, the greater Accounts do they make them
liable unto. A Day will come, when it shall be said unto them, Read rationem
Villicationis tuae; Give an Account of thy Stewardship: And such are we all in
this Case. The Gifts that we have are not our own: they are committed to us but
in trust; we Receive them to Have, but not to Hold; we must Communicate. The
Stars do not shine to themselves; but to the inferior world, to give Light
to others, and that in the darkest times too of the Night, when there is most
need of them. Such Stars must we be, To shine into the World: To give Light to
them that fit in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, to guide our Feet into
the ways of Truth and Peace. And thus you see what it is which the spirit
would say unto the Churches, in this simile, in resembling the Pastors and
Ministers of it by the Stars.

But what is meant, by Holding them in his right hand?

There are five things intimated to us in this Expression.

1. The great Care that Almighty God has of them, to secure them, to preserve
them, to protect them, that the Sons of violence shall not come near to touch
them, or to hurt them; He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine Eye,
Who dare come so near to hurt those which Christ holds in his right hand, but
his left hand will be ready to avenge them?

2. The great Honor that he is pleased to do them, to take them so near unto
himself, as into his right hand. The Right hand is a place of Honor and
Dignity. Christ sits on the right Hand of the Father. The Sheep are placed
on the right Hand of Christ. When Solomon would Honor his Mother, he caused a
Throne to be set, and her to be placed at his right Hand. Pastors, and
Ministers of Churches, they are on Gods right Hand, they are in his right Hand,
they are there as Signets of his right Hand, as precious Stones in his Signer,
Illustrious and Glorious. Great is the Honor that he is pleased to put upon
them, even here in the Church; How studious ought we to be of his Honor, that
has thus honored us, and of our own too, that we carry as becomes us in that
high Relation, Calling, Dignity, Name, and Place that we bear in Gods right
Hand, that so we way sit on his right Hand hereafter, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.

3. The advantage that we have of being abundantly illuminated by the light of
his countenance, at so near a distance; The nearer the Stars are to the
Fountain of Light, the stronger must needs be the irradiation from it, and
their illumination by it: Behold, we are near unto the Lord, Stars in his
right Hand; how strong then must needs be the irradiation from so Glorious a
Presence, through the beams of his countenance darting upon us. In was said of
Moses, that when he came out of the Mount, his Face did shine, that the people
could not look upon him for the glory of it. Behold, we are in the Mount with
God, we are taken near unto him; the Light in us should be so great, our Gifts
and Graces so illustrious and resplendent, that our people should look upon us
with dazzled Eyes, in admiration of our spiritual excellencies; while we behold
with open face the Glory of the Lord, it should be our care and endeavor, and
will be our happiness too, to be transformed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, and that that God, which made the light to shine out of darkness, may
shine into our Hearts, to give the light of the Glory of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ.

4. By this expression is intimated, the continual Eye that God has upon us,
to observe our carriage, and our behavior in our Callings, and in our
respective Churches and Charges. We cannot be in his right Hand, but we must be
under his right Eye too, and that is as a Flame of fire, not so much for the
anger, as for the perspicacity of it. Of all sorts of people, and Callings
amongst men, there are none that he does more strictly observe, or take a more
exact account of, then he does of us. How punctually and particularly does he
Charge the Angels of these seven Churches, in the second and third Chapters of
this Book; This thou bast, for which I commend thee: And these and these things
I have against thee; imagine it every one of us, as spoken unto our selves. A
Day will come, when he will deal as punctually with us, as he does here with
them; In the mean time, He knows our Works, and fees our Ways, and our
Walkings; his Flaming and Fiery Eye is upon us: Oh what manner of Men ought we
to be in all holy conversation and godliness? How circumspectly ought we to
walk? How exactly to order all our goings and doings, that are under the
inspection of so perspicatious, so severe an Eye?

5. By this Expression is intimated to us, The Power that Almighty God has in
his Hand, and the liberty that he reserveth unto himself, to dispose of these
Star as he pleases, to hold forth this Hand, with the Stars in it, to what
part of the world he pleases, and there to continue it as long as he pleases,
and when he pleases to turn his Hand another way, even which may he pleases,
with the Stars in it, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death; and to leave the other from whom he took it in the darkness,
in which at the first, he found them. Beloved, these Stars do not shine to
any place of the world, of the Church, by chance: No, not in particular
Churches, there is a Providence in the disposing of them. In the 16th. of the
Acts, we have a clear evidence of it; there were three bright Stars, feign
would they have shined in Asia, but they received a prohibition from the holy
Ghost, The holy Ghost forbad them, ver. 6. Then they assayed to shine into
Bithynia: but the spirit suffered them not, ver. 7. The Ruler, and Disposer of
the Stars, had otherwise determined, that they should go to Macedonia, and
shine there; and there did this Hand hold them forth for a season, ver. 12. The
Stars must shine where he will have them, and as long as he will have them,
and no longer: These seven Churches of Asia, are an evidence of this truth at
this day. Over them did Christ hold forth this Hand, with the Stars in it at
this time, and a long while after, until he was weary of holding it forth: and
by reason of their barrenness, and unthankfulness, their irreligion, and
Apostasy, they gave him just Cause to Complain, That all the day long, he had
stretched out his Arm to an unthankful, and a gainsaying people; and then to
what purpose should he hold it forth there any longer? In his wisdom and
justice he turned his Hand from them, and held it forth more Westward, to the
Western Churches: And since that, more Northward, to these Parts of the world,
the Inhabitants of the Island, the Inheritance of Japhet, amongst whom we are:
And now, by the blessing of God, we have enjoyed the Light under them many
years: But take heed, least for the same sins, for which God turned his Hand
from Shem to Japhet; he again remove his Hand from Japhet to Cham: and when he
does so, least as upon that remove, he left Shem in darkness; so upon this
turn, he also leave us in that darkness, wherein he found us. Beloved, there
is an Ancient Prophecy, Genesis 9.27. God shall persuade Japhet, and he shall
dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. What is meant by
Shem there? but the Church, which was first Planted in those Eastern Parts,
which were the Habitation of Shem. What is meant by Japhet's dwelling in his
Tents? but his succeeding of Shem in the Privileges of the Church, by
translating the Gospel out of these Eastern Parts of the world, into these
more Westerly and Northerly Quarters of the world, which were the Lot of
Japhets Inheritance, and in which his Posterity seated themselves, and amongst
whom we are, descended from him by Gomer. By virtue of this Promise are we this
Day the Church, and dwell in the Tents of Shem. But what do we think of Canaan
all this while? All this while he has been a servant. But is there not a time
when he shall shake off the Yoke of servitude? shall all those Parts of America
be for ever forgotten? shall Light never appear in them? Me thinks I see the
Dayspring from on high, begin to visit them: Me thinks I see the Beams of the
Morning Sun, begin to break out upon them, in the promulgation of the Gospel
in Virginia, one of the outward skirts of that mighty Continent: And I am
confident it will (as the Sun) shine forth more and more, unto the perfect
Day. I do not doubt but God has a great people among them to be gathered, and
that there will be a glorious Church amongst them, before the Consummation of
the world: But take heed, least as I intimated before, as God turning his Hand
from Shem to Japhet, left Shem in darkness, under which to this Day he lies:
So when God shall turn his Hand, with the Stars in it from Japhet to Cham, or
Canaan, he leave us also in the Darkness wherein at the first he found us,
and their Sunne-rising, be our Sunne-setting, our Barrenness, Unfruitfulnesse,
Aposte^^, falling from our first Love, our Schisms and Divisions, our
Hypocrisy, Formality, general irreligiousnesse and profaneness, seem to
portend and bespeak no less; presages of it we have sure, our Golden
Candlesticks lately tottering, and sore shaken, the Famous Lights in them put
out, others burning in them blue, and dimly; all manner of Heresies that ever
the Church has been pestered withal Revived, Countenanced, Encouraged; the
Seamelesse Coat of Christ Torn and Rent into an hundred pieces, by Sects,
Schisms, and Divisions, Factions, and Fractions; The Discipline of the Church
laid by, the holy Worship despised, and trampled under foor, the Sacraments
thrown out, all Ordinances, but Preaching, and Extemporary Praying cried
down; the lowest of the people made Priests, and the Priests made the lowest
of the people; the Churches turned into Stables, and Stables into Churches; And
how much did all this come short of the Abomination of desolation, standing in
the holy place? How near did all this come to the execution of the judgment
threatened against Ephesus in this Chapter, Of removing the Candlesticks out of
their places? Well, blessed be God, they are not yet removed, they yet stand in
their places, the Lights shining and burning in them, the right Hand of the
Almighty is yet stretched forth over us, with the Stars shining in it. Let us
be admonished by all these threatening punishments, to walk in the light of them
better then ever we have done, while we have it amongst us, as Children of the
Light, to walk up to the Light, to rejoice in it, to be thankful for it, and
to bring forth the fruit of it: this is the best way to keep it, and to
continue it among us. And thus you hear, what it is which the Spirit says
unto the Churches, in this Metaphorical Expression, Of holding the Stars in
his right Hand.

It follows now, That we consider of the next Part of the Description, Of
this Wonderful Person Christ the Son of God, as he is here represented,
Walking in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks.

Not to trouble you with the speculations of Expositors upon this sacred and
misterious number of seven, so often mentioned in this Mystical Book, in all
the Visions which Saint John saw, Seven Spirits, seven Angels, seven Stars,
seven Candlesticks, seven Seals, seven Trumpets, seven Heads, seven Hills,
seven Vialls, seven Plagues, all by sevens, a sacred and misterious Number; and
many are the Mysteries which some perspicatious wits have told us of,
contained in that Number. But to pass by that. Two things we have here to
enquire into: 1. What is meant by these Candlesticks? 2. What by his Walking in
the midst of them?


And for the first, our Lord himself has Interpreted it unto our Hands, what
is meant by them. In the last verse of the Precedent Chapter, The seven Golden
Candlesticks, are the seven Churches, meaning of Asia. Where take up this
Observation by the way.

That notwithstanding there were many Corruptions in them, in Doctrine, in
Worship, in Discipline, in Government, in matters both of Faith and Manners;
yet our Savior still vouchsafes them the Name of Churches: The seven
Candlesticks, are the seven Churches. Ephesus is fallen from her first love,
ver. 4. Smyrna had Hipocrites among them, Which said, they were Jews, and were
not, ver. 9. Pergamos had in her, those that held the Doctrine of Balaam, and
the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which God bated, ver. 14.15. Thyatyra suffered
that Woman Jezabel, which called her self a Prophetess, to teach, and to
seduce men to commit Fornication, and to Eat of things sacrificed unto Idols,
ver. 20. Sardis had a Name that she lived, but was dead, Chap. 3.1.
Philadelphia was the purest of all the rest; yet she is Charged with her defect
too, she had but a little strength, ver. 8. Laodicea was neither cold nor hot,
but lukewarm; she had a high and Pharisaicall Conceit of her self, that she
was Rich, and Wanted nothing; where our Savior tells her, She was Poor, and
Miserable, and Blind, and Naked; and yet notwithstanding all this, a Church
still; notwithstanding all these Defects, Corruptions, Blemishes in all the
rest; yet all this did not un-Church them, all Churches still; The seven
Candlesticks are the seven Churches; and the seven Churches the seven
Candlesticks; nay, Golden Candlesticks still, for all this. It was not a little
Dross amongst them, not a little Dust, nor Rust adhering to them, that made
them cease to be Candlesticks; yea, Golden Candlesticks still, for all this:
The seven Golden Candlesticks are the seven Churches. Surely, Christ the Lord
of the Churches, is more Charitable, more Indulgent to us in this point, then
we are one to another. We have a Generation among us, I pray God they be not
such a Generation as Solomon speaks of, Prove. 30.12. A Generation that it pure
in their own Eyes, yet are not cleansed from their iniquity: I hope the best;
But such a Generation we have amongst us, which out of a high Conceit of their
own transcendent purity, think themselves too good to join with others; others
too bad to be admitted with them into Church Fellowship: Where they see any
Defects, Errors, Miscarriages, though they be but personal, not
Congregationall, and such as we do no way allow of, but reprove, cry out
against, lament, and bewail, where we cannot help it; yet these men take such
offense at them, that they withdraw themselves, separate from our
Congregations, un-church us, revile, reproach, rail upon us, as Synagogues of
Satan, Lymbes of Antichrist, and cast a greater reproach upon us, then the
Papist, themselves. But my beloved Brethren, From what spirit comes this? from
that spirit and wisdom which is from above, which is first pure; then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated? etc. Or, from a spirit of pride,
singularity, disdain, vain glory, and hypocrisy? surely these things proceed
not from that spirit which descended in the likeness of a Dove, in all
meekness and gentleness; but rather that of Boanerges, the Sons of Thunder,
which called for Lightning and Fire to destroy, and to avenge. But if the same
mind were in you, which was in Christ Jesus, in this Text, you would be more
Charitable. He owns the Churches yet for Candlestickes: Nay, for all the Rust,
and Dust, and Dross which they were Corrupted withal, for Golden
Candlestickes: The seven Golden Candlestickes are the seven Churches.

Why the Churches are set forth unto us under the Name and Notion of
Candlestickes?

simile, the spirit of God does allude to that famous Candlestick which was
set up in the Tabernacle, of which we Read Exodus 25.31. From it then we must
fetch light to understand what is meant by comparing the Churches to it. And
herein the Apprehensions of Expositors have been very luxurious in taking hold
of variety of particulars, from whence to raise several Observations, not
impertinent, but especially from these three things. First, From the Matter and
the Mettle whereof they are made. Secondly, From the Form of them. Thirdly,
From the Use of them. Frist, From the Matter and the Metal of them, thus:
When Christ resembles the Churches by Golden Candlestickes, his meaning is,
That they are, Per sanctitatem pura, per dona and gratias spiritu^ sancti
pretiosa, per sinceritatem solida, per bona opera splendentia, per morum
gravitatem ponderosa, per persecutionem probata, per obedientiam facile
ductilia, per praedicationem verbi sonora. By their holiness they are pure, by
their Gifts and Graces they are precious, by their sincerity they are solid, by
their wisdom and gravity they are weighty, by the fire of temptation and
persecution they are tried, by the Preaching of the word they ring, and give a
sound, by their charity and obedience they are easily drawn forth as Gold out
of the Lump, into Leaf Gold. All this From the Matter of them, and the Mettle
whereof they are made. Secondly, From the Form of them: It is observed, that
they are erected, they look upward toward Heaven: such Candlesticks should the
Churches be: Erecta per rerum divinarum contemplationem; Erecta per spem and
fidem in Christo ad dextram Dei in coelo sedent; Erecta ad lucem celestem
recipiendam: Erecta ad lucem illam aliis prebendam, and circumquaque
communicandam: They must be Candlesticks erected and tending upward, by their
Contemplation of Divine things, and setting their Hearts and Minds on the
things that are above, erected by Faith and Hope in Christ, sitting at the
right Hand of the Father, erected to receive the Heavenly Light from the Father
of Lights; and erected, that it being set up on high in them, might the better
and the farther be Communicated to others: this from the Form of the
Candlestickes. Thirdly, From the Use of them, and that was touched in the last,
to hold forth the Light: Men do not light a Candle to put it under a Bushel,
but to set up in a Candlestick, that it may give Light to all that are in the
House: Such a Candlestick is the Church, to hold forth the Light of Truth to
all her Children, called therefore, The Pillar of Truth, Timothy 3.15. because
as the Pillar holds forth the Kings Proclamation fixed upon it, that all that
are Concerned in it may take notice of it, and he that runs may Read it. So
should the Church hold forth the Truth, that it may be visible and audible to
all her Children and Members, as the Pillar does the Proclamation, the
Candlestick the Light. What use is there of the Candlestick, if there be no
Candle set up in it? Or what use of the Candle, except it be lighted, that it
may burn and shine? And that it may do so, there are two things necessary.
First, That it should be fed with a continual supply of Oil, or other
moisture, to nourish it, and to keep it burning; and good reason, that they,
which like Candles, consume themselves to give light to others, should from
others receive that Oil and nourishment which may keep them burning. Secondly,
It Is necessary sometimes that they should be Topt, or Snufft: We Read Exodus
25.38. that in the Tabernacle where the Golden Candlestick was, there were
also Snuffers, and Snuffe-dishes: What the use of those Snuffers was, we all
know, and what that use of them teaches and leads to, we may imagine:
sometimes the Candles may burn luxuriously, and in that Case, It Is necessary
they should be snufft: sometimes they may burn but dimly, being choakt, and
darkened with the snuff it self, and in that Case, it is fit they should be
snufft: sometimes there may be a Thief in the Candle, that may waste the Oil
and nourishment of it, by conveying it the wrong way, and in that Case they may
not take it ill if they be snufft. The Candlesticks themselves are not so free
from Rust and Dust, but sometimes they will stand in need of scouring, of
rubbing, and of dressing, by Corrections, Visitations, and wholesome
Discipline; Nor do the Lights in them burn so clearly, but they had need to
be looked too. Are we of this society so innocent, that we need no inspection?
or so nocent, that we need to fear a Visitation? Are we, amongst all
Societies, so absolute, so independent, that we have no Superintendent? or if
any, who should that be, but our Chief Priest, the Angel of this Church, our
Diocesan, our Metropolitan, whose Presbytery we are, and to whom we have all
Sworn Canonical Obedience? Who but he our Aaron, to fit as a Refiner, to
purify the Sons of Levy in this Society?

But we haste to the other Part of the Description of this Wonderful Person,
as he is here represented to us, Walking in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks. And this is the last Part of this his Description.

And what is meant by this his Walking there, Saint Bernard tells us, Ambulare
in medio Candelabrorum, quid est, nisi Ecclesiis semper adesse, eis delectari,
eas servare, erudire, protegeri, dirigere, juvare, and eis omnibus modis
advigilare: To walk in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, what is it, but
to be ever present with the Churches, to delight in them, to direct them, to
protect them, to instruct them, and by all means to Consult their good? they
are all Comprehended in these four; His Presence with them: His Delight in
them: His Observation of them: And his Care for them. First, He walks in the
midst of them with Delight; Of Syon, he has said, here will I dwell, for I
have a delight in her; and so he walks in the midst of them, as a Man would
do in his Garden, for Pleasure, and for Recreation. Secondly, He walks in the
midst of them, to Preserve them, and Protect them; where he is in the midst of
them within, he is as a Wall of Brass round about them without too: Nay, As a
Wall of Fire, Zachary 2.5. not only to Defend them within; but to Consume and
burn up all them without, which shall presume to attempt to break in upon
them; and so he walks in the midst of them, as once he did in the midst of the
Fiery Furnace for the preservation of the three Children, Daniel 3.23. which he
did so powerfully, that the fire in it had power to burn the Bands and Cords,
with which they were bound; but not to touch an Hair of their Heads, or a
Hemme of their Garments. Thirdly, He walks in the midst of them, Erudire, to
Teach, and to Instruct them, to Awe them, to keep them in order; For he is the
beloved Son of the Father, in whom he is well pleased, whom we must Hear and
Obey, Matthew 3.17. He the great Prophet of his Church, whom we are Commanded
to Hear with a severe intimation, by his Spirit, by his Word, and by his
Pastors sent out by him, does he teach the Churches to the worlds end: And so
he walks in the midst of them, as a Schoolmasters in the midst of his School,
and his Disciples or Scholars. Fourthly, He walks in the midst of them, To
Observe them, to take notice of their Carriage, their Manners, their Order, and
their Behavior, as appears by the particular Charges which he gives to these
several Churches in this his Visitation, in all of them making good what in
General he tells them, before he come to deal particularly with them, Novi
Opera tua, I know thy Works: And so he walks in the midst of them, as the
Master of the Feast in the Gospel walked in his Dining Room, to take a View of
his Guests, to see who had, and who had not on his Wedding Garment. And to this
purpose it is observable, in what manner of Posture and Gesture he is here
seen, He is seen Walking; Not Sedet Otiosus, as Bullinger observes; not Stat
Negligens, he does not sit, as being Idle; He stands not still, as being
negligent; but he is seen Walking, from end to end, forward and backward, to
and fro, that at every turn he might take a View, and at every step cast an
Eye, that nothing done or said amongst them, may escape his Cognizance. Lastly,
he is walking, in Medio in the midst of the Candlesticks; Non in Angulo, non in
exteriori aliqua part; Not in a Corner, not in some Skirt, or Outside of them:
but, In medio Candelabrorum, in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, that he
might look over them every way; and they at an equal distance on all sides,
might receive from him that Direction, Protection, Comfort, and Encouragement
which is their Light and Life. The truth is, He bought them, he laid down a
Price for them, which was far more precious then Gold, his own Blood; he had
need see what becomes of them, and he is to deliver them up to God the Father;
he received them by weight, and he received them by tale; Of those which thou
have given me, have I lost none; It is his great Care that he may deliver up
his full Tale, and that he may deliver them up Pure, and Bright, and Clear,
and that he may present them without spot or wrinkle; and therefore is it that
he has such a special Care of them, such a vigilant Eye upon them,
continually resident among them, and walking in the midst of them. Oh how happy
are the Churches under the inspection of such an Eye, under the Care of such a
Guardian, under the Protection of such a Patron, in the Favor of such a
Prince, the Teaching of such a Prophet, the Intercession and Benediction of
such a Priest continually present with them, President over them, and resident
among them, walking in the midst of them? and how holily ought they to carry
themselves in such a Presence? how circumspectly under the Inspection of so
severe an Eye? that when he shall come to visit them, as here he does this
Church, and to take an Account of them, they may give up their Account with
joy, when he shall say unto them, as here to Ephesus, Novi Opera tua, I know
thy Works, they may be such as they need not be ashamed of, such as may stand
by us, and abide the trial, such as may praise us in the Gate, such, as upon
the enquiry and examination, he may approve of, and upon which we may expect
the Promise here in this Visitation made Vincentibus, To them that over come,
to Eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God, to Receive the White Stone, and therein the New Name Written, which
none can Read, but he that receives it, to be Clothed with White Raiment,
washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and in it to follow the Lamb whither soever
he goes, and to be ever in his Presence, in whose Presence is fullness of joy,
and at whose Right Hand there is pleasure for evermore: Which the Great God of
Heaven and Earth be pleased to admit us unto, for his sake which Holds the
seven Stars in his Right Hand, and Walks in the midst of the seven Golden
Candlesticks; To whom be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

