JACOBUS IIds. D.G. Angliae: Scotiae: Fran: et Hiber: REX. Fidei Defensor. etc.
DIEU ET MON DROIT
portrait R. White sculp

Saml. Lowndes excu:

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal motto



A Complete HISTORY OF ENGLAND, FROM The First Entrance of the ROMANS UNDER The
Conduct of JULIUS CAESAR, Unto the End of The Reign of King Henry III.

Comprehending The ROMAN, SAXON, DANISH and NORMAN Affairs and Transactions in
this NATION during that Time.

Wherein is showed The Original of Our ENGLISH LAWS, THE Differences and
Disagreements between the SECULAR and ECCLESIASTIC POWERS, THE True Rise and
Grounds of the CONTENTIONS and WARS between the BARONS and our Ancient KINGS.

And Likewise An Account of our Foreign WARS with FRANCE, The Conquest of
Ireland, and the Actions between the English, Scots and Welsh, during the same
Time.

ALL Delivered in plain Matter of Fact, without any Reflections or Remarques.

By ROBERT BRADY, Doctor in Physic.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb for Samuel Lowndes over against
Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. MDCLXXXV.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE
DIEU ET MON DROIT
G III R
royal blazon or coat of arms

To the Most Excellent MAJESTY OF SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the
Faith, etc.
GREAT SIR,
the Times I Write of, they might have Obtained a Right Notion of the
Government and State of the Kingdom then, which at this day are much changed
from what they were, to the great Ease and Repose of the King, as well as
Benefit and

Your MAJESTY'S Most Faithful and obedient Servant, ROBERT BRADY.

TO THE
THe General Preface to this History may seem Difficult and Tedious to some
Men; but when it shall be Read with Advertency, and fully Understood, it will
appear Impregnable Rock against the pretended Sovereignty and Power of the
People in this Nation, which the Republicans can never climb over.

To show the Condition of the Bulk of the People, and what the Ordinary
Inhabitants of this Nation were, before the Conquest and after, it was
Necessary to take Notice, and Inquire into Quality of them in every County, as
they are to be found in the greatest Record of this Nation.

If any one thinks this a needless Work, let him Consider I have Prejudice to
deal with, and Men Seasoned with other Opinions, which they have Learnt, and
been Instructed in from their Childhoods, by Men and Authors, they pay a great
Deference unto, who never made it their Business to search into the Originals
slight Popular Notions and Superficial Knowledge of them. And therefore to
Discover their great (not to say) Dangerous Mistakes, and to put to silence
such, as though they be Convinced, will not own it, but Scrible the same Things
over again, and Publish them in a New Dress: I have been forced to be very much
longer, both in that Preface, and the History it self than at first I Designed,
seeing such Satisfaction as the Reader ought to receive, could not be expected
from a short Account of Things, and without a Due Relation of all their
Circumstances.

From them both there is a clear Demonstration, That all the Liberties and
Privileges the People can pretend to, were the Grants and Concessions of the
Kings of this Nation, and were Co. 2 Instit. f. 496.
Derived from the Crown: And from the Preface alone, it is as manifest, that the
Ordinary People, and Bulk of the Nation, were in most Things of the same
Condition, as well before the Conquest as after, and their Quality was not
different, though under the Normans, they were Obnoxious to greater Rigor, and
and more Severities in the same Way of Living, or as now we would call it,
Servitude.

It was not this sort of People that contended for Liberty, but the Military
Men, the Earls, Barons and Tenants in Capite, and such as held of them by
Military Service, especially such as were Dissolute and Poor, having been drawn
in, and Cunning Ambitious Men of the same Order, with the Assistance of the
Bishops and Clergy, who in all those Times of Contention, Labored to cast off
their Feudal Dependence upon the Crown, and to have their Temporals, and the
Investitures of Churches, from others than Laymen, and to be wholly free from
Subjection to Secular Power.

The Laics also contended about their Feudal and Military and Performances, and
the Relaxation of those Laws and Tenures, as most plainly appears by Henry the
First his Charter, the Charter of King John founded upon it, and the Charter of
King Henry the Third, which was only an Enlargement, and further Explication of
that of King John, which in the Main were but Concessions of the more Moderate
Use of Feudal or Military Law; by which their Fees, Tenures, and incidents to
them, were made more easy and certain; For until the Tenants in Capite, and
other Military Tenants might have License to Alien part of their Estates,
keeping enough to perform their Services; There were very few Freehold Lands,
according to the present Notion of them.

Nor were the Proprietors of them of much Esteem, until the Military Men parted
with so much of their Estates, as their Fees grew very narrow and scanty, so as
they could not support their Military Service and Charge, and the Burdens (as
they then accounted them) of attending at Hundred, and County Courts, and upon
the Justices in their Iters or Circuits, and Sheriffs in Attorneys or Deputies,
or by Laws of their own making, forced the inconsiderable Freeholders, or
Soccagers, upon that Drudgery.

Nor were these Military Men any other than Normans, or the Descendents from
them, that made this Noise, and were the Cause of so much Blood being spilt for
their Liberties (as they called them) which were, for the most part, nothing
but the Relaxation Rigorous Exactions and Usages of the Feudal Law relating to
their then Fees and Estates, as was said before, which at first their Ancestors
had received from the Conqueror, without those Easy Terms, and that Abatement
of the Strictness of the Law they required

For however afterward, and of Late Times, that Tenure was esteemed a
Thraldom, yet it did at first begin upon a Voluntary and Desired Submission,
and for many Centuries of years had the Reputation of the most Free and Noble
Service, and all other Tenures, whether in Soccage or otherwise, esteemd Base
and Ignoble in respect of it: And that the Maintainers of the Contest for their
Liberties against our Norman Kings, were themselves Normans, or their
Descendents, is more than Evident from the Witnesses Names to King Henry the
First his Charter, who were all Normans, and from the thirty six Bishops, and
Great Men, Witnesses to King Stephans Charter of Liberties, who were likewise
all Normans Strangers; nor is there to be found amongst the Commanders on
either side in the War between Queen Maud, King Stephan and Henry the Second,
one English Saxon. The Witnesses to King Henry the Second's Charter were also
Normans; The Bishops and Great Men, mentioned in King John's Charter, as
Granted to them, were all of the same Nation or Foreigners; Bishops, Earls and
Barons that were Witnesses to Henry the Third his Charter, were of the same
Condition; And which is more, all or most of the Witnesses and Grantees
mentioned in any of the Charters of the Norman Kings, after the middle of the
Reign of William the First, were Normans or Foreigners; and there is scarce any
one Earl, Baron Great Man to be found in all these Kings Reigns, that was not
of Norman, or other Foreign Extraction.

And yet in spite of Truth and Matter of Fact, we find nothing in our Common
Histories of these Times, but the Brave Feats performed by the English for
their Fundamental Rights and Liberties: Nothing in Sir Edward Coke Mr. Seldom,
Mr. Pryn, and all late Writers when they chop upon these Times, Magnanimity of
the English in Appearing for their Birthrights* and the great Privileges they
had formerly enjoyed, no body knows, nor can tell when or where, when in very
Deed they were not English, but incorrigible Norman Rebels against their own
Norman Princes, from whom they or their Ancestors had received so many, and
Benefits and Favors.

In King Henry the Thirds time, the Controversy was not about the Great
Charter it self, the Granting and Confirmation whereof he never denied, but
only about the meaning and interpretation of it, which then by Law belonged to
the King. De Bracton. p. 34. a. n* 3.
Chartis vero Regis, and factis Regum non debent nec possunt Justitiarii, nec
privatae personae Disputare; nec etiam si in illa Dubitatio oriatur possunt eam
interpretari, and in Dubiis and obscuris, vel si Dictio aliqua Duos contineat
intellectus, Domini Regis erit expectanda Interpretatio and voluntas, cum ejus
sit interpretari cujus est Condere. Concerning the Charters of the King, or
Deeds of Kings, neither the Justices or any private Persons ought or may
Dispute; nor when there may arise a Doubt in any one of them, may they
interpret it; for in Doubtful and obscure Passages, if any Word conteins two
meanings, the Kings Mind and Interpretation is to be expected, when as he that
made and Granted, ought to Interpret it.

The Barons and Bishops, as often as they had a mind to

From hence it was they stiffly insisted upon it, to have a Power to See Answer
^o the Rights of the Commons asserted, ^. 131, 132, etc.
choose the Justiciary or Chief Justice, and send into

But notwithstanding their objecting to the King, his neglect and
non-observation of the Charter, they either would not be, or fol. 40. B. they
used and practiced Arbitrary Dominion and Power over their Tenants and
Neighbors, refusing to be Justified (that is, to receive Justice) from the
King and his Court, or to observe the Articles of the Great Charter which
concerned them. For Remedy whereof the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 20 and 22 Chapter of the
Pul^on's Sta^utes, f. 16, 17, etc.
Statute of Marleborough, 52d year of Henry the Third, were provided. So that
we see, those Factious Barons, when they had secured their own Liberties,
rather made use of them to Oppress, than Relieve their Tenants and Neighbors.

The Practices of these Men were not well understood by our Ordinary Writers,
who have nothing but what they commonly find in the Monks, the only Historians
of those times, and they Wrote the Actions of Kings and Great Men, and rendered
them good or bad, as they were more or less Kind and Beneficient to the Church,
Churchmen, and themselves; and Extolled or Defamed

Who would not think Simon Montfort, Earl of Leicester, a great Patron of the
Liberties of the People, a Saint, an innocent Person, and good Subject, that
barely reads the Monks of those and succeeding times, and such Modern Writers
as have

The old Bone of Contention (the Feudal or Military Law

By Time, and the Concessions of our Kings, the Subjects of this Government,
have and may enjoy, all Freedom and Happiness, that Sober, Rational Men can
desire, and such as is no where to be found but in this Island, and the
Dominions to it belonging; nor can any Man that Loves his Prince or Country,
wish

It is a sad Return of ungrateful Men, pretending to Purity of Religion, and
the most Refined Christianity, to Christian Princes, for their Indulgence to,
and Protection of them for the greatest Immunities and Privileges granted to
them, to take all Occasions and Opportunities to Requite them with Affronts and
Rudeness,

For here never was Pact between King and People, nor Fundamental Terms of
Government agreed between them; nor indeed ever was there, or is it possible
for any such thing to be in any Nation of the World: Matter of Fact so long as
we have any Memorials of it in these Kingdoms, shows the contrary.

And I shall be very Thankful to any Man, and give him leave to Reprove me,
that can Produce any other than what is here delivered from Authors of the same
Credit, and such as lived in, or very near the Times when the Things were done.

Through the whole Course of the History, I have not Labored after an Exact
and Even Style, nor can it be Expected where there is such Variety of Matter,
and where Men are confined to, and limited by the Translation of other Men's
Language: There is nothing my own, but the Method and Version, and whether the
last be Faithful and Just, as it ought to be, I Submit my self to

Nor have I made any Reflections or Politic Observations upon what I have
written from the Relations of others, which some are so much in Love with, as
they Esteem nothing to be History without them; Let these Men enjoy their
Opinions, it may be others will think, that they serve only to Pervert and
Disguise

At the Court at WHITE HALL JVLY 13th. 1685.
Let this BOOK be Printed.

Sunderland.

THE General Preface.
Europe is obliged for the Civility, Literature, Laws and Government it now
injoys, who Inhabited wheresoever they Conquered, and strengthened their
Provinces two ways, by Colonies and Garrisons; L. Lips. de Magnitud. Romans
Imper. c. 6.
Every Colony was an Image and Representation Rome it self, with like holy
Rites, like Courts, Laws, Temples, and Places of Public Commerce, and for the
most part governed by Duumviri from the Number Two, because there were two of
them, Panciroll. de Magistrate. Municipal. c. 8. Duumviri why so called. Their
Office. Ibid. c. 1. Decurions what they were. Ibid. c. 19. Aediles what they
were. Rosin. Antiq. lib. 7. c. 11. Praetors what they were. Ibid. c. 43.
Provincial Praetors what they were. Ibid. c. 4^. Quaestors what they were.
after the Example Roman Consuls; they were the Judges and Chief Officers in
their Cities, Corporations, or Municipal Towns (unless the particular Custom of
any Place was otherwise) their Camps and Villages not having such; yet
sometimes a single person had this Title, and executed soley the Office of
both; sometimes a greater number than Two, as in our Cities and Corporations,
sometime a Major, sometimes Bailiffs are the Chief Magistrates.
Duumviri in stead of Consuls; So called, because in the first settling of
Colonies, every Tenth Man was Assigned and Chosen out, for the Common Council;
They were as the Aldermen, twenty four, forty eight, and Common Council men in
our Corporations.
Decurions in place of a Senate; From Aedes, so named, because at first they
had the care of Sacred Houses and Temples, and afterward of Bargains, and
things sold, that there might be no cheat* and that what was exposed to sale,
might not be vitiated or corrupted: They also had the inspection of Ways,
Streets, Rivers, Aquaeducts, Sinks, ordinary and common Houses, etc. that all
of them might be kept Neat and Clean, and in excellent Repair, that so the
whole might appear decorous and beautiful.
Aediles and other Municipal Officers. Besides this of Strength and Safety,
there were other Reasons and Advantages, after Rome was Colonies, as sending
forth the Superfluous Multitude, the Poor and Burthensom Comunalty, providing
rewards for super-annuated, and overworn Soldiers, the teaching of Arts,
Cultivating and Civilizing the Barbarous People.

When the Romans had Subdued all Italy, and brought under their Power many
other Countries, Not. Imp. or c. 98.
which they called Provinces, Praetor or General to Govern it; and when
afterward by a further Progress of Arms, their Dominions were much more
enlarged, they Ruled the Greater Provinces by Consul.
Proconsuls, the Lesser by Praetors and Consuls were at first called Praetors;
but when the Consuls were called abroad by War, or other great Business from
the City, then were Praetors first Erected, to do Justice in their absence; he
was the Guardian or Keeper of the Civil Law. The Provincial Pr^tors, such as
here mentioned, gave sentence according to Law; he was a Judge or Chief
Justice, and in urgent occasions managed the whole Affair of War; Praetors were
various, and their Office also various, according to the diversity of Times.
Quaestors were Treasurers or Receivers, and Expenditors of the Public Money at
first; afterward they had other Powers, as the Hearing and Determining Causes,
etc. and in the Declining Empire were as Chancellors to the Emperors.
Quaestors: But when Augustus was made Emperor, he Changed the Form of the
Commonwealth, Ibid. Augustus changes the form of the Commonwealth.
and divided the Provinces between himself and the Roman People, those which
were most quiet and remote from Enemies he gave to them; such as bordered upon
the Enemy and were most hazardous, he kept to himself, lest the People having
the Command of Soldiers and Arms, might turn them against Ibid.
Their Magistrates he called Proconsuls, although they had never been Consuls,
or Chosen out of Senators that had born that Office; they had no Power over the
Soldiers, nor did they wear a Sword, or Soldiers Habit: Those which he sent
into the Provinces, Legates or Lieutenants who so called.
that he retained himself, he called Legates or Lieutenants, although they had
been Consuls, and Vice-Praetors; that is, had born the Office of Praetors.

Not. Imp. or c. 98. Cities how many a Province contained.
Every Province contained ten or eleven Not. Imp. or c. 98. Cities and chief
Cities what. Ibid. c* 33. Praetorian prefect what he was.
They were such Places as had Courts for Hearing Causes. Duumviri Judges or
Magistrates Executing Justice; but the greater Cities or Metropoles, such as
had a Pr^t^rium or Palace, a Gymnasium, a School or Place of Philosophy
Exercise, a Theater, Court and Bathes*
Cities at least, and they were Various, according to the Diversity of Times;
in the beginning all were Praetors, because Governed by Praetors; but after the
Conquest of Asia and Achaia, there were two kinds of Provinces; Pretorian and
Consular, which were Governed by Proconsuls, the Magistrates or Officers in
Italy were Pretorian and Consular, those abroad were Propretorian and
Proconsular.

Ibid.
Constantin the Great changed this Constitution, and the Form of Government in
the Empire, Al^iat. T. 2 de Magistrate. etc. 471. Constantin Institutes 4
Praetorian prefects.
and Instituted four The Praetorian prefect at first only Commanded the
Emperors immediate Guard, and from these those constituted by Constantin, had
their Denomination, and had the greatest Trust in the Empire committed to them,
by succeeding Emperors, from whose sentence there was no Appeal, etc.
Pretorian Prefects, one of the East, another of Illiricum, a third of Italy,
and a fourth of Gallia: These had their Vicars or Deputies under them, who
likewise had the Command over several Presidents, Consulars, and other
Magistrates according to the Extent of the Country, where they were Deputies or
Vicars.

Three degrees of Provinces.
There were three Degrees of Provinces, the Greater, the Middle, Not. Imp. or c.
98.
and the Less; The greater Province were Ruled by the greater Magistrates or
Spectabiles, the Conspicuous or Notable, How ruled, and by whom.
such were Proconsuls, Comites, Counts, etc. The middle Consular Provinces, not
that they were governed by Consuls or Proconsuls, but by Senators sent with
Consulary Ornaments: These were sometime governed by Correctors which were
inferior to them of Consular Dignity, because they used not their Ornaments:
Yet they commanded over the Soldiers, and wore a Sword and Military Habit,
Maxima Cesariensis, Valentia, Consular Provinces. See these Explained in the
Notes upon the History in Valentinian. And also these three Presidial Provinces
Britan. 112.
which the Proconsuls did not; Maxima Caesariensis and Valentia were Consular
Provinces in Britain, and Governed by There were two sorts of Consuls before
Constantin, the Ordinarii and Suffecti, The Romans dated their Records,
although they continued not a whole year in that Office. Consulars who.
the Ordinary were the usual annual Consuls, or were such as began their
Consulship in the b^ginning of the year, or on the first of January, whence the
other were Substituted Consuls; these last Constantin called Consulares or
Honorary Consuls; from the Consulary Ornaments they had, which were Instituted
by Julius Caesar, Sueton. in Julio. c. 76. Such also were called Consulares,
that had born the Office of Ordinary Consuls: but these were not of that Number.
Consulars; The less or smaller Provinces were subject to Presidents, by such
were Ruled Britannia prima, secunda and Flavia for what Reasons in those times
the three last Provinces were accounted the least and worst, and the two
former, the greater and better, I know not; Camden says the Empire declining,
those Provinces had only Consular Magistrates which lay next the Enemy, such
were Maxima Caesariensis, and Valentia in Britain.

Whatsoever the first Institution was of these Dignities and Imperial Commands,
yet what distinct Jurisdiction and Powers belonged to them, I find not
sufficiently cleared by any Author I have seen, especially since the time of
Constantin (in whose Reign the Era of the Declining Empire is rightly fixed).
I am apt to think, the same Government, Power and Jurisdiction, or very little
different, might be Used and Exercised, Titles, they all having the same, See
Alciat^ Breviary in his second Tome 482, 483, 485. and Panciroll in utramque
Notitiam, and upon the several Magistrates. Lib. 2.64.688. Digest Lib. 8 Tit. 6.
or not much different Offices and Courts of State, with almost the same
Officers attendant upon them, yet so as they were distinguished by their
several Ensigns, Habits, Symbols, and other Discriminations of mere State and
Honor, according to the first Institution: This Conjecture wants not some
Authority to Confirm it: Zosimus Vice-Pretor was called Duke: And Virius Lupus
Propretor or Lieutenant was called President by Ulpian: Panciroll says those
which Governed small Provinces, by Special Appellation, were called Presidents;
Not. Imp or c. 99.
yet all Proconsuls and Governors of Provinces were contained under the
General Name of President, and they agreed in very many

According to the General Opinion the Civil Government of Britain, after the
time of Constantin, was committed to a Vicar or Deputy of the Pretorian Prefect
of Gallia, under whose Direction or Disposition were the two Consulars, Alciat.
Tome 2d. 482.
and three Presidents before mentioned. In his Office or Court of State he had
these Officers; The Officers of the Vicar^ Court, ibid. Princeps, etc.
Principem de Schola agentium in rebus ex A Decree or Order of M^n in this
Body, so called from the Ducenarii in a Cohort, which commanded two hundred
Men, See Panciroll. Not. Imp. or c. 64. And here it may be noted, that the
Officers in the Courts of Magistrates had the resemblance of Officers in
Military Cohorts, Ibid. c. 20. Ducenarii.
and from thence their Names; and were rai^ed by degrees to Honor, as in that;
the Names of Military being transferred to Civil Officers, whence the
Magistrates Office had the name of Cohort or Court, which we at this day retein.
ducenariis. The Chief or Principal of this Court who gave Direction to the
other Officers, was of the Society or Corporation of the Emperors Emissaries,
Panciroll. Not. o^ c. 64.
Spies and Pursuivants, and Superintendents of the Alciat. Tom. 2.^35. Post
Horses kept at the Public Charge. Public Course what it was.
The Emperors had Horses kept in the Provinces, at several Commodious and set
Stages, at the Public charge, that upon any sudden or extraordinary Occasion,
they might either send out or receive Messengers, very Speedily by often
changing their Horses; and none might use these; but such as had the Emperors
License and Letters. Constantin when he came to his Father at York* hamstringed
all the Horses, but what he used himself, that none might pursue him* This was
called the Public Course or Postage.
Public Course, or such as Rode Post.

Ibid. c. 11. Cornicularius* what.
Cornicularium, One that Wrote and Published the Commands, Sentences and
Decrees of Pretorian Prefects, Presidents, and other Magistrates, a Scribe not
much unlike our Clercs of the Assizes; he had his Name from Cornu, a Horn,
which was his Badge or Ensign, or by the Winding whereof he commanded silence
in the Court.

Ibid. c. 15.
Numerarios duos, Two Accomptants, who Numbered and Public Money, and from
thence called Numerarii: Numerarii. Not. Imp. or fol. 107. b.
There were two of them in every Province, one that noted such Sums as came to
the Count of the Emperors Gifts and Liberality, Comentar. ante c. 156,
the other such as came to the Count of the Privy Purse; one of these supplied
both places oft-times in the East.

Ibid. c. 13. Comentariensis, what
Comentariensem, A Jailer or Keeper of the Prison* The Places where they kept
Prisoners were anciently called Commentaria, whence this Name, they brought the
Prisoners into Court, and delivered a Calender of them to the Judges.

Not. Imp. or c 14. Public Notaries, who.
Ab actis, Public Notaries, who Wrote Testaments, Contracts, and other
Instruments, which were signed before the Judge or Justice, and attested by
him, that after the death of the Parties or Judge they might remain Authentic;
the Generals Counts or Dukes, because they had no Jurisdiction over the People,
had not these Notaries amongst their Officers

Ibid. c. 17.
Cura or de Cur^ Epistolarum, There being frequent Occasion in many Matters for
the Governors of Provinces sending Letters and Epistles to the Emperor,
Epistolares what.
they who had the Care of Epistolares, perhaps they were not unlike our
Secretaries.

Adjutorem, An Assistant, yet not to these Epistolares, Ibid. c. 12. Adjutor,
what.
because in the Catalogue he immediately follows them, but to the whole Court,
although many of these particular Officers had their Adjutors and Vicegerents
in case of Infirmity and Necessary Absence; after this Example, it was in some
places by case of Infirmity should have their Coadjutors.

Subadjuvas, Under-assistants, Ibid. c. 16. Subadjuve, who.
or Assistants to the Adjutor, or his Vicegerents.

Exceptores, so called, quod acta Excipiebant, they wrote the Acts of Court
from the Mouth of the Magistrate, Ibid. c. 19. Exceptors what they were.
chiefly in cases of Appeal to the higher Officers, which they kept, and

Singulares vet Singularios, Ibid. c. 20. Singulars what they were.
They were so called from some Singular Employment which they had; so sometimes
Scouts and the Forlorn Hope of their Armies were termed* they seem to have been
Prosecutors, Informers, Bailiffs, Sergeants, of Tribute, or some such Persons.

Et reliquos officiales, or reliquam officium, Alciat. Tom. 2.482
such might be Apparitors, Messengers, Summoners, etc.

This was the Court of the Vicar or Deputy of Britain, The Vicar of Britain.
under the Viceroy or Pretorian prefect of Gaul; These his Officers in that
Court.

Britain before mentioned, The Ensigns of the Vicar of Britain.
Britaina prima, Britaina secunda, Flavia Caesariensis, Maxima Caesariensis,
and Valentia, expressed in the Forms of several Buildings, with their Names
superscribed* placed on the Triangular Form of the Island, as i^ those Five had
Comprehended the whole Island* and the Book of Instructions as Letters Patent
or Commission, as in a Gilt Cover, with several Letters Inscribed upon the
Book, which Panciroll thus interprets, Not. Imp. or Comentar. ante c. 93. fol.
61.
and thinks them to be the initial Letters of these words following, Floeix
liber, injunctus Notariis, Tribunis, a laterculo, continens Mandata ordine
Principis vel Primicerii, who was the Master or Chief of Clercs of the Crown.

The Consulars Ensigns and Symbols were the same with the Consulars of
Campania, Not. Imp. occid. c. 50. and c. 91. The Consulars Ensigns.
except that in the Guidon or Square Banner, there ought to be the Name of the
Provinces they Governed in stead of Campania, and may be thus* A large Tribunal
in the middle, of which a Woman sat in a Throne, with a Mural Crown, holding
in her right hand a Banner, and resting her self upon a Shield, with the Name
of the Province, either Maxima Caesariensis, or Valentia inscribed upon it.
Their Office was the same with the Vicars, save that the Chief or Master of it,
was out of the Office of the Pretorian Gallia, that he had not an Epistolaris,
and that he had two Tabularii instead of the Numerarii, who dispatched the same
Business, and noted the Sums carried to the Comes largitionum, Not^mper. or
Comentar. ante C. 106 fol. 107 b.
and the names of Debtors: the change in the names being made by Valentinian;
and also that the Office closed thus, Et reliquos Cohortalinos, Cohorta^ines
why so called.
Cohortalinos* because they resembled the Officers i^ Cohorts, and might be the
same which are expressed by reli^uos Officiales at the close of the Vicars
Court, which see.
which ought not to desert the Service of this Office, without the notice, and
favor Master or chief.

Not. Imp. occid. c. 64. etc. 92.93. The Presidents Ensigns.
The Presidents Ensigns were a fair Building superscribed with the name of the
Province under the Book of Instructions, and the Pictures of two Princes on the
top of a Gilt Pillar the same, as likewise their Court and Office, with those
of the President of Dalmatia, and he had almost the same Officers and Court
Magistrates. The Vicar and Counts were honored with the Title of Spectabiles;
the Consulars, with the addition of Clarissimi, and the Presidents with that of
Perfectissimi.

There were also a Rationalis Summarum Britanniarum, under the Disposition of
the Count of the Sacred largesses, and a Prepositus Thesaurorum Augustensium in
Britannia, and Procuratores under the same, and a Rationalis rei privatae per
Britannias under the Dispose of the Count of the privy Purse.

Concerning the Saxons there is not, that I can find, much more to be written
of their Laws, Customs and Usages, than what has been f. 67.68. etc. Of the
Saxons, and what the condition of the ordinary Saxons was before the Conquest.
said in the First part of that History; yet seeing all men of the long Robe,
that do industriously Coments upon Magna Charta, and some other Old Statutes,
do magnify and cry up the Liberties and Freedom of the Ordinary People under
the Saxon Kings, to such a Degree, as makes them all Petty Princes, or at least
Sharers in the Government, and that the Common Authentic and undeniable proof
out of Domesday Book, show them, what Really their condition was, before and
after the Conquest

Essex Little Domesday Book which conteins only Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk f.
1. b. The same Sorts of men, and of the same denomination before the Conquest,
as afterward.
Terra Regis. Hundret de Berdestapla.
BEnflet Tenuit Haroldus Tempore Regis Edwardi, pro uno Manerio and pro octo
Hidis modo Custodit hoc Manerium Ranulphus frater Ilgeri in Manu Regis. Tunc
xii Villani, modo xxi semper vi Bordarii, Tunc tres servi, modo tres iij
Carucatae in Dominio modo ij, Tunc xi Carucae hominum modo v triginta acrae
silvae Pastura 130 ovibus Dimidium Molendini,

Harold held Benflet in the time of King Edward for one Manner and Eight Hides,
now Ranulph Fitz-Ilger keeps it in the Kings hand, Then (that is in the time of
King Edward) there was twelve Villains, now (when the Survey or Domesday Book
was made) one and twenty, There was always then and now) 6 Bordars, then three
Servants, and now three. Three Carucates in Demeasn, now two, Then the men or
Tenants had Eleven Ploughs, or Eleven Plough-lands, now Five: Thirty Acres of
Wood, Pasture for 130 Sheep, half a Mill, etc.

Witham Ibidem.
Tenuit Haroldus Tempore Regis Edwardi pro uno Manerio, and pro v. hidis modo
custodit hoc Manerium in Tunc duae Carucatae in Dominio modo tres, Tunc xxi
Villani, modo xv. Tunc ix Bordarii, modo x. Tunc sex servi modo ix. Tunc xxxiii
Sochemani and modo similiter, Tunc xviii Carucae Hominum modo vii, and haec
perditio fuit Tempore Sueni and Baignardi Vicecomitum, and per Mortem Bestiarum.

Harold held Witham in the time of King Edward for one Manner, and for five
Hides, now Peter the Sheriff Keeps it in the Kings Hand, Then there were two
Carucates in Demeasn, now three; Then there were twenty one Villains, now
fifteen; Then 9 Bordars now 10. Then six Servants now 9. Then there were three
and twenty Socmen, now the same number. Swain and Baynard the Sherifs, and by
the Death of Cattle.

Writelam tenuit Ibid f. 5. a. ^h^lmesfort H^nd.
Haroldus pro Manerio and xvi Hidis Tempore Regis Edwardi, Modo Rex Willielmus
pro xiiii hidis, Tunc C Villani tres minus, post and modo Lxxiii. Tunc xxvi
Bordarii post and modo Lx. Tunc xxxiiii servi modo xviii. etc.

Harold held Writel for a Manner, and 16 Hides in the Edward. Now King William
possesses it for 14 Hides, Then there was an Hundred Villans wanting three,
afterward and now seventy three; Then 26 Bordars, afterward and now sixty; Then
24 Servants, now 18. Then 12 Carucates in Demeasn, now 9. Then the Men or
Tenants had sixty four Ploughs or Plough-lands. Then this Manner yielded 10
Knights farm and 10 Pounds, now it yields an

And thus are the Entries of the ordinary Inhabitants of all the Country Towns
and Manners in this County, they were Villans, Bordars and Servants, as well in
Edward the Confessors, and the Saxons Time, as after the coming of the Normans*
They were people of the same Condition. There Socmen, and very rarely any
Freemen in the Entries of this County.

In Norfolk there are many Freemen to be found, and but few Socmen.

Norfulc Ibid. f. 135. b.
Terra Regis. Hund. de Walesham.
IN Mothetuna tres liberi homines xxxvii acras Terrae, and quatuor acras and
dimid. Prati, and dimid. Carucat. and valet Duos Solidos, and viii d.

In Motheton three Freemen hold thirty seven Acres of Land, and four Acres and
half of Meadow, and it is half a Carucate, and the value of it is two Shillings
eight pence, or

In Bastwic 1 liber homo xxx acras Terrae, and duas Acras Prati, and dimid.
Carucat. and valet xvi d.

In Ibidem.
Bastwic one Freeman has 30 Acres of Land, and two Acres of Meadow, and it is
half a Carucate, and is worth or pays 16 d.

In Martham Ibidem. Flec West Hund. The ordinary free men were under protection
of great men.
Duo liberi homines, unus Gert, alter Haraldi de Quadraginta Acris Terrae, and
6. Acris Prati; Tunc 1 Caruc. post and modo dimid. Tunc and post quatuor sol.
modo 6 sol.

In Martham two Freemen, one the Client, or under the Protection of Gert (he
was Harolds Brother) and the other of Harold, held Forty Acres of Land, and six
Acres of Meadow; Then one Carucate, since and now but half a Carucate, then and
afterward it was worth four shillings, now six shillings.

In Clepesbes unus Ibidem.
liber homo Gerti Comendatus, Tempore Regis Edwardi de xx acr. Terrae et
quatuor acris prati, et tres liberi homines sub Eo. xvii acr. Terrae, tres Acr.
prati, semper 1 Carucat. semper valuit ii Sol. and vi. d. in Censu Ormesbei.

In Clepesby one Freeman under the Protection of Gert. in the time of King
Edward, had twenty Acres of Land, and Ormesby.

In Clepesbes 1. liber Ibidem.
homo Regis de xx Acr. Terrae semper dimid. Car. and tres Acr. Prati, semper
valet 2 s. in Wintertuna, liber homo de vii acr. terrae.

In Clepesby one Freeman of the King has twenty Acres of Land, always half a
Carucate, it always paid 2 s. to the Manner of Winterton, one Freeman there had
7 Acres.

In Borstuna Ibid. f. 130. a.
quatuor liberi homines Algari Tempore Regis Edwardi, Commendati tantum, de xl
Acr. Terr. and 1 Bordar semper 1 Car. and iii Acr. Prati.

Borston four Freemen who were only under the Protection of Algar in the time
of King Edward, had 40 Acres of Land, and one Bordar, and three Acres of
Me^dow, which were always accounted one Carucate, or there was always one
Plough employed.

In Gersinga Ibidem.
octo liberi homines Algari Commendati tantum 60 Acr. Terr. semper quatuor
Bordar. etc.

In Gersinge eight Freemen who were only under the Protection of Algar had
sixty Acres of Land, there were always fo^r Bordars, etc.

And such as these were the Ordinary Freemen of this County wherever they are
found in this Survey, and their

In Suffolk there were also many Freeman like these, few or no Socmen.

Sudfulc Ibid. f. 339. b.
Terra Roger. Comitis, Hundrede de Colenese.
WAletunam Tenuit Normannus Tempore Regis Edwardi, and modo Tenet sub Rogero
Bigot, etc.

In eadem villa xviii liberi homines Commendati, Godricus faber, Ulnotus etc.
de Lxxx Acr. Terrae and subtus eos vi Bordar. semper inter eos iii Car. and 1
Acr. Prati, and valent xxx Sol. etc.

Norman held Walton in the Time of King Edward, and now holds it of Roger
Bigot, etc.

In the same Town there are 18 Freemen under Protection, Godric, (probably a
Smith or Carpenter) Edric and Ulnot, (and so all the 18 named in the Survey)
who held Eighty Acres of Land, and had under them 6 Bordars, amongst them they
had three Carucates, and one Acre of Meadow, they pay thirty shillings.

In Maistuna Ibidem.
Tenuit Idem Normannus, T. R. E. vi liberos homines Commendati de C. Acr.
Edricus and Burthricus, and and Aluricus, and Almarus, and Wulricus, and 1
villan. de quatuor Acr. and quatuor Bordar. semper inter eos quatuor Acr. and
ii. Acr. Prat. and val. xx Sol.

In Maston the same Norman held in the time of King Edward six Freemen under
his Protection who had an hundred Acres, Edric and Burthric, Wulbald, Aluric,
Almar and Wulric,

In Burch Ibid. f. 340. a.
tenuit Idem Normannus T. R. E. xvi. liberos homines Commendatos de 1. Car.
Terr. and vi Bordar. pertinentes ad Waletunam, and quatuor Caruc. inter eos and
ii Acr. Prat. and val. xl Sol.

In Burch the same Norman held in the Time of King Edward sixteen Freemen under
his Protection (all particularly named in the Survey) who had one Carucate of
Land and six Bordars, belonging, appending, or regardant to the Manner of
Waletun, they had four Carucates or Ploughs between them, and two Acres of
Meadow, and paid xl Shillings.

In Alteinestuna Ibid. f. 341. a.
duo liberi homines xi Acr. Turbinus and and valent xxii d. 1 Ecclesia and v
Acr. * Terr. Liber. and val. xvi d.

In Altenston two Freemen held eleven Acres, Turlin and Ulvin, who paid 22 d.
there was a Church and five Acres of Free Land which paid xvi d.

And so in many other Towns, there are the like Entries of one, two, three,
four, or five Freemen. And at last it is said,

Omnes isti sunt Ibid.
liberi homines R. Big^t, and Normannus tenet eos de eo. All these are the
Freemen of Roger Bigot, and Norman holds them of him.

Terra Ibid. f. 406. b.
Hugonis de Montesorti, Hundret de Carleford.
IN Bischelea tres liberi homines in Dominio Gudmundi T.R.E. In Bischeley there
were three Freemen in the time of King Edward, under the Dominion or power of
Gudmund, or in his Demeasn which is all one.

In Ibid.
Burgo 1 liber homo comendat dimid. Sanct. E. ( i. e. Etheldredae) T. R. E. and
dimid. Antecessor. Roberti Malet.

In Burg there was one Freeman, half under the Protection Audrey, (that is the
Church of Ely) in the time of King Edward, and half under the Patronage of the
Antecessor of Robert Malet.

In eadem 1 liber homo commendat dimid. Sancti. E. and dimid. Edrici.

In the same Town there was one Freeman, who paid half Aurdrey or the Church of
Ely, and the other half to Edric.

Sudfulc Ibid. f. 287. a.
Sanfort Hund. and dimid.
TEtra Regis, quam Aluricus Want Custodit: he was the Kings Prepositus or
Reeve, and managed it for

Bercolt tenuit Heroldus T.R.E. xiii Car. Terr pro Manerio Tunc xlii. Vill.
modo xliii. Tunc v. Bordar. modo xxii. tunc vi. servi modo quatuor. Tunc and
post tres Car. in Dominio modo ii. Tunc xx Car. hominum, post and modo x.
duodecim acr. Prati. Silv. M. porcor semper 1. Molin. semper 1. Runcin. and x.
1. Berwita, Sceveleia ii. Car. terr. T. R. E. Tunc x vil. post and modo vi.
semper vii Bordar. Tunc iiii serve. modo ii. Tunc ii Car in Dominio post and
modo 1. Tunc viii. Car. homin. post and modo Because they lay waste, or they
had not Tenant, could set up so many Ploughs
iiii. xvi. Acr. Prati, and 1 Molin. semper 1. runcin. and iiii. animal. and
vii. Por. and xxiii. ov.

Be^leiam tenuit comes Guert. T. R. E. post eam adjunit Ralph de Guader whose
Story is to be found in the Life of William the 1st.
comes, Rud. stalra huic Manerio pro Berwita, T. R. Willielmi, pro ii carucat.
Terr. tunc xix Villi modo xiiii semper tres Board. tunc iiii. serve. tunc ii car.
in Dominio post and modo 1. tunc viii. car. hom. post and modo 1. Et viii car.
possunt in Dominium and Nota. Quia Villani.
Villanos restaurari viii Acr. Prati silv. xxii por. and viii animal.

Scoteleiam tenuit comes Guert They were two Carucates and half in Edward the
Co^fessors
xii car. and dimid. and 1. acr. and val. time, but at the time of the Survey
lay Wast, and worth but two pence.
ii. d. pro 1 Manerio T. R. E. Tunc xii Villani modo sex, semper ii. Board. and
Tunc iiii. serve. modo 1. Tunc 11 Car. in Dominio post and modo 1. Tunc iiii
Car. hom. post and modo, 1. and iiii car. possunt restaurari. and iiii acr.
Prati, et 1. Runcin. et xl. ov. Huic Manerio pertinebant, T.R.E. CCx. Sockman
modo non sunt nisi Cxix et habent xxii car. Terrae et dimid. xxx acr. Minus. et
xlii Board. Tunc xxix car. modo xxvii et xxiiii acr. et dimid. Prati, duae
Ecclesiae de lxii acr. de his hominibus qui huic Manerio remansi sunt, non
habuit Heroldus, etiam Commendationem T.R.E. praeter de quatuor, Ulnod,
Estmunt, Aluricus, Wistricus, and Guert frater Haroldi habuit Commendationem de
Duobus Man. et Alviet. Omnes alii erant commendati aliis Baronibus, T.R.E. de
uno habuit Antecessor Malet commendationem. et Robert fill Wimari iiii. et tamen
semper Haroldus habebat Socam, etc.

Harold held Bercolt in the time of King Edward, and thirteen Carucates of Land
for a Manner. Then there were forty two Villanes, now forty three. Then five
Bordars, now Servants, now four. Then and afterward three Carucates in
Demeasn, now two. Then the Men or Tenants had twenty Carucates, afterward and
now ten, and 12 Acres of Meadow. Wood for 1000 Hogs, always one Mill, always
one Working Horse, and ten young Cattle, and twenty eight Hogs, and eighty five
Sheep,

To this Manner belongs one A Hamlet or member of a Manner.
Berwite (now I think called the Barrow or Berry) Sceveley, it was two
Carucates of land in the time of King Edward, Then there was ten Villans:
afterward and now six, always seven Bordars. Then 4 Servants, now two: Then two
Carucates in Demeasn, afterward and now one. Then the Men or Tenants held
eight Carucates, now four, and sixteen Acres of Meadow, and one Mill, always
one Working Horse, and four young Beasts or Oxen, and seven Hogs, and twenty
three Sheep.

Earl Guert held Bentley for two Carucates of Land in the time of King Edward,
afterward Earl Ralph Master of the Horse, joined it to this Manner as a Berwite
or Berry in the time of King William. Then there were nineteen Villanes upon
it, now thirteen, always three Bordars. Then four Note who Villains.
Villains may be set up again, or eight Carucates renewed, they had eight Acres
of Meadow, Wood to keep twelve Hogs, and forty two sheep, and paid vi d.

Guert held Scotley or Shotley: There was two Carucates and half of Land and 1
Acre, and it paid two Probably it lay Wast.
pence for one Manner, in the Time of King Edward, Then there were xii Villans,
now six. There was always two Bordars, and Then four Servants, now one. Then
two Carucates in Demeasn; afterward and now one, and there may be four

To this Manner there were appendant or regardant (that is fixed to it) in the
time of King Edward two Hundred and ten Socmen, now there are but one hundred
and nineteen, and they have two and twenty Carucates of Land and half, wanting
thirty Acres, or, and thirty Acres more or less. And forty two Bordars. Then
there was Twenty nine Carucates, now twenty seven, and twenty four Acres and
half of Meadow, and two Churches with sixty two Acres. Of these Men or Suitors,
or Tenants, which were regardant or belonged to this Manner (Qui huic Manerio
Remanentes and pertinentes are always taken in the same sense*
remansi sunt.) Harold in the time of King Edward had the protection of only
four, Ulnod, Estmunt, Aluric and Wistric, and Guert the Brother of Harold, had
the Protection of two, Man and Alviet: All the others were protected by or
under the Patronage of other Barons in the time of King Edward. The Predecessor
of Malet had the protection of one, and Robert the Son of Wimar had the
protection of four; and yet Harold always had the Soke, or money paid for their
protection, etc.

Sudfulc Ibid. f. 322. a.
Gislingham etc.
IN Gislingheham tres liberi Homines, de duobus habuit Ulvena Comendationem
vii. Acr. et dimid. Car. et Val. xvi d. In eadem Duo liberi homines, xxvi acr;
unus Comendatus nomine Colemanus cum vi. acr. Tunc dimid. Car. modo It was
waste.
nichil, et valuit iiii Sol. In eadem tenet Alviet liber homo Comendatus Alsio
Nepoti comitis Ralph de Guarder, sometime Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk or the
East Angles under the Conqueror, and a Rebel against him.
Radulfi xxx acr. pro Manerio T. R. E. Tunc 1 Car. modo nichil, et 1 acr.
prati. In eadem vi liberi homines Comendati Alviet, xiii acr. semper dimid.
Car. Tunc xx sol. modo xii. In eadem Ringulfus liber acr. pro 1 Manner.
Comendat. Alsio Nepoti Comitis Radulfi. Tunc 1 Car. modo nihil. Ex hac Terra
tenuit Lewinus filius Ringulfi iii Caruc. quartam partem Silvae. In eadem
Quatuor liberi homines Comendati Ringulfo x acr. et dimid. Car. et iiii acr.
prati, x porc. Tunc valuit xx sol. modo x. In eadem Beso liber homo xvi acr.
Comendatus Alsio. Tunc et 1 Car. modo nichil, et valuit vi sol. et viii d. Ex
hac Terra tenuit Antecessor Aberici de Ver. v acr. Rex et Comes de toto Socam.
In eadem 1 liber homo Soribes vi acr. Comendatus Ulvenae, et valuit xii d. In
eadem Chipinc Ibid. b.
liber homo Comendatus Ulwino Antecessori Alberici de Ver. et in soca ejus, xii
Car. et adhuc tenebat 1 acr. Terrae de Dominio Ulwini, et quartam partem
alterius, et modo Tenet totum Matter Robert Malet.
Roberti, et val. ii sol. Rex et Comes de toto alio Socam.

In Cotetuna Ibid.
tenuit Ansgerus liber homo Comendatus Lewino de Bachetuna xxx acr. pro Manner.
T. R. E. Tunc 1 Car. modo dimid. et 1 acr. prati, Silva vi Porc. et Tres liberi
homines Comendat. lx acr. et dimid Car. et val. x sol. Rex et Comes Socam.

In eadem tenuit Teit Comendatus dimidius, Edrico prepositi dimidius Comendatus
Antecessori Malet viii acr. semper dimid. Car. et val. iiii sol. Soca Regis et
Comitis.

In parvo Thornham viii liberi homines xxviii acr. Comend. Ulvenae. Tunc ii
Car. modo 1 et dimid. et val. v sol.

In eadem Duo liberi homines unus eorum * fuit Comendatus Ulvenae, et alter
dimidius Subcomendatus Antecessori Malet.

In Gislingham three Freemen, of which Ulvene In the time of King Edward.
had the Protection of two, and they seven Acres and half a Carucate and paid
xvi d. in the same Town, two Freemen had twenty six Acres, one was Protected
by Ulvene, by name Coleman with six Acres, Then half a Carucate Before the
Conquest it was half a Carucate, after it lay wast
now nothing, and it Alviet a freeman under the Protection of Alsi the Nephew
or Grandchild of Earl Ralph held thirty Acres for a Manner (that is a Seat or
place of abode) in the time King Edward. Then it was one Carucate, now nothing,
and 1 Acre of Meadow. In the same six Freemen under the Protection of These
were Subcomendats, being under the protection of one that was protected himself.
Alviet, held xiii Acres, which were always half a Carucate. Then they paid
twenty Shillings now

In the same Town Ringulf a Freeman had Thirty Acres for a Manner, he was the
Client, or under the Protection of Alsi, Nephew or Grandchild to Earl Ralph.
Then it was one Carucate, now nothing. Of this Land (suppose of the Town) Lewin
the Son of Ringulf had iii Carucates, and the four Freemen under the Protection
of These were also Subcommendats, who were protected at the second hand.
Ringulf, who had x Acres and half a Carucate, and iv Acres of Meadow and x
Hogs, Then it paid 20 s. now ten. In the same Beso a Freeman Protected by Alsi
had xvi Acres. Then and afterward one Carucate, now nothing, it did pay six
shillings and eight pence. Of this Land the Predecessor of Alberic de He was
Ancestor of the Earls of Oxford.
Ver had five Acres. King and the Earl had the Soke of the whole.

In the same Town one Freeman called Soribes, who had vi Acres, he was under
the Protection of Ulvene and paid xii d. In the same Chipinc a Freeman under
the Protection of Ulwin the Predecessor of Alberic de Ver, and in the Soke of
his twelve Carucates, and he held more 1 Acre, and the Ulwin, now the Mother of
Robert Malet holds the whole, and it pays 2 s. The King and Earl of all the
Soke of the other (that is of Soribes.)

In Cotton Ansger a Freeman under the Protection of Lewin of Backton held
thirty Acres for a Manner in the time of King Then 1 Carucate, now half a
Carucate and 1 Acre of Meadow. Wood for vi Hogs. And there were three Freemen
under Protection that held Sixty Acres and half a Carucate, and paid ten
shillings. The King and Earl have the Soc.

In the same Teit half under the protection of Edric the Praep^situs Regis.
Kings Reeve, and half under the Protection of the Predecessor of Malet, held
viii Acres always, half a Carucate and paid 4 s. The Soc was the Kings and
Earls.

In little Thornham eight Freemen had twenty eight Acres, and were under the
protection of Ulvene, then they had two now one and half, and paid 5 s.

In the same, two Freemen, one of them was under the protection of Ulvene, and
the other was protected, by one who was protected by the Predecessor of Malet,
and was half under his protection, they had xv Acres always, 1 Carucate, or
always they employed one Plough; Then it was worth 3 s. d. now 5 s.

Here we see the Condition of the ordinary Freemen within these three Counties,
and there were more here than in all the Counties in England; And besides
Owners of Towns and Lords of Manors, there were no other Land-holders or
Inhabitants but these and Socmen (if these were not the same) and Villans,
Bordars or Cottars, and Servants in the Country.

Chenth Great Domesday Book, f. 2. b. col. 1.
Terra Regis. In dimid. Lest de Sudtone in Achestane Hund.
REx Willielmus tenet Tarentefort pro uno solino and dimid. se That is Arable,
which is always called Terra in this Survey.
Terra est xl Caruc. In Dominio sunt ii Caruc. and cxlii Villani cum x Bordar.
Habent Liii Caruc. ibi sunt iii Servi and 1 Molend. etc.

King William holds Tarentfort, it is Taxed at one Probably from the Saxon word
Sulk a Plough, but what quantity of Land a Solin, Swolling or Sulling
contained, I cannot find.
Solin and a half, there is forty Carucates of Land, in Demeasn ii Carucates
and one hundred and forty two Villans with ten Bordars, they have fifty three
Carucates, or perhaps rather fifty three Ploughs, with which they Ploughed
their own and the Lords Lands: There are three Servants and one Mill.

Terra Ibid. f. 3 a. Col. ^.
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis. In Achestan Hund.
ARchiepiscopus Cantuariensis tenet in Dominio Tarent pro ii solinis se
Defendit, In Dominio est una Car. and xxii Villani, cum vii Cotar. habent vii
Car. Ibi vi Servi and ii Molend. de L sol.

The Archbishop of Canterbury holds Tarent in Demeasn; There is in Demeasn one
Carucate, and xxii Villans with seven Cotars, they have seven Carucates or I am
apt to think that this abbreviation Car. or Caruc. when it follows Villeni or
Bordarii often signifi^s the number of Ploughs they kept, and not the Land, or
quantity of it.
Ploughs, there are vi Servants and two Mills of 50 s. Rent.

Kent, in the Entries of Towns and Manners, it is very rare to find any other
People than Villans, Bordars and Servants, who were all in Dominio besides the
Lords and Great Possessors, Military Men and Religious.

Sudsex Ibid. f. 1^. a. Col. ^.
Terra Archiepiscopi Cantuar. in Mellings Hund.
ARchiepiscopus Lanfrancus Tenuit Mellinges and est in Rape de Pevensel T. R.
E. defend. se pro quater xx hid. sed modo non habet Archiepiscopus nisi lxxv
hidas. Quia Comes Moretonii habet v hidas extra Hund Terra totius Manner. L Car.
in Dominio sunt v Car. and CC and xix Villan. cum xxv Board. habent Here ^
should think Car. signifies Ploughs, and not the quantity of Land, the quantity
of Carucates differed, some times a Carucate might be so large as one Plough
could not Till, and sometimes so small as one Plough might Till two.
lxxiii Car. and xliii Croftos.

Archbishop Lanfranc held Mellinges, etc. in the time of King Edward it was
taxed for fourscore Hides, etc. the That is the Arable Land which is always in
this Survey called simply Terra.
Land of the whole Manner is fifty Carucates. There is in Demeasn v Car. and two
Hundred nineteen Villans, with thirty five Bordars, they have seventy three
Carucates or

In this whole County few or no others but Villans, Bordars and Servants, and
in Dominio as in Kent.

So in Sudrie, Hantescire, and the Isle of With, as in Kent and Sussex,
Villans, Bordars and Servants only in Dominio.

Berchescire as Sudrie, Sudsexe and Hantescire, few or no others, besides
Villans, Bordars and Servants in Dominio, except owners of Towns, Lords of
Manners, and others that held in Military Service, either in Capite, or by Mean
Tenure, and Religious.

Ibi^. fol. 6^. a. Col. ^.
Terra Regis.
REx tenet Bromham Comes Haraldus Tenuit pro xx Hid. Geldavit, Terra est x
Carucat. In Dominio sunt x Hid. and ibi ii Car. iiii Servi, ibi xiiii Villani,
vi Bordar. and xxx Cozets cum viii Caruc. sometimes Cozets is written Coscez in
this County.

The King holds Bromham Earl Harald held it, and it was taxed for xx Hides, The
Land or Arable Land is ten Carucates. In Demeasn x Hides, and there are two
Carucates, four Servants, There are fourteen Villans, vi Bordars, and thirty
Cozets, with Persons of these Men were all in Demeasn

Rex tenet f. 64. b. Col. 2.
Amblesberie Rex E. tenuit, nunquam In Ca^ in the same fol. and Col. thus,
Cauna nunquam Geldavit, ergo nescitur quot hidae sunt ibi.
Geldavit nec In Ca^ in the same fol. and Col. thus, Cauna nunquam Geldavit,
ergo nescitur quot hidae sunt ibi.
Hidata fuit. Terra est xl Caruc. In Dominio sunt xvi Car. and lv Servi and ii
Coliberti, ibi quater xx et v Villani et lvi Bordar. habentes xxiii Carucat.
etc.

The King possesses Amblesberie (now Amesbury or Ambresbury) Edward possessed
it; it never was taxed nor cast into Hides, the Arable is forty Carucates, In
Demeasn there are xvi Carucates, and fifty five Servants, and two Coliberts,
there fourscore and five Villans, and lvi Bordars, having twenty three
Carucates.

Terra ^. 71. ^. Col. 2.
Milonis Crispin. Wilt^scire.
RAinaldus tenet de Here Milo was the Tenant in Cap^* and Rainald the Lord of
the Manor, or Town who held of him.
Milone Hasberie. Levenot tenuit T.R.E. Gold. pro v Hidis. Terra ^st v Carucat.
de ea est in Dominio 1 Hid. et ibi ii Car. ii Servi et v Villani et xiii Coscez
et ii Cotar. cum iii Car. etc.

Rainald holds of Miles Crispin Hasberie, Levenot held it in Edward, and it was
taxed for five Hides, the Arable is five Carucates, of which there is in
Demeasn 1 Hide, and there are two Carucates or Plough Lands, two Servants, and
five Villans and xiii Coscez, and two Cotars with three Carucates; that is, all
these People had amongst them three plough Lands

In this Shire were Servants, Villans, Bordars, and often Coscez* in stead of
Bordars, and sometimes Colliberts, few or no others, except as before excepted
in Kent, etc. the Entries of all the Towns are after this manner.

Dorsete Ibid. f. 75. a. Col. 2.
Terra Regis.
REx tenet Dorcestre, et Fortitone, et Sutone, et Velingham et From, Rex E.
tenuit Nescitur quod Hidae ibi, quia non lvi Car. In Dominio sunt septem Car.
et xx Servi, et xii Coliberti, cxiiii Villani, Quater xx et ix Board. habentes
lix Car. etc.

The King possesses Dorchester, Fortiton (or happily now Fordington) Sutton,
Velingham and From, King Edward held them, etc. the Arable is fifty six
Carucates, in Demeasn there are seven, and twenty Servants, and twelve
Coliberts, one Villans, and fourscore and nine Bordars having fifty nine
Ploughs, etc. here the Carucates were large, and there was more Ploughs than
Plough Lands.

In this Shire in Dominio Servants, Villans, Bordars, and sometimes Coliberts,
and sometime Coscez, so all the Entries, Socmen or Freemen unless very rarely,
except as before excepted in other Counties.

Sumersete Ibid. f. 86. a. Col. 1.
Terra Regis.
REx tenet Sudperet nunquam Geldabat, etc. In Dominio Car. and v Servi and xxii
Coliberti and lxiii Villani, and xv Bordar. cum xxvi Car. etc.

The King possesses Sudperet, etc. There are in Demeasn two Carucates, and
five Servants, and xxii Coliberts, and lxiii Villans, and fifteen Bordars, with
twenty six Carucates or Ploughs, etc.

Villans, Bordars, Servants, Coscez, and Coliberts in Dominio, but most
frequently Servants, Villans and Bordars.

In Devonshire the Entries are the same, in Dominio, Servants, Villans,
Bordars, and sometimes Coscez in stead of Bordars.

Cornwall the same Entries throughout, Bordars, Villans, Servants, scarce any
others to be found.

Midelsexe Ibid. f. 129. a. Col. ^.
Terra Comitis Rogeri.
COmes Rogerus tenet in Hermodesworde 1 Hid. Terra est 1 Car. ibi est dimid.
Car. and dimid. potest fieri, Duo tenent hanc Terram x sol. valuit and valet,
Hanc tenuit Alwun homo Wigot, and potuit de ea facere quod voluit, modo jacet
in Coleham, ibi non jacuit T. R. E.

Coleham Ibid.
pro viii Hid. se Defendit, Rogerus Comes tenet, Terra vii Car. in Dominio vi
Hid. and ibi sunt iii Car. Villani habent iii Car. ibi vi Villani quisque de 1
virgat. alii quatuor de Every one half a Virgate.
ii virgat. Presbyter. 1 Hid. x Bordar. Quisque de acr. and iii Cotar. and viii
Servi ibi ii Molini de lx sol. and dimid. Mol. de v sol. Prat. iii Car. Pastur.
ad Pecuniam villae. Silva CCCC Porc. and 1 Arpennis, sometime is half an Acre,
sometime an Acre, and the Measure differed according to the diversity of
Countries.
Arpenn. Vineae, in totis valentiis valet viii lib. Quando recepit vi lib. T.
R. E. x lib. hoc Manerium Tenuit Wigot de Rege E.

Earl Roger holds Hermodworth for one Hide the Arable Villans hold this Arable,
and pay ten Shillings Rent. Alwun the Man or Tenant of Wigot held this Land,
and might do with it what he would (that is, use it as he would) now it lies to
Coleham, where it lay not in the time of King Edward.

Coleham is taxed for eight Hides. Earl Roger holds it, the Demeasn there are
six Hides, and there are three Carucates, (that is in Demeasn.) The Villans
have three Carucates, there are six Villans, every one has a Virgate, and
there are four others that have two Virgates, a Priest or the Parson has 1
Hide; There are ten Bordars, every one holds five Acres, and three Cotars, and
eight Servants, and two Mills rented at sixty one Shillings, Edward ten Pound.
Wigot held this Manner of King Edward.

All the Entries of Towns and Manners are after this Method in this County,
seldom, if at all, any others to be found than Villans, Bordars, Cotars and
Servants, except as before excepted in other Counties and Shires.

Hertfordshire was described after the same manner: In Dominio, etc. ibi sunt,
etc. there are Villans, Bordars, Cotars, Servants, and now and then a Socman
appears,

Bochinghamscire Ibid. f. 43. a Col. 1.
Terra Regis.
EIlesberia Domicum Manerium Regis pro vi Hidis se defendit, Terra est xvi Car.
in Dominio sunt Duae, ibi x Villani cum xiii Bordar. habent x Car. et adhuc
quatuor fieri possunt, ibi Duo Servi, et Duo Molini de xxiii sol. In totis
valentiis reddit lvi lib. artas et pensatas, et de Thelonio x lib. ad numerum
T. R. E. reddebat xxv lib. ad numerum.

Aylesbury the Kings Manner, solely under his power, was rated There was always
in those times a fire ready in the Exchequer, and if they liked not the Allay
of the Money they burnt it, and then weighed it.
burnt and weighed; And for Tol, ten Pounds by Tale; In the time of King Edward
it paid five and twenty Pounds by Tale.

So through all this Country in the Entry of every Town, none, or very rarely
others to be found than Villans, Bordars, Servants.

Glowcestrescire Ibid. f. 162. a. Col. 2.
Terra Regis. In Dudestan Hund.
HAbuit quidam Tainus Edmarus iii Manner. Hersefell, Athelai, et Sanher, iste
homo potuit vendere et dare Terram suam Cui voluerit, pro duabus Hidis se
defendebat haec Terra, viii Carucat. and iiii Villani and iiii Bordar. and xxx
Servi cum v Car. ibi pratum sufficiens Carucis.

Edmar a certain Thane had three Manners, Hersefel, Atheley and Sanher, he might
sell and give his Land to whom he pleased. This Land was rated at three Hides.
There were in Demeasn eight Carucates, and four Villans, and four Bordars, and
thirty Servants with five Carucates: There is Meadow for the Ploughs.

Brictric fill. Algar. tenuit Turneberie ibi T.R. E. erant xi Hid. and iiii Car.
in Dominio, and xlii Villani, and xviii Radchenistr. cum xxi Carucat. and
xxiiii Borda. and xv Servi and iiii Coliberti, ibi Duo Molini, etc.

Brictric the Son of Algar held Turnbury, there in the Time Edward were e^even
Hides, and four Carucates in Demeasn, and forty two Villans, and xviii
Radchenistres with twenty one Carucates, and twenty four Bordars, and xv
Servants, and four Coliberts, there are two Mills, etc.

In this Shire no other noted in the Entries of Towns, etc. Dominio, and
sometime Radchenistres.

The same manner of Entry in Glowcestre scire, none to be found but men of the
Condition.

In Herefordshire Ibid. f. 79. b. Col. 1.
the same Method, and the same Names and Persons, and no others. In Dominio,
Villans, Ancillae, or Maid Servants, Cotars and Radchenistres.

In Grentebridge scire, thy same way of Entry in every Town, but that the Words
in Dominio are wanting in most places, and they are found thus in every Town
alalmost. There are Villans, Bordars, Servants, Cotars, and sometime Socmen,
though but seldom.

Huntedune Ibid. f. ^03. b. Col. 1.
and Bedeford scire f. 209. a. Col. 2.
generally in every Town are found in Dominio, only Villans, Bordars, Servants,
and sometimes ibi Villans, Bordars, Servants, and now and then, some Socmen
appear.

Northante scire Ibid. f. ^19. a. Col. 2.
Terra Regis.
REx tenet Chetene ibi sunt vii Hidae, Terra est xiii Car. In Dominio sunt
Duae, and iii Servi, and xii Sochmani, and xxiiii Villani, and v Bordar. cum
Presbytero tenentes xi Car.

The King holds Chetene: There are seven Hides, the Arable is thirteen
Carucates, there are two in Demeasn, and etc.

In this Shire the Entries are in Dominio sunt Villans, Bordars, Servants most
frequently, sometime Socmans, and sometimes ibi sunt, etc. Ledecestre scire as
this.

Warwic scire Ibid. f. 238. b. Col. 2.
Terra Regis.
REX tenet Brailes, Edwinus Comes tenuit, ibi sunt xlvi Hid. Terra est lx Car.
in Dominio sunt vi and xii Servi and iii Ancillae, and C Villani and xxx
Bordar. cum xlvi Car. ibi x sol. and C acr. prati Silv. iii leug. long. and ii
leug. let. T. R. E. Reddebat xvii lib. x sol. modo val. lv lib. and xx summas
Salis.

The King holds Brailes, Earl Edwin held it; there are forty six Hides, the
Arable is sixty Carucates, there are six in Demeasn, and twelve Servants, and
three Maid Servants, Bordars, with forty six Carucates: There is a Mill of ten
Shillings Rent, and an hundred Acres of Meadow, a Wood three Miles long, and
two Miles broad. In the time of Kings Edward it yielded seventeen Pound ten
Shillings, now it pays fifty five Pounds and twenty Seam of Salt.

in Dominio, Servants, Villans, Bordars; rarely, if at all, any others.

Statford-scire, as this County: In Dominio Servants, Villans, Bordars.

Sciropescire Ibid. f. 252. a. Col. 2.
Terra Episcopi Hereford.
EPiscopus de Hereford tenet de Rege Lideberie, and tenuit T. R. E. ibi liii
Hid. Geld. In Dominio sunt iiii Car. and xxxviii Villani, and iiii Bordar. and
viii Radmans cum xxviii Bordar. inter omnes habent xxiii Car. ibi duo servi et
Molin. serve. Aulae. and Silv. clx Porc. incrassand.

Hereford holds of the King of Lidbury, and held it in the time of King Edward.
There are fifty five Hides taxed, in Demeasn there are four Carucates, and
thirty eight Villans, and four Bordars, and eight Radmans, with twenty eight
Bordars, amongst them all they had twenty three Carucates. There are two
Servants, and one Mill which serves the Hall, and Wood sufficient to fat one
hundred and sixty Hogs

The manner of Entry through this Shire was in Dominio, Servants, Villans,
Bordars, Radmans.

Derby-scire: The Entries, likewise, in Dominio Servants, etc. and habet Rex,
Servants Villans, Bordars.

Snotingham scire Ibid. f. 284. a. Col. 2.
Terra Abbatis Sancti Petri de Burgh.
IN Colingham habet Sanctus Petrus de Burgh. iv Car. Terra ii Car. and xxvii
Sochmani de ii Car. and iii Bovat. hujus Terrae, and viii Villani, and xx
Bordar. habentes xiv Caruc.

In Colingham the Abbat of Peterburgh has four Carucates of Land, which he
Rents out: There are now in Demeasn two Carucates, and twenty seven Socmen that
have two Carucates, and three Bovates of this Arable, and eight Villans,
Bordars that have fourteen Carucates.

In this Shire, the Entries of the ordinary Inhabitants throughout are in
Dominio Socmen, Villans, Bordars, as in Derby shire. The Socmen generally held
small parcels of Land, as half a Carucate, a Bovate, etc.

Roteland scire as Snotingham-scire.

Eurvic scire.

In this See Domesday for this Title.
Shire the Entries are generally as to Persons, in Dominio sunt Villans,
Bordars, Sochmen, And habet, as Rex habet Servants, Socmen, Villans Bordars,
seldom Kent, Sussex, Surrey, etc.

In all Counties of England, whose Land soever it was, whether it was the Kings
Land, Church Land, or possessed by Earls, Barons, Knights, or other Military
and Secular Men, Note, That whereas it is said in the Glossary, to my
Introduction, etc. That in every Leaf, and almost every Entry upon that Leaf in
Domesday, Socmen and Freemen were to be found, it proves a mistake, for upon a
second and third perusal, of the great Book, especially the Persons and
Inhabitants of Towns and Villages, were such as I have here noted in every
County.
Inhabitants, and those that occupied, used or managed the Land, under the
Owners of the Towns, or Lords of Manners, who held of the King immediately, or
mediately, as appears by this Survey, or great Record.

By which it is most evident, that most of the Lands in England were holden by
Military Service, or Serjeanty, and in Villanage of those Military Tenants, and
Tenants in Serjeanty: For all these Persons of diverse Denominations, which
afterward received other and fewer names, were but several sorts of Villans,
(as will hereafter appear in the Glossary) and held their Lands by Base and
Servile Tenures. There was at the time of making the Survey, no Free Socage, if
there had, it would have been entered, as the Land holden in Alodio was, for
Hidage-sake: Nor Frank Free, that is, Land holden without performance of any
Service, such as we now Free-holds; unless some small parcels that belonged to
some Parish Churches, especially in Suffolk, which is called Terra libera, or
Burgage-tenure, or the Land holden in Alodio in King Edwards time, or
afterward was such, of which there is here and there a Town or Manner, a Hide
or Carucate, etc. so holden in the Survey. I will give one Instance of it.

Hantescire Dom^sday, f. 50. a. Col. 1.
Tainorum Regis.
ALwi filius Saulf tenet de Rege Tederleg. Pater ejus tenuit in Alodio de Rege
Edwardo, Tunc and modo Geld. pro iii Hid. Terra est iv Carucat. in Dominio sunt
Duae, and ii Villani et ix Bordar. cum ii Caruc. ibi ii Molin. de xxvii sol. et
vi d. et xxvi acr. prati. Silv. de xxx Porc. valuit lx sol. modo xl.

Alwi the Son of Saulf holds Tederley of the King, his Father held it as
Alodium, Frank Fee, or Free-land. Then and now it was, and is taxed for three
Alodium always paid Hidage as other Land. See Alodium in in the Glossary to my
Introduction, f. 1.
Hides: The Arable Land is four Carucates, there are two in Demeasn, and two
Villans, and nine Bordars with other two. There are two s. 6 d. and twenty six
Acres of Meadow, Wood for thirty Hogs, it was worth sixty Shillings, now forty.
This Alwi was one of the Kings ordinary Thanes or Servants, and held this Town
in Serjeanty which might be consistent enough with the Tenure in Alodio, and
such Lands are now reputed Freehold, but these were not Socmen, Villans,
Bordars, Cotars, Servants, and the like.

Nor were many of them in their own hands (as we may phrase it) or in their own
Power, for such as were in Dominio (and in most places it was so) were the
Lords proper Men, wholly under his Power and Disposal, both in Body and Goods
(except Life and Death) and were fixed to the Manner, so as they could not
remove themselves out of the Precincts of it, without his leave. These sort of
Men Ingulph, in the Latin Version of King Edreds Charter to the Abbats and
Monks of Croyland, calls Nativi, a word afterward Villans and Bondmen. Et
praecipio quod omnes homines Fugitivi, quos iidem Monachi and Testimonium
Quatuor vel quinque hominum fide-dignorum, coram vicecomite in Patria, in qua
tales manent, possunt Assidare suos nativos esse, reducantur per eundem
vicecomitem, in Abbathiam eorum cum omnibus catallis and sequelis eorum, omnium
Reclamatione and Reluctatione, abinde remota and Fugitives, which the Monks,
and four or five Credible Witnesses can prove were their Natives (that is, born
Bondmen) before the Sheriff of the County, where such Fugitives are, they shall
be brought or sent back to the Abbey with all their Goods and Children, without
Let or Hinderance of any Man. This Saxon Times, and hereafter we shall see what
they were after the Conquest, when their names were changed, as by the Glossary
will more at large appear, to which I shall refer the Reader, for the knowledge
of their Condition likewise, and how many ways that might be bettered and
changed, shall be our next Inquiry.

These Bondmen, or People of servile Condition, might and Glanvil. lib. 5 c. 5.
several ways, First, by the favor of their Lord or Patron, if he released
their Bondage for him and his Heirs, The first of obteining Freedom.
or did give, or sell him to another to be released. But no Bondsman could
purchase his Liberty with his own Money, if he did, his Lord might by the Law
and Custom of the Land, bring him back again villenage, because all his Goods
and Chattels were his Lords, or so in his Power, that with them he could not
redeem himself. But if a Stranger would Purchase him with his own Money, and
make him Free, then he might for ever defend his Liberty against his Lord, and
plead his Release by Chart, (that is, his Deed in Writing) or by any other way

Yet Ibid.
such a Freedom as this was only good against his Lord, for if he was produced
as a Witness in Court against a Stranger, or to wage Law, he might object
against him, that he was born a Villan (that is, descended from Bond or Villan
Parents) and if it were proved, he might justly be set The second way of being
made Free.
which was a second way of redeeming Men from Servitude.

A third way was, The third way.
Ibid.
if a Bondsman lived quietly a year and day in any privileged Town, so as he was
received into the Common That is, was either Alderman, of Common-Council-Man,
for the Magistrates and chief Citizens were properly the Gild or Corporation,
and transacted the the Affairs of Corporation. The fourth way.
Gild, as a Member of it; That made him Free from Villenage.

A Fourth way was by Exchange, when Base and Vile Services Rent, and that was
advanced and paid, pro omni Servicio: This put the Villan out of all Servitude,
especially as to his own Person, for if the Lord had no Service to command him,
but the payment of his Rent, he was free. This is co-incident with the first
way, by purchase and favor.

William Rufus, and Henry the First, upon their Elder Brother Robert, and the
long Civil War that attended them; The Usurpation of King Stephen upon Maud the
Empress and her Son King Henry Henry the Second, and his Son Henry: The Barons
Wars in the Reigns of King John and Henry the Third: But that the Barons and
Military Men, and the Bishops and Clergy did Manumise and make Free many of
their Clients, Bondmen and Villans, and

Lastly, Time and Desuetude have made the most Free; The last way.
Villenage at this day being rather antiquated and disused, than nulled and
taken away by Law; for when Freemen or Customary Tenants, grew wealthy and
able to stock a Proprietor, so that the Lords had no need or use, for so many
Customary Tenants to Plough their Lands; etc. Cotars, Servile People, and poor
The Labou^ers in our ^imes are Gentlemen in ^espect of those wretch^d People.
miserable Laborers as before; and they were glad to work for small Wages,
little more perhaps than for Meat and Drink, rather than to be under immediate
Correction or their Bodies, and other Severities was lessened, but that still
they remained in a Servile State, and that the Lords commonly turned over their
Works to their Farmers, who looked better after them than they could do, and
saw they labored more, and loytered less; yet if they otherwise used them
inhumanely, or made Remedy against these by Law, which they could not have
against their Lords. And in time, and by degrees they insensibly crept into
more Liberty, as there was less occasion for their Services; and at length
perhaps it was almost as much trouble to look after them, as their etc. and
small Rents in Money, Pence, Halfpence, Farthings, Half-farthings, that the
poor Villans paid* were neglected and lost; and the Way and Manner of Living of
the Nobility, Gentry and Proprietors quite altered

But all this Freedom obtained by Bondmen, or the Freedom of others who were
born Free, and were Heirs to, or had Purchased a small parcel of Land of Socage
tenure, (that is, privileged from Services,) was only personal; they were not
indeed Bondmen, as to their Persons, they were Free from Servile Works and
Services, or if they performed any, known, certain and easy: They neither had,
nor pretended to, for several hundreds of years, that Liberty, nor those now
esteemed Privileges, then thought Burdens, which those sort of men are
possessed of, and now enjoy.

For first, though their Persons, and Issue of their Bodies were Free from
Servile Works, and they were not Bondmen (which was the only and true notion of
those Freemen) in those times, yet they were not all together, (sui Juris) for
as to the Government, and for the keeping of the Kings England were Bondmen,
either in their own Persons, or by their Fidejussors, and such as undertook for
them, and were LL. Ethe^red in Lambard. c. 1. Magna Charta. c. 35. Bracton. p.
124. b. Briton. c. 29. p 72. b. and p 73. b. The Glossary to my Introduction,
etc. f. 55. F. and f. 56. throughout.
bound ten Masters of Families one for another, for their own keeping the Peace
and Good Behavior, as likewise for their Children, Servants and Families,
except Cleres, Knights or Tenants in Military Service, their Wives and
Children, and these Men so

Secondly, The serving on Juries, at the Assizes and Sessions, and that, and
their Suit and Service to or in County and Stat. of Malebourh. c. 4.52. Hen. 3.
Persons, as Knights and others purchased Charters of Exemption from being
Impannelled in Assizes, Juries and Inquests, which they would not have done,
had they not thought it a Burden; and at first these sort of Men were forced,
upon this kind of Privilege or Birthright, as appears in the Glossary to my
Introduction, etc. f. 6^.63, 64. And further, if these men had been so
considerable then, or there had been any numbers of such, what See the Glossary
to my Introduction. f. 57. B. etc.
Reeve or Baily, (who was commonly no other than one of the best sort of his
See the Glossary here, in the word Praepositus or Reeve.
Villans or Bondmen) and four Men of every Town to make answer in Pleas of the
Crown in Turns, and in Pleas of the Forest with Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Knights, Free-tenants (that is, Tenants in Military Service etc.

Thirdly, In an Coke ^ ^stitut. f. ^94 b.
Attaint brought against a Petty Jury for a false Verdict in these times, and
the Fact proved and found; They were to forfeit all their Goods and Chattels,
their Lands and Tenements were to be taken into the Kings Hands; Their Houses
were to be Demolished, their Trees dug up by the Roots, and their Meadows
ploughed up:

Having considered the Quality of our Ancient Freemen, and ordinary
Freeholders; I shall consider what Liberties were contended for in these
times, who contended for them, and who were capable of them, or could receive
the Benefit of them; And how, or in what manner they were Magna Charta was the
sum of the Liberties desired, and how that was obtained, I refer the Reader to
the Reign of King John.

King^ Edwards Law.
The Factious Bishops and Churchmen, and the Seditious and Dissolute Barons
made a noise for King Edwards Laws. Lambards Saxon Laws, were none of his, they
are an incoherent Farce and mixture, and a heap of nonsense put together by
some unskilful Bishop, Monk or Clerc many years after his Death, to serve the
Ends and Designs of the present Time. In the 11th Law, Tit. de Danegeldo, there
is the Story of Duke Roberts pawning Normandy to his Brother Rufus toward the
latter end of his Reign, when he made his Voyage into the Holy Land. In the
35th Law, Tit. de Greve, there seems to be a Reference to the Assise of Arms,
made in King Hoved. f. 350. a. n. 30.
Henry the Second's time, in the whole Rude Mass, the words, Comites, Barons,
Milites, Servientes, Servi^ium, Villanus, Catalla, and many other Norman words
are to be found; All these are pregnant Arguments, they were framed after the
Conquest; And of this Opinion was Sir Henry Spelman, Glossar. f. 68. Col. 1.
In legibus Edwardi Confessoris, Baro saepe occurit, sed has ipsas nobis
porrexit Normannus Quispiam, nam and pluribus aliis dictionibus scatent
Normanicis. In the Laws of Edward the Confessor, the word Baro often occurs,
but these some Norman contrived for us, for they abound with other Norman words.

There is another Sir Ed. Coke says, William the Conqueror composed the sum of
these into a Magna Charta, which was the Ground. Work of all those that
followed. Preface to his 8. Report.
Copy of these Laws which Ingulph, says Croyland. The ordinary men received not
much advantage by these, unless to be severely punished for their
Transgressions, and bound to servitude was a Benefit: What these Laws were, and
how adapted to the Liberty of the ordinary Freemen, see my Answer to
Argumentum Antinormanicum, f. 253, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261.

Henry the First made a wheadling Mat. Paris, f. 55. n. 20.
Speech to the Clergy and Great Men, to persuade them to consent to his
usurpation upon his Brother Robert, who then told him, That if he would Confirm
by his Charter the Laws and Liberties, that flourished in the Kingdom, in Holy
King Edwards time, they would consent he granted the Liberties underwritten to
be observed in the Kingdom for the Exaltation of Holy Church, and the Peace of
the People, which Charter is to be found in the N. 102* fol. 119.
Appendix entire and it was perfectly a Relaxation of some severities which had
been here introduced into the Feudal Law of Europe, and nothing else; and none
but a Tenant in Military Service, his Widow or Children could take any
advantage by it. All the Witnesses to this Charter were Great Normans, and I
remit my Reader to the Translation, and what I have said of it, in the same F.
265, 266, 267, 268, 269.
Answer to Argumentum Antinormanicum.

Charter Henry the Second confirmed in the first or second year of his Reign,
by a Charter of his Append. n. 40. and fol. 40. which see.
own, which being short, I will here Translate, and the rather because it shows
us to what Persons he granted this Confirmation. ^ Henry by the Grace of God,
King of England, etc. to his Barons and Feudataries, See Angli, Anglici, in the
Glossary to my Introduction, etc. And Feudarii and Fideles there.
French and See Angli, Anglici, in the Glossary to my Introduction, etc. And
Feudarii and Fideles there.
English, Greeting: Know ye that to the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, God
and Holy Church, and to all Earls and Barons, and to all my See there, f. 66.
lin. 1.
Vassals or See there, f. 66. lin. 1.
Tenants, all those Customs, (that is Laws) which my Grandfather Gave and
Granted to them; in like manner also those evil Customs or Laws which he
Remitted and Abolished. I do Remit and Grant they shall be Abolished for Me and
my Hei^s; wherefore I will and firmly Command, that Holy Church, and all Earls
and Barons, and all my Tenants may have and hold freely and quietly, well and
in peace, and wholly or entirely, all those Customs and Grants, and Liberties,
of Me and my Heirs, to Them and their Heirs, as King Henry Gave and Granted,
and by his Charter confirmed ^them, Witness Richard de Lacy. Here we see none
but Holy Church, the Earls and Barons, and Kings Tenants and Vassals could
receive the benefit of this Confirmation or Charter, as will more evidently
appear, from the consideration of King John's Charter.

On the 20th of July 1213. King John was Reign of King John, f. 486. F.
Absolved from his Excommunication, and at his Absolution he made Ibid. 48. A.
Oath, ^He would Love, Defend, and maintain Holy Church and the Clergy against
all their Adversaries, to the utmost of his Power; That he would recall the
good Laws of his Ancestors, and especially those of King Edward, and Men or
Tenants, according to the just Judgment of his ^Court.

On the 25th of Ibid. f. 488. B. C. D.
August, the Archbishop met the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans and Barons at
London, at St. Paul's, where he told them, what Oath the King had taken at his
It Is there recited, and is the same as in the Appendix above.
Charter of King Henry the First, which was read to them, and they all Swear,
that upon a fair opportunity, they would strive to Death for those Liberties,
and the Archbishop promised his most faithful Assistance to the utmost of his
Power.

In September Ibid. f. 494. A. B. C.
the next year the Barons met at St. Edmunds Bury, under pretense of Prayer and
Devotion, where Charter of King Henry the First was again produced, the same
they received from Stephan Archbishop of Canterbury at London, which contained
Laws and Liberties Granted by King Edward to Holy Church, and the Great Men of
England, with some Addition of his own. Here they all Swear upon the great
Altar, That if the King refused to Grant them those Charter sealed with his
Seal Confirm all they Demanded; and they agreed, that at Christmas they would
all go to the King together, to Demand the aforesaid Liberties might be
Confirmed, and in the mean time to provide themselves with Horse and Arms, that
they might compel the King to make good his Oath made at his Absolution.

They kept their Ibid. fo. 494. D, E.
time, and came to the King at their time appointed, and demanded the
Confirmation of the Liberties Laws of King Edward, Cum aliis Libertatibus sibi,
and Regno and Ecclesiae, the same with Regno and Sacerdotio.
Regno Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concessis, with other Liberties
Granted to them, the Secular and Ecclesiastic States of the Kingdom, as they
were contained in King Henry's Charter. The King desired respite until the
close of Easter, That he might consider in so weighty a Matter, how to secure
his Crown and Dignity; and being startled at their appearance Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Bishop of Ely, and William Marshal, who engaged with him, that
on the day prefixed he should with Reason satisfy them.

In Easter Ibid. f. 495. A.B. C.D.
Week they met at Stanford with Horse and Arms, and had drawn into their Party
almost all the Nobility England, who made up a very great Army, in which there
were numbered 2000 Knights, besides other Horsemen and Foot, the Barons that
were the chief Incendiaries, were in number forty four, there named, and every
one of them of Norman Extraction, under their Head Stephan Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Ibid. E. F.
Oxford expecting their coming: On Monday after Easter they Rendezvoused at
Brackley in Northampton Shire, to whom he sent the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and William Marshal Earl of Pembroke, with other Wise men to know what
Liberties they desired. And they delivered unto them a Schedule in Writing,
which for the most part contained the Ancient Customs of the Kingdom, Grant and
Confirm them under Seal, they would compel, by seizing his Castles Lands and
Possessions. They brought the Schedule to the King, and read to him all the
Articles contained in it, which when the King heard, he in fury asked, Why the
Barons with those unjust Exactions, did not demand the Grant such things as
would make him a Servant or Slave.

The Archbishop and William Marshal Ibid. f. 496. A.B.C.D. etc.
returned to them, and acquainted them with what the King had said, they
immediately chose Robert Fitz-Walter their General, and gave him the Title of
the Marshal of the Army of God, and of Holy Church, and possess themselves of
London by the Assistance of the Rich Citizens, and then sent Letters to the
Earls, Barons or Knights, that really or seemingly adhered to the King,
exhorting them with Threats, That if they would not desert the perjured King,
(as they called him) and Liberties, they would proceed against them as Public
Enemies, beat down their Castles, burn their Houses, and destroy their Warrens,
Parks and Hortyards. Upon these Menaces most that pretended to be the Kings
Friends, left him, and went to London and confederated with them. The King
seeing himself Runemede, a Meadow between Windsor and Stanes, where both Armies
Ibid. f. 497. A. B.
were drawn up, and the King seeing no probability of his prevailing by Arms,
Granted the Laws and Liberties they desired, and the Witnesses to these
Charters or Grants were all of Norman descent; No English Saxons amongst them.

We see all these Liberties and Laws were the Grants and Concessions of our
Ancient Kings, and no otherwise demanded, nor other pretenses made to them; and
the only Security desired was, that they might be sealed with their Seals. And
as Sir Henry Spelman tells us, what was Glossar. f. ^ 326. Col. 1.
determined by King and Council in that Age, and Confirmed by his Seal, force
of Law.

This Charter of King John, as to the Main of it, and what the Barons contended
for, was only a Relaxation of the Feudal Military Law, and was contrived, and
Granted chiefly for the ease of Military Men; such were all Barons, Knights,
and considerable Freeholders at that time. This appears Granted to be holden
in our Kingdom, as much as it Men or Tenants of our Kingdom; our Clercs and
Laics shall observe, as much as belongs to them toward their Men: Quantum ad
nos pertinet, erga homines nostros tam Clerici quam Laici nostri observent erga
homines suos. The Persons which are expressed by homines, in respect of the
Clergy and Laity, which could not be Subjects in general, were of the same
Condition with those expressed by Homines in respect of the King, that is,
Feudal, or Military Tenants, and this gives us a certainty to whom the Charter
was Granted. If by homines it was intended, that ordinary Freemen, homines,
shows their mean Condition at least, and that they were under some sort of
Servitude, and men of no great consideration, nor most certainly the Governors
or Rulers of the Nation. By homines in this Paragraph, we may understand what
the homines were, that are mentioned in King Henry the Seconds Charter of
Confirmation of his Grandfathers Charter above mentioned. They were the same
Persons, his Military or Feudal Tenants, or his Men, Homines sui, and I shall
here note that the Earls and Barons, by whose advice it is said in the Preamble,
he granted this Charter, were all Normans by Descent, and several of the
Bishops derived from Foreigners.

Magna Charta of King John we pass on to the Magna Charta of Henry the Third.
The King in the 9th year of his Reign wanted Reign of Hen. 3. f. 535. A.
Money for the Recovery of his own Rights, and the Rights of many Earls,
Barons, and others beyond the Sea. The Kings Justiciary propounded in
Archbishop, and all the Bishops, Earls and Barons, Abbats and Priors,
deliberated a while, and returned their Answer to the King, That they would
readily Gratify his Request, if he would Grant to them their long desired
Liberties. The King Complying with them, Charters sealed with the Kings Seal,
and directed into every County, and Mat. Paris Fol. 321. lin. 27, 28.
says, That the Charters of both Kings, viz. John and Henry were the very same,
and in Nullo dissimiles; that is, there was no Alteration made in this of King
Henry, from that of King John. And in the Parliament, in the 37th of Henry the
Third, when Magna Charta, it is said, The Charter which his Father King Ibid. f.
867. n. 10.
John had Granted was produced, and read before them, which the King Regranted.
Also in the 47th year of his Reign, when the Differences between the King and
Barons were Referred to the King of France, it is said, That by his Award he
damned the Provisions made at Oxford, but did not intend thereby in the least
wholly to diminish Ibid. f. ^92. n. 10.
King John's Charter, which was Granted to the University, that is, the
Comunity of England, Hoc excepto quod antiquae Chartae Regis Johannis Angliae,
Universati concessae, per illam sententiam in Nullo inten^ebat Any man would
think Wendover, Paris and Rishanger, were competent Witnesses of the Identity
of these Charters, being all Historiographers to the King Successively, and
living in his Reign, and all Monks of the Monastery of St. Albans; where in the
Archieves, they had without doubt Copies of these Charters, if not the Charters
Tower, that I could find or have seen in either of these Kings Reigns.

but certain it is, the very Charter made in this 9th year of Henry the Third,
dated at Westminster on the 11th of February, is upon Rot. Stat. ^. 1.2, 3. m.
40.
Record by Inspeximus, and was confirmed by Edward the First on the 12th day of
October, in

King Henry in the 37th of his Reign, about five Weeks after the Denuntiation
of Excommunication, and a Curse against the Infringers of this Charter, as
above mentioned, declares Claus. 37 H. 3 m. 9. Dors. De Magna Charta tenenda.
Rex vicecom. Somerset and Dorset Salutem. Scias quod ad instantiam Prelatorum
and Magnatum Regni nostri, Concessimus quod Magna Charta nostra de
Libertatibus, Praelatis and Magnatibus, ac aliis liberis hominibus regni nostri
confecta, de c^tero rata and stabilis perseveret, and quod omnes Articuli in
eadem Carta contenti Ju^ibus and Dignitatibus Coronae nostrae, and Baronibus
nostris and Magnatibus, and aliis nobis Subjectis, Libertatibus, and liberis
suis consuetudinibus, prius usitatis, non expressis vel concessis in Charta
predicta, etc. Saving to his Barons and Great Men, and others his Subjects,
their Liberties Free-Customs they had used, not expressed and granted in this
Charter. And in another Record it appears, who the Freemen were, to whom, and
for whose advantage the Charter was chiefly made. Cart. 49 He^. 3. m. 4.
Ad haec de unanimi assensu and voluntate nostra, Edwardi filii nostri,
Prelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, and Communitatis Regni nostri, concorditer
Provisum est, quod Chartae So called in respect of Oxford Provisions, which
were made in the 42 d of his Reign, and the Ordinances made in the 48th of his
Reign, in the Month of June at London, referred to the beginning of this
Charter.
Antiquae Comunium Libertatum, and Forestae Comunitati Regni nostri dudum
concessae, in quarum violatores ad petitionem nostram sententia
Excommunicationis dudum lata est, and per sedem Apostolicam confirmata,
observentur Further of the unanimous Assent and Will of Us, our Son Edward, the
Prelates, Earls and Barons, and the Comunity of our Kingdom, it was Ordained,
That the Ancient Charters of Common Liberties, and of the Forests, long since
granted to the Comunity of our Kingdom, (against the Breakers of which, at our
Request, the sentence of Excommunication has been pronounced, and confirmed by
the Pope) should be for ever observed: Now that the Tenants in Capite or
Military Tenants were the Comunity of the Kingdom, I have sufficiently evinced
in the Glossary to my Introduction, etc. fol. 27 etc. And by, and through them,
or by their means others enjoyed the advantage of these Liberties. For toward
the close of this Charter in the Record, it is Rot. Stat. ^. 1.2, 3. m. 40.
Omnes istas Consuetudines, and Libertates predictas, quas Concessimus in Regno
nostro tenendas, Quant^m ad nos pertinet, erga nostros observemus; and omnes de
Regno nostro tam Clerici, quam Laici observent, quantum ad se pertinet erga
suos. All those Customs and Liberties aforesaid, which we have Granted to be
holden in our Kingdom or Government, in what belongs to Us, we will observe
toward Ours, and all of our Government or Kingdom, as well of the Clergy as
Laity in what belongs to them, shall observe the same toward theirs. This is
the same Clause, and of the same meaning with that which has been taken notice
of toward the close of King John's Charter. And erga nostros and suos here, are
of the same Import with erga Homines nostros, and erga Homines suos, there. And
the very last Clause of King John's Charter of the Forest, is in the same
Append. f. ^4^. A.
Words and Syllables, with these of the Record here cited. And further, those
words, the Omnes See the Glossary to my Introduction, etc. f. 64, 65.
de Regno nostro Clerici and Laici, cannot be meant of all the People of the
Nation, or every individual Freeman, or Inhabitant of the Kingdom; But of such
only, who had others under them, that belonged to, and omnes, etc. here
intended.

The Matter of Fact before this Confirmation was thus: Edward the First was
Engaged in a War with the French and the Scots; Walsingh. f 68. n. 40. Mat.
Westminster. f. 428. n. 30.
The last of which he had subdued, and brought their King John Prisoner to the
Tower. The King of France the mean time entered Gascony with an Army, and
affronted him by diverse other ways and means: At his return from Scotland, the
King on the morrow after All Souls, on the 3d of November, A. D. 1196. 24 Ed. 1.
according to Walsingham, or on the Martin, on the 11th of the same, according
to Mat. Westminster. held a Parliament at St. Edmunds Bury, to raise Money to maintain
the War against France; Walsingh. ut supra, and n. 50.
In qua a Civitatibus and Burgis concessa est Regi octava, a populo vero
reliquo duodecima pars bonorum. In which the Citizens and Burgesses granted him
an Eighth, and the rest of the Laity, (that is, the Barons and Knights of
Shires) granted him a Twelfth part of their Goods. Clerus ob constitutionem
Bonifacii Papa^ hoc anno editam, quae prohibet sub poena Excommunicationis, ne
Talliae vel Exactiones a Clero per seculares Principes quocunque modo
exigantur, vel eis salvantur de Rebus Ecclesiae, Regi pro Guerra sua petenti
subsidium Denegavit. The Clergy denied the King a Subsidy toward his War, by
reason of Pope Boniface published this year, by which Secular Princes were
prohibited to require any Taxes or Talliages of the Clergy, or they to pay any
to them, upon pain of Excommunication.

But that upon Deliberation they might give the King a better Answer, he
deferred this Business until the next Ibid.
Parliament, which was to be holden at London, on the morrow Hilary (that is,
January 14th). In the mean time, Vt supra.
the Monk of Westminster says, the King caused the Barn-Doors of the Churchmen
to be locked up.

At the 25th Ed. 1.
time appointed the Parliament met at London, and the Clergy persisting in their
Denial of a Subsidy to the King, he put them out of his Protection, seized
their Goods, and prohibited the Ibid. f. 429. n. 30.
Lawyers to Plead for them in any of his Walsingh. f. 69. n. 30.
gave a Fifth part of their Goods: The King found the Archbishop very stiff in
this Business, and therefore seized all his Lands, and caused the Debts he
ought in the Exchequer to be levied upon his Goods, for he by consent of the
Clergy, had procured the Inhibition, that they should not assist

The King Ibid. f. 69 n. 50.
summoned all that ought him Service, and all that had twenty pound Land by the
year, to meet him at London with their Horse and Arms, upon the first of
August, to pass with him beyond Sea, and to receive his pay: Mat. West^ s. ^30.
n. 40, 50.
When they met, the King Commanded his Marshal and Constable, the Earls of
Norfolk and Hereford to Inroll and Order the Militia; they deny to do their
Duty, and in behalf of the Comunity demand a Confirmation of their Liberties
contained in the Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, and make etc. (which
new Demands were Granted in the Statute de Tallagio non Concedendo, in the 34th
of his Reign) But at that time was willing only to renew the Charters, for Mat.
West^ s. ^30. n. 40, 50.
which he required the Which had been granted the last year at Bury.
Eighth part of the Goods of the Laity, which was presently Granted by such as
Pope to give them leave to do it.

The King of France the mean while had led an Army into Flanders, and wasted
the Country, A. D. 1297. 25 Ed. 1.
and reduced the Earl to great necessity, who sent to the King for Relief as
being his Confederate. The Marshal and Constable told the King it would be no
advantageous Expedition to him, and that they were not bound to that Service,
however he shipped himself with 1800 Horse, and a great Body of Foot, on the
23d of August to the relief of Flanders. Ibid.
He was no Barons after them, went to the Chequer and forbad those Barons to
levy by the Sheriffs this Eighth part, because they had not given their
Consents, without which no Tallage could be imposed upon the People, whom they
had made their own, and drawn in the Walsingham, f. 72. n. 40.
Citizens of London, to stand with them for Liberties. These Tumults much
affrighted the People, and amused Prince Edward, his Fathers Viceroy, so that
by the persuasion of some of the Great Men he Mat. Westminster. f. 431. lin 7.
renewed the Charters. This was done on the 12th of October, in the 25th year
of his Fathers Reign, as we have noted before, and they were signed by him at
Gant in Flanders, on the Ninth of November following. Walsingham says he did
it, In arcto f. 74. n. 4.
pofitus cedendum Malitiae Temporis censuit. On the 15th of September the
Prince issued the Append. n.
Writs to the Sheriffs of every County, to cause two Knights to be Elected and
sent to him to London, (without any Directions to send Citizens or Burgesses)
so as they should be there on the sixth of (...) of Parliament; and yet no
doubt, but they were made by advice of his Council. And therefore it seems,
that the Parlements or Great Councils of those times, owned the Kings Charters
under Seal, and the Grants made by them, to the People to be of good Force and
Effect, and that their Petitions to which he gave his Assent, and caused to be
put under his Seal, were by them accepted, and from time to time acknowledged
as firm and valid Laws.

In the 28th year of his Reign, the King led an Army into Mat. Westminster. f. 433.
n. 30.
Scotland, the Scots fled, leaving about 400 of their slain behind them. The
Archbishop of Canterbury came to the King there, and brought the Popes Command
or Message to him, That the Scots having submitted themselves to his
Protection, he England, and held a Parliament at Lincoln eight days after
Hillary. The Earls and Barons complain of the violence and injuries done every
where by the Kings Ministers and Servants; And again, desired the Liberties
contained in Magna Charta, might be so confirmed, that from Ibid. f. n. 40.
The King for some days was not very forward to gratify them in their
Requests, but seeing their Importunity, he told them he was ready to Grant and
Ratify what they desired, and the Charters were renewed, and sealed with the
Kings Seal, and carried into every County in England, and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the other Bishops, denounced the Sentence of the greater
against the Violators of them; Ibid. f. n. 50.
Pro hoc confirmationis effectu concesserunt Comites and Barons quintam
decimam partem bonorum suorum Mobilium, etc. For this Confirmation the Earls
and Barons gave a Fifteenth part of their Moveable Goods, as they should be at
Michaelmass next coming. But Robert Archbishop of Canterbury would grant
nothing Popes special License; This Confirmation bears Date the 28th of March,
in the year above said. This is the true History of the contention between the
Norman Kings and Norman Barons from the 1st of Henry the First, to the 9th of
Edward the First, just 200 years, about Liberties comprehended in these two
Charters especially, and their Pretenses from them, and Expositions of them:
Not one English Saxon Baron to be found, as a Witness to, or Promoter of them,
nor indeed scarce to any public Instrument, Charter or Grant; all this time.

And to any Man that will seriously consider what these Charters were then, to
wit, all of them in the main, but a Relaxation of the Rigor of the Feudal Law
generally used in Europe, cannot believe they were any others; for the
Descendents from the Normans at this very time possessed all the considerable
England, and it was Liberty that they pretended belonged to them, in the
enjoyment of their See what is said of Feudal Law. Feudal Tenure, etc. in the
Glossary, to my Introduction, etc. f. 39. E. etc. and compare it with the main
Articles in Magna Charta.
Feudal Estates they contended for; and the Archbishops and Bishops always
headed and managed them, and began the Dance with pretenses for their
Ecclesiastic Liberty, who were willing to have their Princes Favors, as to the
enjoyment of their Temporalties or Baronies, but were not willing to own any
obligation

But Sir Edward Coke does not care to hear of the Feudal Law, as it was in use
at this time, And has a fine fetch to play off the Great Charter, and
interpret it, by his Modern Law, that was not then known, or heard of. And it
has been, and ever was, an Art of some Men, to interpret and confound New Laws
by Old Practice, and Usage; and Old Laws by late Usage, and Modern When perhaps
if they would endeavor to find out the History of those Laws, the Grounds and
Reasons upon which they were made, there would be found no congruity between
them, nor possibility of explaining one by the other; but if the words sound
alike, it is enough. The same Sir Edward England was here (in practice it is to
be supposed) before the Entry of the Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, and
that it was never altered by any of them: And with Relation to this Opinion he
says, that Magna Charta was for the most part Proeme to 2d. Institut. f. 2. And
see 2d. Instit. f. 3. lin. 3.
Declaratory of the principal Grounds of the Fundamental Laws of England, and
for the Residue it is additional to

Upon this Assertion, no man can think but that he knew what the Fundamental
and Common Laws of England were, before the making of this Charter, otherwise
it was only a conjecture and he had neither Ground nor Reason for a Positive
Eger^on Lord Chancellor, Sir Francis Gaudy Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
Fleming Chief Baron, and Williams one of the Justices of the Kings Bench did
not; for in Prince Cokes 8th. Report. Case the first.
Henry's Case, in Hillary Term in the Third of King James, for the Establishing
the first great Point which was argued in that Case, they all agreed, The Great
Charter did cross and change diverse parts of the Common Law: Now if it did
cross and change the Common Law, it did not declare and confirm it; (for that is
Sir Edwards meaning) n^r would a man think such a Charter could supply the
defects of it. I will leave these different Opinions to those that can
Reconcile them, and take notice of some of Sir Edwards particular Instances.

Magna Second. Instit. f. 15.
Charta. C. vi. Haeredes autem Maritentur absque Disparagatione. Heirs shall be
Married without Disparagement. This he says is an Ancient Maxim of the Common
Law. It is most certain, That the Lords of the Fee should have the Custody,
Warship and Education of the Heir within Age, was See Feudal Law, etc. in the
Glossary to my Introduction, f. 39. E etc.
Feudal Law, especially as it was at this time practiced in England, and from
thence this Law was derived. The next Chapter about the Marriage of Widows was
another Branch of the Feudal Law, where the true Reason is given why they could
not Marry without License from the Lord of the Fee, which he never touches.

No Mag. Cart. C. ^0.
Constable of a Castle may distrain any Knight Castle-Guard) to give Money for
Castle-Guard, if he would do the Service in his own Person, or do it by another
Stout Man, if for any reasonable cause he could not do it himself, and if the
King called him into the Army, he should be free from Castle-Guard, for the
time he was in the Army, and for

This Chapter, or as he calls it 2 Institut. f. 34.
Act, consisting of two Branches, is Declaratory of the Common Law. First, He
that held by Castle-Guard might make a Deputy. Secondly, That he who by the
King was called into the Army, should be free from Castle-Guard, etc. This also
he says was Declaratory of the Ancient Yet Castle-Guard, and whatever related
to it was a Constitution of the Military Feudal Law.

The next Mag. Char. C.xxi.
Chapter about Carriages, was a Prerogative all Princes as Chief Lords of all
Fees, had over the Vassals of their Military Tenants. Nulla Carecta Dominica,
etc. No Demeasn Cart (that is, a Cart in the proper use) of any Ecclesiastic
Person, etc. They were exempt, he says, by the Ancient 2 Instit. ^ 35.
Law of England. The words of the Law prove it to be Military and Feudal; They
were exempt as Military Tenants: The words Carecta Dominica, add to the proof
that it was a Military Law.

We will not hold the Lands of those Convict of Mag. Chart. c. 22.
Felony above a year and a day, etc. Forfeiture of Lands for Felony was
Originally from the Feudal Law.

No Officer of ours Ibid. c. 28.
shall for the future, put any man to Wage Law, etc. This Wager of Law, he
says, for ought England. I am sure he never read the old French Law, the Salic
Law, the old Feudal Law, See my Saxon History.
the old German, nor indeed any ancient Foreign Law, the Practice of it, and
the Constitution also is frequent in all of them.

The 31 Chapter of Magna Charta concerning Military Tenures, Escheats, Reliefs
and Services, he Second Institut. f. 64.
says, is all merely Declaratory of the Common Law, but it is a mighty mistake
from his not having read or observed the Feudal Law; for if ever there were any
such Law in the World, this whole Chapter is certainly only a qualified and
moderate part of it.

Nor are Littletons Tenures any thing else, but a Declension Lapse of the Rigid
Feudal Law, by pact, permission, remission, or favor of Lords and Patrons, or
by time, into the more mild Usages of it, as they were practiced in this Nation
in his time, as must be confessed by any one but meanly skilled in the Feudal
Law.

The whole Feudal Law consisted in Hottom. de Feud. Disput. Col. 871. C. D. E.
Customs, rather Frederic the First, who was made Emperor A. D. 1151, or 1152.
The Lombards had their own Customs in their Fees, the Goths, Franks and Saxons
had others, all different; The Normans and Vandals had their own Customs, every
one in their own Countries and Provinces had their different Customs,

But Sir Edward Coke cannot own any thing of the Feudal, or any Foreign Law
here, though it was really made the English Law by Use and Time: He has a
formal way of Speaking, the Law does this, and the Law does that; this is Law,
that is by the Common Law of England, abstracting it Great Councils in all
Ages, as it was found expedient either by them, or upon Petition, and Request
of their People: Which Claus. 1. E. 2. m. 10. Dors.
is acknowledged by all the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and People present at the
Coronation of King Edward the Second in these words: ^Sir, will you Grant and
Keep, and by your Oath Confirm to the People of England, Laws and Customs
granted to them by the Ancient Kings of England your Predecessors, true and
devout to God, and namely the Laws and Customs, and Liberties, granted to the
Clergy and People, by the glorious King Edward your ^Predecessor.

In very many of the most Ancient Statutes, it is said, The King Ordains, the
King Wills, and it has been resolved by Cokes 8 Report. f. 20. b.
That if those Statutes be entered in the Parliament Rolls, and always allowed as
Acts of Parliament, it shall be intended, they were by Authority of Parliament.
How such Entry, and such Allowance, without any Words in the Statutes to that
purpose, can make them to be by Authority of Parliament, I shall not inquire;
But sure I am those words, The King Ordains, the King Wills, being pronounced
Parliament, and Recorded in the Rolls thereof, for the security of the People,
and owned by them, do clearly prove his Authority and Power in making Laws, to
be far greater than many men would allow him, or have him to enjoy.

If these sayings of Sir Edward Coke have respect to the Times Magna Charta,
there was not then much Law, nor much Pleading, nor many judged Cases from
whence the Bulk of the Law arose, and the proceedings were short, Possession
then was eleven Points of the Law, and Seisin proved the Plaintiff had
Possession presently; the only trouble then and delay was sometimes allowing
and casting Essoins. I will give some

Rex Willielmo de Cahanniis, Salutem: From the Original in the hands of Sir
Tho. Hare Baronet. This was in the time of William Rufus.
Praecipio tibi, ut facias convenire Sciram de Hamtona, and Judicio ejus
cognosce, Si Terra de Isham reddidit firmam Monachis Sancti Benedicti Tempore
Patris mei, and si ita inventum fuerit, sit in Dominio Abbatis; si vero
Teinlanda tunc fuisse invenietur, Qui eam tenet, He was consecrated A. D. 1081
and died 1096.
Willielmo Episcopo Dunelm.

The King to He was Sheriff.
William Cahains, Greeting: I Command you, that you cause the Shire of Hamton
to come together, and by the Judgment thereof, know if the Land of Isham paid
Rent to the Monks of That is, of Ramsey.
St. Benet, in my Fathers time, and if it shall be found so, let the Abbat have
it in Demeasn, or Teinland, he that holds it, let him hold it of the Abbat, and
let him acknowledge to hold it so; If he will not, let the Abbat have it in
Demeasn, and see that no Complaint about this Matter returns to me again.

Rex Angliae Ibidem.
Willielmo Vice-comiti, Salutem: Mando and

The King of England to William the Sheriff, Greeting: I Require and Command
thee that thou make Abbat Ailsi Isham, as he Recovered it by Proof in
Northamptonshire, and as it was Witnessed and Sworn to be to the Use of Saint
Bennet. Witness Roger Bigod.

This was the whole Proceeding, after Proof by the Shire, it belonged to the
Abbat, a Writ of Possession was directed to the Sheriff, and then he had Seisin
of the Land.

Rex Angliae The Original in the Custody of Sir Tho. Hare Baronet.
Episcopo Eliensi and Baronibus and Justiciariis and Vicecomiti and omnibus
fidelibus suis Francis and Anglis de Grantebridge scira, Salutem. Sciatis quia
Barnadus Abbas de Ramseia, Dirationavit in Curia sua apud Sanctum Ivonem coram
Justicia mea quam illuc miseram, In the time of Hen. 1st.
Terram de Stowa and Grettona, Roger Bishop of Salisbury was Elected 110^. and
Consecrated 1107. and was Bishop 39 years, and Justiciary of England many years
in his time.
Et

The King of England to the Bishop of Ely, the Barons Justiciaries, Sheriff and
all his Feudataries of Cambridgeshire, French and English, Greeting: Know ye
that because Barnard Abbat of Ramsey, has recovered at his Court at St. Ives,
before my Justice which I sent thither, the Land of Stow and Gretton against
Pain Peverel, which he claimed to hold of the Church of Ramsey, and it was
there found by the Jury, that he could claim no Right in that Land, and that
the whole belonged to the Church and Abbat of Ramsey, free from any claim of
Pain or his Successors: And this Recovery I Warrant, and by my Chart Confirm;
And therefore I Ramsey and the Abbat, from henceforward, shall hold them
peaceably, quietly and freely, as the Demeasn of the said Church, so as it
shall not answer any more to him, or any of his Successors, or any Claiming by
him. Witness Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and Pain Fitz-John, and William of
Hoctun at Westminster.

The King sent one of his own Justices to take the Assize or Verdict, to
prevent the partiality of the Jury which might have been before the Abbat
himself, or his Steward.

The like Confirmation almost was made by Queen Maud under her Seal, in another
Case in the Absence of this King,

The Inhabitants of the Hundred of Peritune (now Pirton) in Oxfordshire,
pretended the Manner or Hundred of Levechenor, (now Lewknor) in the same County
ought Suit and Service to their Hundred, and was no Hundred of it self; the
Abbat of Abendon proved the contrary in the Kings Court in Winchester; Sed quia
Rex tunc in Normannia erat, Regina quae tunc praesens aderat taliter hoc
sigillo suo Confirmavit.

Carta Registrum Magnum de Abbendon in Bibloth. Cotton Claudius. B. 2.
Reginae de Levechenora.
MAtildis Angliae Regina Roberto Episcopo Lincolniensi, Abbendona, in Curia
Domini mei and mea apud Wintoniam in In the Exchequer or Treasury there, which
was then in Winchster Castle.
Thesauro ante Rogerum Episcopum, Salesburiensem, and Robertum Episcopum
Lincoln and Richardum Episcopum Lundon. and Willielm. de Curceio, and Adamum de
Porto, and Turstinum Capellanum, and Walterum de Glocest. and Herbertum
Camerarium, and Willielmum de Oyleio and Gosfridum fill. Herberti, and
Willielmum de Enesi, and Radulphum Basset and Goisfridum de Magna Villa and
Goisfridum Ridel and Walterum Domesday Book kept in the Treasury of the
Exchequer.
Librum de Thesauro Disracionavit quod Levecanora Manerium suum nichil omnino
debet in Hundredo de Perituna facere, sed omnia quae debet facere tantumodo in
Hundredo de Levecanora facere debet in quo Hundredo habet Ecclesia de Abbendona
xvii Hidas. Test Rogero Episcopo Salesb. and Willielmo de Curci, and Adamo de
Porto apud Winton.

Maud Queen of England, to Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and Thomas St. John, and
all the Barons of Oxfordshire French and English, Greeting: Know ye that
^aritius Abbat of Aberdon, in the Court of my Lord, and mine, at Winchester in
the Exchequer, before Roger Bishop of Salisbury, Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and
Richard Bishop of London, William de our Chaplan, Walter of Glocestre, Herbert
the Chamberlain, William D'oyly, Geofrey Fitz Herbert, William de Enesi, Ralph
Basset, Geofrey Magnaville, Geofrey Ridel, and Walter the Archdeacon of
Oxford, proved by Domesday Book, or the Book which was kept in the Levecanor
ought no Suit or Service to the Hundred of Peritune, but whatever it ought to
do, was only to be done in the Hundred of Levecnor, in which the Church of
Abbendon has seventeen Hides. Witness Roger Bishop of Salisbury, William de
Curcey, and Adam de Port at Winchester.

In these times, and for a Century or two of years afterward, See the old
Registers, Leigers, Couchers and Histories of the Great Monasteries, Ely, Bury,
Ramsey, Abendon, etc.
County, See the old Registers, Leigers, Couchers and Histories of the Great
Monasteries, Ely, Bury, Ramsey, Abendon, etc.
Hundred, and Lords Courts were very considerable, and for good Quantities of
Land, and the Suitors to the Hundred and County Courts were as considerable;
all Men, especially of the Laity, of what Quality soever, within the Hundred,
ought their Attendance there, as appears by this Writ.

Henricus Monast. Angl Vol. 3. f. 262. Col. 2. n. 50.
Rex Angliae, omnibus Baronibus, and Vavasoribus, and omnibus Dominis qui
Terras Tenent in Well-Wapentach, Salutem: Praecipio quod omnes veniatis, ad
placitum, and Wapentachium Episcopi Lincoln quod de me tenet, per summonitionem
Ministrorum suorum; Et facietis ei omnes Rectitudines, and consuetudines in
omnibus Rebus, quas ei debetis de Terris vestris ad illud VVapentachium^, ita
been and plenarie, sicut unquam before fecistis Roberto Episcopo vel alicui
Antecessori suo, and quas just facere debetis, and nisi feceritis ipse vos
justiciet per pecuniam vestram donec faciatis, ne perdam pecuniam meam, quam
Episcopus mihi inde reddere debet. Test Episcopo Sarum, and G. Canc. apud
Fereham.

Henry King of England, to all Barons, Vavasors, or Knights and Lords of
Manners, which hold Lands in Well-Wapentach, Greeting: I Command that you all
come to the The same with an Hundred.
VVapentach-Court of the Bishop of Lincoln which he holds of me, at the summons
of his Bailiffs, and perform to him all Services Customs in all things, which
are due to him from your Lands at that Court, so well and fully as ever ye
performed them to Robert Bloet who died, Jan. 10. A. D. 1122 Alexander
succeeded him, and was consecrated, A. D. 1123. Jul. 22.23 Hen. 1.
Robert the Bishop, or any Antecessor of his, and which ye ought justly to do,
and unless you perform them, he shall Distrein your Goods until you do it, lest
I lose my Rent which the Bishop is to pay me for the VVapentach. Witness Bishop
of Salisbury, and G. the Chancellor at Fereham.

In the Append. n. 34.
eighteenth year of Henry the Third, He by Advice of the Major part of the
Bishops, Earls and Barons Expounded the 35th Chapter of Magna Charta, where
there had been care taken about the keeping of the County Court, Turns and
Leets, but not about Hundred or VVapentach and Lords Courts; In which Chapter
there was a Clause, That all were to have their Liberties they had or used in
the time of King Henry his Grandfather; And it having been proved before them,
that Hundreds and Wapentachs, and Lords Courts were then holden every
Forthnight, which was thought too often, and too great a trouble Great Men
should be holden from three Weeks to three Weeks, where before they had been
holden once in a forthnight, By their Tenures, and held Lands by doing Su^t and
Service at those Courts.
ought Suit to them, That Trials might be dispatched, and Judgments made (which
are done by the Suitors) unless in those Hundreds there ought to be Inquisition
made of Pleas of the Crown, as of the Death of a Man, Treasure found, and the
like, for the Inquiry to be made after them, they should

Notwithstanding this Provision, the Attendance upon these Courts, was thought
a great burden and trouble, and therefore two years afterward Stat. of
Merton. c. 10.
it was provided and granted, That every Freeman that ought Suit to the
County, Trihing, Hundred and Wapentach, or to the Court of his Lord, Great Men
made a Law to excuse their Lands and selves from this Service, and gave some
small parcels of Land to some ordinary inconsiderable men to do this Drudgery
for them. Land then was the price of all things, the very Household Servants had
Land allowed them

Nor was that which is now accounted a wonderful Privilege, then thought any
other than a vexation and trouble, seeing many Knights and considerable Men
purchased of the King Charters of Exemption from being Impannelled in Assizes,
Juries and Enquests, and these Exemptions were so Stat. of Marlebridge, c. 14.
that they hindered the course of Justice, and therefore there was a Law made
to force them in several Cases to serve upon Juries and Enquests; and at length
when the small Barons or Tenants in Capite and Military Men began to grow poor
and beggarly, and had by Law Magn. Chart. c. 32.
leave to Alienate what part of their Estates they would, leaving sufficient to
perform the Services which belonged History, f. 6^7. A. B.
Representatives to save charges in going to, and Attendance at Parlements, and
by several See Glossary to my Introduction, etc. ^. 62. c. etc.
undue Practices and Laws, to force the trouble and vexation (as it was then
esteemed) of serving and waiting at Assizes, Sessions, and County Courts, upon
Men of mean Estates, and meaner Understandings, Parts

These Trials for Lands before the County and Hundreds, are often to be seen in
Domesday Book, and in the old Registers, Leigers, or Couchers of great
Monasteries, as of Ely, Ramsey, Bury, Abendon, Glastonbury. etc. with the
manner how they were recovered, the Testimony of the County or Hundred, and by
such Jurors as most frequently knew the Matter of Fact. The Great Matter of
Inquiry then was, Who had been possessed, and who was possessed of the Land or
Thing in Contention, for by that they most frequently judged of Right. For no
Estate then passed by private Investiture, or as it was called when much in
use, Livery or Seisin, or when the Charts and Deeds of Feoffment were read and
Bra^ton, p. 38. a. n. 12.
granted before the County or Hundred, and there witnessed publicly, by Thomas
of such John of another, Richard of a third, Henry of a fourth, James of a
fifth, (cum multis aliis) with many others, that were Suitors at those Courts,
and they were then many indeed; for besides those that were Suitors by Tenure,
and held Land by Performance of such Services, all others that were Resident
within the County or Hundred, and capable County or Hundred, as a Ibid. p. 37.
a. n. 8.
Service belonging to the King, for preserving Peace and Justice.

When Estates passed thus by the Donor or Feoffor, to the Donee or Feoffee, and
Livery or Delivery was made, and Seisin or Possession given in the presence of
Tenants of the same Manner (or as the Feudal Law calls them Pares Curiae Sir
Edward Coke in the Epistle to his Eighth Report, says, Trial by Juries is an
Invincible Argument of the Antiquity of the Common Law, to which they are
appropriated: But if we received the Trial by Juries, or Pares Curiae, with the
Feudal Law, we have greater Reason to say, the Common Law was either derived
from that, or received this way of trial from it. Li^ inter Duos Vasallos per
Dominum, inter Vasallum and Dominum per Curiam Parium, Disceptanda est, per
Pares Coram Dominum Jura^os. A Controversy between two Vassals, is to be
determined by the Lord, by Peers Sworn before him, between the Lord and a
Vassal by the Court of Peers. Hottom. in lib. 2. Feud. Col. 757. E. Vasallus ob
quodvis Capitale facinus Feudo Col. 886. B. Statuimus ut nullus Miles sine
certa and convicta Culpa suum Beneficium perdat, nisi secundum Consuetudinem
Antecessorum nostrorum, and Judicium Parium suorum. Ll. Longobard. lib. 3. Tit.
8. l. 4. He that desires to know more of the Affinity between our Ancient Law
and the Feudal Law, let him read Dr. Zouch his Description of the Temporal Law
and Judgment according to the Feudal and Norman Customs, and in particular for
Trials by Juries, etc. Section the Fifth, of the third part.
Peers of the same Court) or of the most Substantial Persons nearest the place,
then Men were as secure of these Estates as of Copy-holds now; And therefore it
was, That a Writ of Right was anciently directed to the Lord of the Manner, of
which the Land was holden, to do the Demandant Right in his Court, as the most
ready, secure and quick way of Justice, for either the Tenants of the Manner
knew the Possession whose it was, and how obtained, whether by Descent or
Donation; Or it was entered in the Lords Court Rolls, or Books from whom, and to
whom Alienated for the Security of his Free Rent and Relief, and the Lord could
not Kings Court, or many times immediately into that.

But afterward when the Scholastic and Dilatory Method Caesarean and Canon Law
Flor. Wigorn. f. 671. Orderic. Vit. f. 919. B. Gervas. Act. Pont. Cant. Col.
1665. n. 30.
about the years 1139, and 1145. by the encouragement of Archbishop Theobald,
and other Bishops in the Reign of King Stephen was introduced, publicly read,
and mixed with the Practice of the Feudal or National Law, with Design to
overruled and Baffle it, then all the plainness of it ceased, quick Justice was
laid aside, Canonists and Schoolmen that practiced it, and became almost as
Fine and Subtle, as School Divinity it self, which then and afterward was
followed, as the best Example of Notion, Distinction, Division, and Nicety, to
all Learned Authors and Writers in every Glanville, and Bracton, who Wrote
within an hundred years one of another; How Plain* Easy, Short and Open is the
First; How Intricate, Involved, Subtle and Nice the Second. How much was the
Bulk and Dilatory Practice of the Law, within that time increased by Art, new
Suggestions and Inventions, never before thought of. The Judges Clergymen, or
Professors of the Caesarean and Canon Law, and most frequently advanced by
Ecclesiastic Preferments, and the Pleaders or Lawyers were Monks, who read in
their Cells or Monasteries, and abroad out of them, and explained those Laws,
until prohibited by several Popes from meddling with that Practice,

Bordarii.
SEE the History, f. 206. E. they were Drudges and performed vile Services,
which were reserved by the Lord, upon a poor little House and a small parcel of
Lands, and might perhaps be Domestic Works, such as Grinding, Threshing,
Drawing Water, cutting Wood, etc. or if they were Cotarii, we shall afterward
see their particular Services. See Spelman in the Word, and Due Fresne, in the
Words Borda, Borderia, Bordagium, Bordelaria, a Tenure Anciently very frequent
in many parts in France.

Commendati, Commendatio.
COmmendati were such as lived under the Protection of some Great Man, Lord or
Patron, who undertook to secure their Estates and Persons, for which Protection
and Security they paid him an Annual Stipend, or perfomed Commendatio was the
Safeguard or Protection it self, and was the same with Tutamen and Salvamentum,
and many times it signified the Annual Rent, paid for such Security and
Protection. See Du Fresne's Glossary in the Words: Besides the Commendati,
there were Dimidii Commendati, according to the Latin of Domesday Book. In Teit
Commendatus Dimidius Edrico praeposito Regis, and Dimidius Commendatus
Antecessori Malet, etc. Little Domesday Book, f. 322. b. This Teit in the time
of King Edward had two Protectors, Edric the Kings Reeve, and the Predecessor
of Robert Malet, and paid half the Annual Rent for his Protection to one, and
half to the other. And besides these there were Sub-Commendati, such as were
Commendati under Commendati; that is, Servants under them, or such as had
dependence on them, and were also under the Protection and Security of their
Patrons, and Dimidii Sub-Commendati, such as in like manner were under the
Dimidii Commendati, and had two Patrons or Protectors, and the same as they
had. In parvo Thornham ii liberi, homines, unus eorum fuit Commendatus and
Alter Dimidius Sub-Commendatus Antecessori Malet. Sudfolc. Little Domesday
Book, f. 322. b.

Clliberti, Coliberti.
THese sometimes were called Conliberti, as if they had been Servants, and were
manumitted. They were Conditionales, because obnoxious to some sort of
Servility; they were much like the old Coloni, Colons or Clowns. See more in Du
Fresne

Cotarii, Cottarii, Cotmanni, Cotseti, Coscet, Coscez.
ALL these words are derived from the Saxon Cote, which signifies a pitiful
little House, Hole or Lurking Place, Du Fresne says, with the French Board; and
Cotagium, which was such a Cote, with a small parcel of Land to it, was the
same Tenement with their Borderia or Borderie; and all those that inhabited
such small Houses, and held such Tenements, under Base Services, had these
various names given them, of which Services I shall say more afterward; at
this day we call these Cottagers. Sir Henry Spelman Coscet and Coscez, to be
derived from Coshe, an old English word that signified the same with Cote, but
seeing those words are seldom found any where but in Wiltshire, I rather think
them to have been mistaken by the Scribe, for Cotset, and only falsely written,
he not understanding the meaning of it, which was the true old Saxon word for a
Cotager.

Investitura.
THis Word is derived from the Verb Vestire. Bezoldus says it comes from Vest,
an old Franco-Gallic word, that signifies Possession or Seisin. Discurs. polit.
p. 90. From whencesoever Ceremonies or Symbols, which denoted the passing of an
Estate out of the Power of one man, into the Power and Possession of another,
and the same Ceremonies and Symbols were used in almost all Nations; if land
passed, a Turf, or Green Clod, or Sword of Earth was laid upon the Instrument
to signify the Soil passed, and a little Branch of a Tree, ramus vel fust^ca
was pricked upon it, to signify the profits, and what grew upon it passed with
it. The several sorts of Symbo^s Ceremonies of passing away Estates, with the
Forms which were very many, are to be found in the very Learned Du Fresne in
this Word, where the Reader, as in all parts of his Glossary, may observe what
had anciently nothing peculiar to England. But the Reason of my so much taking
notice of this Word, is, The great confusion it made in Christendom,
Investitures, between Pope Gregory the Seventh, otherwise called Hildebrand,
and Henry the Fourth Emperor of Germany, or rather inter Sacerdotium and
Regnum, between the Clergy and Laity. This was the Original or occasion of the
Contest between King Henry the First, Archbishop Anselm, and Pope Paschal the
Second; Between King Henry the Second, Thomas Becket, and Pope Alexander the
Third; Between King John, Stephan Langton, and Pope Innocent the Third; Between
King Henry the Third, Archbishop Boniface; Pope Alexander the Fourth, Urban
the Fourth, and Clement the Fourth; or between the Clergy, and Rebellious
Barons that struck in with them, and the King and his faithful

This Investiture was made, or the Possession of the Bishopric or Abbey given
by the Delivery of the Pastoral Staff and Ring, to the future Bishop or Abbat
by Temporal Princes; And they had always i^oyed this Right of Investiture until
the Time of Pope Gregory the Seventh, called Hildebrand, Papacy A. D. 1078, in
the Fifth Roman Council, which was called for the Restoration of Holy Church,
procured this Canon to be made.

Because we have been informed, That in many places Investitures of Churches
have been made by Laymen contrary to the None of these are extant.
Decrees of Holy Fathers, and from thence many Disturbances have happened in
the Church, to the Oppression Investiture of any Bishopric, Abbey or Church,
from the hand of Emperor or King, or any other Lay Person, Man or Woman; If any
one shall presume to do this, let him know, such Investiture is made void by
Apostolic Authority, and that he is Excommunicated, until he gives just
satisfaction. Labbe. Tom. x. Col. 371, 372. Can. 2.

In the seventh Council at Rome, held under this Pope A. D. 1080. Henry the
Fourth was deposed from the Empire, and Rodulph made Emperor; and the seventh
Canon, concerning his Deposition and Excommunication is in a high strain, and
worth noting. In this Council the former Canon was confirmed with this
Addition, That if afterward any one should receive a Bishopric or Abbey from
any Lay-Person, they were not to be esteemed as Bishops or Abbats, nor any
obedience was to be paid to them as such, and the Grace of St. Peter, and
entrance into the Church was interdicted them, until they had quitted the place
they had so received. And in like manner it was Decreed, concerning inferior
Ecclesiastic Dignities. Ibid. Col. 381. Can. 1.

In the same Council it was also Decreed, That if any Emperor, King, Duke,
Marquess, Earl, or other Secular Potentate or Person, should presume to give
the Investiture of Bishoprics, Ecclesiastic Dignity, he should be liable to
the same sentence; and furthermore unless he repented and left the Church to
its own Liberty, he should feel the Divine Vengeance in this life, as well in
his Body, as in his other Affairs, that his Soul might be safe at the coming of
the Lord. Ibid. Can. 2.

Pope Urban the Second in the eighth year of his Papacy, A. D. 1095. held a
Council at Clermont in France, in which it was Decreed, That no Clerc should
receive any Ecclesiastic Honor from a Lay-person, Ibid. Col. 508. Can. 15. nor
any King or other Princes should make Investitures of Ecclesiastic Honors,
Ibid. Can. 16. Nor that any Bishop or Priest should do fealty or homage to any
King or Layman. Can. 17.

Pope in the last year of his Papacy, A. D. 1099. held a Council at Rome, about
the beginning of May or latter end of April, in which he declared all Abbats
Excommunicate, which for the future should presume any way to receive the
Investitures of Abbeys from any Lay-hand, and forbad all Bishops to Ordain or
Consecrate them, Ibid. Col. 617. Can. 17. He that will see what advantage the
Clergy made of Henry the First and Henry the Second, the life of King John and
Henry the Third. And who will see the beginning and progress of this
Controversy about Investitures inter Regnum and Sacerdotium, between the
Secular and Ecclesiastic Government, or between the Emperor Henry the Fourth
and Pope Hildebrand, otherwise Gregory the Seventh, and Pope Paschal the
Second, let him see William of Malmsbury, who lived at the same time, f. 60. b.
n. 10. f. 61. a. n. 30, etc. f. 93. b. n. 40. f. 94 a. b. etc. And Jurets
Observations upon Ivo Carnotensis his Epistles printed at Paris Popes
Provisions and Donations of Bishoprics and Ecclesiastic Livings afterward in
all Nations, but especially this.

Libertas Ecclesiastica.
THe Right of Investiture, was a main part of that which the Clergy called
Church-Liberty. But by it they understood, and contended for a Freedom of their
Persons, Possessions and Goods from all Secular Power and Jurisdiction, as
appears by the Canons and Decrees of the Council holden Boniface Archbishop of
Canterbury at Merton. A. D. 1258. and confirmed by another holden at London A.
D. 1260 or 1261. as may be seen in the Church Story in the Reign of Henry the
Third.

Servi.
DO every where occur in Domesday Book, and no doubt but their Condition was
worse than that of the Bordarii. See the First part of the Saxon History, f.
82. B. and f. 83. and the life of William the First, f. 206. F. These were of
four sorts, such as sold themselves for a livelihood. Debtors that could not
pay their Debts, Captives in Nativi, such as were born Servants or Slaves. They
wrought at any time, and did what their Lords commanded them. Their Persons,
Children and Goods were the Lords, they could not marry but with those of equal
Condition, they could not make their Wills, or dispose of their Goods, if they
had any; whatever they got by Labor was the Servi perhaps were the same, which
in the Ancient Surveys of Manners were afterward called operarii, who performed
all servile and uncertain works.

In the History of Ely, p. 210 b. in an Account of Lands and Men detained from
that Monastery, which belonged to it, in the time of King Edward, etc. there is
this noted amongst the rest. Willielmus filius Gorham tenet lxxxvi homines in
Meltuna, Qui ita proprie sunt Abbati ut quotiescunque praeceperit praepositus,
Monasterii Debeut arare, seminare, segetes purgare, Colligere vel terere,
Equosque invenire in omni necessitate These were either Servi, Servants, or the
lowest sort of Bordarii or Socmani. I take the Persons of Servants to have been
always obnoxious to servitude.

Soca, Socmanni, Socagium.
SOca, Soc. generally signifies Liberty or Privilege. Fleta lib. 1. c. 47.
says, Soca significat Libertatem Curiae tenentium quam socam appellamus. Soke
signifies the Liberty of Tenants of a Court; And it differs from Saca, because
that is a Liberty given to any one, of holding Pleas, and Soke or Jurisdiction,
and comes from the Saxon Sace or German Sack, a Cause, Controversy or
Accusation: Sometime it signifies a Territory or Precinct, in which Saca or
Liberty of Court or Trials are exercised. Sometimes it signifies a payment.
Westfelda, etc. Huic manerio adjacent, T. R. E. xxx acr. Terrae quas tenebat
presbyter in Eleemosyna, and reddebat Socham (i.e. he paid Rent) Little
Domesday Book, f. 4. a. VVritelan, etc. ibi Dimid. Hid. libere tenet 1 Sochman
reddens Socam in Manerio. ibid. f. 5. a. VVirecestre-scire, Terra Episcopi,
Hund. Owldestan, Episcopus habet omnes Redditiones Socharum, etc. Ad manerium
Alvertune, pertinet Soca harum Terrarum, Newhuse, VVesthuse,; And nineteen
other Farms, Berwites or small Villages: And then it follows, Inter totum sunt
ad Geldum quater Viginti and quinque Carucat. quas possunt arare xlv Caruc. ibi
fuerunt 116. Sochmani modo VVastum est. The Soke of these Lands belongs to the
Manner of Alvertun, etc. in them all there was fourscore and five Carucates
Socmans, now the Manner is wast, Great Domesday, f. 299. a. Col. Here Soca
signified a Rent for using their Land, with some Privilege or Liberty. In the
Description of many Towns, at the later End, Rex and Comes de Toto habent Socam
or Soca Regis, and Comitis, The King had two parts, and the Earl one of the
Annual Rent, for liberty of using the Land. Sudfulc. f. 322. b. In Limberge
Clamat Ivo Tallebosc super Regem vi Bovat. Terrae, Dicunt homines Comitatus,
quod ipse debet habere terram and Rex Socam. In Limberge Ivo Tallebosc claims
upon the King six Bovates of Land, the men of the County say he ought to have
the Land, and the King the Soke At the latter end of great Domesday Book.
Clamores in Nortreding Lincoliae. Super Drogonem Clamat Norman de Adreci tres
bovatas Terrae In Normanbi dicit VVapentachium, quod ipsius debet esse Terra,
and Drogonis Soca. Ibid. in VVesttredinge. In both these places, here was the
Land, and the Liberty of the Land, that it might be used without too strict
Soke. In Ristuna iii liberi homines vi acr. val. xvi d. In his non habuit
Baignardus nisi Commendationem, and Sanctus Benedictus Socam Invasiones in
Nordfulc. Rogerus Bigot tenet in Plicham x liberos homines de lxxx acr. etc. de
his habuit suus Antecessor Commendationem tantum, and Stigandus super unum and
Commendationem, and super alios Socam. Ibid. Hund. and Dimid. de Fredebruge. In
Grestuna iv liberi homines xxvi acr. Quod tenet idem Rogerus de Rege, and val.
iv Sol. and in hoc non habuit Antecessor Rogeri nisi Commendationem, Rex and
Comes Socam. Ibid. Hundred de VVanelunt. In Dersincham. 1 lib. homo xii acr.
val. xii d. hoc tenet Petrus Valoniensis, de hoc Socam. Ibid. Here I confess I
am in the dark, for it is clear, Commendation and Soke are two different things,
referred to the same thing, and yet they both signify Privilege and
Protection, for which those that received them paid an Annual Stipend or Rent.
Stanford Burgum Regis, etc. In his etc. sunt lxxvii mansiones Sochemanor. qui
habent Terras suas in Dominio, and qui petunt Dominos ubi volunt. Super quos
Rex nihil habet, nisi Emendationem forisfacturae eorum, et heriet et Theloneum,
etc. Lincoln. f. 336. b. Col. 2. Stanford the Kings Burgh, in the Wards there
are 77 Dwellings for Sochmans, who have their Lands in Demeasn, or in their own
Power, and may choose any Lord or Patron faults, Heriots and Tol.

Eiam Tenuit Edricus, etc. huic Manerio pertinent xlviii Socmanni cxxi acr.
Terrae ex his Socmannis xxvii in Dominio, etc. These Socmen were fixed to the
Soil. Sudfulc. f. 319. b.

Sochmanni de Residene, et Irencestre, et Rand fuerunt et iccirco G* Episcopus
Clamat hominationem eorum. Northantshire Terra Willielmi Peurel. This William
was the great Possessor in these Towns; And Burred the Saxon before the
Conquest was Patron or Lord of the Socmans in them Towns, and Geofrey Bishop of
Constance had his Land and Title after the Conquest.

In Bertone tenet Willielmus de Cahanges ii Hid. hanc Terram Sochmani homines
Wallef Comitis, horum Duo Tenuere 1 Hid. and ii Virgat. and Dimid. sed recedere
sine licentia ejus non potuerunt alii vero duo dare and vendere Terram suam
potuerunt, Domesd. f. 201. b. Col. 2. here are different Conditions of Socmen,
Quaere, whether the free use of the Land, might not be the Commendatio, and
Liberty sell the Land, and recede, might not be the Soke meant in in the other
places, as contra-distinct to Commendation.

I find in the History of the Church of Ely, in the hands of the Learned Doctor
Gale, p. 210 b. these passages in a Catalogue of the Lands detained from the
Monastery of Ely* which belonged to it in the time of King Edward, and the
names of those that detained them. Walterus miles Hugonis the Knight of Hugh
Montfort possesses two Carucates of the Demeasnes of the Monastery in Maraham.
Willielmus de Warenna tenet 45 Socamans in Feltewella, qui quoties Abbas
praecepit in Anno arabunt suam Terram, Colligent, and purgabunt segetes,
adducent and mittent in Horrea, portabunt victum Monachorum; That is, William
de Warenna holds 45 Socmans in Feltewell, who as often as the Abbat Commanded,
Ploughed his Land, and were to weed and bind his Corn, to carry it into the
Barn, to carry the Monks Victuals to the Supradictus Walterus, and cum eo
Durandus Homines Hugonis de Montif^rti tenent 26 Socamanos supradictae
consuetudinis in Maraham. The abovesaid Walter, and with him Durand (another
Knight) The Men of Hugh Montfort held twenty six Socmans in Maraham of the
foresaid Custom. In Domesday Book the Entry of the last Clause is thus:
Nordfulc, Terra S. Aldred in Clachelose Hund. and Dimid. In Maraham Tenuit etc.
Huic Manerio adjacebant T. R. E. xxvii Socheman. cum omni Consuetudine; sed
postquam Rex Willielmus advenit, habuit eos Hugo de Monteforti, praeter unum.

What some Socmen were near two hundred year after the making of the Survey, we
may see from the Book of the Survey of the Priory of Spalding in Lincolnshire.
Haec sunt servitia and Consuetudines Sokemanorum Prioratus de Spalding,
Recognita in Comitatu Lincolinensi. Debent in quadragesima per tres Dies arare
si Caucas junctas habeant, and accipere semen ad orreum Prioris, and ad terram
portare, and illud seminare, and cum equis suis Herciare proprio cibo suo.
Debent tres praecarias in Autumno, cum falcibus suis cibo Domini. Item debent
tres Carectas de Ros, and tres vii Denarios. Item, debent de qualibet Caruca
sua juncta inter Purificationem Beatae Mariae et Festum Sancti Butolphi s. iv
d. Item, non possunt Terram dare nec vendere uisi licentia Domini Prioris.
Item, non possunt placitare per Breve Domini Regis de Sokagio nisi licentia
Domini Prioris. Item, non possunt Pullum suum Masculum natum de Equa sua
vendere nisi per licentiam Domini Prioris. Item, debent alleviare filias suas.

Nomina eorum quorum huic scripto sigilla apposita sunt. Sigillum Domini
Willielmi de Albeny, and Domini Galfridi de Sancesmare, and Domini Walteri de
Coventre, et Domini Johannis Bonet tunc Vice-Comitis Lincol. et Domini
Alexandri de Poynton, et Domini Willielmi de Well.

This Recognition was made in the County Court of Lincoln in the time John
Prior of Spaldinge; who was Elected in the year 1252. and died 1273. as appears
by the same Book speaking of him, Convicit etiam Sokemanos suos de Pynchebeck,
Duodecim Militum Die Tertia ante festum Sancti Gregorii Papae apud Lincoln.
Ibid. fol. o. a.

These are the Services and Customs of the Sokemen of the Priory of Spalding,
found by Inquest or Jury in the Lincoln, they ought to Plough three days in
Lent, if they had Ploughs and Horses; To take Seed at the Priors Barn, to carry
it to the Land, to Sow it, and Harrow it, finding themselves Victuals; they
ought to labor at the three Reaping Days in Harvest, upon the summons of the
Lord, he finding them Victuals. Also, they ought to carry five Hogs above a
year old, they might choose the first to their own use, and the Lord the
second, and so it should be of every five, the old Sow excepted; if they had
Hogs above a year old, and not five, the Lord was to have of every one a penny,
and of every one under a year old, an halfpenny. Aid once in a year to their
Lord, saving their Livelihood or Employment in Husbandry. Also, they ought to
go to Beltisford, with their Horses, Sacks and Packing Needle, to carry Corn to
the Granary of Spalding, at their own Expenses. Also, they ought to pay yearly
for their Residence upon the Manner, seven pence. Also, they Yoaked Plough that
was furnished with Horses or Oxen, between Candlemass and the Feast of Saint
Buttolph, two shillings and four pence. Also, they could not sell or give their
Land without License, from the Lord Prior. Also, they could not plead or
maintain a Title by the Kings Writ concerning their Soccage, unless by Horse
Colt, which came of their own Mares, without the same License. Also, they ought
to compound with, or give a Fine to the Lord for Liberty, for their Daughters
to Marry.

The Names of those who put their Seals to this Writing, the Seal of Sir
William de Albeny, of Sir Geofry de Sancesmare, Sir Walter de Coventre, Sir
John Bonet, then Sheriff of Lincolnshire, Sir Alexander de Pointon, and Sir
William de Well. These were undoubtedly some of the twelve Knights,
Recognition was made, of the Services of the Socmen in the County Court, when
they denied them, and would have asserted themselves free from them.

Villani.
VIllanus and Rusticus were almost the same in old Authors, so called because
they lived in small places in the Country, and manured the Lands there, and
because they were employed by Lords of Manners in sordid and slavish Works; the
Word was also used for sordid and slavish People, and such were most commonly
meant by it. See the History, fol. 206. F.

The Socmen, Bordars and Servants, the Names, I mean, were not so usual within
a Century or two after the Conquest; And instead of them, were more frequently
used the words, Consuetudinarii, and Censuarii, such as paid Rent, and
performed Works and Services, Cotarii, who held poor Houses small Rents and few
Works, but generally more Servile. Sometimes by Services only without Rent, and
Coterelli (that is, small Cotars or Cotagers) by the same, though fewer
Services and Payments, in Rent, Hens, Eggs, Fowl, etc. and Tofmanni, very
little different, from the Cotars or Coterelli in Tenure and Services, Toftman
(notwithstanding the common Notion of a Toft, being a decayed Tenement or
House) was one that possessed a very small House, and an Acre or half an Acre,
or some small parcel of Ground, by the same Services with Cotars, or very
little different from; And lastly, Operarii, whose Works were always uncertain,
and were poor miserable Laborers that wrought at all times and seasons, and
did all manner of Works at the command of their Lords, and only Benefit, and
these undoubtedly were such as in Domesday Book are said to be Servi, in
respect of whom, all such Customary Tenants, Cotagers, Villans, Bondmen or
Nativi, that performed certain Works, might be called privileged persons or
Socmen.

All these Men were not exactly of the same condition, though of the same
Denomination, for many times Freemen Persons were Free, and oft-times any of
the others performed certain or uncertain Works at the Command of their Lords,
and according to the first Stipulation or Charge upon their Persons or Lands;
except those that were really Customary Tenants; and I am apt to think that in
Process of Time, all these Names began to be Confounded and Survey or Extent of
all the Manners belonging to the Bishopric of Ely, made about the middle of the
Reign of King Henry the Third, where in every Town all these persons are
described and distinguished one from another, both by the Quality and Quantity
of their Works, but by Extenta Manerii, in the fourth of Edward the First, all
these Servile People of so many different Names pass under two only, that is of
Customary Tenants and Cottagers, in which all the others were then comprehended.

In the same Book the libere Tenentes, those in Military Service Soccagers in
several Towns are described under the same Title: but most commonly, the
ordinary libere Tenentes (which were very few) are clogged with Works, and seem
to differ not much from the Customary and Censuary Tenants, when united in one
Tenure, consisting in part Rent, part Services, that were customary and
certain; many times Novi Feoffati, and these, and such as these who since the
Dissolution of Monasteries, (which were endowed with a third part of the Lands
of the Nation) purchased some small parcels of Land holden in free Soccage,
make at this day the Bulk of the Freeholders.

For until by experience the convenience of changing of Works into Rents was
approved, and until the Military Men had Power by Magna Charta, C. 32. and
Stat. 18th of Edward the First, to alien their Lands, leaving sufficient to
perform the Service; there were but few Freeholders in our now common
understanding of them; nor had they then by being Free in their Persons, and
from base Services or Works, any Interest or real Power, or the least share in
Transacting Public Affairs, or were any ways concerned in them, but were Free
only from Villenage and Servitude, and Sui Jurii, at their own disposing, so
far only as like Villans and Bondmen, they were not under the Power and
absolute Command of other men; that is, their persons were free, and they might
dispose of what they had, without let or hindrance of their Lords, of whom they
held their Lands.

ERRATA.
FOl. 5. lin. 16. dele ae. f. 14. l. penult. r. Brigantes. f. 18. l. ult. r.
Claudius. f. 27. l. ult in note, r. Vrbicus. f. 35. l. 1. r. Ariminum. f. 37.
in the notes change y for u, and u for y. f. 38. instead of z in the notes,
there ought have been *. f. 42. l. 12. r. Turnacensium. Ibid. in note, l. 8. r.
Loir. f. 44. in note, r. Tigrisienses. f. 60. l. 5. r. Gemblacensi^. f. 70. l.
20. r. Allodium. f. 71. vivus. f. 78. l. 23. r. or. f. 82. in note o, r.
Munumitted. f. 84. l. penult. r. Priests. f. 126. in note q, r. Giraldus. f.
132. l. 13. r. matter. f. 134. l. 21. r. Algar. f. 142. in note ^, r.
Ferrariis. f. 153. in note. l. 1. r. Seon. Ibid. l. 5. r. Writ. f. 158. in note
e l. 7. r. 1. Johannis. In eadem l. after Castle insert and. Ibid. l. 10. r. 7.
Johannis. f. 170. l. 8. r. Another. f. 176. l. 8. r. Wauz. f. 188. l. penult.
r. Tosti. f. 189. l. 20. r. Daubin. f. 191. l. 42. r. Praefectures. Ibid. note,
l. 5. r. Sa^rapa. f. 205. in marg. against the figure 6. r. Doctorem. f. 207.
l. penult, r. three. f. 213. l. 34. r. fifth* f. 248. l. 43. r. Mauley. f. 255.
in note k* r. Oppidani. f. 301. in marg. A. r. Blaye. Ibid. in marg. C. r.
Serres. f. 307. l. 3. r. Britans. f. 314. l. 15. dele against it. f. 318. l.
17. r. Ans^betil. f. 348. l. 43. insert Wireliacum. f. 384. l. 29. dele Smade.
f. 466. l. 16. r. Consilio Reg^i. f. 477. l. 21. after upon insert him. f. 514.
l. 2. after Castle insert of Cambridge. f. 524. l. 15. r. Servientes. f. 549.
l. 20. r. arrived. f. 575. l. 42. r. He. f. 592. l. antepenult, r. what. f.
613. l. 21. after would* r. not take effect. Esparnier. f. 646. l. 16. after
not said, dele who.

A Catalogue of the Authors used in this History, with an account what they
were, when they wrote, and where to be found.
JVlii Caesaris Commentaria. Lugduni Bata^orum, 1651.

Historiae Augustae Scriptores Sex. Lug. Bat. 1661.

Lipsius his Tacitus Antverpiae 1648. Tacitus Cluve^. lib. 1. Antiq. German.
fol. 3. and 88. he was Procurator Belgii.
was Equestris Ordinis amongst the Romans, and employed in many public Offices
de Moribus Germanorum 100 years after Christ's Birth, and about 130 years after
Caesar wrote his Commentaries.

Suetonius per Schildium. Lugd. 1656.

Herodian Printed by Stephans 1581. He flourished about the year of Christ 224,
in the time of Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor.

Amianus Marcellinus, Am. Marcel. Histor. in fine. Testimon. ante Histor.
impress Lugd. 1591.
he was a Greek, and a Soldier in the Roman Army under Constantinus and Julian
in Gallia and Germany, a constant Companion of Vrsicinus in the Wars of Europe
and Asia: He wrote thirty one Books of History, and began with Nerva where
Tacitus left off, whom he strove to imitate. Of which the thirteen first Books
are lost, the other eighteen remain, beginning in the eighteenth year of the
Empire of Constantius Son of Constantine the Anno Domini 354. and ending
Chronol. Marcell. in fine Historiae.
with the Death of the Emperor Valens, Anno Domini 378, and of his Empire the
fourth.

Eutropius Eutrop. ib. 10. de se.
was a Greek, and Contemporary to Marcellinus, and a Soldier under Julian the
Emperor, and was with Vineti Epistola ante Eutrop. Basil. 1554.
him in his expedition against the Parthians, Anno Domini 363; and wrote his
Breviarie Testimon. ante Marcell. Lugd. 1591.
of the Roman History, at the Command of Valons the Emperor, unto his Time.

Cassiodorus was Trithem. p. 94.
Senator of Ravenna, Consul of Rome and Chancellor to Theoderic King of Italy,
afterward leaving the world was made a Monk and Abbat of a Monastery in
Ravenna; he was born Anno Domini 480. and dyed Anno Domini 575. Amongst other
thing he wrote in twelve Books various forms of Epistles and Creations of
Magistrates, and other things according to the use of those times he lived in.

Gregory Bishop of Tours Histor. Frank. Vet. by Marquard Fre^er Hano. A. D.
1613.
flourished in the time of Maurice the Emperor about the year of our Lord 600.
and wrote ten Books of History besides other things. In the beginning of Corpus.


Beda Trithem. p. 107.108.
a Benedictin Monk of Wiremuth, he wrote very many Books and Treatises, amongst
the rest the Ecclesiastical History of England; he dyed Anno Domini 732.
according to Pitsius Pit^us p. 119.
734. aged Seventy two years.

Alcwin Helvic. A. D. 780. fol. 114.
a Domestic in the Family of Charlemaign, his great Familiar, and as some say
Preceptor to him, by whose advice he founded the University of Paris A. D. 791.
or 792. according to Isaac-son: He was Bedes Scholar. A Ms Book in Caius Coll.
Library says he wrote Charl^m^igns life, and only such things as he saw, and
was present at, as he says in his Prologue.

Eginhartus Vid. Tit. istius libri. and Adven^ in. Histor. Bojo. f. 181.
Chancellor or Secretary to Charlemaign wrote four Books of his life Printed in
Quarto at Lipsig, without date, and in Fol. amongst the Veteres Scriptores
German. Hanoviae 1619. This is the same Book that bears the name of Alcwin, and
these might be diverse names of the same person; for Eignhart weary of the world
The lives of the Authors in the 1 st. Vol. of old Germ. Writers.
built a Monastery at Selingstat in the Dioecese of Ments, and Alcwin; he was
living after Charles the Great in the Reign of Ludovicus pius.

Aimonius In Aimonius his Epistle Dedicatory.
wrote four Books de Gestis Francorum. of the Acts of the French, and drew down
his History to Pipin, Father of Charles the Great. The whole fifth Book and
part of the fourth, though they bear his name, were wrote by others: He lived
about the year

Adelmii or Ademarii At the beginning of Corpus Hist. Fran. Printed at
Franckfort 1577.
a Benedictin Monk, a Contemporary to, or one that lived not long after
Aimonius; He wrote the Annals of Pipin, Charles the Great, and Ludovicus Pius
Kings of France: Others think they were wrote by Acwin an English Deacon, a
Domestic of Ludovicus Pius, and Praeceptor to Charlemaign.

Wilichind a Monk of the Abbey of Corbey, a German, wrote from the beginning of
the Saxons to the Death of Otho the first Emperor of Germany, Anno Domini 973.
Corbey Abbey was built by Sigebert de vita Witich. Theodoric de Neim f. 803. B.
Charlemaign in the Circle of Westphaly near the Weser; and the Abbot thereof
Mercator in Circulo Westphalic. Trithem* p. 130.
is one of the Ecclesiastic State or order of that Circle.

Dudo Dean of St. Quintins in Picardie; He In Praefat. Hist. Script. Norman.
wrote the Lives of the three first Norman Dukes or Earls, Rollo, William the
First his Son, Richard the First, Williams Grandchild: He lived in the time of
Richard the First, who In the Hist. f. 158. B.
dyed in the year 1002, and began his History at his Command, and finished it
after his Death by order of Richard the Second his Son.

Wippo was Capellane De seipso in Praefat. in Vit. Conradi. etc.
to Conradus Salicus, who was chosen Emperor Anno Domini 1024. and wrote his
life, and such things only as he saw and heard from very credible persons,
amongst the German Historians; Pistorius, and printed at Frankfurt 1607.

Gulielmus Gemet. lib. 7. c. 44.
Pictaviensis wrote the Acts of William the Second Duke of Normandy, and King
of England, commonly called the Conqueror; he was first a Soldier, Order. Vit.
f. 503. D. f. 504. A.
afterward a Priest, and a long time Chaplain to William, and Archdeacon of
Lisieux; he wrote such things as he saw and was present at, but ended Ib. f.
521. C.
his History in the year 1070.

Ingulphus Hist. Croyland f. 513. b. n. 40. ib. f. 514. lin. 3.
Abbat of Croyland, sometime Secretary to William the Conqueror when Duke of
Normandy, whose Father also had born Office in the Court of Edward the
Confessor: He wrote the Crowland Abbey; Ib. f. 518. b. 11.20.
and as they fell in many other matters, he Translated many Charters and
Chirographs out of Saxon, into the Latin of those times, wherein he renders
many Saxon words and things, by the legal phrase and Dialect of the Normans. He
was installed Ib. f. a. 515. lin. 8.
Abbat 1076. and wrote some part of his History at least after the Survey
finished, for he Ib. f. b. 516. n. 10.
took a Copy of the Lands belonging to Croyland Abbey out of it.

Gulielmus Gemeticensis Order. Vit. Prolog. li. 3. f. 458. A.
a Monk of Gemeticum, now Jumegies a Monastery in Normandy, abbreviated Dudo,
and wrote the Acts of the succeeding Dukes, and The Epistle to Duke William f.
215. A. B.
Dedicated his work to William the Conqueror. The Acts of Henry the First
imputed to him were probably wrote by some other.

Sigebertus Rob. de Monte A. 1113.
Gemblacensis, a French man born, and Benedictine Monk of Gemblours in Brabant,
he wrote a Chronography from the Robert Trithem. p. 150.
de Monte to the year 1210. Paul the Deacon or Warnefrid a Monk of Cassino (now
St. Germano) in the Kingdom of Naples, by Nation an Italian, or Lombard,
Sigebert de Script. Ecclesiast. c. 80.
for his Learning was called into the service of the Emperor Charles the Great.

Florentius Bal. de Script. Ang. Cent. 2. c. 66.
Bavonius a Monk of Worcester wrote a general History from Adam unto the year
1118, which was continued unto the Hen. 1mi.

Eadmerus Seldom praefat. ad Eadm. f. 1^^ ex Pits. Aetate 12.199.
Surnamed Canter or Chanter, born in England, a Monk of Canturbury of the Order
of St. Benedict, afterward Abbat of St. Albans, and lastly Bishop of St.
Andrews in Scotland, was a great friend and intimate of Anselms Archbishop of
Canturbury, a companion with him in his Exile, and privy to all his Counsels
and Simon Dunelm. 1121.
made Bishop of St. Andrews 1121 in the 21 st year of the Reign of Hen. 1 st.
and was a Monk of Canturbury in the Conquerors time, being in the company and
presence of Archbishop Lanfranc when he received the first news of Williams
Death, as he testifies of himself, f. 3. lin. 42.

Ordericus Vitalis a Monk F. 548. A. 824. A. B. etc.
of Vticum, or the Monastery of St. Ebrulf, now St. Eurole in Normandy, born in
England Anno 1075. and lived 67 years: At Praefat. ad Script. Norm.
eleven years old was entered into that Monastery A. D. 1086. and there lived 56
years, his History is chiefly Ecclesiastic, but intermixed with much secular
Story, and continued unto the year of our Lord 1121. He dyed An. Dom. 1142.

Simon Seldom in Pr^fat. ad* Script. X. Antiqu.
Dunelmensis ended his History Anno Domini 1130. in the 30 th. year of Hen. the
1 st. and Dyed not long after; he was a Monk and Pr^centor of that Church of
Duresm, and a Learned Man in that Age, but transcribed much out of Florentius
of Worcester.

The Continuer of Florence By his own testimony f. 672. in fine.
a Monk of the same Monastery, who continued his History from the year 1117, to
the year 1142, he lived and wrote in the time of King Stephen.

William a Benedictine Monk of Malmesbury, Dedicated his History to Robert Duke
of Gloucester, Natural Son to Henry the First, who began to Reign Anno Domini
1100, and dyed 1135, he wrote Toward the later end.
Novels he wrote from the first coming in of the Saxons to his own time.

Henry Archdeacon Balaeus f. 192.
of Huntington wrote a History of the Kings of England, and retired to Rome and
lived there some time for that purpose: He was in his time accounted a Learned
Man, and continued Henry the First and King Stephen, After whose Death he only
mentions the coming in of Hen. 2 d. and so ends his History.
and took much of his History, and Transcribed in many places Florence of
Worcester verbatim.

Roger de Hoveden Seldom in Praesat. X. script. antiq. He was one of the Kings
Domestic Clercs* Ben. Abb. p. 60. b. in fine.
was a Priest in Oxford and a Domestic in the Court of Henry the Second; in
many or most things he followed and transcribed Simeon Dunelmensis, and added
many things out of other Authors, and wrote well and faithfully; he wrote the
Annals

Quadrilogus or the Author of the Book Entitled, In the Prologue.
de Vita and processu Sancti Thomae Cantuariensis and Martyris Super liberate
Ecclesiastica, Collected it out of four Historians who were Contemporaries and
conversant with him in his height of Glory and lowest Depression, viz. Herbet
de Hoscham, Johannes Carnotensis, William a Canturbury, and Alan Prior of
Tewkesbury, and they are brought in or named as Relators of matter of Fact
interchangeably. Printed at Paris by Master John Philippi an Alman, in the
Street of Saint James, In fine istius libri.
at the Sign of St. Barbara, Anno Domini 1495, on the second of April. The
Pages are not numbered, nor but few of the Chapters. Gervase the Monk of
Canturbury commends his Readers to three of these in his Relation of the Acts
of this Thomas Col. 1637. n. 40. for their further satisfaction, viz. to
Herbert, John and William, Clarendon, and Northampton in Labb. Tom. 10. Col.
1425. 1433. etc. and others. This Book is much used by the Name of
Quadripartita Historia.

Ranulphus de Glanvill Sub effigy Claud. D. 2.
Chief Justice of England in the time of Henry the Second, wrote de l^gibus and
Consuetudinibus Angliae. These in a Ms. Book in Cottons Library are Entitled
Henry the Seconds Laws. Hoved. f. 390. b.n. 20.
He went with Richard the First into the Holy Land, and Acon A. D. 1190.

Fitz-Stephen, or Gulielmus Stephanides, Pitsius A D. 1190. This was written by
Johannes Carnotensis.
were both one person and the very same with Gulielmus Cantuariensis the Monk
of Canturbury above mentioned; He lived in the year 1190: In the beginning of
Richard the First, his Book has this Title, Vita Sancti Thome Archiepiscopi
and Martyris Cantuariensis Ecclesiae, and is to be found in Cotions Library,
under the Effigies of Julius A. XI. Amongst other small pieces. p. 113. the
life of Thomas that goes under the name of Fitz-Stephen, seems to have been
wrote by John Carnotensis; for in the Quadripart History, what is wrote from
him is often in the same words in that life attributed to Fitz-Stephen, and
never in William of Canturbury.

Gul. Neubrig. Bellarmin de script. Ecclesiast. p. 330.
was born A. D. 1135. and continued his History to A. D. 1197. 8o. Ric. 1.

Gervasius Dorobernensis Seldom Praefat. ad Authors 10. f. 13.
a Benedictine Monk of Canturbury, he was living in the time of King John, Anno
1200, and reputed a very good Historiographer, having Collected a great many
Historians from whom he wrote British, Saxon, and Norman Story. He was Thomas
Becket and ordained. For speaking Chron. Gervas. Col. 1418. n. 10.
of the Death of Thomas, and his own respect to him, he says thus, Mihi namque
Monachatum concessit, eo Anno quo ipse fuit in Archiepiscopum Sacratus, and ei
professionem feci, and ipse me ad Sacros Ordines promovit.

Benedictus Abbas was Abbat Pitsius in A. 1200. Gesta Hen. 2di. In Bibliotheca
Cotton. Jul. A. XI.
of Peterburgh; he wrote the Acts of Henry the second, and the life of Thomas
Becket Archbishop of Canturbury, and flourished in the year 1200, he began his
History Anno Domini 1170. 16. Hen. 2 di.

Gervasius Balaeus in Genturia ^tia. de Gervasio Tilb.
Tilburiensis, or the supposed Author of the Red and Black Books in the
Exchequer, ( de necessariis Scaccarii observandis) Dedicated to Henry the
Second, had his Name from Tilbury a known Town in Essex, Seated upon, or near
the Thames, Nephew of Hen. 2 d. and received much of his knowledge of the
Chequer affairs from the Information Vide ipsum lib. Ms. in Bibliotheca
Caio-Gonvil. Cantab. f. 41. a.
of Henry Bishop of Whinchester, who was Son to Stephen Earl of Bloys, by Adela
one of the Conquerors Daughters, Nephew to Henry the First, who gave him the
Bishopric; and Brother to King Stephen. This Balaus ib.
Gervasius was living in the time of King John 1210. He lived in Hen. First his
time, ib. 26. b. and had much of his knowledge of the Chequer from Roger Bishop
of Salisbury, ib. f. 27. b. and Nigell Bishop of Ely, fol. 38. a. b. whose
business he Transacted when infirm.

Radulphus de Diceto Pitsae^s in that year p. 282.
Dean of St. Paul's London, flourished about the year 1210, he was accounted an
excellent Historian, and a very diligent Collector in his Time.

Sylvester Giraldus Cambrensis, Pitsius A. D. 1210.
a Welch-Man of the Illustrious Family of Barry, as he says of himself, lib. 1.
c. 41. He was first Archdeacon of Brecknok, then of Saint David's, and
afterward Archbishop of Saint David's; he Hanmers Chronicle of Ireland, f. 168.
was many years a Student Hen. 2 d. called him home, made him his Secretary and
Tutor or Governor to his Son John, and sent him with him into Ireland. See lib.
2. c. 31. Amongst very many other works he wrote the Topography or local
Description of Ireland. ib. and the Conquest of it by the English; and wrote
what he knew and saw, as he testifies of himself, f. 808. lin. 6. He dyed at
St. David's about the year 1210, and was there Buried. He is to be found amongst
the Ancient Writers of English, Norman, Irish and Welsh Matters, put out by
Camden in one Volume, Printed at Franckfort, A. D. 1603 In the Proaeme of his
second Edition to St. John f. 811. n. 40. he says he wrote when he was with him
in Ireland, clearly and distinctly what had been done by all the great Leaders,
and persons until they left the Nation.

Henry de Bracton Origin. Jurisd. 10.56. in the Epistle to the Reader.
a Justice Itinerant 29 Hen. 3 d. A. D. 1245. skilled also in the Civil Law of
the Romans, wrote this Book toward the latter end of Hen. 3 d. of the Laws and
Customs of England, Justinians Institutions; he also lived and was a Judge in
Edw. 1 st. his time.

A Survey of All the Manners belonging to the Bishopric of Ely, made in the 32
d. of King Henry 3 d. A. D. 1248.

Chronica Normanniae Scriptor. Norman. f. 977.
containing many things referring to the English and French, from the year of
Christ 1139, to the year Victor in Paris. Published amongst the old Norman
Writers by Andrew du Chesn. Robert de Monte.
Printed at Paris 1619. The Matter and words of this Chronicle unto the year
1161, are taken out of Robert de Monte, who was Abbat of the Abbey de Monte
Michaelis in periculo Maris, of Mount Michael upon the Seashore in the further
part of Normandy next Britany; he was esteemed a Learned Man, and lived in the
time of King Hen. 2 d. He continued Sigebertus Gemblacensis.

Matthew Paris See the Testimonies of him before the Edition at London 1640.
a Monk of St. Albans, was Historiographer to Hen. 3 d. and received an Annual
Stipend from him. He dyed in the year 1259, and 43 d. of that King; he was
continued to the end of that Reign (as is supposed) by William Rishanger,
another Monk of that Abbey, who was also the Kings Historiographer, and received
his Stipend. Ibid.
Paris mostly in the beginning of his History, Transcribed Roger Mendover his
Predecessor, Historian also to the th of Hen. 3 d.

John de Bretton Pat. 53. H. 3. M. 2.
one of the Justices of the King's Bench in the 53 d. of Hen. 3 d. wrote a Book
in Law French of the Common Law of England, called Breton, at the Command of
Edward the First, Seldom Dissert. in Fletam p. 461.462.
who had a purpose to make Law certain, and to be put in writing, and therefore
caused Books to be made by the Judges and others most Seldom Ib. p. 457.458,
459.
affirms Bracton and Bretton to be the same person, whose Name was Diversely
written, and to be the Author of both the Books, that in Latin and the other in
French.

Johannes Brompton Abbat Seldom in Praefat. ad Scriptor. 10. fol. 39.41.
of Jorvaulx in Richmondshire, or the Anonymus History that passes under his
Name, and was only a History procured by him, and reserved in the Library of
that Monastery; Edward 3 d. and has taken many things out of Hoveden. Pitsius
says he was a Cistertian Monk, but when he lived, knows not. Bale does not
mention him.

Flatsbury often cited by Campion, Camden, Stanihurst and Dr. Hanmer, in what
they have written about the Irish Affairs. This name was given by Campions
History of Ireland f. 68.
Campion to certain short Chronological Notes taken up by an unknown Author,
from the time Cambrensis ends, unto the year of our Lord 1370. See Campions
Epistle to the Reader before his History of Ireland, Dated at Droghedah, June
Ib. and f. 77.
one Philip Flatsbury Transcribed them, and added Collections of his own, for
the use of Girald, the Father of the then Earl of Kildare. A. D. 1517.

Ranulphus Seldom in Praefat. f. 47.
Cestrensis had the Reputation of an industrious and diligent Writer by our
Ancestors, Especially Leland: He lived in the Reign of Edward 3 d. He wrote
from the beginning of things, and brought down his History to the end of his
Reign 1377, or perhaps only to the year 1344, as Mr. Seldom observes.

Henricus de Knighton Seldom Praefat. to X. Authors f. 47. Pitsius A. D. 1380.
Canon of the Abbey at Leicester, lived in the time of Richard 2 d. and brought
down his History unto the year 1395.

Theodorick The Author of himself f. 787. B.
de Neim, Literarum Apostolicarum Scriptor to Pope John 23 d. he wrote
Privilegia and Jura Imperii, and the Right of Electing the Pope, and
Investiture of Bishops by the Emperors, and Basil Anno Domini 1566, in Caius
Coll. Library. In the same Volumn are Johannes Parisiensis de Potestate Regia,
and Papali; and Marsilius Patavinus de translatione Imperii, with other small
Tracts.

Walsingham Pits. A.D. 1440.
lived in the time of Henry 6 th. was his Historian, and a Monk of St. Albans.

Matthew a Monk of Pitsius in the year 1377.
Westminster-Abby, called Florilegus, for his judicious collecting the Chief
Matters out of several Historians that wrote before him; Especially Mat. Paris:
He ends his History with the Death of Henry 3d. A. D. 1377, and lived not long
after him.

John Abbat De seipo in lib. de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. pa. 402.
of the Monastery of St. Martin, the Bishop of Spanheim of the order of St.
Bennet in the Dioecese of Ments, a Trittenheim in Mosel-gave in the Dioecese of
Triers. He completed his Book de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis A. D. 1494.

Hector Boethius Vossius de Histor. Latin. p. 615.
a Doctor of Aberdeen in Scotland, he flourished in the year 1497, and wrote
seventeen Books of the History of Scotland, and brought it down Vide Buchan
lib. 11. in fine.
to the end of the Reign of James the 2 d. Printed at Paris 1575. An Author of
no great

Andraei Alciati Comment. in jus Civil. Tom. 2. Basil. 1529.

Pancirolli Notitia utriusque Imperii. Lugd. 1608.

The German Laws, Ludenbrogius his Codex Legum Antiquarum. In fol. 2. Vol.
Printed at Frankfort 1613.

Epistola Dedicatoria to Gryphianders Weichbold. 1625.
Gryphiander Professor of Law at Gulick and at Jene, and Reinews Remeccius his
Predecessor, both Historians, as also Henricus Me^bomius.

Johannes Loccennii Antiquitates Sueo-Gothice. Holmiae 1654.

Annals Monasterii Burton. Oxon, 1684.

Domesday Book in the Custody of the Chamberlains of the Exchequer.

Patent and Close Rolls in the Tower of London thus cited, Rot. Pat. or Rot.
Pat. Cl. or Claus. Fine Rolls; the Pipe Rolls in the

Register of Abbendon or the Abbey of Abbington in Cottons Library Sub Effigy
Claudii, B. 6.

Records in the Tally Office, and Pipe Office, with the Kings Remembrancer,
etc.

The Close Rolls, and Patent Rolls in the Tower.

Charter Rolls in the Tower.

OF
THere being no Certain Account Extant of things done in this Nation, Cajus
Julius Caesar, 53, 54, 55, 60 Years before Christ.
Julius Caesar hither; I shall from that time begin this History, and out of
his own Commentaries, and other allowed Authors of the Romans, briefly relate
the Affairs of Britain, during their Rule and Empire here.

He then having brought under the Roman Obedience the greatest part of Gallia,
France.
Gallia, was, by the Senate, Coment. lib. 4. p. 132.
Decreed Governor thereof for Five years: Dio Cassius, fo. 63. What moved
Caesar to Attempt Britain.
Moved with Revenge, because the Britains had often Aided the Gauls in their
Wars against the Romans, or, by his own Inclination, to attempt Great Things,
whereby he might advance the Glory of the Roman Empire; Resolved upon a Voyage
into Britain, toward the latter end of Summer; and though he should then want
time to carry on the War he designed, or the Season prove unfit for it, yet he
Isle, knew and understood the Men, Places, Ports, and Accesses; almost all
which were unknown to the Gauls, for they admitted none but Merchants into the
Isle, and these only knew the Coasts which lay over against Gallia.

But before he adventured himself, he sent Cajus Volusenus, He sent Cajus
Volusenus before, to Discover the Island.
a Military Tribune, in a Longboat, or Galley, with Command, to Discover all
things, and that he should Return to him as soon as might The Morine Coasts
extended from Calis to Newport in Flanders; Comius, King of the Attrebatii in
Britain.
and the Morini possessed le Boulonois, the County of Guines, and part of
Teutonic Flanders.
Morine Coast, from whence was the shortest passage into Britain, where he
appointed his Shipping to meet him: In the mean time his Design being
Discovered to the Britains, many of the States, or Cities send It Is probable
Mandubrace and Comius might be these Ambassadors, or some of them, as may
appear hereafter; from whom Caesar might receive Encouragement to Invade
Britain.
Ambassadors, who Promise Hostages, and Obedience to the Roman People: To whom
having given Audience,

Comius of Arras Attrebatum, now the Chief City in Artois.
Arras, whom he had made King Courage, Wisdom, and Fidelity he was assured (and
whose Respect and Authority was great among The First Cohort called Militaris,
contained 115 Foot, and 132 Horse, Armed Cap-a-p. and was the Chief of the
whole Legion, the other contained about 555 Foot, and 66 Horse. Greeks. Legion,
Cohort, and Maniple, what, and how many.
It Is thought he was King of the Atrebatii (Barkshire) in Britain, who went into
Gallia, and served under Caesar, and was a great Instrument of the Britains
Submission to him, happily by Treachery, otherwise he would not have been
Imprisoned by them, they not using the same Practice toward other Envoyes.
the Britains) him he Commands to go unto as many Cities as he could, and
persuade them to embrace the Amity of the Roman People, and to tell them he was
hasting thither.

Volusenus having observed the Country (as well as he could) Ship, amongst the
The Romans called other Nations, Barbarous, as the Greeks did those that were
no Greeks.
Barbarous People, within five days returns to Caesar, who having prepared 80
Ships of Burden, in which he Wasted over his Foot, and 18, wherein the
Transported, besides the Long-Boats or Galleys appointed Quaestor-Lieutenants,
and other Officers, in all Two About 7000, a just Legion consisting of 10
Cohorts, every Cohort of 3 Maniples, every Maniple 2 Centuries, every Centurie
100 Foot, and for every 1000 Foot there were 100 Horse; they were called
Maniples, from a handful of Hay used for an Ensign.
Legions; The Seventh and Tenth Legion.
he sets Sail about the Third Watch of the Night, which was Three of the Clock
in the Morning, leaving P. Sulpicius Rufus a Lieutenant, with a sufficient
Guard, to make good the Port; and Orders the Horse, which were Wind-bound in a
Haven, Eight Mile upward, to Imbark and follow him; who, Shipping themselves
but slowly, Caesar arrived upon the Coast of Britain about the Fourth Cliffes a
Multitude of Armed Men, ready to Impeach his Landing.

Nature of the Place was such, that by reason of The Valley where Dover is
Seated, between 2 Cliffs, or High Hills, one upon which the Castle is built,
the other on the South Side of the Town, where there slides into the Sea a
small River, in which Valley was formerly the Haven or Bay, when the Sea more
Insinuated it self into the Land, which may be Collected from the Anchors and
Ship-planks there found: Upon these Hills the Britains appeared, etc.
steep Hills enclosing the Sea on each side, making a narrow Bay, it gave the
Britains great advantage in casting down their Darts upon those underneath;
Caesar thinking this place unfit for Landing, put off from the Shore, and lay
at Anchor until the Ninth Three of the Clock Afternoon.
hour, expecting the Lieutenants, and They had the Command of 1000 Men, and in
every Legion there were 6 of them, they executed the Office both of Colonel
and Serjeant-Major.
Tribunes, he declared unto them what he understood by Volusenus, and what he
would have done, warning them, that as the state of that War, and especially
the Sea Service required, they would be ready to ply too and fro at a Beck, and
in an Instant: This done, having advantage both of Wind and Tide, giving a
Signal, they Weighed Anchor, and Sailing about Eight Miles from that place,
This flat and open Shore is where Sandown, Deal, and Walmer Castles are placed,
about 7 or 8 Miles North of Dover.
plain and open Shore.

But the Britains knowing their Intentions, sending before their Horse and
Chariots, their Main Body following after, endeavored to prohibit their
Landing; Their Ships, by reason of their Greatness, drew much Water, and could
not come near to the Shore, so that the Roman Soldiers were forced, in places
unknown, and over-laden with Armor, to leap into the Water, and Fight with
their Enemies, who being upon dry Ground, or not far into the Water, nimbly
assaulted Horses and Chariots upon them: with which kind of Fight, Cajus Julius
Caesar, 53, 54, 55 Years before Christ.
the Romans being unacquainted, were terrified, and failed much of their wonted
Courage they had shown in their Land Battles.

Which Caesar taking notice of, caused the Long-Boats, or Gall^ys, being swift,
and more serviceable (an unusual sight to the Britains) to put off from the
Greater Ships, and Row toward the open side of the Enemy, and from thence with
Arrows, Slings, and other Warlike to drive them back: This Project succeeded
well, for the fashion of these Ships, the motion and noise of the Oars, and
the unusual kind of Engines amazed the Barbarous People, The Britains amazed at
the Ships, and Warlike Engines of the Romans.
causing them to make a stand, and then retire a little; but, the Water being
deep, the Roman Soldiers making no have to pursue them, the Standard, or
Eagle-Bearer of the Tenth Every Legion had a small Eagle, made of Silver or
Gold, for its Ensign, fixed on the top of a Spear, with its Wings displayed,
and this Eagle was never exposed to the Enemy, or put in hazard but in
desperate B^ttles.
Legion, first invoking the Gods, and Praying for Success to the Legion from
that Action, spoke aloud, Leap down fellow Soldiers, The Roman Standard Bearer
Leaps Overboard with the Eagle, and advances it against the Enemy.
unless you will betray your Standard to the Enemy, This said, he leaps
Overboard, and advances the Eagle against the Enemy; the rest exhorting one
another, not to admit the Disgrace, of Losing their Ensign, all leapt out of
that Ship, being followed by those in the next Ships.

Now began a sharp Fight on both sides; the Romans were much disappointed, that
they could neither keep their Ranks, nor fight upon firm Land, nor follow their
own Ensigns, for every one ran Romans as they came single out of their Ships,
urged forward their Horses, and many setting upon a few, encumbered with Armor,
dispatched them, while their Main Body resolutely assailed those on the Shore,
which Caesar perceiving, Commanded the Cock-Boats and Pinnaces to be Manned
with Soldiers, causing them to ply up and down with Relief, as they saw need:
The Romans at length being Landed, got their Foot into some good Order,
Britains, putting them to Flight, but were not able to pursue them far, The
Britains put to Flight.
for want of their Horse.

The Britains thus overcome, forthwith upon their Retreat, send Ambassadors
unto Caesar, Promising Hostages, and to do whatever he should Command; with
them Comius of Arras returned, Comius of Arras Imprisoned, and Freed again.
whom bringing to them the Generals Commands, they had Imprisoned, so Ship, and
now after the Battle Released; They blame the Multitude for this Violence, and
for their Imprudence ask Pardon.

Caesar Reproving them for ma^ing War without Cause, after they had sought
Peace, yet content to Pardon them, Commands Hostages, whereof some he received
presently, and others being to come from remote Places, were to be sent within
few days: Meanwhile the Britains were dismissed, and sent home, and many
Princes Isle, submitting themselves, and their Cities to Caesar.

The Fourth Day after the Romans Landing, the 18 Ships beforementioned,
appointed for Transporting the Horse, put to Sea from the Upper Those Ports
which Caesar mentions (that it may be noted once for all) were not very Baylike
Shores, then true Ports, such as Fishermen now only frequent, or as may have
been changed and altered by the access or recess of the Sea; Court of Guard
whence that Phrase To be in Station before the Camp, What?
it is probable this Upper Haven is Ambleteul, a small Haven about 8 Miles
North-East from Bolaugne, as Caesar hinted before.
Haven, Cajus Julius Casar, 53, 54 Years before Christ.
with a favorable Gale, and approaching the Island, in view of the Roman Camp,
a sudden Storm arose and scattered them, driving some back to the Port from
whence they came, Island, Westward, with very great danger; where, being at
Anchor, they were almost filled with the Waves; so that they weighed Anchor,
stood off into the Main, Gallia.
Continent: The same Night, the Moon being at the Full, the Tide filled the
Galleys, The Roman Ships (in which their Horse were) scattered by Storm. Many
of their other Ships made Unserviceable.
Romans being unacquainted with Spring-Tides) the Greater Ships also that lay
at Anchor, were Storm-beaten, and many of them split, and the rest rendered
unserviceable; their Anchors and Tackling being lost and spoiled, to the great
disturbance of the whole Army, who now had neither Shipping to carry them back,
nor Means to repair those Ships the Tempest had disabled, nor Provision to
support them here, Caesar having before resolved to Winter Gallia.

These things being known to the Chief of the Britains, who, being met
together, to perform such things as Caesar had Commanded them, The Britains
Confederate, and Revolt.
Consult together, and think it a fit Opportunity to Revolt, while the Romans
wanted Horse, Shipping, and all manner of Provision; the Number also of their
Forces seeming the less, in respect of the small Circuit of the Camp (Caesar
having Transported his Legions without Carriages) Resolve, To stop all
Provisions, and spin Caesar, though Ignorant of their Intentions, yet, from his
Present Condition, and their not sending Hostages, he suspected that which
afterward happened; and therefore to provide against all Accidents, he caused
Corn daily to be brought out of the Fields into his Camp; and with such Ships
as were disabled, and other Materials brought from the Continent, he Repairs
Caesar Repairs his Ships.
by which Means, and the Diligence of his Soldiers, all but Twelve Ships were
again made fit for Service.

While these things are doing, the Seventh Legion, according to Custom, was
sent forth to Forage, without any suspicion of War (some of the Britains
remaining in the Fields, near hand, and others going and coming freely into the
Roman Quarters) They which It was the Custom of the Romans to place whole
Cohorts and Troops before the Gates of their Camp, never less then one Cohort
and one Troop, sometimes more when near the Enemies. Hence our English Phrase,
Court, or Cohort of Guard; they were said to be in Station, from the Posture it
self; for, upon this Duty they did always stand, both Horse and Foot.
in Station at the Camp Gates, gave notice to Caesar, that the same way the
Legion went, there appeared a greater Dust then was The Britains discovered.
he guessed it was some new Practice of the Britains; commands the Cohorts in
Station to follow him thither, appoints two others to succeed them, the rest to
Arm, and speedily to follow him: he had not marched far, when he perceived his
Soldiers much overcharged by the Enemy; who assailed them on all sides with
their Darts: for they having conveyed their Corn from all other parts (this
only excepted) doubted not but that the Romans would come thither, lay in
Ambush for them; whom (having laid down their Arms) being dispersed, and at
their Caesar always employed his Soldiers in some Work or other here, in
Reaping, otherwise in Mending his Ships; he had all sorts of Artificers and
Workmen in his Army, Caesar had all sorts of Artificers in his Army.
to work themselves, and direct others.
Labor in Reaping, they set upon, killing some, and putting the rest into
disorder, compassing them about with their Horse and Chariots.

Their Manner of Fight with their Chariots was thus; They suddenly set upon the
Romans. Their Manner of Fight.
They first rode about their Enemies throwing Darts, where they saw advantage,
Troops of Horse, they leapt out of their Wagons, and fought on foot: The
Charioteers, or Drivers, in the mean while, withdrew from the Battle, and so
Placed themselves, that their Masters being oppressed in Fight, or out-numbred,
might find a Ready Retreat unto them; having performed the Duties of Horsemen
in their nimble-Motion, and of Footmen in keeping their Draught-Tree, or
Chariot-Pole, to stand firm upon the Yoke, and to return speedily into their
Chariots: The Romans Overpowered. Caesar comes Opportunely to their Assistance.
The Romans being Over-set with this new kind of Fighting, Caesar came
opportunely to their Assistance; for, upon his appearing, the Britains made a
stand; and, the Romans, for fear, Retreated to their General; who, thinking it
not a fit time to provoke Battle, kept his Ground for a while, and then Marched
back the Legions into the Camp.

Tempestuous Weather, for many days together, kept both sides from Action: in
this time the Britains send Messengers every way, Declaring, what small numbers
of the Romans were left; What hope they had of obtaining a perpetual Liberty,
and a great Booty, if they could now beat them from their Camp. Hereupon a
great Romans; Caesar supposing it might so happen as in former times, That the
Britains being beaten, would escape his Foot, The Britains Overcome.
and save themselves by flight; yet, with about Happily for CCC, were written
xxx, or rather for 300; 30, as Hottoman thinks, by Mistake; seeing it is strange
to think, Caesar would join Battle with 30 Horse only.
30 Horse, which Comius of Arras brought over with him, he placed the Legions
in Battle-Array before the Camp; not long after both Bodies were Engaged, the
Britains gave back and fled, the Romans pursuing and killing many, Burning and
Wasting every where about as they Camp. The same day the Britains send
Ambassadors, desiring Peace; which they obtained, They obtain Peace.
upon condition the number of Hostages before Imposed, should now be doubled,
and sent after him into Gallia; making have thither, because the Autumnal
Equinox was at hand (suspecting his Patch't and Crazie Ships might not well
endure the Sea in Winter) wherefore, taking the first opportunity, they Sailed
soon after Midnight, and came all Continent: Caesar Wintered in Belgia with all
his Legions; whither two only of the British Cities sent Hostages, the rest
This was his pretense of Invading Britain the Second time: the People not
thinking
neglected. Cajus Julius C^, 52, 53 Years before Christ.
The Roman Senate, upon the Relation of these Services, Decree him a A
Thanksgiving, in Honor of him, Supplication for 20 Days, What.
to their gods, for 20 days; in which, by Decree of the Senate, all the Temples
of the gods were opened, whither the People went cronwd with Garlands, and
offered Sacrifice, with Singing, Releasing Prisoners, and other Triumphal
Rites, etc.
Supplication of Twenty Days.

Caesar departing from his Army in their Winter Quarters, went To observe* what
was done at Rome, and to keep up his Interest among the People.
year) into Italy; first commanding Lieutenants of every Legion, they should
build as many Ships Caes. Com. Lib. v. Caesar goes into Italy.
and more easily drawn on Transporting of Horses, and other Cumbersome Freight,
he ordered they should be nimble Vessels, to which end their Lowness much
conduced.

Army, by the singular Industry of the There were all sorts of Artificers in
their Legions, and a Prefect or Master of them; and the Soldiers themselves,
at their first entering into Service, were Taught, and did Learn Mechanic Arts.
Portus Itius, Where.

Soldiers, At the Spring he returned. Found 600. Ships built, etc.
although there were a great scarcity of Materials, found 600 Ships, and 28
Long-Boats, or Galleys built, and within few days ready Rendezvous of them
Portus, Itius Gessoriacus, and Boulogne Cluverius, affirms to be the same; some
think it to be Calais, others a small Village, called Withsan, Vissen, or
Essen, near Blaness in Boulonois, between Calais and Boulogne, where the
nearest passage is into England; or as others, a kind of Marsh between those
Towns, where yet
Port Itius, from whence was the most commodious passage into Britain, about 30
Miles from the Continent; here he left a sufficient number of Soldiers to
manage this Affair, while he himself, In which he Transports 6 Legions of Foot,
and 800. Horse.
with Six Legions, and 800 Horse, Marched into the Country of the People of Old
Belgium, between the Mosell, and the Rhene, whose Chief City is now called
Triers, Aedui, Who. and Where.
Seated upon the Mosell.
Treviri, who would neither take Advice from, or be Commanded

But Hostages being given, and things settled here, and the They had the right
of Senators in the City, and by the Senate were called Brothers; they served in
the Roman Army, were Free, and had the same Privileges with Roman Soldiers:
Upon Caesar's coming for Britain, Dumnorix their Prince Mutinies and Revolts;
who, being slain, the rest Return to Obedience: their Country was both the
Burgundies, Duchy and County; their Chief Town Bibracte, after Augustodunum,
now A^stun, a small Bishopric in the Duchy of Burgundy.
Aedui reduced, leaving Labienus to Guard the Haven, and supply his wants, he,
with Five Legions, and 2000 Horse, Imbarqu'd, and about Sunset sailed, with a
gentle South-west Wind, which failed about Midnight; and the whole Fleet being
driven by the Current, when it was light, they could discover the Island on
their Left Hand; then taking advantage of the Tide turning, they plied their
Oars, that Isle where they had Landed the Summer before; in which Action, the
Diligence of the Soldiers was much to be praised, who, by an unwearied labor in
Rowing, caused their Ships of the greatest Burden to keep way with the
Long-Boats, or Galleys, they arrived about Noon, where they saw no Enemy.

For, as afterward Caesar understood by the Captives, Cajus Julius Caesar, 53,
54 Years before Christ.
the Britains coming thither in great numbers Armed, when they saw so many
Ships (being of all sorts, with their Victuallers, esteemed Eight Hundred) for
fear they left the Shore, and hid themselves in the Uplands: Caesar Landing his
Army, and having advantageously Encamped it, so soon as he knew from the
Prisoners he had taken, where the Enemy was, leaving Ten Cohorts, and 300 Horse
under Q. Atrius, to Guard his Ships then at Anchor, after the Three of the
Clock in the Morning.
Third Watch he made toward the Enemy, and having The River Stour in Kent, The
place Chilham, or Julham, That is, Julius his Station, or Mansion: a small Town
upon this River, Camb. Brit. 237. As we commonly, Gilian for Julian, from
Juliana. Footmens Shields double, one Broad and Flat, the other concave, like
an half Tube, in breadth 2 foot and half, in length 4 foot. Lib 49. f. 409.
Rosin. lib. 10. c. 16.
between Canterbury and Wye: beneath this Town is a Green Hillock, Barrow, or
Sepulcher, where the People report one Jul-laber was Buried, who Camden thinks
was Laberius the Tribune here slain; his Conjecture is strengthened by the
Distance of this place from the Sea or Shore, which is exactly 18 Miles, which
Answers justly the first March of Caesar after his Landing.
River, and having the higher Romans in their March, and began the Fight; but
beaten back by Caesar's Horse, The Britains beaten back by Caesar's Horse, fly
to a Fortress in the Woods. The Manner of the Britains Fortifying.
they retreated to a place in the Woods, notably strengthened by Art and Nature,
which, as it seemed they had made a Fortress in their Domestic Wars: for
Romans out of their Fort, and hindered their entrance. But the Soldiers of the
Seventh Legion making a Testudo, from the resemblance it had to a Tortoise
Shell; for, as that defends this Animal, so this secured the Soldiers: there
were of Conscutation, a Target, or Shield-fence, for the Soldiers holding their
Targets or broad Shields over their heads, and locking them one within another,
like a Vault or Roof, defended themselves, from the Shot of Arrows, or
Slinging Stones from on high; they also had Oblong Shields, in fashion like an
Half Tube, or Cylinder, which were clapped to their sides; those which carried
these, were said to be Armed heavily, and may seem to be the Triarii, and Chief
of the Soldiers: See this sort of Testudo exactly described in Dio Cassius. The
other was an Engine made with Boards, covered with Raw Hides, under the
Protection of which the Soldiers might safely Assault Walls, and raise
Aggeries, Mounts and Rampires against the Enemy.
Testudo, and raising a Mount against their Their Fort Taken.
without much Bloodshed. Caesar forbad a long pursuit, for that he knew not
the Nature of the place, and it being toward evening, Army.

Next Morning he sent Foot and Horse, in three several Bodies, to pursue those
which fled, the hindmost not being out of sight; there came Post from Q. Atrius
Horsemen to Caesar, with a Message, A great part of Caesar's Fleet Wracked by
Tempest.
That a great Tempest the Night before, had shattered and wracked almost all
his Ships, and cast them upon the Shore, their Anchors and Cables being not
able to hold them, nor the Mariners to guide them, or endure the violence of
the Storm: at this News Caesar recalls Legions, and Horse, and returns himself
to the Fleet, where he sees those things, which he received by the Express:
about Forty Ships were lost, the rest not to be Repaired and Refitted without
great labor; Therefore out of his Legions he chose what Shiprights and Workmen
he could, and commanded others to be called from the Continent; he Writes to
Labienus, that with his Legions he should build, and fit up as many Ships as he
could: and though it was a work of great difficulty, yet he thought it
necessary, that all his Ships should be haled on Caesar's Ship-Camp. Where?
Came. Brit 242 Came. Bri. 213. The Romans Entrench their Army every Night.
Upon the Shore, about Deal, Sandon, and Walmer, are a long Range of heaps of
Earth, or Banks, where the Learned Camden thinks this Ship-Camp was, which he
says, by the People thereabout, was called Romes-Work.
Shore, and brought into the Camp, that they might both be secured by the same
Defense, or Circumvallation.

Caesar causes the Ships that remained to be haled on Shore into the Camp.
leaving the former Guard, he Marched to the place from whence he had dislodged
upon the News from Atrius; where he found the Number of the Britains increased,
by the Confluence of People from Country, who, by Common Consent, made
Cassibelan their General, Cassibelan General of the Britains.
whose Territories were divided from the Maritime Cities by the Thames, and
were distant from the Sea about The Borders of his Territories extended to the
Thames in Surrey, near Oa^elands, and thereabouts, which are 80 Miles from the
East-Shore of Kent, where Caesar Landed.
Miles; other Cities formerly had with him continual Wars, but now, in the
Common Danger, they all made him their Commander in Chief.

A Sharp Fight between the Romans and Britains. Many of the Britains slain. The
rest forced to the Hills and Woods.
The Roman Army being come within view of their Enemies, the Horse and
Charioteers of the Britains encountering their Horse fought Romans were every
where superior to them, and forced them to the Hills and Woods, many of them
being slain, and some of the Romans also, who, too daringly, pursued them: A
while after (the Romans being busy in It was the Custom of the Romans every
Night to Entrench their Camp.
Intrenching their Camp, and suspecting nothing) they suddenly sallied out of
the Woods, Guards and Sentinels. Laberius slain.
in Station before the Camp, Caesar sends Two Cohorts (the The First or Chief
Cohorts of their Legions, as some Write, contained 1000 Men.
chief of Two Legions) who, From whence they Sally out upon the Romans.
standing still at a little distance, amazed Q. Laberius Durus, a Tribune, was
slain; but more Cohorts being sent to their assistance, the Britains were
driven back.

By the manner of this Battle (which was fought within sight of the Camp) the
Romans perceived what advantage the Enemy had of them, and how ill they were
fitted for such a kind of fight, Ensigns; nor were able, without great danger,
to encounter the Horse, who, oft-times, retreated on purpose, and having, by
little and little, drilled the Romans from their Legions, would leap out of
their Chariots, and fight on Foot; the Manner of Fighting with their Horses and
Chariots being alike dangerous to them that retired, and them that pursued;

The next day, the Britains, here and there, afar off, appeared upon the Hills,
and with less courage then the day before, began to engage the Horse: The
Britains again set upon the Romans.
But about Noon, when Caesar had sent Three Legions, and all his Horse, with C.
or Trebonius his Lieutenant, to Forage; suddenly, on all sides, they assail the
Forragers, and Charge up to the very Legions and Standards; the Romans, by a
stout onset, repelled them, and the Horse never gave over the Pursuit (being
confident in the aid of the Legions that followed them) until they totally
routed them; and having killed a great number of them, The Britains Totally
Routed. Very many slain.
they gave them neither time to Rally, to make a Stand, or to leap from their
Chariots. Forthwith, upon this Overthrow, the Auxiliaries, which had come from
all parts, departed; neither after that

Caesar knowing their Design, Caesar Marches toward Cassibelans Country.
Marches with his Army toward the Frontiers of Cassivellannus, Cassibelanus,
or rather Cassibelinus; Prince or Ruler of the Cassii; Cassibelan, Who.
some remains of whom there seems yet to be Caisbo Hundred, wherein are
Situated the Ruins of Verulam Cassibelaus Chief Town: Belinus signifying
commonly in this Island a Chief King, Prince or Ruler. So Cinobelin, as it were
Icenobelin, Prince of the Iceni; Camb. Britan. 275.292. Annotations on Giral.
Cambr. Desc. of Wales. c. 3. Camb. Brit. 213. Bid Eccles. Hist. cap. 2. fol.
26.
and happily might be the same that Czar, Cham, Sultan, Tentomarus and Gottiso,
are, and were among the Moscovites, Tartars, Turks, Tentones and Goths; Dr.
Powel says further, That Hely, the Father of Lud, and this Cassibeline, was
called Magnus Belinus, Belin.
Cassibelan, upon the River Thames, Near Oatlands in Surrey, says Cambden, at
a place called Cowaye-Stakes; and, in this conjecture, he affirms he could not
be mistaken, for that it was 80 Miles from the Shore of Kent, as Caesar
accounted, and for other Reasons there assigned.
which was passable with Foot in one place only, and that with difficulty; when
he came thither, he perceived great Forces of the Enemy in good Bid says, the
Remains of these Stakes were to be seen in his time, which were about the
Bigness of a Man's Thigh, and Plated over with Lead.
sharp Stakes, and others of the same kind, Caesar having notice from Legions
to follow, who waded over so speedily, and resolutely (their heads only
appearing above water) and both Horse and Foot Charged the Enemy with such
violence, that they forsook the Bank and fled.

Cassibelan now out of hope to contend for Victory, Cassibelan dismisseth the
greatest part of his Army. Keeps only 4000 Charioteers to attend Caesar's
Motion.
dismisseth the greatest part of his Forces, keeping about 4000 Chariots to
attend the Motion of the Romans, and going somewhat out of the way, securing
Romans were to pass; whose Horse, as they roved up and down to Wast and
Plunder, the Charioteers sallying out of the Woods, surprised and cut off;
hereupon, Caesar commands them not to depart from the Legions: so that now as
they Marched, there was nothing left to do, but to Wast empty Fields, and Burn
Houses.

Meanwhile the Trinobantes, Middlesex and Essex.
Trinobantes, a very considerable People among Britains, from whom He is by
Entropius, Bid, and later Writers, called Androgens, as is noted by Cambden,
but why he knows not, unless for his Wickedness and Treason, for such a
signification is plainly couched in that Name; and he was one of the three
first that called the Romans into Britain, and betrayed the Country.
Mandubrace, went to Caesar into Gallia, Imanuentius having been King in that
Country, whom Cassibelan had slain; and this young Man saving his Life by
flight, send Ambassadors to Caesar, The Trinobantes send Ambassadors, and yield
themselves.
who promising to yield themselves, and be at his Command, desire him to
Protect Mandubrace, and to commit the Government of their Country unto him:
Caesar requires Forty Hostages, and Provision for his Army, and sends
Mandubrace unto them, they comply with

The Trinobantes being Protected from the violence of the Soldier, the The
Camb. 329. Iceni. Who. Came. Brit. 19^. There, 273. There, 207. Camb. Brit.
275.292. Cassibel. Town. There. 292. Came. Brit. 298. Dio. Book 43.224, 225.
Caesar 's Origin from Anchises and Venus.
Iceni, who possessed Northfolk, Southfolk, Cambridge, and Huntington-shires.
Cenimagni, were People in Hamshire, in Holdshot Hundred, and thereabouts.
Segintiaci, They inhabited Henley* Hundred in Oxfordshire.
Ancalites, Their Seat was the Hundred of Bray about Maydenhead Barkshire,
which seems to be a Contract from Bibract.
Bibroci, They gave name to the Hundred of Caisho^, in Hertfordshire, in which
Old Verulam stood; and where, and in the Country thereabouts, the Cassi were
placed.
Cassi, by their Ambassadors, yield themselves to Caesar: from these he
understood Cassibelins Verulam, out of whose Ruins St. Albans was Built.
Town was not far off, strengthened and surrounded with Woods and Marshes,
Several other Nations also yield to Caesar.
well filled with Men and Cattle Britains call intricate Woods, compassed about
with a

Caesar with his Legions, he found the place notably Cassibelin's Town.
The Britains for some while defended it, but not able to sustain the Force of
the Romans, fled out at another part of the What a Town was among the Britains.
Cassibelin's Town taken.
great store of Cattle were found there; many were taken, and many were slain
in their flight.

While these things are done here, Cassibelin sends into Kent, where there were
Four Kings Reigning, Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, Seegonax; them he
Commands to raise all the Force they could, The Roman Ship-Camp assaulted. The
Britains Beaten. Lugotorix taken.
and suddenly to assault the Ship-Camp; this was attempted, but when they came
near unto it, the Romans sallyed out, killed many of them, and took their Noble
Leader, or Captain Or Cingetorix rather.
Lugotorix, retreating safely to their Camp.

Cassibelin hearing of the Event of this Enterprise, being often defeated,
Cities, or People, for Caesar always called a People, living under, and using
one Law, and the same Customs, Civitas, or a City.
Cities, uses the Mediation of Comius of Arras, to send Ambassadors about his
Submission to Caesar, who, determining to Winter in Gallia, Caesar departs,
taking Hostages, etc. Thus far Caesar's Commentaries. Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 9.
c. 35.
by reason of some sudden Commotions there, and the Summer being almost spent,
commands Hostages, and appoints what Tribute yearly Britain should pay to the
Roman People, and commands Cassibelin he should offer no wrong to Mandubrace,
or the Trinobantes; then taking with him Hostages, and a great number of
Captives, at twice Transports his Army; at his return to Rome, Venus His
Mother, or Genitrix. to whom he Built a Temple, for from Anchises and Venus he
deduced his Stock and Original.
Genitrix a Surcoat, or Corslet, Imbroyder'd with British Pearl. What this
Pearl was? Q. Tacit. de vita, Agric. cap. 13.456. and Lipsius Notes upon him,
Ibid.


After the Death of Julius, by reason of the Civil Wars amongst the Romans, and
the Arms of the Chief Men being turned upon the Commonwealth, Britain was for
a while neglected and forgotten; and Augustus, for some time, after he had
obtained the Empire, was content to be in Amity with the Britains, and under
the Name of Tribute, to accept some small Trifles. Yet afterward he prepared
for an Expedition hither, pretending, that the Tribute which Julius had
Imposed, was detained.

Dio. lib. 53.512.
The Britains hearing of it, send their Ambassadors with their Submission, and
desire Pardon; to whom, upon a new Pact, he granted a Conditional Peace: Not
long after the Britains not having performed their Conditions, and failing in
their Payment of Tribute, Octavius Caesar, Augustus, Cunobelin, Tiberius Nero
Caesar.
he designed another attempt upon them; and being set forward in his Voyage
toward Britain, was diverted, by the Revolt of the Cantabrians and Asturians.
There was no farther undertaking against the Britains in all the time of this
Emperor. Ibidem, 513.


Cuno-belin then Governed the Trimobantes, Ib. lib. 60.679. Cunobelin endeavors
to Reform the Rudeness of the Britains.
whose Royal Seat was Maldon in Essex.
Camolodunum: he first began to Reform the Rudeness of the Britains, and to
Introduce some Civilities he had observed amongst the Romans, and after their
Custom caused his Image to be Stamped upon his The Payments of the Britains
were usually made in Pieces of Brass, and Iron Rings; and, it is very probable,
this Coin Stamped by Cuno-belin, Came. Brit. 322. Caesar 's Com. B. 5.255. The
Romans Exact Tribute in gold. Came. 70 The Romans Instruct their Hostages.
Tacit. de vita Agric. c. 21.459 Alford Britt. Ann. f. 6. Suet. in Augusto. c.
^9.196.
was for Romans exacted in Gold and Silver, as may appear by the word Tasc, on
the other side, which signifies Tribute, or as we at this day call it Task, or
Tax.
Coin; who, as it is said, was brought up in the It was the Custom of the Romans
to instruct their Hostages, and the Sons of Princes, in Liberal Arts, etc. That
they might afterward be useful to them in the Administration of their
Provinces, etc.
Augustus.

Tiberius succeeded Augustus, who following his advice and example, Britains.
Camb. Brit. 62. Money 2. Tacit. as before, and Lipsius Notes.


Gospel, or Christian Profession, was brought into Britain in the last year of
this Emperor, which was the 35th of our ever Blessed Savior, and Two years
after his Crucifixion, grounding their Conjecture upon that noted place of
Gildas, where it is said, Tempore, ut scimus, summo Tiberii Caesaris,
Christianity not in Britain in Tiberius Nero his time.
etc. but seeing this was before the Dispersion of the Apostles and Disciples,
and also at a time when there had been little or no Warlike Achievements, or
other Intercourse between this Nation, Rome, or Eastern Countries, since the
Birth of Christ, or at least his Planting the Gospel in Palestine: Therefore
this Assertion of Gildas may more probably be referred to the latter time of
Tiberius Claudius Caesar, whereof more in that place.

The next to him was Cajus Caligula; who, by reason of his Luxe, Cajus
Caligula. Sueton. Calig. c. 40.^75. His Luxe and Impositions. Dio. Book 59.656.
The cause of his Expedition into Gallia and Britain.
and vast Profuseness, imposed upon all sorts of Men, and Things, new and
unheard of Tolls and Customs, and Collected them by his Centurions and
Tribunes; having wasted and spent all the Money in Italy and Rome, where by any
means it could be had, and his Expenses still urging him, he intended an
Expedition into Gallia, Germany and Britain; That under pretense of War he
might spoil and harrass those Countries; but speeding ill in Germany, he
ventured no further then those parts in Belgia over against Norfolk, from
whence, having only received into his Protection Matthew of Westminster, and
others, call this Adminius, the Eldest Son of Cuno-belin, Guiderius, and his
Second Son Arviragus; but the Latins and Greeks retein that Name, and call the
Second Togodumnus; the Third Catarecus, or Caractacus.
Adminius, Sueton. Call. c. 44.479. His boasting Letters to the Senate.
with a small number, who being driven out of Britain by King Cuno-belin Rome,
as if the whole Island had been delivered to him, charging the Messenger that
his Letters should be carried in a Chariot to the Forum, Ibid. c. 46.482.
and not delivered to the Consuls, but in a full Senate, and in the Augustus
ordained, that the Senate should consult of War and Triumphs in the Temple of
Mars.
Temple of Mars: Lastly, having ordered his Army to be drawn up in Battalia, as
if they were presently to give the Onset, he forthwith Commands them to gather
Cockle-shells in their Helmets, Tiberius. Claudius. Drusius, 43 Years before
Christ.
calling them Spoils of the Ocean, fit to be preserved in the Palace and
Capitol. As a Mark of this Ridiculous Exploit, which he termed a Victory, He
attempts nothing upon Britain, but Commands his Army to gather Cockles. Sueton.
^ud. c. 17.526.
he erected a very high Arx Britannica, Where. Sueton. 482. Schild. Notes.
Sueton. Calig. 479. c. 44. Came. Brit. 249 There 275.
This is thought to be Arx Britannica, the Ruins whereof are to be seen near
the Middle Mouth of the River Rhene, now Landed up, about 2 Leagues from Leyden
in Holland.
Tower, by the Lights whereof in the Night, Ships might be directed in their
Courses.

Claudius, with better Advice and Success then his Predecessor, chose Britain
(not Attempted by any since Julius Caesar) for his Province, from whence he
might acquire the Honor of a Noble and Adminius, the Eldest Son of Cunobelin,
and others, who being Expelled Britain, and Proscribed by his Father, were
received into Protection by Caligula, then in Belgia.
Fugitives which were demanded, were not rendered: whereof one Bercius, Dio. B.
60. f. 677. Aulus Plautius sent into Britain.
and some others, much prevailed with Claudius to undertake this Expedition,
who sent Aulus Plautius a Roman Senator, and an Experienced Soldier, to take
Charge of the Army in Gallia, and Transport it into the Island: to which Action
the Soldiers openly discovered their unwillingness, complaining, they
Narcissus, a Favorite of Claudius, being sent to appease them, Mounted Plautius
his Tribunal, and somewhat yielding to their fury and passion, he so Cajoled
them with an Eloquent Oration, that they were then willing to follow Plautius
whithersoever he would Conduct them.

The Army was Imbarqu'd in Three Divisions, that being opposed in one place,
they might Land in another; the Winds proved cross, with which their Ships were
shaken and driven back, but the Meteor, which darted Flames from the East to
the West, interpreted it, as an Omen of good success, and thinking it directed
their Course, put again to Sea, and Landed without resistance. The Britains not
suspecting their coming; who, finding themselves surprised, fled to the Woods
and Morasses, thinking rather to weary their Enemies by Delays, then to
Encounter them in the Field.

There 678.
Plautius, after a great search, and much hazard, found them out, People of
Gloucester and Oxfordshires.
Boduni, then subject to the So called by Dio, by others, Cattienchlani; they
were the Inhabitants of Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartfordshires.
Cattuellani, he received upon Terms, and leaving Garrisons there, he Marched
toward a River which the Britains supposed they could not pass without a
Bridge, and therefore thought themselves secure, having Encamped on the other
side of the Waters; But Plautius sending first the Germans, who being
accustomed to Swim over Rivers Armed, got over to the further Bank, and there,
acccording to Command, fell upon the Horses which drew the Chariots, Flavius
Vespasianus, who Commanded the Second Legion, and Sabinus his Brother, who
setting suddenly upon them, killed some, and took others, when the Night put a
period to this Engagement.

The next Morning, the Britains having Rallyed their Dispersed Forces, appeared
again, and gave the occasion of a Fresh Battle, which they performed with such
Courage, that it continued a long while doubtful, until C. Sydius Gela,
Togodumnus, Tiberius Claudius, etc. Emperor, Caractatus King, 44, 45, 46, 47,
etc. Years after Christ.
being in danger to have been taken, recovered himself, and forced the Britains
to retire, for which Service he had Triumphal Honors Assigned him at Rome: In
this Conflict, Vespasian being encompassed with the Britains, was in great
danger, either to have been slain, or taken, had not his Son Titus opportunely
Rescued him, who was a Tribune, and began early to manifest his Valor.
Vespasian in danger, rescued by his Son.


Britains retired toward the Mouth of the Thames, and knowing the Shallows, and
Firm Ground; passed over safely; when as the Romans that pursued them were
oft-times in great danger: some of the Germans, who, by their art in Swimming,
were foremost, as soon as they came on shore, were killed by the Britains, and
the rest of the Roman Army much distressed in their passage, and sharply
assailed at their Landing. Where, in a notable Battle, Togodumnus was slain,
Togodumnus slain.
at whose Death the Britains were more enraged; Isle.

Plautius fearing their Strength, proceeded no further; but Fortifying only
such places as he had gained, advertised Claudius, as he was ordered, of the
doubtful condition of his Affairs. Sueton. Vesp. 734. c. 4.
Vespasian being employed under Plautius, sometimes with him, and sometimes in
other parts of Britain, Fought Thirty times with the Britains, overcame Two
Powerful Nations, and Conquered the Isle of Wight.

Upon the News Claudius received from Plautius, he, with a Mighty A City at the
Mouths of the River Tiber in Italy, on which Rome is seated.
Ostia, and Marseilles, a Port in Gallia Narbonensis, according to the Division
of Gallia by Augustus, or in Provincia Romanorum, according to Julius Caesar,
now Provence in France, having the Gulf of Lions, and the Mediterranean on the
South.
Massilia, from whence he Marched by Land to By some thought to be the same
with Portuus Itius, Gestoriacum, Boulogne in France.
but it is more probably Boulogne and the Country about i^ was called
Gessoriacus Pagus, Bononiensis ager, commonly le Boulonnois.
Gessoriacum Gallia; where, Shipping his Forces, Dio. lib. 60.679. Anno Domini
44.
he safely Landed in Britain, and, at Porchester, if we may believe Matthew of
Westminster: This Army being joined with the other of Plautius and Vespasian,
near the Thames, they again cross the River; where the Britains The Britains
Vanquished. Dio. 679.
when, being overcome, they fled into the Woods, some were subdued by Force,
others yielded upon Terms; and pursuing this Victory, they took Camolodunum,
Camolodunum taken. That Country made a Province. Dio. 680. lib. 60.
where they placed a Colony of old Soldiers, and reduced this part of the Isle
into the form of a Province.

In Honor of this Victory, Claudius was diverse times saluted Imperator,
Britains after this were Disarmed, but he remitted to them the Confiscation of
their Goods; for which Favor, they erected a Temple and Altar unto him,
honoring him as a god: he leaving Plautius to Govern these, and Subdue others,
returns to Rome, having sent before his Sons-in-Law, Pompeius and Silanus to
the Senate, with the News of the Victory; who Decreed, he should be called
Britannicus, and that his Son should have the Claudian Family. Messalina his
Wife had the first place in Council assigned her (as Livia, Tiber. Claudius,
etc. Emperor. Caractatus King 44, 45, 46, 47, etc. Years after Christ.
the Wife of Augustus, sometime had) and was also Licensed to Ride in a Chariot
when he came to Rome (which was the Sixth Month after his departure thence,
having continued but Sixteen days only in the Isle) he entered the City in a
most splendid and extraordinary Triumph, whereat many Presidents of Provinces,
and Banished Men were permitted to be present; on the top of his Palace was
placed a Naval Crown, set with Stems, and Foreparts of Ships, as a sign of the
Conquest of the Ocean; Diverse Britain, were Honored with Triumphal Ornaments;
yearly Plays were appointed for him, and Two Triumphal Arches, adorned with
Trophies, were erected, one at Rome, the other at Gessoriacum, to remain to
succeeding Ages, as perpetual Monuments of this Victory.

This Memorable Triumph happened about the 46th Year of our Savior Christ, as
some considerable Authors do Compute the time.

Plautius Recalled: P. Ostorius sent in his stead. Tacit. Ann. lib. 12. cap.
31. f. 195.
Not long afterward Plautius was Recalled, and P. Ostorius Scapula Britains that
were yet Unconquered, Harassing the Countries of those that had yielded, and
were become Subject to the Romans; supposing, that the new Lieutenant,
unacquainted with his Army, and that Winter being then begun, he would not
March forth to oppose them; but he knowing, that first Events either beget Fear
or Confidence, with his most ready Cohorts made toward them, killing such as
resisted, and pursuing the Straglers, Lieutenant or Soldiers, a time of Idle
Repose, he Disarmed those he suspected; and, to secure them, Garrisons placed
on the Rivers Came. Brit. 376
Aufona, now Nen, or Nine, whose two Fountains arise not far from Daventree in
Northamptonshire; where, and at Gildsborough, are yet to be seen two large
Military Roman Forts; as also Bannaventa, now Wedon, on the Street, and
Durobrivae, now Castor in this Shire, and Chesterton in Huntingtonshire, There
369, 379. There 329. Came. Brit. 168. There 556.
were both Roman Stations, and seated upon this River.
Antona and The River Severn.
Sabrina: The first that refused this Yoke, were the People that inhabited
Northfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge and Huntingtonshires.
Iceni, a Romans.

The Counties near adjoining following their Example, take up Lieutenant,
although he wanted the strength of his Legions, yet he attempted that Fence
with the Auxiliaries only; and having placed them in due order, and giving the
Sign, they assayl the Rampart, and break it, disordering the Britains; who,
seeing their way of escape hindered on all sides, The Iceni and other People
beaten.
showed great courage, and behaved themselves bravely.

By this Slaughter of the Icenians, others fluctuating between Peace and War,
were settled and quieted, and the Army was led People that inhabited some part
of Somersetshire about Mendip-Hills, and near the Sea which looks toward
Ireland.
Cangi, whose Country was wasted as far as the Coast toward the Irish Sea, the
Inhabitants not daring to come into the Field.

Yorkshire, Lancashire, Bishopric of Duresme, Westmerland and Cumberland.
Brigantines began to Tumultuate, which brought back the General, The Brigantes
subdued.
who thought it best, not to enter upon any new Action, until he had secured
those parts; where, Tiberius Claudius, Emperor, Caractacus 46, ^^, etc. Years
after Christ.
having killed such as took Arms, and Pardoned others, all things were
presently settled.

But the Hereford, Radnor, Brecknock, Monmouth, and Glamorganshires.
Silures were neither by Cruelty, or Clemency, to be reduced, without a War,
and Garrisons; To that end the Colony at Camolodunum Allies Roman Laws and
Civility: Cogidunus also, a British Prince, and sure Friend and Confederate of
the Romans, Tacit. de vita Agric. c. 14.457.
had certain Cities given him, according to an ancient Custom among them, who
used even Kings themselves as Instruments of Bondage, and enslaving others.

The Silures, valiant of themselves, yet confided much in the Courage of
Caractacus, who, by many doubtful, many prosperous British Princes. But as in
Policy, and Knowledge of the Country, he had the advantage of the Romans, so
perceiving himself inferior in strength, he transferred the War unto the
Montgomery, There 466. There 521. There 446.
Merioneth, Caernarvon, Denbigh, and Flintshires.
Ordovices, who joining in the Action Roman Peace or Servitude) resolved to try
the Fortune of War; having chosen a place for Battle very commodious for
themselves, but disadvantageous to the Romans; the Hills steep and craggy, and
wheresoever there was an easy Rampart; a In the Place in Shropshire, where the
Rivers Tem and C^un meet, in the edge of it, toward Herefordshire, is a Hill
called Caer Carado^, so named from Caratacus, where yet are to be seen the
Relics of these Stone Rampires, and where was Fought this Memorable Battle.
River also of unsafe passage, and guarded with the best Soldiers, was to be
Forded. The Commanders went about encouraging the Soldiers, and Caractacus
himself nimbly speeding up and down, hither and thither, Protested, That Day,
and that Battle, should be the beginning of Recovery of Liberty, or of
Perpetual Servitude, and more to that purpose; which so heigtned the spirits of
the People about him, that they Shouted, and Swore, every one, according Roman
General, as likewise the River, Rampires, high Hills, and all things on every
side ^hreatning danger and destruction to the Assailers, affrighted him: But
the Soldiers urging to Battle, crying out, There was nothing which Valor could
not overcome; the Prefects and Tribunes using the same Arguments and Speeches,
added courage to the whole Army. Ostorius circumspectly viewing those places
which were inaccessible, and those which were passable, led on his Soldiers,
and without difficulty Forded the River.

Then approaching the Rampart, while they fought with Darts the Romans were
worsted; but they having, by the help of a It Is probable this was a Testudo
made of Boards and Raw Hides, etc. under the covert of which the Romans usually
Assailed Walls, etc.
Testudo, Britains fled to the tops of the Mountains, Tiberius Claudius,
Emperor, Caractatus, An. Dom. 53, 54, etc.
and were pursued both by the The Light-Armed, or Velites, were such as
Skirmished, or Fought first in an Army; their Weapons and Armor, were, a Sword,
a small Spear, or Dart, a little round Target made of Wood and Skins, and a Cap
made of Wool, of some Beasts Skin. The Heavy-Armed, or the Principes Triarii,
or Body of the Army, etc. their Weapons and Armor were, a heavy Shield, a
Sword, a heavy Wooden Dart Armed with Iron 3 Cubits long, a Brass or Iron
Helmet, a Coat of Male, or a great Iron Breast Plate, and a pair of Iron Roots.
Light and Heavy Armed Soldiers; who, being assailed with Darts, only proceeded
in close order, and brake the Ranks of the Britains, which had neither Helmet
nor Armor to defend themselves; and being hedged in between Legionary Soldiers
and The Legions were taken out of the Body of the Romans, the Auxiliaries were
such Forces as the Neighbor and Confederate Countries sent unto them.
Auxiliaries, were most of them slain.

Caractacus his Wife and Daughter taken, etc. He is Betrayed by Cartismendua.
This was a Famous Victory, wherein Caractacus his Wife and Daughter were taken,
his Brothers yielding themselves, but he escaping to Cartismandua Queen of the
Brigantes, against her Faith Romans, having maintained War with them 9 Years,
as Tacitus; but as Dio more clearly relates it, only Seven: his Fame was spread
through the Isle and Provinces adjoining, and his Name Celebrated in Italy;
many desiring to see who he was, that had withstood, and contemned the Roman
Power so many years; They spoke not Ignobly of him at Rome; and Caesar, by
extolling his own Victory, added Glory to him he had Conquered: being brought
thither, the People were Emperors Guards were orderly placed in Arms; then came
first the King's Servants, with the Trophies won in other Wars; next, his
Brothers, Wife, and Daughter; last of all himself.

The Carriage of others was low and pitiful, he only behaving himself like a
brave Prince and bold Britain, both in Words and Gesture; That, by his Speech,
and Constancy of Mind, he so prevailed upon Caesar, as to Pardon and Release
him, his Wife, Daughter, Agrippina, who sat by in a Chair of State, a new and
unaccustomable thing, for a Woman to preside among the Roman Cohorts and
Ensigns.

To Ostorius a Triumph is Decreed; the Senate esteeming this act of his equal
with theirs, that had shown in Bonds to the Roman People the greatest and most
renowned Kings; after this, his Success proved ambiguous, or began to decline,
whether because that Caractacus, Britains, commiserating the Misfortune of so
great a Prince, did meditate Revenge, and fell upon the Legionary Cohorts, left
behind, to establish Garrisons amongst the Silures, The Silures Arm
killing the Prefect and Eight Centurions, besides many of the stoutest
Soldiers; and, had not speedy Relief come from the adjoining Forts and Castles,
they had put all the Roman Forragers, and the Troops sent to their Assistance.
Ostorius sending fresh Recruits, could not stay their flight, until the Legions
came in, by whose power the Battle was made equal, and afterward inclined to
the Romans; the Britains escaped with little loss, because the day was spent.

The chief Motive that induced the Silures to Arm, was a report, Tiberius
Claudius, etc. Nero Claudius Caesar. Anno Dom. 56, etc.
that the Emperor should say, He would root out the very Name of them; they
therefore intercept Two Auxiliary Cohorts, by the Avarice of their Commanders,
securely plundering, and liberally distributing the spoils and captives amongst
them, drew others to Revolt; troubled at these things, Ostorius dies, the
Britains rejoicing, And Why. Ostorius Dies.
although no Battle had taken him off, yet a cross War had worn

Caesar being advertised of his Death, Aulus Didius made Lieutenant.
sends Aulus Didius in his place, who, notwithstanding the have he made, found
things in great disorder; Manlius Valens having, with his Legion, encountered
the Britains with ill success; the Silures made Inrodes into the subdued
Country, until they were repelled by Didius.

After Caractacus was taken, Venusius, next to him in Military knowledge, a
Prince faithful to the Romans, and protected by them, Cartismandua continued
Loyal to him, she being Queen of the Brigantes, and much in the Romans favor,
for betraying, and delivering up Caractacus, rejected her Husband, Tacit. Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 45.380.
Marrying Vellocatus his Esquire, and making him King; The War at first seemed
private amongst themselves, until she had, by craft, taken Venusius his
Brother, and some other of his Relations; who, by the help of his Neighbors,
and the defection of the Brigantes, abhoring so base an act, soon reduced her
to great extremity; she, Tacit. lib. 12. Anno 198.
begging Romans, who, after a sharp and doubtful Conflict, in the end obtained
the Victory, rescued the Queen from danger, took the Kingdom from the King, and
brought a War upon themselves. The like success Caesius Nasica had with his
Legion: Didius Superannuated.
for Didius himself growing old, and fitter to Direct then Execute, used the
Ministry of other Men, designing to keep what his Predecessors had gotten,
built only some Castles and places of strength within the Land. This was the
state of Affairs in Britain when Claudius died, leaving Nero Claudius Caesar,
his Adopted Son, to succeed him.

It Is probable the Christian Religion was brought from Rome into Britain in
Claudius his time, either by such as returned with the Romans, that were
Banished with Adminius by his Father, or by such as might return again after
his first or second Triumph, whether Slaves or Hostages, for no doubt but he
had of both these sorts of People; Captives from such as he Conquered, and
Hostages from Gildas says, The entrance of Christianity was, Summo Tiberii
Caesaris, it must be understood of this Tiberius Claudius Caesar; Christianity
first in Britain. Suet. Claud. c. 17.526.
for from the time that Julius Caesar left this Island, it was attempted by
none until Claudius; neither is Gildas his Relation certain, but conjectural
only, and is to be expounded according to the sense of Eusebius, from whom he
had it, as appears by his mention of the Edict Tiberius, which I find no where
else, unless related from him, and is to be understood of the first and general
propagation of Religion through the World, which Eusebius there recounts,
Eusebius. Eccles Hist. Bas. Ed. lib. 2. c. 2, 3.
and by conjecture only, or (as it seemed to him) probable consequence, in
Britain also: But by whom the Gospel was brought hither, is uncertain, and
whether by Jacobus Zebedaeus, Simon Zelotes, Antiq. Brit. c. 1.
Simon Peter, St. Paul, or any of them, it is not sufficiently made appear by
Archbishop Parker, Nero Claudius Caesar. Anno Dom. 58, 60, etc.
Bishop Godwin, Archbishop of Armagh, Sir Henry Spelman, or any of the Anglican
Church; nor proved by Cardinal Baronius, Father Parsons, Father Alford, or any
of the Romish Persuasion; De Pras. l. Ang. c. 1. De Primord. Eccles. c. 1, etc.
De Exord. Christian Religion, in his Counsils. Baron. Tom. 1.512. Parsons, de
Tribus Conv. Book 1. Alford. Ann. Eccles. Brit. fol. 11. and so forward.
Polydor. Virg. Histor. Argl. lib. 2. fol. 19. Tacit. de vit. Agric. c. 14.457.
or whether it arrived here by any of the Apostles, or by any from them, by
Special Mission, or Designation, or by accident, as Polydor Quaeries in the
Story of Joseph of Arimathaea, it cannot be made out; It is most probable, and
rational to assert, that it came into Britain, by Commerce with the Romans, as
by that the Manners Britains were Cultivated, and their Barbarity Civilized, by
some Converted Captives, Hostages, or Fugitives, or with the Business and
Traffic here, of some other Christians of less note; and whether it were from
Rome, or any other place, the matter is not much.

Veranius succeeded Didius in the Lieutenancy of Britain, and died within a
year; after him the Government was assigned to Suetonius one of the most famous
Military Men of his age, who established what was gotten, and proceeded to
Conquer further, until he came to the Island The Isle of Anglesey in Wales.
Mona, which was well Peopled, and a Receptacle of Fugitives: he makes
flat-bottom'd Vessels, in which he Suetonius Paulinus. Tacit. lib. an. 1^. cap.
30.250. There 250, 251
either forded the Shallows, or Swam.

Upon the Shore stood diverse Bodies of Armed Men, the Women in dismal Habit,
like Furies, ran up and down with their Hair about burning Torches in their
hands; the Druids Their Priests, of whom afterward.
lifting up their hands to Heaven, filled the Air with hideous Cries and
Curses. The Roman Soldiers were astonished at the Novelty of the Spectacle,
and, like Men Enchanted, as if all their Limbs were rigid and benumbed, stood
still while they were wounded, until the General spoke, and encouraged them not
to fear a heard of silly Women, or a Fanatic Multitude; when they fell on,
knocked them down, and threw them into their own Fires: after this they
Garrisons in their Towns, and cut down their Woods and Groves consecrated to
cruel Superstitions, The cruel Superstition of the Britains in the Isle of
Anglesey.
for they Sacrificed the Blood of Captives upon their Altars, and Praedicted
their Success, by the Inspection of the Entrals of Men.

While Suetonius was busied here, he had News of a sudden Revolt of the
Province; Prasutagus, King of the Icenians, famous a long time for his Wealth
and Opulency, made Caesar Coheir with his two Daughters, There, Chapter 31.251.
thinking thereby to preserve his Kingdom and Kingdom was seized on, and
harassed by Centurions, his House became a Prey to Boodicia Boodicia, vodica
Boadicea, according to some, or as Dio, Bunducia.
was Whipped, his Daughters Ravished, the Chief of the Icenians, as if the
Romans had received the whole Country by Gift, were deprived of their Goods,
and dispossessed of their Estates, and his Kindred made Slaves; Dio. lib.
62.701.
Seneca, one of Nero's Counselors, having forced many of the Chief of the
Britains to take great Sums of Money of him upon Decianus Catus the Procurator
in Britain, renewed the Confiscation of their Goods, which Claudiuus had
remitted. The Colony at Camalodunum thrust the Owners and Ancient Inhabitants
out of their Houses and Possessions, calling them Vassals and Slaves; the
Temple also erected to Claudius was a great burden to them, while the Priests
that attended there, under pretense of Religious Dues, seized each Man's Goods.

To these common Grievances of the afflicted People, the present opportunity
seemed to offer means of redress, while the Roman General Mona: The Iceni being
made a Province, The Iceni and Trinobantes Revolt. There 701, and
inciting the Trinobantes, and other Nations (not wholly brought under
subjection) to do the like, take Arms, and resolved to free themselves. About
this time diverse Prodigies were observed to portend the Sub version of the
Roman Colony, to wit, Tacit. ann. lib. 14. c. 32.251. Prodigies.
the Image of Victory falling down Reversed at Camalodunum, Strange Noises
heard in the Air, Strange Apparitions seen in the Sea, the Ocean, in show,
Bloody, and the Print of Men's Bodies upon the Sands, and certain Women, in
Ecstasy, foretold Romans, so they added courage to the Britains: and because
Suetonius was far absent, the Colony required help of Decianus the Procurator,
but he sent them no more then 200, and those ill Armed: The Soldiers, trusting
to the Protection of their Temple, and not mistrusting the Conspiracy of some
amongst them, that favored the Britains, neither Fortified themselves, nor sent
out of the Colony the Old Men and Women, and such as were not able to bear
Arms; Petilius Cerealis, Lieutenant of the Ninth Legion, coming to their
Relief, was met upon the way, his Legion routed, all his Foot slain, he
escaping, with the Horse, into the Roman Camp; Catus, whose Rapine and
Extortion had partly caused this Insurrection, fled into Gallia: But Suetonius,
There c. 33.252.
with wonderful presence of Mind, Marched through his Enemies Countries to
London (a place not known at that time by the Name of a Colony, but famous
Petilius, resolves, with the loss of one Town, to save the rest; nor was he
moved with the Prayers or Tears of any that desired him to stay, but giving the
Signal of Departure, took with him such as were able and willing to go; such as
through weakness of Age, or Sex, or for love of the place, stayed behind, were
oppressed,

The Ruins whereof are in, and near St. Albans in Hartfordshire.
Verulamium, a Roman Free-Town, had the same fate, for the Britains passing by
the Forts and Garrisons, assailed the Richest Places, and most easy to be won,
lading themselves with the Spoils of their Enemies, whom they Hanged, Burned,
and Crucified, There, c. 33.252.
using all the cruelty, and inhumane outrage, that a Giddy-Rabble, elated with
success, could think of; they took no Prisoners, either to preserve them for
Ransom, or Exchange, according to the Laws of Romans and their Allies, 80000
Romans slain. Dio, lib. 62.700. There, lib. 62.701.
to the number of 70 Thousand, or as Dio, 80 Thousand. They hanged up naked the
Noblest and Honestest of their Matrons, cutting off their Breasts, and sowing
them to their Mouths, that they might seem to eat their own flesh; Nero
Claudius Caesar, Anno Dom. 62, 63, etc.
these things they did, while they Sacrifized and Carouzed in the Temple of
Andate their Goddess of Victory. Suetonius with the Fourteenth Legion, the
Standard-bearers of the Twentieth, and some Auxiliaries, about Ten Thousand,
resolved to encounter the Britains, and without delay prepared for Battle,
having chosen a place with a narrow entrance, and a thick Wood for defense
behind him, Tacit. 14. Annal. c. 34.252.
and before him a wide Plain; the Legionaries were drawn up in close order,
being encompassed with the Light-armed, Britains ranged abroad in great
Companies and Brigades, triumphing, and supposing now no Force able to resist
them, so that they brought their Wives, and placed them in Wagons about the
utmost parts of the Plain, to behold the Slaughter of the Romans, and to be
Witnesses of their expected Victory; Boadicia Commands the Britains.
Boadicia Commanding in Chief, mounts a Chariot, with her two Daughters, and
coursing about (or Dio Reports) uses many Arguments to Bespeak the Courage of
her Army, Dio. lib. 2.704.
or rather Rude, Insolent, Undisciplined Multitude, consisting of 230 Thousand;
at last, persuading them to pursue their Enemies, Dio. lib. 62.703.
as Dogs and Wolves do fearful Hares and Foxes, she let out of her Lap a live
Hare, at whose running through them, the Britains Shouted, apprehending it
Ominous, and foresignifying the Romans Flight; Suetonius, though he perceived
not his Soldiers to be terrified with the great Numbers Legions kept the
Straight as a place of Defense, Tacit. 14. ann. c. 37.253.
while the Britains had spent their Darts, and then Marched into the Plain,
where the Auxiliaries and the Horsemen making way, The Britains Overthrown.
they, as an irresistible Wedge, broke and dissipated whatever opposed them;
the rest fled, but could not easily escape, by reason Britains, 80000 Slain.
There. Dio. lib. 62.706. Tacit. 14. ann. c. 38.253.
said to be slain, was 80 Thousand; of the Romans 400, and about as many
wounded: Boadicia Poisoned her self, according to Tacitus, but Dio says she
died of Sickness, when the Britains had prepared for another Battle. Suetonius
drawing together his Army kept the Field, with design to finish the War, and
Caesar Germany augments it with 2000 Legionaries, 8 Cohorts of Auxiliaries, and
1000 Horse, who being disposed into their Winter Quarters, from thence they
wasted with Fire and Sword all such Countries as opposed them, or were wavering
in their obedience.

But Famine was the greatest Enemy to the Britains, who neglected to till their
Lands, making account to supply themselves with the Spoils and Provisions of
their Enemies: Nevertheless, the hardiest and stoutest People and Nations, were
not inclinable to Peace Suetonius his too much severity to those that yielded;
they also deferred their Submission, Julius Classicianus Procurator in Britain.
for that Julius Classicianus, who succeeded Catus in the Procuratorship, being
an Enemy to Suetonius, reported, That a new Lieutenant was coming, who, without
the Rigor and Pride of a Conqueror, would kindly receive into Favor such as
yielded; he likewise Wrote to Rome, Nero Claudius Caesar, Anno Dom. 62, 63, 64,
etc.
That there was no end of the War to be expected, while Suetonius continued in
the Government: That his bad success was to be referred to his ill Management
of Affairs, and his good, to the Fortune of the Commonwealth.

To compose this Difference between the Lieutenant and Procurator, and
reconcile them, Nero sent Polycletus, a Libert, Polycletus sent an Arbiter into
Britain.
or one he had Britains; There, c. 39.253.
he appeared in Britain in the same state and Equipage he had done in Italy and
France, and was received by the Soldiers with fear and Reverence: but it seemed
a Ridiculous thing to the Britains, that so great a General, and such a
Victorious Army, should give an account of their actions to a Slave: These
things, however they were in themselves, yet to the Emperor they were so
represented, Suetonius, after the loss of some of his Shipping upon the Shore,
was commanded (the War not being finished) to deliver up his Army to Petronius
Turpilianus, Petronius Turpilianus.
he neither being troublesome to the Enemy, nor molested by them, speciously
imposed upon his own sloth and easiness, the most acceptable name of Peace, he
being unacquainted with the Temper and failings of the Britains, the more
easily remitted them, and having attempted nothing of moment, delivered up the
Province to Trebellius Maximus, Trebellius Maximus.
who was Roscius Caelius, Commander of the Twentieth Legion, who objected to
Trebellius, the Defrauding and Impoverishing of the Legions; and he again to
Caelius, Sedition and Want of Discipline: Trebellius fled from the Rage of the
Army, yet returning again to his Command, Ruled precariously, and by
Capitulation

In the 63d Year of our Savior, and in Nero's time, it is Storyed, That Joseph
of Arithamaea, with I know not who besides, Joseph of Arimathea, his coming
into Britain but a Story.
came into Britain, for the Propagation of Christian Religion, and settled
themselves at Glastonbury, etc. as it is declared at large in the Famous
Narrative of his coming hither: but I confess I cannot see any reason there is
that this Story should be reputed Authentic, William of Malmesbury, who Lived
and Wrote in the Year 1130, or thereabouts, and is taken from the Chart, or
Epistle rather of St. Patrick, Monasticon, Tome 1. fol. 11.
which is Printed in the Monasticon of the Learned and Laborious Dugdale,
wherein Josephus is not mentioned, only the Twelve Disciples of Philip and
Jacob; it relisheth of the humor of those ancient times, and seems to be a
farce of great improbabilities, and untilligible stuff, and not unlike the
many ridiculous and incredible Relations of Saints, Miracles and Relics,
Monastery, and are published by the same Worthy Author. Besides, Patricius came
hither, There.
An. Dom. 433. and in this Epistle enumerates 12 Brethren he found there, and
gives some of them pure Saxon Names, when as the Saxons came not into Britain
until the Year 449. as Bede Reports, or in 458, Bid Eccles. Hist. lib. 2. c. 5.
as the same Story of Glastonbury in the next Page, Line 20, seems to intimate.
Nor was this History either Notorious or Current in V. Bedes time, Nero
Claudius Caesar, Anno Dom. 62, 63, 63, etc. Titus Flavius Vespasianus, Anno
Domini 70, 71, etc.
for he takes not the least notice of it, nor have any of the Moderns, with any
reasonable probability, confirmed it.

Nero having Killed himself, from the time of Trebellius, Britain was Ruled by
Lieutenants of the Legions in equal Authority (only Caelius was most active,
and dared most) until after the short Reigns of Galba and Otho; Suet. Nero. c.
49.647. Vectius Bolanus Governor in Britain. Tacit. de vit. Agric. c. 6,
17.458. There. Lib. 3. Histor. c. 44.380.
Vitellius having obtained the Empire; sent hither Vectius Bolanus, who was not
much unlike Trebellius, save that, Britains, he had procured their love and
affection; who took occasion from his easiness, and the Divisions and War that
happened from the Contention of Vitellius and Vespasian for the Empire, to
revolt in several parts of the Isle, and some of them openly to declare in
favor of Vespasian, who had behaved himself nobly and honorably in Britain in
Claudius his time, so that for this cause Bolanus refused to send any of the
Legions, or to give Vitellius any assistance Suet. Vitell. c. 17.725.


Tacit. de vit. Agric. c. 17.458. Petilius Cerealis Pro-Praetor in Britain. An.
Dom. 73. Brigantes Overcome.
So soon as Vespasian had, with the whole Empire, recovered Britain, he employed
there great Captains, and a Powerful Army; Petilius Cerealis his Lieutenant
struck terror into the Britains, invading the Country of the Brigantes, the
most Populous of the whole Province, the greatest part whereof, after many
bloody Battles, he Britains; nor was the Reputation of his Successor Julius
Frontinus, Julius Frontinus Succeeds him in the Lieutenancy, A. D. 76. The
Silures Subdued. Agricola succeeds him, A.D. 79. There, c. 18.
lessened by his Fame, he subduing the Silures, a strong and Warlike Nation,
not only by fighting with the Men, but encountering Mountains, Streights, and
places of difficult access.

In this condition Agricola found Britain, when he came in the Roman Soldiers
being as it were secure, and their Enemies taking every opportunity of
advantage against them; the Ordovices, a little before his Landing, had
destroyed a Wing, or Brigade of Horse that lay upon their Borders. The Country
alarmed with this beginning, and being inclined to War, allowed the Example;
yet some stayed to see how it would affect the new Lieutenant: Then Agricola,
although the Summer was spent, and the Cohorts lay dispersed in the Province,
and the Soldiers Legions, and some Auxiliaries, and because the Ordovices durst
not descend into the Plain, he himself, to encourage the Army, Marches first in
the Front, up the Hills, The Ordovices almost Extirpated.
and by this Enterprise he almost destroyed the whole Nation; and following his
Success, he designs the taking of the Isle Mona, from the Possession whereof
Paulinus had been revoked by the General Britain; But Ships being wanting, his
Policy and Resoluteness devised a Passage; for he commanded the most choice of
the Auxiliaries, to whom the Shallows were known, and who, according to the
Custom of their Country were able to Swim over with Horse and Arms, suddenly to
Invade them; which so Amazed the Inhabitants, who expected Ships and Boats to
Waft them over; Titus, Flavius, Vespasianus. Anno Dom. 70, 71, etc.
That now believing nothing could be hard or invincible to Men of their
Resolution, begged Peace, and yielded the Island.

Thus Agricola became great and famous; Mona ^ielded.
because at his first entrance, he used that time in the achievement of
laborious and dangerous Enterprises, which others spent in vain Gratulations
and Ambitious The Wisdom of Agricola.
he committed no Public Affair, either to his Liberts, were such as were
Manumitted from Bondage, or Slavery. Rosin. Ant. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Liberts, or Slaves; he received no Soldier near him, upon private affection,
or the Commendation and Petition Centurions, There, c. 19.
but elected and preferred the best and most serviceable; he observed all
things, but punished not all Faults, small ones he Pardoned, and for great ones
used a suitable Severity: not always animadverting upon Offenders, but
oft-times satisfied with Repentance; he chose rather to prefer such to Offices,
and the Administration of Affairs, as were not likely to offend, then after the
offense to punish and remove them: And Justice.
he equally imposed the payment of Corn, and Tribute, taking away the
Exactions, and Fees Publicans in former time forced the People to wait at the
Barn Doors, which were shut against them, first to buy Corn of them at dear
rates, and afterward to sell it them again cheap, and at their own price; they
were also often appointed by the Purveyors to carry Provision from places near
one Winter Camp, to others far off, and out of the way, taking a composition of
such as would be excused: There, c. 20.
By Repressing these Abuses and Extortions in his first Year, a good Opinion
was

By his sudden Incursions and Assaults, the Summer following, An. Dom. 80.
Agricola's Arts to Subdue the Britains, and cause them to submit.
by his Prudence, Diligence, and Activity in War, he very much terrified the
Britains, and then again he would forbear them, and assay to reduce them, by
Invitations and Allurements to Peace. Whereupon many Cities, which before would
not submit, gave Hostages, and received Garrisons; There, c. 21.459. His
Practices to change their Manners.
The next Winter he spent in most wholesome Counsels, and Designs, for that he
might, by Pleasure, accustom rude Men, who lived dispersed, and were therefore
prone to War, to Ease and Quiet, he privately exhorted, and publicly assisted
them to build Houses, Temples, and Courts of Justice, They build Houses,
Temples, and Courts of Justice.
commending such as were forward, and chastising the slow and idle, raising
among them an emulation to this undertaking, from force and necessity, which
they perceived not; he caused also the Noblemens Sons to be instructed in the
Liberal Arts, preferring the Wits of Britain before those of Gallia; by which
means they became very desirous of Roman Eloquence, that before refused the
Language, after that the Roman Habit came in Fashion, and the Gown was much
used, and so by little and little, they proceeded to the common Provocations of
Vice, Titus Flavius Vespasianus, filius. Titus Flavius Domitianus, Anno Dom.
80, 81, 82, etc.
Sumptuous Buildings, Bathes, and Exquisit Banquettings, which things the
ignorant People called Civility, when as they were intended as preparatives for
Bondage.

In his Third Year he discovered New Nations, wasting all before him unto the
Frith of The Frith, or Firth of the River Tay in Straythern in Scotland,
between Fife South, and Angus North.
Taus; he was so dreadful to his Enemies, They use Bathes and Banquettings,
etc. Flavius Vespasianus Dies. Anno Dom. 81. There* c. 22 His Son Titus
Succeeds. His Skill in Raising Forts, etc. Anno Dom. 82. There, c. 23.
that although his Army was wearied with many sharp Conflicts and Tempestuous
Weather, yet they dare not oppose him, but permitted him to build Fortresses
and Castles where he pleased: Agricola was either so skilful or fortunate, that
no Fort or Castle of his erecting, was either taken by Force, Surrendered upon
Conditions, or Quitted as not Defensible. By Irruptions out of these, made
Impregnable by continual Relief, he so straightened the Enemy, whose custom it
was, to attempt in Winter what they lost in Summer, that their condition was
now alike at all times.

His Fourth Year was spent in viewing and settling what he had overrun; and if
the Valor of his Army, and the Glory of the Roman Britain then were at that
time Discovered. For Glota, now Dunbrittain Frith, and Bodotria, now Edinburgh
Frith. Camb. Britan. 701.

Glota and Bodotria, two opposite Arms of the Sea, shooting into the Land, are
divided by a narrow portion of Ground, which was Guarded with Garrisons and
Castles, so that the Romans possessing all on this side, had removed their
Enemies, as it were, into another Island.

Anno Dom. 83. There, c. 24.460. Domitian.
In the Fifth Year of the War, and the First of Domitian, he Conquered and
Subdued Probably the Orcades, and other Scotch Isles.
Nations, until that time unknown, and had a Design upon Ireland; one of the
Petit Kings whereof came unto

Anno Dom. 84. There, c. 25. A Fleet first used by Agricola.
In the Sixth Year of his Government, because a General Insurrection of all the
Nations beyond Bodotria was feared, and that his Agricola, became first an
Addition to the Roman strength, and by which Sailing along their Shoars, and
bearing up their Friths and Creeks, he made War upon them both by Sea and Land:
Oft-times both Sea and Landforces mixed in the same Camp, each side extolling
their Adventures, some, in a Military Ostentation, talked of the Woods and High
Mountains they had passed, others of the Dangers of Rocks and Tempests,

The Britains (as it was understood from Prisoners) were much amazed at the
sight of the Navy, as if their Seas being discovered, there would be no way
left for them to escape, if they were overcome. Nevertheless the Caledonians.
That part of Britain which lies Northward beyond Graham's Dyke, or the Wall of
Antoninus Pius, commonly called Severus his Wall, in the Straight between Glota
and Bodotria, was called Caledonia.
Caledonians Arming with great preparation, began to Assail diverse Castles, and
some of the Roman Captains being Cowards, Titus Flavius Domitianus, Anno Domini
84, 85, etc.
under pretense of Prudence advised the General to retire on this side
Bodotria, and rather to Retreat on his own accord, then to be driven back with
shame: In the mean time he understood, that the Enemies would make their
Irruptions in several Bodies; and lest they, being much superior in number,
should enclose him, he also Marched with his Army, in three Divisions, which,
when known to the Caledonians, they suddenly Legion, as being the weakest, The
Ninth Legion almost destroyed. There, c. 26.460.
and having slain the Sentinels (partly asleep, and partly amazed with fear)
they broke into the Camp, and were Fighting within the Trenches; when Agricola
had intelligence from his Scouts, which way they were gone, he speedily Marched
after them, and commanded his Lightest Horse and Foot, to Charge them in the
Rear, and the rest to make a great Shout: the Day dawning, the Glittering of
the Roman Ensigns dazzled Britains, who, after a very sharp Fight, The
Caledonians beaten.
in the very Gates, or entrances of the Camp, drew off to the Woods and Bogs
which secured them, otherwise the War had been then finished by a complete
Battle.

Upon this Success, There, c. 27.
the Soldiers presuming all easy and open to their power, cried out to be led
into Caledonia, that with a continual course of Conquest they might find out
the utmost bounds of Britain: now such as before the Battle, were so wary and
wise in General to Retreat, began to speak glorious things of themselves (such
is the condition of War, that in prosperous events all claim a share in them,
but Misfortunes are commonly imputed to one:) Notwithstanding this, the
Britains abated not of their Courage, attributing the Victory more to the
Policy and Art of the General, then valor of the Soldiers, who, transporting
their Wives and Children into places of safety, The Caledonians Associate^
by frequent Assemblies and Religious Rites, entered into an Association and
Confederacy against the Romans,

That Summer a Cohort of Germans, having slain their Centurion, Britain first
discovered to the Romans to be an Island.
and other Roman Officers appointed to Discipline them, got, to save
themselves, into some light Vessels, without a Pilot, and by Tide and Weather
were carried round the Coast of Britain, exercising Piracy where ever they
Landed, and were the first Discoverers to the Romans that it was an Island.

In the beginning of the Summer following, An. Dom. ^5. There, c. 29.461.
Agricola sent his Navy Britains, while he himself, with an expedite Army, in
which were some of the most Valiant Britains, such, as by long experience, he
had found faithful, Marched on to the Mountain Grampius, Gramp-Hill, now
Grantzbain, begins not far from Grahames Dyke, Northwards, There.
being a crooked bending Mountain, extending into Athol and Murray.
where Britains, above 30000 were Lodged, who yet increased, by the Affluence
of stout young Men, and also of such old Men as were vigorous and lusty, and
had been long practiced in War; amongst Galgacus, by Birth and Merit a Person
of the best Conduct; Galgacus General of the Caledonians. There, c. 30.
by whose Oratory, in Detestation of Servitude, their Courage was much
heightened, which before was forward and vigorous enough, and as a testimony of
the Impression it made upon them, they received it with Loud and Barbarous,
Titus Flavius Domitianus. An. Dom. 46, 87, etc.
yet Cheerful Acclamations and Shouts.

Agricola likewise, although he saw a great forwardness and alacrity in his
Soldiers to engage the Enemy, yet incited them with an encouraging Oration,
There, c. 33.462.
to Victory and Glory; while he yet spoke, they ran to their Arms, and longing
to fight, he thus disposed them; The Main Battle consisted of 8000 Auxiliary
Foot, the Wings of 3000 Horse, the Legions he placed behind next the Trench
Roman Blood, or as a Reserve, if the Auxiliaries should be Beaten: The first
Battalion of the Britains stood in the Plain, the rest upon the Ascent of the
Hill, the middle of the Field was filled with Chariots and Horsemen, clattering
and ranging up and down: Agricola seeing them so much to out-number him, drew
out his Army at length, There, c. 35.463, etc.
and leaving his Horse, Marched before it on Foot; the Battle was sharp and
doubtful, until he commanded Three Cohorts They Inhabited part of Holland about
Leyden, and also other part of it, and Gelderland, between the Rhene and the
Waal, now de Betowe.
Batavians, and Two of Tungri, or Germans, they Inhabited the Bishoprics of
Liege and Colon, the Dukedomes of Jul^ers and Limburgh, the County of Namurs,
and part of the Dukedom of Lutzenburgh.
Tungrians (used to that kind of Britains made good the Fight a long time, and
often hazarded the Roman Army; The Caledonians and Britains totally defeated.
at length, by the great conduct of Agricola, they were miserably routed, and
by a hot and home pursuit, were totally defeated: about 10000 of the Britains
were slain, of the Romans 340.

The Britains being dispersed, both Men and Women together howling and crying,
drew with them their Wounded, forsaking There, c. 38.464.
and, in Spite, Firing them; seeking Lurking places abroad, in the Woods and
Mountains, some killing their Wives and Children, out of Compassion, to prevent
a more cruel violence from their Enemies: The Night ended the pursuit; and the
next day more fully discovered the greatness of the Victory: Desolation and
silence every where; the smoke of the fired Houses appeared afar off; no
Sallies out of the Woods, no Shiring upon the Mountains; the Scouts met no Man.

Summer being spent, the General Marched his Army into the The Horesti, or
Horesci. Camb. Brit. 691. There, 210.
Inhabited, as Cambden conjectures, Esk-Dale in Scotland, adjoining to
Anandale, so Named from the River Eske, which runs into Solway Frith.
Horestians Country, where, having received Hostages, he commanded his Admiral
to Sail about Britain, while himself, with slow Marches, that they might with
more terror awe the Countries newly reduced by this delay, leads both Horse and
Foot into their Winter Camps; Britain Compassed.
and the Fleet, by a Prosperous Voyage, compassed the Isle, and arrived at Port
Thought to be Rhutupia, near Sandwich in Kent, now Richborowe.
Trutulensis, from whence it set out.

Thus the whole Isle of Britain being Conquered, and the South-part of it
reduced into a Province, There, c. 39.465. Agricola represents to Domitian the
State of Britain.
Agricola drew up the State of Affairs here, and Modestly represented them by
Letters to Domitian the Emperor; who, after his manner, received them with a
Cheerful Countenance, but was inwardly troubled at the great Fame of Agricola,
and tormented with envy at his Military Glory, Titus Flavius Domitianus. Aelius
Hadrianus. Antoninus Pius. Anno Domini, 119, etc.
he privately designed his Ruin, although for the present he commanded the
Senate to Decree him Triumphal Ornaments, and Statua, and what else was usual,
or Extraordinary in such cases; but sending Salustius Lucullius his Successor,
Britain was delivered up to him in a good and peaceable condition; Domitian the
meanwhile pretending, that Syria, then wanting a Governor, Agricola Recalled.
There, c. 40.
should be Assigned to Agricola; however, whether he meant so or not, he never
lived to enjoy that Province, Dying soon after, There, c. 43.466.
not without suspicion of Poison.

His Successor left little Memory of himself in Britain, where he remained but
a short time, for by Domitians order he was put to Death, because he suffered
certain Spears, of a new Fashion, Suet. Dom. c. 10.799.
to be called after his own Name, Lucullians.

Domitian being slain, Anno Dom. 98.
Anno Dom. 98. Nerva Coccejus was Saluted Emperor: but there are no certain
Memoirs left by any Authors what was done here in his time, nor is there much
extant in Story what was done in Britain by the Romans in Trajans time, who
succeeded him; only some Authors Write, that the Britains, out of a desire to
Free themselves, made an Insurrection, but were soon repressed.

Hadrianus being Proclaimed Emperor, received intelligence, Anno Dom. 119.
that the Northern Britains made Incursions into the Province, and sent thither
Julius Severus, but before he could subdue and quiet them, he was recalled to
suppress some Jewish Commotions in Syria, and the Emperor himself came with an
Army into Britain, where he encountered the Barbarous People of the North,
recovered such Forts as they had taken, and forced them to retire into the
Mountains Anno Dom. 123.
Fortifying the Limits of the Province with a Wall of Turfes and Stakes, This
Wall was extended from the Irish to the German Sea; it began hard by Bu^ness,
and passing over Ituna, or Eden, now Solway-Frith, and so by Carlisle, Camb.
Brit. 653. There, 668.
ended at Walsend, about three Miles from Newcastle upon Tine, or perhaps went
as far as the Promontory, or Tinmouth; it was called the Picts, or Hadrians
Wall.
80 Miles in length, to defend the Inhabitants Hadrians Wall. Spartian. in
Hadr. c. 11.51.
he returned Triumphantly to Rome: for this Exploit he was called the Restorer
of Britain, which, as a Motto, was Stamped upon his Coin.

The Provincial Britains, The Provincial Britains conform to the Roman Laws.
now fearing as much the Cruelty of their Northern Countrymen, as formerly the
Invasion of Strangers, Roman Laws, as well Civil as Martial, under the
direction of Priscus Licinius then Pro-praetor.

Hadrian was succeeded by Antoninus Pius; Anno Domini 139. Antoninus Pius.
Capitolin. in Anton. Pio. c. 5.132. His Wall.
whose Lieutenant Lollius Vrbicus beat the Brigantes; and having driven back,
and removed the Barbarous Northern People, built another Between Dunbritton and
Edinburgh-Frifth, commonly thought to be built by Severus, but was built by
Lollius Rebicus, Lieutenant to Antoninus Pius, and ought truly to be called
Antoninus Pius his Wall. There, 699.

Wall of Turves; for these two Expeditions of Lollius he was called Britanicus,
although he never saw Britain himself.

Marcus, Aurelius, Antonius, Verus Philosophus, and Lucius Verus, Lucius, King
of some part of Britain, Livius, Aelius, Aurelius, Commodus, Antoninus. Anno
Dom. 119, etc.
After him Marcus Aurelius possessed the Empire, with his Associate Lucius
Verus, and Calphurnius Agricola was constituted Lieutenant of the Province of
Britain, who, partly by his Prudence, and partly by Force, appeased the
Northern Tumults, and settled the Minds of those People who were the most
impatient of the Roman Yoke.

He Dying, his Son Commodus was invested in the Empire.

About this time it is said, that King Lucius applied himself to Eleutherius
Bishop of Rome, that by his Assistance and Direction, he and his Nation might
be instructed in the Christian Faith: Marcus Aurelius. Anno Dom. 162. Capitol.
in Aurel. c. 8.169. Commodus, Anno Dom. 181. Council. 12, 13, 14, 35. De
Primord. c. 3. de Praesul. c. 3.
Who Wrote back to him an Epistle, and sent Phagatius, or Fugatius, Diruvianus,
Duvianus, or Damianus, hither, by whom Archbishops and Bishops were appointed
and Consecrated in the Seats of Archflaminsus and Flamins; which Epistle and
Tale of Archflamins, Flamins, etc. Sir Henry Spelman clearly argues of Forgery;
they are also rejected Archbishop Usher, and Bishop Godwin, upon very good
grounds and reasons there expressed.

More consonant to Truth and Reason it is, That Christianity spreading it self,
and much Increasing, in so many years after its appearing here in Britain, and
in the Territories of King Lucius (if any such Man there was) and being a
Profession, sober, simple, plain and free from Pagan Dotages, their Foolish
Rites, and Groundless Superstitions; and probably then also being taken up by
Sober, Rome (if there were any such King in Britain) it being then the most
Celebrated Place for the Profession of Christianity, and to Eleutherius, or
some Bishop of that City, for a Correspondency in the Affairs of Religion, and
to know the usages, Doctrine, and practice of it there; but, that he should
Write back such an Epistle as this, no Judicious Man will believe. Authors
differ Bid would have it, An. Dom. 156. Malmesbury 166. Matthew. Westminster,
185. others, 182.167, etc.

Anno Dom. 186. Dio, lib. 72.820.
Amongst all others, the most troublesome War to Commodus was the British; for
the Northern Britains having broken down, and passed the Wall placed between
them and the Roman Camp, surprised and killed the General, and most of the
Soldiers, and wasted the Province far and near.

Marcellus Lieutenant.
The Emperor affrighted with this action, sent against them Vlpius Marcellus, a
Man, sober, vigilant, magnanimous, mild, and temperate, against Bribes
impregnable; he soon made an end of this War, which at first appeared so
formidable, and sufficiently Chastised the Britains for their Revolt;
Chastises the Britains.
he revived the lost Discipline of War, for want of which the Army grew
Licentious; for this good Service, and for his Virtues sake, Commodus could
scarce abstain from putting him to Death; yet, upon better thoughts, he He is
Dismissed.


After he left the Isle, the Roman Army began to Mutiny, and refused to
acknowledge Commodus for their Emperor: which Disorders, Perennis, his great
Favorite (to whom he permitted the Care and Management of the whole Affair of
the Empire) undertook to Redress, by Menacing the Soldiers, and removing of
Officers, and placing others of less note and worth in their steads; Livius,
Aeliu^, Aurelius, Commodus, Antoninus, An. Dom. 182, 183, etc.
In this heat the Legions chose 1500 Soldiers, and sent them to Rome, who,
without any trouble, or prohibition, came unto Commodus, and exhibited an
accusation of Treason against Perennis, for Conspiring against him; and
designing to make his own Son Emperor; There, 821.
He easily believed it, especially at the instance of Cleander, who hated him,
and being declared Traitor, was delivered to the Soldiers, who first

He being slain, Commodus, by Letters, Anno Dom. 188. Capitol. in Pertina. c.
3.301. Pertinax Succeeds him. And craves Dismission.
sollicites Helvius Pertinax to undertake the Charge of Britain, and being come
thither he suppressed the Sedition, and deterred the Soldiers, who would rather
have had any other Emperor, especially Pertinax himself; in this attempt he
underwent a great danger, being almost slain, and left amongst the Dead; which
Seditious action he severely Revenged,

After him, by the Command of Commodus, Clodius Albinus made Governor. Capit.
in Albin. c 13, 14, 403. Anno Dom. 192.
Clodius Albinus had the Government of the Province assigned to him, and by him
also was honored with the Title of Caesar, but he declined it; and afterward
declared openly his affection to the Ancient Government by the Senate, in an
Oration he made to the Soldiers, upon a false Report of the Death of Commodus,
commending, and preferring the Emperors; which Oration being carried to Rome,
so exasperated Commodus, that he presently sent Junius Severus his Successor,
who, whether he stayed, or what he did here, is uncertain: Commodus not long
after being Strangled by Narcissus, Commodus Murdered. Anno Dom. 195. Herod,
lib. 2.56.
and the Reigns of Pertinax, and Didius Julianus being very short, Albinus was
found again in the Head of the Army in Britain, in the beginning of Severus,
which he Transported against him into Gallia afterward, where, near Lions in
France.
Lugdunum, he was encountered by Severus, Severus. There, 69, 70. There, 71.
he divided Britain into two Governments, or Praefectures; the South part was
committed (as may be thought, to Heraclianus, or Heraclitus, as Spartian) and
the Virius Lupus, where the Meatae, Spart. in Sev. c. 6.339. Dio. lib. 75.
The Inhabitants of Northumberland, and the Lower parts of Scotland near
Hadrians Wall.
assisted by the The Inhabitants of the North parts of Scotland, Maeatae.
Caledonians. Camb. Brit. 701.
beyond Antoninus Pius his Wall, attributed to Severus, now commonly called
Grahames-Dike.
Caledonians, withstood him, and forced him to purchase Peace with Money.

Not long after, the Emperor was informed by Letters from the Britain (Virius
Lupus) That the Barbarous People, Herod. lib. 3.82.
by Severus goes into Britain.
Severus joyfully receives this News, and being naturally desirous of Glory,
after his Victories in the East, he prepares to erect Trophies in Britain, and
besides, to take off his Sons (whom he carried with him) from the Pleasures of
Rome, Aged as he was, and much afflicted with the Gout, There, 83.
being, for the most part, carried in a Horse-Litter, yet came thither sooner
then he was expected: The Northern Britains daunted at Ambassadors to seek
Peace, and to excuse their former Delinquency.

Severus, Antonin^s, Bassianus, Caracalla, etc. Geia, etc.
But he purposely delaying them (being ambitious of Victory, and the Name of
Britannicus) while he prepared all things for War, and then dismissed and sent
them home with an ineffectual Answer. Anno Dom. 209. Severus desires the Name
of Britannicus. Herod. lib. 3.83. Dio. lib. 76.


His first care was, to lay Bridges over the Bogs and Morasses, that his
Soldiers might stand firmly, pass easily, and fight safely; and having Marched
his Army beyond the Rivers, Bulwarks and Rampires, which distinguished the
Roman Limits from the Barbarous Britains (or into Caledonia, as Dio) there were
many Tumultuary Fights and Skirmishes, the Romans being every where Victors;
but the Britains easily saved themselves, by retreating into their Fastnesses,
There, lib. 76.867. His great Labor to Conquer the Britains. Q. How these two
Reports agree.
amongst the Woods and Bogs, almost naked; yet Dio reports this Expedition into
Caledonia somewhat otherwise, and says, That he passed thorough it with great
difficulty, and that to make his way he cut down Woods, dug through Hills,
made Causeways over Bogs and Fens, and Bridges over Rivers: that there was
Romans into Ambushes, by which means, and by reason of the Difficulty of the
March (many being killed by themselves, that were not able to continue it)
there died Fifty Thousand; yet did not Severus give over till he came to the
utmost parts of the Isle, although by reason of his Age and Weakness, he was
carried in a Horse-Litter, forcing the Britains to make their The Britains
yield up part of their Country, and make Peace. Burton. upon Anton. Itener. 63.
Severus Repairs Hadrianus Wall. Spart. in Sev. c. 18.355. Camb. Brit. 652.
There, 868.
by yielding up a great part of their Country; Conditioning also to lay down
their Arms, to contein themselves within their own Mountains, and that they
would make no Inroads, or Invade the Roman Province, which he had, by the help
of the Sixth Legion, Bounded and Fortified with a Stone Wall of 12 Foot high,
and 8 Foot Thick, with Towers and Battlements, in the same place and Tract of
Ground where Hadrians Wall was, and drew it from Sea to Sea, from whence he was
called Britanicus, Cambden viewed.

When he returned into the Province, he committed the Government thereof, for
Civil Causes, to his youngest Son Geta; Aemilius Paulus Papinianus, the Famous
Lawyer, being appointed to assist and direct him, Zosin. lib. 1.6. Papinianus
appointed Governor to Geta.
who, as Chief Minister of Justice under him, had his Tribunal at The City of
York, Histor. August varior. 745.
which was the Station of the Beloved Legion of Severus, called Sex^a Vectrix.
Eboracum: To Bassianus Antoninus, the Eldest, he commits the Command of the
Army; But, no sooner was Severus Britains Arm again; wherefore Severus Voweth.
Anno Dom. 212.
and kill Man, Woman and Child: yet, before his Commands were executed, worn
out with Labors, Old Age, Infirmities, and Grief for the wickedness of his Son
Antonine, he died at Eboracum.

Herod. lib. 3.85.
After whose Death, Antoninus Caracalla, his Impious Son, put to Death the
Physicians, because they dispatched not his Father, according Caracalla his
Cruelty.
nor did his Cruelty spare any one that had been advanced by, or shown any
respect or honor to his Father; he practiced, by Bribes and Promises, with the
Soldiers, Antoninus Bassianus, Caracalla, etc. and Geta, etc. Divus Aurelianus,
Aurelius Probus, Carinus Dioclesian and Maximianus, An. Dom. 209, 271, 278, etc.
to declare him sole Emperor; which, when he could not effect (for the kindness
and affection they had for his Father, who had appointed his Brother Geta equal
with him in the Empire) he made Peace with the Britains, received Hostages, and
departed to Rome. From this time of his leaving the Island all Authors are
silent, concerning what was done here, for many years together; only, it is
thought, some of the So they called all the Chiefs and Leaders of Rebels.
Tyrants, as Lollianus, Victorinus, Posthumus, the Tetrici and Marius, in the
Reign of Gallienus, might Usurp the Government here, where their Coyns have
been found in great quantities.

In the time of Aurelianus, Proculus and Bonosus at Agrippina, Camb. Brit. 50.
Colonia Agrippina, Colon upon the Rhene in Germany, the Chief City of that
Electorate.
Invaded the Empire, and Usurped Britain, Spain, and Afterward called Gallia
Narbonensis; it contained those parts of France which are now called Languedoc,
Savoy, Dauphine, or Delphinate, and Provence. Britan. 50.

Gallia braccata: Probus, hanged himself, and gave the occasion of the Jest,
An. Dom. 265. An. Dom. 271. etc. Vospic. in Probo, c. 18.942. Probus. Idem in
Bonoso. c. 15.971. Zosin. lib. 1.36
That

After that, Probus, by the means of Victorinus a Moor, prevented another
Rebellion in Britain; for calling to him Victorinus, he upbraided him with the
Seditious Practices of him, whom he had recommended to him for Thought by
Cambden to be Co^ Lalianus.
Governor of Britain, and sent Victorinus Author) slew the Traitor: Ibid. lib.
1.37.
About this time Probus Fought with the Vandals and Burgundians that Invaded
Gallia, and overcame them; the Prisoners he took were sent into Britain, where
being well settled, they proved very useful to the Emperor upon any Commotions
or Insurrections.

After him Carus succeeded in the Empire, who making an Expedition into Persia,
took with him Numenarius, one Son, An. Dom. 282
and left Carinus Gallia, Italy, It contained the Countries of Dalmatia and
Croatia lying upon the Gul^ Adriatique, or of Venice, between Istria and
Macedonia, now called Schlavonia* or Sclavonia.
Illiricum, Spain, Africa, Carinus.
and Britain, as Emperor; and directed, that in all things he should Vospic. in
Carin. c. 16.985. c. 18.989. Dioclesian. An. Dom. 284.
But Dioclesian being saluted Augustus by the Eastern Army, after many Battles,
vanquished and Killed him at Margum, a Town in Margum was a Town in Upper
Masia, the Country's since called Bosna, and Servia, near Dalmatia.
Moesia.

About this time, Carausius, a Man of mean Birth, but of a great Belgi^ now
Bretaigne in France.
and Armorican Coasts, An. Dom. 287.
infested by the Francs and Saxons; who neither restoring to the Victor. de
Caesar c. 39. Sect. 2. Bid, lib. 1. c. 6.30, 31. Carausius Rebelleth.
Maximianus made Dioclesians Colleague. An. Dom. 286.
nor giving the Emperors Officers an account thereof, grew Rich with his
Spoils; and being too great a delinquent to think of safety, and urged also by
the notice he had, of Maximianus Herculius (whom Dioclesian had made his
Colleague in the Empire, then making War in Gallia) his Commandment to have him
Killed; he Assumed the Purple, and possessed himself of Britain; him Maximianus
endeavored to reduce by force, but in vain; for having gained the Roman
Legions, and drawn into his Party the discontented People, Dioclesian and
Maximianus. Anno Dom. 271, 278. etc,
and Northern Britains, being likewise a valiant Man and great Soldier, at last
he made Peace with him, and permitted him to enjoy the Island.

Eutrop. lib 9.94, 95. Anno Domini 291. Galerius and Constantius made
Associates in the Empire. Anno Domini 293. Eumenius Panegyr. 10.
The State of the Empire growing troublesome, the Two Emperors chose Two
Associates and Assistants in the Government, by the Title of Caesar's; Galerius
Maximinus, who was sent into Persia, and Constantius Chlorus into Britain
against Carausius; but before he arrived, Carausius was slain by Alectus, his
Familiar Friend and great Confident, one trusted with the Management of his
greatest Affairs, after he had ruled Britain Seven years.

Constantius, after he had taken Gessoriacum, which had been possessed by
Carausius, laid hold of this opportunity, to prosecute the War against Alectus,
who had set himself up in Carausius his place; and understanding Constantius
his Design, resolved to meet and intercept Isle Vectis, Vectis, the Isle of
Wight: here must be a Mistake in Eumenius, for why he should lie here I
understand not, seeing from Gessoriacum, or Bologne, there was a more ready
Passage, and far shorter into Britain.
but his expectation being frustrated, by reason the Romans, in a thick Mist,
recovered the Land, before he could discover them, he prepared to encounter
them, and try his Fortune on shore.

Constantius, that he might leave to his Soldiers no hope of safety but
Victory, burnt his own Ships, so soon as they were Landed: both Armies
approaching one another, Anno Domini 296.
Constantius charged Alectus, Francs, Germans, etc. was soon routed, and
Alectus himself slain by Asclepiodotus He was Captain of the Emperors Guards,
and the Soldiers of the Guard were called Praetorian Soldiers.
Praetorian Prefect: The Francs fled to London, which they Pillaged; but
before they could get off with their Plunder, part of the Roman Army, which in
the Mist at Sea had been separated from the main Fleet, by chance being brought
thither, unladed them of their Spoils, and put the most part of them to the
Sword, he having Usurped Three years; after Ten years Britain was restored
Roman Empire, Eutrop. lib. 9* 95.
according to Eutropius; but Eumenius seems to report this as one Continued
Action.

The Christians Persecuted, A. D. 303. Bid, lib. 1. c. 7* 31. Gildus, n. 8.
Page 16, 17, 18. etc.
Most certain it is, that about this time, the Innocent and Harmless Christians
throughout the Empire, suffered under a most horrid and dreadful Persecution,
because they refused to offer Sacrifice to the Roman gods, according to the
Command of Dioclesian, and many in this Island; the Narratives of whose
Christian Zeal, Courage, and Constancy are so obscured, by the Fabulousness of
the Relators, and

Anno Domini 304. Eusebius. de vita, Constantin. lib. 1. c. 9.
But Dioclesian and Maximianus having resigned the Empire to Galerius and
Constantius, the latter of whom, among his other Provinces, having Britain for
his share, gave the Christians there the Free Exercise of their Religion; he
came into this Isle himself, where, reinforcing Peace, he came to York,
Dioclesian and Maximianus, Ga^erius and Constantius, Constantinus Magnus, Anno
Dom. 300. etc.
and there fell Sick of a languishing Disease and died.

In the mean time Constantine happily made his escape, and came Post from Rome,
whom his Father received with exceeding great joy, named him, and was, after
his Funeral, saluted Emperor by the whole Army.

Constantius by Helena, and what she was, Au^el. Victor. de Caesar. c. 40.
Eumen. Panegyric. 9. Zosim. lib. 2.46 Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 1. c. 15,
16. Constantine, Anno Domini 307. Zosim. lib. 2.46, 47. Bid, lib. 1. c. 6.31.
Niceph. lib. 7. Eccl. Hist. c. 17. at large.
whether his Wife or Concubine, and of what Country, whether of Britain,
Moesia, or Bithynia, it is much controverted amongst Authors. Zosimus, Bid,
and Nicephorus report her his Concubine, and unlawful Woman; others, as
Eutropius, etc. will have her his Wife, and that he was Divorced from her, when
he Married Theodora, the Daughter in Law of Maximianus, who exalted him to the
Empire: As to her Country Bid is silent: Baronius, Cambden, Alford, and many
others, will have her a Britain, and some the Daughter of King, or Earl Coel:
and that Constantin was born in Britain; Nicephorus, Livienus, Lipsius, and
others, contend he was born at A Town in Asia, in the Country Bithynia, between
the Cities Nicomedia and Nicaea, near the Propontis, called Helenopolis, in
Memory of Helena.
Drepanum, and that Helena was the Daughter of Constantius's host, when he
lodged there, in his Expedition against the Persians and Sarmatians; Firmicus
affirms, he was born at Naisus, Now Nisi, or Nissam, in Upper Moesia, which was
noted before.
a Town Moesia.

But I leave these Controversies to those that think it worth their Constantin,
who Governed the Empire by Four Pretorian Prefects, Ibid. 63.64.
which he Instituted, and committed the Civil Administration of Britain to
Pacatianus, Vicar to the Praetorian Prefect of Gallia; Came. Brit. 53.
and being called from thence by the War against Maxentius, he carried over the
Alps into Italy an Army of Germans, People that Inhabited Gallia, Celtica,
afterward Lugdunensis, which is that part of France which lies between the
Rivers Loire and Sein; it also contained both the Burgundies, Duchy and
County, and some part of Switzerland, etc. They also were, whether at first, or
in process of time, seated in Spain, Italy, and most parts of Europe.
Celts and Britains, Zos. lib. 2.50.
and other Recruits, drawing the Guards from the limits of the Empire Gallia,
Germany and Britain, Ibid. 65. Camb. Brit. 53. Constantin Draws the Garrisons
from the Limits and Frontires into Inland Towns. An. Dom. 315.
and removing them also from the Frontires into Inland Towns and Cities, which,
filled with Soldiers, were abandoned by the Inhabitants, he opened a way for
Invasions and Incursions into the Western Empire, and the Province in Britain,
and by which means (the Soldiers also in their new Quarrers, growing soft and
voluptuous) he laid the Foundation of the Ruin of the afterward declining
Empire.

About the 9th of his Reign, says Sir Hen. Spelman, Council. 39.
out of Sirmondus, Arles in France, where were present Three British Bishops,
Eborius of York, Three British Bishops at the Council of Arl ^. Anno Dom. 330.
Socrat. lib. 1.209, 214.
Restitutus of London, Adelfius of Camelodunum, or Maldon, Sacerdos a Priest,
and Arminius a Deacon, who brought with them the Canons of this Council into
Britain, that they might be observed there.

Constantin likewise called the General Council at Nice in Bithynia, and Wrote
into Britain, amongst other Countries, for the observation of such things as
were determined and decreed there; Constantinus Magnus, Constantius and
Julianus Apostate. An. Dom. 315.
and also directed his Epistle to the People, that upon pain of Death they
should burn all Arius his Books: By Testament he divided the Empire, after his
Death, between his Three Sons, Constantinus, Constantius, Spel. Council. 43, 45.
Constantine Writes to have the Council of Nice observed. Anno Domini 337. He
dyed this year upon Whitsunday. Zosim. lib. 2.69. Constantin Junior Murdered.
Anno Domini 340. Ibid. 70. Ibid. 71. Ibid. 78.
and Constans; he was Interred at Constantinople, and his Funeral Pomp attended
by Constantius.

In the Division of the Empire by Constantin the Great, France, and Britain
were assigned to his Eldest Son Constantin, Junior, but by the contrivance of
his Brother Constans; after he had enjoyed them Three years, he was Murdered;
who then Usurped that part of the Empire; yet before he was well established,
Magnentius rises up against him, and by his order, one Gaiso, with a Select
Company, dispatched him, at a Town named Helena, by the Pyrenaean Mountains:
Magnentius being seized of the greatest part of the Empire, Constantius comes
out of the East part of it, which Magnentius from place to place, being
deserted of all, and not able to support his greatness, he Killed himself.

After whose Death, Britain submitted it self to Constantius; and then Martinus
was deputed there under the Praetorian Prefect; who, disturbed and offended at
the Inhuman Cruelty of Paulus Catena, Camb. Britan. 54. out of Am. Marcellin.
who was sent an Inquisitor, to find out what Officers and Soldiers Magnentius,
accusing the Innocent as well as the Guilty, that he might Enrich himself by
extorting Money from them: Martinus commiserating the condition of such as he
knew Innocent; interceded with Paulus, persuading and beseeching him to spare
them, or otherwise he would depart the Island; who fearing he might be as good
as his word, Accused the Vicar himself, that he was in the Conspiracy, and
urged that he might be laid hold on, and carried bound to the Emperor.

Martinus much moved with such Reproaches (or, perhaps not altogether
Guiltless, drew his Sword, and struck at Paulus, but failing to kill him,
turned the Point upon his own Breast, and killed himself.

Julianus Apostata, Son of Constantine Junior, Brother to Constantius.
Afterward Julian the Apostate being declared Caesar, by Constantius and his
Colleague, in the Empire, the Government of Gallia, Britain, etc. was committed
to him; who, residing then at Paris, upon Scots and Picts into the Province,
and Complaints of the Spoils and Outrages they committed there, Am. Marcell.
lib. 20. c. 1.
he sent Lupicinus to repel them, and settle the Country, not daring himself to
pass into the Isle, lest the Gauls and Alemains, in his absence, should Revolt,
being without a Governor: Lupicinus came with an Army to Bologne, where
Shipping his Men, with a Rhutupiae, the same with Portus Trutusensis in
Tacitus, now Richborowe, near Sandwich in Kent.
Rhutupiae, and Marched to London, that from thence he might proceed whither
his Business carried him.

The Christians in Britain disturbed by Arianism. Anno Domini 359.
About this time the Arian Heresy crept into Britain, which mightily disturbed
the Peace and Quiet of the Christians there; in Favor of which Constantius
commanded a Council of 400 Bishops of the Western Church to meet at Arminium,
Valentinianus Primus, and Valens, Anno Dom. 364. etc.
where there were Three Bishops only out of Britain; which, by reason of their
Poverty, accepted the Emperors Allowance of Diet, while they staid there, all
others refusing it. Constantius died of a Fever, in October, Three British
Bishops at the Council of Arminum. Sulp. Sever. Hist. Sacr. Amstel. 1656. lib.
2.109. Amm. Marcel. lib. 21. cap. 15. lib. 22. c. 2. Amm. Marcel. lib. 26. c.
1. An. Dom. 364. Valentinian and Valens.
Anno Dom. 362, and left, by Will, Julian his Successor.

Jovianus Succeeded Constantius and Julian, whose Reign was Britain in his time.

After him Valentinian, by the Unanimous Consent both of Military and Civil
Power, was chosen Emperor; who declared his Brother Valens Augustus, and made
him Emperor of the East: He himself Ruling in the West; where, while he was
passing from the Amiens, or the People about Amiens in France, seated upon the
River Some. Picts, Whence. Camb. Britt. fol. 82. Scots. Whence. Brit. fol. 86.

Ambiani, to the Triers, or as the French call it Treves, seated upon the
Mosell, and is the Seat of an Archbishop, and one of the Electors of the Empire.
Treviri, he received a sad and astonishing Message, That the They were called
Picts, quasi Pict^, from the Provincial Latin, which was then much used on the
South Side of the Wall in Roman Province, and were no other then the Britains,
who still Painted their Bodies as before the Provincial Britains had done (from
whence they also had their British Name) and who inhabiting on the North side
of the Wall, made War upon the Romans.
Picts, They were called Scots, Scytes, or Seui^, as Cambden conjectures,
having had, as other Nations, their Original from Scythiae; Histor. Eccles.
lib. 1. c. 1.22. and lib. 2. cap. 4. Topogra. Hiber. c. 16.7 ^. Camb. Brit.
fol. 90. Attacots. Lib. 2. Contra Jovianum.
they came first out of Ireland into Scotland, as Bede Reports, and out of the
Province of Vlster, as Giraldus Cambrensis says, and settled themselves amongst
the Britains and Picts, in the West part of Scotland, which did not presently
obtain this name; but in process of time, when more of these Scots (now
properly the Highlanders) came to them, until they out-numbred, and almost
destroyed the Picts; and the Kingdom of Northumberland also being wasted by the
Danes, fell into their hands. The North parts of Britain received its Names
from the Scots.
Scots, and It Is Isle; happily they might be wild and Mountanous Britains;
whatever they were, they exceeded in Barbarity; for St. Hierome says, That when
he was a young Man, being in France, he see them eat Man's flesh.
Attacots, from the North, together with the Francs and Saxons, who were the
most Gallia, had harassed, Britain; Nectaridius, the Count or Comes of the
Seacoast, Buchobaudes, Duke of Britain, and General of his Land Ibid. lib. 27.
c. 7. Picts, Scots, etc. Invade the Province. Nectaridius Slain. Buchobaudes
Surprised.
first sent Severus, then Jovinus, to suppress the Fury, Violence and
Incursions of these People.

Britain requiring a greater Assistance, at last he sent Theodosius, a Man of
known Valor and Experience, who was made Duke of Britain, and with an Army of
stout Young Men, selected out of the Legions and Cohorts; Lands at Rutupiae;
from whence, with the The Inhabitants of part of Holland and Gelderland,
chiefly between the Rivers Wale and Rhene, they were Originally Germans, and
excellent Horsemen.
Batavians, People habiting about the Lake Mootis, Ferrar. Lex.
removing from thence into Pa^onia, which contained Hungary, part of Bosnia,
Sclav^nia, Istria, Carn^ola, etc. and thence into Lombardy in Italy, or out of
Scardinavia, which contained, Norway, Swedeland, Poland, and part of Denmark,
etc. as Dymonius.
Herulians, and other Forces that London, afterward called Augusta, Theodosius
Propr^tor. Ibid. lib. 27. c. 7. London called Augusta. The Scots and Barbarous
Nations overcome.
Pillaging Enemy, laden with Spoil; from whom, recovering the London
Triumphantly; having scattered their whole Force; Valentinianus Primus, and
Valens. 364, etc
and Proclaiming Impunity to such as deserted the Roman Service and Government,
they most returned to obedience. Yet the Enemy being numerous, of many Nations,
and in diverse Parties, Anno Domini 365.
he sent for, to his assistance, Civilis, to be Vicar, an able and upright Man,
and Dulcitius, a Famous Captain, to be Duke.

Theodosius having thus overcome and vanquished these many sorts of People, and
being employed in repairing the ruined Castles and Cities, and in laying the
foundation of a firm Peace, one Valentinus Panonian, Zosim. lib. 4.742. Am.
Marcell. lib. 28. c. 7.
a Man of a haughty spirit, who was, for some great Fault, Banished into
Britain, with other Exiles and Soldiers, Conspired against him, as the only bar
to his Design of obtaining the Government of the Isle; who being discovered,
with some few others, that were most strictly joined with him in the forming
this Conspiracy, were delivered to the Duke Dulcitius to be put to Death:
others he permitted to be quiet, not making too severe an Inquisition into this
Confederacy, where many were engaged, left by this

Am. Marcell. lib. 28. c. 7.
After this he Corrects many things out of order, repairs Cities, places
Garrisons, and strengthens the Castles and Limits of the Province, with
sufficient Watches, and Praetentures, or Forefences. And thus having recovered
that part of the Province, which was under the Power of the Enemy, he reduced
it to its former State and Government; and from that time, according to the
pleasure of Valentinian, it was called The Division of Britain by the Romans.
Britannia Prima. Britannia Secunda. Britannia Flavia C^sariensis. Britannia
Maxima Caesariensis. Camb. Brit. 111. Valentia. Upper Britain, etc. Lower
Britain, etc. Vetturiones. Maeatae. Caledonii.
It was Customary with the Romans, when they Conquered any Kingdom, to give it
new Names, and divide it into several Portions, or Provinces, according to the
Will of the Conqueror. All the South Country, between the Rivers, Thames and
Severn, was called Britannia Prima, because it was first Invaded and Conquered
by the Romans. Wales was called Britannia Secunda, because next subdued; All
that Tract of land between the Rivers, Thames, Severn and Humber, was called
Britannia Flavia Caesariensis, from Flavius Theodosius Augustus, the Son of
Theodosius; and before it had this Name from him, was part of Maxima
Casariensis, which, after his time, only contained all the Country between
Humber and Tine, or Hadrians Wall; and was called so, because it was the
greatest part of the Conquered Country, before Britannia Flavia was taken out
of it: And Lastly, all that Country between Hadrians, or Severus his Wall, and
Grahams Dike, or Antonines Wall, Edinburgh and Dunbritton Frith^, was called
Valentia: Britain was also, by Dio, divided in Citeriorem vel superiorem, which
contained these parts here described; and Inferiorem, Barbaram vel ulteriorem,
which contained the Vetturiones, whose Country the Picts, or Maeatae possessed,
and the Caledonli, whose Country the Scots, the Conquerors of the Picts, etc.
first Invaded and seized.
Valentia, the Certain Speculators, or Scouts, who were always coursing up and
down in the limits of the Province, to observe and discover the Motions and
Approaches of the Enemy.
Areani, were found guilty Roman Affairs to the Barbarous People.

Ibid. lib. 28. c. 7. Theodosius recalled.
Theodosius, after these Achievements, being recalled, was accompanied to the
Seaside, with the general Favor and Applause of all Men, and passing the Sea
with a gentle Gale, came unto Valentinian; by whom being received with much joy
and affection, he was made Here to describe this Office.
Valens Jovinus, sometime afterward Froamarius, whom Valentinian had made King
of the They were Inhabitants of the Town and Country of Weisbaden, on the
North-side of the Rhene, right against Ments, an Appendant of the County of
Nassaw, or the Country thereabouts.
Bucino-bantes, Ibid. lib. 29. c. 9. Anno Domini 374.
upon fresh Excursions and Devastations made upon the new acquired Country, was
sent hither, with power of Tribute over the Alemans, which were then much
valued for their Number and Courage.

Gratian, the Eldest Son of Valentinian by Severa, Gratianus, Valentinianus
Junior, Theodosius. Anno Dom. 374.
growing toward a Man, his Father made him his Colleague in the Empire, and he
succeeded him after his Death; with whom, Valentinian the younger, his
half-Brother, by his Stepmother Justina, but then four years old, was elected
his Partner in the Empire, by advice of the Council, and General consent of the
Army. Ibid. lib. 27. c. 5. Anno Domini 37. Ibid. lib. 30. c. 12. Zosim. lib.
4.751. Anno Dom. 379. Theodosius chosen Emperor by Gratian, and Ruled in the
East. Zosim. lib. 4.760.


But Gratian finding his Affairs perplexed, the Goths and other Empire on one
side, and the Nations upon the Rhene Infesting it on the other, not thinking
himself sufficient for the Administration of it, after the Death of his Uncle
Valens, chose Theodosius, Son to that Theodosius that had so bravely behaved
himself in Britain, to be his Consort, and sharer with him in the Empire, who
Ruled in the East.

Things being in this state and condition; Gratian being an easy Prince,
listening to Flatterers, and such as are wont to corrupt and Princes; received
into his favor, and into the Army, certain Renegado People of Europaean,
Sarmatia, and thought, by some, Alans, Who!
to have Inhabited that Country, which is now called Lithuania; but more
rightly they were Seated near the Alanian Mountains, not far from the head of
Tanais.
Alans, unto whom he gave great Rewards, and trusted them with the Management
of Britain, and excited by Maximus, a Spaniard by Birth, Maximus Excites the
Soldiers to Sedition.
and fellow Soldier with Theodosius there; who, taking it ill that Theodosius
should be thought Empire, and himself not thought fit to have any honorable
Employment in the Government, more and more irritated the Soldiers against
Gratian; and they being ripe for Sedition, were easily prevailed upon to Salute
Maximus Emperor; Anno Dom. 381. He is Saluted Emperor. Zosim. Ibid.
and having delivered him the Imperial Diadem and Purple, they forthwith passed
the Sea with him to the Mouth of the River Rhene; the Armies in Germany; and
the Neighbor Nations, with much satisfaction approving the Design.

Gratian prepares to suppress this Rebellion, and Fight Maximus, but being
deserted by the Army he had gathered together, seeing his Affairs desperate, he
fled with 300 Horse toward the Mountains that separate Germany and France from
Italy.
Alps, and Singidunum rather, a City of Upper Moesia, seated upon the Danube,
Six Leu^s Eastward from Taurinum, or Belgrade, now called Zendorin, of the
Greeks, Simedro; and in Modern Latin, Semandria.
Rhaetia, Noricum, Pannonia, toward Then the Second City of Italy, and Chief of
the Carni, now Aquilegia, seated on the North-East part of the Top of the Gulf
of Venice, and in that Dukedom.
Upper Moesia, whether being pursued by Andragathius, Master of Maximus They
were Northern People, Vandals, Whence. Sheringh^m de Orig. Angl. 210. Ibidem.
who came out of Scythia, from about the Lake Maeotis, and River Tanais. etc.
and were of Gothic original, they were called Vandals, from the word Wandelen,
signifying to Wander, or rove up and down, because they often changed their
places of abroad: at last they fixed upon, and near the Coasts of the Baltic
Sea, toward Germany, which from them, with many other North-East Countries
adjoining, was called Vandalia, a^ Meckleburgh, Pomerania, Polonia, Silesia,
etc.
Sigisdunum, Gratian slain
he was overtaken and slain.

Theodosius, at the Instance of Justina, Mother to Valentinian, Anno Dom. 3^3.
prepares to encounter Maximus, whose Army being defeated in Pannonia, he fled
to Aquileia, Theodosius Major, Valentinianus Secundus, Honorius, Arcadius. Anno
Dom. 383, etc.
where he was taken, delivered to Theodosius, and presently put to Death; and
to young Valentinian was restored whatsoever his Father, or his Brother Gratian
had possessed.

The Scots and Picts taking advantage, when the Army, and the Flower of the
British Youth was transported by Maximus (most of which were either slain, An.
Dom. 388. Zosim. lib. 4.769, 770. Young Valentinian restored. Gildas, c. 11.
The Scots and Picts invade Britain. They Waste it. Socrat. Hist. lib. 7. c. 12.
or seated themselves in Amorica, now Britanie in France) miserably spoiled and
wasted the Province; for the opposing and reducing of whom, Chrysanthus, the
Son of Marcian, Constantinople, was made Vicar in the British Isle, who behaved
himself worthily, and with great praise; but whether he totally subdued these
Northern Enemies, or whether Stilicho, who was, by Theodosius, appointed Tutor
and Governor to Honorius after his Death, or some other sent by him, as
Claudian seems to affirm, Empire Legion for this purpose sent into Britain, was
recalled, Chrysanthus sent to repress them, and Stilicho. Claud. Paneg. 2. de
laud. Stilich. Anno Dom. 395. The Legion sent with them recalled. The Vandals
etc. Invade Gallia, and Germany. Zosim. lib. 6.824, 825. They Affright the
British Forces. Anno Domini 409. They Mutiny, and set up Marcus, Gratianus and
Constantin successively. He transports the British Army into Gallia. So^omen.
lib. ^. c. 15. Constantin taken, Anno Dom. 413. and put to Death. A^^icola
intr^ceth Pelag^anisme into Britain. An. Dom. 429. Bid, lib. 1. c. 17.
and the Sueves, Whence
People of the same Origin with the Vandals, so named from the Word Schweben, of
the same signification with Wandelen, and might be the same People under diverse
Names; for they are also affirmed by very good Authors, to have Inhabited
Meckleburgh, Pomerania, etc. they likewise possessed that part of Germany
beyond the Danube, which is now called Suevia, and Sachwaben.
Vandals, * Sueves, and Alans, having passed the Alps, harassed and destroyed
the Nations on this side of them, with so great a slaughter, as they became
very formidable to the Forces in Britain, who, fearing to be Invaded, in a
Sedition they place Marcus (then Deputy, as may be thought) in the Throne, and
Subject themselves to him; who, not pleasing their humor, they presently Kill:
bringing forth Gratianus Municeps, and putting upon him the Crown and Purple,
placing also about him the Guards of a Prince; yet after Four Months him also
they Dethrone, and Constantin, a common Soldier, thinking his Name Ominous, and
sufficient only to preserve the Empire: he, with the Army, and whole British
Power passed into Gallia; where, by the assistance of Edobec, a Franc, and
Gerontius a Britan, and by good words and flattery, he reconciled to him the
whole Force there, and obtained all that Country as far as the Alps.

But having disobliged Gerontius, he took as much pains to throw Empire against
him; who, being Besieged in Arles, finding his condition hopeless, turned
Priest to save his Life; where being taken, he was sent into Italy, and in his
way thither put to Death; having played the Emperor about Four years.

At this time, when both the Nation and People were in such great Distraction
and Confusion, Agricola, Disciple to Pelagius a Monk, Bangor in Flintshire,
propagated his Heresy here, to the Disturbance of the weak Christians, who not
able to withstand his Errors, called in to their Assistance, some years after,
Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in France, who by their
Preaching in open Fields, and Highways, and Disputations in a great Concourse
of People (both Spectators and Judges) this Heresy was well nigh extinguished.

The Empire now declining, Honorius, Theodosius Junior, Valentinianus Tertius.
Anno Dom. 414, 420, etc.
and most of the Soldiers being Transported out of Britain into other parts of
it, by the Tyrants Maximus and Constantin, when they set up for Emperors: The
Britains, after the example of the People of Gallia Celtica, which lay between,
and was bounded with the two Rivers, Celts, Who.
Seyn, upon which Paris is Seated, and Scheid, which slides by Antwerp in
Brabant; or as Magnus and some others, that part of Gallia which was called
Lugdunensis, between the Rivers Loyre and Sein, and contained Britain,
Normandy, Anjou, Main, the Isle of France, Champaigne, both the Burgundies,
Lionnoys, etc. as they are now termed.
Celts and other Nations, by little and little made a Defection from the
Romans, laying aside their Laws, and living according to their own Institution;
who taking Arms, left no way Anno Domini The British Forces twice Transported.
Zosim. lib. 6.827. The Britains Revolt. Permitted by Honorius. Zosim. lib.
6.830.
Honorius, who seems to discharge them of their Obedience, when he Wrote
Letters to them, That they should provide for, and Manage their own Affairs.

This Revolt of the Britains was pusht forward by the Irruption of the Vandals
into Spain, the Alans into Portugal, the Goths into Italy, and the taking of
Rome by Alaric.

Anno Domini 414. The Britains Petition Honorius for assistance. Anno Domini
420. Paul. Diac. Miscel. lib. 14. c. 4.
being infested and horribly oppressed by the Picts and Scots, they send to
Rome, and with Tears Petition Honorius for Assistance against their Enemies,
Promising a firm Subjection, if but once more they might be Repelled. To whose
aid (forgetting all former Injuries) he sent a Legion, under the Command of
Victorinus, which with a mighty slaughter drove the Britains Enemies out of
their Country; but being Remanded, at their departure they ordered them to
Build a Wall * That is between the Friths of Edinburgh and Dunbritan, as Bede
interprets them, whereof the East, Bid. lib. 2. c. 12. Camb. Brit. 690. See
before in Constantin.
or Edinburgh, has in the middle of it the City Guidi, now the Island Keith;
and the West Frith has seated upon it the City Alcluith, now Dunbrittan.
between the Seas Director, Gildas 25. N. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
proved of little use to them.

For the Legion was no sooner passed the Sea with Triumph, The Picts and Scots
pass the Friths in Boats at both ends of the Wall. Bid, lib. 1. c. 12.
but their wonted Foes passed over the Friths at both ends of the Wall in
Boats, made Irruptions into the Province, broke down the Boundaries, committed
great Slaughters, wasting and destroying all before them: When they again, with
a lamentable Narrative of Aid from It Is probable that Constantius Institution
of Praefects might yet be retained in the Empire; That Aetius was Praetorian
Prefect of Gallia, and that at this time Britain was Governed by a Vicar under
him, for which reason they might apply themselves to him for assistance.
Aetius, Prefect or President of Gall^a; who, And miserably destroy the
Britains. Anno Domini 421.
moved with their sad and deplorable Legion (as it is affirmed) under the
Command of Gallio of Ravenna, which coming unexpectedly in Autumn, with great
destruction and ruin chased the Picts and Scots over Edinburgh and Dunbritan
Friths.
the Seas or Friths.

Then the Romans told the Britains, Dousa Annal. Holland. lib. 1.56. Gildas, as
before.
They could not undertake any and Liberties, from the Injuries of their
Barbarous Enemies; and helping them to Build a Wall of Stone, where Severus had
made his, Honorius Theodosius Junior. Valentinianus sertius. Anno Domini, 414,
420, etc.
Twelve Foot high, and Eight Thick, Fortifying it with Towers and Castles
toward the Sea, to keep Boats from passing, and teaching them the use of Arms,
they bid them Farewell, never intending to return again.

The Romans departure out of Britain. Bid, lib. 1. c. 12.54.
The Legion being Transported into Gallia, the Scots and Picts return again, and
seize upon all the North part of the Isle as far as the Wall, and then Assault
the Wall it self, pulling the Cowardly with Hooks from the top of it; who then
leaving it, with the Cities and Fortresses adjoining, flee, the Enemy pursuing
them, with a more Cruel and Bloody Slaughter then the former.

The poor Remains of the Britains send once more their most Miserable and
Tragic Complaint to Aetius, An. Dom. 446.
in these Words; To Aetius Thrice Consul: The Groans of the Britains; The
Barbarians drive us The Britains in vain implore Aid from the Romans.
we are either Drowned, or perish by the Sword. But they Solicit in vain; the
Empire then distressed, by the Huns, Goths and Vandals, was not in Condition to
assist them. And the Britains Romans, and by reason of the What number of
Forces. Camb. Brit. o. Carried out of Britain.
Besides the two Armies of Romans and Britains carried from hence, by Maximus
and Constantin, when they set up for Emperors, there were several Wings and
Cohorts of Britains in the Service of the Empire in Egypt, in Armenia, in
Illyricum, in Spain, in Gallia, and amongst the Guards of the Palace.
great numbers of their stoutest and best Men that had been drawn out of the
Isle for the Service of the Empire, not being able to withstand the Picts and
Scots, called into their Aid the Saxons, etc. as shall be delivered Discourse
of them.

The ROMAN Military Estalbishment in BRITAIN.
THis Military Establishment is taken out of the Notitia, Alciat. Tom.
2.482.483.485.486, etc. Pererg. lib. 5^. c. 13. Tacit. lib. 1. ann. fol. 12.
or Summary of Theodosius Junior (so called by Alciat) in the Declining State
of the Empire: such a Breviary was first invented and composed by Augustus,
which contained the Public Revenues and Treasure; how many Magistrates and
Officers there were; what number their Army was; and of Romans had; also the
Tribute and Taxes of the Provinces; the Public Burdens, and Payments; all
which he Wrote with his own hand: This Suetonius calls a Rationary, In Augusto.
c. 28. Ibid. c. ult. toward the end.
and says he made it when he thought of delivering up and quitting his
Government; and in another place calls it a Breviary: but much changed and
altered by succeeding Emperors, according to the difference of times and
things: The Names of Magistrates and Officers were much altered, Theodosius the
Younger, Not. Imp. occid. c. 73.162.
and about the Year 410.

In this Establishment there was a Comes Britanniae, Comes Britanniae, what he
was.
a Count of Britain, under the Generals, or Masters of Horse and Foot So
called, because they always accompanied, and were present with the Emperor:
Not. Imp. or c. 30. Master of the Horse and Foot Praesential. Why so called.
lib. 2.64.688.
there was one of the Foot, and another of the Horse in the West, and the like
in the East: These had all Authority given them over the Soldiers, and were
erected (as Zosimus reports) by Constantin, to diminish the power of the
Pratorian Praefects, who, after this time, only heard and determined the Civil
and Criminal Causes of the Provincials.
Praesential in the West; the whole, whatsoever the Romans had in this Isle,
Ensigns denote; which were, his Book of Instructions, his Letters Patents or
Commission, and under them a Castle Fortified, encompassed with the Sea in the
Form of the Island, and superscribed Britannia. His Ensigns.
Those that served immediately under him, were, 3000 Foot, and 600 Horse: Ibid.
His Office or Court was thus;

A Principal, or Master of the Office, His Court or Office.
out of the Office of the Generals, Commentariensis, or Jailer, out of those
Offices alternately also; two Numerarii, or Accountants, out of each Office
one; an Adjutor, Subadjuva, Exceptores, Singulares, and other Officers
explained before at the beginning of this History, in the Office of the Vicar
of Britain: The Cornicularius, and Regerendarius, Ibid.
which other Counts had, are wanting here; which Pancirol imputes to the
negligence of the Transcriber of the Breviary.

Ibid. c. 72. Count of the Saxon- Shore.
There was also Comes littoris, or limitis Dominion of the Sea, c. 5, 6, 7.
which see. Two Navies appointed by Augustus to secure the Seas. Eutrop. lib.
9.94, 95. Carausius employed by Dioclesian to secure the Belgic Coasts, etc.
Not. Imper. occid. c. 86.87. Not. Imper. occid. c. 23. Not. Imp. occid. c. 72.
Not. Imper. or. c. 47.
This Count Mr. Seldom affirms to be an Admiral; and that by the Saxon-shore is
meant Denmark to the Western Gallia, or West part of France, that is, all the
Coast from the River Elve, to the Gobaean Promontory, now Cape S. Mahe, or to
the Isle Heysant. Augustus placed two Navies, one at Montesino, another at
Ravenna, for the security of the Seas under the Roman Power, and there were
others appointed afterward: Carausius was employed under Dioclesian to secure
the Belgic and Armorican Coasts, from the Francs and Saxons that invested them:
at Grannona under the Duke of the Armorican and Nervican Tract, between the
Rivers Sein and Louvre in France, in the Saxon-Shore, there was placed a
Tribune of the First Cohort of New Armonia; and in Belgica Secunda, the Country
between the Mose and Seyn, under the Duke thereof, there were Dalmatian Horse
placed in the Saxon-Shore, near the Borders, and he had a Fortress drawn in his
Ensigns, superscribed, Littus Saxonicum.
Saxonici per Britanniam, a Count of the Dominion of the Sea, c. 5, 6, 7. which
see. Two Navies appointed by Augustus to secure the Seas. Eutrop. lib. 9.94,
95. Carausius employed by Dioclesian to secure the Belgic Coasts, etc. Not.
Imper. occid. c. 86.87. Not. Imper. occid. c. 23. Not. Imp. occid. c. 72. Not.
Imper. or. c. 47.
This Count Mr. Seldom affirms to be an Admiral; and that by the Saxon-shore is
meant Denmark to the Western Gallia, or West part of France, that is, all the
Coast from the River Elve, to the Gobaean Promontory, now Cape S. Mahe, or to
the Isle Heysant. Augustus placed two Navies, one at Montesino, another at
Ravenna, for the security of the Seas under the Roman Power, and there were
others appointed afterward: Carausius was employed under Dioclesian to secure
the Belgic and Armorican Coasts, from the Francs and Saxons that invested them:
at Grannona under the Duke of the Armorican and Nervican Tract, between the
Rivers Sein and Louvre in France, in the Saxon-Shore, there was placed a
Tribune of the First Cohort of New Armonia; and in Belgica Secunda, the Country
between the Mose and Seyn, under the Duke thereof, there were Dalmatian Horse
placed in the Saxon-Shore, near the Borders, and he had a Fortress drawn in his
Ensigns, superscribed, Littus Saxonicum.
Saxon-Shore throughout Britain; his Ensigns were, Maritine Towns placed on
the Form of the Island, and the Soldiers in Garrison were about 2200 Foot, His
Ensigns.
and 200 Horse, expressed as follows;

Under the Disposition or Command of the Remarkable Person, the Count of the
Saxon-Shore through Britain, by Marcellinus, lib. 27. c. 7.
called, Comes Tractus Maritimi, or Count of the Seacoast.

1. Praepositus Numeri So called from Fortia, a Asiatic Sarmatia.
fortensium Othonae.

What Soldiers and Garrisons under his Command.
The Captain, or Provost of the Cohort, or A Cohort was called Numerus; but
sometimes the word Numeri signified any Band or Company of Soldiers.
Band of the So called from Fortia, a Asiatic Sarmatia.
Fortenses at Ithancester, near St Peter's Chapel, and not far from Maldon in
Essex, upon the Coast, in Dengy Hundred.

Cambden in the several Counties.
2. Praepositus Numeri From Tour^ay, now Doornicke, in Gallican Flanders, and
the People thereabouts.
Twenacensium Lemanis.

The Captain of the From Tour^ay, now Doornicke, in Gallican Flanders, and the
People thereabouts.
Turnois at Lime near Hithe in Kent.

Praepositus Militum Tongres, or Tungeren, in Brabant, and the People
thereabouts, the Inhabitants of Liege, Colon, Juliers, Limburgh, Lutzenburgh,
etc. were all called Tungri.
Tungricanorum Dubris.

The Provost or Captain of the Tongres, or Tungeren, in Brabant, and the People
thereabouts, the Inhabitants of Liege, Colon, Juliers, Limburgh, Lutzenburgh,
etc. were all called Tungri.
Tongrians at Dover.

Praepositus Equitum Dalmatarum Branodunensis, Branoduno.

The Brancaster Captain of the Dalmatian Horse at Brancaster, a Town upon the
Coast near Burnham-Market in Norfolk.

5. Praepositus Equitum Stablesianorum Garianensis, Garionono.

The Yarmouth's Captain of the They were from Pelusium an Archiepiscopal City
in Egypt, seated upon the East-Mouth of the River Nilus, but why so called I
know not.
Stablesian-Horse at Yarmouth in Norfolk.

Tribunus Cohortis Primae Vetasiorum, forte The Vetusii, were People of the
Alps, and it is probable this Cohort consisted of them.
Vetusiorum, Regulbio.

The Tribune of the First Cohort of the The Vetusii, were People of the Alps,
and it is probable this Cohort consisted of them.
Vetusians at Reculver, a Town of Kent, upon the Northern Coast, in the Lathe
of St Augustines.

7. The Praefecture of a Legion was at this time the Command of 1000 Foot, part
of that Legion.
Praefectus Legionis Secundae Augustae Rutupis.

The Praefecture of a Legion was at this time the Command of 1000 Foot, part of
that Legion.
The Prefect of the Second August or Imperial Legion at Richborow near
Sandwich in Kent.

8. Praepositus numeri Abulcorum forsan So named from Abula, an Episcopal City
of old Castile in Spain.
Abulorum Anderidae.

So named from Abula, an Episcopal City of old Castile in Spain.
Abulians at Newenden in Kent, in the Lathe of Scraye near Oxney Island.

9. Praepositus Numeri Exploratorum portu Adurni.

The Captain of the Band of Scouts at Aldrington, now a small Village near
Shoreham in Sussex.

His Office and Officers were the very same with those of the Britain, save
only he had a Cornicularius, explained in the Office of the Vicar before this
History, and a Regendarius, Not. or. Imp. c. 18.
a Master of Requests, that presented Petitions, Memorials, and Bills of
Complaint, to the Chief Magistrate, Explained them, and received his Answer; so
called a Regerendo, because he Wrote them into a Book; he was also called
Subscribendarius, from Subscribing these Petitions, Memorials, etc. Corrected
Praesidents had not any Masters of Requests, or Regendaries, because they were
bound to etc. themselves.

One Praefecture 1000. Six Bands 1200. Two Squadrons, Not. occid. Imp. c. 72.
or Troops of Horse 200. In all 2200 Foot, and 200 Horse.

There was likewise in this Establishment, a Duke of Britain, The Duke of
Britain.
Dux Britanniarum, his Ensigns were 14 Towns, placed also as upon Island, with
his Book of Instructions, and Letters Patents, or Commission, as the Counts and
other Dukes; his Garrisons and Officers are thus described.

1. Praefectus Legionis Sextae.

The Prefect of the Sixth Legion; His Garrisons distant from the Wall.
but rather of the Legion at Sextae, that is, York, if it be taken for a place,
as it ought to be, by the Town placed in the Ensigns, and Superscribed Sextae,
for the York.

2. Praefectus Equitum Dalmatarum, Praesidio.

The Prefect of Dalmatian Horse at Warwick.

3. Praefectus So called from Crispiana, a Town in Panonia. Not. Imp. occid. c.
89.

Crispianorum Equitum, Dano.

The Captain of the So called from Crispiana, a Town in Panonia. Not. Imp.
occid. c. 89.

Crispian Horse at Doncaster in Yorkshire.

Praefectus Equitum Cataphractariorum Morbio.

The Captain of the Horse Armed Cap-a-pe, or all over, at Moresby in
Cumberland, near the Coast between Egremond and Wirkington.

5. Praefectus numeri Barcariorum, Tigrisensium, Arbeia;

If they were Spanish People they were from Braga, an Archiepiscopal-City now
in Portugal; but Anciently in Spain; by the Romans called Bracara, and the
Inhabitants of that and the Country belonging to it Bracarii, See Ferrar. Lex
Geogra. last. Edit. 2 Tom. of the Greek Canons Oxon. 1672. The Watchmen in Rome
why first Instituted. Defensores, what they might be.
Pancirol conjectureth, they were Bracarii, a People of Spain; but perhaps he
might have guessed nearer, if he had said they had been Shipwrights, for such
an one Barcarius signifies, and might be a Barbarous word Latinized, and
introduced into the Provincial Latin (as there were many at this time) from
Barca, a Bark, or small Ship; and having been brought hither from the parts of
the River Tigris in Asia, might be called Barcarii Tigrisienses: To make this
conjecture more probable, the Romans always had Artificers of all sorts in
their Armies, ranged in whole Cohorts, and perhaps Legions; and these Jerby is
seated upon the River Eln (which then might be considerable) not far from the
Sea, and that the Saxons sometimes, but the Picts and Scots out of Ireland,
mostly and chiefly made their Invasions upon this Coast, so that they might at
this time be employed here in Building, and managing out small Ships or Vessels
to oppose them; or from Barca, a Country or Province in Afric, and in Barbary
near the Mediterranean, so called from the Chief City thereof: Beveireg. Notes
in Canon. Concilii. Trullan. f. 149.
Barcarians, etc. at Jerby in Cumberland.

6. Praefectus numeri Nerviorum, Dicti.

Dictensian People that inhabited Hanault, the Dominion of Cambray, Gallic
Flanders, etc.
Neervians, at Diganwey in Caernarvonshire, near Aberconwey.

Praefectus numeri These Watchmen were first instituted by Augustus, as a
remedy against Fire, Theives, and other Inconveniences and Mischiefs, in the
great and Populous City of Rome, and had their several Circuits appointed for
this Night-Service; they were afterward Soldiers, and distributed Cohorts,
from whence the name was derived unto other Soldiers abroad in the Provinces,
whose Duty might be somewhat alike.
vigilum Concangies, or as Alciat, Concagios.

The Captain of the Watchmen in the Baronie of Kendal. I rather think,
according to the Import of their Name and Office, that Concangies was somewhere
nearer the Wall, and perhaps on the North-side of it, some place not yet made
out.

8. Praefectus numeri Exploratorum Lavatris.

The Captain of the Scouts at Bows in Stanemore in Richmondshire, in the
North Riding of Yorkshire, not far from Barnards-Castle in the Bishopric of
Durham.

9. Praefectus numeri directorum, alias Duroctorum, aut Durocortorum veterum,
aliter verteis, vel Verterae, as it is noted over the Town in the Dukes Ensigns.

Part of a Legion, so called in M^sia, from Durocortum, Rhemes in Champainge,
so named by Caesar.
Durocts, or Durocorts, at Burgh-Castle Stanemore in Westmoreland.

10. Praefectus numeri Defensorum Braboniaco.

What these were I know not, unless perhaps they might be such as were
constantly in Garrison, and never Marched out upon other Service; or happily
they might be part of a Legion, or other Body of Soldiers, called Defensorum
Legio, etc. (which I no where find) so named at first for defending the Borders
of the Empire, which though removed from that particular service, yet they
might retein the name afterward.
Defenders at Brougham in Westmoreland.

11. Praefectus numeri Solensium, Maglovae.

The Captain of the So called from Soloe, a City of Cilicia.
Solenses at Maclenith in Montgomery-Shire, Montanose People.

12. Praefectus numeri pacensium. Magis.

The Captain of the They had their Name from Pax, or Pace Julia in Portugal,
near Badajox.
Pacenses, at Old Radnor in Radnorshire, or Magiovinium, Dunstable in
Bedfordshire.

13. Praefectus numeri Longovicariorum, Longovico.

The Captain of the Lancastrian Band; at Lancaster.

14. Praefectus numeri Derventiensis, Derventione.

The Captain of the Derventienses, so called from the place where they lay, at
Aldby upon the River Derwent, about Seven Miles from York.

These 14 Garrisons under the Duke of Britain, The number of his Forces in
these Garrisons.
contained one Legion, then about 4000 Ten Bands or Companies, and Three Troops
or Wings of Horse; in all about 6000 Foot, and 300 Hose.

From one end of the Wall to the other, and on both sides of it, were also
placed, under this Duke, 23 Tribunes and Praefects (whereof there were Five
Wings, and one Troop of Horse)

1. Tribunus Cohortis quartae Lergorum, Segeduno. Roman Garrisons upon the Wall.


The Tribune of the Fourth Cohort of the Lergi (what they were is not known) at
Segehill in Northumberland.

2. Tribunus Cohortis, They Inhabited Warwick, Worcester, Stafford, Shrop, and
Cheshires*
Cornaviorum, So denominated from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor, that built it.
Ponte-Aelii.

They Inhabited Warwick, Worcester, Stafford, Shrop, and Cheshires*
Cornavii, at So denominated from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor, that built it.
Pont-Eland in Northumberland.

3. Praefectus, Wings, Wings of Soldiers, what they were, and why so called.
Lib. 2. c. 8. Suet. in Augusto, c. 38.
were Squadrons or Troops of Legions, or other Bodies of Foot, as the Wings of
Birds and Fowls upon their Body's, they consisted of 56, or at most 66 Horse,
as Vegetius says; their Captains were called Praefects, and were the Sons of
Senators: but this agrees not with Pancirols Account, who makes these Wings at
least 100 Horse, but more of the number afterward.
Alae primae Asturum, Conderco.

The Prefect of the first Wings, Wings of Soldiers, what they were, and why so
called. Lib. 2. c. 8. Suet. in Augusto, c. 38.
were Squadrons or Troops of Legions, or other Bodies of Foot, as the Wings of
Birds and Fowls upon their Body's, they consisted of 56, or at most 66 Horse,
as Vegetius says; their Captains were called Praefects, and were the Sons of
Senators: but this agrees not with Pancirols Account, who makes these Wings at
least 100 Horse, but more of the number afterward.
Wing of Asturians, or Esturians, People in Spain, their Country Asturia,
Situate between Gallaecia, Portugal and Leon.
Esturians in Spain, at Chester on the Street, in the Bishopric of Durham,
between that Town and Newcastle.

4. Tribunus Cohortis primae, Frixagorum forsan From the Town Fraxinum; there
were two of that Name in Spain, according to the Itinerary put out by Surita,
and 3 or 4 of them according to Ferrarius, and now, in the vulgar Spanish, all
called Fresno.
Fraxinorum.

Cohort of Frixagians (what they were is not known) but perhaps rather of From
the Town Fraxinum; there were two of that Name in Spain, according to the
Itinerary put out by Surita, and 3 or 4 of them according to Ferrarius, and
now, in the vulgar Spanish, all called Fresno.
Fraxinians at Walls-end in Northumberland.

Praefectus Alae So named from Sabina, Hadrians Empress, as Cambden, or the
Sabini, a People of Italy, or from Savia Panonia, where they might be raised,
now Windischland, between Carniola, and Croatia, upon the River Savus.
Savinianae Hunnum, in the Roman Map of Britain, seems to be Rowcliffe, near
Carlisle in Cumberland, and Aesica, not far from it.
, Humo.

So named from Sabina, Hadrians Empress, as Cambden, or the Sabini, a People of
Italy, or from Savia Panonia, where they might be raised, now Windischland,
between Carniola, and Croatia, upon the River Savus.
Savinian Wing at There seems to be some resemblance, between Saviniana Ala*
and Sevenshale.
Sevenshale in Northumberland.

6. Praefectus Alae secundae Asturum, Cilurno.

The Prefect of the Second Wing of Esturians at Collerton, or Collerford in
Northumberland.

7. Tribunus Cohortis primae Batavorum, Procolitia.

The Tribune of the first Batavian Cohort at Prodhowe Castle in Northumberland.

8. Tribunus Cohortis primae Tungrorum Borcovico.

The Tribune of the first Cohort of Tungrians at Berwick.

9. Tribunus Cohortis quartae Gallorum, Vindolana.

The Tribune of the fourth Cohort of the Gauls or French, at Winchester in the
Wall, or Old Winchester in Northumberland.

10. Tribunus Cohortis primae Asturum, Aesica.

The Tribune of the first Cohort of the Esturians at Netherby upon Eske in
Cumberland.

11. Tribunus Cohortis secundae Dalmatarum, Magnis.

The Tribune of the second Cohort of Dalmatians at Chester in the Wall in
Northumberland, near Haltwessel.

12. Tribunus Cohortis primae So denominated from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor.
Aelii People of Dacia, which contained those Countries that are now called
Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia.
Dacorum, Amboglanna.

So denominated from Aelius Hadrianus the Emperor.
Aelian Cohort of People of Dacia, which contained those Countries that are now
called Transylvania, Moldavia, and Wallachia.
Dacians, at Ambleside Westmoreland, upon Winander Mere.

13. Praefectus Alae petrianae, Petrianis.

The Prefect of the Petrian Wing at some place near Peteril in Cumberland.

Praefectus numeri Manrorum So called from Aurelianus the Emperor.
Aurelianorum, Aballaba.

The Prefect of the Band or Company of So called from Aurelianus the Emperor.
Aurelian Moors, at Appleby in Westmoreland.

15. Tribunus Cohortis secundae Lergorum, Congavata.

The Tribune of the Second Cohort of the Lergians, at a place near Candbeck in
Cumberland.

16. Tribunus Cohortis primae Hispanorum, Axeloduno.

The Tribune of the first Cohort of the Spaniards at Hexham in the Bishopric
of Durham.

17. Tribunus Cohortis secundae Thracum, Gabrosenti.

The Tribune of the second Cohort of the Thracians at Gatesend, near Newcastle.

18. Tribunus Cohortis primae Aeliae Classicae, Tunocello.

The Tribune of the first Aelian Sea Cohort at Tinmouth in Northumberland.

19. Tribunus primae Cohortis Morini, or Morines, People of Belgium, or Gallia
Belgica, their Chief Town was Tarvanna, or Terovanna, now Teroenne, in the
Confines of Picardy and Ar^ois.
Morinorum, Glannibanta.

Cohort of the Morini, at a place on the River Wentsbecke in Northumberland.

20. Tribunus Cohortis tertiae Nerviorum, Alio^e.

The Tribune of the third Cohort of the Nervii at Lancaster, or Whitby Castle
in Cumberland.

21. Part of the Roman Army, so called, when it was drawn up in form of a
Wedge; but here (as it often does) it may signify a single Troop or Band.
Cuneus Armatuna in general was any Exercise of Arms, and was either the Foot,
or Horse Exercise; young Lads about 14 or 15 years of age were taught to handle
their Arms, and some gestures of their Body. But the true Armatura, the Art and
Science of the Exercise of Arms, was taught every day in Campi-Doctores, such
as instructed young Soldiers in the knowledge of the Exercise of Arms; At first
all Soldiers were instituted in the Art of Armature, but afterward only the
Chief and Noblest Persons, such as served in the front of the Legions; and the
Armaturae were called, and by it understood such Bands or Troops of Soldiers as
were under the Campi-Doctors, and learnt the Art of Armature; Of which Exercise
there was also one peculiar kind, called Pyrricha, scientia saltandi in armis,
an Art of Dancing in Arms. See Veget. lib. 2. Leo's Tactic. C. 7. Ammianus
Marcellinus, Paris Edi^. 1681. fol. 52, 53, 58, 71, 72, 116. for the manner of
Arming and teaching this Exercise. These mentioned here were Foot, as appears
from the word Cuneus.
Armaturarum, Brementuraco.

The Band of Young Men that were taught the Art and Science of Brampton in
Cumberland.

Praefectus Alae primae The first Wing of the Legion so named, from Herculius
Maximianus the Emperor.
Herculeae, Olenaco.

The Prefect of the first The first Wing of the Legion so named, from
Herculius Maximianus the Emperor.
Herculean Wing at Helenborow in Cumberland.

23. Tribunus Cohortis Sextae Nerviorum, virosido.

The Tribune of the sixth Cohort of Nervians at Werewicke upon the River Eden
near Carlisle in Cumberland.

His Office, or Court, and Officers, The Duke of Britain his Court.
were the same in all things with those of the two Counts; his Government seems
to have been Counts in the Southern.

By Panicrolls Account, Not. Imp. occid. c. 72, 73, 89. The whole Force of the
Romans in Britain. De Magn. Roma^a lib. 1. c. 4. fol. 19. Rosin. Antiq. Romans
lib. 10. c. 4. Legions, Wings, and Cohorts diverse, according to the Diversity
of times. Veg^t. lib. 2. c. 6. Not. or. c. 100. f. 87. Commentar' de alis.
Cuneus* What it signifies in a Military sense. Zos. lib. 3.729. Armatura, What
it was.
this Duke had under his Command 14000 Foot, and 900 Horse; the Count of
Britain 3000 Foot, and 600 Horse; the Count of the Saxon-Shore 2200 Foot, and
200 Horse; which added together, make 19200 Foot, and 1700 Horse, the whole
Roman Force in this Island: but how this Account agrees with the Ancient
Establishment of Legions, Cohorts, Wings, etc. in the ancint Empire, Vegetius,
lib. 2. c. 6. de re militari, or of Modestus, fol 2. de vocab. rei militaris,
and others, I shall not inquire; nor as Lipsius said of the difference between
Dio and Tacitus, about the number of Vrbane Cohorts, endeavor to reconcile
them: for the Numbers in Legions, and consequently those of Wings and Cohorts,
were diverse, according to the Diversity of times, a Legion sometime consisted
of 3, 4, 5, or 6000 Foot, and 2 or 300, or more Horse. The first Cohort, when
Vegetius Wrote in the time of Valentinian, consisted the other Cohorts were 555
Foot, and 66 Horse, a full Legion, which contained 10 Cohorts, being then 6105
Foot, and 726 Horse. Lipsius speaks of Legions and Cohorts, De M^g. Romon. lib.
1. c. 4, 5.
which were various in number: and as the Legions, Cohorts, Bands, Wings, etc.
at different times, were various in Number, Military Officers, different,
according to different times.
so also it is most probable, that the Commanders of them had various Names,
although they had the same Command, such as are here expressed, Tribune,
Prefect, Provost, etc. More to this purpose may be read in Leo's Tactics, c.
4, etc.

The Romans placed their Garrisons toward the Frontiers.
It was usual, and always done by the Romans, to place their Garrisons, and make
their Soldiers Quarters toward the Limits and outmost bounds of their
Provinces, and fix their Colonies in the more inward parts of their Conquests,
as well to cultivate the People, as to overawe and keep them in Subjection,
for they were all places of Force and Strength, though less exercised in War
then those in the Frontiers and Borders; so we see it was here in England,
there were Guards and Garrisons on the limits next Scotland chiefly, and on the
Seacoasts; Castra Stativa, Hiberna, aestiva. Gogmagog-Hills, etc.
not but they had also here their Castra Stativa, hiberna, and aestiva, their
constant and fixed Camps in the Fields; their Winter and Summer Camps. Such
were the Fortress upon Gogmagog Hills near Cambridge, being 1000 Paces about on
the outside, encompassed with a Double Ditch, and two high Banks. That before
and on the North-side the Crown-Inn in Chesterford in Essex, where, on the
Bottom, going up the Hill, from Cambridge, or Born-Bridge, toward the Inn which
stands upon London-Road, is yet to be seen the Foundation of a Foot-Bridge over
the Trench toward Icleton, (or Old Icelodunum) made of Roman-Brick and Mortar;
and as I received it from that Learned and Worthy Person Sir Thomas Darrel of
Castle-Camps, and sometimes of Hinckston, near the place, he had seen some of
Antoninus Pius his Roman Coin, which was found, and Plowed up within the
Trench. One there is upon Hill opposite to Audley-Inn-House, on the West Side
of it; another at Little-Bury near adjoining, from whence the Name of the
Village, it lies behind the Church near to the Rivulet; another in Wiltshire
opposite to the Town or Village Wiley, called Yanesbury; another in Dorsetshire
near M^nckton, and not many Miles from Dorchester, and in other parts of the
Nation; by these they kept in subjection the Natives and M^diterranean People,
The Saxons made use of the Roman Castra, or Fortresses.
though they did not fill their Colonies with Soldiers; Several of these Castra
were used Saxons for the same purpose, when the Romans left the Nation, and
some of them were by them called Chesters, or Castres, and have those Names at
this day.

Veget. de re Militari, lib. 3. c. 6. The Roman Ways. Eccles. Hist. lib. 1. c.
11.
The Romans, for the greater Convenience of Passage from Garrison to Garrison,
Stations were their Winter-Camps, Fortresses, and perhaps Garrisons; hence the
Passages
Station to Station, Colonia and Municipium were often changed one into
another, Roman Stations. What. Municipium, What.
and these words used promiscuously sometimes for the same places.
Colony to Colony, and from one A City or Town having the same Privileges that
Rome had, or rather according to Modern acceptance, a City or Town, having its
own proper and special Officers, Laws, and Privileges.
Municipium or Corporation to another, had their Public Ways, called the
Consulary, Praetorian, Kings, and Military Ways, by Bid, and the Moderns,
Strates, or Streets. There were in England Four of chiefest note, Via
Vetelingiana, from I know not what Wetle, or Wethle, or from Vitellianus, if it
could be made out; in Saxon, Wetelinga-streate, from the word Streate common to
all ways; Watling-street. His Dictionary.
and the Saxon Weadle signifying a Beggar, or poor Man, as Somner guesseth,
because it might be frequented by such; or because (having the Kings Peace, as
also the others had) it became a free and secure passage both to Poor and Rich:
it was also called Werlam-streate (because it went thorough, or passed near
Veru^am, Camb. Brit. 45.
or St. Albans) high Dover, by, or through London to Westchester, others to
Cardigan in Wales.
Watling-street, Via Icenorum, so called, because it passed thorough,
Ikenild-street.
or led from the Icenians, according to the common opinion: but if it went from
Tinmouth to Southampton, thorough Yorkshire, Darbyshire, Leicestershire,
Warwickshire, Glocestershire, Warwicksh. Antiquities. fol. 666. Peramb. Kent.
268.
Oxfordshire, and so directly to Winchester and Southampton, as the Learned
Dugdale has described it, or from Tinmouth to St. David's, as Lambard, it could
not then come near the Iceni, nor by consequence have its name from them; but
if it went cross the Nation, from East to West, as the Archdeacon of
Huntington affirms, it might then either begin or end there; or if Iken in the
British Tongue signifies an Elbowe, or Angle (as I have some where read) and
that this Street should have made many Angles, by turning Ermin street. Spel.
Glossar. 319.

Ikenild-street, Book II. Part I.
Ermingstreet, perhaps for Hermen-street, from Hermes, or Mercury, whose
Statua, raised upon a Pillar, the Saxons Worshipped, which might be placed upon
this way, or Ermund-street, from Er, and that from Apus, Mars; Mund in Saxon,
Safety, or Defense, and Streate, as much as to say the Martial, or Mars, his
free and safe Street; or lastly, as Somner guesseth, it may more truly be
Written, Herman-street, that is, the Military, or Soldiers way, which went from
Southampton to St. David's in West- Wales, as some affirm, or as others, to
Carlisle in the North.
Ermin-street, and Fosse-way, from Fossa a Ditch, because it was Ditched on
both sides; this way passed from To^nes, a Cape in Cornwall, Fosse-way. Peramb.
Kent. 268.
to Cathness in Scotland, as Lambard says; or as others, from the furthest
part of Cornwall thorough Devonshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Warwickshire,
to Coventry, from thence to Leicester, Lincoln, where it ended; or thence,
according to others, to York, etc. The Tracts of these Four Ways, are, and have
been, for many Ages, very obscure, and Authors do very much differ about them,
and I believe it is not yet sufficiently cleared, where any one of them
distinctly went, or thorough what parts of the Kingdom; and there being very
many more Military Ways, they who sought after them, Lambard. L^. Ed. Confess.
c. 12. The Privileges of the Four great Ways.
might hit sometimes upon one, sometimes upon another; they had belonging to
them, very considerable Immunities and Privileges; amongst others, the King's
Peace was granted unto them. That is, Security of Life and Goods; and upon
these Ways, the Persons of all Men, in all Cases, were free from Arrest, and
their Goods from Distress.
the Fosse-way; two whereof were extended cross the Breadth of the Kingdom,
Lamb. Ll. Ed. Confess. c. 12.
the other through the length of it. These were made by the Soldiers and People
under the excellent Discipline of the Romans, and other great and magnificent
Provincials, as the Britains grievously complained, Romans wore out, Four of
them of most Note. How made. Tacit. in vita, Agric. c. 31.
and consumed their Bodies and Hands in clearing the Woods, and making Ways
over the Fens and Bogs, with 1000 Stripes and Reproaches. The vast Charge and
Labor in making these Ways, may be collected from the carriage of Gravel,
Sand, and Stones many Miles, where the Soil it self afforded no such Materials;
as in most, or a great part of that Gravel Cause-way, Dugd. Hist. of drayning,
fol. 157. a. The Cause way thorough the Fens.
which extends it self from Denver near Downham-Market Norfolk, over the Fens
to Peterborough, 24 Miles in length, about 3 foot thick, and 60 foot broad, but
that there were many more then these Four Famed Ways, and that from Garrison to
Garrison, Station to Station, Colony to Colony, etc. That part of the Itinerary
which relates to Britain, is a sufficient Argument, where there are described
16 several Journeys in several Traverses and Turnings up and down the Country,
where these ways went not; yet it is not unlikely, that wheresoever these ways
have appeared, were placed Mansions, where Strangers stayed and rested
themselves, there being Inns for their Reception and Entertainment, and
Mutations, where they changed their Posthorses, Wagons and Chariots; where
there was only Provision for Horses, and Carriages, and not for Men.

Their Works were so stupendous, that in these latter Ages they exceed the
Belief of Human Performance, and are esteemed impossible Roma Illustrata, 139,
140. The Soldiers Burden when they Marched.
a Spear, Shield, and Helmet, their Utensils for sudden Intrenching, and
Incamping, a Saw, Basket, Spade, Hatchet, and other Instruments, besides
several Stakes sharped at one end, a Thong also and Chain for the Binding of
their Captives; will not much wonder, that Men, accustomed to such hardships,
should outdo the Labors of other Men. And lest they might They March out of
their Camp Thrice in a Month. They were Exercised Twice in a Day.
they were commanded to March out thrice in a Month Ten Miles, and back again,
furnished with all their Arms and Utensils, as if they were upon an Expedition.
Besides this, the Raw Soldiers were Exercised Twice every Day, and the Veterans
once. He that has a Mind to Wonder at the Prodigiousness of the Works of Rome,
which were also in many of their Greater Towns and Colonies, let him Read
Lipsius his Third Book, De where he may lo^^ himself in Admiration.

THE
BOOK II.
History of the Actions of the Saxons cannot be expected, Book II. Part I.
where there is such want of good Authors, especially for some considerable
time after their arrival here. Chap. 2. p. 8. Gildas Wrote from the Information
of Foreign Authors.
Gildas confesses he Wrote his Epistle from the Information he had out of
Foraign Writers, and not from any Chronicle Annals he had seen left by any
Historian of his own Country, which (if any such were) had been either burnt,
or carried beyond the Seas, by such as fled thither.

Bid, with some Additions of his own, followed Gildas and Ethelward, and most
others Bid; and the old imperfect Chronicle printed with him: Indeed,
whosoever considers the continual Wars in Nation, the Barbarity of the Saxons,
the Desolation they every where made, and the Persecution they raised against
Religion, and Religious Men, their cruelty in putting to death Priests, Monks
and Friars, of all Orders: Their Burning, Destroying, Learning most in
Monasteries.
and Rifling of Monasteries, where most of the Learning of that Age was then
Cloystered, and the most considerable Memoires of things preserved; cannot, in
reason, hope for a very particular and just account of what was done here for
several Centuries of years (especially in Ecclesiastic Matters) before the
coming of Augustine, Anno Domini 598. or thereabouts.
they being wholly confined to the Descriptions of the Customs of some
particular places, and the Lives and Actions of particular Persons, and those
so blended with the Fabulous Hyperbolies, and Metaphors of Ignorant Writers
(such as the Age they lived in afforded) that the brightest Rays of Truth,
could scarce penetrate and appear through those thick clouds of darkness, and
Ignorance.

There are hints to this purpose in William of Malmesbury, and others of good
note: In his Prologue to his Gesta regum. Malmesbury says, fol. 105. b. n. 30.
There were none after Bid to the Normans that had any care to Write the
History to those times.
Yet I could not be satisfied but that I must make a re-search into what
Authors I could, both Printed and Manuscripts, that I might make Public an
Authentic and well-grounded History of these Times. But failing in my
expectation, I resolved to be very short, as having no where found a sufficient
Warrant to Write much, notwithstanding all my Pains and Industry.

I have omitted all the particular Accounts of the Foundation of Monasteries,
their Burnings, Ruins, and Desolations in these times, with the Legends and
Fables relating thereto; As also those of particular Christians and Saints, for
which, they that please, may peruse the several Parts of the Monasticon of the
Laborious and Learned Sir William Dugdale; the several Martyrologists,
Menologists, and Biographers of those times, where they may have a sufficient
variety of these things; and have noted only such things as are pertinent to
the Design of this History, and that have an Appearance of Truth: Yet if any
Man be doubtful, let him give, or suspend his Assent and Belief, as he likes
the probability of the Matter of Fact, and the Author which I have every where
cited.

For I doubt not but in many things, and oft-times, the Monks William of
Malmesbury traced Eadmer, Hoveden follows Huntington, and he Florence of
Worcester, and him Simon Dunelmensis, Mat. Paris Transcribed Roger Wendover,
etc.

The strange Intricacies in the Chronology of this Age are also

These things I have Premised, to save others the Labor and trouble I have been
at; for, upon Trial, they will be as much deceived in their Satisfaction, as I
was my self.

See Ushers Primord. p. 394. For the usages of the Saxons, we must look further
then our own Historians, Cimbers. Celts, Germans. The Saxons not named in
Tacitus*
So that for the Laws, Customs, and Usages of the Saxons and German People that
came hither with them, we must look further then our own Historians, or rest
satisfied with a very ordinary, pitiful, and lame Accoun^ of them: Nor can we
in the more early times find much of the Saxons, or any other particular
People, but as they passed under the general Names of Cimbers, Celts, Germans,
etc.

Tacitus, his Book De moribus Germanorum, mentions not the Saxons, Germans, I
leave to the conjectures of Crantius In praefat. ad Hist. Saxon.
Cisner In Praef. ad Crantium.
Cluverius In Ant. Germ. fol. 588.
and others, as not being much to our purpose to know it; for it was usual with
those People to change their Names, almost as often as they did their
Countries, driving one another from their Seats, the weakest either yiedling
to, or being removed by the Power of the strongest; and sometimes when many
small Nations put themselves under the Patronage and Protection of greater, and
became their Clients, they became also one Body of People, and were afterward
better known by the Names of their Patrons, then their own.

Tacitus Secundo Annalium, cap. 44, 45. where the Semnones and Longobardi are
accounted Swevish Nations; and de Moribus Germ. c. 38, 39. where, though the
Semnones are said to have inhabited an 100 Pagi, or smaller Territories, yet
they were esteemed but the chief of the Swevians. More to this purpose may be
seen in Lazius de transmigratione Gentium. Cluverius, lib. 3. Ant. Germ. cap.
25 and 27. and in Learned Sheringham, de Angl. Gent. orig. cap. 3. n. 1.

Though Tacitus, who lived about the beginning of An. Dom. 100. Cluver. ibid.
fol. 3. Ferrar. Lexicon.
Trajan Emperor, names not the Saxons, yet Ptolomaeus the Geographer, within
less then 40 years after, who Geogra. fol. 357. Edit. Paris. The Germans
Illiterate.
flourished in the Reign of Hadrian and Antoninus Pius, expressly mentions them,
their Seat and Country.

When Tacitus Wrote, both German Men and Women were Illiterate; Tacit. de
Morib. Germ. cap. 19. They were Governed by Customs. Plus boni m^res ibi
valen^ quam alibi bonae leges. Many Customs in the Saxon times the same with
the German Customs. Hanging and Drowning for great Crimes. Dugd. Origin.
Literarum Secreta ignorabant; and therefore it is more than probable they had
no Written Laws, but lived, and regulated Customs, which the same Author in
this Chapter says were of more Authority with them, then good Laws in other
places. Some they then had, not much unlike some of our Customs and Laws in
the Saxons time here in England, and probably were but a continuation of their
usages in Germany: Treason and great offenses, Scelera and flagitia (to which
our word Felony answers) ibid. c. 12. were punished by Hanging the Offenders
upon Trees, or Drowning them. The same Punishments we have Charters and Laws,
Furca and Fossa, Pit and Gallows, Hanging and Drowning; for Crimes that
deserved either, were Jurid. cap. 31. Leg. Inae. n 23.
practiced here in the Saxon, and after in the Norman times, and with the Scots
more lately, and perhaps at this day. Tacit. ut supra. Fines and Mulcts for
small Offenses.
Delicta, or lesser offenses, they punished by Fining the Delinquent in a
certain Number of Horses or Cattle. Ibid. c. 5.
(which then was their Wealth) for Gold and Silver they had none. Ibid. c. 12.
Part paid to the King, part to the Injured Person, or his Relations.
part of which Mulct belonged to the King, where there was one, or to Nation
where there was none, and Ibid.
part was paid to the Injured Person, or his Relations.

This practice often occurs in our Saxon Laws; again, Ibid. c. 21. The same
Punishments and Mulcts in our Saxon Times and Laws. Murder punished by
Pecuniary Mulcts.
Homicide and Murder were Paenal Punishments, by a certain number of Beasts,
and Cattle, and the whole Family received satisfaction. Nothing more frequent
in our Saxon Laws then Pecuniary Mulcts for Murder, and a LL. Inae. n. 7^.
Inheritance and Success^
giving or division of it to some of, and amongst

Haeredes successoresque sui, etc. every Man's necessary heirs were his
Children, they had no testamentary heirs, if there were no Children, then the
next of the Kindred, Brothers, Uncle by the Father, and Uncle by the Mother
succeeded; This Succession and Inheritance seems not to have been of Lands, but
Goods; unless it was in such a share and portion of Land, which of right was
annually set out to the Predecessor, for they had no fixed Estates. Ibid. c. 26.
Their Propriety was only Annual.
Their Lands were used and manured of every one by turns, according to the
number of his Husband or Plowmen, which they quickly divided amongst
themselves, according to their Dignity or Eminency. The largeness of their
Fields made the partition easy. They every Year changed their Arable Lands,
and one Field lay fallow.

Caesar more clearly delivers this Custom of Land-shifting, which originally
was commune to most Nations; speaking of the Germans, Comment. 6. p. 224, 225.
The Germans lived upon Milk, Cheese and Flesh. They lived together in Tribes or
Kindreds.
He says, Agriculture they minded not, further then to serve their own
necessities, and the greatest part of their Food was Milk, Cheese, and Flesh;
nor had any one any certain Land of his own, contained within certain Bounds
and Limits; but their Magistrates, Princes, or Chiefs, appointed to their
several Tribes, or Kindreds (who always lived together) as much Land, and in
what place they thought good; and the next Year force them out of it.

Tacit. de mor. Germ. c. 16. They had no Cities. Their Houses poor Sheds, or
Cotes, etc.
Cities the Germans had none, they placed themselves where Rivers, or Brooks,
Fields and Woods offered most convenience, per Vicus a Via; It being nothing
else but two Rows of Houses, with a Way between them; and via a veha, because
their Carriages were brought out of the Fields, and from other-where upon this
Way; and from vehilla, villa; Vicus now signifies a Town, and was anciently a
Collection, or Conjunction of many Villa's, or Farm-Houses Vici had sometimes
Cross and Oblique Streets, whence probably the Vici Majores, which afterward
became Burghs, and places of note, or Oppida Majora, and Cities, from vicus
comes, vicinus, Nigh-burgh, or as we Write it, Neighbor.
Vicos, as it were in Streets, not according to the manner of the Romans, with
their Houses joined together, but severed one from another, and compassed about
with a space of Ground. Their Houses were poor Sheds or Cotes, and the
Herodian. in Maximin. lib. 7. fol. 147. Steph. Ed.
Materials of them Wood, Branches of Trees, Culm or Stuble.

Tacitus ut supra, c. 11. They assembled on set days, either in the Full* or
New of the Moon. The Priests were Chairmen in their Assemblies, and had a
Coercive Right. Their manner of Approbation or dislike in their Assemblies.
They Assembled upon set days, either in the New or Full of the Moon, unless
some Fortuitous or sudden thing happened. Morosity, and Roaring Outcries; But
if it pleased them, they clashed and ratled together their Spears and Pikes.

Ibid. c. 12. Vicus, What, and whence derived. Via, Whence derived. Vici
Majores, became Burghs, great Towns, and Cities. Vicinus, whence derived.
In these Assemblies, the Chiefs, Princes, or Governors were chosen, which
declared Law and Right in every These Pagi, which at this day the French call
Vales in Praef. ad notit. Gal. fol. 9. What Pagi were, and are.
Pays, and the German, Gows, or Gaws, Choves, or Chaues, were of three sorts;
greater, lesser, and very small ones: the greater, Pagi, Pay's, Gows, or Gaues,
were the same with Ibidem. What the Great Pagi.
Civitates, or the whole Nation of that denomination; as Pagus Parisiacus,
Senonicus Pagus, etc. Pays de etc. The lesser were commonly some parts of the
greater, as Francia la France, or the Isle of France, and le Parisis, part of
the Ancient Pagus Parisiacus; and those Pay's, or Pagi of smaller note in the
same Territory, or greater Pagus, are Pagus Josacensis vel Huripensis; la
Josas, or la Huripois, and Pagus Castrensis, which took their Names from small
and obscure places. Pagus Senonicus, or Le Senonois, beside some of better
note, contained the Pagi; also Wastinensis, Melodunensis, and Stampensis, le
Gastinois, Melunois, and l'Stampois. In Normandy the lesser Pagi, or
Territories were Pagus Caleticus, Le pays de caux, pagus Constantinus, le
contentin, pagus Baiocass^us, le Bessin, etc. The smallest pagi, The Lesser
Pagi.
Oximensis le pay's de Hiesmois, Holmetius, pagus le pays du Houlme, etc. le
pays Hovinet, de ^ve^ot inter Morinorum pagos, who were seated in part of
Flanders, The Smallest Pagi.
in part of Picardy, and part of the adjoining Countries, were Pagus
Tervanensis, and a portion of that pagus from the little River Teru; also pagus
Gesoriacus le Boulounois, pagus Gisnensis, le comte de Guines, and Ager, or
pagus Au^nsis, la Terra de Oye, so named from Auca, a small obscure Town upon
the Coast.

Helvetia was divided into four Pagos, Regions, Countries, or Gawes. 1.
Zurich-Gowe, Pagus Tigurinus, the Region or Country about Zurich. 2.
Wiflispurger-Gowe, pagus Aventinus, the Country or Territory about Wiflisburg.
Argow, the Country about the River Aar. Turgowe pagus Turensis, the Country
lying about the River Thur. And these again were subdivided into many
Praefectures, and Gawes, or Pagi, whereof Zurich-Gowe into Nine Great ones, and
Twenty Two small ones; And Wiflisburger-Gowe, or pagus Aventinus into Thirty
one German, and Eight French Praefectures, or Governments. Besides these, there
are pagus Brisiacensis, pagus Sungintensis, Brisgow and Sungow, pagus Mosanus,
Masg^w, or now Maseland, pagus Mosellanus, Muselgawe, from the great Rivers
Maes, and Mosell, and from Saravus, or Sarra, the River Sar, which parts
Lorrain and Alsace, and falls into the Mosell, pagus Saravensis, Sarchowva, or
Sargowe, also from the small River Nide, that falls into the Sar; pagus
Nitensis, Nita-chouva, Nitegow, and Hundreds, more great and small, throughout
the Countries of Upper and Lower Germany and Gallia; as may appear to any one
that will be further satisfied, in Valesius his Notitia Galliae, and Blacus
Tables, or Maps of France and Germany, Vol. 1.2.

In the Antiquities of the Abbey of Fulda upon the River Fulda, in Franconia,
there are many Donations of Lands in Pago Tullifield, in Villa Sundheim, f.
548. A.D. 858. in villa quae vocatur Hostein, in pago Grapfield in Comitatu
Kristani comitis; and in another place he names Fifteen Villages, or Towns in
pago Grapfield in comitatu comitis, who was Commander of that place, fol. 570.
An. Dom. ^74, To the Tradition or Donation his testibus; Signum Kristani
comitis, etc. yet about this time they used the words pagus, regis, and
provinciae promiscuously; and in the same Leaf, are to be found in pago
Grapfield, in Regione Grapfeld, These Pagi like our Counties, Ridings, Laths,
and Hundreds.
and in provincia Grapfeld, for the same place, fol. 564. An. Dom. 863. and the
same of Tullifeld and others, 562, 563. We may conjecture these greater,
lesser, and smaller pagi, Regions, or Territories, to have been like our
Counties and Shires, or Laths, Trithings, Trikings, or Ridings, which anciently
contained several Hundreds in, or a third part of a County or Shire, and our
Hundreds.


Pagus or Vicus, that is Country or Territory, Shire, Streets, or Villages.
Every one of these Princes had a Hundred of the common The Plebs here were
Military Men, not Rusticks, but such as went to War with the Prince.
people their Assessors, Comites. From this declaring Law in Vicusse's, or
small places, Principes, or Governors, declare Law and Right in every Pagus, or
Country, or Territory. Centeni ex Plebe Comites. Court-Barons, Leets, Manors.
came our Courts, or small Towns, Court-Barons, Leets, and Manors.

Not. Variorum on that place. Hundred Courts in Germany.
There are yet in some parts of Germany, as in the Palatinate, Franconia, etc.
Courts Criminal, which are called Zentgericht, or Hundred right, or Court, and
the Presidents of them Zent-graffen, or Zent-greven, the Hundredary, or Judge
of the Hundred; and the Assessors Zent-Schoppen, or Zent-Schappen; which most
ancient Institution of the Germans, had its Name from the Number of Assessors.
And from thence also we derive our Hundred Courts in England, where anciently
there was a particular Person called the Centenarius, Hundredarius, who was
Judge, and all the best and Chief Men of the Country, Suitors, Assessors, or
Jurors; where also the Bishops often sat with the Hundredarie.

Tacitus ut supra, c. 13, 14. Comites.
But besides these, there were Comites always about the Person of the Prince.
There was difference amongst the followers of Princes, according to the
Judgment and Appointment of him they followed. There was great emulation
amongst these Comites, who should be Favorites, and among the Princes, who
should have most and stoutest of them. This was their Honor, this their
Strength, to be incircled with a Multitude of choice young Men, an Ornament
Peace, a Guard in War; yet none might take Arms before he was approved by the
Nation. Antequam civitas probaverit. The Origin of Knighthood.
Then in the very Council, or Assembly, some of the Princes, or his Father, or
some of his Kindred, adorned him with a Sword and Spear. This was the first
honor of their Youth, before they were only part of the Family, now of the
Commonwealth; High Nobility, and great Merit of their Fathers, gave their Sons,
though but young, the Title of Princes: Ibidem. The Prince and his Followers
ought to be of equal Courage; it was Infamous to outlive him in Battle: The
Oath of the Comites.
It was dishonorable for the Prince to be overcome, and as dishonorable for his
followers Princes were slain, it being the chiefest part of their Oath to
preserve, defend, and make him Glorious Ibidem. Who all served on Horseback.
They received from him a Horse fit for War, a Bloody and Conquering Spear; the
Reward for their Service was Meat and Drink, and Large, though Rude
entertainment, instead of pay or stipend: And when from the Princes
Munificence, they received a Boon, it was of things obtained by War and Rapine.
Caesaris Com. 6. p. 226. Theft allowed.
Theft not Tacitus ut supra, c. 14.
for without that a numerous Train of Followers was not to be maintained.

Ibid. c. 15. The Princes received Cattle and Corn for the support of their own
People, etc.
The Princes, as an honorarie, and for their Sustentation, received of every
Man of the Nation a quantity of Cattle, and Corn; and from their Neighbor
Nations (such it is supposed as were under Prince and his Comites, and
Followers, and a Mutual Obligation; they Swear to defend him, he Arms, Feeds,
and Supports them; yet really, they were but little more, then mere Comites,
according to the Notation of the words, which is derived from cum, and eo
according to Vossius, in his Etymology, and became a Name of Dignity, Not. in
Codinum, p. 288.
Junius, Comes proprie est, qui cum altero est, eumque adjuvat; he is properly
a Comes, that accompanies another Man, is with him, and helps and assists him;
but more of this Title afterward.

Comites were all Equites.
These Comites were all Equites, Horsemen, chosen out of the Noble and best sort
of People. The Tacitus ut supra, c. 6. The Foot how raised.
Foot were chosen out of the generality of the People, ex omni Juventute, a
Hundred out of every Pagus (it must be supposed out of the lesser Regions, or
Pagi) and he that Commanded them was called Hundredarius, Centurio, or
Centenarius, die hundreter, and the pagus Centuria, or die Hundreter. Ibidem.
Et quod primo numerus fuit jam nomen and honor est.

Besides these Military, Noble, or Freemen, there were amongst the Germans,
Servants, or Slaves, Ib. c. 25. The Duty of a German Servant. The same with
Boers.
but not like the Roman Servants, or Slaves, who were employed in
Family-Drudgeries, and Services; here every one managed his own House and
Family. Their Lords enjoined them to provide a certainty of Grain, Cattle, and
Apparel, which the Tenent or Servant performed, and no more. These were no
other then Baurs, Buurs, or Boers, Plowmen, Colon's, or Rustic's, so called
Buen to Plow. And at that Antiq. Germ. fol. 10^. n. 20. Our Customs from those
of Germany. Their Great Councils.
time Cluverius Wrote, he says, many of these were in little better condition
then Slaves to the German Noblemen inhabiting near the Seacoasts, their Riches
being valued according to the number of their Buurs, whose conditions and
duties were also certain, and prescribed; beyond which, if the Lord commanded,
the Boer was not bound to obey.

From these Ancient Customs of the Germans in general, if I mistake not, may be
deduced the Grounds and Rudiments of the Saxon and Policy afterward in this
Nation. Here we see their great Counsels, consisting of their Princes, Comites,
Priests, and Eldest of the Nobility. Praef. to Ina's Laws. Their Division of
their Country. Their Judges, and Ministers of Justice. Their Laws most Paenal.
So it was in this Nation, their division of their Countries into pagos and
vicos; so in England, or New Saxony, into Shires, Counties, Lathes, Trihings
and Hundreds; and as they had their peculiar Governors, who were Judges in
their pagi and vici, so we had our Shireves, Aldermen, and Hundredarie, that
did the like in our Shires, etc.

Their Laws were most Paenal; and under Pecuniary Mulcts; so ours: Their
Capital punishments Hanging and Drowning; so Dugd. Origin. Jurid. c. 31. Their
Succession Lineal.
ours: they had a Lineal Succession in their Goods and Estates; so had we in
Bockland especially, etc.

After Tacitus there are no considerable Authors, which give any account what
was done in Germany for many years, and the complaints of Not. ad lib. 1 p
Lypsius, and colit. lib. 1. c. 31. Saxons first named amongst the German
people.
Bertius were very true, that the Writers Amianus Marcellinus, were very vain

The first that names the Saxons amongst the German People, Saxons Famous for
Piracy, together with the Francs.
is Claudius Ptolomaeus, the Great Geographer, and only tells where they were
Seated, as he is cited by Cluverius, Antiq. Ger. lib. 3 c. 21.
who flourished in the Reign of Hadrian, and Antoninus Pius, between the Years
of Christ, 120, and 160.

Afterward they grew Famous for Piracy, and joining with the Eutrop. lib. 9.
Franc's, infested the Coasts of Belgica, was contained between the Rivers,
Vales in Not. Gal^ in verbo ibidem, in verbo Armorica Belgica and Armorica,
Where.
Mas^, or Mose, and Sequane, or Seyn, comprehending the Coasts of Flanders, and
Picardy, part of Normandy, etc.
Belgica, and The Coasts of Vales in Not. Gal^ in verbo ibidem, in verbo
Armorica Belgica and Armorica, Where.
Normandy, and Britain, between the Rivers Seyn and Loire.
Armorica, in the time of Dioclesian, Circa* An. Dom. 300.
when Carausius, a Famed Person for Military Exploits at Sea, undertook at
Boulogne, Sur-mer, Gesoriacum, Morinorum, Ibidem in verbo Gesoriacum.
Bologne on the Coasts of Picardy in France.
Bononia, to secure and quiet those Coasts.

The next News we hear of the Saxons, from any Author of credit, is from Lib.
27. c. 7. The Saxons and Francs attempt Gallia. An. Dom. 367.
Amianus Marcellinus, in the Empire of Valentinian and Valens, where he says,
the Francs, with the Saxons their Neighbors, Gallia, wherever they could, by
Sea and Land, Sacked and Burnt Towns, killing their Captives, and wasting the
Country; and again in the third Armentor. lib. 28. c. 11
Consulate of Valentinian and Valens, An. Dom. 370. A great Multitude of the
Saxons by Sea brake in upon the Roman Limits, and committed great slaughters
upon their People. The Saxons and Francs Invade the B^itish Isles.
And in the Fourth Consulate of the same Emperors, An. Dom. 373. Chronicon
Cassidori, fol. 696.
the Saxons collected Val. rerum Fran. liber. 1. fol. 47.
a great force of the Germans to have Invaded Gallia; And near the Rhene about
80000 of them were slain by the Direction of Valentinian.

Neither did they only infest the Coasts and Country of Gallia, British Isles,
and wherever else they could make descents, Plunder and Wast the Country, and
bring it under Tribute, living upon, and enriching themselves, by Rapine and
Pyracy; Ann. Marcell. lib. 28. c. 7. They became dreadful, for the sudden
Invasions. The Count of the Saxon-shore.
being the most dreadful of any People, from their sudden Invasions; and
therefore the Romans appointed an Officer, to drive them away, and secure the
Nation from their Attempts, called the Count of the Saxon Shore throughout
Britain, who had several Garrisons upon the Coast of this Nation, supplied with
a sufficient number of Horse Roman Story.

We see here the Franc's were joined with the Saxons in R^pine and Pyracy;
Bid, fol. 58. of his History, adds the Jutes and Angli to those which were
invited into England; and Seldom adds to them the Danes and Frisons, The Danes
and Frisons joined with the Saxons.
in his Chronology, at the end of Janus. And it is not to be doubted, but that
under the Names of Saxons were Rapine, or Piracy, or such as they had subdued,
which by the Conquering Romans, or their Neighbour-Nations, were forced to
live, for their own safety, in Islands, Boggs, and Morasses, upon, and near the
Coasts of the German-Sea; Saxonum gens in Oceani littoribus and paludibus
^nviis sita Orosius. The Seat of the Saxons in Germany.
from the River Eydor in Juteland, to the Elv, and from thence to the Rhine,
According to Ethelwerd, an ancient and noble Saxon Writer, lib. 1. fol. 474. a.
n. 30. and that they were possessed (before their Invasions of England and
France) of all Jutland, Holsatia, etc. to the Elv, and all the Coasts from that
River, to the Southermost Mouths of the Rhene and Scheld. Cluverius, in his
Third Book, Antiq. Germ. c. 21. and 23. and Mr. Sheringham, in his Book de
Origin, Gent. Angl. c. 2. n. 1. and c. 3. n. 1. do both Assert.

And these German People, coming hither under the Names only of Saxons, or at
least of Saxons, Angli, and Jutes, which are only reported by our Historians to
have come with them, might as well Almans, as the collection of the several
People of Gallia, Almain, Why so called, or rather Allmannia, Allmannie.
whom want and poverty had made daring and courageous, which Conquered the
Country in Germany, lying between the Rivers, Rhene, Main, and Danube, called,
after their Conquest, De Allmaner, or, Die Allemanner, from this Miscellaneous
Collection, or Convention of all sorts of People, by whom it was Conquered. As
Agathias, an approved Author, that lived near the time of this Transmigration
of the Galls into Germany assures us, lib. 1.

Ethelw. lib. 1. Seld. Dom. Sea. 250. The Miscellaneous People of the Saxons
called into England against the Picts and Scots.
This Miscellaneous People, thus known to the Britains by their frequent
spoiling, and harrassing of the Country near the Seacoasts, for many years
together, were called into their Assistance against the Picts and Scots, when
the Romans left this Island, and made themselves Masters of it, as is related
in the ensuing History. What their Policy and Government was, and by what Laws
and Rules they Governed here, comes next to be enquired into. These, as all
other People, at first lived without Written Laws, and were guided by Customs
and Usages only, The ancient Romans lived by Custom, rather then Written-Law.
as Pompon. in leg. 2.. 3. de origin juris, speaking of the ancient Romans,
says; they used rather an uncertain Law and Custom, then any that was Written;
and adds, that it was to be thought the old Longobards and Saxons, as being
Tacitus, as before cited.

But more particularly of the Saxons: after their coming hither, The Saxons
used only their own Customs they brought out of Germany.
Seldom affirms expressly, that they received not the Caesarean* or any other
Law, but only used their own Customs, which they brought with them out of
Germany. Dissert. ad Flet. c. 7. p. 505. And when any Nation or People began to
be more Civilized, and to Write their Laws, they were but the Customs they had
constantly used, unless the rude and barbarous Traditions and Customs of the
Pagans, were by the first or ancient Christian Kings altered, or abolished.
Lindenbrog. prologomen. in cod. leg. Antiquarum, and more particularly
Gryphiander, De Weichbild. Saxon. c. 37. n. 4. Laws increased with Civility.
concerning the Saxons, from Crant. lib. 2. c. 21. when as by time Civility
increased in the Saxon Nation, the observation of Laws also increased; Thence
it was that those things, which by long use had been approved, were at length
reduced into a Code or Traditions and Vsages I shall not prosecute, as being
the same with the Written Laws of the Germans, which are more ancient then any
I find of the English Saxons in this Nation.

The first of the Saxons here that I have met with, are those of Ethelbert,
mentioned by Bid, lib. 2. c. 5. fol. 120. which he says, Ethelbert K. of Kent
gives Laws after the Example of the Romans.
according to the example of the Romans, he made by the Counsel, or Advice of
his Wise Men, and that they were Written in the English Tongue, and observed in
his time.

I confess these Laws I have not seen: but they are noted by the Laborious and
Learned Dugdale, in his Origin. Jurisd. c. 22. but there cannot probably be
much in them (if any thing at all) more then is in our Saxon Laws, published
by Lambard. For Allured, in the Preface to his Laws, says, That by the Advice
of his Wise Men, he Collected what ever was worth notice, out of the Laws of
Ethelbert, and Offa, and caused them to be observed, and omitted the rest. The
beginning of Ethelberts Reign is fixed in the Year 561, He began his Reign, A.
D. 561.
by this worthy Author; but according to Bede's Account he began his Reign in
557. for he died Anno Dom. 613. and Reigned 56 Years King of Kent, as he
reports in the beginning of the Chapter aforesaid.

The next Laws of the Saxons I find any where, are Ina's, Ina's Laws.
King Saxons, Printed in Lambert's Archaionomia, fol. 1. This King began his
Reign, Anno Dom. 712, and died 727. ibid. The rest of the Laws of the Saxon and
Danish Kings follow in their succession of time, unto the Conquest of England
by William Duke of Normandy.

Having thus Noted the Age and beginning of our Saxon Laws, I shall also give
an Account of the time, when first the several German and French Laws were
Composed, or reduced into Writing. As they are published by Lindenbrogius, in
his Code of Ancient Laws; the first was the Hotton. in verb. in Diction. Feud.
Salic-Law, why so called. A^mon. lib. 2. c. 10. Gallia West-France, Germany
East-France.
So called, from the River Sala in Germany, about which the Eastern Franc's
inhabited, or probably near it held their Placita, and Conventions, in which
they made their Laws, etc. or from Sal, or Sala, the same with Aula, a Hall, or
Court; so that then Salic-Law was Royal, or Court-Law.
Salic Law, dictated to the They were a stout People, and Inhabited no large
Country, between the Saxons and Almains, called Franconia; afterward they
overran all Gallia and Germany; so that Gallia was called West-France, and
Germany East-France. Wendelin, in his Leges Salicae Illustratae, endeavors to
prove the Francs to have possessed, or inhabited the Country of the Aetuatici,
which he places in Belgium, or Germany the Less, and in the Province of
Brabant, between the Rivers Tamar and Lachar, and the Wood or Forest called La
Forest Charboniere, making Die the Ancient Sala, Hall, or Court of the Kings
of the Salick, or Noble Francs; and in his Glossary of Salic Atuatic Words, he
derives the Word Francus from the Atuatic Word Vranghe, or Vranck, yet in use
in Haspen, Hottom. ut supra. Gryph. Weich. bild. Saxon. c. 40. n. 5.8. Loccen.
Antiq. Sueo-Goth. p. 35, 36.
or Hasbania, the Neighboring Country, which signifies Stout, Cruel, Fierce,
Austere, etc. and further. That the name of the Francs was never known beyond
the Rhene, until the Year 496. when Chlodov^us, in a mighty Victory at
Tolbiacum, now Zulick, Colen, subdued the Almains, who then left off their own
Names, and called themselves Francones, and their Country Franconia, to obtain
Favor from their fierce and cruel Conquerors and allay their Severity.
Francs by Four Sigebertus Gemblac reports in the Year 422. But under the
Prologue to these Laws it is said, That Charles King of France (which was
Charlemaign) ordered the small Book, Salic-Laws, when first Written.
or Tract of the Salic Laws to be Written. Not but they were Written before
without doubt, Burgundian Laws, Burgundian-Laws, when first given.
established by Gundebald King of Burgundy, in the Second year of his Reign, as
is said in the Preface to these Laws, which was about the Year 500, as appears
by Greg. Turon. lib. 2. c. 32. with the consent of his Nobility, or Optimacy,
and were selected out of some former Constitutions of his own, and his Parents,
or Predecessors.

Next follow the Alaman, Boioarian, or Bavarian, and Ripuarian Ripuarii, were
those People that inhabited the Countries between the Rivers Rhene, Mose, and
Moselle, from Ripa, a Rivers Bank, whence Riparius, and Ripuarius.
Laws, which the Prologue to the Bavarian Laws says, were given by King
Theoderic, Boioarian, or Bavarian Laws when first given. When the Alaman and
Ripuarian. The Laws of the West-Goths, when reduced into Method.
or Theiri, King of Austrasiae, Almaniae, etc. Son of Clodovaeus, Greg. Turon.
lib. 3. c. 1. who began his Reign, Anno 514, or 515. Helvicus a Isaacson.

Then the Laws of the Wisigoths, or West-Goths, a German People, were reduced
into some sort of Method by Euricus, or Euridicus, Theodoricus, about the Year
500. Lindenbr. in prolegom. and received many Additions, and much Force from
Chindaswind, and Receswind, Kings of these Goths, who began their Reigns about
the Years 644, and 650. Ll. Wisigoth. lib. 2. Tit. 1. leg. 1.5, 7, 9. About
Laws of the Longobards, from the Latin word Longus, and the Gothish word Bard,
or Bart, a Lance, Two-edged Spear, or Halbert, so called from the Long Lance,
or Halbert, which they used in War; they were derived from the Norwegians,
amongst whom no other Arms were more frequent then that.
Longobards, which were known by Use and Memory only: The Longobards or
Lombards Laws, when First Written.
King Rotharis, who according to Isaacson, began his Reign, Anno Dom. 638.
caused them to be put in order, and Written 70 years after the Lombards came
into Italy. Paulus 4. c. 44.

The Saxons, Angles, Varins, and Frisons Laws.
After these, or rather of an uncertain date, are the Saxon Laws. The Laws of
the Angles, Varins, and Frisons, of which there are but few published, and
therefore presumed to be lost, unless they made use of the Laws of some other
Nations with their own.

The Capitulary of Charlemaign, Ludovicus Pius his Son, The Capitulary of
Charles the Great Ludor. Pius his Son, and Lothar. his Son.
and Lotharius his Son, was Collected by Ansegisus (Abbas Lobiensis) afterward
Archbishop of Sens, Trithemius, p. 120. in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of
Ludovicus Pius, and his Son Lotharius, An. Dom. Membranes, or Parchments, as he
says in his Preface to these Laws, which he divided into Four Books.

Eginhart, in this matter, says, That after Charlemaign was Emperor, he took
notice that there was much wanting in the Laws of his People, which he thought
to have added, and reconciled the differences in them, and to have Corrected
the evil Laws, but he did Laws in being, and those imperfect: yet he caused the
Laws of all Nations under his Dominion, that were not Written, to be Written,
p. 32.

The Three latter Books of this Capitulary were Collected by Benedict the
Levite, from diverse places and Schedules, but chiefly out of the Archives of
the Metropolitical Church of Ments, whereunto he belonged; And as he notes,
some Chapters are to be found double Ansegise, because he found them in diverse
Schedules, and had not time to correct, or reduce them into order. See his
Preface before the Fifth Book.

Many, different, and almost contrary Laws there are in this Capitulary, and
the other German Constitutions, and were so, because made by diverse Emperors,
Kings, and Governors, with their Councils, at diverse times, and in diverse
Countries, according to their Code picked out of all these Laws, as Charles the
Great (without doubt) designed for a General Law.

Yet this Capitulary which bears his Name, was called an Edict, The Capitularie
of Charles the Great esteemed the Common Law of Germany.
and in many matters was esteemed the Commune Law of Germany, as is clear in
lib. 2. leg. Longobard, Tit. 56. Romani Successiones juxta illorum legem
habeant, similiter and omnes Scriptiones secundum legem suam faciant, and
quando jurant juxta Legem suam Jurent. Et alii similiter That is, the Romans
may have their Successions (in Goods or Estates) according to their Laws, and
likewise may make all their Writings, or Charts, according to their Law: And
when they Swear or make Oath of any thing, they may Swear according Charles,
the most excellent King of the Franc's and Longobards united into an Edict.
Above this Law stands Carolus Imperator, as made by him, which was Charles the
Gross, Great Grandchild to Charles the Great, and took upon him the Empire of
Germany, 877. Antiq. Alaman. Tom. 2. Part. 1. Fol. 4.

The Germans would not admit the Roman-Laws, or any other but their own.
Whatever these Laws seemed to be to others, yet they so esteemed them, as they
would admit no other Laws of other Nations in their Judgments or Decisions of
Controversies, yet permitted Men to Read them for Equity sake, and to better
their Understanding, though Roman Law, or any Foreign Institutions. Leg.
Wisigoth. lib. 2. Tit. 1. Leg. 9, 10. Capit. Caroli and Ludov. lib. 6. Tit.
269. Thus having shown the Origin, or Time when our Saxon and the German Laws

I should be troublesome to the Reader to no purpose, should I here Insert all
the Laws of the English-Saxons and Germans, that are like one another, or the
very same for substance and matter, though the Mulcts or Penalties may be
greater or less, according to the Judgment of the Legislators, and the exigency
of different cases. The Our Saxon-Laws are to be found amongst the old German
Laws.
and in most of them the Manner is the same, although different in some
circumstances; and there is not one Law published by Lambard, but either its
self, or the Matter and Substance of it, is to be found over and over again in
the German Laws.

The English and German Laws for Murder the same.
Their Laws for punishing Manslaughter, and Murder, by Pecuniary Mulcts, were
alike, only different in the Sums or Penalties imposed. Ll. Inae. c. 33.
Alured. c. 26. Edmund. c. 3. Ethelred in Faeder. 5. Senatus consult. de Montic.
Walliae. c. 5. The same are to be found amongst the German Laws, as Ll. Fris.
Tit. 1.17. and 20. Saxon, Tit. 2. Ripuar. c. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16,
36. Boioar. Tit. 18. c. 2. Alaman. Tit. 49.76. Salic. Tit. 61. Anglor. Tit. 1.
c. 9. and as by some of our Saxon Laws, Killing a Man was Death, Praefat. in
Leg. Alured. c. 13. so was it by the German Law, Capit. Car. lib. 6. Tit. 5.39.
Ibid. lib. 7. Tit. 183. Banishment for Manslaughter, Ll. Canut. c. 6. Capit.
Car. lib. 4. Tit. 20. In some of these forecited German-Laws, Man-killing is
called Mordritum, in others Mordrido, or Mortando, Mordrum used in the German
Laws, not found in ours till after the Conquest.
but in the German-Saxon Laws, Tit. 2.. 6. it is called Mordrum, which word,
nor any thing like it, is to be found in our English Saxon Laws, though it
occurs often in William the Conqueror's Laws, and the Laws of Henry the First.
The word is from the German, Ermorden, or Morden, to kill a Man basely and
privily as Thieves use to do. Herman. Commit. Nuenarii, Exposit. verb. ante
Egginhart. Ll. Christin. Tit. 20.. 2. Siquis hominem occiderit and absconderit;
the Mulct commonly for the death of a Man was his Wergild, that is, the value
of his Head, or Life, out of which, The Mulct for Murder commonly the Wer-gild,
or value of him that was slain.
if he were a Servant, his Master, or Patron had a part, or Compensation for
his loss, which was called Manbote, Ll. Inae, c. 69. Ll. Fris. Tit. 1.. 3.6, 9,
10. And for this purpose the Weregilds of almost every person, from the highest
to the lowest, are settled and named in both the English-Saxon, and German Laws.
Ll. Ethelstani, toward the end. Capit. Car. lib. 3. c. 25. qui subdiaconum
occiderit 300 solid. componat. qui Diaconum 400, qui Presbyterum 600, The
Weregilds, or value of the life of every person, set in Germany as well as
England.
qui Episcopum 900, qui Monachum 400, Ll. Ripuar. Tit. 36.. 11. Boioar. Tit. 2.
c. 20.. 4. where the Weregild of a Duke is 9060 Shillings, Ll. Fris. Tit. 15.
where the Wergilds of a Nobleman, Freeman, Countryman and Slave, or Servant,
are all particularly mentioned; English-Saxons, half, or part of the Were was
given to the Parents, or Relations of the slain Person, Ll. Inae. c. 20, 23. So
amongst the Germans, Ll. Longobard. lib. 1. Tit. 9.. 2. Fris. Tit. 1. as above.

Next after the Laws of Homicide and Murder, we may show the agreement of the
English and German Laws, in punishing Theft, Injury, Trespasses, Strikings,
Maiming, or Maihening, Wounding, Bloodshed, etc.

Theft, punished by Mulcts, in the English Saxon Laws, Theft, how Punished.
Ll. Inae. c. 7, 13, 14, 15, 21. Senatus consult. de Montic. Wall. c. 4. Ll.
Canut. c. 59.6. it was also Penal by the German-Laws, Ll. Boioar. Tit. 8.
Ripuar. Tit. 7.18. Fris. Tit. 3. Angl. Tit. 7. Longobard. lib. 1. Tit. 25. yet
by the German Saxon Law it was Death to steal a Horse, or any thing by Night or
by Day to the value of Three Shillings, Tit. Slanders, Defamations, Miscalling,
punished by Mulcts, Slanders and Defamations how Punished. Bloodshed,
Striking, and Fighting, etc. how punished. Trespasses, how Punished.
Ll. Sal. Tit. 32. per totum. For Bloodshed, Striking, Mayming, Wounding,
Dismembring, etc. See Ll. Alured. c. 38, 40. German Laws, Ll. Saxon. c. 1.
Anglor. and Werin. Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Ll. Boioar. Tit. 3. Addit. Ll. Fris.
Tit. 3. throughout. Trespasses, ibid. Tit. 4, 5, 7. Boioar. Tit. 9, 10, 11.
throughout. Ll. Inae. c. 42. Injuries, Ll. Anglor. and Werin. Tit. 12. Ll.
Wisigoth. lib. 8. Tit. 3 and 4. Salic. Tit. 18. Alam. Tit. 81. Ll. Longobard.
lib. 1. Tit. 17.. 1. in ours Ll. Canut. c. Ll. Inae. c. 9. and in many other
English Saxon Laws; in all these the Laws were the same, though different in
the Mulcts or Penalties.

From these we proceed to a parallel between the possessionary Laws of the
English-Saxons and the Germans; that is, The Law for entering upon, and taking
away another Man's Estate, was Restitution and Punishment. Theoderic. began his
Reign An. 495. Taking away another Man's Goods was Theft.
the Laws by which they held what they possessed, either Lands or Goods, or the
Laws of meum and tuum. If any Man seized or took away another Goods Estate, he
commonly made restitution, and suffered a Mulct for breach of Peace. Ll.
Alured. c. 16. Edict. Theoder. c. 10. Capit. Car. lib. 5. c. 204. Ll. Wisigoth:
lib. 8. Tit. 3* and 4. but seizing, taking, or deteining other Men's Goods, was
in these Ages reputed a sort of theft, and the Law was accordingly.

These Mulcts were paid in Cattle, and other Goods valued at a certain rate,
both here and in Germany, Ll. Alured. c. 10. Ll. Saxon. 18.

The Rates how the Germans valued their Good, do here follow, as expressed in
their Laws.

Solidus est duplex, unus habet duos tremisses qui est bos Anniculus, 12
Mensium, vel ovis cum agno. Alter solidus 3 tremisses, id est, bos 16 mensium;
The Rates of the German-Cattel, and Grain.
majori solido aliae compositiones, minori homicidia componuntur: Westfalaiorum
and Angrariorum, and Ostfalaiorum solidus est secalis Lindenbrogius Interprets
this Word no otherwise, then that he says it was an usual Measure amongst the
Germans, and certainly was no more, if so much as our Bushel.
Sceffila 30, Ordei, 40, Avenae 60; quadrinius bos 2 solid. 2 boves quibus
arari potest, 5 Solid. Bos bonus 3 Solid. Vacca cum vitali Solid, duo semis:
That is, there is a twofold Shilling, one of two Tremisses, Solid. 12. dena.
capit. lib. 8.
a Steer 16 Months old; other Mulcts or Compositions were paid by the Great
shilling, those for Homicide or Mankilling by the Less. The Shilling of the
Westfalians, Angrarians, and Ostfalians, was Lindenbrogius Interprets this Word
no otherwise, then that he says it was an usual Measure amongst the Germans,
and certainly was no more, if so much as our Bushel.
30 Scheffils of Rye, 40 of Barley, and 60 of Oats. A Steer 4 years old 2
Shillings, 2 Plough-Steers 5 Shillings, a good Ox 3 Shillings, a Cow with her
Calfe Ripuarian Laws, Tit. 26.. 11. Si quis Weregildum solvere debet, bovem
cornutum videntem and sanum pro duobus solid. tribuat. vaccam cornutam videntem
and sanam pro uno solido tribuat; The Rates of Horses. Of Arms.
equum videntem and sanum pro 6 solid. tribuat. Equam videntem and sanam pro
tribus solid. tribuat; Spatham cum scogilo pro 7 solid. tribuat. spatham absque
scogilo pro tribus solid. tribuat, Bruniam bonam pro 12 Solid. tribuat. Helmum
cum directo pro 6 solid. tribuat; Banibergas bonas pro 6 Solid. tribuat, scutum
cum Of Hawks.
Acceptorem non domitum pro 3 solid. tribuat, Commorsum gruarium pro 6 solid.
tribuat Acceptorem mutatum pro 12 s. tribuat. That is, he who ought to pay his
Weregild, may give a horned sound, and seeing Steer for 2 s. a horned sound and
seeing Cow for 1 s. a seeing and sound Horse for 6 s. A Mare of like condition
for 3 s. a Sword with a Hilt, or Handle for 7 s. a Sword without a handle for 3
s. a good Coat of Mail for 12 s. An Helmet without a Beauvoir, or Belvoir, for
6 s. Armor for the Thighs for 6 s. a shield or Buckler, with a Lance, for 2 s.
an untrained Hawk for 3 s. a Crane-Hawk for 6 s. a Mewed-Hawk he may give for
12 s.

An Insolvent Freeman entered into Servitude. An Insolvent Servant, or Slave,
was Whipped, etc.
If a Freeman had not wherewithal to satisfy, he entered into servitude, while
he had given satisfaction, Ll. Longobard, lib. 1. Tit. 14. c. 10.13. Capit. 3.
Tit. 67. Ll. Alured. cap. 10. Ibid. Tit. 25. c. 60. Faed. Ed. Guth. c. 7. If a
servant, or slave, and could not pay, or his Patron would not pay for him, he
was Whipped, Cudgelled, or Beaten, with so many lashes, blows, and stripes, as
the Law directed, Ll. Inae. c. 49. Faedus Ed. and Guthrini, c. 7, 8. Ll.
Ethelstani, c. 19. and in the German Laws in places sans number. Every where.
The Punishments and Rates for all Faults were set down in a Book, kept by the
Magistrate. The Germans had a Doom-Book, wherein was noted the Composition
every Man was to make to the Person Injured, and to the Emperor for Breach of
Peace.


These Mulcts for all these Offenses were set down in a Book, which was the
rule or standard of the Judges Sentence, (...) Ll. Edovar. in praefat. and as
it stands in their Dome, or Judgment-Books: again, (...); Let them compound, or
give satisfaction, as the Judicial, or Doom-Book says. Ib. c. 8. So in the
German-Laws, Comes secum habeat librum legis, ut 15.. 2, 3. that is, the Earl,
Count, or Governor of the County ( Comitatus in the former Paragraph) shall
have the Law-Book with him, that he may always Judge right Judgment. That in
every case he that does contrary to the Law, may compound for such things as
are to be compounded for, according to the Law, as the Law has it, or as it is
in the Law-Book, and let him give to the Earl Security, or Pledge for the
Peace, as the Law is.

And as there was the same design and contrivance in their Laws and
Punishments, so was there the same ways of Purgation, or Clearing themselves
from supposed false Accusations, or such where the proof was not evident, or
no^ thought sufficient, or in dubious Cases and Titles. By Somn. Glossar. in
verbo. Ordeal, What. And what the Trial was.
Ordeal, from or, a, Negative, or Privative, and Dal, which signifies
Distinction, or Difference, that is, without Distinction, or Difference, and
imports a just impartial Judgment, it was of two sorts, by Fire, or Water; by
Fire, when the Person accused carried in his bare-hand a red-hot Iron some few
steps, which, if it weighed but One Pound, was called Single Ordal; if Three
Pound, Treble Ordal: or when he walked barefoot, and blindfold, over and
between certain red-hot Plough-shares, placed at a certain distance; if in
doing this the Party was Burnt, he was pronounced Guilty; if not, he was
accounted Innocent. Water- Ordal was either when they cast the Accused into
Water, Water Ordeal, What.
and if they did Swim, were Judged Guilty; if they Sunk Innocent; or their
hands and arms were put sometimes up to the Wrist, sometimes up to the Elbow
in Boiling hot Water, if they were Scalt, they were esteemed Guilty, if not
Innocent. Ll. Longob. lib. 1. Tit. 9. c. 39. Glanv. lib. 14. c. 1. in fine. The
Forms, Exorcisms, etc. used in these Trials.
The Ordal; the Peasants and Servants, by Water- Ordal.

The Forms, Exorcisms, Conjurations, Offices, Litanies, Lessons, Gospels, and
Celebration of the Communion, used in all sorts of Ordal, may be seen in the
latter end of Marculphs Formulae; where they are the most exact and ample I
have seen. Also some part of them in Aethelstanes Laws, Spelman's Glossary,
fol. 436. and Origin. Jurid. fol. 86.

The Judgment or Trial by Cold-Water Marcul. form. 1301. Instituted to prevent
Perjury.
Marculph reports was instituted instead of Swearing, at the Request of Lud.
Pius, by Pope Eugenius the Second (who obtained the Papacy, Anno Dom. 824. and
was Pope only three years) commanding all Bishops, Earls, Abbots; and all
Christian People ^ithin his Empire, to defend the Innocent, and examine the
Nocent by it, lest being perjured upon the Relics of Saints, they should
Olaus Wormius Monument Dan. lib. 1. c. 11. de Ordalia.


Ordeal. This way of Purgation, or Clearing of themselves from Crimes, Debts,
(nay some times Heirs, Swearing themselves. Ll. Alaman. Tit. 2.. 2. How and how
many Swear anciently. Ewa, from the Saxon word aew, or aewe, Jus, or Lex, in
the Preface to Ina's Laws, in Lambard* See Somners Sax. Dict. in the word aewe.
Into Estates, when the Chart of Donation was lost or burnt) is very frequently
mentioned in all the German-Laws, thus expressed; Tertia, quinta, sexta,
duodecima manu, etc. jurare. And in the Alaman Laws. Tit. 6. being de
juratoribus. Quales and quantos, secundum ewa, homo habere debet, of what
condition, and how many, sacramentales, sive conjuratores, fellow-Swearers
according to the Law a Man ought to have; the number of which always varied,
according to the degrees of the Crime or Matter objected, after several cases
noted, wherein the accused person was to Swear cum uno Sacramentali, one only
to Swear with him, or Tertia, vel Sexta or with Three or Six. The manner of
their Swearing is prescribed, Ibid.. 7. Ista Sacramenta debent esse jurata
(referring to the Cases beforementioned) Vt illi conjuratores, manus suas
super Capsam ponant, and ille solus cui causa requiritur, tantum dicat, and
super omnium manus, manum suam ponat, ut sic illi Deus adjuvet, vel illa
reliquiae, ad illas manus quas comprehensas habet, ut de illa causa, unde
interpellatus est, culpabilis non sit. That is, those Oaths (referring to the
Cases beforementioned) ought to be so Sworn, that the Fellow-Swearers may put
their hands upon the Case of the Relics, and he alone that Prosecuted shall
say the words, and shall put his hand upon all their hands, that so God may
help him, or those Relics to which he holds their hands, as he is not Guilty
of that Cause for which he is prosecuted. Some shadow of this practice we have
yet in our Nation, in Wager of Law, in Actions of Debt without Specialty, where
the Proof is not Plaintiffs side, the Defendant is admitted to wage his Law;
That is, Nomothet. verb. Law.
to take his own Oath that he Owes nothing at all to the Plaintiff, and to
bring as many credible persons as the Court shall Assign, to make Oath, that
they believe he Swears true.
Oath, and Battle, or Duel, called Wehadine, by the Boioarians, Decret.
Tassilon,. 10. Ll. Boioar. Tit. de leg* populari,. 5, 6. and Camfroic. decret.
Tassilon,. 6. he that had his Land taken from him by another, might prove it to
be his by due Witnesses; but if the Invader or Occupier contradicted that
Proof, Judgment by Battle.
it was to be determined by Battle, campo adjudicetur Ll. Saxonum, c. 15.
Siquis Adalingum occiderit 600 Solid. componat, si negaverit, cum 12 juret, aut
in Campum exeat. Ll. Angl. and Werin. Tit. 1.. 1, 3. That is, if any one kills
a Noble id est) Try it by Battle: Si mulier maritum veneficio dicatur
occidisse, etc. If it be said a Woman Poisoned her Husband, her next Relation
may Right her by Battle; but if she has no Champion, let her be Tried by Nine
red-hot Plough-shares, ibid. Tit. 14. All cases of Theft, and Wounding* which
deserve a Mulct of 2 Shillings, and upward, to the highest Mulct, or
Composition, are to be judged by Battle, if the Fact was denied, Ibid. Tit. 15.
This way of Judgment by Battle was so prevalent, and frequent amongst the
Lombards in Italy, in the time of King Rotharis, who began his Reign about the
Year 640, according to Helvicus, that although (as he says) they were
uncertain, concerning the Judgment of God. And that they had heard, many had by
Duel, or Battle, lost their causes without reason, yet such was the Custom of
his Nation (the Lombards) and so pertinacious they were in it, that he could
not prohibit Ll. Long. lib. 1. Tit. 9. c. 23. More of this, and the manner and
circumstances of Battle, or Duel, see in Ll. Alaman. Tit. 84. and in my Preface
to the Norman History, or in the words Battle, or Duel, in my Glossary.

There was besides these another way of Examination, and finding out Guilt, and
Innocence, Trial by a Decretory Morsel, or Eucharist.
in some Criminal Causes mentioned by Lambard in his Glossary, by a Judicial,
or Decretory Morsel, called by the Saxons Corsned, which according to his
Interpretation signifies Execrated Bread. But Mr. Glossary in verbo.
Somner better derives it from the same Cors, a Curse, and Snaed, or Snid, a
Snidan to cut; so that it signifies an Execrated, Particle, Morsel, or Piece.
This is mentioned in the Purgation of Regular and Secular Priests, who, if
accused of any Crime, and had no Compurgators, no Consacramentales, or
Conjuratores, to Swear with them. Ll. Canut. Part. 1. c. 5.
Gato Corsnaed, let him go to the Trial of the Decretory, or Barly-Bread, or
Morsel of Cheese, Marculph. 8. delivers thus, After the Litanies and Offices
for this purpose, and the Barly-bread or Cheese Sanctified, Form. fol.
1037.1038.
and Exorcised, and the Accused Person Acceperat Communionem, had received the
Communion, it was offered with this, or such like Form of words there
mentioned, Ad adpositam ei pro ostentione veritatis creaturam panis
sanctificati, vel casei, faux ejus claudatur guttur ejus stranguletur, and in
nomine tuo ante id rejiceretur, quam devoretur, innoxius vero and inscius,
sobrie ad salubritatem sui cum omni facilitate, hanc partem panis vel casei in
nomine tuo, Signatam manducando diglutiat. Vt sciant omnes, etc. That is, Let
his Jaws be shut against the Creature, of Hallowed Bread, or Cheese, which is
forced upon him, for the demonstration of Truth, Let him be Choked, and in thy
Name let it be cast up again, sooner then swallowed: but if he be Innocent, and
knows nothing of the Theft, or Wickedness, wherewith he is charged, let him
with ease and health swallow this Morsel, or Piece of Bread or Cheese, Signed
in thy Name. Why our English Saxons called it Corsned, Cursed Particle, and
Morsel, or Execrated Bread, when as from Marculph it is clear, it was usually
Hallowed, and Consecrated, I know not, unless from the wishes in the beginning
of the Form, at the forcing it, upon such as were to undergo the Trial, or that
they believed it proved a Curse sometimes to them.

From these we pass to the Laws concerning the Germans and English-Saxons Real
Estates, their Lands and Titles, how they held, and claimed them; And these
were but very few, considering the multiplicity of the other, both here and in
Germany.


Battle, or Duel. Faed. Edovard. and Guthrin. c. 9. Ll. Ethelstan. c. 7.21, 23.
Ll. Inae. c. 55. Canut. 20. Ll. Frison. Tit. 3.. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Tit. 14.. 3,
4. Fire Ordeal.
Capit. Car. in append. Secunda, lib. 4. n. 3. n. 33. Add. Lud. lib. 4. Tit.
80. Ll. Angl. Tit. 15. Frison. Tit. 5.. 1.

Mr. Gavelk. fol. 112.
Somner says, There were but two sorts of Tenures here in the Saxons times
before the Conquest. Ll. Ed. Sen. c. ll.
Bockland, and Folkland, to which two all other sorts of Land might be reduced.
Bockland, as Gloss. in verbo. Terra ex Scripto. Bockland and Folkland, What?
Lambert says, was free and hereditary, and was a possession by Writing, the
other without. That by Writing was possessed by the Free or Nobler sort; that
without, called Folkland, was holden by paying Annual Rent, or performance of
Services, and was possessed by the Rural People, Rustick's, Colon's, or Clowns;
In those times these Writings Spelm. Council. fol. 319 A^. 800. Council.
Clovisho. c. 2, 3, 6.
were called in Latin, Libelli terrarum, Landboc's, and Telligraphia, and
Livery and Seizin was then made and given, by Somner ut supra, p. 12, 13.
delivery of a Turfe taken from the Land Bockland could not be alienated
without Somner ut supra, p. 12, 13.
the Kings consent; it was a Royal Prerogative in the King only to grant it,
and it was forfeited also to the Ll. Etheldred, p. 1. c. 2.
King by him that deserted his Lord, either in a Sea or Land-Expedition. This
was called Terra testimentalis, and hereditaria, Land inheritable, and
Deviseable by Will. Unless the first purchaser, or acquirer, by Writing or
Witness, had prohibited it; And then it could not be sold or disposed of from
the Ll. Alured. c. 37. Bockland and Allodium.
nearest Kindred. This Bockland was of the Allodium in Doomesday, holden
without any payments, nor chargeable with Services to any Lord or Seigniory;
and though the Name was almost quite lost, yet the thing remained under the
name of Allodium, and the Lands possessed by the Allodiarii, mentioned in
Doomesday. Somner Gavelkind, p. 120, 121, 122, etc. yet these Lands holden in
Allodio, or Alodium, were not altogether free, but subject to the general
Land Tax of Hidage, as all other Lands were, As appears in Doomesday-Book, in
all places where Alodium is Hantescire in Tit. Terra Hugon. de port. idem. ten.
Cerdeford and Willielmus de eo, duo liberi homines in Allodium tenuerunt,
Tempore Regis Edwardi.
T.R.E. tunc and modo Geld. pro 5 Hid. fol. 44. b. in Bermesplet. Hund. Ipse
Hugo ten. Dummere, unus homo suus de eo, Alric tenuit de R. E. in Allodium tunc
and modo se defendit pro 5 Hidis, fol. 45. b. That is, Hugo de Port holds
Cedeford, and William of him; two Freemen held it in Alodium in the time of
King Edward, then and now it gelded, that is, paid Geld or Hidage, after the
rate of 5 Hides, etc. And not Alodio, were and are those in Normandy, of the
same Tenure: Les terres de franc Alleu sont celles qui ne recognoissent
superieur in Feodalite and ne sont Sujetts a fair ou payer aucun Droits
Seigneuriaux Reform. Custum. Artic. 102. That is, Lands of Franc Alleu, or free
Alode, are such as acknowledge no superior in feudality, and are not subject to
do, or pay any Seigneural Rights. Godefroy, upon this Article, says, that these
Lands, notwithstanding their Freedom, were subject to the Justice Royal, or
Justice of the Jurisdiction, and therefore it is added here in Feodality, to
show, it was exempt only from Superiority, and Jurisdiction Seigneural, so
that the Possessor might sell, and dispose of it at pleasure, without leave of
any Lord, or Superior. Much of this Land there was in the Diocese or Viconte of
Bajeux, where Odo was Bishop, who was also Earl of Kent here after the
Conquest, Berault, fol. 714.
and there was also the Custom of Gavelkind; and it is probable many Normandy
might translate themselves into Kent, and bring those Customs with them.

But besides these two, Saxon Tenures.
there are Lands and Possessions mentioned by other Names in our Saxon Laws, as
Gafolland, Rent-Land, or Farme-land, Foedus Alured. and Guthr. c. 2.
Gafolgylden hus, an House yielding, or paying Rent, or Gable, Ll. Inae. c. 6.
Inland.
There are also mentioned Inland, or the Lords Demeasnes, which he kept in his
Neatland, which is called Vtland, or Outland, Utland, or Outland.
in Lamb. peramb. Kent. p. 495.1 Edit. Spelm. Gloss. in verb.
Byrthrics Will; Terra Villanorum, and was let out to Countrymen, or
Villagers, aegder of Thegnes inland ge of Neatland, either of the Lords or
Thanes Inland, or Demeasnes, or the Country-Mans, Villagers, or Villans Land,
Gafolland, Neatland, and Vtland, as Mr. Gavelk. p. 14.115. Spelm. Gloss. in
verbo.
Somner truly informs us, were opposed to Inland, or Demeasne Lands, and were
Lands granted out for Rent, or Service, or both, and reducible to Folkland, and
it is very probable they were the same, or of the same nature; for that in the
Laws where they are mentioned, it appears they were always occupied by Ceorls,
Churls, Countrymen, The Names of ordinary People.
Colons, or Clowns; by Gebures, Boors, Rustic's, Plough, or Husbandmen, or by
Neates, and Geneates, Drudges, Villanes, or Villagers. These three Saxon words
being almost of the same signification, though very different in sound, were
always applied to the ordinary sort of People, called by us Folk at this day.

Gavelk. ut supra. Saxon Lands held by Military-Service.
Inland he thinks to be the same with Bockland, or at least of the same
condition, or reducible to it. Yet besides these Lands, there were other Lands
also which were holden by Military, or Knights-Service, called then Feoda, or
Beneficia, Fees, or Benefices. Such were the Feudal-Lands of Ealdormen, Thanes,
and less Thanes, or as they were afterward called Valvasors, which they had of
the King's Gift, for personal Attendances, Military Services, or as Governors
Provinces, Counties, or Towns, for which see Selden's Titles of Honor, Part. 2.
c. 5. n. 3, 4. and that there were such Lands, as well in the hands of the
Lower sort of the Nobless and Gentlemen, as of the greater Noblemen, is further
clear, by undeniable testimony from the Saxon Laws, and Doomesday, Legalis
Homo, or Militaris Homo; the Judicious Dugdale thinks, Sithesocha signifies,
Curia libera legalium hominum, or Militarium hominum, a Court of Military, or
Legal-Men: but perhaps the word may more aptly be translated, the
Court-Liberty, or Jurisdiction of a Sith, Gesithe, or Sitheman, in such part
of a County, like our Hundreds, where also he had a Military-Power, to lead the
People out to War, as appears by the Saxon-Laws, and might be then Captain.
That isle man haebbe aet thaer Sylh Twegen pel gehorsaede men, Ll. Aethelstan,
c. 16. Every Man for a Plough shall have two well-furnished Horsemen: They who
were to find these Men had the Land given them for that purpose, A Sithcundman,
what he was.
Mr. Somner, in his Glossary, derives this word from Since, or Gesith Comes, vel
Socius, a Ruler or Governor, and Cund, Kind, as it signifies the condition and
quality of any one, and Mon, Man, that is, a kind or sort of Comes, Governor,
Judge, or Prefect: He was esteemed equal to a Thane, by the valuation of his
Life in A^thelstane's Laws.
Sithcund-Man refused his Service in the Army, or a Military Expedition, he
Forfeited his Land, etc. Ll. Inae. c. 52.

Now we do not read of Land any where forfeited in such case, unless it be
Feudal Land, and such as was given by a great Person, Lord, or Signior to his
Vassal, or Feudatarie, for the performance of Military Service agreed on
between them. Again, if any Man was killed, fighting in Battle, by, or in the
presence of his Lord, or Patron, his Heirs succeeded in Lands and Goods,
without paying an De weris, Thrymsas, Thrymsa.
or Groates; Thrymsa not being 3 Shillings, as Lambard Interprets it, but only
a corruption of the Latin Tremissis, which often occurs in the German Laws, and
was the third part of a Shilling, or 4 d. Ll. Alaman, Tit. 6.. 3. Saiga autem
est quarta pars Tremissis, hoc est denarius unus. Tremissis est tertia pars
solidi, and sunt denarii quatuor; the Germans sometimes reckoned the values of
their Goods by Tremisses, optimus bos 5 Tremisses valet medianus, 4. Ll.
Alaman. Tit. 27. and so frequently in the Laws of the West-Goths.

The Office of a Sithcundman.
His Office, or Place of Trust seems to have been the same, or much like that of
a Centgrave, or Hundredarie; for many small Territories or parts of Counties,
which we now call Hundreds, were anciently, reteining the Saxon expressions,
called Sithesocks, as the Hundreds of Knightlowe* Kineton, and Hemlingford in
Warwickshire, were 16 Hen. Secundi, Sithesocha, de Cnutchlelawa, Sithesocha de
Chinton, Sithesocha de Humliford. Dugdale's Antiq. Warwickshire, fol. 2. col.
2. fol. 297. col. 1. fol. 636. col. 1. Soke being interpreted a Court, Liberty,
or Jurisdiction, where Pleas were holden, and Sith, Gesithe, Sitheman, See
Lageman in Glossar.
or Sithcundman,


Heregeat, or Heriot. Ll. Canut. c. 75. which word Heregate, or Heriot,
Brompton expounds by Relevatio, a Relief, col. 931. and so likewise it is
turned in Edward the Confessor's Laws, where we have this very Law, cap. 35.
Tit. de Heretochiis. And these Heregeats, Heriot and Relief the same.
or Hereots, Ll. Canut. c. 69. were certain Arguments of Feudal Lands, or
Tenures in Military, or Knights-Service. They being due to the Lord or Patron,
upon the death of his Vassal; and besides Horses and Lords Armory, there to
remain for his use and defense when there was occasion. An Earls Heriot.
The Earls Heregeat was 8 Horses, 4 Sadled, 4 Vnsadled, 4 Helmets, 4 Coats of
Maile, 8 Spears, as many Sheilds, 4 Swords, and 200 Marks in Gold; which
payment in Money I take to be the Relief rather for the Earldom, that
differing from the Heriot, or Heregeat, as Sir Hen. Spelman, Mr. Somner, and
others do, in their Interpretation of those words, tell

The Heregeates, or Military preparations of the King's Thanes, or Barons,
Middle Thanes, and Lower Thanes, all Military Men of inferior degrees, follow
in proportionable order, for which see the Law abovementioned.

From these we proceed to the Laws of Edward the Confessor, in Knights, or
Military-Service is fully and clearly set forth and described, Ll. 35. Tit. De
Greve. All Freemen of the whole Kingdom, according to their Estates, Goods, and
Possessions, and according to their Fees and Tenements ought to have Arms, and
keep them ready for the defense of the Kingdom, and Service of their Lords, as
the King shall command.

Birtrick, the Rich Saxons Will, A Rich Saxon gave Money to have his Will
confirmed. In a Rebellion of Earl Godwin and his Sons against the same King, he
and his Son Harold were commanded; Servitium Militum quos habebant in Anglia
Regi contradere: To deliver up, or pass over to the King all their Military or
Knights-Services they had in England, Malm^. fol. 46. b. n. 50. and f. 47.^.
lin. 1.
is very observable in this Matter, in which he gave to his Lord a Bracelet of
80 Marks of Gold, and a Hand-Sword worth as much, Four Horses, two of them
Trapped, and Two Swords Trimmed, Two Hawks, and all his Hounds. And to his Lady
one Bracelet of Thirty Marks of Gold, and one Palfry, to prevail with him, that
his Will might stand, and take effect. Lambert's Peramb. of Kent, p. 493.
Without all peradventure the Lands of Birtrick, bequeathed by his Will, Feudal
Lands, holden in Military-Service, and not Deviseable without his Lord, or
Patrons consent. In Doomesday we find, Tit. Kent. fol. 1. b. in lest de Sudton
and lest de Ailesford habuere ipsi, T.R.E. Sacham and Socham Brixii, Cilt,
Adelold de Elleham Auchil de Becheham, Azor de Lesneis, Levinot de Sudton,
Edward de Eston, etc. to the number of 15; and if so many in these Lests, we
may conclude the like proportion in others. All which must have been Military
Thanes, and held their Lands by Military-Service, for Sacha and Socha, Lord and
Tenants, or his Men and Tenants, as the words import, was, and is a most
certain Argument of Dominion and Seigneurie, which was first obtained from the
Prince, and an Infallible Mark of Military Service due from him that enjoyed
it, and an obligation upon him to perform it: What Feudal Tenures were, and
are, and what the Obligations, Stipulations, or Necessitude between Lord and
Vassal, Patron and Feudatarie; See the Preface to the Norman History, Tit.
Herefordscire consuetudines de Hereford, T. R. E. if any Burgess or Citizen
would leave the City, he might, by the leave of the Prefect, or Governor, and
sell his House to another Man, that was willing to do the Service, that was due
for the same, ibid. from a Burgess or Citizen, serving with a Horse, the King,
when he died, had his Horse and Arms, in the time of King Edward. Doomesday
Beroscire Wallingford Tainus etc. a Thane, or one of the Kings Knights dying,
the King had all his Arms, one Horse with a Saddle, and another without, etc.
in the time of King Edward. This Relief, as it was there called, was a sure
Mark of Military Service, besides what the words Miles dominicus Regis imports.

Instances are frequent in Doomesday Book, that prove Military Service,
Warwicscire, Tit. Terra comitis de Mellent in Patelawe fol. 240. b. col. 2.
ipse Comes tenet in Luditone 12 Hid. and 4 Milites de eo 4 Teini libere
tenuerunt, T. R. E. pro duobus Maneriis. Here we see four Thegnes, or Teins
changed into four Knights, or Horsemen; Hantscire Terra Hugonis de Port in
Neteland Hundred; ipse Hugo tenens Celtone Oda tenuit de Rege Edwardo in Modium
ibi erant december Hidae sed R. E. misit ad servitium (that is, Military Service)
and Geldum pro 4 hidis and 1. Virgat. Terrae; and Milites, are often mentioned
in Doomesday, in Edward the Confessor's time.

Liberi homines and thegnes were Milites, or Soldiers.
And further, it is not to be doubted, but many of the Thegns, or Teins were
Military Men; it is most probable that the liberi homines and Teins, which were
very many in Cestrescire, Scropscire, and Herefordscire, all Bordering
Counties, which are recorded in Doomesday, to have held whole Towns and Manners
before the Conquest were all Milites, and those in other Counties also that
held whole Towns and Manners, though they were no where so many, as in these,
they were entered thus, Cestrescire Atiscros Hund. Rob. de Roelent, tenet de
Comite Brochelune Levenot tenuit and liber homo fuit, so through the whole
Country almost: Scropescire Tit. Terra Roger. Comitis in Odenet Hund. fol. 245.
a. Raynaldus Vicecomes ten. de Comite Mercemeslei, Sewarus and Aluric pro
duobus Maneriis tenuerunt T.R.E. and erant liberi: ibidem, Idem Raynaldus ten.
de Comite Stanweie and Odo de eo. Aluric tenuit and liber homo fuit, ibidem
Rainaldus cum quodam Roberto ten. de Comite Grotintune and Odo de eis, Alfric
and Otro tenuere pro duobus Maneriis ipsi Teini erant liberi, and so in Naisse
Hund. fol. 180. b. Rex tenet Feccheham quinque Taini tenuerunt de Edwino Comite
and poterant ire cum Terra quo volebant, and habebant sub se quator Milites ita
liberi ut ipsi erant. These Milites probably served for them in their Absence,
Ibid. Tit. Terr. Hugon. Lasne, fol. 187. a. col. 1. Hugo Lasne ten.
Chenescestre, Ulwi Cilt tenuit and poterat ire quo volebat. And in this Shire,
the Saxons that held Towns and Manors, T.R.E. are often mentioned with this
and potuit ire quo volebat, which was a phrase equivalent to and liber homo
fuit. The reason of my conjecture that these liberi homines were Milites, is
for that the Normans who made this Survey, called Milites frequently Liberi
homines, See the Laws of William the First, Ll. 52.55, 58, 59. And Spelman's
Glossary, verb. parium judicium, fol. 449. col. 1. And they only served upon
Juries in an Assize upon a Writ of Right. Glanvil lib. 2. c. 11. lib. 9. c. 7.
and those Jurors were always liberi homines or Freemen.

Military Service was always called liberum Servitium, Liberi homines always
served on Juries. Military Service called Free-Service. Tenures.
Free-Service, ib. lib. 12. c. 3. And in other Nations, in these Ancient times,
all Tenures were esteemed base and ignoble, except Military Tenures, which were
reputed Free and Noble. From this Survey we may Bock-land, if it were only
expressed by Allodium, for in the Saxons time there was but little of that, in
respect of other Tenures.

These were the several sorts of Lands here amongst our English Saxons, let us
see whether they were also amongst the Germans. The several sorts of Land
amongst the Germans.
For Gafol Rent, or censual Land, it is as old as Propriety, and therefore in
Germany as well as in other Countries; for all men could not De Mor. Germ. c.
25.
Tacitus frumenti modum Dominus aut pecoris aut vestis colono injungit. The
Lord injoyns his Colon, Clown, Bore, or Rustic, to pay him a certain quantity
of Grain, Cattle, or Clothes, etc. This sort of Land is also found in the Laws
of the West-Goths, lib. 10. Tit. 1. c. 11.25. Capit. Car. lib. 4. c. 39. where
it is called Terra tributaria c. 37. As for Hereditary English Saxons called
Bock-land, it may be as ancient as Gafoland; however we find it in the German
Saxon Laws, Tit. 14.. 2. and Tit. 16. This sort of Land and Alodium, was the
same with the Germans, as appears by the Ripuarian Laws, Tit. 56. de Alodibus.
3. While any of the Masculine Sex remains, a Woman shall not succeed in the
ancient Inheritance; Ll. Anglor. Tit. 6. de Alodibus. 1. Haereditatem defuncti
filius, non filia accipiat. The Son, not the Daughter shall receive the
hereditary Estate of his dead

And. 5. Ad quemcunque haereditas Terrae pervenerit ad istum vestis Bellica (i.
e.) Lorica debet pervenire. The Habiliments of War went with the Land.
To whomsoever the Inheritance shall come, the Warlike Garment and Habiliments
ought to descend likewise; and. 8. After the fifth Generation the Daughter may
succeed, and then the Inheritance passes from the Lance to the Distaff. This
whole Title and Law seems to be concerning ibidem Tit. 13. libero homini licet
haereditatem suam cui voluerit tradere. A Freeman may dispose of his
Inheritance to whom he will, Ll. Salic. Tit. 62. de Alode. 6. de Terra vero
Salica nulla portio haereditatis mulieri veniat sed ad virilem sexum tota terra
haereditas perveniat. No part of the Inheritance of Salic Land shall descend to
a Woman, but the whole Inheritance of the Land shall come to the Males, Ll.
Alaman. Tit. 92. de haereditate, etc.. 1, 2. Courtesy of England brought from
Germany.
Si quae mulier quae haereditatem paternam habet post nuptum praegnans That is,
if any Woman which has a paternal Inheritance, after marriage bring forth a
Child, and dies in Childbirth, and the Child remains alive for some short
space, so as it can open its eyes and see the top of the House, and the four
Walls, and afterward dies, the Father shall enjoy the Mothers Inheritance,
and if the Father has Witnesses which saw the Infant open the eyes, so as it
could see the top of the House, and the four Walls, then his Father had liberty
to defend his Title by Law. But if otherwise, Courtesy of England, and which
the Lawyers call Lex Angliae; and Littleton in his Tenures, Sect. 35. says,
this this Custom was used in no other Realm, than in England only; yet Sir
Edward Coke upon this Author, fol. 30. reports it to be used in Scotland and
Ireland also.

Feudal Tenures from Germany.
We shall now further enquire after the Feudal Land and Tenures German Nations,
to whom De Jur. Belli and pacis lib. 1. c. 3.. 23. n. 1.
Grotius says they were proper, and that they were no where to be found, unless
where the Germans placed themselves, but besides this Testimony of Grotius,
they are often found mentioned in the German Laws, by the name of Beneficia,
which as In verb.
Hottoman observes, were the same with Feuda; and Beneficiare the same with
Infeudare, or Feudum alicui tribuere. Capit. Car. lib. 3. c. 71. Quicunque
beneficium principis habet and non pergit in exercitu, honorem suum and
Beneficium perdat. ibidem lib. 1. c. 132. Omnes Episcopi, Abbates, Abbatissae,
Optimates, and Comites, ceu domestici, and cuncti fideles, qui Beneficia
regalia, tam de rebus Ecclesiasticis, quam quae de reliquis habere videntur
unusquisque suam familiam suo beneficio nutricare faciat, etc. All Bishops,
Abbats, Abbesses, great Men, Earls, or Domestics, and all Vassals that have
Royal Fees, as well of Church Lands, as of others, shall maintain their own
Families, and such as etc. again lib. 3. Cap. Car. c. 19, 20. the Emperor takes
notice that many of his Earls and other Vassals cheated him of his Fees, by
giving or granting the Propriety of them to others, and then by purchasing them
again ( in ipso placito) in the public Court, acquired to themselves an
Inheritance; and in many other places there are provisions made for the
ordering of these Fees or Beneficia. And Vassi dominici comitum Ducis,
Episcoporum, Imperatorum, Regis; and ad Marchiam custodiendam are to be found
in most of the German Laws. Now Hottom. in verb. Feud. in verbo.
Vassus was such an one, as having received a Fee or Beneficium, obliged his
Faith to the Author or Donor of it, and is indeed the same with Feudatarius and
Beneficiarius.

The reason why in these ancient times we find few Laws concerning Fees or
Beneficia, or that we want a just account of them, is because the Feudal Law
was then contained only in Customs. De feud. disput. l. 871.
and Frederick the First, Anno Domini 1158. Radev. invita Fred. 1mi lib. 2. c.
7. n. 30. Yet somewhat before this time, there is extant a notable Feudal
Constitution of Conradus Salicus (who Wippo in vit. Chunrad. fol. fol. 423. n.
20. fol. 424. n. 40.
was chosen Emperor in the plain between Ments and Worms in Germany, and began
his Reign Anno Domini 1024.) amongst the Laws of the Longobards, lib. 3. Tit.
8. L. 4. Conradus Dei Gratia Romanorum Imperator, etc. Praecipimus and firmiter
statuimus ut nullus Miles Episcoporum, Abbatum, Abbatissarum Marchionum vel
Comitum vel omnium qui Beneficium de nostris publicis bonis, aut de Ecclesiarum
praediis nunc tenent, aut tenuerint, Conrades Constitution about Fees.
aut hactenus injuste perdiderint, etc. Conrad, by the Grace of God, Emperor of
the Romans. We command and firmly enjoin, that no Miles, (Knight or Horseman)
of Bishops, Abbats, Abesses, Marquesses, or Earls, or of any which hold or have
held a Benefice or Fee of our public Lands, or the Farms of the Church, or
have unjustly lost them, as well our great Valvasores or Feudataries as their.
Miles and Vassallus Synonyma Hottom. in verbo.
Milites or Vassals, without a certain or evident fault, shall lose his Fee,
unless, according to the Custom of our Ancestors, and the judgment of his
Pares, Peers, etc. That their Sons and Grandchildren should succeed in their
Fees, observing the ancient Custom of giving their Horses and Arms, upon every
Succession, to their Lords or Patrons. Constitution of Lotharius* Lotharius his
Constitution about Fees.
Tit. 9. lege 9. dat. 6. Novembris 1036. made at the request and desire, and by
the Council of his Archbishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, Palatines, and the
rest of the Nobility, for restraining Vassals from aliening and embezling their
Fees and Beneficia, without license of your Lords, by which means the Service
of the Empire had been much impaired and neglected, and the profit and
advantage of their Lords much diminished. Gryph. de Weickbild Saxon. c. 42. n.
12* 13.
These Fees, although they Charles the Great, and in Germany under Conrad the
First, yet their Original is not to be attributed to them; and being much more
Ancient, of right belongs to the Longobards. But whither their Origin was from
the Longobards, or not, certain it is, these Tenures and Lands were amongst the
Franc's a German-people in France, some Centuries of years before Charlemagne;
for Clotharius by his Edict. Vales. rerum Francicar. Tom. 3. fol. 7.
Anno Domini 615.15o Calend. November. 31o Regni sui Parisiis, confirms to all
persons their Beneficia Fees, which had been granted to them by his
Predecessors or himself.

It appears further, for the Antiquity of Feudal Customs. Ib. fol 254. Anno
668. The noble Franc's married not their Daughters without the Kings consent.
That the Noblemen of France, who held Fees or Benefices of their Kings, dare
not Marry their Daughters without their consents; and long before that, it was
usual for the Ib. Tom. 2. fol. 6. Anno Domini 565. Their Children were educated
in the Kings Court.
Franc's to send their Children, when grown up, to the Kings Court, and to
Noblemen, to be educated Arts and Warlike Exercises. This, without question,
was a feudal Custom, and by this way of Education, the Prince had two
Advantages, as our Ib. fol. 438.
Author observes, first that these young men were Pledges of their Fathers
Fidelity toward them, and then that the Nobility were accustomed to their
Kings in their tender years, and learnt how to revere and love them, as their
Parents in whose Court they had been educated.

France and old Germany were beneficia, or feudal Lands, and holden by
Military, and other public Services; the Alodia or Lands of Inheritance being
but few in respect of them, nor were there many Land-holders, especially of
considerable quantities, except the Noblest and Great men, and they were only
such as were Military men, and executed public Offices and Ecclesiastics. Not
but their Mancipia and Servi, their Slaves and Drudges, might hold a Cottage
and some very small parcel of Land at the will of their Lords, as they did here
in the Saxons time before the Conquest.

For, that such there were here then, we find in the Conquerors Survey from one
end of it to the other, under the Norman Names of Villani, Bordarii, Servi,
etc. Take one instance for a thousand* Easessa Tit. Terra regis, Dimid. Hund.
de Harlava, Hadfeldam tenuit Haroldus T. E. R. pro 1. Man. and viginti Hidis,
tunc L. Villani, modo lx. Tunc xix. Bordarii modo xxx. Tunc xx. Servi, modo
xx11. etc. of their Tenures hitherto.

We pass unto their Courts and Judicatories, which if not the same, yet were
very much alike here, and in Germany; for as our English Saxons had their
Scyregemote or Court; The Germans had their County Courts.
so the ancient Germans Placita, Malls or Conventions for doing of Justice, and
they were held twice in the year, Ll. human. Edgar. c. 5. or oftener, leges
polit. Canut. c. 17. So Capit. Car. l. 7. c. 96. Twice in a year
Vt ad Gryph. de Weickl. Sac. c. 66. n. 4. Mallus why so called, ib. c. 65. n.
1.2. Fliccamburch.
It is called Mallus or Mallum, from Ein Mahl, signifying in Saxon a sign, mark,
or token; as a Stone, a Tree, a Perch or Pole, a Cross, a Hill, etc. at which
the Mall or Courts were holden, they being always kept at a certain noted place
amongst the Saxons, and so with us, of which one instance for many in the
County of Norfolk, from a Writ William Rufus upon a claim of the Abbat of
Ramsey, to certain Lands in Holme, in these words. Willielmus Rex Anglorum, H.
Camerario Salutem, facias convenire consedere 3. Hundr. and dimid. apud
Fliccamburch, etc. this without doubt had been a noted place before the
Conquest, for the meeting of all or some of these Hundreds; the place is upon
an Hill about a Mile above the Town of Flitcham, in the Hundred of Freebridge
citra Lin in Norfolk, on the West Side of the way leading from Flitcham to
Shernborn, now called Flitchamburgh, or Burrow, being a square plece of ground
about an Acre, ditched about with an old large Ditch, about eight Miles from
Holme, where the Land in Controversy lay.
Mallum venire nemo tardat, unum circa aestatem, alterum No man shall forbear
to come to the Mall or general Meeting of the Prince or County twice in a year,
about Summer and Autumn, and if there be necessity, or

As in England, so in Germany, the Bishop and Earl both sat in the County
Court.
And as by those Laws of Edgar and Cnute, the Bishop of the Diocese, and
Alderman or Earl, were both to be there present to give mutual assistance each
to other, according to their several Functions and Offices, in executing
Justice. So were they also to be both present in the German Malls or general
Placita, Addit. 2. Car. ad Ll. 10. Ll. Longobard. lib. 2. Tit. 53. or 54. c. 1.
These County Courts are much like the Sheriffs turns, which were duly observed
with us in former times.

County Courts every month in Germany.
Besides these, there were as now, monthly County Courts in every County, and
the like we find in Germany amongst the old Bavarians, Ll. Boioar. Tit. 2. c.
15.. 1. Let there be Placita or Courts Infra illum Comitatum.
so as Peace may be in the Province, and all Freemen shall meet at the
appointed days which shall reside within the County whither they be the Kings
Vassals or the Dukes, all shall come to these Meetings, and he that neglects to
come, shall be punished fifteen shillings. So it was here in the Saxons time
Doomesday in the Customs of Arcenfield in Hereford-shire. Si vice-comes evocet
eos ad Sciremote, meliores ex eis Sex, aut septem cum eo vadunt, qui non vadit
vocatus, det duos solidos vel unum bovem Regi; An Ox valued at 2^.
and qui de Hundret remanet tantundem solvit. And there in the Customs of
Chester T. R. E. erant duodecim Judices civitatis and hi erant de hominibus
Regis, and Episcopi, and Comitis, horum siquis de Hundret remanebat, die quo
sedebant sine excusatione manifesta x. solid. emendebat inter Regem and
Comitem, and so in the Customs of other places in Doomesday, in the time of
Edward the Confessor; there are Mulcts and Punishments to be found for such
Suitors as gave not their Attendance at the County and Hundred Courts.

And further, as we had our 12 times in a year, Ll. Ed. Conf. c. 35. Tit. de
Heretoch.
Hundred Courts, Ll. Edgari, before Ll. Ethelred c. 4. and leg. polit. Canut.
c. 16. So had the old Germans, Ll. Alaman. Tit. 36.. 1. Conventus, etc. let the
Meeting or Gemote, according to ancient Custom, be in every Hundred before the
Earl, his Commissary, or the Hundredary, ibidem. 2. Hundred Courts in Germany.
Let the Court be from Saturday to Saturday, or what day the Earl or Centenary
shall think fit, every seventh The old Germans and Saxons reckoned their time
by nights instead of days, and Winters instead of years; in some spaces of time
we yet retain the Custom, as in seventh night, and fourteenight, or Forthnight.
night when In old Germany all Frays, Fighting, Wounding, Striving, Stealing,
and all great Offenses and Crimes were accounted breach of the Peace, so was it
here amongst the English Saxons, and at this day with us.
the Peace is not Vassal of a Duke, or Earl, was punished twelve Shillings, if
he came not to this Meeting.

Matters of less moment were determined in the German hundred Courts, as well
as in ours, Ll. Longobard lib. 2. Tit. 52. c. 3. Matters of less moment were
^riable in the hundred Court.
No man in the Court, before the Centenary, shall be judged to death, or to
lose his Liberty, his Estate, or his Slaves; but all such things shall be
judged before the Earl, or Legate, or Commissioner, And the greatest matters
were triable in the County.
that is in the

And lastly, as we had our Burghmotes mentioned in our Saxon Laws last cited,
so had the Germans in their Municipia, Burghs, and Cities their Courts and
Judges. Their Burgraves and civitatis praeposit. which Magistrate was sometimes
called Sculdais, Sculdasis, Scultetus or Schults, the Tungreve, Burmester, or
Burgomaster, not unlike our Major, Bailiff, or Alderman; if the Cause were such
as the Sculdais could not end it, he was to direct both Parties to their Judge,
which was the Comes pagi, or Earl of the County, where the City or Town was,
Ll. Longobard lib. 2. Tit. 41. c. 1.2.

The Parity or Identity of Courts being shown, the Method of proceeding in them
shall be considered; the very Forms are not to be found, of what was done in
the Saxons times. The Learned Praefat. in Auth. december. fol. 43.
Seldom make, what was done here, and show the proceedings in Germany. It Is
said in the Fourth of King Ethelred's Laws, made at Wanateing Brompton, col.
896. and Habeantur placita in singulis Wapentachiis; and let Courts be held in
every Wapentach or Hundred, How the English Saxons proceeded in Judgment. The
12 men mentioned in the Saxon Laws, were no Jurymen, but Judges.
and let twelve of the most knowing (so I translate Seniores here) Thanes or
Freemen assemble and meet with the Centenary or Governor of the Hundred, (so I
render Praepositus) and swear they will accuse no Innocent person, nor spare
one that is guilty. These twelve Thanes are Jurors or Jurymen, and the other
twelve mentioned in Lamb. fol. 94.
Senatus consulto de Montic. Wall. Six Welsh, six English, are taken to be a
Jury, ex medietate linguae, to try the Welsh and English in those parts; but
these last in the very Law are said to be Judges and Lawyers, and not Jurors,
and were to be punished in their whole Estates, if they judged not according to
Right and Equity, unless they could excuse themselves by pretending to be
ignorant of the Law; and the other twelve Thanes, named in Ethelred's Law,
Judges, or Assessors with the Hundredary, Reve, or Praepositus; and sworn with
him to do every man right, and were They were Assessors to the Comes in his
Court or Mall, so called from the Saxon Racha, a Cause, and Burgus a Burgh or
City, as if we should say a City Judge; they are often mentioned in the Salic,
and Ripuarian Laws, as Assistants to the Graffio or Comes.
Rachinburgii and So called from the Gryph. Weich. Sax. c. 64. n. 7. They occur
often in the German Laws.
Saxon Scheppen jubere, monere, and were Assessors also with the Count, and
sometimes, as Officers under him, judged Causes. A shadow of these we retain
still in our Coke in Hund. and County Courts, Inst. 4 c. 55, 56. Freeholders
Judges in County and hundred Courts.

Notes. Judgment given by the Major and Assessors in some of our Corporations.
Essoims what and whence that word.


County and Hundred Courts, where the Freeholders, Sectatores curiae,
Free-Suitors are Judges, and Judgment cannot be given in the Court by the
Sheriff, but in the presence of two, three, four, or more of Freeholders,
which is now holden sufficient to entitle them to be Judges, and the Judgment
there given. In some also of our Corporations there are Assessors, with the
Major or chief Magistrate, as in Cambridge Major and Bailiffs, which are four
in number, besides the Aldermen, etc. And we find in the Customs of the City of
Chester, in Doomesday there were twelve Judges of that City, in the time of
Edward the Confessor, which were the men or Feudataries of the King, Bishop,
and Earl.
Scabini of the Germans, which were Judges, Coadjutors, and Assessors with the
Comes and other inferior Judges.

The Germans caused appearance by Summons and Distress.
The Germans had two ways of procceeding, one by Summons, which in their Laws is
called Mannitio, and that only in two cases, Question was about a man's Liberty
or Freedom, as whether he was a Freeman or not, or when the Controversy was,
concerning an Inheritance; in all other cases the Earl or Comes distrained
them, and the proceeding was by The word Distringere, in the old German Law is
used as in ours, to force men to appear in Court, or give satisfaction by
taking a Distress.
Distringas from the Comes after Summons, (a method used this day in many, if
not all of our County and Hundred Courts in this Nation) and if after the
second Summons they appeared not, all their Goods were seized, Ll. Longob. lib.
2. Tit. 43. c. 2.4. Ll. Boioar. Tit. 6. Also qui ad Mallum legibus mannitus
Sunnis an impediment or excuse, hence the Barbarous Latin Exonia, and the
French Essoin, and from them it came into our Law, and in casting and pleading
Essoins, a great part of the Art of our old Law was contained.
non detinuerit, sol. 15. culpabilis etc. If any man, according to Law, was
summoned to the Mall, and came not; if he had no excuse or impediment he was
punished fifteen shillings, so the second, and so the third time; the fourth
time he was in contempt, and his Possessions were seized until he appeared and
gave satisfaction in the matter for which he was summoned, and if he had no
propriety of his own, his Fee, if he had one, was seized. The first Summons was
upon a weeks notice, the second a fourteenights, the third three weeks, and the
fourth 42 nights, or six weeks. The Summons was thus made, he that summoneth
another man, went to his House with Witnesses, How Summons were made.
and summoned him in his own Person, but if he found him not, he gave his Wife
notice, or any of his Family, that they should tell him he was summoned, which
was sufficient, Ll. Salic. Tit. 1.. 3. Comes made his Summons by a Writ or
short writing, in manner of a Citation, a Form of which is extant in Marculphs
formulae, n. 116.

As to the English Saxons, Mr. Lambard Arch. p. 64 65.
thinks their proceeding in Judgment was de plano, and without Solemnity; they
used, for ought he could observe, not to call the parties by writ or writing,
but sent for them by certain Messengers or Ministers, such as we Normans call
Sergeants, from the Latin Serviens a Servant, and if they did use any Writs,
it is strange the Forms of some of them should not be found in the Leigers, or
Books of some of our old Monasteries, or in some of our old Historians. Yet one
there is in Spelm. Gloss. cited out of the Book of Ramsey in Hardy-Cnute's time
about 1041. A possessionary Writ to the Burgers of Thetford, by which he willed
and commanded, that Aethelstane Abbat of Ramesey, should have his House or Farm
in Thetford in Norfolk, as fully and freely, etc. Norman mode by the style of
it, and put in here to secure the Title.

Though we have no clear examples of the Process and Judgments here in the
English Saxon times, yet we find some very ancient amongst the Germans, by
which we may receive some light perhaps, how they proceeded in this Nation.
Appendix The Form of a Judgment in old Germany.
One Hrothelm comes to the public Mall, for the hearing of all Causes holden
by Humfrid Rhaetia, in his Court in the Fields, the Seventh year of the Empire
of Charles the Great, Anno Dom. 807. or there abouts, complains to the Comes,
and claims a House unjustly withheld from him. The Earl calling together the
Witnesses, which were of the very Country where the House was, and charged them
upon their Oath, that they should speak the truth, what they knew in that
cause. And they said they knew the bounds of the House, and the ground that one
Mado had bordering upon it, and they set out the Houses and Land, what belonged
to Hrothelm, and what to Mado, then he commanded them to go upon the place and
show the bounds, which they did, and fixed the bounds between the two
dwellings, as they had said, and the Earl directed many Nobles, there present,
to go with them. This being done, the Comes asked the Scabins what they would
Judge in that Cause, and they said, according to the Testimony of those men,
and his Inquisition, and Judgment was given accordingly. These are the Names
Valeriano, Burgolfo, Vrsone, Stefano, Majornio, Valerio, Leontio, Victore,
Maurestone, Frontiano, Florentio, Siptone, Valentiano, Quintello, Stradaris.
These are the Names of the Scabins, Flavino, Orcisino, Odmaro, Alexandro,
Eusebio, Maurentio, and very many others. N. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. in append.
See the Judgment its self in barbarous provincial Latin.

And that these Testes were the same we call Jurors or Jurymen, is evident
from the Laws of the Longob. lib. 2. Tit. 51. de Testibus. The best persons in
every Territory or City against which there was no Crime, Testes and Jurors the
same. In pago vel civitate. What sort of men the Testes were to be.
were to be Witnesses, c. 3. The Comes or Judges were to admit none of ill Fame
in their Country to be Witnesses, c. 7. Witnesses not to be of any other County
( nisi de illo comitatu) where the things in Controversy were, because it was
presumed none could know better the State and Condition of a man, whether Free
c. 11. Such Freemen only as had a Propriety of their own, were admitted to be
Witnesses, and not Tenants, or such as resided upon their Lords Lands, and had
no Propriety of their own, yet such might be Conjurators of other Freemen,
because they were Freemen, c. 15. Capit. Car. and Ludov. lib. 5. c. 150. Now
let any man consider these qualifications of their Witnesses, and he must think
them the same with our ancient Jurors or Jurymen in England; for Witnesses in
private Causes between man and man, could not be capable of these
circumstances; and that in all probability Jurors were used all old Germany
over, before we had them here: And also that the twelve Thanes mentioned in
King Edgar's Law, were Scabins, inferior Judges and Assessors with the
Aldermen, and not Jurors. Somewhat like our Justices of Peace at our Assizes.

Before the Conquest, and at the time of making the Survey on Doomesday-books,
the Jurors here, were also called Witnesses, Ll. Canut. polit. c. 76. he that
has defended or secured his Land by the Testimony or witness of the County, be
Scire Gewitness, and in Doomesday the Verdict of the Jury is often called the
Testimony or witness of the County or Hundred, Clamores de Eurwicscire North
Treding homines qui Juraverunt Testantur quod Terr. Haward. in Eurwicscire
tenuit Ws. Mallet, etc. de omni Terra Asae testantur quod etc. Norff. Terra
Sanctae Aldred. Hundr. and dimid. de Clatsclosa in Photesthorpa, sed totus
Hundredus Testatur eam fuisse T. E. R. ad Sanctam Adeldred. Hantescire Andov.
Hundr. in And. hoc Testatur Hundr. So in Doomesday, evere where the Hundred
witnesses or testifies this, the Wapentach witnesses or testifies this, or
the County witnesses or testifies this or that, which Juries, or men of the
Hundred or County, that were summoned, sworn, and gave in before the
Commissioners, (that took them) the Particulars of the Survey. And of such
indeed Witnesses, did our Juries consist sometime after the Conquest, for in
Glanvills time, Glanv. l. 2. c. 17.
none were admitted to be of a Jury, that knew not the truth of the thing in
question, and by their own proper view, or sight, and hearing, had had
knowledge of it: Few Laws in these elder times, Few Laws in elder times about
Lands and Possessions.
concerning Lands either here, or in Germany, Beneficia or Fees held in
Military-Service, they were held and governed by such Customs and unwritten
Laws as were not any where published, except in one or two fragments. And all
other Rights concerning them, were only handled in their Lords private Courts.

Above all these Courts, the King had his Court, Ll. Edgar. human. c. 2. Ll.
polit. Canut. c. 16. where no man might Appeal, unless he could not have
Justice done him in the Hundred or County, and then it was to him both a Court
of Law and Equity, An Appeal to the Kings Court when Justice could not be done
other where.
if he could not have right at home, or if that right were too heavy for him,
then let him seek to the King for ease, to the King himself, that he might have
the rigor of the Law mitigated by the Conscience of the Prince, the Germans,
Capit. Car. lib. 5. c. 14. and c. 141. Charts and Donations signed in public
Malls and Conventions.

See Chirographum, Testamentum, Chartae pariculae vel pariles Chartae
indentatae, Indentu^ae. In use in old Germany and old France, before known in
England. Mab^llon. dear Diplomatica, lib. 1. c. 2.


In their public Malls, their Charts of the Sales of their Estates, Donations,
and Traditions, (so they called some Donations and Sales) to Religious Houses
and Monasteries were confirmed. See Chartae Antiquae in Antiquitat. Alaman.
Tom. secundo part prima and Antiquitates Fuldenses lib. 1. where are many
Instances to be found amongst those Charters and Traditions, or as we may call
them, Deeds and Conveyances. See Vadianus Tom. 3. fol. 44, 71. Antiqu. Alaman.
by Godalst. who says, the consent of the Comes was required to all Donations;
to Monasteries, lest such Lands might be given them as paid Rent to the Prince,
and by that means his Revenue might be injured.

And conveyances of Land in our English Saxon times, Somners Gaves, p. 87.
Conveyances of Land entered in the Shire-book. They also and Mortgages Recorded
in the Hundred.
were entered in the Shire-book, or Recorded in the Hundred, perhaps for the
better Security of their Estates: And their Morgages likewise, Hundred or
County present before the Commissioners for making the Conquerors Survey, that
such and such Lands were morgaged, and the Sum for which they were engaged,
Terra invadiata, with the Sum for how much and to whom expressed, which I have
seen in Doomesday more than once, but do not remember the places; and that it
was so here after the Conquest, it not only appears by what Bracton says, fol.
38. n. 12. but it is evident also from the Witnesses to our ancient Deeds,
which were commonly John of such a Town, Thomas of another, and Richard of a
third, etc. who it is probable did not meet to be witnesses to a Conveyance of
an Acre or two, or some small parcels of Land, but they being Suitors to the
County, or Hundred Courts, and bound to attendance there, those Deeds or Charts
were brought thither, and witnessed in open Court.

Laws and Courts, The German Judges and Officers like to the English Saxon
Officers.
so was there a likeness in their Judges and chief Officers. Comes in the Latin
version of the German Laws, and Aldermannus in the English Saxon, was the
general word by which they expressed their Judges, or at least those which were
Counts and Aldermen, were also Judges, and under one Name executed two Offices,
one of a Governor of a County, Shire, or Province, the other of a Judge of the
same; our old Latin Historians translate the Saxon Ealderman, by Regulus,
Subregulus, and Consul, and it was expressed by every of these Latin words,
according to the way of those times, Seld. Tit. Hon. fol. 502. Aldermannus a
general word for many Officers.
The Shirereve or Earl was called Aldermannus Comitatus, The chief Magistrate
of a City, chief Officer of a Burg or Town, and the Constable of a Castle or
Castellan, was called Aldermannus Civitatis, Burgi, vel Castelli, and the
Centenary, Hundredary, or chief Officer of the Hundred or Wapentach, was called
Aldermannus Hundredi, sive Wapentachii. Spelm. Glossar. in verb. Aldermannus.

This word in its signification, imports no more than Senior or Elder, or as it
was corrupted in the Provincial Latin, Signior or Seignior, which in the
Hottom. in verb.
Feudal Law signified Lord or Patron, who had his Feudataries or Vassals, which
were obliged to him by the Donation or Tenure of Fees. And its more than
probable, that seeing most of the degrees of Nobility, and men of Power were
expressed Ealderman in the Saxon times, that it was much used here in the same
sense that Seignior was in Italy, Germany, and the Roman Provinces, for a Lord
or Patron, and sometimes for a great or Royal Vassal, which held immediately of
the King or Emperor, sometimes for such other Vassals (though not of the
meanest rank) that held of them, and sometimes for mere ministerial Officers.

Which later by our Saxons, were often called Thegns or Thanes, and by those
Names, Thegn or Thane what.
and in the Latin Versions of them, by the name of Minister. They are often
found in the Subscriptions of ancient Charters of the Saxon Kings after the
Principes, Duces, and Comites. The chief of which were the Kings, Sel^ Tit.
Hon. (...). 507, 508, 515. Personal.
Feudal Thanes, or Tenants in Grand Serjeanty or Grand Service, is a Service
that cannot be due to any Lord from his Tenent, Grand Serjeanty, what.
but to the King only, because what is to be done, he ought to do it in his own
Person. As to be General of the Kings Army, to bear the Kings Banner, his
Sword, his Spear, or other Weapons: And to bear the Office anciently of
Marshal, Constable, or Champion; to follow the Kings Banner or Standard within
the four Seas, to give notice of the Irruption of Enemies by sound of Trumpet,
Horn, etc.
grand Serjeanty, or Knights Service in chief. These had large Possessions for
their personal Services, had honorary Dignity, and Saxon Ibidem.
Annals, and Story with Earls; as also in Charters of the Saxon Kings. The
Saxon words Eorlas and Degnas, Eorlas and Thegnas.
being by Florentius of Worcester Huntingdon, Hoveden and our ancient
Historians, translated Comites and Barons, Earls and Barons; and the Writers
after the Normans coming, either received Thegn translated by Baro, or used so
to translate it, where they met it in the Saxon Story. These Ibid. fol. 518,
519.
Feudal Thanes, or such as held of the King in chief by Military-Service,
Normans Honorary or Parliamentary Barons; and their Thainlands only were the
Honorary Thainlands, and such as were afterward Parliamentary Baronies.

But to return to our Parallel, from whence we have somewhat digressed. Comes a
general word for many Officers.
Comes was as general a word among the Roman Provincials, and in the old German
Laws, for a Person of absolute Power, Ealderman was with the English Saxons,
and as Greve or Grave was amongst the Germans. Hence Comes Pagorum,
Provinciarum, Civitatis, Limitum. A Count of a Pagus or Country, a Count of a
Province, a Count of a City, a Count of the Borders or Marches against an
Enemy. Grave answers Comes.
To which do answer the German Gawe or Gograve, Landgrave, Burgrave,
Marchgrave, and Gravia in Barbarous Latin for Comitatus, in Saxon and German
Graffscaft And as Comes often signified a Judge, as he did preside in giving
judgment; so Witch-bild. Saxon. Gryph. c. 61. n. 10.
Judges in the ancient Saxon-language were called Besoldus derives Graven (and
perhaps truly) from the German Crawen, Cani, or gray-haired; as if a man should
say, Seniores ancient men, or Senators: And by Interpretation, Discursus polit.
4. c. 4. n. 3. Grave whence.
Nobiles praecipui and Optimates; Noble, the Chief, or best men. The Romans
were frequently first Patres and Senatores, Fathers and Senators, then Comites
or Counts. This agrees with our Ealdormen or Seniores, Oldermen; which denoted
here our chief Governors and Officers under the Saxon Kings.
Graven.

These Dignities of Dux and Comes, Duke and Earl or Count were translated from
the old Roman to the German Empire; being found Constitutions of Emperors, and
other Writers before the Goths and Lombards overran those Countries; nor is it
probable the Roman Emperors did frame their Court according to the Model of
Barbarous Nations. Seld. Tit. Hon. p. 2. n. 22. Besold. Discursus polit. 4. c.
4. n. 1. They were first officiary, afterward had Feuds or Fees annexed to
them during the pleasure of the Donors only. About the time of the declining
Empire, they became Patrimonial and Hereditary, Seld. ibid. n. 23. Besold. ib.
n. 12.

Fees became first Hereditary in Germany, Fees when first Hereditary in Germany.
about the time of Otho the Great, Anno Dom. 970. that is descended to the
Issue Male of him that was first invested with them. And afterward under
Conraedus Salicus about 1030. to Grandchildren, etc. Seld. ut supra. And in
France Dukedoms, Earldoms, or Counties and Baronies, Earldoms and Baronies not
Patrimonial in France before Hugh Capet.
were of old Names of Office and Government only, and not of Patrimonies, and
might be revoked at the pleasure of the Prince; certainly they etc. The first
was Hugh Capet was anointed July 30. 9^7. and died 22. Nov. 996. or 998.
Capet, who to draw to him the affections of the Nobility, by whose help he
had, without right, obtained the Kingdom of France, that made them perpetual,
and then afterward other small Fees passed to their Heirs, whilst they were
Knights or Soldiers, Hottom. in Feud. Disput. col. 845. A. B.

Before the year of our Lord 900. in the Reign of King Alfred, In K. Alfred's
Reign, Earldoms were not Hereditary in England.
Asser. de Gestis Alfredi. fol. 21. n. 20, 30.

Their Possessions here in those times, were sometimes whole Counties,
sometimes parcels of Counties, sometimes a whole Kingdom, as it was in the
Heptarchy, sometimes more, sometimes less, which much depended upon the King's
pleasure, Seld. Tit. Hon. p. 2. c. 5. n. 3. Besides these Possessions, they had
a third part of the Profits of the Shires, and of the Mulcts, and Forfeitures,
as every where may be seen in Doomesday, in the time of Edward the Confessor.
The third part of the Profits, etc. due to the Earl.
For the third Penny of Forfeitures, take one instance for many in the Customs
of Chester, Tit. Cestre-shire; if any one brook the Peace that was granted by
the Earl at the Kings command, of the hundred Shillings which were forfeited
for that, the Earl had the third Penny. ^o it was in Germany.
So was it in Germany, the Earl had the third part of the Pleas, Mulcts,
Punishments, or Composition due to the Crown, Ll. Longobard. lib. 1. Tit. 2. c.
10. who desires to be further satisfied in the various acceptations of Dux,
Comes, Aldermannus, Grave, etc. may see Seldens Tit. Hon. p. 2. c. 1. Hottom.
in verb. Feud. Spelm. Glossar. verb. Aldermannus. Lindinbrog. Glossar. Besold.
discurs. polit. 4. c. 4. Cassiodor formul. lib. 6. Toward the end and in many
other places.

Orders of men, the same in Germany as in England.
Nor did we resemble only, and receive from the old Germans and Saxons our Laws
and Magistrates, but the ranks and orders of our People also. The Saxons had
their From Edel, or Ethel, noble, and Ling or Ing a Patronymick, as some, or a
Termination only, as others would have it; generally it signified all sorts of
the Nobility, but strictly with us, the Kings eldest Son, and Heir of the
Kingdom.
Edlingi, From Fri Free, and the same Termination.
Frilingi, From Fri Free, and Lazzi a Slave.
Frilazi, or They were called Manumissi, because put or delivered from one man's
hand to another; Ll. Longob. lib. 2. Tit. 35. c. 1. Other ways there was of
Manumission, or making men Free by Will, ibid. Tit. 18. c. 3. by Charter or
Deed, Marculph. form. n. 89, 90, 91, etc. by striking a Denarius, or piece of
Money out of the Slaves hand, Vet. Chart. Alaman. Goldast. n. 7. and several
other ways: From the two last, the manumitted Person was called homo
Chartularius, and homo Denariali^, Ll. Longob. lib. 2. Tit. 35. c. 11. And as
there was several ways of being made Free, so was there several ways of
becoming Slaves. By birth when they were born of such Parents; others sold
themselves into Slavery for a price agreed Marculph. Formul. n. 134, 135, 136,
etc. Others for Stealing both here and in Germany, as a Punishment to them,
were made Slaves, Ll. Inae. c. 7. Ll. Burgund. Tit. 57.. 1, 2, 3, etc. the same
Laws in both places.
Manumissi, and Servi; such as had obtained their Freedom, Lib. 2. rerum
German. c. 3. Frequency of Slaves when first in Germany.
and Servants or Slaves. B. Rhemus tells us the frequency of Slaves in Germany,
was after the Battle of Tolbiacum, now Zulch in the Dukedom of Juliers, wherein
Lewis the Great King of the Franc's totally subdued the Almans, and all Germany
beyond the Rhine, Anno Dom. according to Sigebert Gemblacensis, 499. and
brought most of them into Slavery and Servitude, some of them were Servi
fiscales or Fiscalini, whose Bodies and Estates belonged to the King's Revenue;
others were Servi Ecclesiastici, Ecclesiastic Slaves, such as were given to
Monasteries by the King, his Dukes, or Earls; and hence those Prestations and
Payments of the best Beast in the Stable, or best piece of Household Stuff, at
the death of the French Princes, enjoyed many Servants or Slaves in his time.
B. Rhenanus in the place before cited. All these sorts of People were amongst
our English Saxons, though by other names. The Nobility were called Sapientes,
Witen, Ealdermen, Cynings, Thegns, Eorles, Hlafords, etc. The Freemen most
commonly called Freoh, the Servants or Slaves Theows or Thowes.
Dowes, and the manumitted Slave or Servant Freoman.
Freot mon, a freed-man, or man made Free. Somners Saxon. Dictionar. in verb.
the first three sorts occur often in the Saxon Laws, and the last in the
eleventh and twelfth Chapters to the Preface of Alured's Laws. That very many
Servants and Slaves there were here in the Saxons times, before the Conquest,
may be proved from Doomesday-book, which the Normans in their Latin called
Villani Bordarii Servi, etc. And without doubt many there were of the Liberts,
or such as were made Free, seeing no

The German Servants or Slaves could not better their condition; what they got
and wrought for was their Patrons, Servants their Condition in Germany.
they might be given away, changed, or sold, Godalst. Antiq. Alaman. Tom. 2.
Chart. 3, 4. And it is not to be thought their condition was much better here,
for it should seem by some of our old Saxon Laws, that the very Freemen of
ordinary condition, had Ll. Inae. c. 3. If a Servant, Drudge, Freemen had
their Lords and Patrons in old England.
or Slave work upon a Sunday by his Lords command, let him be Free. If a
Freeman works the same day without his Lords command, he shall lose his
Freedom or sixty Shillings. Freemen had their Patrons in old Germany.
And in several places of these Laws, Freeman and Lord are mentioned as
relatives; and so it was in old Saxony, that Freemen were under the Protection
of Noblemen, Ll. Saxon. c. 16. Liber homo If a Freeman that was under the
Protection of a Nobleman, was banished, and forced to sell his Inheritance, let
him first offer it to his Patron; to the same purpose there was a Law amongst
the West-Goths, lib. 8. Tit. 1. c. 1. The State and Condition of a Freeman in
Germany.
The State and condition of an ordinary Freeman in Germany, seems chiefly to
relate to his works or labor. By which we may take notice of Liber homo qui
statum suum in potestate habet, and pejorare eum and meliorem facere potest,
atque ideo operas suas diurnas Nocturnasque locat, Capit. Car. lib. 3. c. 79. A
Freeman which has his state or condition in his own power, may make it better
or worse, and therefore may dispose of it, or take Wages for his night or day
labor, which a Servant, Villain, or Slave could not do. Saxon Freemen were
constantly bound to their good behavior.
Nor were the English Saxon Freemen of such an absolute free condition, but
that they stood constantly bound to their good behavior; for King Alfred
instituted Hundreds and Tithings, and contrived every Shire into such Portions
and Divisions, that every English man living under Law, might be in some
Hundred or Tithings, so called where ten men and their Families were cast into
a Society, all of them being bound to the King, Spelm. Glossar. in verbo.
for the peaceable and good behavior of each other of their Society. Of these
there was one principal Person, who from his Office was named Tienheofod or
Teothungman Decurio, Capitalis Friborghus, or Plegius, the head Ten man, or the
head pledge or Friborgh, so called from Fri free and borgh, Surety or Pledge,
and signifies no more than a free Pledge (the Servi Slaves and Villainies being
under the power nigh borgh, or as we now write it neighbor, for Vicinus our
next Pledge, a Surety that lived near us. The Office of the Tithing-man, or
head Ten man, as appears by c. 32.
Edward the Confessor's Laws, was to determine of smaller matters there
specified, between neighbors and such matters and trespasses as belonged to
their Farms. We have at this day the word left only in our Court-Barons, and
Leets, that is Deciner, Disiner, or Desiner for Decenner, one of the Decenna, a
Handborgh, or inferior Pledge, See Spelm. Glossar. in verbo Handborowe.
Tithing; and if he were accused of any Transgression, he should forthwith
bring in some one of the same Hundred or Tithing, that would be his Surety to
answer the Law; but if he could find none Malmsb. fol. 24, a. n. 40.

These were the Divisions of Shires into Hundreds and Tithings, but where to
six the first Division of the Nation into Shires and Counties, I find not.
Hist. Croyland. fol. 595. b Lo^d. Ed.
Ingulph was mistaken when he fixed it upon this Alfred, who began his Asser.
in v^t^ Alfred. fol. 7. n. 50.
Reign Anno Dom. 871. for in Asser. Menevensis, fol. 2. n. 10. and n. 50. we
read of Ceorl Earl of Devonshire. Eanwulfe Earl of Sommerset-shire, and fol. 4.
n. 40. Osric Earl of Hantshire, and Ethelwolph Earl of Berrocshire, in the
Reign of his Father Ethelwolph, and his Brother Ethelbert, before him in the
years 851, 855, and 856.

The manner of making the English Saxon Laws and German Laws the same.
Further the Agreement between the old Germans, and our English Saxons, in the
manner of making their Laws, is worthy notice. In the second year of Gundebald
the most glorious King of the Burgundians, about the year of Christ 500. those
Laws were made Praesat. ad Ll. Burgund.
cum concilio comitum and proc^rum, with the advice of his Earls, Counts, and
Nobility, whereof 32 Comites there named. The Alaman. Praesat. vel Tit. ad Ll.
Alaman.
Laws were made or renewed in the time of King Clotharius, Bavarian Laws, made
about the same time by Theodorick King of the Franc's, and perfected by
Clotharius, It Is not to be supposed that all the Christian men, or 100 men in
his Empire, were advising or assisting in, or any ways knew of, or were
consulted, in the making of, or establishing those Laws.
with the assistance of his Princes, and all Christian People within his
Kingdom; where we may note that Populus here and in the Title to the Alaman
Laws, signifies only the Nobility of lesser note, that is, of an inferior
Order, to Dukes and Earls, or Counts Caroloman Dux and princeps Francorum Anno
Dom. 742. there was a Synod held, and Laws made, most of them Ecclesiastical;
concilio Servorum Dei, that is, as he there expresses it, by the advice of his
Archbishops, Bishops, and Presbyters, and Optimatum suorum, and of his
Nobility. The same year in the Kalends of March, he held another Conventus
Synodalis, or Synodal Convention, where all the former Decrees of the last
Synod were confirmed by the venerable parts of God, as also by his Earls, lib.
5. Capit. Car. and Lud. c. 2, 3. The Salic Laws were made in Praefat. ad Ll.
Salic. The English Saxon Laws how made.
Mallo, in the public Convention, and were by Charlemaign caused to be written
Anno Dom. 798. The manner of making our English Saxon Laws, exactly answers
this, Lamb. in Ll Saxon. And Tham ylderstan Witan Miare Theod.
Ina King of the West Saxons, who began his Reign Anno Dom. 712. made Laws at
the request, and by the advice of Cenred his Father, Hedda and Erkenwold his
Bishops, all his Ealdermen or Senators RAM YLDERTAN WITAN MINRE THEODE and of
the Seniors Sapientes and Prudentes, wise men In verb. Feudal in verb.
Sapientes Sapientes in our Saxon Laws signifies the Temporal and Spiritual
Nobility, or Bishops Earls, Thegns, etc.

There is no particular mention of any Aldermen, Eorles, Gerefes or Bishops, or
other sort of Saxon Nobility, and yet without doubt they advised in the making
of all the Laws which proceeded or followed these Prefaces, it is only it was
done with the advice of his Wisemen.


Hottoman interprets to be Lawyers, or men skilled in the Laws. Sometim^s it
might be so in the Feudal and other Laws, and the places by him cited, being
called by the Legislators by way of advice and Counsel. But in our Saxon Laws,
the Sapientes or Witena were diverse times taken for the whole Baronage or
Nobility, as I may so say: And in this sense it is used in the 49. Chapter of
the Preface Alured Laws. Where if Sapientes or Witen signified only men skilled
in the Laws, then were none of the temporal Nobility present at the making of
those Laws, unless perhaps they were the Lawyers meant by that word, as being
many of them Judges and Justiciaries at that time. King Edgar, who began his
Reign 950. prefaceth his Laws thus. This is Seo geroedniisse, The Edgar Cyno
mid his Witena getheah^e geraed, etc. which literally is to be thus translated.
This is the Constitution or Ordinance which King Edgar made with the Counsel
and Advice of his Wisemen. The same Preface is to the Laws of Ethelred, who
began his Reign 979. made at Woodstock in Mercia, which was then governed by
the English Laws, that is, the Laws of the East Angles. Also the
Senatus-consultum Walliae has the same Preface. And the Laws of Cnute.
Likewise both Ecclesiastic and Humane. Now in all these Prefaces Witan
Sapientes, Wisemen must be taken for, or
wise men of his Nation; and according to this method, were the Prefaces or
beginnings of all the Saxon Laws.

And as according to this manner, all the considerable people of Germans, had
their own Laws agreeing generally in many things, The several Nations in
Germany had different Laws. So it was in our English Heptarchy.
though different in some particular Usages and Customs. So without doubt had
our English Saxons under the Heptarchy, every Kingdom whereof, having been
reared and erected, either by a different Germany, or else by the same people
under diverse Leaders, who were invited hither, and became sharers of the
Nation, and established Laws either according to the Laws of the Country from
whence they came, or their own Dictates what they thought most fit and
expedient. In process of time all these Laws became merged, In Process of time
all the Laws were called the West Saxon Law. The Danish and Mercian Laws why so
called.
and by coalescence, had the Titles only of the West Saxon Law, (And after the
Danish Invasions and Dominion) of the Danish Law, and the Mercian Law, which
had its denomination from the Mercians, West Saxon Law was the Law of that
Kingdom, and the Danish Law the Law introduced by the Danes, while they had the
Dominion in the whole, or some parts only of the Nation, The several Kingdoms
of the Heptarchy not governed by a distinct Law.
yet perhaps the several Kingdoms of the Heptarchy, nor the greatest part of
them, were constantly governed by the same Law, but sometimes by one, sometimes
by another, or many of them had one and the same Law; for Mercia in the Reign
of King Ethelred, was governed by the English East-Angle Law, which was in all
probability most Danish at that time.

And as in Laws, legal Customs, and Usages; so likewise they agreed in other
things and Practices. The old Germans or Saxons were wont to defend and secure
their Bounds and Limits by great ^itches; The old Germans and English Saxons
secured their Lands by great Ditches.
such was the Saxon Ditch or Vallum, that King P^pin Adelm. an^al. An. 7^8.
forced, and by which he entered Saxony, after a stout defense the Saxons made
upon it, to keep him out of their Country. And that also, called Olaus Wo^mius,
fol. 55.
Dane-Werke, erected by the Danes as a Boundary and Defense against the Saxons,
made of Earth and Stakes in Jutland, or rather the Duchy of Sleswick, from the
River Sley on Olaus Wormius above cited.

Offa's Ditch.
Like unto these we had in England Offa's Ditch, which Asser in the Life of Fol.
3. ^. 30
King Alfred, calls Vallum (from whence our English word wall) was a Bank cast
up on the brim of a Ditch, Vallum, what.
palisado'd or fortified with sharp Stakes outwardly toward the Ditch with
their points depending, to hinder any thing from getting over it; and the
distance between the Palisado's or Stakes, Intervallum, what.
was called Intervallum from Vallis, denoting the same with Sudis, or Tribulus
a sharp Stake or Turn-pike; and from hence also Vallum, so that not every great
Bank was to be called Vallum, but such an one thus fortified.
Vallum, and says, that between the Britains and Mercians, it reached from Sea
to Sea. Britan. fol. 478. Radnor-shire.
Cambden tells us, this Ditch was made by Offa King of Mercia, as a Boundary
Mercia from the Britains; that it was in length from the mouth of the River
Dee, to the mouth of the River Wye above 90 Miles, and that Harold made a Law,
that whatever Welch-man was found on the English side of it with a Weapon,
should have his right hand cut off. Speed in his general Description of Wales,
says it began at Basinguerke in Flint-shire, and passed to the South Sea near
Bristol, in length about a hundred Miles; and that the Country between this
Ditch, and the Rivers Dee and Wye, Wales.

Wans-ditch.
In the West of England, there was another Ditch called Wans-ditch or
Wodens-ditch, passing East and West through the planes, and near the Cambd.
Wilts. fol. 176.
middle of Wiltshire, which was a Boundary of the West Saxons Kingdom, and bank
of defense against the Mercians.

In the East of England there are other Ditches, as the first and New Market
Heath, Devils Ditch.
called Divels-Ditch, about a Mile from the Town, it begins at Rech, a Town in
Cambridgeshire, which stands just upon the Fens, Morasses, or Bogs, and the
Ditch passes through that which is now the Street to the very Fens. And is
extended over the Planes called New-market-Heath, about eight Miles to
Wood-Ditton in a straight Line, where it ends in Woods and Thickets, or in
that Country which is at this day called the Wood-lands. The height of the
Bank in many places is now East Angles against the Mercians: And as they
extended their Limits, the East Angles threw up another Ditch, Seven-mile Ditch.
now called the Seven-mile Ditch, distant from the other about six or seven
Miles South-west. The Bank whereof is now in many places from the bottom of the
Ditch forty Foot, as it rises sloping in height, and the breadth of the Ditch
proportionable. It begins in the Wood-lands at Balsham in Cambriage-shire, near
a House and Farm called Godscroft, and is carried on not altogether in a
straight Line about four Miles to Fulborn Town end, and from thence turns
toward the two Towns of Wilbraham Northwest, and ends upon the Fen or Boggy
ground between Fulborn, Wilbraham, and Teversham, and begins again on the
North-west side of Qui-Watering, and passes along from thence through
Fen-Ditton-street, to the River Grant, or the low grounds of Ditton,
Chesterton, Malton, etc. then perhaps Fens or Bogs or drowned Lands.

All these Ditches were drawn and cast up either from and between several
Waters, Rivers, Fens, and Woods, Ditches of Defense, in what places usually
cast up.
or between Woods and Woods, for under the shelter and security of these, the
English Saxons Germans, thought themselves safe. And that the Germans
constantly retired to Bogs, Fens, or Woods, as to their places of safety and
retreat, we have sufficient Testimony from Ex Edit. St^ph. 1581. fol. 147.
Herodian, who tells us that the Emperor Maximinus having wasted much of
Germany, destroyed the Corn, and permitted to his Soldiers the Plunder of the
Cattle, could find no Enemy for that the People had left the Field and plain
Country, and fled or retired into Woods and Fens (so I turn Paludes) and from
thence they annoyed Romans. The old Germans retire into Woods and Bogs.


Lastly, the English Saxons followed the practice of those in old Germany, in
holding their general Councils, Conventions, They held Councils as our English
Saxons at Easter Whit-sunday, and Christmas.
or Placita's, at Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontide, and that is the reason
the old German Historians and Annalists, as well as ours, do constantly note in
their Histories, where their Kings or Emperors kept these Feasts, because at
those times were present also in Court all the Bishops, Saxon and Danish Kings,
before the Conquest, with the advice of the Clergy and Nobility in their great
Councils and Conventions, made diverse Laws for the Government of the Church of
England, and regulating the Clergy, And in them make Laws Ecclesiastic, as
well as Civil.
and directing them in their Offices, and appointing what they should do; and
amongst all their Laws put out by Lambard, there are some Ecclesiastical Laws
to be found, but more especially and the greatest number in Alfreds, Edwards,
's, and Canute's Laws. Some whereof are cited in the second part of this
History.

And it appears by the ancient Laws of the German people, the Saxons, Franc's,
English, Burgundians, Lombards, etc. and by the Capitularies of Charles the
Great, and Lewis his Son, and by their ancient Historians, that the like usage
and Custom was in old Germany, and that theirs as well as our Princes, called
these Synods, presided

Yet it cannot be denied, but that the English Church received many things from
the Roman, by way of Commendation, Advice, and Direction, as being that place
from whence the Saxons in a great measure received their Conversion, and Rome
the most celebrious and famous place for the Profession of Christianity, as it
was then generally used and practiced; though from thence it received not in
aftertimes the Ecclesiastical Laws and Rules made for the Government of it; No
Encroachments upon Regal Authority, or Popes Legates here before the Conquest.
nor were the Pope's Encroachments upon Regal

True it is, that in the Saxons times before the Conquest, at the request of
Kings, and other great Personages, that Popes did confirm the Foundations,
Liberties, and Privileges of several Monasteries, and strengthen them (as the
Founders in those ignorant

Three Objections against that Assertion answered.
Against what is said, there are three Instances which may be insisted on, the
first is of an Appeal to Rome, by Wilfrid Bishop of York, having been put from
his Archbishopric by Ecgfrid King of Northumberland, and that he was restored
by the Authority of Pope Agatho; and being removed from his See the second
time, by King Alfrid Son of Ecgfrid, he was restored by order and command of
Pope John the Sixth. This Story is related at large by Lib. 3. de gestis
Pontif. fol. 147. b. n. 10.
Malmesbury, yet as he says, it was but a Compendium of a larger written by one
See Actorum Benedictinorum. Tom. 5. Edit. Par. Per J. Mabillon.
Stephan a Priest, but wanting an opportunity of perusing these Acts of the
Benedictines, shall relate the matter of fact from Bid, who at the time of
this Controversy was twenty years of Age, and a Monk in the Monastery of
Weremouth in the Bishopric of Duresme, but then, and not long before in the
Diocese of York, who being a diligent observer of these things, must give us
the best account of this case.

The matter of Fact, as it is by him reported, was this, Bid Eccl. fol 443.
Anno Dom. 680. Wilfrid put from his Bishopric by Ecgfrid.
Wilfrid was forced from his Bishopric by King Ecgfrid; he appeals to Rome,
where in the presence of Pope Agatho, and many Bishops, by the judgment of them
all, he had been accused without fault, and found worthy of his Bishopric. But
at his return, notwithstanding this Judgment, he was Ibidem fol. 292.
kept out of his Bishopric by King Ecgfrid: or as De gest. pontif. fol. 11^.
b. n. 50.
Malmesbury has it, both by the resistance of Ecgfrid, and Theodore
Archbishop of Canterbury, who was a Greek sent from Rome, and made Archbishop
by the Pope. This Wilfrid had his Education mostly at Rome, and in France,
Ibidem fol. 148. a. n. 30
from whence England with the French Elegancy or Fineness, and the Roman Pomp.
And the Lux, Splendour, and Pomp he lived in, were his only Ibid. 149. a. n. 40.
Crimes, if we believe that Author; and he says not plainly that he was thrust
out of his Bishopric, but that King Ecgfrid and Archbishop Theodore, He was
not restored by the Pope.
taking notice of his pompous way of living, Theodore thought the largeness of
his Diocese, and profits of it, sufficient to maintain four Bishops; and
therefore he ordained two other Bishops (for Ibidem fol. 111. b. n.
he placed and displaced Bishops where he pleased) in that Diocese, and for
this cause he appealed to Rome.

After the death of Ecgfrid Bed. uti supra fol. 444. An. Dom. 686.
in the second year of the Reign of Alfrid began his Reign the first Floren.
Wigorn. fol. 566.
day of June, Anno Dom. 685. when his Brother Ecgfrid was slain, so that
Wilfrid was restored to his Bishopric Anno Domini 686. and to that of Ibidem.
Hagustald or Hexam in Northumberland only, and put out again five years after,
Anno Domini 691. in the time of Pope Sergius, who was created, as Chron.
Pontif. Romans fol. 21.
Onuphrius says, December 17. 687. and died September 8. Anno Domini 701. to
whom Pope John the Sixth succeeded, 29 of October following, and died the
seventh of January Anno Domini 705. And if any Appeal was, it must be to this
John the Sixth, above ten years after his last Expulsion by Alfrid, which is
scarce credible, for probably he would not have had patience to have staid so
long.
Alfrid his Son, Wilfrid received again his Bishopric at the But received
again by King Alfrid And five years after removed again. An. Dom. 685.
he was again thrust out of his Bishopric. When also appealing to Rome, he was
by Pope John the Sixth, and many Bishops, judged in some things objected
against him, to have been falsely accused, insomuch that the Pope wrote to
Alfrid, to restore him to his Bishopric; Ib. fol. 447. Alfrid contemns the
Popes Letter, etc.
who contemning the Message he brought, refused to receive him, yet after his
death, he was restored, after some bandying, and agitation of his cause,
Ibidem. He was restored by a Synod after his death.
by Osred.

Ibid. 446. A pretended Vision helped much toward his Restitution.
A pretended Vision he had in his return out of Italy, much helped toward his
Restitution, in which he said Michael the Archangel appeared unto him, in a
great Fit of Sickness he had at Meldae, (now Meaux upon the River Marn ten
Leagues from Paris) and told him he should be recovered from death, and also be
restored to a great part of his Possessions which had been taken from him in
England, Rome Acca a Priest, who without doubt made the best advantage of it in
those credulous times.

There accompanies this Story of Wilfrid in Spelman's Councils, Tom. 1. fol.
163. and Labbe's Councils, Tom. 6. col. 576. taken from the former, The
Privilege of the Abbey of Medehamsted alias Peterburgh.
a Privilege granted by Pope Agatho to the Abbey of Medeshamstede now
Peterburgh, wherein it is said, in the person of Agatho, and as a Constitution
of his, that the Abbat of that Monastery, should be the Legate of the Roman
See, through all England; and that such as had made a vow of Pilgrimage to
Rome, and were hindered by Sickness or by any other impediment or necessary
cause, if they came hither they might receive the same Absolution and Remission
which they should have received at Rome.

This Privilege Sir Henry Spelman had out of a Saxon M. S. belonging The
Privilege in the Saxon Tongue.
and says he never saw the Latin Original. But now that is extant in Dugdale's
Vol. 1. fol. 66. And in Latin.
Monasticon, and does no way agree with the Saxon Privilege; in this it is only
said that the Bishop of the Diocese should not have any Prelatical Power over
this Monastery, nor the Abbat thereof, but should use and respect him as if he
were a Roman Legate, his Fellow-minister of the Gospel, and his Companion, not
his Subject. That all People of Britain, and other near Nations, who being
hindered by the length of the Journey, or other necessary cause, might visit St.
Peter here, as effectually as at Rome, his own City, where they might pay their
Vows, Hence its name of Peterburgh.
have Absolution from their Sins, and receive Apostolical Benediction, etc.
Both these Privileges, though very much different in Form, Matter, and their
Attestations, or Witnessing, yet they bear date the same year Ibid. fol. 67
col. 2. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. fol. 266. One of them false. Both suspected.
viz. 680. and are both said to be sent by Ibid. fol. 67 col. 2. Spelm. Council.
Tom. 1. fol. 266. One of them false. Both suspected.
Archbishop Wilfrid from Rome, so Saxon Tongue is the Counterfeit, seeing the
other from Rome was in Latin, and therefore most probable to be the Original:
or probably they might both be false, for the Monks had an excellent Art in
making Bulls, Privileges, and Charts, for advancing the Credit, Reputation,
and Interest of their Monasteries, as appears by the Controversy between the
Gervas. Dorob. col. ^458.
Archbishop and the Monks of St. Augustin's in Canterbury, Anno Domini 1181.
near five hundred years Durham, and Abbat of St. Albans, the one said to be the
Privilege of King Ethelbert; the other of Augustine their first Archbishop of
Canterbury; both which for the reasons there alleged, were suspected not to be
what they pretended they were, and therefore not allowed.

But if true, they prove not a Popes Legate here before the Conquest.
But suppose the Latin Privilege to be true, it makes nothing to Legantine
Power or Authority, and therefore Legate here, must signify an ordinary
Messenger, Minister, Commissary, Deputy, or Official; as it did most frequently
in those elder times: so that when it is said in the Latin Privilege, the
Bishop was to respect the Abbat as a Roman Legate, Legate anciently signified
only a Commissary, Official or ordinary Minister.
than as the Pope's Commissary, Official, or Minister, to give, in his stead,
Papal Absolution, and Benediction to such as had made Vows for Pilgrimages to
Rome, and from hence, no doubt, the Pope had a considerable Income or
Composition.

The other two Instances follow the first, Anno Domini 905. in the Fifth year
of King Edward the elder Son of Alfrid. He received a chiding Letter from Pope
Formosus, Malmsb. de gest. Regum fol. 26. n. 30, 40. Monast. Angl. vol. 1. fol.
220. col. 2. and fol. 221 col. 1. A pretended Letter from Pope Formosus
commanding him, and all his, Phlegemond Archbishop of Canterbury presided; in
this Council were made seven Bishoprics, where before there were but two. This
Synod ended, the Archbishop goes to Rome with the News, which was very
acceptable to the Pope; and at his return, ordained or consecrated those seven
Bishops in one day, which before in the Synod had been Edulfe Bishop of
Crediton in Devon-shire; which Bishopric, afterward, Edward the Confessor gave
to Leofric his Capellan, Anno Domini 1046. who (as was believed) moved with
Divine Inspiration, cast about how he might procure the Sea to be removed from
Crediton to Excester; and because he thought it could not be done without the
Authority of the Roman Church, he sent Lambert his Priest or Capellan, to
solicit this Affair with the most Holy Pope Leo; and he most willingly
complying with his request, wrote to the King, using these words in his Epistle
(which by the Incongruity both of Words and Latin, seem to be the Invention and
Scribble of some illiterate Monk) Cum vero ad vos miserimus Legatum nostrum de
aliis dicens, nunc autem de nostro fatre jam dicto Leofrico, praecipimus atque
rogamus ut propter Domini and The King, Ibidem n. 50. Edward the Confessor, by
the Pope's order changes the Seat of the Bishopric from Crediton.
with great Devotion, giving his assent to these Letters, forthwith gave to
Bishop Leofric the Monastery of St. Mary and St. Peter the Apostle in Excester,
that he might fix his Episcopal Seat there, and after some Months coming
thither, he took him by the right hand, and his Queen Edgith by the left, and
placed him in his Pontificial Chair in the said Monastery, in the presence of
many of the chief Nobility of England.

By both these Stories it might seem, that the Popes had some power over the
Kings of England in these times, for that they commanded as well as requested,
them to do the things abovementioned. Both these Stories are groundless.
But both of them may well be suspected, for there never was but one F^rmosus
Pope, who died December. 14. in the year 895. according to Onuphrius in his
Chron. Pont. Roman. fol. 27. ten years or at least before Edward the Son of
Alfrid, who was not King of England at that time, having begun his Reign Anno
Domini 900. as is noted in Lambards Saxon Laws, or Anno Dom. 901. according to
the Saxon Annals. And not much unlike to this Message, is the pretended Epistle
of Leo to Edward the Confessor: For Leo the Ninth (who it must be if any)
entered not upon the Papacy, until the twelfth of February in the year 1049. as
in Onuphrin in that year which was the seventh and not the third of the
Confessor's Fol 221. col. 1. lin. 3.
Monasticon, from a M. S. in Cotton's Library.

I shall conclude this present matter, and this first part of the Saxon
History, with this Remark, that many Bulls, Charts, Privileges, Epistles, etc.
reserved in the Saxon Monasteries, were thought fraudulent, and suspected by
the Ancients themselves: And that by the Observation of some Norman words,
often to be found in them, the Popes Sittings, they may be detected.

THE SECOND PART
Roman Empire sinking under its own weight, Vortigern alias Guortigern. A. D.
446.
and not able to afford the Britains any further assistance (as was said in the
close of the Roman Story) who were at this time under the pressure of many and
grievous Miseries, Fire, Sword, The Miseries of the Britains.
and Devastation from the Picts and Scots, Gildas c. 17. p. 39, 40.
and the Romans departure, appears not. By Gildas it is probable there were
several petty Princes or Rulers in the several parts of Britain, which were
once the Province, and subject to the Romans; as Constantine, Aurelius Conanus,
Vortiper of the Demetians, Cuneglasse, etc.

Ibid. p. 66, 72, 75, 77.
from the Violence of their cruel Enemies, an horrible Plague invaded them,
which swept away such multitudes, as the living were scarce able to bury the
dead; Ib. 46, 47, 48.
and then also the News was brought them of the Intentions of their inveterate
Enemies, that they were about to return and invade them with such a force, as
should take possession of their whole Country: at this time Vortigern otherwise
Guortigern, Vortigern chief in Britain
whether by choice as some, or force as others report, obtained the Government
over the Britains; to whose Easiness, Supinity, Luxury, and Effeminacy, Ibidem,
and so forward.
the Ignorance, Avarice, Debauchery, and Simony of the Clergy; and after these
great Examples, an Universal Lapse of the Nobility and People into notorious
Extravagancies and Impieties, The Cause of the Ruin of the Britains.
Gildas passionately attributes the ruin of his Country.

Vortigern. A D (...).
To prevent which (as was thought) and to repel the Violence, and hinder the
Incursions and Invasions of the Picts and Scots, Vortigern held a Counsel of
his Great men and Nobles, (...). 49. Mela^b l. 1 c 1
being excited thereto by the no^se and clamours of his People, wherein by
general consent it was agreed to call the They were originally Scythians, and
came out of Asiatic Sarmatia, and possessed, and overcame many Countries, yea
almost the whole Roman Empire, under diverse names of Goths, Huns, Vandals,
Sweves, Lombards, etc. and since that time have conquered other Countries under
other names, of Saxons, Danes, Normans* etc. Their Breed was great, and they
multiplied so fast, that their uncultivated Country was over-stock'd with
Inhabitants, and not able to sustain them, which forced them upon their
Expeditions; their multitude of Wives being the chief cause of such a vast
increase of People. These Invaders of Britain had then names from the Gothic or
Runic word Saex, which signifies a Falchion, Sheringham de Orig. Gent. Aug. p.
207.
or short hooked Sword, or long Knife, which they wear as their usual Weapon,
from thence Saxons.
Saxons out of They who inhabited, or rather committed Piracies from all the
Sea Coasts of Germany, between the Rivers Rhene and Elb; and also upon the
Coasts of the Cimbrian Chersonesse, or Peninsula which now contains Jutland,
the Dukedom of Sleswic, Ditmarsh, and Holsatia, which by Bid and other ancient
Authors, are truly called Saxony.
Germany to their Aid, They call in the Saxons.
who no sooner received the Invitation from the Britains by special Messengers,
A D. ^49. B^d. l. 1. c. 15 Gildas, p. 50.
and arrived soon after, under the conduct of two Heugist and Horsa, in three
Long-boats or Galleys, which in their own Language they called K^ules in the
Island of Tanet, which was bestowed on them for a place of Habitation; Tanet
Isle given to the Saxons.
and being received with much favor from the King, and great affection of the
People, by giving their Faith on both sides; the one part stipulated to defend
the Britains Country, Bid. Ibid 58. Malm. l. 1. c. 1.
the other that over and above their place of abode, they should receive
sufficient Pay and Reward for their Services done them.

Here they were not long without Employment, for the Scots not thinking perhaps
of any opposition, The Saxons overthrew the Scots and Picts
came boldly into the heart of the Nation, whom the Saxons encountered and
overthrew.

Hengist and the Saxons taking notice of the Fertility of the Country, the
Easiness, Sloth, and Negligence of the People, send home to invite others to
be sharers of their Future Success and Expectations, More Saxons invited and
arrive. Bid. l. 1 c. 15.
and there came in sixteen Ships, People of three Nations in Germany; Saxons,
People that inhabited Anglia vetus, or old England; the Country lying upon that
part of the Baltic Sea, Old England, where.
between Flensburgh and Sleswic, now called Angle^.
Angles, They came from Jutland in Denmark, situated more Northerly in the same
Chersonesse or Peninsula.
Jutes,

With them, and by design of Hengist, came over his most beautiful I do not
think this Story very Authentic, it not being in Bid or Gildas, and Malmsbury
relates it as a Report only.
Rowen or Ronix, who was ordered by her Father, to attend on Vortigern at an
Entertainment he had prepared for him, Malm. l. 1. c. 1.
who surprised and deeply smitten with the Elegancy and Beauty of Hengist at
first cunningly dissembled, what he most of all desired, pleading the meanness
of his Daughter, and the inequality of the Match, but at length, with much
seeming unwillingness and reluctance, he consented, and received all Kent for a
Reward. Kent given to Hengist.


With which not being satisfied, he insinuated into the King, Vortigern. A. D.
450.
how advantageous it would be to him, that he sent for yet a greater Force
under the Conduct of his own and his Brothers Son Octa and Abissa, Matt. Westminster.
An. 453.
who might defend the Northern Borders (where he advised they might be seated)
from the Invasion of the Scots and Picts, while he guarded the East parts of
his Nation; Vortigern consents, and there came presently with the Messengers,
Three hundred Ships more with Saxons arrive in the North. Malm. l. 1. c. 1.
three hundred Ships Orcades, and making every where Impressions upon the Scots
and Picts, took Possession of that which is now called Northumberland, and the
parts adjacent, but it was not then erected into a Kingdom, until the time of
Ida.

The Saxons now thinking their numbers sufficient to overpower the Britains,
League first with the Scots, and upon pretense that Britains, and threaten,
that if they were not augmented, they would break Friendship with them, Gildas,
c. 24, 55, 56.
and wast their Country; and without delay they practiced what they threatened,
The horrid Destruction of the Britains, Ibid.
every where destroying and spoiling the adjoining Cities and Countries,
burning all before them from the East Sea, to the West; Pastors, Priests, and
People, all were slain together. The lofty Tops of public and private
Buildings, Bid, l. 1. c. 15.
the Stones of lofty Towers and Britains, were taken in the Mountains, and
butchered in heaps, others constrained by Famine, yielded themselves eternal
Slaves to their Enemies, others passed beyond the Sea, while others in
continual fear, committed the safety of their lives to Rocks, and Precipices
near the Sea, high Mountains, and thick Woods, enjoying yet their Country,

After this vast Destruction and Ruin, Gildas, c. 25, 26
these Cruel Spoilers returned home, and what were left of the miserable
Britains, peeped out of their lurking places, and taking courage, and Embodying
together, put themselves under the Conduct of Roman, for Gildas calls him
Ambrosius Aurelianus, P. 59. c. 25.
and says his Parents were adorned with Purple, which was an honorable Garment
and Badge amongst the Romans.
Ambrosius Aurelius, The Britains under the conduct of Ambrosius Aurelius, beat
the Saxons.

Gild. Ibid. Bannesdown Battle, A. D. 489.


(who was the only man of note of the Romans that was in Britain, and weathered
out this storm) provoked their Enemies to Battle, Britains, sometimes the
Saxons winning the Field, until the year of the Siege of Bathe, (forty years
after the Saxons arrival) A large Hill or Mountain so called, Camb. Brit. 170.
not far from Bathe in Somersetshire, where yet remain the footsteps of some
Military works.
when on Bannesdown the Britains overcame them with a mighty slaughter.

Vortigern. A. D. 445.
The old Saxon Annals relate things otherwise, and that Hengist and Horsa fought
against Vortigern at Aylesford in Kent near Maidston, whence the Lath of
Aylesford has its Denomination.
Aylesford, where Horsa was slain, Chron. Sax. An. Dom. 455.
and Hengist with his Son Eso took upon them the Government of Kent. That they
two fought with the Britains at Now Crayford upon the River Craye in the Lath
of Sutton in Kent.
Creganford, Britains leaving Kent, Four Battles between the Saxons and
Britains. A. D. 457.
fled to London in great fear; eight years after they again fought the Britains
nigh Wyppedsfleot, where there were twelve The Saxon words here translated by
Comites and Barons, and sometimes by Principes, are Ealdormen and Thegn,
signifying properly Elders and Ministers, or Servants; they are sometimes in
Latin translated by Dux and Consul, these words being equivalent, and
signifying the same thing in Monks and old Authors. Selden's Title of Honor,
502.

Earls of the Britains slain, and the Saxon Thane Wypped, who probably might
give name to the Britains received such a Defeat, Twelve chief Britains, etc.
Wypped the Saxon slain. A. D. 473. Matt. Westminster. A.D. 454, 455, 456. Monmouth.
fol. 48. b. The Saxons forced into Tanet. Driven to their Ships, and out of
Britain. Hengist returns A. D. 460. After Vortimer 's death.
that flying in great Consternation, they left an infinite spoil to their
Enemies.

Matt. of Westminster Dilates upon Galfrid of Monmouth, and reports this
matter, yet after another manner; that the Britains offended with Vortigern for
marrying a Pagan Wife, and his compliance with the Saxons, deposed him and set
up Vortimer or Guortimer Saxons, drove them into the Isle of Tanet, and from
thence into their Ships, who leaving their Wives and Children, fled into
Germany; from whence Hengist having heard of the death of Vortimer, returned
again with 300000 as Monmouth, but with 3000 only as Westminster, when sending
Messengers to Vortigern (who after the death of his Son Vortimer, was restored
to his Government) speciously pretending the cause of Vortimer yet living, whom
he desired above all things to vanquish and expel the Nation; that since he was
dead, and Vortigern restored, he committed himself, and the People he had
brought with him, to his disposal; that as many as he would, should stay in his
Kingdom, and the rest presently be sent back into Germany, Propounds a Treaty
with Vortigern.
offering also a personal Treaty by a select number on both sides, for the
determining and concluding all things according to the Will of Vortigern, to be
managed by the Chiefs of both A. D. 461.
who being mightily pleased with the pretense, appointed May Day, and for the
place some where near As some report at Stone^enge near Amesbury in Wiltshire,
or Ambrosebury so called in memory of Ambrosius Aurelius, where there was a
Monastery of three hundred Monks, as some would have it, before Queen Alfrith
built there a Nunnery.
the Monastery of Ambry, when and where both Parties by agreement were to meet
without Weapons.

But Hengist had so contrived it, that his Saxons had under their This Tale
seems to have been taken out of Wittichindus, and applied to the Britains, De
gestis Saxon, lib. 1. c. 1.
where are the same things spoken verbatim of the Saxons and Thuringians.
Watchword given (that was Neme Eour Saxes) they drew out and killed every
Three or four hundred of the British Nobility killed by Treachery.
the next Britain, the Latin words in Monmouth are Barons and Consules. There
is nothing of this Story in the Saxon Annals.
to the number of four hundred and sixty Barons and Earls or there abouts, and
took Vortigern Prisoner, who to redeem himself, gave them as much of his
Country as they Wales.

Malmsbury says, that Hengist invited his Son in Law, Vortigern, A. D. 461.
with three hundred of his principal Britains, to a Feast, and when he had well
animated them with Liquor, De gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
he industriously provoked them with smart Reflections, which first begat
Tumult and Wrangling, and afterward Blows and Fighting, where the Britains
perished to a man, and the King being only saved alive, redeemed his Captivity
by the Gift of three Provinces. The impious Cruelty of the Saxons against the
Christian Britains.
A sad Ruin and Desolation now Britains, from these barbarous Enemies to
Christianity, their Churches were every where levelled with the Ground, their
Priests killed at the Altars, the Scriptures burnt, Religious men fled into
Caves, Mountains and Deserts to preserve themselves.

These different and almost contrary Relations are left to every man's Judgment,
either to believe or reject them, the sum of all is only certain, that the
Saxons after their first arrival under Hengist and Horsa, came into this Island
at several times, and under diverse Commanders Britain, (except Wales) which was
divided into seven Kingdoms or Governments. The first whereof was the Kingdom
of Kent, The first Kingdom of the Saxons. Kent. A. D. 457. Before the first
Tome of Spelman's Counsels.
and contained only that County, and had these following Kings.

Doubtful, or Foreign Kings of Kent.

1 Hengist 31 2 Esk 24 3 Otta or Octa 20 4 Immeric 29
Christians
5 Ethelbert 56 6 Eadbald 24 7 Ercombert 24 8 Edgbert 09 Lothar 12 10 Edric 07
Christians
11 Withred 33 12 Edbert 23 13 Edilbert 11 14 Alric 34 15 Edilbert 03 16
Cuthred 08 17 Baldred 18

This Kingdom began Anno Domini 457. and ended Anno Domini 823. and continued
366. years.

The Second was the Kingdom of the South Saxons, The second of the South-
Saxons. A. D. 491.
and contained Sussex and Surrey, or at least, part of it; this was mostly
under the Power of the Kings of Kent, and the West Saxons, and therefore the
names of but few Kings are taken notice of in Story, which were these Pagans
1 Aella 32 2 Cissa 75
Christians
3 Ediltwach alias 25 Ethelwolf 25 4 Berthum 5 Authum



It began Anno Domini 491. and ended about the year 600. and continued about
109 years.

Vortigern, A. D. 519.
The Third was the Kingdom of the West Saxons, and contained Cornwall (where
notwithstanding were part of the Remains of the Britains) Devonshire, The Third
of the West Saxons, A.D. 519.
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Wiltshire, Hamshire and Berkshire, and had these
Kings, Pagans
1 Cerdic 16 2 Kenric 26 3 Ceaulin 31 4 Celric 06 5 Ceolwulf 14
Christians
6 Cinegils and Quincelm 31 7 Kenewalc and Sexburge 32 8 Esciwin 02
Christians
9 Kentwin 09 10 Cedwalla 02 11 Ina but fifteen only according to Lambards
Leges Inae 38 12 Aethelhard 14 13 Cuthred 14 14 Sigebert 01 15 Kinewulf 29 16
Brithric 16 17 Edgbert 37



It began Anno Domini 519. and ended 1066. at the coming of the Normans, and
continued 547. years.

The Fourth of East Saxons, A. D. 527.
The Fourth was the Kingdom of the East Saxons, which contained Essex,
Middlesex, and part of Hartfordshire: The Dates of the Kings Reigns are not
added, because there is nothing certain of them.

Pagans
1 Erkenwin 2 Sledda
Christians
3 Sebert 4 Sexred Brothers. 4 Seward Brothers. 4 Sigebert Brothers. 5 Sigebert
the little. 6 Sigebert the good. 7 Swithelm 8 Sigher and Seba 9 Sigheard and
Senfred 10 Ossa 11 Selred 12 Swithred

It began Anno Domini 527. and ended 747. and continued 220. years.

The Fifth was the Kingdom of Northumberland, A. D. 547.
which contained Lancashire, Yorkshire, the Bishopric of Dresm, Cumberland,
Westmorland, Northumberland, and part of Scotland, as far as Edinburgh, The
Fifth of Northumberland, A. D. 547.
Frith; and had these Kings.


1 Ida 12 2 Aella 30 3 Edelric 04 4 Edelfrid 24
Christians
5 Edwin 17 6 Oswald 09 7 Oswy 28 8 Egfrid 15 9 Alfrid 19 Osred 11
Christians
11 Kenred 02 12 Osric 11 13 Ceolwulf 08 14 Edgbert alias Eadbert 20 15 Osulf
01 16 Ethelwald al. Mollo 06 17 Alured 09 18 Ethelred al. Ethelbert 04 19
Alfwold 11 20 Osred, then Ethelbert again.

It began Anno Domini 547. ended about 792. and continued about 245 years;
after Ethelred was slain, there was an Interregnum of 33 years, when Egbert
King of the West Saxons possessed himself of this Kingdom; yet there were some
Reguli or petty Northumberland in the Danes time.

The Sixth was that of the East Angles, which contained Norfolk, The Sixth of
the East Angles, A. D. 575.
Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, with the Isle of Ely, and had these Kings.


1 Vffa 07 2 Tityst 10 3 Redwald 44 4 Eorpwald 12
5 Sigebert 6 Egric 7 Anna 13
Christians
8 Ethelbert 9 Ethelwald 09 10 Adulf 19 11 Aelfwald 07 12 Beorna 24 13 Ethelred
52 14 Ethelbert 05

Anno Domini 575. ended 793. and continued 218 years, when Ethelbert was slain
by Offa, the Kingdom of the East Angles was united to the Kingdom of the
Mercians, yet St. Edmund reigned afterward, and was murdered by the Danes, A.
D. 870.

A. D. 582.
The Seventh was the Kingdom of the Mercians, which contained Glocestershire,
Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Leicestershire, The Seventh of the
Mercians, A.D. 582.
Rutlandshire, Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire,
Buckinghamshire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Shropshire, Nottinghamshire,
Cheshire, and part of Hartfordshire, and had these following Kings.

Petty Kings.
Pagans
Cridda Wibba Cheorl 1 Penda
Christians
2 Peada and Os^y Dukes 03 3 Wulfer 16 4 Ethelred al. Aedired 30 5 Kenred 04 6
Ceolred 08 7 Ethelbald 41
Christians
8 Beornred 01 9 Offa 38 10 Egfer 01 11 Kenulf 02 12 Kenelm 01 12 Ceolulf 01
13 Beornulf 03 14 Ludecan 02 15 Withlaf 13 16 Bertulf 13 17 Burrtred 22 18
Ceolwulf

It began under Cridda Anno Domini 582. under Penda Anno Dom. 625. Anno Domini
874. and continued 292 years.

Thus the first Leaders of the Saxons thought themselves worthy of Kingdoms and
Principalities; and such shares of their new acquests, as they thought equal to
the Power and Numbers they brought hither, their Interest and Desert. They all
in one degree or other, derived themselves from Woden, according to the
ambition Bid l. 2. c. 5.
But yet this Heptarchy became so established afterward, that whosoever had
most Power, was reputed King of the English, and Ethelbert King of Kent, at the
time of his Death, commanded over all those Countries, on the South Side of the
River Humber, in whose time Redwald (afterward King) was only Duke or Earl of
the East Angles, whatsoever is worth notice, (and that is

But before I pass to them, it may not be amiss to note that there were yet
remaining in Wales, many Bishops, Abbots, Priests, Religious Persons, Spel.
con. fol. 62. A. D. 560.
and Monasteries; and that Christianity flourished amongst the Britains there,
and at the command and by the sole Oudoceus Bishop of Landaf, there were at
that place three Synods called, wherein were excommunicated and cursed for
Murders, Three Welsh Princes excommunicated by Oudoceus Bishop of Landaf,
before Augustines coming.
three petty Welsh Kings and Princes, Mouric, Morcant, and Guidnerth, and
compelled to make satisfaction by Fasting, Prayers, and Alms.

The Saxons all this while, and some time after, remained Pagans, Ethelbert
King of Kent. A D. 596. The Heptarchy.
until Gregory Bishop of Rome, moved by Divine Instinct, (as it is said) sent
Augustine and many other Monks to preach the word of God to the English Nation,
who smitten with fear, when they were forward in their Journey, thought it more
safe to return, Augustine sent from Rome to convert the Saxons, A.D. 596. Bedel.
c. 23. He is afraid to proceed in his Journey.

But pressed by Gregory, goes on.


than commit themselves to the Inhumanity and Barbarity of those People; but
Gregory, encouraging them by his pressing exhortatory Epistles,

They landed, passing through France, in the Isle of Tanet, Ethelbert King of
Kent.
Ethelbert then being King of Kent, who at that time commanded all the Country,
as far as the River Humber; it was a main advantage to Gregory's and
Augustin's, Ibid. c. 25.
that Berhta the Queen of Ethelbert was Daughter to the then King of France and
a Christian, to whom was permitted the free use of her Religion, and also the
company and assistance of Luidhard a Bishop, and her Chaplain; and from whom
it is most probable, Gregory was first solicited to this undertaking by private
Messengers sent to Rome. In what manner Augustine made his approach to
Ethelbert, vid. Spel. conc. fol. 217.
When Ethelbert was pleased to admit him, he made his approach, having a Silver
Cross carried before him for a Banner, the Image of our Savior

This the manner of the Address which Ethelbert received in the open Air,
avoiding coming under any roof, Ibidem. He fears Witchcraft.
fearing Fascination or Witchcraft, and that he might be deceived and overcome
with malefick Practices; the message delivered to him by Augustine, was eternal
Life, and an endless Reign with the true and living God, and the word of life
which he preached to him and all his Company.

Ethelbert answered that they brought fair Promises, His Answer.
but because they were new and uncertain, he could not assent to them, leaving
those things which had so long time been observed by the English Nation, but
because they were Strangers, coming from far Countries to communicate unto him
such things as they believed to be the best, and true, they should kindly
receive all necessary accommodation; nor would he prohibit, but that they might
join to the Faith

He assigned them convenience of Habitation in Canterbury his Metropolis, Ibid.
c. 26.
on the East side of which there was an old Church dedicated to St. Martin,
built while the Romans were in Britain, in which Queen Berhta used often to
pray; in this they began first to meet, to sing, pray, celebrate Mass, Preach
and Baptize: here despising the World, they began to imitate the Apostolic
Life of the Ibidem. Ethelbert would have none forced to Christianity.
As Ethelbert freely became a Christian himself, so he would have none forced
into Religion, having received from those that instructed him that the Service
of Christ ought to be voluntary, Ethelbert King of Kent. A D. 597. The He^^archy
and not compelled. After this Augustine passed into France, and by the
Archbishop of Arles was ordained Archbishop of England, at the command of
Gregory, and returning into Britain, he forthwith sent to Rome Laurence a
Priest, and Peter a Monk, Ibid c. 27.
to give Gregory an account of the Faith of the English-Saxons, and his being a
Bishop, with Instructions that they should bring back from Gregory certain
Solutions of Questions sent by them, some whereof were these.

Ibidem.
First, How a Bishop should converse with his Clergy, and what Churches not
endowed, nor Tithes paid. Primer. 69. A Pall what.
There were then no Tiths paid, nor Churches endowed, but the Clergy lived upon
the Oblations and Contribution of the People, which doubtless was very great,
as is evident by this Question and Answer.
of the Oblations of the People should be divided amongst the Priests,
Questions sent to Gregory by Augustine.
etc.

To this he answered that it was the received Custom in the Church, and of the
Apostolic See, to divide the Oblations into four shares or portions, one to
the Bishop and his Family for Hospitality, another

The Second was, whether those Clerks that could not contain, might marry, if
so, whether they should return to the World, or leave their employment.

The answer was, that such Clerks (which were the lesser Clerks, as Choristers,
Sacrist, Acolyte, etc.) that were not in Orders, might marry if they could not
contain; but yet they were to live under an Ecclesiastic Rule, etc.

The Third was, when as there is but one Faith, why were there several Customs
in diverse Churches, and why there was one Custom Roman, and another in the
Gallican Church.

To this he answered and advised, that out of every Church he should choose
whatsoever things were Pious, Religious, or True, and instill them into the
minds of the English, the other are frivolous and impertinent Questions not
worth any man's notice.

A. D. 601.
Some years after, by reason of the great number of Converts gained every day,
Mellitus, Justus, etc. sent into England.
he sent as assistants to him Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, Rusinianus, and with
them a A Pontifical Vesture, or as Archbishop Usher, the Badge of a
Metropolitan made of Lambs Wool, in breadth not exceeding three fingers, A
Mark of Obedience and Subjection. Bid lib. 2. c. 17, 18.
above their other Ornaments; it was sent by the Popes as a Note or Mark of
Subjection and Obedience of those that received it, to the Se^ of Rome, as
appears by Pope Honorius his Epistles to Edwin King of Northumberland, and
Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury; it was called a Superhumeral, and was made
partly, or appeared to be most part of Wool, that it might signify the lost
Sheep placed upon the shoulders.
Pall, Vestments for the Altar, Sacerdotal Vestments, Books, Utensils,
Ethelbert Eadbald. A. D. 602. The Heptarchy.
etc. and power to ordain twelve Suffragan Bishops under him, and an Archbishop
of York whom he pleased, when that City and the Country adjoining should
receive Christianity, so that he should also be a Metropolite, and have twelve
Bishops under him, to whom he would likewise send a Pall, but so as he should
be under the direction of Augustine.

Ethelbert, in the Consines of the West Saxons, Bid l 2. c. 2. Augustine
procures a Conference with the British Bishops, etc. and cannot persuade them
to Unity.
Augustine obtained a Conference with the British or Welsh Bishops, and by
brotherly admonition, persuaded them to a commune use of some Rites in the
Roman Church, and endeavored to persuade them to preach to the Pagan Saxons,
but neither by Prayers, Persuasion, or Chiding, could he prevail with them, and
for that time left them; afterward induced by a Miracle, (as my Author says)
that was, a blind man cured by the Prayers of Augustine, when as he found no
relief British Priests, He procures a second Conference.
they consented to a second Meeting and Conference, where were seven British
Bishops, and many learned men, especially out of the Monastery (called in the
English Tongue) Bancornaburge, Ibidem. Dinooth Abbat of Bangor.
whereof Dinooth was at that time Abbat; but by the way as they came to this
meeting or Synod, they asked the advice of a Holy and Prudent man, that was an
A Recluse, one that sequestered himself from the World, and lived severely in a
constant recess, from (...), recedo, secedo.
Anachoret, whether they should follow the preaching of Augustine, Ibidem.
and not rising to them at their approach, they presently apprehend him to be a
proud Person, and in passion contradict whatsoever he said; The British
Bishops and Priests contradict Augustine, and refuse compliance.
and although he desired their obedience and compliance in three things only,
That is, Easter, in the manner of Baptism, according to the Custom of the Roman
Church, and that they would assist them in preaching the word of God to the
English-Saxons, affirming he would forbear them in other things, though
contrary to the Usages and Customs by him practiced; yet they utterly refuse to
do any of these things, or to accept him for their Archbishop; They will not
accept him for their Archbishop.
saying one to another, that if now he will not rise to us, how much more would
he slight and contemn us if we were under his Power, and

He ordained Mellitus a Bishop, A. D. 604. Ibidem c. 3.
and directed him to preach in the Province of the East Saxons, where Sebert
reigned though Subject to Ethelbert, whose Nephew he was by his Sister Ricula,
and so soon as they received the word of Truth by the preaching of Mellitus,
Ethelbert founded the Church of St. Paul's in London, St. Paul's built and made
a Cathedral. Rochester made a Bishopric.
and made it the Episcopal Seat for him and his Successors; he also at the same
Justus Bishop of Rochester in Kent.

Ethelbert Eadbald. A. D. 608. The Heptarchy.
About this time died Augustine, or as Matthew. Florilegus in the year 608. or
Nicholas Trevet in the year 611. to whom succeeded Laurentius a Roman, ordained
by Augustine himself while alive, that he might take care of the weak State of
his Church scarcely yet established; Spelm. con. f^l. ^^1. Ibid. c. 4. Augustine
dies. A. D. 6^1. Laurentius Archbishop* Bid lib. 2. c. 5. fol. 120.
and that it might not one hour want a Pastor, he brought the Scots and
Britains to some Conformity with him, especially in the Observation of Easter.
Ethelbert gave his People Laws and Statutes, by the advice of his wise men,
according to the example of the Romans, Saxon Tongue, and observed in Bede's
time, wherein his great care was, to punish such as had stolen any thing from
Church or Churchmen, thereby showing how gratefully he received from them the
Christian Faith.

Ethelbert and Sebert dead, their Sons revert to Paganism. A. D. 613. or 616.
Ibid. c. 5. Mellitus and Justus go into France. Eadbald converted by
Laurentius. The Londoners refuse Mellitus Ibid. c. 6.
He and Sebert being dead, Eadbald the Son of Ethelbert, and the three Sons of
Sebert, relapse into Paganism, from whom, and their People, after they had
received many Affronts, and being without hope of their reduction to
Christianity, M^llitus and Justus departed France, but Eadbald being converted
by Laurentius, calls them back to preach.

Rochester easily received Justus, but the Londoners rejected and refused their
Bishop Mellitus, rather submitting to their Pagan Priests, and delighting in
their old Heathenish Vanities; after the death of Laurence, first Mellitus and
then Justus were Archbishops of Canterbury

Edwin King of Northumberland.

Bid lib. 2. c. 9. Edwi^ demands Edelburge for Wife.


Edwin King of Northumberland sent to Eadbald King of Kent, to desire his favor
that he might take his Sister Edelburge to Wife, he answered that a Christian
Virgin ought not to marry a Pagan: Edwin receiving this answer, promised he
would do nothing contrary to the Christian Faith which Edelburge professed, and
that he would permit to her, and all that came with her, whether Men or Women,

Paulinus is ordained Bishop, and sent with her.

An. Dom. 625.


Upon these Terms the Virgin was sent to him, and with her Paulinus (who was
ordained Bishop by Justus, about the twelfth of the Calends of August 625.)
that he might preserve her, and the whole Pagan Vanities. His further design
was also, to bring off the whole Province whether he went, to the Christian
Religion; he labored, but in vain, amongst the People, while their King
remained Pagan, whom upon every occasion, he persuaded and allured to embrace
the Christian Faith; yet he would not do it without mature deliberation, Ibid.
c. 13.
and the advice of his principal Friends and Counselors, and having been first
well instructed in Christianity Paulinus, he consulted his great men, and
propounded the Reasons to them, The Northumbrians converted.
that happily might move them to the Christian Religion; they all complied with
him, and first of all Coifi his chief Priest, who also first of all offered to
destroy the Altars and Temples of their Gods, Edwin and his Nobility baptized
by Paulinus.
which he presently effected; and then Edwin, with all the Nobility of his
Nation, and many of the common people, in the eleventh year of his Reign, were
baptized; The Heptarchy. A. D. 628.
after this vast numbers of the vulgar flocked in every day to be instructed in
Christian Religion, and to be baptized, Ibid. c. 14.
the next Rivers serving instead of Fonts, which at that time they had not, nor
were there then, very few, if any Churches built, unless one small one at York,
which Edwin caused to be built of Wood, for the Solemnity of his own Baptism,
where he fixed Paulinus his Episcopal Seat; after the Conversion of Edwin moved
with much Devotion toward the Truth, endeavored to persuade Eorpwald King of
the East Angles, Eorpwald King of the East Angles receives Christianity. A. D.
632. Ibid c. 1^. A. D. 633.
with his Province, to receive the Faith and Sacraments of Christ, whose Father
Redwald had received them in Kent; but returning home, overruled by his Wife,
to make sure of the right way, he erected in the same Temple, one Altar to
Christ, and another to the Heathen Gods. Eorpwald being slain also not long
after he became a Christian, his Province remained three years in their Errors,
until Sigebert took upon him the Government of this Kingdom, who while his
Brother lived, remained an Exile in France, Sigebert King of the East Angles.
A. D. 635. Ibidem.
where he received the Faith of Christ, and at the very entrance upon the
Government, took that care that his whole Province might receive it also:
Faelix a Burgundian Bishop contributed very much to this work, They are
converted by Faelix.
and was almost the sole Author of the Conversion of this People; he applied
himself to Honorius Archbishop of Canterbury, and acquainting him with his
Design, received his Mission from It Is most probable it was Dunwich upon the
Coast of Suffolk.
Domoc.

Honorius the Pope sent to Paulinus and Honorius then Archbishop of Canterbury,
each of them a Pall, and Decretal Letters; Ibid. c. 18. The Archbishop of York
and Canterbury have power to consecrate one another. A. D. 634. Bid l. 3. c.
1. etc. 3. Aidan sent for by Oswald. An. Dom. 637.
wherein he gave Power, that if either the Archbishop of Canterbury or York
should dye, the Survivor might ordain and consecrate another in his Rome.

After the death of Edwin, the Northumbrians fell from Christianity, and were
reconciled again in the Reign of King Oswald, by Aidan, who at his request was
sent out of Scotland; he was a Bishop, and had his Seat in Holy Island or
Lindisfarn.

About this time Byrinus sent by Pope Honorius, The West Saxons converted. A.
D. 637. Bid l. 3. c. 7.
came to convert Pagan parts of Britain, and landing amongst the Gevisses, or
West Saxons, he prevailed with their King Cynigils to be baptized, to whom
Oswald King of Northumberland was Godfather, and afterward his Father in Law
by Marriage of his Daughter; after his Conversion of the West Saxons Cynigils
as King of the Nation, and Oswald as the most Potent, who then had the Title of
King of England.
both Kings gave him Dorchester in Oxfordshire for his Bishops Seat. But King
Cenwalch divided his Nation into two Parishes or Paroches, and erected another
Bishopric at Winchester, where he placed Wine as Bishop.

The Heptarchy. A. D. 6^6.
Peada Prince of Mercia or Middle England (his Father Penda yet living and
remaining Pagan) for the love he had for Alfrede the Christian Daughter of Oswi
King of Northumberland whom he married, The Me^cians converted. Bid l. 3. c.
21. A. D. 656.
became a Christian himself, and propagated Christianity in his Dominions by
the means and assistance of Finian a Bishop, and of Cedda, Adda, Bett^, and
Diuma Partners.

The Controv^rsie about East^r. Ibid. c. 25, 26. A. D. ^64.
The Question about the Observation of Easter, and some other Scots followed the
Quatodeciman way, according to the Asian Tradition, the English the Roman
manner of observing Easter, and some other small things, Managed by Coleman and
Wilfrid. O^wy joins with Wilfrid.
the Controversy was managed by Coleman a Scotch-man, Bishop of Holy-Island,
and Wilfrid an Englishman, and Abbat at a meeting of diverse of both Judgments,
at the Monastery of Streneshalch Whitby in Yorkshire,) where in the opinion of
King Oswy of Northumberland, Wilfrid prevailed, whom he made Bishop of York.

Ibid. l. 4. c. 1.
Deusdedit Archbishop of Canterbury being dead, Ercombert King of Kent, and
Oswy King of the Northumbrians sent Wighard to Rome, desiring he might be
ordained Bishop of the English Church, who dying at Rome, Pope Vitalian
ordained Theodore a Monk, then Rome, Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury. A. D.
668. Ibid. c. 2.
a Grecian born, and (very learned man in those times Archbishop of Canterbury)
he founded a Library and School there, had the Greek and Latin Tongues taught,
with other Arts and Sciences, he brought this Church to the Roman Order and
Discipline in all things, and it is thought he was the first that had the Title
of Archbishop, though others before him are so called; in his fifth year he
called a Council at Hartford, A Council called by him at Hartford. A. D. 6^^.
in noteing the Acts whereof he styles himself only Bishop of Canterbury, and
the other Bishops his Spelman's Councils, he ejected Wilfrid out of his
Bishopric of York, Fol. 153. A. D. 680. Bid l. 4. c. 17.
but he was restored again by See more of this at the latter end of the first
part of this History.
Agatho at Rome.

This year at the command of Ecfrid King of Northumberland, Edilred King of
Mercia, Another Council called at Hatfield by the c^mmand of four Kings. Sp^lm.
council. fol. 169.
Aldwulf King of East Angles, and Lothar King of Kent, he called a Council at
Hatfield; in which were received the Canons of five Councils, viz. Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon, and the fifth at Constantinople held against
Theodore and Theodoret, and those Constitutions made at Rome by the Synod held
under Pope Martin, Ibid. fol. 172.
Anno Domini 648. which Agatho this year sent England. Bid l. 4. c. 18.
This year likewise John chief Chantor of St. Peter at Rome, brought over
hither the yearly order and course of singings and readings, as it was
practiced there.

Wilfrid was not idle, although thrust out of his Bishopric, The Heptarchy. A.
D 692.
for then by his preaching he converted the South Saxons, whose King Aedilwalch
had been before baptized in Mercia. Ibid l. ^. c. 13. The South Saxons
converted. Isle of Wight converted. Bid l. 4. c. 2. Theodo^e erects
Bishoprics in several places. Dr. Marshams Preface to the first Volumn of the
Monasticon


After the same manner, and by the same Wilfrid, was the Isle of Wight
converted, and by others the other parts of Britain subject to the Saxons or
English: Theodore was the first Archbishop to whom English Church submitted,
who traveling about all the Island in the Saxons Possession, appointed and
consecrated Bishops, and erected Bishoprics in fit places, and distinguished
them into Paroches or Not into such limits as now make Paroches or Parishes,
but Bishoprics, Parish and Bishopric all one in elder times. Bid l. 3. c. 7.
Fol. 188. South Saxons and Kent ruled by West Saxon Laws.
which were commonly called Parishes in Elder times; so King Cenwalch is said
to have divided his Province into two Parishes, when he made a new Bishopric
at Winchester, that was taken out of the Diocese of Dorchester.
Parishes.

Lambard says Ina began to reign in the year 712. and quitted his Government in
the year 727. but I rather follow Spelman in his Councils, who thinks his Laws
might be published about the year as in the Margin here is noted, to the Laws
of the West Saxons were subject the South Saxons, and the People of Kent.
Ina King of the West Saxons about this time published his Laws, Cenred, his
Bishops Hedda and It Is probable Ina at that time might be the most powerful of
all the Saxon Kings, and have the Title of King of England, and so Erkenwald,
who was Bishop of London, might be called his Bishop, or London then be under
his Power.
Erkenwald, and of his Earls or Elders and wise men, Ina his Laws. A. D. 692.
merely Ecclesiastic, as the first, Lamb. Ll. Inae. Laws merely Ecclesiastic
made by King Ina.
the second about Baptism, the third about working on the Lord's Day, the
fourth about first Fruits paid to the Church* etc.

Not long after there was It was called a great Council perhaps Archbishop of
Canterbury called Archbishop of Britain at England.
and five of them Women.
a great Council held at Becanceld a Kent, Withred the King thereof presiding
in it, A. D. 694. Becanceld Council where King Withred presided. Spelm. Conc.
fol. 191.
where were also congregated Bertwald Archbishop of The Archbishop of
Canterbury in these ancient times, is sometimes called Archbishop of Britain,
sometimes of England.
Britain, Toby Bishop of Rochester, and all the Abbats, Abbesses, Priests,
Deacons, The Latin words Dux, Comes, Princeps and Consul, in elder ages are
used promiscuously, and signify any kind of Nobility.
Dukes and Noblemen of that Kingdom, the only things here treated and
concluded on, were in favor of the Church and Monasteries, viz. Acts of
Council subscribed by Women. Ibid. fol. 192.
The Acts of the Council were subscribed by five Abbesses.

Naitan King of Picts, being persuaded by the Epistle of Ceolfrid, Bid l. 5.
c. 22. Naitan King of Picts receives into his Dominions Canonick Easter and
Roman Tonsure. A. D. 714.
Abbat of the Monastery of St. Peter and Paul at Now Monk-Weremouth, at the
mouth of the River, were in the Bishopric of Durham.
Weremo^th (to whom he sent, for Information in this case) made a Law for the
Observation of Catholic Easter, and Roman Tonsure, or the manner of Picts and
Monks shaving their heads and crowns as it was used at Rome.

The Heptarchy. A. D. 7^5.
About this time Ina King of the West Saxons being at Rome, gave the famous
Alms called Otherwise called Romescot, Romefee, Heorth-penny.
Peter Pence toward the maintaining of a Saxon-School, Peter- pence given by
Ina. Spel. Conc. fol. 230. and passim.
which was a Penny of every House or Family yearly to be paid at the Feast of
St. Peter ad vincula, or the first of August.

Under Ethelbald King of the He was then also styled King of England in
Boniface Bishop of Ments his Epistle to him. Lamb. peram. Kent ^88. Cloveshoo
where.

Mercians, there was a great Council In Saxon Cliofeshoo, or Cliffe at Hoo near
Rochester, or Cliffe at Hoo, that is Cliffe in the Bayliwicke or Hundred of Hoo
in Kent, if then perhaps there were such Divisions in this County.
Cloveshoe, he presiding, Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, A. D. 742.
Withred, in the Convention at Becfield are confirmed, Cloveshoe Council where
King Ethelbald presided. Ibidem. Ethelbald 's Lust and Luxury.

A. D. 745. The Saxons wickedness. Boniface Archbishop of Ments reproves
Ethelbald.

Spel. Conc. fol. 232, 256.


and nothing else done.

This Ethelbald contemning Marriage, yet gave himself all the freedom and
enjoyment of unlawful Lust; making no difference between Places and Persons,
Cloisters and Nuns, Palaces and other Women were alike to him, and by his great
Example the Nobility and People were infected with an universal Vitiousness and
Luxury; which Boniface the Pope's Legate then in Germany hearing of,
notwithstanding Ethelbald's good Works and Alms, he sharply reproves him by an
Epistle, which had such a good Effect upon him, that he repented of his former
Life, and endeavored to make satisfaction by many charitable Works, and
several large Immunities which he granted to the Church and Monasteries.

The second Council of Cloveshoe. Cuthbert Archbishop presides.
There was a second famous Council held at the same Cloveshoe, Zachary, who by
his Epistles severely admonishes the Saxons of all sorts, Kings, Nobility,
Clergy, Religious and Laity, that they leave off their wickedness; here
Cuthbert Archbishop Canterbury presided, King Ethelbald, his The Latin words
are Duces and Principes.
Dukes and Princes being present, the chief Canons worth notice were, That
Bishops should prosecute their Pastoral Charge, A. D. 747. Ibid. a fol. 242. ad
fol. 256.
and not Secular Affairs; The Latin is Parochias only.
Paroches or Diocesses, and take account of the Regularity, labor, and
sufficiency The Lord's-Prayer and Creed to be taught in the Vulgar Tongue.
the words of the Mass, and of Baptism, should learn to understand and teach
them in their own Tongue, especially the Creed and Lord's-Prayer, that they
ought not to intermeddle in worldly Employments, and in their singing of Psalms
and Hymns, those that understood not Latin, might say them in the Saxon Tongue.
The rest for the most part are Provisions against the Inordinacy, The
Drunkenness, Incontinency, etc. of Ecclesiastics.
extravagant Garbs and Vestures, Drunkenness, Incontinency, Luxury, Irregular
Murder and Adultery punished only with Pennances. Ib. fol. 282, etc.
The reigning Vices in these times (as appears by Egbert Archbishop of York his
Canons for remedy of sin) Fornication, Adultery, Murder, Drunkenness, Perjury,
etc. were only punished with longer or shorter Pennances, of so many Days,
Weeks, Months or Years, but what these Pennances were, it is not declared.

Charlemaign King of France sent a Synodal Book of the Second Council of Nice,
to Offa King of Mercia, The Heptarchy. A D. 792.
which was imposed here upon the English Saxons, Simon. Dunel. Fol. 111. Image
worship first used in England.
and contained many things contrary to the true Faith, especially the injoyning
Adoration of Images, which the Church of God execrated; against this one
Albinus or Alcuinus wrote an Epistle, and presented that with the Book, in the
name and person of the Bishops and chief men of the English, to the King of
France.

King Offa of the Mercians to expiate the treacherous and base Murder of
Ethelbert King of the East Angles, Offa murders Ethelbert King of East Angles.
Brompton 754 A. D. 793.

He gives Rome penny or Peter's penny.

Spel. conc. fol. 311.


who came to him with all respect, to desire his Daughter in Marriage, built
the Cathedral at Hereford, and dedicated it to him, and founded also the
Monastery of St. Albans, and going to Rome in Penance, gave to St. Peter, and
the then Pope, Rome-penny, or Peter's- penny, that was a Penny of Spelman out
of the Life of Offa, says these Spelman out of the Book of the Life of Offa,
affirms they were called Peter Pence, Conc. fol. 311.313. Peter Pence why so
called.
because they were paid exactly on the day of the Feast of St. Peter ad
vincula, as common Rents are called Michaelmas, and our Lady Day Rents, because
due or payable upon those days.
Peter Pence were given to the English School at Rome, for the Sustentation of
English Scholars there; he rather confirmed Ina's Gift

Sim. Dunelmensis says this year the Danes invaded England, and that they
landed in the North, but Matt. of Westminster, De Hist. Eccl. Dunelm. col. 12.
Danes first arrival. A. D. 793. Florileg. in that year.
where ever he had it, tells another Story, that they came first hither as
Spies in Brithric King of the West Saxons Anno Domini 791. but the Country
coming in, forced them to their Ships again. It may be probable according to
the opinion of some, that they were only Pirates with a general Commission, and
that they landed here by accident, or were by weather forced upon this Shore.

This Church Story is lame and incoherent, yet it is all I could find worth
notice, amongst the many Volums of the ancient Monks, they being nothing almost
but vast heaps of Legends, Tales, and vulgar Reports which passed for current
in those ignorant and credulous times; nor is there any more methodical or
authentic Story to be expected for some, and those not a few years yet to
come; yet out of these Clouds of darkness, out of these voluminous, idle, The
Devotion and Piety of Elder times.
the fervent Prayers, the large (and I had almost said) profuse Alms of those
times; what stately and magnificent Fabrics, Churches, Palaces, and
Monasteries were built and founded in those days; what plain and unlearned
Zeal, what obedient, quiet, and hearty Devotion, then possessed the minds of
the People, when in 220 years time, Marsham's Preface to the first Volum of
Monasticon.
thirty English Saxon Kings and Queens left the World, and entered into

Egb^rt Monarch. A. D. 854. etc.
The Secular Story of the Saxons almost ever since their first entrance, I have
hitherto omitted, consisting chiefly of Wars, by which we may know and
understand their Barbarity, Violence, and Rapine; but for what cause they were
undertaken, by what Counsels directed and managed, or what Reason or Justice
there was for them, we cannot once guess, the Relations of them being so narrow
and frivolous.

Nor are the Battles themselves described more artificially than the Combats of
Bears and Wolves, or the Skirmishes of Kites and Crows in the Air. There were
frequent attempts upon one another Dominions, amongst their petty Kings, and
as frequent Rebellions of the great men against them, and oft-times in some or
most of these Nations, he whom Riches, Popularity, or Faction advanced, took on
him the Title and State of a King.

Egbert King of the West Saxons. Saxon Ann. A. D. ^54.
Egbert the famous King of the West Saxons, made himself Monarch of the Saxon
Heptarchy, and as some affirm of Great Britain, his Title to the West Saxons
Kingdom he derived justly from Ina. Thus he was the Son of Ealmund, he the Son
of Eafa, he the Son of Eoppa, he the Son of Ingild, and he the Brother of Ina,
whose direct Line was Extinct, when Egbert assumed the Diadem, and was called
out of France by the West Saxons (being there an Exile) to undertake the
Government.

He conquers the Cornish and Welsh Britains.
His first Achievement was against the Britains in Cornwall, and the So called
in respect of the Cornish Britains, from whom they were situated due North, an
arm of the Sea, or the mouth of the River Severn only parting them.
North-Britains in Wales, whom he subdued and made Tributary: by the Fame of
these Victories, he became a Terror to the Bernulph King of the Mercians,
swelling at his success, thought it would be a glorious and bold attempt in
him, to rescue others from fear, and to make War upon Egbert, who cheerfully
gives him Battle, wherein Bernulph and his Forces were Bernulph routed, and
Mercia conquered by Egbert.

A. D. 806. Malmesb. de gest. reg. l. 2. c. 2. A. D. 824. Ibidem.

The South and East Saxons conquered by Egbert and the East Angles. Ingulph.
Hist. fol. 487. a.




The West Saxon King urged forward with this Victory, sent his Son Ethelwolf,
with Alstan Bishop of Sherborn, to take in Kent, which they presently added to
the West Saxon Dominion, and proceeding, drove Baldred the King thereof, over
the Thames; and some years after, he subdued the South and East Saxons; soon
after the East Angles, encouraged by Egbert, slew Bernulph and Ludecan Kings
Mercians, and their Successor Withlaf at first expelled his Kingdom by Egbert,
afterward by the Mediation of Siward Abbat of Crowland (with whom he privately
remained in that Monastery) was restored upon condition of Subjection, and
payment of a yearly Tribute. Malmesb. ubi supra The Kingdom of Northumberland
yields to Egbert.
In the same year the Northumbrians broken with Factions, and wearied by the
Usurpations and Pretenses of several ambitious Princes, gave Hostages and
submitted themselves to Egbert.

And now though he enjoyed Britain, Egbert Monarch. A. D. 832.
yet he enjoyed not the full satisfaction and pleasure of his Conquest, for the
Danes landing in the Isle of Shepey, wasted it, and the next year coming again
in thirty five Ships, they landed at the River Car in Dorsetshire, Danes land
in Shepey.

At the River Car in Dorsetshire.

An. Dom. 833. Two Bishops slain.

They land again A. D. 835. A. D. 836.


where Egbert fought them, with a great slaughter on both sides, yet so as the
Danes made good their ground and encamped. Herefrid and Wigferth two Bishops
were here slain, as also Dudda and Osmund two Saxon Danes arrived again, and
joined with the Cornish Britains, against Egbert, who overthrew, and put them
to slight, and the next year died.

After his acquest of the whole Heptarchy, by Edict, he caused it to be called
England, which in Latin was called Anglia from the Angles, the most numerous
and valiant of the three Nations, which came hither with Hengist, they
possessed the Kingdoms of Northumberland, and East-Anglia, the Jutes, only Kent
and the Isle of Wight, and the Saxons, East-Saxony, South-Saxony, and
West-Saxony, yet long before this time it might be, and was called England,
though not by a public Edict, forbid inscribes his Book, the Ecclesiastic
History of the English Nation; Bid l. 2. c. 4.5.
and Pope Boniface writes to Ethelbert King of the English, and Gregory sent
Augustine to preach to the English Nation, also Ercombert King of Kent, Ibid. l.
4. c. 1.
and Oswy King of Northumberland (or of the English as most Potent) sent
Wighard to Rome to be ordained Bishop of the English. Nor was he perfectly
absolute, notwithstanding he became Monarch of England, for some, if not all
the petty Kings, though Tributaries, held their Titles for many years, and some
Successions of Monarchs after him; as Witlaf King of Mercia under Egbert,
Ingulph 's History, fol. 487. a. Ibid. fol. 488. b. Ibid. fol. 491. a.
and Bertulph under Ethelwolph his Son, Beorred King of Mercia, and Edmund King
of East Angles under the same; and so they continued at least until Edward the
Elder.

Ethelwolph eldest Son of Egbert, Ethelwolph.
by some of the more Modern Authors said to have been a By Matthew. of West
Brampton, and many others, but not mentioned by Asser, Malmsbury, or in the
Saxon Annals, and therefore suspicious.
Monk, and Bishop of Winchester, took A. D. 836.
the Government of the Kingdom of the West Saxons, his Father giving to his
Brother Athelstan the Kingdoms of Kent, Essex, Surrey and Sussex, Saxon Annals
A. D. 836.
or of the South Saxons, which afterward by the Death or Cession of Ethelstan,
came under the Power of Ethelwolph, Malms. l. 2. c. 2.
who being of a quiet Danes made their advantage of him, with whose Invasions
the most part of his Reign, he was mightily afflicted; and with whom in one
place or other, there were Battles or Skirmishes almost every Barely mentioned
and briefly Saxons Annals, and in Asser, whom the rest follow, enlarging upon
them according to their Fancies; Saxon Annals and Asser in these years and so
forward. The Danes harass Lindsey, East Angles, Kent, London, Canterbury, and
Rochester.
as that Duke Wulfheard fought against three and thirty of their Ships at
Hampton, A. D. 887. and the same year Consul Ethelhelm fought the Danes with
the Dorsetshire men at Port, where at first Ethelhelm, but at last the Danes
prevailed; the next year Earl Herebert was killed in Battle of the Pagans, and
many others at Mereswar, and the same year the Countries of Lindsey,
East Angles, Kent, etc. were harassed and destroyed, and many slain by them,
and the next year they made great slaughters at Canterbury, London, and
Rochester, and so forward nothing but insignificant Relations.
year, sometimes the Saxons, sometimes the Danes prevailing, Ethelwolph
Monarch. A. D. 836.
who by their often Invasions in every part of the Kingdom, rather seemed to
pray upon and wast, than conquer and possess England: if at any time they were
repelled, and very much beaten by the English, Danes often beaten, yet it
availed not the English.

Their often fresh Supplies.


it availed nothing, there coming presently greater Fleets with fresh Supplies,
and while the Saxons or English marched to oppose them in the East, they
shipped themselves and invaded the West, or some other Quarter, so that the
People despaired of any means of Safety.

The King, Nobility, and Clergy, over-set as it were, and strangely afflicted
with the Depredations of these Pagans, Ingulph. Historia. Fol. 491. a.
judging these Evils and Miseries to be the Consequences of their Sins,
bethought themselves of a wholesome and uniform Remedy (as they affirmed it) The
General Meetings of the Bishops, great or wise Men, as they were frequently
named, Great Councils or Parliaments. Tenth Mansion, Hide or Family, what it
signifies.
or of the States or Baronage, were called Witenage gemotes, Mycel, Synods,
great Councels, and afterward Paliaments.
Act of the great Council or Parliament in those days, however it be commonly
Ethelwolph, of the Tith of the Profits of all Tiths might be paid by some
Persons, and in some places before this Grant, but this was the first public
Act that imposed a necessity of paying them. In Ingulph the Latin words are
decimam Mansionem, that is, Hidam seu familiam, the Tenth Hide or Family; which
perhaps man ^elate to the Poor Parson which was to be maintained upon every
Tenth Mansion as above noted; or perhaps if the Tenth Mansion were given* it
might be the first Foundation of the Rectory and Glebe Lands in every Parish:
for besides it is said in Ingulph, that the Tenth of all Goods, were granted
Latin words are decimam partem terrarum per regnum nostrum; the things granted,
however expressed, were the Tithes of the Profits of all Lands, as Seldom
concludes, History of Tiths. fol. 206, etc. Ibid. fol. 207.
for as he affirms, whether it be the Tenth Hide, the Tenth Mansion or Family,
or the Tenth part of the Land, it is all one, they being words that signify
the same things, and import no more than the Tenth part of the Profits growing
in them.
Lands, Ethelwolph grants the Tiths of all England to the Church. A. D. 855.
Ibidem.

Ingulph. histor. 491. a. This Grant subscribed by all the Kings and Nobility
in England.

Ibidem. Ordered to be published in every Church.


free from all Burdens, Taxes, and Exactions Free from Military Service,
building and repairing of Bridges and Castles, called the Trimoda Necessitas,
to which all Lands whatsoever were subject.
whatsoever England, by Beorred King of Mercia, and Edmund King of the
East Angles, then Subject and Tributary to Ethelwolph, who after it was
subscribed, offered it upon the Altar of St. Peter the Apostle, in the
Cathedral at Winchester, where the Council was held, and the Bishops caused it
to be published in every Church of their several The Latin words are, Per omnes
Ecclesias in suis Parochiis.
Paroches.

This done he went to Rome, leaving the Danes in Shepey Island, and carried
with him his beloved Son Al^rid, and staying there a France, he brought with
him Judith Daughter of Charles King thereof, Asser. de gest. Al^r. fol. 2.
whom he had married.

Ethelbald conspires against his Father, Ib.
In his absence, Ethelbald his eldest Son, Alstan Bishop of Sherborn, Eanwulf
Earl of Somersetshire conspired against him, and would have excluded him the
Kingdom, who foreseeing the Dangers and Miseries of a Civil War, Ibid. fol. 3.
Between Ethelbald and his Father, the Kingdom is divided. A. D. 858.
out of his mere Clemency, and great Condescension, by the assent of his
Nobles, divided the Kingdom between himself and his Son, he taking the East
part, and leaving the West part, which was the best and greatest, to Ethelbald;
two years after his return from Rome, he disposed the Kingdom to his two eldest
Sons, and his Hereditary Estate to his other Sons and Daughters. Ethelwold,
Ethelbald, Ethelbert. A. D. 858.
For the advantage of his Soul, he ordered that in his Hereditary Lands, every
Tenth Hide or Mansion, should maintain one Poor Parson with Meat, Drink, and
Clothing; he commanded likewise there should be three hundred Marks carried to
Rome every year, Ethelwold gives three hundred Marks to Rome. Ibid. fol. 4.
and to be thus disposed of, one hundred Marks to buy Oil for the Lamps in the
Church of St. Peter, as much to buy Oil for the Lamps in Paul, and the other
hundred Marks to the Pope, in this year he died.

To him Ethelbald and Ethelbert the two elder Brothers succeeded, Ethelbald and
Ethelbert. Ibidem. A. D. 860. Winchester sacked.
the former lived but two years after his Father, and there is nothing
memorable of him, but his infamous Marriage with Judith his Fathers Widow.
After his death, Kent, Surrey, and Sussex, with the whole Kingdom, came under
the Power of Ethelbert, in whose Danes sacked Winchester, The Danes beaten.
Ibidem.
who returning to their Ships with a mighty prey, were met by Osric Earl of
Hamshire, and Ethelwolph Earl of Berkshire, and overthrown with great
slaughter. Ethelbert, after he had reigned honorably five years, Ethelbert
dies. Ibidem.
and much loved of his Subjects, died; and was buried at Sherborn with his
Brother.

About this time the Danes wintered in Thanet, A. D. 864.
the Kentish men making a firm League with them, buying their Peace with Money,
Pagans repenting themselves, The Danes wast East-Kent.
and judging their bargain disadvantageous, by a sudden Irruption in the night,
wasted all the East part of Kent.

Ethelred the third Son of Ethelwolph, Ethelred the third Son of Ethelwolph
King.

The Danes harass almost the whole Nation.


followed his two elder Brothers in the Government, whose Reign was a continual
conflict with the Danes, who under the Conduct of These two Leaders are not
mentioned in Asser, the Saxon Annals or Malmsbury to have had the conduct of
the Danes at this time, nor at any other, unless it were some Parties of them,
and therefore the Relations of the Moderns are here to be suspected.
Hingnar and Hubba, as most affirm, arrived in great Numbers, and form a great
Army in East Angles, where they wintered, striking a League with the
Inhabitants, and Horsing themselves in those Parts, roved up and down, and
almost wasted the whole Nation; Saxon Annals. A.D. 866. and so forward. Asser
de gestis. Alfrid about the same years.
they first marched to York, where they made their advantage upon the Civil
Dissentions of the King and Nobility of Northumberland, and became Masters of
that Country; from thence they march to Nottingham, from thence into Lindsey in
Lincolnshire, from thence into Kesteven in the same County, and from thence
into Holland another Ely, from thence into the Province or Kingdom of the
East Angles, and wintered at Thetford, near unto which place Edmund King of the
East Angles, A. D. 870. Saxon Annals. Edmund King of the East Angles slain, and
his Country subdued
assaying them with his whole Army, was put to flight; himself being slain, and
his whole Country subdued, from hence the next year they marched to Cambridge,
thence toward the West Saxons, to Reading in Barkshire, to Warham in
Dorsetshire, Basing in Hamshire, etc. Excester in Devonshire.

Ethelred. A. D. 870.
Their Marches and Progresses are variously described by diverse Authors, as
Asser, the Saxon Annals, Ingulph, Florentius, Wigornensis, Florilegy, etc. The
opposition they met with, the Battles Fought, the Leaders, Commanders, and
Places names also by them variously reported, and the Saxon Annals themselves,
the Foundation and Basis of their Histories being very obscure, they have yet
rendered the Truth more difficult and obscure, by their Additions and
Inventions, so that what to believe or reject, will puzzle the De gestis regum.
fol. 22. b. Saxon Annals. A. D. 871. Ashdown Fight.

Oseg a Danish King, and five Earls slain. Monasteries destroyed.


Malmsbury says this King fought nine Battles with the Danes in one year, with
various Fortune, yet in most he was Victor; and that he killed them one King,
nine Earls, and common People without number: That the last Battle was at
Ashdown, where he and his Brother Alfrid put them to flight, slew their King
Oseg, five Earls, and a great number of People; most certain it is, wheresoever
they came, they laid all wast with Fire and Sword, demolished Cities, Towns,
Castles, Churches and As at this time the Monasteries of Croyland, or Crowland,
Medeshamstede, now Peterborough, Ely, and many others, the reason may be for
that they were very Rich in Money, Jewels, and Plate, which might move the
Danes to rifle and destroy them, as much as their Enmity to the Christian
Religion: and indeed at their first arrival and plundering here, they landed as
near as they could to Monasteries, and made it their business to destroy and
sack them, an instance of their great wealth may be the Abbey of Croyland,
which about 104 years after this Destruction of it, it being rebuilt by Edred
King of Great Britain, A. D. 948. at the time of the Death of Abbat Turretul,
A. D. 975. in the Edgar, the Treasure of the Monastery then brought forth
before the Convent, amounted to 10000 l.
Monasteries; The Danish Cruelty.
and massacred more cruelly and readily than others, and for this reason there
is little of Church Affairs left us in this Age; Asser de gestis Alfr. fol. 7.
A. D. 871.
worn out with these Afflictions, Ethelred died, and was buried at Winburn in
Dorsetshire.

Aelfrid or Alfrid before he was King, was Secundary to his Brothers, whom he
excelled in Wisdom, Justice, and Courage; the Latin word is Secundarius, which
cannot here signify the second Person in the Kingdom, for that he was by Birth
in Ethelred's Reign, but he was not so in Ethelbert's time, it must therefore
signify an Office, and whether he was a Vicegerent, or an Assistant, or a
Minister of State, I cannot determine, perhaps he was all, or at least the two
last, for it appears in Asser, that all things were transacted according to his
advice and direction.
Aelfrid fourth Son of Ethelwolph, scarce fixed in his Throne, when he
encountered with the Danes at Wilton, Aelfrid. A. D. ^71. Beaten at Wilton.

Asser de gestis Al^r. fol. 7.8. The Mercians make Peace with the Danes. A. D.
873. Malmsb. de gest. Reg. l. 2. c. 4.


much his Superiors in force, London, where they wintered, with whom the
Mercians made Peace.

But here I shall follow the Method of Malmsbury, who that he might not
confound his Readers with the Stories of the Danish Rapines and Slaughters,
with their hurryings, and swift removals from one part of the Nation to the
other, the Narratives whereof are as Irregular, Aelfrid fights with various
success.

De gest. Aelfr. fol. 9.

Danes come over in great Numbers.

Aelfrid reduced to great streights.

Secures himself in the Fens. Crowland, Peterborough. Ingulph Hist. 497. a.

The Charter in Ingulph bears that date, and it is there said to be then built,
or about that time. Ibid. 498. b. Ibid. 504. b. The Wealth of Croyland Abbey.

Ibid. fol. 7. Secundarius what he was.


wherein Aelfrid had the fortune of War, sometimes conquering and other while
being conquered, for if Asser says the Danes came hither with such often
supplies, and in such great numbers, that if thirty thousand were killed one
day, there succeeded others to double that number, until at length Aelfrid was
reduced to such streights, that with a few of his Nobles, and some Soldiers and
Vassals, he was forced to secure himself in the Woody and Now the Isle of
Athelney in Latin, gronnosa Ioca, Came. Brit. fol. 163. Gron what.
without doubt from Gron an old English Saxon word, signifying a Fen, or low
Moory Boggy grounds, and the parts adjacent are Gronningen, the chief Town in
the Province of that name in the Netherlands, for that it is situated in such a
Country, and other places of the like sound.
Fenny places of Somersetshire, Aelfrid. A. D. 878.
where they had nothing but what they got from the Pagans by frequent
Irruptions, or such Christians as had submitted to them.

But not long after adventuring out of these fastnesses, Ibid. fol. 10.
with the whole force of Somerset, Wilt, and Hamshire, which came unto him,
marching swiftly early in the Morning, Aelfrid suddenly sets upon the Danes,
and obtains a great Victory.
he set upon the Danes at Ethandun, where their Army lay, and by a great
slaughter of them obtained the Victory, and had the pursuit of them to their
Camp or Fortress, and when he had there besieged them fourteen days, forced by
Famine and Despair, they yielded, The Danes beg Peace.
and begged Peace upon such Terms as he never had before, they offering as many
Hostages as the King would require for the performance of them, which when the
King had received, the Danes swore that as soon as they could, And swear to
depart the Land.
they would depart the Kingdom. In Asser Godrum and Gothrum, in others Gy^ro,
Gothrun, or Gurmund; Godrun his several Appellations.
in Lambard's Laws, Gythrun or Guthrun.
Godrum their King presently Aelfrid was Godfather, Godrun their King becomes
Christian. Hist. 494. b. Some Danes abjure the Land.
and with him Ingulph says that Aelfrid gave to him and his People that staid
with him, the Kingdom of the East Angles, and that such as refused to be
baptized, abjured England, and went into France.

Malmsbury says that Aelfrid gave him that Kingdom, and also Northumberland,
Northumberland given to Godrun.
to hold of him by Fealty and Allegiance, which before Aelfrid was the Sea
Force, Aelfrid 's Sea Force 120 Ships.

Asser. fol. 10. A. D. 877.


which he first advanced to any considerable height, have in number about 120
armed Ships, with which he several times destroyed his Enemies Fleets, and kept
them from landing.

Learning in this Kings days, was at a very low Ebb, In Praefat. Pastoralis
Gregor apud Asser. fol. 27, 28. The Ignorance of the Bishops, Priests and
People in Aelfrid's days. A. D. 884.

Aelfrid's design for the advancement of Learning.

A. D. 886. Asser. fol. 16. The Controversy between Grimbald and the Oxonians.


there scarce being any that could read English on the South Side of Humber, or
a Latin into English, wherefore he translated Gregory's Pastoral into English,
and sent a Copy of it to every Bishop, especially to such as did not well
understand the Latin Tongue, to whom he thought it very necessary, yet after
some repose and quiet from War and Tumult, he thought of the advancement of
Learning and Justice, and the making of Laws; for effecting the first, he sent
into France for Grimbald and John the Monk, and into Wales for Asser, who read
to him, and wrote the History of his Life, whom Oxford, there to read in
several Sciences, where not long after their coming, there happened a great
Contest between the Scholars they found there, and these Strangers, the first
pleading their Antiquity and Seniority against the latter.

Aelfred. A. D. 886.
The King hearing of the Controversy, goes to Oxford to put a period to it, who
showing much moderation, and endeavoring to reconcile them by persuasion, it
so moved Grimbald (who thought himself sure of the Kings favor,) that he left
Oxford, and went to the Monastery at Winchester, and removed from thence to
Winchester also the Tomb wherein he designed to lay his Bones.

Ibid. fol. 20.
Aelfred gave the half of the Revenue which came into his Exchequer, So were
all places of literature called at this time, the Formality and Constitution of
Universities not being then the same that it is at this present; such an one
was the School of Sigebert, which he erected in his Kingdom of the East Angles,
and not perhaps without much probability at Cambridge.
School, which chiefly consisted of his Nobility, he also ordering that the
Sons of Freemen should be brought up in Learning until they were fifteen years
of Age.

Asser. fol. 21. Aelfred 's great care of Justice.
In doing Justice he was so careful and exact, that he would inquire after all
the Judgments and Decisions of the whole Country He reproves the ignorance of
his Judges.
if they answered from Ignorance, he reproved their Folly and Unskillfulness,
and admiring their Insolence, that they should pretend to do what they
understood not, commanded them either to lay down their places of Judicature,
or by applying themselves to Study and Books, make themselves more fit and
skillful to perform The Latin word is Comites, which the Saxon translates
Danish word Earl.
Earls, Sheriffs and Ministers, (many of them in their old Age) rather than
part with their Places and Profits, And they addict themselves to laborious
Studies.

Brompton col. 829. His Laws collected out of the Laws of preceden^ Kings.


addicted themselves to laborious Studies. His Laws, whereof many were
Ecclesiastic, for the most part were Collections from the Laws of Ina, Offa,
and Ethebert, which were made, and the Observation of them commanded, by the
advice and assistance of his Council, such as were fit for the present time
were retained, others antiquated, and some new ones made, Lambard, only one or
two of the Secular Laws that are observed among us at this day shall be noted.
Ll. Alured, fol. 31. Estates intailed in his time.
As that for Entailing Estates, They that had Book-land, or Estates in Land
that came to them, or passed by writing (or perhaps as we now call it Deed)
from their Ancestors could not sell or alien it from their Heirs; and that for
vouching of things sold, etc. no man's Horse or Ox could be bought or sold
without a Voucher, Foed. Alured. and Guthrum. Ibid. fol. 36. Hundreds and
Tithings erected by Alfred.
that is one then that should take upon him to make good the sale, and thing
This King, according to Ingulph, first divided the Provinces into Without
doubt, as to this De gestis Aelf^ed, fol. 284.
Ingulph was mistaken, for Asser who lived in Aelfred's time, mentions Osric
Earl of Hamshire, and Ethelwolph Earl of Bark-shire, under Ethelbert and
Eanwulf Earl of Somersetshire under his Father Ethelwolph. There are also
mentioned as witnesses to a Charter of King Ethelbald's, A. D. 716. cited by
Ingulphus, Egga Earl of Lincoln, and Lencitus Earl of Leicester, Histor.
Croyland, fol. 485. a.
therefore such Divisions were before; nevertheless it is most probable the
Partitions of Counties into Hundreds and Tithings were made in his times, as
appears in the notices.
Counties, those into Hundreds, and Decimes or Tithings, that every English man
living under Law, should be within some Hundred or Tithing; Edward the Elder.
A. D. 886.
of this see more in the first part of this History. He made also a Survey of
all the Counties, Hundreds and Tithings throughout England, and the Roll
thereof was called the Roll of Winchester, All Counties surveyed by Alfred.

In his History, fol. 516. b.


(the chief City of the West Saxon Kingdom) because it was kept then, out of
this Roll, and that afterward made by William the Conqueror in imitation of
it, but more exact, Ingulphus took out the Particulars of the Croyland Abbey.

Edward his Son called the Elder, Edward the Elder. A. D. 900. Sax. An. 901.
Disturbed by Ethelwald. Ibid. 905. Who flies to the Danes in Northumberland.
and persuades them to invade Mercia.
(because the first) succeeded Aelfred, less learned, but more Potent. In the
beginning of his Reign he received some disturbance from the pretenses of
Ethelwald his Uncles Son to the Kingdom, who not being able to make good his
Cause, fled to the Danes in Northumberland, and prevailed with them to invade
Mercia, where Edward marching upon them, forced This was that Ditch which is
called Divels-Ditch upon New-Market-Heath, and the Country here mentioned, was
all that between this Ditch, Huntington, St. Neots, Bedford, etc. which are
seated upon the River Ouse.
Ditch and Ouse, even to the North Fens, and not long after both Armies joined
Battle, and fought with great loss and slaughter on both sides; Duke Sigulf,
Earl Sigelm, Eadwold the Kings Thane, Cenwulf the Abbat, with many common men,
A great slaughter of Saxons and Danes.
were slain on the Saxons part, on the Danes part their King Eohric, the
seditious Ethelwold, Brihtsigerus, Isop HOLD is a Danish word, and signifies a
Field-Marshal, Knight-Marshal or General.
Hold, Osketel Hold, with very many other Danes Ibid. 907.
however two years after Edward makes Peace with the Danes.

The East Angles and Northumbrians which were now one Nation with them, not
long after the Danes broke the Peace* Ibid. 9 1.
and wasted his Countries, to whom he gave Battle, overthrew them, The Danes
beaten.
and killed their King Ecwils, persuing this Victory, and marching for several
Elsted Countess, Queen of Mercia, every where expelled the Danes, Malms. de
gestis reg. l. 2. c. 5. Ingulph. Hist. fol. 595. b. Edward repairs his Towns
and Fortresses, and places strong Garrisons in them.
and either built and erected new Towns and Fortresses in all convenient
places, or repaired the old, and placed strong Garrisons in them, especially
toward the Frontiers, by which means he checked the Insolency of the Danes,
and hindered their Excursion, their places of Safety and Retreat, added such
courage to the Countrymen, that whereas before they fled from the Danes,
Mercia to his former Territories, (which he took into his own hands after his
Sisters Death) Howel, Cledanc, and Jeothwell, Kings of the These were those
that inhabited that which is now called Wales, who were called North-Britains,
in respect of those which inhabited Cornwall, who were called South-Britains.
North-Britains, Saxon Annals. A. D. 922. The North-Britains or Welsh submit.
Ibid. A.D. 924. And the Scots Danes and Northumbers. Divels-Ditch. Hold what
and who. North-Britains who.
and desired him for their Lord and Master, as did also not long after the King
of Scots and all his Nation, the Northumbrians, the English and Danes, and
other Northern People, Athelstan. A. D. 924.
with the King of Straecled Welsh who. De ^cb. Scot. l. 6. p. 175, 156.
Britains which at that time inhabited Calloway in Scotland; Buchanan
confesses, that the English Army being far inferior to the Danes, and the
Forces with which the Scots assisted Aethestan, who was Edward's General, they
obtained a great Victory, and took from the Scots Cumberland and Westmorland,
and from the Danes Northumberland; but he will not acknowledge the submission
of Scotland.
STRAECLED Wales, and his People.

Straecled.
This King, by the advice of his wise men, made several Laws, and confirmed the
League his Father Aelfrid made with Godrun or Guthrun, He confirms the League
Alfrid made with Guthrun.

Lamb. inter Ll. Edward Sen. He makes many Ecclesiastic Laws.

Col 829.


by Agreement of the Great men on both sides, and amongst other Articles of the
League, they enacted many Laws merely Ecclesiastic, which were reputed as part
of it; these Ecclesiastic Brompton amongst Aelfrid's Laws, as being made then,
and are more perfect than in Lambard; and with others there are Laws for the
Payment of Tithes, Peter Pence, Candle-money, etc. Edward dying in the year,
924. was buried with his Father in the Monastery of Winchester.

Athelstan. Lib. 2. de gest. ^eg. c. 6.
After the death of King Edward, his eldest Son Athelstan (by a Concubine, as
'twas reported, says Malmsbury) was crowned at Kingston upon Thames by Athelmus
Archbishop of Canterbury, the beginning of whose Reign was disturbed by the
Sedition of Alfrid a Nobleman, A. D. 924. Perjury punished with sudden Death.
who being apprehended, and sent to Rome to purge himself, denying the Fact
upon Oath, fell down suddenly, and within three days died. He obtains many
Victories over the Danes Scots and Irish Ibidem.

The Welsh agree to pay him a yearly Tribute They are bounded with the River
Wye.


This King obtained many great Victories over the Danes, Scots and Irish, and
forced Constantine King of Scotland, and Eugenius King of Cumberland to yield
their Kingdoms; he made the North-Britains or Welsh to submit, who assembling
at Hereford, Malmsbury, yet but 2500 as others, and made the River The River
which passes by Hereford, and not far from Chepstowe, falls into the Severn.
Wye their utmost boundary; he also subdued the So called because they
inhabited the West part of Britain, which is now called Cornwall; they are
sometimes also called the South-Britains, in respect of the Welsh which were
called North-Britains.
Western-Britains, Excester, which he strengthened with Walls and Towers, Ibidem.
and confined them within the River This River parts Devonshire and Cornwall,
and runs into the Sea by Plymouth.
Tamar, The Cornish with the River Tamar.


The Fame of this King filled all Europe, and he married his Sisters, one to
Otho Son to the Emperor of Germany, another to Hugh King of France, Foreign
Princes purchase his favor with Gifts.
a third to Lewis Prince of Aquitain, a fourth to Harrold King of Norway; all
which and many other neighboring Princes for to purchase his Friendship, sent
him great and very rich Presents, but his noble and glorious Actions were
sullied and blackened with the Death of his Brother Edwin (if true as it is
storied) That by order of Athelstan, out of Jealousy of State, he was put into
a small Pinnace, Malmsbury thinks not to be true, by reason of his great
kindness to his other Brothers and Sisters, and says the Story was only found
in the Songs of former Ages, and in no good Author, his Grandfather Aelfrid
knighted this King in his Childhood, Athelstan knighted by his Grandfather
Aelfred.
putting him on a Scarlet Cloak, and girting him with a Belt set with Gems, and
a Saxon Sword in a Golden Scabbard. He with the advice of his Bishops and great
men, Most of the Saxon Kings Laws are Collections or Repetitions of other and
former Laws, they most commonly confirmed or new worded the old, but made not
many new Laws.
made many very good Laws, for preserving Peace and the Government of his
Country, The Punishment of Murder Pecuniary.
but amongst the rest established the This Custom and manner of Punishment
seems now very strange, that Money should
price of Murder or Man-killing, from the King to the Peasant; the Punishment
of which, at that time was Pecuniary, not Capital

The price of the King's Life by the common Law of the English, The Estimate of
Heads, or value of Lives, from the King to the Peasant.
was 30000 From the Saxon word THRIM, Thrimsa what, Thrim.
three, or a third, as Sir Hen. Spelm. in his Glossary, who there thinks a
Thrimsa was to the value of three shillings; Somner in his Saxon Dictionary,
says it was a piece of Money or Coin of an uncertain value: Seldom takes it to
be a third part of a Shilling; Tit. hon. fol. 501.
whatsoever it was, these Sums were a Poor Price, and a slender satisfaction
for Blood, especially Royal and Noble Blood. And therefore the learned Author
of the Notes upon the Life of Alfrid, thinks that willful, malicious, or
clancular Murder was never Penal, but only Manslaughter, and that after it had
been declared such by the Judges, fol. 68. But see William the First his Laws.
Thrimsa's, whereof 15000 were paid to his Kindred, and 15000 to the Nation or
People.

The Life of an Archbishop or Earl was valued at 15000 Thrimsa's,

The Life of a Bishop or Alderman at 8000.

The Life of a Field-Marshal, Knight-Marshal, or General, 4000.

Mass-Thane or Priest, and a Secular or World- Thane, 2000.

The Life of a Peasant or Countryman, by the Danes Law was 267 Thrimsa's.

The Life of a Welch-man, if he grew so rich as to maintain a Family, possess
Land, and pay a yearly Tribute to the King, was valued Thrimsa's; or if his
Sons or Grandchildren arrived to the same Wealth, they were under the same
Valuation.

The Morcians valued the Life of a Peasant at 200 shillings, and Thane at 1200,
and they were wont to value the Kings Life equal with 6000 Thanes, that is
30000 Sceates, and so much his Death; the price of his Life was paid to his
Kindred, and the Compensation of his Death to the People.

Edmund, Edred. A. D. 940.
The Oath of him whose Life was valued at 1200 shillings, was equal to the Oaths
of six Peasants, and the Oath of a Priest was equal to the Oath of a Thane.
Oaths valued according to Wealth. Edmund. An. Dom. 940. Saxon Annals. A. D.
942. Takes Lincoln, Nottingham, Stanford and Derby. Ibidem. A. D. 944, 945. He
subdues Northumberland. Gives Cumberland to Malcolm King of Scots. A.D. 943,
944.


In the year of our Lord 940. Edmund Brother and Heir to Athelstan was crowned
King; in the second year of his Reign, he cleared Mercia of the Danes, and took
from them the Cities of Lincoln, Nottingham, Stanford and Derby; the two Danish
Kings Anlaf and Reginald Edmund for their Godfather; yet notwithstanding this
Spiritual Relation and Sonship, they soon prove his Enemies, and invade him who
put them both to flight, and took into his own hands Northumberland, and gave
Cumberland to Malcolm King of Scots, to hold of him by Fealty, and upon
condition he should assist him by Sea and Land.

About this time Odo or Oda Archbishop of Canterbury set forth Canons, He makes
many Ecclesiastic Laws.
whereof many were purely Ecclesiastic, after he had reigned six years, and
behaved himself Nobly both in Peace and War.

Malms. l. 2. c. 7.
He finished his days by a sad accident, for Feasting with his Nobles on St.
Augustin's day at Puckle-kerke in Glocestershire, to celebrate the Saxons, he
discovered Leof a noted Thief whom he had banished, sitting among his Guests,
at which being much moved, rising from the Table, he ran to him, and laying
hold of his Hair, he pulled him to the ground, and while they were struggling,
He is killed by a Thief.
the Thief privately drew out a Dagger, with which he mortally wounded the King
in the Breast, so as he died presently; the Company immediately fell upon the
Murderer, and cut him in pieces; the King's body was carried to Glastonbury,
and

Edred. A. D. 946. Ibidem. He subdues the Northumbrians, and makes the Scots
swear Fealty.
After him Edred third Brother of Athelstan, in the Nonage of Edmund's Sons,
took upon him the Government: He subdued the Northumbrians, and made the Scots
of such a pliant Temper, as they swore to do whatever he would have them; he
imprisoned Wulstan Archbishop of York, upon suspicion of having connived at the
Revolt of his Countrymen, but having respect to his Dignity and Office A. D.
955.
in the flower of his Age he sickned and died, after he had been King about ten
years. He confirmed to the Monastery of Crowland their Lands by Charter, and
granted many Privileges to it, Ingulph. Fol. 498. b. A. D. 948.
under the Penalty of 100 l. to be paid to his Treasury, and Damages and Costs
whatsoever the Monks should sustain by any Infringer of them, to be taxed by
the Oaths of four or five honest men before the King's Judges. Edwin. A. D.
955. Flor. Wigor. fol.

He rejects Monks and brings into Monasteries Secular Priests. A. D. 957.
Mercia and Northumberland choose Edgar for their K.




The next after him was Edwin Son to King Edmund a dissolute Prince, of whom
there is little memorable, only that he was prompted to it by the Council of
his Harlot Algiva; he ejected the Monks, and brought in Seculars into
Monasteries; he was so displeasing to the People, that the Mercians and
Northumbrians chose his Brother Edgar for the King, and the same year Edwin
died.

In all the Reign of Edgar there was no Wars, Edgar. A. D. 959.
the Saxons cheerfully obeying him in all his Dominions, and being very kind
and favorable to the Danes, they gave him no disturbance, he recalled Dunstan
from Banishment, and in a severe Oration to the Clergy, Spelm. con: 77.

He reproves the Lives of the Clergy.

Edgar's Speech to the Clergy, M. S.

Commits the Reformation of them to three Bishops.


he perstringes the Lives of the Seculars, tells them of their impudent
Whoreing, Diceing, Singing and Roaring, Drinking, Excess in Apparel, Luxury in
Diet, Dogs and Hawks, Sports, Pastimes, and Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury,
Athelwold Bishop of Winchester, and Oswold Bishop of Worcester, with order that
by his Regular Authority, and their Episcopal Censures, the filthy Livers (by
which he meant the Seculars) might be ejected, and regular men (by which he
meant the Monks) restored to their Monasteries; his Government was attended
with Peace, Honor, and Prosperity, from whence he acquired the Title of
Peaceable, as he might also have His great love to Justice.
for in his Circuits and Progresses through the Country, he did take a special
account of the Demeanor of his Ministers and Judges, Malms. l. 2. c. 8.
so that the greatest Persons could not elude the Law, or the poorest want the
benefit of it. To repress Drunkenness which the Danes had brought in, Ibidem.
He restrains excess in Drinking.
he caused Silver or Gold Pins to be fixed to the sides of their Pots or Cups,
beyond which they should not drink themselves, nor force others to drink.

Ludwal King of Wales, Ibidem. He injoyns the Welsh a Tribute of Wolves.
a yearly Tribute of three hundred Wolves, which so totally destroyed them in
three years, that the fourth there was none to be found.

He was very careful in guarding the Coasts with several stupendous and great
Navies, if we may credit Matt. of Westminster, who says they were 4800 Ships
divided into four Squadrons, A. D. 975. His Fleets consisted of 4800 Ships
Ibidem.
whereof

At Chester from his Palace to St. John's Church, and from thence to his
Palace, he was rowed by eight Petty Kings, while himself sat at the Helm; they
all swearing Fealty to him, Flor. Wigor. A. D. 937. Eight Kings swear Fidelity
to him.

His inordinate and indiscreet Lust.


and that they would Lib. 2. c. 8. Dunstan injoyns him seven years Penance,
etc.
Malmsbury reports, Archbishop Dunstan severely reproved him, and enjoined him
seven years Penance, with strict Fastings and Abstinence; also that he should
reform the Lives of the Clergy, build Monasteries, make good Laws, and see them
executed, and do many Alms-deeds, which when he had finished, Spel. con. fol.
482.
with his seven years Penance, Dunstan in a full Assembly of all the Nobility
and Bishops, set the Crown upon his head, which he had commanded him not to
wear the time of his Penance; Edgar. A. D. 975.
all this was done with the applause of this great Assembly, to the praise of
God and St. Dunstan. He died having reigned sixteen years, He built and
repaired 47 Monasteries.
in which time he built and repaired seven and forty Monasteries and intended
to have made them up fifty if he had lived. This, in all probability, was a
great occasion of the Danes conquering England, for by this means he exhausted
his Treasure or ready Money, and gave away a great part of his Lands, for the
future maintenance of the Monks, who refused his Son Ethelred Spel. con. 444.
And so forward
With the concurrence of his great Council, he ordained many Laws Ecclesiastic
and Temporal, amongst which there was one for the payment of Tithes, another
for the payment of a Penny to Rome imposed upon every House, at the Feast of
St. Peter, under the Forfeiture of 120 shillings to the King; many Canons also
were set forth in his time, which relish of the present Age, and contain
nothing extraordinary.

Edward the younger. A. D. 975. Malms. l. 2. de gest. R. R. c. 9. Florileg. A.
D. 975. Opposed by his Mother in Law Elsted.
Edward called the younger, the eldest Son of Edgar, by Egelfleda his Wife, was
placed in his Fathers Throne, according to his just right, but contrary to the
design of Elsrida his Mother in Law, and second Wife to Edgar, who made it her
business to set up her own Son Ethelred, a Child of seven years of Age, and
half Brother to Edward, that she in his Nonage might govern the Nation.

The Factions between the Monks and Secular Priests, begun in Edwin's days, The
Controversy between the Monks and Seculars divides the Nobility.
were now revived, and extended themselves to the Nobility, many of which sided
with each Party, Dunstan with the Monks, and all that Party, adhered closely to
King Edward, the Seculars and other Party favored Queen Elfrid and her Son
Ethelred; many of the Nobility and great men threw out the Abbats and Monks
which Dunstan had placed in Monasteries, Ibidem.
and brought in and placed there Secular Clerks or Priests and their Wives; Two
Councils about this Controversy. A.D. 975, 977.
several Synods or Councils were held about this Controversy between the Monks
and Winchester, another at Caln in Wiltshire. That at Winchester ended with
confirming the Monks in their Possessions, moved to it by the voice from a
Crucifix, pronouncing in favor of them; Ibidem.
the issue of that at Caln is not clearly affirmed by the Relators telling only
a Story of a Beam that fell down while the Discourse was hot about matters in
Difference, where all or most were slain, but Dunstan who strangely escaped.

Amidst these Contests of the Clergy and Nobility, Queen Elfrid took her
opportunity of murdering Edward, to make way for her Son Ethelred, Ib. A.D.
978. Edward murdered by Elfrid his Mother in Law.
which she caused to be done after this manner: Edward, weary with Hunting, and
being very thirsty alone, while his Attendance followed the Dogs, hearing that
his Mother and his Brother Ethelred were at Camb. Ibid.
Now Corfe Castle in the Isle of Purbecke in Dorsetshire.
Corvesgate, innocently went thither, she

Edward thus removed, Ethelred. A. D. 979.
left his half Brother Ethelred right Heir to the Crown, which he received in
the presence of Dunstan Archbishop of Canterbury, Oswald Archbishop of York,
Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 978.
and ten Bishops more, whom Dunstan severely rebuked for aspiring to the
Kingdom by Blood, and prognosticated the Inundation of the Danes which
followed: This King's Easiness, Inactivity, and Softness, An easy unactive
King.
gave the greatest occasion to the Danes Conquest, who well understanding The
Danes, after many years quiet, invade England.
and their Countrymen here, (who lived in great peace and quietness until this
time) first landed in one place, then in another, ('it is to no purpose to name
the particular places, or follow them in their Sea-rambles and Landings) first
seizing the Towns and Countries near the Sea, then others more remote, until at
last they wasted the whole Nation: Ethelred often attempted to drive them out
of the Kingdom, and sometimes did beat them, but to no purpose, they always
retired Danemark and Norway.

His Nobility were not unlike him, being Easy, Supine, and Cowardly, and most
of them allied to the Danes in Blood, Ethelred betrayed by his Nobility.
so that upon any great occasion, or fair hopes of Victory over them, he was
for the most part by Fear or Treachery, betrayed by some of them, but by Edric
more especially.

After many years experience of their barbarous Murders and Cruelties, by the
consent and advice of his great men, The Danes barbarous Cruelty.
he sent Messengers to them to buy Peace, offering them Tribute, which was
called Dane and Gelt or Geld, that is, Money, Danegeld what it was.
and this word signified as much as Danes Money, Tribute or Tax paid to them.

The first Tribute paid to the Danes, that they should abstain from Rapines,
Burnings, Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 991. Ethelred buys Peace. Ibid. A.D. 994.
and Slaughters of men upon the Sea Coasts, and hold a firm Peace with the
English, was 10000 l. in the year 991. See Lambard fol. 90. Foedus Ethelredi
cum exercitu Anlavi, etc.

The next Tribute paid them for the same Purposes in the year 994. was 16000 l.

The third paid in the year 1002. was 24000 l. Ib. A. D. 1002^


l. Ib. A.D. 1007.


The fifth paid in the year 1012. was 48000 l. Ib. A.D. 1012.


The sixth and last paid for the same ends and intention to the Danish Army,
Ib. A.D. 1018. At this day very near, if not full, two Millions Sterling.
when Cnute was King of England and Danemarke, in the year 1018. was for all
England 72000 l. and for London 10000 and 500 l. Cnute carrying and sending
away the greatest part of his Army and Fleet into Danemarke.


Danegeld, and a present Sum of Money, Flor. Wigorn. A.D. 991, 994, etc.
so as they would desist from their Rapine and horrid Devastations, with which
they seemed satisfied, but still destroyed the Country; Peace and Leagues
English would bleed Money. They often, for a while, left England, gave over
wasting it, and retired home with their Fleets, but it was, that they might
return with greater Force, and receive a greater reward for their Barbarous
Hostilities and unheard of Cruelties, until the Nation was exhausted of its
Wealth and Glory.

Ethelred. A. D. 1012.
It is Storied that the Danes thus The Danes say some of our Authors lived
lazily and idly here, taking their Pleasures, while they made the English their
Slaves and Drudges, abusing their Wives and Daughters; hence they were called
Lord-Danes, and at this day in some Countries they yet call a lazy idle Fellow
Lurdan, which seems to be a corruption of Lord Dane.
lording it, and domineering over the English, Ethelred thought to effect that
by Policy, which by force he could not, Mat. Westminster. A. D. 1012.
and by the advice of some great men, sent Brice his day at night (which was
the thirteenth of November) the Danes should be This Massacre seems suspicious,
for that the Danes being dispersed all over the Nation, and that it must be a
business of time to give every place notice of the Design; it is scarce
conceivable it could be carried on with so great secrecy required to such an
universal Surprise; besides the Reporters of it agree not in the time or
manner: Hen. of Huntington says it was in the year 1002. when the Danes lived
peaceably and quietly in the Nation, Matt. of Westminster affirms it to be done
in the year 1012. by the advice of Huna King Ethelred's General, upon the
Insolent behavior of the Danes after Peace made with them; Hoveden agrees
Huntingdon in the year, and says that King Ethelred, not long after he had made
Peace with them, commanded that all the Danes great and small of both Sexes
inhabiting England, should be killed, because they sought the Dominion of the
whole Kingdom, and would have deprived him and his Nobility of their Lives. If
there was any such Massacre, it seems rather to have been done in the day time
by Assemblies of the People called together under pretense of Muster, or some
other public business which might be an unsuspected cause of their meeting.
Edric. Ib. A. D. 107. Hoveden. Anno codem. Malmsbur. l. 2. c. 10. What he was.
His abominable Treason.

massacred, Hen. Hunt. fol. 206. a. n. 50. A. D. 1002. Who says in his Youth he
received' this Story from very ancient People.
which was attempted, and they were all killed and destroyed accordingly.

In this Massacre amongst the rest, Lady Gunhild, Sister to Swane King of
Danemarke, (who after she came hither, received Christianity with her Husband
Palingus, and was pledge for the Danes observing One whom Ethelred had from
mean degree advanced to be Earl or Duke of Mercia, and given him in Marriage
his Daughter Edgith, he was called Sheen from his unsatisfied Avarice, he was
vastly Rich, not by Nobility or Birth, but made so by his Tongue and Impudence;
he was Crafty to Dissemble, Cunning to Invent, under pretense of Fidelity he
dived into the King's Councils, and discovered them Ethelred or his Son Edmund
had any considerable advantage, he by some trick or other diverted them from
the use of it; he was sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, where he
could get the best Plunder and most Money.
Edric Earl Godwin's Fathers Brother, Gunhild Sister to Swane King of Danemarke
massacred. De gest. R. R. l. 2. c. 10.
says Malmsbury, barbarously murdered.

The News of this Bloody Tragedy moves the Danes to revenge, and the year
following King Swane with a mighty Navy invades England, English, He invades
England with a mighty Navy. Presently overruns a great part of the Country. And
uses great Cruelty.
presently overran a great part of the Country, his Sword made no more
difference between Ages, Sexes, and Conditions of People, than the Fire did of
Houses or their Materials, the Cruelty and Violence of one killing, and the
Fury of the other destroying all it met with.

By Ethelred's command Hen. Huntingd. A. D. 100^. Every 310 Hides of Land to
set forth a Ship, and every nine Hides a Soldier.

Hoveden in that year.

This Preparation came to nothing.

Ibidem.

Lord-Danes. Lurdan whence The Danish Massacre suspicious.


To obviate these dreadful Miseries, and frequent Invasions, Ethelred

The next year came another Fleet of Danes under the leading of Turkill,
Ethelred. Danes
Swane Cnute
A. D. 1013.
and soon after a second under the Conduct of Heningus and Anlaf, all Danish
Princes; the former whereof in the year 1012. was with 45 Ships sworn to serve
Ethelred, Two Fleets of Danes arrive under the Conduct of Turkill, Anlaf, and
Hemingus.

Turkill with 45 Ships, takes Service under Ethelred. The People submit to
Swane Emma with her Children departs into Normandy.

Eth^lred follows them. Hen. Hunt. A. D. 1013. Swane imposes a great Tribute
upon the People.

Hoveden, Anno eodem. Turkill does the same. Hunting. A. D. 1014. Swane dies
suddenly. Ibidem. Cnute made King by the Danes.

The English recall Ethelred.


he finding them Food and Raiment.

Swane proceeding victoriously, almost wherever he came received Emma Queen
to King Ethelred, with her two Sons Edward and Alfred, went into Normandy to
her Brother Richard Duke thereof; and after Christmas in the same year,
Ethelred followed them thither, from the Isle of Wight, all the People
esteeming and receiving Swane for their King, whom he commanded through England
to make great Provisions for his Navy, and to pay almost an intolerable
Ingulph. Hist. 506. b. 507. a. The Abbey of Croyland paid 2000 Marks in one
year to Swane.
the Abbey of Croyland alone paid 2000 Marks to Swane, besides several years
before it paid to Ethelred 400 Marks a year, and 200 l. for building of Ships.
Ingulph says this was A. D. 1018. when as others say Swane died A. D. 1014.
therefore it was Cnute, or the other Historians were mistaken in their
Chronology.
Tribute: In like manner Turkill sent out his commands every where, the like
should be paid to his Greenwich; Swane thus obtaining the Throne of England, in
the beginning of his Reign, died suddenly.

After his Death the Danish Army and Danes make Cnute his Son their King, and
the English upon condition of his better Government, send to Ethelred to return
out of Normandy, who sending for his Son Edward, with promise of doing all
things worthy of himself as King, and the English People, came himself soon
after, and was English Nation.

Cnute lay then at Gainsborough, to whom the People of Northumberland and
Lindsey in Lincolnshire submitted, into the latter of which Ethelred hearing of
their submission marched, and destroyed it with Fire and Sword.

Cnute troubled that for his sake the Country should suffer, sailed Sandwich,
where he left the Hostages given to his Father, Cnute departs, and returns with
160 Ships. Ib. A. D. 1016. Edric betrays Ethelred.
first cutting off their Hands and Noses and so departs, yet in as short a time
as might be, returns again with 160 Ships, to whom the Traitor Edric joins
himself with forty Ships more; against whom Ethelred raises a vast Army, but
being told it would betray him, dismissed it, and retired to London.

His Son Edmund called Ironside, with Vctred Duke of Northumberland, Cnute
destroyed others, Vctred compelled by necessity, submitted and gave Hostages,
notwithstanding which he was slain, and Hoic made Earl of Northumberland.
Edmund returned to London to his Father, Ibidem.
and Cnute was coming toward it with his Fleet, Ethelred dies.
but before he arrived Ethelred died.

Cnute. Edmund Ironside. A. D. 1016.
In the year 1009. and about the Thirtieth of this King, Spelman thinks he
called a Council of all his great and wise men at Aenham, at the instance of
Aelfeage Archbishop of Canterbury, and Wulstan Archbishop of York, A Council at
Aenh^m. A. D. 1009. Spelm. con. fol. 511, etc. Ibid. c. 2. c. 6. c. 19.

Canons against Priests Marriage.


wherein many Ecclesiastic and Secular Laws were either made or confirmed,
among which these three were not very usual, That Priests should not Marry, it
being the Custom then for them to have two or three Wives. That Gualdas
Cambrensis reports it was the Custom and common Vice of the English, in time of
Peace, to sell their Children and Kindred into Ireland for Slaves, although not
urged to it by Want or Necessity; and the Northumbrians, not under pretense of
Necessity, but for mere Profit, were wont to sell Children.
none should be sold out of their Country, especially to a Pagan. That Widows
should remain Other Laws were made for preservation of the Peace, correction of
false Money, and bringing Weights and Measures to a just Rule.

Against the sale of men, etc. C. 22. C. 23.
Here were also ordained Naval Laws. That a Fleet should be ready and equipped
every year, as soon as might be, after Easter, for the Defense of the Kingdom.
If any man did injury to any Ship designed for this Expedition, he was to
repair the Damage. But Plenam Luito Injuriam, and laesam praeterea majestatem.
FORGYLDE HIT FVLLICE and CYNING THONNE MVNDBRICE.

Hoveden. A. D. 1016. fol. 219. a. Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 1017. The Bishops,
Abbats, and many of the Nobility elect Cnute their K. and abjure the Saxon
Race. The Citizens and Nobility at London set up Edmond Ironside.
Ethelred having finished his Life and miserable Reign, the Bishops, Abbats,
and many of the Nobility assembling together, or as others being summoned by
him, meet at London, elected Cnute their King, Southampton, where he then was,
renounced before him all the Race of Ethelred, and swear unto him Fidelity; and
he also swear to them, that in matters both Secular and Religious, he would be
their faithful Lord; but the Nobility which staid at London, together with the
Citizens, chose Edmond called Ironside, the eldest Son of Ethelred then living
by his first Wife; he going with all speed to the West Saxons, was received by
them with great Demonstration of Joy.

In the mean time Cnute coming to London with his Fleet, caused a great Cut or
Ditch to be made in the South part of Thames, and laid up his Ships West of the
Bridge, compassed the City with a wide and deep Ditch, Cnute besieges London.
closely besieged it, so as none could pass out or in, He quits the Siege.

Ashdown Battle.


and often assailed it, but was as stoutly repulsed by the Defendents;
wherefore for that time quitting the Siege, and leaving part of his Forces to
defend his Ships, with the other he swiftly West-Saxony, before Edmond had
raised an Army, who yet with such Forces as he had ready, Hibern. expug. c. 18.
It was a common Custom of the English, to sell their Children. Malms. de gest.
R. R. lib. 1. c. 3. Ibid. l. 2. c. 11. fol. 4^. a. Cnute builds Churches and
Monasteries in many places to expiate the Blood spilt there. Ibid. l. 2. c. 10.
boldly sets upon them, and (by Gods help) puts them to flight. Not long after
being recruited and receiving more strength, he fought the Danes the second or
third time, some report at A Town in Essex in Rocheford Hundred near Ralegh,
where Cnute built a Church to expiate the blood spilt there, as he did in all
other places where he fought, building of Churches and Monasteries being then a
common way of satisfaction for great Persons, for Blood, Murder, and all
manner of wickedness.
Ashdown or Assingdon, others at other places.

But in the last Battle, wherever it was, (by the Treachery of Edric, who
revolted to the Danes, with what Forces he could, when he saw the Victory
inclining to the English) Edmund was totally defeated, and the flower of the
English Nobility cut off; Edric's Treachery.

Huntingd. A. D. 1016. Fol. 208. The flower of the English Nobility destroyed.
Ibidem.


here perished noble Duke Ednod, Duke Alsric, Duke Godwin, and the brave
Vlfketel Duke of the East Angles, and many more gallant English; after this
great Victory Cnute took London, and the Royal Scepter.

Edmund, with the Remains of his Army, marched toward Gloucester, where
collecting what Force he could, he prepared for a new Engagement; but the
Nobility on both sides terrified with the dreadful slaughter in the last
Battle, and fearing the Courage as well of Edmund as Cnute, persuaded them, for
avoiding the great Effusion of Blood, to decide the Controversy by single
Malmsbury says Cnute refused a Duel, yet at the Instance of both Armies, he was
willing the Nation should be divided.
Combat, which Cnute and Edmund part the Kingdom. Matt. Westminster. A. D. 1016. f.
205. n. 40.
they agreed to part the Kingdom between them. Edmund for his share had
East-Saxony, East-England, the City of London, and all the Land on the South
side of the River Thames; and Cnute had all the North parts of England.

Not long after Edmund died at London, Flor. Wigor. A. D. 1016. Fol. 618.
and was buried at Glastonbury, when Cnute commanded all the Bishops, Dukes,
Princes and England to meet at London, and when they were come together, he
craftily asked such as were Witnesses to the Agreement, Cnute surprizeth the
Witnesses to the Agreement between him and Edmund.
and Division of the Kingdom between them, as if he knew nothing of the matter,
what he and Eadmund discoursed of his Brothers and Sons; Whether it should be
lawful for his Sons to Reign in the Kingdom of the West Saxons after him, if
Eadmund should dye while he was living.

Ibidem.
that King Edmund neither living or dying, had given the Protection of any part
of his Kingdom to his Brothers; and they said also they knew that Edmund
desired Cnute should be the Protector of his Children, while they were of Age
to Reign.

But, says my Author, They gave false Testimony, and lied falsely, Ibidem. They
give false Testimony.
thinking to make Cnute more kind to them, and hoping for great

Then he exacted of them Oaths of Fidelity, Ibidem.
and they swear they would choose him King, humbly obey him, and pay Taxes to
his Army, wholly rejecting the Brothers and Sons of Edmund.

By the contrivance of Cnute and Edric, Ibidem. A. D. 1017. fol. 619. Edric
advises Cnute to murder Edmund 's Sons.
Edwin the Brother of Edmund Edric gave him further advice to kill his two Sons
Edward and Edmund, but thinking it would prove a great disgrace to him, if they
were murdered in England, sent them to the King of Sweves, Cnute. Edmund
Ironside.

A. D. 1017.


that he might dispatch them, who though his Friend would not do what he
desired, but sent them to Solomon King of Hungary to be preserved; where Edmund
died, and Edward married Agatha Daughter to Henry the Roman Emperor, by whom he
had Edgar, Aetheling.
Aethelinge, and Margaret Queen of Scotland.

Cnute. A. D. 1017. Flor. Wigorn. Divides England into four parts.
Cnute having thus obtained the Kingdom of England, divided it into four parts
or Governments, West-Saxony he kept to himself, Mercia he committed to Edric,
to Turkill the East Angles, to He is sometime called Iricius, Hirc or Eric
Iricius Northumberland. His first care was to make a firm friendship between
Danes and English, and a right understanding between himself, Ibidem. To indear
himself to the People, causes the Murderers of Edmund to be put to death.
Nobility and all the People, whose love his own quiet and security prompted
him to seek, and as a means, to that end he caused to be brought forth the
Murderers of Edmund in a great frequency of People, who openly confessing the
Fact, were put to death; and not long after finding an opportunity, He always
urged him to fight, when Cnute had the advantage, but when he was probable to
conquer, he dissuaded Battle.
Edric whom he inwardly Malmsb. f. 41. a. n. 10. And cuts off Edric. Ibid. and
Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 1017. Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 1017.
growing now troublesome to Cnute, whom he often minded of the Wickednesses and
Treasons he had committed in favor of him. With him Duke Norman, the Son of
Duke Leofwin, the Brother of Earl Leofric, and Aethelward the Son of Duke
Agelman, and Brightric the Son of Alphege Earl of Devonshire, were without fail
put to death. Leofric he made a Duke, and was afterward very kind to him.

Malmsb. ut sup. n. 30. He Marries Emme Widow of Ethelred.
The more to ingratiate himself into the English, he married Emme Widow to
Etheldred, and Sister to Richard Duke of Normandy, whose Alliance was the more
considerable, in respect he had in his Protection the two Sons of Ethelred by
this Emme.

Malms. ut sup. To expiate the Blood, Murders, etc. he builds and repairs many
Monasteries. A. D. 1032. Hoveden. By Bribes he obtains the Kingdom of Norway.
Ibidem. A. D. 1028. A. D. 1031. Vid. Epist. in con. Spelm. fol 535. Ingulph.
Hist. 508. b. Malms. f. 41. b. n. 10.
To expiate the Blood, Murders, Rapine, and Violence of himself, Father and
Ancestors, he repaired all the Monasteries which England, and built some new
ones, as that at St. Edmund's- Bury, etc.

Cnute hearing the Norwegies, neglected and slighted their King Olave for his
Meekness, Justice, and Simplicity, sent to some of the chief Persons of the
Land great Bribes in Gold and Silver, soliciting them to reject Olave, and
make him King; they accept his Propositions, and Cnute coming thither from
England with fifty Ships, they Olave, and declare him their King. In the
fifteenth year of his Reign, he made a Voyage to Rome, (as he declares in his
Letter from thence to his great men by Livingus) that by his respects paid
there to the Apostles Peter and Paul, he might receive Pardon for his Sins; at
his being there he complained to the Pope of the great Exactions practiced upon
the Archbishops for their Palls, and was promised redress; in the same Letter
or Epistle he promises amendment of Life, and commands his Counselors, with
whom he trusted the His great Justice in some things.
they should consent to any Injustice, or suffer any to be done in his Kingdom;
Cnute alone. A D. 1031.
the like command he lays upon his Sheriffs and Justitiaries, that no Violence
be done either to Rich or Poor, but that all men should have equal Justice, and
that they should not grievously exact upon the People to fill his Coffers; he
further strictly injoyns them, that before his return from Danemarke, (whither
he was going to settle all things in firm Peace) they should pay all his Debts
due according to the old Law, Churches or Cyriscet or Cyricsceat. Church-shot,
or by some Church-Seed, Churchset what. Cyricsceat.
being a Sum paid for the first Fruits, or Garden-Seeds, to be paid at
Martlemass, or the Feast of St. Martin in November.
Church-seed, Tithes, Peter Pence, etc. he strictly enjoined the Ethelred,
Malms. l. 2. c. 11 fol. 42. a. He injoyns the Observation of the old Laws. Ll.
Canut. Lamb. fol. 97.
which were afterward called the Laws of Edward the Confessor, not that he made
them, but only caused them to be observed; this large Collection is extant in
Lambard, and besides the Ecclesiastic Laws, of which there are many, contains
nothing but the antiquated Usages and Injunctions of those times, except what
was said concerning them in the notices. Many Laws purely Ecclesiastic made by
Cnute and his great Council.
The Ecclesiastic Laws concerning Religious

1. That there should be no Markets, Fairs, Assemblies, Ll. Cnut. c. 15. No
Markets, Fairs, etc. on the Lord's Day. Ibid. c. 19. The Sacrament to be
received thrice in a year.
or other Secular Actions practiced on the Lord's Day. 2. That all Christians
should receive the Eucharist, or Sacrament of the Lord's Supper at least three
times in the year. 3. That if a Priest killed a man, or committed any notorious
Crime, he should be deprived of his Order and Dignity. 4. That a married Woman
convict of Adultery, Ibid. c. 50.
should have her Nose and Ears cut off. 5. That a Widow marrying within twelve
months after her Husbands Ibid. c. 71.

Cnute not long before he died, appointed his eldest Son Swane, Hoveden 251. a
A. D. 1035. Cnute dies and disposes his Kingdoms to his Sons.
by his first Wife By most Writers reported to have been a Concubine, she was
Daughter to a Mercian Nobleman, who is said to have been Earl of Northampton.
Elgiva, to be King of Norway, and his second Son Others say he was elected
King, Ingulph. Hist. 509. a.
and some that he was King only of the North parts of England, and Hard Cnute
of the South parts.
Harold, by the same Woman to be King of England, and Harde-Cnute his Son by
Emme, King of Danemarke. This year he died in November at Shaftsbury, and was
buried at Winchester.

Harold according to some being chosen King by the Danes and Londoners, Harold.
Hunt. 209. a.
whilst Earl Godwin and the English would have had for their King one of the
Sons of Ethelred, or Harde-Cnute the Son of Cnute, but their attempt was in
vain, Malms. l. 2. c 12
not being equal either in number or force to the Abettors of Harold, and
therefore he enjoyed the Crown, which was given to him by his Father, A. D.
1036.
as it is said in Hoveden before-cited; however he came to be so, King he was,
and innocent Elfred, Elfred and many Normans slain.
a younger Son of Emme by Ethelred coming out of Normandy to visit his Mother
then being at Winchester, Harold, Harde-Cnute. Danes.

A. D. 1036.


(as it is storied) was by Earl Godwin and others by order of Harold, together
with many Normans that came to accompany him, slain; his Mother Emme not
thinking her self safe here, much grieved for the death of her Son cruelly
murdered, Hoved. 251. Emme flies to Baldwin Earl of Flanders.
went to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who received her honorably, and assigned
Brugis for the place of her abode, where she remained three years, whither her
Son Harde-Cnute came out of Danemarke to visit her, Malmsb. ibid. Hunting.
ibid. Hoved. 251. b. Harold dies. Ibid. and Flor. Wigorn. A. D. 1040.
in the mean while having Harold dies at Oxford, some say London, and was
buried at Westminster. Florence of Worcester says they divided the Kingdom of
England by Lot, and that the North part fell to Harold, and the South to
Harde-Cnute, who was rejected because he came not out of Danemarke, when sent
for, so soon as was expected, and therefore Harold was elected King over all
England, A. D. 1035, 1037. fol. 622.

Harde-Cnute. both English and Danes make him their King.
After his death all the Nobility both Danes and English sent to Brugis to
Harde-Cnute, to come and be their King, (the Children of Ethelred being
neglected, and post-poned for the easiness and ill fortune of their Father) he
arrives with sixty Ships manned with Danes, and was of all People received with
great applause, but during his short Reign, did nothing worthy a King, save
that he treated his half Brother Edward, and his Mother Emme, who came to him
out of Normandy, He laid a grievous Tax upon the Nation. Ibidem.

At which Worcestershire People tumult.


very kindly and honorably; he laid a grievous Tax Worcester the Country
People and Citizens killed two of his Domestic Servants which he sent to
gather his Tax, but he chastised them severely for that Fact, for he sent
thither Leofric Earl of Mercia, Godwin Earl of West-Saxony, Siward Earl of
Northumberland, Their City and Country is burnt and plundered. Ib. A.D. 1042.
He dies suddenly.
etc. who plundered and burnt the City, and wasted all the Country, when he had
reigned about two years; he died Lambeth, where Osgod a great Danish Lord had
married his Daughter to Prudan another Potent Dane.

Edward the Confessor. A. D. 1043. His Descent.
Edward commonly called the Confessor, the eldest Son of Ethelred by Emme, and
half Brother to Edmund Ironside, Son also of Ethelred by a former Wife being in
England, at the death of his half Brother Harde-Cnute, was in a great straight,
not knowing what to do, and Normandy, Malms. de Gest. R. R. l. 2. c. 13. fol.
45. a. n. 10.

He applies himself to Earl Godwin.


applied himself to Earl Godwin, who gave him other advice, minds him whose Son
he was, and what great probability there was of his being King; and withal
promises his assistance upon Conditions to be agreed on between them. Edward
urged by necessity, promises to make good all he asked. Then a Council being
called at London, Godwin being very eloquent and powerful in persuading, so
prevailed in this Assembly, that by the consent of almost all present, He is
declared King.
he was made King, and Hoveden 252. a.
crowned at Winchester, anointed by Edsi Archbishop of Canterbury, and Alfric
Archbishop of York, in the presence of almost all the Bishops of England.

And not long after, by advice of the Earls Leofric, Godwin, Edward the
Confessor of the Saxon Race A. D. 1043.
and Siward, he seized and took from his Mother Emm^, all her Gold, Silver,
Jewels and Treasure. The reason assigned is, that she was very hard and sparing
toward him in the time of his Exile; he married the Daughter of Earl Godwin,
by name Edith or Edgith, Hor. Worcest. He takes away Jewels and Treasury from
his Mother Emme.

He Marries Earl Godwin's Daughter Edgith.

Malms. ut sup. Her Beauty, Learning, and Modesty.


as he had promised. She was no ways like her Father or Brothers, but was very
beautiful, learned, humble, and modest. Histor. Croy. 509. a. n. 30.40, 50.
Edward much addicted to the French Modes and Custom^. Ibidem.
Ingulph Grammar, but in Logic.

The same Historian there says, that though Edward was born in England, yet
having had his Education in Normandy, he was almost become a French man; and
calling many from thence both Lays Robert a Monk, whom he made first Bishop of
London, and then Archbishop of Canterbury; and William his Chaplain, whom he
made Bishop of Dorchester, with other Military men, which he placed upon the
Borders to defend them against the Welsh.

Then the English under this King, and the Normans which he English Rites and
Customs, and in many things to imitate the French; Ibid. b. n. 10. And the
English, according to his Example, they speak French, and imitate their Vsages,
and are ashamed of their own.
the chief and great men to speak French in their Courts and Houses, as a great
piece of State and Breeding, to make their Charters, Deeds, and Writings, after
the French manner, ashamed of their own Usages and Customs, in these and many
other things. Ibidem. A. D. 1051. fol. 510. a.n. 50. He remits the Tax called
Dane-geld.
About the eighth year of his Reign, there being a great Scarcity and Famine,
he then remitted for ever the Tax called Dane-geld, it having been continued
eight and thirty Ethelred to King Swane. The English began Malmsb ut sup. n.
40.50 The English murmur at the Preferment of the Normans.
to murmur at the Preferments of the Normans, and took it ill, that Strangers
should enjoy such places of Trust and Dignity; on the contrary, the Normans
stomached the English defended themselves, and Ibidem. They calumniate the
English, especially Godwin and his Sons. f. 46. a. n. 40, 50
calumniated them, especially This mighty Earl was a Cow-heards Son, advanced
by Cnute, whose Sister he had married, she being dead, he married a second
Wife, says Malmsbury, but of what Stock not known, by her he had six Sons, Sim.
Dun. A. D. 1051. Flor. of Worcest. the same year, fol. 1627.
Swane, Harold, Wulnoth, Tosti, Girth, Leofwin, he himself was Earl of Kent,
the South and West Saxons, Sussex, Hampshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire, and
Cornwall; Swane was Earl of Oxfordshire, Berkeshire, Gloucestershire,
Herefordshire, and Somersetshire. Harold was Earl of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk,
Cambridge, and Huntingtonshires, Wulnoth and Hacun Son of Swane, were Hostages,
with William Earl of Normandy, for Godwin's good behavior toward King Edward;
after Siward's death Tosti was made Earl of Northumberland, and Girth and
Leofwin possessed other places.
Godwin

Edward the Consessor. A. D. 1051.
These Factions and Animosities at Court were notably heightened by the following
Accident. Ib. b. n. 20. Eustace Earl of Bulloigne, comes to visit King Edward.
Upon his return, one of his Herbingers quarrels with a Townsman of Dover or
Canterbury, and is slain.

Eustace and his Followers kill 21 of his Townsmen.


Eustace the Elder, Earl of Balloigne, who had married Goda Sister by the
Fathers side to King Edward, came into England to visit him, and returning
homeward, at Canterbury as some report, at Dover as others, one of his
Herbingers unadvisedly quarrelled with a Townsman or Citizen about Lodgings he
was to take up for his Master and Retinue, was by him slain; the Earl, to
revenge his Servant's death, and his Followers, kill several Eustace and his
People, and slay one and twenty of them; he immediately posts to Court, and
makes his complaint to the King, of the Injuries received, who being incensed,
and the Master aggravated by the Norman Courtiers, Godwin was Florence of
Worcester reports, That Godwin being much moved, and very angry that such
things were done in his County or Government, he and his Sons in their several
Counties raised a mighty Army, of which the King taking notice, and being
affrighted, sent to Leofric and Siward to come to him, being in great danger,
with what Forces they could raise, etc. A. D. 1051. fol. 627.
sent for, and commanded to march into Kent with an Army, and punish the People
of Canterbury or Dover; (who had likewise made their Complaints on both sides
come to the King. Godwin is commanded to punish the People of Canterbury or
Dover. He refuses unless both parties were heard.
and represented their Case to him as their Earl) he, He is summoned to answer
his refusal before the Peers.
The King not pleased with his refusal, ordered an Assembly of the Peers at
Gloucester, where the matter might be fully debated; thither came the two great
and famous Earls Leofric of the Mercians, and Siward of the Northumbrians, and
all the Nobility of England, except Malms. de Gest. R. R. fol. 45. b. n. 40.
Godwin comes with an Army.
Godwin, who suspected his own Cause, or the Violence of his Adversaries, with
his two Sons Swane and Harold, came with a great Army, raised in his own and
their Earldoms, (under pretense of subduing the Welsh) the King knowing of his
Leofric and Siward at the King's request oppose him.
desired the assistance of Leofric and Siward, who raising the force of their
Countries, checked Godwin's design, who not knowing of this force, boldly
demanded Sim. Dunelm. A. D. 1051.
Eustace and his Followers; the King delayed him with fair answers, until the
Mercians and Northern men advanced, who were eager of fighting. But Leofric and
the more wise men interposed between the King and Godwin, that Hostages given
on both sides, the cause should be again debated at London, whither the King
and Lords coming with their Army, send Godwin and his Sons, who with their
Forces were come to Southwark, Servitium militum. Quos per Angliam habebant
Regi contradere. Malmsb. f. 56. a. Lin. 1. Godwin and his Sons banished.
commanding their appearance with twelve Attendants only; they refuse to appear
before their Adversaries without Hostages, yet deny not to disband their
Soldiers, or consign or make over their Service to the King, or in any thing
else to obey the King, that might be agreeable to their Honor and Safety, this
answer not satisfying the King, Godwin and his Sons by Edict within five days,
was to depart the Land, who perceiving his numbers falling off, readily obeyed,
and with his Wife Gytha, and three Sons, Swane, Edward the Confessor. A. D.
1052.
Tosti and Girth, passed over into Flanders to Earl Baldwin, whose Daughter
Judith Brompt. col. 943. Edward sends his Queen into a Nunnery.
Tosti had married; his Sons Harold and Leofwin taking Ship at Bristol, passed
over into Ireland: They depart into Flanders.
Edward pursuing his anger against Godwin, put away his Wife, Edith his
Daughter, and with one Maid only, sent her to the Nunnery of Warewell, to be
kept there by the Abbess.

Ingulph. Hist. 510. b. William Duke of Norman^y comes into England. An. Dom.
About this time William Duke of Normandy, with a great train of Followers,
coming into England, was honorably entertained by Edward, and had many of the
Cities and Castles shown unto him, although at that time there was no discourse
of Succession between them, after some time spent liere, being richly
presented, he returned home.

Emme the Mother of Edward died, and was buried at Winchester, A. D. 1052. Emme
King Edward's Mother dies: She undergoes Fire-Ordale. See the Glossary in the
word. The Crimes objected to her. Godwin in the Life of Robert Archbishop,
confutes this Story, and argues it of falsehood, p. 80. and makes it appear idle.
who for all her great Virtues escaped not the Malice of her Enemies, although
she either fortunately or miraculously (if the Story be true) escaped burning
by Fire-Ordale. Her chief Enemy was Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, the Crimes
objected, were her consenting to the death of her Son Alfred, that she had a
greater affection for her Danish, than English Children; and Incontinency with
Alwine Bishop of Winchester, but having blindfolded and barefooted, passed

Sim. Dunel.

A. D. 1052. Godwin and his Sons infest the Coasts, and come up the Thames.

And draw together a Land-Army.

The K. marched toward them with his Army.


During their Exile, Godwin and his Sons, much infested the Coasts of England
in the West and South; at last Harold joining Thames toward London with their
Fleet, where a Land Army of Londoners and Countrymen out of their several
Earldoms, met them at Southwark, which by their Agents and Emissaries, under
many fair Pretenses and Suggestions, they had drawn together; the King being
then in London, marched and advanced his Army and Fleet against Godwin's; the
Fleets being placed on the contrary sides of the River, and the Armies on the
contrary Banks, the chief men on both Parties being English, Godwin, The
Differences composed without Battle. Eadmen. fol. 4.
which they did, and brought them to an accommodation. But the King suspecting
Godwin's Subtilty and Instability, would not consent to Peace, before Wulnoth
the Son of Godwin, and Hacun the Son of Swane, were delivered Hostages for his
good behavior to William Duke of Normandy, Godwin and his Sons restored.
and then he and his Sons were restored to all their former Rights and
Enjoyments, except Swane, who troubled in Conscience Beorn, went to Jerusalem
Barefoot, and in his return died. Edward also received his Queen Edith,
Godwin's Daughter, in the same Dignity she was before.

This done, the Normans who had given the King ill Council, and under his
Authority done many unjust things. John ^romp^on.
Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, The Normans banis^^d.
William Bishop of London, Vls. of Dorcester, etc. were banished the Realm.
B^pt col. ^4^. A. D. ^0^3. Edw. Con ^^
Robert Archbishop died beyond Sea, but William for his excellent goodness, a
little while after, was recalled from banishment, and restored to his
Bishopric. Soon after Earl Sim. Dunelm. A. D. 1053. Godwin di^s. Eadmer. fol.
4. Fol. 510. b. n. 30, 40
Godwin sitting with the King at Table, taken Speech^ess, sunk down suddenly in
his seat as dead, his three Sons Harold, Tosti and Girth carrying him into the
King's Chamber, in hopes he might revive, but the fifth day after he died. By
Ingulph and others it is storied, that Edward (as he sat at Table) reproving him
for the death of his Brother Alfred, he took a Morsel, and wished it might
choke him if he were guilty, with which, endeavoring to swallow it, he was
choked. And his [8.] Earldom of Kent and West-Saxony, was given to his Son
Harold, and his to Algar Son of Leo^ric.

Macbeth vanquished by Siward Earl of Northumb^r.
Siward the stout Earl of Northumberland, by the King's order, made an
Expedition into Scotland, vanquished the Tyrant Sim. Dunelm. A. D. 1054.
Macbeth, and made Malcolme, Son to the King of Cumberland, King of Scotland;
within two years after this great action, Siward dies, and Tosti Brother to
Harold was made Earl of Ingulph. ut sup. A. D. 1056. Earl Algar banished,
recovers his Earldom by assitance of Griff. King of Wales.
Northumberland.

About this time Earl Algan was banished without a cause, but invading England,
with the assistance of Griffin King of Wales, he Sim. Dunelm.

A. D. 1057. Edward first Son of Edmund Ironsides sent for into Hungary.

A. D. 1058. Ingulph. Hist. 511. a. Algar is banished, and again recovers his
Earldom.


King Edward now sent into Hungary for his Nephew Edward Son to Edmund
Ironside, who as he was right Heir to the Crown, so he intended to make him his
Successor, but he died not long after he came into England; in this year good
old Leo^ric commonly styled Earl of Leicester, but indeed Earl of Mercia died,
a wise and prudent man, and Algar his Son succeeded him in his Earldom, whom
Edward banished the second time, but again by the aid of Griffin, and a Fleet
from Norway, by force recovered Edwin and Morear his Sons.

Sim. Dun. A. D. 1063. 1064. Ingulph. A. D. 1063. Griffin King of Wales
overcome by Harold.
The Welsh under the conduct of Griffin their King, invade and harass those
parts of England next Wales, but vanquished and overcome by Harold, and his
Brother Tosti, at the King's appointment, they submit and promise to pay
Tribute, depose and kill their King. Ingulph. A. D. 1065. Fol. 511. b. n. 30.
Edward gives Wales to Griffin's Brother's Blechgent and Rithwalan, who swore
Fidelity to him by Harold his Representative, promising all ready Service by
Sea and Land, and to pay whatever used to be paid to the Kings of England.

Tosti returning into Northumberland, (which was then accounted all that part
of England beyond Humber Northwards) used the People severely, and Sim. Dun. A.
D. 1069. The Northumbrians Tumult against Tosti. Harold sent to appease them.
imposed high and grievous Taxes upon them, committing many Outrages, the
People run to Arms, beset his Palace, Tosti Petitions the King to send his
Brother Harold and others, to hear Matters in difference between him and the
People, who endeavoring to reconcile them, the People would not be persuaded
to admit Tosti for their Earl, but by the help of Edwin Earl of Mercia expelled
him, Edward the Confessor. A. D. 1065.
and then Morcar they chose for their Earl, at the King's command.

Edward now growing infirm with Age, having no Children, By the help of Edwin
Earl of Mercia, they expel and reject him.

And by the Kings command they choose Morcar for their Earl. Ingulph f. 511. b.
n. 30. Edward declares William Duke of Normandy his Successor.


thought not Edgar Atheling Son of Edward, called the Outlaw, Son of Edmund
Ironside, the right Heir, either fit for the Crown and Government, or able to
bear up against the Power and Violence of Godwin's Sons, and therefore declared
William Duke of Normandy his Cousin-German by the Mother-side, his Successor;
and of his intention to do so, he had given him private intimation before by
Harold and others, who with all readiness promised to give him their assistance
to obtain the Crown.

De Ducib. Norman. lib. 6. c. 31.
Gemiticensis says he first sent Robert Archbishop of Canterbury to give him
notice of his intention, and afterward sent Harold to do Edward's Grant by Oath.

Gul. Pictav. fol. 181. D. and 191. A.
Gul. Pictavenses says the same, and adds further, that his Brother and
Brother's Son remained Hostages for the Security of this Succession, and that
this was done by the consent of Edward's great men, A. D. 1066. alias 1065. and
dies.

The broad Seal first used. Lamb. peramb. Kent.


or the English Nobility; on Christmas time this year he sickned and died, and
was buried in the Abbey of Westminster, which he had England. He was a quiet
Prince, had a great kindness for the Clergy, and much governed by them, so
nothing considerable passed in Church Affairs in his Reign.

Edward the Confessor being dead, Harold Son of Godwin, A. D. 1065. Ingulph. in
that year. fol. 511. b. Gesta Gul. de fol. 191. A. De Duc. Nor. lib. 6. c. 31.
He died on the Eve of Epiphaphany. Ib. fol. 512. A.
and then Earl Kent and West-Saxony, who had formerly Eadmer reports, that
after the death of his Father Earl Godwin, Fol. 4, 5. See Notes in Edwards
letter. b. Seld. Note on Eadmer. fol. 163. Eadmer fol. 5. Gemitticen. de duc.
Norman. l. 6. c. 31.
he asked leave of the King to pass into Normandy, and fetch home is Brother
Wulnoth and Nephew Hacon, who were there Hostages, and that he was driven by
Storm into the River Maia, in the Earldom of Ponthieu in Picardy, bordering
upon Normandy, where by Earl Guido he was made Prisoner: Harold sends to
William Earl of Normandy, and gives him an account what had happened to him,
who forthwith commands the Earl of Ponthieu to send Harold unto him, if he
would enjoy his accustomed Friendship, and being sent after a second threatening
Message, he is honorably received of William, who in a short time propounded
to him, that if King Edward should give him England, he would keep for him the
Castle of Dover, with the Well of Water to assist him in obtaining the Kingdom,
and promise to marry his Harold knew the danger in consenting to these things,
yet knew not how to escape if he should refuse them, he therefore swore upon
all the Relics of the Saints produced by William, Mat. Paris, fol. 2, etc. A.
D. Annal. 1066. Ibid. Eadmer fol. 5. n. 30.
that he would perform them.
gone, or rather was Edward over into Normandy to Duke William, according to
William of Poictiers, and there had sworn, after the death of Edward, to marry
his Daughter, and preserve the Kingdom for him. Gemetricensis says, upon these
Conditions he offered to give him in Marriage, his Daughter Alice, and half the
Kingdom. The day after the Kings Funeral, contrary to his Oath and Faith given,
invades the Throne, and was solemnly Crowned by It Is generally said by our
common Historians, that he invaded the Throne, and crowned himself without the
assistance of a Bishop, which made the Pope and Clergy his enemies ever after;
but Hoveden, as here Ingulph, says he was crowned by this Alfred, and Eadmer
and Hoveden both say he was designed Successor by King Edward.
Aldred Archbishop of York, Harold. A. D. 1065.
and for the time he enjoyed it, (which was nine months only) behaved himself
worthily with great Courage and Justice. William hearing what was done, sends
Messengers to expostulate with Harold, Gul. Pictav. 220. B.
and let him know that he had broken his Oath, and not performed his Agreement
and Promises, and to require from him some just means of accommodation between
them; but Harold claims the Crown upon a Grant from Edward upon his Deathbed,
later than that of William, scarce vouchsafes his Ambassadors Audience, denies
Saying he could not dispose of a Kingdom that was not then his, nor do that, or
with Ibidem. Gemit. de duc. Nor. l 6. c. 32. Ingulph. 510. b.

excuses his Promises, slights and neglects all just means of Compromise
offered; and then when the Summer was almost spent by an ineffectual
intercourse of Messengers and Messages, Or as some say, he consented to hold
the Kingdom as his Feudary.
William appeals and refers this Affair to the Pope, who examining his
pretenses, Ib. Ingulphus.
animates and sends him a Banner in token of Victory.

Harold in the mean time, little valuing the Pope's Judgment and Sentence,
gathers an Army, secures the Ports, and more especially By Instigation of, and
confederacy with William he hating his Brother Harold, and they marrying two
Sisters, the Daughters of the Earl of Flanders.
Tosto daily infesting the Coasts, who sailing Harold, As he was roving up and
down the Coasts of Scotland, and North part of England, King Edwin Earl of
Mercia, sometimes called Earl of Chester, Morcar of Northumberland, sometimes
called Earl of York* both Sons of A^gar, eldest Son of Leofric Earl of Mercia,
Ibidem. Malms. in Guliel. 1. fol. 56. b.
sometime Earl of Leicester.
Harfager King of Norway, with a Fleet of 200 Ships, came into the mouth of
Humber, and up the River Ouse almost to York, where landing a numerous Army,
they assault, take and sack the City, committing a mighty Ibidem.
k Edwin and Morcar, both Earls and Brethren, with what Forces they could
suddenly bring together, advance toward them, but were soon repelled by them,
they being more in number Harold comes up with a Potent Army, Alias Battle
Bridge upon the River Derwent not far from York.
Stanford Bridge, where though the Norwegians made a stout and obstinate
resistance, yet at length the English obtained the Victory, Harfager and Tosto,
with the greatest part of their Army, being slain, and most of their Fleet
taken, only Oslaus Harfager's Son, and Paul Earl of Orcades had liberty to
depart with Here was so much Gold as seven lusty young men could carry, besides
other rich Spoils, all which Harold taking to his own use, disgusted his Army.
Treasure behind them.

Gul. Pictav. 197. A. 198. A
William was not idle all this while, but calling together the great men of his
Country, consults with them, and propounds the Conquest of England to the chief
of them, who dissuade him from the attempt, as a thing too difficult to be
effected, and beyond the Power and Force of Normandy; and which might change
the excellent State of their Country into a miserable Condition. Gul. Pictav.
197. A. B.
There were then in Normandy, besides Bishops and Abbots, several Laymen,
knowing and able to advise; such were Robert Earl of Mortaign, half Brother
William, Robert Earl of Ou, Richard Earl of Eureux, Son of Robert Archbishop of
Roan, Roger Beaumont, Roger Montgomery, William Fitzh-Osborn, Hugo vicecom
Ibidem.
and Viscount Hugh, these he consulted with, but so as the result of all things
was left to the Duke himself, how many Ships to equip, and with what Men and
Arms, and at length every one cheerfully makes ready what was charged upon
him, according to his Possessions, and the value of his Estate, and having
prepared a great number of Ships, and a great Army of Normans, Flemmings,
Malms. de gest Reg. fol. 56. a. n. 50. Ge^er. de duc. Nor. l. 6. c. 34.
French, Poictovins, Aquitans, and Britans, both Horse and Foot, after some
stay for a wind at the mouth of the River Dive, he fell down to, and set sail
from St. Now St. Valery upon the River of Soame in Picardy.
Waleric or Gualeric, with a gentle Gale, and landed at Pevensey in Sussex,
erected a Fort there, to secure It Is said by Cambden he burnt all his Ships,
that he might cut off from his Soldiers all hopes of Safety by flight; if so,
Britan. fol. 106 He had it out of the Manuscript History of Battle Abbey in
Bib. cotton. sob Effigy Domitian. A. 2. fol. 1. Malms. Will. 1. fol. 57.
Dunel. Brompton. A. D. 1066. Gesta Guliel. Ducis f 202. D. In Will. 1.56. b.
57. b.
certainly he designed no place of Safety for a retreat, or to secure his Ships.
wherein he placed a Garrison, Gul. Pictav. Gesta Gul. Ducis fol. 199. c.
and marching from thence to Hastings, he raises another Fortification for the
same Purposes, and Garrisons that likewise, and then declares Brompt. col. 958.
Son to Ethelred, and younger Brother of Edw. the Confessor to Emme.
Alfred whom Godwin Harold's Father and his Sons had cut off with Normans:
Secondly, to chastise Harold for banishing Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, and
other Normans out of England; and Thirdly, to gain the Kingdom from Harold
which he had possessed by It could hardly be thought his Army should consist of
raw Soldiers, for Malmsbury Sim. Dunel. and Brompton reports from Gulielm.
Pictaviensis, English thought a flight, and followed them, by which means they
opened their close Order, when the Normans suddenly faceing about, charged and
broke them in pieces, scattered them, and obtained the Victory, etc.
of kindred, and promise of Obedience and Subjection, he restrained his Army
from Plundering, Malmsb. in Will. 1. f. 56. b.
telling them they ought to spare those things which were suddenly to be their
own, and for fifteen days they behaved themselves so quietly, as if they
thought not of War.

The News of this Descent of the Normans in Sussex, Ingulph. f. 512.
quickly came to Harold by several Messengers, who puffed up with his late
Victory, dreamed of the like success for the future, and refusing the Terms
William's Envoy, Malms. ut sup.
a Monk (either to quit his Pretenses to the Kingdom, or hold it as his
Viceroy, Gul. Pictav. fol. 200. c.
or that they two by Combat for the sparing the Effusion of Blood in the sight
of both Armies, might decide and end the Controversy) in great have with a
small part only of his Army, he came near unto Hastings, Ingulph. Ibid.
and having gathered together the Country People, formed of them a It could
hardly be thought his Army should consist of raw Soldiers, for Malmsbury Sim.
Dunel. and Brompton reports from Gulielm. Pictaviensis, English thought a
flight, and followed them, by which means they opened their close Order, when
the Normans suddenly faceing about, charged and broke them in pieces, scattered
them, and obtained the Victory, etc.
rude and undisciplined Army, staid not for his Northern Forces, On the
fourteenth of October, not many days after the Battle at Stanford-bridge.
Earl William Battle, and fighting valiantly Gurth and Lefwin, and most of the
English Nobility here present.

Malmsbury says they were not there, but being appointed by Harold (he posting
before to meet the Normans) to bring the Riches and Spoils taken in the last
Battle to London, where hearing that Harold was slain, they courted the People
to make one of them King, he also there says, that the other great men would
have chosen Edgar King, if the Bishops would have consented, but by reason of
the present danger, and their Domestic Dissentions, it could not be effected.
Then Edwin and Morcar, with some few others that escaped, came London, and
sent their Sister Algith the Queen, and Wife to Harold, Sim. Dunelm. A. D. 1066.
into the remote parts of the Nation, and consulted with Aldred Archbishop
York, the Citizens and Seamen, to make Edgar Atheling King, but while they
provided and prepared to oppose William, the two Earls with their Forces,
withdrew themselves into their own Countries.

THE
AS the Saxons that conquered England were a miscellaneous People, Vid. lib. 1.
Of the Saxon Story.
consisting of many German Nations, that went all by the name of Saxons. So
also were the North, Nort, or Berault. in Cust. Norm. form. fol. 2.
Normans that first obtained that part of France, now called Normandy, a
Collection of the several People that inhabited Scandinavia or Scandia,
Enginhart. in vita Car. M. Cluver. Antiq. Germ. l. 1. c. 11
which was the most Northern part of old Germany, from whence their name, as
Inhabitants of it. And it cannot want probability, but that some of the more
Southern and Easterly People of Germany, their neighbors especially might also
accompany them, though those marine Enterprises were first thought of,
contrived, and undertaken by the Normans, under which name the Adventurers of
other Nations were contained.

The French Normans likewise that conquered this Nation, were assisted in that
undertaking by the French, Flemmings, Br^tains, Poictovins, Anjovins, and other
Nations of France, and some from Germany under great Commanders, though perhaps
most Volunteers and Free-booters brought together by the mighty Gul. Pict. fol.
196. c. fol. 197. b. c.
Fame of William Duke of Normandy, were all called Normans, and according to
this diversity of Nations, diverse Laws, Customs, and particular France,
Normandy, etc. though in general the old German Laws and Customs, (which were
most of them feudal) did every where obtain, as appears by the several old
Charters of Emperors and Princes, and Customaries of most of the Provinces and
Towns of France, and other Countries.

In the first part of the Saxon History, I have endeavored to show what were
the Laws and Usages of this Nation, and from whence Perfect Form of Law
preceding, not known what it was in the Saxon times
before I enter upon the Norman Story. But as an exact and perfect Form of
proceeding in Law Cases in the English-Saxon times before the Conquest, In
praesat. ad Script. 10. dat. 10. Maii 1652. fol. 43.
Mr. Seldom says is no where to be found, so neither for a short time after,
does the very exact way and manner of proceeding appear. The times and places
of such Decisions, and before what Persons made, are very evident, both before
and after the Norman Government, but not the method of pleading in, and
managing of those Controversies. Nor the Execution of the Sentence, especially
in Cases Civil are so very clear.

The Controversy between Lanfranc and Odo for Lands belonging to the Church of
Canterbury.
The first Case we find after the Conquest, and before the Survey, or at least
the completing of For there in the Manner of Estoches or Stokes, under the
Title of the Bishop of Rochester's Lands in Kent it is thus said, Dirationavit
illud Lanfrancus contra Bajocensem Episcopum and inde est modo Saisita
Roffensis Ecclesia.
Doomesday-book, is the most famous Controversy between Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Odo Bayeux in Normandy, and Earl of Kent, half Brother to the
Conqueror by the Mother; Eadmer fol. 9. n. 30.
who by his great Power and Rapine Not. in Eadm. fol. 198. n. 20.
twenty five Manners belonging to Endowment of the Church of Canterbury, and
had also usurped many Privileges and Customs appertaining to the same.
Lanfranc complains to the Conqueror, and Sues for redress, who directs his
Append. n. 2. A Writ or Precept from William the First to the Nobility.
Commission, Warrant, or Precept to himself, Goisfrid Bishop of Constance in
Normandy, For Robert Earl of Ou, and Hugh Montfort. See in William the First,
Fol. 1, 2.
Robert Earl of Ou, Richard Son of Earl Gilbert, Gemet. lib. 8. c. 15. B C. Or
de Tonebrige.
had, as it was then reported by ancient People, Tunbridge in Kent in lieu of
Brion a strong Castle in Normandy, and a League or three Miles round, measured
out with the same Rope brought into England, that the Precincts of Brion were,
being likewise three Miles round it. He is sometimes called Richard de
Tunbridge, and sometimes Richard de Benefacta, Script. Norm. f. 1085.
or de Clarae. Ib. and Gemet. l 8. c. 37. The Earls of Clare and Pembroke their
Original.
He was Son to Gilbert Earl of Brion, and Ou whose Father was Godefrid, natural
Son of Richard the First, Duke of Normandy. This Richard married Rohais
Daughter of Walter Giffard, from whom issued the Earls of Clare and Pembroke.
Richard Gilbert, Hugh Montfort or de Monte forti, and others his great men of
England, to summon his Sheriffs, and by his command to order them to restore to
the Bishoprics and Abbeys all The Conqueror commands all Lands taken from
Bishoprics and Abbeys to be restored.
etc. which by lenity or fear the Bishops or Abbots had granted away, or which
by Violence had been taken from them, and if willingly they did not restore
them, that then they should constrain them to do it whither they would or not.
Seldom 's Notes on Eadmerus, from Textus Roffensis* fol. 198.
By Virtue of which Commission or Precept, N. 10. Eadmer, f. 9. n. 40.
the chief men of the County Kent and of other Counties of England, were
assembled on Pinenden* Now Pikenden Heath near Aylesford in Kent; Si fuerint
praemoniti ut conveniant ad Doomesday Tit. Kent, fol. 1. col. 2.
Sciram ibunt usque ad Pinnedenam non longius. If the men of the three
Monasteries of the Holy Trinity, St. Augustine, and St. Martin, that ought suit
to the County Court, were summoned to it, they were to go to Pinnenden and no
further, which was the usual place where it was holden.
Heath, where the Pleas or Controversy between Lanfranc and Odo continued
three days, and well it might, for there Lanfranc recovered Ibidem.
twenty five Manners, with their Customs and Appurtenances, together with all
Liberties and Customs of the Church of Canterbury, which were in debate between
the King and the Archbishop Ib. f. 199. Lanfranc a Norman pleads his own Case,
and recovers twenty five Manners. etc. to the Church of Canterbury. He recovers
also the manner of Estoches or Stokes to the Church of Rochester. Richard Son
of Earl Gilbert.
Goisfird Bishop of Constance was Justiciary, and in the place of the King, or
represented him, Lanfranc pleaded Dominico suo, in his demain and Possession,
so did the Archbishop hold his.

The same way of proceeding by virtue of the general Precept beforementioned
is to be found in the History of the Church of Ely; The Plea of the Church of
Ely, for the Recovery of its Lands.
King William In Appeal n. 3.
directs his Writ to all his Leiges or Tenants, and Sheriffs in whose
Sherifwicks the Abbey of Ely had Lands, that it should have and enjoy all its
Customs, etc. that it had the day that King Edward was living and dead, and as
they were recovered and proved to belong to that Church by many Shires at
Keneteford, (a Suffolk near Newmarket) before his Barons. Several Writs are in
the N. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Appendix, touching the Lands and Customs belonging to the Abbey of Ely; That
such Normans as had seized, or invaded any of them, were to restore them.

In Warwic scire, Terra Episcopi de W^recestre, f. 238. b. col. 1. The Bishop
of Worcester's Plea.
Doomesday Book it is Recorded that the Bishop of Worcester, the Famous Wulstan
by Plea, and by force of the same general Writ, in the presence of four
Counties or Shires, before Queen Maud, recovered Alvestone, and that thereof he
had the Writ or Chart of King William, and Testimony of the County of Warwick.
In Alvestone, tenuit Britnodus and Alwi septem hid. and dimid. T. R. E. Sed
Comitatus nescit de quo tenuerit, Wulstanus autem Episcopus dicit se hanc
Terram deplacitasse, coram Regina Matilde in presentia quatuor vice-comitatuum
and inde habet Breves Regis W. and Testimonium Comitatus Warwick.

English were called thither to give Testimoy, whether they belonged to those
Churches in the time of King Edward, for no others could be competent
Witnesses, being all Strangers to the thing in question.

There are likewise many Instances to be found in Doomesday, of Clamores in
Treding or Rideing, not improbably from Trihinga, which was a portion of a
County that contained three or four Hundreds, Ll. ^d. Confessor. c. 34.
to which portion of a County, there was an Appeal from the Hundred, and from
that to the County.
Sudtreding

In Tadevill, Trials for Tiths of Lands in the Hundred or Warpentack in the
Conqueror's time.
Hundred. clamant homines Episcopi Bajocensis Carucatam Terrae super Robertum
Dispensatorem and homines de Wapentack dicunt quod ipse Episcopus jure debet
habere; and in the same Hundred, there under the same Title, Clamant homines
ejusdem Episcopi, super Comitem tres Bovatas Terrae, and Wapentack dicit quod
ipse Episcopus debet habere. In the same Title there is also an Appeal from the
Hundred to the County, in a Plea between Gilbert de Gund, and Norman de Areci,
both claiming upon William de Percy twelve An Oxgange or Oxgate auncienly,
Spelm. Glossar. in verbo.

A Bovate or Oxgange of Land what.


as much as one, or a pair of Oxen could Plough or keep in Husbandry tilth in a
year, or as much as they could Plough in a day sometimes; but here it is to be
taken in the first sense, by some accounted eighteen Acres, by others but
thirteen, but as Carucates and other Portions of Land, was uncertain according
to the Soil, which was harder or easier to Plough.
Bovates Sed Wapentack and comitatus dicunt quod Gilbertus debet habere non
Norman Willielmus, vero Percy tenet ea dono Regis. Sicut tenuit Robertus Filius
Stigandi. And in the Title of Clamores in Kesteven (a part of Lincolnshire)
there is a claim referred to the King's Court, Clamores quos Drogo de Bruera
facit super Terras Morcari dimittunt (viz. the men of that Division) in judicio
Regis, and there is also Recorded in a claim of Earl Alan upon Wido de Credon
of fourteen Bovates, and given in by the same Persons, that Alger homo Alani
dedit vadimonium Baronibus Regis (that is, such Barons as were Commissioners to
make the Survey of this County) ad confirmandum per judicium aut per Bellum:
See Bellum, and Judicium in the Glossary.
That is, Ordeal or Battle.

Doomesday, fol. 212.
In Norf. in Hund. and Dimid. de Clakeslosa Photestorp. Hanc Terram Libram. That
is, it was not Church-land, or appendant to the Church, and so free for Normans
to seiz^ on.
liberam Vlchetel homo. Hermerius de fenariis.
Hermerii quocunque modo judicetur vel Bello vel Judicio, See Glossar. ut supra.
and alius est praesto probare eo modo, quod jacuit ad Ecclesiam die qua Rex E.
obiit. Sed totus Hundredus testatur, Eam fuisse T. R. E. ad Sanctam Adeld.

In Norf. the Hundred and half of Clakeslose Since called Fodeston, or Foston a
decayed Town.
Photestorp Ulshetel the Vassal, Man, or Champion of Hermerius, claims this
Land to be Free, which way soever it be tried, or judged by Battle or Ordeal,
and there is another ready to prove the same way that it was Church Land, the
day that King Edward died: But the whole Hundred witnesses, that in the time
of King Edward it was the Land of St. Audry, or the Abbey of Ely.

Doomesday, Clamores de Treding or Riding, from Trihinga as before, and the
same with Lests in Kent, or Rapes in Sussex. See Ll. Ed. de Trighingis and
Ledis, c. 34.
These Trihings had their Thrihingerefas, their Governors or Reves, and what
could not be determined in the Hundred or Wapentach, was ended here, and what
could not be ended here, was determined in the Shire.
North-treding, Everwicscrire, f. 374. col. 1.
Sanctus Johannes de Beve^laco.
Omnem Terram quam calumniabatur Drogo super Sanctum Johannem, Testificata est
ad opus ipsius S. Johannis per homines de Treding, and per Donum R. W. quod
dedit S. Johanni tempore Adeldredi Archiepiscopi, de hoc habent Canonici
sigillum Regis Ed. and R. Will. Canonici de Beve^laco.


Ibidem, Clamores in Sub-treding Lincoliae.
T. R. E. fuit saisitus Almar Antecessor Archiepiscopi Thomae, de soca x. Bovat
in Ulingeham, hac terra fuit Code, and modo est Rayner de Brunon, and pro iii.
lib. fuit invadiata T. R. E. and modo affirmant homines de Treding quod
Archiepiscopus jure debet habere, hanc socam quousque ei reddantur iii. lib.

Almar was not here Antecessor to Thomas in the Archbishopric, for there never
was one of that name Archbishop, but was his Antecessor in the Possession of
the Soke, of these ten Bovates of Land, which Soke was Mortgaged, or the Gage
assigned to the Archbishop (who was a Norman) for three Pounds.

Ibidem. Clamores in North-Treding Lincoliae.
In Limberge Clamat Ivo Tallebose super Regem, vi. Boxat. Terrae. Dicunt
homines Comitatus, quod ipse debet habere Terram and Rex socam.

Very many more Pleas there are of Titles, and for the Possession of Estates of
different sorts, before the Counties, Hundreds, Wapentacks, Normans and
Normans, or those and King William, or between Bishops, Religious and
Ecclesiastics, and the King or Lay- Normans who had seized Church Lands; and
no Pleas of Titles between English Saxons, or between them (unless they were
Churchmen or Religious) and Normans. Nor no such fabulous Pleas, as the
pretended Plea of Sharnburn, of which more afterward.

A Writ from William Rufus for assembling the County.
we proceed to the Reign of William Rufus, and in the very beginning of it we
find this Writ or Precept directed to the Sheriff of Northamptonshire. Spelm.
Gloss. verb. Tain-land, ex lib. de Rams. Sect. 178.
Willielmus Rex Angliae W. de A Norman who came in with Conqu. vid. Cataloge.
Cahaniis salutem. Praecipio tibi ut facias convenire Shiram de Hamtona and
judicio ejus cognosce, si Terra de Isham reddidit firmam Monachis Sancti
Benedicti tempore patris mei, and si ita inventum fuerit, si in Dominio
Abbatis: sit vero Tainlanda tunc fuisse invenietur, qui eam tenet de Abbate
teneat and recognoscat. Quod si This was William de Carile former Bishop of
Duresm, and Malms. de Gestis Reg. fol. 67. b. n. 30.
Justiciary of England in the beginning of Rufus his Reign.
W. Episcopo Dunelm. There is also another Precept of this King cited by the
same learned Sir Glossar. fol. 303. col. 1. A Trihing Court.
Henry Spelman Rex Anglorum H. Camerario salutem, facias convenire and
consedere tres Hundredas and dimid. apud The place where the Hundred of
Freebridge citra Lynn in Norfolk used to meet.
Flicchamburch propter Terram illam de Holm quae pertinet ad Ringstedam and
quam Abbas Ramesiae clamat ad victum and vestitum Monachorum Roger Bigod was
then neither Chancellor nor Justiciary of England, but Earl of Norfolk, in
which County the Plea was held.
R. Bigod apud Wendesoriam.

To these may be added a Charter of Henry the First, A Charter of Henry the
First for holding County and Hundred Assemblies.
for the holding of County and Hundred Meetings, published Glossar. fol. 302.
col. 2.
by the same Author. Henricus Rex Anglorum Norman, and Canon of Baieux, made
Bishop of Godw. de praes. An. f. 509.
Worcester 1097.
Samsoni Episcopo and He is sometimes called Vrso de Doomes. in Wircestreshire.
Wirecestre, and sometimes Vrso Dugd. Baron. f. 406. c. 2. Urso Vice-comes.
Vice-comes, he being Hereditary Sheriff of Worcestershire, came in with the
Conqueror, and had forty Hides of Land in Worcestershire, besides two Lordships
in Warwickshire and one in Glocestershire.
Vrsoni Barons here Vid. Spel. Gloss. verbo Baro.
are to be understood Milites, such as held by Military-Service, or Barons
Minores, Lords of Towns or Manners, or perhaps Freeholders, which if any then,
they were of better account, before Town-ships, Manners, and Lands were
parcelled but into small Divisions.
Baronibus Francis, and Anglicis de Wircestrescira salutem. Sciatis quod
concedo and praecipio ut amodo comitatus mei Godw. de praes. An. p. 233
and Hundreda in illis locis and eisdem Terminis sedeat, sicut sederunt in
Tempore Regis Edvardi and non aliter. Ego enim quando voluero faciam ea satis
summoneri propter mea dominica necessaria ad voluntatem meam. Noble men, the
King's Barons, such as held immediately of him.
Barons meos Dominicos, tractetur placitum in curia m^a, and si inter
Vavasores duorum Dominorum tractetur in comitatu, and hoc duello fiat nisi in
eis remanserit. Et volo and praecipio ut omnes de comitatu eant ad comitatum
and Hundreda sicut fecerunt T. R. E. nec ramaneant, propter (here wants non
habebunt I guess) qui non sequuntur placita mea and Judicia, mea sicut R.
Richard de Beaumes a Norman consecrated, 5. 1108.
Episcopo Londinensi, and R. Episcopo Ranulpho Cancellario and R. Comite de
Mellent apud Radinge.

Henry the First reserves a Power for his own business, to conv^ne the County
or Hundred at pleasure.

And reserves the Controversies of his great Barons to his own Court.


Here Henry the First reserves a Power of convening the Hundred and County when
he pleased for his own proper Business. And also reserves the Controversies of
the great Barons that held immediately Henry the Second's Reign, as appears by
this Dugd Orig. Jurisd. fol. 23. col. 2.
Writ. He was Gul. Pictav. 202. c.
Son of Roger de Bellomont, Gemet. 3^2. A. B. Robert Earl of Leicester, who he
was.
Grandson to Turolf of Pont Adomar, by Weva Sister to Gunnora, first Concubine,
then Wife to Richard the First, Duke of Normandy, Great Grandfather to the
Conqueror.
Robertus comes Legecestriae priori de Ely Salutem, Praecipio quod sine
dilatione teneas plenum rectum Humfrido filio Gaufridi de terra Dunnigeland
nisi sit feodum Militis and nisi remaneat pro Assiza Regis: Et nisi feceris,
Episcopus de Ely faciat, and nisi fecerit ego faciam. Here Leicester commands
the Prior of Ely to do the Demandment right in his Court, which was probably a
Court Baron, if not, the Bishop should in his Superior Court; and if neither,
then he himself would do it. There needs no more Instances in a matter so
apparent, and that never was disputed or denied. That for many Kings Reigns,
Trials for considerable Estates in Lands, Debts, Bacon's use of the Law, etc.
p. 37.
under forty Pounds value, and almost all Controversies were had in the Court
Baron, Hundred, or County Courts.

Old Nature. Brev. fol. 2. Glan. l. 12. c 6.
The Writ of Right was always brought first in the Lords Court, of whom the
Land held, Ib cap. 7. Writ of Right first brought in the Lords Court, etc.
and could not be taken from thence into the County, unless it were proved that
the Lord failed in doing right; and without such proof, if they were removed,
the Lord might resume them, and pass Judgment in his Court, where both the
Demandant and Tenent agreed the Land in question to hold of the same Lord. Ib
cap. 8. and lib. 3. cap. 7.
But if they claimed to hold of diverse Glan. lib. 9. c. 8, 9, 10. The Lord of
a Manner, his Right and Power over his Tenants.
The Lord also of a Manner, by his own Right, without the King's or his chief
Justiciaries Precept, had Power, by the Judgment of his Court, that is by the
Presentment or Verdict of his Tenants or Suitors, to distrain his Tenants by
their Goods, or Lands if need were, for his reasonable Aids, Reliefs, Services,
and Customs. Ibidem.
But if the Lord were not powerful enough to do himself Right, against his
Tenent in his own Court; then he had a Writ directed to the Sheriff to do him
right in the County, before whom, if the Lord proved his Relief, Services, etc.
to be his right, the Tenent was not only forced to pay them to his Lord, but
was also fined to the Sheriff, more or less according to the Custom of the
County.

Controversies between People of the same Jurisdiction, how.
all matters between Persons under the same Jurisdiction were triable in the
same; as all Actions of Debt, Trespass, Detinue, etc. Dugd. Orig. Jurid. fol.
29, 31, etc. Spelm. Gloss. verb. commit. fol. 143. Bract. l. 3. c. 7. And where
they were tried.
were determined in every Decury, Tithing, or Township, between those of the
same Tithing, Decury, or Township. But if the Parties litigant were of diverse
Townships, then the Controversy was determined in the Hundred, if they were of
diverse Hundreds, then in the Trihing, Lath, or County Bracton. l. 3. cap. 7.
Controversies between men of different Jurisdictions when and where tried.
Suitors to the several Courts bound to appear under great Mulcts.
where the Sheriff was Justiciary. And perhaps if they were of diverse

And for the more certain doing of Justice and Right, all the Suitors Sp^lm.
Gloss. 303. c. 1 Doomesd. Tit. Cestreshire in Derby hund. claus 3. H. 3. in
dorso in 13. claus. 9. H 3. m. 11. in do^so.
were bound to appear under Doomes. Tit. Cestreshire, Derby Hund. The
Punishment of such as went not to the Shire and hund Motes
Such as went not to the Scire mote, or County Court, without reasonable
excuse, forfeited ten Shillings, which was more than ten pound at this time.
Nor went to the Assembly of the Hundred, when commanded, lost five shillings.
great Mulcts and Penalties, that there might be some present of the
Neighborhood or same Parish, who did know the Land, and things in question,
and who had been possessed of it, and for what time. And to this purpose, in an
Assize, if Glanv. l 2. cap. 1. and Grand Custom, c. 93. etc. 113.
none of the Jurors Milites Spel. Gloss. in verbo.
who though according to the notion of our times, they were no Knights, yet
they were of the better sort of People in the Country, and of the best
Reputation, such as held by Knights or Military-Service.
knew the Right it self, or truth of the Matter, and it were testified to the
Court upon Oath, recourse was then had to

Ibidem Twelve at least ought to know the Thing in question.
Also if some of them did speak for one of the Litigants, and some for the
other, there were more added to them, until twelve at least did agree on one
side; and every of them was to swear, being Glanv. l. 2. c. 17. and Grand
Custom, c. 113. By their own proper view and hearing.
And further, that such as were sworn might have the better understanding of
the matter, it was required, that by their own proper view or hearing, they
have had knowledge of the thing in question: And by Cap. 12.
Magna Charta it appears that the Assizes or Trials of Nometh. in Assize of
Novel. Disseisin. Mort. de Ancester what.
Where one was lately disseized or dispossessed of his Lands or Tenements,
Rent, Office, etc.
Novel Disseisin, and Ib. in Assize de Mort. de Ancester.
Where Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, etc. died seized or possessed of Lands,
Tenements, etc. and a Stranger (according to the Law Phrase) abateth, that is,
enters upon them before the Heir takes Possession.
Mort D'ancester were only to be taken in their As in Normandy in their proper
Balliages or Bayliwicks which were answerable to our Counties before the
Bailiff, who was Judge of the Assize there, Grand Custom, c. 93, and 98.
proper Counties, and by Justices sent by the King, and the This way of trying
Titles by Juries, or something very like it, was used upon the making Seldom.
in praef. ad Eadmer. fol. 15. and Doomesd. Tit. clamores in Sudtreding etc
Survey of England in the time of William the Conqueror, and not only so, but
about that time, viz. about the year 1077, or 1078. There seems to have been
Ingulph. Hist. Croyl. fol. 515. a. n. 50.
Itinerant Justices appointed, to which purpose Ingulph who was made Abbot of
Croyland Ib. Lin. 8.
1076. says. Nobis itaque in dictis tenementis coram regis ministris calumniam
ponentibus dies Juridicus apud Stanordiam datus est, quo die cum regis
Justiciarius pro negotiis aditurus.
Knights of the Shire.

At the time of making of Tit. Sud-Treding in Lincolia. Kesteven, ib. and many
others.
Doomesday Book, or the general Survey of England, and for many years after,
the Jurors passed their judgment, and gave in their Verdict according to
Possession. For those that were then seized of Lands, had no other Title, than
that In Doomesday it is so said frequently.
by his Seal, Mortgages and Sales of Lands Registered in Counties, Hundreds, etc.
or by being put into Possession by his Commissioners, or some other mediate
Lord, who claimed from him, and then Possession and Right were almost the same
thing; so that then every man's Right was easily determined.

Especially when the Dugd. Origin. Jurisd. ^ol. 27, 28, 31* 93, 94.

Cook Proem. to Report 3. ^omn. Gavelkind. p. 87. Doomesd. Tit. Clamores in
Subtredinge Lincoliae, etc. Ibidem.

Fines levied in County Courts, etc. Fines and Corcords, many before Justices
Itinerant. See Counties and Rolls of Assize.


Conveyances, Assurances, Morgages, Sales, etc. of Lands were registered and
recorded in the Counties and Hundreds where they lay. As in the time of the
Saxons, and Norman Kings was usual, of which there are many Instances in the
Citations in the Margin, and many more might be produced. Fines also were then
often levied, and Concords made in the County Court before the Sheriff and
other chief Gentlemen of the Country, and recorded there, as likewise in
Court-Barons, before the Lord, etc. Dugd. Origin. Jurid. fol. 93.94, etc. And
may be so to this day for Copyholds, where the Custom of the Manor will bear
it: So that Sir Ed. Cook's Assertion that Readings on Stat. de ^in. p. 2. Pleas
held in Churches and Churchyards.
Fines cannot be

Besides set and determinate places in Hundreds and Counties for holding these
Pleas, they were sometimes held Sim Dun. c. 35. Gervasius. Dorobern. col. 12 92.
in Churches and Churchyards, until they were Spel. council. 2. vol. A. D. 1287.
inhibited; and from hence may be made out the meaning of that Passage in Col.
12 91.
Gervasius Dorobernensis, concerning the South Door or Porch of the Cathedral
Canterbury, which so much Praef. ad Authors 10. fol. 42, 43, 44.
perplexed Mr. Seldom concerning Pleas ended there, that could not be
determined in the Hundred, County, or King's Courts, which might be such as
were usually defined in that place by the Civil or Imperial Law; Seld. dissert.
ad Flet. ex Epistola. Pet. Blessensis. c. 8.. 1. f. 52 2.
for in the time of Henry the Second, etc. in the Palace of Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury, there was a College of Students in the Cesarean Laws, Ibidem.
to whom all the knotty Law Questions in the Kingdom were referred for
Solution.

This way of Trial Glanv. l. 2. c. 7.
by Assize, and the Oaths of twelve good lawful men of the neighborhood, by
Verdict or Recognition, seems to have been introduced, or at least brought into
more frequent practice in the time of King Henry the Second, Ibidem.
who vouchsafed the great Assize, as a Royal Benefit to the People, upon
Consultation had with his Nobles; whereby in tenderness of Life, men might
decline the doubtful success of Battle, and try their right to etc. And the
latter to purge and acquit men from, or condemn them of Crimes of what nature
soever, but especially such as were heinous or capitol. The last of which,
according to In his Gloss. verb. Ordeal.
Mr. Somner's account of the word, signifies an upright, just, and indifferent
Judgment. See the first part of the Saxon Olaus Wormius de monument. Danicis.
lib. 1. cap. 11. de Ordalio.

This Law or way of Trial was abolished by Append. n. 9. a. Trial by Ordeal
prohibited.
Henry the Third in the third year of his Reign, with command to his Itinerant
Justices through England, in regard it was prohibited by the Roman Church, that
such as had committed Theft, Murders, Burning, and the like Offenses, to whom
belonged the Judgment of Fire and Spelm. Gloss. fol. 435. col. 2.
on Jan. 7.16. Hen. 3. by Inspeximus, the Grant of King John in the Second of
his Reign, of Ordeal and Duel, was amongst other Privileges confirmed to God
and the Church of Trinity in Norwich. And very strange it is, what An. Dom.
1085. f. 12. n. 20
Mat. Paris reports of Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, that being accused of
Treason, his Servant purged him by Fire Ordeal, by which means he was restored
to the King's Favor, and the disgrace was wiped off.

But by Glanvile it should seem that Duel or Combat was much used, if not most
frequently for the trying of Right, before Henry the Second instituted,
introduced, or revived the way of Trial by Glanv. l. 2. c. 7.

Henry the Second introduced or revived the Trial by twelve men.


which in tenderness of Life, (as is said before) men might decline that
doubtful success of Battle, and try their Right that way; and for the course of
proceeding, in obtaining the Right of a Tenement by Duel or Grand Assize,
Glanvile treats of Ib. in Tit. cap. 1.
them both together, although he speaks first of Battle, as being most ancient.
In this manner, Ibid. c. 3.
after the view of the Land, and both Demandant and Tenant appearing in Court,
the Demandant claimed thus; Ibidem. The manner of claiming by Battle in Civil
Cases.
I do demand against B. half a Knights Fee, as Demesne as of Fee, etc. And this
I am ready to try, by this my Freeman D. And if any ill shall happen unto him,
as Death, Sickness, or other Impediment before Battle, then by this or that
Person (as many as he would) which were present and showed in Court, who had
seen and heard of the thing in Controversy: or thus; and this I am ready to
try, by this my Freeman D. unto whom his Father on his Deathbed enjoined upon
the Duty of a Son, which he ought to him, that if at any time he should hear of
a Suit for that Land, he should adventure himself by Combat to prove it, The
Tenant had his choice to defend himself by Duel or Grand Assize.
as that which his Father had seen and heard the claim of the Demandant; thus
heard, it was in the [8.] choice of the Tenent to defend the same against the
Demandant by Duel, or put himself upon the Great Assize of the King, and to
require a Enquest recognoisant. Grand Custom* c. 92.
Recognition which of them had most Right in that Land. Ibidem.
And Ibidem.
And note, before the Duel began, it was necessary for the Demandant to appear
in Court, and have his Champion there ready to fight; nor might he bring any
other, than one of those he first showed in Glanvile. lib. 2. c. 3.
The Champion of the Demandant ought to be such an one as might be a ^it
Witness; nor could the Demandant prosecute his Appeal in his own Person,
because that could not be done, but by a fit Witness, who had heard of, and
seen the thing in question.

Ibidem.
Note also that the Champion Defendant could not in the Ibidem.
But it often happened that a Champion was hired for reward to make
Dirationation, or proof of the matter controverted; against whom, if the
adverse Party should except that he was less fit, because he had taken a
reward, or been hired; and being ready to prove the same against him, if he
should deny it by himself, or by some Person who saw him take the Reward,
Principale duellum remanebit.
he should be heard, and the principal Duel was to remain, Ibidem.
And if he was hereof convicted, and the Champion of the Plaintiff vanquished
in Combat, then his Master or Patron lost his Suit, and the Champion, as being
conquered, lost the Law of the Land, that is to say, afterward he was never to
be admitted in Court as a Witness to make proof, or Dirationation of any thing,
for any other man by Battle. Ibidem.
But for his own self, he might defend his own body, or prosecute an injury
done to him, as breach of the King's Peace, and might also defend the Right of
his Ibid. c. 3. In fine. The Punishment of a Recreant.
The Battle ended, the vanquished Person was This was a great Penalty in those
days, and in the Saxon times one of the highest for great Crimes, as appears
every where in their Laws.
punished sixty shillings as a Recreant or Coward, and moreover lost the Law of
the Land.

Ibid. c. 3. In fine. The Punishment of a Recreant.
And if the Champion of the Tenent or Defendant was overcome, his Lord, Patron,
or Master, lost the Land claimed, with the Profits and Commodities found upon
it at the time of Seisin. And could never afterward be heard in Court again
for the same; to the Sheriff, That the Victor should have the Land which by
Combat was proved to be his, and should be put in Seisin of it by this Ibid. c.
4. A Writ of Seisin to the Victor after Battle.
Writ. The King to the Sheriff Greeting, I command you, that without delay you
cause M. to be seized, or give him Possession of one Hide of Land in such a
Town, concerning which there have been a Plea or Controversy in my Court,
because the said Hide of Land was adjudged to him in my Court by determination
of Combat, witness Ranulph, etc. Ibid. c. 5.
Thus it was if the Demandant prevailed in the Combat, but if his Champion were
overcome, then the Tenent or Defendant was acquitted from his claim. Thus much
Glanvil of Trial by Combat in Civil Cases.

In Criminal Cases it was also used, Duel or Battle in Criminal Cases.
but more especially in Appeals of Treason and Murder. And the manner of this
Trial Lib. 3. c. 18
Bracton delivers, beginning thus, of those which are taken for any Crime etc.
Ibid. n. 3.
when the Delinquent was brought forth and accused in Court, and confessed the
Crime, there was sufficient ground for a full and complete Judgment. But if he
denied it, and any one Appealed him of the Crime, and that he did not except
There were many Exceptions to be taken* many several ways in this way of Trial;
Exceptions against an Appellant.
as first to the Person of the Appellant, that he was Outlawed, Perjured, a
Condemned Person, or formerly had been Recreant, and not made good his Proof,
etc. any of which were reason enough to put him by his challenge, if proved.
against the Appellant, he had his choice Ibidem.
The Judge by his Office ought to examine whether all things rightly concurred
for the joining Battle; Ibidem.
and if the Fact and Cause were sufficient, and all things concurred well to
warrant the Combat, then the Appellate or Defendant gave Pledges or Security to
defend himself, and the Appellant to disprove or dirationate him, and if the
Appellate or Defendant were overcome, The Defendant, if overcome, lost his
Estate and Goods.

The Appellant, if vanquished, cast into Prison as a False Accuser.


he Appellant were vanquished, he was committed to Prison to be punished as a
False Accuser, yet he was not to lose either Life or Member, and then the
Appellate being acquitted, receded from that Appeal, unless the Justices, upon
any other Suspicion, thought fit to retain him.

Of these Combats, in Cases Criminal, Seldom de duello c. 11.
some are for Trial of Crimes, against which the Law by Segar in his Fol. 137.
Honor Military and Civil, gives several Instances of Combats granted by the
Kings of England, upon Accusation of Treasons between Party and Party, when the
truth of the Cause could not be proved by witness or otherwise.
ordinary course may proceed, King's Bench have the ordering, Battle in Criminal
Cases, under the direction of the King's Bench.

Or Court of Chivalry.


others for Purgation of Offenses against Military Honor, and Treasons
committed beyond the Seas, (anciently without Remedy by the Law of England)
which the high Court of Chivalry has cognizance of, by Law of Arms. Those in
Civil Causes were Dugd. Origin. Jurid. fol. 6.
under the disposition of Itinerant Justices, or the Justices of Common Pleas.

In Civil Cases under the disposition of the Common Pleas.
For the Bill of Challenge, the Ceremonies in Arming the Combatants, fitting and
allowing their Weapons, the preparing the Lists, the Introduction of the
Approver and Defendant of their Oaths upon matter of Fact, which were
contradictory word for word to one another; the Office of the Constable and
Marshall, and other Circumstances Preparatory to the Combat, See old Customs
of Normandy, c. 68. Bracton lib. 3. cap. 21. Segar's Honor Military and Civil,
lib. 3. c. 17. fol. 131. Dugdale's Origines Juridiciales, fol. 68, etc. 76,
etc. where Spelman's Gloss. in verbo Campus, where is described the manner of
Combat, both according to the Mareschals or Military, and also according to the
Civil, or Court of Common Pleas, Trial by Duel in Tothilfields* A. D. 1571.
as it was performed in Totil Fields near Westminster 1571. The whole Court of
Common Pleas, being adjourned or translated thither from Westminster Hall, Dier
as Chief Justice, and all the Judges sitting upon a Tribunal there erected, and
all the Sergeants, taking their places in their Solemn Scarlet Habits. In a
Writ of Right between Simon Low and Thomas Paramour, for a Manor and certain
Land in the Isle of Heart, by the Isle of Shepey in Kent.

This way of Trial from the Lombards.
This way of Trial by Combat, as that of Ordeal, and the Judgment of twelve men,
came to us out of the North, Seldom. de duello.
from the Lombards, who coming out of Scandia, Seldom. de duello.
Scandia contained Norway, Swethland, Danemarke, and other Regions North of
high Germany.
overran the chief Countries of Europe, and is thought to be instituted by
Frotho the Third King Saxo. Gram. Ed. Francofurt. fol. 86. n. 20.
of Danemarke, at the time of Christ's B^rth, who among other Laws, Ib. fol.
77* n. 40. f. 81. n. 10.
Controversy should be determined by the Sword. And so pertinacious were these
Northern People in this way of Judgment, that it continued Olaus Worm. monum.
Dan. f. 70.
in Holsatia unto the time of Christian the Third King of Danemarke, who began
his Reign Anno Domini 1535. Ib. fol. 71.
Luitprandus King of the Lombards attempted to abrogate this wicked Custom of
Trial by Combat, but in vain. And though he had heard that many had lost their
Right by this sort of Judgment, yet the Custom of his Country was such, as
Campiones a Campo.
From these Northern Nations we had both name and thing. Campiones Champion,
says the Learned Spelman. Gloss. in verbo campus.
A Campo, as Forensis a Foro, and Monumenti Dan. fol. 62. Campio. Champion, a
Kemp. or Kemp From whence Cimber.
Olaus Wormius tells us, that he was called Campio, or as we Champion, whom the
Danes called Kempe, that is a Warrior or Gigant, and the most Valiant or Stout
man, which the Danes or Northern People (as suppose the Lombards or Scandians)
called Kemper, the Romans according to their Idiom, expressed by Cimber.

Writ of Right, now become, obsolete.
But whatsoever high Reputation a Writ of Right had, as the highest Point of the
Common Law of England, for the Trial of Propriety, either by the Recognition of
twelve lawful men, or by Duel; yet are Spelm. Gloss. fol. 103.
both these ways of proceeding now become almost obsolete and out of use.

But all things having constantly had their Execution from the Kings Writs and
Commands, let us see who, and of what Quality they were, to whom these were
directed, immediately and for some time after the Norman Conquest. That they
were directed to the Justiciaries of England, or that they had power from the
King, either to make them out, or to give order for their making out, and
direction to the Earls in their several Counties, Vicounts, Sheriffs, or

And the first Justiciaries we find to be after the Conquest, Norman
Justiciaries.
were both Normans, Odo Bishop of Baieux in Normandy, half Brother, by the
Mother, to the Conqueror, Odo and William Fitz-Osborn Justiciaries.
and William Fitz-Osborn Gul. Pictav. f. 208 D.
who was Viceroy, and had the same Power in the North, that Odo had in the
South; was the chief in William's Army, most dear to the Normans, and therefore
he knew would be a Terror to the English: He Order. vital. 521. D.
was Sewar of Normandy, and had given him here the Isle of Wight, and County of
Hereford; of whom more in the Life of William. Next after them Order. vital.
fol 493. B.
William Earl of Warren in Normandy, and a great Commander in the Battle
against Harold, and Ib 535. A.
Richard de Benefacta, alias Richard de Geme^. l. 8 c. 15. and lib. Doomesday.
Tonebridge, Son to Gilbert Earl of Brion in Normandy 1073. were made chief
Justices of England, who summoned to the Kings Court diverse Rebels, etc.

In the great Plea between Lanfranc and Odo beforementioned, Goisfrid Bishop
of Constance Justiciary. Odo Justiciary.
Goisfrid Bishop of Constance in Normandy was Justiciary; and all those great
men of England who were to cause the Sheriffs of every County to restore to the
Bishops and Abbots their Lands which were taken from them; to whom the
before-noted Precept was directed, were all Normans.

William Rufus, Hen. Hunt ^ol. 212. b n 40.
Odo Bishop of Baieux, and Earl of Kent, was again Justiciary, and chief of all
England. Malmsb. in W. 2. fol. 67. b. n. 30.
William de Carilefo Bishop of Duresme succeeded him in this Office, a Norman
also, and he was in that place, and that Bishopric followed 1099. by Order.
vit. fol. 786. c.
Ranulph Flambard Godw. de praes. p. 109.
Chaplain sometimes to Maurice Bishop of London, a Norman likewise; in the
Reign of Henry the First, M. Paris, fol. 204. n. 10. fol. 629. c.
Hugo de Bocland a Norman, in the year of our Lord 1100. was Justiciary. Next
was Radulph Ord. vit. f. 629. c. 465. c.
Basset a Ib f. 905. D. 906. A.
Norman. After him his Son Richard Basset Ibidem.
was Justiciary. And then Roger Godw. de praes. fol. 389.
who had been a Curate of a Church in the Suburbs of Caen in Normandy, for a
small Sallery, by Henry the First made Bishop of Salisbury: Order. vit. fol.
919. c.
And during his Life, whether the King was in England or Normandy, he presided
over all England, and was Justiciary and Chancellor, as says Fol. 91. a lin. 4.
fol. 104. b. n. 10.
Malmsbury, who lived Ibid. fol. 99 b. n. 10.
in his time. In the time of King Stephen, Hov. 1153 f. 2^1. a. n. 20.
Henry Duke of Normandy, afterward King of England by the Title of Henry the

In the Reign of Henry the Second, Robert de Bello-monte Earl of Leicester
beforementioned, a Norman was Justiciary 1168. before him M. Paris. fol. 77.
n. 50.
Alberic de Vere a Norman, Earl of Guisnes, and much exercised in variety of
Causes, is said to be Justiciary of England. And after Robert Earl of
Leicester, Hov. f. 293 b. n. 30.
who died Anno Dom. 1168. Ib. f. 337. a. n. 20.
Richard de Lucie was made Justiciary of England, who in the year 1179. leaving
that Office and all Secular Employments, was made Canon Regular in the Abbey of
Lesnes which he had founded. I find not directly that this Richard was a
Norman, but it is probable he was so, by his Name, and for that King Henry the
First gave him the Manor of Dugd. Baron. fol. 562.
Disce in Norfolk, either for his Service, or as his Inheritance, which was a
Boon too great for an English man in those times; and for that he was also
Governor of Ibidem.
Falais in Normandy for Stephani, and defended it stoutly against Geofrey Duke
of Anjou. He was a great Instrument in making the accord between Stephen and
Henry the Second, and was by this last King in the eighth of his Reign,
advanced to this high Office: After him in the year 1180. Hov. f. 342 b. n. 30.
Ranulph de Glanvil that Famous Lawyer, was constituted Justiciary of all
England, who by his name was certainly of Norman Extraction; Gulielmus de
Glandivilla was Dean and Archdeacon of Lisieux in the year 1077.
although as Sir In Epist. to the eighth Report.
Edward Coke says, he himself was born at Stratford in Suffolk. It also
appears by the Ibidem. He was a Norman. vid. Dugd. Baronage. vol. 1. fol. 423.
c. 2.
names Normans, which adds to the presumption that he was so himself. After him
Hugo de Putaceo commonly called Pusus, Putac, or Pudsey, a Norman, Godw. in
praes. Dunelm.
Nephew to King Stephen, by his Sister was made Hov. 1190 fol. 378. b. n. 40.
Justiciary in the North parts beyond Trent, and William de Longo-Campo, or
Long-Champ Bishop of Ely, was at the Ibidem.
same time by Richard the First made Justiciary on the South parts on this side
Trent. Ib. and fol. 400. a. n. 10, 20, 30.
He transacted all the Affairs of the Nation while Justiciary, yet Ib f. 401.
a. n. 30.
understood not the English Tongue. Then after the Deprivation of William
Bishop of Ely, Ib. 399. b. n. 40* 50.
Walter Archbishop of Roven in Normandy was made Justiciary of all England. And
many of their Successors were Normans, or descended from Normans.

At the same time with these Justiciaries, the Chancellors and Keepers of the
Seal were also Normans; Maurice Godw. de pres. p. 233. and Malms. f. 134. b. n.
50.
the Conqueror's London and Chancellor: Osmundus Godw. de praes. p. 389.
born in Normandy, and Governor of the City of Sees there, came into England
with the Conqueror, and was Bishop of Salisbury and Chancellor: Herfastus
Malmsb. 1^8. a. lin. 2.5.
a Norman, Chaplain to William the Conqueror, Bishop of Helmam, then of
Thetford, and Spelm. Gloss fol. ^09.
Chancellor. William Giffard Bishop of Winton: Robert Bloet Bishop of Lincoln:
Roger Bishop of Salisbury beforementioned: Galfrid called Rufus Bishop of
Duresm: Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, Ord. vit. fol. 919. D.
Nephew to Roger Bishop of Salisbury: Roger Ibidem.
Rogerius Pauper was Son to the Bishop of Salisbury, by Maud of Ramesbury his
Harlot.
Son to that Bishop called Ibidem. fol. 920. A.
Pauper, and may others who were successively Dugd. Chron. series. fol. 1, 2,
3. Spelm. Glossary, f. 109, 110, etc.

The Chancellor his Office in Elder times.


Chancellors, were all Normans.

Of what Power and Authority the Chancellor was in these Elder times, or what
his Office, is not easily made out, the reading, allowing, and perhaps
dictating Royal Grants, Charters, Writs, etc. keeping and affixing the King's
Seal to them, as the Learned Gloss. fol. 106, 107.
Sir Henry Spelman thought, and many also be gathered from Mr. Dugdale's
Origin. Jurid. fol. 37. Ord. vit. f. 55. A Order. vit. fol. 920. A.
discourse of the Chancery, was the greatest part of their trust and
employment, and that he had no causes pleaded before him, until the time of
Spelm. Gloss. ^ol. 107.
Edward the Third, and those not many, till the Reign of Orig. Jur. fol. 37.
Henry the Fourth; nor are there any Decrees to be found in Chancery, before
the Ibidem The Justiciary above the Chancellor, and next the King.
Twentieth of Henry the Sixth, be his Power and Office what it would then, it
was less than that of the Justiciary, who was next to the King in place of
Judicature; by his Office he presided in the Exchequer, the Chancellor sitting
on his Scaccarii observe. lib. 1. c. 4, 5.
Gervase of Tilbury tells us, and by his Office, after the King, was the first
man in the Kingdom; and that under his own Test, he could cause the Kings Writ
to be made out to deliver what Sum he would out of the Exchequer. The
Chancellor was the first Ibid. c. 6
in order on the left hand of the Justiciary, and as he was a great Person in
Court, so he was in the Exchequer, for no great thing passed but with his
consent and advise, that is, nothing could be Sealed without his allowance or
privity, as it there appears.

But the Justiciary surmounted him and all others in his Authority, and he
Spelm. Gloss. f. l. 331.
alone was endowed with, and exercised all the Power which afterward was
executed by the four Chief Judges, that is, the Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, the Chief Justice of Common Pleas, Steph. Segrave Mat. Paris. A.
D. 1234.
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the Master of the Court of Wards As Sir
Ibidem.
Henry Spelman makes it out by the Articles exhibited against Hubert de Burgo,
there cited out of Mat. Fol. 376. n. 30, 40, 50.
Paris and other

Sp^lm. Gloss. ut sup.
The Barons by right of Dignity in all Cases, many others by Right of Tenure,
and most by Privilege granted by Chartre, were not to be impleaded for their
Lands and Tenements; but before the King, or his Capital Justiciary: Some
Remains there are to this day, There remains somewhat of the Office of the old
Justiciary in the Chief Justice of the King's Bench.
of this great Office in the Chief Justice of the King's Bench; all England as
to keeping the Kings Peace, and Dignity of the Crown, and some other Matters,
is under his Jurisdiction, and therefore is styled Chief Justice of England.

This great Officer had his Original from Spelm. Gloss. fol. 332
Normandy, and was the same in Power and Office with the ancient Teutonick,
Sehen, or Saxon Theon, to see videre, inspicere, and scale, servus, or
Minister, as it were the chief Minister or Inspector of the Family, Major
Domus, Dapiser, Scon. Somn. Gloss. in verbo
or Seneschallus; and so from this great Service, and general employment,
called Seneschallus Normaniae.
Seneschal thereof, C. 10.
Grand Customs of Normandy, a certain Superior Justice, called the Prince his
Seneschal, to travel and pass through all Normandy; The great power of the
Justiciary, which name we received from Normandy, Grand Cust. c. 384.
he corrected the Delinquence of inferior Justiciaries, took care of, and
secured Prince his Lands, caused to be observed the Rights and Laws of
Normandy, and rectified what had been less justly done by the Bailiffs, and
removed them from their Office if he thought it convenient. He also inquired
into the Vsages and Customs of the Forest, and caused them to be observed;
every three years he passed through, and perambulated every part of Normandy,
and visited every Bayly-wic was a portion of the Dukedom of Normandy, Bailey and
Balywic what. Si inventus saerit in Balliva sua.

Grand Cust. c. 4


answerable to our County, having respect to that Province; and hence that
expression in the King's Suit to the Sheriff of a County or Shire; it was
greater than a Vicount, and contained many of them, the Bailiff was an Officer
appointed by the Prince, and had greater Power and Jurisdiction in greater
Causes than the Vicount; he was Judge of, and had Power to hold Assizes in his
Balliage, to keep the Peace of the Prince, to hold Pleas of the Sword or Crown,
and had cognizance of Arms, and arming the People.
Bayly-wic, and inquired into all the Excesses and Injuries done there by
Sub-Justiciaries; he likewise took notice of all public Thieves, Rapes,
Murders, Burnings, or Fireings of Houses, and all other Pleas of the Sword, or
as we call it, the Crown of Treasure dug out of the Earth, Mines, Wrecks,
Watercourse changed or not kept, Highways changed or stopped up, etc. doing
right in all these and many more things there enumerated. This great Officer
was also General, Viceroy, and Guardian of the Kingdom in the Kings absence,
and sometimes made Peace and War by the advice of the chief Nobility, History.

The Determination of this great Office.
This mighty Office of Justiciary, received many gradual Diminutions, and at
length determined about the Dugd. Origin. Jurid. fol. 20.
45th of Henry the Third, there being afterward a Chief Justice in each Court
of King's Bench and Common Pleas, appointed Spel. Gloss. fol. 334.
men less eminent in Quality, not of the highest Nobility, or greatest order in
the Church, without great Alliances in Blood, and a numerous Train of Clients
Ibidem.
very sublime Mystery, very intricate and involved.

Inferior Ministerial Officers all Normans.
For other inferior Ministerial Officers, Earls, Vicounts, Bailiffs, Lords of
Hundreds and Manners, before whom Titles and Causes of smaller Consequence were
tried, it is evident they were all Normans, Lands, Liberties, or Jurisdiction,
as must be acknowledged by all that know any thing of the Catalogue of
Proprietors in Append. n. 10
Doomesday Book, or have well considered what Gervasius L. 1. c. 23.
Tilburiensis says in his Book de Necessariis Scaccarii observandis, to that
purpose, a Person beyond exception, being an Officer in the Exchequer, which
Court then took notice of all the Estates in England one way or other.

Nor were the Judges and Lawyers of those times in all probability other than
Normans, for then they were most, if not all, Dugd. Origin. Jurid. fol. 21.
Clergymen, and so were they in Normandy, as is manifest by the C. 9.
Grand-Customer, where it is said the Judges are Sage Persons and Authentic,
which in Court give judgment of those things they have heard, as Archbishops,
Clergymen, Judges and Lawyers in Normandy.
Bishops, Canons of Cathedral Churches, and other dignified Persons, Abbots,
Priors and Rectors of Churches, famous for their Honesty and Piety; and the
most of the great Clergymen in Bishops, dignified Persons, Abbots, Priors,
etc. were Normans. William Hoved. fol. 259. b. n. 30, 40. A. D. 1070.
depriving very many of the English of their Ecclesiastic Honors, and put
those of his own Nation into their places, as a means to confirm him in his new
acquests; and it is not to be doubted but great numbers of the inferior Clergy,
as well Regular as Secular, came over with them, who were exercised in the
Controversies of the Norman Law; for Confirmation whereof, there were in the
Reign of William Rufus, so many of the Clergy Fol. 69. b. n. 10. All Clerks
Pleaders.
Malmesbury said there was nullus Clericus nisi causidicus, No Clerk which was
not a Pleader.

If therefore the Justiciaries, Chancellors, Earls, Sheriffs, Lords of Manners,
such as heard Causes and gave Judgment were Normans; if the Lawyers and
Pleaders were also Normans, the Pleadings and Judgments in their several Courts
must of necessity have been in that Language and the Law also, otherwise they
had said and done they knew not what; especially when the Controversies were
determined by Military-men, Earls or Counts, Sheriffs or Vicounts, and Lords of
Manners, that understood not the English Tongue; or when the Chief Justiciary
himself was a Military-man, as it often happened, and understood only the
Norman Language: For this reason, Why all Pleadings were in the French Tongue.
and no etc. were in the Norman-French, until by Act of Parliament in 36 Edw.
3. c. 15.
Edward the Third's time, they were appointed to be in the English Tongue, but
entered and enrolled in Latin, save that the ancient Terms in Law might still be
retained in that Language, as being more apt Sir John Davis in his Preface to
his Irish Reports.
and significant than in any other, which seems to be no obscure Argument. That
the Laws of this Nation, except such as have been altered, or introduced by our
Kings and great Councils, or by Act of Parliament, were for the Norman Laws,
and brought in or instituted by William the Conqueror, the Subject next to be
treated of.

It Is not to be thought, No Nation governed merely by one Law.
that ever any Nation enjoyed one simple Law by its self pure, and unmixed with
some of the Vsages and Customs of other Countries; especially such as have been
often overrun and conquered, which do commonly retain somewhat they received
Municipal Laws agreeable to their own Customs.

And so does this Nation retain some of the Saxon and Danish Customs, which do
not much differ from the Norman, seeing they were Cluverius in his Lib. 1.
Germany contained many Nations.
Antiqua Germania, asserts Germany, France, Spain, and Britain, to be one
Nation and of one Language, viz. Celts. And also there affirms that Germany
anciently comprehended Danemarke, Sweden, Norway, Finmark, the Cimbric
Peninsula, etc. And that all or most of those Nations spoke the same Language
in a different Dialect.
Neighbors by Situation, had the same Language, only differing in Dialect, and
communicated in many Rites and Usages; nay jointly conquered both this Country
and Neustria in France, They were not People of one Nation that conquered
England and Normandy.
afterward called Normandy, for they were not entirely Saxons, Danes, or
Norwegians, or of one Nation that made these Conquests, although Leaders, and
the greatest numbers of any one Nation, might be such, but a mixture of all
these, and several other People of the North parts of Germany.

Yet that the bulk and main of our Laws, The main of our Laws were Norman Laws.
or at least very different usages of them, were brought hither from Normandy
by the Conqueror, such as were in use and practice here for some Ages after the
Conquest, is without question; And our Tenures.
for from whence we received Tenures, and the Manner of holding of Estates in
every respect, from thence we also received the Customs incident to those
Estates, as Reliefs, Aids, Fines, Rents, or Cens, Services, etc. and likewise
the quality of them, being most of them Feudal, and enjoyed under several
Military Conditions and Services, and of necessary Consequence from thence, we
must receive the Laws also, by which these Tenures, and the Customs incident to
them were regulated, and by which every man's right in such Estates was secured,
according to the Nature of them. See Grand Custom throughout and Scriptor.
Norm. 1037*
But from Normandy (and brought in by the Conqueror) we received most, if not
all our ancient Tenures, and manner Lands and Estates, as will appear by
comparing our ancient Tenures with theirs.

First concerning Fees, the Learned Gloss. fol. 218. col. 1 The Servitude of
Fees brought in by the Conqueror.
Sir Henry Spelman tells us, William the Conqueror brought over the Servitude
of them into England, who divided all England amongst his Great Men, and Chief
Commanders, and this he says appears from See Append. n. ^0. where are the
Names of all the Normans in every County, to whom all the Lands in England were
given.
Doomesday-book. And after that the Bondage of Fees was known in all parts of
the Kingdom, Saxon times.

Somners Gavel. p. 102. Berault. on Cust. Norman. fol. 112.
The word Beneficium or Praedium was anciently used for Feodum, which was not
used in any Nation or Country, until about the beginning of the Tenth Century,
from our Savior's Incarnation. Dudo Sti. Quint. Decan. fol. 34. c.
Rex viz. (Galliae) quoque adjecit donationi quam prius Rolloni donaverat totam
Britanniam, ut per hoc etiam beneficium, efficeret illum In lib. de feud. disp.
c. 5. B
Hottoman says beneficium datur propter officium, quo verbo demonstratur
Feudale officium non nisi militare and Bellicum fuisse. And so Dudo ut supra.
f. 85. A.B
Rollo upon his acquest of Normandy, after having given a Portion to the
Church, divided. Normandy, and measured it out to his Chieftains and A sort of
Bondmen, or Servi in the Saxons time
Not but there were a sort of Bondmen or Villains in the Saxons time, they had
their Ceorls or Gubures, their Rusticks, Ploughmen, and Servi; but here he
speaks to, and means the manner of Servitude which came from Normandy.
Vassals; Ib. f. 86. B.
and in his old William, Fees originally Military.
by Popa, to whom he had given his Country, and bound them to him by Oath, or
procured them to

F. 1. printed at R^ven, 1620.
Mounsieur Berault upon the Customs of Normandy says, the Origin and Antiquity
of their Customs was not certain, but it was very likely they were the Laws of
the Normans that conquered Neustria, The Conqueror gave Norman Laws to the
English.
and established there by them, and that by the example of Rollo, William the
Conqueror gave the Laws of Normandy in the Norman Language to the vanquished
English, Ibidem.
yet in the Preface to the Chapter of Fiefs, he reports from Coquill upon the
Custom of Nevernois, and Du Hailan, that they were first heard of in Gallia,
when the Francs conquered it, The Francs conquered Gallia. And divided the
Lands amongst their Soldiers. Gentlemen, such as served on Horseback.
in the Declension of the Roman Empire, that they distributed their conquered
Lands amongst their Soldiers, to whom was reserved the Dignity of Gentlemen,
and the management of Arms, and from the ancient Gauls Inhabitants of the
Country, who were called Roturiers, they took away the use of Arms, and
permitted to them the management of Rustic Affairs, Fiefe, Noble, and
Roturier, etc.

There were Spel. Gloss. fol. 219. Hottom. in lib. de disp. Feud. c. 6. F.
three sorts of Military Fees, Royal Fees, as Dukedoms, Counties, Marquisates,
etc. which held immediately of the Emperor, King, or Prince, and was called
tenure in capite: And so less Estates and Offices in process of time, that held
immediately of the Crown or Person of the Prince, then Mesne or mediate Fees,
which held not immediately of the Prince, These Milites or Knights were
Horsemen, and these Military or Knights Fees given to maintain their Horse and
Arms Hot. in lib. 2. Feud. col. 691. D.
but of some of these Capitanei or Chieftains; as Barons, Vavasors, Castellans,
etc. lastly Military Fees or Knights Fees, such as were held of those Mesn
Lords, and by them given to their Soldiers, all these degrees of Fees were in
Normandy, as appears by the C. 34, 35.
Grand Customer, where they also had all the Incidents of Military Fees, Ward,
Marriage, Relief, Homage, and Fealty; and such Divisions into all these sorts
of Fees, were made of the greatest part, if not See Doomesday in every County,
and here, Ap. n. 10.
all the Lands in England, by the Conqueror, to his great men, Commanders and
Soldiers, as is manifest by Doomesday-Book, a Record without Exception.

And for the Incidents to these Tenures, Escheat, Ward, Marriage, Relief,
Homage, Fealty, Aids, Escuage, etc. both according to their first rigorous
Institution, and afterward qualified Condition, we have a sufficient
Information from all our ancient Historians and Lawyers that we received them
from Normandy. Forfeitures also were incident to these Fees, many of which
Gloss. fol. 214, 215. Forfeitures incident to Feudal Tenure.
Sir Henry Spelman has collected from the Feudist and Feudal Laws, and some of
them do Vassals held their Lands at the will of the Lord, and whether they were
Delinquents or not, he might at his pleasure take them from them: In point of
Tenure they were much like our ancient Copy-holds, at mere will, and in this of
Forfeiture they much resembled them, and those also at this day. Vid. Hot. de
Feud. Disp. c. 38. col. 886. D. E. etc.
It was a Forfeiture, if thrice summoned to the Lords Court, they neglected or
refused to come and take up their Lands and do Fealty. If they refused to do
their Service, or denied their Tenure, it was a Forfeiture. If they sold their
Estates without leave of the Lord, or if they sold it by any other Title than
they had themselves, it was a Forfeiture. If they did any thing against their
Oath of Fealty, if they adhered to their Lords Enemies, or did forsake him in
time of War or Danger, all these were Forfeitures. If they committed any
outrageous wickedness which was called See the Glossary.
Felony, as Murder, Robbery, burning of Houses, Rape, etc. and which was no
Treason, this likewise was a Forfeiture of their Lands and Estates to the Lord
of the Fee. And by committing Felony and the nonperformance of the most of
these things, upon conviction the Tenants Coke complete Copyholder, Sect. 57,
58 Kitchen Tit. Copyholder.
at this day forfeit their Lands, and they Escheat to the Lord, some by
presentment of the Homage, others immediately where the Fact is notorious.

And while we mention Tenants, it will give some light to the knowledge from
whence we received our Laws, briefly to give an Institution of Manors here in
this Nation, as I find it in our Learned Glossarist, Fol. 389. The first
Institution of Manners. Manors from whence derived
who says it was a Norman word, and brought from thence, and what the Saxon
called a Praedium or Villa, their Possessions in Land with the enjoyment of
Soc, Sac, Toll, Team, and other Privileges, the Normans called Manners a
Manendo, because such Possessions were ordinarily the Seats of the Lords.

Saxon Many of them had so, but without doubt they had some Feudal Tenures, or
somewhat Angli, Jutes, etc. coming from the Cimbric Peninsula, and the North
Parts of Germany, where such Tenures were General, from whence the word Vassus,
Vassallus, or Valvasor was derived to other Nations, Hot. de Feud. disp. cap.
7.820. C. As also in their Neighbor Nations of Danemark and Norway.
Jurisdictions had their Origin from the Grants of their Kings, They were
Feudal.
but Manners had their beginning from Feudal Law or Right; for whoever could
dispose of Fees, might justly give Laws to their Vassals, erect Courts for
passing of estates, and take upon them all other Privileges, merely pertaining
to a noble Fee.

How they were instituted.
He further says, at the beginning this was the course of instituting Manners,
for the most part different Lords possessed the Territories See Doomesday Book
every where* how Villages and Towns are described with such People in them,
under the Proprietor.
cultivated it by their Servants, Vassals and Husbandmen, for at that time
there were living in the Country, only Military men, Laborers, or Husbandmen;
first the Lord designed the place of his own Habitation, and annexed to it a
plentiful Portion of Land for the maintenance of his Family, which are yet
called Terrae-Dominicae, Demesne Lands; Ibidem.
another share he gave to his Vassal or Vassals for their aid and assistance in
War, and I rather think these Fees to have been most whole at first, and that
in time by favor of the Lord, they parcelled out and sold them, and such a
part of a Knights Fee was apportioned to such and such a man, as Rents are
amongst Copyholders at this day, where a Tenent sells part of his Copyhold to
one, part to another. There are many Instances of whole Manors granted by the
Service of one Knights Fee, Robert Fitz-Roger 9. Richard the First had a Grant
from him of the Manner of Eure in Buckinghamshire, by the Service of Jonannis, a
Confirmation of the Castle Manner of Workeworth in Northumberland by the Service
of one Knights Fee. 5. Johannis, the Manner of Newburn in the same County, by
the Service of one Knights Fee. The Manner of Clavering in Essex by the same
Service. 7. Johannis, the Manner of Robiri in Northumberland by the same Service
of one Knights Fee, and the Manner of Hwayton, with the whole Barony, which
formerly belonged to Robert de Cramavil, by the Service of three Knights Fees;
he had then also the Honor of Tikhil, with sixty Knights Fees, and three parts
of a Knights Fee belonging to it. Dugdales Baronage, fol. 107. Tom. 1.
Knights Fees, or Military Fees, which if they For maintenance of their Horse
and Arms
yet according to the Quantity of Land they enjoyed, they contributed such a
share or performed such Service as was appointed and agreed for, half, a third,
or fourth, or less part according to the smallness of the Portion of the Fee,
granted toward the Lords Military Expenses, Ibidem. Base Tenure.
a third part he distributed to such as performed all rustic and servile
Works, repaired his Houses, ploughed and sowed his Land, reaped his Crop,
carried it into Barn, Threshed it, Dug, Hedged, and

The Precincts of this Distribution were governed by such Laws as the Lords
imposed; and as all their Estates arose from his Beneficence, so they depended
on his Will. Hence so many several Customs, Whence several Customs in several
Manners.
in several Manners.

The Lords House was the Aula, Hall, or Court, and all the Tenants, if
Annuntiation, and St. Michael, from whence these Courts kept at those times,
were called Curiae generales, or General Courts. These Lords of Manners, or
small Baronies, held either in Capite of the King, or most commonly of other
great Grand. Cust. of Norm. c. 34, 35, 53 and every where in our ancient
Lawyers and Historians.
Barons, as of their Honors or Heads of their Baronies by the same Tenures, and
under the same Forfeitures, and these in like manner of the King in Capite; for
by the Hot. de ^eud. Disp. ^ 10. 830. D ^hey might ^aighten, but not enlarge
the Condition of the Fee, Ibid.
Feudal Law, Sub-Fees were to be given, and received according to the Laws of
the first Institution of the Capital, Royal, or Great Fees, which held
immediately of the Prince, and therefore as the Inferior, or lowest Lords
Charter. ^rand. Cust. c. 53.
had their Courts most commonly for adjusting all Matters within the
Jurisdiction Lords of Manners ought Suit to the Courts of mean Barons.
and arising between their Tenants, were ordered and decided, and they were not
only held at the chief Seats of their Honors or Baronies* but perhaps all over
England where they had any considerable Lands or Possessions, as the This Title
was Frequent in Normandy, for the Seat or head of the Honor, Earldom, Honor
what.
or Barony; See Script. Norm. 1037, 1040.
Honor of Richmond, Honor of Gloucester and Clare, Duchy of Lancaster, And
they to the Courts of great Barons, on whom they held.
etc. have at this day their several Courts for determining Controversies and
Suits within their Jurisdiction of matters of small value.

Lastly these great Barons were within the Glan. l. 1. c. 3. And the great
Barons to the Exchequer* or Kings Court.
Jurisdiction of the Kings Court or Exchequer, where all Pleas concerning their
Baronies were terminated.

Conqueror gave to some of the greatest of his Followers whole Counties, and to
some two, three, or more Counties, with a great proportion of Lands in them;
The Lands of England parcelled out and distributed by the Conqueror.
to others some part or portion of a County, as Hundreds, or several Manners and
Towns in them, who sometimes parcelled them out to their Dependents and
Friends, and they again to theirs, till at last (though the Saxons most
frequently held their own Estates, of these new Lords, and by new Titles from
them) some Soldiers, and ordinary men, had some proportionable Normandy, as to
Possession and Tenure; so was it here in England, until by the Indulgence of
Usurpers, to the great men, and of them to the People their Tenants and
Followers, their Tenures became more easy, and were changed into Inheritances,
both Free and Bond as they did in France upon the Usurpation of Hottom. in
Feud. Disp. col. 845. A.B. Et de Serres, fol. 120. A. D. 987. The Barons made
advantage by setting up Usurpers. and sometimes of their lawful Sovereigns by
bearing too hard upon them.
Hugh Capet, the Baronies and Fees might be Hereditary and Patrimonial, which
before were Arbitrary, and enjoyed at the Will of the King only: The Nobility
in those times never lost by advancing Usurpers, if they prospered, always
bargaining with them for some Flowers of their Crown, and the bettering their
own Condition. As appears by the Stories of our Henry the First, King Stephen
and King John, and with their Lawful Sovereigns also, who according to their
Examples, and their own Demands of Holy-Church, and the Barons called in to her
Assistance, though to their own disadvantage; and besides this way, Lands
became ^ree and Hereditary many ways.
without doubt many Lands became Free and Hereditary, or their Services made
certain by Compact or Agreement between Tenants and indigent Lords; whereby
their Lands were manumised, the Services released, or they were granted to them
by Deed or Feofment, The Feudal Law might be relaxed, by the use of the Canon,
and Imperial Law.
and it is not unlikely, but that the use of the Canon and imperial Law
prevailing here, or being promiscuously used with the ordinary Law, for a
Century or two of years, from the time of King Stephen, until Seld. Dissertatio
in Fletam. c. 8.
the Reign of Edward the Third, might much Feudal Law, and render the Fees less
Conditional, and far more qualified than they had been formerly; and hence the
Laws concerning them became more easy, and received their several Alterations
and Amendments by Flux of time, or Acts of great Councils or Parliaments; and
instead of rigorous Tenures, the more soft ones of Fee-Simple in all its kinds,
and inheritable and qualified Copy-holds were introduced.

Besides this Tenure of Homage, there were also other Tenures in Normandy,
Tenures in Almoigne in Normandy. In Burgage.
as Per Elemosynam, in Frank almoigne, as the Church Lands were held. Burgage
as the Lands in Buroughs are held by Custom of the Borough, both which we
have, and ever had here from the Conquest, though not perhaps the former, in
pura and libera Elemosyna as in the Saxon times.

Normans also had Fiefs, All Services base and ignoble but Military Services.
These held by Rent or Cens, ignoble Services, all Berault. fol 112. and Article
158.
Services in ancient times being
Roturiers, the same or very like Soccage Tenure; In Soccage. And Bordage.
and Tenure by Bordage, which was a drudging Len doibt Scavoir que acune que
tien son fief per vil Service, etc. And ye ought to know that such as hold
their Fiefs or Fees in base Service, as ( Roturiers) ought not to have a Court
of their Tenants, of their own Fee, such as Bordiers, and ceux qui servent a
sac and a sum, which do drudging Services, carry Sacks and Burdens, etc. and
others which owe Villain Services, as to drain Marshes and Moors to Dung or
compast Grounds, make Hay, and do other Villain Services; Grand. Custom. C. 53.
In sine.
servile Tenure, and those that held such Lands, could neither give, Grand.
Cust. C. 28, 29, 30, etc. with the Gloss. Or servile Tenures. Gavelkind there
also. See Berault in many of the Vicounties.
They had also a Tenure not much unlike our Gavelkind, if not the same, as
appears there, c. 26. de portionibus, and this Custom is used to this day in
several Vicounties of Normandy, and in the Vicounte of Baieux, where Odo made
Earl of Kent by the Conqueror, was Bishop, Berault fol. 714.715. and might be
brought from Kent by him.

Having thus briefly given an account how men held their Lands, and what
propriety they had in them about, and for some Ages after the Conquest, and the
Laws by which they were regulated. The second Argument I shall make use of, to
prove that men held their Estates by the Norman Law; The Exchequer in England
the same with the Norman Exchequer.
and that it was the chief Law in use here, shall be the consideration of the
Court of Exchequer; which Lib. 1. c. 1.4.
Gervasius Tilburiensis de Necess. Scac. obs. (a sure Author) reports, was here
from the very Conquest, and instituted according to the Pattern of that in
Normandy, and was erected there by Rollo, as Revise says, Notes on Grand Cust.
fol. 8. Ib. fol. 9. b.
The Authority of this Court was so great, that no man might contradict a
Sentence pronounced here, and not only the Law and the Affairs concerning all
the great Baronies of England, and all such Estates as held in Capite, were
transacted there, but many Laws or Rights were discussed, and many Doubts
determined, which frequently arose from incident questions; for the excellent
knowledge of the Exchequer consists not in Accounts only, but in multiplicity
of Judgments. Common Pleas holden in the Exchequer.
And Common Pleas were usually held in this Court until the Eight and twentieth
Edward the First, it was A^tic. supra cart. c. 4.
Enacted, That no Common-Plea should be henceforth held in the Exchequer
contrary to the Form of the great Charter.

In this Court sat the Gerv. Till. lib. c. 4. What Persons Judges, and
Assessors in the Exchequer.
Capital Justiciary, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and as many of the most
Discreet, greatest and knowing men, (real Barons) whether of the Clergy or
Laity as the King pleased to direct.

The Business of the Court, was not only Accounts and what belonged to them,
but to Decree Right, determine doubtful Matters which arose upon incident
Questions, to hold Common Pleas, Pleas of sundry and diverse Natures judged in
that Court.
as before, and to judge what chiefly concerned all Capite Lands, and the great
Baronies of England.

The great Officers and other great men that sat here, were all Normans, or of
Norman Extraction, which probably neither well understood nor spoke the English
Tongue, nor much less had time to learn, know, or understand the Common Law of
England, being then and ever since the Conquest, His Reading de finibus, p. 3.
Lex non Scripta, Ibidem.
divinely cast into the heart of Man, as Sir Edward Coke affirms, unless they
received it this way by Inspiration. How then could Judgments be made, and
Sentence given in this Court, by any other than the Norman Law?

By what has been said, it does in a great measure appear, that the English
and Norman Laws were the same; yet to make it more plain, I will add a very
brief Abstract of the old Norman Laws out of the old Customs.

Jurisdiction was either Feudal or Commissory, Grand. Cust. C. 2. A Brief
Abstract of the Norman Laws.
Feudal was that which a man had by reason of his Fee, by which he might do Law
Plaints belonging to his Fee, and in all Plaints moved against the Residents
within his Fee, unless such as appertained to the Duchy, i. e. Royal or Pleas
of the Sword or Crown.

Commissory Jurisdiction, was such as was committed to any one by the Prince,
or Lord to whom it belonged, as to a Bailiff, C. 3. This was the way to do
Justice by forcing the Execution of the Law.
Seneschal, or Provost, etc. the Prince only had a full Jurisdiction of all
Lay-Pleas that came before him. That is, he might if he pleased, Pleas.

Alcun Justicie bien ses Hommes, Tell Justice est faict per prendre members,
ou fien, ou Corpse. Quis been Justiciat homines suos. Such Justice was done by
Caption of Goods, the Fee or Body, and was called Justicement, c. 6. forcing of
men to do Justice by one of these three ways, according to Law.

C. 4. Justiciers or Justices.
Justicier sive Justiciarius Nomen accepit, eo quod Justiciandi homines habeat
potestatem. The Justiciary took his name from bringing men to Justice, or doing
Justice to them. The Justiciaries were Superior or Inferior, appointed by the
Duke to take care of and guard his Country. The greater were the Masters of the
Exchequer, who had power to amend, les Torts, the Wrongs which the Bailiffs had
done.

Bailiffs what they were in Normandy.
The Bailiffs were called the less Justices, because they had not Justice out of
their Bailywicks, which were but seven Principal ones in all Normandy. The
Bailiff had power to do Justice and Right to the People under him, to keep the
Peace, to end or determine Plaints, to destroy Thieves, Murderers, Burners, and
other Malefactors. Plaints were to be carried to the Justices, and they were
bound to receive them, and to take Pledges for Prosecution, to assign a day for
hearing, to keep a Court, and to put their Judgments in Execution. The
Subjusticiers were Officers established under the Justiciers to do Execution,
such were Viscounts, Sergeants of the Sword, Bum-Bayliffs.
Bedells, or under-Serjeants, etc.

C. 5. with the Coment. A Vicount in Normandy was an under Officer of the Law,
a Pedanens judge, and was the very same with a Provost or a Viginer or Vicar,
who heard small and Ordinary Cases* Pasqu. Recherch. fol. 860. D. Sergeants of
the Sword.
The Office of the Vicount was to hold Pleas of ancient Paths, Ways, Bounds,
Watercourses, etc. and to walk the Parish with twelve men of the same, and by
their Oath, or the Oath of the greater part of them, to inquire whose Lands lay
next the Ways, etc. and cause by the Oath of twelve lawful men, of Malefactors,
as Murderers, Thieves, Traitors, Ravishers, and other Criminals, to keep them
in Prison till they were delivered by the Law of the Country.

These had also under them Sergeants of the Sword, who held the Views, and made
the Summons to them, and executed the Precepts of Assizes, and what was judged
there; and to keep and deliver according to Law, Distresses taken. The Bedells
were the less Sergeants, which ought to take the Distress, and to do Offices
less honorable, and to make the lesser Summons; and these were in every good
Town.

C. 6. Default.
Trespassment des Terms sont Appellez defaultes, that is, such as came not at
the time appointed, nor appeared in Court according to Summons, or when they
ought, or performed not what they were then to perform, were in Default.

Fealty.
No man in Normandy could receive Fealty from another, without saving his Fealty
to the Duke, which is to be expressed in doing Homage. And therefore the Duke
has the whole Justicement of the body of a man for or by reason of the Fealty
that all men owe him.

If a Lord does wrong to his man, by reason of his Fee, the Court then
appertains to the Duke, if there be no Mesne or Middle-Lord, between the Duke
and him, which by reason of his Fee, may have the Court.

About Distresses, taking Goods and impounding Cattle much used, C. 7.
as in use with us.

Of the times when many Lands are to be several, or commune, C. 8.
the Usage much the same as in England.

Judges were Sage Persons, and Authentic, C. 9. So it was in England. Who
anciently Judges in Normandy, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Canons, etc.
which gave Judgment Archbishops, Bishops, Canons of Cathedral Churches, and
other dignified Persons in Churches, Abbats, Priors, Conventual and Governors
of Churches, famous for their Discretion and Honesty; Bailiffs, Knights,
Sergeants principal, and Seneschals of Barons, Famous for Knowledge and
Honesty; every of these might remain in Judgment, if the Cause were not their
own, or they were no ways Parties, nor had given Judgment, nor were Witnesses
in it, nor were suspected for Love, Favor, or Hatred. Barons ought to be judged
Peers, and others by all such as cannot be removed from Judgment, (i. e.) such
as were not suspected as before.

Anciently there was in Normandy a greater Justice than all the
beforementioned, which was called the Seneschal of the Prince; C. 10. Seneschal
of Normandy. He was like the Missi Regales, or Dominici, in the old Empire, or
Itinerant Justices, anciently that went their Circuits once in two, three,
four, five or six years
he corrected all inferior Justiciers, as Bailiffs, etc. and removed them from
their Offices, if he saw it convenient, he preserved the Land of the Prince,
and made to be preserved the Laws and Rights of Normandy, traveled every three
years through Normandy, and visited all the particular Baylywicks, and inquired
of the Injuries and Excesses done by the Sub-justiciers, and also held Pleas of
the Sword, etc. and in all things that belonged to his Office, he might cause
them to be amended, without Pleas or Assizes, and in all places where he found
any thing amiss, he might do as he thought expedient.

C. 11. Custom, Law, and Usage.
understood and practiced in the same manner as in England.

All such as were Residents in the Duchy of Normandy, C. 14. All the Residents
in Normandy swear Fealty to the Duke.
ought to swear Fealty to the Duke and keep it; and therefore in all things
they ought to be Loyal toward him, and were not to procure his damage, nor to
give Council or Aid to his manifest Enemies; such as were found culpable of any
of these things, were called Traitors to Prince, and all their Possessions
remained to him always.

The Women in Normandy, without consent of their Husbands, C 15.
could make no Contract or Bargain.

Wrec belonged to the Duke of great and rich things there named, C. 1^. Wrec.
and of ordinary things to the Lord of the Fee; all the Controversies arising
from it, were to be determined in the Dukes Court.

Treasure Trove, i. e. found or dug any where, C. 18. Treasure Trove
belonged to the Duke.

Waifs belonged to the Lord of the Fee, or sometime to the Duke, C. 19. Waifs,
etc.
according to Custom.

C. 20. And Glanv. lib. 7. c. 16.
The Chattels of Usurers that died, belonged to the Duke; so to our Ancient
Kings.

C. 21. Felon^ Goods were the Dukes
The Chattels of such as killed themselves, Excommunicate and Desperate Persons
(such to whom Confession and the Sacramen^ was denied) were the Dukes.

C 22. Movables and Chattels forfeited to the Duke.
All Movables forfeited, belong to the Duke. Movables were the Chattels of
such as were condemned by Judgment, that were hanged, burnt, their Eyes pulled
out, or their hands or Feet cut off or banished, etc.

C. 24. Assize what.
Assize was an Assembly of Knights, and Sage men, with the Bailiff in a certain
place, and at a certain time, which contained the space of forty days, between
one Assize and another, by which Judgment and Justice was done of such things
as were heard in Court; in these Assizes the Juries sometimes were brought to a
Non-scavoir, Ibidem. Juries brought in Ignoramus.
or Ignoramus. And when nothing of Certainty or Credit was deposed, the Inquest
being first examined, the Return or Verdict was L'enquest scet rien.

Ibidem. Lands, etc. forfeited, as in England.
The Lands and Estates and Profits of condemned Persons for Felony, were the
Dukes for a year and a day, afterward they were the Lords of the Fee, of whom
he held immediately; so in England.

C. 25. The eldest Son Succeeds the whole, etc.
In Fuedal Succession the Eldest Son succeeds in the whole, and so it descends
to the next of the Blood, and never ascends when there is any of the descending
Line remaining.

In the Latin Version of the Customer of Normandy, printed at Paris 1539. there
is a C. 25.
Chapter de exercitu Ducis, not to be found in the French Print of that year;
but Du Fresn in his Tom. 3. col. 832.
Glossary cites a MSS. Customer in the Chamber of Accounts at Paris, Military
Service in chief.
which he made use of in these words; Or est un service que Doit estre fet au
Prince en arms, se lont la Coustume and L'establissement des Fiemens, and des
Villes, and icest service est accoustume a fere par 40. jours, Service of 40.
days.
pour le secours, and l'aide de la terre de c^ux qui en tiennent les Fiemens,
come ce soit fet pour aucun Delivrance, and pour le profit d^l Comun P^eple,
etc. Tous fiefs de See the Glossary.
Hauber^ sont especialment establis pour fair, le propre service, de la Duchee,
and Ensement de Tous les Normandy, ne doivent pas de service, D'ost, fors as
Seigneurs as quieux il sont soumis. Except nequedent Larrierban del Prince,
auquel Trestous, grans and petits pourtant que il soient Convenables pour arms
porter, sont tenu sans excusation nulle, a fair lui aid and profit a tout leur
pooir. Now there is a Service which ought to Co. Lit. Sect. 95.
forty days, for the succor and aid of the Land, by such as hold the Fees; as
it were done for any Deliverance, and for the profit of the Commune People,
etc. All Military or Knights Fees were especially established to do the proper
Service of the Duchy, and likewise all the Earldoms and Baronies ought to
accomplish this Service, and all the Cities or Burghs that have Communities; it
is also to be understood, that the Knights Fees which are in the Earldoms and
Baronies, which are not established for the Duchy of Normandy, nor do owe
Service to the Army, but to the Lords of whom they are holden, except at the
Arrierban of the Prince, to which all both great and small, that are

The Latin Version agrees with this French Text, and as it proceeds further,
The Duke granted to such as held of him Scutage, Service of the Tenants.
there is a Clause exactly agreeable to the ancient practice in England. The
Duke of Normandy granted to such as had performed their Service in the Army
forty days, Scutage-Service, of such as held of them by Military Service.
Exercitus autem dicitur auxilium illud pecuniale, quod concedit Princeps
Normanniae facto exercitus 40 dies servitio, Baronibus vel Militibus, de illis
qui tenent, de eis feodis, vel de tenentibus suis in Feodo Loricali: And so was
the Usage of our ancient English Kings after the Conquest, to grant to such as
had personally, or by substitute or fine, performed their Service in the Army,
Scutage-Service, of such as held of them in Military Tenure.

Heritages partible and not partible: C. 26. and 36. Gavelkind.
Tenure in Military Service and Serjeanty impartible. Heritage partible was
equally divided amongst all the Sons, etc. All the Children of one Son, were
but to have the share of their Father divided amongst them.

A Father that had many Sons, Ibidem. Glanvil. lib. 7. c. 1. and 3. Soccagium
divisum.
could not give one a better Share than the other of his Heritage; for if he
did, notwithstanding his Gift, it was to be divided with his other Lands,
amongst his Sons

Impediments of Succession were Bastardy, profession of Religion, C. 27.
Impediments of Succession.
Blood attainted, Leprosy, etc.

Lands of a Bastard, if he had no issue by a lawful Wife, returned

Tenures were by Homage, by Parage, by Bourgage, by Almoign, C. 28. What
Tenures in Normandy.
Bordage or Tenure of servile works, Tenure of Rent or Rent Charge, etc.

No Tenent by Homage could sell or engage his Fee, C. 29. Tenent by Homage
could not sell, etc.
without consent of his Lord, unless in some parts there was a Custom to sell
or engage a third part, or a less, so as there was left enough to pay

Parage is when the younger Brothers hold their Share of the Fee of the elder
Brother, and he of the Lord, C. 30. Parage.
and does the Homage and Service, they contributing their Shares. So it is
called Parage in respect of Parentage, in which they are equal, not in respect
of their Estates.

C. 31. Bourgage.
Bourgage is a Tenure according to the Customs and Vsages of Bourghs, and may
be bought and sold as Movables, without the Assent of the Lord.

C. 32. Franc Almoign.
Tenure in Almoign, or Franc Almoign. So Lands given in pure Alms to God and
such as serve him.

C. 33 Ward and Marriage. A Member of a Military Fee what?
The Duke of Normandy had the Guard, or Wardship and Marriage of all Minors,
which held of him by Homage, by a Fee or a Member Military Fee. A Member of a
Military Fee is the eighth part, or any part under, as a sixth or seventh, not
but it might be divided into more, but less than an eighth could not have Court
and Usage belonging to it. So other Lords, of such as held of them by Homage.

The Duke and other Lords had also Reliefs, 15 l. of a Military Fee, C. 34.
Relief.
and 100 l. of a Barony; upon the death of the Tenants, an Earl l.

C. 35. Three Capital Aids, Glanv. lib. 9. c. 8.
Tenants in Military Service paid three Capital Aids, one to make the Lords
eldest Son a Knight, a second to marry his Daughter, a third to redeem their
Lord out of Prison.

C. 39, 40, 41, etc. Glanv. l. 1. c. 28. to the end. Essoins.
Essoins or excuses for delaying Suits in Feudal Pleas, were de Malo veniendi,
de Malo lecti, per Servitium Ducis, de ultra Mare, de Privilegio The same in
England.

C. 50. Warranty.
Of Warranty, whoever was called to it, was bound to secure the Land he passed
away, or to give so much other Land in lieu of it, to him that vouched him to
warrant it.

C. 51. and 67.
Wrong in Word or Deed, as Battery and Defamation, were Actions personal,
Actions of wrong Possession of Fees, Movables, or Chattels,

De Tort faicte Tort.
Wrong or Tort was the Fountain of all Contention.

C. 5^. Forcible Entry.
Forcible Entry, and breach of the Peace, contrary to the Dignity of the Duke,
and Peace of the Country.

C. 53. and Gloss. Tit. Court Pleas of the Sword* By Charter from the Duke,
Knights, Earls, Barons had Courts, etc.
Of all these Pleas, and also Pleas of the Sword, the Duke has Frank
Sergeanties, or other Frank or Free Fees have their Courts of their Residents
in simple Plaints. And of light and weighty Matters of Movables and Heritages,
and of Thefts; yea although they were to be determined by Glanv. l. 8. c. 9
Battle. But such as were not noble Tenants, or held by vile Services as
Bordiers; and such as performed drudging and villain Services, had Court or
Usage over Tenants in such Fees.

C. 52. Tit. de Haron our Hue and Cry.
There was a Court of the Cry called Haron (with us Hue and Cry) to which all
that heard it were bound to go: And there was an Inquest whether the Cry was
rightfully or wrongfully levied; for it was never raised but in Causes
Criminal, as for burning Houses, for Theft, Murder, Robbery, or other great and
apparent Mischiefs or danger. They begun at the place the Fact was done, and
pursued the Malefactor from Parish to Parish with noise and Arms, until, if
they could, they had taken and rendered him to Justice; and for neglect in the
Parish or Peoples making this Cry and pursuit, they made fine to the Duke. This
was called a Plea of the Sword (or as we call it of the Crown) because such
Malefactors ought to be restrained by the Sword Arms, and ought to be put in
Prison and bound.

Such Plaints are called Criminal, Ibidem. Plaints Criminal.
for which a man loses Life or Member; others are called simple, by which the
Malefactor is only chastised as a Child with a Rod.

The Court of some Plaints is in the Vicount, of some in the Assize, Plaints in
the Vicount, Assize, Exchequer.
of some in the Exchequer.

In the Vicount were only Holden Simple Plaints, What Plaints in the Vicount.
and the amends of Defaults in the Assize, and such Plaints as ought to have
the term of fifteen days; that is, were holden from fifteen to fifteen days.
And such as were holden in this Court, were called Pleas Vicountel. Pleas
Vicountel


Every great Plaint, as Breach of the Peace, Cases Criminal, Ib. and Gloss. K.
What Plaints in the Assize and Exchequer.
Cases touching Noble Fees, and all the like great Plaints could not be
determined Assize, in the Exchequer, or before the Prince where the
Determination was Recorded. And for this reason these Courts were furnished
with more Sage men than others, that the Plaints might be more discreetly
determined.

The Exchequer was an Assembly of high or Superior Justiciers, C. 56. What the
Norman Exchequer was.
to whom it belonged to amend the Judgments of the Bailiffs and lesser
Justiciers, and to correct their Errors, to render right to every man, mouth of
the Prince to preserve his Rights, and to recall such things which had been
evilly and fraudulently granted away, or put out of his hands, and to observe
every where, as with the Eyes of the Prince, those things which appertained to
his Dignity and Honor.

The ordinary way was, Ib. in the Gloss. The Office of Bailiff and Vicount.
that the Vicount corrected the ill Judgments and Errors of the base Justicies
under him, and the Bailiff those Vicount, and the Exchequer those of the
Bailiff.

A Plaint or Clamor is, C. 57. A Plaint or Clamor what? Plantiff bound to
prosecute.
when any one shows by complaint to the Justicers, the wrong that is done him,
who have power to receive them, and to take Pledges of the Complainants that
they will prosecute them.

The Plaintiff thus bound, C. 58.
if he appeared not in Court at the day appointed Adversary then appeared, he
had leave to go without day, if the Suit were concerning a Lay-Fee, To go
without Day what?
and the view were made, and the Plantiff pursued not his Claim, but made
Default, he was not to be heard any more in that Matter: To lose by Default.
And if the Defendant made Default, in that Case he ought to lose the Seisin of
the Fee which was shown or viewed.

C. 62. Glanv. l. 2. c. 3. Witnesses, etc.
Witnesses swear to what they heard and saw, and were ready to do as the Court
should award; no man to witness in his own Case, nor his Heir for him, nor any
Partakers in the Plaint or Relations.

C. 63, 64, 65. Pleaders, Conteurs, Attorneys
There were Pledeurs, Conteurs, and Attorneys that pleaded and managed Cases in
Normandy; to these are answerable our Sergeants, Barresters and Attorneys.

C. 66. View before Trial. Land demanded by Battle or Writ of Right, Knights,
etc. made the view.
There were also views of several things required before Trial, view Fee, view
of the Sick person, view of the Mischief done, view of the person slain, view
of the defloured Virgin, etc. The view of the Fee or Land in question, when it
was demanded by Battle, or a Writ of Right, and generally in all Pleas or
Controversies concerning the Inheritance, was made by four Knights, and twelve
lawful-men.

Novel Disselsin, view made by Knights. Languor, view made by Knights
In Novelle Disseisines and all Plaints brought after the manner of Novel
Disseisin which were for Possessions; the view might be made twelve lawful men
without Knights, but it were better if Knights were there, if they might easily
be had: The view of Languor or Sickness was made by Glanv. lib. 1. c. 19. The
same here.
four Knights. The view of Murder, Homicide, Mayheme, or wounds inflicted by
force, was made after the same manner: The view of a Virgin defloured, was made
by seven Matrons of good Credit.

C. 67. C. 51. Tit. de Querelles.
Pleas or Plaints some are personal, some real; personal either by Deeds or
Words; by Deeds, as by Battery, or Wounds.

C. 68. Glanv. l. 14. c. 3 Murder, Battle*
In Suit of Murder R. complains of T. that he Feloniously murdered his Father,
being in the peace of God, and the Duke, and that he was ready to prove it,
etc. If T. denies it word for word, and offers gage to defend himself, then the
Battle was arrayed, as in this Chapter is further described; but if there were
none to make Suit or Clamor of Murder against a suspected Person, accused by
common fame, the Justice might put him in Prison, and examine him before four
Knights, Four Knights, 24 lawful men.
and might cause a Jury of four and twenty of the most discreet and lawful men
that could be found in or about the place where the Murder was committed, which
were supposed best to know the truth of the Case, and how it was done, and by
these to try him; he had his challenge allowed to any of them, but what twenty
of them said, was to remain good without contradiction.

C. 70. Appeal of Murder.
Of Murder and Homicide, the next of Kin might have the Suit, etc. if the next
of Kin were not of Age, then the next of Kin to him, that was so.

C 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. Glanv. lib. 14. c. 4, 5, 6.
Appeals or Suits of Robbery, of breach of the Peace, when a man had given
Security in Court of his peaceable behavior toward another; of Treason, of
Mayheme, of Assault, Rape, Burning, etc.

C. 69. Jurors were. Glanv. l. 2. c. 17. The nearest and best men such as knew
the matter in question.
Jurors were bound to speak the truth concerning the Plaints, and therefore
were to consider all Circumstances relating to them; they were to be of the
nearest and best men, which were supposed to know the thing in Controversy;
those which were not such, or did not know or understand the matter in
Controversy were not admitted.

It was Vacation all those times, C. 80, 81. See Westminster. 1st. c. 51.
in which Marriages ought not to be solemnized, upon all Solemn Feasts and
Fasts, and the four Solemn times.

The Law of Sanctuary was in Normandy. C. 81, 82. Law of Sanctuary.


No Clerk, Ecclesiastical Person, or Religious, C. 82, 83. Clerks, etc. exempt
from Lay-Courts, except, etc.
was to be taken or arrested; and if he were, was to be restored to the Church
if demanded, Ecclesiastical Court, was to be degraded, and deposed from the
Privilege of a Clerk. Such Persons were exempt from sole Jurisdiction of a
Lay-Court, unless in such matters as concerned a Lay-Fee.

Simple Plaint personal was so called, C. 85, 86, 123. Simple Plaint, Desrene.
because determined by Simple Law, which was called Desrene, which was a
Purgation of the Defendant, by his own Oath, and by the Oaths of his
Coadjutors. This Plaint was either of Words or Deeds, of Deeds as when one
complained that another struck him, and had his Witness ready that said it was
true, that he saw and heard it, and was ready to do according to the award of
the Court, without which last words his Testimony had been invalid; for 'twas
not enough to say he saw and heard it, but he must also offer himself to the
award of the Court; from which Accusation the Defendant purged himself, by
swearing that he did not strike him, and that his Witness neither saw nor heard
it; Purgation by Oath, or Canonical Purgation.
and his Coadjutors swore also that he swear a true Oath. Desrene in Latin is
called Deraisnia, and perhaps is the same with Dirationatio in the old
Historians; in the Canon Law it is called Purgation or Canonical Purgation, and
with us wager of Law; as also here, Wager of Law.
Se cil qui est querelle enchet de la Loy que il a gaigee il doibt amender le
misfaict a celuy a qui il le fist and a la Court: C. 85. If the Querelate or
Defendant fails in the Law he has waged, etc. when the Coadjutors had sworn,
the Accuser was in Amends. See in this Chapter toward the end the difference of
the Amends to common Persons, and to Knights and Soldiers, who are called
Authentic Persons. The Amends was as much to the Lord, in whose Court it was
tried, as to the injured Person, and more to the Duke, or at the discretion of
the Judge, according to the worth of the Person, and Merits of the Cause.

Personal Plaints that arise from words, C. 86. Actions of Defamation.
were the same we call Actions of Defamation.

Pleas or Plaints concerning Possession, C. 87. All Pleas of Movables
exceeding 10 s. were tried by Law apparent. Ibidem.
(possessory Actions) with us were either for Movables, which they called
Chattels, as Horses, Cows, Gold, Silver; or Immoveables, as Land, Meddow,
Pasture, and all Possessions inherent to the Land, which they called Fees.
Their Possessory Actions were called Simple, when terminated by Simple when
judged by Law apparent, that is by Duel, or by Inquisition of Country, which
they call Recognition.

Pleas of Debts, Debtors, and Suerties, and of Contracts, Covenant, C. 88, 89,
90, 91.
and Bargains.

C. 92. Feodal Plaints. Jury of twelve Knights, etc.
Pleas Feodal are determined, some by Desrene or Simple Law concerning
Movables Feodal; and others by Enquest, which is a Recognition of the truth of
the thing in Controversy, by the Oath of twelve Knights, or twelve other
discreet, honest, credible Persons, no ways suspected. The matter of all
Inquests was contained in the Writ or Brief, Inquests* R^cognitions.
and those Inquests that proceed by brief, are called Recognitions.

C. 91. Glanv. l. 13. c. 2 The same Writs.
There was one Brief or Writ of Novel Disseisin; another of Mort anoter of
Eschaet; another of Marriage Encombre; another of Dowres; another of
Presentment to a Church; another of Fee and Gage, (i. e.) to inquire whether it
were a Fee or Morgage redeemable by the Heir in the Tenants hands; another De
Feodo and firma (i. e.) to inquire whether it were a Fee or a Farm, for years
in the Possessors hands, and who was the next Heir of him that let it to Farm;
another de Estabilia to establish Right, or of right as we Sur-demand, when the
Lord demanded more Rent and Services than was due; another of Lay-Fee and Franc
Almoign; another of Lineage denied; another of Heritage.

C. 95. Tit. vene. By Justice here i^ meant the Sergent. Views how taken.
View is when the Plantiff shows before the Justice and legal men the thing
which he demands, and it is to be made at a certain place, day, and hour
assigned by the Sergeant, (who is here intended by the Justice) the Viewers
being assembled, the Sergeant is to recite the matter of the Plaint contained
in the Writ, or cause it to be read, and then the Bracton. l. 4. c. 16. n. 4.
Upon View the Land was taken into the hand of the Duke, and not restored until
the Plea ended.
Plantiff is to show what he demands with the bounds in length and breadth, or
as we the Buts and bounds. At the time of the View, the thing shown ought to be
taken into the hand or Possession of the Prince, nor was it to be restored
until the Plea was ended; and this was the meaning of those words in the Writ,
Vt terra sit in pace. When the thing was thus shown, the Sergeant commanded the
Possessor to resaise the Plantiff, according as it was fine to the Duke or
Court.

C. 95.
After the View made, and the Recognition was adjourned to the Assizes, the
Bracton. l. 4. c 18, 19. The same method there in Normandy.
Writ was there read in the presence of both Parties, Bailiff or his Deputy
that held the Assizes, demanded of the Plantiff if he would pursue his Brief,
if he said no, he was punished for false Claim or Clamor* and so it was if he
said he did not know whether he should or not; if he said he was ready to
prosecute, then the Defendant or Possessor was asked whether he would stand by
the Writ as it was read; if he said neither the View nor Recognition were made
according to the words of the Writ, The French word Record used here signifies
Witness. Dissaisin.
his answer was to be tried by the Record, or witness of two of the View. If he
would not stand Dissaisin, he was to amend, or fine to the Prince, and pay
Damages to the Plantiff, as they should be declared by the Jury, and the Saisin
was to remain to the Plantiff also, as it had been acknowledged to belong to
him by the Jurors.

If the Defendant or Tenent said he would stand to the Writ, C. 95. Bracton.
lib. 4. c. 19. n. 2.
then the men were called before the Parties, every one by his name to make
Oath, and their Names were entered in the Register of Assize, and the Parties
might challenge or except against such as they had right reason for to do it.
After the Jurors were sworn, Ibidem n. 3. Jury go out and are shut up.
no man was to speak to them publicly or privately, except the Bailiff who
commanded them to speak the truth in this form. By the Faith Belief you have in
our Savior Jesus Christ, etc. do you know the Plantiff was possessed of, or
had the Saisin of the Land, which was shown you before such a time (the time
suppose of the Dissaisin) and how and in what manner he had it; and that since
that time the Defendant did dissaise him and how. Then the Jurors went out to
consider and advise, and were kept under strict guard, least the truth might be
corrupted by evil persuasion.

Bailiff in the Assize, and if they were all agreed, one answered for the rest,
C. 95. They return one answer for all, etc.
if they disagreed, every one then might give his Answer. If they said the
Plantiff had the Saisin Feodal, as he affirmed, and that the Defendant had
dissaised him, the Saisin was rendered to him, and the Defendant fined or
amended, and then there was an Inquiry made, what Damages the Plantiff had
sustained by the Dissaisin. Inquiry of Damages.


Jurors said the Plantiff was not saised in the Fee, C. 95.
but held Land for Debt or by Mortgage, or by Rent, or for any other such
reason, and would not part with it though the term was out, then the Defendant
remained in Saisin, and the Plantiff amended or fined; if the Jurors knew not
the term, the Plantiff, if he would, might prove it.

In Pleas of Novel Disseisin, the manner of Saisin ought to be regarded Saisin,
C. 95. Novel Disseisin.
ought not to be rendered to him that required it. If any one of his own accord,
or by Sentence, gave another the Saisin that he has, if he requires it
afterward, he shall not have it; if any one required the Seisin where he entered
by force, or which he had received from one that had nothing in the thing to
give him, such Saisin was not to be confirmed to him, or allowed, for all
Saisin which was either by force or stealth and fraud, was detestable.

C. 93. Writ of Novel Disseisin. Bracton. lib. 4. c. 16. n. 2, 3, 4 So all our
Writs run, that the Viewers be at the next Assizes
Command a R. que a droict and Sans delay il resaisisse, T. du une Terre qui
est Assise en le paroisse de Marbeufe don't il a dissaisy a tort and sans
Judgment de puis le denier Aoust devant Cestuy and se il ne le faict. Semond
le recognoissant du voisine quel soit an primieres Assizes de la Baillie, and
fay dedens ce veoir la Terre and estre la chose in paix. Command R. that justly
and without delay he does resaise T. of certain Lands in the Parish Marbeuf, of
which he has dissaised him unjustly, There was also a time limited in our
Writs of Novel Disseisin
and without Judgment, since the last of August before this, and if he does
not, Summon a Recognition of the Vicenage to be at the next Assizes of the
Bayliwick, and the mean while cause the Land to be viewed, and to be in peace.

Writs directed to the Sergeant of the Bayliwick*
This Writ was directed to the Sergeant of the Bayliwick or his Deputy, and when
he received it, he appointed a day to the Plantiff to hold the View, and
summoned the Defendant to be present if he would, and twenty men the nearest to
the Land, the most credible such as were not suspected by, or a kin to one
party or the other, and were to be such as were believed to know the truth of
the Plea, and before them the Land was to be taken into the hand of the Prince,
whether the Defendant came or not; nor was it to be put

Glanv. lib. 12. c 3. c. 6. Many sorts of Dissaisins.
There were many Dissaisins, some of Lands, others of Herbages, others of Rents,
others of servile Works, others of Franchises, others of Services, in all which
the Writs were framed according to the diverse Terms and times of Performance or
Payment, from and upon Pleas were always laid.

C. 97. Default Plea lost for not bringing it, etc.
If the Plantiff made Default, the Defendant went without delay, and if he would
renew his Plea, he was also to renew his Summons; the Plantiff might also for
ever lose his Plea, if he slipped the time limited for bringing of it, which was
within a year and a day.

C. 98. Writ of Mort D'ancester.
The Writ de Morte Antecessoris, of the death of the Parent or next Predecessor
in Blood, was in this Form. Se A. done plege de suyvir B. estoit saisy en cest
An, quand il mourut de la Terre que C. lui deforce a Rouen and comment, and
scauoir se A. est le plus prochain hoir avoir lescheance de B. la Terre soit
dedens ce veue, and soit en paix. If A. give Pledges that he will prosecute his
Clamor, A Recognition of the Vicenage.
Claim or Suit, Summon a Recognition of the Vicenage to be at the next Assizes
of the Bayliage, to know whether B. C. dispossessed him of at Roven, and how:
And to know if A. be the next Heir to have the Escheat or Succession of the
Land, in the mean while let it be viewed, and be in peace.

Ibidem.

The Writ directed to the Sergeant of the Bayliwick.

To be brought within a year and a day, etc.


This Writ was directed to the Sergeant of the Bayliwick, and the further
Proceedings were the same as in a Plea of Novel Disseisin. No man that was of
Age and Discretion, according to the Custom of Normandy, could have a
Recognition in this Plea, unless he brought the Writ within a year and a day
after it was publicly known his Ancestor was dead, whose Saisin or Possession
he would recover, but no time prejudiced a Minor.

Ibidem. Next Heir.
This Recognition appertained only to the very next Heirs, who had the Dignity
of Primogeniture, either in themselves, or by their Ancestors.

The Nextness of Heirs, which was to have the Saisin, was thus, the eldest Son
was the next Heir of his Father, and those which descended from him; C. 99. Who
were next Heirs.
and when this Line failed, the second Line was the next, and so it was
intended of other Lines, were they Male or Female, while any of the first Line
were left, none of any other Line could have the Saisin of his Antecessor.

Concerning Dower, according to the Custom of Normandy, C. 101, 173. Dower.
Glanv. lib. 6. c. 1, 2, etc. The Wife had the third part of the Fee of her
Husband.
the Wife had the third part of the Fee her Husband was possessed of at the
time of the Espousals or Contract of Marriage; or if he was not then possessed
of an Estate, or died before he was, his Father or Grandfather possessing the
Fee, if they were present at the Marriage, or procured or assented to it, after
their, and her Husbands death, if he was sole Heir, she had the Thirds of that
Fee, if not, of so much of the Fee as fell to his share; and no man could give
more than a Bourgage Tenure, and then she had the Moiety. In Burgage Tenure the
Moiety.
If a man had taken a Woman (so are the French words) and died before they lay
together in the same Bed, the Woman had no Dower: For by the Custom of
Normandy, their bedding after Marriage gained the Woman her Dower.

Dower against such as withheld it, Ib. C. 101.
two manner of ways, by Writ, or Record. By Writ, as in the Chapter of View and
Plea of Novel Disseisin. By Record or Witness of such as were at the Espousals
or making the Contract of Marriage, where the Dower was determined either in
Chattels or Land. Record, what?
Record est racontement de chose qui a est faict. Record is a calling to mind
or recounting things that have been done. Il ya Record de Court de Roy, etc.
There was a Record of the Kings or Dukes Court, Record of the Exchequer; a
Record of Assize; a Record of Duel; a Record of View; a Record of Pasnage; a
Record of Marriage, etc.

All these Records were made by Witnesses in the several Courts and Places,
where and before whom the things were transacted, C. 108. Cum Gloss. de celui
qui demand Record, etc. 121. de loy qui est faict par Record. Recorders.
these were called Recordatores from remembering things done in Court, Promises,
Bargains, Contracts, etc. and when there was a Plea of Record brought, the
Plantiff in writing named his Recordeurs, Recordatores, Recorders or Witnesses,
in some Cases six or seven, in some twelve, in some more, in some less, and if
the Recorders were dead, or gone out of the Duchy, then the same Plea was
tried by Inquest of the Vicenage, as well as it might: See C. 102, 103, 104,
105.

When the Propriety of a thing was demanded, four Knights, and eight legal men,
with the Sergeant, were Recorders, C. 106. Tit. de Record de veue.
but in a View of Seisin was only demanded, there twelve discreet or lawful
men, and the Sergeant, were sufficient.

In the View of Languor the four Knights sent to the Person, C. 121.
are called Recorders, and that called Record de veue de Corpse languoreux.

The right of Patronage of Churches, and who last presented, was decided by
Recognition, as other Proprieties and Possessions. Assize D'arrein Presentment.
C. 109. Glanv. lib. c. 2. 4, 5, 13. lib. 14. c 19.
The Church was taken into the Dukes hands, and the Bishop prohibited to
present during the Plea, or the Ecclesiastic Courts to meddle with it. Yet if
the Patron presented not in six months, the Bishop of the Diocese presented.
The Writs I omit being near the same with those in Glanvil. The Writs in this
Plea the same with those in Glanvil.


C. 113. Tit. de Brief de establie. This was as our Writ of Right.
The Duke of Normandy had the Jurisdiction of the Bodies, as well of the great
as of the small, because bound to him by Fealty and Allegiance, and willing to
restrain the Malice of the mighty and puissant, he established two Laws by the
Council of his Prelates and Barons. L'un qui est appelle establie and L'autre
recognoissant de sur demand, and Corent per Brief, etc. the one is called
Establie, the other Recognition of Surdemand, and they proceeded by Writ, etc.
by these Writs inquiry was made concerning the Propriety of the Fee, and to

Ibidem. Glan. l. 2. c. 15. Writ of Right.
The Writ d'establie was in these words, A. se plainct de B. qui lui demand a
tort vne Terre a Roven de quoy il demand l'establie au Duc de Normendie pur
recognoistre le Scavoir se quil y a greigneur droict, celui qui tient, ou celuy
qui demand. A complains of B that he unjustly exacts of him certain Lands at
Roven, for which he demands the Duke of Normandy's Writ D'establie, to know by
Recognition whether he has greater right that holds it, than he that exacts
it. The Sergeant of the Bayliwick was to see to the Execution of this Writ, as
to that of Novel-Disseisin, So our Sheriffs were to take Pledges.

If neither Knights nor Gentlemen in the Vicenage, then the View was to be made
by men of good names.


the Land was to be viewed, but before that, he was to take Pledges for the
Prosecution of it, and then the men to make the View, were to be summoned, and
if in the Vicenage neither Knights nor Gentlemen sufficient were to be found,
the Inquest was to proceed by other men of good Name, or good renown, according
to the French words. The Vicenage was accounted a League Place, and is commonly
called in this Customer the Ban Lien, and the Recognitors were to be summoned
out of the Parish where the Land was, or the Parishes adjoining, within a
League of it.

C. 114. Tit. Brief de surdemand. Glan. l 2. c. 13.
The Writ of surdemand was to defend the Rights of the Tenants against the Lords
of Fees, when they unjustly demanded such Rents and Services as were not due,
whereof this is the Tenor. A. Plainct qui B. luy Demand a tort Service de fief
and In the French Copy there wants couper or some other word.
les Gerbes par raison de complains of B. that he does unjustly exact Service
of his Fee, (i. e.) the cutting of his Corn by reason of the Fee he holds of
him, wherefore he desires L'establie of the Duke, to know whether has greater
right, he that exacts by reason of his Dictum for Veredictum.
Note that what we call Veredictum, is always in this old Customer called only
Dictum.

C. 115. Tit. de fief-lay and Demosue, with us an Assize utrum Glanv. lib. 13.
c. 23.

Scavoir ce or se signifies utrum in the old Customer.

Facit se securum in our old Writs.


There was used in Normandy a Writ of Lay-Fee and Alms, by which the Fee was
tried whether it was Lay or Alms, when it was Se A. te done plege de suyvir
sa clameur semond le recongnoissant du voisine qui il soit aux premieres
Assizes du Bailliage a recongnoistre scavoir se le fief que B. demand est
lemosne a celuy qui le tient ou le fief Lay a celuy que demand, le veue soit
ten dedens ce, etc. If A. gives Pledges to pursue his Claim, summon a
Recognition of the Vicenage to be at the first Assizes of the Bayliwick, to
discover whether the Fee which B. demands, be Alms to him that holds it, or
Lay-Fee to him that exacts it. Let there be a View taken of it, etc. no man in
Normandy could make a Lay-Fee pure Alms, without the Grant and special Assent
of the Prince, for he had the Jurisdiction and Seigneury of all the Lay-Fees in
Normandy. If the Jury was brought to a rien Scavoir, non scire or Ignoramus;
then the Church had cognizance of the Plea.

Custom in Normandy long ago, C. 119. Courtesy of England.
that if a Man married a Woman, and had a Child by her born alive, if both she
and the Child died, he should hold all the Land that came by his Wife during
Life. The Gloss says, that if his Wife were with Child by him, though born
dead, yet the Husband should enjoy the Estate, for that it was not his fault
that the Child died, or no defect in him, that it was not preserved.

Desrene or Disrainia or Law-Simple was always amongst Equals, C. 123. c. 85,
86. Glanv. l. 8. c. ^. Desrene wager of Law

The Case put in the old Customer.

La loye doibt estre Gaigee.


and men of the same condition, and it was a Law in Normandy, by which a man
that was impleaded in a simple Plea, made it appear that he did not or was not
guilty of what his Adversary charged him with, which was performed by his own
Oath, and the Oaths of two others at least. A man lends another five Shillings,
who promises to pay it at Easter, if he denies it, the Law is to be waged,
that is, Debtor is to swear he ows no such sum, and others are to swear with
him they believe his Oath to be true.

Whoever has read our old Law, knows it to be the same with this, allowing
some, not many, or very great Variations, and therefore needless to add any
abstract of that by way of Parallel. But I must desire the Reader to note, that
from the time wherein Glanvile wrote, which was in the Reign of Henry the
Second, to the time of Henry de Bracton, who was a Judge in the Reign of Henry
the Third, the Subtleties and Niceties of our Ancient Law were so much
increased and multiplied, that it became very bulky and dilatory, as well as
perplexed and intricate.

Amongst others we find in the old Norman Law, our Writ of Right, or Grand
Assize, the four Writs of ordinary So called for that the time in these Writs
was limited within, and from which the Action was to be brought; so Lib. 13. c.
32. See also Cl. 2^. Henr. 3. m. 17. dors. where the times are limited for
bringing Actions by these Writs.
Glanvil. Cum quis itaque infra Assizam Domini Regis, id est infra Tempus a
Domino Rege de concilio Procerum ad hoc constitutum, quod quandoque majus,
quandoque minus censetur, alium injuste and sine judicio disseisiverit de
libero Tenemento suo Disseisito hujus Constitutionis beneficio subvenitur and
Tale Breve habebit.
Assizes, that is of Novel-Disseisin, Mort D'auncestor, D'arrein Presentment,
and Vtrum.

By the manner of Trial both in England and Normandy, after the View taken, and
by the Judges in both places, expounding the Writ to the Parties in Court, and
interrogating them by it, it is more than probable there were then no
Declarations, and that the Writ was both Precept and Declaration, according to
* Bracton, dicitur ideo Breve, quia rem de qua agitur, and intentionem petentis
paucis verbis breviter enarrat. It is therefore called a Brief, (which we call
a debate, and the mind of the Plantiff, upon which followed Pleading in Court,
and giving in the special matter in Evidence; one example will make this very
clear.

Mat. Paris f 538. n. 10, 20.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Vicecomiti Hertfordiae salutem, Si Abbas
de S. Albano fecerit te securum de Clamio suo prosequendo, tunc submone per
bonos submonitores Galfridum de Childewick, Galfrum Gulielmum, Johannem, and
Ricardum filios ejus, Willielmum de Gorham, Thomam de Wanz, Walterum, and
Henricum filios ejus, Adam de Sumery,

And that the Juries summoned by these Writs, were Persons of the same Quality
and Degree in England and Normandy, the following

In a Plea concerning Duel between Warin de Semperston, and the Prior of
Coventry, for eight Carucates of Land in Pakinton: Milites qui ferebant
Recordum Duelli, dicunt quod Warinus tulit Breve de recto in comitatu versus
Priorem, etc. and Prior venit and defendit jus Warini; Warinus vero obtulit
verse. Priorem, quod Walterus Avus ejusdem Warini saisitus fuit de illis viii.
Caracutis cum pertinentiis Tempore Henrici Patris, etc. ut de jure and
haereditate, etc. Prior defendit, etc. per quendam liberum hominem and vadia
data fuerunt ex utraque part, 2 do. Johan. fol. 14. a.
etc. Rot. 24. out of an Class. 3. Book 6.
Abstract of Pleas, from the First to the Fifteenth of King John, amongst Judge
Hales, Class. 3. Book 6.
M. S. in Lincoln's Inn Library.

The Knights which made, or had then the Possession of the Record Jurors in the
Assize by Writ of Right, say, that Warin brought a Writ of Right in the County
against the Prior, etc. the Prior comes or appears, and denies the Right of
Warin, and he offered to prove it against the Prior, that Walter Gross the
Grandfather of Warin, was saised of those eight Carucates, with the
Appurtenances in the time of Henry the Father ^f King John, as of his Right and
Inheritance. The Prior denies it by a certain Freeman, (a Champion that he
brought, who denied Warin's Plea, and swear as he had heard or seen it was not
true) and Pledges were given, or the Duel was waged on both sides.

Placitade Termino Pasch. and Trin. An. Reg. Johannis 1. Ibid. fol. 6. B.
To make this more clear, I will bring an Instance of an Assize of
Novel-Disseisin. Adam de Chetwind, Petrus de Eiton, Hamo de Puelesdon, Adam de
Alarton, Philippus de Buteria, Walterus de Elpole, Paganus de Cheriton, qui
fuerunt Recognitores Assizae Novae Disseisinae, inter Walterum de Whitfield,
and Robertum de Huntingland, de Terra de Chershal summoniti fuerunt ad
ostendend' quomodo Assiza ista capta fuit, etc. Dicunt quod ipsi coram Roberto
Whitefield, Rado Archidiacono Hereford, Roberto de Salopesberie, nunc Episcopo
de Bangor, etc. tunc Justiciar. Juratam fecerunt de Assiza Novae Disseisin',
quam tulit Robertus de Huntingland verse. Robertum de Woodcote, de Terra de
Chershall, de qua Robertus de Woodcote eum disseizet. Ita quod Idem Robertus
remansit in misericordia pro Disseisina, Rot. 2o.

Adam de Chetwind, Peter de Eiton, etc. which were Recognitors of an Assize of
Novel Disseisin, between Walter de Whitefield and Robert de Huntingland, for
the Land at Chershall, were summoned to show how that Assize was taken; do say,
that they before Robert Whitefield, Ralph Archdeacon of Hertford, and Robert of
Shrewsbury Bangor, etc. then Justices made a Jury of Assize of Novel Disseisin,
which Robert de Huntingland brought against Robert de Woodcote, concerning Land
at Chershall, of which Robert de Woodcote had disseised him, so that the same
Robert remained in mercy, that is, was fined by the Justices of Air, or
amerced by the Oaths of Lawful men for the Disseisin. These seven might be
those, that before the Assize made the View of the Land in question, and might
by their Names be Knights or Knights Fellows, for twelve or more Bracton. p.
179. b. n. 4. Fleta, p. 222. n. 4.
seven could not.

Both these Pleas seem to be the same with Record of Duel, and Record of
Assize, and the Jurors in both to be Recordeurs, Recorders, or Witnesses of
what had been done in Court, as has been showed in the old Norman Custumer and
Law, C. 101, 106, 108, 121.

In a Plea of Right; In the same MSS. Placita Term. Mich. 3. Johan. f. 18. b
Placita and Assizae apud Lincoln. in Cro. octab. Sanctae Trinitat. Coram Simon.
de Pateshult. Eustach. de Faukenburgh and sociis little 4. R. Joh. Ibid. fol.
26. b.
Milites Electi ad faciendam Assizam Magnam inter G. Episcopum Wintoniensem
petent. and Nigellum de Broc. tenent. etc.

In a Plea whether the Donation of the Priory of Thornholm belonged to the King
or John Malherbe. Dominus Rex mandavit per G. fill. Petr. per Chart as
Canonicorum de Thornholm. Et per liberos and legales homines, diligenter
inquireret, utrum prioratus de Thornholm de Donatione Domini Regis vel Johannis
Malherbe debeat esse, Prior ergo venit and protulit chartam Regis Stephani, in
qua continetur quod ipse pro anima Regis Henrici Avunculi sui, and pro statu
animae suae dedit and concessit in perpetuam Elemosinam Deo and Ecclesiae
Sanctae Mariae and Canonicis Regularibus locum suum in Bosco Milites vero See
Glossar. in the word.
Electi ad faciendam illam Inquisitionem, sunt Herv. de Arci, Philippus de alta
Ripa, Andreas de Wotton, Petrus de Bekeringe, Willielmus Hanpel, Rogerus Arsic,
Herb. de Nevill, Rob. de Basingham, Richardus Ottringham, Willielmus fill.
Drogonis, Willielmus Quaesiti dicunt, etc.

From this Plea it may be noted, that Knights as well as ordinary Freemen or
Freeholders were anciently intended by those words, Liberi and Legales
homines, Norff. Placita de Temp. R. Richard primi Anno 7. In an Abridgement of
Pleas and Fines.

Temp. Ric. 1. in a Book with Parchment Covers, with the under Chamberlains of
the Exchequer. Hales MSS. before cited, fol. 68. a.


in the Writs directed to Sheriffs for summoning of Juries.

In a great Assize between Matthew de Gurnay and Gilbertum Runhale, Rogerus de
Ho, Umfr. de Miliers, Thomas filius Willielmi and Robertus quatuor Milites
summoniti ad Eligendum duodecim ad faciendum magnam Assizam inter Matheum de
Gurnay peten. and Gilbertum Runhale tenen. etc. Rot. 10.

In the same Assize, Milites Electi ad faciendum magnam Assizam inter Gerardum
de Rhodes and Robertum Marmium peten. and homines de Sancto Botulfo tenen. de
Communia, etc. Rot. b.

In an Assize of Darrein Presentment, Milites qui fecerunt Inquisitionem Dant
unum Palfridum ut Emendare possint Inquisitionem suam de Ecclesia de
Beckingham, Placita de Term. Sanct. Hillar. An. R. Regis Joh. 13. Ibid. fol.
72. a. Norff. Placita Temp. R. Johannis Anno 11. in a Book bound in Russet
Leather with the under Chamberlains of the Exchequer, fol. 96. a Mat. Paris,
fol. 539. n. 30. An. D. 1240. 24. Hen. 3.
Rot. 12. in Dorso. This was a Plea of Darrein Presentment, because by King
John's Magna Charta, such Pleas could not be held before any but the Justices
de Banco.

In an Assize of Sur-demand of Services, Milites de vicenet, de Thorp summoniti
ad faciendum Recognitionem inter Emmam Belet Pet. Et Edam de Thorp tenent. de
Consuetudinibus and Servic. quae eadem Emma ab ea exigit de Tenemento quod ipsa
tenet de ea in Thorp, quia ipsa etc. Rot. 4o in Dorso.

In the Controversy before mentioned, between the Abbat of St. Albans, and
Galfrid de Childewike, etc. for Hunting in his Liberty without License, they
insisting upon it, that it was their right to Hunt there; the Jury summoned
were twelve Knights: Duodecim milites accincti gladiis fuerunt Electi in Assiza
de Consensu partium, etc. Mat. Paris recites the whole Plea and Process of the
Suit, which is worthy Ib. fol. 538. n. 30. fol. 539. n. 30.
The Writ bears date 26. Junii, 24 Hen. 3. and the Trial was the ninth of
October following.

He that will be at the trouble to peruse the Plea Rolls in these elder times,
which he may find in the keeping of the under Chamberlains of the Exchequer, or
the Abstracts of them in the Books here cited, will see that in all Grand
Assizes or Pleas of Right whatever, the Jurors were constantly actual Knights
or Tenants in Capite, or other Military Tenants, and likewise in all Pleas that
related to Military or Noble Fees, as it was in Normandy, where though it
appears, it Grand Custumer, yet I confess I have but one instance to confirm
the Practice of it, nor do I know whether they have any such Records of Pleas
in these elder times as we have.

Inquisitio de Regalia Rothomagensi Johannes de pratellis, Richardus de Rui,
Scriptor Norman. f. 1656. D. 1057. A. Example of a Trial by twelve Knights in
Normandy.
Richardus de Villequier, Robertus de Fresquines, Willielmus de Vivario,
Reginaldus de Petri villula, Robertus de Tiliolo, Galfredus de Mesnilio,
Galterus de Sancto Johanne, Willielmus Pantoll, Gilbertus de Remfrevilla, Adam
de Maretot, Richardus de Sahors, Willelmus de

After this Abstract made as an Argument of the Similitude, at Norman and
English Laws, we shall consider their Terms and Vacations, or times in which
the Laws were practiced and forbidden, Terms and Vacations.
which may much add to the discovery of the sameness of them, and whence they
were derived.

Grand. Cust. C. 81. Tit. de Temp^ enquoy, loy nest pas faicte. See Terms and
Vacations in the Glossar.
In Normandy there were Times wherein the Law ought not to be practiced, neither
simple nor apparent; and those were the times in which Marriages could not be
celebrated, which in a manner were answerable to our present Vacations, and
were established by Canon Law, viz. from Advent until the Octaves of, or after
Epiphany, from Septuagesima to the Octaves of Easter, and three Weeks before
the Nativity of St. John Baptist; but these times of Prohibition of Marriages
differed, according to the Constitutions of several Councils. Non Council.
Herdens, An. Dom. 524. B. in Council. Tom. 2. f. 628. Sect. 1.
oportet a septuagesima usque in Octavas Pascha, and tribus Hebdomatibus ante
festivitatem S. Johannis Baptistae and ab adventu Domini usque post Epiphaniam
nuptias celebrare, quod si factum fuerit, seperentur.

Nullus Christianus Council. Salegunliadiense, A.D. 1022 c. 3. Lab. vol. 11.
uxorem ducere debeat, ab advetu Domini usque in Octavas Epiphaniae, and a
septuagesima usque in Octavas Paschae, nec in quatuordecim dies ante
festivitatem S. Johannis Baptistae, neque in Jejuniis quatuor Temporum.

Vt tempora interdicta ad celebrandum nuptias non possunt aliquando Council.
Ravennate, A. D. 1311. Bin. Tom. 3. part 2. fol. 789. Rubr. 19. With these
agree the times in which Marriages are prohibited in the Church of England.

See Council. Saxon. Ephamen. in the time of King Ethelred. Spel. Council. Tom.
1. fol. 518. c. 18. Con. 2. Instit. Westminster. 1. c. 51. fol. 264.

See Cokes 2d. Institutes, ibid. from Briton. c. 53.

Decret. Greg. 9 lib. 2. Tit. 9. de feriis. c. 5.

He was placed in the Chair. A. D. 1227.


omnes Sacerdotes, Parochiales maxim, quatenus dicta Tempora, Dominica ante
Adventum and Dominica ante Septuagesimam, and Dominica ante octavam ascentionis
Domini, studeant public in Missarum solemniis nuntiare, quod nullus celebret
nuptias, Temporibus ab Ecclesia interdictis, scilicet a prima Dominica de
Adventu, usque post Epiphaniam; and a Dominica de Septuagesima, usque ad
octavam Paschae, and a tribus diebus ante ascentionem usque octavam Pentecostes.

viz. The Vacation after Michaelmas Term, the Vacation after Hillary Term, and
the Vacation after Easter Term, which were established by Canon, though not
every where and in all places according to the same exact time; but were in
some Countries longer, in some shorter, though without any great variation.

The fourth long or autumnal Vacation, was made by necessity. The Harvest and
Vintage (where there was one) and other autumnal Law-business, and leaving men
free to follow their own Affairs.

Debet Judicialis strepitus Diebus conquiescere feriatis, qui ob reverentiam
Dei noscuntur esse statuti, licet diebus feriatis Gratia vindemiarum vel
messium ob necessitates hominum indulgentur, procedi valiant. Si de partium
processerit voluntate. And the gathering in of Harvest and other autumnal
business were the chief motives for Stat. 32. Hen. 8. c. 21.
abbreviating our Trinity and Michaelmas Terms; the first of them in the end,
and Stat. 17. Car. 1. c. 6. Practice of the Law in Normandy and England alike.
latter in the beginning.

We will add here, that the practice of the Law in bringing all sorts of Writs
of Assize, and in Proceedings and Trials thereupon, was very near, if not
altogether the same, both here and in Normandy. Save that the Practice here was
very much enlarged and lengthened in about two Centuries of years, though the
original manner of it was not much altered. This is evident by the second and
third Book of Glanvil, from the whole fourth Book of Bracton, but more
especially Fleta, (who in most things exactly follows Bracton) but more
particularly in his 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Chapters of that Book. And if what
Justice Fitz-Herbert in the Preface to his Natura Brevium says, and Sir Edward
Coke in the Preface to his eighth part of his Reports, and upon Littleton,
Sect. 101. fol. 73. b. be allowed, (as I think it is generally) that original
Writs are the Foundations upon which the Law depends, and truly called the
Principles Law; then certainly the Foundations and Principles of ours, and the
Norman Laws, are very little, if any thing at all different.

This is what may be affirmed from greater reason than usually either
Historians or Lawyers upon these Topics, bring for assuring any thing they
assert. But Sir Edward Coke in his Preface to the third part of his Reports,
observes and asserts from William de Rovil (a Commentator upon this Treatise
which he expounds mostly by the feudal and imperial Law) in his Preface to it,
where he says from the History called Chronica Chronicorum, The Customs of
Normandy not from Edward the Confessor.
that our Edward the Confessor was the maker or giver of these Customs to
Normandy. But let us observe the Authority of this Historian, for immediately
after Rovill delivers from him for as great a truth, and to be believed upon
the same Terms, that the Conqueror was not only Testamentary Heir, by Donation
of Edward the Confessor, but also next Heir by blood to the Kingdom of England,
by his Wife Maud, the Daughter of Baldwin Earl of Flanders and Niece of Edward
the Confessor, which was Ireland passed by this Story, as a surmize only in
their Argument, upon the case of Tenures, fol. 36.

But though Sir Edward lays a great stress upon this Author there, yet he
himself is of another opinion in another Reading de finibus p. 3. and Preface
to his third Book of Reports. A fond Assertion of Sir Edward Coke.
place, viz. that the Conqueror found the Customs and Laws, contained in the
Grand here, and that from hence he carried them into Normandy. For says he
there, if the Normans have any Laws that do resemble the Laws of England, out
of doubt when the Conqueror had subdued this Kingdom, perceiving the equity and
excellency of the Laws of England, never attempted See what I have said before
The Laws of England were by the Conqueror carried into Normandy.
to alter or change the same, but to the end his Country men the Normans, might
know the Laws of England, under which from thenceforth he resolved they should
live. And therefore for their England to be written in the Normand Tongue; and
afterward seeing, and well perceiving the happy success where such Laws were
observed, abolished his old Laws out of Normandy, and established part of our
English Laws there. And it cannot be truly said that the Ibidem.
English Laws are in the Norman Tongue, for the Laws of England are Leges non
scriptae, but divinely cast into the hearts of men, and built upon the
immovable Rock of Reason.

This Assertion is groundless.
This assertion is so groundless and precarious, it deserves no Confutation, it
has no Authority or Testimony, nor other reason than his own Fancy to support
it: For it would have been a greater difficulty than the Conquest of England,
to have imposed the English Laws upon so stubborn a People as the Normans were,
especially at that time when the Conqueror had much to do to keep them in
subjection; nay, Traditions, and the mutable and various Constructions of them
in stead of a Law, if the Common Law of England, Lex non scripta; The English
Law Lex non scripta.

More excellent than Acts of Parliament, etc And learnt by Tradition.


especially by Sir John Davis in his Preface to his Irish Reports, where he
contends and often avers, That the Common Law of England is Jus non scriptum,
and more excellent than our written Laws, namely Statutes or Acts of
Parliament. Also that it is a peculiar invention of this Nation, and delivered
over from Age to Age by Tradition, nay that it is a Tradition, and learned by
Tradition, as well as by Books; which makes me wonder how the Normans learnt
English Tongue; it may be it was divinely cast into their hearts, and they
understood it by Revelation. But to return a little to the whimsey of Rovill in
his Preface to the Grand Customer, no Body that considers, what Lib. 2 de Gest.
Reg. f. 44. b. n. 20, 30, etc.
Malmsbury and other ancient Historians report of the Confessor, that he was a
weak easy man, Edward the Confessor unfit to make Laws.
not fit for Government, will ever believe he could contrive a System of Laws,
and so adapt them to the Genius and Humor of the Normans, that they should
quit their own, and receive new Laws and Customs from him, if it were not
almost a Contradiction to call a Custom new. I need not say more to satisfy
any judicious Person, that the Grand Customer of Normandy was the Law of that
Country, and not made by Edward Traditional than written Laws, this Book has
that advantage likewise: For Grand Custom, 2d part, fol. 69.
before and after that Charles the Simple gave Normandy to Rollo and his
Northern People, unto the time of Philip Ibidem. A. D. 1203. or thereabouts.
the August, who caused them first to be put in order and written. The Customs
contained in it, were a Epistle to the Custom of Normandy, collected by George
Lambert, etc. printed at Roven, 1588.
Cabal, Traditional and unwritten, for at least 800 years, and were imposed
England by William called the Conqueror: But what answer would Sir Edward have
made, if he had been asked whether William did not also carry our Laws into old
Germany, for there, in Normandy and England, were in a great measure the same
Laws, only the Normans used a more formal, and perhaps rigorous and strict
method in the Practice and Execution of them which they brought hither.

From these Observations concerning the Laws in use, at, and presently Proof
from Authority, that our Laws were not the Norman Laws.
and undoubted Testimony of such as lived in or near those times, for without
Authority some men will not be satisfied.

Eadmer Hist. Novor. fol 6. n 10, 20, 30.
writes, that William designing to establish in England those Usages and Laws
which his Ancestors and he observed in Normandy, made such Persons Bishops,
Abbots, and other Principal men through the whole Nation, who could not be
thought so unworthy, as to be guilty of any Reluctance or Disobedience to them,
knowing by

Somewhat also to this purpose Ingulphus Hist. Croyland. f. 512. a. b. All
Earldoms, Places of Honor and Profit given to the Normans.
informs us, that by English submit, that he gave the Earldoms, Baronies,
Bishoprics, and Prelacies of the whole Nation to his Normans, and scarce
permitted any English man to enjoy any place of Honor, Dominion, or Power.

But more express and full to this purpose is the account we have in De
Necessar. Scaccarii observe. de Murdro in M. S. Calo-Gonvil. p. 35. a.b.
Gervasius Tilburiensis of the Conqueror's dealing with the Natives, more
valuable than the Testimony of a hundred others, which he thus delivers. After
the Conquest of the Kingdom, and just subjection William, and did not, if in
process, of time they could obtain the favor of their Lords and Masters, by an
humble obedience, and obsequiousness, they might possess somewhat in their own
Persons, without hope of Succession, their Children only enjoying it, afterward
at the will of their Lords, to whom, afterward when they became odious, they
were every where forced from their Possessions, nor would any restore what they
had taken away. When a commune miserable Complaint of the Natives came to the
King, that they thus exposed, and spoiled of all Perhaps from hence might be
the Original of Freeholds or Copyholds of inheritance after the Conquest.
they should hold by inviolable right, but should not claim any thing from the
time the Nation was overcome, under the Title of Succession or Descent: Ibidem.
Upon what great Consideration this was done, it is manifest, when as they were
obliged by a studied compliance and obedience, to purchase their Lord's favor;
so therefore whosoever of the

What I have here delivered upon this subject, may probably meet with great
prejudice, from such especially, who have, or may read Sir Edward Coke's
Prefaces to his third, sixth, eighth, and ninth parts of his Reports, his
reading upon the Statute of Fines, or other parts of his Works: Sir John Davis
his Preface to his Irish Reports; Mr. Nathan. 's Semper Idem. The late Learned
Lord Chancellors Survey of Hobbs his Leviathan, p. 109, 110. And many other
works of eminent Persons of the long Robe, or indeed any of our English
Historians, and therefore I am necessitated to dwell the longer upon it. That I
may give all just satisfaction to such as desire to inquire into the validity
of their Arguments and Authorities by which they would persuade, The Arguments
used to prove the Common Law of England was not the Norman Law.
nay convince the World, that the Common Law, and Customs in use, and practice
in their times, were the same that were in Saxon times, and never altered or
changed by the Conqueror.

And beyond them all, Epistle to the sixth part of his Reports.
Sir Edward Coke concurs in opinion with Sir John Fortescue, that this Nation,
in the time of the Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans was ruled by the same Laws
and Customs, and that they were not changed by any of these People, which he In
Preface to the eighth part of the Reports.
affirms he has proved by many unanswerable Arguments, in the Preface to the
third part of his Reports. These Arguments are drawn from two Heads, Record as
he calls it, and History. But all the Record I Novel Disseisin, out of Glanvil
Lib. 13. c. 33. l. 4. c. 16. n. 2.
and Bracton in this form: Rex Vicecomiti Salutem; Quaestus est nobis A. quod
B. injuste and sine judicio disseisivit eum de libero Tenemento suo in E. etc.
ideo tibi praecipimus quod si praedictus A. fecerit te securum de clamore suo
prosequendo, tum facias Tenementum illud reseisire de Catallis quae in ipso
capt. fuer. and ipsum Tenementum cum Catallis esse in pace usque ad primam
Assizam cum Justiciarii in parts illas venerint, and interea facias liberos
and legales homines de viceneto illo videre tenementum illud, and nomina eorum
imbreviari.

From this Writ in Glanvil, who was made Hoved. fol. 342. b. n. 30
chief Justice of all England 1180. by King Henry the Second, one hundred and
six years after the Conquest, Preface to his third Book of Reports.
he collects four things, (how I know not;) first that before the Conquest,
time out of mind, there were Sheriffs in England, which though I think is not
to be collected from this Writ, is readily granted to him, there were such
Officers, Sciremen, Sciregerevs, or Aldermani, who had the government of the
County, held Courts, and were Judges in them, yet perhaps not altogether the
same with the Sheriffs in the Norman or our times. Secondly, That all that time
there were Juries of twelve men; This also may be granted him, though I see not
how it will be enforced from this Writ, nor proved Twelve men mentioned in the
Saxon Laws were Assessors.
for the twelve men or Jurors mentioned in the Saxon Laws were Assessors, and
had their share in giving Judgment, as appears by the Text it self. Thirdly,
That all that while there were original Writs, and Writs of Assize, which are
the Rules and Principles of the Commune Law of England, and therefore that Law
was before the Conquest, and received no Alteration or change from the
Conqueror.

How this can follow any ways from the consideration of this Writ, The Forms of
our ancient Writs in the Grand Customer of Normandy.
And further the very forms of most of our ancient Writs, are to be found in
the Grand Customer of Normandy, as has been shown, which makes it very
probable, that they were not used here until the Entry of the Normans: And with
this accords Mr. Lambard in his P. 64, 65. The Saxons Proceeding in Judgment,
was de Plano without Writs, etc. Manitio according to the Saxon way in Germany.
Archion, where he says that the Saxons proceeding in Judgment, was de Plano,
without Solemnity, and therefore so far as he could observe, they did not use
to call the Parties by any Writ, or writing, but to send for them by certain
Messengers, Theies, perhaps rather Theows, or Thegens, that is Ministers or
Servants; and if it had been otherwise, that there had been the same Forms of
Writs, and the same Formality in Law Proceedings before the Conquest as after,
and at this day, they would have been found in Books somewhere reserved in one
Monastery or other, or they would have been delivered from one to another, and
preserved by Tradition, as well as the very Commune Laws and Customs
themselves, which were Jus non scriptum, as all the Patrons of Antiquity of our
Law affirms. Ibidem.


And when that manner of Summoning by Writ was brought in here, yet was not the
Sealing of them forthwith committed only to the Chancellor, for you may see in
Glanvill's Book, that some original Writs of his time had this Form, Glan l. 1.
c. 6. Writs sealed by the Chief Justice.

See also Hoved. fol 445. b. n 10. For Writs in Grand Assize issued by the
Justiciary.


Test Ranulpho de Glanvilla, who was then Chief Justice, under whose Sealing
the Writs passed, which takes off and fully answers his fourth and last
Observation or Consequence, he would draw from this Writ, which is, that before
Saxon History, that in those times where the Law was too severe and rigorous,
all Appellants from it for Equity, or where they had not Justice done them in
their County Courts, found relief in the King's Court, which was the only Court
of Appeal, according to the second of Lamb. fol. 63. The Normans that wrote
after the Conquest, called and expressed many of the Saxon Officers, and things
by Norman names and words.
Edgar's Laws.

Vicecomes, Hundredus, Servitium Regis, Redditiones Socharum, etc. from which
he would infer the existence of the Commune Laws of England before the
Conquest, as they were in his time, because then these words were also used in
our Laws.

Particular Liberties and enjoyment of many Customs, there were certainly very
many granted by our Saxon Kings, to many Persons and Places, and in some sort
continued to them by the Conqueror, which yet were but Liberties particular,
Particular Liberties not the Common Law of a Nation.
and not the Commune Law of the Nation, for had it been, they might of Commune
Right have claimed it, without special Grant, seeing it was always the practice
of all Nations, to allow the People the use and benefit of their clear and
known Laws. The Laws of Engl. proved from the Terms to be rather from the
Normans than Saxons.
And if there were any cogency from Norman Law Terms.
to prove that our Law was the Norman Law; such as are Fee-simple, Fee-Farm,
Franc-Fee, Grand and Petit Sergeanty, Escuage, Burgage, Villenage, Assize, Mort
D'ancestor, Novel Disseisin, Court, Vice-Comes, Consuetudo, Custuma, and a
great number Somner P. 104.
says in his Gavelkind, and every one knows are all of the Norman Plantation,
and we by the Normans brought acquainted with them; and indeed from them we had
very near all our Law Terms, and words of Art in that Profession.

After Sir Edward Coke as he thought, had thus established his Opinion of the
Antiquity of our Laws by Record, he renews his Discourse Argumentum
Antinormanicum, where they are all repeated, and therefore on purpose passed
over in this place.

William the First,
Dudo de moribus and actis Normannor. fol. 63. B.C.
THE Danes and Norwegians under Hastings or Anstings their former Leader,
having harassed and wasted a great part of France with Fire and Sword, Ibid.
66. B. C.
the French, and their King especially, wearied with his Ravages and Cruelties,
make Peace with him, pay him Tribute, and allow some part of their Country for
an Habitation to him and his Followers, Ibid. 75. D. An. Dom. 876.
do now again under the Conduct of Rollo, at the Ib. 76. C.
Instigation of Hastings, come with their Fleet out of the River Scaldis or the
Scheld, a River running through Brabant and Flanders, and passing by the
Borders of Haynault, upon which Antwerp, Ghent, Oudenard, and To^^naye are
seated.
Scheld into the Mouth of the River Sequana, or the River Seyn, running through
the Isle of France, and falling into the British Sea, upon which Paru and
Rhoan are seated.
Seyn, to whom Franco Archbishop of Roan with his whole Country sent for
Protection France, and attempts Ib. 79. b.
Paris, Rollo comes into the River Seyn, Archbishop Franco begs his Protection.
and assisted with Ibidem.
English and other People that resorted to him, often defeats the French, and
became so formidable, that Charles the Simple at the Ibid. 81. D. 82. A.
Instance of his People, and Ib 83. c D. 79. b. The King of France gives Rollo
Normandy.
Advice of Franco aforesaid, made a Composition with them, and gave to Rollo
all the Land from the Rivers Epta or I^ta, a small River upon which Gisors,
Gurnay, and Bray are seated, which falls into the Seyn between Varnon and la
Roche Guion.
Epta to the Sea, then called Neustria, now Normandy from these Northern Men,
which because it was then almost wast, uncultivated, and unpeopled, and the
Corn Brittany for their present support, that from thence they might take all
Necessaries to sustain them; and likewise his Daughter Gisla to Wife, Ib. 79.
B. He is Baptized An. Dom. 912.
upon Condition he would turn Christian, which he did accordingly, and was Ib.
84. C. And his whole Army.
Baptized by Franco, and named Robert by his Godfather Robert Duke of France
the Kings Brother; and afterward caused all his great Commanders, Soldiers,
and whole Army to be instructed in the Christian Faith and Baptized. Ibid. 85.
A.B. He shares his Land, gives some part first to the Church. Will. Roberts
Bastard.
Before he measured out his Normandy, which he repaired and new built, as also
the Walls of his Cities and Fortresses. From this Rollo, in a direct Line,
Robert was the Sixth Duke of Normandy, to whom Gemetic. lib. 8. c. 3.
William was Natural and only Son by Herleva or Herlotta his Concubine,
Daughter of Fulbers his Chamberlain Robert out of Orderic. vital. fol. 459.
Devotion, against the mind of his People, Robert goes to Jerusalem.
going to visit the Sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem, Gem^t. lib. 6. c. 12. D.
called together the Archbishop, and other the great Men of his Dukedom, and
caused them to do Homage and Swear Fealty to his young Son then about Eight
years old, as their future Prince and Lord, appointing Malmsb. degest. reg.
fol. 53. b. 30.
Gilbert Earl of Gemet. lib. 6. c. 11. He leaves his Son and Tutor to the Care
of the King of France
O^ his Governor, committed them both to the Care and Protection of Henry the
First, King of France, and afterward in his return from the Holy Land died at
Ibid. c. 13. An Dom. 1035. Robert dies.
Nice in Bithynia; After his death many near to Ibid. lib. 7. c. 2.
privately killed his Tutors and Governors, and endeavored to take from him
the Dukedom, for that he was a Bastard, which then in France was not esteemed a
sufficient Bar to the Inheritance of Princes, especially if according to the
Canon Law they Married their Concubine, Thierry or Theoderic Vales. rerum
Franc. Tom. 1. fol. 320, 321.
Bastard of Clovis, had for his Share, with his Lawful Children, Anstrasie, now
Lorrainge, etc. Ib. Tom. 3. fol. 88.113.
Sigibert Natural Son of King Dagobert had Anstrasie as his Share also of
France, with his Lawful Son Clovis 12. with many such Examples in other Nations.
for before that time many had succeeded their Fathers in this and other
Countries, as if they had been His Tutors privately Murdered.
The first of whom was Gemet. lib. 7. c. 3. Roger de Toney Arms against William.
Roger de In most of our Historians he is called Roger de Tresuye.
Toenio Standard Bearer in all Normandy, a Descendent from Malahulcins, Rollo
the first Duke thereof, and an Adventurer with him in the Acquest of it,
Bastardy was no bar to the Inheritance of Princes.
he returning out of Spain, where he had performed many great things against
the Saracens, and finding William a Child to succeed his Father in the Dukedom,
was much displeased, and scorned to serve him, saying, a Bastard ought not to
Command him or the Normans; Combined with others, who Conspired against
William, and enters the Territory of Humphid He was Son of Turulf de Ponte
Audomari, by Wera Gemet. lib. 8. c. 37.
Sister to Gunnora a Forresters Daughter, first Concubine, and then Wife to
Richard first Duke of Normandy. Osbern de Bolebec M^rried another Sister of
Gunnors, by whom he had Walter Giffard, made Orderic. vital. 522. c.
Earl of Buckingham by the Conqueror* From these two Sisters of Gunnor, and her
Brother Herfas^us sprang many of the Gemet. ubi supra.
great Men of Normandy, and afterward of England, the Fliz-Osberns, Mortimers,
Giffards, Warrens, Montgomeries, Gournay, Bachervill, Bellomont, or Beaumont,
etc.
de Vetulis, wasting it with Fire and Sword, whose Son, Roger de Bello-monte or
Beaumont, He is overthrown and his two Sons killed.
routed his Forces, and slew him and his two Sons Helbert and Elinantius.

Gul. Pi^av. f. 179. D. 180. A. B.
After him He was Gemet. lib. 5. c. 13. Guy Earl of Vernon who? Constantin, le
Contantin.
Son to Raynald Earl of Burgundy, by Alice Daughter of Richard the Second Duke
of Normandy.
Guy Earl of Vernon and Brion pretended to the Nigel Governor of Constantin, or
the Territory of That part of Normandy is like a Peninsula, Vire East. Vales.
not. Gaff. fol. 156.
Le Constantin or Contantin, so called from the chief Town or City thereof
Constance. Ibidem, fol. 73.4. le Bessin. Baiocassin.
Le Bessin or Baiocassin, so called from the chief City thereof Bayeux, is that
part of Normandy bounded with the Rivers Dive East, and Vire West, and with the
British Sea North.
Constance, Raynulph Viscount of Bayeux or Bessin, and the greatest part of
Normandy, resolved to try Valoignes, from whence he fled to Brion a strong
Town, Guy beaten.
where William besieged him, and being almost starved he employed Mediators for
Mercy, which was granted, Asks Pardon, and recives it.
and the Duke being possessed of his Castle, permitted him to remain in his
Court, and pardoned his Abettors and Followers. These Clouds blown over,
William receives a greater Trouble from Galfrid Ibidem. fol. 181. D.
Martel Earl of Anjou, who having subdued Tedbald Earl of Tours, and taken that
City from him, and seized Poictou, Ejecting Earl William, usurped also Damfront
and Alencon, Galfrid Martel seizes Damfront and Alencon. They are retaken.
Ibidem, fol. 182, 183.
Members of Normandy; The Duke after having given him a Diversion by marching
into Anjou, besieges Alencon and takes it; Martel being come very near to
relieve it, but hearing it was yielded, struck with Damfront submitted to the
Duke so soon as he came before it. Ib. 184. B.
After these He Gul. Pictav. fol 1.
was Son to Richard the Second Duke of Normandy, Brother to Richard the Third,
and Uncle to William.
William de Archis or Earl of Now Arques near the Town of Diepe.
Arch, not being forewarned or restrained by the Ruin of Guy, or overthrow of
Martel, Arms against William, fortifies Arches against him, Ib. 18. C. Henry
King of France comes to his relief, and his Army intercepted by Ambush.
to whose Relief Henry King of France came with a great Army, William de Archis
Arms against the Duke. Fortifies his Castle.
which was intercepted by an Ambush, the Earl of Ponthieu and many Men of Note
killed, and Hugo Bardulf taken Prisoner. The King of France Ibid. D. His Castle
is taken, and Earl William taken into favor.
done, repents he had abetted the Earl of Arche, and marches back; The Castle
then reduced to miserable straights, and the Defendents even starved,
supplicate to yield, saving only their Lives, which were granted; and he did
not only give his Uncle the favor of staying in his Country, but also gave him
large Ibidem, 186. A. Ibidem.
Possessions and Rents, using him more like a Friend than Enemy; Many also
Deserters in this juncture went over to the King of France, whom the Duke
received again into favor. Ibid. B. The King and Princes of France Confederate
against William.
Successes raised envy in the minds of the King of France and the other Princes
of that Nation, with suspicion of his Greatness, the Roman Emperor assisting
and being in League with him, so that Tedbald Earl of Tours, the Earl of
Poictou, Galfrid Martell Earl of Anjou, and the whole Powers of Burgundy,
Avergn, Aquitain and Gascoign Confederate with the King against him, and raised
two mighty Armies, designing to destroy his whole Country, whereof one under
the Command of Odo the Kings Brother, and his most familiar Friend Rainold,
entered the Country of Caux; the Normandy, and proceeds toward Eurux and Roan;
They are beaten and fly.
The Duke likewise divided his Army, the better to encounter his Enemies, into
two parts, and Heads that himself which opposed the King, Ib. 187. B.
the other under the Command of Ib. 195. Gemet c. 20.
He was Son or Grandchild to William Earl of Ou who was Natural Son of Richard
the First Duke of Normandy, and was made Earl of Ou by Richard the Second, his
half Brother by the Mother side.
Robert Earl of Ou or Ewe. Hugh Gornay, Ib. lib. 8. c. 37.
He was Son of Thurstan de Bastenburgh.
Hugh Montfort, Walter Giffard, The same with William Fitz-Osbern the Son of
Osbern Crispin or Crepon.
William Crispin, and other valiant Mortimer in Caux, Apud mare mortuum.
put them to flight, and took many Prisoners; *.
The King hearing of this Normandy, *.
and concluded a Peace, upon these Conditions; Ibidem, c.
That the Prisoners taken in the Battle should be delivered to the King, and
that by his Consent and Gift the Duke should for ever enjoy as his own,
whatsoever he had or could take from Geoffry Martel Earl of Anjou. Ibidem.
And he presently directs his chief Commanders to build a Fortress at
Hambrieres in Anjou; which Ibidem, 188. A.
Martel by the help of William Earl of Poictou, Eudo Earl of Britain,
besieged and assaulted; but so soon as William approached to relieve it, they
fled.

Soon after the Guil. Pict. 1^8. B.C. The King of France and Martel enter
Normandy again.
King of France breaking the Peace, entered Normandy again with a great Army, to
whom Geoffry Martel joins what Forces he could raise, and by quick Marches came
through the Country now called Per Oxim^nsem Comitatum
Hyesmes to the River Dive, destroying all that Country with Fire and Sword to
the Sea Coast, none resisting, none pursuing them; but while they were passing
that River, the King with part of the Army being over, the Duke comes suddenly
They are beaten and fly.
or forces them into it and drowns them, the King looking on, but not able to
help them; who with the Earl of Anjou in all speed fled once more out of
Normandy. And not long after the King of France died, Ibidem, D. King Henry
dies.

Leaves his Son to the care of Baldwin Earl of Flanders.


and Philip his Son, a Child, succeeded him, between whom and the Duke there
was always a firm Peace, he being left by his Father under the Tuition and
Protection of his Uncle Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who was a great William, and
whose Daughter Ibidem, 183. D. Whose Daughter William had Married.
Matild he Married in the midst of these Tumults, Insurrections, and Troubles.
About the same time Galfrid Ib. 188. D.
Martell also died; These Enemies dead, he is at leisure to pursue his Design
upon Ibidem, 189. B. He claims Anjou.
Anjou, to which, besides the Gift of the King of France, (upon the conclusion
of Peace between them after the Battle of Mortimer in Caux) he had likewise a
Title from Herbert Son of Earl Hugh, whom Martel had Expelled; He dying without
Issue, left William his Heir, and willed Walter Earl of Mayn, who had Married
the Sister of Hugh; Ibid. D. The Anjovins submit.
yet not long after, being wearied with the Incursions of William, they
joyfully received him as their Lord. Gul. Pict. 196. C.
These Successes and the Fame of his Piety, by founding, endowing, and
advancing Churches and Monasteries, spreading through France and the adjacent
Countries, brought a great frequency of Foreign Nobility to his Court, as well
Ecclesiastic as Secular, some esteeming it a favor to be allowed Ibidem.
none daring to Arm against him, that he provided for the security of Church
and State, Ib. 193. B. C. D. and 194. A. B.
discouraging the Loose, Luxurious, and Profane Ecclesiastics, encouraging
the Sober, Learned and Pious; taking care also of the Cause of the Widow, Poor,
and Fatherless, by quickening the Execution of the Laws, and where they were
not He goes over into England. See the Reign of Edward the Confessor and of
Harold.
he went over into England, as is related, in the Reign of Edward the
Confessor, whither the course of this History is to be referred until the end
of his Reign, and also unto the end of the Reign of Harold. This mighty Fame he
acquired by these Actions; and the opportunity he had given him Here in Ed.
Confessor. Of the easy Conquest of England.

The Clergy Ignorant and Debauch, and Nobility Loose and Profane, etc.


of viewing and observing the chief Fortresses, Cities, and Castles, when he
was in England, were no small Advantages toward the Conquest of it: Harold and
his Brother Tobi, the Malmsb. vit. Gul. 57. a. n. 54. ibid. b. n. 10. Mat. Par.
vit. Fred. Abb. 46. n. 30.
Looseness, Debauchery, and Ignorance of the English Clergy and Nobility, In the
Manusc. Book of Additaments, fol. 79. b. cit^d by Dr. Watts his Notes upon Mat.
Paris, fol. 3.
the large Possessions of Religious Houses, which if they had been in the hands
of Temporal Lords, would have enabled them to have made Resistance, but being
in their hands, William answered the Abbat of St. Albans, giving him this
reason of the easiness of the Conquest, and quiet possession of England, That
if this were the cause, the Conquest of England might be as easy to the Danes,
or any other that should make War upon him, Ibidem.
and he should not know how to defend his Kingdom, and thefore began with him,
and took away some of his large Possessions, to maintain Soldiers for the
defense of the Nation, almost all his Lands and Lordships (as it is said there)
between Barnet and London Stone.
they neither would, or ought to oppose him, who they thought had right to the
Kingdom.

And lastly, The different and jarring Saxon, Danish, and Norman See the Reigns
of Etheldred. Harold the 1st. Harde-Cnute, and Edward the Confessor.
the Saxon Nobility and People would have had Edgar Atheling the right Heir of
that Line their King: The Danish would have brought in Swain King of Denmark,
who claimed from Harde-Cnute, and both perhaps against the Norman Interest, as
being lately introduced in the Reign of Etheldred by the Marriage of Emme,
except such as by the example of Edward the Confessor, were inclined to, and
trained up in the Norman Modes and Customs, Norman Bishops and Great Men before
the Conquest.
who preferred many of that Nation to Scriptor Norman. 1023.
Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, William Bishop of London, In Append n. 9.
al. Wulsus
who obtained the Charter of the Liberties of that City from the Conqueror,
Vrsus Bishop of Dorchester in Oxfordshire, the greatest Diocese in England, all
Normans; Randulph Peverell in Essex, Fitz-Scrobi in Salop, Ralph Earl of
East Angles, Danbin de Bear, Hugolin his Chancellor and Steward, Swein of
Essex, Alfrid the Yeoman of his Stirrup, and many other Laics, Men of great
Power and Reputation with Welsh, and called in for that purpose by Edward.

The Conqueror after the Battle of Hastings, fatal to the English, Pictav. 204.
C. D. The Conquerors March after his Victory at Hastings to Romney.
having buried his dead, and appointed a stout Governor in that Fortress,
marched to Romney, where having revenged himself of the Cruel Inhabitants, (so
they are there called) for the Slaughter of Dover, whither, though an
innumerable Multitude of People had betaken themselves, as to a place by reason
of the Castle inexpugnable, yet dismayed with the Conquerors approach, the
place with all readiness submitted to him, Dover yields.
who after eight days Fortification of it, marching from thence, and leaving
his sick Men there, not far from Dover, the Kentish Men of their own accord
came in to The Kentish Men of their own accords come into William.
Ib. 205 A. B. etc. Canterbury sends her submission.
Canterbury also sends her Submission, and the next day he came to the Broken
In Latin Fracta Turris, this place is somewhere in Kent, and not far from
Canterbury, but where I know not.
Tower, proceeding forward, and understanding where Stigand the Archbishop,
with the Earls Edwin and Morcar, and Edgar Atheling their King) were assembled,
he made toward them, and encamped not far from London, from whence some Troops
issuing out against him, 500 Normans Horse which were sent against them, drove
them back into the City, not without the Slaughter of many by the way; This
Action was followed with the Firing of all Buildings on that side the River
Thames, Archbishop Stigand deserts Edgar.
and proceeding whether he pleased, passing over the River at Walingford,
whether Stigand followed him, who deserting Edgar, made his Peace with William,
and owned him as his Sovereign; London submits, and gives Hostages.
proceeding from hence, so soon as he came within sight of London, the People
there, as well Citizens as others, which were many, submitted themselves, and
(as the Kentish Men had done) The Bishops and Nobility supplicate him to be
King.
This done, as well the Bishops as other Great Men supplicate him to receive
the Ibidem. His Army also would have it so.
Crown, for that they desired to have a King, having been accustomed to live
under one. He acquaints his Confidents with this Address of the English, who
persuade to a Compliance with it, as being upon their Knowledge the unanimous
desire of the whole Army; He weighing all things, could not but yield to the
importunity of so many petitioning and persuading him London, he sent some
before to raise a place of security and Fortress within the City, and prepare
things fit for such a Royal and Magnificent Solemnity. Ibidem, D. 206. A. An.
Dom. 1666. They dare do no otherwise being overawed by his Army there present,
Hov. f. 258. a n. 10.
The day designed for his Coronation was Christmass-day, when much People, as
well English as Normans, assembled at Westminster, where Aldred Archbishop of
York, after an Oration to the English, asked them, if they consented he should
be Crowned, who all cheerfully with one Voice consented; The like being done to
the Normans by the Constance, and their consent declared, Neither Pictaviensis,
Ordericus Vitalis, Hen. Huntingdon, or Mat. Paris make any mention of any Oath
he took at his Coronation. No Oath taken at his Coronation. Fol. 258. a. n. 14.
Col. 195. n. 43. de gest. pont. 154. b. n. 9. or not such an one as it is
commonly Storied he took.
Sim. Dunelm. Malmsbur. and Hoveden indeed says, the Archbishop exacted an
Oath from him, and that he took one before the Altar of St. Peter, and swear to
defend the Church and the Governors of it, justly to govern Scriptor. Norman.
1000.
'twere the same Oath he took when he was installed Duke of Normandy: not one
word hereof the English or King Edwards Laws.
he was Crowned by Aldred, (the Archbishop of Canterbury Stigand being then
anathematized by the Pope) in St. Peter's, the Abbey Church at Westminster, in
the presence of many Bishops, Abbats, and Noblemen.

After this Solemnity he looked into the Treasury of Harold, Gul. Pict. ^06. B.
C. D. Harolds Treasure distributed.

To his Followers.

To St. Peter's Church at Rome.


wherein were found vast Riches, part of which he distributed amongst such as
were with him in the Battle, and some to the Poor Peter in Rome, and lodged in
the hands of Pope Alexander an incredible Sum of Gold and Silver Money, And to
1000 other Churches, etc.
besides Ornaments; he sent also to a thousand Cathedral, Conventual, and
others, such as said Masses for his Success, Gul. Pictav. 194. C.
whose Prayers he was wont to desire and purchase in time of War and Difficulty.
Churches in France, Aquitain, Burgundy, and Avergne, to some very large Golden
Crosses set with Gems, to others much Gold or Golden Vessels, rich Palls,
Copes, or other Vestments. In January next Ibidem, 207. C. He ordains many
things for the advantage of London and the whole Nation.
during his abode in London, he ordained prudently and justly many things, some
for the Advantage and Dignity of that City, others of the whole Nation in
general, and some for the profit of the Church, Ibidem, 108. B.
then departing from London, he staid some time at Barkinge in Essex, in
Pictaviensis, Bercingis, in Ordericus, Bertingis, in Bid, Berecing, and not
Berkhamstede in Hartfordshire.
Berking, while those Places of Strength were perfected which The Conqueror
stays at London, until he secures London.
to check the instability and power of that People, for he saw it in the first
place greatly necessary to restrain them; Hither repaired to him the two great
Earls of Mercia and Northumberland, and Brothers Ibidem. Edwin, Morcar, and
others Swear Fealty. Ibidem, C.
Edwin and Morcar, with many more great Noblemen, whom upon their swearing
Fealty Order. Vit. 506. B. He Garrisons the Castles and Places of Strength.
stout French Captains and Governors, with many Foot and Horse, to remain in
and Garrison in the Castles every where, giving them great Rewards for the
Labors and Danger they should undergo; he seemed kind to all, but more
especially to Edgar Gul. Pict. 208. C. And goes over into Normandy.
Atheling, to whom he gave many and large Possessions. Having thus provided for
the security of this Lent, that year, he returns into Normandy, so to settle
his Affairs there, as afterward they might not need his presence. For some
long time before he went, the Care and Government of this Kingdom was committed
to his Brother Ibid. D.
Odo whom he placed in Dover Castle, and gave him the Government of Kent, with
the adjoining South Coast, And appoints Odo Bishop of Baieux, and William
Fitz-Osbern, Viceroys in his absence.
and to He was Son of Osbern Crepon, who Married a Daughter of Rodulph Son of
Sprot, Widow of Richard First Duke of Normandy, by Asperlinge, Gemet. l. 7. c.
38. his Grandfather Herfastus was Gunnora's Brother, ibid. l. 8. c. 15.
William Fitz-Osbern, whom he placed at Winchester in the Castle he had built
there, with direction to look after the North parts; these he Ord. vit. 506. C.
power well, others wanting all modesty, immeasurably oppressed such as were
under them. Ibid. and Gul. Pict. 209. B. He takes the Chief English Noblemen as
Hostages with him.
To leave all safe behind him, he carried over as Hostages Archbishop Stigand,
Agelnoth Abbat of Glastonbury, the three Earls Edwin, Morchar, and Waltheof,
Fol. 506. C.
Ordericus Strapa Cantuariensis, the Governor, Earl, or Lieutenant of
Canterbury or Kent. Hoveden somewhere calls him, Regis Haraldi Stallarius,
Master of the Horse, or Standard Bearer to Harald.
Egelnod and others of the highest and chiefest Nobility, Gul. Pict. 211. C. D.
And keeps his Easter or Triumphal Feast at Fecamp. An. Do. 1067. The Beauty of
the English envied.

The rich Habits of the Conqueror and his Guards.


The Feast of Easter he Celebrated at Now Fischamp or Fecamp in Caux, upon the
Coast of Normandy, between Havre de Grace and Diepe.
Fiscann Abbey, dedicated to the Holy Trinity, whither came the great Earl
Rodulph, Father in Law to the King of France, and much French Nobility, who
with the Normans curiously viewing the English, Ibid. 212. A.B C.D. The two
Vicegerents behave themselves justly.
In the mean while things were very well ordered in the Refectures or several
Governments of Odo Bishop of Baieux, and William Fitz-Osbern, who acted
severally or jointly, assisting each other as occasion required, and used great
Justice as the King had advised them; but the English neither by fear or favor
could be kept quiet, who taking an opportunity (especially they of Kent) of the
absence of Odo and Hugh Montfort, with the greatest part of the Soldiers from
Dover, beyond the Thames, sent to Eustachius Earl of Bulloign, Eustachius Earl
of Bulloigne, and the Kentish-Men attempt Dover Castle, and are beaten off, or
retire.
then the Kings Enemy, and invited him to join with them in the surprizal of
Dover Castle; he agreed with them in the Design, and passed over to them in the
dead of the night with a Fleet of chosen Soldiers, and joining with them,
assaulted the Castle, but finding the Defendants resolute, and more than were
expected, he drew off, retired with his Men to his Ships, He is reconciled to
the King.
afterward he was reconciled to the King, and was Honored as one of the
greatest Personages about him. About this He was Seldens Tit. Hon.
Earl of Northumberland.
Coxo a great and powerful English Earl was killed by his own People, Earl Coxo
slain by his own Men.
for standing firm to William, and not Arming against him with his English
Friends and Relations.

507. D. 508. A. B.
Ordericus Vitalis gives another account of the behaviors of the Normans, and
the two Vicegerents, who says the English were The English mightily oppressed
by the Normans.
and that the lesser Governors of Castles and Places of Strength, did vex and
abuse the noble and middle sort of Natives with great Exactions and many
Contumelies; and especially Odo and William Fitz-Osbern, who elated with too
much haughtiness, Their Complaints refused.

They Consult to regain their Liberty.


refused to hear the Complaints of the English to do them right, and by force
defending their own Soldiers spoiling the English, and ravishing their Women.
The English therefore deprived of their Liberty, are mightily troubled, and
Besides Bulloinge, he was Earl of Ord. vit. 508. D.
Guinet. and Tarvena.
Eustachius Earl of Bulloinge, etc. as in the former Relation. Ibid. 509. B. C.
D. Eustachius Earl of Bulloing joins with them. William returns, and brings
with him Roger Montgomery.
The Conqueror having settled his Affairs in Normandy, left the Government
thereof to his Wife Maud, and his Son Robert, with the assistance of his
Bishops and Great Men, and hearing of the Contrivances of the English and Danes
against him, he came to Diepe on the Sixth of December, and that night passed
over to Winchelsea, and brought with He was Son to Hugh de Monte Gomerico, by
Jocelius, Daughter of Weva, Sister to Gunnora, and Turolf her Husband, he
Married Mabil the Daughter and Heir of William de Belesine, by whom he had five
Sons, whereof Robert de Belesino (a Castle in Perch) succeeded him in his
Mothers Inheritance.
Roger Montgomery, whom, with his Wife, he had left Governor of Normandy upon
his Expedition into England, to him he Chichester and Arundel, and some time
afterward the Earldom of Shrewsbury. He keeps his Christmas at London;
Cajoles and flatters the English Nobility, and likewise the Welsh.
He kept his Christmas at London, where he Treated the English Bishops and
Nobility with much Craft, Officiousness, and Flattery, he granted what they
asked, and readily heard what they offered to him; with the like Art he cajoled
the Welsh, but withal privately directed the English to be prepared to resist
their Ibid. 510. A. B. C. D. Exceter stands out against him.
Exceter refused to Swear Fealty, and to admit the Conqueror or his Forces into
the City, but would have paid Tribute, with which he was not satisfied, sending
to them, and letting them know, he was not wont to have such Subjects, and
presently brought his Army before them, placing the English in the Front; The
Chief of those within the City came out to meet him, Gemet lib. 8. c. 37.
having notice of his approach, desire Peace, and promise to do what ever he
commanded, and presently Hostages for performance are brought, such, and as
many as the King thought fit; In the mean time the ordinary Citizens refuse to
give up the City, whereupon he Commands his Army to move near unto it, where
before the Gate one of the Hostages, by his Order, had his Eyes put out; then
battering the Walls, and undermining them, they within beg his Pardon It
submits.
humbly submitting themselves, and confessing the guilt of the People, all
things were forgotten as if never done, The Citizens pardoned and enjoy their
Estates.
and their Goods secured to the Citizens from the Violence of the Soldiers, by
Guards placed upon the Gates only, with Command to keep out the Soldiers. Sim.
Dunel. Col. 197 n. 45.
Githa the Mother of Harold, and many Citizens escaped and fled into Flanders
with great Riches. Here within the Walls he Baldwin the Son of Earl Gilbert to
see it done, and with many other stout Soldiers to remain there in Garrison.
From thence he went into Cornwall, He settles Cornwall.
and disposing all things there to his own satisfaction, he dismissed his Army,
and returned to Winchester, there to recreate and refresh himself all the time
of Easter; and not long after he sent for his Wife Maud to come to him, An. Do.
1068. Queen Maud Crowned by Archbishop Aldred.

King Henry I. born.

De gest. pont 154. b. n. 10.


who was Crowned by Aldred Archbishop of York on Whitsunday following; and
before the year was out, she brought forth Henry, afterward King of England.
Upon England, he imposed an importable Tribute upon the English, which
Malmsbury reports thus; That Aldred Archbishop of York, whilst William behaved
himself with temper and justice toward the English, loved him as his Son, and
honored him as a King, but when he exacted from them an importable Tax, he
sent Messengers to him about it, which being hardly admitted, were returned
with a rough Answer; whereupon he presently Cursed William and all his Progeny.
The King hearing of it, sent some

Ord. vit. 51^. A.B.C.D. William promises his Daughter to Earl Edwin, and
deceives him.
Earl Edwin was assured by the King he should have a Daughter of his in
Marriage, yet through the Fraudulent Advice of the Normans he performed not his
Promise; This deceitful dealing toward this young Earl, that had long expected
his Mistress, together with his hard usage in carrying him and many others
beyond Sea with Morcar to take Arms, Edwin and Morcar take Arms.
who being very Popular and well beloved, had the assistance of many in the
North parts, and especially of their Blidens Father Married Edith, Edwins
Sister, after whose Ord. vit. 311. B.
death she was Married to Harold.
Nephew Blidon King of Wales, who came unto them with a great number of
Welsh-Men; Hereupon William caused a search into, and discovery to be made of
all the Private Places, and Places of Retreat, and forthwith fortified such as
might Warwick, and gave the Custody of it to He was Gemet. lib. 7. c. 4. Hen.
de Bellomonte, Hen. de Newburg, Roger de Bellomonte, who?
Brother to Roger de Bello monte, who was Son to Humfrid de Vetulis, Son of
Turolf of Pont Adomar by Weva, etc. he was called Hen. of Newburgh from the
place of his Birth, the Castle of Newburgh in Normandy, and made Earl of
Warwick by the Conqueror after the Survey.
Henry de Bello-Monte, so that these Brothers reflecting upon the doubtfulness
of their Success, They crave favor.
crave favor, which was but in show only granted them; he then also built
Nottingham Castle, Which was in show only granted. Nottingham Castle built.
and gave the keeping of it to William Peudell. Those which were in York, so
soon as they heard these things, delivered the Keys of the City with Hostages
to the King, who suspecting their Constancy, raised a Fortress in the City, and
This Arkill Married Sim. Dun. Col. 80. n. 34.
Sigrid the Daughter of Ecgfrid, the Daughter of Aldun Bishop of Duresm, by
Kylvert her second Husband; her first Husband was Vethred Earl of
Northumberland, who dismissed her; This Ibidem, Col. 82. n. 27.
Arkill seized some part of Northumberland that was wast, and inhabited it, by
Sigrid he had a Son named Gospatric, and he another of that name, afterward
Earl of Northumberland.
Archill also, the most Northumbrians, makes his Peace, and delivers his Son an
Hostage; The Bishop of Duresme likewise is received into favor, and by his
Mediation Conditions were offered to Malcolme King of Scots, which he accepted,
and swear to a faithful Compliance with William. Lincoln and Huntington Castles
built.
In his return from this Expedition, he built Castles, or made Places of
Strength at Lincoln, Huntington, and Cambridge, placing in every one of them
stout Commanders. Sim. Dun. Col. 19. n. 56.
Afterward Marleswen, Ordericus calls him Gaius Patricius, he represented his
Lineal Extraction from Vcthred aforesaid, by his Mother Algiva, Daughter of
King Ethelred, by which, and a great Ibid. Col. 204. n. 60.
Sum of Money, he obtained the Earldom of the Conqueror.
Gospatric, and the most Noble of the Northumbrians Edgar Athaling, his Mother
Agatha, and two Sisters, Margaret and Christina, went by Sea into Scotland, and
by the leave of Malcolm King of Scots, stayed there all Winter. While Ibid Col.
^98. n. 2. and Order. vit. 513. A. The Sons of Harold invade England, and beat
Ednoth.
William was busied in the North, the two Sons of Harold, Godwin and Edmund,
who fled to Dermot King of Ireland, came from thence and landed in
Somersetshire, who defeated and slew Ednoth, sent by William against them with
an Army of English, plundered and wasted Devonshire and Cornwall, and with a
great Prey returned into Ireland. Ordericus Vitalis says, they were beaten by
Brien Son of Eudo Earl of Britain, and Gulielmus Gualdi, and returned by
weeping Cross. About this time, some of the Ibid. 512. A. B. The Norman Ladies
want their Husbands.
Norman Ladies and Women, wanting their Husbands, sent for them to return, and
withal to let them know, that if they returned not, they must make use of other
Men, to relieve their necessities; Hugo de A Town in Normandy, Vales. not.
Gall. fol. 237.
Grentonis Mansio, vel mansionile seu parva mansio.
Grentmesnil, who presided at Winchester, Humfrid de Governor of the Fort at
Hastings, and many others returned into Normandy, Some of them return.
sorrowfully and unwillingly deserting the King; Ibidem.
His Soldiers likewise wearied with the Desolations of the Country, where they
saw nothing but Burnings, Rapine, and daily Slaughters, committed by the
Natives as well as themselves, issuing out of Woods and Places of Security,
whither they had retired, importuned him for their Refreshment, that they might
retire to their fixed Residences, An. Do. 1069.
which he willingly granted, and dismissed them Ibid. C. and Sim. Dunel. Col.
38. n. 18. Robert Cumin and 700 Men slain.
In the third year of his Reign he made Robert Cumin Earl of Northumberland,
who with 700 Men coming to Duresm, and using the People of that Place, and
Inhabitants of the Country severely, they Conspired against him, killed him and
most of his Men.

Soon after they killed He was Son Ibidem, Col. 205. a. 27. Waltheof who?
of Siward Earl of Northumberland, by Els^eda Daughter and Heir of Aldred, also
Earl of Northumberland.
Robert Fitz-Richard, Ord. vit. 512. C. Mar^eswen, Gospatric, and Edgar Athelin
attempt York
Governor of the Garrison at York, with many others; Flusht with this success,
Ord. vit. 513. D. Edric the Forester who?
Ordericus Vitalis calls him Marius Suev^^.
Marleswen, Gospatric, and Edgar attempt York, where William Mallet then
Commanded, who being much distressed by them, the William Fitz-Osborn, and
returned to Winchester, where he kept Easter. A second Castle built there.
Ibid. 213. B. C. D. The Danes assist the English.
King Sweyn of Denmark, much solicited by the English, and furnished with
their Money, about this time set forth 240 Sail of Ships, under the Command of
his two Sons Harold and Cnute, and their Uncle Earl Osbern, Manned partly with
Danes, partly with English that had fled thither, which roved up and down the
English Coasts, upon S. Dunel. Col. 198. n 40.
At length having joined a Fleet provided by Edgar, He was Son Ibidem, Col.
205. a. 27. Waltheof who?
of Siward Earl of Northumberland, by Elfleda Daughter and Heir of Aldred, also
Earl of Northumberland.
Waltheof, Ord. vit. 513. D. Edric the Forester who?
Ordericus Vitalis calls him Marius Suevus.
Marleswain, and many others, Humber, where they received Gospatric with the
whole Force of Northumberland; with which united Strength, about the middle of
September, And joining with the Northumbrians, take York and 3000 Normans.
they assault the City of York and its two Fortresses, take them, and kill more
than 3000 Normans, William Malet, the then Vice-Comes, his Wife, and two
Children, Gilbert de Gant, and some few others having Ibid. Col. 199. n. 2. The
Conqueror marches with a great Army into Northumberland, wastes it, and buys
off the Danes.
King William being advertised of this Slaughter, raised a great Army, and
marched speedily, and in great fury into Northumberland, which he wasted all
Winter, killing the Inhabitants, and committing other Cruelties; in the mean
time by Messengers, he Treated with the Danish Earl Osbern, and promised
privately to give him a great Sum of Money, and permitted him to take Provision
for his Army upon the Sea Coasts, so as after Winter he would depart without
Fighting; to which he agreed. The Ibidem. n. 20, 30. Northumberland void of
Inhabitants.
Nation now was so destroyed by the Normans, and especially Northumberland,
that between Then Northumberland was accounted all the County beyond Humber
Northwards, as far as Tweed.
York and Duresm, it was wholly Ibidem, n. 50.
he Two Rivers which bound the Bishopric of Durham North and South, the Land
between them was anciently called St. Cuthbert's Patrimony.
Tees and Tine, where he found the Houses empty, the Inhabitants having fled
for their safety unto the Mountains, and into Woods; Ord. vit. 515. B. C. D.
Gospatric, and Earl Waltheof reconciled to the Conqueror.
here Earl Waltheof and Gospatric were reconciled to him, giving their Oath of
Fealty. From thence he returned to York, and having Cheshire and Wales, to
correct those People, who besides other Offenses committed, had lately besieged
Shrewsbury; and arriving Ibidem, 516. A. He quiets Mercia.
safely with his Army at Chester, he quieted the whole Country of Mercia, S.
Dunel. 202. n. 47. The Castles at Chester and Stafford built.
and He was called By the Normans, Sylvaticus, and sometimes Forester, for his
living in and frequenting the Woods for his security, S. Dun. Col. 197. n. 29.
he was Son of Alfric, who was Brother to Edric Sireon, the Arch-Traytor, Earl
of Shrewsbury.
Edric the Forester was reconciled to him; which done, he raised Stafford, and
placed strong Garrisons in both; From thence he marched to Salisbury, where
largely rewarding his Soldiers for this Expedition, dismissed them. While S.
Dunel. Col. 200. n. 20.30. Col. 201. n. 20, etc. Malcolm King of Scots
waste*Teesdale* Cleveland, etc.
William lay between Tees and T^ne, Edgar Atheling, with his Mother and
Sisters, and many others, took Ship at the Mouth of the River The River upon
which Duresm is seated.
Were, and passed into Scotland, the Danes all that time doing nothing further
against the King, or returning Malcom King of Scots, with a great Multitude,
passing by Cumberland, Gospatric wastes Cumberland.
then in his power, wasted and plundered Teesdale, and Holderness, carrying
away great Spoils and many Men and Women, Ibidem, n. 30, etc. Malcolm Marries
Edgar Atheling's Sister.
which were made Servants and Slaves to the Scots. In revenge of these Ravages,
Gospatric enters Cumberland, and makes the like destruction there. When Malcolm
after this Inrode returned home, he Married Margaret Sister to Edgar Atheling.

Paris in vita Fred. Ab. fol. 49. n. 10. See the Answer to Argum^ntum An^.
Not long after Lanfranc was made Archbishop of Canturbury, the stout Abbat of
St. Albans Frederic practiced with many of the Nobility, Edgar Atheling King;
and notwithstanding a Peace made with William, yet fearing lest he or his
Archbishop should vent their fury upon him, left his Convent, and went
privately into the Isle of Ely. S Dunel. Col. 203, 22. Frederic Abbat of St.
Albans, with many Bishops and Noblemen, retire into the Isle of Ely.
Upon the same fears Edwin and Morchar retired from Court, and suspecting the
success of their Affairs, Edwin determined to go unto Malcolme King of
Scotland, but in his Journey thither was slain, being betrayed by his own
Followers; Morchar betook himself to the Isle of Ely, where he met with
Frederic) Agelwin Bishop of Duresme, Siward called Barn, Walter Bishop of
Hereford, and many other great Men of the English, Dugd. Hist. of Draining.
fol. 186.
who sent for Ingulph. Hist. Croyl. 511. a. n. 42. They send for Hereward, and
defend it a long time.
Hereward, or Heward, He was younger Son to Leofric Earl of Mercia, Hereward,
who he was* A Norman Fortress against the Isle of Ely yet remaining.
and Brother to Algar Earl of Leicester or Mercia, after Leofric.
a great Thurstane, then Abbat of that place, and his Monks, whose the whole
Island was, and on their behalf the same was fortified against the King; Hist.
Eliens. in Bibl. Cotton. sub. Effig. Titl. A. 1. fol. 87. a.
who often attempting it by Land, and One Fort where the Normans had a Garrison
or Guard, remains at this day at the South-west end of Audry Cause-way, in the
Parish of Wivelingham, or Willingham; it is large, of a circular or round form,
encompassed anciently with a steep Bank, and deep Ditch, by the Country Belsars
Hills, but corruptly, for in a Parchment Roll belonging to the Bishop of Ely,
of the Soldiers names that were quartered in that Monastery, after the Island
was delivered to the Conqueror, I find one Belasius or Belassis, that was
General against the Island, and had his Station in this Fort, from whom, says
that Roll, it was called Belasius or Belassis Berge, Belsars Hills, why so
called.
Borough, Hill, or Fort; or perhaps the Fort might be called Belassis Fort,
for its opportune and convenient situation, for the placing a Garrison against
the Island, being at the end of the great passage into it, from the two French
words Bell and Assis, signifying well seated or placed, being so named by the
Normans.
Guards on the outsides thereof; Of which the Monks having notice, The Abbat of
Ely and the Monks yield the Isle to the King.
on Condition he would restore unto them freely and honorably all their Lands
belonging to the Church, his Forces into the Isle privately, and gave him
possession thereof without resistance, and all the great Men submitted, only
Heward made his escape. S. Dunel. Col. 203. n. 32. A. D. 1071. The Bishops and
Noblemen made Prisoners, and used barbarously.
Agelwin Bishop of Duresm was presently sent to Abington, to remain in Custody
there, where he died not long after. Morcar was likewise made Prisoner, and the
rest, some having their Hands cut off, others their Eyes put out, were
permitted to go whether they would. Hist, Croyl. fol. 512. b. n. 43. Ingulph
gives a different Account of ^he Defense of the Isle of Ely.
Ingulph gives somewhat a different Edwin and Morcar, Roger Earl of Hereford,
Ralph Earl of Suffolk, and Waltheof Earl of Northumberland, not submitting to
the King, together with other great Men in like manner disherited, possessed
themselves of the Isle of Ely; and forthwith sent for Hereward, and made him
General of their Forces, where he did so many Warlike Exploits, so often beat
his Enemies, so often deluded them, that he obtained perpetual praise for the
same; and for that he did (so long as he could) sustain the

And when the rest of the Noblemen rendered themselves in hopes of the Kings
favor, he only refusing, would not submit, Ibidem, fol. 512. a. n. 50. b. n.
2. And disposes all the Temporal and Ecclesiastic Pref^rments to his Normans.
but got away to some other place; Ibidem* fol. 511. b. n. 20.
yet afterward he made his Peace, obtained his Estate, died in quiet, after
very many Conflicts with William, his Earls, and Governors, and was buried in
Croyland Abbey. The Conqueror divides the Nation amongst his Followers.
The Conqueror having thus baffled Edwin and Morcar, English submit. The
Earldoms and Baronies, Bishoprics, and Prelacies of the whole Nation he gave
to his Normans, and scarce permitted any Englishman to enjoy any place of
Honor, Dominion, or Power. Ord. Vit. 521. D. 522. A. William Fitz-Osbern Earl
of Hereford, etc. Gherbod Earl of Chester. After him Hugh Auranches.
To William Fitz-Osbern Sewer of Normandy, he gave the Isle of Wight, and
Earldom of Hereford, and placed him, He Rot. penes Episcopum Elicus. Walter
Lucey, who? Hugh Lupus, who?
was the Conquerors Standard Bearer.
Walter Lacey, and others, to oppose Welsh. To Gherbod a Flemming, he first of
all gave the Town and County of Chester, who by most urgent Affairs being
called into Hugh Richard de Abrincis, Surnamed Goz, Father of this Hugh, was
Son of Gemet. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Thurstane Goz, Son of Ansfrid a Dane; Knighton. Col. 2376. n. 60.
and this Hugh Surnamed Lupus was Sisters Son to William the Conqueror.
of Amonches, in his Youth a Profuse Libertine, Son of Richard Surnamed Goz,
who with Robert de Rodelent and others* shed much of the Welsh Blood. Ibidem,
B. C. D. Roger Montgomery had Arundel, Chichester, and Shropshire.
To Roger Montgomery, he first gave Arundel, and then Chichester, and
afterward the County of Salop* To Waltheof he gave Ibid. 702. C. Waltheof,
Northampton and Huntington.
Northampton and Huntington, with Judith Gemet. lib. 8. cap. 37.
was Daughter of the Countess of Albemarle, the Conquerors Sister by his Mother.
Judith. To Walter Giffard the County of Buckingham. Walter Giffard Earl of
Buckingham.
William He was at some distance allied to the Conqueror, Ibid. lib. 8. cap.
37. William Warren, who?
his Father having Married one of the Nieces of Gonnora, first Ibidem, cap. 36.
Concubine, and then Wife to Richard the First, Duke of Normandy, and Great
Grandmother to William; his Name he had from Vales. notit. Gal. 237.
Guarenna or Varenna, a Place or River in the County of Calais or Caux.
Warren the County of Surrey. To Odo Son of Tedbald, William Warren had Surrey.
Earl of Blois, that Married King Williams Sister, he gave Holderness. To Ralph
He was a Britain, and called de Guader from Orderic. Vital. 535. C. Ralph de
Guader or Guaer, who he was. He had 176 Lordships of the Gift of the Conqueror.
Guader, now Guaer Castle in Brittany, not far from Montfort le Can, of which
Castle he was Lord also near Ren^es.
Guader the Earldom of Northwic or the East Angles. Hugh de Grentmesnel he gave
the Town of Leicester; and to many other Noble Persons he distributed many
Cities and Towns, Ralph Guader had Norff. or the East Angles, etc.
with great Power and Honors. He was Son of Guachelm de Ibidem* 522. B. Hen.
de Ferrariis, who he was.
Ferrariis, and though no Earl at the time of the Survey, he had then 176
Lordships, Manners, or Farms, besides Tutbury Castle, Domesday-Book.
in several Counties, whereof in Darbishire 114.
To Hen. de Ferrariiis the Castle of Tutbury; and to many Strangers and others
of mean Odo Earl of Kent.
he gave many and great Honors, insomuch that they had England Clients and
Dependants far richer and more powerful than their Fathers were in Normandy.

His Brother Odo, by the Mothers side, received from him the Earldom of Kent,
Ord. Vit. 522. D.
was a Count Palatine, and gave Laws as Viceroy, or Ibidem.
second King, and was Justiciary Justiciary of England.
of England, the chief Man for Administering Justice under the King; and after
the death of William Malms. 62. b. n. 53.
Fitz-Osbern, he was Vice-Dominus Vidame of all England under the King. Besides
those in Kent, Domesd. in the several Counties. Odo had 439 Lordships of the
Gift of his Brother.
where he had 184 Lordships or Farms, he also had in Essex 39, in Oxfordshire
32, in Hertfordshire 23, in Buckinghamshire 30, in Worcestershire two, in
Bedfordshire eight, in Northamptonshire 12, in Nottinghamshire five, in
Norfolk 22, in Warwickshire six, in Lincolnshire 76; in all 439.

To Orderic, 523. A. Geofry Bishop of Constance had 280 Lordships.
Geofry Bishop of Constance in Normandy, who was often Hastings, he gave 280
Manners, which he left to his Nephew Robert Molbray, made Earl of Northumberland
by William the Conqueror, Hoveden, 243. b. n. 47.
after the death of Walcher Bishop of Duresm, who had the Government of it.

Robert also Earl of Moreton in Normandy, and by his Mother, Brother to
William, had the Earldom of Malmsb. 88. b. n. 46.
Cornwall given him, and in that 248 Manners, Domesd. in the several Counties.
Robert Earl of Moreton in Normandy, and Cornwall in England, half Brother to
William, had 793 Lordships of his Gift. The Earl of Richmont.
in Sussex 54, and the Borough of Pevensey, in Devonshire, 75, and a Church
and House in Exceter, in Yorkshire 196, in Wiltshire five, in Dorsetshire 49,
in Suffolk 10, in Hantshire one, in Cambridgeshire five, in Hertfordshire 13,
in Buckinghamshire 29, in Gloucestershire one, in Northamptonshire 99, in
Nottinghamshire six; in all 793.

And now while I mention these Earls and their Possessions, I shall be somewhat
more large in the Account I give of these two following, that in some measure
the Power and Authority of the Earls in those days may appear. And first I
shall take notice of Vincent, fol. 57.
Alan Earl of Britane in France, whose Grandmother Hawis was Great Aunt to
William the Conqueror; This Ord. vit. fol. 544. C.
Alan Married Constance, Daughter to King William, to Ex. Reg. Honor. de
Richmond in Bibl. Cotton sub. Effig. Faustini. B. 7. fol. 7^.
whom in the third year of his Reign, at the Siege of York, he gave all the
Lands of Earl Edwin in Yorkshire, in these words. Ibid. and Cambden in
Richmondshire. The Conquerors Grant to the Earl of Britain.
Ego Gulielmus cognomine Bastardus Rex Angliae do and concedo tibi He Married
the Conquerors Daughter Constance, but why he called him his Nephew,
Nepoti meo Alan^ comiti Brittaniae, and haeredibus tuis in perpetuum omnes
villas, and terr^s, quae nuper fuerunt Comitis Edwini in Eborascira, cum feodis
militum, and (That is) I William, Surnamed Bastard, King of England, give and
grant to thee my Nephew Alan Earl of Britain, and thy Heirs for ever, all
those Towns or Villages, and Lands, which were lately Earl Edwins in Yorkshire,
with Knights Fees and Churches, with other Liberties and Customs, as freely and
honorably, as the same Edwin held them; Dated in the Siege before York. These
Lands when given, were Ibid. in Registro de Richmond.
Gildable, (that is) paid a Rent, Tax, Honor was feodum Nobile, beneficium
Regale, An Honor, what it was. The general practice of the Normans in building
Castles for their own safety.
in these ancient times granted by the King for great Services done, or to be
done, it was the same sometimes with the Parony or Earldom it self; sometime it
signified the Jurisdiction of them, and other some the Capus Baronia, the chief
Seat, Castle, or place of Residence of the Earl, or Baron, and was never then
attributed to small Baronies.
Honor, which was the Northern part of Yorkshire, Richmondshire. Being
possessed of these Lands, he built a Castle Ibidem, Richmont Castle built. Why
so called.
and This was the general practice of the Normans, to whom the Lands of the
English were given, especially of the great ones, and of the Conqueror himself,
who was at vast Expenses in building very many Castles.
Place of Strength by his Capital Mansion of Gillings, for the defense and
safety of his People and Tenants against the English and Danes, then thrust out
of their Estates and Inheritance, and named it Richmont, according to the
French denomination, which signifies Rich-Mount or Hill, it being situated upon

For the guard and security of this Castle, It was Guarded by the Earls Tenants.
his chief Tenants had their several Places assigned them, and had several
Knights Fees given them for their Service, thus set down in the Register, or
Book of Richmond in Cottons Library.

Placea Ranulphi fill. Roberti in Castro Richmond ad Capellam Sancti six Knights
Fees; The Establishment of the Guard of Richmont Castle. Ibidem inter feoda
Militaria. He had six Knights Fees.
This and the rest I shall render in English as there mentioned.

The place of Ranulph Fitz-Robert in the Castle of Richmond by the Chapel of
St. Nicholas.

The place of the Constable in the Keep, Ibidem inter feoda milit.
he had six Knights Fees and an half.

The place of Brian Fitz-Alan, in the great Hall of Scouland. He had four
Knights Fees, and a sixth part.

He had three Knights Fees, and a sixth part.




The place of Torphin Fitz-Robert of Manfield, between the Kitchen and
Brew House.

He had three Fees, and a sixth part.
The place of Ralph Fitz-Henry, on the West part of Scouland Hall.

He had three Fees, and an half.
The place of Conan Fitz-Helias, by the Keep on the East side without the Wall.

He had two Fees, and an half.
The place of the Chamberlain, on the East part of Scouland Hall by the Oven.

He had two Fees.
The place of Tho. de Burge, on the West part of the great Chapel, by the
Cannons in the Wall.

He had in this part of the Honor of Richmond in Yorkshire Ibid. b.
68 Knights Fees and an half, and had here at the time of the Survey 166
Lordships, Manners, or Farms; in Dorsetshire one, in Essex eight, The Earl of
Richmont had 442 Lordships of the Gift of the Conqueror.
in Hantshire two, in Cambridgeshire 63, and ten Burgages or Cambridge, in
Hartfordshire 12, in Northampton one, in Nottinghamshire seven, in Norff. 81,
in Lincolnshire 101; in all 442. All his Tenants ought Suit and Service to his
Court, and for this Honor, and under the Title thereof, there were Courts kept
for the Tenants of it several Counties every three weeks, and are kept to this
day in Norff. And the Jurisdiction of these, and the like Courts usually
extended no farther than to some Personal Actions between the Tenants and such
matters as appertained to the Lands Tenants bound to Castle-Guard.
and most probable it was, that all these Tenants of these Lands (as also in
all other Fees where the chief Seat or Head of them was a Castle) did watch,
and were bound to Castle-guard at appointed times; as may be gathered from what
will be said next concerning the Earls of Chester.

The first Ord. Vit. fol. 522. A.
whereof was Gherbod a Flemming, made Earl by William, Anno Dom. 1070. who
going upon an Expedition into Flanders, fell into the hands of his Enemies, and
was there detained Prisoner all his Life, upon whose restraint the Conqueror
created He was Son of Richard Gemet. lib. 7. cap. 6. Hugh Earl of Chester, who
he was.
Surnamed Goz, Vicecomes de Abrincis, or Viscount of Auranches in Normandy,
whose Father was Thurstane Ibidem.
Surnamed Goz, Son of Anfrid Dane.
Hugh de Abrincis Earl of Chester, who with He was Son of Ord. Vit. 669. C.
Robert Roelent, how he was.
Humfrid de Teliolo, who was another Son of Anfrid the Dane, and Governor of
the Fortress the Conqueror erected at Hastings. This Robert was Cousin German
to Ibidem. B. C.
Richard de Abrincis, Father to Hugh Lupus Earl of Chester, and was Commander
in Chief at the Siege of Rochester Castle.
Robert Roelent, and Robert de Malo Passu, and others, shed much Welsh Blood;
Ibidem.
he was a Man of great Note amongst the Normans at that time, and an expert
Soldier, and therefore placed here to restrain the Incursions of the
unconquered Welsh; This Earldom was given to hold as freely by the Sword, as
the King held England by the Crown. Monast. Angl. vol. 1. p. 202.
Barons under his Jurisdiction, but whether they were so or not, there were
many that held great Estates of him, and had shares and Commands in the
Government of this petty Kingdom; amongst whom these were chief.

Robert Fitzhugh, Domesday in Cestreshire, where all the Places are named.

Barons, or reputed Barons of Cheshire.


whose Seat was at Depenbach, now called Malpas, who held of him 31 Manners,
part of Manners or Towns.

William de Maldebenge, whose Seat was at Wickmalbanc, now called Nantwich,
held 47 Manners, etc.

William Fitz-Nigell, called sometimes Constabularius, had his Heleton, now
Halton Castle, and held of him 29 Manners, etc.

Richard de Vernon, whose Seat was at Shipbroc, held of him 17 Manners, etc.

Hugo de Mara held 14 Manners, etc.

Hamo de Masci, whose Seat was at Dunham, commonly called Dunham-Masci, held 10
Manners, etc.

Bigot de Loges held 12 Manners, etc.

Gilbert Venator or de Venables, whose Seat was at Kinderton, held 19 Manners,
etc.

Robert de Roelent, whose Seat was Roelent or Ruthelan Castle in Flintshire,
from whence he had his Surname, held 16 Manners, etc.

This Robert was General to Earl Hugh, Robert Roelent General to the Earl of
Chester.
who for fifteen years together checked the Welsh, and daily gained upon them,
and enlarged the Conquerors Territories, Ibidem.
but at last, after many sharp Conflicts, and bold Adventures, hazarding
himself too far, with no more than one Soldier, he was unhappily slain. He held
North Wales William, at the Rent of 40 l. per Annum, Domesday in Cestreshire.
besides Ross and Rewinioc, extending twelve Miles in length and four in
breadth, which he held in Fee. After this manner William placed several others
in other parts of the Borders of Wales, giving them great Possessions in Land.
These Earls of Chester had all Royal Officers, and in State differed very
little from Kings; Earls had their great Officers of State.
As will be shown more at large concerning Earl Ranulph in the Reign of King
Stephen, in whose time he lived.

All other Earls likewise had their great Officers of State, though they lived
not in the same Magnificence as these Earls Palatine did, The manner of
Investiture of an Earl.
and the manner of Investiture into that Dignity then, was by girding them with
the Sword of the County, as Fol 154. l. 54.
Mat. Paris observes.

Earls, as also Spelm. Glossar. verb. Baro.

Earls and Barons had generally Castles, etc.


Barons, in these times had every one their William, which continued many Ages
after him; From this Digression, I return to the History it self.

Sim. Dun. Col. 203. n. 50. A D. 1071 William the Conqueror invades Scotland.
King Malcolm submits*
William having settled England in quiet, invaded Scotland by Land and Sea,
with design to subject it to his Government, for that King Malcolme had
grievously offended him, and the year before had entered England, and cruelly
wasted the Borders thereof with Fire and Sword. But so soon as he had entered
Scotland, King Malcolme met him at a place called Abernithi, yielding to him,
and held his Kingdom as in subjection to him. At his return William displaced
Ibidem, Col. 203 n. 10.
Gospatric from the Earldom of Northumberland, and gave it to Waltheof the Son
of Earl Siward. About this time the County of Main Ibidem, Col. 205. n. 40. The
County of Main revolts, and is reduced.
revolted from William, who went over into Normandy, and by the help of the
English he carried with him, and some Forces he collected in Normandy, he soon
reduced it to obedience. Ibidem, Col. 208. and Malmsb* fol. 59. n. 20. Florent.
Wigor. A. D. 1074. The Conspiracies of Ralph Guader.
In his absence Ralph Waher or Guader, Norman Customs brought into England.
So called from Guader Castle in Brittany.
Roger de Britolio, Bretevill a Seignory in Normandy of that name, he was Son
to William Fitz-Osbern Lord of Bretevill in Normandy, and Earl of Hereford in
England, and from him it was, that the Domesd. Cestrescire Terr. Hug. Com. in
manner. Roelend. Atiscros Hundr.
same Laws and Customs which were observed in Bretevill, were also observed and
practiced in Hereford after the Conquest.
Earl of Hereford, and Waltheof the great Earl of Northumberland, meeting
Ixninge near Newmarket, on Ralph's Wedding day, (who Married, against the Kings
Command, Emme Sister to the Earl of Hereford) William to deprive him of the
Kingdom; and having raised what Forces they could in their several Counties,
Ibidem.
endeavored to join them; but Wulstane Bishop of Worcester having notice
thereof, got what Strength he could together, and hindered the Earl of Hereford
for passing Severn with his Army, Agelwin Abbat of Evesham, Vrso Sheriff of
Worcestershire, and Walter de Laco, a great Baron of Herefordshire, coming with
what Power they could raise to the Bishops Assistance. Ibidem.
And as these prevented Roger in his Proceedings: so Odo Bishop of Baieux, and
Galfrid Bishop of Constance, with an Army of English and Normans marched
against Earl Ralph, whom they found encamped near Cambridge, He flies.
and not being able to give them Battle, he fled to Norwich, and soon after got
into Brittany, and from thence into Denmark, leaving his Forces to the Mercy of
their Enemies, of whom the Christmas following some were banished, some had
their Eyes plucked out, others their Hands and Feet cut off; Norwich Castle
yielded.
And Norwich Castle being kept Hen. Huntington, fol. 211. b. n. 40.
In Denmark he prevailed with Canute, Son to the King, and Hacun a great Earl
of that Country, to assist him against William; he sailed to England with 200
Ships, but when they came upon the Coast, finding an Army ready to receive
them, they diverted their Course, and Landed in Flanders. Some few Sim. Dun.
Col. 209, 210. A. D. 1078. Robert eldest Son to William Rebelled against his
Father. Unhorsed, and hurt him in the Arm.
years after this, his eldest Son Robert, to whom he had given Normandy in the
presence of Philip King of France, before his Expedition England, applies
himself to Philip, and by his Assistance entered Normandy with an Army, and
would have made himself Duke thereof. King William hearing hereof, passes with
an Army into Normandy, where in Battle meeting with his Son hand to hand, he
was by him unhorsed, and hurt in the Arm; but his Son perceiving by his Voice,
it was his Father, suddenly leaped off his Horse and mounted him again,
permitted him Ibidem, Col. 210. n. 10. They are made Friends.
to march off with his Son William, being wounded, leaving many of his
Followers dead behind him; yet not long after, by the Mediation of the Norman
Nobility, Orderic. 573. B. And Robert is sent General against Malcolm King of
Scotland.
they were reconciled, and both came over into England. Robert being sent
General in an Expedition against Sim. Dun Col. 211. n. 60.
Malcolm King of Scots, who having invaded the borders of England, retreated
upon the approach of Robert. Ingulph Hist. Croyl. fol. 516. a. n. 50.

The Castle upon Tine built, whence Newcastle has its name.


says, that Scotland William, and that Malcolm did Homage and Swear Fealty unto
him at Abernithi. Robert at his return built a Castle upon the River Tine, from
whence the Town of Newcastle took its name. The Conqueror erected many Castles,
amongst which the Tower of London was one; This he did, and all his Earls,
Barons, and other Great Men after his example, to secure themselves from the
Attempts and Insurrections of the English. Toward the latter Ord. Vit. fol.
648. B. The King of France (...) King William.
end of his Reign, for the four years he survived his Wife Maud, he was for the
most part in Normandy, Stow. fol. 40.
being constantly in War and Dissension with his Neighbors, Gemet. lib. 7. c.
42.
especially with the King of France, who in a Sickness of King Williams, jeered
him for his fat Belly, and said he Laid in at Rouen; who to show the King of
France his up sitting, Ibid. 655. D. and 656. A. Gemet. lib. 7. c. 44.

King William enters his Country.


entered his Country in the last week of July, and time of harvest, and wasted
it all the way he went; and coming to a Town called by Ordericus Where this
Mandatum or Medanta was, I cannot well say, unless it be Mant upon the River
Seyn between la Roche Guion and Meulan, the Conquerors direct way or passage
into the Country called Veuxin Francois, which he then Ord^r. fol. 655. D.
Feudal Investiture.
claimed of the King of France, and made this Expedition to recover.
Mandantum, and by Gemeticensis he sacked it, where with too much heat and
labor, Ord. fol. 660. D. King William dies.
the Ninth of September, Anno Domini 1087.

While he was thus employed in Normandy, he had notice that Ibidem, fol 646. D.
Odo his half Brother, whom he had made Bishop of Bayux and Earl of Kent,
aspired to the Papacy, and that he had bought a Palace at Rome, whither he was
going with a great Retinue of Normans, and much Treasure; Ibidem, fol. 647. A.
on a sudden and unexpectedly meeting Wight, as he was ready to take the Seas,
Ord. fol. 647. C. Anno Domini 1085. William seiseth his Brother Odo with his
own hands. As Earl of Kent, not as a Clerk or Bishop. The Crimes of Odo.
with his own hands seized on him, when he could not persuade those with him to
do it; who saying he was a Clerk, and could not be Sentenced without the
Judgment of the Pope, the Conqueror answered, he seized him as Earl of Kent and
his Viceroy, and not as Clerk or Bishop: All his Treasure was taken from him;
and the Crimes objected to him were infinite Oppressions of the People under
his Government, Seduction of the Kings Subjects to forsake the Rhoan, where he
continued until the death of William; who as he See my Preface to this History.
The Norman Laws and way of Pleadings Established here.
brought in the Norman Laws, and caused all Pleadings, and what concerned the
Law to be done in Norman French, Seldom upon this passage and observation of
Ingulph, somewhere in his Janus Anglorum, admires the honesty and simplicity of
those times, and seems not to be well satisfied with the Intricacies, Practice,
and Tricks of the Law, and manner of Conveyances of Land in his and our times;
but this Practice contains somewhat more than that, it was an Investiture and
Gift, or Pledge of Investiture of Feudal Estates in those times; it b^ing a
Hottom. in lib. feud. 2. Tit 27.. 7. By delivery of a Sword, Bow, Arrow, etc.
Custom that the Lord or Patron of a Fee should deliver his Vassal something as
a Monument and Token of his Investiture, that if any Controversy happened
concerning his Possession, he might produce it as a Testimony against him.
transferring Land was changed. Ingulph. Histor. Croyland, fol. 512. b. n. 30.
In former times many Farms and Manners were given by bare Word without Script
or Scroul, How Lands passed before the Norman Conquest.
only by the delivery of a Sword, Helmet, Horn, Goblet, Spur, Horsecombe, Bow,
or Arrow by the Lord. The Normans called all Chirographs or Writings Charts.
And whereas they were made firm before by the Subscription of the Party with a
Cross, Sealing of Writings, when first used in England.
they now had a Seal fixed to them, set upon Wax, and attested by three or four
Witnesses. Yet there were some ancient Charts or Chirographs before the
Conquest with Seals appendant William having Conquered England, subdued Paris,
fol 12. n. 10.
Scotland and Wales, Established his Norman Laws here, and his Gervas. Tilb.
fol. 9. a.
Exchequer, according to the form of that in Normandy; takes care for the
settling a constant Revenue that might uphold him in his Grandeur and new
Acquests, The Conquerors Revenue.
which consisted in several Branches; one whereof was a Land Tax called Hidage,
Hidage was a Land Tax.
which he found here before his arrival in the time of Edward the Confessor, as
appears every where in Domesday-Book,

Hantescire Tit. Terra Hugonis de Port in Fordingbridge hundred. Alodium what
it is.
Alodium in this place was not Land or an Estate that held of no body, nor
though it might be free in respect of other Lands, yet it paid the common and
constant Land Tax of Hidage, which was most commonly 2 s. per Hide; and Hoved.
fol. 176. a. n. 40. Seld. Dom. Sea. fol. 2^6.
paid every year extraordinarily sometimes 3 s. sometimes 4 s. sometimes 6 s.
per Hide; Mat. Paris, Anno 1083. fol. 11. The meaning of the Tenure in Alodio.
as it was in the Seventeenth year of the Conqueror, and also in some other
Kings Reigns, as will be noted hereafter. Some would have this Tenure like that
of the Prince of Haynault de Deo and Sole, without acknowledgment of any
Superior Lord. But we have no such Land in England; And it signifies here only
an Hereditary and perpetual Estate, free and in the power of the Possessor
Alodium in the Glossary.
Alodium tenuerunt pro 2 Maneriis de R. E. tunc and modo geldabat pro 5 hidis.
Idem Hugo In Paragio. Lands that were held in Parage; Hottoman In Verb. feud.
in verbo. Paragium and Pariatio, what they signify.
says Paragium is a Feudal word, and worth noting, and that by a Barbarism it
was used for Pariatio, an Adequation, or equal division of the Heritage amongst
Brothers, although Custom has prevailed so^n some places, that by the
Prerogative of Age, the younger has not so great a share as the elder; so in
the C. 30.
Grand-Customer of Normandy, it is Tenure in Parage, though the younger has
less than the elder Brother, because they are pairs or equal in Succession in
the same Fee and Tenure; they hold a like nobly, and are of the same Lineage,
although the younger hold of the elder in Parage.
in Paragio de R. Se defendit; Defendere in Domesday-Book, is the same with
Geldare, to be Taxed or Rated, and to pay.
defendit pro 4 Hidis modo pro duabus Un. Virgat. minus. Domesd. fol. 45. a.
In isto Manerio and isto hundred. Ten. Picot. virgat. and dimid. de Rege.
Phitelet Ten. in alodio de R. E. pro Manerio tunc and modo Geld. pro duabus
virgat. Ibidem.
Hugo de Fort Cerdeford, two What Freemen were, and the several sorts and kinds
of them, see the first part of the Saxon History and Preface to this History.
Freemen or Knights Soldiers held it for two Manners in the time of King Edward
in Alodio; then and now it was Taxed, Hidage.
and paid for five Hides. Hugh holds Warneford, Vlric and Olward held it in
Parage of King Edw. they had two Halls or Mansions, then it paid for four
Hides, now for two Hides, and one Manerium, Some. Glossar. in verbo.
a pure Norman word, from the French Manoir, and that from the Latin Mansio a
manner, vel Ord. Vit. 523. A Manerium from whence derived.
Manendo, from the Lords remaining or dwelling upon his Fee. It is not to be
found here in any of our Authors or Historians before the coming in of the
Normans, in stead of which the Saxons used Hida, Familia, Mansura, Ma^sam,
Casata, etc.
Manner and that Hundred, Picot held two Virgara Terrae. The Saxons called it
Somn. Glossar. in verb. Virgata. Yard land what and how much.
GYRDLAND, commonly Yardland, a certain quantity of Land, and perhaps part of a
Hide different according to the diversity of Places; for in some it is twenty
Acres, in others twenty four, in others thirty, etc. In some but three Roods.
Virgates and an half of the King; Phitelet held it in Alodio of King Edw. for
a Manner, then and now it is Taxed and pays for two Virgates. These and the like
Entries we find, or at least the number of Hides or Carucates in every Town and
Manner in Domesday, by which the Tax was limited, known, and understood.

The making of this Survey called Domesday was a great design in Domesday, or
the Conquerors Survey how made.
and it may not be much out of the course of our History to take notice how it
was made, and in what method written. It was made by Seldom gives an Account in
his Preface to Fol. 15.
Eadmer from an ancient Manuscript, (he thinks as old as the Survey it self) of
the names of the great Men that were Sworn in diverse Hundreds in
Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely, which were most Normans, The Jurors i^
Cambridgeshir^ and Isle of Ely at the making of the Survey.
and presented the Survey according to the form the King had directed. And
Comitatus dicit, or testatur, hundreda, vel Wapentachium dicit, vel testatur.
Again, homines qui juraverunt, the men that were Sworn in this or that County,
Hundred, or Wapentach, do witness, say, and aver, so and so concerning diverse
matters in debate and controversy, do often occur in the Survey it self. The
Histor. Ellen. penes Domini Gale, p. 177. b.
In Staplebou Hund. Nich de Chenet, Willielmus de Chipenham homo Gaufridi,
Hugo, de Herenluge, Warinus de Saham, Robertus Anglicus de Fordhom, Hordmerus
de Bethlingham, Alanus de Burwell, Alfricus de Sneillewelle, Isti homines
Juraverunt de isto hundredo. In Cestertuna Hund. Juraverunt Roggerus de
Cilderlaio, Gifard de Draitona* Gislebert de Histona, Surmi de Coten^am,
Brunningus de Cestertuna, Almer de Co^en^am, Ledmarus de Draitona, Aermus de
Gilderlaio and omnes alii-Franci and Argli de hoc Hundredo Juraverunt. These
two Instances are cited out of the ancient Manuscripts mentioned by Seldom,
Jurors in every Hundred of the County are noted.
names of the Jurors in some Hundreds mentioned by Mr. Seldom exceed not the
number of eight or nine; in others, besides those named, all that were fit for
the purpose were Sworn.
Verdict or Presentment of Juries, or certain Persons Ge vas. Tilb. lib. 1. b
29.
Commissioners, who were most discreet Persons, and commonly Normans, sent from
Court. Those for Dugd. B^ron. fol. 257. Col. 2.
Worcestershire and many other Counties were He was a Monk Malms. de Gest.
Pontif. f. 165. b. n. 20.
in the Abbey of Fischampe or Fecampe in Normandy, and gave great Assistance
unto William in his Expedition into England, Eadmer. fol 7. n 1^.
for which he made a Bargain
Remigius Bishop of Lincoln, Walter Giffard Orderic fol. 522. C. And other
Counties.
Earl of Buckingham, He was Son Ord. Vit. fol. 5^2. d.
of Gualchelin de Ferrariis* a Stranger, and an Adventurer with the Conqueror,
and was possessed of 176 Lordships or Manners, whereof in Domesd. in com. Darby
Darbyshire 114, as before was noted.
Hen, de Ferriers Earl of Darby, and This Monast. Angl. vol. 2. fol 889. n. 50*
60.4 ibid. 900. n. 20. Adam third Son of Hubert de Rye.
Adam who had given him great Possessions in Kent, was third Son to Hubert de
Rye, a trusty Servant to William when Duke of Normandy and employed by him to
Edward the Confessor, in the business of declaring him his Successor to the
Crown of England, etc. Eudo being his fourth Son.
Adam Brother unto Eudo Steward of the Household, Sewar to the King, who
enquired into, and described as well the Commissioners in Worcestershire.
The Books themselves. How and of what things the Survey was made.
They noted what and how much Arable Land, Pasture, Meadow, and Wood every Man
had, and what was the extent and value of them before the Conquest, and at the
present time. The Survey was made by Counties, Hundreds, Towns or Manners,
Hides, half Hides, Virgates, and Acres of Land, Meadow, Pasture, and Wood. etc.
in every Town and Manner, and who they belonged to. Always in every County
setting down The Books themselves.
the Kings name first, and after him all his great Men in order that held of
him in chief, with numbers placed before them for the better finding them in
the Book, as may be Append. n. 10.
seen in the Catalogue of Tenants in chief, or the Possessors of Lands at the
time of the Survey there following. All England Westmorland, Cumberland, and
Northumberland, That part of Lancashire between the River Mersey and Ribble was
laid so and described in Cheshire, the other part was described in Yorkshire.
was described, and part of Wales, and the Description or Domesday-Book why so
called.
There was no receding from, or avoiding what was written in this Book, and
therefore ob hoc ( as P. 41. b. Domesday from the Saxon Dome Bordarii what they
were.
Gervase of Tilbury says) nos cundem librum judiciarium nominamus, non quod in
eo de prepositis aliquibus dubiis feratur sententia, sed quod ab eo sicut ab
ultimo die judicii non licet ulla ratione descedere.
Domesday-Book, remaining in the Custody of the Vicechamberlains of his
Majesty's Exchequer.

The little Book contains only the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Essex,
this Survey was begun about the Fourteenth year of the Conqueror, and finished
Little Domesday, fol. 450.
in the Twentieth of his Reign, Anno Domini 1086. To make the manner of the
Entries in these Books

Easessa. Terra Regis dimid. hundred. de Witham. Witham tenuit Heraldus 5 Hidis
tunc 21 What these Villanes were, see in the letter (f) here following.
Villan. modo 15 tunc 9, In the Appendix are two Catalogues of all the
Ter-Tenents, or as they may be called, Proprietors names in this Survey, one
Alphabetical. the other as they are found before the Description of every
County.
Bordarii from the French Bordier, a Villan or Cottager, and that from Board a
little etc. Custum. Norm. Gloss. sup. c. 28.
Bordage was a Tenure, where such a House or Cottage was given to any one to do
any base Service for his Lord, as to be an Executioner or Hangman, or other
base Service, and he who had any thing given him after that manner, could not
sell, give, or engage it, for that it was given him to hold after that form.
Bordar. modo 10 Tunc 6 Servi what they were.
Servi* Servants, or rather Slaves, (for Servus in Classick Authors never
signifies otherwise) were of Spelm. Gloss. fol. 513. col. 2. See more what
Villanes were in after times in the Glossary.
two sorts, better or worse, or Predial and Personal, Predial although they
were of a Servile Origin and Condition, yet they possessed their Lands and
Goods at the will of the Lord, performing such rustic and servile works as
were commanded them, in Villa's or Villages, from whence they were called
Villani, such as are noted above. The Personal Servants or Slaves had nothing
of their own, but what they gained was their Servus was quite disused, and the
word Villanus used to express both these sorts of People, unless Nativus or
Bond-Servant or Man, might happily to used for the Personal Servant, which were
the same with the German Mancipia, so frequently mentioned in their very
ancient Laws, Charts, or Charters, and called by our Saxon Ancestors AGEN-HINE,
that is Proprius Servus, ones Proper Servant.
servi modo 9 tunc 23 Sochemanni and modo similiter tunc inter totum valebat 10
lib. modo 20 sed Vicecomes inter suas consuetudines and placita, de dimid.
hundred, recipit inde 34 lib. and 4 lib. de Gersuma, in hoc Manerio adjacebant
T. R. E. 34 liberi homines 10 sol. de consuetudine and 11 d. ex illis tenet
Ilbodius 2 de 45 acr. and val. 6 sol. and redd. Manner. suam consuetadinem.
Tedricus Pointel 8 de dimid. Hid. and 22 acr. dimid. reddentes co^suetud.
Ranulph Piperel 10 de 2 hid. and 45 acr. non reddentes consuetudinem.
Willielmus Gross 5 and unus tantum reddit consuetudinem, and val. 3 lib. 13 s.
Rad. Baignard 6 and unus redd. consuetud. and val 20 s. Homo Dapifer 1 de
dimid. Hid. and val 20 s. Goscelinus Loremarius habet terram unius and non
redd. consuet. etc. modo custodit hoc Manerium.

Petrus Vicecomes in manu Regis. Thus in English.

Easesse, Title in the top of Leaf, the Kings Land; The way how the Towns,
Manners, or Lordships were entered in the Survey.
and before the particular Manner or Town, the Hundred in which it lies is
noted, as here the half Hundred of Witham. Harold held Witham in the time of
King Edward for a Manner, and for five Hides, then there Edward the Confessors
time, as well as in the Conquerors) then there were nine Bordars, now ten, then
six Servants or Slaves, now nine: then there were 23 Sochemans, now the same
number: then the whole was valued at 10 l. now 20 l. but the Viscount or
Sheriff received from the half Hundred for his Customs and Mulcts or
Forfeitures 33 l. and 4 l. for Fine or Income. In this Manner, or belonging to
this Manner, or in the bounds of this Manner, there were Edward thirty four
Freemen, which then paid an accustomable Rent of 10 s. and 11 d. of these Ilbod
holds two which had 45 Acres, and they were worth to him 6 s. and paid their
old Rent to the Manner. Tedric Pointel holds eight, who had half a Hide, and
twenty two Acres and half, paying Custom or old Rent. Ranulph Piperel holds
ten* who had two Hides and 45 Acres, which paid no Custom or old Rent. William
Gross holds five, and only one of them paid Custom, and were worth to him l.
13 s. (by the year is to be understood in all these Sums) Ralph Baignard holds
six, and one paid Custom, they were worth 20 s. Hamo the Sewar or Steward holds
one, who had half a Hide, and was worth to him 20 s. Goscelin Loremar has the
Land of one, and pays no Custom; Peter the Viscount or Sheriff keeps this Manner
in the Kings hand.

Essessa Terra Regis Hund. de Beventre: Another Example of the Entries in
Domesday.
Haveringas tenuit Haroldus 1 Manner. and pro 10 Hid. tunc 41 villan. modo 40
semp. 41 Bordar. and 6 servi, and 2 Car. in Dominio Tunc 41 Car. hominum modo
40 Sylv. D. porc. C. acr. prati modo 1 Molen. and 2 Runc. and 10 animalia and
160 porc. and 269 ov. huic Manner. adjacebant 4 lib. homines de 4 Hidis: T. R.
E. reddentes consuetudinem, modo ten. 3 Hid. Rob. fill. Corbutionis Hugo de
Montefori quartam hidam and non reddidere Consuetudinem ex quo eas habuere,
etc. Hoc Manner. val. T. R. E. 36 l. modo 40. and Petrus Vicecomes inde recipit
80 l. de censu, and 10 l. de

Essex, Title as before, the Kings Land, the Hundred of Beventre. Harold held
Haveringe in the time of Edward the Confessor for one Manner and ten Hides: then
there were forty one Villans, now forty: there were always forty one Bordars,
and six Servants or Slaves, and two Carucates in Demeasn, or the Lords hands:
there were forty one Carucates amongst the Men or Tenants, now forty: Wood
sufficient Edward the Confessor, paying an accustomable Rent; Now Robert Son of
Gorbutio holds four of those Hides, and Hugh Montfort the fourth, and have paid
no Rent since they held them. This Manner was worth 36 l. now 40. And Peter the
Viscount or Sheriff receives from it 80 l. for Rent, and 10 l. for an Income or
Fine.

These two Instances are sufficient to show the method which was used in making
Domesday-Book, but all Entries in it are not alike, they being more or less
exact and particular in some Counties than others, according to the care,
diligence, and industry of the Commissioners and Scribes.

A second Branch of the Conquerors Revenue.
A second Branch of his Revenue was Reliefs or Fines for giving the possession
of Hereditary Fees, assignation of Dower out of the Husbands Estate,
composition for License to Marry, and to have the Wardships of Heirs, or
entrance upon Farms due to him from all Tenants in chief, by the Feudal Law of
all Nations, where there were Fees as incident to that Tenure; (but by our
Lawyers said to be by the Common Law of England) These were called Oblata Gerv.
Tilb. lib. 2. c. 13. ibid. c. 24. b.
Spontanea, Free Offerings or Biddings for such a thing before mentioned, and
are such as are entered by themselves upon the Oblata Rolls of King John and
Henry the Third. And also when the King accepted what was offered, they were
called Conventions, Bargains between the King and Offerer. Rot. Pip. 14.
Johannis Everwics^.
Hawisia Countess of Albemarle gave 5000 Marks to have the possession of her
Inheritance and Dower. Oblat. 1. Johan. m. 19. Fines for leave to Marry.
Robert Fitz-Roger gave 300 Marks for a Fine for Leave to Marry his Nephew to
the younger Daughter of Hubert de Rot. ^in. ^ Johan m. 9.
William de Warenna gave 300 Marks for the Wardship or Custody of the Lands of
Gilbert de Aquila; and for the entrance into Farms. Gersunna, an Income, is
often found in Domesday, as paid to the Gerv. Tilb. lib. 2. c. 13.
Sheriff of the County, who in these elder times stood charged in the Exchequer
with the Kings Rents and Revenue, all perhaps but the Oblata or Conventiones,
and some Fines or Mulcts that were charged upon particular Persons.

These were great Sums in the time of King John, but greater in the Conquerors
time. And if we consider the frequency of these Payments, most of the Lands in
England being of this Tenure, we must also think of the greatness of the
Revenue arising from hence.

Also Penal Fines may be accounted part of this Branch. John Earl of Warren had
a Claus. 3. Edw. 1. m 2. Penal Fines.
Fine of 10000 Marks laid upon him for assaulting and wounding Sir Alan Zouch
and his Son in Westminster Hall. Claus. 15. Edw. 1. m. 2.
Hugh Despencer paid a Fine to the King of 2000 Marks for Marrying Isabell
Widow of Patrick Chaworth, Daughter of William Beauchamp Earl of Warwick,
without License.

Likewise to this Branch may belong all Forfeitures of Goods, and pecuniary
Mulcts for Crimes, (Murder not excepted, which was then Penal, Gerv. Tilb. lib.
1. c. 23. Murder Penal, and punished by a Pecuniary Mulct.
in some Hundreds it was 36 l. in others 24 l. according to the largeness of
the Hundred) all Fines and Pecuniary Punishments for etc. which were all
redeemed and satisfied by Penalties and Fines, as well now as in the Saxon
times; and no Suits, or very few Actions brought for them; but when Actions
began to be frequent for these things, they still retained some shadow of the
Kings Prerogative in them; for in every Writ at this day, wherein are these
words, Vi and Armis, by Force and Arms, or Contra pacem Domini Regis, against
the Peace of our Lord the King, if the Action comes to Trial, there are some
small inconsiderable Fines due to the King, but whether ever paid into the
Exchequer is a Question, yet they are always levied by the Sheriff upon a
Capiatur issuing out of the Office of that Name. Money paid to the King to have
Trials and Judgments.
Compositions or Money paid to the King to have Trials and Judgments in many
Controversies, (which in

Obl. 2. Johan. m. 14. Ebor.
William de Stutevill gave 2000 Marks, Hoved. fol. 456. b. n. 20, 30, 40.
pro judicio habendo, to have Judgment in the Barony of Frontebeof, in a
Controversy between him and William de Albany concerning that Barony, which
was determined by the Council of the Kingdom, and Will Rot. Pip. 2. Richard 1.
Ebor.
William de Latimer gave 100 s. to have a Trial at Law with Galfrid de Valoins
who had possessed himself of part of his Park. And many considerable Sums of
Money I have met with given to obtain Writs in several cases in the times about
and near unto the Conquest. And this may be the reason why Glanvil so very
often in ^his Treatise of the Laws and Customs of England, has these words,
Petens ac querens perquirit breve, the Demandant or Plaintiff s. 8 d. where the
Debt is 40 l. 10 s. where the Debt is 100 l. and so upwards in Suits for Money
due upon Bond.

The last thing which may fall under this Branch were Tolls and Customs for
Passage and Pontage. Tolls and Customs for what paid.
Tolls and Customs for Liberty of Buying and Selling. Excise or Tolls and
Customs upon Gervas. Tilb. lib. 1. c. 21.
Victuals, and many other things; Besides the ancient and greater Customs LL.
Ed. Con. c. 24.
buying and selling, for freedom of Markets and Fairs, and protection in going
to, and coming from them, was also in the Saxon times before the Conquest;
Therefore it was that Markets and Fairs were then kept, and all things sold in
good LL. Ed. Sen. c. 2. LL. Aethelst. c. 12.13.
Towns, Castles, and Ports only, in the presence of the Magistrate of the place
or Kings Officer. And it was by Law Established LL. Will. 1. c. 61. No Markets
but in Cities, Burghs, Castles, etc.
Conquerors time, that no Market or Fair should be permitted but in Cities,
Burghs, Walled Towns, and Castles, where the Customs of the Kingdom, the common
Right of the King, and Dignity of his Crown, as they were Constituted and
Established in the times of his good Predecessors, might not be lost or
violated. Dav. Rep. fol. 12. b. Paid by all Nations.
Tolls were Originally imposed according to the value of things, sometimes an
eighth part, sometimes a twentieth, sometimes a fortieth; and were ever paid by
Ibidem.
Romans, Britains, Saxons, Lindinbr. Codex. LL. vet. passim. Tolls were farmed
before and after the Conquest.
Germans, and perhaps all other Nations. After this rate in the Conquerors time
they were of some value. These were generally farmed both before and after the
Conquest. Yet Edward the Confessor kept in his own hands through all England,
these three Forfeitures, as they are called in In Civit. Sciropesberie.
Domesday.

Domes. fol. 1. col. 2.
Breach of the Peace, Forstell, viz. Cutting Cross, Hedging, or stopping up the
Kings Highway, and g Hein-^are flight for Murder, or perhaps taking away
another Man's Servant, Civit. Hereford in Domesday.
for every of which there was paid One hundred Shillings.

Crown Lands a third Branch of his Revenue.
A third Branch of his Revenue were Crown Lands, being 1422 Manners Domesd. in
the several Counties.
or Lordships, in several Counties; besides several Farms and Lands in
Middlesex, Shropshire, Rotelandshire, in the l. of Rent in white Money. These
with the Escheats in general are taken in Col. 1381.
Gervase Tilb. for Reliefs, Wardships, and Marriage Fines also; but more
particularly they are interpreted as above written.
Escheats (which were Lands, and many times great The word used in the same P.
60. b.
Author for Felony is Scelus according to the old Feudists, and not Felonia
according to later use.
Felony or Treason, or that Escheats.
raised a great Revenue in Money; For it cannot be altogether true which
Gervase of Tilbury P. 26. b. 27. a.
reports from Tradition, and the Current of Historians from him or one another,
that only etc. of which the Kings Officers had a Roll of what quality and
quantity every Man's proportion was in every County. And that in Henry the
First's time, by Special Commissioners sent into every County, upon Complaint
and Request of the Kings Tenants, the Victuals chargeable upon all Lands were
rated at the usual price and the value of them paid in Money; The price of
Wheat, to make ^00 Men Bread 1 s. of a Sheep 4 d. etc. A false Story that Rents
were paid in Victuals all the Conquerors time.
which was after the rate of s. for a Ram or Sheep 4 d. for Provender for
twenty Horses 4 d. etc. This Story, I say, cannot be altogether true, if
compared with Domesday-Book, where we almost every where find what Annual Rent
in Money was paid to the Conqueror out of every Manner; out of some 10, 20, 30,
60, 80, 100 l. etc. as we see in the Examples before mentioned. Indeed in some
of the Kings Manners or Honors, there are firmae duarum vel trium noctium, etc.
reserved, Saxon or German way of accounting time by nights, as we by days; and
in some others there are so many Muttons and other Victuals reserved, but very
rarely, and therefore it is most probable, that if ever there was such a
practice of paying only Victuals in stead of Rent, and that this Rent-Victuals
was by Commissioners turned into Money, it was done by those Commissioners the
Conqueror directed into every County, etc. to make the

Custom of Merchandise.
To this Branch may be added the Customs of Merchandise, properly so called for
liberty of coming in, and going out of his Ports, and passing upon and through
his Seas. In short his Revenue was so great, that Fol. 523. B.
Ordericus Vitalis says, it was reported to be One thousand and sixty pound of
Saxon STEORE, signifying a Law or Rule, Somn. Gloss. in verbo Esterlingas.

Sterling, what it signifies, and from whence derived. Sir Edw. Coke perverts
the Sentence.

Gervase of Tilbury.


and Linge an Addition common among the Saxons, rendering the word to which it
is joined more significant, or expressive, as in Dearlinge, Wordlinge, etc. so
that Sterling Money is no more than good and lawful Money answering the
Standard.
Sterling Money, thirty Shillings England every day of the year, The Conquerors
Revenue was 1060 l. 30 s. ^ d. every day in the year* 3874497 l. 16 s. 3 d.
besides his Gifts and Presents and Pecuniary Punishments, which if we reckon
ten times as much now, according to the forementioned rate of things in his
Reign, his yearly Revenue amounted to 3874497 l. 16 s. 3 d. But allow it to be
fifteen times so much now as then, as may very well be done and not over rate
it, l. 14 s. 4 d. besides free Gifts, Fines, and Amerciaments for Offenses. His
standing Army not paid out of this Revenue.
Besides this great Revenue, he had a mighty standing Army of Horse especially,
with which he made good his Conquests without any Expense or Charge issuing out
of his Revenue; Ibidem. After what manner they were distributed, see the
Preface here.
for the same Author affirms, that he so distributed the Lands of England to
his Followers and Soldiers, as he had 60000 Knights or Horsemen constantly at
his Command to be employed in any Expedition he pleased. This estimate of
Gloss. fol. 218. col. 2.
Sir Hen. Spelman, Answer to the Reasons for Foreign Wars, p. 9.
Sir Robert Cotton, and Tit. of Hon. fol. 573.
Mr. Seldom, with an Addition of 215 more. And this number of Knights Fees was
the same or greater in the Fifth of Henry the Second, 1159. for then he took
Scutage of England only to prosecute the Wars in France, One hundred and
fourscore thousand pounds of Silver, if Col. 1381.
Gervase of Canterbury may be credited. If there were then but 60000 Knights
Fees, it l. or as they then reckoned, four Marks and an half upon every Knights
Fees, a very high and unusual rate; but upon extraordinary occasions, as for
maintaining of War, and paying of Stipendiary Soldiers, Scutage over and above
the Revenue before mentioned was a common and usual Tax; we have both name and
thing in Gervase Lib. 1. c. 22. Tit Scutagium, etc. Scutage paid to maintain
Soldiers.
of Tilbury. Fit interdum, imminente vel insurgente in regnum hostium
Machinatione, decernat Rex de singulis foedis militum summam aliquam, marcam
scilicet vel lib. unam, unde militibus Stipendia Sir Edw. Coke transposeth
these words, Institut. 1. fol. 69. a. and reads them thus, (perverting the
sense of the Author) Mavult Princeps Domesticos, quam Stipendiarios Bellicis
apponere casibus. Admiring the wisdom of Antiquity, that the Prince had rather
be served in his Wars by his own Subjects than Stipendiary Foreigners.
Stipendiarios quam domesticos Bellicis apponere casibus. Haec itaque summa
quia nomine That is, sometimes upon imminent danger or designs raised by
Enemies against the Kingdom, the King may Decree or take upon every Knights
Fee, a Sum of Money, (to wit) a Mark or one Pound, from whence arise the
Stipends and Donatives of Soldiers; for the Prince had rather employ in his
Wars Stipendiaries, than Domestics. This Sum Scutum (that is) a Knights Fees
were called Scuta, from their Shields, a certain part of the Armor the always
used; and therefore we see our ancient Kings, and great Men pourtrayed in a
Military posture on Horseback, with a Shield upon their left Arm.
Knights etc. as will appear in the Sequel of this History.

He brought the Clergy under subjection.
Nor did he think himself secure only by having all Persons in Secular Authority
his Dependants, and at his Command: but he brought the Clergy also,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and all Degrees of that Function under his
subjection, Mat. Paris, fol. 7. n. 10. And the Church Lands under Military
Service. And Quartered Soldiers in their Monasteries.
for he put the Bishoprics and Abbeys which had Baronies, that is, great
Possessions, and were before free from all Secular Service, under Military
Service, and according to his will and pleasure appointed how many Knights or
Soldiers they should find in time of War, and chased out of the Ingulph. Croyl.
n. 40.
which he had hired in France, Almain and Spain, in all Monasteries of England;
in Croyland Abbey he Quartered six Milites or Knights, and twenty eight
Cross-bow-Men, that shot Stones and Darts out of Ballistarii.
Cross-Bows, or perhaps the Officers of the Steel-Bow-Men, or Directors of the
Management of the great Brakes or Engines, with which they battered Ely, after
the Isle was reduced, were placed forty, whereof Bellassis, Governor at least
of the old Fort, called now by the Country People Belsars-Hills, if not General
of the Forces against the Island, was one, and thirty nine more, all Officers
or Men of Account, as by their Names and Arms appears in a Parchment Roll in
the Custody of the Bishop of Ely, made in the time of Robert de Orford Bishop
of Ely, who was Godw de Presul. Angl. p. 318.
Consecrated 1302. and died 1309. Nor did he think this enough to restrain Anno
Domini 1070.
who then bare the chief sway in the Government; but by Advice of William
Fitz-Osbern Earl of Hereford, and others of his Council, he searched the
Florent. Wigorn. f. 636. He Rifles the Monasteries.
Monasteries of all England, and took away the Money which the richer sort of
English had secured there, fearing his Austerity and Ravages, and commanded it
to be carried into his Treasury. Fol. 7.
Mat. Paris says he robbed all the Monasteries of their Gold and Silver, and
spared not their Shrines and Chalices; Nor yet did he think himself Eadmer,
fol. 6. n. 10. He brought in the Norman Laws, and made Norman Bishops in
England. All things were done according to the Conquerors Pleasure.
until having brought into England the Laws and Usages which he and his Fathers
were wont to observe in Normandy, he had made such Men Bishops, Abbats, and
chief Rulers through the whole Land, as might be thought very unworthy, if in
all things they submitted not to his Laws, or should in any wise oppose him;
and therefore all Divine and Humane Matters were ordered according to his Will
and Pleasure. To this purpose there was a great Council Winchester, eight days
after Easter, at the Command of the King, he being present, and with the
Consent of Pope Alexander, by his Legates Herminfrid Bishop of Sedune, now by
the Germans called Sittes, and the French Sion, and the Country about it
Sionois; it is seated upon the River Rosne, before it falls into the Lake of
Geneva.
Sedune, and two Priests, Cardinals of the Apostolic See, Florent. Wigorn f.
636. An. Do. 1070. A Council at Winchester, wherein Stigand was Deposed.
John and Peter, producing his Authority. In this Council Stigand Archbishp of
Canterbury was Deposed for three Causes, to wit, because he unjustly possessed
the Bishopric of Winchester with the Archbishopric, and because he invaded
the Archbishopric while Archbishop Robert was living, Canterbury, in
Celebrating Mass, when by force he was unjustly put out of England, and
received a Pall from Benedict whom the Roman Church had Excommunicated, for
that by Money he had invaded the Apostolic See. De Gest. Pontif. fol. 116. b.
Malmsbury says, with these two Bishoprics he also possessed many Abbeys* who
in this (as he conceived) did not commit a Sin of Judgment, but Error, for that
he was a very illiterate Man, as were almost all the Bishops of England at that
time. Florent. Wigorn. ut supra. Agalmar Bishop of East Angles, and some Abbats
Deposed.
In this Council also Agalmar Brother of Stigand, Bishop of East Angles, (his
Seat being Elmham) was Deposed, and some Abbats; The King promoting that work,
that he might put into their places Men of his own Nation, for the confirmation
of his new Conquered Kingdom. Ibidem. Others were kept in Prison all their
Lives.
He also kept in Prison some Bishops and Abbats all their Life time, without
any evident Cause, Ibidem. Agelric Bishop of the South Saxons turned out, and
imprisoned without fault.

He makes his own Chaplains Bishops.


being neither condemned by any Councils or Secular Laws, merely out of
Jealousy and suspicion of the safety of the Kingdom. On Whitsunday the King
gave the Archbishopric of York to Thomas Canon of Bayeaux Normandy, and the
Bishopric of Winchester to Walkelin his Chaplain; and on the Morrow, by his
Command, Herminfrid the Bishop of Sedune, the Cardinals being returned to Rome,
held a Synod, in which Agelric the Bishop of the South Saxons was not
Canonically Deposed, whom the King imprisoned at Malborow without any fault;
There were then also (to use the Authors own Phrase) very many Abbats degraded.
The Conqueror gave to his Chaplanes Herfastus the Bishopric of East Angles,
and to Stigand the Bishopric South Saxons, and gave the Abbeys to his Norman
Monks. Eadmer, fol. 6. n. 20. No man to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for Pope
without his Command.
He would not suffer any one in his Dominions to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome
for Pope, without his Command, nor to receive any Letters from him, unless they
were first shown to him. Ibidem. The Archbishop might not appoint or prohibit
any thing without his Leave.
The Archbishop might preside in any Council, but he would not permit him to
appoint or prohibit any thing but what he pleased, and such things as were
first Ordained by him. Ibid. n. o. His Barons without his Command not to be
impleaded.
He would not suffer any Bishop to implead and Excommunicate any of S^ld. not.
in Ead. f. 168.
held immediately in Capite) or Officers, for Incest, Adultery, or any heinous
Crime, unless by his Command. But notwithstanding the Conquerors Stoutness and
Resolution in these matters, by his admission of the Popes Legates for the
purposes above mentioned, his Holiness gained the first Po^ut of his Usurped
Jurisdiction in England, although William still retained the absolute Power of
investing Bishops, and seemed only to use the Advice and Assistance of the
Legates in Ecclesiastical Matters, for that no Decree or Constitution was put in
Execution without his Royal Assent.
Eadmer, ut supra, n. 49. Lanfranc made Archbishop, An Do. 1071.
In the first year of his Reign Lanfranc Abbat of Caen in Normandy, a stout
Man, and very much skilled in Divine and Humane Affairs, was made Archbishop
of Canterbury, and Consecrated the fourth of the Kalends of Sptember, or the
Twenty ninth of August. Malms de gest. Pon. lib. ^ fol. 117. a b. The Pope
Decreed the Controversy about the Primacy, between York and Canterbury ought
to be decided in England.
Afterward going to Rome for his Pall, Thomas Archbishop of York, whom he had
Consecrated, Thomas propounding to Pope Alexander the Controversy between
himself and Lanfranc, about the Primacy and Subjection of the Sea of York to
Canterbury, and the three Bishoprics of Lincoln, Worcester, and Litchfield,
which he claimed as subject to York. The Pope Decreed, That the Cause ought to
be heard in England, and decided by the Testimony and Judgment of all the
Bishops and Abbats of the whole Kingdom. Spelm. Council. vol. 2. fol. 6. Anno
Domini 1072. Sir John Danis Irish Reports, fol. 89. b.
After two Discussions, one at Winchester in the Kings Chapel there in the
Castle, in the Solemnity of Easter; and the other at Windsor in the Feast of
Pentecost; it was finally determined in the presence of the King, Bishops,
Abbats, and of Hubert Legate of the Roman Church, as says Fol. 8. n. 30.
Paris, and many other Orders of Men met The Conqueror commonly kept Easter at
Winchester, Whitsunday at Windsor or Westminster, and Christmas at Gloucester;
at which times were present in Court, all the Temporal Nobility, Bishops,
Abbats, etc. through all England; so that at those times he could hold a great
Council or Synod at a days warning, when he pleased, and at those times were
commonly held the Great Councils for all Public Affairs.
occasion of that Festival. Malms. ut supra, b. n. 20, 30, 40. The Church of
York ought to be subject to Canterbury. The Jurisdiction of York extended to
the further part of Scotland.
Upon proof made by old Authorities and Writings, that the Church of York ought
to be subject to the Church of Canterbury, and the Archbishop of York to obey
the Archbishop of Canterbury in all things pertaining Britain; That the
Bishopric of Duresm, and all the Countries from the bounds of the Bishopric
of Litchfield, and from the great River Humber, unto the furthest part of
Scotland, should be the Province, and under the Jurisdiction of York; so that
if the Archbishop called a Council wherever he pleased, the Archbishop of
York with his Suffragans were to be present there, and give obedience to what
should be determined; That the Archbishop of York ought to receive Episcopal
Hist. Nov. fol. 9. n. 20.
Eadmer says, (who had most reason to know best) they were confirmed by the
Testimony of the Kings Seal. About this time he amended Cart. in Append. n. 11.
The Ecclesiastical and Civil Jurisdiction distinguished.
the Episcopal Laws which had not been well observed, by the Common Council of
his Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and all the Chief Men of his Kingdom, and
Commanded by his Regal This is left out by Mr. Seldom. f. 167, 168. Not. in
Eadmer. No Sheriff, Minister, or Laick to meddle with Episcopal Laws.
and if any one was so obstinate as not to appear at the third Summons, he
should be Excommunicated; and if need were, the Kings or Sheriffs Power were to
be added; Cleopat. E. 1. Bibl. Co^ton 1. vol. of the State of he Church, and ex
Chart. Willielmi, sub sigillo ibid.
by the Assent of Lanfranc Archbishop, Stigand Bishop of Chichester, in a
Council of his Bishops and Barons, granted to the Church of St. Martin of
Battle-Abby, which he founded, In Append. n. 12. An. Do. 1086.
all the freedom from subjection imaginable, and that although it was within
the Diocese of Winchester, yet it should not be subject to the Bishop, Great
Privileges granted by William to Battle Abbey.
and that in his Visitation, he should not lodge there, nor in any of the
Manners belonging to it, and that in all things in the same Church, and a League
every way of which Constitution were for ever anathematized by Lanfranc
Archbishop, Stigand aforesaid, Walkelin Bishop of Winchester, Wolstan Bishop of
Worcerster, all then present. The Pope sent to William by his Legate Hubert, to
do him Fealty, and pay him the Arrears of Peter Pence; but though willing to
gratify him in one, he absolutely In Appest. n. 13. The Conqueror refuses to
be Feudatary to the Pope.
denied the other, and refused to become his Feudatary or Vassal for the
Kingdom of England. Archbishop Lanfranc London, Spelm. Council. fol. 7* 8. vol.
2. Anno Domini 1075. Bishoprics removed from Villages to Cities The Clergy not
to give Judgment in loss of Life or Member.
wherein, because it was forbidden by the Councils of Sardis and Laodicea, that
Bishops Sees should be in Villages, therefore by the Kings Munificence and
Authority of this Synod, Bishop Hermannus removed from Sherborn to Salisbury,
Stigand from Selsey to Chichester, Peter, from Litchfield to Chester, and
afterward Remigius from Dorchester, a Village in Oxfordshire, to Lincoln. It
was also Ordained in this Council, that according to the Council of Eliberis
and the Eleventh of Toledo, (both Cities in Spain) that no Bishop or Abbat, or
any of the Clergy should give Judgment concerning the Life of any Man, or loss
of Member, nor by their Authority should countenance any that do it. Another he
held at Winchester, Ibidem, fol. 13. Anno Domini 1076. No Canon to Marry.
Priests in Burghs and Cities might retain their Wives.
wherein it was Decreed, That no Canon should Marry: and that Priests which
lived in Buroughs and Villages, that had Wives, should not put them away; but
if they had none, they were prohibited to take any; and Bishops were to take
care In Appen. n. 14. The Origin of Exempts and Peculiars.
Archbishop Lanfranc exempted all the Clerks or Parish Priests of the Towns
belonging to him, or where he was Lord, or presented to the Living in any
Diocese from the Jurisdiction and Visitation of the Bishop, which might be the
Original of Peculiars. These were the Ecclesiastical Affairs in England in the
time of William the First, what they were then in Normandy, and how alike to
them here, may be seen in the Constitutions made there In Appen. n. 15.
1080.

In the last year of his Reign Flor^ Wig. fol. 642. Anno Domini 1087. many of
the chief Cities of England and London burnt. Order. vit. fol. 663. C.
almost all the chief Cities of England were burnt, and the greatest and best
part of London, with the Church of St. Paul's.

King William dying on the Ninth of September 1087. as was noted before, left
Issue by Maud, Daughter of Baldwin Earl of Flanders,

1. Robert his eldest Son, Florent. Wigor. fol. 642. Anno Domini 1087.
according to the Will and Bequest of his Father, succeeded him only in the
Dukedom of Normandy.

2. Richard his Second Son, Order. vit fol. 573. C.
who following a hard Chase in Hunting in the New-Forest, was mortally hurt by
the Bough of an Hasle-Tree, before either his years of Marriage or Knighthood.

William commonly called Rufus succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of England,
Florent. Wigor. ut supra.
as he had given it to him in his last Will and Testament.

4. Henry, who after the death of his Brother William without Issue, was King
of England, and Duke of Normandy; Order. fol. 659. C.
he had given him by his Father only Five thousand Pounds in Money.

Ibid. fol. 484. D. 548. B. C.
5. Cicely his Eldest Daughter, first a Nun in the Monastery of Fescamp in
Normandy, afterward Abbess of the Holy Trinity in Cane, where she died Anno
Domini 1127. July 13.

Ibidem. fol. 544. C.
6. Constance Married to Alan Fergant, or the Red, Earl of Britain, for the
assurance of Peace between King William and him, died without Issue.

Lib. 8. c. 34.
7. Adelidis or Alice his Third Daughter, Contracted to Harold Fol. 573. C.
Seems to be the same with Agatha, Script. Norm. f. 1070.
as Gemeticensis affirms, but at his death being Marriageble, died a Virgin;
but Ordericus Vitalis mentions not this Contract between her and Harold.

Ibid. and fol. 574. A.
8. Adela who was Married to Stephen Earl of Blois, by whom she had four Sons,
William, Theobald, Henry, and Stephen, who by his Uncle King Henry the First
was made Earl of Mortainge, and by his Maud Daughter and Heir of Eustachius
Earl of Bulloign, by whom he had that Earldom, and also very great Possessions
in England.

Ibid. 573. C. Seems to be the same with Adelidis or Adelis, Script. Norm. f.
1070.
9. Agatha who died a Virgin, but reported by Ordericus Vitalis to have been
first Contracted to Harold the Usurper, and afterward to Amfurcius King of
Gallicia, but died in her Journey thither, not having ever seen him.

THE
THE Conqueror dying on the Ninth of October, An. Do. 1087.
Ord Vit. fol. 763. D. Rufus brings his Fathers Donation of England to
Archbishop Lanfranc.
Robert Bloiet his Chaplain immediately came over into England with his Son
William, and brought with him, to Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, the
Donation of his Father, Ibidem, fol. 663. C. Who Anointed him King.
who having read it, made haste with him to London, and on Michaelmass-day
Anointed him King in the old Church of St. Peter at Westminster, having first
promised Eadm fol. 13. n. 50. Upon the great Promises he made to him. He was
Knighted by Lanfranc.
upon his Faith Lanfranc, (being not over forward to grant his desires) that he
would in all matters through the whole Kingdom, preserve Justice, Equity, and
Mercy, defend the Peace and Liberty of the Church against all Men, and also in
all things obey his Council and Precepts.

But though Lanfranc having been his Tutor, Malms. de Gest. Reg. fol. 67. b. n
30. Order. Vital. fol. 665. D. Eudo King Williams Steward, a great Instrument
in setting up Rufus.
and also having He was Son to Hubert de Rye, Privado to both Edward the
Confessor and William the Conqueror, and Envoy in the greatest and most private
Matters that passed between them.
Eudo his Cottons Library Monast. 2. vol. fol. 900. n. 40.50. The Keys of the
Treasury at Winchester delivered to Rufus.
by Sir William Dugdale) for he upon the occasion of his Fathers Grant, incited
William Rufus to be active in his own Affair, and then hastening into England,
so insinuated himself into William de Ponte-Arche, that he obtained from him
the Keys of the Treasury then at Winchester, and passed to Dover, where he
obliged by Oath the Guardians of the Castle, that they should not deliver the
Keys of that Fortress to any, without his Advice; The like he did at Pevensey,
Hastings, and other Maritime Castles, pretending the King (whose death was kept
secret) would stay yet in Normandy, and would have good assurance of the safety
of his Castles in England, by him his Steward. And having thus dispatched his
Business, he returned to Winchester, and discovered the Kings death; and by his
Contrivance, while the Nobles in Normandy were Consulting about the Succession,
William Rufus was advanced to the

In the mean time Orderic. fol. 665. C. Robert Duke of Normandy distributed his
Wealth amongst his Soldiers.
Robert Duke of Normandy his elder Brother, plentifully distributed his Wealth
among his Veteran Soldiers or Knights, and by hope of Rewards brought into his
Service a Multitude of young Soldiers; but his Ibidem.
Treasure failing, he borrowed of his Brother Henry Three thousand Pounds, for
which he received the whole Country of Constantin (now Contantin) being then
the Normandy, with the Cities Constance, Auranches, and the Monastery of St.
Michaels Mount in the Sea, etc.

Presently Ib. D. D.
upon this Action of Duke Roberts, in the first year of the Government of the
two Brothers, the chief Men that had, An. Do. 1088.
and were like to have great Estates in both Nations, met to Treat about the
division and separation of them one from another, Ibid. fol. 666. A. The
English and French Normans meet to Consult whether it were expedient England
and Normandy should have two different Princes.
both of them having been under the Power and Government England; They were in
a great straight what to do; they could not serve two Lords so remote from one
another; Ibidem.
if they faithfully served Robert Duke of Normandy, they should offend his
Brother William, and should lose their Lands and Honors in England; and if
they proved obedient to William, Robert would deprive them of their Paternal
Inheritance in Normandy. Ibid. C.
At last they resolved, that seeing Robert was the elder, and that they had
Sworn Fealty England and Normandy, for preservation of the Unity of both
Ibidem. The chief Friends and Undertakers for Duke Robert.
This was the Agreement of Odo Bishop of Bayeux, Eustacbius Earl of Bulloine,
They concluded to make Robert King of England and Duke of Normandy.
Robert de Belesin e, or de Bellismo castello Vales. not. Gal. in verbo. Robert
de Belesme who he was.
quasi bellisimo, a Fair Castle in the County of Perch, he was eldest Son to
Roger de Montgomery Earl of Arundel and Shrewsbery, and had the great
Inheritance of his Father Orderic. fol. 708. C.
in Normandy, when his second Brother Hugh de Montgomery enjoyed his Fathers
Earldoms in England, who dying without Issue, they came to this Robert in the
Ibidem. 768. C.
Tenth year of William Rufus, for which he gave him 3000 l. Sterling as a
Relief.
Robert de Belesin, and many others, which they Communicated to Duke Robert, to
whom, if they would begin, he promised sufficient Assistance for effecting
their Design. Therefore Ibidem.
after Christmas they passed into England, fortified their Castles, and in a
short time stirred up a great part of Ibidem.
with these joined Roger Earl of Arundel and Shrewsbery, Hugh Grentmesnill
Viscount of Leicester, and many more very great Men in England, or at least
seemingly continued with William, and favored the design of Robert; Ibid. D.
who fortified, Manned, and Victualled their Castles, and wasting the Countries
almost all over the Nation, expected Duke Robert with an Army out of Normandy
at the Spring. Ibidem.
King William observing the posture of his Affairs, resolved to suppress these
Insurrections; and to that purpose Convoked Lanfranc Archbishop, Bishops,
Earls, and Natural English, Lanfranc the Archbishop the other bishops, and
Natural English side with Rufus.
and showed them his intention, who exhorted the King to proceed against the
Perturbers of the Peace, and promised their ready Assistance. Ibidem. fol. 667.
B. Rochester chosen as a place of advantage and fit for a Magazine.
Odo with some of the chief Normans, who intended to set up Robert, chose
Rochester as a place of advantage and most fit for their chief Magazine, London
and Canterbury near the Sea, and near the Kentish Islands, which were
conveniently seated for the landing Forces and Warlike Provisions: from whence
at their pleasure, they could keep a Correspondency with Duke Robert. But
Ibidem. fol. 667. B. Rochester besieged. Duke Robert lost the Town and Castle
by sloth and want of diligence.
King William prevented their Designs by besieging the Town in the Month of May
following, where he shut up Odo, Eustathius Earl of Bolloigne, Robert de
Belesme, and many other Noblemen, and Persons of inferior Rank, who in vain
expected the Robert, being detained only by ease and sloth from his promised
Expedition; Ib. C. D. The Defendents offer to yield upon Conditions.
out of the Town they were forced into the Castle, where many perished by a
raging Sickness, and urged by many other necessities, they sent out to King
William, that upon condition they might enjoy their Lands and Estates they
would yield the Castle, and for the future serve him faithfully as their
Natural Lord.

Rufus denies their Conditions.
and swear he would take the Perfidious Traitors by force, Hang, and destroy
them with diverse kinds of death: and to his Nobility having many Friends and
Relations in the Castle, persuading him to moderation, Orderic. fol. 668. B.
he gave this Answer, That whosoever spared Perjured Men, Thieves, Plunderers,
and Execrable Traitors, took away quiet and peace from innocent Men, and laid a
foundation of innumerable Mischiefs to the good and harmless; Ibid. D.
but at length overcome by the intercession Ibidem. 667. C.
which were, all the Bishops of England, with the English, Hugh Earl of
Chester, Ibidem. 669. C.
He was an Esquire to Edward the Confessor, and by him made Knight, his Father
was Ibidem.
Humfrid de Teliolo, Ibidem, fol. 512. b.
Governor of the Fortress of Hastings, and Son to Ansfrid the Dane; His Mother
Adeliza Sister to Hugh de Grentmoisnill, Viscount of Leicester, and Governor of
Ibidem.
Winchester; He had his name of Rodeleds Domesd. Cestrescire Atiscros. Hundr.
or Roelent, from the Castle and Territory of Roelent in the Marches of
North Wales, of which he was Governor, and General of all the Forces in
Cheshire under Earl Hugh, and not only defended it against the Welsh. but
Conquered much of North Wales. Ibidem.
which he farmed of the King for 40 l. per Annum, Ibidem.
besides the Fee of Ross and Rowenloc, which he held of the King twelve Miles
in length, and four in breadth.
Robert de Roelent, William He was Son of Haimon Earl of Corboile in Normandy,
Monast. vol. 1. fol. 154. Col. 2. n 40. Robert Fitz-Haymon made Earl of
Gloucester by Rufus and had the Estate of Brictric the Saxon Earl thereof.
to whom for the great Services William Rufus gave the Earldom of Gloucester,
and the Possession of Brictric the Saxon, who was Earl thereof before the
Conquest. The which Earldom and Possessions. Queen Ma^d enjoyed during her
life, and her Husband the Conqueror afterward. This Robert had Ibid. f. 1^^. n.
60. Mabil his eldest Daughter and Heir was Married to Robert Earl of
Gloucester, Natural Son to Henry the First.
Four Daughters, two whereof were Abesses, Amice a third Married the Earl of
Britain, (who probably had her Fathers Possessions in Normandy) the eldest
Mabil was Married to Robert, Natural Son of Henry the First, who by his Father
was made Earl of Gloucester, and enjoyed all those Possessions.
Robert Fitz-Haimon, and other legal and ancient Orderic. fol. 668. D.
granted the Besieged their Lives, The Terms upon which Rochester Castle was
surrendered.
pardoned the loss of their Limbs, and gave them leave to pass out of the
Castle with their Horse and Arms, but without hopes of enjoying their Lands and
Inheritance in England during his Reign. Ibidem, fol. 669. A. The Arts by which
Rufus setl^d himself.
Odo returned to Bayeux, and never came to England afterward, where he lost
all his great Possessions. It was not by force that he quelled this universal
defection of the Normans, Malmsb. de Gest. Reg. fol. 68. n. 10.
but by publishing, that he would ease them (and especially the English) of
Taxes, that he would alleviate the Laws, and give them free liberty of Hunting:
Ibidem, and ^. 20. And brought off to his side Roger Earl of Arundel and
Shrewsbury.
And by insinuating himself into Roger Earl of Arundel and Shrewsbury, the
chief Person next Odo in this Insurrection, to Ibidem.
With these fair words and Promises the Earl was brought off from the
Confederacy, which was immediately broken, and the Nation reduced to quiet, (as
was said before) the Confederates either submitting or flying.

Rufus passes into Normandy with an Army.
William thus confirmed in his Kingdom, Order. fol. 608. B. 681. A. Flor.
Wigorn. fol. 644. A^. 1090. St. Valery Castle delivered to him. Girard de
Gournay delivers up his Fortresses to William Rufus. Robert Earl of Ou, Walter
Giffart, Ralph Mortimer, etc. join themselves to the English.
next year passed with an Army into Normandy, to requite his Brother Robert,
and subdue that Dukedom. The Army landed at St. Valerie, and had Stephen of
Albamarle, Son of Odo Earl of Champaigne, at King Williams Charge fortified and
Manned his Castle for him.

Girard de Gournay followed his Example, and delivered up to the King his
Fortresses of Gournay, Ferte and Gailly-fountaine; and afterward Robert Earl
of Ou, Walter Giffart, Ralph Mortemer or de Mortuo-Mari, and almost all the
Inhabitants on the North-side the Seine, joined themselves to the English, and
received sufficient Money Florent. Wig. 664. Anno. 1091. Duke Robert makes a
disadvantageous Peace with Rufus.
Whereupon Duke Robert called to his Assistance Philip King of France, who
underhand receiving Money from William, returned home, without attempting any
thing against him; which, with the revolt of his Normans, caused Robert to make
a disadvantageous Peace with his Brother; Ibidem. The Conditions of that Peace.
The Conditions these, That King William should enjoy the County or Earldom of
Ou, the Monastery of Fecampe, Mount Saint Michael, the Town of Cherburgh, and
all the Castles that revolted from the Duke; That the King should reduce the
Country of Maine, with the other rebellious Castles in Normandy, to the
obedience of the Duke, that he should restore to those that adhered to the Duke
their Lands in England, and also to the Duke himself so much Land as should be
agreed on between them. Lastly, That if the Duke died without Lawful Issue, the
King to be his Heir; and in like manner, the Duke to be

Twelve Barons on each side Swear to the Peace.
Which Agreement twelve Barons on the Dukes, and twelve on the Kings part
confirmed by Oath. In the mean while, no Consideration having been had of their
Brother Henry in this Treaty, whose Money was detained, and Order. fol. 672. D.
he himself also had been imprisoned, and ill used by his Brother Robert, and
Ibidem. 689. C.
disseised of his Mothers Lands in England, which his Brother William had given
to Robert Fitz-Haimon; Ibidem. Henry the younger Brother fortifies his Towns in
Normandy. Some Normans Revolt to him.
He fortifies his Towns, which were Cherburgh, These Towns were in that part of
Normandy called Constantin, which was pawned to Henry by Robert for 3000 l. he
borrowed of him.
Constance, and Guabreium, and craftily gained to his Party many of his Fathers
Nobility, as Earl Hugh de Auranches, Richard de Badveriis, and others of the
Country of Constantin, now Contantin, besides Robert Mowbray, by which means
his Forces increased Ibid. D.
but the English Kings Army passing where it would, almost through Normandy,
and the Norman Nobility favoring him for his Money; the Citizens of Rouen
likewise allured with his Gifts and Promises, Treated with him about changing
their Prince, and consulted how to betray the Metropolis of Normandy, and their
Drowsy Ibidem.
Duke to the King. One Ibidem. A Conspiracy to deliver Rouen to Rufus.
Conan, who by reason of his great Riches, had a good Interest in the Citizens,
was the chief Conspirator, and bargained with William Rufus to Gournay, and
other Castles near, which were in his possession, to surprise the City; but the
Duke made sensible of this Conspiracy, struck up a Peace with his Ibidem. The
City secured Conan the chief Conspirator, and many Citizens slain.
Brother, and some others that had revolted from him, who put themselves time
enough into the Town to secure it, though with much Slaughter of the Citizens,
who made resistance; amongst whom Conan the chief Traitor and many others were
taken, and for his Punishment Conan was by Henry's Order carried to the top of
Ibidem. fol. ^90. D
with his own hands thrust down headlong out at a Window. Next year Duke Robert
besieged Ib. 692. B. 693. B. 696. D. Anno Domini 1091. Rufus returns into
Normandy. Is Caressed by the Norman Nobility, by the French, Britans,
Flemmings, etc. They extol his Bounty.
Curcey in the Month of January; but King William arriving in Normandy with a
great Fleet he left the Siege, and almost all the Norman Nobility strove who
should make their Addresses and Presents to the King, and not only they, but
the French, Britans, Flemmings, and many of the Neighboring Provinces, so soon
as they heard he intended to remain at Owe or Eu in Normandy, obsequiously
flocked to

At length the Ibid. fol. 693. B. C. The Duke and King reconciled.
two Brothers came together at Rouen, where all former Complaints being laid
aside, they were reconciled to each other; The Duke received mighty Gifts and
Presents from the King, to whom the Duke granted the County or Earldom of Ou,
Albamarle, Gerard de Gournay and Ralph de Couches, with all the Castles and
Fortresses subject and belonging to them. Henry not pleased with this
Transaction, raised great Complaints against both Ibidem. 6^9. A. Henry
displeased with his Brothers, got together a Body of Britans and Normans.
his Brothers, and demanded some part of the large Possessions of his Father,
and having gathered together a Body of the Britans and Normans, fortified
Constance, Auranches, and some other Towns. But Ibidem. His Friends Revolt from
him, His Brothers besiege him in St. Michaels Mount.
Hugh Earl of Chester, (who was also Earl of Auranches) and others the great
Favorers of him, weighing his William, deserted Henry, and yielded their
Places of Strength to the King; and in the middle of Lens the two Brothers
William and Robert besieged their Brother Henry in St. Michaels Mount, which
was yielded for want of Drink and Water; Sr. Michaels Mount yielded.
on Condition, That he and those with him might have liberty to go whether they
pleased. Ibid. B. Henry wanders from place to place.
After which Henry wandered for some years from place to place with one Knight,
a Priest, or a Clerk, and three Servants or Esquires.

While the King employed himself in Normandy, there was in England a great
Ibid. fol. 703. B. C. An. Do. 1093. Robert de Mowbray Earl of Northumberland
Conspires against Rufus.
Conspiracy formed against him by Robert de Molbraio, or Mowbray, Earl of
Northumberland, and many other Normans, of which the King having notice, raised
an Army and marched against them; Ibid. D.
who understanding which way he was to pass, laid an Ambush to intercept or
kill him in a Wood; which was discovered to him, and the design prevented, by
Gilbert de Tonebridge one of the chief Conspirators, and then his Troops passed
on to Ibidem, fol. 704. A.
Bamborough Castle which they besieged, and at length Robert fell into their
hands, Ibid. B. Mowbray taken Prisoner.
who was kept in Bonds almost thirty years. Roger de Lacy had his Lands taken
from him, Hugh, who faithfully adhered to the King; Ibid. C. The Earl of
Chester gave 3000 l. to be restored to favor, and many others Compound for
their Crimes.
Hugh Earl of Chester was privately chidden by the King, and gave 3000 l. to be
restored to favor, as likewise he received of many others great Sums of Money,
as Compositions for their Crimes; Ibidem. The Earl of Owe had his Eyes pulled
out, and his Testicles cut off.
and William Earl of Owe being openly Convicted, had his Eyes pulled out, and
his Testicles cut off; Many others the King spared out of Policy, by the Advice
of his Council. This year Malcolm King of Scots, on Bartholomew-day, came to
King William, William would neither see or speak with him, and further would
have constrained him to have done him right according to the Judgment only of
his Barons in his own Court, but he refused to do it, unless in the Confines of
both Kingdoms, where the Kings of Scotland used to do right to the Kings of
England, according to the Judgment of the Chief Men of both Kingdoms, Flor.
Wigorn. f. 646. A. D. 1093. and not long after William Rufus surprised
Buch^rer. Scot. lib. 7. p. 214. Flor. Wigor. f. 645. Malcolm King of Scots, and
his eldest Son slain.
the Castle of Alnewick in Northumberland, which Malcolm King of Scots
presently besieged, where he and his eldest Son Edward were both slain; and
Donald his Brother was elected King by the Scots, or rather (as P. 215. An. Do.
1093. Donald usurped the Crown of Scotland.
Buchanan relates it) he usurped the Crown by the assistance of Magnus King of
Norwey, to whom he promised all the Islands.

This news so soon as it reached Duncan, Son, or Ibidem.
Bastard of Malcolme, as Buchanan calls him, being then in King Williams Army,
Florent. Wigor. f. 646. Duncan by the Assistance of Rufus obtained Scotland.
begged and obtained his Fathers Kingdom of him, and swear Fealty to him for
it, and with a Multitude of English and Normans marched speedily into Scotland,
expelled Donald, and Reigned in his stead. Next Ibidem, Anno 1094. The Welsh
invade England.
year the North-Welsh, West-Welsh, and South-Welsh labored to shake off the
Yoke of Servitude, they burned and harassed the Towns in Cheshire, Shropshire,
and Herefordshire, and killed many English and Normans, which caused William to
return England about the later end of December, and presently Lead an Army
against the Welsh, where he lost many Men and Horses.

In the mean Order. fol. 722. B.
while the untamed and intractable Normans, who not restrained by a rigid
Governor, were fit for any Mischief; Ibid. D. Many great Normans desert Duke
Robert.
many whereof corrupted by Gifts, or drawn away by terror, as Robert Earl of
Owe, Stephen of Albamarle, Gerard de Gournay, Ralph de Conch^, Robert Earl of
Mellent, Walter Giffard, Philip de Braiosa, and Richard de Curcey, and many
others, with all their People and Strong Holds adhered to King William because
he was dreadful to them; Ibidem. fol. 723. A. He passed over his Dukedom to
Rufus for 10000 Marks.
by which means Normandy was in great Confusion, and became uneasy to Duke
Robert, who destitute of Rufus, Ibid. and Flor. Wigor. fol. 648. Duke Robert
goes to Jerusalem Anno Domini 1095, 1096.
who received it to keep for him for five years, upon condition to lend him
10000 Marks, while he finished his Expedition with others to Jerusalem. This
famous Expedition of the Christians against the Infidels, was first Ord. fol.
723. A. B. Flor. Wig. 647. 10000 Marks raised with much difficulty.
set on foot by the Preaching of Peter the Hermit of Amiens, and afterward
greatly encouraged, and mightily advanced by the Council of Clermont in France,
called by Pope Urban for that purpose; France and Germany became Undertakers in
this Holy War.

Much to do there was to raise this 10000 Marks, which William imposed upon his
Great Men. Ibidem, fol. 648.
The Bishops, Abbats, and Abbesses brake the Gold and Silver Ornaments of their
Churches; and the Earls, Barons, and Viscounts (or perhaps Sheriffs only) Ibid.
and Order. fol. 765. A. Anno Domini 1097, 1098. Rufus by his severity keeps the
Normans in due subjection.
In September Rufus passed the Sea, made Peace with his Brother, paid him his
Money, and received Normandy as a Pawn for it, and kept the Normans in due
subjection by his severity, during the time he lived, almost five years.
William thus possessed of Normandy, Ibid. fol. 766. A.B.C.D. and 667. B. Anno
1098. Vales. Not. Gal. fol. 588. Rufus cl^ims Veuxin Francois and the chief
Town in it.
claimed the French Le Veuxin Norman, and le Veuxin Francois; The People that
inhabited this Country Caesar in his Commentaries, Bellocassi, by others
Veliocassi, by some Vilcass^, and Vulcassini, and the Country called Pagus
Vulcassinu^, and Vilcassinus. Veuxin Norman, and Veuxin Francois.
The Norman Veuxin is seated between the River Andelle, upon which are placed
Ratepont, Churlevil, Fleuri, and falls into the Seyn, a little above
Pont-larch, and the River I^ta, Etta, Epta, or Ryta, upon which New-March,
Gournay, Giso^s, Dangu, and St. Cle^ are seated, and it falls into the Seyn
between Vernon and le Roche Guion. Veuxin Francois is seated between the last
River Epte and the River Isara, Ese, or Oyse, upon which stands Pontoyse, etc.
Some part of Veuxin Norman lies beyond the River Andelle, toward Rouen. These
ancient names are antiquated, and not to be found but in ancient Authors,
Charts, and Monuments.
Veuxin of Philip King of France, and Pontoyse, Chaumont, and Mant; and after a
years Scuffle for it, by Burnings, Rapines, and leading the People Rufus his
Business in England requiring his presence there, which probably was the Arming
of the Welsh, and the fresh attempts they made upon England, Flor. Wig. fol.
648.
for about this year King William the second time marched into Wales, with
intention to kill all the Male Sex, but of them he scare found or killed any:
yet he lost some of his own Men, and many Horses. Ibid. and Buch. ^er. Scot. p.
216. Duncan slain, Donald usurps Edgar Son of Malcolms made King.
Presently after this Duncan being treacherously slain, and Donald usurping
again in Scotland, Aedgar was sent thither with an Army to expel Donald, and to
make Aedgar King, then the eldest Son of Malcolme, and here in England under
the Protection of William, which was effectually done. Florius supra Order.
fol. 772. D. An. Dom. 1098.
Then having news that the City Man's, and Countries of Anjou and Main had
revolted, he returned into Normandy, besieged and took the City, Anjou and Main
revolt, and are reduced.
and reduced the Countries to obedience; bringing Elias the Earl of Maine to
his own Terms. Ibidem, ut supra.
In the mean while Hugh Earl of Chester, and Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury with an
Army attempted the Isle of Anglesey; wherein they took many Welsh and killed
them, and pulled the Eyes out of some others, after they had first chopped off
their Hands and Feet, they cut off their Testicles. Ibidem, Magnus King of
Norway invades Anglesey.
This was the time when Magnus King of Norwey invaded this Island, in
resistance of whom, seven days after this Welsh, Hugh Earl of Shrewsbury lost
his Life.

The next Ibid. 649. An. Do. 1099.
year the King returned out of Normandy into England, and held his Court in the
Solemnity and Feast of Pentecost at London, when he gave Ibidem.
to Ranulph, whom he had appointed to manage the Affairs of the whole Kingdom,
the Bishopric of Duresme. The greatest Action now on foot in Christendom, was
the prosecution of the War against the Turks; and Jerusalem being Princes
Zealous to prosecute the Holy War.
and the Christians much prevailing in Palestine, others of the Christian
Princes that were first engaged in the Holy War (as 'twas termed) became
inflamed with a Zeal of assisting in, and prosecuting of it; Amongst whom Ord.
fol. 780. B. C.
William Duke of Poictou was one, and that he might the better raise a
considerable Force, and accomplish his Design, he sent to William Rufus
Ambassadors to borrow Money; Acquitain Pawned to William Rufus.
for the security thereof, he offered to Pawn to him the Duchy of Aquitain By
Aquitaine here cannot be understood all the Province anciently so called, but
only Loir and Garone, as the Countries of Poictou, Saintonge, Angoumois,
Perigor^, etc.
and all his Countries.

The King most willingly embraced the Proposal, Ibid. C. A great Fleet prepared
to take possession of Aquitain.
and Commanded a mighty Fleet to be prepared, and a great Body of Horse to
accompany him out of England, that he might hinder his Brother Roberts return
into Normandy, take possession of Aquitain, and extend the bounds of his Empire
as far as the River Garone. Ibidem, fol. 781. B. An. Do. 1100.
In the Month of July this Royal Navy which was to carry over immense Sums of
Silver and Gold, was near ready to set sail; but Florent. Wig. fol. 649. Anno
1100. Gemet. lib. 7. c. 10.
Second of August Hunting in Cambden in Hantshire. New-Forest.
Part of Hantshire so called at this day, it contained in compass thirty Miles,
in this space of Land William the Conqueror depopulated all the Towns and
Villages, and demolished thirty six Parochial Churches to make it a Forest.
New-Forest, was slain by an Arrow He was a rich Inhabitant Orderic. fol. 78.
A. Walter Tirrel, what he was.
of Pontoyse, a generous Knight or Soldier, potent amongst the Great Men, in
Arms very dexterous, and therefore a Familiar and Constant Companion to the
King.
Walter Tirrell a Frenchman, (whether at a Deer or the Winchester, and buried
in the old Monastery in the Church of St. Peter. Rufus is slain. The
Ecclesiastic Affairs in this Kings Reign.


These were the Military and Secular Achievements of William the Second, which
kept him in constant Action and Employment; Anselme, in relation to
Ecclesiastic Power and Jurisdiction, Eadm. fol. 14. lin. 1. Rufus kept not the
Promises he made to Lanfranc.
he brake many of the Promises he made to Archbishop Lanfranc before and at
his Coronation, yet while he lived he abstained from many things, though
against his will and inclination; Ibid. n. 10, 20, 30.
but after his death, which happened Flor. Wig. fol. 644. He let to farm
Bishoprics and Abbeys.
May 24. 1089. he kept the Bishoprics and Abbacies as they fell void in his
own hands, or let them to Farm, and took the Profits of them to his own use,
allowing the Monks just so much as would maintain them; amongst others the
Church and Archbishopric of Canterbury, and Revenues thereof, was then
possessed and disposed of by the King to Secular uses, Eadmer, fol. 15. n. 30.
which much troubled the Clergy and many of the Nobility, Ibidem, fol. 16. n.
10, 20, 30, 40.
King falling Sick, and being very Penitent, made great Promises of ease and
satisfaction to the Clergy and Nobility; and being much pressed by them, to
make an Archbishop of Canterbury, he consented and enquired after a Person
worthy of He was born in Ausburg in Germany, and was first a Monk, and then
Abbat of the famous Bec in Normandy. Onuphr. Chron Pont. Romans An. 1080.
At this time there were two Onuphr. Chron Pont. Romans An. 1080.
Popes, Guibert or Wibert Archbishop of Ravenna, called Clement the Third, who
was created by the means of the Emperor Henry the Fourth, Antipope to Gregory
the Seventh. Victor the Fourth, Urban the Second, and Paschal the Second; he
was buried in the Cathedral of Ravenna, Anno Domini 1101. and not long after by
the Command of Paschal the Second, his Body was taken up and burnt.
Abbat Anselme was the most worthy; who brought to the King, that he might
receive the Investiture of Eadmer, fol. 18. n. 10. Bishop Anselm pressed to
accept the Archbishopric.
yet after very importune persuasions, and pressures by the Bishops and
Nobility, he suffered himself to be with great Applause elected Archbishop,
Ib. n. 40. An. Do. 1093.
and had investiture of all things belonging to the Archbishopric both within
it and without it, on the Sixth of March 1093. But Ibidem, fol. 19. n. 50. He
demands Restitution of the Lands belonging to the Church of Canterbury.
before his Consecration he demanded of the King to restore all the Lands
belonging to his Church which his Predecessor Lanfranc was Ibid^m, fol. 20.
lin. 1. etc. n. 10, 20. He demands of the King to rest in his Advice in the
things that pertain to God and ^ Christianity. He declares he had acknowledged
Pope Urban.
He also demanded of the King to rest in his Council before others, in those
things that pertain to God and Christianity, and as he would have him for his
Terrene Lord and Protector, so the King would have him his Spiritual Father and
Overseer of his Soul. Also concerning The other Pope at this time was Ibidem,
Anno 1088.
Urban a Frenchman, Bishop of Ostia, and acknowledged by the French and
Italians; he was created Pope at Terracina in Italy in March 1088. and died at
Rome in August 1099. and was buried in St. Peter's Church there.
Vrbane Bishop of Rome, who the Ibidem, n. 20, 3^. The King loath to restore
all the Lands.
The King was loath to restore all Lands, but would have reserved such Lands of
the Church Eadmer, fo. 20. n. ^0.
as he after the death of Lanfranc had given to his Courtiers for particular
Services, and would have had Anselme consented that they might have holden
Ibidem. Anselm would not consent to the alienation of any of the Church Lands.
but Anselme could not be brought to consent, that the Church should be any
ways spoiled of its Lands or Rights. Hence arose the first difference Ibidem.
The cause of the first difference between the King and Lanfranc.
between the King and him, about his Dignity, Bishopric, and Prelatship; which
remained undermined during the Kings Life; yet at present, being urged by the
Ib. n. 30.
Clamor of all Men concerning the ruin and destruction of Churches, A Council
of the Nobility at Winchester. Archbishop Ans^lm did Homage to the King.
he held a Council of his Nobility at Winchester, and by many great Promises of
what he would do for the Church of God, he persuaded Anselme to take upon him
the Primacy of the English Church; who induced by the Example of his
Predecessor, according to the Custom of the Land, Eadm. fol. 20. n. 30. Homo
Regis factus est.
did Homage to the King, as Lanfranc had done in his time, and it was Commanded
he should have seizen of the whole Archbishopric; After Ibid* and fol. 21.
lin. 4.
which going to take possession of it, Thomas Archbishop of York, and all the
Bishops of England met at Canterbury, where he was Consecrated the Fourth of
December 1093. Ibidem, fol. 21. n. 30, 40. fol. 22. n. 10.

The King went into Normandy to take it from his Brother.


At that time the King endeavoring to take away Normandy from his Brother
Robert, wanted a great Sum of Money to accomplish his design, and the new
Archbishop offered him 500 l. toward his Expedition, which the King refused,
expecting at least twice so much. And the King Ibid. fol. 24. n. 10, 20. He
presses the King to restore the Church to its Pristine State.
preparing for his Voyage, he expostulates with him about restoring the Church
to its Pristine State and Condition which was Ibid. fol. 25. n. 10, 20. Anselm
falls from the Kings favor. The King refuses his Prayers and Blessings.

The King returns out of Normandy without success.


but would part with no Money, not what he once offered, although pressed by
other Bishops, saying, he had given the greatest part of it to the Poor;
whereupon he fell from the Kings favor, who neither respected him as his
Spiritual Father, or Archbishop, and utterly refused his Prayers and
Blessings. At the Kings return into England, after the expense of a vast Sum of
Money without effect, Ib. n 30. Anselm would go to Rome for his Pall.
Anselm went to him to let him know his intention, of

The King asked him, from which Pope he would require it, Ibidem, n. 40, 50.
The King is not willing he should. No Pope to be owned without the Kings
License.
he answered him, from Urban; to which the King replied, that as yet he had not
acknowledged him Pope, neither had it been the Custom in his or his Fathers
time, that any one in the Kingdom of England should nominate or accept of a
Pope without their License or Election; and whosoever should take from him this
power, did

Anselm wondering at these things, rehearsed what before he had said to the King
at Rochester, That while he was Abbat of Bec he had recognized Urban Pope, and
that he would not by any means depart from his obedience and subjection; which
words very much Ibid. fol. 26. lin. 1.
moved the King, so as he protested, that the Archbishop against his will
could not keep the Faith he ought to him, and Obedience Ibidem. A Council of
all the Bishops, Abbats, and great Men of the Nation.
Anselm therefore desired a Council or Convention of the Bishops, Abbats, and
all the Great Men of the Nation for the determination of this Question, Whether
he might, saving his Revenue and Obedience to the Apostolic See, keep his
Faith to a Terrene King. Which Ibidem, n. 10.
was granted, and almost all the Nobility of the whole Kingdom met at
Rockingham in the Church within the Castle the Eleventh of March, by the Kings
Order and Decree, for the ventilateing of this Cause. In which Anselm made a
Speech, Ibidem, n. 20, 30, 40. etc.
recapitulating how hardly he had been drawn to accept of the Archbishopric,
and only by their persuasion, and that he had told the King he could not one
hour depart from his Obedience to Pope Urban, and then with much perplexity
urging the difficulty of his bearing Faith to both King and Pope, asks the
Bishops Advice in the presence of the Great Men; who Ibidem. fol. 27. n. 10,
20, 30.

The Bishops advise Anse^m to obey the King in all things.

Anselms Speech to the Bishops and Great Men.


unanimously advised him to submit and obey the King in all things. But he told
them, since he gave him their Prince Counsel only according to the will of one
Man, (meaning the King) he would apply himself to the chief Pastor and Prince
of all Men, and would follow what Counsel he should receive from him in the
business of his own Church. Because it was said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and
upon this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of; So also to all the
Apostles in Commune it was said, He that hears you hears me, and he that
despises you despises me, and he that touches you, touches as it were the
Pupil of my Eye; And as things were taken to have been principally said to St.
Peter, and in him to the rest of the Apostles, so we hold the same to be
principally Peter, and by him to the other Bishops Successors to the Apostles,
not to any Emperor, King, Duke, or Count. Yet we are also taught in what things
we ought to be subject to Temporal Princes; Give unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, and the things that are Gods unto God. These are the Words, these
the Counsels of God, these I approve, these I receive, from these I will not
depart; Wherefore ye shall all know in general, that in the things that belong
to God I shall yield Obedience Peter, and in those that of right belong to the
Terrene Dignity of My Lord the King, I will give faithful Counsel and
assistance according to my utmost skill and power.

With this Discourse he Ibidem, fol. 28. lin. 8.
distracted the thoughts, and brake the unanimity of the Bishops and Great Men;
yet they urge him again, Ibidem. n. 20.
that he knew the whole Kingdom complained against Ibidem. The Bishops advise
Anselm to relinquish Urban, and submit to the King.
for whosoever takes away or destroys the Customs of Regal Dignity, takes away
both Crown and Kingdom; and withal advise him to quit his subjection to Urban,
and wholly submit himself to the Will of the King. He gave them the hearing of
these things, but would in no wise deny his Obedience to the Pope. This
troubled Ib. f. 29. n. 40, 50.

The Bishops grow saint in the Kings Cause.


the King, but much more when the Bishops by his perseverance grew faint and
cold in this Affair, and especially William Bishop of Duresme, plainly affirmed
nothing could be brought to enervate the Reasons of Anselme, being founded upon
the Word of God, and Authority of St. Peter; yet he Ibidem. The King advised to
take away Anselms Staff and Ring
advised to oppress him by Violence, and if he would not submit to the Kings
Will, to take away his Staff and Ring, and Banish him the Kingdom. Ibidem. That
Advice pleases not the Great Men.
This Advice pleased not the Great Men, to whom the King said, If this don't
please you, what will? And adds, While I live I will not suffer an Ibidem, fol.
30.

n. 10, 20, 30. Anselm baffled the Bishops by urging the Popes Authority and
his own ov^r them.


upon the Bishops by urging the Popes Authority over him, and his over them,
that they told the King, they were sorry they were not able to satisfy him,
for being Primate not only of England, but also of Scotland and Ireland, with
the adjacent Isles, and they his Suffragans, they could not reasonably Judge or
Condemn him, although he was faulty.

After much Debate in this matter, Ib. fol. 31. n. 40, 50.
it was referred to a further Hearing until eight days after Whitsunday. In the
mean while the King Banished Baldwin a Monk, Anselms chief Counselor, and two
of his Chaplains, which much afflicted and troubled him. Ib. fol. 32. n 20. 30.
During this Truce or Respite of Hearing this Cause between the King and
Anselm, The King sends two Messengers to Rome to know which Pope was
Canonically Instituted. And to Treat with him about sending the Pall to the
King.
the King sent two of his Chaplains, Gerard and William to Rome, to enquire of
the State of that Church, and which of the Popes was Canonically Instituted;
and that being known, they Anselm from his Archbishopric, and also out of the
Kingdom, might dispose of it to whom he pleased. Ibidem.
When these Messengers returned, Walter Archbishop of Albano (a City fourteen
Miles from Rome) came with them and brought the Pall privately, Ibidem, n. 40,
50. The Pall is brought to the King.
passing by Canterbury silently, avoided Anselm, and hastened to the King,
saying nothing of the

Nither did he Mediate with the King to have any thing of his Severity (as it
was then thought by many of the Nobility and Clergy) against Anselm mitigated.
Ibid. fol. 33. lin. 3. etc.
With this Artifice and his Crafty Management, he brought the King into so good
an opinion of Urban, that he believed he would not have any Controversy with
The King acknowledged Urban Pope. But could not persuade him to Depose Anselm.
which he did accordingly, and labored with the Bishop by all possible means,
that by the Popes Authority, backed with Regal Power, he would Depose Anselm,
but could not prevail; Ibidem, n. 10.
by which he perceived he had gained nothing by acknowledging Urban for Pope.
Ibidem, n. 20.
The day being at hand to which the Debate at Rockingham was Adjourned, Anselm
was Commanded to be at a Town of his own nigh Windsor, where the King
Pentecost, that there might be a more ready Intercourse between them. Most of
the Bishops repaired to him, and moved him by Money to reconcile himself to the
King; but being inflexible, he only desired safe Conduct of the King to Sea,
and then when he understood what he had to do, he would do. Ibidem, n. 50. The
Great Men persuade the King to receive Anselm into savor.
Notwithstanding all this, the King by the Advice of his great Men, laying
aside what was past, received Anselm into favor. And as Spiritual Father of
the Kingdom, and Bishop of Canterbury, granted that he England. This pleased
Anselm, Ibidem, fol. 34. lin. 7. He refuses to receive the Pall from the King.
but when he was to receive the Pall, some persuaded him that for continuance
of the Kings favor, and saving his Honor, he would receive it from the hands
of the King; He refused, saying, the gift of it belonged not to him, but to the
singular Authority of St. Peter. Ibidem, n. 10, 20, 30.
It was then ordered, that he which brought it into England should lay it upon
the Altar of the Savior, and thence Anselm should take it as from the hand of
St. Peter, which being Peter, and the Archbishop putting it on presently
Celebrated Mass. About this time Append. n. 16.
Murchertach King of Ireland, and many Irish Bishops and Nobility, An Irish
King and the People of Waterford Request Anselm to Consecrate the Elect of
Waterford An. Do. 1096.
with the Clergy and People of Waterford requested Anselm to Consecrate
Malchus, a Monk belonging to Walkelin, Bishop of Winchester, whom they had
chosen to be their Bishop, which he did at Canterbury with the Assistance of
Ralph Bishop of Chichester, and Gudulph Bishop of Rochester.

Eadm. fol. 37. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50. The King marches into Wales.

Anselm se^ds raw Soldiers to the Kings assistance.

He is summoned to the Kings Court. Refuses to appear.

The King denies him leave to go to the Pope.


The next year the King marched into Wales, to suppress an Anselm with the
small number, rawness, and ill appointment of the Soldiers he sent to that
Service, and therefore commanded him to appear when he should be called, and do
him right according to the judgment of his Court; Which he declined, and
thought it better to apply himself to the Authority and Judgment of the Pope in
this matter, and therefore in the Feast of Pentecost, he went to Court, and by
some great Men about the King which were his Rome, which the King denied. In
Ibid. fol. 38. lin. 6. Anselm presses the King for leave to go to Rome.
the Month of August following, the King considering the State of the Kingdom,
by his Precept Convened the Bishops, Abbats, and all the great Men of the
Nation, who having dispatched the Business they were called together for, while
every one hasted to return home, Anselm stayed and pressed the King for leave
to pass to Rome: The King denied him the second time; Ibidem. n. 20. The King
denies it, and threatens to seize his Archbishopric.
yet he still urged the King, who then said, if he went he would seize his
Archbishopric,

But he persisted; and being told Ibidem, fol. 39. n. 20.
by several Bishops and some Barons, he had promised the King to observe his
Usages and Laws, and to defend them against all Men, Ibidem, n. 40.
Answered, He had promised to observe neither, but so far as they were
agreeable to the Laws of God, and to the Rules of Equity and Right; and
pronounced that Custom by which he was prohibited to go to the Pope Ibid. fol.
40. lin. 5. Anselm declares the Custom by which he was prophibited to go to the
Pope to be against the Word of God.
was against the Laws of God and Rules of Equity, and therefore ought to be
despised by every Servant of God; Ibidem, n. 50.
and then told the King plainly he would go. Ibid. fol. 41. lin. 8.
This Contest happened the Fifteenth of October 1097. on which day Ibidem, n.
10. Anselm goes beyond Sea without the Kings leave.
Anselm went toward Canterbury, and so on to Dover, where he lay fifteen days
for a Wind, and when he and his Retinue were ready to take Ship, Ibidem, n. 20.
3^. His Archbishopric is seized.
their Bags and Sachells were all searched by William who was sent from the
King with order to do it; and presently after he was gone, his Archbishopric
and all that belonged to him was seized to the Kings use.

Anselm coming to Lions in France, sent an Epistle In Append. n. 17. Anselms
Complaints to the Pope concerning the Kings usage of him and of the Church
Lands.
to the Pope, setting forth his Grievances and Complainings of the King, that
he gave the Lands of the Arch Bishopric, which he held in his hands after the
death of Lanfranc, to his Knights or Soldiers, and did Lanfranc held them; that
he exacted grievous Services from him, such as his Predecessors knew not, and
such as he could not, nor ought not to bear; and that he overturned the Laws of
God and Canonical Apostolic Authorities, with his voluntary Customs, and would
not give him leave to come to his Fatherhood to seek Redress or ask Advice what
he should do, etc.

When Eadm. fol. 45. n. 20. The Pope writes to King William, and Commands him
to restore to Anselm what was taken from him.
he came to Rome, and was decently received by the Pope, he was asked the cause
of his coming thither, which he rehearsed in the same order he had wrote it in
his Epistle. The Pope promises him Relief, and wrote Letters to King William,
in which Commanded him to restore to Anselm what he ought to have, and what was
taken from him; To the same purpose Anselm wrote to the King, and sent his
Letters with the Popes. Ib. f. 48. n. 20, 30, etc. Anselm seems weary of his
Dignity.

The Pope charge him by virtue of his Obedience to keep it.


Before the return of the Messenger that carried these Letters, he made a great
Complaint, and seemed weary of his Dignity in England, and desired of the Pope
to be discharged of it; but the Pope would not consent, charging him by virtue
of his Obedience that wherever he were, he should bear both the Name,
Canterbury. Ibidem, fol. 49. lin. 4. And threatens to smite the King with St.
Peter's Sword. An. Do. 1098.
And for the King of England (said he) and others like him, which have erected
themselves against the Liberty of the Church, We shall Censure and smite them
with St. Peter's Sword in the next Council, which I have appointed at Bar on the
First of October, where you shall be present. Ibidem, fol. 50. n. 10. In the
Council of Bar it was Decreed the King should be Excommunicated.
In this Council it was Decreed, that King William should be Excommunicated and
Anathematized; which Anselm hearing, fell down upon his Knees before the Pope,
and with much

This Ibidem, fol. 51. n. 40.
Council being ended, the Pope with Anselm departed to Rome, where they found
the Messenger that carried the Letters to King William, who told them that with
much ado he received the Popes Letters, but would by no means receive Anselms;
and perceiving the Messenger to be a Retainer to Anselm, he Swear by Gods Face,
that if presently he did not depart the Kingdom he

The King unwilling to return an Answer by this Messenger, Ibidem, and n. 50
The King sent William Warlewast to answer for him to the Pope.
sent William Warlewast to Answer for him to the Pope, who declared unto him,
That his Master the King wondered not a little why he should so much urge the
Restitution of Anselm, seeing it was expressly told him, that if he departed
out of England without License, the King would seize his whole Archbishopric.
Ibidem, fol. 52. lin. 1.
The Anselm, than that he had appealed to the Apostolic See, and came thither
without his Kings leave; He answered, No. Wonderful! said the Pope, The Pope
again threatens to Excommunicate the King.
Have you come thus far to tell me this? Return, and that quickly, and command
your King, on the behalf of St. Peter, that if he will not be Excommunicate, he
restore Anselm wholly to all things, and let me know his Resolution before the
next Council, which shall be in the third week after Easter in this City;
Otherwise Damnationis Sententiae.
Condemnation as he deserves. Ibidem, n. 10.
Hereupon the Kings Agent William said, he had private Instructions to impart
to him, and remained many days in Rome, in which time he so well managed this
Affair, Ibidem, Watlewast by Gifts procures the Censure of the King to be
deserred.
that with Gifts and Promises, he procured many to favor his Cause, and so
altered the Popes mind, that to the satisfaction of his Master the prosecution
of this Cause was deferred until Michaelmass following, it being then the time
of the Solemnity of Christ's Nativity. In the third week after Easter, An. Do.
1099. A Council at Rome.
the Pope as he had appointed held a Council at Rome, in which Ibidem, n. 40,
50.
though Anselms Cause was propounded, and vehemently urged, yet nothing was
done in it, particularly to the advantage of Anselm; yet after he made great
use of Ib. f. 53. n. 10, 20. A Decree against receiving Investitures from
Laymen.
a general Decree, That Eadmer, who accompanied Anselm in all his Travels,
Ibidem.
says he was present in this Council, and saw and heard this Decree passed and
confirmed.

The Council then ending, Ibidem, n. 30. Anselm goes from Rome, and fixes
himself at Lions.
the day following Anselm receiving Rome to Lions, and there fixed his
Habitation, without all hope of returning to England while William was King;
where he remained until the death of Pope Ibid. fol. 54. lin. 2.
Urban, which happened Onuph. Chr. Pont. Roman.
the Thirtieth of July 1099. before the time King Williams Answer was expected,
and afterward until the death of the King, Eadmer first of all Historians from
common fame, Fol. 46. n. 50. fol. 47. lin. 1. n. 10. King William Rufus accused
of Judaizing.
writes, That the Jews at Rouen applied themselves to William, and by Money
Judaism; and more particularly, that the Father of a young Man, a Jew,
Converted to Christianity by Stephen the Protomartyr (who Ibidem. St. Stephen
appears to a young Jew and Converts him to Christianity.
appeared to him in a splendid Vesture, and a florid Countenance) offered Sixty
Marks of Silver, to force him to renounce Christianity and embrace Judaism
again. The King (as it is there reported) attempted it, but without effect, the
young Man being so close riveted to Christian Religion by Stephens Ghost.

He also Ib. n. 50. fol. 48. lin. 1. Eadmer reports the King denied the
Providence of God, etc.
reports from common Fame, (whereas he could not but know King William and his
Actions very well himself) that his Mind was so far elated as to deny the
Providence of God, and to assert, that Prayers to Saints were insignificant,
and availed not. This Author mentions not the Disputation said to be between
Jews and Christian Bishops, nor the encouragement King William gave the first,
by promising, that if by Argument they overcame the later, he would forsake
Christianity and turn Jew. The first Historian that mentions it is De Gest.
Reg. fol. 69. b. n. 40. Rufus his Revenue.
Malmsbury, who softens the Kings Promise, with this Expression, that it was in
Merriment, as he believed. His Revenue was in all probability the same with his
Fathers, yet his Expenses being greater, he took up a new way of augmenting it,
by keeping Flor. Wig. fol. 650. He keeps void Bishoprics and Monasteries.
void Bishoprics and Monasteries, Canterbury, the Bishoprics of Winchester
and Salisbury; and as Vt supra, lin. 5.
Malmsbury says, twelve Abbeys; and when they were disposed of, they had them
that would give most for them. He also had much Money broubht into his Treasury
by oppressing and exacting upon the People. His chief Ib. a. n. 50. b. lin. 3.
Instrument and Adviser in these things was Ranulph a Norman Clerk, of mean
Parentage, but Eloquent, and of a ready Wit, and an invincible Lawyer; to whom
the King Flor. Wig. fol. 649.
committed the dispatch of the Business of the whole Kingdom, and gave him the
Bishopric of Duresme. His craft and subtilty was such, that he became Ibidem.
fol. 650.
the general Informer of the Kingdom, and had got such power, that he punished
some Rich Men all the Kingdom over, by taking away their Lands; and the Poorer
sort by imposing on them a great and unjust Tribute; and many ways oppressed
both great and small, Winchester before the high Altar.

THE
THE words by which Historians of these times express the manner of this Kings
ascending the Throne are various.

Hist. nov. fol. 54. n. 10
Eadmer says William Rufus died the Second of August, and that Ibidem, f. 55. n
10.
Henry succeeded his dead Brother. Florence of Worcester Fol. 649. An. Do. 1100.
tells us he was slain in the New-Forest on the Fourth of the Nones of August,
(which is the Second of that Month) and that his younger Brother Henry
succeeded him; and on the Ibid. fol. 650. lin. 9.
Nones of August, (which is the Fifth day) being Sunday, was Consecrated King
by Maurice Bishop of London. In W. 2d. f. 71. a. n 40.
William of Malmsbury reports, that Rufus was slain the Fourth of the Nones of
August, and that after his Funeral Ib. in H. 1st. f. 88. a. n. 20.
Henry was See the Glossary.
chosen King, chiefly by the assistance of Roger de Bollomonte, Gemet. lib. 7.
cap. 4. Script. Norm. f. 1091.

Henry Earl of Warwick who he was.


by Adelina Daughter and Heir of Walleran Earl of Mellent* a Town upon the
River Seyn in Veuxin Francois, between Mant and Poissi; He was made Earl of
Warwick in the later end of the Reign of William the First, or beginning of
William the Second.
Henry Earl of Warwick, after some Ibidem, n. 30.
Crowned at London with the Shouts of the Rabble on the Nones of August, four
days after his Brothers death, which are to be understood inclusive of the
Second and Fifth. Hist. lib. 7. f. 216. b. n. 20.
Hen. of Huntington says Rufus was killed in the New-Forest on the Morrow after
the Kalends of August, (which is the second day) that Ibidem. n. 30.
the day after his death he was buried at Winchester, and Henry his younger
Brother was there Elected King; and that going from thence to London, he
Maurice Bishop of London Consecrated. Col. 225. n. 10, 20, 30, etc.
Simeon Dunelmensis in this Relation transcribes Florence of Worcester
Verbatim. Fol. 781. C. 7^2. A.
Ordericus Vitalis relates, that King William on the Morrow after the Kalends
of August, after Dinner, went a Hunting in the New-Forest, and with him his
Ibidem, fol. 782. B.
Brother Henry, William of He was Gemet. lib. 8. cap. 5. William of Breteul
whence, and who he was.
eldest Son of William Fitz-Osborne Earl of Hereford, and had his Fathers
Estate in Normandy, of which Britolium or Bretolium was the chief Seat, from
whence he was called William de Bretolio, now Breteul, not far from Eureux.
Breteul, and other Illustrious Persons dispersed in the Woods, it was not long
before the King was killed, whose death made an horrible noise in the Forest;
Henry posted to Winchester, where the Royal Treasure was, The Contest between
William of Breteul and King Henry about his Succession.
and demanded the Keys, as if he had been true Heir. William of Breteul
followed him in great haste, and intending to prevent his design, said to him,
We ought legally to remember the Faith we have engaged to your Brother Duke
Robert, who is the first born Son of King William; and I, and you my Lord Henry
have done him Homage, and therefore we are in all things to keep our

Upon this there was a sharp Contention, and a great Confluence of Men; Henry's
power increased, who laying his Hand upon his Hilt, drew out his Sword, and
would not permit any Stranger by a frivolous delay to seize the Scepter of his
Father. At length Friends and Wise Counselors coming together, the Contention
was allayed, and by found Advice, lest there might be made a greater Division,
Henry; and then London with Robert He was Gemet. Script. Norm. lib. 8. cap. 15.
eldest Son to Roger de Bell^monte, and Adeli^ abovesaid, and in her right Earl
of Mellent, now Meulant, seated as above said.
Earl of Mellent, was Ord. Vit. fol. 783. A. B.
the Sunday after Crowned in the Church of St. Peter at Westminster by Maurice
Bishop of London.

Three, if not four of these Historians were living, and in all probability
Writers at the time of this Transaction, and they all agree in the time of King
Williams death, Henry's invading the In loc. (...).
to destroy all evil Customs, and remove all unjust Exactions, to restore the
Church to her Liberties, and King Edwards Laws, with such Emendations as his
Father had altered or mended them; Which Grants Eadm. fol. 55. n. 40.
were drawn into the form of Letters, or a Charter, and being Sealed with his
Seal Flor. Wig. ut supra. King Henry his Charter.
the day he was Crowned, were by his Command published all the Kingdom over.
This whole Charter is to be found in F. 55. n. 40.
Mat. Paris, and is recited Argumentum Antinormanicum, with an Exposition upon
it.

Immediately after the Coronation, Eadm. fol. 55. n. 30. Archbishop Anselm
called from Exile. The King submits to him.
the King and great Men dispatched away a Messenger to Archbishop Anselm, then
in Exile at Lions in France, inviting him to return into England with what
speed he could; The King in his Letters, adding his Prayers and Wishes for the
same, promising to subject himself and his Kingdom Dover the Twenty third of
September following, to the exceeding great joy of the whole Nation, of whom
more afterward; Only this shall be here noted of him, That not Ibid. fol. 56.
n. 30, 40, etc.
long after his return, the Cause of Maude Daughter of Malcolme King of
Scotland, (with whom the King was in Love) whether she might lawfully Marry, or
not, was discussed. The Case of King Henry's Queen.
The reason of the doubt was, for that she had been Educated in a Monastery
amongst Nuns from her Infancy, whereupon put to the determination of Anselm
alone; but without the approbation of a Council he would determine nothing. And
therefore he calls Ibidem, fol. 57. n. 10. A Council at Lambeth. The Lust and
Luxury of the Normans.
the Bishops, Abbats, Nobles, and Men of Religious Orders together at Lambeth,
where she confessed that indeed she was Veiled against her will, and took that
Habit upon her to preserve her Chastity from the furious and tempting Lust of
the Normans, which she proved by sufficient Witnesses, and that not only she,
but many William first Conquered this Land, went into Monasteries and Veiled
themselves, that they might thereby be protected from the Nefarious Lust of his
Followers, who puffed up with so great a Victory, thought all things subject to
their Will and Luxury, and that they might not only seize the Estates of the
Conquered, but also ravish Matrons and Virgins when they had opportunity. Upon
which Allegation and Proof by Judgment of the Council and Anselm, Ibid fol. 58.
n. 10, 20. Ran. Bishop of Durham imprisoned.
she had the lawful liberty of her Henry. He began his Reformation of the
Nation with imprisoning Flor. Wig. fol. 650. He makes his escape, and flies to
Duke Robert, and persuades him to invade England.
Ranulph Bishop of Durham, the great Instrument of his Brothers Oppressions and
Exactions, in the Tower of London, from whence after Christmas he made his
escape, and passed the Sea to Duke Robert, (who had returned into Normandy Ord.
Vit. f. 784. B.
in September preceding) and persuaded him to Invade England. And very many of
the Flor Wig. ut supra.
sent Messengers to him, to make haste and come thither, promising him the
Crown and Kingdom. And F. 88. a. n. 40. These were all Normans by birth. Most
of the great Men of England favored Robert Duke of Normandy.
Malmsbury reports of all the great Men of this Nation, there only remained
faithful Robert Fitz-Haimon, Richard de R^dvers, Roger Bigod, Robert Earl of
Mellent, with his Brother Henry; all others privily favored Robert, and would
have had him King, or openly reproached, and contumeliously used Henry. In the
Solemnity of Pentecost there was a warm Eadm. f. 58. n. 50. The King and they
suspect one another.
Report, that Robert was coming England, which much moved the Court, and
inclined the Minds of many, some one way, some another; The Chief Men suspected
the King, and he them; They him, that having obtained Peace he might urge them
with severe Laws; And he them, lest they should desert him, and set up his
Brother. In this difficulty Ibid. fol. 59. lin. 4. Anselm reconciles them.
Ibid. n. 10. Duke Robert Lands at Portsmouth The great Men prepare to go to him.
Anselm was such a Mean between them and the King, that he promised to govern
by Holy and just Laws; In this they rest satisfied, believing themselves secure.

The King hearing of his Brothers Preparations, raised a great Army, and was
resolved to give him Battle; Anselm with his Friends in this Army watched
diligently about the King; yet so soon as it was noised that Duke Robert was
landed at Portsmouth, forthwith the great Men of the Kingdom, unmindful of
their Engagements, prepared to march to him and leave the King; Eadm. ut supra.
n. 20. King Henry fears the lost of his Kingdom and Life. He makes great
Promises to Anselm of Obedience to the Church and Pope.
of which Anselm having certain notice, was grieved, and was the more earnest
to Anselm, whence he came often to him, and brought with him such great Men as
he feared, that by his Speeches they might be terrified, and kept steady to the
faith they had engaged, and he relieved from his fear. And then the King
promising to Anselm that he should freely exercise the Ecclesiastic Laws and
Discipline, and that ever after he would be Obedient to the Decrees and
Commands of the Apostolic See. Anselm fixes the great Men to King Henry.
He called together the great Men, and urged upon them and the whole Army how
execrable a thing it was for them to violate their Faith given to the King, by
which Discourse he changed their Minds, and they resolved rather to lose their
Lives than revolt from him; and it was from his Fidelity and Industry that
Henry at that time lost not the Kingdom of England. And Robert failing in the
trust reposed in the great Men, and fearing to be Anselm, as an Invader, made
Peace with his Brother, and dismissed his Army.

Florence Fol. 650. lin. 27.
of Worcester says as above, that very many of the great Men sent for Duke
Robert over, and promised him the Crown and Kingdom; and coming, they did some
of them adhere to him, and others dissembling their Kindness and Affection to
him, staid with the King. But the Bishops, Common Soldiers, or Stipendiaries,
English remained with him, being unanimously ready to fight for him. The two
Brothers are reconciled by the Mediation of Wise Men. The Terms of Peace.
At which time the Wise Men on both sides consulted together, and by their
Mediation made Peace between the Brothers on these Conditions; That Robert
should yearly receive 3000 Marks; and that all such as had their In the Latin,
Honores suos, which signifies strictly the Seat and Head of the Earldom
Earldoms and Baronies taken from them in England for their Fidelity to the
Duke, and all those that Normandy for their Fidelity to the King, should have
them again freely without Compositions.

Ordericus Vitalis gives a third Relation of this Transaction. In the year of
our Lord, Fol. 785. An. Do. 1101.
says he, 1101. the Seditious great Men, (fearing the Magnanimity of King
Henry, and loving the easiness of Sloathful Duke Robert, sent to him that he
would suddenly provide a Fleet to transport himself) Ibidem, fol. 786. A.
that is to say, Robert de his two Brothers, He was so called because Malms. f.
88. b. n. 30. Rogerus Pictaviensis, who he was. Domesd. in iisdem Comitat. His
great Estate.
he Married a Poictovis Woman, and was the same Roger Pictaviensis, who in the
Conquerors Survey is said to have possessed all the Lands between the Rivers
Rible and Mersey in Lancashire, and so much more as made 188 Manners in that
County, 76 in Yorkshire, three in Essex, 59 in Suffolk, 11 in Nottinghamshire,
seven in Derbyshire, 10 in Norfolk, 44 in Lincolnshire; in all 398.
Roger the Poictovin, and Arnulph, William de Warrenna Earl of Surrey, and
Walter Giffart, Ivo de the Son of Ilbert, and many others who first privately
entered into a Confederacy, and then publicly advanced the Dukes Title. Anselm
the Archbishop, and all the Bishops and Abbats, and all the Clergy, and
English, adhered to their King; as also did Robert Earl of Mellent, and others.
Ib. 787. B. Aug. 1.
In Autumn Robert landed at Portsmouth, where he was received of the Nobility,
who had long since done him Homage. The two Brothers remained with their Forces
in a Ibid. fol. 788. A. B. C.
Plain some days, and there was daily an Robert should quit his Claim to
England, and release the Homage his Brother had done to him in respect of the
Royal Dignity; That Henry should yearly pay to him 3000 l. Sterling, and render
up to him the whole Country of Constance, and all he possessed in Normandy,
except Damfront. They also then agreed upon mutual Assistance, and that they
should resume all their Fathers Lands and Demeasns; And lastly, That they
should equally punish the Fomenters of Discord and Contention on both sides.
After this Agreement the Duke staid here two Months, and then he returned,
William de Warrenna, and others that had lost their Estates in England for his
sake. Not long after Ord. Vit. f. 804. C. D. The Duke mediates for the
Restitution of the Earldom of Surry to William de Warrenna. The King rebukes
him for it.
William de Warrenna made a sad Complaint to the Duke, that for his Cause he
had lost his Earldom of Surrey, of the yearly value of 1000 l. and prevailed
with him to come over into England to mediate with the King for the Restitution
thereof. But moving him in this matter, he upbraided him with breach of the
Peace, for not bringing Public Traitors to Punishment, and not exercising a
due severity upon Robert de Belesin, and given him his Fathers Possessions, the
Castle of Argentoile, the Bishopric of See's, and the Forest of Golfer*
Ibidem, fol. 805. A. Duke Robert releases the Annual payment of 3000 l. The
Earl of Surry is restored.
To all which was charged upon him, the Duke humbly promised amendment, and at
the Instance of the Queen he released the Annual payment of 3000 l. whereupon
the King was reconciled to him, renewed the former Peace, and restored William
de Warrenna to his Earldom, who ever after remained faithful to Henry, and was
numbered

After King Ord. Vit. fol. 787. B. 804. C.
Henry had made Peace with his Brother, and was confirmed in his Kingdom, he
began by degrees to punish such Traitors as deserted him, and adhered to, and
invited over Duke Robert. He summoned to Trial Robert Mallet, Ivo de
Grentemaisnil, Several Traitors summoned to Trial.
Robert de Pontefract, the Son of Ilbert Lacey, and Robert de Belism, the
greatest of them all, with many others; yet not all at once, Some were Fined,
others lost their Estates.
Some of them that could not purge themselves of the Crimes wherewith they were
charged, he condemned in great Sums of Money; and from others which he most
feared and suspected he took away their Estates and banished them.

When the mighty Earl Ibidem, fol. 806. A. An. Do. 1102. Robert de Belism.
summoned to Trial.
Robert de Belismo was summoned Normandy, and he was Commanded to Answer openly
to every one of them; for the King by the space of a year had set Spies upon
him, who observed and committed to Writing all his oblique Actions. He being
thus charged, asked leave, He flies to his Castles.
as the Custom was, to go to Counsel with his Friends, and having obtained it,
knowing he could not purge himself of the Transgressions objected Robert had
made his escape, The King issues a Proclamation against him to appear. He
fortifies his Castles.
whereupon the King issued his Proclamation, that unless he came in and
submitted himself to Trial, he was adjudged a public Enemy. But in stead of
appearing before the Court, he fortified his Castles, praying Aid of all the
Normans that were of his Alliance, of the Welsh, The King raised an Army.
Angliae Exercitum Convocavit. Arundell Castle besieged.
and all others of his Relations or Affinity. Upon this obstinacy the King
presently called together the Army of England, and besieged his Castle of
Arundel in Sussex, and building several Castles about it, departed. The
Besieged Petitioned the King for leave to dispatch Messengers to their Lord,
that he would either send them Relief, or permit them to reconcile themselves
to the King, which was granted. And seeing he could not help them, very
sorrowfully gave them leave to make their Peace with him.

At this time the King Hoved. fol. 69. a. n. 20. Tikhill and Bridgnorth Castles
besieged.
Commanded the Bishop of Lincoln with part of the Army to besiege Tikhill
Castle, while he himself went and besieged Bridgnorth Castle in Shropshire,
from whence Robert was gone to Shrewsbury. Here the King stayed three weeks,
and by Ibidem, n. 30. Shrewsbury Manned against the King. The Welsh join with
the Earl against the King.
Gifts corrupting the Welsh, in whom the Earl placed most confidence, they
rendered to him the Castle. Robert stayed not long in Shrewsbury, but left it to
the care of Roger the Son of Robert de Nevil, and Vlger Venables, with whom he
joined eighty Stipendiary Soldiers, and made Peace with the Welsh, and drew
their Kings Caducan and Gervat the Sons of Rese to his Party, by whom and his
own Forces he often disturbed the Kings Army. Ord. Vit. f. 807. A. B. C. The
Earl disinherited William Pantulf. He assists the King, and by Gifts and
Promises brings the Welsh to the Kings side.
Before this time the Earl had disinherited William Pantulf a great Man in
Shropshire, who withdrew his Assistance from him, and returned to the King, who
forthwith sends him 200 Soldiers, and makes him Governor of Stafford Castle,
from whence by Excursions Welsh Kings and their Forces to the Kings side. After
this the King demanded the Town of the two Governors, and threatened that if it
were not delivered in three days, he would Hang all he should take there; The
Governors Treat with the King, by the Mediation of William Pantulf who was
Allied to them, Shrewsbury delivered to the King. The Stipendiaries had leave
to depart with their Horse and Arms.
and they the Townsmen and Burgesses were willing to save themselves, and
deliver up the Town. The Stipendiaries

The King having thus subdued his Enemy, Ibid. fol. 808. A. B. C. The King
takes away his Earldom of Shrewsbury, and his Lands. Banisheth his two
Brothers, and endeavors to extirpate that Family in England.
he took away his Earldom and Lands, and all the Estates of such as adhered to
him, and gave him safe Conduct to pass beyond Sea, and with him he sent away
the two wealthy Earls his Brothers, Roger Pictaviensis, and Arnulph, and seized
their Estates; his Enmity being such against Robert, that he endeavored
totally to extirpate that Family in England.

They being Ibidem, C. D. Robert de Belismo wasted Normandy.
expelled out of England, there followed mad work in Normandy for three years
together; Many Towns were burnt, and Churches with the People in them that fled
to them for safety. Almost all Normandy rose up against this boisterous and
Robert de Belismo, but they wanted a Head and a Leader of such Courage as might
subdue so great a Waster and Subverter of his Country. He was a Man of Parts
and Cunning, and had a considerable Strength about him, and supported himself
by his Wealth which he had treasured up in thirty four strong Castles, He had
thirty four strong Castles.
that he had formerly built with a design of Rebellion. He only enjoyed his
Fathers Estate, He gave his Brothers nothing of his Fathers Estate. Roger dies*
Arnulph leaves his Brother.
not suffering his Brothers to possess any part of it, although for his sake
they had lost their Fortunes. Roger left him, and took himself to Carof-Castle,
which was his Wives Inheritance, and there grew old and died. Arnulph after
many difficult Undertakings for him, to no purpose, grew discontented, and fell
off to the Duke, seized the Castle of Amanisca, now Almenesches, delivered it
to him, and such as favored his Brother that were in See's, many with Arnulph
left the Turbulent Earl, and delivered their strong Holds to the Duke.

Although he was much Ibid. and fol. 809. A. Robert de Belismo burns the Abbey
of Almanisca.
dismayed at the Revolt of his Brother, yet hearing some of the Kings Troops
were quartered in the Abbey of Almanisca with design to harass and plunder the
Country; He presently marched thither, fired and burnt it, he there took many
Prisoners, whereof some he punished with death, others he Normandy at Hi^smes,
and marching toward the Earl, he drew up his Forces, and many ways attempted
the Duke, He rou^s the Dukes Army.
and boldly charging him upon a Causey, put him to flight, and made many his
Prisoners. Puffed up with this success, and scorning the Duke, he endeavored
to bring all Normandy under his power; the Country where he was, and the
Neighboring Territories submitted to him, not being able to resist. He took in
the Fortress of Hiesmes and Gunters Castle (now Gontel) and many other Garrisons
round about him.

About this time died Ibidem, fol. 810. B. A great War and Contention in
Normandy about a private Estate.
William de Britolio or Breteul, without lawful Issue; His two Grandchildren
William de Guader, and Raynald de Cracey contended who should succeed him. The
Normans rather chose for their Lord his Son Eustachius by a Concubine, as more
affecting one born in their own Country, though a Bastard, Britain or
Burgundian; from whence there arose great War among the Adverse Parties, and
great desolation of the Country. William de Guader soon died, and left Raynald
to contend with Eustachius. Ibid. C.
To Raynald These were Norman Barons, and this Ralph de Conchis was the same
Gemet. lib. 8. c. ^7. Ord. Vit. f. 813. D. and 522. C.
Person with Ralph de Todinei^ Lord of Flamstead in Hampshire, who afterward
Married Alice one of the three Daughters of Judith Widow of Waltheof Earl of
Huntington, Northampton, etc. Niece to the Conqueror by his half Sister Maude
Countess of Albemarle, the eldest Maude being Married to Simon de St. Liz, or
Sylvanectensis, with whom he had the County of Huntington, etc. and the third
was Married to Robert the fifth Son of Richard de Tonebridge.
Ralph de Conchis the Son of Isabel, and Ascelin Goell, and Almaric de
Monteforti joined their Eustachius had with him William Alis, Ralph Rufus, and
Tedbald, and other his Barons, which made a stout resistance, by England, who
Married his Natural Daughter Julian to him, and gave him such Assistance as
neither Goel nor all his other Enemies could withstand.

After this Match King Henry Ibid. 811. B. C. D. An. Do. 110^.
employed Robert Earl of Mellent to compose the Differences in Normandy, and
sent to Duke Robert and other great Men to assist his Son in Law, and resist
his Enemies, otherwise they should feel his displeasure; Many that were his
Enemies not willing to disoblige the King, became Friends to Eustace; yet
Raynald and Goel persisted, and by a nefarious rashness committed Slaughters
and Burnings, but Eustace prevailed, gained the possession of his Fathers
Honor, and Raynald was beaten out of the Country; Then Robert Earl of Mellent
soon reconciled all other litigating Parties, and made perfect Peace between

In the mean time Ibidem. The Duke makes Peace with Robert de Belismo without
Advice of his Brother.
the Duke seeing the desolation of his Country, and not able to defend it
against Robert de Belism, without Advice of his Brother, (contrary to
Agreement) made Peace with him, and granted him his Fathers Honors and
Estates, the Bishopric of Seez, and others beforementioned. Ibid. and fol.
812. A. The Bishop and Abbat of Seez Curse Robert de Belismo and flee into
England.
The Bishop of Seez Serlo, and Ralph* Abbat of the same, not willing to live
Robert, after having Anathematized him, departed from that place and fled into
England to King Henry, who received them very kindly.

Not long after many Honorable Ibidem, 813. D. The Normans Petition King Henry
to take their Country into Protection.

He passes into Normandy.


Persons of the Normans, as well of the Clergy as Laity, reflecting upon the
Miseries of the Church of God, and their Country, Petitioned Henry to come
over, and take it into his Protection, and to Correct the Profane Normandy
with a great Fleet, and visits Danfront and other Towns subject to him, Ibidem,
fol. 814 A. The English Normans adhere to the King against the Natural Normans.

The King rebukes his Brother.


and was very Honorably received by his own great Men, and plentifully
presented after the Royal Custom. For Robert Earl of Mellent, Richard Earl of
Chester, Stephen Earl of Albamarle, Henry Earl of Ou, Rotro Earl of Mortaigne
in Perch, Eustace Earl of Breteul, Ralph Earl of Conches, Robert Fitz-Haymon,
Robert de Monteforti, Ralph de Mortemer, and many others which England, and now
being in Normandy, did all adhere to him, with their great Men, and were ready
to fight for him against the Natural Normans. Few days after he sent to his
Brother for a Conference, in which he rebuked him for breaking the Ibidem, B. C.

The Duke desired his Friendship, which he obtained, and the King returned into
England.


Accord made between them in England, for making Peace with Robert de Belism, a
Traitor to them both, and restoring him to his Fathers Lands and Dominions, and
for many other things; The Duke fearing his Brothers Power, desired his
Friendship, and England.

No sooner was Ibidem, C. D.

In King Henry's absence Robert de Belismo seized the Lands, killed the
Tenants, and burnt the Houses of such as favored him. The Normans apply
themselves to the King of England.


he gone, but Robert de Belism, with his Nephew William Earl of Mortain in
Normandy, and as many Nobles as he could seduce, broke out into War again, and
fell upon such as favored the King, seized their Lands, killed their Men or
Tenants, and burnt their Houses. The Plowmen and ordinary France with their
Wives and Children, and suffered great Miseries during their abode there. In
the midst of these Miseries they apply themselves again to the King of England,
who in the last Week of Lent Ibidem, fol. 815. A.
landed again at Barbaflot in Normandy, and on Easter Day was at Carenton,
seated on the River Vire, where Serlo the Bishop of Seez came to him, and
offered his Service, who going with the King into the Church at Carenton, to
Celebrate the Solemnity of Easter, they found it almost filled with Chests, and
Household Stuff of the Country People, which was brought thither as to a place
of safety. Ibidem, B. C.
Upon which Spectacle the Bishop in an Harangue to the King laid open the
Miseries of that Country, and showed him what the People were forced to do to
secure themselves from Robbers, Plunderers, and Spoilers; The Bishop of Seez
exhorts King Henry to Conquer Normandy.
Telling him also it was Ibid. D. He resolves to procure Quiet to the Church.

Many Noble Normans encourage him to it.

An. Do. 1104.


The King encouraged by this Speech of the Bishop, and what he heard from the
Noblemen which were with him, immediately resolved by their Assistance to
procure the Peace and Quiet of the Church of God. The Earl of Mellent with the
consent of the great Men present, advised, and urged him to put in execution
what he had resolved.

But before they made any progress in this Affair, the Bishop had a small job
of work to do; The Normans then wore very long Hair, and used much art in
preserving and making it (as was then thought) Ornamental. Ibid fol. 816. A. B.
C.
The Eloquent Prelat (says the Historian) continues his Preachment, and
inveighs mightily against that Vice, admonishing and exhorting the King to show
a good Example to others, and suffer his Hair to be cut off first; He submitted
Serlo Bishop of Seez cuts off the Kings Hair.
and the Bishop presently drew a Pair of Sissors out of his Sleeve, and first
Polled the King, and then the Earl, and many Noblemen with his own Hands; and
the People fearing the Kings Edict, came from all parts, and strove who should
be first Polled or Clipped.

After the Solemnity of Easter, King Henry Ibidem. King Henry Chastises the
Enemies of the Church.
sent Ambassadors to Philip King of France, and called to him Geofrey Martell
Earl Anjou, and Manfully Chastised the Enemies of the Church.

In the year 1106, in the Ibid. fol. 818. C. D. He attempts the Conquest of
Normandy.
Spring King Henry went again into Normandy with design to take it from his
Brother Robert, and having Hired Elias Earl of Main and his Forces, besieged
the City Bayeux, of which Gunter Dauney was Governor; he went out to the King,
and delivered to him Robert Fitz-Haymon whom he had taken He burns the City of
Bayeux.
forthwith the King attempts, fires and burns it to the ground, took the
Governor and Garrison Prisoners. The Governors of other places were much
affrighted at the destruction of this City; and the People of Caen, the King
marching to them, Caen yields to him.
sent to him and yielded upon Summons, expelling Engeran Fitz-Ilbert their
Governor. For this Service the King gave to four of the chief Citizens
Dalington in England, worth Fourscore Pounds per Annum. From hence he Falais,
but had not the same success, Falais beats off his Army.
having been beaten off by the Garrison.

In the mean time Malms. f. 88. b. n. 40, 50. William Earl of Mortain demands
the Earldom of Kent.
William Earl of Mortaigne, Son of Robert the Kings Uncle, not content with two
Earldoms, that in Normandy, and Cornwall in England, demanded of the King the
Earldom of Kent, which his Uncle Odo sometime held; who not only refused what
he asked, but by Judicial Proceeding took from him what he held, The King takes
from him the Earldom of Cornwall.
without right. For this, being in great fury with the King, he went into
Normandy, Ib f. 89. a. n. 10. He joined himself to the Duke, and Robert de
Belism.
and joined himself to the Dukes Party, and with Robert de Belism and others,
firmly adhered to him, and with Fire and Sword prosecuted King Henry's Friends;
for which he took away from him all he had in England, and levelled his Castles
with the Ground.

Ord. Vit. f. 819. D. 820. A. B. The King streightens Tenerchebray.
And a while after gathered some Forces together in Normandy, built a Fort near
his Town of Tenerchebray, (now Tinchebray) and put a Garrison into it, with
intention so to streighten it as to make it yield. Notwithstanding William
being a stout young Man, with some Companies of Soldiers relieved it; at which
the King was much angry, and calling together his Army, laid Siege to the Town,
whereupon Earl William solicited the Duke, Robert de Belism, The Duke, etc.
endeavors to relieve it.
and other his Friends for Assistance to raise it, and he obtained it. There
were with the Duke besides these two great Earls, Robert de Stoteville, William
de Ferrariis, and many others with their Forces. The King had with him Elias
Earl of Main, William Earl of Eureux, Robert Earl of Mellent, William Earl of
Warren, and these great Barons, Ranulph of Bayeux, Ralph de ^onches, Robert de
Monteforti, and Robert de Grentmaisnil, and many others with their Clients.
There were more Knights or Horsemen on the Kings Party, and most Foot on the
Dukes. Before this place they came to a Battle, The Battle of Tenerchebray. The
Dukes Army routed.
wherein the Dukes Army was routed; The particulars of Henry's Letter to
Archbishop Anselm, which will be presently mentioned.

The disagreement in Chronology between the English and Norman Monks.
As to the certainty of the time of these Transactions, neither the English or
Norman Monks do exactly agree one with another; but certain it is that King
Henry plied between England and Normandy according to the exigency of Affairs.
F. 80. ^in. 1.
Eadmer reports, that he was in Normandy in the year 1104. and almost subdued
all of it, Normans presently upon his coming, despising their Lord the Duke,
quitting their Faith they ought him, ran after the Kings Gold and Silver, and
delivered him Cities, Castles, and Towns. Ibid. fol. 83. n. 20, 30.
But not being at that time able to Conquer the whole Dukedom, he returned into
England that he might furnish himself with Money sufficient to subdue what
remained under the power of his Brother, King Henry used strange ways for
raising Money.
and so totally disinherit him. In the Collection of this Ibidem, fol. 84. lin.
3, 4. and n. 20.
These Exactions fell hard upon the Clergy, by which he lost their good
opinion, and brought an odium upon Fol. 85. n. 10.
himself.

He observing these things, hastened his Reconciliation with Anselm, Ibid. fol.
89. n. 40. f. 90. n. 10. King Henry gives Anselm an Account of his Victory of
Tenerchebray.
England, the King wrote to him a Letter of his Victory at Tenerchebray, in
which he tells him, that Robert Earl of Normandy with all his Troops of Horse
and Foot, that he could either by Entreaty or Money get together, at an
appointed time fought sharply with him before Tenerchebray, That he had beaten
him with small loss on his side, and that Divine Mercy had given into his hands
the Duke of Normandy, The Particulars of that Victory. Vsque ad 400 Milites and
10 Millia peditum.
and Earl of Mortain, William Crispin, William Ferrers, Robert Stotevile the
elder, and others to the number of 400 Knights or Horsemen, and Ten thousand
Foot, together with Normandy it self. Ibid. fol. 90. n. 20, 30. Robert Duke of
Normandy sent Prisoner into England.
Many ascribed the obtaining of this Victory to the Peace he made with Anselm,
after which having settled his Affairs there, sending before him the Duke and
Earl of Mortain in safe Custody, he returned into England

Malms. f. 89. a. n. 30.
This Battle was fought the day before Michaelmass-day. In the Ord. Vit. f.
822. A. A great Council called in Normandy.
middle of October the King came to Lisieux, Convened all the Optimates, or
Chief Men of Normandy, and held a most profitable Council for the Church of
God, wherein he Decreed by Royal Sanction, That there should be firm Peace kept
throughout all the parts of Normandy; That all Rapacities, Robberies, and
forcible King Henry reassumes all his Fathers Lands in Normandy.
and by the Judgment of Wise Men he made those Gifts void, which by imprudence
had been bestowed upon ungrateful Persons. He sent his Prisoners taken in the
Battle into England, and kept William Earl of Mortain, and Robert de Stoteville
in perpetual Prison, and some others, being inflexible, notwithstanding he was
importuned by Petitions, Promises, and great Offers, yet could not be softened
into a yielding temper.

Mat. Paris Fol. 61. n. 40.
writes, That King Henry passed over into Normandy with design to fight against
his Brother the Duke in the year 1105. and Conquered Caen and Bayeux by the
Assistance of the Earl of Anjou (he should have said Main) and many other
Castles; Principes or chief Men of Normandy yielded themselves to him. But in
the Ibidem, n. 50.
same year he returned into England to recruit his Army, that he might go back
with a greater force. In the year 1106. Ibidem.
Robert Duke of Normandy came to his Brother at Northampton, requesting he
might be restored to his Grace and Favor; But God (says the Monk) consented
not to an Accord between them, yet Henry was smitten with the sense of a
Cauterized Conscience in obtaining the Kingdom, and began within Ibid. fol. 62.
lin. 4.
because he had usurped upon his elder Brother, who had manifest Right to the
Kingdom, which he had too unjustly taken from him. But fearing Men more than
God, he first bound the Noblemen to him by crafty Speeches, and subtle
Promises, which in the end he Ibid. n. 20.
impudently violated. Ibidem. lin. 6. Robert de Belism escaped from the Battle.
Thinking afterward by the Foundation of an Abbey to satisfy God for so great
a Crime. And then follows a

From which Robert de Belism the Kings Mortal Enemy escaped by flight, Ord.
fol. 822. B. And would have brought the Earl of Main from the King.
and endeavored to bring Elias Earl of Main off from the King, by whose help
he designed to restore Duke Robert again; but finding him not to be drawn off,
Ibidem, fol. 823. A.
he then used him as a means to make his Peace with the King, Robert de Belism
is restored to his Paternal Inheritance.
which was granted, and he was restored to Argenton Castle in the Bishopric of
Seez, and all that was his Paternal Inheritance. It fared not so well with
Robert de Monteforti, Ibid. C. An. Do. 1107.
for King Henry called together his Proceres or great Men, and impleaded him
for breach of Faith, having favored the Dukes Title; whereupon knowing himself
guilty, he got leave to go to Jerusalem, and left all his Lands to the King.

And having thus subdued Normandy Ibidem, fol. 831. D. An. Do. 1107. A great
Council in Normandy.
by War, he often called the Magistrates or Governors of the People to Court,
and both with fair words and threats moved them to behave themselves as they
ought to do. In the Month of January there was a Convention of the Proceres or
Noblemen before the King, and in Ibidem, fol. 832. A. Another in which many
necessary Laws were made.
March he held a Council at Lisieux, and made necessary Laws to govern the
People under him, by the Consultation of the Magnates or great Men. And by his
Royal Power having allayed the Tempests, he Normandy in subjection. Ibidem,
fol. 833. B. King Henry returns to England.
And thus prudently disposing the Affairs of that Country, he went into England.

Where by the Eadm. f. 49. n. 10, 20. He redresseth many evil Practices there.

And punishes them, by pulling out of Eyes, cutting off Hands and Feet, etc.


Advice of Archbishop Anselm and the Proceres or Noblemen of the Kingdom, he
redressed several evil Practices, and began with his Court first. It was usual
in the time of his Brother, that the Multitude which followed the Court,
committed wast and spoil wherever they came without control; and behaved

He Ibidem, n. 30, 40. Coyners of false Money to have their Eyes pulled out,
etc.
also took notice what a great Grievance false and corrupt Money was to the
Nation, and Decreed, That every one (without Redemption) that Coined false
Money, should have his Eyes pulled out, or be Emasculated.

Henry Ord. Vit. fol. 837. D. An* Do. 1108. Henry endeavors to get William the
Son of Duke Robert into his Custody.
thus Established in the Dukedom of Normandy, and having his Brother Robert
Prisoner in England, by Advice of his Privado's, Commanded his Son William
(whom he had for his Education Elias de Sancto Sidonio) should be taken into
Custody, and appointed Robert Beauthamp Viscount of Arches to do it; when he
came to the Castle of Elias, the young Prince had made his escape, whereupon he
seized the Castle to the Kings use, who gave it to William de Warrenna.

Ibidem, fol. 838. A.
His Tutor Elias carried him through many Countries, and show to many Persons
the Elegancy of his Person, and Excellency Normans favored him, and wished he
were in possession of the Dukedom, by which they offended the King, and rendered
themselves suspected to him. Especially Ibidem.
Robert de Belism, who thinking upon the Affection and Kindness he had for the
Duke, and what Power he enjoyed under him above the greatest of the Normans,
Endeavors to set up William Son to Duke Robert.
endeavored what he could to set up his Banished Son. Ibid. B*
Robert and Elias consulted about this Affair, and solicited Lewis King of
France, William Duke of Poictou, Henry Duke of Burgundy, and Alan Prince of
Britain, and other powerful Governors of Countries to afford him Assistance.

At length Ibidem.
Fulke Duke of Anjou Gemet. lib. 8. C. 34. B.
who had Married the Elias Earl of Main, promised him his Daughter Sibyl, and
with her the Earldom of Main, and for a while gave him great encouragement. But
King Henry by Craft and Industry, by fair words, Threats, and Bribery, broke
off the Match. He also sent subtle Disputants, that moved Controversies about
their Consanguinity, for which it was determined, That by the Christian Law
they ought not be joined together, Ibidem
for Richard Duke of Normandy begot Robert, and Robert William the Bastard, who
begot Robert the Father of Prince William: and Robert Archbishop of Rouen, and
Earl of Eureux, and Brother of Duke Richard begot Richard Earl of Eureux, and
Richard Agnes the Wife of Simon, which was Mother to Bertrade, the Mother of
Fulke, the Father of Sibyll; Thus by the discovery of the Parentage of William
and Sibyll the long desired Marriage was frustrated.

Almeric de Monteforti, or Earl of Montfort, Son of Simon who Agnes, Gemet. l.
8. c. 17. Script. Norm. f. 1092. Ord. f. 843. B.
Sister and Heir to William Earl of Eureux, Ibidem, f. 834.
who died without Issue, after the death of his Uncle, was Heir to that
Earldom; but having displeased the King, he took it from him into his own
possession, for which reason, so soon as he had opportunity, he thought to
revenge himself upon him, and Ibidem, 840. D.
instigated Fulke Earl of Anjou, his Nephew Gemet. lib. 8. C. 38.
by his Sister Bertrade, who was then grown considerable by the accession of
the Earldom of Main, by the Orderic. ut supra. War against Normandy. Anno
Domini 1112, or 1113.
Daughter and Heir of Elias, to make Normandy, and implored the help of the
King of France. By the good Management, Wealth, and Force of Henry, his Enemies
were soon broken, and their designs frustrated, together with the Concurrence
of his Nephew Tedbald Earl of Blois, who at that time made War upon the King of
France, and gave him a Diversion.

Robert de Belism King Henry's constant Enemy Ibidem, fol. 844. A. Robert de
Belism impeached.
was in this Design with the Earl of Anjou, and fell into the Kings hands, and
November was impeached of breach of Faith, for not appearing in Court, being
thrice called, for not yielding an account of the Kings Rents in the Viscounty
of Argemon and Hiesmes, and what belonged to Falais as the Kings Viscount, or
Sheriff, And imprisoned by Judgment of the Kings Court.
and Officer, and for other Crimes which he could not deny; for which he was by
the just Judgment of the Kings Court committed close Prisoner. Ibid. B.
Presently after the King besieged, and took in Alencon.

Ibidem. The Earl of Anjou submits to the King, does him Homage, and receives
from him the Earldom of Main*
continued not long, for in the first week of Lent, Fulke Earl of Anjou came
into the Territory of Alencon, and Swore Fealty to King Henry, did him Homage,
and received from him the Earldom of Main, and gave his Daughter to Prince
William the Kings Son, and the King gave him the Earldom of Eureux, yet
received into favor Almeric de Monteforti, whose by right it was, and William
Crispin, who had done much against him.

This being done, Ibid. C. Peace between the Kings of England and France.
the two Kings of England and France came together at Gisors, and struck up a
Peace; Then Lewis gave to King Henry Belism, the Earldom of Main, and all
Britany, for which Fergan Duke of the Britans did him Homage; and the King
promised his Daughter to Conan his Son; and now it was (according to Fol. 90.
b. n. 10. Prince William does Homage to the King of France for Normandy.
Malmsbury) that Prince William did Homage to the King of France for Normandy,
acknowledging he was to hold that Province of him by Lawful Right.

Notwithstanding Ibid. D.
these Renditions and great Submissions made to King Henry, yet Hameric de
Villery and other Proceres, or great Tenants of the Honor, or Earldom of
Belism, to whom William Talvane the Son of Robert de Belism had committed the
guard of that place while he went to secure his Earldom of His Father Script.
Nor. f. 1093. Gemet. lib. 8. c. 35.
Robert Married Agnes Daughter and Heir to Wido Earl of Pantheu.
Pontheu, trusting to the Strength of it, and multitude of Dependents, prepared
to resist him. Henry drew together the Army of all Normandy, and May, and
beyond expectation Tedbald Earl of Blois, Fulke of Anjou, He was also Earl of
Gemet. lib. 8. c. 29. etc. 35.
Perch, and Married Maude a Natural Daughter of King Henry, to whom, after he
took it, he gave the Town of Belism and the Territory belonging to it.
Rotro Earl of Mortain in Perch, and other famous Optimates or Worthies came
with Aid to the Normans, invested the Town, and within three days took it by
Assault. Ibidem, fol. 842. A. King Henry made a complete Conquest of Normandy.
Thus King Henry Conquered Normandy, and having made firm Peace with all his
Neighbors, came back into England, and governed both Kingdom and Dukedom in
great Tranquillity for five years. Flor. Wig. fol. 656. Anno Domini 1113.
He landed in England in the Month of July, and brought Robert de Belism who
was kept Prisoner at Warham.

King Henry had many Expeditions against the Welsh, always prone to Rebellion,
(or rather to assert their own Liberties) and with the following Contrivance
much diverted their Incursions into England. Malms. fol. 89. n. 20, 30, 40.
Flor. Wig. fol. 656. An. Do. 1114. He removes the Flemmings into Wales.
There were many Flemmings come over into England, besides what came over with
the Conqueror, in the time, and by the favor of this Kings Mother, Queen
Maude, Daughter to the Flanders, and so many as they became burthensom to the
Nation; These he transported into Wales with their Goods and Families, and gave
them the Country of Ross (where to this day they speak a different Language
from the Welsh) which is the best part of Pembrokeshire for their Habitation,
that he might both clear his Kingdom of them, To check the Insurrections of the
Welsh.
and that they might check the fury and Insurrections of the Welsh. Yet this
contrivance he thought not a sufficient security against them, but demanded and
received as Hostages the Sons

After these Successes he Ibidem, fol. 657. An. Do. 1116.
caused the Optimates or Earls, and Barons of all England* to meet at Salisbury
on the Nineteenth day of March, and in his presence to do Homage and Swear
Fealty to his Son William.

Eadmer Fol. 117. n. 30, 40.

A great meeting at Salisbury.

The Laymen readily Swear Fealty, and do Homage to Prince William.

The Bishops make fair Promises.


says, That the King by Edict commanded a meeting of the Bishops, Abbats, and
Principes, or chief Men of the Kingdom at Salisbury, on the Twentieth of March,
that he might make his Son William Heir of the Kingdom, and secure the Title to
him. The Princes* or Chief Laymen knowing the Kings mind, readily did Homage,
and Swear Fealty to him. The Archbishop of Canterbury and other Bishops and
Abbats Swore, That if he

Malmsbury F. 93. a. n. 30, 40.

All the Military Tenants in England compelled to do Homage to Prince William.


declares this Transaction more fully, affirming, That all the Freemen of
England and Normandy, of whatsoever Order or Dignity, or to what Lord soever
they were Vassals or William the Son of King Henry, and Queen Maude.

She died the Ord. fol. 843. B. Anno Domini 1118.
First of May and was buried at Westminster, and on the Ninth of June following
died Ibidem.
Robert Earl of Mellent King Henry's great Counselor.

It is said before, that Almeric de Monteforti was Sisters Son and William Earl
of Eureux, who now again demands Ibid. C. A new War in Normandy, many Noblemen
Conspire to set up William Son to Duke Robert.
of the King that Earldom, which he utterly denied to grant him, by the Advice
of Audin Bishop of that City; He therefore took Arms against the King, and
excited almost all France to do the like. The Governor of Eureux, William
Pointel, delivered the City to him, and the Bishop with his Clerks and Vassals
were forced to flee from thence. There joined with him Robert de Gournay,
Stephen Earl of Albamarle, Eustachius of Breteul, Richard de Aquila, Robert de
Newburgh, Henry, and endeavored to Establish William the Son of Duke Robert in
his Fathers Estate. Ibid. D.
With these also joined Baldwin Earl of Flanders, who entered that part of
Normandy called Tellau, and burnt many Towns, of whose Flames the King and his
Normans were Spectators; he fortified Bures, and because he suspected most of
the Normans, he put a great Garrison of Stipendiary Britans and English into it.
Baldwin comes before it, provokes the Garrison to fight, where he was Ib. f.
844. D. 845. C.
received likewise Assistance from the King of France, and Duke of Anjou; on
both sides they plundered the Country, took and burnt Castles and Towns.

On the Nones Ibid. fol. 846. B. C.

A great Council at Rouen.


or Fifth of October there was a Council summoned at Rouen, there King Henry
Treated of the Peace of the Kingdom, with Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the other Geofry Archbishop of Rouen spoke about the State of the Church, with
his four Suffragan Bishops, Richard of Baieux, John of Lisieux, Turgis of
Auranches, and Roger of Constance, and with many Abbats. Serlo Bishop of Seez
was not at this Council, being excused by reason of his Age and Infirmity; and
Audin Bishop of Eureux excused himself, as being employed against the Common
Enemies of the Country.

The War still continued in Ibid. fol. 848. B. C. The War continues in Normandy.
Normandy, and every day almost brought the King news of some considerable
Norman or Castellan revolting from him, amongst whom Eustachius de Breteul, an
Illegitimate Son of William Earl of that place, was one, who had Married Julian
one of King Henry's Natural Daughters: he demanded great things of his Father
in Law, and because he would not grant them, he fortified four Castles against
him. Ibid. fol. 850. A. Anno Domini 1119.
Yet some repenting of what they had done, came and submitted to the King, and
made their Robert Son of Ascelin Goell, whose example many followed. The King
sent to Almaric, offered him his Earldom of Eureux, and invited him to accept
of his favor, but he refused it. Ibid. fol. 851. A. The Adherents to King
Henry were English Barons of Norman Extraction.
The Optimates or great Men which faithfully adhered to the King were Richard
Earl of Chester, Ralph de Conches, William de Warrenna, William de Rolmara,
William de Tancardi-villa, Ralph de Sancto Victore, Walter Giffart, Nigell de
Albiney, and his Brother William, and the Sons of Robert Earl of Mellent,
Waleran, Robert.

In the Month of Ibid. B. Peace concluded, Prince William Marries the Earl of
Anjou's Daughter.
May this year Prince William came from England into Normandy, much to the joy
of his Father, who sent Mediators for Peace to Fulke Earl of Anjou, and invited
him kindly to his Court after the Peace was concluded between them; And in the
Month of June Ibid. C.
the Prince was Married at Lisieux to the Earls Daughter, and then the King by
the Mediation of the Earl, William Talvace, the Son of Robert de Belism, and
restored to him all his Fathers Estate in Normandy.

After this Ibid. D. King Henry burns the Towns and Castles of his Enemies.
Henry marched up and down Normandy to revenge himself upon his Enemies, and
burnt their Castles and Towns; He besieged Eureux, and after he had Ibid. fol.
852. B. C.
burnt that Town and the Cathedral, took it.

While both Fire and Sword raged in the bowels of Normandy, the King of France
invaded it Ibid. fol. 853. C. The King of France invades Normandy.
on that side toward France, and came as far as Audely upon the River Seyn, and
wished he could meet the King of England in the open Field, who hearing of it,
gave him his desire, and marching toward him, came into the Plain of Ibid.
fol. 854. A. The Battle of Brenivill.
Brenivill near the Mountain Guarclive with 500 Horse, amongst whom were the
Kings two Natural Sons, Robert and Richard, excellent Soldiers, and three
Earls, Henry of Ou, William de Warrenna, Walter Giffard, and many others of
great Note; Edward of Salisbury carried the Banner. Ibidem, B. C. D.
Lewis of France seeing what he had long wished for, drew out 400 Horse, and
amongst them was William Duke Roberts Son engaged, that he might deliver his
Father from Prison, and recover his ancient Inheritance. There were also
Matthew Earl of Beaumont, Guido Earl of Clarmont, Otmond de Chaumont, William
de Guarlanda General of France, Peter de Manley, Philip de Mont-Bray, Burchard
de Montmorency, Baldric de Bray, The French are beaten.
and many other Normans. They join Battle, the French are beaten, and lose 140
Horse, Guido Otmund, Burchard and William Crispin were taken; Ibid. fol. 855. A.
The King of France was alone, and lost in a Wood, from whence a Country Man
conveyed him to Audeley, whether the remains of his routed Army was retired.

In this Battle were Ibidem. fol. 884. D. But 900 Horsemen on both sides.
but 900 Milites or Horsemen on both sides, (unless perhaps there might be so
many Milites besides their Retinue) and they accounted a great number, whereof
only three were killed, for they were so Clothed with Iron, as they could
scarce be in danger. Ibidem. fol. 885. B.
King Lewis his Standard was here taken, and King Henry bought it of him that
took it for 20 Marks, which he kept as a token of the Victory; His Horse also
was taken, which William sent likewise his Cosen William the Son of Duke
Robert, his Horse which he had lost, with many other Gifts.

When King Lewis Ibid. D. Almeric de Monteforti persuades King Lewis to raise a
new Army.
returned to Paris, Almeric de Monteforti, who was not in this Fight, came to
Visit and Comfort him, being much dejected at his ill fortune; in their
Discourse he encouraged Ibidem, fol. 886. A.
The King being well pleased followed his Advice, and forthwith sent his Edict
to the Bishops, who readily obeyed it, and Anathematized Normans. They came
from Burgundy, Ibidem, B. C.
Berry, Paris, the Countries of Orleance, Vermandois, Beavais, Laudun, and le
Estamps, and other places, as Wolves to their Prey, and committed strange
Outrages in their March, which the Bishops permitted out of hatred to the
Normans. To these the King joined an Army which he gathered from Noyon, Isle,
from Tournay, and Arras, from Gournay, and Clermont, and from all the Provinces
of France, and Flanders, The French besiege Breteul.
that he might restore to their ancient Honors all such as were in exile for
the sake of William the Son of Duke Robert. With this Army he laid Siege to
Bretteuill or Breteul, which is in the heart of Normandy; The Governor of this
place was Ralph de Guader a Britain, The Valor of Ralph de Guader Governor of
Breteul.
who valiantly sallied out upon, and fought with them, and commanded all the
Gates of the Castle to be opened, but none could enter; such was

King Henry so soon as he heard Ibidem, C. D.
the French were returned into Normandy, sent his Son Richard with a Supply of
200 Milites or Horse, to Ralph de Guader, which being discovered, the courage
of the Assaylants began to fail them; The brave Governor went from Gate to Gate
to encourage and aid his Soldiers, and often French. But they despairing of
taking the Town, were forced to return into France, The French march home.
carrying back nothing besides plundered Goods, but Ignominy and Blows. Ibidem,
fol. 857. A.
William de Chaumont the King of France his Son in Law, and other haughty
Soldiers, much moved at their ill success before Breteul, in their march home
set upon the Castle of Tiliers, where Gilbert the Cast^llan suddenly sallied
out upon them, and took William Prisoner, for whose Redemption he had 200 Marks
of Silver. Others also of his Company he surprised, and the rest fled with
disgrace. Upon this success Ibidem, B. C.
Richer de Aquila a great Baron submitted to the King, and by the Mediation of
his Uncle Rotro Earl of Perch, obtained his Fathers Estate both in England and
Normandy. The Castellans of Gloz and Lire followed his Example, made their
Peace, Henry.

In the midst of Ibid. D. An. Do. 1119.
October This Pope was Orderic. f. 848. A.
Guido Archbishop of Vienne in Dauphin, seated upon the River Rhone, a
Frenchman, and chosen the Second of February then last past: he was Son to
William Duke of Burgundy, whose Mother was Alice Daughter of Richard the Second
Duke of Normandy.
Calixtus the Pope, with the Roman By the Roman Senate Ordericus means Ibidem.
the College of Cardinals, many of whom he names, and says it was their
special Prerogative to chose and Consecrate the Pope.
Senate came to Rhemes, stayed there fifteen days, and held a An Ecclesiastical
Council at Rhemes.
with many Abbats and Dignified Men of the Church, for by the Popes Command
they were called out of Italy, Germany, France, Spain, Britany, and England,
the Isles of the Ibidem. King Henry's Prohibition and Directions to his Bishops
in this Council.
The King of England indeed permitted the Bishops of his Kingdom to go to the
Synod, but did altogether prohibit them to make any Complaints of any sort
whatever, telling them he would do every one that complained, Right in his own
Land. Ibid. fol. 858. A.
That he paid yearly the Revenue those that had gone before him, had granted to
the Roman Church; And yet, says he, I hold the Privileges, in like manner
acknowledged due to me in ancient times, declaring the further Liberty he gave
Go ye, salute the Pope in my name, and only hear his Apostolical Precepts, but
bring none of his new Inventions into my Kingdom.

In this Council the King of France accompanied with his Ibidem, C. D. The King
of France in this Council complains of the King of England.
Barons came, and made his Complaint against King Henry, That he was his
Confederate, and yet committed many Spoils and Rapines upon his Subjects; That
he violently invaded Normandy that was a Robert Duke of Normandy, that was his
Vassal, and Henry's Lord and Brother; That he had taken, and a long time
detained him in Prison; And behold (says he) William the Son of the Duke, who I
present here before you, he has utterly disinherited, and banished. By Bishops
and Earls I have required him to deliver me the Captive Duke, but could not
obtain my desire. I sent Robert de Belism to him on several Messages, he
secured him in his Court, cast him into Tedbald is my Vassal, and yet by the
instigation of his Uncle he rises up against me, and being inflated by his
Power and Riches, Rebelled, and made grievous War against me and my Kingdom;
and much more to this purpose. Ibidem, fol. 859. B.
All the French Clergy in this Council justified what he said, yet Geofrey
Archbishop of Rouen, and all the Norman Bishops and Abbats rose up to make his
defense and excuse him, but could not be heard.

In this Juncture Ibid. fol. 863. C. D. Tedbald Earl of Blois reconciles the
Noble Normans to King Henry.
Tedbald Earl of Blois the Kings Nephew made it his business, to reconcile all
dissenting Persons to the King, and brought to him Almaric de Montfort, who was
received into his favor, and restored to the whole Earldom of his Uncle.
William Eustachius Julian his Wife, the Kings Natural Daughter, were at that
time restored to his Grace, and their Lands, except Breteul, which for his
faithful Service the King had given to his Kinsman Ralph de Guader, in
recompense whereof he gave him yearly 200 Marks of Silver in England. Hugh de
Gournay, and Robert de Newburgh, with the rest of King Henry's Enemies came in,
and were graciously received. Only Stephen Earl of Albamarle stood out, who
seeing the King coming against him with an Army, by Advice of

When this Council was ended, in Ibid. fol. 864. D. 865. A. B.

The Pope moves King Henry to restore his Brother Robert and his Son.


November following the Pope came into Normandy, and met King Henry at Gisors
to Treat of Peace. He told him by the Law of God every Man ought to enjoy his
Right, and that it was his Desire and the Request of the Council, that he
should free Robert his Brother from his Bonds, and restore William to the
Dukedom. He Ibidem, C. D. His Answer to the Pope.
Answers the Pope, that he did not take the Dukedom from his Brother, but only
secured his Fathers Inheritance, which was given away to Dissolute Men,
Thieves, and Robbers; That he was called into Normandy by the Bishops, Clergy,
and Religious, to prevent the desolation of the Church, and that what he did,
was not out of choice, but by compulsion, and invitation, The Pope satisfied
with his Answer.
to preserve the Country from desolation and ruin; With this Answer (which was
the same the Norman France) the Ibidem, fol. 866. B.
Pope was satisfied, and approved what he had done, and said he had heard
enough of the Duke and his Son.

And so leaving them to shift for themselves, his next. Ibid. fol. 866. B. C D.
The Pope makes Peace between the Kings of France and England.
work was to strike up a Peace between the two Kings, which was suddenly
accomplished, without the least cavil, exception, or difficulty, all Castles
and Strong Holds taken in the time of War being mutually

The War being Ibidem, fol. 867. C. King Henry comes for England.
ended, and things well settled in Normandy, King Henry commanded a Fleet to be
prepared, and many Military Men of all sorts that had served him well and
faithfully, to accompany him into England; where he intended to bestow on some
large Rewards, and to raise others to great Honors. At this time Ralph de
Guader, who had the Town of Montfort, and other Towns and Britany, upon the
Kings consent and good will, offered his Daughter in Marriage to his Natural
Son Richard, and with her the Towns and Castles of Breteul, Gloz, and Lire, and
his whole Honor in Normandy. Which intended Marriage was never completed.

When the Fleet Ibid. D.
was ready in the Port of Bartaflot, now Barfleur, the King with a noble
splendid Train, the Wind at South, set Sail on the Twenty fifth of November in
the Evening, and landed in England next Morning. His Sons William and Richard
had not the same good fortune, for being in another Vessel, called the White
Ship, whereof one Thomas Fitz-Stephen was Captain or Master, ( Ibidem. fol 668.
A. Prince William, etc. with 300 Persons drowned.
who pretended to hold his Place or Office in Fee) both Master and Mariners had
got too much Wine in their Heads, and striving to be the foremost Ship in the
Fleet, run upon a Rock and split the Ship, so as she presently sunk with near
300 Persons in her. Ibidem, f. 870. A. B.
Amongst whom were, as before noted, Prince William, his half Brother Richard,
and his half Sister Maude, the Wife of Rotro Earl of Mortain in Perch, Richard
Earl of Chester, and many of the young Nobility, who chose that Ship for the
Company sake. The King Ibidem, fol. 871. A.
distributed the Honors and Estates of such as perished in this Shipwreck very
providently, for he Married their Widows,

King Henry Ibidem, A. D. 1120.
having lost his Wife and Son, by the Counsel of his Wise Men, resolved to
Marry, and chose for his Wife Alice the fair Daughter of Godfrey Duke of
Lovain: She continued his Queen fifteen years, but never bare him any Children.

Many Ibidem, f. 875. C.D. An. Do. 1122. A new Contrivance against King Henry.
observing that King Henry had no Issue Male, looked toward William, Duke
Roberts Son, and endeavored to set him up; Amongst whom was Gualeran and
Robert the Sons of Robert Earl of Mellent, who had been Educated in the Kings
Court, and used as tenderly as his own Children, and were both Knighted by him.
Gualeran besides his Fathers Estate, the Earldom of Mellent in France, had
Beaumont and the Patrimony belonging to it in Normandy. His Brother Robert had
the Earldom of Leicester in England, to whom Amicia the Daughter of Ralph de
Guader, which had been Contracted to his Son Richard, and Breteul in Normandy,
with all the Estate appertaining to that.

Others of the Ibid. fol. 876. A. B. C. The Confederates.
Confederacy were Almaric de Monteforti Earl of Eureux, the Kings perpetual
Foe, Hugo de Monteforti, Hugo de Novo-Castello, or New Castle, William Lupell,
Baldric de Braye, and Pagan de Gisors, etc. who met in September, and entered
into a general

The King Ibid. D. An. Do. 1122. Civil War in Normandy.
understood their Designs, and in October summoned together a great Force at
Rouen, and on Sunday after Dinner marched from thence, no Man knowing his
Resolution, or whether he intended to go; for about two years Ibid. fol. 877,
878, 879.
both Parties burnt and harassed the Country, took one another Towns and
Castles. At length Ibid. fol. 880. A.B.C. An. Do. 1124. A Battle between King
Henry and the Normans.

The Normans beaten that appeared for Prince William.


on the Twenty sixth of March they came to a Battle, Walteran, Hugh de
Montfort, and Hugh of Newcastle, his two Brothers in Law, and Eighty other
Knights or Tenants in Military Service were taken; William de Grandcort, Son of
William Earl of Ou, took Almaric flying from the Fight, but fearing the Kings
severity toward him, left the King with whom he was engaged, and his Estate,
and conveyed him to Beaumont, and went and lived with him an Exile in France.
After Easter the Ibid. D. fol. 881. D.
King brought to Judgment at Rouen some of the guilty Persons; Geofrey de
Torvill, and Odard de Pine, had their Eyes pulled out for Perjury, and Luke de
Bar had the same punishment for making scurrilous Songs of the King, and
Singing them.

The Earl of Mellent, and his two Brothers in Law were sent Prisoners England;
Ibidem, 882. A. They submit and make their Peace with King Henry.
Most of the Confederates not long after submitted, Almeric, Lupell, and others
the Kings Enemies procured his Peace, and when they could not help Exiled
William, they unwillingly deserted him, yet obtained their Pardons and Estates
again, having first given due satisfaction.

In the Malms. Hist. Novel. fol. 99. a. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50.

King Henry sends into Germany for his Daughter Maude the Empress.


year 1126. the Emperor Henry the Fourth died, of which so soon as the King
heard, he sent into Germany for his Daughter, Germans would have had Reign over
them, but the King having an intention to Marry her to the Duke of Anjou,
Tourain, and Main, they lying convenient for a conjunction to Normandy, would
not permit her to stay.

When Ord. Vit. f. 884. C. D. An. Do. 11^7. Prince William Married to the Queen
of France her Sister.

He claims Normandy.


all these Designs failed in restoring Robert the Father, and advancing William
the Son, Lewis King of France still protected the young Man, and by the
procurement of Alice his Queen, he Pontois, Chaumont, and Mant, and all that
Country now called Veuxin Francois. This was done in January, and before Lent
he came with some force to Gisors, and claimed Normandy, but the Normans were
afraid to receive him as their Natural Lord.

It happened that on the First of Ibid. D. f. 885, 886. A. An. Do 1127. Gemet.
lib. 8. cap. 14.

He is made Earl of Flanders.


March following, Charles of Denmark Earl of Flanders was Murdered, and Lewis
King of France gave unto this William that Earldom, in right of his Grandmother
Maude Queen of England, and he restored to the King all the Towns and the
Country of Veuxin which he had given him in France. There were many Pretenders
to the Right of this Earldom, as William Earl of Ipre, Theoderic Earl of Ou,
and Baldwin of Haynault. Williams carriage and behavior toward the Flemmings
was more cruel and harsh than they expected, and therefore they set up
Theoderic against him, to whom many Towns revolted, and amongst Alost, which
William besieged, and beat the Forces of Theoderic that came to relieve it; but
that very day before the Castle, Is slain before Alost Castle.
he was with a Lance thrust under the Ball of the Thumb into the Wrist, of
which Wound he died within five days, and according to Lib. 8. c. 16.
G^meticensis, his death happened on the Twenty seventh of July 1128. he died
without Issue, as also did Ord. Vit. f. 780. D. 781. A.
Richard and William, two Natural Sons of Duke Robert, by a beautiful young
Harlot of an old Priest; Richard was Shot with an Arrow in New-Forest, William
after his Father was taken at Tenerchebray went into the Holy Land, and there
was slain, The Issue of Duke Robert extinct.
both dying unmarried, and in them the Issue of Robert was extinct.

This year the King brought his Daughter into England, Maude the Empress
arrives in England.
in the Month of September; At Christmas he called together at London a great
number of the Clergy and Optimates, or chief Men of the Nation, and gave the
Earldom of Shrewsbury to his Queen; and fearing she would bear him no Children,
he bethought himself of a Successor to the Kingdom, and in the same Council
caused all the Optimates of England, The great Men of England Swear to make her
Queen after her Fathers death.
the Bishops and Abbats to Swear, That if he should dye without Issue Male,
they would receive his Daughter Maude the Empress for their Queen, having first
told them what a great misfortune to the Nation the death of his Sons was, and
now that his Daughter was his only Lawful Successor. The first that William
Archbishop of Canterbury, next the Bishops, and then the Abbats. The first
Layman that Swear was Malms. Hist. Nov. f. 99. b. n. 10.
David King of Scots, the next Stephen Earl of Mortain and Bologn, King Henry's
Nephew, by his Sister Adala; then Robert Duke of Gloucester, between whom and
Stephen there was great emulation which should Swear first. All thus bound by
Faith and Oath, the Council was dissolved. An. Do. 1128. She is Married to the
Earl of Anjou's Son.
After Whitsuntide he sent his Daughter into Normandy, that she might be
betrothed to the Son of Fulke Earl of Anjou, Rouen, and followed himself to see
them Married, and Ibidem, n. 20.
returned again that very year. The Norman Monk places this Orderic. fol. 889.
A.
Marriage in the year following, and says that Turgis Bishop of Auranches
Married them.

In the Malms. f. 99. b. n. 30. f. 100. a. n. 30.
Thirtieth year of his Reign the King passed into Normandy, and met Pope
Innocent at Chartres, and there acknowledged him for Pope, notwithstanding he
was shut out of Rome, Anacletus possessed of that Seat; and then at Rouen he
and his great Men made him many Presents.

The next Ib. n. 40. An. Do. 1131.
year he returned into England, and with him his Daughter the Empress; and in a
great Convention of the Nobility at Northampton, such as had Sworn Fealty to
her before, renewed their Oaths, and such as before were not Sworn, did then by
Oath bind themselves unto her.

The year following Ibidem, b. n. 10. Duke Robert dies.
on the Fifth of August he passed again into Normandy, and never came more into
England. He continued there three years Orderic. f. 89^. D. Contin. ad Florent.
f. 665. An. Do. 1134.
and about four Months, and in the mean time his Brother Robert died on the
Tenth of February in the Castle of Cardif in Wales, after he had been Prisoner
Twenty eight years, and was buried in St. Peter's Church in Gloucester.

In the Ord. fol. 900. B. C. D. An. Do. 1135. Geofrey Duke of Anjou disturbs
King Henry.
last year of his Reign, hearing strange news of the Insurrections of the
Welsh, he thrice endeavored with a choice number of Bowmen and others to come
for England, but was diverted by his Son in Law Geofry When his Father in Law
Fulke was made King of Jerusalem and Prince of Antioch, he gave to him Anjou,
and all his Territories in France.
Duke of Anjou; who affected the great Treasures of his Father in Law, and
demanded Normandy, affirming that was the Agreement he made with him when he
Married England. He besieged Roscelin Viscount of Beaumont in Man's, Son in Law
to the King, and burnt that Town down to the ground. This was the Origin of
great Dissentions in Normandy, and William Talvace, Talvace and Toeny
Incendiaries. King Henry keeps them in awe.
and Roger de Toeny or Todeny were suspected to be the chief Incendiaries in
these Broils. The King placed a good Garrison in the Town of Conches that was
Todeney's chief Strength, which kept him quiet. Talvace, he often summoned to
his Court, who refused to come, whereupon he seized all his Lands; And thus
deprived of all his Honors, he went to the Anjou, and lived in his Country.
The King from the beginning of August till the Feast of All Saints went about,
and viewed the Country of Seez, and took into his possession Alencon and
Almenesche, and other Castles belonging to Talvace.

On the Ibid. fol. 901. B. C.
Twenty fifth of November he came to Lions Castle, and ordered his Huntsmen to
Hunt in that Forest the day following, but that night he fell sick, and died
the First of December, King Henry dies.
being Sunday. His Body was brought into England, and buried in the Monastery
of Reading. He orders all Exiles to be restored, pardons all Mulcts and
Forfeitures.
Before his death he ordered that all Forfeitures or Mulcts should be forgiven,
all Exiles restored to their Country, and that all Men whose Estates had been
seized should enjoy them again. He directed also his Son Robert, who had the
Custody of his Treasure at Falais, that he should distribute 60000 l. amongst
his Servants and Stipendiary Knights or Horsemen.

Ibidem.
five Earls, Robert of Gloucester, William de Warrenna, Rotro Earl of Mortain
in Perch, Waleran of Mellent, and Robert of Leycester, aliique Proceres and
Tribuni Nobilesque Oppidan, other Noblemen, great Commanders, and Noble It Is
frequent with Ordericus Vitalis to call Castellans or Governors of Towns and
Castles Oppiandi, especially in the twelfth and thirteenth Books of his
History, Lib. 12. fol. 853. B. fol. 850. C. fol. 843. C.
Castellans. These Malms. Hist. Novell. fol. 100. b. n. 30.

He names his Daughter to the Succession. No Rebellions in England during his
absence in Normandy, by reason he was kind to the Clergy, and rigorous to
Seculars.


and he adjudged all his Land in England and France to his Daughter by lawful
and perpetual Succession; being angry with her Husband, because he had provoked
him

The King was in Normandy far the greatest part of his Reign, yet never had
Insurrection or Rebellion against him in England, which is to be imputed to his
favor and kindness to the Clergy, the Bishops especially, who were therefore
his Friends; and to the rigorous Execution of his Secular Government, Ibidem,
fol. 91. b. n. 10, 20, 30.
for he was inflexible in the rigor of Justice, and never suffered any thing
committed

These were the mere Secular Actions of this King, what he had to do with the
Ecclesiastics compleats his Story, and acquaints us with the foundation of all
the Rebellious Actions and Practices, first of the Clergy, and then of the
Temporal Barons, by their instigation, which will be related in the following
History.

Church Story.
ON the Eadm. f. 55. n. 30. f. 56. lin. 1. An. Do. 1100. Anselm refuses to do
Homage to the King.
Twenty third of September Anselm landed at Dover, and a few days after went to
the King at Salisbury, and was kindly received by him; But required to do
Homage to the King, as by Custom it had been done to his Ancestors, and receive
the Archbishopric from his Hands, Answered, He neither would or could do it.
The reason of his denial having been demanded, he insisted on diverse things
which had been determined in the Council at Council. Romans tertium. Under Pope
Urban the II. Lab. Tom. 10. Col. 615, 616, ^17. Denies him the right of
Investitures. Anselm would have the King obedient to the Pope.
Rome, which if the King would receive and observe, there should be a firm
Peace between them, but if otherwise, he could not see that his stay in England
was either honest or profitable, especially if the King continued to dispose of
Bishoprics and Abbacies, England to reside there, unless the King would be
obedient to the Pope. Eadm. ut supra, n. 10, 20.
Who hearing these things, was much troubled, esteeming it a great matter to
lose the Investitures of Churches and Homage of Bishops; thinking it also a
grievous thing, that Anselm should depart the Kingdom, having scarce been
confirmed in it. In the first he should as it were lose half the Kingdom,
Anselm should pass over Sea to his Brother Robert, (then come from Jerusalem)
and bring him into subjection to the Roman See (which he knew was easy to be
done) and then make him King of England; Upon these Verbal Altercations, the
further debate of the matter was respited until Easter, that Messengers might
on both sides be sent to the Pope to incline him to wave his Decrees, and
suffer the Custom of the Kingdom to have its course, and the Church the mean
time to remain Anselm knew it signified nothing to send Messengers, yet to
avoid suspicion from the King or great Men he consented to what they desired.
The Decrees of the Pope have been touched before, and they were Sentences of
Excommunication (which Eadmer, being present with Anselm in this Council, says
he Fol. 53. n. 10. The Heads of the Decrees which Anselm insisted on.
heard) against such Laymen as gave the Investitures of Churches, and against
such as received them from the Hands of Laymen, and lastly against such as
should do any Homage to any Layman

This year Guido Ibid. fol. 58. n. 40. The Popes Legate not received in England.
Archbishop of Vienne in France came into England by Command, and in the Name
of the Pope, as his Legate of all Britain, at which all Men admired, seeing it
was never heard of before, that ever any Man was the Popes Legate in Britain,
except the Archbishop of Canterbury; and therefore he went as he came, no Man
taking him for Legate, nor did he in any thing execute

When Ibid. and fol. 59. n. 40. An Do. 1101.
Easter was come, the Messengers not returned from Rome, and therefore the
Debate between the King was deferred until their return, which was not until
toward the later end of Summer, and then they only brought Pope Append. n. 18.
Paschals Letters to the King, against the giving of Investitures by Laymen, in
which he seems to be of the same opinion with his Predecessor Urban.

The King Ibidem, and fol. 61. n. 40, 50. The King demands of Anselm Homage. He
refuses to do it.
Commands Anselm to Court, and when he came, required him to do him Homage, and
Consecrate those to whom he gave Bishoprics and Abbeys. He refused to do them;
and the King told him he would not lose the usage of his Ancestors, nor suffer
any Ibid. fol. 62. n 10, 20.
of the Land met at Winchester, and by common assent prevailed with Anselm to
respite the matter again, until other Messengers of better Note than the former
were sent and returned. Anselm on his part sent two Monks, Baldwin of Bec in
Normandy, and Alexander of Canterbury; The King sent three Bishops, Gerard
Elect of York, Herbert of Thetford, and Robert of Chester. These Ibid. fol. 63.
n. 10.
bring back from Rome two Epistles, Appen. n. 19.
one to the King, in Paschal by the Judgment of the Holy Spirit, interdicts him
from giving Investitures; another to Anselm, wherein he confirms what he had
done. The King calls together the great Men at London, and sends to the
Archbishop, that he would no longer deny him the enjoyment of his Fathers
Customs, and if he did, to avoid the Realm. He refers the King to his Letters,
( Ibid. fol. 70. n. 30.
which the King would not have opened or read) and said, if by those he were
permitted to do what the King desired, then he would comply. Ibidem, fol. 65.
n. 10, 20, 30, etc.
Anselms Letters, and that the Pope sent by them a Verbal Order to the King,
That so long as in other matters he was a good Prince, he might use
Investitures; The Monks maintained the contrary. The Ibid. f. 66. n. 30, 40,
50. Anselm would not be persuaded to comply with the King.
Bishops and great Men were on the Kings side, and persuaded Anselm to do
Homage, and Consecrate such as the King should appoint to Bishoprics. But all
Rome to know certainly what he was to do; but in the mean time he would neither
Consecrate any of them, nor command or permit any other to do it.

Here the Ibidem, n. 50. The King invests two Bishops by the Pastoral Staff.
Controversy rested, and the King thinking he had the Roger the Chancellor in
the Bishopric of Salisbury, and another Roger his Landerer in the Bishopric
of Hereford.

This was done Flor. Wig. f. 651. An. Do. 1102.
in the Feast of St. Michael, when the King was at Westminster, with all the
Principes or chief Men of the Kingdom of both Orders, Ecclesiastical and
Secular, at which time there was held a great Council.

Anselm Eadm. f. 67 n. 10, 20. A great Council of both Orders.
by the Kings consent presided in this Council, and requested the King that the
Secular great Men might be present, that what was Decreed by the Authority of
that Council, might be observed as Established by the unanimous consent of both
Orders, that is, of the Bishops, Abbats, and Principes or Primates, the chief
or prime Men of the whole Kingdom. These Append. n. 20.
Acts and Canons of this Council are noted by Eadmer, as he received them from
the Archbishop.

Roger the Eadm. f. 68. n. 50.
Elect of Hereford died not long after he was chosen, and Reinelin the Queens
Chancellor succeeded him by the like Investiture; and the King Ibidem, fol. 69.
n. 10, 20, 30.
sent to Anselm to Consecrate the two late Elects, with William Giffard that
had been elected to the Bishopric of Winchester some time before; He would
have Consecrated Winchester, Anselm refuses to Consecrate such as received
their Investitures from the King.
because chosen before his return from Exile, but refused the other two; but
the King would not permit that to be done, unless he would Consecrate them all;
and therefore commanded Gerard Archbishop of York to Consecrate them all
together. Which so soon as Reinelin understood, he brought back the Staff and
Ring to the King, repenting that he had received them from him, reputing it
rather a Curse than a Blessing to receive Consecration from Gerard; for which
he lost the Kings favor, and was York, with all the Bishops of England were
ready, and appointed a day to Consecrate the other two at London, where when
all things were prepared for the Solemnity, William the Elect of Winchester
likewise refused his Consecration by him, and so the Bishops departed in
confusion, not doing any thing; Whereupon the Multitude (which used to be
gathered together upon such occasions) having for the sake of Anselm a good
opinion of William, The People had such an opinion of Anselm that they clamor
against the other Bishops.
made a loud clamor, that he was a William is brought before him, and accused,
who remained obstinate, and therefore had all his Goods taken from him, and was
banished the Kingdom. Concerning these Matters Anselm seeks for Judgment and
Justice from the King, and urged him with repeated Prayers and Complaints, but
could not move him.

About the Ibidem, n. 40, 50.
middle of Lent following, the King came to Canterbury, pretending to go
forward to Dover to meet the Earl of Flanders; He staid three days there, and
by his Friends let the Archbishop know, A wrangling Intercourse between the
King and Archbishop.
that he had almost outworn his patience, and that if he still derogated any
thing from the Customs of his Father, he should be forced to use severity
against him. Ibid. fol. 70. n. 10, 20.
He said the Messengers were come back which he had sent to Rome to know
whether the Verbal Relation the Bishops brought from thence were true, and
Roman Council, unless it were revoked by the same Authority. Rome himself, and
by his own industry endeavor to do that which others could not, lest losing
the Rights of his Ancestors he should be less esteemed than they were. Anselm
desires his Resolution herein might be respited until Easter, that hearing the
Advice of the Bishops and prime Men of the Kingdom which were not then present,
he might give his Answer accordingly. At Easter he comes to Court, An. Do. 1103.
and consults the Nobility of the Kingdom in this business, and it was the
unanimous Advice of the Council, that it was not fit for him in a matter of
that weight, to refuse the labor and hazard of the Journey; He pursued their
Advice, and prepared for his Journey, and when he came to the Abbey of Bec in
Normandy, he opened the Popes last mentioned Letters to him, Append. n. 21.
contradicted what the Bishops had said, and were in all points answerable to
his expectations. By Eadm. fol. 72. n. 10, 20, 30.
Whitsuntide he was gotten no farther than Chartres, where Ivo Bishop of that
place and other Friends persuaded him to defer his Journey into Italy, until
the great heat of the Season was somewhat over; He took their Advice, and
returned to Bec, where he staid until the middle of August, and then went again
to Chartres, where he was rceived by the great Men of the Countries adjoining
with high Respect and Honor,

While he thus loytered in his Journey, Ibidem, n. 40. The King sends William
Warlewast his Solicitor to Rom^.
the King sent William Warlewast, who had formerly solicited his Brother Rufus
his Cause at Rome, against Anselm, who was there some days before him, and
endeavored with all his Art and Industry to procure to King H^nry the
confirmation of all his Fathers and Brothers Customs and Usages by Authority of
the Apostol^ck See. Ibidem fol. 73. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. He demands the
permission of his Fathers and Brothers Customs and Usages.

They are denied, especially the Investiture of Churches.


He obtained the favor of Romans; and the Pope and Anselm being both silent
while the Controversy was in agitation, thought nothing could be denied him,
said before the Auditors, that whatever was discoursed there, he would have
every one know, that his Master the King would part with his Kingdom before he
would lose the Investiture of Churches. To whom the Pope replied, If it be so,
neither will Paschal permit him to have them, though it were to save his Head*
Yet he granted to the King some of his Fathers Usages, prohibiting Rome, and
the satisfaction such as were invested should give, was left to the Censure of
Anselm. After this determination he sent away Anselm, with his Blessing and
Append. n. 22. The Pope confirms the Primacy of Canterbury.
Epistle that confirmed to him all the Primacy Canterbury, as fully as any of
his Predecessors ever enjoyed it.

Warlewast Ibidem, f. 74. n. 10, 20. Warlewast brought from the Pope only
wheadling Letters.
stayed at Rome after the Archbishops departure, pretending other business,
but indeed to try if the Pope might be wrought upon in his absence, but could
not move him from his Resolution. All he brought back were wheadling perswasory
Letters Append. n. 23.
to the King, to draw him to a compliance. Eadm. in vita Anselm. lib. 2. fol.
82. Col. 1573.
Anselm and William met at Placentia in Italy, and proceeding to Lions in
France, William left his company, Ibidem. William Warlewast forbids Anselm to
return into England unless, etc.
forbidding him in the King his Masters Name, to return into England, unless he
would certainly promise, that laying aside all obedience and subjection to the
Apostolic See, the King might possess all the Customs of his Father and
Brother.

Anselm staid at Ead. Hist. Nov. f. 75. n. 30. Anselm gives the King an account
what he did at Rome.
Lions, where he was mightily caressed by the Archbishop and his Clergy, from
whence he sent a Messenger with Letters to the King, in which he gave him an
account what had been done at Rome, and what Command he had received from his
Commissioner William; in which he wrote; that Append. n. 24.
the Pope would not depart from the Decrees of his Antecessors, and also
commanded him, that he should have no Communion with such as had been Invested
by him, or such as Consecrated any Persons so Invested; and further, that he
had received his Command by William, not to enter into England, unless he
resolved to do what his Predecessor had done with his Father; And says, he
could not use such Compliance, because he could not do him Homage, nor
Communicate with such as received Investitures from him, by reason of the
prohibition he had heard in the Council made against them.

When Ead. Hist. f. 76. n. 30, 40, 50. The King owns the prohibition of Anselm
to return into England.
Warlewast returned, and informed the King what he Anselm received at Lions
Letters from the King, by Everard a Monk of Canterbury, wherein the King owned
that he did direct William to tell him, that he was not to come into England
unless he would promise to observe toward him all the Customs of his Father and
Brother.

The Ibidem. f. 78. n. 30, 40, 50.
King again sends Messengers to Rome, to try if they Anselm to submit to the
King; but he was so far from it, that he Append. n. 25. An Do. 1104. Anselm
Excommunicates the Kings Counselors.
Excommunicates by the Judgment of the Holy Spirit (as he says) all the Kings
Counselors, and particularly Robert Earl of Mellent, for advising the King to
insist upon, and put in practice his Rights of Investiture, and those likewise
which were invested by him, but the Sentence against the King was Ibid. fol 78
n. 20.
respited until further Consideration.

At length Ibidem. fol. 79. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. Anselm visits the Countess of
Blou.
Anselm came from Lions to the Priory of St. Mary de la Charity upon the River
Loire, a Cell of Clugny, where he understood that Adala Countess of Blois, the
Daughter of great King William, lay sick at that Castle, thither he goes to
visit her, who had been very kind, and magnificently liberal to him in his
former Exile, as being an Holy and Religious Man, and one that she had under
God, chosen to be the Director of her Life. When he came to her, he found her
recovered of her Sickness, and staying some France; He told her it was to
Excommunicate her Brother Henry King of England, for the injury he had done to
God and him above two years; Which when she heard, she grieved vehemently (as
the Monk says) that her Brother should be damned, She endeavors to reconcile
the King and Anselm.
and intended to try if she could reconcile him to the Archbishop; To which
purpose she desired him to go with her to Chartres.

The King Ibidem, fol. 80. n. 10, 20, 30. The King dreads Anselms
Excommunication.
was then in Normandy, and when he had heard by Messengers from the Countess,
that Anselm was come into France, and the reason of his coming, he presently
considered how to divert him from his purpose. Therefore advising with his
Friends, he by Messengers requested the Countess, that she would bring him into
Normandy, that he might speak with him, promising he would for Peace sake
condescend to many things, he stood upon formerly. They met all three on the
Twenty second of July at Aquila Castle, An. Do. 1106. The King and Anselm
reconciled.
(now l'Aigle) and there the King after some Discourse had with them,
re-invested Anselm of all his Profits of his Bishopric, and they entered into
their old Friendship; And it was further urged by some who were earnest in that
particular, that he might return into England, the King consented, so as he
would not withdraw his Communion from such as he had Invested, or such as had
c^nsecrated them. Anselm would not comply with the Kings desires.
But he chose rather to stay out of England than to submit to this Condition,
until such, as by agreement between them were sent to Rome for a determination
in this point, and some others they could not then settle, were returned.

Upon Ibidem, n. 20, 40. Many Designs formed against King Henry upon
supposition he would be Excommunica^ed.
the common Fame, that King Henry was to be Excommunicated, England, France,
and Normandy, (as not being then overmuch beloved) and it was not doubted but
after his Excommunication they might take effect, yet by this Agreement they
were all frustrated. With which the King seemed mightily pleased, and promised,
Anselm, his Messengers should make such haste, as he should be in England at
his Court at Christmas.

Ibidem, fol. 83. n. 20, 30, 4^, 50.
Envoy to Rome was William Warlewast, and the Archbishop's was Baldwin a Monk;
While these were gone about the Consummation of the Agreement, the King went
into England to recruit his Army, and furnish himself with Money, King Henry
used great Exactions to raise Money.
in the Collecting whereof he used cruel Exactions upon all Men. Those that had
not Money to pay, were either thrust out of their Houses, or had their
Household Stuff sold. But not having raised a sufficient Sum as he thought, he
fell upon the Clergy; Especially upon the Clergy.
In the Council of London the Priests and Canons of England were forbidden the
company of Women. They many of them violated the Interdict, either by
retaining, or re-taking their Wives or Women; for this fault the King caused
his Ministers to implead them, and take the Money due for the Expiation of it.
But his Exactors finding the Sum this way raised to be less than they expected,
set a certain Sum upon every Parish Church, and forced the Incumbent or Curate
to pay it.

The Archbishop Ibidem, fol. 84. n. 10, 20. The Bishops fall from the King
of York and many other Bishops that were always firm to the King against
Anselm, provoked with these Actions, wrote Append. n. 26.
to him to come into England, and use his power to relieve them and the Nation.

He wrote Ibidem, n. 40.
back to him, that until the Messengers returned from Rome he could not help
them, not knowing till then what his Append. n. 27.
wrote to the King, That it belonged not to him to exact the Punishments, and
take the Forfeitures of such Priests, who had not observed the Precept of the
London Council; For that it was never heard of in any Church of God, that any
King or Prince ever did so, for it belonged to the Bishops in their several
Diocesses, and in case of neglect by them, to the Archbishop and Primat.

Several Letters Ibidem, fol. 85, 86.
passed between the King and Archbishop about this Controversy, before the
return of the Messengers from Rome into England; who first acquainted the
Archbishop then in Normandy with their dispatch from Rome, in which Append. n.
28.
he had power given him by the Pope in all cases but that of Investitures, to
use his discretion. The Letters they brought from the Pope bear date March 23.
1106.

From Anselm Ibid. fol. 88. n. 50. Anselm falls sick at Bec. The King goes to
him.
Warlewast came into England to the King, and gave him an account of his
Negotiation with the Pope; and in few days returned to Anselm again to bring
him into England, but found him so ill at the Abbey of Bec, that there was no
hopes of his coming; so that the King went to him, and arrived at Bec Ibid. f.
89. n. 30. An. Do. 1107. And promised not to take the Revenues of Churches when
vacant. And restores to Anselm the Revenues of the Archbishopric.
on the Fifteenth of August, where he delivered free, without any exaction the
Churches which his Brother William had first put under Tribute, or let to Farm,
and promised that he would not take the Profits of Anselm all the Revenue of
the Archbishopric which he had received during his Exile.

Things proceeding thus smoothly between the King and Anselm, he came for
England, Ibidem, n. 40, 50. The observance of the Queen toward Anselm.
and landing at Dover, was received with a general rejoicing and exultation of
the People; and the Queen

While these Matters were in agitation, the King was wonderfully Eadm. in vita
Anselmi, lib. 2. fol. 30. col. 1573.
joyful that he was like to make Peace with Anselm, and thought that thereby he
should certainly Conquer all Normandy; which he Sept. 28. 1107.
Brother Robert, and other Princes and great Men of that Nation, he took him
and several of them Prisoners, and also killed a great many, and became a
Conqueror of the whole Nation, of which Victory Append. n. 29.
he wrote Letters to Anselm; and all who at that time heard what was done, did
ascribe it to the Merits of the Peace which the King made with Anselm.

After which Victory Ead. Hist. f. 90. n. 30, 40. A Council to dispose of the
vacancies of Churches. The King prorogues the Council.
the King came into England, and at Easter the Principes or chief Men of the
Land assembled at his Court, about disposing the vacancy of Churches; This
Council the King prorogued until Whitsuntide, for that the Pope was come into
France, and had sent for William and Baldwin, the late Envoys of him and
Anselm, to come to the Council he held at Troyes; The King suppossing he might
have declared his mind in that Affair. At which time the Archbishop being
sick, the Council was again prorogued till the August.

It was then a Ibidem, fol. 91. n. 10. A Dispensation from the Pope.
Constitution in the Roman Church, that the Sons of Priests should not succeed
their Fathers, or enjoy Ecclesiastical Benefices; but seeing there was a great
number of such in England, the Pope sent a Append. n. 30.
Dispensation to Anselm, that they might enjoy them, For Priests Sons to hold
Livings.
and that he might receive Richard Abbat of Ely into his Communion.

At the time, according to the last Prorogation, on the First of August Ibidem,
n. 20. An. Do. 1107.
the Bishops, Abbats, and Proceres or great Men of the Kingdom met in the Kings
Palace at London, and for three days there was a Debate between the King and
the Bishops about Investitures, Anselm being absent all that time; some
persuading the King to act as his Father and Brother had done, and not to
regard the Command of the Pope, The Pope grants the Clergy might do Homage.
who stood firm to the Decree concerning Investitures, but granted that the
Clergy might do Homage, which had been also interdicted. By which means he
brought the King to part with his Right of Investitures. Ibidem, n. 30. The
King parts with his Right of Investiture.
Afterward Anselm being present before the Multitude that was there, the King
consented and ordained, That from that time forward, neither Bishop nor Abbat
Anselm likewise granted, That no Man should be debarred of his Consecration by
reason of the Homage he should do to the King. This Agreement being made,
almost all vacant Churches were filled with Pastors by the Advice of Anselm and
the Proceres or great Men of the Kingdom: and they were Instituted by the King,
without Investiture by the Pastoral Staff or King. Lib. 2. f. 30. col. 1573.
Eadmer in the Life of Anselm, delivers the last Passage Primores or Prime Men
of England met in the Kings Palace at London, and Anselm obtained the Victory
concerning the Liberty of the Church, for which he had long contended. For the
King leaving the usage of his Antecessors, neither chose alone by himself such
Persons as were to govern the Church, neither invested them in their Churches
by delivering their Pastoral Staff. Anselm exacts Obedience of the Archbishop
of York.
In this Council Anselm exacted obedience and subjection of Gerard Archbishop
of York, the King thought it sufficient if he performed Hereford, which Anselm
accepted.

It was agreed in this Ibid. f. 92. n 10.
Council, That the Elects should be Consecrated, and accordingly William
Giffard Elect of Winchester, Roger of Salisbury, Reinelin of Hereford, William
Warlewast of Exceter, Urban of Landaff, were Consecrated on Sunday the Eleventh
of August, and on that day according to the Popes Command he delivered Ealdwin
Abbat of Ramsey his Pastoral Staff, of which he had been deprived Ibidem, 67.
n. 30.
for Simony in the Council of London.

In the Ib. f. 94. n. 50. f. 95. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. Anno Domini 1108.
Solemnity of Pentecost following there was held a great Council of all the
great Men of the Kingdom at London, where Anselm and Thomas Elect of York, (for
Gerard died coming to Court) and all the Bishops of England, did in the
presence of Henry, by the assent of all his Barons, Severe Laws made against
Priests, etc.
make severe Laws against Priests, Archdeacons, Deacons, and Subdeacons, that
kept Women in their Houses, or had Wives or Concubines, and caused the
Archdeacons and Deans to Swear to put those Laws in Execution against them, or
they should lose their Preferments.

The first Debate Ibidem,
about the largeness of the Diocese of Lincoln was in this Council, and the
King, the Archbishop, and other Principes or chief Men of the Kingdom, The
Bishopric of Ely taken out of the Bishopric of Lincoln.
to make another Bishopric out of it, and to fix the Bishops Seat at Ely. But
though Anselm wrote to the Pope about it, the design was not finished in his
Life time: Append. n. 31.
yet not long after it was completed, and Hervy Bishop of Bangor was first
made Bishop there.

Thomas Elect of York deferred his Consecration Ib. f. 97. n. 40, 50.
which Anselm supposed he did on purpose, to avoid his profession of Obedience
Canterbury, or that he would not come to Canterbury to be Consecrated, (as the
Custom then was) and suspecting he might without his knowledge procure a Pall
from the Pope, he wrote to him not to send him one, in diminution of the Rights
of the Sea of Canterbury, and had his desire granted. Many Ib. f. 97, 98, 99,
100, 101, 102.
Epistles passed between them in this Contest; at last Anselm prohibited Thomas
under a perpetual Anathema, that the should not receive Benediction to the
Bishopric of York, Append. n. 32. Anselm sends his Epistl^s against Thomas
Elect of York, to all the Bishops.
until he had made Canterbury, and involved all the Bishops of England in the
same, if they laid hands on him at his Consecration, or Communicated with him
as a Bishop, if he he were Consecrated by any Foreign Bishops. He sent every
Bishop of England one of these thundering Ibid. f. 102. n. 30.
Epistles against Thomas under his Seal, that they might observe the Contents
of it.

Anselm Ibidem, n. 40, 50. An. Do. 1109. Anselm dies.
died April 20. 1109. and the King held the Feast of Pentecost next following
at London, in great Worldly Glory, and Rich Appearance. The Feasting days over,
he began to Treat with the Bishops and Princes of the Kingdom, what was to be
done concerning the Consecration of the Elect of York. Ibidem, f. 103. n. 10,
20, 30, etc. The Bishops stand close to the Contents of Anselms Epistle. The
King awed by Anselms Excommunication.
The Bishops stick close to the Contents of Anselm's Epistle, and resolve to
lose all rather than recede from them. Robert Earl of Mellent began to
Expostulate with them how any of them dare receive such a Letter without the
Kings Consent and Command; They declare their resolution Anselm, and therefore
appointed Thomas, according to the ancient Privileges of the Church of
Canterbury, and Decree of his Father in the time of Lanfranc, to make his
Profession, or Ibidem, n. 50.
he should not have the Archbishopric of York; which he did, having
considered the Authorities by which it was supported, Ibidem, f. 104. n. 10, 20.
and his Profession was Professio ne quid mutaretur Sigillo regio inclusa; and
Literae sigillo regio inclusae. fol. 101. n. 30. and Literae sigillo regio
repositae, fol. 86. lin. 9. They were wound up in Wax, and had the impression
of the Kings Seal; Such as these were called Literae Clausae, Close Letters or
Writs; and the Literae extra sigillum pendentes, were the Letters Patents, or
Literae Patentes; and the ancient Rolls upon which these were Entered and
Recorded, are to this day called the Patent and Close Rolls.
included in the Kings Seal, that nothing might be altered. He July by the
Bishop of London and other Bishops, being Sunday, in St. Paul's Church, and read
his Profession in this Form.

The Form of the Profession of the Archbishop of York.
I Thomas, which am to be Consecrated Metropolitan of the Church of York, do
profess Subjection and Canonical Obedience to the Holy Church of Canterbury,
and to the Primate of the same Church Canonically Elected and Consecrated, and
to his Successors Canonically inthroned; saving the Fealty of my Lord Henry
King of England, and the same Obedience due from me, that Thomas my Antecessor
for himself professed to the Roman Church. ^lor. Wig. fol. 654.
On the First of August he received the Pall at York sent from the Pope by
Cardinal Vlric, and the same day Consecrated Turget, Prior of Duresm, Bishop of
St. Andrews in Scotland.

At next Christmas the Kingdom of England met according to Custom at the Kings
Court at London, Eadm. fol. 105. lin. 3. n. 10. A Contest between the Bishop of
London and Archbishop of York about Crowning the King.
where there was a great and high Solemnity. The Archbishop of York fitted
himself to Crown the King that day, and Celebrate Mass in stead of the Primate
of Canterbury; but the Bishop of London would not permit him, who as Dean of
the Province placed the Crown on the Kings Head, and lead him by the right hand
into the Church, and performed

In this Council Ibidem, n. 20.
was agitated the Cause of the Priests, which had been forced from the Company
of Women in the time of Anselm, many of them rejoicing at his death, promising
themselves their old Liberty; but it happened contrary to their expectation,
for the King, whom many feared more than God, The King would not permit Priests
the Conversation with Women.
by his Law forced them whether they would or not, to the observation of the
Council London, at least according to outward appearance.

But Ibidem, n. 40, 50.
behold (says my Author) some Abbats which were deposed for Simony in that
Council, either obtained for Money those Abbeys which they had lost, or others
from Laymen. Their Bishops and Archdeacons for Money permit them the use of
Women.
And those which were called Priests or Canons (the Kings Edict growing faint)
by an infamous Commerce prevailed with their Bishops and Archdeacons that they
might enjoy such Harlots as they had Anselm, Ibidem, fol. 106. lin. 1.
did so abound, and so boast of the Womanish and Ignominious length of it, that
such as did not wear it, they called by the opprobrious name of Clown or Priest.

When Anselm was dead, Ibid fol. 109. n. 10, 30.
King Henry took the Archbishopric of Canterbury and all that belonged to it
into his own hands, William, and so kept it five years, when he caused the
Bishops and Princes, or chief Men of England to meet at Windsor, as desirous to
have their Advice in making of an Archbishop of Canterbury; and on the Twenty
fifth of April the Ibidem, fol. 110. n. 10, 20. An. Do. 1114. Ralph Bishop of
Rochester made Archbishop of Canterbury.
Bishops desiring, and the King assenting to it, Ralph Bishop of Rochester was
chosen Archbishop; and it being declared to the Multitude, they rejoiced
wonderfully. On the Seventeenth of May he came to Canterbury, and was
gloriously received

This done, the King designed speedily to go for Normandy, yet taking the
opportunity of this Council, Ibidem, n. 30, 40. King Henry hated the English.
by the Advice of his Bishops and Princes, or great Men, he supplied the
vacancies of all Monasteries; He so hated the English, as he put in all
Strangers, and it was only their Country that kept them out; If he were an
Englishman, no virtue whatever could make him be thought worthy of Preferment:
but if a Stranger, any pretense to worth, or slight testimony made him capable
of great Dignity.

Again, when Ibidem, f. 113. n. 30.
Anselm Nephew to Archbishop Anselm brought his Pall from Rome, which was on
Sunday the Twenty sixth of June, there came to the Metropolis the Bishops,
Abbats, Nobles,

At the great Council held at Ibidem, f. 117. n. 50. f. 118. n. 10, 20. Flor.
Wig. f. 656. Anno Domini 1115, 1116. The Controversy between the Archbishops
of Canterbury and York.
Salisbury, March 19. 1115. or as Florence of Worcester 1116. the Controversy
between Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, and Thurstan one of the Kings
Chaplains or Clerks, who had been elected at Winchester on the Fifteenth August
the year before, to the Archbishopric of York, was discussed. This Elect was
admonished to receive his Benediction from, and do his Duty to the Church of
Canterbury; He answered he would willingly receive his Consecration, but could
by no means make the Profession his Predecessors had done. Ralph not having
patience to hear, what was, or might be said, this matter remained
undetermined; Whereupon Thurstan sent to Rome to obtain a Dispensation for his
Profession, but prevailed not. In the mean time Thurstan, and that he presumed
much upon his favor, declared, That unless he would make such Profession as
his Antecessors had done, and own the Dignity of the Church of Canterbury, he
should never be Consecrated, or enjoy the Bishopric of York. He answered the
King and Archbishop, That who ever was made Bishop there, he would never so
long as he lived pretend or claim any Title to it.

Amidst this Controversy about August, Anselm that brought the Pall to the
Archbishop of Canterbury came into England, Ibidem, f. 118. n. 20, 30.
with the Popes Letters, to be his Vicegerent or Legate. At which the Bishops,
Abbats, and all the Nobility much admired, and were called together at London
before the Queen, to Treat in a Common Council of this and other matters; when
it was resolved by all that the Archbishop of Canterbury (whom this business
mostly concerned) should go to the King, and acquaint him with the ancient
Custom Rome, and annihilate these Novelties. He complies with their Order, and
passes over Sea to the King at Rouen, where he found Anselm expecting passage
into England; but the King not suffering any violence or prejudice to be done
to the Customs of England, detained him in Normandy, and would not permit him
to go further.

The Archbishop Ibidem, f. 119. n. 40, 50. f. 120. n. 10, etc.
goes on his Journey, but being hindered by Sickness, stayed much by the way,
and at last came not to the Pope (who was then at Benevento in the Kingdom of
Naples) by reason of his infirmity, but sent to him Messengers from Rome, by
whom he received the Append. n. 33. The Pope confirms the Privileges of
Canterbury.
Confirmation of all the Privileges to the Church of Canterbury, that Anselm
enjoyed, and so came back to the King at Rouen. This Confirmation was dated at
Benevento, March 24. And the Ibidem, n. 50.
Clergy of the Church of York, by their Sollicitors, mad Application to the
Pope, for the Restitution of Thurstan, without making Profession to the Sea of
Canterbury; but they only Ibidem, f. 121. n. 10. Append. n. 34.
obtained his Restitution by a Bull dated April the 5th then next following.

Thurstan Ibidem, f. 121. n. 30.
having thus been restored to his Bishopric after two years abode in Normandy,
returned into England, but the Archbishop of Canterbury staid with the King,
as did Anselm, Peter Pence collected in England.
until the Peter Pence were collected in England, which he carried with him to
Rome.

About this time Pope Ibidem, n. 40. Anno Domini 1118 Jan. 19. Antipopes.
Paschal died, and John a Monk of Monte-Cassino in Naples, who had been
Chancellor to three former Gelasius. The Emperor set up Burdin Archbishop of
Braga in Spain, by the name of Gregory, and put him into possession of Rome.
Gelasius left Ibidem, f. 122. n 40. f. 123. lin. 2.
Italy and came into France, of which when Thurstan had notice, he went to
Rouen, where the King rebuked him for coming over Sea without his leave, and
commanded him to proceed no further, until the King knew certainly where the
Pope was, and would make his Residence. The Messengers sent for that purpose
return with the news of the Popes Gelasius into France, chose Guido Archbishop
of Vienne in France, who took upon him the name of Calixtus. Ibidem, n. 10, 20.
An. Do. 1119.
England was much moved and divided concerning this diversity of Popes, some
maintained one, some the other, and some that neither was duly elected to the
Papacy; yet the French, the King of England, France and England receive
Calixtus.
with the Archbishop of Canterbury acknowledged Calixt, and received him for
Pope, denying Gregory.

October Calixt Ibidem. f. 124. n. 30, 40, 50. An. Do. 1119 A Council at Rhemes.
held a Council at Rhemes, where there was a great appearance of Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and Princes of diverse Provinces, with a numerous Multitude of
Clerks and Plebeians. The King sent to this Council the Norman Bishops and
Abbats, and all the English Bishops with him in Normandy, William Bishop of
Excester, Ralph Bishop of Duresm, Bernard of St. David's, and Urban of Landaffe;
The Archbishop of Canterbury was sick and could not go. Thurstan also
Canterbury, or receive Episcopal Benediction from him. But when he came there,
laying aside his faithful Promise, by bribing of the Romans he obtained his
desire, Thurstan by Bribery is Cons^crated by the Pope.
and was Consecrated Bishop by the Pope himself: Ibidem, f. 125. n. 10, 20, 30,
40.
notwithstanding the King by a special Messenger had before given him notice
Ralph and Thurstan, as also of Thurstans intentions, with request that he would
not Consecrate him, or Command or permit any one to do it, unless the
Archbishop of Canterbury, according to old Custom; in which affair he promised
to act no otherwise than the King would have him; Ibidem, n. 40, 50. The King
prohibits him coming into England.
of which Consecration when the King had certain notice, he prohibited Thurstan
and his Followers from coming either into Normandy, England, or any of his
Dominions.

King Henry and the Pope met not long after at Gisors, in the Confines of
France and Normandy, to Ibidem. The Pope yields the King should enjoy his
Fathers Customs.
Confer about this and other matters, when he yielded the King should enjoy all
the Customs his Father had in England and Normandy, and chiefly that no Man at
any time should be sent as Legate into England, unless the King himself had some
special Case or Plaint that could not be decided by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other Bishops of the Kingdom, and should desire him to send one.

Upon this Agreement Ibidem. f. 126. lin. 1. n. 10. The Pope would have
absolved the King.
the Pope desired the King to be a Friend to Thurstan for his sake, and to
restore him to the Bishopric to which he was Consecrated. He answered, he had
engaged his Faith not to do it so long as he lived. The Pope replied, if he
would do what he required, he would absolve him from that Engagement. The King
said he would consider of that, and acquaint him with his Resolution. Ibidem,
They parted, and the King by his Envoy answered, He denies his Absolution.
if against it, he should receive Thurstan as Archbishop of York, it seemed
not agreeable to the Justice and Honor of a King to consent to such an
Absolution.

But because he so earnestly desired Thurstan N. 10, 20.
should be admitted, he granted it should be so, if he would come to
Canterbury, and profess due obedience and subjection to the Sea, and to the
Primate Thomas, Gerard, and a second Thomas had done before him, which if he
refused, he should not be Bishop of York so long as he was King of England.
This I have promised, said the King, The King would neither acknowledge
Thurstan Bishop of York, or permit him to remain in his Dominions.
and pledged my Faith to make it good. Archbishop Ralph returned to Canterbury
the Second of January; Thurstan followed the Pope; The King stood to his
Resolution, and would neither admit him to be Bishop of York, or suffer him to
remain in his Dominions.

Soon after Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury Ibidem, f. 130. n. 10, 20. Eadmer
made Archbishop of St. Andrews.
his return to England, Alexander King of Scots directed a Letter to him to
send Eadmer, one of his Monks, (and our very Author) that he might be made
Archbishop of St. Andrews; with the Kings leave the Archbishop sent him, and
on the Ibidem, fol. 132. n. 10, 20.
Feast of St. Peter and Paul was Elected, and was invested or put in possession
of the Bishopric without receiving the Crosier or Ring from the King, or doing
him Canterbury; and standing upon other Punctilio's, being somewhat of the
temper of his Master Anselm, And rejected for his stifness.
whose perpetual Companion he had been, the King would none of him, and so he
returned again to Canterbury: yet afterward repenting himself, he wrote a very
Ibidem, fol. 139. etc.
submissive Epistle to King Alexander.

In the Convention of great Men at Dover which came thither to meet and receive
the new Queen, Ibid. fol. 136. n. 30.40. An. Do. 1121. Thurstan obtained a Bull
for the enjoyment of his Bishopric.
there was Discourse of the difference between Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Thurstan of York, who had procured a Bull from the Pope, after the same
manner all things were obtained at Rome, which commanded he should enjoy his
Bishopric under pain of an Anathema to the King, and Suspention to the
Archbishop. After great discussion of the Privileges of the Church of
Canterbury, left the Punishment determined in the Popes Letters might affect
the King or Archbishop, Thurstan was permitted to come into England, and go to
York; but so, as he should not Celebrate Mass out of his own Diocese, until he
had made satisfaction unto the Sea of Canterbury, by abjuring the obstinacy of
his Mind.

Calixtus Ibidem, f. 137. n. 30, 40, 50.
by the help of an Army having taken his Antipope Gregory, spoiled him of all
he had, and thrust him into a Monastery, and then being secure of the Papacy,
sent his Legates all the World over, and gave to one Peter of a Princely Family,
a Monk of the Order of Clugny, a Legantine Power over France, Britain, Ireland,
and the Orcades. King Henry Ibidem, f. 138. n. 10, 20. The Popes Legate not
admitted in England.
sent the Bishop of St. David's to Conduct him into England, and when he came,
told England, granted by the Pope, of which one was, That England was free, and
not subject to any Legantine Power; with which Information and rich Presents he
departed well satisfied, not offering to execute his Commission.

On the Twentieth of October died Ralph Archbishop of Canterbury, Gervas. Dor.
col. 1662. n. 30. An. Do. 1122. William Prior of St. Osith's chosen Archbishop
of Canterbury.
and by the Kings Precepts all the Bishops, Abbats, and Gloucester on the
Second of February following to fill that Vacancy; where William a Benedictine
Monk, Prior of St. Osith's in Chiche, was substituted in his place. Gervase the
Monk of Canterbury, as all the Writers of this Age tell us, That John de Crema
Priest, Cardinal, and the Popes Legate, whom the two Archbishops received
pompously, held, and presided in a Council at Westminster, (the Canons of which
are to be seen in Simon Dunelm. Anno Domini 1126. and in the Continuer of
Florence, 1125.) and Ibidem, Col. 1663. n. 40, 50.
adds, That it was a thing never heard of since the first coming of Augustine,
that it was an unsual Novelty, a Scandal to England, and a grateing upon the
Liberty of this ancient Kingdom, which had never been subject to any Legantine
Power. The year following Archbishop William as Archbishop, and Legate, called
and presided in a Council at Westminster. The Canons of it are published by the
Continuer of Fol. 662, 663. The King confirmed the Canons of Councils.
Florence of Worcester, which the King confirmed by his Royal Authority, as he
did likewise those of the Council the year before.

In the Twenty ninth year of his Reign this King Huntingd. f. 220. a. n. 10,
20. The punishment of Priests permitted to the King.

He Compounds with them for the enjoyment of their Wives and Concubines.

King Henry's Taxations.


held a great Council on the First of August, for the prohibiting of Priests to
make use of their Wives or Concubines, in which the Bishops and Clergy, by the
easiness of William Archbishop of Canterbury, granted to the King the
Correction and Mulcts of the Priests for this Transgression. He makes his
advantage of it, and upon Composition and a yearly payment permits them to
enjoy their Wives and Concubines; and Huntingdon) an infinite Sum of Money.

The extraordinary Taxations of this King are not particularly noted, nor is it
said how they were imposed. In the Fourth year of his Reign Fol. 652. An. Do.
1104.
Florence of Worcester says, it was not easy to declare what misery England
suffered by reason of the Kings Exactions.

In the Sixth year of his Eadm. fol. 83. n. 30, 40.
Reign his Impositions were general and cruel, according to Eadmers report; and
besides other rigorous Exactions from the Clergy, he set a particular Sum upon
every Parish Church, and forced the Incumbent to pay it; or, according to the
Historian, to redeem the Church.

In the Eighth year of his Reign he had for the Hen. Hunt. f. 217. b. n 10.
Marriage of his Daughter Maude to the Emperor Henry the Fifth, three Shillings
England, which upon a just value at this day would be equal to 824850 l.

In the Sixteenth year, by reason of the Kings necessities, England was
oppressed with Ibidem. f. 218. a. l. 6. Paris, f. 67. lin. 3.
frequent and various Payments and Exactions; I find no Scutage paid unless it
were comprehended under Gelds and Exactions. No doubt but it was often paid,
especially by such as did not accompany the King in his several Expeditions,
being summoned,

Besides his extraordinary Exactions, if there be any credit to be given to the
Laws attributed to this King, or that are said to be in use in his time, he had
a constant annual Land Tax, which is there Danegeld, of Twelve pence upon very
This Hidage or Danegeld was at first collected to hire Soldiers to repel the
Danish Pirates upon their Landing, Hidage or Danegeit what it was.
as it is said in the LL. Ed. C. 11.
Laws attributed to Edward the Confessor. But Florence of Worcester says more
truly, Flor. Wig. An. Do. 991. Ibid. in the same years.
that it was paid as a Composition and Tribute to the Danes, that they might
desist from their Rapines, Burnings, and killing of Men upon and near the Sea
Coasts, and for to have a firm Peace with them, and that the first Payment
made, and Money given, was 10000 l. in the year 991.

In the year 994. they received 16000 l. Tribute; in the year 1002. 24000 l. in
the year 1007. 36000 l. in 1012. 48000 l. in 1014. 30000 l. in the year 1018.
72000 l. of all England, and 10500 l. of London.

In this Kings Reign Lib. Nigr. in Scaccario, Tit. 19. The price of Victuals in
this Kings Reign.
Wheat to make Bread for One hundred Men one day was valued at one Shilling; a
Ram or Sheep at four Pence; and the Allowance, or Hay, and Provender for twenty
Horses one day at four Pence. So that if we set things at twenty times the
value now they were then, that is, that one Shilling or Groat then would buy as
much as twenty Shillings or Groats will now, and go as far in ordinary
Expenses; which is no hard Account, it follows that every 10000 l. then, must
be equal to 200000 l.

In the time of the Heptarchy there were in England, Cambd. Brit. f. 114.
South of Humber 244400 Hides of Land, besides what was in Wales, (and perhaps
Cornwall) and the five Counties beyond Humber, Yorkshire, Bishopric of Durham,
Westmorland, Cumberland, Northumberland, and part of Lancashire, which at one
Shilling per Hide amounts to 12220 l. which multiplied by twenty produces
244400 l. and then allow the five Counties and part of Lancacashire to be the
eighth part of the Nation, Wales excluded, there ought to be added 30550 l.
more, which makes the annual Tax of Hidage then at one Shilling per Hide equal
to 274950 l. now.


Hide, to be paid at certain Terms, and a forfeiture set upon such as did not
duly pay it.

Henry the First his Issue.
1. HIS Lawful Issue by Maude of Scotland was only one Son named William, who
was drowned as aforesaid, and died without Issue.

2. One Daughter commonly called Maude the Empress, because Hen. 5th the
Emperor. Her second Husband was Geofry Plantagenet or Plantagenist, that is
Planta genestae, or Broom Plant, Plantagenet, the reason of the name.
because he wore in his Cap or Bonet a Sprig of Broom.
Plantagenet Earl of Anjou, by whom she had Henry the Second King of England;
and two other Sons Chron. Norm. 994. A.
Geofry and Ibidem, 999. C.
William that died without Issue.

His Natural Children.
RObert created Earl of Gloucester in the Ninth of Henry the First, by Geneal.
Hist. of the Kings of England, fol. 45.
Nesta Daughter of Rhees ap Tewdor Prince of South Wales.

2. Richard begotten of the Ibidem, fol. 30.
Widow of one Anskil a Nobleman in Oxfordshire: he was drowned with Prince
William his half Brother.

Reynald created Earl of Cornwall in the Fifth of King Stephen, was begotten of
Fol. 50.
Sibill Daughter of Sir Robert Corbet of Alcester in Gloucestershire.

4. Robert by Fol. 30.
Edith Daughter of a Northern Nobleman of England.

5. Gilbert. Ibid. f. 31.


6. William Ibidem,
de Tracey, so named from a Town in Normandy, who died soon after his Father.

7. Henry by Ibidem,
Nesta aforesaid.

8. Maude Ibidem, f. 32.
espoused to Rotro Earl of Perch, who was Son to Arnulph de Hesding that had
great Possessions in England.

9. Another Maud Ibidem,
Married to Conan Earl of Britain.

10. Julian Ibidem.
Married to Eustace de Pacie Bastard Son of William de Breteul, eldest Son and
Heir of William, and elder Brother of Roger Earl of Hereford in England.

11. Constance Ibidem, f. 33.
Wife of Roscelin Viscount of Beaumont, so Mayn.

12. Ibidem,
Married to Matthew Son of Burchard of Montmorency, from whom descended the
ancient Family of that name.

13. Elizabeth Ibidem,
by Elizabeth Sister of Waleran Earl of Mellent Married to Alexander King of
Scots.

Gemeticensis, lib. 8. c. 29.

THE REIGN
KING Stephen was third Son to Stephen Ord. Vit. f 573. D. 574. A. An. Do. 1135.
Earl of Blois, by Adela the fourth Daughter to William the Conqueror: his
Uncle King Henry made him Earl of Ibidem. King Stephen Married the Daughter and
Heir of the Earl of Bologn.
Mortaign in Normandy, and gave him many Lands and Honors in England; by
reason of which Advantages and Preferments, he became the Husband of the
Daughter and Heir of Ibidem.
Eustachius Earl of Bologn.

After the death of King Henry, he made haste into England, and was too quick
for Maud the Empress, She was Daughter to Henry the First.
her Husband Geofry Earl of Anjou, and her Brother Robert Earl of Gloucester,
who were delayed for some time with the Business of Anjou and Normandy. Hen.
Hun. f. 221. a. n. 50.
Tempting God, he invaded the Crown, notwithstanding he had Sworn Fealty to the
Daughter of King Henry, as Inheritrix of the Kingdom England. And William
Archbishop of Canterbury, who first swear to be faithful to her, All the
Bishops, Earls, and Barons consent to the Coronation of Stephen,
notwithstanding their Oath to Maud, and do him Homage.
Crowned him on the 22d of December, King Henry dying the first of that Month
in Normandy; All the Bishops, Earls, and Great Men, that made the same Oath to
Maud, assented to his Coronation, and did Homage to him. At that time he took
an Oath.

^ First, That after the deaths of Ibidem, f. 221. b. n. 30, 40. Stephens Oath
at his Coronation.
Bishops, he would never

^ Secondly, That he would not retain the Woods of any Clerk or Layman in his
hands, as King Henry had done, who every year impleaded, or vexed them, if
either they Hunted in their own Woods, or if for their own necessities, they
stubbed them up, ^or diminished them.

^ Thirdly, That he would for ever Release Danegelt, (that is) two Shillings an
Hide, which his Predecessors were wont to receive ^every year.

Gervase of Col. 1340. n. 10.
Canterbury says, That coming over in a swift sailing Ship, the People of Dover
repulsed him, and the Inhabitants of Canterbury shut their Gates against him;
and that the Londoners, with some Great Men, received him with Honor; where in
Discourse between Stephen, and some of the Chief Men of England, about the
Succession of the Kingdom, in the presence of William Archbishop of
Canterbury, he said, The Archbishop scrupled the Coronation of Stephen, and
how he was satisfied. Anno Domini 1135.
That by reason of the Oath he had made to Maud the Empress, he dare not Crown
any other. One of the most powerful Men of England standing by, swear, he Henry
voluntarily, and in good Faith, released that Oath. Which being heard, Stephen
was Elected by almost all of them, and Crowned by Archbishop William on the
22d of December. A more true and full Account, how this Man obtained the Crown,
may be seen in the Exact History of Succession, f. -- His Title (such as it
was) he procured to be confirmed by the Popes Bull, which may be found in the
History of Richard Prior of Hagustald, Col. 313. n. 30.

He found a vast Treasure that King Henry had left; Malmsb. f. 101. a.n. 50.
King Henry left a vast Treasure; with that Stephen raised and maintained an
Army of Strangers.
One hundred thousand Pounds in Money, and Gold and Silver Vessels of all
inestimable value. This drew to him very many Soldiers, especially out of
Flanders and Brittany, besides the English, which at present so Established
him, as neither the Duke of Anjou, nor his Brother in Law, Robert Earl of
Gloucester, thought fit to attaque him; who after Ibidem, n. 40. Robert Earl of
Gloucester doubtful what to do.
Easter came out of Normandy into England. Stephen and acknowledge him, then he
should go contrary to the Oath he had made to his Sister; if he did not submit,
he could have no opportunity of doing any thing for the advantage of his Sister
and her Children. Ibid. b. l. 5. and n. 10. He does Conditional Homage to King
Stephen.
All the Noblemen had very freely submitted themselves, therefore he dissembled
for a time, and did

In the same Ib. n. 10. A. D. 1136. The Bishops swear Fealty to him upon
Conditions.
year, not much after the coming of the Earl, the Bishops swear Fealty to the
King, so long as he should preserve the Liberty and Discipline of the Church.
And then he gave them a Ibidem, and n. 20, 30. His Charter chiefly to the
Church, and what he granted by it.
Charter, by which he obliges himself to maintain inviolably the Liberties,
Ancient Customs, Dignities, and Privileges of the Church, and that it should
enjoy all the Possessions and Tenures it William, died He gave also leave to
Bishops, Abbats, and other Ecclesiastical Persons to distribute and dispose of
their Goods before their deaths. When Bishoprics were void, he granted, that
they should be in the Custody of the Clerks, or other good Men of the Church,
until it was provided of a Pastor. The Forests which his Grandfather King
William, and his Uncle King William had made, or held, he reserved to himself;
such as his Uncle King Henry had made, or superadded, he restored Ibidem, n.
40. He confirmed his Charter by Oath, but never kept it.
Charter was granted at Oxford, in the first year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1136.
to the observation whereof he bound himself by Oath; but, as the Historian
notes, kept it not, for he Ibidem.
seized the Treasure of Churches, and gave their Possessions to Laymen; He
turned out the Incumbents, His usage of the Church, and Churchmen.
and sold them to others: he imprisoned Bishops, and forced them to alienate
their Possessions; Abbeys he gave and sold to unworthy Persons. But it is there
said, These actions are not so much to be ascribed to him, as to such as
advised, and persuaded him, And Monasteries.
never to want Money, so long as the Monasteries had it.

The first that gave him any considerable Trouble was Gesta Stephan. f. 934. A.
936. D. Baldwin de Redvers fortified Exceter Castle against him; yielded for
want of Victuals.
Baldwin de Redvers, Earl of Devonshire, and Lord of the Isle of Wight; Exceter
against him, which the King besieged, and at last it was, for want of Victuals
delivered to him; The Defendents had liberty to go whether they would, and
carry what they would with them. The Earl went into the Isle of Wight with
Ibidem, f. 937. A. B He is driven out of the Isle of Wight, and goes to the
Duke of Anjou.
design to keep that against the King: but he followed him so close, that he
soon drove him out there, and took it from him, and all his other Lands and
Estate, and banished him; who then went to the Duke of Anjou, and was there
received very Hen. Hunt. f. 222. a. n. 10. The King troubles the Noblemen about
their Woods and Hunting.
Brampton near Huntingdon, and held Pleas concerning the Forests of his
Noblemen, that is, concerning their Woods and Hunting, and broke the Vow he had
made to God and the People.

This year David King of Scots Ricard. Hagulstad. Col. 312. n. 40, 50, 60.
David King of Scots invades England. King Stephen and he make Peace. Carlisle
granted to him; his Son Henry made Earl of Huntingdon, etc.
entered Northumberland, and seized the Towns of Carlisle, Work or Warke,
Alnwick, Norham, and New Castle, and intended to take in Durham, but King
Stephen Scots restored New Castle, Warke, Norham, and Alnwick, and had Carlisle
given to him. Stephen also gave to Henry his Son, the Earldom of Huntingdon,
which had been King David's, and the Town of Doncaster, and all that belonged to
it.

In the year 1137. King Stephen, in the beginning Malmsbr. f 101. b.n. 50. King
Stephen goes into Normandy; Earl Robert follows him.
of Lent, sailed Normandy; Robert Earl of Gloucester, having tried his Friends,
and knowing who were faithful, followed him at Easter. By the Contrivance of
Ib. f. 102. 4. lin. 2. King Stephen uses treacherous Practices against him.
The particulars of the Treachery not expressed by the Historian. King Stephen
returns out of Normandy.
William de Ipre, after he was come into Normandy, King Stephen endeavored to
intercept him by Treachery, but having notice of the practice, from one that
was privy to it, he escaped, and came not to Court (though often invited) for
many days afterward. The King was troubled his Design took not effect, and
thought to extenuate the greatness of the fault, by confessing it; Hen. Hunt.
f. 222. a. n. 20, 30. His Son Eustachius does Homage for that Dukedom.
Peace with the King of France, and his Son Eustachius had done Homage to him
for Normandy, and settled all things there, he returned into England, Order.
vit. f. 911. D. Earl Robert troubled about his Sister.
leaving William de Rolmara, Roger the Viscount, and others, his Justiciaries,
Robert stayed there, often thinking of the Oath he had made to his Sister, and
what he ought to do for her, that he might not be noted for Perfidiousness.

The next year, in England, happened many intestine Malmsb. Histor. Novell. f.
102. a. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. A. D. 1138. King Stephen to maintain his Cause was
forced to give Lands, Castles, and Honors to his Followers.
Commotions; many of the Nobility, and other Confident daring Men, demanded of
the King, some Lands, others Castles, and what ever else they had a mind to;
and if he delayed them in obtaining their desires, by Excuses, that he could
not do it without prejudice to the Kingdom, and that such things were either
claimed, or possessed by others, they forthwith fortified their Castles, or
erected Places of He made many new Earls, and gave them Crown Lands.
and he more Profuse in giving, by reason of the common Report through the
Nation, that Robert Earl of Gloucester, intended to assist defy the King,
before he attempted it.

This was done presently after Whitsunday, The Earl of Gloucester defies the
King. He was encouraged to it by Religious Men and the Popes Decree.
by sending Messengers from Normandy to the King, to whom he renounced his
Faith and Homage, because he had unlawfully aspired to the Kingdom. To this he
was encouraged by the Answers of many Religious Men, he had Consulted in this
Business, that he could neither pass this Life without Ignominy, nor be happy
in the Life to come, if he neglected Popes Decree, which Commanded, he ought to
observe the Oath he made to his Sister, in the presence of his Father. The King
deprived him of all his Possessions he could in England, levelled all his
Castles, except that at Bristol, which was a great Check and impediment to the
success and

The Ibidem, b. n. 10. Anno Domini 1139. Upon the Report of Earl Roberts coming
for England, many forced to deliver their Castles.
Report that Earl Robert was coming with his Sister out of Normandy, spread
more and more about the Nation; in hopes whereof, many fell from the King, and
many others which were in the Court; Upon suspicion only, he imprisoned, and by
other hardships forced them to yield their Castles, and to such other
Conditions as he pleased. It was noted at this time, that Roger Bishop of
Salisbury, had built two Ibidem, n. 20. The Bishop of Salisbury built the
Castles at Devises, Malmsbury, and Sherborn. The Bishop of Lincoln built the
Castle at Newark.

The Bishops envied.

Complaints made of them to the King.


famous and splendid Houses with Towers, and Turrets, after the manner of
Castles, one at the Devises in Wiltshire, another at Sherborn in Dorsetshire;
That he had begun to build a Castle at Malmsbury, and that formerly he had
procured to himself the Custody of Salisbury Castle, from King Henry, and
enclosed it with a Wall; and likewise, that his Nephew Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln had built a Castle at Newark, (as he said) for the safety and Dignity
of his Bishopric. This brought upon them Envy from the Earls and Barons about
the King, who told him, that the Bishops were more intent upon Erecting
Castles, than their Empress came over, they would assist, and deliver them to
her, as being obliged to it by the Memory of the Favors they had received from
her Father; persuading him, they were to be forced to give up their Castles to
him. He readily heard them, and took the first occasion, to put their Advice in
Execution. Which was done after this Manner;

At Oxford, about the 24th of June, was a Ibidem. n 40, 50. f. 103. a. lin. 1.
etc.

An Affray between the Servants of the Bishops of Salisbury and Lincoln, and
the Servants of the Earl of Britanny.

The Bishops brought before the Kings Court.

Ordered to deliver their Castles to the King.


Meeting of the Great Men, where were these two Bishops; ( William of Malmsbury
reports, he heard the Bishop of Salisbury say, he had no mind to the Journey,
and undertook it with great Reluctance, for that he could be of no use to the
King) and so it happened, that the Reteiners and Servants of the Bishops, and
the Reteiners and Servants of Alan Earl of Britanny quarrelled, about taking up
Lodgings; from They delay to do it, and are kept with greater strictness.
Roger Bishop of Salisbury was carried unbound, and his Son Roger, the
Chancellor of England, which he had by Maud of Ramesbury his Concubine, was
carried in Fetters, before the Castle of Devises, which his Nephew Nigell
Bishop of Ely, (who fled from Oxford thither) held out against the King. The
Castles of Salisbury, They deliver their Castles.
Sherborn, and Malmesbury, were delivered upon the first demand; and the
Devises after three days: the Bishop of Salisbury of Alexander Bishop of
Lincoln purchased his Liberty by rendering his Castle speedily.

Ordericus Vitalis tells this Story otherwise; He F. 919. D. 920. A. B. The
foregoing Story differently reported by Ordericus Vitalis. Episcopi pellex,
principalem munitionem servabat. William de Ipre threatens to starve the Bishop
of Salisbury, and hang the Chancellor of England, if the Bishop of Ely
delivered not the Castle of Devises.
says, Walran Earl of Mellent, and his Brother Robert, with Alan Earl of
Britanny, sought occasion of Quarrel with the Bishops; and that after the
Affray, when the Bishops Roger and Alexander were taken, the Bishop of Ely
escaped to the Castle of Devises, and fortified it, in which Maud of Ramesbury,
the Bishop of Salisbury's Harlot, kept the chief Place of Strength. The King
hearing of this, was very angry, and sent William of Ipre, a Flemming, before
with an Army, to take in the Castle; who carried Roger the Bishop, and Roger
the Maud to redeem her Son, sent to the King, that she would surrender the
Keep, or chief Place of Strength she was in, which forced the Bishop of Ely to
give up the whole Castle, in Consideration he might have his Liberty.

This Act of the King made a great noise, Ib. n. 10. Hugh Archbishop of Roven
defends King Stephen.
Hugh Archbishop Roven, a great Friend to, and Defender of the Cause of King
Stephen, was of Opinion, it was but just Bishops should be deprived of their
Castles, which were not built by allowance of the Canons Ecclesiastic; they
ought to be Evangelists of Peace, not Architects of such Houses, that were to
be Places of Retreat and Security to them for their Evil Doings. Henry Bishop
of Winchester, King Stephens Brother, and the Popes Legate, affirmed, Ibidem.
and n. 20, 30, 40, 50. The Bishop of Winchester, and Popes Legate, commanded the
King to appear in a Council of Bishops, etc
That if Bishops transgressed in any thing, they were not to be tried in the
Kings Court, but to be judged by the Canons; nor to be deprived of any thing,
but by a public and Ecclesiastical Council; and forthwith commanded the King,
his Brother, to be present in the Council he intended to hold at Winchester on
the Twenty ninth day of August.

On that day appeared most of the Bishops of England, A Council of Bishops at
Winchester.
with Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury; Thurstan Archbishop of York was
excused, both in respect of Health, and present Care in the Defense of the
North parts against the Scots. The Popes Legate aggravates King Stephens
supposed faul^s.
The Legate first produced his Commission from the Pope, and then made a Latin
Speech to the Clergy, wherein he aggravated his Brothers Fact, in that he
should Command the Bishop of Salisbury to be taken in his Chamber at Lincoln in
his Lodgings without notice; And Exhorting the Archbishop and others, to
consult what was needful to be done, telling them, that for the loss of his
Brothers Friendship, or of his Possessions, or Head, he would not forbear to
put in Execution the Decree of the Council. The King not distrusting his Cause,
sent some of the Earls into the Council, And was resolute against him.
to know why he was called thither; The Legate immediately answered, That he who
was guilty of such a Crime, as that Age never saw, Roman Church, the Court of
France, or their Brother Earl Theobald, (a Pious and Religious Man) would find
fault with; which was, That he should do wisely, either presently to give a
Reason of this Action, or submit to the Judgment of the Canons. The Earls when
Ibidem, b. lin. 6. Rex Comitem Albericum de Ver ad Go^cilium misit. M. Paris,
f. 77. n. 50.
Alberic de Ver, a Man much Exercised in Law Controversies, accompanied them,
and carried the Kings Answer.

This great Lawyer in Ibidem, n. 10.20. Alberic de Ver's Defense of the King,
and Accusation of the Bishops.
Defense of the King, and against the Bishops, urged, That the Bishop of
Salisbury had been very injurious to him, That he very seldom came at Court;
also, That his Men, or Reteiners, presuming upon his Power, moved Sedition: who
as Oxford, had done violence to the Men, or Followers of the Nephew of Earl
Earl of Britanny and Richmond.
Alan, and likewise to the Men of Hervey of Lions, who was of such Nobility and
Spirit, that though King Henry had often Requested him, yet he would never
vouchsafe to come into England. The Affront, he said, reflected upon King
Stephen, for the love of whom he came over. Further, he accused the Bishop of
Salisbury, That he privately favored the Kings Enemies, which appeared to him
in many Instances, Roger Mortemer, with the Kings Troops which he commanded,
sled for fear of those belonging to Bristol, he would not permit them to
Quarter one Night in Malmsbury; That it was general Discourse, that he with his
Nephews and Castles, as soon as the Empress should arrive, would declare for
her. He added, That he was taken not as a Bishop, but as the Kings Servant,
that had transacted the Kings Business, and received Wages for so doing; That
the Castles were not taken from them, but they freely rendered them to escape
the Accusation and Danger of the Tumult they had raised in the Court. That the
small Sums of Money which were found in the Castles, did lawfully belong to the
King, for that in the time of his Uncle King Henry, his Predecessor, the Bishop
He was then Treasurer, and what ever he asked of King Stephen Lands, Castles,
etc. he denied him nothing.
had taken them from the Revenue of the Exchequer. That he willingly parted
with them, and the Castles, as a Composition for the Crimes he had committed;
And of this (he told the Council) the King wanted not Witnesses; and therefore
he advised, the Composition between him and the Bishops might remain firm. The
Bishop of Lincoln was only accused of an old grudge he bare to Earl Alan, and
was therefore made the Author of the Tumultuous Actions, and Violence committed
by his Followers.

The Bishop of Salisbury Ibidem, n. 30, 40, 50. The Bishop of Salisbury
threatens to Appeal to Rome.
Replied, he never was the Kings Servant, nor had received his Wages: and
threatened, that if he whether all those things, of which the Bishops were
accused in that Council, were true, before they could be sentenced. And
therefore, according to the practice in Secular Courts, the King should revest
them in their Possessions, (alioqui jure gentium See Preface to the Norman
Story, f. 170. C. D.
dissaisati, non placitabunt) otherwise remaining disseised, by the Law of
Nations they shall not Plead. Much having been said on both sides, at the Kings
Request, the Roven came; who granted, the Bishops should have Castles, The
Archbishop of Roven defends the King, and baffles the Bishops.
if they could prove by the Canons, they ought of Right to have them; And be it
so (says he) that they may have Right, yet certainly, the Times being
suspicious, all the great Men, according to the usage of other Nations, ought
to permit their Places of Strength to the Kings pleasure, who is to defend them
all. Alberic de Ver added, Albrric de Ver rebukes them for their design of
Appeal to the Pope.
That if they presumed to send any of the England, to appeal at Rome, contrary
to his Will, and the Dignity of the Kingdom, their Return would be very
difficult. By this they Ibid. f. 104. a. lin. 2. The Bishops forbear to Censure
the King according to the Canons, and why.

The Legate and Archbishop cast themselves at the Kings Feet, to persuade him,
etc.


understood the King would not endure the Censure of the Canons, and therefore
the Bishops thought it was best to forbear Pronouncing it, for two Reasons;
First, That it would be a rash thing to Excommunicate a Prince, without the
knowledge of the Pope; Secondly, Because they saw some of the Military Men draw
out, and brandish their September. Yet the Legate and Archbishop, according to
their Duty, threw themselves at the Kings Feet in his Chamber, beseeching him
to be Merciful to the Church and his own Soul, and to consult his Reputation,
so as he might not suffer a Breach to be made, between the Inter Regnum and
sacerdotium.
Secular and Ecclesiastic Governments.

On the Thirtieth of the same Ibidem, n, 10.20, 30. A. D. 1139. Earl Robert and
his Sister land at Arundel.
September, Robert Earl of Gloucester, with his Sister the Empress, and only
140 Knights, or Horsemen, (which the Historian says, he had from very true
Testimony) landed at Arundel in Sussex; where did at that time reside in the
Castle Adeliza, her Mother in Law, who had received it, and the M. Paris. f 77.
n. 40.
County of Sussex in Dower, from King Henry the First, whose Widow she was, but
then Married to William de Albini. The Earl left his Sister at Arundel Castle,
The Earl goes toward Bristol.
under the Protection of her Mother in Law, who had often sent for her by
special Malmsb. ut supra.
Messengers, and with twelve Knights only, or Men at Arms, went toward
Bristol. The King came presently before Arundel, and Hen. Hun. f 223. a. n. 40.
besieged it; Her Mother in Law (whether it were because she came over with so
small Force, or whether it were for the not resorting of the great Men to her)
(most of which, Malmsb ut supra. Adeliza the Empresses Mother in Law grows
weary of her, and she prevails with King Stephen to suffer her to go to Bristol.
either opposed, or Stephen, under the Conduct of Henry Bishop of Winchester,
and Waleran Earl of Mellent, to go to Bristol to her Brother, who with some
Troops met her at the place appointed by the King, and conveyed her thither;
but soon after he sent her to Gloucester, to remain under the Guard and Defense
of This Milo is sometimes called, Milo de Gloucestria, Comes Constabularius,
and Regius Constabularius; and so he was until he revolted from him, Cont. of
Flor. Wigorn. f. 673. Several Towns and Castles revolt to the Empress.
Milo, to whom he had, in the life of King Henry, committed the Custody of

When the arrival of the Empress in England was certainly known, several Towns,
Castles, and Men of Note revolted, and did Homage to her as their Queen, after
her coming to Bristol. Malmsb. f. 104. a. n. 40* 50. Hen. Hunt. f. 22^. a. n.
50 Chron. Norm. f. 977. A. B. Shrewsbury Town and Castle taken, some of the
Defendents Hanged. The Governor of Dover affrighted, with that Example, yields
the Castle.
Geffry Talbot, with the City of Hereford, declared for her, -- Paganell, and
the Town and Castle of Ludlowe, and a great part of Wales. William Moiun, and
Dunster Castle, Ralph Luvell, and Castle-Cary, William Fitz-John, and the
Castle of Harpetre, all in Somersetshire; Robert the Son of Alured of Lincoln,
and Warham Castle and Town, all submitted to her, and William Fitz-Alan with
the Town of Shrewsbury: which he quitted, when the King came against it, and
left a Deputy in it, who made Oath to him to defend it; In few days he took the
Town and Castle, and Hanged some of the Prisoners, which had such effect upon
Walchelm the Governor of Dover Castle, which the Queen then besieged, that so
soon as he heard it, he yielded it to her. The King marched with his Army from
place to place, and Castle to Castle, endeavoring to take them in, but where
he had no hopes of doing it, he built an Anti-Castle or Fortress commonly
before the Gate, at a small distance, either to keep them in, and so starve
them, or to prevent their going out in great Parties into the Country, and so
in a great measure preserve that from Plundring.

While King Stephen was thus employed, Hen Hun. ibid. b. n. 10, 20, etc. Chron.
Norm. ut supra David King of Scots invaded England, on behalf of his Niece the
Empress.
David King of Scots with a great Army invaded Northumberland, and the North
Parts; By the Direction and Advice of Thurstan Archbishop of York, and Walter
de Espec, a powerful Baron of Northumberland. A great Standard, in form of a
Dragon was fixed at Alverton, (now North-Alverton in Yorkshire) to which the
Forces and Volunteers of those parts resorted, which were raised by the
Industry, Diligence, William Earl of Albamarle, William Peuerel of Nottingham,
Roger de Molbraio, or Moubray, and Ilbert Lacy. These with Walter de Espec,
under the Earl of Albamarle, were the great Commanders; The English kept close
to their Standard, the Scots charged them furiously, and were received, and
beaten back, and then charged by the English with great Courage and Resolution,
His Army Routed.
whereupon they fled, and the English obtained a complete Victory, killing 10,
or 12000 upon the place. This was the famous Battle of the Standard, The famous
Battle of the Standard.
largely described by Richard Prior of Hagustald, and of which Ailred Abbat of
Rievall has written a particular Tract.

The War in England between Maud the Empress and King Stephen managed with
great Rap^ne and Barbarity.
Hence forward, during all of this Kings Reign, in most of the Historians, we
read of nothing almost, but Fire and Sword, Blood Continuer of the Chronicle of
Florence of Worcester.

The Contin. F^or. Wigorn. f 671, 673. A. D. 1139. Worcester burnt and taken.
Clergy and Citizens of Worcester had often received King Stephen with great
Joy and Kindness: They were told that their Enemies from Gloucester would
suddenly come and Burn, Waste, and Plunder their City; They were much terrified
at the Report, They should betake themselves to the Protection of Christ, and
his Blessed Mother: commit themselves to the Tuition of St. Oswald and Wulstan,
sometimes Bishops of that City. Those that were present might see all the
Citizens Goods carried into the Cathedral. There was scarce room in the
Monastery for the Clergy; All the Hangings and Ornaments of the Church and
Altars were taken down, and laid aside; The Clergy sang within the Church, the
Mothers and Children cried, and lamented without. November, (on which day began
a great Frost) the City of Gloucester came with a great Army of Horse and Foot,
By these words it appears the Monk was then present.
to take, spoil, and burn the City of Worcester. Nos autem (says the Monk)
timentes Ornamentis San^uarii, benignissimi Patroni nostri Oswald, reliquias,
Albis induti tota sonante Class, etc. But we fearing the Ornaments of the
Sanctuary carried abroad in our Surplesses, the Relics of our most benign
Patron Oswald, with humble Procession, the whole Quire and Company singing
aloud, and walking The Rapine of the Soldiers.
and were beaten off: from thence they go and assault the North side, where
they enter, and fire it in many places, and burn a good part of the City, but
the greater part stood. They had a very great Prey of the Citizens Goods, and
of Oxen, Sheep, Cowes, and young Cattle, and Horses in the Country; They took
very many in the Lanes and Streets, and coupled them together like Dogs, and
carried

On the Thirtieth of Ibidem, f 673. The Earl Worcesters revenge for the
destruction of that City. The Earl of Worcester who he was.
November, The Earl of Worcester was Waleran Earl of Mellent, now Meulan,
seated upon the River Seyn in Normandy; Dugd. Baron. Tom. 1. f. 225. col. 2.
Hen. Hunt. f. 226. a. n. 50.
he was made so by King Stephen, and William de Bello Campo or Beauchamp of
Elmly Castle in that County, turned out, who was Hereditary Castellan at
Worcester, and Sheriff of the County by Emelin his Mother, Daughter and Heir of
Vrso de Abe^ot.
the Earl of Worcester came to the City, and when he saw how it was burnt, was
much grieved; and perceiving what injury he had received, gathered together
some Forces, and went to Sudley in Gloucestershire to be revenged upon He was
Son to Harold, who was Son Ibid. f. 21. col. 2. f. 428. col. 2. Flor. Wig. f.
629. Anno Dom. 1055. John Fitz-Harold who he was.
to Ralph Earl of Hereford, in Edward the Confessors time; which Harold is to
be found in Domesday-Book in Gloucester, and Warwick-Shires, noted thus,
Heraldus filius Comitis Radulfi. Ralph's Father was Walter de M^dunta, now
Mant, in or near Normandy, who Married Goda, King Edwards Sister, and was a
Norman or Frenchman. This John Fitz-Harold had the Seat of his Barony at Ludley
Castle in Gloucestershire, from whence he was sometimes called John de Ludleagh.
John Fitz-Harold, who had deserted the King, and gone Sis Soldiers Rapine.
and rendered Evil for Evil: bringing many Men with their Goods and live Cattle
to Worcester. Not long after the King came from Oxford to Worcester, with a
great Army; and saw what had been reported concerning the destruction of it;
From thence he went to Oxford again, and from thence to Salisbury, where he
kept his Christmas.

After that Solemnity, he came to Ibidem, and f. 674. An. Dom. 1140.
Reding, and there lay a while, and Recruited his Army, and marched toward the
Isle of Ely: the Bishop whereof he always suspected; there he found some
Resistance, but the Bishop seeing he could not defend it, against the force of
the Army, fled to Gloucester to the Earl. The Isle of Ely taken by King Stephen.
The King placed a Garrison in the Isle, and returned to Worcester with the Earl
thereof, and a very great Army, with which he went to reduce Hereford. See all
these Practices affirmed by William of Malmsbury, f. 105. a. n. 10, 20. The
Earl of Worcesters further Revenge, he burns Tewksbury, and returns to
Worcester with great Spoils.
the Earl mindful of the Injuries his Citizens had received, with a great
Multitude of Armed Men, set upon Tewksbury, and burnt the Magnificent House of
Robert Earl of Gloucester, and all things round about, with the Houses of
others, and their Goods, within a Mile of that City; He spared only the Goods
of the Church of Tewksbury, being overcome with the importunity of the Abbat
and Friars. The Spoils taken were great, as well of Men, as of Goods, and
Beasts; but after Worcester, protested to all Men, That he neither in Normandy,
or England, had burnt more Places and Houses at one time.

This was the way in Normandy, and from thence brought hither: This way of
Burning and Rapine brought out of Normandy. The manner how the Normans executed
their private Revenges one upon another.
If any Earl or great Man found himself aggrieved by another, injured, Norman
Histories abound with these Stories; See Ordericus Vitalis in the Lives of
Rufus, Henry the First, and this King Stephen especially, wherein these
inhumane Ravages were as frequent, and more barbarous than in England, for many
years, until Geofry Duke of Anjou, obtained Normandy, which was the Inheritance
of his Wife Maud the Empress, as well as the Crown of England. The Readers may
wonder, what they did with their Prisoners and Captives? This Author, The
Continuer of Flor. of Worcester, F. 672.
will resolve them; The Soldiers sold their Prisoners, and put them to Ransom.
Militibus in stipendium dantur, and venduntur vicorum and villarum Cultores,
atque habitatores, cum rebus suis universis, ac substantiis. Such as Manured
and Cultivated Towns and Villages, and the Inhabitants thereof, were given to
the Soldiers as their Wages, and were sold with their Goods and Substance. In
this Kings Reign, England Camden. Britan. f. 199, 200.
so many Tyrants, as there were Lords of Castles; every one pretending to Coin
Money, and to exercise the Rights of Majesty. The King had with him, very many
Flemmings and Britains, who were accustomed to live by Plundring, that came to
England in expectation of great Booty.

Presently after Malmsb. f. 105. b. n. 10, 20. A Treaty of Peace propounded by
the Legate.
Whitsunday this year, by the Mediation of the Legate, there was a Treaty of
Peace in a Plain near Bath; The Robert Earl of Gloucester, and others; for the
King, his Brother the Legate, the Archbishop of Canterbury, Theobald, and the
Queen; The Empress was inclinable to Peace, but the King, by the Advice of
those about him, averse to it, so as this Treaty soon ended without effect.
Ibidem. It ended without success.
Toward the later end of September, the Legate went over into France, to Confer
with the King, and Theobald Earl of Blois, (King Stephens elder Brother) about
the Differences in England, and how they might be Proposals offered to them by
the Legate, the Empress accepts, the King refuses them.
He returned about the end of November, and brought with him such Proposals for
Peace, as the Empress and Earl assented to, but the King delayed his Answer
from day to day, and at last refused them.

In the Ord. Vit. f. 921. A. B.
year 1141. according to F. 105. a. n. 30. An. Do. 1141, 1142. Lincoln Castle
surprised by the Earl of Chester.
Malmsbury 1142. Ranulph Earl of Chester, who had Married the Daughter of Earl
Robert, and his Brother by the Mother, William de Rolmara, or Raumara, Lincoln;
The Citizens, who much favored the King, sent to let him know, that both the
Earls were very secure in the Castle, and thought not of his coming: that they
might easily be taken, and that they would assist him in taking of them. The
King besieged it.
The King makes haste, and invests the Castle in Christmass-Holidays; The
Citizens hearing of his coming, seized seventeen Men at Arms, that were out of
the Castle, in the City, and made them Prisoners. The Earl of Chester makes his
escape, and sollicites Assistance from the Empress, and Earl of Gloucester.
The Earl of Chester, in the Night, gets out of the Welsh; He further applied
himself to his Father in Law, (being very sollicitous for the safety of his
Brother, and both their Wives, which he left in the Castle) and to the Empress,
promising her all future fidelity, and begged their Assistance.

The Earl of Ord. Vit. f. 921. C. D. f. 922. A. B. The Earl of Chester obtains
Assistance.
Gloucester takes hold of the occasion, joins the Forces he had, and others he
immediately raised, with those of his Lincoln; Upon his approach, the King
marched toward him in Battalia, his Army consisting of a Main Body, and two
Wings; He Commanded the Main Body himself: one of the Wings consisted of
Flemmings, which William de Ipre Commanded, and of Britains, which Earl Alan
Commanded: The other was Commanded by Waleran Earl of Mellent; There were also
in this Army William de Warenna, Gilbert de Clare, and Balduin, Fitz-Vrse,
Engelran Say, and Ilbert Lacy. The Battle of Lincoln.
The Earls Army was drawn up in the same manner; Robert Earl of Gloucest^r led
on the Main Body, the Earl of Chester one Wing, a^ the two Brothers Mariadoc
and Kalader the Welsh, which made the other Wing. The Welsh charged the
Flemmings and Britains, and soon routed them; The Kings Army routed.
The Earl of Chester charged the Earl of Mellent, who fled presently; Stephen
showed his Personal Courage in this Battle, His Personal Courage. He is taken
Prisoner.
he fought bravely and stoutly against the Earl of Gloucester, until he was
deserted by all his Horse, when he yielded himself to him. Baldwin de Clare,
Richard Fitz-Vrse, Engelran de Saia, and Ilbert Lacy staid by the King, and
fought valiantly so long as they were able. The City plundered, and many
Citizens killed.
After the Battle, the Earls Army miserably wasted the City, and requited the
Citizens for their kindness to King Stephen, by killing very many of them.

The Malms. f. 106. a. n. 40. He is Imprisoned at Gloucester, and put in Irons.
Earl presented the King to his Sister, then at Gloucester, from whence, for
more security, he was carried to Bristol, where he was Honorably used, until
by the instigation of some, who affirmed, that he had been several times out of
the places appointed for his safe Custody, especially in the night, by the
Connivance of his Keepers, and therefore was put in Irons. The Empress and Earl
Ib. n. 50. and b. n. 10, 20.
with great importunity, by Messengers, moved the Legate, Henry, to whom all
England and Normandy had sworn Fidelity. A Treaty between the Empress and Legate
in an open Plain. Her Oath to him.
On the third Sunday in Lent, they came to a Conference in an open Plain by
Winchester. The Queen swore to the Bishop, he should Order and Direct all the
great Business in England, and should dispose of all Bishoprics and Abbeys, if
he would keep perpetual Fidelity to her, and with Holy Church receive her as
Queen. The Earl of Gloucester, Brian March^o de Walingford; He was Constable of
Walingford Castle.

The Legate acknowledged her Queen. His Oath to her.


Marquess of Wallingford, and Milo of Gloucester, afterward Earl of Hereford,
and some others, did together with her swear the same things. The Bishop then
acknowledged her Queen of England, and some of his Friends with him, made Oath
to her, That so long as she should make good what she had promised him, he
should be faithful to her. The next day she was received into the City of
Winchester, and the Cathedral, with a Noble Procession; The Legate led her into
the Church by the Right Hand, and the Bishop of St. David's by the left. There
were many Bishops, Abbats, Barons, Contin. ^lor. Worcest. f. 676.
The Legate Cursed those which Cursed her, and Blessed those which Blessed her;
Those which were Obedient to her Commands, he Absolved: such as were not, he
Excommunicated. From Winchester she went with the Court to Wilton, where came
to her Theobald the Archbishop, and made his Recognition of her as Queen; Here
she kept her Easter, and there was a mighty affluence of People.

Malms. ut supra, n. 30, 40, 50. f. 106. a. lin. 1. etc. The Monk of Malmsbury
says, he was present in this Council, and gave great attention to what was done.
April, there was a Council of all the Bishops of England, and many Abbats at
Winchester, in which the Legate presided, notwithstanding the Archbishop of
Canterbury was there. The Legate had private Conference with the Bishops apart,
with the Abbats apart, and with the Archdeacons apart. The next day he makes a
Speech to them all; Setting forth the cause of their meeting, was to Consult of
the Peace of the Country: tells them of the flourishing estate of the Kingdom,
The Legates Speech to the Bishops.
in the Reign of King Henry, That many years before his death, he had received
an Oath of England and Normandy, for the Succession of his Daughter and her
Issue; That she being in Normandy at the time of his death, delayed to come
into England; for the Peace of the Country, his Brother was permitted to Reign.
He says further, That though he made himself a Pledge between God and him, that
he should Honor and Exalt Holy Church, maintain the good Laws, He accuses his
Brother King Stephen of many Crimes.
and abrogate the Evil: yet it grieved him to; Bishops were imprisoned, and
forced to deliver up their Possessions; Abbeys were sold, and Churches robbed;
The Counsel of ill Men took place, and the Advice of good Men was despised.
That he had Convented him before a Council of Bishops, and got nothing but
hatred for it; He ought indeed to love his Mortal Brother, but much more the
Cause of his Immortal Father; and therefore seeing He declares the power of
Electing Kings to be in the Clergy.
I have called you all hither by my Legantine Power; yesterday the Cause was
propounded in private, to the greatest part of the Clergy of England, to whom
of right it belongs to Elect and Ordain a King; and therefore, after having (as
is meet) invoked the Divine Assistance, They elect Maud the Empress Queen.
we Elect Maud, the Daughter of the Peaceable, Glorious, Rich, and in our time,
incomparable King, Queen of England; and to

All that were Ibidem, n. 10.
present either assented to what he said, or by their silence seemed not to
contradict it. The Legate adds; We have summoned the Londoners, The Londoners
present in this Council.
( who in respect of the greatness of their City, may be compared with the
great Men of England) and sent them a safe Conduct; and that he hoped they
would not stay beyond the The Londoners came accordingly, and were brought into
the Council; and said they were sent from the Community of London, Not as
Members, but Petitioners to it.
(as it was called) That they came not to make Debate and Contention, but to
Petition, that their Lord the King might be delivered out of Prison; and the
same did all the Barons which had been lately received into that Community
earnestly desire, of the Legate, the Archbishop, and all the Clergy present.
The Legates Answer to their Petition.
That it became not the Londoners, who were esteemed as Noblemen in England, to
side with such, as had forsaken their Lord in Battle, who by their Advice had
made Holy Church Contemptible; That they favored the Londoners, but for their
own advantage.

There stood up one whose Ibidem, n. 20. King Stephens Queen moves the Council
for her Husbands Release.
name was Christian, a Chaplain to King Stephen's Queen, and offered a Letter
from her to the Legate, That she earnestly entreated all the Clergy, and by
name, the Bishop of Winchester, her Lords Brother, to restore him to the
Kingdom, whom wicked Men, his Feudataries, had cast into Prison.

To this the Legate gave such an Ib. n. 30. The Legates Answer to the Queens
Request.

The Londoners Answer to the Council,


Answer as he had before given to the Londoners; who consulting together, said,
They would Communicate the Decree and Resolution of the Council to their fellow
Citizens, and comply with it as far as they could.

This done, Ibidem. King Stephens Friends Excommunicated.
many of the Kings Party were Excommunicated, by name William Martel, who had
been his Butler, and was then Ibidem, fol. 105. b. n. 20. The Council sat but
three days.
Feria secunda post Octavas Paschae, which was Wednesday in the Week after
Easter-week, and it ended Ib. f. 106. a. n. 30.
Feria quinta, of the same Week, which was Friday.

From Wilton the Cont. of Flor. of Worc. fol 676. Oxford Castle delivered to
the Empress. She comes to St. Albans, and so to London.

And gives Orders for the Government of the Nation.


Empress went to Reding, where resorted to her a great Confluence of People;
Robert D'oyley came thither, Oxford: She went thither, and received the Homage
of that City, and the Country round about. From thence she went to the
Monastery of St. Albans, where many Citizens of London met her, and Treated
about delivering the City to her: To which place she came, thinking her self
secure, with a great Company of Bishops and Barons. At Westminster she was
received with a stately Procession, and staid there some days to give
Directions and Orders about the State of the Kingdom; and first of

This Matter being over, King Stephens Ibidem, f. 677. The Empress solicited
for the Liberty of King Stephen, and other things, which she denied, as the
Laws of King Edward.
Wife solicited the Empress for her Husbands Liberty: She was also solicited
by many of the Prime Men of England, that upon Hostages given, and Castles
delivered up to her pleasure, the King might be released, and restored to his
Liberty, not to his Kingdom; They undertaking to persuade him, to quit his
pretense to the Kingdom, and to devote This she would not grant. The Bishop of
Winchester solicited her, to give the Ibid. and Malms. f. 106. b. n. 10. And
the Earldoms of Bologn and Moreton to be settled upon Eustachius, King Stephens
Son.
Earldoms which were his Brothers, viz. Bologn, and Moreton, or Mortaign in
Normandy, to his Son Eustachius. This she likewise denied. Then the Londoners
moved her, they might live under St. Edward's Laws, which were the best, and
not under her Father, King Henry's, which were grievous. But she, not being
well advised, consented not to their demands.

For this her Rigidness, (as was pretended) the Londoners Cont. of Flor. f.
677. The Londoners Conspire against her, and intended to take her privately.
Conspired against her, and intended to seize her privately; but she having
notice of it, fled suddenly, leaving all her Goods behind her. The Legate seeing
this, cast about, how he should deliver his Brother; and that he might do it
effectually, he applied himself to the Londoners, who, the Monk of Salisbury Vt
supra, a. n. 50.
says, were always suspected, and never Cordial in the Reception of the
Empress,

Having this advantage, the Legate went to his Brothers Wife Malms. ut supra.
The Legate contrives how to set his Brother at Liberty.
at Guildford, to discourse with her about his Design; She with Tears and
Promises, that her Husband should make satisfaction for his former deportment,
urged him forward. He, without the Advice of the Bishops, He absolves his
Friends. And publishes his Complaints against the Empress.
absolves all those of his Brothers Party, which he had Excommunicated in the
Council, and published through England his Complaints against the Empress: That
she would have taken and imprisoned him: That what ever she had Sworn to
observe signified nothing: That the Barons had performed their Oaths to her,
but she had violated hers, and knew not, with moderation, how to use the things
she had acquired.

The Empress when she left London in such haste, went through Cont of Flor. of
Worc. fol. 677. The Empress goes to Oxford, etc.

Milo of Gloucester made Earl of Hereford.

His great Kindness and Beneficence to her.

The Earl of Gloucester goes to Treat with the Legate.


Oxford to Glouc^ster, and by the Advice of Milo, her constant Friend, and
faithful Subject, she presently returned to Oxford again, and staid there until
her dispersed Troops came thither to her. At this time she made Milo of
Gloucester Earl of Hereford, in Remuneration of his Services; He was not only a
just, faithful, and courageous Counselor, but, next to her Brother, was her
chief support: for from him, and at his sole Charge, she had received all her
Diet, Gloucester, which was then above two years. Our Historian says, he heard
this from his own Mouth.

The Earl of Gloucester in the mean time, Malmsb. ut sup. n. 20. He is no
Friend to the Cause of the Empress.
went with a few Followers to Winchester, to try if he could compose these
Commotions by Discourse with the Legate, but returned to Oxford (where his
Sister had then fixed her Residence) without success. She, by her Brothers
Relation, finding the Legate had no kindness for, or Ib. n 30, 40, 50. Cont. of
Flor. ut sup. She marches with an Army to Winchester. Ego me parabo. The
principal Adherents to the Empress. The Bishop of Winchester and Legate sends
for the Londoners.

Winchester blocked up and fired.


Winchester, with such an Army as she could get together, and was without
difficulty received into the Royal Castle there: and sent for the Bishop to
come to her without delay. He thinking it not safe, eluded the Messengers with
an ambiguous Answer, That he would prepare himself. And immediately sent for
all he knew favored King Stephen; Most of the Earls of England came to him,
who were young, light Men, such as the King advanced. With the Empress were
David King of Scots, Robert Earl of Gloucester, Milo, then of Hereford, and a
few Barons; Ranulph Earl of Chester came slowly toward her, and to no purpose,
as it appeared in the Issue. The Legate had likewise sent to the Londoners, who
came in great numbers, and by their assistance the City was blocked up, all
Passages to it being so guarded, that Victuals and Necessaries could not be
brought into it without difficulty and danger. While they were thus straightened
without, Fire was thrown from the Bishops Tower upon the Citizens Houses,
Nunnery within the City, and burnt it down, and of the Abbey called Hide without
the City, and burnt that down; William of Ipre burnt also the Nunnery of
Warwell, which was six Miles from Winchester.

The City being thus, as it were, besieged, Malmsb. f. 108. a. n. 10, 20, 30.
Earl Robert sends the Empress from Winchester. He is taken Prisoner.
the Earl prepared for their departure, and sent his Sister before, with the
greatest Devises. So they left Winchester on the day of the Exaltation of Holy
Cross, September. 14.
having come thither some few days before the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.
August 15. His firmness to his Sisters Cause.
The Earl was sent Prisoner to Rochester, and attaqued both by large Promises,
Persuasion, and Threats, to leave his Sisters Cause, but nothing Malmsb. f.
109. a. b. The King and Earl exchanged upon equal Terms.
could prevail with him to desert her; At last the King and he were Released,
and Exchanged upon even Terms, and left to pursue their several Interests.
Several Propositions for both their Liberties had All Saints, at which time the
Exchange was agreed to on both sides. After they were free the King came to
Winchester, and the Earl went to his Sister at Oxford, the place of her
constant Residence.

The Legate proceeds in his Design to ruin the Empress, Anno Domini 1142* or
1143.
and by his Legantine Power Ibid. f. 108. a. n. 30. The Legates Design to ruin
the Empress.
calls a Council to meet eight days after St. Andrew at Westminster. The Popes
Letters to him are openly

The King Ibidem, n. 40, 50. King Stephen makes his Complaints in that Council.
The Legate gives his Reasons, why he received the Empress.
came into the Council, and complained that his Vassals or Feudataries, to whom
he had never denied Justice, had imprisoned, and reproachfully used him to his
great Affliction. The Legate by his Rhetoric endeavors to free his Invidious
Actions from received the Empress by Compulsion and Necessity, not with Favor
or good Will: for presently after the Kings Army was routed, when the Lords
either fled, or expected what would be the event of things, she with her
Assistants came to Winchester, and what Bargain she made there, or Promises to
preserve the Rights of the Church, she obstinately broke them all. Besides, he
said, That she and her Friends had contrived not only to deprive him of his
Dignity, but his Life, but God in his Mercy had beyond her hope, so ordered
things, He Deposes the Empress as far as he can.

King Stephen's Title.

He Excommunicates all Favorers of the Empress.


that he escaped Destruction, and his Brother was freed from his Bonds; and
therefore Commanded them on the behalf of God and the Pope, that they should
aid the King with their utmost Power, who was Anointed by the Will of the
People, and Assent of the Apostolic See; and to Excommunicate all Perturbers
of the Peace, that favored the Duchess of Anjou.

The Historian says he was not present in this Council, and therefore Ibidem,
lin. 37.
could not say so exactly what was done in it, as in the former, but he thought
the Legates words Ibid. b. lin. 1. etc. The Legates Speech in that Council not
received by all, though by silence allowed.

The Empress defended by a Laick.


were not grateful to all the Clergy, yet none contradicted, and all for fear
or Reverence kept silent; only one Lay-Messenger from the Empress, forbad the
Legate to act any thing in that Council contrary to her Honor, by the Faith he
had engaged to her; That he had given his Faith to the Empress, not to assist
his Brother; That she came into England by his invitation; That she had taken
the King, and kept him Prisoner, This the Messenger said and much more with
great Briskness, but could not move the Legate to Anger, or to make Answer.

From the time of this Council until Ibidem, f. 109. b. n. 10, 20, 30. An. Do.
1143. The Empress holds a Council at Devises.
Lent both Parties were quiet, but then the King began to move, and the Empress
likewise: and came to the Devises, and held a Council there, in which it was
Resolved she should send for her Husband the Duke of Anjou, She is advised to
send to the Duke of Anjou her Husband.

Messengers go for him.


to help her to recover the Inheritance of her and her Children; which
Resolution was forthwith spread among the People, and Honorable Persons sent
for him. About Easter the King fell sick at Northampton, and so continued until
after Whitsunday. The Messengers return from Anjou, and deliver what they
brought back to the Empress in a second Council holden at the Devises, which
was, That her Husband desired Earl Robert should go over to him, He desires the
Earl of Gloucester to go to him.
and These Pledges were the Sons or next Kinsmen of the Noblemen, and were left
with Geofry of Anjou.

He goes with Pledges, etc.


Pledges, as well for the security of the Earl of Anjou, as his Sister: That
they should stay with her at Oxford, and with all their force defend her. They
all assented to him, and gave Pledges to be carried into Normandy.

Robert Ibidem, ^. 40. The Duke of Anjou makes Objections against his going for
England.
taking leave of his Sister, with his Pledges and a Guard, went to Warham in
Dorsetshire, of which Town and Castle he had made his eldest Son William
Governor; from thence he set sail presently after Midsummer, and landed in an
Haven near Caen; from whence he sent to the Duke of Anjou to come to him: he
came, and made many Objections against his going into England; The chief was,
That his stay in Normandy was necessary, that he might Ord. vit. f. 923. A. B.
C. D. Chron. Norm. f. 981. A. B. Mat. Westminster. f. 243. n. 50. Several of the
Great Men of Normandy, and several Towns and Castles submit to the Earl of
Anjou and the Empress.
hearing of the Victory his Wi^e had obtained against King Stephen at Lincoln,
he went into Normandy, and sent to the Noblemen to deliver their Castles to
him, as of right they ought. Rotroc Earl of Mortaign in the County of Perch,
Hugh Archbishop of Roven, John Bishop of Lisieux, and many other Bishops,
Abbats, Earls, and Barons, and Governors of Towns and Castles submitted to the
Government Jeffry, and Maud the Empress; He had been, and was then busied in
reducing such as would not yield. Malmsb. f. 109. b. n. 50. He sends his eldest
Son Henry, with his Brother the Earl into England.
This Objection caused the Earl of Gloucester to stay longer than he intended,
for that he might not leave him without Excuse, he staid and assisted him in
the taking of ten Castles; yet he had fresh Objections, by which he put off his
Voyage into England, but granted his eldest Son Henry should go with him, to
animate and encourage those that defend the Cause and Title of the just Heir.

In the mean time, while the Earl was absent, the Ibidem, f. 110. a. lin. 3.
and n. 10, 20, 30.40. King Stephen takes Warham, -- burns Oxford. Besieges the
Empress in the Castle.

The Noblemen, her Favorers, Rendezvous at Wallingford to deliver her.


King suddenly came to Warham, and finding it without a Garrison, plundered it,
and presently the Castle was delivered to him. From hence he marched toward
Oxford, and three days before Michaelmass came unexpectedly upon the City and
burnt it, and besieged the Empress who was in the Castle, only with her
Domestic Servants; and prosecuted the Siege so resolutely, that he declared,
he would not leave Walingford, with intention to sight the King, if he would
come forth into the open Field; but as he was lodged in the Town, it was
concluded, they could not attack him, the Earl of Gloucester had so strongly
fortified it, and made it Inexpugnable, but by Fire. The Earl comes out of
Normandy. Takes Warham.
Who hearing of this Siege in Normandy, hastened his return; He brought over
with him in fifty two Ships, three hundred Men at Arms, and somewhat more: They
came to Warham, and presently made themselves Masters of the Haven and Town,
and besieged the Castle, which was defended by choice Soldiers the King had
placed in it; but after it had Siege of the Empress; but the King would not
stir: The Isle of Portland and Lulworth Castle delivered to him.
whereof the Defendents having notice, the Earl had at the same time this
Castle, and the Island of Portland delivered to him, and a third place called
Lullewerden, Lulworth Castle in Dorsetshire.

From thence he marched toward Ibidem, n. 40, 50.
Cyrencester in Gloucestershire, and gave Order, that all such as were Friends
to the Empress should meet him there in the beginning of Advent, that they
might march on to Oxford, fight the King, and Relieve their Mistress the
Empress. The Empress escapes from Oxford.
But in their way they met a joyful Messenger, that informed them she was
escaped out of the Castle, and safe at Walingford; They The manner of her Escape
The manner of her Escape the Historian would have added, if he had certainly
known it; He says, it was sufficiently evident, that for fear of the Earls
coming, many of the Besiegers slipped away from Oxford: Ibidem, b. lin. 1.
observed by them in the Castle, she with only four Soldiers, Men at Arms, or
Knights, went out at the Postern Gate* and passed the River, and went on foot
to Abington, and from thence on Horseback to Walingford. After her departure
King Stephen received the Castle upon Terms, the Defendents went whither they
would without disturbance. Most Authors, and some of the best Credit Report,
That it was at that time a great Frost and Snow, and that she Clad her self in
White, and by that means escaped undiscovered. Thus far William of Malmsbury,
and no further; who England between Maud the Empress, and King Stephen, at the
particular Ibidem. f. 98. b. n. 30, 40.
Request of Robert Earl of Gloucester.

Who not long after, being informed that the King intended to make a Garrison of
the Gervas. Dorob. Col. 358. n. 50, 60. Hen. Hun. f. 225. a. n. 20. King
Stephen forced from Wilton.
Nunnery at Wilton, to prevent the Excursions of those in Salisbury, that
favored the Empress, he raised all the Force he could, and upon the first day
of July, in the Evening, Henry Bishop of Winchester; The Earls Soldiers killed
many of the Kings, and took many; amongst them Gervas. ut supra. Col. 359. lin.
1. etc. William Martel taken Prisoner, his Ransom.
William Martel, for whose Redemption there were given 300 Marks, and the
Castle of Sherborn.

Not many days after, Ib. n. 10. Milo Earl of Hereford dies. An. Do. 1144.
Milo Earl of Hereford, one of the chief Counselors, most faithful Friends,
and greatest Supporters of the Empress died, to her great Grief and Misfortune.

The next year King Stephen seized upon Geofry de Magna villa, in his Court at
St. Albans, and kept him Prisoner Ibid. Col. 360. n. 10 Hen. Hunt. ut supr. n.
40. King Stephen seiseth Geofrey de Magna villa, he gives up the Tower of
London, his Castles of Walden and Plesset^.

King Stephen besieges Lincoln, and is baffled.


until he delivered up to the King the Tower of London, his Castles of Walden,
and Plessets; and not long after was slain, first having given the King Ramsey
Abbey.

After this the King again besieged the Castle of Lincoln, where the Earl of
Chester destroyed eighty of his Ib. n. 50.
Workmen and Engineers, so as he was forced to depart, having done nothing;
From thence he gathered a great Force, and marched to Ibidem, b. n. ^0. Anno
Domini 1145. The Earl of Gloucester worsted at Faringdon. King Stephen
besieges Walingford Castle.
Faringdon, where the Earl of Gloucester was erecting a strong Fortress or
Castle, where they fought or rather skirmished: and much Blood having

From thence he came and besieged Walingford Castle, against which when he saw
he was not likely to prevail by Force or Art, he built a Castle called Ibidem,
n. 30, 40. Gervas. Doro^. col. 1361. n. 10, 20. He built Craumerse Castle
against it. The Earl of Chester makes his Peace, he is made Prisoner, and
delivers Lincoln Castle. Anno Domini 1146, 1147.
Craumersh, and placed a Garrison to keep in and hinder the Excursions of the
Garrison of Walingford. Hither came to the King Ranulph Earl of Chester, and
made his Peace, and added to his Forces a considerable Strength; A while after
he came Northampton, where he was taken and kept in Prison, until he had
delivered to the King the Castle of Lincoln, in which City he kept a most
splendid Christmas.

Geofrey Earl of Anjou having subdued and The Earl of Anjou sends for his Son
Henry.

Robert Earl of Gloucest. dies.


settled Normandy and Anjou in Peace, had a great desire to see his Son Henry,
and sent three Noblemen with a Guard for him to Earl Robert; who Conducted him
safely to Warham, where he took Ship, and afterward Earl fell sick of a Fever
at Gloucester, of which he died on the First of November, and was buried at
Bristol in the Monastery he built there.

After his Death, the Ibid. Col. 1363. lin. 1. The Empress goes into Normandy
to her Husband.
Empress wearied out with these Commotions and Wars in England, before Lent
passed over into Normandy, choosing rather to live there with her Husband in
Peace, than undergo so many Troubles.

In the year 1149. Henry the Son of the Ibid. Col. 1366. n. 30, 40. An. Do.
1149. Henry the Son of the Empress comes into England.
Empress, Cum grandi Comitatu militum Electorum and peditum rediit in Angliam,
returned into England with a great Company of choice Knights or Horsemen, and
Foot, and stirred up the Thoughts and Courage of many against King Stephen; for
after the Deaths of Robert and Milo Earls of Gloucester and Hereford, and the
Empress having passed the Sea, Stephen, but the true Heir to the Crown. After
his Appearance in England, he took with him Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Roger
Earl of Hereford, and some others, He is Knighted by David King of Scotland his
Great Uncle.
besides those he brought with him out of Normandy, and went to David King of
Scotland his Great Uncle, who received him with great Joy and Honor, and in
the Solemnity of Pentecost, Knighted him and some others.

This raised Ibidem, n. 60. and Col. 1367. lin. 1. David King of Scots comes to
Carlisle.
great Suspicion in King Stephen and his Son Eustachius; for when the King of
Scots with his Forces, and his Nephew with the So called in respect of the East
parts of Scotland.

The two Kings of England and Scotland retreat one from another.


Western Barons of England, were united in the foresaid Solemnity, King Stephen
came to York with a great Army, lest they should surprise that City, and stayed
there unto the end of August; but both the Kings, one at Carlisle, the other at
York, were afraid of one another, and so of their own accords they retreated,
Stephen toward Lincoln, and David toward Scotland, but Eustachius Son of
Stephen, now also Knighted by his Father, made great havoc and spoil upon the
Lands belonging to the Earls and Barons which favored Henry, Ibid. Col. 1367.
n. 30. An. Do. 1150. These old Historians begin the year at Christmas. Henry
receives the Dukedom of Normandy.
who in the beginning of January in the year following sailed into Normandy,
and with his Fathers good liking, received that Dukedom Chron. Norm. f. 984. B.
C. D. The King of France takes offense at it. They are reconciled. Geofrey Earl
of Anjou, Henry's Father dies.
as his Inheritance by his Mother. At which the King of France took offense,
raised an Army, and with Eustachius in his Company invaded Normandy, and
besieged the Castle of Arches. Earl Geofry and his Son prepare to oppose him,
in the mean time he burnt the City of Sees, and when the Father and Son had
drawn together a great Army, and Marshalled their Troops, by the Mediation of
Wise Men, the King received the Homage of Henry for the Dukedom of Normandy,
and one Gerrard Berlas, Lord of the Castle of Monstreul, out of Prison, and so
rested satisfied. Being thus in quiet, Duke Henry intended to call together all
his great Men of Normandy on the Fourteenth day of September at Lisieux, to
England; in the interim his Father laboring under a great Fever, died on the
Seventh of the same Month, and left him Lord and Heir of Normandy and Anjou.

Within less then half a year after there happened some Discontent between
Lewis Ibidem, f. 985. B. Anno Domini 1151. The King of France and his Queen
dissatisfied one with another. They are Legally Divorced.
King of France, and his Queen, which so increased, that they thought of a
Separation by Consent; and in Lent the Archbishops and Bishops were Assembled
at Bangency, a Town Loir, and it appearing by their Oaths they were Allied in
Blood, and that there was Consanguinity between them, they were in the Close of
Easter duly separated by Ecclesiastic Authority. And about Ibidem. Henry Duke
of Normandy Marries her.
Whitsunday the Duke of Normandy Married her by the name of Alianor Countess of
Poictou, she being Inheritrix of that Earldom, and the Dukedom of Aquitan.

At which Marriage the Ib. C D. The King of France displeased with that
Marriage. He Invades Normandy, etc. Duke Henry makes Peace with the King of
France, and beats his Brother out of Anjou.
King of France was much moved, Eustachius Son of King Stephen, Robert Earl of
Perch, the Son of Theobald Earl of Blois, and Geofry his younger Brother,
joined together, to take from him Normandy, Anjou, and Aquitan. When the
Normans thought all would suddenly be lost, he so ordered his Affairs, and
behaved himself with such Conduct and Resolution, that he made Peace with the
King of France, and beat his Brother out of Anjou, and forced him to make Peace
with, and be reconciled

While he was settling and securing Normandy, and his Territories in France,
King Stephen thought also to secure and establish the Crown of England upon
himself and Family, and to that purpose called Chron. Ger. col. 1371. n. 50.
Hen. Hunt. f. 226. b. n. 30.
a General Council at London; That is to say, Theobald the Archbishop, the
Bishops, and Great Men of England. He propounded to them the Coronation of his
Son Eustachius, King Stephen desired to have his Son Eustachius Crowned. The
Archbishop refused to do it.
that thereby he might deprive Duke Henry of his Right; and particularly
required the Archbishop of Canterbury, to whom of Ancient Right it belonged to
Anoint and Consecrate Kings, that he would perform that Office to his Son; who
Answered, That the Pope by his Letters had forbidden him to Crown or Anoint his
Son, because he contrary to his Oath had Usurped the Kingdom. For this Repulse,
Chron. Gervas. Col. 1372. lin. 1. Hen. Hunt. ut supra.
the King, his Son, and those which favored him, were vehemently Thames in a
Boat, (leaving some of the Bishops wavering, The Archbishop flies beyond Sea.
and in a Complying Temper) and fled to Dover, and so beyond Sea. And so the
Kings Design was defeated, which notwithstanding, Mat. Paris says, the Earls
and Barons of England did Swear Allegiance and Fidelity to Eustachius. Fol. 84.
lin. 3.


Not long after the King besieged Hen. Hun. ibid. n. 40. Chron. Gerv. ibid. n.
10, 20. An. Do. 1152.
Newbury Castle and took it, and then came before Walingford, and blocked it up
close, as they could neither well get out, or any Victuals in; and being thus
pressed, they sent Messengers to their Lord Duke Henry, either to send Relief,
or give them leave to deliver the Castle to the King.

This year died Ibidem, n. 30. Maud the Queen, and Wife of King Stephen dies.
Maud the Wife, and Queen of King Stephen, on the Third of May, and was buried
in the Monastery at Feversham in Kent that her Husband and she had founded.

Duke Ibidem. Duke Henry comes into England with an Army. He takes Malmsbury
Castle. Robert Earl of Leicester comes in to him.
Henry, all things being in pretty good order in France, was hastened over with
this news from Walingford, came with an Army into England, and first of all
Besieged and took Malmsbury Robert Earl of Leycester came in to him, and also
more than thirty strong Castles with their Garrisons submitted to him.

From Ib. 1373. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. Hen. Hun. f. 127. b. n. 10, 20. The Duke
besieges Craumerse Fort, and Relieves Walingford Castle.

The King and Duke meet, and Treat. Nothing is Concluded.


Malmsbury he went with all speed to Walingford, to relieve his almost famished
Friends there, and besieged the Castle or great Fort of Craumerse: He compassed
it about, and all the Kings Forces in it, with a large Ditch or Trench, and so
ordered the matter Walingford might go out, but those which he had begirt could
no ways get out. King Stephen Collected all the Forces he could to raise this
Siege; when Duke Henry was informed he was coming toward him, he left his
Trenches, and went to meet him with his Army drawn into Order ready to Fight.
Both Armies being ready for Battle in a great Plain, William Earl of Arundel
Mediated a Truce or Treaty between the Duke and King; After some Discourse of
Peace, they came to no Conclusion, but referred themselves

Before the second Ibidem. 30, 40.
Treaty and Overtures for Peace, Eustachius, King Stephens eldest Son, and
Simon Earl of Northampton both died at the same time, the two great and Potent
Enemies of Duke Henry, whose deaths facilitated the finishing of the ensuing
Peace. Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury labored heartily between the King
and Duke, to bring them to an Accord; Ib. f. 228. a. lin. 3.
Henry also Bishop of Winchester, who had horribly troubled the Nation by
making his Brother King, now moved with Repentance, when he saw the Nation
ruined with Rapine, Fire, and Slaughter, Joh. Brompton, Col. 1037. n. 40. An.
Do. 1153.
assisted in the finishing this great Work of Peace; by which it was Concluded,
That King Stephen should Reign as King during his Life, and Henry as Lawful
Heir should succeed him. The Bishops and Barons were summoned by the Kings and
Dukes Precept to Winchester in the end of November, to give their Assent to the
Peace, and Confirm it by Oath. The Charter of King Stephen, containing all the
Articles of this Peace, may be seen in the N. 35. King Stephen dies. An. Do.
1154.
Appendix. He lived not a year after this Peace so solemnly Confirmed,
departing this Life upon the 25th of October, in the year following, 1154. and
was Buried at his Monastery in Feversham.

In the Fourteenth of this King Anno Domini 1149. Mat. Westminster. An. Do. 1149. f.
^45. n. 20, 30.
Tamesis sic Congelatus est, ut pede, and equo, and quadrigis etiam oneratis
transmeabilis redderetur. The Thames was so Frozen, as Men on Foot, and
Horseback, and Laden Wagons passed over it; The Frost began December the
Tenth, and ended February the Nineteenth.

Of Ecclesiastical Affairs.
THere has been three Councils of Bishops and Clergy only before mentioned;
One was held on the 29th of August 1139. Winchester; The second on the 30th of
March 1142. at Oxford; The third eight days after St. Andrew, in the same year
at Westminster. The Business transacted in all three was merely Secular, which
properly falls not under this Title, and therefore I shall proceed to such
things as do.

In the year 1138. Alberic Bishop of Ostia in Italy, The Popes Legate calls a
Council of the Clergy.
the Popes Special Comissary, or Legate in England, and Scotland, by Chron.
Gervas. Col. 1346. n. 40, 50, 60. Col. 1347. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60. Col.
1348. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60.
Apostolical Authority called a Council of Bishops, Abbats, and other Religious
Persons of the Kingdom, to meet at Westminster on the December, and sent his
This was never done before.
Citatory Letters to the Prior and Convent of the Church of Canterbury, and all
others whom it concerned to be present there, and choose an Archbishop, that
See being then void. There were sixteen Ibidem, Col. 1347. n. 10, 20. The Popes
Legate directs the choosing of an Archbishop of Canterbury. Cont. of Flor. of
Worcester, f. 671. Anno Dom 1139.
Constitutions Decreed, the most notable whereof were these, at that time
somewhat new, and not fully Established, and one or two of them never practiced
before in England.

Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, Simon Bishop of Worcester, Roger Bishop of
Coventry, Robert Bishop of Exeter, and Rainald Abbat of Evesham, were Commanded
by the Pope to Repair to Rome, where they were received with much Honor, and
were present in the Roman Council, such an one as had not been many Ages
before. In this Council they freely, and according to their desires propounded
and managed their own Causes, and returned home with joy, bringing with them
the Decrees of this Council, (then when the Monk wrote) written and dispersed
far and wide through England. And in this Council the under written
Constitutions which had been made in this English Council were Decreed, which
according to the Title was the second Lateran Council, holden under Pope
Innocent the Second, Anno Dom. 1139. Apr. 8. Labbe Tom. 10. Col. 999. This
practice of the Pope was new, to call particularly, whom he pleased to
Councils.

Constitution V. None may receive a Church, or any Ecclesiastical Ibidem. The
foremer part of this Constitution about Investitures, was new.

Buying of Benefices prohibited.

Married Priests, and such as kept Concubines deprived of Ecclesiastic
Benefices, etc.


Benefice from a Lay Man. When any receive Investiture from a Bishop, we
Command that he swear upon the Gospel, That neither by himself nor any other,
he gave or promised any thing for it, and if it be presumed he did, the gift
shall be void, and both the Giver and Receiver shall be subject to Canonical
Censure. Spelm. Council. vol. 2. f. 41.

Constit. VII. Walking in the steps of the Holy Fathers, we deprive Married
Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, and th^se that have Concubines, of their
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Offices; And by Apostolical Authority, we forbid
all People to hear their Masses.

Constit. IX. If any one Kills, Ibidem, Col. 1348. lin. 5. and n. 10.
Imprisons, or lays his Wicked Hands upon a Clerk, Monk, or Nun, or any
Ecclesiastic Person, unless Pope; and if he dies impenitent, his Body shall
not be Buried.

This Canon or Constitution was made to prevent the Rudeness and Inhumanity of
the Soldiers, who in this Intestine War used all Persons alike, Religious and
Secular, the Sword made little difference;

Constit. XI. We prohibit by Apostolic Authority, That no Man builds a Church
or Oratory in his own Fee without the Command of his Bishop.

This Constitution was new, and made to baffle the Right of the Pope or Bishop
unto it; by reason of his Command was this Constitution made. This Council
being Dissolved, Ibid. n. 50.
Jeremy Prior of the Church of Canterbury, and some of the Convent whom the
King had called, in the presence of England, chose Theobald Abbat of Bec
Archbishop of that See. At which the Bishop of Winchester and Legate was much
moved, (designing it for himself) but lost it by the Contrivance of the King
and Queen; and for this cause it was reported by some, that he left the King
his Brother, and went off to the Empress, Earl Robert, and Milo the Kings High,
or Great Constable.

Notwithstanding the Ninth Constitution of this Council, the Soldiers abated
not of their rough usage of the Clergy and Ecclesiastics: and therefore the
Bishop of Winchester and Popes Legate, to check their Barbarities, Rog. Hoved.
f. 279. b. n. 40.
called a Council at London in the Eighth year of this Kings Reign, Anno Domini
1143. in which it was thus Decreed.

That because no Honor was given by Ravagers and Plunderers to Clerks, nor to
the Church of God: A Canon for the security of Clerks.
and that Clerks were as frequently Imprisoned, and put to Ransom as Lay Men;
Therefore who ever laid violent Hands upon a Clerk, should not be absolved but
by the Pope himself. From which Decree the Clerks received much Relief and
Advantage.

Mat. Paris F. 79. n. 30.
adds to this another Decree, ^That the Churches Another for the security of
Ploughs and Ploughmen.
and that the Ploughs and Ploughmen in the Fields should enjoy the same
freedom; and they Excommunicated all Contraveners to this Decree, ^with Light
Candles or Tapers. And so, (says the Monk) the Rapacity of the Kites was
somewhat abated.

The next was a General Council in the Sixteenth of this King, Anno Domini
1151. holden at London Hen. Hun. f. 226. b. lin. 3.
by Theobald the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Popes Legate, in which were
present King Stephen, his Son Eustachius, and the Barons, or Great Men of
England. This whole Council says the Arch Deacon of Huntington (without doubt
then present at it) was mad with Appeals. Appeals to the Pope were now first
used in England.
For in England Appeals were not in use, until Henry Bishop of Winchester,
while he was the Popes Legate, cruelly to his own mischief, dragged them in; and
in this Council there were three Appeals to the Pope.

Besides these three, there were many Appeals to Rome in this Kings Reign. Upon
the Vacancy of the Radulf. de Dice^o, Col. 506. lin. 1. An. Do. 1136.
Bishopric of London, the Dean and Canons could not agree in the Electing of a
fit Person to be Bishop, several were propounded. The Canons without the
knowledge of the Dean chose Anselm Abbat of St. Edmonds-Bury; Ib. n. 30. An.
Do. 1137. Anselm Appeals to the Pope, and is Confirmed Bishop of London.
They privately take the Treasure of the Church, and with their Elect that was
laden with Money, go to Rome; Their success Ib. n. 50. An. Do. 1138.
The Dean by two of the Canons, and his Domestic Clerks, Ralph de Langeford,
and Richard de Belmeis, his Sollicitors, Appeals to the Pope; He having heard
their Allegations, and by them received the Archbishop of Yorks Letter and
Certificate concerning Anselm, and with the Ibid. Col. 507. lin. 4. The Dean of
London Appeals to the Pope, and Anselm is turned out.
Cardinals having seriously debated the matter, pronounced by the Mouth of
Alberic Bishop of Ostia, That since the Election of Canons was made without the
knowledge of the Dean, who ought to have had the first Voice, it was therefore
void. Ibidem, n. 50.
And then the Pope committed the Care of the Church of London, by the Kings
favor, to the Bishop of Winchester; and so held it as it were in Commendam
from the Pope two years. This Man had ill luck, for after he had possession of
the Bishopric of London, Ibid. Col. 506. n. 50.
Ordingus the Prior was chosen Abbat of St. Edmonds-Bury, and so he lost both.

Richard de Belmeis aforesaid had been Ibidem, Col 5^7. n. 10, 20, 30. An
Appeal to the Pope for the Arch-D^aconry of Middlesex.
made Archdeacon of Middlesex, but was too young to execute the Office, which
Hugh, one of his Uncle Richard de Belmeis, the then Bishop of London's
Chaplains was to manage for him. When Richard became ^it for the Office, and
his Uncle the Bishop of London was dead, Hugh refused to restore it unto him;
He Appeals to the Pope, who sends his Letters or Brief to the Bishops of
Lincoln and Hereford to hear the Cause, who gave it to Richard.

In the year 1147. Pope Eugenius held a Council at Rhemes; Chron. Gervas. Col.
1363. n. 30. The Clerks of the Church of York Appeal to the Pope. He Deposes
the Archbishop of York.
in this Council appeared some Clerks of the Church of York, with Henry Murdack
Abbat of Fountains, accusing William Archbishop of York, That he was neither
Canonically Elected, nor Lawfully Consecrated, but intruded by the King; at
length the foresaid William was Convicted and Deposed. Alberic Bishop of Ostia
pronouncing the Sentence, and saying, We Decree by Apostolic Authority,
William Archbishop of York be Deposed from the Bishopric, because Stephen
King of England Nominated him before Canonical Election.

When as therefore Ibidem, n. 40, 50. The Pope Commands the Chapter to choose a
new Archbishop, etc. He that had the fewest Suffrages is made Archbishop.
Pope Eugenius, on his own Will, and by the Consent of the smaller number of
Cardinals, had Deposed St. William Archbishop of York, the Chapter of that
Church Convened by his Mandate, chose an Archbishop, (or rather Arch-Bish^ps)
Hilary Bishop of Chichester, the other part chose Henry Murdac Abbat of
Fountains. When both Elections were presented to the Pope, he confirmed the
Election of Henry Murdac, and Consecrated him with his own Hands.

Strife between the Legate and Archbishop.
While Henry Bishop of Winchester was the Popes Legate, there were great Strife
and Animosities between him and Theobald Archbishop Canterbury, he stretching
his Gervas. Act. Pontif. Cantuarien. Col. 1665. n. 20, 30.
Legantine Privilege mightily beyond what he ought, and called his own
Archbishop and the Bishops of England to meet him when, and where he pleased.
Theobald taking it ill, and scorning to be thus overawed, by the Industry of
Thomas a This was Thomas Becket afterward Archbishop of Canterbury. The
Archbishop made ^egat.

Appeals first used in England.


Clerk of London, (whom he sent to Rome) he dealt so effectually with Pope
Celestin, who succeeded Innocent, that he removed Henry, and made Theobald his
Legate. From hence arose great Discord, Contentions, and several Appeals never
Ibidem. The Canon Law first used in England.
heard of before. Then the Laws and Lawyers were first called into England,
(meaning the Canon Law and Lawyers) the first Teacher whereof was Master
Vacarius, who Read at Oxford.

These Appeals to Rome were very Chargeable, and besides nothing could be done
without Friends, and Gifts, or Presents. This Kings Reign was not very long,
but never quiet, and free from intestine War, Confusion, and Unsetledness;
which gave the Pope and Clergy The Reasons why those Appeals and Laws obtained
in England.
Usages, and Customs, as were not before practiced in this Nation. For the King
dare not oppose these Practices, because his Title wholly depended upon the
Popes Confirmation of his Election (as they called it) by half a dozen Persons;
and his Brother Henry Bishop of Winchester, who set him up, and was Legate a
great part of his Reign, dare not but comply in all things with the Pope, (if
it were not his inclination so to do) nor Archbishop Theobald after him, lest
they might be Exauthorated, and lose a place of mighty Power, (at this time) as
well as Profit.

Scutages, Subsidies, or Taxes, I read of none during all this Kings Reign,
both Armies and Pretenders lived by Plunder and Rapine,

King Stephen by his Wife Maud had Mr. Sandfords Geneal. Hist. f. 42.
Baldwin his eldest Son, who died in his Infancy.

2. Ibidem.
Eustace Earl of Bologne; he Married Constance Daughter of Lewis the Seventh
King of France, and Sister to Lewis the Gross,

3. See King Stephens Charter in the Append. n. 35.
William Ibidem, f. 43.
Earl of Mortaign and Bologn, Lord of the Honors of Aquila, or Eagle, and
Pevensey, Married Isabel the Daughter and Heir of William the Third Earl of
Waren and Surrey; he died without Issue accompanying King Henry the Second at
the Siege of Tholose, Anno Domini 1159. or 1160.

Maud Ibidem.
his eldest Daughter died young.

5. Mary Ibidem, f. 44.
his second Daughter, first Nun, then Abbess in the Nunnery of Rumsey in
Hampshire; being secretly taken from thence, was Married to Matthew Earl of
Flanders, etc. and had Issue by him two Daughters Ida and Maud, etc.

His Natural Issue were.
1. WIlliam, Ibidem.
who in a Charter of the former Williams, is called his Brother, etc.

2. Gervase, Ibidem.
begotten of a Norman Gentlewoman named Dameta, and brought into England in the
year 1140. was Abbat of Westminster twenty years, and died in the year 1160.

THE REIGN
Anno Domini 1154.
WHen King Stephen died, King Henry was in Normandy, and after his death, so
soon as he had notice, came for England, and landed here on the Seventh of
December; F. 92. n. 20. How King Henry came to the Crown.
and, as Mat. Paris says, was received by the Clergy and People with great Joy,
and by their Acclamations saluted King, and Crowned at Westminster on the
Nineteenth of the same Month, by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury. John
Brompton Col. 1043. n. 40.
writes, That Stephen being dead, Henry the Second, the Son of Maud the
Empress, was by Archbishop Theobald Consecrated King, and received an
Hereditary Kingdom without diminution; The People shouting for Joy, and Crying
out, Let the King live. Gervas. Chron. Col. 1377. n. 30. He Banisheth or
thrusts out the Flemmings and Strangers out of England.
He held his Court at Christmas at Bermundsey, where he Treated with his
Principal Men concerning the State of the Kingdom, and settling Peace, and
resolved to expel the Strangers out of England,

In the Reign of King Stephen many Strangers, Flemmings especially, came over
as Soldiers, in hopes of great Booty and Plunder, and had seated themselves in
England by the permission of that King, and were very loath to leave their warm
Seats, yet by his Ib. n. 50. He demolisheth the new built Castles.
Edict, fixing them a day for their Removal, when they saw they could not
continue here, they left the Nation; and his next work was, to have Ibidem, n.
60.
death of his Father, except some few, which were kept up for the Strength of
the Nation.

The Ibidem, Col. 1046. n. 40, 50. He recalled the Crown Rents and Lands.
Crown Lands and Rents which King Stephen had given to his Followers he
recalled, and Commanded, That whosoever were possessed of them, they should be
restored wholly and fully without any manner of diminution. Many pleaded the
Charts and Donations Stephen; To which King Henry Answered, That the Charts of
an Invader ought not to prejudice a Lawful Prince. They were very loath at
first, but at length they all resigned up their Usurped Estates. In
Northumberland they were most resolute, and therefore Ibidem, n. 50, 60.
King Henry went thither, and cited before him William Earl of Albamarle and
others, who with great grief submitted to his Power, and yielded up the Kings
Lands and Demeasns, which they had possessed many years; together with the
Castle of Scardeburgh in Yorkshire. Hugh Mortimer only opposed the King, who
when he was Commanded to deliver his Castle of Bridgnorth in Shropshire,
fortified it against him, which the King besieged, and in a short time took;
and he begging the Kings Mercy for his Rebellion, was Pardoned, delivering also
his other Castles. From William the Son of King Stephen, he took all the Lands
his Father had given him, except Henry his Uncle.

In the time of Contention between Ibidem, Col. 1047 n. 10. Mat. Paris, f. 96.
n. 40.
Maud the Empress, and King Stephen for the Kingdom of England, David King of
Scotland had in her Name seized upon the Counties of Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmerland, and possessed them as his own; These King Henry
required of him, and the then King of Scotland Malcolm presently parted with
them, and all their Rights, receiving from him Huntington, as belonging to him
of Ancient Right.

In March the Queen was delivered of a Son at London, called after his Chron.
Gervas. Col. 1377. n. 50.
Fathers Name, Henry. After Easter there was a Ibidem, Col. 1378. n. 20. An.
Dom. 1155. Henry Son of King Henry born.
General Convention of the Bishops, and Chief Men of all England, at
Walingford, where they swear Fealty to the King and his Heirs; to his eldest
Son William, if he should outlive his Father; and to the Infant Henry, if he
outlived his Brother.

Not long after the Brompton. Col. 1047. n. 50 60. Col. 1048. n. 10, ^0. Guil
Neub. rerum Angl. lib. 2. c. 5. Mat. Paris, f. 96. n. 50. Rad* de Diceto, Col.
535. n. 20. An. Do. 1156. The Welsh Conque^ed, and yield.
Welshmen making Incursions into England, King Henry raised a great Army to
subdue them, or at least bring them to a Peaceable Correspondency. The Welsh
trusting to the security of their Woods and Mountains, retreated thither upon
his Approach: The Van of the Army marching on as well as they Henry de Essex
the Kings Hereditary Standard Bearer threw it down, and fled, and told those
which he met, the King was dead, which put the Army into great confusion; but
upon the Kings hasty appearance it received new vigor, Rallied, and forced
their Enemies to such Terms as satisfied the King. He cut down their Woods, and
made open Ways into their Country, had the Castle of Roelent, and all other
Places of Strength delivered unto him which they had taken from his
Predecessors, and received the Homage and Fealty of their Nobles and Great Men.

For his Cowardice, Ibidem. An Appeal of Treason.
Henry de Essex was charged by Robert de Montfort (a Nobleman of Fame) with
Treason, and in a Trial by Battle was vanquished, for which he ought to have
lost his Life by Law, but the King spared that, causing him to be Shorn a Monk
in the Abbey of Reding, and seized all his great Estate.

The Welsh thus secured, the King had news that his Brother Joh. Brompton, Col.
1048. n 40, 50. An. Do. 1257. According to Mat. Paris, 1156. King Henry's
Brother Geofry claims Anjou; Pleads his Fathers Will, and Brothers Oath.
Geofry was very troublesome beyond Sea* He was his next Brother, and his
Father Geofry Earl of Anjou had by Will given him that Earldom, when his
Brother Henry should be possessed of the Kingdom, and Dukedom of Normandy, his
Mothers Inheritance; and in the mean time gave him three Castles for his
support, Chinon, Mirabell, and Lodun; and because his Son Henry was then
absent, he adjured all the Bishops and Noblemen present, That his Body should
not be buried, until he had Sworn he would not violate his Will. The Father
being dead, the Son comes to his Interment; and being told by the Noblemen what
Charge his Father left with them, he long considered what he had to do; At
length all cried out, it would be a perpetual Disgrace to him to suffer his
Fathers Body to remain unburied, with great Reluctance he took the Oath. But
when he was fully possessed of the Kingdom of England, he procured from Pope
Adrian (an Englishman) Ibidem, n. 60. Pope Adrian dispenceth with King Henry's
Oath.
Absolution from it; for which Reason, not thinking Anjou; Whereupon his
Brother fortifies his Castles* and makes Incursions into all King Henry's
Countries round about them. The King passed over Sea, raised an Army, besieged
and took the Castle of Chinon, and so humbled his Brother, that he rendered all
his Castles, and had his Pardon. F. 95. n. 40, 50.
Matthew Paris says they came to an Agreement, and that Geofry quitted his
Claim for 1000 l. Annuity of English Money, and 2000 l. Anjovin, and places
this Action in the year 1156.

Soon Brompton. Col. 1049. n. 10. The City of Nantes choose Geofry the Kings
Brother their Earl.
after the City of Nants in Britany, not knowing who was their true Lord, chose
Geofry for their Lord, and gave him the Dominion thereof, and the Country about
it; but he lived not long to enjoy it. After whose death Conan Earl of Richmond
in England took possession of it. The King hearing his Brother was dead, went
France, and claimed Nants in his Right, and as his Successor, and gave Command
his Earldom of Richmond should be seized.

It was in Chron. Norman. f. 994. A. B. An. Do. 1157. A Treaty between the
Kings of England and France.

Margaret the King of France his Daughter to be Married to Henry the Kings Son.


August he went over into Normandy, and the first thing dispatched was a Treaty
between him and Lewis King of France upon the River Epta, (in the Confines of
France and Normandy) concerning Peace, and a Marriage to be had between
Margaret the Lewis, and his Son Henry; what they Agreed upon was Sworn to on
both sides. And from thence the King of England went to Argentom, and on the
Eighth of September summoned the Army of Normandy to meet at Abrinces on
Michaelmass-day, to go against Conan Duke of Britany, to force him to render
Nants that he had invaded. In the mean time he was invited to the French Court
at Paris, where he was Entertained with all the Joy and Splendor imaginable;
and coming from thence, he brought the Kings Robert de Newburgh Justiciary of
Normandy. Robertus de Novo-Burgho Dapifer and Justitiarius Normanniae, Chron
Norm. f. 996. A.
On Michaelmass-day Conan Earl of Rhenes and Duke of Britany, with his Britans,
came to Abrinces, now Auranches, and delivered to the King the City of Nants,
with the whole County or Earldom belonging to it.

In December following Ibidem, f. 994. D. Theobald Earl of Blois makes Peace
with King Henry.
Theobald Earl of Blois made Peace with King Henry, and delivered the two
Castles of Ambois, and Freteval; also Earl of Perch, gave up the two Castles of
Molins, and Bon-Molins, which were the Demeasns of the Duke of Normandy, which
Rotroc the Father of this Earl had seized upon after the death of King Henry
the First. At the same time he granted to this Earl Bellism Castle, for which
he did him Homage.

He kept his Christmas at Cherbough, where he came to meet his Queen Ibidem, f
995. A. B. An. Do. 1158.
Alienor, who a little before was come out of England. From thence he passed to
the Castle of Ibidem. King Henry takes the Castle of Bray.

A Match propounded between Richard Son to King Henry, and the Daughter of the
Earl of Barcelone.


Blaye, seated upon a steep Hill over-looking the River Garonne, where he met
Raymond Earl of Barcelone, with whom he made a League, confirmed with both
their Oaths; by which it was mutually agreed, That Richard the Kings second Son
should, at years of Maturity, Marry the Daughter of Raymond, Aquitan. This
Raymond's Paternal Inheritance, was the Earldom of Barcelone, and by Right of
his Wife he was King of Aragon, which he reserved for his Son he had by her.

King Henry having made this Alliance, declares his Ibidem, 995. C. D. An. Do.
1159. The Title of King Henry to the City and Earldom of Tholose.
Title to the City and Earldom of Tholose, which by his Wife was thus. Her
Grandfather William Earl of Poictou and Duke of Aquitan had Raimond Earl of St.
Giles, which Money he paid not, but left the Debt upon his Son William, the
Father of Queen Alienor. For non-payment of this Money, Anfonsus Son of
Raimond, and after him Raimond Son of Anfonsus held the City and Earldom. The
King of France Married Alienor, Daughter and Heir of the last Duke of Aquitan,
etc. and demanded, and was ready to possess himself of the City and Earldom of
Tholose, when Raimond the then Earl of St. Giles Married his Sister Constance,
King Henry offered the Mortgage Money. See John de Sennes. The great Army
raised to pursue the Title of Tholose.
the Widow of Eustachius Son of King Stephen: and by that means he was
permitted to enjoy it. King Henry Married Alienor, after she was Lawfully
Divorced from the King of France, and had Issue Male by her, then four Sons:
and from thence grew his Title and Pretense to the City and Earldom. To obtain
which, as his Wives Inheritance, he summoned the Force of all England,
Normandy, Aquitan, Ibid. D.
of every Knights Fee in Normandy Sixty Sols of Anjou Money, and in England,
and his other Countries what he thought good; His Capital Barons, with few
others accompanied him: Solidarios Milites innumeros.
but he collected or raised Stipendiary Soldiers innumerable. In this
Expedition was Malcolm King of Scots, who was Knighted by him, and William King
Stephens Son. Raimond Earl of St. Giles alarmed with this great Preparation,
desired France; who put himself into the Town with an Army; which King Henry,
for the Ibidem, f. 996. A. The Person of the King of France secures the City.
Cahors taken, etc.
Honor he bare to him would not besiege, but by force, and through fear, the
greatest part of the Earldom was made subject to him; He also took the City of
Cahors. From this Action of the King of France arose great Enmity between the
Kings, and the Normans and French prosecuted one another with Fire and Sword.

Gervase the Monk of Canterbury Col. 1381. lin. 3. The Relation of the
Expedition of Tholose by Gervase of Canterbury.
gives a different Relation of this Expedition to Tholose; He says the King
took Scutage to the value of One hundred and fourscore thousand Pounds in
England, and accordingly in his other Countries; That there were with him the
King of Scots, and a certain King of Wales, and all the Earls, and Barons of
England, Normandy, Aquitan, Anjou, and Gascony, and many others of diverse
Countries, Horse and Foot; That the City was besieged from Midsummer to
Holy-Mass, and that the King of France defended it so well as the King of
England could not take it, and so was forced to raise his Siege.

Fitz-Stephens P. 8. Col. 2. in vita Thomae, etc.
Reports, That in this Expedition the Chancellor had 700 chosen Knights or
Gentlemen that served on Horseback of his own Family or Dependents;
Cancallarius de propria familia, lectam manum Militum, septingenta Milites
habebat; and that if the King had Tholose, and the King of France in it; but
being possessed with a vain Superstition and Reverence toward his Lord the King
of France, who had made himself his Enemy, he never invested the City, but went
from it, satisfying himself with the taking the City of Cahors, and many
Castles in the Neighborhood of Tholose; for the keeping whereof, all the Earls
refusing that Service, only the Chancellor with his Attendants and Retinue, and
Henry de Essexia, the Kings Constable stayed there; who after Garonne, reduced
all that Country, and made it subject to the King; from whence he went to him,
and was received with great Favor and Honor.

In the Month of October, Ib. C. D.
King Henry having fortified Cahors, as a Check upon Tholose, and recommended
it to the Care of Thomas That is Thomas Becket.
his Chancellor, and having fixed Garrisons in Places necessary and convenient,
and confiding in the Assistance of Raimond Berengar Earl of Barcelone,
Tranchevel Earl of Nimes, and William of Montpelier, King Henry returns into
Normandy, destroys and burns Towns and Villages.
his faithful Confederates, he returned into Normandy; and thence with a great
Force went into le Beauaisis, destroyed the strong Castle of Guerberes, and
burnt many Towns and Villages. Simon Earl of Montfort at that time delivered up
to King Henry, his Places of Strength in France, Rochfort, Montfort, Espernon,
and the rest, France, for none of his People could pass freely from Paris to
Stamps, or Orleans, for being disquieted with the Normans he had put into those
Castles; and for this Cause a Truce or Cessation of Arms was made between the
two Kings, A Truce between the two Kings.
from December until eight days after Whitsunday. In his return from this
Expedition of Tholose, William Earl of Moreton died without Children, and King
Henry took his Earldom into his Hands.

In this War Ibid. p. 9. Col. 1* 2.
between the Kings of France and England, on the Borders of their Territories,
the Chancellor, besides his own Retinue, the Seven hundred Horse or Knights,
had 1200 others, Stipendiaries, and Four thousand Or it may be these 4000
Servientes were Foot, for sometimes there were Servientes pedites.
Servientes, or Ordinary Horse or Attendants, for one Month, and every Knight
or Miles received every day to provide for his Horses and Esquires, ad Equos
and Armigeros, etc. three Shillings of that Country Money; Ipsi Milites, The
Knights themselves had their Diet from the Chancellor; who though he was
France, named Engelram de Try, and with his Lance unhorsed him, and gained his
Horse. In the whole Army of the King his Knights were always the first that
engaged, and always dared most.

The King and Queen kept their Ibid. D. and f. 997. A.
Christmas at Falais, from whence she went for England, and not long after
It Is so said in this Author. But see Anno Dom. 1166.
Maud the Empress sickned, and died, and by the Advice of her Son, gave all her
Riches to be distributed to the Churches, Monasteries, and the Poor.

In May following there was a Ibidem.
firm Peace Established between the two Kings. Vid. Rob. de Monte. An. Do.
1161. A Peace between the two Kings. A Norman great Council or Parliament.
In July Henry called together all the Bishops, and Barons of Normandy at
New Market, and King Lewis all his Bishops, Abbats, and Barons at Beavais,
where they Treated about the Reception of Pope Alexander, chosen by the
Cardinals, and the Rejection of Victor, elected by the Emperor Frederic and his
Friends; They consented to the first, and disowned the last. In September Queen
Alienor, Ibid. B.
by the Kings Command, returned into Normandy, and carried with her his Son
Henry, and his Daughter Maud. In October Ibidem.
the two Kings met again, and confirmed the former

Upon the Ibid. and Rad. de Diceto, Col. 523. n. 20, 30. A. D. 1160. Henry and
Margaret are Married.
Third of November, by the Authority and Allowance of Henry of Pisa, and
William of Papia, Priest Cardinals, and Legates to the Pope, there was a
Marriage solemnized between Prince Henry, the King of Englands Son, of Seven
years of Age, and Margaret, Daughter of King Lewis by his second Wife
Constantia* the King Lewis Married her, after the Divorce of Alienor, Chron.
Nor f. 989. D. The three Templars Commanders of these Castles were Robert de
Pirou, Tostes of St. Omer, and Richard de Hastings; The King of France expelled
them his Kingdom, but the King of England received, and much enriched them.
Hoved* f. 282. a. n. 10.
Daughter of Alfonso King of Spain, about Three years of Newburgh in the
Custody of King Henry; by which Marriage he obtained the Castle of Gisors,
which by Agreement of the two Kings, was to remain in the keeping of Knights
Templars, until the Consummation of a Marriage between these two young Persons,
and then to be delivered to King Henry. With Gisors, he received also as
Dependencies upon it, the Castles of Neausle, and New-Castell, all seated near
or upon the River Epta or Itta, in the Confines of France and Normandy. This
enraged the Ibidem, f. 997. C. A quarrel between the two Kings about the
Marriage of their Children.
France, and his King Lewis after the death of his second Wife, within Rad. de
Diceto, Col. 532. n. 10.
fifteen days Married Ala Daughter of Theobald Earl of Blois, who had three
Sons; Chron. Nor f. 985. A. King Lewis his third Wife, Ala Daughter to Theobald
Earl of Blois.
Henry the elder, who had the Earldoms of Troyes and Champagn, and whatever his
Father had beyond the River Seyn; Theobald the second, who had the Earldoms of
Chartres and Blois, and Le Dunois; Stephen the third, who had the Honor of
Servicius in Berry. What this Honors was I find not.
Wives three Brothers, Henry, Theobald, and Stephen; which three Earls joined
their Forces, and began to fortify Chaumont, which was of the Fee of Blois
Castle, that from thence they might infest Tourain. King Henry no sooner hears
of this Design, but immediately without calling together many Forces, goes to
frustrate it; The Earls hearing he was coming, left their Work. He presently
took this new Fortress, and about 120 Soldiers in it, and demolished it; and
then fortified Ambois and Freteval, and Man's, where he kept his Christmas with
Queen Alienor.

After Ibidem, f. 997. D. An. Do. 1161. The King takes possessession of the
Castles in Normandy.
this he took into his own hands all the strong Holds of the Earl of Mellent,
and his other Barons in Normandy, and committed them to the Care of his Trusty
Friends, and repaired and strengthened all his Castles in the edge of Normandy
toward France, and well Manned them, especially Gisors. Theobald Earl of Blois
Ibidem, f. 998. A.
did ill Offices, and made Contention between the two Kings, who after Easter
drew their Armies into the Field, one against the other, to defend their
Countries, first in Le Veuxin, afterward in Le Dunois, He takes the strong
Castle of Again.
every day expecting Battle; at length they made Truce without Bloodshed. From
hence King Henry after Midsummer marched into Aquitan, and besieged the famous
Castle of Again, seated upon the River Garonn, strengthened as well by Nature as
Art, and in a week made himself Master of it, on The Tenth of August.
St. Laurence-day, to Gascoins.

The Ibidem. The King calls a great Council, Complains of the Bishops and their
Ministers, etc.
King spent his Christmas at Bayeux, and in the first Sunday in Lent, he
called together the Bishops, Abbats, and Barons of all Normandy at Roven, and
made Complaint of the Bishops, their Ministers, and their Viscounts, and
Commanded the Sea Append. n. 15.
Council of Lillebon should be observed.

Some time this Ibid. D. The Kings of England and France perform the Office of
Yeomen of the Stirrup to Pope Alexader.
year the two Kings came together at a place on the side of the River Loir, and
received Pope Alexander with great Honor, and performing the Office of Yeomen
or Gentlemen of his Stirrup; and afterward walking on Foot, one led his Horse
by the Bridle on the right side, and the other on the left, until they brought
him to a Pavillion prepared for him, by whose Mediation a firm Peace was made
between them.

The King Chron. Gervas. Col. 1382. n. 10.
busied with Transmarin Affairs, sent over his Chancellor Thomas, to manage his
Business in England, and he brought with him Henry the Kings Son, to whom the
Rad. de Diceto, Col. 533. n. 10. An. Do. 1162. The Bishops and Abbats swear
Fealty to Henry Son of King Henry. Thomas the Chancellor, or Thomas Becket made
Archbishop of Canterbury.
Bishops and Abbats of all England, by the Kings Command, swear Fealty, and
Thomas the Chancellor was the first that did Homage to him, saving his Faith to
his Father, so long as he should live, or would continue King. He came over in
April, or the beginning of May, but what was done in England upon his coming, I
find not, more Archbishop of Canterbury in May, and was Consecrated on the
Octaves of Pentecost or Trinity-Sunday.

In December following, Ibidem, Col. 534. n. 20. Chron. Norm. f. 999. A. An.
Do. 1136. The King comes to England, having composed all things in France.

He Commands a Recognition to be made of his Barons Rights in Normandy.


the King having ordered and settled his Affairs, and provided for, and
furnished his Castles with Men, Arms, and Victuals, in Normandy, Anjou,
Aquitan, Gascony, Tourain, and Main, came to Barfleu, intending to pass into
England before Christmas, but detained by contrary Winds, passed that
Solemnity, with his Queen Alienor, at Cherbourgh; and in January they set Sail,
and landed at Southampton on the 26th of that Month, where he was received by
almost all the Nobility with great joy. Rad. de Diceto, Col. 536. n. 10. The
Kings of South Wales and North Wales do Homage to the King.
Before his coming over, he Commanded Rotroc Bishop of Eureux, and Raynald of
St. Valery to make Recognitions in the several Bishoprics, what Legal Rents,
Rights, and Customs belonged to the King and Barons.

I can find nothing more of moment done this year, Rad. de Diceto, Col. 536. n.
10. The Kings of South Wales and North Wales do Homage to the King.
but that Malcolm King of Scots, Rese King of South Wales, Owen King of
North Wales, and all the greatest Men of that Nation did Homage to the King of
England, and his Son Henry, upon the First of July at Woodstocke. The Norman
Chronicle adds, F. 999. B.
That he gave his Brother David, and some of his Barons Sons Pledges for his
good Behavior, or preservation of Peace, and that the King might have such of
his Castles as he pleased.

All the next year is wholly taken up with the Controversy between the King,
and Archbishop of Canterbury: and indeed there is very little else to be found
in any of our Historians until after his

The Welsh notwithstanding their Homage and Oaths of Fealty made to the King,
and notwithstanding their Hostages given, The Welsh unquiet.
Joh. Bromton. Col. 1059. n. 10. An. Do. 1165.
harass the Marches, and make Incursions into England. The King raises a great
Army, enters their Country, and forces them to N. 30. An. Do. 1166.
next year also King Henry marches with an Army into Wales, to confirm them in
the observation of the Peace, and then passed beyond Sea, where William Talvace
Earl of Sees, and his Son John, and his Grandchild John, the Son of his eldest
Son Guido Earl of Pontheu, Chron. Norm f. 1000. C. The Earl of Sees delivers
his Castles to King Henry.
delivered to him the Castles of Alencon, and Roc-Mabine, with what belonged to
them, and they lost them for the ill Practices of them and their Predecessors,
which King Henry abolished.

From thence he went into Britany with an Army, and there Ibid. D. Joh.
Bromton, ut supra, n. 40. King Henry Marries his Son Geofry to the Daughter of
the Duke of Britany. And reduces the Country to his Obedience.
made a Match between his Son Geofry and Constance Daughter and Heir of Conan
Duke of Britan lately dead, though neither of them Marriagable; where though he
found opposition, yet he soon reduced his Enemies and the Country to obedience;
he besieged the Castle of Fougeres in the Confines of Normandy and Britany,
took and rased it to the ground; At Touars he received the Homage of Rennes,
which is the chief City, and by that was seized, or took possession of the
whole Dukedom; and because he had neither seen Dol nor Combourgh, he visited
them in the way to his Devotions at Mont-St. Michael.

At Christmas King Henry was at Chron. No^man. f. 1101. A. King Henry marches
into Avergn, and asserts the Title of the Disinherited Earl.
Poictiers, where his Son Henry came to him from England; In Lent he had a
Conference with the Earl of St. Giles at Grammont. After Easter he marches
Avergn, and wasted the Lands of Earl William, who engaged upon his Faith, to
stand to Justice in the presence of the King, in relation to his Nephew, the
young Earl of Avergn, whom he had disinherited: but he broke his Faith, went
over to the King of France, and made Discord between them.

On Trinity Ibid B. An. Do* 1166. A Treaty of Peace between the two Kings
without effect.

They burn each others Towns and Villages.


Sunday the two Kings met in Veuxin, where they Treated of Peace, but the great
Men of France exasperated their Henry, and so nothing was then done; whereupon
both sides fortified their Castles, and brought together what Forces they
could. The King of France burnt several Villages between Mant and Pacey. King
Henry provoked by that Action, (though with great deference to King Lewis,
says the Chronicle) burnt the Strong and Rich Castle of Chaumont by Gisors,
which was the King of France his Magazine of Victuals, and there also his Money
was lodged to carry on the War, with very many Villages about it. At which the
King of France was much moved, and burnt Vadum Nigasi^, that is, Gany L'Isle,
and other Villages in Veuxin, belonging to the Abbey of St. Owen in Roven; he
burnt also the good Town of Andeli Sur Sein, which belonged to St. Mary and the
Archbishop of Roven, and wasted some other places appertaining to the Church
of Holy Trinity of that City.

In August there was a Ibidem, C. D. A Truce between the two Kings. King Henry
subdued Britany.

Maud the Empress dies. Leaves great Treasure to Monasteries, and the Poor.
Gives a great Sum toward the building a Stone Bridge at Roven.


Truce made, and Sworn by both Kings, until Easter. From hence King Henry went
into Britany, and brought under his subjection all the Britans, and those of
St. Pol de Leon; for Gaimar Son of Henry Viscount of that Town, gave Pledges,
and submitted to the King, being much affrighted, when he saw his very strong
Castle taken and burnt, and other places either taken or rendered. While he was
thus busied in Britany, a Messenger came to him with the News of his Mother
Maud the Empresses death; September at Roven, and was buried at the Abbey of
Bec. Thesauros infinitos, etc. Her Son distributed her vast Treasure, to
Churches, Monasteries, Lepers, and other Poor, for the health of her Soul. She
built three Monasteries in Normandy, and gave a great Sum of Money toward
building the Stone Bridge at Roven which she had begun.

The greatest part of the Ibidem. f. 1002. Anno Dom. 1167. The Poictovins and
Anjovins Conspire against King Henry.

He burns and wastes their Country. They apply themselves to the King of France.


Poictovins and Aquitans Conspired Henry, and wasted the Country with Burning
and Rapine; he marches into their Country, destroys their Towns and Villages,
takes their Castles, and puts Garrisons into them of his own Soldiers, and
leaves those Countries to the Care of his Queen, and Patrick Earl of Salisbury,
while he goes to meet the King of France eight days after Easter, between Mant
and Pacey, to Discourse and Expostulate with him about the Injuries he had
received from him; for the Poictovins had applied themselves to the King of
France, and Henry's proper Subjects. There was great Debate between the two
Kings about this Matter, The Truce continued.
but the King of France would not deliver his Hostages, though received against
Justice, and therefore the Truce was only prolonged until eight days after
Midsummer.

Before the last Ibidem, C. D. The Britans Confederate against the King of
England.
Truce was made, the King of England had Eudo Vicecomes or Viscount of Porhoet,
who by a false Title was called Earl; he had received many kindnesses from the
King, yet refused to come to his Service and Assistance, having Confederated
with other Britans, (to wit) Oliver Fitz-Oliver of Dinan, and his Cousin
Rowland; King Henry was very angry with them, and began first with Eudo who was
the Chief: he took his chief Castle, He reduces them by Fire and Sword.
and burnt and wasted all his Territories, he took from him the County of
Broguerec, whereof the City of Vannes was the Dinan and took that, and all the
Fortresses in the Country about it into his possession. Then he went to the
Lands of Rowland, and plundered and burnt them.

Eight Ibid. D. An unsuccessful Treaty.
days after Midsummer the two Kings came together again, at Ferte-Bernard, (a
Castle in Main near the edge of Perch) to Treat of Peace, and as before,
departed without success; for the Britrins and Poictovins, when they gave
Hostages to the King of France, he Covenanted with them, That he should make no
Peace with the King of England, without their Consent. The two Kings fortify
their Borders.
Hereupon both sides fortify Advent. King Ibidem, A. B. The Earl of Pontheu
denies the Earl of Bologn passage through his Country. The Earl of Bologn, and
King of England burn his Towns and Villages.
Henry craftily brought over Matthew Earl of Bologn to his side, but when he
was to come to his assistance, John Earl of Pontheu would not permit him to
pass through his Country, so that he was forced to Ship his Soldiers, and bring
them by Sea; for which denial the King and Earl Matthew march into Earl John's
Country, and burn above forty Towns and Villages. The mean while the King of
France burnt the Castle of Hugh of Newcastle, Brueroles, and wasted almost all
the Country of Perch.

In the day of Ibidem, C. 1168. Peace between the two Kings. Henry Son of King
Henry did Homage to the King of France for Anjou, Main, and Britany. He is made
Senescal of France.
Epiphany, or on Twelf-day, the two Kings were Reconciled, and made Friends;
Henry Son to King Henry did Homage to the King of France, his Father in Law,
for the Earldoms of Anjou and Main, and the Dukedom of Britany, which he then
gave him; for the Dukedom of Normandy he had done Homage before; At the same
time his Father in Law made him Senescal of France, Anjou; and then also
Richard Son of King Henry did Homage to the King of France for the Dukedom of
Aquitan. In the Feast of the Purification of the Virgin Mary, or at Candlemass,
Henry the Son of King Henry, at Paris, served the King of France at his Table,
as Senescal of that Kingdom.

Ibid. D. An. Do. 1169. He does Homage to Philip Son of King Lewis. As also his
Brother Geofry for Britany.
Henry Conferred with the King of France at St. Germans En Ley, and there his
Son Henry did Homage to Philip Son of King Lewis; and Geofry, at his Fathers
Command, did Homage to him for the Dukedom of Britany. In Lent King Henry went
into Gascony, and destroyed many Castles that were fortified against him, and
reconciled to himself, and made Peace with the Earls of Angolism, and March,
and many others of less Note. In May Geofry the Son of King Henry came to
Rennes, and Stephen Bishop of Rennes, Geofry receives the Homage of the Barons
of Britany.
Aubert Bishop of Alith, and Robert Abbat of Mont-Michael, and other Religious
Persons receceived him with great Veneration in the Peter, and there he rceived
the Homage of the Barons of Britany.

At Christmas following the King kept his Rad. de Diceto, Col. 551. n. 50.
Benedictus Abbas, p. 29. a. The remainder of the British Barons swear Fealty to
King Henry and his Son Geofry.
Court at Nantes, where were present the Bishops and all the Barons of Britany,
and all the Earls, Barons, and Freemen that had not done it before, swear
Fealty to him, and his Son Geofry. From thence he passed into Normandy, and put
all things into good order there, and then England, and landed at John.
Bromton, Col. 1060. n. 30. King Henry comes for England, is in danger of
Shipwreck.
Portsmouth on the third of March; In his Passage there happened a great Storm
at Sea, wherein the King was in danger of Shipwreck, one of his best Ships was
lost, and several of the Nobility, with 300 Persons of both Sexes perished in
her.

Soon after his coming into England, Chron. Gerv^s. Col. 1410. n. 10. Ben.
Abbat. p. 29. b. Inquisitors appointed in all Counties of England.
he called together his Great Men, and appointed Abbats and Clerks, Earls and
Knights, to pass through the Land, giving them a Form in Writing what they were
to do.

Into Kent, Surry, Middlesex, Berkshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and
Bedfordshire, were sent the Abbat of St. Augustins in Canterbury, the Abbat of
Chertesey, the Earl of Clare, William de Abrincis, of the Hospital, and Ralph
de Dene; All these together were to go the Circuit in the Counties abovesaid,
and in like manner Inquisitors were sent through all the Counties of England.

These Itinerant Chron. Gervas. Dorob. Col. 1410. n. 20, 30. Anno Dom. 1170.
Barons were to exact Security and Pledges of all Sheriffs, who were Sheriffs
since the King went into Normandy,

I. First of all Ibidem, n. 50. The Articles of Enquiry.
they were to enquire of the Sheriffs and their Bailiffs, what and how much
they received of every Hundred, and every Township, and every particular Man,
since the King went last into Normandy, by reason whereof the Nation or
particular Men might be grieved; and etc. (i. e. lawfully) was to be written
and noted by it self, and what was taken without Judgment, etc. (that is,
unlawfully) was also to be written and noted by it self; and of all their
takings, they were to enquire the Cause, and with what Testimony or Authority
they took any thing from any Man.

II. Also, They were to enquire, Ibidem, n. 60.
what Lands, and how much the Sheriffs had bought, or received in Mortgage, or
were Pawned to them.

III. Also, They were to enquire of the Ibidem.
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Vavasors, Knights,
Citizens, Burgesses, and their Senescals or Stewards, Bailiffs or Ministers,
what and how much they have received in their Lands after the Term aforesaid,
of every of their Hundreds, Townships, or their particular Men,

IV. Also, They were to Ibidem, 1411. lin. 5.
enquire of all those that since the time aforesaid, had any Bayliwick (that is
Charge or Employment) under the King, concerning an That is, when they were
void, and the Baronies in Custody or Ward.
Archbishopric, Bishopric, Abbey, Barony, Honor, or Eschaet, what, and how
much they gained in that Employment.

V. Also; They were to Ibidem, n. 10.
enquire of the Kings Bailiffs* (or Officers) who managed his Business, what in
any place had been given to them.

They were to Ibidem.
enquire concerning the Goods of such as That is Tho. Becket the Archbishop,
and his Friends.
fled by reason of the Assize of That is Tho. Becket the Archbishop, and his
Friends.
Clarendon, and of the Goods of such as suffered by it: what was done and
received of every Hundred, Township, or Man; They were to enquire, whether any
one was unjustly accused in that Assize, for Reward, Promise, Hatred, or any
unjust way: or if any one accused, was released, or his Judgment reversed, for
Reward, Promise, or Affection, and who received the Reward; They were to
enquire concerning the Aid to Marry the Kings Daughter, what

VII. They were to Ibidem, n. 20, 30.
enquire what and how much the Foresters took, their Bailiffs, or Ministers, or
Servants after the time aforesaid, in their Bayliwicks or Liberties, after what
manner, and upon what occasion; and if by Connivance they omitted to exact what
was due to the King, for any Reward, Promise, or Friendship; and of the
forfeitures of Forests, Ibidem.
or their Servants took any Man, or did upon Accusation take Security and
Pledges for him, and then released him without Justice; They were to enquire
who did these things, and to note them.

And all that were Ibidem, n. 40.
accused of any Fault were to give Security and Pledges, to appear before the
King on the day they should appoint, to do such Right to the King and his
Subjects as they ought to do, and such as had no Pledges were to be imprisoned.

IX. They Ibidem, n. 50.
were to enquire if the Sheriffs, or any of their Bailiffs, or Lords of Towns,
or their Bailiffs had returned any thing they had taken, or had made their
peace with their Men, or Tenants, or Vassals, to stop their Complaints for
coming before the King.

They Ibidem.
were to enquire who had been Amerced, and if any one had been excused or
abated any thing of what he was first Amerced, and by whom it was done.

XI. Also, Ibidem.
They were to enquire in every Bishopric, what, and how much, and for what
Cause, the Archdeacons, or Deans (Rural Deans) took of any one, and the whole
was to be written down and noted; and they were to enquire, who ought Homage to
the King, and had not

This wonderful Ibidem, n. 60. and Col. 1412. lin. 4. and n. 10, 20. An. Do.
1170. The day of General Appearance was the Fourteenth of June. Who appeared.
Inquisition was made, and all were commanded to appear before the King at
London on the Fourteenth day of June. And upon that day the Bishops, Abbats,
Earls, Barons, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and Aldermen of all England appeared with
their Fidejussors, or Sureties, in great fear, for they knew not the Kings
Design or Intentions. King Henry cau^ed his Son to be Crowned.
On that very day he Knighted his Son Henry, (who came out of Normandy but that
Week) and presently commanded him to be Anointed and Crowned, all present being
astonished, and wondering at this Act. The Archbishop of York performed the
Coronation Ceremonies, which ended, the new King, by Command of his Father, The
Earls and Barons do Fealty to him.
received the Fealties of all the Earls, and Barons, and thus freed from their
fear, they all departed to their own Homes.

Benedictus Abbas gives a shorter Account of this Inquisition, and in some
things different. ^At Easter (says he) P. 29. b. and p. 30. a.
the King kept his Court at Windsor, where were present at that Feast William
King of Scots, A great Council at London.
and David his Brother, and almost all the Nobility, and Great Men, as well
Bishops, as Earls and Barons, from whence after the Solemnity he came to
London, and held a great Council for the Coronation of his eldest Son Henry,
and concerning the England and their Bailiffs, for abusing his People, and
caused them to do Right to himself and them, by causing all the Omnes homines
Regni sui, scilicet Comites, Barons, Milites, Francos tenentes, and etiam
Villicanos, etc.

Willielmum Regem Scotiae and Davidem fratrem ejus, and omnes Comites, and
Barons and Francos tenentes Regni sui fecit, etc.

The King of Scots, his Earls and Barons swear Fealty to the new King.


Men of his Kingdom, Earls, Barons, Knights, Franc-Tenents, and also Husbandmen
in every Shire to Swear, what, and how much the Sheriffs and their Bailiffs had
taken of them, and what with Judgment of the County or Hundred, and what
without Judgment, and for what Forfeitures. But by this Inquisition June, in
the presence of almost all the Earls, Barons, and Noblemen of the Land, he
caused his eldest Son Henry to be Crowned, and Consecrated King, by Roger
Archbishop of York, and Legate from the Apostolic See, and the day after
caused William King of Scots, David his Brother, and all the Earls, Barons, and
Franc-Tenents of his Kingdom, to

On Ibidem. King Henry goes into Normandy.

The King of France angry that his Daughter was not Crowned Queen.

The new King made Viceroy of England, and a new Seal made for him.


Midsummer-day the King the Father was at Portsmouth, from whence he sailed
into Normandy, for that King Lewis of France was angry, that his Daughter
Margaret was not Crowned with the new King her Husband, and threatened War
there. At his departure

On Ibidem, p. 30. b. The two Kings are Friends.
the Twenty second of July, on St. Mary Magdalens-day, the two Kings met at
Vandeure in Main, where upon a Conference they agreed very well.

From Ibidem. King Henry fell into a dangerous Sickness in Normandy.

He divides his Kingdom and Lands amongst his Sons.


this Conference he returned into Normandy, and about the Laurence, or Tenth of
August, he fell into so great a Sickness, as it was reported through all France
he was dead. In this Sickness he divided his Kingdom and Lands amongst his
Sons; To Henry the eldest he gave the Kingdom of England, the Dukedom of
Normandy, and Earldoms of Anjou and Main, and left his youngest Son John to be
provided for and maintained by him. F. 296. b. n. 40.
But Roger Hoveden says, he gave unto John the Earldom of Moreton in Normandy.
To his Son Richard he gave the Dukedom of Aquitan, with all its Appurtenances,
to be holden of the King of France; And to his Son Geofry the Earldom of
Britany, with the Daughter and Heir of Earl Conan, to be holden of the King of
France.

After King Rog. Hov. f. 298. a. n. 50. An. Do. 1170. King Henry claims the
Archbishopric of Bourges, etc.
Henry was perfectly Recovered of his great fit Bourges, as belonging to the
Dukedom of Aquitan, which Lewis King of France denied, from whence great
Discord arose between the two Kings; The King of England came into Berry with
an Army, to take possession of it, encouraged thereunto by the Confession of
the Archbishop then upon his Deathbed, That of Right it did belong to the
Duchy of Aquitan; A Truce between the two Kings.
but the King of France coming likewise with an Army into that Country,
prevented his Design, and the Discord Hillary following.

Next year King Henry being in Ireland, and busy about the Conquest, and
Establishment thereof, (of which more afterward) he had Ibid. f. 302. b. n. 30.
news of the two Cardinals, Theodinus, and Albertus, the Popes special Legates,
coming into Normandy; with mighty haste he comes from Wexford, arrives in
Milford-Haven, and with great dispatch proceeds to Portsmouth, from whence with
his Son Henry he Normandy, and finds the two Cardinals at Caen; by their Advice
he was reconciled to King Lewis concerning the Crowning of his Daughter, so as
he sent back his Son into England, and with him Rotrod Archbishop of Roven,
Giles Bishop of Evreux, Young King Henry and his Wife Margaret both Crowned.
An. Do. 1172.
and Roger Bishop of Worcester, to Crown him and Margaret his Wife and they
performed that Solemnity at Winchester in the Church of St. Swithin, on the
27th of August 1172.

After this, about the Ibidem, f, 304. a. n. 20, 30.
Feast of All Saints, the new King of England with his Queen, according to his
Fathers Command though much against his Will, went into Normandy; when he came
to his Father, he sent him to the King of France, who had a desire to see, and
speak with his Daughter, he received them both with great Joy and Honor, and
they staid some time with him. The King of France makes Discord between the two
Kings Father and Son, and sets the Son to demand either England or Normandy of
his Father for a Subsistence.
From this Visit there arose great Mischief, as well to France as England for
King Lewis, who always hated the King of England, advised the Normandy, he
should Require of his Father either all England, or all Normandy, as a
Subsistence for him and his Wife; and directed him, that if his Father would
grant neither, he should return into France to him. In the mean time the King
suspecting the Fraud and Malice of the King of France, of which he had had
often experience, sent for his Son and his Wife, they came to him; Toward
Christmas he went into Anjou, and left his Son and Daughter in Law in Normandy.

Walsingham Reports, Hypod. Neustr. f. 447. n. 40. Queen Alienor suspected to
have caused Division between her Husband and Son.
That whilst the King was in Ireland, Hugo de St. Maur, and Ralph de Faia, the
Queens Uncle, (as 'twas said, by her instigation) began to avert the Mind of
the young King from his Father, suggesting to him, It seemed indecent to all
Men, that any Man should be a King without a Country or Dominion.

About this time ^en. Ab. ^. 43. a. Adam de Port outlawed for Treason, not
appearing upon Summons.
one Adam de Port was impeached of Treason, for Conspiring the Kings death, and
because being summoned by the King, he would not stand to Judgment, he was
Outlawed from England.

After Hoved. f. 304. a. n. 40.
Christmas King Henry sent for his Son to Chinon in Anjou, from whence they
went to Averng, to In Hoveden it is Montferrat, but mistaken for Clermont.
Clermont, to meet and Treat with Hubert Earl of Maurania, now Savoy, about a
Marriage John, and his Daughter Alice, with whom he was to have had her Fathers
Dominions. This Treaty of Marriage was performed, and concluded with the
greatest State and Solemnity imaginable; it is long, and because she died before
it took effect, I have omitted it.

From hence they both went to Limoges, where Ibid. f. 305. a. n. 20. The Earl
of St. Giles does Homage to the King and his Son Richard for Tholose.
Raymund Earl of St. Giles came to them, and became their Man, or did Homage
England, and Richard his Son Earl of Poictou, to hold Tholose of them in
Hereditary Right, by the Service of coming to them upon Summons, and staying in
their Service forty days at his own Cost; but if they would have him stay
longer in their Service, it was to be at their Charge; and furthermore, he was
to give them for Tholose yearly, One hundred Marks of Silver, and ten Horses
fit for War, every of them to be worth Ten Marks.

The Ben. Ab. p. 45. b. Hov. f. 305. a. n. 30. The young King contradicts his
Father.
Earl of Mauriana followed King Henry to Limoges, to know what Lands or
Possessions he would give his Son John, and when he would have given him the
Castles of Chinon, Lodun, and Mirabel, the young King contradicted his Father,
and would not suffer him to do it, for he took it very grievously, that his
Father would not assign him any of his Dominions, where he and his Wife might
keep their Residence, when as he had desired England, or Normandy, The young
Kings mind alienated from his Father.
or Anjou, by the Counsel of the King of France, and Normandy that loved not
his Father: From this time he sought occasions and opportunity to recede from
him, and would in nothing hearken to his Advice.

Having Ben. Ab. p. 46. a. The young King leaves his Father.
therefore dispatched his Business at Limoges, he hastened to come into Normandy
as soon as he could, and his Son with him; Coming to Chinon, the King staid
there all Night, his Son not having taken his leave of his Father, went
forward, and on the Morrow Alencon, and the next day at Argentom. His Father
followed him, and that Night he was at Argentom, his Father was at Alencon, and
that very Night about Cock-Crowing, And goes to the King of France.
he with his private Family came to the King of France, on the Eighth day of
March.

The King Ibidem. The King visits and strengthens his Castles in Normandy, and
in the Borders.
knowing his Son had escaped, feared the treachery of the French, and therefore
with great diligence visited his Castles in the Borders of Normandy toward
France, and well Manned and Gisors also he strengthened as well as he could; he
likewise visited his Castles in Normandy, and sent his Commands to all his
Castellans in England, Anjou, and Britany, that they should strongly guard, and
take care to secure the Castles under their Command. Ibid. b. The Authors of
the Conspiracy against him.

Queen Alienor suspected.


The chief Contrivers of this Treason were Lewis King of France, and as some
said, Queen Alienor, and Ralph de Faia; for she had with her Richard Duke of
Aquitan, and Geofry Earl of Britany her Sons, and sent them both into France to
the young King their Brother, that they might side with him against their
Father.

After the departure of the young King, Ibidem. Young King Henry's Chancellor
brought his Seal to his Father.
Richard Bar his Chancellor returned to his Father, and delivered him the Seal
he had committed to him, which he received, and caused it to be securely He
caused such as staid with him to Swear Fealty to him against his Father.
he caused to swear Fealty to him against his Father, and would not permit any
to stay with him, that would not take that Oath; To wit, Walter Edward his
Chamberlain, and William Blund his Porter. These came and staid with his Father.

In the mean while Lewis King of France was very kind to his Ibidem, p. 47. a.
Anno Dom. 1173. The King of France received the young King and his Brothers
kindly, and caused a new Seal to be made for him.

The whole Kingdom of France engage against King Henry in a Council.

His Sons not to make Peace with him without his Consent.


Son in Law, and to his Brothers, and those that came with them; and caused a
new Seal to be made for him, with which he confirmed all his Grants and
Donations; he also called together Earl Robert his Brother, Philip Earl of
Flanders, and Matthew his Bologn, Henry Earl of Troys, Theobald Earl of Blois,
and Earl Stephen, and the other Earls, and Barons of France, and also the
Archbishops, and Bishops, and all the Clergy and People of France, and held a
great Council in Paris, in which he himself swear, he would according to the
utmost of his Power assist the young King to maintain the War against his
Father, and to gain the Kingdom of England. The like Oath he caused the Earls
and Barons of France to swear to him: they first having ^ceived the Oaths
France, nor make Peace with their Father without his consent, and good liking
of his Barons.

In this Council the Ibidem, a. and b. The young King receives the Homage of
Philip Earl of Flanders, Matthew Earl of Bologn, Theobald Earl of Blois, etc.
young King received the Homage and Fealty of Philip Earl of Flanders, and gave
him for his Homage and Fealty, One thousand Pounds yearly Rent in England, and
the whole County of Kent, with the Castles of Dover and Rochester. Matthew Earl
of Bologn, and for them he gave him the whole Soke, or Liberty of Kirketon in
Lindsey, and the Earldom of Moreton. He received also the Homage and Fealty of
Earl Theobald, and to him he gave 500 l. by the year of Anjou Rent, the Castle
of Ambois, with all the Right he claimed in Turain, and all the Right which his
Father and he claimed in Castle-Reginald; All these Donations he confirmed with
the new Seal which the King of France caused to be made, William King of Scots,
and David his Brother do voluntary Homage to him.
William King of Scotland for his Homage and Service all Northumberland to the
River Tine; To David his Brother he gave the Earldom of Huntington, and as an
Augmentation, added all Cambridgeshire; To Earl Hugh Bigot, he gave the Honor
of Eye to hold in Fee and Inheritance; and the Castle of Norwich in Custody to
him and his Heirs for ever.

After Easter Hoved. f. 305. b. n. 10. A general Insurrection against King
Henry of England.
the whole Kingdom of France, the young King, his Brothers Richard and Geofry,
and almost all the Earls and Barons of England, Normandy, Aquitan, Anjou, and
Britany, rose up against King Henry the Father, and wasted his Countries on all
sides with Fire, Sword, and Rapine: They besiged and took his Castles, and he
resisted, and made what defense he could; he had with him 20000 Often in old
Historians, they are called Pradones Brabantini, the Plundring Brabanters.
Brabanters which served him faithfully, but not without great Pay.

Philip Earl of Ibidem, n. 40. Albamarle, and Dreincourt taken from the King.
Flanders marched with a great Army into Normandy, besieged and took Albemarle,
and from thence went and besieged Driencourt, which was delivered to him; Here
his Brother Matthew Earl of Bologn was shot with an Arrow, of which Wound he
died.

In the mean time the King of France and his Ibidem, n. 50. f. 306. a. lin. 1.

The King of France and his Son in Law besiege Verneul.

Three Burghs in that Town beside the Castle.

The great want of Victuals.


Son in Law besieged Vernol; but Hugh Lacy, and Hugh Beaumont, the Constables
or Governors, stoutly defended the Town, so as the King of France with his
great Army and Engines made but small progress against it, though he lay a
Month against it. There were within that Town besides the Castle, three Burghs,
all separated from each other, and enclosed with a strong Wall, and Ditches
full of Water; one was called the great Burgh, against which the King of France
fixed his Engines without success. After a Month the Defendents wanted France
for three days, to go to the King of England to desire Relief, and if in that
time they sailed of it, then to deliver the Burgh. The peremptory day appointed
was the Vigil of St. Laurence; At the Request of the Defendents, the King of
England came to relieve the Town, and drew up his Army; The King of France sent
to the King of England the Archbishop (...) Sens, Earl Henry, and Earl
Theobald unto him, to let him know next day, which was the peremptory day, he
would The great Burgh gained by a trick. The King of France his Army flies.
King Henry the elder Relieves Verneul.
When he had it, the King of France dare not keep it, but entered the Town,
plundered it, burnt the Burgh, and slying carried the Burghers Prisoners with
him into France. So soon as the King of England knew it, he pursued them,
killed many, and took very many, and returned that Evening to Vernol: Lodged
there that Night, and Commanded the Walls that were battered down to be
repaired up. This Action was on the 9th August.

Next day he went from Ibidem, n. 30, 40. Takes Damvile.
Vernol or Verneuil, and took Damvile, the Castle of Gilbert de Tileres, and in
it Multos Milites, and Servientes, many Knights, and Esquires, or Servants;
from thence he came to Roven, and sent his Brabanters, in which he most
con^ided, Sends his Brabanters into Britany.
into Britany, against Hugh Earl of Chester, and Ralph de Fo^geres, (he was
Lord of a Castle of that name, in the Con^ines of Normandy and Britany) who had
seized upon almost all that Country; The Earl, and Ralph came to meet them, and
in a pitched Field and plain Battle the Britans were vanquished; The Britans
vanquished in a pitched Field. Seventeen of their stoutest Knights taken.
those two and the most Potent of the Britans fled to the Castle of Dole. In
the Battle were taken seventeen of the stoutest Knights, Hasculf of St. Hilary,
William Patricius, or Patric, Haimer de Falcilia, Patric de Landa, Geofry
Farsi, William de Rulent, Ralph de Sennes, John Pincerna, or Butler, the He was
the Deputy-Lord, Castelia^, or Governor of Dole.

1500 Britans slain.


Viguier or Vicar of Dole, William de Leges, William de Mota, Robertus de
Treham, Paganus Cornutus, Reginald Pinzun, Reginald de Campo Lamberti, Eudo
B^stardus, besides many others Horse and Foot; and there were slain above 1500
Britans in the Battle, which was fought on the Twentieth day of August.

Ibidem, n. 50. and b. lin. 1, etc. The Brabanters besiege Do^e in Britany.

The King of England goes to them.

The Tower of Dole rendered.


after this Battle the King of England had news of it, and forthwith marched
toward Dole, (which the Brabanters presently after their Victory had invested)
and gave order for his Pe^rars (Machins to cast great Stones into Towns, or
against the Walls) to be fitted and prepared, with other Warlike Engines; but
the Earl of Chester, and such as were with him in the Tower, not being able to
defend it, rendered themselves on the Twenty sixth day of August; and in like
manner all Britany, with its Fortresses Ibidem, b. n. 10, 20. The Earl of
Chester taken Prisoner, and all Britany reduced.
The Historian names fourscore Earls, Barons, and Great Men that were taken in
this Tower or Castle, besides, as he says, many others he did not name.

After these Ibidem, n. 30. A Treaty between the King and his Sons.
Victories the King of France and his Adherents began to despair, and
endeavored by all means to make Peace between King Henry and his Sons. The
place appointed for the meeting Gisors and Try. Thither came Lewis King of
France, with the Ibidem.
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons of his Kingdom, and brought with him
Henry, Richard, and Geofry, Sons of King Henry, who came also with the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons of his Dominions, on the Twenty fifth
of September. Ibidem,
In hoc Colloquio, In this Conference and Treaty, His great Offers to them.
half the Rents of his Demesns of England, and four Castles there; or if his
Son had rather Reside in Normandy, he offered him half of the Revenue of that
Dukedom, and all the Revenue of Anjou, three Castles in Normandy, one in Main,
one in Anjou, one in Turain. Ibidem.
To Richard he offered half the Revenue of Aquitan, and four Castles there; and
to his little Son Geofry he offered all the Hereditary Estate of Earl Conan, if
by the consent of the Pope he could Marry his Daughter Constance. Ibidem, n. 40.
And further, he referred himself to the Judgment of the Archbishop of
Moustier^en Tarantais, and the Popes Legates, to

But it was not the mind of the King of France such a Peace should be made; for
presently after the Treaty, he and the young King Ben. Ab. p. 52. b. and Hoved.
ut sup. n. 50. The Earl of Leicester comes into England with an Army of
Flemmings. Hageneth Castle taken.
sent Robert Earl of Leicester with an Army of Flemmings into England, who with
his Countess and Army landed upon the Coast of of Suffolk, about the Feast of
St. Luke, and were received by Earl Hugh Bigod into his Castle of Framingham,
where he furnished them with Necessaries. The Earl besieged Hagenet, a Castle
whereof Ranulph de Broc had the keeping, and within four days took it; and
proceeding from thence to Leicester, it was told him, there was a great Force
got together about St. Edmunds-Bury, and being surprised at the News, he
returned.

At this time Richard de Lucy Ibidem Ben. Ab. p 53. a. ^oved f. 307. a n 10,
20. Richard Lucy and Humfrid de Bohun make Truce with the King of Scots.
Justiciary of England, and H^mphry de B^hun the Kings Constable, were gone
forth with a great Army to waste the Dominions of the Kings of Scotland; they
had burnt B^rwick, and spoiled the Country round about it, but receiving the
News of the Earl of Leicester, they made Truce with the King of Scots, until
the Feast of St. Hillary, and gave, and took Hostages on either side for the
performance of it. This done, Humphry de Bohun marches as fast as he could
toward St. Edmunds-Bury, Leicester; There came into his assistance Reginald
Earl of Cornwall, This should rather be William, for Robert was then Son to
William Earl of Gloucester.

They with the assistance of other Earls, rout the Earl of Leicesters Army.

And kill Ten thousand Flemmings. The Earl of Leicester and his Countess taken
Prisoners.


Robert Earl of Gloucester, and William Earl of Arundel, about the Feast of
All Saints came from Framingham with his Army near to St. Edmunds-Bury, in a
place called Fornham, in a Marsh or Meadow not far from the Church of St.
Genovef; The Earls with a great Army, and Humphry de Bohun with three hundred
of the Kings choice Horse met him, and with the Banner of St. Edmund displayed
before them, charged that part Leicester was, and in a moment his Army was
defeated, and he and his Wife taken, as also Hugh de Castellis a Noble
Frenchman. In this Battle fell Ten thousand Flemmings, and the rest were taken,
imprisoned, and starved; The Earl of Leicester and his Wife, and Hugh de
Castellis, with the better sort of those that were taken were sent into France,
to King Henry the elder, and were imprisoned at Falais with the Earl of Chester.

About the Feast of St. Martin, or Eleventh of November, Ben. Ab p. 53. b.
Several Castles in Anjou surrendered to King Henry the elder.

Many Knights, and Esquires, or Servientes taken.


King Henry the Father with his Brabanters marched into Anjou, and about eight
days after Geofry de Haya came to him, and delivered the Town and Castle of
Hay; The Castle also of Prulli, and the Castle of Campen^, which Robert de Ble
held against him, were rendered; in which last, Multi Milites and Servientes
capti fuerunt, many Knights, and their Servants or Men were taken; as for
example Haimeric de Ble, Miles, and Hosmundus, Everardus, and Gaufridus,
homines his Men, or such as held of him in Knights Service, or had done Homage
to him: and so to the number of forty Knights and Servants, as the Historians
do number them.

About the Ibidem.
Feast of St. Andrew, or later end of November, he came before Vendome, Vendome
taken.
which Brachard de Lavardin, having expelled the Earl his Father, held against
him, and took it; from whence old King Henry returned into Normandy.

At Christmas Ibidem, p. 54. a. A Truce betwixt the Kings of England and
France.

A Truce with the King of Scots, and 300 Marks given for it.


following King Henry the Father was at Caen in Normandy, where a Truce was
made between him and the King of France, from the Feast of St. Hillary, or
Thirteenth of January, until the Close of, or eight days after Easter. At the
same time likewise Hugh Bishop of Duresm made Truce with the King of Scots at
Revedal for the same time, and gave him for it 300 Marks of Silver, to be
levied upon the Lands of the Barons of Northumberland.

In the time of this Truce, Hoved. f. 307. a. n. 50. b. lin. 1. Two Fortresses
erected, one in the Isle of Axholm, another at Durham.
Roger de Mowbray erects a Fortress at the Ferry in the Isle of Axholm, and
Hugh Bishop of Durham erected one at Alverton.

When Ibidem, lin. 1. The young King and Earl of Flanders design an Expedition
into England.
the time of the Truce was e^pired, after Easter, An. Do. 1174.
the young King Henry, and Philip Earl of Flanders propounded to raise a great
Army, with design to come for England; and how they were diverted from the
Voyage see afterward.

The King of Scots also not long after the Close of Easter, Ben. Ab. p. 54. a.
The King of Scots enters Northumberland with an Army.
having first collected his 300 Marks of the Barons of Northumberland, Scots
and So the old Historians called the Inhabitants of Galway, and sometimes only
Wallenses.
Galualenses, or Inhabitants of Galway, made great Slaughters and Ravages,
(incredible, and beyond the inhumanity of the most Barbarous Nations, as these
Authors report them.) His Brother Ibidem. The King of Scots besieges Carlisle.
Waltes Northumberland. Takes several Castles in that and the Neighboring
Countries.
David he sent to Leicester to assist that Earls Forces against the King,
whilst he besieged Carlisle, where Robert de Vaus was Governor; When he had
been a few days before it, he invested the Castle with part of his Army, and
with the other part he marched through Northumberland, Lidel, which was
Nicholas Stutevills, and the Castles of Burgh and Appleby which were the Kings,
but in the Custody of Robert de Stutevill, and the Kings Castle of Werkworth,
which Robert Fitz-Richard kept, and the Castle of Jerby which Odonel de
Vnfranvil held, and then returned to his Army before Carlisle, and staid there
so long as the Garrison wanted Victuals, when the Governor Articled with him,
That he would deliver the Michaelmass-day following, unless by that time he had
Relief from the King of England, and for performance of this, he secured the
King of Scots by Oath and Hostages.

From hence he went with his Army and besieged Ibidem, p. 54. b. The Yorkshire
Army prepares to Relieve Car^isle.
Prudhou, the Castle of Odonel de Vnfranvil, but could not take it; for the
Yorkshire Army prepared to come upon him, the Commanders whereof were Robert de
Stutevill, and his Son William, William de Vesey, Constable to the Archbishop
of York, Bernard de Bailoll, and Odonel de Vnfranvil. The King of Scots rises
from before it.
The news whereof raised the King of Scots from that Castle, from whence he
fled and besieged Alnwic, and sent from thence Earl Duncan, the Earl of Anegus,
and Richard de Morvill, with almost the whole Army, to harass, pillage, and
burn the Countries round about; His Army barbarously burns and wastes the
Northern Countries.
which Orders they executed with barbarous, and more than inhumane Butcheries
and Cruelties (if we believe these Historians.) Yorkshire Army being informed
of his Retreat from Prudhou, and that he had Ibidem, p. 55. a. He besieges
Alnwic.
besieged Alnwic, and sent most of his Army from him, they make toward him
with mighty speed: and on a sudden came before Alnwic, where they found him
secure, sporting with his Soldiers, and fearing nothing, for when he saw them
afar off, he thought they had been his own Army under Earl Duncan: but when
they set upon him, And before it is surprised and taken.
and took him Prisoner, his Soldiers fled; With him they took Richard or Lisle,
Henry Revel, Ralph de Ver, Jordan a Flemming, Waldeuf Fitz-Baldwin de Bicre,
and Richard Malus Juuellus. This was done on the Thirteenth day of July.

On the same day Ibidem.
Hugh Earl of Bar, the Nephew of Hugh Bishop of Durham, landed at Hertlepole,
with forty Knights from France, The Bishop of Durham hearing the King of Scots
was taken Prisoner, sent back the Flemmings ^e had retained. He puts the
Knights or Horse into Alverton Ca^le.
and 500 Flemmings, for whom the Bishop had sent; but when he heard the King of
Scots was taken Prisoner, he remanded the Flemmings, giving them forty days Pay
according to Contract, but retained Earl H^gh and his Knights, and delivered to
them his Castle of Alverton, which they were to defend.

Huctred the Son of Ibidem. Huctred Prince of Galway rejects the Government of
the King of Scots.

Expels his Officers out of his Country. Kills all the English and Fr. he could
take. Destroys the Fortress the King of Scots had raised.


Fergus, Prince of the Country of Galway, and his Brother Gilbert, so soon as
they heard their Lord the Scots was taken, with their Galwalens returned home,
and expelled out of Galway all the Bailiffs and Ministers, or Keepers, the King
of Scotland had imposed on them, and killed all the English and French they
could apprehend: all the Fortresses and Munitions the King of Scots had built,
and raised in their Country, they besieged, took, and destroyed, and put to the
Sword such of the Defendents as fell into their hands.

While these things were done in the Ibid. b. Norwich fired. The Soldiers from
Leycester fight with the Burgesses and Soldiers of Northampton, and beat them,
etc.
North, Earl Hugh Bigot came with his Flemmings to Norwich, and fired it; and
presently after Whitsunday, Anschelil Mallore, the Constable of Leicester, went
with his Soldiers to the Kings Town of Northampton, and the Burgesses with the
Soldiers they had within, went out to meet them; they fought, and the
Leycestrians were Victors, carrying away with them 200 Prisoners, and a great
Booty.

At the same Ibidem. Geofry Elect of York destroys the Fortress in the Isle of
Axholm.
time Geofry the Kings Base Son, Elect of Lincoln, called together the Forces
of Lincolnshire, and besieged the Fortress Roger Mowbray had built in the Isle
of Axholm, took it in few days, and demolished it; and as he was going to
assist the Leycestrians, he was taken by the Country People at a place called
Claye.

So soon as Geofry Ibidem. The Castle of Massarch taken.
Elect of Lincoln had taken and destroyed this Castle, he joined himself to the
Archbishop of York, and they Roger Mowbray's Castle of Massarch, and took it
with many Knights and Servants in it; and it was delivered into the Custody of
the Archbishop of York. While these Bishops Ibidem. Nottingham plundered and
burnt.
were busy in Yorkshire, Robert Earl of Ferrers, with the Soldiers of
Leycester, came very early in the Morning to Nottingham, the Kings Town,
whereof Reginald de Lucy was Governor, which they presently took without
difficulty, and burnt it, killed the Burgesses, and carried many away Captive,
and what Prey they could get.

Toward Ibidem, p. 56. b. Huntington Castle besieged.

The Town burnt.

The Earldom of Huntington claimed in the Kings Court.


Midsummer Richard de Lucy besieged Huntingdon Castle; the Garrison had burnt
the Town before his coming; Richard de Lucy built a Fortress before the Gates
of the Castle, so as none of the Garrison could go out with safety, and by the
Kings Command, put it into the hands of Earl Simon, who claimed the County of
Huntingdon in the Kings Court, as his Inheritance: which the King granted to
him, if he could get it.

At Ibid. and p. 57. a. The young King of England, and Philip Earl of Flanders
come with a great Army to Gravelin, Intending to come for England.
Midsummer the young King, and Philip Earl of Flanders, at the Instigation of
the King of France, and the Request of the Earls, and Barons of England, came
with a great Army to Gravelin in Flanders, where there were Ships ready to
Transport them. In the mean while the old King was with his Army in Poictou,
and subdued many Forts and Castles, The old King subdues Saints, takes many
Castles and Forts in Poictou.
and at length came to the City of Saints, entered it and took two Towers,
whereof one was called the great Tower, wherein were many Knights, and
Esquires, or Servientes; He likewise besieged the Cathedral, which was
fortified and Victualled against him, and within few days possessed himself of
that, where he took also many Knights and Servants; afterward he returned into
Anjou, about St. Barnaby he took Ancena, He wastes that Country, extirpates the
Vines, and Fruit Trees.
Guininon de Ancena, and built there a strong Fortress, and placed a Garrison in
it; After this he wasted the whole Province, and extirpated the Vines, and
Fruit Trees, and then returned into Normandy.

The young Ibidem, p. 57. a. Hoved f. 308. b. n. 20. The young King and Earl of
Flanders Wind-bound. The old King Lands at Portsmouth.
King, and the Earl of Flanders were yet at Gravelin, detained with contrary
Winds; King Henry the Father, to oppose, and bring to nothing what they might
do in England, he Barfleu, and landed at Southampton the Eighth of July, with
both the Queens, the Brabanters, and his Prisoners, the Earls of Leycester and
Chester; From thence he went toward Canterbury, and so soon as he saw the
Cathedral there, where Archbishop Thomas was buried, he behaved himself, as
will be related afterward. His Devotion, or Submission, and Penance there
ended, He besieged and took Huntington.
he moved with his Army toward Huntington, and besieged it, and forced it to
surrender on the Twenty first of July, upon Mercy, saving the Lives

From thence the King marched Ibidem, and Ben. Abb. p. 27. b. He marches to
Framingham, Earl Hugh Bigot delivers that and Bungey Castle to him.

The Bishop of Durham delivers his Castles.

The Constables of the Earl of Leicester delivers his Castles. Roger de Mowbray
and Earl Ferrers deliver their Castles.


with his Army toward Framingham Castle, where Hugh Bigot was with a great
Force of Flemmings, and pitched his Tents before it, and on the Morrow, on the
Twenty fifth of August, the Earl came, and made Peace with the King, and
delivered his Castles of Framingham and Bungey, and Flemmings might depart
home; From thence the King went to Northampton, where came to him the Bishop of
Durham, and delivered him that Castle, the Castles of Norham and Alverton, and
he scarce could obtain of the King, that Hugh Earl of Bar his Nephew, and the
Soldiers or Knights that came with him out of France, should return from whence
they came. And on the same day, the Thirty first of July, came to him Ansketil
Mallore, and William de Diva, Constables of the Earl of Leycester, and rendered
the Castles of Leycester, Montsorrel, Groby; and the same day came to him Roger
Mulbray, or Mowbray, and rendered his Castle of Treske; and then also came the
Earl of Ferrers, and delivered his Castles of Stutesbury, and Duffeld.

While Ibidem, p. 58. a. b. Hoved. ibid. n. 40. The young King and Earl of
Flanders recalled from Gravelin. Roven besieged.

The old King Lands at Barsleu in Normandy.


these things were doing in England, the King of France recalled the young King
and Earl of Flanders from the Sea Coast, and with a great Army besieged Roven,
but prevailed little Normandy, that heartily loved Henry the Father, put
themselves into the City, and courageously defended it. This news coming to
King Henry the elder, his Affairs in England being in a great measure settled,
with great speed he went to Portsmouth, and on the Eighth of August, being
Friday, landed at Barfleu in Normandy, and carried with him his Brabanters, and
One thousand Welsh; With him he also carried William King of Scots, the Earls
of Leycester, and Chester, and first imprisoned them at Caen, and afterward at
Falais. On Sunday next he came to Roven, the next Morning early he sent the
Welsh beyond the River Seyn, to search the Woods on that side of the Town,
where the King of France was with his Army, they met with forty Wagons laded
with Wine and Victuals from France, The Welsh take a French Convoy of Wine and
Victuals.
the Drivers and Convoy fled, the Welsh pursued and took some, and killed
others, and returning to their Prize, they broke the Wagons, and staved the
France and his Army, they thought of nothing but slight. The King of England in
the mean time cleared the Gates the Citizens had stopped up, and marching out,
filled up the Ditch which was drawn between the King of France his Army, and
the City. The King of France then Commanded, That his Stone-Casting, and other
Warlike Engines should be broken, and burnt; He also Commanded his Soldiers to
Arm. The King of England came up to his Tents with his Soldiers, or Knights,
and their Servants; and the King of France, his Knights, and Servants, or
Esquires, came out of their Tents, and charged furiously the English, The
English beat the French.
who took and wounded many of them, and killed most of their Horses. Next
Morning William Archbishop of Sens, and Theobald Earl of Blois, came to the
King of England, and asked Leave that the King of France might safely Retreat
with his Army to Malhauny, The Siege raised.
upon Condition he came next day to Treat with the King England; and that he
should do so, they both obliged themselves by their Faiths and Oaths; and so
the King of France departed with his Army to the place appointed, and there
staid; but about Midnight, The King of France regards not his Promise. An. Do.
1174.
he privately caused his Soldiers to march, and they halted not until they came
into France: not regarding the Faith and Oaths of the Archbishop or Earl, by
which for his advantage they had obliged themselves. This Retreat of the King
of France happened on the Fourteenth of August.

On the day following the Archbishop and Earl came again Ibidem, p. 58. b. and
p. 59. a.
to King Henry the Father, and propounded a Colloquium, That was the word as
much used in the old Historians, French and English, as Concilium was for a
Parliament.

Richard Earl of Poictou Rebels against his Father. He flies before his Father,
and leaves his Castles and Fortresses. He casts himself at his Fathers Feet,
and begs Pardon.


Conference or Treaty between him and the King of France at Gisers, upon the
Feast of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, or Eighth of September; at which time
they met, but could not agree: but appointed another Colloquium or Treaty on
Michaelmass-day, between Tours and Ambois, upon Condition, that the King of
England the mean while might Poictou, to subdue his Son Richard, they swearing,
That neither the King of France, nor the youg King, nor any for them, or on
their Party, should give, or send him Relief. When he came into Poictou, his
Son Richard dare not stand him, but fled from every place where he thought he
would come, and relinquished the Castles, and Fortresses he had formerly taken;
and when he heard the King of France and his Brother, had made Truce with the
King his Father, Ibidem, p. 59. a. Hoved. f. 309. a. n. 30, 40, 50. Who
forgives him.
This Peace was made between his Father and him on the Twenty third of
September. Richard went with his Father to meet the King of France, and his
Brother, that he might inform them what he had done. On Michaelmass-day all
Parties met between Tours and Ambois, according to Agreement, and the day
following the young King and his Brothers, All his Rebellious Sons submit to
his Mercy.
according to the Advice of the King of France, submitted themselves to their
Fathers Mercy, and made with him Articles of Peace, and confirmed them with
their Seals.

I. The young King Append. n. 35. Articles of Peace between old King Henry and
his Sons.
Henry, and his Brothers Richard, and should return to the Obedience of their
Father, notwithstanding any Oaths (of which they were to be absolved) they had
made between themselves, or with others, against him or his Men.

II. That all their Men (Tenants in Military Service, or such as had otherwise
done Homage to them) and Barons, (such as held immediately of them their
Baronies) that had for their sakes receded from the Fidelity they ought to
their Father, were by them to be freed, and

III. The King, his Men, and Barons were to re-have, and possess all their
Lands, Castles, etc. which they had fifteen days before the Rupture between
Father and Sons. Likewise the Kings Barons and Men, that left him, and followed
his Sons, were to have again all their Lands,

IV. The King the Father remitted all Evil Will toward his Barons and Men
which left him, so as for that he would do them no Evil, so long as they served
him faithfully, as their Liege Lord. The like the young King remitted to all
Clerks and Laics which were in his Fathers

V. By this Concord the King was to give his Son Henry two convenient Castles
in Normandy, by his own appointment, and 15000 l. yearly of Anjou Money. To his
Son Richard two convenient Receptacles or Places of Receipt in Poictou, so as no
damage might accrue to his Father from them, and in Money half the Revenue of
Poictou. To his Son Geofry he gave in Money half the Fortune or Revenue he was
to have by his Marriage of Earl Conans Daughter, and after he was Married Pope)
the whole Revenue, as Earl Conan had directed.

VI. The Prisoners that had Compounded, and made their Compos^tions with the
King, (that is) William King of Scotland, the Earls of Leicester and Chester,
and Ralph of Fougeres, and their Pledges, were exempted out of this Concord.
But the other Prisoners on both sides were to be delivered, and set free, yet
so, as the King should

VII. The Castles that were fortified in the time of the War, were to be in the
same Condition they had been before the War.

VIII. That Henry the young King should firmly observe the Donation made by his
Father to his Brother John; That is to say, One thousand Pounds yearly out of
his Demeasns and Escheats in England, the Castle of Nottingham with the County,
the Castle of Malborough, with its Appurtenances; In Normandy, One thousand
Pounds by the year of Anjou Money, and two Castles, such as his Father would
appoint; In Anjou, and the Lands that were the Earls of Anjou, One thousand
Pounds yearly of Anjou Money, and one Castle; and in Turain one Main one Castle.

IX. The King for the love of his Son, pardoned all forfeitures of such as left
him, and adhered to his Son, so as they were not to answer for them; but for
Death, Treason, and the loss of a Member, they were to answer according to the
Judgment and Custom of the Land; If any one had forfeited any thing before the
War, he was to stand to Or the Law.
Judgment for that; They that were engaged in any Plea or Suit, the

X. King Henry the Son gave his Father Security, that he would keep this
Concord; As also he and his Brothers gave him Security, that they would not
exact more of him against his Will, than what he had given, and that they would
never withdraw their Services from him. Richard and Geofry became his Men,
(that is, did Homage to him); Henry would have done it likewise, but his Father
would not receive it, because he was a King, yet he took Security of him.

At the same time Ben. Abb. p. 60. b. Gilbert kills his Brother Vctred Prince
of Galway.
there was a Dissension between Vctred and Gilbert the Sons of Fergus, who
should Rule in the Country of Galway, so that they both contrived, and laid
Designs to kill each other. Gilbert called his Men together, and Consulted with
them how they Malcolm not long after sets upon the Island in which Vctred
Resided, and took him, and commanded he should be slain, first having ordered
he should be Emasculated, Roger Hoveden and Robert de Vaus sent to Treat with
him.
and have his Eyes pulled out. The King not knowing this, sent one of his
Clerks, by name Roger de Hoveden, to Robert de Vaus Governor of Carlisle, that
they two might go to the two Brothers aforesaid, and endeavor to bring them
into his Service. When they came to Discourse with Gilbert and the Galwegians,
about November, they offered them, to the use of the King, King Henry hearing
of the Murder of Vctred refuses Peace with the Galw^gians.
2000 Marks of Silver, and 500 Cows, and 500 Hogs, as a yearly Rent, upon
Condition he would receive them into his Protection, and secure them from the
Servitude of the King of Scots. But these Messengers would conclude nothing,
until they spoke with the King of England, who when he had heard how Vctred his
Kinsman was slain, he would make no Peace with the Galwegians.

At Christmas Ibidem, p. 61. b. and 62. a. He sends his Son Richard into
Poictou, to demolish the Castles and Fortresses there, that had been fortified
against him.
the King was at Argentom in Normandy, and from thence sent his Son Richard
into Poictou, to reduce the Castles of his Earls and Barons, which they had
fortified against him, to the same Condition they were in before the War, and
to demolish such as he thought sit, and by his Letters Ordered the Army of
Poictou, his Bailiffs, and Ministers, to be assistant to him. On the Second of
February the two English Kings were at Man's, and from thence came into
Normandy, and the Twenty fourth of that Month they had a Conference with the
King of France at Gisors, and went from thence to Roven, where he left his Son,
and went on into Anjou, and fortified his own Castles, and demolished some
others, and the Residue he reduced to the same State they were in before the
War; and from thence came to Caen in Normandy, and sent for his Son to England:
at first he refused, The young King unwilling to go with his Father into
Normandy.
upon the suggestions of People, That if his Father got him into England, he
would put him in Prison; at length his Father plying him with many Messengers
and good words, so wrought upon him, as he came to him to Bure, and there
before the Archbishop of Roven, and Henry Bishop of Baieux, and William Earl
of Magnavill, and Richard Humet Constable of Normandy, and other the Kings
Friends and great Officers, threw himself with Tears at his Fathers Feet, Young
King Henry does Homage to his Father.
France, while he went to Valoingues, and from thence to Cherbourgh, where his
Son came to him; and from thence they both went to Caen to meet Philip Earl of
Flanders, They both come for England.
who delivered up the Chart of the Donation made to him by the England before
the War. From Caen they went to Barfleu, and arrived at Portsmouth on the Ninth
of May. But before his coming over he sent his Son Geofry into Britany, An. Do.
1175. The Castles and Fortresses demolished in Britany.
and commanded him to demolish the Castles and Fortresses that had been
fortified against him in that Dukedom.

The King Ibidem, p. 65. b. and 66. b. The King impleads the Earl of
Gloucester, and all the Earls, Barons, Clerks, and Laics in England.
impleaded the Earl of Gloucester, for that he Bristol, and kept it in his
hands during the time of the War; and he willing to satisfy the King,
delivered him the Tower. He likewise impleaded all the Earls, Barons, Clerks,
and Laics of England concerning their Forfeitures in his Forests, and for
Hunting in the time of War, and caused them all to be Fined, notwithstanding
Richard de Lucy Justitiary of England appeared on their behalf, and vouched the
Kings Mandate from beyond Sea, by which he was empowered to grant them etc.

On the Tenth of August Hoved. f. 311. b. n. 30, 40. Ben. Abb p. 66. b. 67. a.
and b. Both Kings meet at York where the King of Scotland, and David his
Brother did Homage to them
both Kings were at York, where William King of Scotland, and David his
Brother, Cum universis fere Episcopis, Abbatibus, and aliis Magnatibus terrarum
suarum, says Hoveden, with almost all the Bishops, Abbats, and great Men of his
Land. Abbat Bennet says, That the King of Scots met him there, and secum
adduxit omnes Episcopos, Comites, Barons, Milites, and brought with him all
his Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, and Franc-Tenents, or such as held by
Military Service from the greatest to the least. The Business of this great
Meeting was to renew the Peace and Agreement the King of Scots had made with
the King of England, when he was his Prisoner at Falais in Normandy. The Effect
where f was.

1. ^That the King of Scotland and David his Brother did Homage to King Henry
for all the Territories they were possessed of, namely, Scotland and Galway,
and did Swear Allegiance and Fealty to him against all Men. The like they did
to Henry his Son, saving their ^Allegiance and Fealty to his Father.

The Bishops and Abbats of Scot and swear Allegiance and Fealty to the Kings of
England and their Heirs.
2. ^In like manner Richard Bishop of St. Andrews, Joscelin Bishop of Glasco,
Richard Bishop of Dunkeld, Christian Bishop of Galway, Andrew Bishop of Ca^nes,
Simon de Thoum Bishop of Murrey, the Abbat of Kelzan, Lauren^e Abbat of Malros,
and the Abbat of Newbottle; and besides those all the Abbats of Scotland did
Swear Allegiance and Fealty, by the Command of the King ^of Scotland, to both
Kings of England, and their Heirs for ever.

3. ^The same Bishops swear, That if the King of Scotland observed not this
Agreement with the King of England, they would They swear Subjection to the
Church of England.
They also Swear, they would continue the same Subjection to the Church of
England their Predecessors ^were used to observe, or such Subjection as was due
unto it.

4. The Earls and Barons of Scotland swear Allegiance to both the King and his
Son Henry.
^In like manner the Earls and Barons, by Command of the King of Scotland, did
Homage, and swear Allegiance and Fealty to both Kings against all Men, viz.
Earl Dun^can, the Earl of Angus, and Earl Waldef; and they swear, That if the
King of Scotland should recede from the Agreement, they would assist the King
of England against him, until he made satisfaction according ^to his Will.

The Agreement between the King of England and Scotland Sealed.

Several Cautionary Towns and Castles put into the King of England's hands.


And then the King of England caused the Agreement between him and the King of
Scotland to be read before them all, and to be Confirmed with his Seal and the
Seal of his Brother David; which Appendix, n. 167. But besides their Seals, he
had for his Security the Castles of Rokesburgh, Berwick, Gedwurth, Edinburgh,
and Sterling, put into his Hands, which were to be maintained by a
proportionable Allowance out of the Revenue of the King of Scotland, by
assignment of the King of England.

After Ibidem, p 69. a. The King of England gives leave to the King of Scots to
go into Galway.
the dispatch of this great Affair at York, King Henry gave leave to the King
of Scots to march with his Army into Galway, Gilbert Son to Fergus, that had
receded from his Fealty, and wickedly slain his Brother Vctred.

On the Twenty fifth of January Hoved. f. 313. a. n. 50. The King holds a
Council at Northampton.
the King held a great Council at Northampton, with the King his Son, and with
the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons, concerning the Statutes and Laws
of the Kingdom: and by common Advice of them all divided it into six parts,
into every one of which he sent three Justices;

I.
Hugh de Ibid. b.
Cressi. Walter Fitz-Robert. Robert Mantel.
Norfolk. Suffolk. Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire. Bedfordshire.
Buckinghamshire. Essex. Hertfordshire.

II.
Hugh de Gundevill. William Fitz-Ralph. William Basset.
Lincolnshire. Nottinghamshire. Derbyshire. Staffordshire. Warwickshire.
Northamptonshire. Leicestershire.

III.
Robert Fitz-Bernard. Richard Giffard. Rogert Fitz-R^infray.
Kent. Surry. Hampshire. Sussex. Berkshire. Oxfordshire.

IV.
William Fitz-Stephen. Bertram de Verdun. Turstan Fitz-Simon.
Herefordshire. Gloucestershire. Worcestershire. Shropshire.

V.
Ralph Fitz-Stephen. William Ruffus. Gilbert Pipard.
Wiltshire. Dorsetshire. Sumersetshire. Devonshire, and Cornwall.

VI.
Robert de Vaus. Ranulp de Glanvill. Robert Pikenot.
Yorkshire. Richmundshire. Lancastershire. Coupland. Westm^rland.
Northumberland. Cumberland.

And then Ibidem, n. 40. The King Swears his Justices to observe his Statutes.
the King caused all these Justices to Swear, they would truly and justly,
without any Artifice, keep the underwritten Statutes, and cause them to be kept
inviolably by his Subjects.

The Assizes or Statutes of King Henry made at Clarendon, Northampton.
I.
The Trial by Water Ordeal Established.
^IF any one was Accused before the Kings Justices, of Murder, Theft, or Robery,
or for receiving such Malefactors, or of Forgery, or Malicious Burning of
Houses, by the Oaths of twelve Knights of the Hundred, and if there were not
Knights present, Water, or Water Ordeal; and if he appears Guilty, let one Foot
be cut off; And at Northampton it was added, for the Rigor of Justice, That he
should besides his Foot, have his Right Hand cut off, and to abjure the
Kingdom, and leave it within forty days. If he be Innocent, let him find
Pledges and Water, he was to go out of the Kingdom within forty days, and carry
his Goods with him, (saving the Right of his Lords) and to be at the Kings
pleasure for abjuring the Kingdom. This Statute shall take place from the time
the Assise or Statutes were made at Anno Dom. 1164. 10 Hen. 2.
Clarendon, until this time, and as much longer as the King pleases

II.
No Strangers to be lodged above one Night in a House, and to depart in the day
time.
^It shall not be Lawful for any Man in Burgh or Town to Lodge

III.
No one can deny any Felony he has confessed before the Justices, or what he
has confessed before he be apprehended.
^ Si quis saisitus de Murdro, vel de Latrocinio, vel Roberia, vel falsoneria,
If any one be apprehended for Murder, or Theft, or Robery, or Forgery, or any
other Felony he has committed, and confesses it before the Hundredary, or
Chief Magistrate of the Hundred or Burgh, and before Lawful Men, he cannot deny
that afterward before the Justices. Et si idem sine saisina coram eis aliquid
ejusmodi recognoverit, etc. And if any one without being apprehended shall
confess or acknowledge any such Crimes before such Persons, he ^cannot deny it
before the Justices.

IV.
^ Si quit obierit Francus Tenens, etc. If any Franc-Tenent dies, Heirs to
inherit what the Father died seiz^d of, and to satisfy Legacies.

If un^r Age, the Lord o^ the Fee to receive his Homage and Wardship. The
Relict to have her Dower.


in Tali saisina qualem pater suus habuit, etc. in such Possession as their
Father had of his Fee in his Life time, and they shall have his Catals or
Goods, and satisfy the Devise, or Legacies of the Defunct; and afterward they
shall repair to the Lord, and satisfy him for his Relief, and do all other
things they ought concerning their Fee; and if the Heir be under Age, the Lord
may receive his Homage, and have the Wardship of him so long as he ought; other
Lords (if he have any) may receive (and inde attaintus fuerit)

V.
^The Kings Justices shall cause a Recognition to be made of Dissaisins, from
the precise time the King came into England, after he ^made Peace with the King
his Son.

VI.
^The Justices shall Administer the Oath of Fealty to the King by the Close of
eight days after Easter, The Oath of Fealty to be Administered to all Persons
within eight days after Easter or Whitsunday; All that refuse to be looked on
as the Kings Enemies.
or at furthest eight days after Whitsunday, to all Earls, Barons, Knights,
Free-Tenents, and also to Rusticks or Husbandmen, who will stay in the Kingdom,
and he that will not take the Oath of Fealty, shall be taken as the Kings
Enemy; and the Justices have power to command all such as have

VII.
^The Justices shall do all manner of Law and Right belonging to the King, or
his Crown, by his Writ, The Justices empowered to do all manner of Right in the
Kings absence. If the Controversy be weighty to be referred to the King or his
Viceroy.
or the Writ of his Viceroys in his absence, concerning half a Knights Fee or
under, unless

VIII.
^ Faciant etiam Assisa sometimes signifies Mulcta.

The Justices to inflict Punishment upon Malefactors by the Kings appointment.


Assisam de Latronibus iniquis and Malefactoribus terrae, quae assisa est per
Consilium Regis, filii sui, and Hominum suorum, per quos ituri sunt Comitatus.
The Justices also shall inflict such Punishment upon Thieves and wicked
Malefactors in those Counties they pass through, which was set and appointed by
Direction

IX.
The Justices to take care that Castles be demolished and destroyed.
^The Justices shall take care, that the Castles that are demolished, be
thoroughly demolished, and that such as are to be destroyed be levelled with the
Ground; and unless they do this, the King will ^have them judged in his Court
as Contemners of his Precept.

X.
'The Justices shall enquire of Escheats, of Churches, Lands, 'and Women that
are in the Kings Donation.

XI.
The Kings Bailiff to answer Perquisites as well as set Rents.
^The Kings Bailiffs shall answer at the Exchequer, as well for the Perquisites,
as the set Rents in their Bayliwicks, except such as ^belong to the Sheriff and
his Office.

XII.
^The Justices shall enquire of Castle-Guards, and from whom, and how much, and
where they are due, and shall inform the King

XIII.
^A Thief when he is taken is to be committed to the Sheriff, if the Sheriff be
not near, he is to be carried to the next Castellan, or Constable of a Castle,
and he is to keep him until he delivers him ^to the Sheriff.

XIV.
Those that flee out of the Land to be Outlawed, if they return not within an
appointed time.
^The Justices shall cause Enquiry to be made, by the Custom of the Land, for
such as are fled or gone out of the Kingdom, and unless they will return within
an appointed time, and stand to Right in the Kings Court, they shall be
Outlawed, and their Names returned into the Exchequer at Easter and
Michaelmass, and from

In the Feast Hoved. f. 314. b. n. 40.
of Easter this year, young King Henry, and his Son Richard Earl of Poictou,
and Geofry Earl of Britany, were with their Father at Winchester, and after
that Solemnity, the three Sons with their Fathers leave passed into Normandy,
Young Henry with his Brothers go into Normandy. Richard with his Brother Henry
overcomes the Brabanters, and reduces them.
Richard forthwith went into Poictou, raised an Army, and fought with the
Brabanters, and overcame them, and by the assistance of his Brother King Henry,
he took many Towns and Castles, and forced the Submission of many Viscounts, or
Sheriffs, of Towns with small Territories, and Castles, in Poictou, and the
Places adjoining unto him.

Ib. f. 316. b. n. 10, 20. The King demolishes several Castles in England and
Normandy.
the King caused the Walls and Castle of Leicester to be demolished, as also
the Castles of Groby, Treske, Malesart, and the new Castle at Alverton, the
Castles of Framingham, and Bungey, and almost all the Castles of England and
Normandy that were fortified against him; The Castle of Pasci or Pacey in
Normandy he retained in his own hands, and placed a Garrison in it; as likewise
the Castle of Montsorrel, which was Sworn to be his own Propriety, by
Recognition of Lawful Men

About the beginning of October Ibidem, f. 317. a. n. 50. The King of Scot and
brings Fergus Prince of Galway to the King of England.
this year, William King of Scotland came into England to the King, and brought
with him Gilbert Son of Fergus Prince of Galway, who killed his Brother Vctred,
who did Homage to King Henry the Father, and swear Fealty to him against all
Men, and gave to the King to be restored to favor, or for his Peace, One
thousand Marks of Silver, and his Son Duncan

In a General Council at Ib. f. 320. a. n. 30. The King restores several
Noblemen to their Lands and D^gnities.
Northampton, soon after St. Hillary, or the Thirteenth of January, the King
restored Robert Earl of Leicester to all his Lands in England and beyond Sea,
which he had fifteen days before the War, except Pacey, and Montsorrel Castles;
Hugh Earl of Chester all the Lands he was possessed of at the same time; and to
William de Albeny, Son of William Earl of Arundel, the Earldom of Sussex.

Alfonsus Ibid. b. n. 30, 40, 50. An. Do. 1177. The Kings of Castile and
Navarre refer their differences to be determined by the King of England.
King of Castile, and Sanctius King of Navarre, after many Debates, and much
Wrangling, referred all their Claims and Controversies to be determined by the
King of England, and there were sent several Bishops, and Great Men, and choice
and able Persons, Proctors, and Advocates, to Allege and Answer for either of
them, and to receive the Judgment of the Court of England. With England between
Christmas and Lent, and the King summoned all the Bishops, Abbats, Priors,
Earls, and Barons to meet at London on the first Sunday in Lent; when they were
come together, the King ordered the Proctors and Advocates on both sides to
bring in their Claims and Allegations within three Ben. Ab. p. 89. a.
the Messengers before his Bishops, Earls, and Barons, to be there again, all
Excuses laid aside, upon Sunday following, to receive his Judgment. So that
this great Affair was determined in eight days. The Demands, Allegations, and
Pretenses on both sides, and the whole Process, with King Henry's Award are to
be found in Hoveden, fol. 320. b. n. 40, etc. See also the Judgment it self by
the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, which is very short, though the Kings
Exemplification of it under his is very much longer, Bromt. Col. 1124. n. 20.

The King Ibidem, p. 86. b. The King Summons his Noblemen and Knights in Capite
to follow him into Normandy.
Commanded this year all the Earls, Barons, and Knights of the Kingdom which
held of him in Capite, to be at London, well prepared with Horse and Arms,
fifteen days after Easter, Normandy, and stay with him a whole year beyond Sea,
in his Service at their own Charges.

At Easter the Ibidem, p. 96. b. Anno Dom. 1177. The King with his Earls and
Barons go in Pilgrimage to St. Edmunds-Bury, to Ely, and Gaidington.
King with his Earls and Barons kept his Court at Wy in Kent, and after the
Solemnity went to London, and from thence in Pilgrimage (in perigrinatione) to
St. Edmund the King and Martyr, (to the Monastery at St. Edmunds-Bury) where he
was the Sunday after Easter; The next day he went to Ely, in Pilgrimage Audry,
and from thence he went to Perhaps Gayton in Cheshire, or Gaiton in
Northamptonshire, as Gervase of Canterbury says, Col. 1522 l. 3.
Gaidington, or Gaitintune, where many Welsh flocked about him, and swear
Fealty to him. Ibidem.
Hither by his Command came to him Roger Archbishop of York, Reginald Bishop
of Bath, John Bishop of Norwich, and Adam Bishop of St. Asaph, and many Earls
and Barons of the Kingdom, to Treat of the Peace and Settlement thereof;
Ibidem, p. 97. a. The Lords and Knights of the Kingdom come to Windsor, to go
where the King should Command. The King removes several Constables of Castles,
and places others in their room.
and when they had Treated some time there, the King removed to Windsor, and
the Archbishop, and other Bishops with him, where England, provided with Horse
and Arms to go whether the King should Command. And when they had Treated
further there about the Peace and Establishment of the Kingdom, by Advice of
his Bishops, Earls, and Barons, he removed the Constables of several Castles in
the North of England, and made Knights which were of his own private Family,
Constables. William Stutevill he made Keeper of the Castle of Rokesburgh, and
Roger Stutevill of the Castle of Edinburgh, William Nevill of the Castle of
Norham, and Roger Archbishop of York of the Castle of Scarburgh, and Geofry
Nevill of the Castle of Berwick, and Roger Comers of the Tower of Durham, which
the King took from Ibidem, and Hoved f. 323. b. n. 20.
Hugh Bishop of Durham because he served him falsely in the time of War; and
for that reason, and that it might stand, and not be demolished, and for the
Kings Peace, and that his Son Henry de Puteaco, or Pudsey, might enjoy the
Manner of Wicton with its Appurtenances, the Bishop gave

From Windsor Ben. Abb. p. 97. b. The King Commands the Welsh Kings to meet him
at Oxford. Who with many other Noblemen did Homage to him.
the King went to Oxford, where he had Commanded the Welsh Kings, and the most
Potent Men of Wales to meet him, viz. Rese the Son of Griffin King of
South Wales, David Son of Owen King of North Wales, Cadwalan King of Delwain,
Owen de Kevilian, Griffin de Bromfield, Madoc Son of Gervet Chone, Wales, who
all did Homage, and swear Fealty to him against all Men, and that they would
keep Peace with him and his Kingdom. To King David who had Married King Henry's
Sister, he gave the Land of Ellesmar, and to King Rese the Land of Merionith.
These things F. 323. b. n. 20, 30.
Hoveden says were done in a General Council at Oxford, and that there King
Henry made his Son John King of Ireland, etc. More of which afterward.

On the Sunday before Ben. Abb. p. 98. b. 99. a. The Tenants in Capite attend
the King with Horse and Arms.
Ascension-day the King was at Winchester, where by his Precept all the Earls,
Barons, and almost all the Knights or Soldiers that held of him in Capite, came
to him, prepared with Horse and Arms, to know his Commands; for at that time he
had caused most of the Ships of England and Normandy to be ready at Portsmouth
and Southampton to Transport them with the King. On Ascension-day the King gave
them leave to go Home, Winchester again in the Octaves of St. John Baptist,
(which is the first of July) and then to execute his Commands.

The King Ibidem, p. 103. a. He defers his passing into Normandy with his
Tenants in Capite, until he sent to the King of France about the Contracts of
Marriage made between their Children
was at Winchester at the time appointed, and his Tenants in Capite ready to
pass into Normandy with him, but deferred his Voyage, until the Envoys he had
sent to the King of France, Ibidem, p. 99. b.
to know whether he would stand to his Bargain and Contract, concerning his two
Daughters Margaret and Alice, and his two Sons Henry and Richard, and whether
he would give them the Lands he promised them in Marriage, were returned. They
came Ibidem, p. 104. a. The King of France refuses to stand to his part of the
Bargain, but would force the King of England to make good his, and procures the
Pop^s Legate to threaten an Interdict. The King of England by ^is Bishops
Appeals from the Legate to the Pope.
not themselves, but by special Messengers, let the King know the effect of
their Negotiation with the King of France; which was, That the King of France
would part with no Land, and yet expected his Son Richard Earl of Poictou
should Marry his Daughter Alice, and if he did not, the Popes Legate threatened,
and was ready to put all his Dominions, as well on one side of the Sea as the
other, under an viz. Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, Geofry of Ely,
Bartholomew of Exceter, and John Bishop of Chichester, and other Wise Men of
his Kingdom, that were then with him, what he should do in this matter. They
Counseled the King, by the Bishops that were there, to Appeal to Pope
Alexander against his Legate, which they did, and put the King, themselves, and
the whole Kingdom under his Protection; and the York, that he, and his Province
should make the same Appeal, as the Archbishop of Canterbury had done in his
Province. This was about the Twelfth of July.

Notwithstanding this Hoved. f. 325. b. n. 30.
Appeal, the King about the middle of Ben. Abb. p. 107. b. He passes with his
Army over Sea.
August passed into Normandy from Portsmouth, and almost all the Earls, Barons,
and Knights of England followed him. On the Twenty first of Hoved. ut supra.
The Covenants of Marriage between the Children of the two Kings.

Upon Conference they agree.


September the two Kings came to a Conference at Yur^, in presence of the
Legate, and the great Men of both England gave his Faith, that Richard his Son
Earl of Poictou should take Alice, Daughter of the King of France, to Wife, if
her Father would give him with her in Marriage the City of Bourges, with its
Appurtenances, as it was Covenanted between them; and to Henry his Son all the
French Veuxin, that is, all the Land between Gisors and Pontoise, which he
promised to give him in Marriage with his Daughter. And because the King of
France would not perform these things, he would not permit his Son Richard to
Marry his Daughter Alice; Yet in this Conference, by Advice of the Cardinal and
Legate, and the Princes of both Kingdoms, there was Amity and final Concord made
between them. Benedict the Abbat P. 108. a.
says, That King Henry granted that his Son Richard should He was Affianced to
her, but never Married.
Marry the Daughter of the King of France, and so they made Peace, which was
confirmed by their Faith, Oaths, and Seals. Which was to this Ibidem.
purpose.

I. They Agreed Append. n. ^6. Articles of Agreement between the two Kings.
to take upon them the Cross, and to together to Jerusalem against the Infidels.

II. That if either were injured or affronted, they should assist each other.

III. That all manner of Discord might be cut off between them, they granted
each to other, that from thence forward, neither of them Avergn, and except the
Fee of Castle-Ralph, and the small Fees, and Divises, or Limits of Lands in
Berry: about which, if they could not Agree between themselves, there were
three Barons, and three Bishops named on either part, who were to determine of
their Right according to the Oaths of such Laymen as understood and knew it,
and they to stand to their Determination.

IV. That if either of them should die in their Journey, the other should have
the Management of the Men, and Money, and whole Affair.

V. That if they should both die in the Journey, they were before they set
forth to choose such of their honest and faithful Men or Vassals (de probis and
fidelibus hominibus nostris) to whom they should

VI. They were to appoint such Governors of their Dominions in their absence,
as in all Difficulties should assist one another.

VII. That Tradesmen, Merchants, and all Men, as well Clerks as

This Treaty Hoved. f. 326. a. n. 50, etc. Ben. Ab. p 109. b. The Statute of
Verneul so called.
being ended, the King of England went to Verneul, and there upon the Petition
of the Good Men of Grammont, he Ordained in the presence of Richard Bishops of
Winchester, Henry Bishop of Bayeux, Giles Bishop of Eureux, Froger Bishop of
Sees, and in presence of Simon Earl of Eureux, and Robert Earl of Leicester,
and before many other Earls and Barons of his Kingdom, That no Man presume to
take the Goods of a Vassal for the Debt of his Lords, (nequis pro Domini debito
res hominis capere praesumat) unless the Vassal was Pledge or Surety for the
Debt of his Lord; but the Rents of Vassals, which they are to pay to their
Lords, shall be paid to their Lords Creditors, not to the Lords.

The other proper Goods of Vassals shall be in peace, neither shall it (namtire
non liceat) or take them for the Debts of their Lords.

This Statute, and this Custom, (Hoc Statutum, and Consuetudinem hanc, etc.)
the King Ordained should be firm and general in all his Towns, and every where
in his Dominions, viz. in Normandy, Aquitan, Anjou, Main, Turain, and Britany;
and that it might be stable, permanent, and firmly observed and kept, it was
Written and Confirmed with his Seal.

After this, the King Ibidem, 110. a. The King of England summons his Earls and
Barons of Normandy to appear with Horse and Arms.
by his Writ summoned the Earls and Barons of Normandy, to meet him at
Argenton, on the Ninth of October, prepared with Horse and Arms for his
Service, and went to Alencon, and sent his Son Richard into Poictou to subdue
his

King Henry desirous to return into England, sent to Lewis King of France, and
obtained his Letters of Protection, in this Form. Hoved. f. 327. a. n. 30. An.
Do. 1178. The King of France gives the King of England Letters of Protection.
LEWIS King of France, to all whom these Presents shall come, Greeting; Know ye
that We have received into Our Custody all the Lands of Our Most Dear Brother
Henry King of England on this side the Sea, if he shall happen to pass into
England, or go on Pilgrimage, Baillivi sui.
Bailiffs or Officers shall Require Us, We shall truly, without Design, give
them our Counsel, and help, for the Defense and Protection of the same.

After his coming out of Ibidem. f. 331. a. n. 40. Geofry Earl of Anjou
Knighted by his Father.

His Military Exercise and Ambition.


Normandy into England, at Woodstock he Knighted his Son Geofry Earl of
Britany, who soon after passed into Normandy, and in the Confines of France and
that Country, was at a Torneament, or the Exercise of Feats of Arms, where
Henry and Richard had acquired great Honor and Renown in such Military
Exercises.

Peter of St. Agatha, Ibidem, b. n. 10. The King puts an Oath upon the Popes
Legate. An. Do. 1179.
the Popes Legate, came this year through England, to summon the Bishops and
Abbats of Scotland and Ireland to a General Council at Rome, but before he had
leave to pass through the Kingdom, he made Oath, not to do, or seek to do any
Injury Ibidem. f. 332. a. n. 50. And upon the Scottish and Irish Bishops and
Abbats. An. Do. 1179.
The same Oath the Scottish and Irish Bishops and Abbats took, before they had
passage given them to go this way with the Legate.

After Easter the King Ibidem, f. 337. a. n. 20. England divided into four
Circuits.
held a great Council at Windsor, and by the common Advice of his Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, and Barons, he divided England in four parts, and to every part
he appointed Wise Men to do Justice in the Land. After this manner.

I.
Richard Bishop of Winton. Richard the Kings Treasurer. Tho. Basset. Robert
Witefeld.
Hamshire Wiltshire. Gloucestershire. Dorsetshire. Sumersetshire. Devonshire.
Cornwall. Berkshire. Oxfordshire.

II.
Geofry Bishop of Ely. Nich. the Kings Chaplain. Gilbert Pipard. Reginald de
Wisbech the Kings Clerk. Geofry Hosee.
Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire. Northamptonshire. Leicestershire.
Warwickshire. Worcestershire. Herefordshire. Staffordshire. Shropshire.

III.
John Bishop of Norwich. Hugh Murdac the Kings Clerk. Michael Belet. Richard
Del Pec. Radulph Brito.
Norfolk. Suffolk. Essex. Hertfordshire. Middlesex. Kent. Surrey. Sussex.
Buckinghamshire. Bedfordshire.

IV.
Godfrey de Lucy. Johannes Cumin. Hugh de Gaerst. Ranulph de Glanvill. William
de Bendings. Alanus de Furnellis.
Nottinghamshire. Derbyshire. Yorkshire. Northumberland. Westmerland.
Cumberland. Lancaster.

The last six were appointed Ibidem, b. n. 20.
Justices in the Kings Court, to hear the Clamores populi, Clamor a common word
then for a Suit or Petition.
Clamours, or Business, and Suits of the People, and had the last seven
Counties assigned them.

This year Lewis King of Jo. Brom. Col. 1139. n. 40, 50.60, etc. An. Do. 1179.
The King of France calls together all his Bishops, Earls, and Barons, to Crown
his Son Philip at Rhemes.

His Son falls sick.

He had a Vision, by which he was admonished, for his Sons Recovery, to visit
the Martyr of Canterbury (so called.)


France cited all the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons of his Kingdom,
that they should without Excuse, be in the City of Rhemes, on the Assumption of
the Virgin Mary, (that is the Fifteenth of August) to Crown his Son Philip,
then Fifteen years old. They hastened to come as they ought to do; but just
before the time, his Son fell into a great Sickness, so as many despaired of
his Life, his Father grieved night and day, and was mightily afflicted for his
Son; Being thus without Comfort, Thomas the Martyr of Canterbury appeared to
him, and told him the Lord Jesus Christ had sent him his Servant to him, to let
him know, That if he believed, and with Contrition went to visit his Servant
Thomas the Martyr of Canterbury, his Son should recover his Health. He
discovered this Vision to his Friends, and asked their Advice, who told him it
was dangerous to pass by Sea into another Man's Country, Roger Hoveden is more
modest in this Story, and only says he was admonished by Divine Revelation.

He comes to Canterbury, Offers, and Prays at his Tomb.

Gives the Monks 100 Measures of Wine every year.

And grants them a Charter of many Privileges in France.


etc. The next Night the Martyr appeared the second and third time, and told
the same Story, and added Threats, if he went not quickly, and obeyed the
Command of God. He came, and the King of England met him at Dover on the Twenty
second day of August, and Conducted him to the Tomb of the Martyr; where the
King of France Prayed, and offered a great and precious Holy Trinity for ever
yearly, One hundred Measures of Wine, ( Centum Modios Vini) to be delivered
them at a certain place in France, without Charge; And for the Love of God, and
Holy Thomas the Martyr, he granted, that whatsoever the Monks should buy for
their own use in his Kingdom, should be free from all Toll, Custom, and
Exaction; and of these things he made them a Chart, which they received from
his Chancellor Ibid. Col. 1140. n. 30.
Hugh de Puteaco, (or Pudsey) Son to Hugh Bishop of Durham.

The third Hoved. f. 338. a. n. 10, 20. An. Do. 1179. His Son Philip recovers.
day after this Visit, King Henry Conducted him back to Dover, and from thence
the next day, which was the Twenty sixth of August, he passed into France; In
the mean time his Son Philip, by the Merits and Prayers of Blessed Thomas the
Martyr, recovered his former Health. Out of exceeding Joy, the King of France
by public Edict, Commanded all the Princes, or Rhemes on the Feast of
All Saints, to Crown his Son, The Princes and great Men of France summoned by
Edict to meet and Crown him at Rhemes on All-Saints-day.
and the Solemnity was then performed; Henry the young King of England, in
right of the Dukedom of Normandy, carrying before him, from his Chamber to the
Church, a Golden Crown, with which he was Crowned, and Philip Earl of Flanders
the Sword of the Kingdom: and the other Dukes, Earls, and Barons took their
places according to their several Offices; but King Lewis could not be there,
England, he made a Visit to St. Denis, or Dionys, and got Cold, and fell into a
Palsy, by which he lost the use of the Right Side of his Body.

This young King of Ibidem, b. lin. 3. and n. 10. The young King of France
abuses his Mother, Uncles, and Fathers Friends.

They apply themselves to the King of England. An. Do. 1180.


France taking advantage of his Fathers Sickness, was in all things Directed by
Philip Earl of Flanders, by whose Advice he began to Tyrannize over the People,
and to despise and hate all that loved his Father, or were his Friends, and so
pursued William Archbishop of Rhemes, Earl Theobald, and Earl Stephen his
Uncles, very severely. At whose Request Henry the young King went into England
to his Father, and informed him how Philip King of France used his Mother and
Uncles by the instigation of the Earl of Flanders. Upon this Information they
both pass into Normandy before Easter, where the Queen of France, her Brothers,
Earl Theobald, and Stephen, and many others of the French Nobility England the
Father, their Oaths and Pledges, that they would not recede from his Advice.
Upon which he raised a great Army, intending to enter France, He raises an
Army, and enters France.
to Revenge the Injuries the new King had done to his Mother and Uncles.

But before Ibid^m, n. 30. Before Hostility, Peace made by Conference.
any Hostility, King Philip and old King Henry came to a Conference between
Gisors and Try, in which, one while with fair words, another with sharp, he so
effectually prevailed upon him, that contrary to the Counsel of the Earl of
Flanders, and Robert Clement, he laid aside all the Contrivances against his
Mother and Uncles, and received them into favor, appointing his Mother to
receive Seven Pounds of Paris Money every day for her Diet, and agreeing to
allow her full Dower, except the Castles

In this Conference King Ibidem, n. 40. The Earl of Flanders does Homage to the
King of England. For 1000 l. per annum he is to find him 500 Horse forty days.
Henry the elder, out of great Caution, received the Homage of the Earl of
Flanders, before the King of France, and for that Homage granted he should
receive yearly One thousand Marks at his Exchequer in London: and in Recompense
thereof, he was to find the King of England every year in his Service, when he
was summoned, 500 Knights or Horsemen

In the same Ibidem, n. 40, 50. A Conference and Peace between the Kings of
France and England.
. year Lewis King of France died at Paris on the Eighteenth of September, and
soon after Philip and the King of England came to another Conference at the
same place, and made the same Peace and Agreement that had been made before
between his Father and him, (except that Covenant of taking the Cross, and
going to the Holy Land) and Confirmed it with their Oaths.

This year Ibid^ f. 341. a. n. 20. New Money made in England.
King Henry the elder caused new Money to be made in England, and severely
Fined, and otherwise punished the Moneyers, or Coyners, for abasing the Allay,
and corrupting the old Money.

In all his Dominions Ibidem, f. 348. b. n. 10, 20. An. Do. 1181.
beyond the Seas, the King after Christmas appointed what Arms every one
should have ready for the defense Anjou Money, was to have a Horse, and full
Military Arms; Every Man that was worth Forty, thirty, or five and twenty
Pounds of Anjou Money in Goods, An Assise of Arms appointed by the King in all
his Dominions beyond Sea.
was to have an Iron Cap, a Gorget, a Lance, and Sword; and all others to have
a Wambais, that is, a Coat twilted with Wool, or Tow, or such Matter, an Iron
Cap, a Lance, and a Sword, or Bows and Arrows; and he prohibited all Men to
sell their Arms, or pawn them, and ordained France and Earl of Flanders heard
of it, they caused their Men to be thus Armed.

While the King Ibid. f. 350. a. n. 20.
of England was at Barslen in Normandy, expecting his Passage into England,
there happened a great difference between the King of France and Earl of
Flanders, about the Earl of Clermont; The King of England the elder makes Peace
between the King of France, and Earl of Flanders.
he was sent for to Gisors by the King of France, and Cherbourgh, and set sail
for England, and arrived at Portsmouth the Twenty fifth of August, and brought
with him William King of Scots, whom he had sent for into Normandy, Ibidem,
^in. 4.
to make a Peace and Reconciliation between him and the Bishops of St. Andrews
and Aberdene, who were forced out of Scotland by his harsh usage.

Ibidem, n. 30. King Henry makes an Assise of Arms in England; so it is here
said, but doubtless it was done by a great Council, and not only by himself.
Deinde Henricus Rex Angliae fecit hanc assisam de armis habendis in Anglia.

Soon after his return, he made this Assise of Arms.

Whosoever has a Knights Fee, shall have a Coat of Mail, an Helmet, a Shield,
and a Lance: and every Knight shall have so many Coats of Mail, Helmets,
Shields, and Lances, as he has Knights Fees.

2. Every Free Layman, that has in Goods or Rent to the value of The value of
the Goods I suppose mistaken, it should rather have been Sixty Marks.
Sixteen Marks, shall have a Coat of Mail, an Helmet, a Shield, and a Lance.

3. Every Free Layman, that has in Goods Ten Marks, shall have an Iron Gorget,
an Iron Cap, and a Lance.

4. All Burgesses, that is, Inhabitants or Freemen of Burghs, and the whole
Community of Freemen shall have a Wambais, (that is a Coat twilted with Wool,
Towe, or such other Materials) a Cap of Iron, and a Lance.

And Ibidem, and n. 40, 50. Every one to have Arms, and to keep them for the
Kings use.
every one shall swear, That before the Feast of St. Hillary he will have these
Arms, and will be faithful to King Henry the Son of Maud the Empress, and that
he will keep these Arms for his Service, according to his Command, for the
Defense of the King and Kingdom; and no Man when he has these Arms, shall
Sell, Pawn, Lend, or any way put them out of his Custody: neither shall his
Lord any way take them from his Man or Vassal, neither by Forfeiture, Gift,
None to keep more Arms by him than the Assise allows.
If any Burgess has more Arms than he ought to have by this Assise, he may
sell, or give them to any Man that will use them in the Kings Service; and no
Man may have or keep by him more Arms, than he Jew may have a Coat of Mail, or
a Jerkin of Mail in his Custody, but may sell, or give, or so part with it,
that it may be for the Service of the King. No Jow to ha^o a Coat of Mall in
his Custody.
Also no Man shall carry Arms out of England, unless by the Kings Command, nor
sell Arms to any Man that shall carry them out of England. Neither Merchant or
other Person shall carry them out of England. And the Justices shall swear as
many Knights, or other Freemen, and Legal-men in the Hundreds and Burghs in
every County, as they think fit, whether they All that have Sixteen Marks in
Goods or Rent, to have of their own a Coat of Mail, an Helmet, Shield, and
Lance.
an Helmet, a Shield, and a Lance; and that they shall distinctly name all
those in their Hundreds, and Neighbourhoods or Burghs, that have Sixteen Marks
in Goods or Rents; and the Justices shall cause the Jurors and all others to be
written in a Roll, and the value of their Goods or Rents. And then they shall
cause this Assise to be read before such as are to find Arms, and cause them to
swear, they will provide Arms according to the value of their Goods and Rents,
and the Direction of this Assise; and that they will keep them for the Defense
of King Henry Son to Maud the Empress, and his Kingdom, according to his
Command. And if it happen that any one that is to find Arms be not in the
County when the Justices are there, they are to appoint him a time to appear
before them in another County; And if they come not to them in any County
through which they pass, An. Do. 1181.
let him come to Westminster eight days after Michaelmass, and then take the
Oath, as he loves himself and Hillary aforesaid.

All that make default to be punished in their Limbs and Members. None to be of
the Jury, but such as are worth Sixteen or Ten Marks.

No Ship to be sold, or Timber carried out of England.

None to receive the Oath of Arms but Freemen.


Also the Justices shall cause to be published in all Counties through which
they go, that all may take notice, That the King will not punish such as make
Default, in their Lands or Goods, but in their Limbs or Members. None shall be
upon the Jury, but such as are worth Sixteen or Ten Marks.

Also the Justices shall Command, in all Counties through which they pass, That
no Man, as he loves himself, and all that he has, do buy or sell any Ship to
be sent out of England, nor that he carry, or cause to be carried any Timber
out of England. And the King Commands, that none be received to the Oath of
Arms, but a Freeman.

After Ibidem, f. 35^. a. n. 40, 50. Young Henry's undutifulness causes the
King to go into Normandy. An Do. 1182. Young Henry submits to his Fathers Will
and Pleasure.
Christmas the undutifulness of the young King caused Normandy, for he and his
Wife had gotten to his Brother Philip King of France, by whose instigation he
wrought all the mischief imaginable against him, notwithstanding the Oaths he
had taken to be obedient, just, and faithful to him. He again demanded Normandy
of his Father, or some other of his Dominions; but once more he returned to
him, and swear to submit to his Will and Pleasure, and that he would not recede
from it, nor desire more for his own Expenses, than One hundred Pounds a day of
Anjou

Next Ib. f. 352. b. n. 30, 40.
year at Christmas, the old King and all his three Sons were at Caen in
Normandy, and with them his Son in Law Henry Duke of Saxony, and his Wife and
Children, the Archbishops of Canterbury and Dublin were there also, and many
Bishops, Earls, and The young King receives Homage of his Brother Geofrey, but
Richard refuses.
After the Solemnity, the old King Commanded the King his Son to take Homage of
Richard Earl of Poictou, and Geofry Earl of Britany his Brothers; He received
the Homage of Geofry, but Richard refused to do Homage to him; yet afterward
when Richard offered it, he would not receive it. Whence Richard grew very
angry, retired from Court, and went into Poictou, where he built new Castles,
and fortified the old; His Brother King Henry followed him, and with the Earls
and Barons of that Country that Richard. And when he saw Geofry come with an
Army to his Assiance, not being able to resist both his Brothers, he sent to
his Father for help, who raised a great Army, An. Do. 1183.
and marched with speed, and besieged the Castle of Limoges, which but a little
before had been delivered to his Son King Henry.

While the King was before Ibidem, f. 353. a. b. Young Henry and Geofrey
Confederate against their Father.
Limoges, his two Sons Geofry and Henry that understood one another very well,
pretended to their Father, they would reconcile the Barons of Aquitan and
Poictou to him and his Son Richard; and as they pretended, went to several
Places to meet and Treat with them, and there Confederated with them against
him; and he thinking himself now safe with his Sons, had no great number with
him at Limoges, whereby he was exposed Geofry taking the advantage, pillaged,
and miserably wasted his Fathers Countries. In the mean time Henry in a fit of
Devotion, under pretense of an old Vow, takes upon him the Cross, and would go
against the mind and persuasion of his Father into the Holy Land; his Father
(as he thought) finding his Son resolute, bemoaned him with many Tears, and
told him, since he would go, his Equipage and Company should equal, if not
exceed the Preparation Christendom. But he executed his Design before his
Journey; for under pretense of Devotion, visiting several Rich Monasteries, he
pillaged them, and distributed what he got amongst his Soldiers; and when he
saw he could not destroy, nor have his Will of his Father, his Ibidem, 354. a.
lin. 1. Young Henry dies at Martel.
Fury and Passion cast him into a great Sickness at a Town called Martel, of
which he died on the Eleventh of Chr. Nor. f. 1004. D.
June.

Hov. ut sup. n. 40. Several Castles delivered to the King, which he either
Garisoned or utterly demolished.
death his Father assaulted the Castle of Limoges from day to day, while that
and the City was delivered to him, and with them all the Castles of his Enemies
in that Country, some whereof he Garisoned with his own Men, others he
demolished, not leaving one Stone upon another.

France upon his Death Ibidem, and n. 50. The King of France demands the Dower
of young Henry's Widow.
demanded the Dower of his Sister, young King Henry's Widow, and also the whole
Land of Veuxin, with the Castles and Munitions his Father King Lewis gave in
Marriage with her, upon which, coming to a Conference between Gisors and Try,
they thus Agreed; That the Widow for her Pro quieta clamantia.
quiet Claiming, or Relinquishing all the before demanded Premises, should
receive every year of the King of England at Paris, Seventeen hundred and fifty
Pounds of Anjou Money, and from his Heirs so long as she lived.

Geofry Earl of Britany Ibidem, b. lin. 1. John refuses to do Homage to his
Brother Richard.
returned to his Father, and made Peace with him, and with his Brother Richard
Earl of Poictou. To whom King Henry Commanded he should receive the Homage of
his Brother John for that Country which he held of the Earldom of Aquitan, but
he would not.

Pope Lucius the Third, not able Ibidem, b. n. 40. This Pope was expelled the
City of Rome by the Senators, upon some difference that arose between them,
Platin. f. 181.

The King sends an Aid of Gold and Silver to Pope Lucius.


to resist the Romans, sent his Legates to all Kings and Princes, as well
Secular as Ecclesiastics, Peter against them. His Messengers came to King
Henry, requiring Aid of him and the Clergy of England; The King Consulting his
Bishops and Clergy concerning this Request, they advised, he should give an Aid
suitable to his Honor and Good Will for him and their selves, for it was more
tolerable, and better pleased them, that he should receive Recompense from
them, than that the Popes Messengers or Legates should be permitted to come into
England to take it of them, by which means there might arise a Custom to the
detriment of the Kingdom. The King took their Advice, and made the Pope a great
Aid in Gold and Silver; with which and the Money of other Princes, the Pope
made a Peace with the Romans, necessary for himself and for the Church.

This year Ibidem, f. 355. a. n. 10. King Henry does Homage to the King of
France.
at a Conference between King Henry and Philip France between Gisors and Try,
on the Tenth of September, he did Homage to the King of France for all his
Transmarin Dominions, which he never would do before that time.

Next Ib. n. 20. An. Do. 1184.
year on the Tenth of June the King came into England, and the Duchess of
Saxony his Daughter with him: and not long after made Ibidem, b. n. 20. The
Kings Sons reconciled.
Peace and Agreement between his Sons Richard, Geofry, and John, which was
written and confirmed by their Alienor, Henry Duke of Saxony their Brother in
Law, and many others.

This year the Ibidem, f. 3^6. a. lin 3. The King of South Wales swears Fealty
to King Henry.
Welsh grew very troublesome; they wasted the Kings Lands, and killed his Men.
To subdue them, the King went with a great Army to Worcester: Rese the King of
South Wales, fearing his Power, upon safe Conduct granted by the King, came
thither, and swear Fealty to him, and also swear he would deliver

The Winter Ib. f. 358. a. n. 20.
following died Gilbert the Usurper of Galway in Scotland, who had Murdered
his Brother Vctred, whose Son Rolland, taking the advantage of his Uncles
death, and of his Son Dunecan, England, as an Hostage or Pledge for his Fathers
Fidelity, invaded and obtained that Country.

The Patriarch of Jerusalem, Ibidem, n. 30. The King solicited to send Relief
to the Holy Land.
and the two great Masters of the Hospital and Temple came into England, sent
by Baldwin King of Jerusalem, the Templars and Hospitallers, to the King, who
met them at Reding, where they presented him with the Royal Banner, the Keys of
the Sepulcher, and of the Tower of David, and City of Jerusalem, with Pope
Lucius's Letters: by which very meanly he endeavors to excite the King to
undertake the Relief and Protection of the Holy Land.

The King promises Ibidem, b. n. 30, 40.
them an Answer on the first Sunday in Lent; at which day He, the Patriarch,
the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons of England, William King of Scots, David
his Brother, and the Earls and Barons of that Kingdom met at London, and then
Deliberating and Advising about this Affair, they unanimously France, and so
the Council was dissolved. The King gives all his Subjects leave to take upon
them the Cross.
And the King gave leave to all his Subjects, as well Clerks as Laics, to take
the Cross; and thereupon Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, Ranulph, or as
some, Radulph de Glanvill.
Ranulph Justiciary of England, Walter Archbishop of Roven, Hugh Bishop of
Durham, and many other Bishops in England and beyond Sea, and almost all the
Earls, Barons, and Knights of England, Normandy, Aquitan, Britany, Anjou,
Turain, and Main undertook the Crusado.

On the Second of May Ibidem, f. 359. a. n. 30. An. Do. 1185. Richard submits
to King Henry his Father.
the King, Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Bishop of Durham, and many of
the Chief Men of England went into France; in Normandy the King raises a great
Army, and sent to his Son Richard, who had Armed Poictou against his Father,
and beaten Geofry his Brother Earl of Britany, That unless he delivered all
that Country to his Mother Alienor, free, and in Peace, he would come and
scourge him for his obstinacy and undutifulness. Poictou, and remained with his
Father, as a very kind Son.

A while after Ibidem, n. 40. The Kings of England and France promise Relief
for the Holy Land.

The Patriarch goes away dissatisfied.


the Kings of England and France had a Conference about the Relief of the Holy
Land, and they both promised to give very good Assistance in Men and Money. But
this pleased not the Patriarch, for he hoped he should have carried back with
him England, or one of his Sons, or some other Man of great Conduct and
Authority, but because he could not do this, he returned much disatisfied and
confounded.

King Henry at Ib. f. 360. a. n. 20. The King of France promises to give Alice
his Sister to Richard.
Christmas kept his Court at Damfront in Normandy, and after that Solemnity,
at a Conference with Philip King of France at Gisors, he swear he would deliver
to his Son Richard Alice the Kings Sister, that he might make her his Wife, and
France granted to Richard with his Sister, Gisors and all that his Father Lewis
had granted with his Daughter Margaret to Henry the young King of England; and
swore he would never move any Question against them concerning those Lands.
After this Conference the King passed into England.

Soon after Ibidem. Rowland the Scot makes his Peace with the King.
his arrival he marched to Carlisle with a great Army, and intended to go
further to correct Roland or Rowland the Vctred the Son of Fergus, for
Disseising Dunecan the Son of Gilbert, the Son of Fergus; but Rowland came
thither to the King, and made his Peace with him.

The same year Ibidem, n. 30. An. Do. 1186.
Geofry Earl of Britany in a Military Conflict at Paris, was kicked by, and
trampled under the Horses Feet, and slain, where he was buried in the
Cathedral. After whose Ib. f 361. a. n. 40, 50. Geofry killed in a Military
Conflict at Paris by his Horse.
death Philip King of France would have had the Custody of his Daughter,
England would no way consent to it; and sent Walter Archbishop of Roven,
William de Mandevill Earl of Albamarle, and Ranulf de Glanvill Justiciary of
England, at whose Request the King of France granted a Truce until the Feast of
St. Hillary next. In the mean time Ibidem, b. n. 10. He left his Wife with
Child of his Son Arthur.
Constance the Widow of Earl Geofrey, whom he had left great with Child,
brought forth a Son, who was named Arthur.

Ibidem, n. 40.
the King carried over into France Cardinal Octavian, and Hugh de Nunant, that
they might be present at a Treaty between him and that King; at which
Conference he made such intolerable Demands, that they departed one from
another without hopes of Peace.

After Whitsunday Ibidem, n. 50. An. Do. 1187. Richard and John the Kings ^ons
besieged by the King of France.
the King of France besieged the King of England's* two Sons John and Richard
with a great Army in Castle-Radulf. Their Father comes to Relieve them, the
King of France meets him with his Army, and draws it up in Batalia, the King of
England likewise rangeth his, when by Advice Ib. f. 362. a lin. 1. A Truce made
for two years.
and Mediation of the Bishops of both Kingdoms they make a Truce for two years,
so as the King of France should posssess Issoudun for that time.

The Truce concluded, Ibidem, n. 10. Richard seizes his Fathers Treasure, and
fortifies his Castles.
Earl Richard against the Will of his Father remained with the King of France,
and such an Intimacy there was between them, that they often eat together, and
lay in the same Bed. His Father grew jealous of him, and often sent for him out
of France; he pretending to come to him, went directly to Chinon, where his
Fathers Treasure was, and carried away the greatest part of it, notwithstanding
the resistance the Keeper of it made: and with it fortified his Castle in
Poictou, and would not At last he submits, and does Homage.
Yet at length he once more returned, and did Homage to his Father before many
of the Clergy and Laity, and swore to him Fealty against all Men upon the Holy
Gospels, and that he would never recede from his Advice.

On Christmass-day Ibidem, f. 365. b. lin. 1. and n. 10. The King of France
threatens to invade Normandy.
King Henry was at Caen in Normandy, from thence he went to Barsleu, and from
thence into England. So soon as the King of France heard he was gone, he
gathered a great Normandy, if he did not restore Gisors with its Appurtenances,
or Married not his Sister Alice to his Son Richard. Upon notice of this, the
King presently passed into Normandy, and on the Twenty first of January there
was a Conference between them, at the old place, between Gisors and Try, where
also were Convened the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons of both their
Dominions; There was also at this great Convention the Archbishop of Tire, who
Preached so effectually to them, Both Kings reconciled, and receive the Cross.
and received the Cross from his Hands. The Kings resolved to go in Person, and
the King of France's Men were to wear Red Crosses, the Kings of England's White
Crosses, and the Earls of Flanders Green Crosses, for Notes of Distinction.

Upon this Resolution for an Expedition into the Holy Land, this Ibidem, n. 20.
They agree upon Articles how to carry on and maintain the War.
Council presently entered upon the manner and way of Hoveden recites them
confusedly, and has several superfluous Heads, which are not in Labbe, or
Gervase the Monks of Canterbury.

Labbe^ Council. Tom. 10. Col. 1740. B. C. D.
Talis est dispositio ad subveniendum Terrae Jerusalem, a Domino Philippo Rege
Franciae, and Henrico Rege Angliae, Communi Episcoporum, and Comitum, and
Baronum, Terrarum suarum approbata. Scilicet.

This is the Establishment for the Relief of the Land of Jerusalem, by Philip
King of France, and Henry King of England, approved by the Common Council of
the Bishops, Earls, and Barons of their Dominions. That is to say;

I. Every one as well Clerk as Laick, that is not worth above One hundred
Shillings, for every House he has where there is a constant Fire kept, shall
pay Two Pence for three years every year.

II. If he have more than One hundred Shillings in Movables, of every Pound in
all the King of France his Dominions, he shall pay Two Pence of Province Money;
and in the Dominions of the King of England on that side the Sea, two Pence of
Anjou Money, and in England one Shilling Sterling for the same term.

III. He that has One hundred Pounds in Lands or Rents or above, shall pay
yearly twenty Shillings.

IV. He that has less than One hundred Pounds in Rents, of every twenty
Pounds, shall give four Shillings, and of every forty Pounds,

V. Very little to the purpose.

VI. The Tenth is due for the Defense of the Land of Jerusalem, from Midsumer,
1184. for ten years, saving the Right of the Lords,

Out of this Estimation are excepted in Clerks, the Treasure and Ornaments of
their Churches, their Books, Horses, Vessels, Vestments, Gemms, and Vtensils,
which are necessary for their daily use; And in Knights or Soldiers, their
Horses, Arms, Vessels, and Clothes for their common use.

For the Collecting of this Alms, Two Templars and an Hospitaller appointed to
be Collectors in every Bishopric.
there shall be appointed in every Bishopric two Brothers, one of the Temple
another of the Hospital, and in every Parish they two, and (Dominus Presbyter
Villae) the Priest of the Town, (and duo de legalioribus Parochianis) shall
collect and keep this Alms.

All this great Work was Hoved. fol. 366. a. n. 20.
dispatched, and the King was come back into England, and arrived at Winchester
on the Thirtieth of January. Ibidem. The King returns into England, and in a
Council of his Lords causes these Articles to be recited.
forthwith, says Hoveden, he assembled a great Council of Bishops, Abbats,
Earls, Barons, and many others, as well Clerks as Laics, at Gaintington, where
he caused to be recited all the Articles which had been agreed on beyond Sea,
about taking the Cross.

The Monk of Chron. Gervas. Col. 1522. lin. 3. An. Do. 1188.
Canterbury tells us they met on the Eleventh of February. Tertio Idus
Februarii Convenerunt apud Gaitintune quae Northamptonnia, octo vel december
distat Miliariis, una cum Rege, Praesules, and Principes Regni de defensione
sacrosanctae Terrae Jerosolimae tractaturi: unde variis and multis hic inde
prolatis sermonibus, haec tandem de cruce sumpta, vel sumenda capitula
subscripta promulgata sunt. That is, On the Eleventh of February, the Bishops,
with the Princes, or Chief Men of the Realm, met with the King at Gaitintune,
about eight or ten Miles from Northampton, to Treat about the Defense of the
Holy Land of Jerusalem; and after much Debate, at length, these underwritten
Articles, concerning such as had taken, or would take the Cross, were published.

All that take the Cross to be absolved from their Sins.
I. Every Clerk or Layman that shall take upon him the Cross, shall be freed and
absolved from all his Sins, of which he has been Confessed, and has Repented,
by the Authority of God, the Blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, and the Pope.

All that do not undertake it, to pay the Tenth of their Estates and Goods.
II. Dispositum est a Regibus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and aliis Principibus,
quod omnes illi tam Clerici quam Laici, etc. It is Ordained by the Kings, the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other Princes, or Chief Men, That all those as well
Clerks as Laics, who shall not undertake this Expedition, shall give the Tenth
of all their Rents for one year, and of all their Goods, as well in Gold as
Silver, and in all

III. Notandum etiam. It is also to be noted, Quod omnes Clerici, Milites, and
Servientes, that all Clerks, Knights, and Esquires, which shall undertake this
Expedition or Croysado, shall have the Tenths

There are five Articles more in this Monk, about the mean Habits, and Clothes
they should wear in this Crusado, and their sober and humble Carriage and
Behavior; and about Liberty, and Conditions to engage their Estates, to
prepare and sit themselves for the

When this Constitution was thus made, says Hoveden, F. 366. a. n. 30. An. Do.
1188. The King sends out his Officers to collect the Tenth.
the King sent his Servants, as well Clerks as Laics, to Collect these Tenths
in his Dominions beyond Sea; but in all the Cities in England, he caused all
the Richest Men to be chosen out, viz. in London two hundred, in York one
hundred, and in others proportionably, and caused them all to appear before him
at certain days and places; Those that refused to pay were imprisoned till they
paid.
he presently committed them to Prison, and there kept them until they had paid
the uttermost Farthing. The Jews also that were in England paid after the same
Rate.

Into Ibidem, n. 40.
Scotland he sent the Bishop of Durham, and other Scots met them between Werk
and Brigeham, and would not permit them to enter into his Kingdom to collect
them, yet offered to give the King for them, The King of Sco^s offers 5000
Marks.
and to have his Castles again, Five thousand Marks of Silver. After the same
manner Philip King of France caused the Tenths of the Rents and Movables
(hominum suorum) of his Men or Subjects, to be collected in all his Dominions.

This very year Ibidem, n. 50. Raymund Earl or St. Giles makes War upon Richard
the Kings Son, and is conquered.
Raymund Earl of St. Giles, Aimer Earl of Engolism, Geofry de Rancune, and
Geofry de Lusignan, and almost all the richest People of Poictou made War upon
Richard Earl of that Country, and he upon them; who overcame them all; and
amongst other Prisoners, he took one Peter Seillun, that had advised the Earl
of St. Giles to take some Merchants or T^adesmen that were under Earl Richards
Protection, and Inhabitants of his Countries, and use Giles Ibidem. b. lin. 1.
found he could not Redeem him, Waylaid, and gave order to his Castellans and
Soldiers, to apprehend any of the King of England's Sons, Earl Richard's
Subjects. Within a little while they seize upon Robert Poer and Ralph his
Brother, two Knights of the Kings Family, that had been in Pilgrimage at St.
James in Spain, and were returning home, and delivered them to Earl Raymund;
who kept them in Prison, until his Servant Peter was ser Richard would make no
exchange, but said the Reverence of their Pilgrimage was sufficient to
discharge them; and therefore the King of France Commanded they should be set
free, neither for Respect to the King of England, or his Son Richard, but for
the Reverence he bare to St. James the Apostle. Ibidem, n. 10.
The Earl of St. Giles Released them, not by the King of France his Command,
but for the great Ransom he had of them.

Richard Ibidem, and n. 20. An. Do. 1188. Richard enters his Country, and
wastes it.
moved with this, entered his Country with an Army, and wasted it with Fire and
Sword, and besieged, and took his Castles near Tholose. The King of France,
hearing the Complaints of the People, sent into England to King Henry, to know
whether the damages that were done in his Dominions by his Son Richard, were
done by his Order, and demanded Restitution. King Henry returned this Answer,
The King of France complains to the King of England.
That his Son had not done any thing by his Directions or Consent: and that he
had let him know by John Dublin, that he had done nothing, but by Advice of the
King of France.

At this time King Henry Ibidem, n. 30, 40. King Henry receives a Letter from
the Patriarch of Antioch.
received an Epistle of the Patriarch of Antioch, representing to him the
miserable Condition of the Christians in the Holy Land; How that on the Fourth
of July 1187. Saladin Emperor of the Saracens or Turks in a pitched Battle, had
killed their Prince Raimund with his own hands: that there were of Jerusalem,
and swore to take the Sepulcher, and divide it into small pieces, and throw it
into the Sea, etc.

To this the King Ibidem, f. 367. a. n. 20, 30, etc. He Answers it, and gives
great hopes that Relief would speedily be sent.
sends an Answer, to the Patriarchs of Jerusalem Antioch, in which he gives
them great encouragement, and tells them, there was coming to their assistance
such an Army of Christians as was never heard of, nor seen before; and that
amongst the other Princes, he and his Son, rejecting and despising all the
Glory and Pleasures of the World, were coming toward them with all the speed
imaginable.

But in the mean time Ibidem, n. 50. The King of France enters Berry wi^h a
great Army.
Philip King of France had raised a great Army, and entered Berry, and taken
Castle-Radulf, (quod Burgenses reddiderunt ei) which the Burgesses delivered to
him; and proceeding, almost all Berry, except Luches, was delivered to him. The
King of England demanding a Reason of these things, it was told him, they were
done in Revenge for the Injuries Richard Earl' of Poictou had done to the King
of France and Earl of St. Giles.

The King of Ibidem, and b. live. ^ etc. The King of France refuses to make
Peace.
England Advising with his Friends, sends Baldwin Arch Bishop of Canterbury,
and Hugh Bishop of Lincoln to the King of France, that they might persuade him
to Peace; and when they could not, he passed into Normandy, and landed at
Barfleu on the Eleventh of July: and gathered together in Normandy and his
other Countries a great Army. In the mean time Richard Earl of Poictou enters
Berry, destroys the Lands of the Earls and Barons that adhered to the King of
France, and took some of them.

The King of France Ibidem, n. 10.
left Berry to William de Bars to defend it, and went toward the King of
England, permitting his Soldiers to waste his Dominions; He sends Walter
Archbishop of Roven, John Bishop of Eureux, and William Marshall, to demand
Restitution, and unless he made it, to defy him. The King of France Answers,
he would not desist until all Berry and Veuxin-Norman was subjected to him.

Toward the Ibidem, n. 20, 30. Richard Earl of Anjou destroys the King of
France his Countries. The King of France desires Peace.
later end of August the King of England entered the King of France his
Dominions; His Son Richard took William de Bars Prisoner, and his Father, and
he, and William de Mandevill burnt and destroyed the King of France his
Countries, and took his Towns and Castles, more, and faster than he burnt and
took theirs, so as he sent to them, and desired Peace, and offered to part with
what he had gotten in Berry.

They came to a Conference at Ibidem, n. 40. They meet to Treat of Peace, but
cannot agree.
Gisors, to Treat of Peace, and when they could not agree, the King of France
in a mighty rage and anger cut down a brave spread flourishing Elm, between
Gisors and Try, where the Conferences were wont to be between the Kings of
France and Dukes of Normandy, and swear there never should be more Conferences
in that place.

The Ibidem, n. 50. Several French Lords lay down Arms.
Earl of Flanders, Earl Theobald, and the other Earls and Barons of France laid
down their Arms, and said they would fight no more against Christians until
they returned from their Pilgrimage to the Holy Land. The King of France
destitute of his Friends, desired a Conference with the King of England: he
consents, and on the Morrow, being the Sixth of October, St. Faith's-day, they
met at Chasteaux; The Terms propounded were, Ibidem.
That the King of France should resign what he had taken since the Truce, The
Treaty for Peace renewed, but without effect.
and Richard should resign what he had taken by War from the Earl of St. Giles;
and for Security, the King of France demanded of the King of England the Castle
of Passy* which he would not grant, and so they parted Enemies. The King of
France took the Castle of Palud as he went from thence, and passed on to
Castle-Radulf, and brought the Plundering Brabanters from thence to Bourges,
promising them their Pay, where he took away their Horses, Arms, and all their
Goods, and turned them off naked, and without Arms.

Earl Ibidem, f. 368. a. lin 6. Richard offers to stand to a Trial in the
French Court.
Richard offered to come into the Court of France, and stand to the Law there,
for what had been done between him and the Earl of St. Giles, that so he might
make Peace between the two Kings, which much displeased the King of England.

On the Nineteenth of October Ib. f. 370. a. n. 30.
they had another Conference between Bon-Molins, and Suleini, where the King of
France offered to render whatsoever he had taken by War, upon Condition he
would deliver his Sister Alice to Earl Richard his Son, that he might make her
his Wife; and that he would permit him, as his Heir, to receive the Homages and
Fealties of the Men of all his Dominions; But King Henry being sensible of the
ill Consequences of that, and the Henry, and by exalting him, he utterly
refused to do it; whereupon Richard was exceedingly displeased, Richard swears
Fealty to the King of France.
and without the knowledge or Consent of his Father, did Homage to the King of
France, for all the Tenements or Lands of his Father in that Kingdom, and swear
Fealty to him against all Men, and adhered to him; and for his Homage and
Fealty, gave him Castle-Radulph, and Issoudun, with the whole Honor.

Yet the two Kings made a Truce Ibidem, n. 30, 40. A Truce agreed upon, and
Earl Richard Anathematized.
until the Feast of St. Hilary, and Henry Bishop of Alba, and a Cardinal, whom
the Pope had sent to reconcile the two Kings, Anathematized Earl Richard as a
Disturber of the Peace.

Hilary, Ib. f. 37. b. n. 30. The King of France, and Earl Richard wasted the
King of England's Dominions.
when the time of Truce was expired, the King of France, Earl Richard, and many
other Earls and Barons that had left the King his Father, and the Britans (to
whom the King of France and Earl Richard had given their Charts, that they
would not make a separate Peace with the King of England, excluding them) in a
Hostile manner entered the Dominions of the King of England, and wasted them
every way.

John (...) Cardinal came from the Ibidem, n. 40, 50. An. Do. 1189.
Pope to the two Kings to exhort them to Peace, and he obtained of them to
stand to Canterbury, Rhemes, Roven, and Bourges, and appointed them a day of
meeting near Ferte-Bernard eight days after Whitsunday; All to be
Excommunicated that were Hinderers of the Peace, except the two Kings.
and the Cardinal, and four Archbishops pronounced Sentence of Excommunication
against all Men, Clerks, as well as others, that should hinder the making of
Peace, excepting the Persons of the Kings themselves; They all met at the time
and place appointed, and the Earls and Barons of both Kingdoms. In this
Conference the King France demanded of the King of England, that his Sister
Alice might be given in Marriage to Richard Earl of Poictou, and that the
Homages and Fealties, etc. as in the last Treaty; And further, that John his
Brother might receive the Cross, and go to Jerusalem.

The King of England Ibidem, f. 372. a. l. n. 2. The Treaty ends without
success.
Answered, That he would never consent to it, and offered the King of France,
that if he would agree to it, his Sister Alice should be given in Marriage to
his Son John, and that all things should be performed more fully than he
desired; but the King of France would not yield to this, and so the Treaty
ended without success.

The Cardinal Ibidem, n. 10. The King of France values not the threats of an
Interdict.
threatened the King of France, that if he made not Peace with the King of
England, he would interdict his Dominions; The King told him he valued i^ not,
and said, it belonged not to the Church of Rome to pronounce Sentence against
the Kingdom of France, when the King chastised his Men, (homines suos) or
Subjects, for their Contumacy and Rebellion, and the Injuries done to the
Crown; And added, That the Cardinal had smelt or received some of the King of
England's Sterlings.

The King Ibidem.
of France presently attempted i. e. Firmitas Bernardi, the Fortress of
Bernard. The King of France defeats the King of England's Army.
Ferte-Bernard, and took it, and Montfort, and Beaumont, and Mayen, and Tours,
Ambais, and Chaumont, and all the Castles and Towns round the Country, nothing
stood before him; Coming to the Relief of Mayen, the King of England's Army was
routed, and he fled with 700 Horse, many were slain in the pursuit: The King
with a few got into the Castle of Chinon; Ibidem, n. 20, 30, 40.
And the King of France had now Conquered Tourain, and Main.

In the Ibidem, n. 50.
later end of June, or beginning of July, Philip Earl of Flanders, William
Archbishop of Rhemes, and Hugh Duke of Burgundy came to the King of England,
who was then at Saumur, to make a Peace between him and the King of France.
Ibidem, b. n. 10.
The two Kings, and Earl Richard, with their Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and
Barons Tours and Arasic, where the King of England submitted himself wholly to
the Will and Pleasure of the King of France, King Henry does Homage to the King
of France.
and then did Homage to him, because in the beginning of the War he had defied
him, and denied his Dominion, and the King of France had disowned and
disclaimed his Homage.

These were the Terms of Peace, Ibidem, n. 20. The Articles of Peace between
King Henry and the King of France.
Dictated by the King of France; First, ^That his Sister Alice which the King
of England had Richard should choose, and that she should be delivered to him
in his return ^from Jerusalem.

Secondly, ^That Richard should have all the Fealties of all his Fathers
Dominions, and that no Baron or Knight that left his Father to follow him, That
is, shall not be forced to return.
shall return to him again, unless it be in the last ^Month, when they move
toward Jerusalem.

Thirdly, ^The time of that motion shall be in the middle of Lent, when both
the Kings and Earl Richard shall be at (...) at that ^time.

Fourthly, ^All the Burghers (de Dominicis villis Regis Angliae) of the King of
England's proper Towns, shall be free in all France, paying only their due
Customs, nor shall be impleaded unless of forfeiture ^in Felony.

Fifthly, 'The King of England shall give to the King of France '20000 Marks of
Silver.

Sixthly, ^All the Barons of the King of England shall swear, That if the King
of England keeps not this Agreement, they will assist ^the King of France and
Earl Richard against him.

^The Cities of Mayen and Tours, the Castles of Ligdi and Trou, were to remain
in the hands of the King of France and ^Earl Richard while all things were
performed.

Upon the Confirmation of this Peace, he desired Ibidem, n. 30.
to have a written Catalogue of the Names of all such as had deserted him, and
adhered to the King of France and his Son Richard; King Henry finds his Son
John the first that deserted him.
which when he had received, and found his Son John the first Man, he was
strangely Chinon, and out of very grief and anguish of Mind, Cursed the day in
which his was born, and gave Ibidem, n. 40. He Curses his Sons, and would never
release them.
Gods Curse and his own to his Sons, which he would never release, though
Bishops and other Religious Men had often persuaded and admonished him to it.
When he was sick to death, he caused himself to be carried into the Church
before the Altar, and there received the Communion of the Body and Comunionem
Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, Q. whether he received it not in both kinds.
Blood of the Lord; Confessing his Sins, and being Absolved, he died eight days
after the Feast of St. Peter and Paul, or on the Sixth of July, when he had
Reigned Thirty four years, seven Months, and four days; and left this World
about the Fifty seventh year of his Age.

Some Men believe that the aversation of King Henry, from the Consummation of
the Marriage of Alice Sister to the King of France, unto his Son Richard,
proceeded from the kindness he had for her himself; and John Bromton Col. 1141.
n. 50, 60.
affirms it to be so.

Of the Conquest or Acquest of Ireland.
HEnry the Second had a great desire to add Ireland to the rest of his
Dominions, and to that purpose held a Council of his Great Men at Chron. Norm.
f. 991. C. An. Dom. 1154. in the first year of King Henry.
Winchester, on Michaelmass-day, where they Ireland; but because it pleased not
his Mother, Maud the Empress, for sometime that Expedition was laid aside.

Yet that he might be prepared against the first opportunity should offer it
self, he sent Sylvest. Girald. Cambr. Hibern. Exp. f 787. lib 2. C. 6. King
Henry obtains a Privilege of the Pope to subdue Ireland.
John of Salisbury, afterward Bishop of Chartres in France, to Rome, to Pope
Adrian the Fourth, an Englishman, with his Complements, and Congratulations;
from whom he Append ^. 37.
Privilege, by his Authority and Assent, to bring Ireland under his Obedience,
Girald. ut supra.
that he might cause them to be instructed in the Rudiments of Faith, and
informed in Ecclesiastic Discipline and Rules, according to the usages of the
English Church, and received from him a Gold Ring as a Token of Investiture;
First suggesting to him, That the Irish were a Rude People, and ignorant of the
verity of Christian Faith: as appears by the Popes Privilege or Bull it self.

About the year 1168, or 1169. an occasion offers to put his Design in
execution.
Some fourteen or fifteen years after, he had a fair occasion and advantage to
put his Design in execution. There was then five (at least) Kingdoms or
Dominions in Ireland, and many more petty Governments, whereof those that
Commanded in them, were often by our Ancient Historians called Kings; Girald.
Cambr. Hiber. Expugnat. lib. 1. C. 1.
One of the five Rulers was Dermot Fitz-Murchard, commonly called Mac-Morogh,
who was Prince of Leinster; from his youth, and first entrance upon his
Kingdom,

To the evil Ibidem.
Treatment of his People, there was the Accession of another Mischief; Ororic
Prince of Mead went with an Army to view the utmost parts of his Country, and
left his Wife Omachla, the Daughter of Herlin, or of O Machelin, in an Island
belonging to it. Dermot and she had formerly understood one another Dermot
Ravishes Prince Ororic's Wife.
yet taking the advantage of her Husbands absence, he speedily came to the
place were she was, and Ravished her, because she had a mind to be Ravished.
King Ororic mightily provoked with this indignity, breathed nothing but
Revenge; and gathering together his own, and Neighbors Forces, drew into his
Assistance Roderick Prince of Connaugh, Roderick drawn in to Ororic's
Assistance.
then Monarch of all Ireland. The People of Leinster considering in what
streights their Prince was, and how he was encompassed with his Enemies,
unmasked Dermot thus forsaken, and after many Conflicts with his Enemies,
Dermot flees to King Henry, and is kindly received.
with unequal Force, having been always worsted, he shipped himself, and sled
to King Henry of England, then in France, and much busied in Aquitan, about
reducing to obedience, and settling of that Province: Who received him kindly;
and having heard the cause of his Exile, and of his Address and coming to him,
delivered with much order; After he had sworn to be his true Vassal and
Subject, (not being able at that time otherwise to assist him) gave him his
Letters Literas Patentes indulsis.
Patents in form following.

Henricus Ibidem. King Henry's Letters Patents to Dermot.
Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, and Aquitaniae, Andegabiae, universis fidelibus
suis, Anglis, Normannis, Gualensibus, Scotis, Cunctisque Nationibus suae
ditioni subditis, Salutem. Cum praesentes ad vos literae pervenerint,
Noveritis, nos Dermitium Lageniensium principem in Gratiae nostrae and
Benevolentiae sinum suscepisse, unde and quisquis ei de Amplitudinis nostrae
Finibus tanquam homini and fideli nostro, Restitutionis Auxilium impendere
volu^rit, se nostram ad hoc tam Gratiam Noverit, quam licentiam obtinere.

^ Henry King of England, Duke of Normandy, and Aquitan, and Earl of Anjou, to
all his Vassals or Subjects, English, Normans, Welsh, and Scots, and to all
Nations under his Dominion, Greeting. Know ye, that We have received Dermot,
Prince of Leinster, into our Favor and Protection; Wherefore, whoever within
any of Our Dominions will aid, assist, and help to restore him, may know ^he
has Our Favor and License in this matter.

With these Letters he came into England, and for his Convenience repaired
Ibidem, c. 2. Dermot comes into England, and causes the Kings Letters to be
read.

He gives large Promises to such as should assist him.


to Bristol, where he could by Ships coming from Ireland, often receive
information of the State and Condition of his Country and People. While he was
there, he caused the Kings Letters to be frequently read in the Audience of
much People: and made great promises to settle Lands upon, and give great Wages
or He was a Norman by Extraction, and Descended from Dugd. Baron. Tom. 1. f.
208, 209. Strongbow, what he was.
Richard the eldest Son of Gilbert, Surnamed Crispin, Earl of Brion in
Normandy, Son of Geofry Base Son to Richard the first of that name, Duke of
Normandy, Thus; Gilbert Crispin Earl of Brion in Normandy, Richard his Son.
Gilbert de Tonebrigg (from his place of Residency) his eldest Son; Richard his
eldest Son. Gilbert Surnamed Strongbowe his second Son, made Earl of Pembroke
by King Stephen, Anno Domini 1138. Richard Earl of Strigul, now Chepstow, (so
called from his Residence there) his Son, Married to Eva Daughter of Dermot
King of Lei^ster.
Richard Earl of Strigul, (now Chepstow in Monmouthshire) Son of Earl Gilbert,
called Strongbow, came to Discourse with him; and it was agreed between them,
that the Earl should next Spring assist Dermot should give unto him in Marriage
his eldest Daughter, with the Succession of his Kingdom.

The Agreement thus concluded, Dermot was very desirous to see David's in
South Wales, from whence was the nearest Passage into Leinster, where Rice, or
Rese Fitz-Grifin had the chief Command under the King: and David the Second,
was Bishop of St. David's; They both Commiserated the Calamity of the Exile, and
pitied his Condition. At this time He was Sandf. Geneal Hist. f. 31. Fitz
Stephen, what he was.
Son of Stephen Constable of the Castle of Abertivy, by Nesta Daughter of Rhees
ap Tewdor, or great Rice, or Rese King of South Wales. She had a former Husband
called Girald or Gerold of Windsor, Constable of Pembroke Castle, and Father of
Maurice Fits Girald. Both these Constables were Giral. ut sup. Cap. 2. f. 761.
n. 20.
Normans, and were the Progenitors of the Fits-Giralds and Fits-Stephans in
Ireland.
Robert Fitz-Stephan Governor of From Aber the Mouth, and the River Teife or
Tefie, or as it is now called Tivy: Abertivy is now called Cardigan, which is
seated upon that River near the Mouth of it.
Abertefie, or Aberteife, who Rese, and by him had been detained in Bonds, and
imprisoned three years, and was now released upon Condition he should take up
Arms with him against the King of England. But he had no mind to that Service,
and chose rather to make his Fortune abroad. By the Mediation therefore of his
Brothers by the Mother, David Bishop of David's, and Maurice Fitz-Girald, he
obtained License of Rice, and in their presence made a Contract with Dermot,
That upon Condition he would grant them the City of Wexford in Fee, with two
Cantreds (or Hundreds) adjoining, Maurice Fitz-Girald and himself would assist
him next Spring. Hereupon he returned to St. David's, Shipped himself, and came
privately to Ferns, not far from Wexford, and remained with the Clergy of that
place all Winter.

Ibidem, C. 3. Anno Domini 1169, or 1170. Robern Fitz-Stephan goes to the
Assistance of Dermot.
In the mean while Robert Fitz-Stephan, not unmindful of his Engagement,
Embarked with 30 Knights, 60 Esquires, or Men at Arms on Horseback, and 300
Archers on Foot, in three Ships, and landed about the first of May at Bannogh
Bay, not far from Waterford. Herveie of Mount-Maurice accompanied him, a Client
or Dependent of Earl Richards, and went rather as a Not upon his Countrymen,
but as a Discoverer of the Country, for the Information of Earl Strongbow.
Spy than Soldier. On the Morrow the tried brave and stout Maurice de
Prendergast (so Haverfordwest in Pembrokeshire) following Fitz-Stephan to the
Aid of Dermot, set Sail from Milford-Haven, and landed at the same place with
ten Knights and many Archers, which he transported in two Ships. Not thinking
themselves safe where they were, their landing being known to the Country, they
dispatched Messengers to Dermot; who forthwith sent his Base Son Donald, with
500 Men to receive them, and came after him with all speed; where renewing the
former Agreement, Wexford, about twelve Miles from Bannogh; Upon their coming
near it, the Townsmen to the number of 2000 go forth with intention to give
them Battle; but when they saw the Order of the Foot, the Arms, Discipline, and
Appointment of the Horse, such as before they had not known, their minds were
presently changed; Fitz-Stephan Assaults Wexford, but is repulsed.
they burn the Suburbs, and retire into the Town. Fitz-Stephan and his Men
prepare for an Assault; he caused the Ditches to be filled by the labor of
Armed Men, while the Archers at a distance watched and observed the Walls and
Towers; They scale the Walls with great Courage and Shouts: The Citizens make a
stout Defense, throw down from the Walls great pieces of Timber and Stones, by
which they hurt many, and beat them off a little. Amongst those which were
hurt, one Robert Barrie, a brave young Gentleman, was beaten from almost the
top of the Wall with a great Stone that fell upon his Headpiece, yet was
carried off by his Comrades with safety of his Life. Upon this Repulse they
withdrew themselves from the Walls, and burnt all the Ships they could come at
on the Strand and in the Haven. He burns all the Ships in the Haven.


The next day Girald. ut supra, l. 1. c. 3.
they proceed more warily to an Assault, and when they came near to the Walls,
the Citizens despairing of defending Wexford surrendered.
that they yielded and delivered four Hostages to be kept by him for their good
Behavior and Fidelity to him for the future. He no sooner was possessed of the
City, but he gave it, with the whole Territory, to Robert Fitz-Stephan, and
Maurice Fitz-Girald, according to the Agreement he had made with him, and to
Hervey Mont-Maurice he gave in Fee, two Cantreds or Hundreds between Wexford
and Waterford,

Having thus reduced Wexford, by the addition of the Ibid. c. 4. Dermot marches
into Ossery.
People of that place, he made up an Army of 3000 men, with which he marched
toward A Portion of Leinster anciently and at the time of Conquest a County or
Earldom, Camd. Britan. f. 731. there are two of them, one named Vpper-Ossery in
the Diocese of Leighlin, another called the lower, lies North of Ormond, and is
a Diocese of it self, but the Bishops House and Residence is at Kilkenny. So
Holinshed in the Conquest of Ireland, c. 4. Camden calls the first
Lower-Ossery, ibid. f. 742. and the last Vpper-Ossery, f. 744.
Osserie, the Prince whereof Duuenald, or Donald, amongst all his Rebels, was
the greatest Enemy to Dermot. Osserians, who resolved stoutly to defend
themselves, hereupon the Army retreated into the Plains, the Osserians trusting
to their former good Fortune in many other Engagements, and thinking their
Enemies through fear had turned their backs, issued out of their fastnesses,
and persued them in the open Fields.

Robert Ibidem. Fitz-Stephan totally routs the Osserians.
Fitz-Stephan, taking the advantage; faced about Irish Axes cut off their
Heads, and presented them to Dermot. After this they entered the most inward
Parts of the Country, and ruined it with Slaughter, Rapine, and Burning. So
that the Prince of Ossery, The Prince of Ossery swears Fidelity to Dermot.
by advice of his Council, desired Peace, gave Hostages, and swear Fidelity to
Dermot. It was rather a feigned than real Peace on both Robert Barrie and Henry
the First, King of England, had a base Son Sandford's Genealog. Hist. f. 31.
by Nesta aforesaid, Daughter to the King of South Wales, called Fitz-Henry, or
Fitz-Roy, he was born, bred, lived and married in Wales, and had two Sons
Meiler and Robert, the two Persons here mentioned.
Meyler, were the most conspicuous for

Dermot Ibid. c. 5. Roderic resolves with all his Force to oppose Dermot.
and his Strangers with this Success, became formidable through the Island.
Roderic King of Connaught, and There was always Holinsh. Conquest of Ireland,
f. 8. n. 10.
one Principal Governor amongst the Irish, and he was commonly one of the Mac
Carty's in Monster, Morroghs in Leinster, or O Conors in Connaught, chosen by
the Nobility; he made Peace and War, and what he commanded was always done.
Monarch of all Ireland, by his Messengers called together all the Primates, or
Chief men of the whole Nation; upon Consultation, they agreed Dermot, and led
several Armies, and an infinite multitude of Men (says my Author) into
Leinster; most of his pretended Friends forsake him, not regarding their
Promises or Oath. Fitz-Stephan and his men, with some few others, stuck Ferns,
surrounded with thick Woods, steep Mountains and Bogs, by Nature and Situation
almost inaccessible, they secure themselves, and by cutting down Trees, and
placing them so artificially, and with Ditches and Pits which they dug in
places of advantage, they shut out their Enemies, yet with great Art reserved
entrance for their Friends.

Roderic Ibid. c. 6. Roderic sollicits Fitz-Stephan to withdraw, but prevails
not.
sent to Fitz-Stephan, and endeavored to persuade Fitz-Murchard to Mac Morogh,
to induce him to join Arms and destroy the Strangers, with full assurance he
should peaceably enjoy all Leinster, and the firm friendship of Roderic; but
could not move him.

But at length, Girald. Ibid c. 10. A Peace concluded between Dermot and
Roderic.
by the intervening of Messengers and Friends, Dermot should enjoy Leinster,
acknowledging Roderic as Prince and Monarch of Ireland by due subjection; and
that the Peace might remain firm, he delivered his Son Cnothurn according to
Stanihurst.
Cnuth to him as an Hostage. This Agreement was published and confirmed by
their Oaths, and it was further privately agreed between them, that Dermot
should call no more Strangers into Ireland, and that such as were there, should
be sent away.

Just after this Agreement Ibid. c 11. Maurice Fitz-Girald lands at Wexford
with a great Force.

Dermot marches toward Dublin, and spoils the Country.


came Maurice Fitz-Girald, Brother by the Mother to Fitz-Stephan, with ten
Knights, thirty other Horsemen, and one hundred Archers on Foot in two Ships,
and landed at Wexford. Dermot rejoiced, and was much encouraged at his coming,
and forthwith raised an Army, and marched toward Dublin, Maurice being
General, while Fitz-Stephan was busied in building a Castle upon a Rock called
Karrec. In a short space the whole Country belonging to the City, and others
adjoining, with

In the mean time there happened Ibidem. Roderic makes War upon Donald.
Discord between Roderic Prince of Cannaught, and Donald Prince of Limrick;
Roderic with Arms invades the Territories of Limrick, Dermot sends Fitz-Stephan
with his Troops to the Aid of his Son in Law Donald, by whose assistance he
obtained Victory in every Conflict, He is overth^own, and withdraws with
disgrace.
insomuch as Roderic withdrew himself from his Government with disgrace. Robert
Barrie and his Brother Meiler, were very eminent for their Bravery in these
Engagements.

Fitz-Murchard or Morrogh Ibid. c 12. Fitz-Murchard projects the obtaining the
Monarchy of Ireland.
encouraged by this Success, having regained his Country, thought of recovering
his ancient Connaught, and obtaining the whole Monarchy of Ireland; and
secretly imparts his Project to Fitz-Stephan and Maurice. They think it easily
to be accomplished if he could procure more English Forces; He sollicites
Fitz-Stephan for more Forces from England.

And writes to Richard Earl of Strigul to assist him.


and earnestly beseech him to send for them, that he might put his design in
Execution. He wrote to Richard Earl of Strigul, to let him know that the Spring
and Autumn were come and gone without seeing of him, or receiving the least
assistance from him, and therefore desired him Henry, and earnestly supplicated
him, either to restore his Hereditary Lands according to Justice, or give him
leave to make his Fortune in some other Nation.

And having received a Ibid. c. 13.
dissembled rather than true License, after Winter he sent before a Young Man
of his Family called He was Nephew to Maurice and Fitz-Stephan by their Elder
Brother.

Reymund sent by Earl Richard into Ireland with Forces.


Reymund, a stout and valiant Person, and well skilled in the use of May in
Ireland under a Rock called Dundolf is a Rock in the Holinsh. ut supra f. 12.
n. 40.
County of Waterford by the Seaside, lying East from the City about eight
English Miles, and is from the Town of Wexford about twelve Miles. It is now a
Castle, called by the name of Dundorogh.
Dundolf, four Miles from Waterford, on the South side of Wexford; where they
built a weak Castle of Boughs of Trees, Wood and Turf. The News no sooner came
to the Citizens of Waterford, and Machlachlin Ophelan, but they gather together
a Body of 3000 Siver, they marched toward the Ditches of the Castle in three
Divisions, with intention to assault it. Reymund, that he and his men went
forth to meet them, who oppressed with number, and not able to resist, returned
to their Castle and Trenches, their Enemies persuing and entering with them.
Reymund seeing in what streights they were, He obtains a great Victory of the
Irish.
faced about toward the Enemy, and with his Sword cut them down one by one as
they entered, and with a great outcry he called back his men to his defense,
which struck Terror into his Enemies, that they gave back and fled in such
confusion and disorder, that Reymund and his men persuing them, killed above
five hundred, with their Swords and Weapons, and threw many of them who had
climed steep Rocks for their own safety into the Sea: In this Conflict one
William Ferrand was very Famous for his wonderful Courage and Exploits.

By this Victory Girald. Ibid. c. 14, 5. Many of the Citizens of Waterford
taken Prisoners
they had seventy of the chief Citizens of Waterford Prisoners and in Bonds
within their Castle, for whom Hervey of Mount-Maurice, who had joined him at
his first landing with three Knights or men at Arms and Reymund, were of a
contrary opinion; Reymund was for their Redemption by Money, and urged, That it
was against the Principles of Humanity, Piety and Honor, to destroy them.
Hervey urged, that to spare them, was to nourish Serpents in their Bosoms, and
but to give them an opportunity of revenging themselves; and put the Question,
That if the Victory had been on their side, whether they would have sold them
their Lives, and out of Piety given them leave of Redemption. He was for doing
what they came for, subduing The Prisoners cruelly destroyed.
and so fisrt breaking their Limbs, they threw them headlong into the Sea.

On the 23d of August following, Earl Ibid c 16 A. D. 1170. Strongbowe
overthrows Mac-Laghlin, and takes him Prisoner.
Richard Strongbowe landed near Waterford with 200 Horsemen, or men at Arms,
and about 1000 others, and on the 25th in the Morning assaulted that Dundolf;
but upon the third attack they entered, killed very many in the Streets, and
obtained a Bloody Victory. Mac-Laghlin Prince of Ophaly, or Ossalie, was that
part of Leinster, which is now called the Kings County. Camd. Britan. f. 746.
Ophaly, and one Reginald, who by the mediation of Dermot had their Lives
saved, and with him came Maurice Fitz-Girald, Robert Fitz-Stephan and Reymund,
and joined their Forces with Earl Richard, to whom Dermot gave his Daughter Eva
in Marriage, after which Solemnity they marched Dublin.

And so soon as they came before it, Ibid. c. 17. Dublin assaulted and taken.
Reymund and Miles Cogan, with a select Company of brave young men assaulted,
and made themselves Masters of it, and killed many Citizens; but the Governor
Hasculf, and the better part of them, with the best of their Goods and Jewels,
got out of the other side of the City, and recovered the Ships in the Road, and
sailed to the Northern

Roderic King of Connaught was much concerned at these Ibidem. Roderic
threatens to put Dermot's Son to death.
Proceedings of Dermot, and sent to him to let him know, that he had broken the
Peace between them, by calling so great a number of Strangers into the Island,
and that he neither was mindful of his Oath, nor compassionate toward his
Hostage, which was his Son; and therefore gave him notice, that if for the
future he did not restrain Dermot answered, that he would not desist, until he
had subdued Connaught, and made himself Monarch of all Ireland according to his
right. Roderic provoked with this Answer, condemned his Son to death.

About this time Ibid. c. 18. The Irish Clergy hold a Council at Ardmagh.
the Irish Clergy met in Council at Ardmagh, consulted together, and inquired
into the cause of Strangers coming English Children of Merchants and Pirates,
and make them Slaves, and for this reason they thought they lay under Divine
Vengeance, and by public consent made a Decree, That all the English that were
in Servitude, The Irish Clergy Decree that all English Slaves be ^et at Liberty.
should have their Liberty. The Historian tells us, the English, by a common
Vice of the Country, had a Custom to Ibidem.
fell their Children and Kinsfolks, though they were neither in want or extreme
Poverty.

King Henry hearing what progress the Ibid. c. 19. A D. 1170. King Henry
recalls his English Subjects from Ireland.
Earl made, and what Success he had in Ireland, put forth an Edict, by which he
prohibited all his Subjects from carrying any thing by Ship into that Nation,
and by the same recalled all the English, appointing them to return by Easter,
or to be disinherited and live in perpetual Exile. The Earl sent Reymund to the
King then in Aquitan, with a Letter, Reymund pleads for their continuance there.
in which he puts him in mind he had his License to go and assist his Dermot,
and tells him, that as whatsoever he had acquired, proceeded from his
Munificence, so it was all at his command, and should return to him whenever he
pleased.

In the beginning of May, Ibid. c. 20. f. 771. n. 50. A. D. 1170.
Dermot Fitz-Murchard, being a very old man, died at Fernes.

About Ibid. c. 21. A. D. 1171. Hasculph attempts to recover Dublin.
Whitsuntide the same year, Hasculph sometime Governor Dublin, attempting to
regain that City, came into the River Liffe, now the Road or Haven, with sixty
Ships filled with Norwegians, and Inhabitants of the Northern Isles, who landed
and assaulted it; But Miles Cogan the Governor defended it so well, and his
Brother Richard sallying out upon them, beat them off with so great slaughter,
that they fled; He is repulsed by Cogan, and taken Prisoner
their Leader John Thewoode being killed, and Hasculph taken in the Silt or
Ouse, as he was making to his Ships, who was reserved for Ransom; but being
brought before Miles, he told him these were but a small Company, and came only
to try what might be done, but if he lived, in a short time there should come a
far better and greater Force. So soon as he had said this, Miles caused his
Head to be struck off. And at last Beheaded.


The Irish Princes or Great Men Ibid. c. 22. The Irish Princes agree to besiege
Dublin.
perceiving that no recruits of either Men or Victuals came from England to the
Earl and his Forces, collected a vast Army from all parts of the Country, and
Dublin: By the Instigation of Laurence Bishop of that place this was done, and
he with the Prince of Connaught Roderic, wrote to Gotred Prince of Man, and
other Chiefs or Princes of the Islands, promising great rewards for their
assistance, who with thirty Ships full of Fighting men, arrived in the Port of
the City, or Water of Liffe.

Two Ibidem. Dublin much pressed with want of Victuals.
months the Siege had continued, without any relief by Donald Son of Dermot,
were informed (who came from the Borders of Perhaps now Kinsale with the
Country about it. Fitz-Stephan besieg^d in Karrec Castle.
Kencele) that Robert Fitz-Stephan was by those People, and the men of Wexford,
to the number of 3000, besieged in his small Castle of Karrec, (not far from
Waterford) and unless he were relieved within three days, he must fall into his
Enemies hands.

Within Dublin Ibid^m.
there were with the Earl, Reymund and Maurice Fitz-Girald, the last was
mightily moved with the Calamity of his Brother Robert, his Wife and Children,
seeing he was to defend a Defenseless Castle made only of Boughs of Trees, Wood
and Turf; Ibid. c. 23. Maurice and Reymund persuade the Earl to Sally out and
attack the Enemy.
Reflecting upon their desperate condition, Maurice and Reymund persuade and
exhort the Earl, and the small Troops within the City, to go out and attack the
Enemy, who though they appeared

The Soldiers and Adventurers Ibid. c. 24.
strive who should Arm first, and were divided into three small Troops; in the
first commanded Reymund, were twenty Knights, in the second commanded by Miles
were thirty, and in the third commanded by Maurice were forty, with some other
Horsemen, and a few Citizens joined to every Division or Troop; with these
(leaving enough for the Guard of the City) they march out, and suddenly about
nine of the Clock in the Morning, They set upon Roderic on a sudden, and Defeat
his whole Army.
they set upon an Army of Thirty thousand men, who neither expected or thought
of them, killing very many of them and dispersing the rest; Roderic trusting to
the multitude of English persued their Enemies until the Evening, beating off
and dispersing as well the Southern, as other Bodies of men, They spoil his
Camp, and return well provided with Victuals.
that lay on several parts of the City, under several Chiefs and Commanders,
and then returned well provided with Victuals, Carriages, and Spoils. On the
morrow having secured and placed sufficient Guards in the City, they march
toward Wexford.

In the Ibid. c. 25. The Wexfordians take Fitz-Stephan by a Trick.
mean time the Wexfordians and Kencelians take Robert Fitz-Stephan by a Trick
and Falsity, when they could not prevail by Force: They brought before the
Ditches of the Castle, the Bishops of Wexford and Kildare, with other men in
Religious Habits, and diverse Relics, upon which they all affirmed upon Oath,
that Dublin was taken, and the Earl, Maurice, and Reymund, and all the English
were destroyed, that the Army of Connaught and Leinster Wexford, that they did
this out of kindness to him, that he and the People with hm, might quietly be
conveyed over into Wales, before the multitude, who were his desperate
Enemies, came up. Fitz-Stephan believing them, gave himself into their Power
and Protection; they no sooner had Possession of him, but killed some of his
men, beat, and grievously wounded others, and put them into Prison and Bonds.
But very suddenly there came contrary news, that the Siege of Dublin Wexford,
and removed themselves and Goods, with their Captives, into the Isle of Beg, or
St. Beger, at the mouth of the Harbor.

The Earl, Ibid. c. 26. The Earl marches toward Wexford to relieve Stephan.
in his march toward Wexford, was impeached at Odrone, a narrow and difficult
place, by reason of Bogs and other impediments, which was also fortified with
Stakes; here the Forces on both sides were engaged, many of the Irish were
slain, the English gained the pass with the loss of one man only, and marched
into the Champain Country. Meiler in this Fight was eminent above all others
for his Valor.

When they Ibid. c. 28. The Irish threaten to kill all the Prisoners, if the
Earl should disturb them.
came to the Bordes of Wexford, they were informed of the case and condition of
Fitz-Stephan, and of the burning of the Town, and received a Message from the
Irish, in whose custody he was, That if they presumed to come near or disturb
them, they would cut off all their Prisoners Heads; at which Message being much
troubled, they directed their course toward Waterford, where they find Hervey
returned from the King of England; who Newnham in Glocestershire, having
provided an Army to be transported into Ireland. After much Discourse, by the
Mediation of Hervey, the King was reconciled to him on these Conditions, That
he should deliver up to him Dublin, with the Cantreds, The Earl agrees to
deliver up Dublin to King Henry.
Baronies, or Hundreds adjoining, and all the Maritine Towns and Castles, and
he and his Heirs should hold of the King and his Heirs, all the Residue of his
Conquest, or what he had obtained. Upon David's, The King provides a great Fleet.
and going from thence to Pembroke, in a short time there appeared a gallant
Fleet in Milford Haven.

In the Ibid. c. 29. Ororic attempts to assault Dublin, but is repulsed with
loss.
mean time Ororic King of Meth taking advantage of the absence of the Earl, and
Reymund, who was then at Waterford, came to Dublin in the beginning of
September, entered the Ditches, and assaulted the Walls of Dublin; but Miles
Cogan the stout Governor, Ororic.

On the 16th of October, Ibid. c. 3^. A. D 1172. The King Lands at Waterford
with a great Army.
the King, with 500 Knights or Men at Arms, and with many ordinary Horsemen
and Archers, took Shipping at Milford Haven and landed at Waterford on the
18th. Roger Hoveden F. 301. b. n. 30.40.
says, he set sail with a great Army of Horse Milford Haven, and landed at a
place called Croch eight Miles from Waterford by nine of the Clock next day,
and that he and his whole Army marched to Waterford on the Feast of St. Luke.
Here he staid some days, and the Citizens of Wexford, Girald, ut supra, c. 30.
The Wexfordians deliver up Fitz-Stephan to the King.
under pretense of Obedience and good Service, brought to him Robert
Fitz-Stephan in Bonds, for that he first of all invaded Ireland without his
consent. The King in great anger reproved him, and for that rash and
unwarrantable Attempt, sent him A small Tower so called upon the walls of
Wexford.
Reginald's Tower.

Hither came Dermot Mac-Carty Ibid. c. 31. Hoved. f. 301. b. n. 40. Dermot
Mac-Carty submits to the King and swears Fealty.
King of Cork, and of his own accord submitted to him, swore Fealty, gave
Hostages, and agreed to pay a certain Annual Tribute. From hence King Henry
with his Army, marched to Lismore, and from thence to Cassil; at these places
came in upon the same terms, the King of Limeric, the King of Ossery, All the
Irish Princes submit, except the King of Connaught.
the King of M^th, and almost all the mighty men of Ireland, except the King of
Connaught. The King returned back to Waterford, after he had received the
Submissions of the Irish Princes, and Fitz-Stephan was again brought before
him, and then considering his valiant Achievements, and the greatness of his
mind, restored him to his Liberty, Fitz-Stephan restored to his Liberty.
but took from him Wexford, and the Territory adjoining.

All the Hoved. ut supra. n. 50. Benedict. Abb. p. 38. b. 390. a. The Irish
Clergy swear Fealty to him and his Heirs for ever.
Archbishops, Bishops and Abbats of Ireland, came unto the King of England at
Waterford, and received him as King and Lord of Ireland, and swear Fealty to
him and his Heirs, and from every Archbishop and Bishop he received a Chart, by
which Hoved. ut supra. n. 50. Benedict. Abb. p. 38. b. 390. a. The Irish Clergy
swear Fealty to him and his Heirs for ever.
they acknowledged and constituted him King, and submitted unto him and his
Heirs as their Kings for ever. And according to their example, the foresaid
Kings and Princes received him as King and Lord Ireland, and became his men,
and swear Fealty to him and his Heirs against all men.

These Charters were transcribed, and the King Hoved. f. 302. a. n. 20. Ben.
Abb. p. 39. b. The Charters sent to the Pope and confirmed.
sent the Transcripts to Pope Alexander, who confirmed by Apostolic Authority
to him and his Heirs, the Kingdom of Ireland, according to the form of those
Charters.

The Nation being in perfect peace and quiet, the King Girald. ut supra. c. 33,
34 The King calls a Council of the Clergy at Cassil.
called a Council of all the Clergy thereof at Cassil, and sent Ralph Abbot of
Bildewas, Ralph Archdeacon of Landaf, Nicholas his Chaplain, and other Clerks
to assist at it, and his design was to bring the State of the Irish Church, as
near to the form of the English Church as might be; and therefore he confirmed
the App. f. 464 H^ confirms their Decrees by his Royal Authority.
Decrees of the Council by his Royal Authority.

From Waterford he came to Dublin, Hoved. ut supra. n. 30.
about the Feast of St. Martin or 12th of November, and staid there until the
beginning of Lent; he kept a Noble Christmas, the Irish admired his
Hospitality, and the Splendour of his Court.

Here King Henry staid until the beginning of Girald. c. 36. Hoved. f. 302. b.
n. 20.
Lent, when he went to Wexford, where receiving Information that two Cardinals,
Theodinus and Albertus were sent from the Pope into Normandy, The King leaves
Ireland and goes to meet two Cardinals sent by the Pope into Normandy.
he Ireland in such an unsettled condition; yet before he went, he consulted
with his Friends and Chief men, and made some provision for the Security of it
before he departed; he gave to Hugh Lacy all Meth with the Appertinences, to
hold in Hereditary Fee of him and his Heirs, by the Service of 100 Horse, and
delivered Dublin into his Custody, and made him Justiciary of Ireland; and
delivered to Ibidem. Hoveden.
Robert Fitz-Bernard in custody the Cities of Wexford and Waterford, with

Giraldus Cap. 37. f. 778. n. 20.
Cambrensis says he thus provided for the Security and Defense of the last
mentioned Cities and Towns. To Hugh Lacy he left the keeping of Dublin, King
Henry settles the Government of Ireland.
with twenty Knights or men at Arms, and also left with him Robert
Fitz-Stephan, and Maurice Fitz-Girald, with other twenty Knights or men at
Arms. To Humfry Bohun he gave the command of Waterford, and left with him
Robert Fitz-Bernard, and Hugh de Gundevill, with forty Knights or men at Arms;
William Fitz-Aldelm had the Government of Wexford, and with him were Philip de
Hasting and Philip de Breus, with twenty Knights or men at Arms. Ibid. n. 30.
A. D. 1173.
Having made this Settlement, (such as it was) on Easter Monday Morning, i. e.
by Sunrising, he went on Shipboard in the furthermost part of the Haven of
Wexford toward the Sea, and landed near St. David's in Wales about Noon that day
(says my Welsh Historian) and from thence with all imaginable speed he passed
to Portsmouth, He leaves Ireland and hastens into Normandy.
where the Ships lay ready to transport him into Normandy; he had intended to
have staid in Ireland all the Summer, and to have reduced the King of Connaught
and the whole Nation, had it not been for this sudden avocation into Normandy
about the business of Thomas Beckett, and the Differences between him and the
King of France, that were to be

Not long after the King's departure, having left the Nation in some tolerable
Tranquillity, Ibid. c. 40. Ororic's Treachery to destroy Lacy and Maurice.
Ororic the one-ey'd King of Meth, and Hugh de Lacy, gave Counter-Security, and
made Oath each to other for their safe coming and going to and from the place
appointed; on a certain day met at Ororic Hill, to confer and discourse for the
better and more peaceable ordering of their Affairs; Grifin the Nephew of
Maurice Fitz-Girald, had a jealousy of the Treachery of Ororic, and brought
with him seven choice Knights or men at Arms of his Relations; after some time
spent in Discourse upon several Proposals to no purpose, Ororic gave the sign
to his men he had laid in Ambush, for the destruction of Hugh Lacy and Maurice,
and advanced to smite Hugh with his Irish Axe, with which stroke the
Interpreter interposing himself, had his Maurice and his Nephew Grifin came in
to the Rescue of Hugh Lacy, which when Ororic saw, he intended to fly, but in
the very act of mounting his Horse, Grifin charged him so home with his Lance,
Ororic killed by Grifin Nephew to Maurice.
that he pierced both man and Horse, killing them both, and afterward his
Servants that brought the Horse; the rest fled to the Woods, of which several
were killed in the persuit. Ororic's Head was sent into England to the King. In
this conflict Ralph the Son of Robert Fitz-Stephan deserved praise

The Rebellion of the Sons of the King against him at this time, and the
Dissension both in England and Normandy, and other parts of France, under his
Dominion, (which the Irish very well understood) Ibid. l. 2. c. ^. The Irish
encouraged to throw off the E^glish Yoke.
gave them an opportunity of taking Arms, and endeavoring to throw off the
English Government, all the Princes of the Richard Strongbow was sent over with
the Kings Commission, who in a short time spent all the Treasure he brought
over with him; his Soldiers also that were under the conduct of Hervey de
Monte-Morisco or Mont-Morice, then Herveio se Constabularium jam geren^e. The
S^ldiers desire Reymund for their General.
Constable or General, wanted their Pay, who came unanimously to the Earl,
affirming, that unless he would make Reymund their General again, they would
all presently leave him, and either return into England, or go over to his
Enemies.

In Ibid. c. 2. Reymund invades and Plunders Ophaly.
this time of necessity Reymund was made Commander in Chief of these Forces,
with which he invaded Ophaly, and got good Plunder, recruiting his Soldiers
with Horse and Arms; from hence he went to Lismore and plundered that City and
the Country about, and laded with their great Booty some small Vessels which
came Waterford and other places, which they found there, and carried it to
Waterford by Sea; in the way they were set upon by the Inhabitants of Cork
(distant from Lismore sixteen Miles) who had manned out 32 Vessels of War to
intercept them. There was a smart Engagement, at length the men of Cork were
beaten, and their Admiral Gilbert Fitz-Cutger killed by Philip Welsh, a very
stout young man; and Adam of Hereford came safe into Waterford with his whole
Charge. He vanquishes Fitz-Cutger, and puts Dermot to flight.
Reymund was not in this Rencounter, but Waterford, met with Dermot Mac-Carty
Prince of Desmond coming to the assistance of Cork men, they skirmished, Dermot
left the Field, and Raymund went to Waterford with 4000 Head of Cattle.

Soon Ibid. c. 3.
after Reymund had notice that his Father William Fitz-Girald was dead, and
passed over into Wales, in whose absence Hervey Mont-Morice was made Constable
or Commander again in Chief Cassil, where the Forces of Dublin were commanded
to meet them. In their march thither they quartered one night at Ossory, of
which Donald O Breen Prince of Limerick had certain advice by his Scouts, very
early in the Morning he beat up their Quarters, and killed 300 Ostmans, The
Irish unanimously rise up against the English.
with four Knights that commanded them, the Earl hearing this, returned in
disorder to Waterford. Upon occasion of this accident Ireland unanimously rise
against the English, so as the Earl was as it were besieged in Waterford.
Roderic Prince of Connaught passed the River Shanon, and invaded Meth,
demolished the Castles being without Garrisons, and with Fire and Sword wasted
the Country, almost to the very Walls of Dublin.

The Earl Ibid. c. 4.
was in a great straight, and wrote into Wales to Reymund, that he would return
with all speed, and bring what Aid Meyler, with thirty Gentlemen of their
kindred, an hundred Horse, and three hundred Archers, chosen men of Wales,
shipped themselves in fifteen Vessels and landed at Waterford; The
Waterfordians design to kill all the English within their Walls.
at this time the Waterford men had designed to kill every English man within
the Walls, but when they saw these Vessels come from Wales with Flags and
Banners displayed, they altered Reymund entered Waterford, with his Forces he
conducted the Earl to Wexford, leaving the care of that Town unto one Tyrell or
Purcell, him the Waterfordians slew, and all the English they could find in the
Streets or in their Houses, Man, Woman, and Child, not sparing Age or Sex, yet
the City it self was preserved by such as were in Reginald's Tower, who drove
the Traitors out of the City, and forced them to seek for Peace, which they
obtained upon hard Conditions. Reymund marries Basilia.
At Wexford Reymund was married to Basilia, and the Wedding night being over,
next day hearing Roderick King of Connaught had again destroyed M^th, and was
marched into the Country near Dublin, went with his Forces toward him, but he
stayed not his coming. Reymund finding him retired, repaired the Castles in
Meth, and brought things

But long it was not Ibid. c. 8. Donald breaks his Oath made to King Henry.
e're Donald O Breen or Brin, King of Limerick and Mounster departed from the
Fealty he had sworn to the King of England. Whereupon Reymund gathered together
an hundred Knights or men at Arms, and with twenty other Horsemen as his
Guard, three hundred Archers on Horseback, and as many on October attacqued
Limerick, and coming to the River Shanon, that almost encompasseth the City,
which was deep and swift, they could proceed no further. David Welsh his
Courage.
David Welsh (so called from his Family, not Country) a courageous young
Gentleman, that despised Death, in respect of Honor, forced his Horse into the
River and passed over it, and from the place where he was, cried out to the
Army, he had found a Foord, yet none followed him but one Geofry Judas a common
Soldier, who was drowned. Meiler seeing David Welsh had got in his passing over
and safe return, clapped Spurs to his Horse, and went through the River,
notwithstanding the great danger he was to undergo from the Stones thrown at
him from the Walls, and the opposition he was to meet with at his going out of
it on the other side, yet he got safe upon Land, and was presently encountered
by the Enemy. Reymund observing in what danger his Nephew was, encouraged his
Army, and led them over, with the loss only of two Guido, Reymund takes
Limerick.
that were drowned. He presently drove the Enemy into the City, and with great
slaughter of the Citizens, took it by force; wherein the Army found much rich
Booty and Gold.

When Reymund Ibid. c 10
had put the City into good order, leaving there fifty Knights or men at Arms,
with 200 ordinary Horse, and as many Archers, he marched into Leinster, leaving
Miles of St. David's Hervey de Monte Marisco, envying the Honor and Success of
Reymund (notwithstanding he was related to him by the Marriage of his Cousin
German Nesta, Hervey endeavors to undermine Reymund.
the Daughter of Maurice Fitz-Girald) plied the King continually with secret
and malicious Informations against him, insinuating and asserting that he would
not only subdue and usurp to himself and followers, the Country of Limerick,
but also the whole Nation of Ireland.

Hervey, sent Ibid. c. 11
four Legates or Commissioners, Robert Poer, Osbert de Hereford, William de
Bendinges, and Adam de Gernemie, or rather Gernem^e, whereof two were to come
with Reymund, being recalled into England, and two were to stay with the Earl.

But it so happened, that while Reymund was preparing for his passage into
England, Messengers came from the Ibid. c. ^2.
Garrison in Limeric, Donald besieges Limeric.
relating that Donald O Breen Prince of Tuomond, with a great multitude had
besieged or encompassed it, and that in Winter time they had spent most of
their Victuals, and therefore desired sudden Relief. The Earl was very earnest,
and sollicitous to relieve them, and called upon, and quickened the Army to
that undertaking, Reymund sent to relieve it.
but they all denied to march without Reymund. The Earl Reymund undertook the
Service, and marching toward Cashil, with 80 Knights or men at Arms, 200
ordinary Horse, and 300 Archers, besides the Irish he brought with him,
Murchard Prince of Kincel, (perhaps now Kynsale) and Donald Prince of Ossory,
he heard that Donald of Tuomond had left the Siege of Limeric, and was coming
to meet him at the Pass of Cassil, which was of it self very strong, but by new
fortifying

The Army Ibid. c 13. Meyler enters Limeric.
marched in three Divisions, Meyler commanded the first, who made such a
furious onset at the Pass, as he almost destroyed the Hedge and Barricado of
Trees, killing many of the Defendents, and opened his way through it by the
Sword, on the Vigil or Eve of Easter, and on Tuesday that week entered Limeric
with his

Not long after Ibidem. Conaught and Tuomond swear Fealty to King Henry
Reymund had Conference with the Princes of Conaught and Tuomond on the same
day, but not in the same place; after much discourse, each Prince gave
Hostages, and swore inviolable Fidelity for the future to the King of England,
and his Substitutes.

No sooner Ibidem. Reymund helps Dermot against his Rebel Son.
was Reymund returned with his Hostages to Limeric, but Dermot Mac-Carty sent
and supplicated him for assistance against his eldest Son Cormach O Lechan, who
had almost driven him out of his Kingdom, promising him and his Soldiers large
rewards. He takes advice about his request, and then marches to Cork, takes the
Town, subdues the Rebel Son, and restores the Father, and returned with much
Booty and good satisfaction to Limeric. Under

A. D. 1175.
After this the Prince of Conaught sent his Submission and Conditions to the
King of England, Hoved. f. 312. b. n. 10, 20. King Henry holds a Council at
Windsor.
by his three Commissioners, Catholic Archbishop of Tuam, Cantord Abbat of St.
Brandan, and Laurence his Chancellor. On the sixth of October the King held a
great Windsor; present there, the King his Son, the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and the Bishops of England; and present also Laurence the Archbishop of Dublin,
and the Earls and Barons of England, where they made this Concord and Agreement
on behalf of Roderic of Conaught.

First, The King of England Append. N. 38. Conditions and Articles between King
Henry and Roderic.
granted to Roderic his Liegeman the Kingdom of Conaught so long as he should
serve him faithfully, that he should be a King under him, ready at his Service,
as his Sicut homo suu^.
Vassal or Man, and that he may hold his Land as well and in Peace, as he held
it, before the King of England entered Ireland, paying unto him Tribute, etc.

England, and him, and refused to pay Tribute by his hand, and to perform other
Rights to the King of England, he should Justice or punish and remove them, and
if he could not Justice them, the Constable of the King of England, and his
force should do it, etc. with several other things mentioned in the Concord it
self.

In this Council King Henry Hoved. f. 313. a. n. 10. Augustine made Bishop of
Waterford by King Henry.
gave unto Mr. Augustine and Irishman, Waterford then void, and sent him over
with Laurence Archbishop of Dublin, to be consecrated by Donat Archbishop of
Cassil.

In the next year Ibid. f. 316 a. n. 20. A. D. 1176.
Pope Alexander the Third sent Vivian Priest, Cardinal, Legate of the Apostolic
See in Scotland, and the circumjacent Isles, and in Ireland and Norwey to hear
and determine in Ecclesiastical Causes.

This year about the beginning of June died Ib. b. lin. 6. Earl Strongbowe dies
at Dublin.
Earl Strongbowe at Dublin, of whose death Reymund, then in Desmond, Girald.
Cambr. ut supr. c. 14.
had notice from his Lady Basilia, which he endeavored to keep private from
the Irish, and immediately upon the news he called a Council of his most
knowing and trusty Friends, to consider what was to be done in the present
Constitution of Affairs, and for that Reymund was suddenly to depart for
England, they resolved to remove the Garrison Limeric, and disperse it into the
Maritim Towns, and the strong places in Leinster, to reinforce them, and to
leave the charge and defense of that City, Reymund commits Limeric to O Brien.
to Donald O Brien or Breen of Tuomond Prince of Limeric, as one of the King of
England's Barons, who gave new Hostages, and made fresh Oaths for to defend the
Town, restore it to the King of England upon demand, and to preserve the Peace.
But the English were no sooner over one end of the Bridge, He breaks down the
Bridge, and fires the Town*
but Donald caused the other end to be broken down, and the City Dublin. The
Irish Annals place the death of Earl Richard, and the coming of Cardinal Vivian
into Ireland, in the year following A. D. 1177.

The Kings Ibid. c. 1^.
Commissioners after the Earls death, make have into England, and acquaint the
King with the change of Affairs in Ireland, who forthwith sends This William
was reckoned as one of the Household or Dapifer to King Henry the Second, Hoved.
f. 301. b. n. 40. and was Seneschal of Normandy, Poictou or some other his
Dominions in France, he was Luxurious and Proud, yet Covetous, and scraped
together much Wealth, by indirect as well as fair courses. He was harsh, unkind
and injurious to the Officers both Military and Civil, which he found in
Ireland. He was negligent in his Government, and therefore continued but a
short time in it, Girald. Cambren. l. 2. c. 16, 17.
William Fitz-Adelm In Hiberniam procuratorem misit.
Procurator thither, with ten Knights or Men at Arms of his private Guards or
William Fitz-Adelm sent Procurator into Ireland.
Household to attend on him, and joined with him John de Curcy, with whom he
sent ten others of the same Quality. Also Robert and F. 293. b. n. 10
Hoveden calls him Miles de Coggeham; Richardus Comes de Striguil, magno
congregato exercitu invasit Hiberniam, and maximam illius partem subjugavit
sibi, auxiliante e^ Milone de Coggeham, viro bellicoso, and facta concordia,
cum Rege Diviliniae, filiam illius in uxorem duxit, cum Regno Diviliniae, that
is, Leinster.
Miles Cogan, (who for two years last past, had served him nobly and bravely in
his Wars of France and England) with twenty to attend upon their Persons:
Reymund hearing they were landed, marched to Wexford, and received them with
great respect and kindness, and forthwith delivering up the Cities, Garrisons,
Ireland, to William Fitz-Adelm as Senescal, sent by the King.

John de Curcy Ibid c. 16. f. 791. lin. 1. John de Curcy holdly sets upon
Vlster.
finding William Fitz-Adelm to act Covetously, Timorously, and Deceitfully, as
not being faithful to those under his command, or formidable to the Enemy. He
took out of the Forces of Dublin, which by the sloth of the General, and for
want of Pay, and their usual refreshment by Plunder, two and twenty Vlster, not
yet attempted by the English Arms.

Cardinal Hoved. f. 320. b. n. 10, 20. He takes Down.
Vivian beforementioned was with King Guthred in the Isle of Man at Christmas,
and after Epiphany or Twelf-day passed into Ireland and remained at Down, the
chief Town then of Vlster; while he was there about Candlemass, Ibid. and
Girald. Cambren. Hibern. Expugn. lib. 2. c. 16. f. 794. n. 20. A. D. 1177.
John de Curcy came before Dunleue (or perhaps Donald) not being provided for a
defense, fled. The Cardinal mediated a Peace between the King and John, but
without effect. Whereupon Roderic King of that Province, and Dunleue raise an
Army of 10000 Irish in few days, and march toward Down to besiege it; John de
Curcy thought it could no ways be for his advantage, to be shut up in a
Fortress he had built in a corner of the City, and therefore drew out the few
men he had, not exceeding He obtains a Victory over Roderic and Dunleve.
They came to a sharp and cruel Engagement, wherein he obtained the Victory,
with a mighty slaughter of his Enemies, though not without great loss on his
own side. Roger Poer a stout young Gentleman, was the second eminent Person in
this Action.

Giraldus Cambrensis in the same Chapter tells us of four other Battles fought
by John de Curcy in Vlster, but just only mentions them, Stanihurst also in his
P. 182.
History of Ireland passes them over as briefly; but Dr. Hanmer in his F. 148.
I take this to be the Book of Houth* so often cited by Camden and Dr. Hanmer.
Chronicle of that Nation, from a Book written in Latin by an Irish Friar, and
F. 148. I take this to be the Book of Houth* so often cited by Camden and Dr.
Hanmer.
translated by -- Dowdall Primate there, into English, A. D. 1551. gives a more
full account of them, and of this John de Curcy.

Who was Ibidem. John de Curcy's descent.
by his Father a Norman, by his Mother a Cambrian or Welchman, and married the
Daughter of Guthred King of Man; he served King Henry in all his Wars. In
France he became acquainted with Sir Amoric Tristram who married Curcy's
Sister, and whether from the Ladies name, or that they were married on St.
Laurence day, he was ever after called Amoric de Sancto Laurentio, and his
Descendents always bore that Surname, from whence the Lords of Houth were
lineally descended. These two Knights became sworn Brethren in the Church of
our Lady at Rhone, where they solemnly vowed to serve together, to live and dye
together, France, Anjou, Normandy and England; and when Sir John de Curcy was
joined in Commission with William Burgh, Fitz-Adelm, He enters into a strict
Alliance with Sir Amoric de Sancto Laurentio.
and others, Sir Amoric de Sancto Laurentio, or St. Laurence, accompanied him
into Ireland, where Curcy received a Grant from the King by Patent for him and
his Heirs or Assigns to enjoy in that Nation all he could Conquer with his
Sword, reserving to the King Houth, a Town or place within a Bay not far from
Dublin Haven.
Houth, and there by a Bridge were opposed by the Irish, with whom there was a
Bloody Conflict. Sir John de Curcy was then sick and remained on Shipboard, Sir
Amoric being General, behaved himself most worthily, many fell on both sides;
and he got the Victory, with the loss of seven of his own Blood and Relations,
for which good Service, and his Valor, Sir John de Curcy allotted him the
Lordship of Houth, with other things, as his share of the Conquest. This seems
rather Louth, by the manner of the Story, than a real Truth, but as I find it,
I leave it, and pass on to the four other Battles. Four Battles fought by John
de Curcy.


The first Ib. f. 152. He beats the Vlster men.
was fought on Midsummer-day following, before the Walls of Down, with fifteen
thousand Irish, in which Curcy was Victor, and beat them so much, that the
Vlster men had no great stomach to set upon the English afterward; here Sir
Amoric was Nicholas St. Laurence was almost in as ill a condition with his
Wounds, yet did well again.

The Second was in Ib. and f. 153.154. He conquers the Irish at Fern, and takes
a great number of Cattle.
Fern against Eleven thousand Irish, the English not being above a tenth part
of the number: The occasion of it this, Sir John de Curcy had built many
Castles in Vlster, especially Fern, where Mac Mahon lived; he was very kind to
Curcy, and had sworn to be a true and faithful Subject; whereupon he gave him
two Castles with the Lands belonging to them; within a month Mahon pulled them
down and levelled them with the ground. Curcy demanded the reason of his so
doing; his answer was, he did not promise to hold Stones of him but Land. For
which Practice and slight answer, Curcy resolved to pillage and drive all the
Cattle he could out of his Country; the Prey was so Curcy's men that drove it.
The ways were narrow, Boggy, and Miry, having thick Bushes on both sides, and
the three Droves of Cattle were three Miles in length. The Irish in like manner
divided themselves into three Bodies, The English defeated of their Prey by an
Ambuscade of the Irish.
and lay in Ambush in the Woods ready to take all advantages; when they set
upon the English, they made such shouts, and such an hideous noise, that the
Cows (says my Author) ran like Devils, and overthrew Horse and Man, so that
more were trodden under foot in the Dirt and Mire by the Cows, than were killed
by the Sword of the Irish. The English were broken to pieces, Sir Roger Poer
(for this Book Knights them all) was taken Prisoner, and rescued Amoric, and he
and Sir John Curcy, in their flight, and in several Skirmishes, killed nineteen
score of those that persued them, amongst whom was Mac Mah^n himself, slain by
the base Son of Sir Amoric; at length in the Evening they by chance recovered
an old Fort, in which they secured themselves. Sir Amoric, after a short sleep,
went out to discover the Enemies Camp, (which was not far off, The Irish routed
and slain by Sir Amoric's Policy.
as appeared by the great Fires they had made in it,) and to see in what
posture they were; he found they were in a careless John de Curcy, that they
might march with all their strength, and catch them Napping, which was done,
and they killed the Irish without resistance, and so many of them, that not
above Two hundred escaped that were very nimble footed. The English lost the
day before Four hundred men, and in this Mornings work only two.

Giraldus Cambrensis Lib. 2. c. 16 f. 795. lin. 6.
in his short Account of this Action, says only, it happened in the taking of
Prey, and by reason of the narrow passages, after many great and doubtful
Fightings and Skirmishes, John de Curcy was overcome, many of his men being
slain, and others dispersed in the Woods, so as he hardly escaped with eleven
men; yet with an undaunted Courage, and with so small a number, he marched
Thirty Miles on Foot (having lost their Horses) armed,

The Third was Ha^m. Chronicle of Ireland, f. 155, 156. Anciently in Latin
Ergalia, it contained the Countries about Louth, M^naghan, and Ardmagh.
fought in that part of Vlster called * Vriel. John de Curcy had sent into
England for Victuals, Ammunition, and other necessaries, by stress of Weather
the Ship that brought them, was driven into a Creek there, called Torshead. O
Hanlan with Irish, board the Vessel, kill the men and Mariners in it, and make
it a Prize. Curcy drew his men together, and marches toward the Newry, to go
into Vriel, but in his march, he had notice that the Irish of those Parts were
in Arms, and provided for their defense, and were encamped South of Dundalke.
The English marched toward them, and procured a Poor Friar to go and tell them,
that there were great Forces arrived from England at Tree or Drogedagh, and that
they were marching toward them; the English, when they Irish Army, they went
forward in such order as might make the greatest show, and appear many in
number, by the advantage of the places where they marched; The English
approaching make a great shout, with which the Irish were so daunted, as they
broke their order, tumbled one upon another, and attempted to pass the River,
when the Tide coming in, many were drowned, and others that dare not adventure
through the Water, were killed by the English; O Hanlan with his men had passed
the Water. The Friar showed unto the English a Ford, where they went over and
pursued the Irish, which were about 6000, A Fight between Courcy and O Hanlan.
and the English 1000; the matter was so ordered on both sides, that they must
fight; the Conflict was sharp, the English Foot gave back, and Courcy in the
midst of his Enemies; his Brother Amoric comes into to his relief, rallies, and
incourageth the Soldiers, who charged the Irish so briskly, as they made them
retreat: The slaughter was great on both sides, and each of them drew off
without boasting of Victory.

The Fourth Ib. f. 157. Girald. ut supr. l. 2. c. 16. f. 795. n. 10.
was at the Bridge of Ivori where Courcy prevailed and slew many of his
Enemies. These were the great Acts of John who commanded those English Forces
that subdued Vlster, after which he built many Castles in fit places for the
Security of it, and established there a firm Peace.

While John de Courcy Ibid. c. 17.
was thus employed in reducing Vlster, Miles Cogan who was Dublinens. familiae
constabularius, and urbis custos, etc.

Miles Cogan invades Connaught.


Constable of, or had the chief command of the Forces of Dublin, and Governor
of that City, under William Fitz-Adelm Seneschal of Ireland, with Forty
Knights, 200 other Shannon, and invaded Conaught, the men whereof burnt their
own Cities and Towns, hid their Food and Victuals in Caves under ground, and
drove their Cattle into Fastnesses. The English Anglicana familia cum Tuemoniam
Metropolin pervenisset, etc.
Forces went as far as Twomond or Tuam the Metropolis, and staid there eight
days, but not finding wherewithal to subsist, returned to the Shannon, where
Roderic Prince of Conaught met them with three great Bodies of men. There was a
sharp Fight, and many of the Irish slain, but Miles and his men got safe to
Dublin, with the loss only of three Horsemen.

After this William Fitz-Adelm was recalled, and Ibid. c. 18. A. D. 1177.
Hugh de Lacy was by King Henry made Procurator General, that is, Seneschal or
Governor of Ireland. Rex Henricus Hugonem de Lacy generalem Hiberniae
Procuratorem constituit.

This same year in a general Council at Oxford, Hoved. f. 323. n. 20, 30, 40,
etc. Henry makes his Son John King of Ireland.
King Henry made his Son John King of Ireland, by the Grant and Confirmation
Alexander. Venit Rex Oxeneford, and in Generali Consilio ibidem celebrato,
constituit Johannem filium suum Regem in Hibernia, concessione, and
confirmatione Alexandri summi Pontificis. Benedictus Abbas P. 97. a.
says he purchased or procured a License from Pope Alexander, to make which Son
he would King of Ireland. Rex perquisierat ab Alexandro summo Pontifice quod
liceret ei filium suum quem vellet coronare, and Regem facere de Hibernia.

Hoveden u^ supra. Henry grants to Fitz-Stephan and Cogham the Kingdom of Cork.
Council to Robert Fitz-Stephan, and Miles de Cogham, the Kingdom of Cork for
the Service of sixty Knights, to hold of him and his Son John, except the City
of Cork, and one Cantred or Hundred, which the King reserved to him and his
Heirs. The King gave also to Herbert Fitz-Herbert, and William the Brother of
Earl Reginald, and Jollan de la Pumeray their Nephew the Kingdom of Limeric,
for the Service of sixty Knights, or for sixty Knights Fees, except the City of
Limeric and one Cantred which he retained to him and his Heirs; He likewise
delivered to William Fitz-Adelm his Dapifer or Seneschal, the Custody of the
City of Wexford, with all its Appertenencies; and decreed, that for the future
the places following should belong to the Service of Wexford, Harkelow with its
Appertinencies, Glascarric with its Appertinencies; and the Land of Gilbert
Boisrohard, Ferneg, Winal with its Appertinencies, and all the Land of Hervey
between Wexford and the River Wexford, the Service of Raimund de Druna, the
Service of Frodrevelan, the Service of Vthmorth Leighlerin; the Tenement of Man
Taloe with its Appertinencies; and Leis the Land of Geofry of Constentine with
its Appertinencies, and all the Land of Otneld.

King Henry also delivered in Custody unto Robert Poer his Marshal, the City of
Waterford with all its Appertinencies, and ordained, that for the future these
places following should belong to the Service Waterford and the River beyond
Lismore, and all the Land of Ossery with its Appertinencies.

Dublin committed to Hugh de Lacy.
He also delivered in Custody unto Hugh de Lacy Dublin, with all its
Appertinencies, and ordained that these places following should belong to the
Service of Dublin, the whole Land of O Felana with its Appertinencies, and
Kildare with its Appertinencies, and the whole Ophaly with its Appertinencies,
and Wicklow with its Appertinencies, and the Service of Meth, and the Service
of four Knights Service, which Robert Poer owes for his Castle of Dunavet.

When the King had thus Ib. f. 324. a. lin. 8. All to whom Lands were
committed, swear Fealty to the King and his Son John.
given the Lands in Ireland, and divided their Services, he made all those to
whom he had committed the Custody of them, to become his and his Son John's Men
or Vassals, (homines suos and Johannis filii sui Devenire) and to swear
Ligeance

Afterward he gave Ibid. n. 20.
to Philip Bruise the whole Kingdom of Limeric for the Service of sixty
Knights, to hold of him and John his Son, for Herbert and William the Brothers
of Reginald Earl of Cornwall, and Joslan de la Pumeray their Nephew, would not
have that Kingdom, because it was not then fully subdued, for the English had
killed the King of Limeric, who was the King of England's England, nor would he
obey his People, for their unfaithfulness, and the Injuries they did to the
Irish without cause or provocation.

Robert Fitz-Stephan and Miles Cogan Girald. Cambren. l. 2. c. 18. Limeric
fired by the Inhabitants.
conducted Philip Breuse to his Government, but when he came near Limeric, the
Inhabitants set the Town on Fire in spite: Robert Fitz-Stephan and Miles Cogan
Limeric, but Philip refused to come and live amongst such People, and so
returned with them to Cork.

Some time after this Ibidem.
Miles Cogan and Ralph Son to Robert Fitz-Stephan that had married his
Daughter, went toward Lismore to treat with the Waterford men, and determined
to lodge with one Mac-Tyre that night, who had invited them: But while they
were in the Field expecting the Waterfordians, stealing upon them unawares,
Miles Cog^n treacherously slain by Mac-Tyre.
he killed them and five other Knights, whereupon Mac-Carty and Mac-Tyre, with
the Irish in those parts, put themselves into Arms, refusing subjection to the
English, and designed to destroy Robert Fitz-Stephan whom they had besieged in
Cork; his Nephew Ibid. f. 797 n. 10.
Reymund Wexford with twenty Knights, and an hundred Foot and Bow-men, and
landed at Cork, encountered the Enemy, killed many, caused others to fly, and
forced the greatest number of them to sue for Peace and live quietly.

The King hearing of the death of Miles, Ibidem Richard Cogan his Brother
succeeds him.
sent Richard Cogan his Brother with a choice Band of men to succeed in his
place in the Cork; a man no way inferior to his Brother for Courage and Martial
knowledge.

Hugh de Lacy at this time governed Ireland Ibid. c. ^9. The Irish quietly
submit to the Government of Hugh de Lacy.
with great Prudence and Moderation, he recalled such as had been violently
thrown out of their Habitations, so as in many places the Lands were stocked
and cultivated again; in a short time he established the Nation in such Peace,
and by his Generosity and kind behavior so allured Irish, and obliged the great
men, that he was much suspected to have aimed at the Dominion, Crown, and
Scepter of that Nation.

This suspicion of him increasing, Ibid. c. 21. A. D. 1181. Upon suspicion he
is recalled, and new Governors appointed.
he was recalled from his Government, and John Constable of Chester, and
Richard de Pec, were sent by the King to undertake that Charge, but before he
went, and in the time of his Government, he had built very many Castles, and
placed Garrisons in them for the security of the Kingdom.

Hoveden places this F. 348. b. n. 30.
Revocation, and sending of the new Governors in the year 1181. and says, they
would not continue him Governor any longer, because he had married the
Daughter of the King of Connaught according to the Custom of the Irish, which
might add much to the suspicion of his Usurpation. He also says, Ibid. n. 20.
that Laurence Archbishop of Dublin, some time before and about Candlemass,
came into Normandy, and brought with him the Connaught, and delivered him to
the King of England as an Hostage, for the performance of the Agreement between
them, concerning the Tribute of Ireland.

These two Governors were sent into Ireland in Ibid. c. 22. Hugh de Lacy
restored to the Government of Ireland, with Robert of Shrewsbury his Coadjuror.
Summer this year, and I find nothing done by them there; in the following
Winter Hugh de Lacy was restored to the Kings Favor, and having given Security
to him, had the Care of that Nation again committed to Robert of Shrewsbury a
Clerk was joined in Commission by the King, as his Coadjutor and Counselor,
and Witness of his Actions; upon this Resumption of the Government, he built
many other Castles for the security of the English Interest.

King Henry, as he had given Ibid c. 24. A. D. 1182. King Henry gave the
Dominion of Ireland to his Son John.
the Dominion of Ireland to his Son John, so now he resolved he should go
thither, and in the beginning of August sent before him John Cumin an English
Monk of Evesham (lately chosen Archbishop of Dublin upon the Death of Laurence)
to prepare things against his coming; John Cumin Archbishop of Dublin.
at the same time Hugh Lacy was discharged from his Government, Hugh Lacy
discharged from his Government of Ireland, and Philip of Worcester sent in his
stead.

He exacts great Tribute from the Clergy.


and Philip of Worcester, in the beginning of September, was with Forty Knights
sent in his stead: The first thing he did, was to seize again the Lands Hugh
Lacy had aliened and sold away to the King's use; in the beginning March he
went to Ardmagh with a great Army, and exacted and forced from the Clergy a
great Tribute of Gold, and from thence marched to Down, and so returned with
the Tribute to Dublin.

As he had determined, King Henry having prepared all things for his Voyage,
Hoveden f. 359. a. n. 20. 50 A D. 1185. Girald. ut supra, c. 31. John, King
Henry's Son, goes into Ireland.
sent his Son John into Ireland. Ranulph Glanvill Principal Counselor of the
King and Kingdom, and Justiciary of England, Milford Haven on Wednesday in
Easter week in the Evening, and arrived with the rest of the Fleet at Waterford
next day about Noon, with 400 Knights or men at Arms, and many other ordinary
Horsemen and Archers. Many Clerks were sent with him, and amongst the rest The
Author of the Conquest of Ireland.
Giraldus Cambrensis was by his Father appointed his chief Director and Tutor.

At the very first coming of John the Kings Son, there met him at Waterford
Ibid. c. 35. f. 807. n. 40. The Irish came to complement John, they are
despised by his Followers.
all the considerable Irish of those Parts, who had been faithful to the
English, and lived peaceably under them, who were derided and despised by the
New men and Normans that came over with him. The Irish wore long and great
Beards, with which these light young men played many tricks, and abused them
otherwise. These men got themselves out of Town and repaired to their own
homes, from whence they departed with their Families and all they They fly to
the Kings of Limeric, Connaught, and Cork, and make their Complaints to them.
some to the King of Limeric, others to the King of Cork, and some to Roderic
King of Connaught; To these they declared how they had been abused and ill
treated; and told them what a stripling the King's Son was, and how he was
accompanied and governed by very young men, in whom was no Gravity or Sobriety,
no Stanchness or Prudence, by which they or their Country might be safe and
secure.

These three Princes Ibid. f. 808. l. 1. etc. Those three Princes were prepared
to come to John and acknowledge their subjection to him.

But were diverted by the ill usage of the Irish.


were then prepared to come and wait upon Earl John, to acknowledge their
subjection, and pay their Duty to him. But hearing this news, and suspecting
what might be the end of such beginning, concluded to join together against the
English, and enter into a League of Defense of their Liberties and Country, and
now became Friends, who before were Enemies.

Upon these Misdemeanors Ibid. n. 50. King Henry removed the young men from the
Affairs of Ireland, and puts in experienced men.

John de Curcy made Governor of Ireland.


King Henry removed these young People that understood not the Affairs of the
Nation, and put in experienced men who had been employed in the Conquest of it
to manage them, and made John de Curcy Chief Governor of Ireland, who with the
Army scowred the Countries of Cork, Limeric, and Connaught, and made them quiet.

At the time of committing these Extravagancies, Ibid. f. 809 n. 30, 40. Three
different Interests in Ireland.
there were in Ireland three different Interests, and three such, as then they
called Armies, one of the Normans, another of English, and a third of Welsh.
The first were in great Favor, the second in less, and the third in none at
all: The Normans were Luxurious drinking much Wine, they refused to be placed
in the Marches or Borders against the Enemy, or in Castles far from the Sea,
they were always with, and not great Talkers, Giraldus Cambrensis his Character
of the Normans in Ireland.

The first Subduers of Ireland discontented.

John the Kings Son did nothing considerable in that Nation.


Boasters, and Swearers, very Proud, and Contemners of all others, greedy of
Places of Honor and Profit, but backward in undertaking any hazardous or
dangerous Action, or performing any Service that might deserve them; and for
these reasons the old Militia that first invaded the Island, seeing themselves
neglected and slighted, and the new men only caressed, sat still and acted
not, so as Earl John made small progress in the further subduing of that
Country.

After this Giraldus Cambrensis tells us, how Ireland was to be completely
conquered, and how to be governed, and then shuts up his History in these
words. Finem igitur hic Historiae Ibid. f. 811 n. 10.
ponentes: Dum ea quae scimus loquimur, and quae vidimus fideliter testati
sumus; novis de caetero Historicis tam indolis egregiae, gesta futura digno
coaequanda, explicandaque stilo nunc relinquamus.

Ireland he is frequently Fabulous and Romantic, relying upon Tradition,
common Story, and Relations of the People. The greatest part of his History is
undoubtedly a true Narrative of things done, though it is tedious to read,
being written in long Tropical Sentences, and as it were Quibling, Convertible,
and Gingling Latin, which was the Eloquence of those times.

I have as it were Epitomized him in this Relation of the Conquest Ireland, not
having heard of, or found any other that has given so good an Account of it.
He tells many times of strange Victories obtained by very few men against great
Numbers, which Stories may have some allowance, if we consider how fearful the
Irish were of Bows and Arrows, which killed and wounded at distance, The The
Irish Arms were only a short Lance, two Darts, and a sharp Hatchet which they
used with one hand; and they threw Stones when their Arms failed, such as they
could grasp in one hand, which they had always ready; Cambren. Topograph.
Hibern. Distinct. 3. c. 10. f. 738. n. 50.
use whereof they seemed not to know, before they English; and how they were
confounded and amazed at the Arms, charging, and management

Hoveden F. 359. a. n. 50. b. n. 40. A. D. 1185. John the Kings Son returns out
of Ireland. The Pope by his Bull, gave King Henry leave to make which Son he
pleased King of Ireland. And sent a Crown of Peacocks Feathers interwoven with
Gold
says, that King Henry, after the return of his Son John out of Ireland,
without doing any thing considerable there, hearing Urban was chosen Pope, sent
to him, and obtained many things which his Predecessor Lucius would not grant;
amongst his Favors, one was, That he had leave confirmed by his Bull, to make
Ireland, and as an Argument and token of this Concession and Confirmation, he
sent him a Crown of Peacocks Feathers interwoven with Gold.

There is nothing more to be found of this Hugh de Lacy, but his Annal. ^ibe^n.
A. D 1186. Hugh de Lacy his strange Death.
Death, which the Annals of Ireland tell us happened in this manner; when he
was very busy and intent, about building the Castle of Dervath, and finding
the Irish he employed in preparing the Ground, and doing other things toward
the erecting of it, very unskilful at the use of the Tools and Instruments they
wrought with, he himself undertook to show them how they were to work with His
Head was cut off by an Irish Laborer.
and stooped inclining his head, the man chopped it off with an Hatchet or Irish
Axe. Cambrensis, that I know of, has not the full Relation of this Story, but
in his Recapitulation of things done in Ireland, this is Lib. 2. Hibe^n.
Expugn. c. 34. f. 807. n. 20.
one among the rest, where he says thus. De Hugonis de Lacy a securibus male
securi, Dolo Hibernensium suorum apud Dervath Decapitatione.

Not long after Roger Poer, who under this Ibid. c. 20. Roger Poer
treacherously slain by the Irish.
Hugh commanded the Forces at Lethlin in Ossory, was treacherously slain, and
amongst others, is by Cambrensis reckoned as one that lost his Life Ibid. f.
810 n. 50. c. 37.
by the Treachery of the Irish.

In the year 1187. after Christmas, Hoveden f. 361. b n. 40. Two Cardinals
sent by the Pope to Crown John King of Ireland.

His Coronation deferred by his Father. He was only Lord of Ireland.


Pope Urban sent into England Octavian Subdeacon Cardinal, and Hugh de Nunant
(afterward Coventry) his Legates, with power to pass into Ireland, and Crown
John the Kings Son. But his Father deferred the Coronation, and carried the
Legates into Normandy, to a Conference between him and Philip King of France. So
that not being Crowned, John contented himself with the Title of Lord of
Ireland ever after.

Besides the Title of Conquest, King Henry's Girald. Cambr. lib. 2. c. 32. f.
806. n. 20. Henry the Second his Title to Ireland.
Title of mere Richard Earl Strongbow who married Eva the Daughter and Heir of
Dermot Mac Murchard King of Leinster, granted all his Right and Title to him;
and the rest of the Princes in a short time after, voluntarily subjected
themselves to him, and gave him an irrefragable Title.

A Catalogue of many of the Chief Adventurers in the Conquest of Ireland, made
out of Giraldus Cambrensis, as it is to be found in Camdens Description Hanmer
f. 136. Corrected in many places.
Half Brothers by the Mother. Ann. Dom. 1170.

RObert Fitz-Stephan Maurice Fitzgerald
David Barry. Married Nesta Daughter to Maurice Fitz-Girald. William Not.
Maurice de Prendregast. Meyler, Son of Henry Fitz-Henry, who was Son of King
Henry 1st. by Nesta Mother to Robert Fitz-Stephan, and Maurice Fitz-Girald.
Reymond le Gosse, Nephew to Robert Fitz-Stephan, Married Basilia the Sister of
Earl Strongbowe. Richard Strongbowe, Earl of Stiguil alias Chepstow. Brethren
and Nephews to Robert Fitz-Stephan and Maurice Fitz-Girald.
Miles Cogan alias Cogham Richard Cogan alias Cogham
Henry Second King of England. Ann. Dom* 117^.
Hugh de Lacy. William Fitz-Adelm. Ralph Abbat of Buldewas in Normandy.
Archdeacon of Landaf. Nicholas the Kings Chaplain. Humphry de Bohun. Robert
Fitz-Bernard. Hugh de Gundevilla. Philip de Breusa alias Braosa. William de
Breusa alias Braosa. Philip Hastings. Director or Tutor to John the Kings Son.
John Redensford. William Fitz-Maurice, Eldest Son to Maurice Fitz-Girald, he
Married Alnia the Daughter of Earl Strongbow, Cambren. lib. 2. c. 5. Two other
Sons of Maurice Fitz-Girald.
Girald Alexander
Griffin the Son of William Fitz-Maurice. Brethren.
-- Hereford
-- Purcell. Nicholas Wallingford a Prior, afterward Abbat of Malmsbury. David
Welsh Nephew to Reymond le Gross. Geofry Judas. Reymond Kantitunensis. Reymond
Fitzhugh. Miles of St. David's. Osbert of Herford alias Haverford West. William
Bendeuges. Roger Poer alias Puyer. Adam of Gernemie alias Gernemne. Hugh
Tirell. John de Courcy. Almeric, alias Amoric de Sancto Laur^ntio, though not
found in Cambrensis. Hugh Cantwell. Redmond Cantimore.
Church Affairs in this Kings Reign, whereof the chief and greatest, are
contained in the Brief, but Clear Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury.
IN the Second year of his Reign, Ann. Dom. 1155.
King Henry to the Honor of God and Holy Church, and for the Emendation of his
whole Kingdom, Granted and confirmed to God Append. N. 40. King Henry's Grant
to Holy Church, and to the Earls, Barons, etc.
and Holy Church, and to all Earls, Barons, and all his men, ( omnibus
hominibus meis) All the Customs ( omnes Consuetudines) which his Grandfather
King Henry Gave and Granted to them by his Charter, and abolished all ill
Customs; and therefore Willed and firmly Commanded, That Holy Church, and all
Earls and Barons, and all his men (or feudataries) should have and hold all
those Customs, Donations, Liberties, and free Customs, freely, quietly,
wholly, and in peace of him, and his heirs, to them and their heirs, so freely,
quietly, and fully in all things, as King Henry his Grandfather gave and
granted, and by his Charter confirmed unto

About the Year 1162. certain Gul. Neubr. lib. 2. c. 13. A. D. 1162. A Sect
called Publicans came out of Germany into England.
Wandering people, called Publicans, came out of Germany into England, which had
infested many parts of France, Spain, Germany, and Italy with their Doctrines.
They were in number about thirty men and women, who dissembling their Design,
came peaceably into the Nation, under the Conduct of one Gerard, who they
respected as their Master and Leader. He was somewhat Learned; but the others
were unlettered, ignorant, mere Rusticks, who spoke the Teutonie Language, and
were of that Nation: They had been some time in England, yet Converted one
Woman only. Being discovered they were put in Prison: The King not willing to
Dismiss or Punish them without Examination, They were Convented before the
Bishops.

Their Opinions.


Convened a Council of Bishops at Oxford, before whom they were Convented
touching their Religion, where Gerard undertaking the Cause, and speaking for
them all, Answered they were Christians, and had a veneration for the Apostolic
Doctrine, and being interrogated Articles of Faith, they answered rightly as to
the Substance of them concerning God; De Divinis Sacramentis perversa dixerunt,
Sacrum Baptisma, Eucharistiam and Conjugium detestantes.
but as to the Divine Sacraments they spoke perverse things, Abhorring and
Detesting Baptism, the Eucharist, and Marriage, and Derogating from the Unity
of the Church: When they were urged with the Testimonies of holy Scripture,
they Answered they Believed as they had been Taught, and would not dispute
concerning their Faith. Being admonished to return to the Unity of the Church
they despised all advice: And Threatened, they Laughed, that for Fear they
should be brought to Repent, saying, Blessed are they that suffer Persecution
for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Then Ibidem. The Bishops pronounce them Heretics.

They are delivered to the secular power They are Burnt in the Foreheads, and
Whip^. They rejoice at their punishment.


the Bishops publicly pronounced them Heretics, and Delivered them over to the
Temporal Power to be Corporally punished. The King Commanded they should be
Burnt in the Forehead with the Mark of Heretics, and be Whipped out of the City,
in the Sight of the people, strictly forbidding every person to give them
Lodging or any other Comfort: They Rejoiced at the Execution of the Sentence,
and made have through the City, their Leader singing before them, Blessed shall
ye be when men hate you, who was doubly Cauterized in the Forehead Chin. It was
in the Depth of Winter, and they miserably perished, none affording them
succor.

The Life, Actions, and Behavior, etc. of Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury.
THomas Gul. Fitz-Steph. p. 1. Col. 1.
Becket was the Son of Gilbert sometime Sheriff of London. Ibidem. Tho. Becket
Educated at Paris.

Clerc to the Sheriffs of London.


In his Childhood he was taught in his Fathers House, and the City Schools; in
his Youth he Studied at Paris. Upon his return he was in part received into the
care of the London, and was made Clerc to the Sheriffs, and their Procurator,
Accountant, or Manager of that Office, in which he behaved himself laudably,
and learnt the Wisdom of this World, by which afterward he knew well how to
transact the Common affairs of the Church of England, and the public business
of the Kingdom, or secular Government. Reversus receptus in partem
Sollicitudinis Reipublicae Londinensis, and vicecomitum Clericus and rationalis
effectus, jam ibi laudabiliter se habens, didicit prudentiam hujus Lucis. Ib.
Col. 2.
Qua

He Ibidem. How he was brought to the knowledge of Archbishop Theobald.
was brought to the knowledge of Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury, by two
Brethren of Bologn, Baldwin Archdeacon, and Master Eustachius, oftentimes his
Fathers Guests; and of the Retinue and acquaintance of the Archbishop, p. 2.
Col 2. By him he was employed to Rome.
who sent him several times to Rome upon business concerning the English
Church, where great favor with the Popes, and great Officers of the Roman
Church.

The Ibidem and p. 3. Col. 1. His first Preserment.
first Preferment he had, was the Church of St. Mary in the Strand (which stood
I think where Somerset House is now built) given him by the Bishop of
Worcester; then the Church of Otford given him by the Archbishop. Then he was
made Prebend of St. Paul's London, He went to Bononia and Auxerre, and studied
Law.
and also Prebend of Lincoln. By leave of the Bononia in Italy, and afterward
at Auxerre in France. In process of time the Archbishop ordained him Deacon,
and made him Archdeacon of Canterbury, who was then after Bishops and Abbats,
the first and best Clergy man in England, the Arch-Deaconry being worth to him,
one Hundred Pounds of Silver by the Year.

By the Ibidem p. 5. Col. 1. He is made Chancellor His Popularity His
Enterteinment, and the manner of it.
mediation and procurement of the Archbishop and the Bishop of Winchester he
was made Chancellor, and proved mightily popular. His [2] House and Table was
common to all Indigent persons of whatsoever order coming to Court. There was
scarce a day passed, but he Eat with Earls and Barons, which he himself
invited; he commanded his Ro^ms of Entertainment should every strewed with
fresh straw or hey, in Winter; and with fresh Rushes, or green grass or leaves
in Summer; That the multitude of Knigts or Military men, the Seats could not
receive, might sit down upon a clean floor, lest their fine Clothes, and shirts
might be Spotted and Sullied with the Dirt or Dust.

The Ib. Col. 2. and p. 6. Col. 1. The Kings and Noblemens Sons Committed to
his Education.
Great men of England, and Neighbor Kingdoms, sent their Sons to serve him,
from whom they received ingenuous Education, Knighted and sent back to their
Parents with honor. The King himself placed his Eldest Son with him, and
recommended him to his Education, whom with many of the Sons of Noblemen, and
their Retinue, their Masters or Tutors, and proper Servants he had always with
him, and treated them with all due honor.

To him Ib. and Col. 2. and p. 7. Col. 1.
Noblemen and Knights without number did Homage, which he received saving their
Faith to the King. Cancellario Hamonagium Nobiles and Milites faciebant, it is
Homagium in Quadrilogus. He receives homage of Noblemen, etc His Bounty and
Liberality
Quos ipse salba side Domini Regis recipiebat. There was scarce a day in which
he did not give some large boons, as Horses, Hawks, rich Clothes, Gold or
Silver utensils, or money. And his Liberality and bounty was such, that he
became the love and delight of all Europe, and was most acceptable to the King,
Clergy, Military men, and people, Regi Clero, Militia here signifies Tenants in
Capite, Earls Barons Knights and other Military men, as it always does in old
Historians.
Militiae, populo, erat acceptissimus. Thus he behaved himself in Peace, let us
see what he did in War.

Ib. p. 8. Col 2. His great Retinue.
Army and Siege of Tholose, when all England, Normandy, Anjou, Britany,
Poicton, and Scotland, furnished out Soldiers to the King, The Chancellor had a
chosen number of Seven Hundred Knights of his own Family or Forces. See more of
this matter in the Reign of this King, f. 302. E.

After Ib. p. 10. Col. 1. and Col. 2. He is made Archbishop of Canterbury. A.
D. 1162. The Sea of London was then void. Gervas. Dor. Col. 1669. n. 20.
the Death of Theobald, the King being confident, he would serve and obey him,
according to his will and pleasure, as when Chancellor, resolved to prefer
him to the Archbishopric. To which he was unanimously chosen by the
Suffragans of his Province, and in the year of our Lord 1162. in the Octaves of
Pentecost, on the Feast Day of holy Trinity in the Metropolitan Church, in the
presence of all the Suffragan Bishops was presented to the Church of
Canterbury, by Henry Son and Heir of King Hen. 2d. and by Richard de Luci and
other great men of England, on behalf of the King then beyond Sea, and was
ordained by Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Pope Alexander the 3d. sent him a
pall by his Clerc or Chaplain John of Salisbury afterward Bishop of Chartres
in France, and well known by the name of Ivo Carnotensis. Hoveden says, King
Henry gave him the Archbishopric. f. 282. a. n. 20.
Anno ab incarnatione Domini 1162. Hen. Rex dedit Tho. Cancellario
Archiepiscopatum Cantuariae; That is named him, or gave him a Conge Destire.

After he was consecrated Ib. and p. 11, 12, 13. After his Consecration he
changed his manner of living, and proved Disobedient to the King.
Archbishop he became another man, put on a severe and rigid Monks Habit,
lived an austere life, and altered, chose, and ordered his family accordingly;
and contrary to the Kings hope and expectation, he withdrew himself from the
Kings obedience and service, and contradicted him in many things. Ib. p. 14.
Col. 1.
Postquam Rex Archiepiscopum fecerat, a suo se retraxit obsequio, and in
pluribus contradixit.

Some Ibidem. The Kings mind alienated from the Arch Bishop.
Court Clercs and Bishops about the King who fearing the Titles of their
Preferments, and the Archbishops power, persuaded him that if it should go on,
his power must come to nothing, and unless he provided for the security of
himself and Heirs, he should at any time be King, whom the Clergy would choose,
and he should Reign as long as the Archbishop pleased. Ib. Col. 2.
This says mine Author was the first cause of the Kings displeasure against
him.

It Ibidem. The Kings displeasure against him The Military men Dissatisfied at
the Archbishops proceeding against the Earl of Clare.
heightened the anger of the King, and Military men of the Kingdom (or
Government) That he designed to recover the Castle of Tonebrigge from the Earl
of Clare, and that whole honor long ago aliened from the Church of Canterbury,
because according to the Decretals, it was lawful for his Predecessors and the
Stewards so to manage the farms of the Church, as to increase them; not to
lessen or alienate them. To this Earl of Clare almost all the Nobility of
England

The Ibid. p. 15 Col. 1. The Archbishop pretends to a right of presentation,
to all livings, in all Towns possessed by his great Tenants and Monks.

He Excommunicates William de Eynsford a Tenant in Capite, and Absolves him to
please the King.


Archbishop had, or challenged a right to present to the vacant Churches in
the Towns as well of his Barons, as his Monks, and gave the Church of Eynesford
in Kent to one Laurence a Priest. The Lord of the Town William de Eynesford
molested the Servants of Laurence, and forced them out of the Town. The
Archbishop Excommunicated him; he applies himself to the King, who writes to
whose answer to the King was, That it belonged not to him to command any man to
be excommunicated or absolved. The King insisted upon his Royal Dignity or
Prerogative, That no Tenent in Capite ought to be Excommunicated without his
Knowledge or Consent; At length the Archbishop to please the King Absolved
him: from henceforward the King had no kindness for him, tho before he had
obtained of him liberty to enjoy the whole Dignity of his Church, and that he
might seek to recover all the Lands aliened by his Predecessors, or were
possessed by Laymen.

The Insolence and wickedness of Clercs.
Long before this the King had been angry with the Clergy, in the time of
Archbishop Theobald, having been provoked with the insolency of some of them,
who had committed Rapin, Theft, and Murder. Ib. Col. 2. Guilty of great Crimes.
For this reason the King demanded of the Archbishop, That by the Consent of
him and his Coepiscoporum.

The King would have them tried in his secular Court.


Fellow-Bishops, such Clercs as were taken convicted of, or had confessed any
great crime, should first be degraded, and forthwith delivered to his Court,
That they might be corporally punished, and not have any protection from the
Church. Ib. p. 16. Col. 1.
He demanded also, That when any Clerc was degraded, some of his Officers might
be present to take him into Custody, that he might not fly and escape that
punishment.

The Ibidem. The Archbishop calls together the Bishops.

They were of opinion Clercs were to be Degraded, and Delivered to the secular
Court.


Archbishop when he could not obtein leave to defer his Answer until next
morning, went apart with the Bishops, and discoursed the matter. The Bishops
were of opinion, that according to the secular Law, Clercs were to be degraded,
and delivered to the Secular Court, to be corporally punished, which they
proved not only by Laws, but authentic Examples.

But he Ibidem. The Archbishop says it was against the Canons, and Cautions
them about the Liberty of the Church.
following the Canons, thought otherwise, asserting it was unjust, against the
Canons and against God, that any man should be twice punished by two several
Courts. And added that they ought to be very careful that they destroyed not
the liberty of the Church, by their own Consent; for which by example of their
High Priest, they were by Duty bound to contend unto Death. Ib. Col. 2. and p.
17. Col. 1
The Bishops replied, that if they consented to what the King demanded, the
Church danger, and that they ought to yield to the wickedness of the time, (as
they called it) lest the King should seize all their Temporalties. The
Archbishop persisted in his opinion, and told them they migt not expose any
man to death, That could not be present at a sentence of Blood.

The King Ib. Col. 2.
not like to prevail in this, asked them, if they would observe his Royal
Customs or Laws. The Archbishop answered in Salvo tamen per omnia and in
omnibus ordine nostro. The Archbishop and Bishops answer to the King about
keeping his Royal Customs.
Saving their Order, by and in all things. Afterward he asked the same thing of
every Bishop in order, and they all gave him the same Answer. At which the King
was much troubled, and left them. The Bishops fearful of the Kings Anger,
followed him, and consented to acknowledge his Laws without any Ib* p. 18. Col.
1.
saving, but the Archbishop was immovable, and said; far be it from him, That
for the fear or favor of any Mortalman, he should be found to contemn God. Ib.
Col. 2. The Case between a Burgess of Scarburgh and a Dean.
If an Angel should come from Heaven, and give him advice to

When the Richard de Lucy was then Justitiary of England.

Satisfaction Demanded for Breach of the Kings Law.


King on a certain time was at York, a Burgess of Scarburgh complained to him
of a Dean (a rural Dean) that had taken from him 12 s. and enjoined his Wife
penance as an Adulteress without proof, contrary to the Kings Law. The Dean was
Convented before the King, the Archbishop, the Bishops of Lincoln and Durham,
and John Treasurer of York, who not being able to clear himself, the Barons
were joined to the Bishops to pronounce sentence upon him. John the Treasurer
thought it sufficient if he restored the Burgess his money again, and was left
to his own Bishops mercy, whether he should keep his Office or not. Richard de
Lucy was then Justitiary of England.

Satisfaction Demanded for Breach of the Kings Law.


Richard de Luci asked what satisfaction the King should have for the Breach of
his Law, John answered, nothing, because he was a Clerc, whereupon he refused
to be present at the Passing of the Sentence, and went out with the other
Barons to the King, who appealed from this sentence, but being called beyond
Sea,

The The Insolency and Crimes of Clercs.
Justices Itinerant being at Dunstable, there happened a Controversy between
Simon Fitz-Peter, and Philip de Broc Canon of Bedford. Simon informed the King
that Broc in a great audience had spoken dishonorably of him. The King accused
him before the Archbishop, and not being able to deny it, excused himself,
that it was done in passion. The King demanded judgment against him. The Clergy
judge him to lose the Benefit of his Prebend for a year, and Banishment out of
England for that time, but this satisfied not the King.

Fornication and Murder. For which the Arch Bishop. would not permit Trial in
the Kings Court.
There was a Clerc in Worcestershire that had corrupted an honest man's Daughter,
and afterward killed her Father, This man the King would have tried in his
Secular Court, Archbishop Thomas would permit it, but caused him to be kept in
the Prison of the Bishop of the Diocese, lest he should be delivered to the
Kings Justices.

Another Clerc Stole a Silver Chalice out of a Church in London called St.
Mary's in the Market. Sacrilege.
This man the King would have tried in his Secular Court, The Archbishop
caused him to be tried in the Ecclesiastical Court, where he was Sentenced to
be degraded, and to appease the King, to be branded in the face with an hot
Iron.

The King resolving to have the Clercs severely punished for these and the like
Crimes, Hoved. f. 282. a. n. 40. Gervas Dorob. Col. 1385. n. 60. Fitz-Steph. p.
20. Col. 1. A. D. 1164. A General Council at Clarendon.
and to assert the Rights of his Crown, called a general Council at Clarendon
about the Feast of St. Hilary, in which he propounded to the Bishops and
Secular Barons, many ancient and Royal See Append. n. 41. The Archbishop and
Bishops do consent to, and own the Kings ancient Laws.
Customs, Laws, and Vsages, which he would have the Bishops own, and recognize
as the rights of his Crown. The Bishops Archbishop would not consent. The King
sent to him the Earls of Cornwall and Leicester to incline him to acknowledge
them, but they could no ways prevail. At last two Templars Robert de Hastings,
and Hosteus de Bolonia, went to him, and by throwing themselves at his feet,
with many Tears and great Lamentation, overcame him, so as he promised without
fraud, or any Reservation or Saving, really to receive and submit to the Kings
Laws which he called Ancient. Fitz-Stephan p. 20. Col. 2.
says that the two last Messengers, Tears laid before him the danger he was in,
and what the ill consequences of his standing out would be for fear of Death,
and that he might appease the King; both the Archbishops and all the Bishops,
consented to all those Laws and established them with their Seals; The Pope
damns them. They were brought from Normandy.
and that the King afterward sent them to the Pope to be Confirmed, who not
only refused to do that, but Cassated and Damned them. These Laws and Customs
King Henry pressed the Bishops to receive, had been received and practiced in
Normandy, and in all England, as appears by an Append. n. 42.
Inquisition found by the Nobility of that Nation, which declares the Rights of
the King over Churches and Ecclesiastical persons there.

The Archbishop Fitz-Steph p. 20. Col. 2. The Archbishop repents he
acknowledged the Kings Royal Customs.
soon repented of this Act, and severely Chastized his own Body, he thought it
so heinous, and that it had defiled him so much, as he was not fit to say Mass,
or to appear before the service for some Weeks, until by his Confession and
Penance he thought he deserved the Popes Absolution, which he Append. n. 42.
obtained without Difficulty.

But considering what danger he was in, Fitz Steph ut supra. And twice attempts
to make his Escape.
prepared to leave England, to avoid the Kings Anger, and at Rumsey a Town of
his own, he twice put to Sea, but either had no wind, or a contrary one, and
was forced to come again on Shore, and Gervas. Dorobern. Col. 1389, n. 10.
went from thence in the night to Canterbury; the news whereof the King
received with great joy, fearing that if he had got beyond Sea, he would have
put his Province under an Interdict.

The King suspecting he might Ibid. n. 30. The great Council at Northampton.
Escape unpunished, Commanded the Bishops and great men to meet at Northampton,
the third day before the Feast of Calixtus the Pope (which was the 12th of
October) Fitz-Stephan p. 21. Col. 1.
says it was on the Octaves of St. Michael, that is, on the 6th of October, and
that he was there with the Archbishop, Octava Sancti Michaelis, feria tertia,
Concilii dicta die Rex aderat; Ipsa

In this Council the Archbishop Ibid. C. 2. The Controversy between the
Archbishop and John the Marshal. Who complains he could not have right in the
Archbishops Court.
was accused upon the occasion of a Controversy between him and John Marshall
(or the Marshall.) This John demanded of the Archbishop a Manner or Farm, which
was a member of one of his Towns called Pageham: He came with the Kings Writ
into the Archbishops Court (to remove the Suit, it may be supposed) where he
could gain nothing, (as having no right says Law then was, he proved the
Defect of the Archbishops Court (that he had not right done him, as may be
supposed) and Swore upon a Tropaz or Book of Old Songs (as Gervase of ut supra,
n. 40.
Canterbury calls it) which he drew from under his Coat, and the Justices of
the Archbishops Court accused him for Swearing upon that Book, whereas he
ought to have Sworn upon the Gospels.

John comes to the King, and procures his Writ, by which the Archbishop
Fitz-Steph p. 21 Col. 2. and Cites him into the Kings Court.

He delays to appear.


was required to answer him in the Kings Court, and the day appointed for his
appearance was Holy-rood Day, or the fourteenth of September. The Archbishop
came not at the Day, but sent to the King four Knights, with his Letters, and
the Letter of the Sheriff of Kent, attesting the Injury of John, and the
Imperfection of his proof (that is, because he had Sworn upon the Tropaz, and
not upon the Gospels.)

The Monk of Canterbury Vt supra. And excuses himself by reason of sickness.
reports he sent, duos legales homines per quos excusatus est, Quod citatus non
venit ad Regis praesentiam; non enim Contemptus fuit, sed infirmitate valida
invitus retentus est. Two lawful men to make his Excuse that he appeared not
before the King, that it was not out of Contempt, but by reason he was
unwillingly detained by great Sickness.

Angry, that Fitz-Steph ut supra, and p. 22. Col. 1. The King Angry because he
came not in person.
he came not in his own person, to make the Allegations the Knights brought,
whom he treated with Threats, as such that against the Kings Citation, brought
into his Court false and frivolous Excuses, and scarce let them go free though
they had given security.

At the Ibidem. The Archbishop is cited by the Sheriff of Kent, and appe^rs in
the Kings Court.
Request of John he appointed another day, (to wit) the first day of the
Council, and sent his Writ to the Sheriff of Kent to Cite the Archbishop, for
the King would not write to him, because he would not salute him. Nor had he
any other Solemn Summons to the Council by Letter, according to ancient
Custom. Ibid.
The Archbishop appeared, and said he was come by the Kings Command for the
cause of John. The King replied that John was in his service London, and would
be there on the Morrow, and then their cause should be discussed. Ibidem.
Erat siquidem Johannes ille cum Thesauriis, and caeteris fiscalibus pecuniae
and publici aeris Receptoribus Londoniis ad Scaccarium and. Vbi etiam placita
Coronae Regis Tractantur; for this John was amongst the Officers of the Receipt
of the Chequer in London, where also pleas of the Kings Crown were handled or
holden. That first day there was nothing more done between the King and
Archbishop, the King bad him go home, and return to his cause on the Morrow.

On the Second Ib. Col. 2.
day before all the Bishops, except the Bishop of Rochester and another which
were not then come, and all the Earls and Barons of England, and many of
Normandy, Archiepiscopus lose Majestatis, Coronae Regiae arguitur. The
Archbishop was accused of Treason, because as is said before, he was cited by
the King in cause of John, and neither came, nor made a sufficient Excuse. The
Archbishops defense signified nothing; yet he Alleged the foresaid Injury of
John, the proper Jurisdiction of the Cause, and the Integrity of his Court.

The King Ibidem. The King demands Judgment.
Demanded judgment; no Reason of the Archbishop was approved: It seemed to
all, out of Reverence to Royal Majesty, and the Bond of Liege Homage, that the
Archbishop made to the King, and Fidelity and Observance of Terrene Honor,
which he had Sworn to the King, That he made smade small Defense; because when
cited by the King he neither came, nor by his Messengers alleged any Corporal
infirmity, He is Condemned in the forfeiture of all his movables.
or necessary administration of any Ecclesiastical Office, that could not be
deferred. And they Condemned him, to be in the Kings Mercy for all his Moveable
Goods.

There was a Difference Ib. and p. 23. Col. 1. Difference between the Bishops
and temporal Barons in pronouncing Judgment.
between the Bishops and Barons, who pronounce Judgment, each of them imposed
it upon other, excusing themselves. The Barons said, you Bishops ought to
pronounce sentence, it belongs not to us, we are Laymen, you Ecclesiastical
persons. So he, you are his fellow-Priests, and Fellow-Bishops.

To these things Ibidem.
one of the Bishops Answered, yea its rather your Office then ours; for this is
not an Ecclesiastic Sentence, but a Secular, we sit not here as Bishops, but
Barons, we are Barons, and you are Barons; we are Peers or aequals here, (
pares hic sumus.) You cannot rely upon our Order, for if you have respect to
that in us, you must also have Regard to it in him, and then as we are Bishops,
we cannot Judge our Archbishop and Lord.

The King Ibidem. The Bishop of Winchester pronounced sentence.
hearing of this controversy about pronouncing Sentence: it was soon ended,
and imposed upon the Bishop of Winchester, who unwillingly pronounced it.
Archiepiscopus autem quia sententiae, vel Recordationi Curiae Regis Angliae non
licet contradicere, sustinuit, Censilio Episcoporum: Addacta ad mitigandum and
honorandum Regem solenni in manum ejus missione, quasi Concessionis Judicii, ut
Moris est. contradict a sentence, or Record made in the King of Englands Court,
by advice of the Bishops, submitted to it, and by a forced compliance, for the
honor and mitigation of the King, solemnly put himself under his power, as it
were Granting and acknowledging the Judgment, as the Custom was.

Afterward on the same day he was prosecuted Ibid. and Col. 2. The Archbishop
prosecuted for 300 l.
for three hundred he had received, as he was Castellan, or Constable of the
Castles of Eye in Suffolk, and Berkamstead in Hertfordshire. The Archbishop
first waved the Action, by saying he was not cited for that matter. And further
said, That he had expended that money, and much more in the Reparations of the
Palace of London, and those Castles, as might be seen. The King would not admit
he had done this, He gives security for it.
and Exacts Judgment. The Archbishop ready to please the King, and not willing
such a sum of Money should be the Cause of Anger between security by three
Laymen, distinctly and severally, the Earl of Gloucester, William de Eynesford,
and another, all his Tenants.

On the third day Ib. and p. 24. Col. 1. He is prosecuted for a 1000 marks more
and several other moneys he received when Chancellor.

He Consults the Bishops about this matter.


he was prosecuted at the Kings Suit for five hundred marks lent him in the
Army of Tholose; and for other five hundred, which he borrowed of a Jew upon
the Kings security, he was also prosecuted for all the profits of the
Archbishopric and other Bishoprics and Abbeys that were void during his
Chancellorship: of all which he was commanded to make an Account to the King.
The Archbishop said he came not prepared to Answer this matter, nor was he
cited concerning it, yet in time and place he would do to his Lord the King
according to right. The King exacts security upon that; he answered he ought to
have the advice of his Suffragans and Clercs about it. The King yielded to it,
and he departed. And from that day, neither Barons, nor Knights, came to his
House or Hostel, to visit him, having understood mind by these proceedings.

On the fourth day Ibid. and Col. 2. p. 25. Col. 1. They advise a Compliance.
all the Ecclesiastical persons came to the Archbishops House, where he
treated with the Bishops severally and apart, and with the Abbats severally and
apart. The Bishop of Winchester advised him to offer a Composition in Money,
and try the King that way, 2000 Marks were offered but refused. Others
encouraged him to maintein bravely the Liberties of the Church, but most
persuaded a Compliance with the King.

It Is Ib. and Col. 2.
said they consulted very closely on the fifth day, which was Sunday, but the
Result of their Debates and Counsels not mentioned. On the sixth Day the
Archbishop fell Sick, and the King hearing of it, sent all his Earls, and many
Barons, to Demand of him his Resolution after these Consultations and Advices,
and to know of him whether he would give Security to render an Account of what
he received from the vacant Churches in the Time of his Chancellorship, The
King demands security, and that he would stand to the Judgment of his Court.
and stand to the Judgment of his Court in that matter. The Archbishop
answered by the Bishops, That if he was not hindered by Sickness, he would on
the Morrow come to the Court, and do what he ought.

He came Ib. and p. 26. Col. 1.2. p. 27. Col. 1.2. He comes to Court, and sits
in an outward Room, while the other Bishops Earls and Barons are admitted to
the Kings presence.
next day, and found the King in an inward Chamber with the Bishops, who staid
with him a long time, and with them Roger Archbishop of York, who came last,
that he might not be suspected to be one of the Kings private Counselors, and
Advisers. The Archbishop sat in an outward Room with his Cross in his own
hand, while all his Suffragans, and the Earls and Barons were called to the
King.

The Ib. p. 27. Col. 2. p. 28. Col. 1.2. The Bishops tell the King, he disliked
the Judgment and had Appealed to the Pope.
Bishops in this Conference told the King, that the Archbishop when he advised
with them, told them, they had used him very ill, and with the Barons treated
him as an Enemy, and not judged him justly, but after an unheard of manner,
because for one absence (pro una absentia, quam supersisam dicunt) which they
call a Delay or Defalt, and was not to be judged a Contumacy, they ought not to
have Condemned him in such a pecuniary mulct as that he should forfeit all his
moveable goods to the King, or they should be in his Bishops also told him that
he had appealed to the Pope against this Sentence, and by the Authority of the
Pope forbidden them for the future to Judge him in any Secular Accusation.

The King was very much Ibid. The King much moved at his Appeal.
moved at this Relation, and sent the Earls and many Barons, to know of him
whether he was the Author of this Appeal, and prohibition, especially seeing he
was his Leige-man, and bound to him by a Common and special Oath at Clarendon,
That he at Sentences of Blood. Vt Episcopi, omnibus ejus assint Iudiciis,
preterquam Iudicio Sanguinis.

They Ibid. He is required to give pleges to stand to the order of the Kings
Court.
were also to know of him whether he would give Pleges to stand to the Judgment
of the Kings Court concerning the Account of his Chancellorship.

To which Ib. and p. 29. Col. 1.2. The Archbishops Answer to the Information
of the Bishops.
Demands, this was his Answer, That he was indeed bound to the King by
Leige-Homage, Fidelity, and Oath, but the Oath was Chiefly Sacerdotal; That in
Respect of God, he was in all Due Obedience and Subjection, obliged to observe
honor and Fidelity toward him. Saving his Obedience to God, his Ecclesiastical
Dignity, and the Episcopal Honor of his person. That he Declined the Suit,
because he was not cited to yield an Account upon any other John; neither was
he bound to make Answer, or hear Judgment in any other. He confessed he had
received many Administrations and Dignities from the King, in which he had
faithfully served him, as well in England, as beyond Sea, and had spent his own
Revenue in his Service, and for the same contracted many Debts. Ib. and p. 30.
Col. 1.
As to his putting in Pleges or Fidejussors to render an Account, he ought not
to be compelled to that, because he was not adjudged to do it; nor had he any
Citation in the cause of Account, or any other except that of John the Marshal.
And as to the Prohibition he that day made to the Bishops, and Appeal, he did
acknowledge, That he said to his fellow-Bishops, That for one Absence, but not
Contumacy, they had unjustly condemned him, contrary to the Custom and Example
of Antiquity, He Appeals and puts his Church and person under the Protection of
the Pope.
wherefore he Appealed and forbad them, That depending the Appeal, they should
not Judge him in a Secular accusation, or cause of things done, before he was
Archbishop. And that he did then Appeal, and put his Person and the Church of
Canterbury under the Protection of God, and the Lord the Pope.

The King Ib. and C. 2. The Bishops fear the Archbishops Prohibition.
having received this Answer, urged the Bishops, by the Homage they had done,
and the Fealty they had Sworn to him, Barons, They would Dictate to him a
Sentence concerning the Archbishop, Vt simul cum Baronibus de Archiepiscopo
sibi dictent Sententiam. They began to excuse themselves by reason of his
Prohibition; the King was not satisfied, and said this his simple Prohibition
ought not to hold against what was done and Sworn at Clarendon. They reply, if
they should not obey his Prohibition, he would Censure them, and that for the
Good of the King and Kingdom, they should obey the Prohibition. At length by
the Kings persuasion

And the Bishop of Chichester Ib. and p. 31. Col. 1. The Bishop of Chichester
puts him in mind what they promised at Clarendon, and by his command.

In the word of Truth, in good faith, and without Deceit Lawfully.


told him that lately at Clarendon, they were by the King called together,
concerning the Observation of his Royal Dignities, and lest they might doubt
what they were, he showed them those very Royal Customs of which he spoke in
Writing, and that they promised their assent to, and Observation of them. He
first, and afterward his Suffragans, by his Command. And when the King pressed
them, to Swear to what they promised, and set to Seals for the Confirmation of
it, They answered, it ought to suffice for a Sacerdotal Oath, That they said in
the Word of Truth, in good Faith, without Deceit, and Lawfully, they would
observe them. Why do you now forbid us to be present at that Sentence, which he
Commands us? Upon this Grievance, and lest you may add any thing to our
injury, we will Appeal to the Pope, and for this time give obedience to your
Prohibition.

The Archbishop Answered him he would be present at the Prosecution Ibidem.
Col. 2. He answers those words, Oblige not against the true faith of the Church
and the Laws of God.
and that there was nothing done at Clarendon by them or him, ( nisi salvo
honor Ecclesiastico) in which, their Ecclesiastic honor was not saved. 'Twas
true he said, that they promised, in good faith, without Deceit, and lawfully,
to observe those Determinations, and by those words, the Dignities of their
Churches, which they received by the Pontificial Law were safe. For whatsoever
was against the true faith of the Church, and against the Laws of God, could
not in bona fide, and legitime observari; in good faith, and Lawfully be
Dignity, by the use whereof the Liberty of the Church, which he has Sworn to
maintein, must Perish. Further those which you call Royal Dignities, were sent
to the Pope to be confirmed, and brought back, rather disallowed than allowed
by him: he has shown us an Example, and taught us that we should do so, being
ready with the Roman Church, to Receive what that Receives, and to Refuse what
that Refuses. Yet further, if we failed in any thing at Clarendon, for the
flesh is weak, we ought to take Courage, and by the virtue of the holy Spirit
to strive against the old Enemy, who Endeavors, that he which stands may
fall, and that he which has fallen, may not Rise. If we promised any injust
things there, or confirmed them in the Word of Truth, you Know, such unlawful
stipulations do not oblige.

The Bishops Ib. and p. 32. Col 1. The King Excusi^g the Bishops, exacts
Judgment from the Earls and Barons against the Archbishop. Certain Sheriffs
and Barons of a Second Rank were added to them.
return to the King in Peace, being Excused from Judging the Archbishop; they
sit apart from the Barons; Nevertheless, The King Exacts Judgment of the Earls
and Barons, Concerning him. Evocantur quidam Vicecomites, and Secundae
Dignitatis Barons, antiqui Di^rum, ut addantureis, and assint Judicio. Certain
Sheriffs are called, and ancient Barons of a Second Rank or Dignity, to be
added to them, and to sit in Judgment, after a little while, Proceres ad
Archiepiscopum redeunt. The Noble men return to the Archbishop, and the Earl
of Leicester pressing some of them to pronounce sentence, who refused it; began
to repeat the Business of Clarendon very particularly, as the Bishop of
Chichester had done before. Quasi inde manifesta Erat Regiae Majestatis laesio,
and promissionis in verbo veritatis ibi sactae transgressio, as if he had been
Guilty of manifest Treason, or had broken his promise in verbo veritatis there
made, and bad the Archbishop hear his Sentence.

But the Archbishop Ib. and Col. 2. (...) 1* He refuses to hear their
Judgment.

And went to the Monastery of St. Andrew.


not willing to forbear any longer, said, Judicium est sententia lata post
Contraversiam, Ego hodie nichil dixi ut in Causa. Judgment is Sentence given
after the Controversy or Trial. I said nothing this day as to the Cause. I
have been Cited for no Cause Except that of John, who Tried it not with me, and
therefore you cannot Judge me. I am your father, ye are Noblemen of the Court,
of Lay power, Secular persons, I will not hear your Judgment. The Noblemen
retired, and the Archbishop went his way to the Monastery Andrews in
Northampton, and Herbert and William Fitz-Stephan with him.

The King hearing Ib. p. 33. Col. 1. The King caused Proclamation to be made
none should revile or hurt him.
of his Departure, caused Proclamation to be made in the Streets, That no man
should give him, or any of his Retinue ill Language, or molest them any ways.
After Supper that Night, he sent three Bishops, to ask License and safe Conduct
from the King for his Departure, who told them they should have his Answer
morning; but he fearing some ill from that Delay, dare not stay.

This was the Seventh day of his appearing in Court, Ib. Col. 2. and p. 34.
Col. 1. The King and Council Consult what to do after the Archbishops
departure.

The Archbishop of York and four Bishops sent to the Pope.


and that night, he went away without License, only accompanied with two
Servants, without either Clerc or Knight. On the Morrow, when his flight was
known to the King and all the Council, they considered what was needful to be
done, and the Archbishop was permitted to Canturbury, because both sides had
appealed. The King sent presently beyond Sea to the Pope, the Archbishop of
York, and four Bishops, Gilbert of London, Hilary of Chichester, Bartholomew of
Excester, Roger of Worcester, and two Earls, and two Barons with three of his
Domestic Clercs. The rest of that day was spent about Raising some foot to be
sent against Rese King of Wales, and there was a certain number promised by
every Ecclesiastic, and lay person, for the Kings assistance which was written
down; and so the Council was Dissolved.

The Ibidem The Archbishop lands at Graveling.
King sent after him to Dover and other Ports, but he lay still in the Day time
amongst his friends in several Monasteries, and trav^lled in the night, and it
was from fifteen days after the Feast of Michael, until the Second of November
before he took Ship at Sandwich (say most of the Historians) and Landed at
Graveling.

Quadrilogus of the Quadripartite History does not in all things agree with
this Relation of Thomas the Archbishops Trial. And the Reasons of the Discord
between the King and him. The chief whereof was; Lib. 1. c. 22. The chief cause
of the Difference between the King and Archbishop.
That several Lewd irregular Clercs were accused of diverse Crimes, and one of
Murder in the Diocese of Salisbury, who was taken Delivered to the Bishop
thereof, the Kings Officers, and the Kindred of the Defunct, call for Justice:
The Priest denies the fact, which not being proved by his Accusers; he was put
upon Canonical purgation, in which he failed. The Bishop of the Diocese, sent
to the Archbishop to know the Law in that Case, who commanded he should be
Deprived of his Benefice, His opinion and Direction how Criminal Clercs were to
be punished
and all his Life perform strict penance in a Monastery. And thus all
Debauched, Infamous Clercs, by Decree of the Archbishop, confirmed by the
Sanction of Canons were Province, and the Punishment to be greater or less
according to the quantity of the Crime, the Degree and Order of the person, and
the manner and Cause of perpetration.

At the Ibid. The King as zealous for the peace of his people, as the
Archbishop for the Liberty of the Clergy.
same time one Philip de Lydrois a Can^n (of what Church it is not said)
Reproached the Kings Justiciarie, for which he was not only Exasperated against
him, but the whole Clergy. The Archbishop punished this Clerc, by causing him
to be whipped with suspended from his Benefice for some years. But this
satisfied not the King, who was as Zealous for the Peace of his People, as the
Archbishop was for the Liberty of the Clergy, who grew every day more
Dissolute all the Kingdom over. For which Cause, the King calls the
Archbishop, Bishops and Clergy to London.

And Ibid. c. 23. He urges the Bishops that Clercs might be tried by the
Secular Law for Enormous Crimes.
having told them the Cause of their being called together, pressed, that
Clercs taken for, or accused of Enormous Crimes, might be Left to his Officers,
and not have the protection of the Church. He most Earnestly required, by
Advice of such as had skill in both Laws, That such Clercs might presently be
Degraded and Curiae Tradantur.
Delivered to the Court, whence some very learned men by reason of the Kings
favor did affirm, That they were not to be sent into Exile, or Thrust into a
Monastery, by the Canon Law, but rather were to be Delivered to the Court,
That is, they were to be punished by Secular Judgment.

The Ibid. The Archbishop neither could or would bear it.
Archbishop with the Bishops of his Province, having consulted their Learned
men, being much concerned for the Liberty of the Clergy, answered to these
things, clearly and probably, or perhaps by proof, (luculenter satis and
probabiliter Respondent) according to the Canonical Institution of ancient
Fathers. And in the End of his Speech with much Devotion, beseeched his Royal
Clemency, Regi^m objecrabat Clementiam, ^esub novo Rege Christo, and sub nova
Christi Lege, in novam and peculiarem Domini sortem, contra sanctorum patrum
instituta novam per Regnum suum induceret cohertionem, etc.
That he would not under a new King Christ, and under a new Law of Christ,
Introduce into a new and peculiar Lot of the Lord, contrary to the Decrees of
the Ancient Fathers, a new way of Coertion into his own Kingdom, and this he
begged for the Kings Sake, and the Quiet and Stability of his Kingdom, often
humbly inculcating, that he neither Could or would bear it.

But the Ibid. c. 24. He requires the Observation of his Laws.
King not moved with his importunity, Demanded more earnestly whether he and
the Bishops would observe his Royal Consuetudines sua^ Regias The Archbishop
and Bishops answer they would observe them, saving their Order.

The King angry at their Answer.


Laws and Customs, adding that in his Grandfathers time they were observed by
the Archbishops, Bishops, Chief men, and privileged persons, and That now
they ought not to be set aside. The Archbishop after Consultation with his
Brethren, Answered they would observe them, salvo ordine suo, and the Bishops
being asked one by one, gave the same answer, only Hilary Bishop of Chichester
changed the Phrase, saying, observe the Kings Customs or Laws, (Bona fide) in
good faith; The King was Angry at the Answer, and Reservation of the
Archbishop and other Bishops and departed from them.

Most of the Ibid. c. 25. The Bishops desert the Archbishop
Bishops Desert the Archbishop, and he a long time persists in his Denial,
notwithstanding all the exhortations of them, and persuasions of the Secular
great men; yet at length he came to the King at Oxford, and promised to change
those words, ( salvo ordine saving his Order, which gave him so much Trouble.

Hereupon the King Ibidem. C. 26. The Council at Clarendon.
called the Bishops and great men to Clarendon, where he Exacted the promises
of the Archbishop and Bishops, and by the persuasion of the Bishop of Man and
Norwich, and two of the greatest Earls of the Nation, and other great persons
sent from the King, he promised, bona fide, and in verbo veritatis, in good
faith, The Archbishop and Bishops promise Bona fide, and in verbo veritatis to
observe the Kings Royal Laws.
to observe the Kings Laws, leaving out the words, salvo ordine suo, and all
the Bishops did the like, and then those Royal Customs were drawn up in form,
and caused to be written by the great men, and Recognized by them.

In this Council Ib. c. 27.28. The King requires the Bishops to put their Seals
to their acknowledgement. The Arch Bishop repents and refuses, and endeavors
to Escape.
the King requires the Archbishop and Bishops to confirm their acknowledgment
of his Laws, by putting thereunto their Seals: The Archbishop repents him of
his promise, and refuses to do resolved to go privately unto the Pope, which
he attempted, and having been twice at Sea, was both times Driven back.

This Ibidem C. 30. Anno Domini 1164. The King Angry at his Endeavor to Escape.
attempt much heightened the Kings Displeasure against him, and he caused him
peremptorily to be Cited, at a certain Day to answer such things as should be
objected against him. The King also by a strict Edict Regni Episcopi Vniversi
and Proceres, Ex Edicto Regio Districtissime Convocantur. The Bishops and great
men judg^ all his Movables to be Confiscated.
called together all the Bishops and great men Northampton, where the
Archbishop appeared not in person, according to his Citation, though he sent
his answer and excuse; for which cause, by the Judgment of all those Bishops
and great men, all his movables were confiscated. This he said was a new form
of Judgment, according to the new Canons, or Laws made at Clarendon, for it was
never heard of before, That the Archbishop of Canturbury should be tried in
the Kings Court for any Cause whatsoever, both in Respect of the Dignity of his
Church and person, and that because he was spiritual father of the King, and of
all in the Kingdom; but he complained more of his Brethren and Fellow-Bishops,
Than he did of the Judgment, or the Lay persons etc. Ibidem.
veruntamen multo magis quam de Judicio, vel de proceribus Judicantibus, de
Consratribus suis and Coepiscopis Querebatur, Novam formam and ordinem
Judiciorum dictos invenisse; ut Archipraesul a suis Suffraganeis, aut Pater a
filiis judicetur.

The King in the Ibidem. C. 31. 500 l. charged upon the Archbishop. Security
given for it.
Second day of this Council required five hundred pounds of the Archbishop,
which he said he had borrowed of him: The Archbishop affirmed the King gave
him the money, which notwithstanding, Exacted Caution, and the Archbishop
making some Delay, it was told him, he must either pay the money or go to
Prison. But some men seeing his friends and Suffragans forsake him, voluntarily
offered themselves as Sureties for him, and five (not there named) became bound
every one, in an hundred pounds.

On the C. 34.
last day of the Council before he Entered into the Court, Bishops came to him
astonished, and affrighted at the things they had heard, whence Vndenonaperto
propter Enormitatem, sed sub quadam insin^ationis specie artificiose ei
suadebans, ut ipse etc.

The Bishops persuade him to Compliance.


they did not openly for any Enormity, but as it were by way of insinuation
artificially persuade him. That he should in all things, even to what belonged
to the Archbishopric submit himself to the Kings pleasure, if he could so
appease his wrath and Indignation. Adding, That unless he did it, he would be
accused of Perjury, and Judged as a Traitor, because he had not observed his
Oath of Fealty or Fidelity he had Sworn to the King, by which he maintein his
Terrene honor; nor had observed the Kings Customs or Laws, to which he had
specially bound himself by a new Oath. He was not much dismayed, that the world
so frowned on him, but That which was to him most Detestable above all things
was, That he Collected from the words of the Bishops, That they were ready to
Judge him not only in Civil, but also in Criminal Causes in a Secular Court.
Communiter vobis omnibus in virtute Obedientia Sanctae, sub ordinis vestri
periculo hoc inhibeo, ne deinceps itersitis Judicio quo mea persona judicetur.

He prohibits the Bishops to Judge him.


And therefore he forbad them all, by virtue of holy Obedience, and under peril
of their Order, That they for the future present in Court when his person was
Judged. And that they might not do it, he appealed to their Mother the Roman
Church, the Refuge of all oppressed. But notwithstanding what he said, all the
Bishops hastened to the Court except two, London, and Winchester, who privately
staid behind and Comforted him.

After this he went into the Kings Chamber Ib. C. 35. He goes into the Kings
Chamber with his Cross Erected.
Carrying the Cross himself Erected, expecting the Kings Coming: The Bishops
Dissuaded undecent posture, and would not, That he should have proceeded after
this manner. Ib. Col. 36.
The King took notice of it, and by Out-Crie or Proclamation made by an vocatis
igitur praeconis voce Pontificibus and proceribus universis.

The King complains of his Insolency.


Herald, called together all the Bishops and great men, to whom he made a great
and grievous complaint, That the Archbishop had in Reproach of himself, and
the Kingdom or Government, so Entered the Court as a notable Traitor, and so
insolently, as no Christian Prince, had ever seen or heard of the like
behavior. All were of the Kings opinion, Declaring him always a vain and proud
man, and that such Ignominy not only reflected upon the King and Kingdom, but
upon themselves also, and said it had Worthily happened to him, The Bishops and
great men confess him a Traitor.
who had made such a man, the second person in the Kingdom; To whom all were
subject and none his aequal. Therefore they all Declared him a manifest
Traitor, and to be punished accordingly, who had not according to his Oath
observed Terrene honor toward his Prince, from whom he had received so many and
so great advantages, impressed upon the King and Kingdom, a perpetual mark of
Treason, sed potius in hoc facto, and Regi and Regno perpetuam proditionis
Macalam impressisset, And to be punished as a perjured person and Traitor.
(they are the Authors words) and therefore he ought to be punished as the
Kings perjured man, and Traitor, and this was the voice of them all, and
propterea in eum tanquam in Regis perjurum, and proditorem animadvertendum, and
super hoc Clamor omnium invalescebat.

The Ibidem. C. 37. The Bishops obtein leave of the King to Consult apart.
Bishops by leave from the King Consulted apart, for they were either to
incur his indignation, or with the great men in a Criminal Cause, to Condemn
their Archbishop, which for the manifest violation of holy Sanctions or
Canons, they dare not do. At length the matter was thus patch't up by Common
Council or Contrivance of the Bishops; That they woul Appeal the Archbishop of
perjury in the Court of Rome, and bound themselves to the King in the word of
Truth, would use their utmost Endeavor to Depose him. Having thus obliged
themselves to the King, They promise to endeavor to oppose him
they all went from him to the Archbishop, and Hilary Bishop of Chichester in
the name of the rest, told him, Ibid.
That he had been their Archbishop, and then they were bound to obey him. But
because he had Sworn fealty to the King, and did Endeavor to destroy his Laws
and Customs, especially such as belonged to his Terrene Dignity and honor,
therefore they declared him Guilty of perjury, and That for the future they
were not perjured Archbishop. They App^al to the Pope.
And therefore put themselves, and what was theirs under the Popes protection,
and Appealed to his presence, and appointed him a day to answer these matters.

The King Ibidem. C. 38.
and Chief men, (without the Bishops) sitting in Judgment, Rege cum principibus
(pontificibus substractis) sendente pro Tribunali, It was most certainly
believed, The Archbishop would have been imprisoned, or somewhat worse have
been done to him; for the King and all the great men that were present, judged
him perjured and a Traitor. The King and great men judge him perjured and a
Traitor.

The Earls and Barons go to him, the Earl of Leicester tells him what he must
do.


And the Earls and Barons and much Company went from the King to the
Archbishop, of whom the chiefest person Robert Earl of Leicester, told him, he
was to come and answer what was objected against him, as he had promised to do
the day before, or he must hear his Sentence; he rising up said, Sentence! yea
Son Earl hear you His obstinate answer to the Earl of Leicester.
when the Church of Canturbury was given to me, I asked what manner person that
would make me, and it was answered free and exempt from the Kings Court. Et
responsum est, Liberum and quietum ab omni nexu Curiali me redderet. Free
therefore and absolute as I am, I will not, nor am I bound to answer to those
things from which I am Exempt. And then added, My Son Earl observe, by how much
the Soul is more worthy than the Body, by so much the more I am to obey God
than a Terrene Prince. But neither Law nor reason, permits That Children or
Sons should Condemn or Judge their Fathers, and therefore I decline the
sentence of the King, your self, and others, as being to be judged under God
alone, by the Pope. Vnde Regis et tuum et aliorum Iudicium decline, sub Deo
solo a Domino Papa judicandus. To whose presence I do before you all appeal,
putting both the Dignity and Order of the Church of Canturbury, and my own,
with all things belonging He Appeals to the Pope.
I call you to the Audience and Judgment of the Pope; And as from the Enemies
of the Catholic Church, by Authority of the Apostolic See, I retire from hence.
And so made his Escape, as has been before related.

But Hoved. f. 284. a. n. 10.20. A. D. 1165.
before he could reach the King of France, Gilbert Foliot London, and William
Earl of Arundel had been with him, ^o prohibit him from receiving the
Archbishop of Canturbury into his Kingdom, and to prevail with him to send to
the Pope, The King sent the Bishop of London and Earl of Arundel to the King of
France not to receive him.
That out of kindness to him he would not receive him into his favor. But by
how much the more the King of Englands Messengers labored that the Archbishop
might be expelled France, by so much the more the King of France cherished his
cause, and besides sent Francis his Almoner to Pope Alexander then in France,
Mandans ei ut sicut honorem.
Requesting or Requiring him, That as he loved the Honor of the Roman Church,
and the Advantage of the Kingdom of France, so in all things he should maintain
Thomas Archbishop of Canturbury and his cause against the Tyrant of England,
and from that time forward the Pope received him into great favor.

In the mean time ibid. and n. 30.40. He sends also to the Pope to no purpose.
King Henry sent to the Pope, Roger Archbishop of York, Henry Bishop of
Winchester, Gilbert Bishop London, Hilary of Chichester, and Bartholomew Bishop
of Excester: Wido Rufus, Richard Ivelcester, and John de Oxford Clercs; William
Earl of Arundel, Hugh de Gundevile, Bernard of St. Walery, and Henry
Fitzgerald, who found the Pope at Sens, and spoke many Evil, and false things
against the Archbishop, but the Pope believed them not, His messengers
R^quested him to send two Legates to hear and determine the cause.
Knowing they delivered false Testimony against him. They seeing they could not
prevail, Requested him to send two Legates into England, to hear the
Controversy between the King and and to determine it, according to the Honor
of God, and of Holy Church and the Kingdom.

Hoveden reports f. 483. b. n. 20.30. The Arch Bishop charged with 30000 l.
that the King sent his Knights to him, and commanded he should come and give a
full Account of what he had received when he was Chancellor, and particularly
of 30000 pounds of Silver, To whom he answered, That the King Knew well enough,
that he had often given an Account of all those things which were demanded of
him before he was Elected Archbishop. And That at the time of his Election,
Henry the Kings Exchequer, and Richard de Luci, Justitiary of England, had
acquitted and discharged him to God and Holy Church from all Receipts and
Accounts, and from all Secular Exaction on- behalf of the King, and That he
was chosen to his Office Free, and discharged, and therefore would not answer
further. He pleads his discharge.
ibid.
In Electione mea Henricus filius ejus omnes Barons Scaccarii, and Richardus
de Luci Justiciarius Angliae clamaverunt me quietum Deo and Sanctae Ecclesiae
de omnibus Receptis and Computationibus, and ab omni exactione Seculari, ex
part Domini Regis, and sic liber and absolutus Electus fui ad hujus officii
administrationem, and ideo nolo amplius inde placitare.
But the Pope Hoved. 1.284. a. n. 30.40. The Pope would neither send Cardinal
nor Legates lest they should be corrupted.
would send neither Cardinal nor Legates, Knowing the King of England to be
mighty in Word and Deed, and that the Legates might easily be corrupted, as men
loving Gold and Silver rather then Justice and Aequity; and therefore the Kings
Envoyes retired from the Popes Court, and within four days, the Archbishop
came thither, and throwing himself at the Popes Feet, delivered him a See
Append. n. 41. The Pope damns the Kings Laws.
Transcript of the Laws, which the King called Ancient. Which when Pope had
heard read before the Cardinals, Clergy, and People, he for ever damned them,
and anathemized all those that kept, or any way favored them. After these
things in the same year King Henry passed into Normandy, making a Grievous and
See Append. n. 44. The King puts forth a severe Edict.
execrable Edict (so Hoveden) against the Pope and Archbishop; the Contents
whereof were these.

If Hoved. f. 284. b. lin. 4.
any one shall be found bringing Letters, or Mandates of Pope or Archbishop,
containing an Interdict of Christianity (that is, the use of the Service,
Sacraments, and Holy Rites) in England, let him be taken, and let speedy
Justice be executed upon him as a Traitor to the Kingdom.

Also no Clerc, Monk, or other Religious person, may be permitted to pass
beyond Sea, or return into England, unless he has a Passport from the
Justices for his Going out, and the Kings Letters for his return, taken and
imprisoned.

Also it was forbidden That no man bring any Command or Message from the Pope
or Archbishop; whoever does, let him be taken and detained. Also generally it
was forbidden that no man should Appeal to the Pope, or Archbishop, nor for
the future should receive any Message or Commands from them, nor hold any Plea
by their Order or Command; and if any man did contrary to this prohibion, he
was to be taken and detained, or imprisoned.

Also the Bishops, Abbats, Priests, Monks, Clercs, or Laymen, that shall
comply with or submit to the Sentence of an Interdict, They and their Kindred,
shall forthwith be cast out of the Nation, and shall carry nothing with them:
Their goods and possessions shall be taken into the Kings Hand.

Also all Clercs That have Rents and Estates in England, shall be summoned,
that they Return to them within three months, and if they do not, their Goods
and Possessions shall be seized to the Kings use.

Also That the Bishops of London and Norwich should be summoned before the
Kings Justices, to make satisfaction, for that contrary to the Statutes of the
Realm, they had interdicted the Lands of Earl Hugh Bigod Earl of Norwich. Or
Hugh Earl of Chester.
Hugh, and pronounced Sentence against him.

Also That the Peter Pence should be gathered, and safely kept.

After this, in a Discourse in the Council which the King held at Chinon in
Tourain, (as f. 284. b. n. 30.
Hoveden seems to have it) or in an Epistle to him, as the Quadripartite lib. 5.
History has it, He tells the King That the Church of God consisted of two
orders, Clergy and Laity. Hoved. f. 285. a. n. 10. The Church consists of two
Orders, Clergy and Laity.
Ecclesia Dei in duobus constat ordinibus, in Clero and populo. Amongst the
Clergy, were Apostles, and Apostolic men, The Church consists of two Orders,
Clergy and Laity.
Bishops and other Governors or Rectors of Churches, to whom the Care and
Government of the Church was committed. In Clero sunt Apostoli, and Apostolici
viri, Episcopi, etc. Ibidem.
amongst the Laity were Kings, Dukes, Earls, and other powers, who transacted
Secular affairs, that they might reduce the whole to the peace and unity of the
Church. In populo sunt Reges, Duces, and Comites, etc. And because it was
certain Kings receive their power from the Church, Kings receive their power
from the Church, according to the Archbishops Doctrine.

The state of the Controversy between the King and Archbishop from his own
Mouth.


and not That from them, but from Christ, therefore he had nothing to do to
command Bishops to excommunicate or absolve anyone, To force Cleres into
Secular Courts or Judicatures, To judge of Tithes, of Churches, To prohibit
Bishops That they handle not, or meddle with transgression or breach of Faith,
or Oath ( interdicere Episcopis ne tractent de Transgressione fidei, vel
Iuramenti) and many other things which were written after this manner amongst
his Customs, which he called ancient. Then after a Ibidem n. 20.
Citation of Scripture out of the Prophets, Woe to those that make unjust laws,
and writing, write injustice, That do oppress the Poor in Judgment, and do
wrong to the cause of the humble of the people of God, he goes on.

^Let my Ibidem. His Speech or Epistle to the King.
Lord, if he pleases, hear the Counsel of his faithful one, the admonition of
his Bishop, the chastisement of his Father. Have no Familiarity or communion
for the future with That is, Frederic the Emperor, and such as adhaered to Pope
Victor, and rejected Alexander. See here fol. 303. A.
Schismatics; for devoutly and honorably you received the Pope (meaning
Alexander) how you honored and cherished the Roman Church, how much the Pope
and Roman Church loved and honored your person, and heard you in all things
whatever they could, without offense to God; Et in Quibuscunque secundum Deum
potuerint, vos Exaudierint. Do not therefore my Lord, if you desire the Health
of your Soul, any ways substract from that Church, what is its own, or oppose
it any thing contrary to Justice; Yea, let have the same Liberty in your
Kingdom, which it is known to have in others: Be mindful also of the Profession
you made, and laid it written upon the Altar at Westminster, when you were
consecrated and anointed King by our Predecessor. That you would preserve to
the Church of God, her Liberty, and That you would restore the Church of
Canterbury to the same State and Dignity it was in the times of your and our
Predecessors* Restore wholly to us, The Possessions that belong to that Church,
The Towns, Castles, Lands, which you distributed at pleasure, and all things
taken away from Us, our Clercs or Laymen. Permit us freely and in peace to
return to our See, And we are ready faithfully and with Respect to serve you as
our most Dear Lord and King, In all things we can, Saving the Honor of God, and
the Roman Church, and our Order, Ibidem n. 40.
Otherwise Know certainly, That you shall feel the Divine severity and
vengeance, Et nos vobis tanquam charissimo Domino, et Regi fideliter et devote
servire parati sumus, in Quibuscunque poterimus The same words are in
Quadrilogus. lib. 5.
Salvo Honor The same words are in Quadrilogus. lib. 5.
Alioquin pro ^certo scias, Quod divinam severitatem, et ultionem senties.

In an Append. n. 46.
Epistle to his Suffragans, He Expostulates with them why they Concurred not
with him in opposing the King, and reclaiming him from his perverse purposes,
which seemed to him dangerous and intolerable, and gives them notice, That,
first having invoked the Grace of the Holy Spirit, he had damned and cassated
the writing, He expostulates with his suffragans, why they concurred not with
him in opposing the King, etc. He castates and nulls the Kings Laws, and
Excommunicates all the favorers of them.
in which he had published his Customs, or rather (as he calls them) Pravities.
And that he had Excommunicated all the observers, exactors, advisers,
promoters, and defenders of them, and had absolved all them his suffragans by
Gods, and his own Authority from the Observation of them. Also That he had
Excommunicated John of Oxford, afterward Dean of Salisbury and Bishop of
Norwich, for Joining with Reginald Archbishop of Colon and the Germans, for
Victor alias Octavian against Alexander, and for usurping the Deanery of
Salisbury against the Popes and his Command, and declared his Title to it null
and void.

He also Ibidem. He Excommunicates by name many others, for several matters.
let them Know he had Excommunicated Richard Ivecestre or Ilcester for joining
with Archbishop Reginald and the Germans, as was said before, and That he had
Excommunicated Richard de Luci, and Iocelin de Bailol because they drew up and
put form the Royal Customs and Laws, or (as he says) because they were the
authors and makers of those pravities. Likewise That he had excommunicated
Ranulph de Broc for taking and Deteining the Goods of the Church of Canturbury,
and for taking and imprisoning his Men or Tenants, as Laymen. That with him he
had Excommunicated Hugh de St. Clare, and Thomas Fitz-Bernard who had occupied
the Goods and Possessions of the same Church without his Connivance or assent,
and all others That afterward should do the like.

He further, Ibidem. He tells his suffragans he yet deferred to pronounce
Sentence against the Kings person, but was ready to do it.
signifies to them, That as yet he had deferred to pronounce Sentence against
the Kings person, expecting That being inspired by Divine Grace, he might
Repent, which if he did not quickly, he was ready to do it, and commanding
their Fraternity, by virtue of their Obedience, That they should Esteem as
Excommunicated, the before mentioned persons, and cause them to be denounced
such, injoyning the Bishop of London, to send and show this Epistle to all his
Brethren and fellow-Bishops of his Province.

After these proceedings of the Archbishop A severe Edict to watch the Ports,
and against such as brought any thing from the Pope, etc.
King Henry sent his Precept into England, That all the Ports should be most
strictly watched, lest Letters of Interdiction should be any ways brought in;
and if any one brought them, he commanded his Feet should be cut off; if he was
a Clerc, then to lose his Eyes and Genitals; if a Laic, to be hanged; if a
Leper to be burnt. And if any Bishop, fearing such interdict, would depart the
Nation, he should carry nothing Staff. He willed also that all Scholars should
return into England, or they should be deprived of their Benefices, and such as
staid should never return. The Priests that would not chant, or sing Mass, he
ordered to be Gelt, and all such as were Rebels to him, were to lose their Fees
or livelyhoods.

He also sent his Append. n. 47. The King Commands the Sheriffs to imprison all
such as Appealed to the Pope, etc. and to seize the Rents and Possessions of
the Archbishop.
Writs to all the Sheriffs in England, That they should imprison all such as
Appealed to Rome, until his Pleasure Known, That they should seize all the
Rents and Possessions of the Archbishop, as Ralph de Brocke and his other
Ministers should direct, That they should take security for the good behavior
of the Fathers, Mothers, Sisters, Brothers, Nephews and Nieces of all such
Clercs as were with the Archbishop, and also that their goods should be
forthcoming, until his pleasure was Known.

When he Hoved. f. 286. b. N. 10. A. D. 1166. He Banished all his Relations.
returned out of Normandy into England, in the year 1166. he Banished out of
England and all his Dominions, all Men and Women that he could find which were
akin to the Archbishop, and spared not the Children sucking their Mothers
Breasts, and he had not been two years in the Abbey of Pontigny, (in the
confines of Champaign and Burgundy) with Warin and his Monks Pope Alexander had
recommended him; Ib. N. 20. And forced him to leave the Monastery of Pontigny
But King Henry sent to the Abbat, That if he sheltered any longer the
Archbishop of Canturbury in his Monastery, he would Banish all the Monks of
his They were Cistertians. From whence he goes to the Abbey of St. Columb.
Order out of England. The Archbishop being told of this Message, of his own
accord left the place, lest for his sake so many Religious houses might perish.
And from thence he went to the King of France, who received him very kindly,
and sent him to the Abbey of St. Columb near the City of Sens.

Pope Alexander writes to Hoveden ut supra, n. 30. etc. The Pope writes to King
Hen. in behalf of Thomas, And tells hi^ of the difference of the Secular and
Ecclesiastic power and rights, And advises him not to confound them.
King Henry in favor of the Cause of Thomas the Archbishop, and tells him that
as the Seculars were Distinguished in Life and Habit from Clercs, so their
Courts were quite Different; That therefore he had perverted them by an
indecent order and usurped those things which belong to Christ, by making new
Laws according to his own Will, to the oppression of the Church, and poor of
Christ; and so Exhorts him to permit every one to have his own Ecclesiastical
matters, and especially such as were Criminal, about breach of Faith or Oath,
(de laesione fidei aut Juramenti) The Causes also which concern the things and
possessions of Churches, to be discussed by Ecclesiastic persons, because it
neither was Expedient, nor became him to confound the Secular and Ecclesiastic
government, Regnum and Sacerdotium confundere, non adeo Serenitatem tuam
Deceret, nec etiam expediret.

Append. N. 48.
Gilbert Bishop of London to persuade the King to be kind to the Church, and
Receive the Archbishop into favor. The Bishop of Ibidem. N. 49. He writes
also to the Bishop of London to incline the Kings affection to Thomas and the
Church. The Kings sober and complying answer to his proposals.
London takes to his assistance Richard Bishop of Hereford, they both urge the
King according to their instructions given them by the Pope, in this and other
Epistles; who they tell him received his Correptions very thankfully, and with
great temper of mind answered every thing very modestly. First, That he had no
aversion to him, nor ever thought of any such thing: That while he Paternal
grace and favor, The King would Love him as his Father, and honor and cherish
the Roman Church as his Mother, and humbly obey his holy Commands, saving his
own and the Dignity of his Kingdom. That if at any time he had been Deficient
in his Reverence toward him, it was because when he had in his necessity with
his whole heart, mind, and strength espoused his Cause, yet afterward he being
in great straights, his Holiness failed him, and to every Petition gave him a
Repulse. He said he will hinder no man from visiting your Holiness, nor as yet
has he done it. In Appeals according to the ancient Constitution of his
Kingdom, he affirms, that no Clerc ought for a Civil Cause (ob Civilem Causam)
to go out of his Kingdom, before he had by his Authority and precept tried
whether he could obtein his right or not; if he cannot, any one might and shall
Appeal to you. In which if he did any ways prejudice your right or honor, he
would amend it, by advice of the Church of his own Kingdom. He asserts he never
Expelled the Archbishop out of his Kingdom, and as he went of his own accord,
so he may freely return again to his Church when he please; On Condition he
observe his Royal Dignities, which he Swore to observe, though now he calls
them wicked and unjust; and if any Church or Ecclesiastical person can show
himself grieved by him, or any of his, he is ready to make Satisfaction
according to the Judgment of the whole Church.

These they say were the Ibidem.
Kings Answers, and beseech his sublimity to consider what Issue this Affair is
like to have, when as the King seems much to justify himself, in that he
submits in all things to the Counsel and judgment of the Church of his Kingdom.
And the Archbishop may Return upon the Condition before Expressed: And do
supplicate his Excellentiae vestrae supplicandum aestimavimus.
Excellency, to act Mildly, and not to pronounce senten^e of Interdict or
Excommunication against him, lest he should force the King, and with him much
people, and innumerable Churches from his

The Archbishops Suffragans, or the Bishops of his Province Append. N. 50. The
Bishops of the Province of Canturbury write to the Archbishop in behalf of the
King, they excuse him and exhort Thomas to a compliance.
wrote to him, They did hope that those things, which by his unexpected
Departure, and by the newness of the thing it self, had been put into
Confusion, might by his humility and prudence, with Cooperating Grace, have
been reduced into their former peaceable Condition. And it was a comfort to
them when by common fame they heard, that Designs or Contrivances against their
Lord the King, or his Kingdom, but that he did bear with modesty that Burden
of Poverty which he had voluntarily undertaken, and had withdrawn and
sequestered himself, out of Devotion to humble himself, and to obtein or
improve his Spiritual Welfare, and rejoiced to hear he was so studious of
Peace. But then to their great Grief, they heard he Threatened the King with an
Interdict, and to cut him off from the Church; They press upon him the
inconveniences of such proceedings, conveniences of a Quiet and peaceable
temper. And urge him to consider, That the King against the Dissuasion of his
Mother, and the Opinion of the Kingdom, or Secular Government, (Regno
reclamante) caused him to be Elected Archbishop, in hopes he might Reign
happily, and enjoy great Quiet and Security by his advice and assistance They
tell him, The King being appointed by God, provided for the peace of his
Subjects in all things, and preserved it to the Churches, and people committed
to him, That he exacted and required the Dignities and Exhibited to Kings
before him, should be allowed and Exhibited to him. About which if there were
any Controversy between the King and himself, when he was admonished by the
Bishops of London and Hereford by Directions from the Pope, he answered humbly
and meekly, That if any Church, or Ecclesiastical person whatsoever could show
themselves grieved or injured, he would in all things submit himself to the
Judgment of the Church of his Kingdom, and That in very Deed he was then ready
to perform it, and give satisfaction for the right, what Law, what Canon, or
interdict, he could urge or press the King, or how he could cut him off from
the Church, and then move him to Peace and compliance, and smoothly Reprove
him, for several preposterous, new, and unwarrantable Actions; as suspending
and Condemning the Bishop of Salisbury, before he was accused or heard; which
new Order of Judgment (say they) to Condemn first, and hear the cause
afterward, as they hoped, was then not to be found amongst the Laws or Canons.
And lest he might attempt to exercise and extend it against their Lord the
King, or his Kingdom, or against them, and the Churches committed to them, To
the prejudice of the Pope, the Disgrace and Detriment of the holy Roman Church,
and the increase of his own confusion, they opposed the Remedy of Appeal, and
the second time Appealed to the Pope in Writing, and Designed Ann. Dom. 1167.
Ascension Day for the time of Appeal.

Such another Append. N. 51. They write to the same effect to the Pope.

They tell him there was no need of an interdict, etc.

They fix the Ground and cause of the Controversy, in the Extravagancy and
Crimes of insolent Clercs, and the manner of punishing them.


Epistle, and much to the same Effect, The Bishops of his Province wrote to the
Pope in behalf of the King; In which they excuse him as before, Commend his
compliance and obedience, and inform the Pope there was no need of an
Interdict, Threats, or Curse to force him to satisfaction. They assign for the
ground and Cause of the Controversy the Extravagancies and Excesses of certain
insolent Clercs, and the manner and place of punishing their grievous Crimes and
Enormities: They Blame Thomas for Threatening to Excommunicate and Interdict the
Nation, and say, it was neither like the Devotion or Patience of a Father, or
Archbishop. They acquaint the Pope he had Excommunicated some of the Kings
Servants, and chief men of the Kingdom, and his special assistants and
Counselors, by whom the great affairs of the Kingdom were much directed,
without Citation, without making any Defense, and as they said, without Guilt,
not being Convicted, or having Confessed any fault. And lay before him the
inconveniences and ill consequences of his extravagant actions, and at length
make their Appeal to the Pope, and propound the Day of Appeal as before.

An Abstract of the Rescript or Answer of the Archbishop to his Suffragans
Epistle here follows. The Rescript it self is to be found in the Appendix. N.
56.
THrough the whole he Draws and insinuates a Parallel between our Savior
Christ and himself, The Archbishops Answer to the Epistle of his Suffragans.
Tells them they wrote it not by Common advice and Prudence, it containing more
of Mordacity than Comfort, more of Disobedience than Piety or Charity, and
wonders why they should be so unkind to him, when he never did them injury. He
exhorts them to lay down their lives with him to free the Church from the Yoke
of servitude. Says, the injury done to him, the Church of God, Canturbury, was
the Cause of his Appeal, and that, the Cause of his Recess. He accuses the
Bishop of London, Archbishop of York, and Richard de Ivelcester for Dictating
the Sentence against him, and particularly the Bishop of London for Receiving
the Money of the Church of Canturbury, and applying it to the use of his own.
He affirms he ought not to fear any punishment, or ill consequences for
standing out against the King. The Bishops he Exhorts not to confound the
rights of the Church and Kingdom which were Distinct Powers, of which The He
mea^s the secular power, received authority from Church.
one received power and authority from the other. He says the Bishop of
Salisbury admitted John of Oxford Dean of Salisbury, against the Popes and his
Prohibition, which was manifest Disobedience, and therefore there was no
solemnity required in the Process against him, and cites Canons to make good
his Assertion. He argues against their Appeal, and asserts, That Legally and
Canonically they could not Appeal. And affirms it no injury or grievance smite
him with excommunication. As to what they say, that he was made Archbishop
against the Opinion and good liking of the Kingdom. He appeals to the form and
manner of his Election, and endeavors to make what they say improbable, from
the number and Quality of the persons present, and for that the King wrote for
a Pall, and the Election was made without Contradiction. He takes notice they
reported him a little Fellow, and of mean Parentage, his answer was, That he
Descended not from Kings; yet chose rather by the He tells them they talked of
the Danger of the Roman Church, of the loss of Temporals, and the fear of the
Kings and his peoples recess from it, of his own Danger, and of those that
belonged to him; but thought not of the Loss of Souls; And after this averrs
the Suffragans of his Church, ought all to be of his opinion, and to suffer and
dye with him. The Epistle or Rescript is very long, and what his Potency and
skill was in Arguing or Defending, the knowing

A while after he Excommunicated the Append. N. 52. A. D. 1168. The Archbishop
Excommunicates the Bishop of London, and commands the Dean and Chapter and
Clergy of his Diocese to avoid it.
Bishop of London because he abused his patience, grew more obdurate, and would
neither hear the Pope nor himself, until he gave just satisfaction, and
Commanded him by virtue of his Obedience, the Danger of his Salvation, Dignity
and Order, that he should abstein from the Company of all faithful people,
defile the ^lock of the Lord, which he was to teach and inform by his Doctrine
and Example. He also wrote to the Ibidem N. 53. And the company of others which
he had Excommunicated.
Dean, Archdeacon and Clergy of the Diocese of London, That by virtue of their
Obedience, Danger of their Salvation, and Order, they should avoid his Company,
and likewise the Company of other persons Excommunicated, there named, to wit,
I^celin Bishop of Salisbury, Earl Hugh, Ranulph de Broc, Thomas Fitz-Bernard,
Robert of the Church of Broc, Hugh de St. Clare, Letard Clerc of Northfleet.
Nigell de he was Sigillifer Domini Regis.
Saccavill, Richard the Brother of William Hastings, who had usurped his Church
of New Coton, and informed them that on Ascension Day he would Excommunicate
others which he had cited, if in the mean time they made not satisfaction,
namely Gilbert Archdeacon of Canturbury, and Robert his i. e. Official
Vicar, Richard de Ivelcester, Richard de Luci, William Giffard, Adam de
Cheringes; And all such as by the Kings Mandate, or their own Rashness, seized
the Goods of him or his Clercs, And those by whose assistance or advice the
Kings mind was set against the Liberty of the Church, and by whose instigation
he proscribed and wasted the innocent, and such as hindered the Popes
Commissioners and his, from persuing the Business of the Church. And then Bids
them not be troubled or fear, because by the assistance of God, and the
Protection of the Apostolic See, he was safe from the Tergiversations of
Malignants, and the Subterfuges of Appeals.

He gave Robert Hoved. f. 294, a. N. 20. and b. N. 10.20. He gives the Bishop
of Hereford notice of several he had Excommunicated by name. And that he had
Excommunicated all such as received Benefices from the hands of Laymen.
Bishop of Hereford notice by an Epistle, That he had publicly Excommunicated
Gilbert (or as it is here in this place) Geofry Archdeacon of Canturbury,
Robert his Vicar, (or Official) Richard de Ivecester, William Giffard, Earl
Hugh, Richard de Luci, Adam de Cheringes, and also all those who had received
Ecclesiastical Offices or Benefices from the hands of Laymen, contrary to or
had usurped them by their own Authority. Those likewise which hindered the
Popes, and his own Agents from prosecuting the Affairs of the Church. And
Commanded him by the Popes Authority, and his own, That they might be Declared
excommunicate in his Diocese, and so bids him farewell, and commend him, and the
Cause of God which was in his hands, to the Prayers of the Saints.

A. D. 1169.
on Twelfe Day the Kings of Chron. Gervas. Col. 1404. N. 50, 60.
England and France met at Mount Miral in Champaign, where they treated of, and
Concluded a Peace, and the Poictovins and Britans which took Arms with the King
of France, against the King of England were received into favor.

Not long after by the Persuasion of friends Ibidem. Col. 1405. N. 10. The King
and Archbishop are brought together.
the King and Archbishop were brought together, in the presence of the King of
France, Archbishop offered, to Commit the Controversy between them to the
King himself, Saving the honor of God, which last words when the King heard he
was very angry and reproached him very much: Thomas answered him Calmly, and
the King observing that he gained upon the Auditory, interrupted him, and told
the King of France he would say whatever Displeased him, was contrary to the
honor of God, by which means, and under that pretense he would Dispossess him
of all his rights. But that he might not in any wise seem entrench upon the
honor of God, Ibidem. N. 50, 60. His fair offer to Thomas.
The King said, there had been many Kings of England before him, of greater and
less authority than he was, and there had been many Archbishops of Canturbury
before him great and holy men, let him do what the greatest and most holy of
his predecessors, did to the least of the Kings predecessors, and he would
acquiesce in it. And added, That he Drove him not from the Kingdom, but that he
fled privately, no man Compelling him. And that now he insinuated to the King
of France, and great men, that he Defended Church of God. For his part he
always Willed and Granted, and did then Will and grant, That he should Enjoy
his Church, and Govern it in the same Liberty, in which any of his Antecessors
did best and most freely Govern it.

Ibidem, Col. 1406. lin. 3. and n. 10.20. Approved by the King of France.
On every side it was said, the King yielded sufficiently. And the King of
France being moved against the Archbishop, asked him, whether he would be
greater than Saints, or better than Peter. Thomas willingly receive his Church
in the same Liberty his Antecessors had it, but the Customs which were
Contrary to the Institutions of the Holy Fathers he would not receive. The
Mediators advised him to submit to the King, and give him his Due honor; he
replied our Fathers suffered because they would not Conceal the Name of Christ.
And should he for the favor of Man suppress the Honor of God?

All the Ibid. The great men of England and France against him.
great men of both Kingdoms rose up against him, saying his Arrogance was the
hinderance of Peace, and because he resisted the Will of Both Kings, he was not
Worthy of the assistance of Either. And seeing he was Ejected out of England;
France ought not to receive him. The King of France his Mind was averted from
him for some Days, nor did he visit him as he was wont, nor did he receive from
him his usual supplies. Ibid. N. 30 40. The King of France his A^tifice,
Jugli^g, and Hypoc^sie.
But it was not long before he sent coming to the King, he found him sitting
with a sad Countenance, not rising to him as he was wont; and on a sudden he
threw himself with a sob at the feet of the Archbishop, saying, truly thou
alone see, and doubling those words with a Sigh, verily thou alone see, we
were all blind, Ibid. N. 50 60.
who gave the Counsel against God, That for the favor of man, thou should
keep silent concerning the honor of God. I Repent father, Pardon me I beseech
you, and absolve me from this fault; from this hour I offer you my self and my
Kingdom. He raised the absolved him.

Within a few days it was Ibid. and Col. 1407. lin. 1. The Design of the King
of France his hypocrisy.
told the King of France that the King of England, had broken all the Covenants
he had made with the Poictovins and Britans in the Treaty at Mount-Mirall by
his Mediation; whereupon he magnifyed Thomas for what he had told him
concerning the King of England, who sent to him Ib. N. 10.
to let him Know that he much wondered he should keep the Archbishop in his
Country, who Contumaciously refused the Peace offered unto him. The King of
France bad his Envoyes tell their Master, That seeing he stood so much upon
Customs which he called ancient, he would not abate any thing of the ancient
liberty of the Kings of France, which was to Relieve all Banished persons,
Especially Ecclesiastics. -- Now was the time of the Archbishops thundering
out his Excommunications, and urging the Pope to interdict the Kingdom.

The Kings of Ibid. Col. 1408. N. 10. The King of France Mediates Peace.
England and France met again, at the Mont of Martyrs, (apud Montem Martyrum)
and amongst other things Discoursed of restoring the Archbishop. King Henry
granted the Archbishop should return in peace and with security and enjoy his
Bishopric with the same liberty, it could be made appear any of his
Predecessors enjoyed it, and promised to give 1000 marks toward the expenses of
his Return. He Demanded 30000, and said, unless he restored what he had taken
away, his sin could not be remitted; Ib. N. 20, 30, 40. All things were agreed.
But the King of France great men of both Kingdoms, persuaded him to Quit his
Demands. When all things were agreed, The Archbishop by the Popes Command
required Caution for the Confirmation of the Peace; when every one said a
Caution was not to be Exacted, and that the Kiss of Peace, The King of England
excuses his not giving the Kiss of Peace to the Archbishop.
(osculum pacis) sufficed, which was intimated by (...) King of France to the
King of England; he said, he would willingly do it, because in his anger he had
publicly sworn he would never Kiss the Archbishop, although he should make
Peace with him, and receive him And yet notwithstanding that, he would not
retein any Rancor or Malice against him.

The King of Ibidem. He would not accept the Peace without the Kiss.
France and other Mediators suspecting Poison in the fair words of the King,
reported them as they were to the Archbishop, neither persuading one thing or
other. The Archbishop would not accept the Peace, without the Kiss, and so
all parties went their several ways, without finishing of the Peace; and the
King of France sent his Letters and Messengers with those of Thomas to the
Pope, beseeching he would make no longer delay in the Sentence against Ibidem,
n. 50, 60. The King of France and Archbishop of Sens, excite the Pope against
King Henry.
And the Bishop of Sens went in person to prevail with the Pope, to Interdict
England, unless Peace was restored to the Church. Whereof King Henry having
notice, sent into England a severe Edict or Precept Append. n. 54.
against bringing into it any Letters or Mandates from the Pope or Archbishop,
relating to an Interdict, making all, both old and young, swear to the Chron.
Gervas. ut supra, n. 60.
observation of every Article.

Ibidem. Col. 1410. l. 5. A. D. 1170. These old Monks began the year at
Christmas.
third of March, A. D. 1170. King Henry landed in England: The Pope hearing of
his Passage thither, lost the Church might any longer suffer wrong, he renewed
his Mandate Ibidem, n. 10. The Pope sends the Archbishop of Rouen, and Bishop
of Nevers into England, That if the King submitted not, to Interdict his Nation.
to the Archbishop of Rouen, and Lord-Bishop of ^evers, commanding them if it
were needful to pass over into England, and admonish the King of Peace, which
Epistle or Mandate is to be found in the 5 th. Book of Quadrilogus, and in the
Appendix, n. 57. By it they were enjoined, by virtue of their Obedience, within
Twenty days after, the receipt thereof to hasten to the King.

And if he would not make full Restitution of his Possessions to the
Archbishop, and others, and also Kiss him, or if he used any Art or Shuffling,
then they were by St. Peter's Authority and his, to pronounce the Sentence of
Interdict, without contradiction of Appeal against England, and they were to
prohibit the celebration of all Divine Offices, except the Baptism of Infants,
and Penance to dying And if the Archbishops and Bishops did not observe the
Edict, and cause those under their care to observe it, They were to suspend
them, and upon neglect afterward, to Excommunicate them. It bears Date the 10
th of May.

About the middle of Ibidem, Col. 1411. n. 60. By Letters they acquaint the
King with the Popes Command. He stays them beyond Sea, and promises to come
over to them and make peace.
June being ready for their Journey, the King received Letters from them, in
which they acquaint him with the command they had from the Pope, he wrote back
to them, not expose themselves to the danger of the Sea, promising he would
suddenly be with them, and consent to a Peace with the Archbishop by their
Advice.

Hoveden f. 295. a. n. 10.20. King Henry feared an Interdict, and Appeals to
the Pope for himself and Kingdom.
says in the year of Grace 1169. King Henry fearing lest Thomas shoul pronounce
sentence of Excommunication against his Person, and of Inderdict against his
Kingdom, Appealed for himself and Kingdom to the presence of the Pope, and sent
Messengers to Request him to send one or two Legates to hear the Cause between
him and the Archbishop, and to determine it to the honor of God and Holy
Church, and that in the mean time, such as were Excommunicated might be
Absolved.

The Append. n. ^5. The Popes Answer to him.
Pope wrote back to him. That he had Received his Messengers John Cumin and
Ralph de Tamworth, and promises he would send Legates with full Power to hear
and determine the Cause, and declared, That if in the mean time the Archbishop
should denounce any Sentence against him, In which he makes him kind promises,

That were to be kept secret.


or his Kingdom, or any persons thereof, it should be void, and then desired
him to make these Letters a great secret, and not to show or let any one Know
of them, but in great necessity, and promises that his Legates should absolve
his Servants, Courtiers, and Counselors.

The Hoved. f. 295. b. lin. 5. The Legates came.
Legates came accordingly, and though Hoveden mentions them not, yet certainly
they were Gratianus nephew of Pope Eugenius, and Vivianus an Advocate in the
Roman Court, mentioned in Col. 1407. n. 40.50.
Gervase of Canterbury, to whom the King Granted the Archbishop should return,
and enjoy his Archbishopric, saving the Honor of his Kingdom, (Salvo Honor
Regni sui) and by whose industry, and the Application of the King of France,
the Agreement was finished, and brought on, so far as the Kiss of Peace, as
before

King Henry Ibidem Col. 1412. n. 10.20. Hoved. f. 296. b. n. 10.20. Ben. Abb.
p. 30. a. b. King Henry's design to Crown his Son.
had a design to Crown his Son Henry King, which was kept private, yet the Pope
either suspected or smelt it out, for on the 2d. of April he wrote to the
Archbishop of York, and all the Bishops of England Append. n. 58. The Pope
prohibits the Archbishop of York, and all other Bishops to do it.
That if any such Coronation was, they should not perform the Ceremony, without
the Consent and Privity of the Church, or Archbishop of Canturbury, whose
right it was to Consecrate Gervas. Hoved. Ben. Abb. ut supra.
The day appointed for this Solemnity was the 14 th of June, and he was
anointed and Crowned by Roger Archbishop of York, Hugh Bishop of Durham,
Walter of Rochester, Gilbert of London, and Iocelin of Salisbury assisting him,
no mention having been made of Thomas, to whom the Coronation and Consecration
belonged in right of his Church. Gervase of Canterbury said it was done in
contempt of the Popes prohibition.

The King Hoved. f. 296. n. 30. The King of France displeased, that his
Daughter was not Crowned with her Husband.
of France hearing his Daughter Margaret was not Crowned with the young King
her Husband, levied a great Army and invaded Normandy. The King of England
having notice of it, left his Son in England, and passed thither, and in a
Treaty at Vendosme, made peace with the King in the Feast of * St. Mary
Magdalen, promising his Son should be Crowned again, and his Wife with him.
Gervase of Canturbury says, this Treaty, and the Day was appointed before the
Coronation of his Son.

In Ibidem. n. 40. Thomas complains to the Pope of the A. B. of York, and other
Bishops, for Crowning the King's Son He suspends the A. B. of York, and Bishop
of Durham, and Excommunicates the others.
the mean time Thomas complained to the Pope of the Archbishop of York, and
the four Bishops that assisted at the Coronation of the new King in the
Province of Canturbury, at whose Instance he Excommunicated the Bishops of
London, Rochester, and Salisbury, and suspended the Archbishop of York, and
Bishop of Durham from their Episcopal Offices; and wrote to the last two Appen.
n. 59. He accuses the King for Depression and Diminution of the Church.
an Epistle, wherein he accuses the King for Depression and Diminution
Churches Liberties, That under pretense of preserving his Royal Dignities, he
destroyed them, contrary to the Cannons, and tells the Bishops how much he had
been solicited to confirm his Prevarications, and Usurpations, meaning, The
Statutes of Clarendon, That he had sent some Cardinals and others to soften
him, but he grew more obdurate, and would not Abate the least of the Rigor of
his perverse Laws. That he seized the rights of the Church of Canturbury,
contrary to its Ancient Dignity. That his Son Henry had been Crowned by him the
Archbishop of York, without any Caution or Reservation of the Rights of the
Church of Canturbury, And to avoid Damnation suspends the Archbishop of York
and Bishop of Durham.
in performing of that Solemnity, and at last, least he should be involved with
them at the day of Judgment, in the Sentence of Damnation, he suspends both the
Archbishop of York, and Bishop of Durham from the Exercise of

Notwithstanding the late peace made at Vendosme, Hoved. f. 297. b. n. 10. The
King of France his Archbishops Bishops, and great Men solicited the Pope
against King Henry. He complys with them.
Lewis of France, his Archbishops, Bishops, and great Men of the Kingdom,
solicited the Pope that he would not permit the King of England to make any
further Delays, as he loved the Kingdom of France, and the Honor of the
Apostolic See: Upon which, The Pope granted, that unless he presently made
peace with the Archbishop, his Kingdom should be Anathematized, and put under
Interdict: And (says the Historian) it pleased God to change the Kings mind, so
that by the mediation, and paternal Exhortation of the Pope, and of the King of
France, by the advice of many Bishops, Ibidem n. 20.
and supplicating intervention of great Men the King received him into favor,
and restored him unto his Church. p. 31. a.
Benedictus Abbas, says, the peremptory day was at hand, so as the Sentence
could be deferred no longer, and That the King of England being forced by
Canonic severity, at length hearkened to Peace, and came to Amboise near Tours,
on the fourth of the Ides, or twelfth of October: with the Archbishops,
Bishops, and great Men of his Land; where he met William Archbishop of Sens,
and Theobald Earl of Blois who brought with them Archbishop Thomas, and the
next day, it pleased Divine Providence, by the mediation of the King of France,
and by the Command and admonition of Pope Alexander, and also by the advice of
the Archbishops, Peace between the Archbishop and King.
and Bishops of his Land, the King received him into his Grace and Favor, and
pardoned him in Exile, his anger and ill will, (Iram and malevolentiam suam)
promising to restore wholly to him all the possessions of the Church of
Canturbury, as he held them a year before he went out of England. All agree
about the matter of this Treaty, but differ about the Time and Place. f. 297.
b. n. 30.
Hoveden agrees with Abbat Bennet, and says it was on the 4 th of the Ides, or
12 th of October, on a Hill between Tours and Amboise. lib. 3. c. 2.5. p. 46.
Col. 2.6. Col. 1412. n. 30.
Quadrilogus [5] Fitz-Stephen and [6] Gervase of Canturbury, say it was Mary
Magdalens day or 22 of July at Fretev^ll between Chartrin and Main, in a Meadow
called the Meadow of Traitors.

The King and Arch Bishop being thus Reconciled he Append. n. 60. The King
writes to his Son to give him notice of the agreement
wrote into England to his Son Henry, to let him Know the Archbishop had made
peace with him according to his own Will: and therefore Commanded him, to let
him and all with him have and enjoy all things, as they did three months
before he left England.

After his Peace made with the King, he told him Fitz-Steph. p. 47. Col. 2.
Thomas complains of the Archbishop of York, concerning the Coronation of the
young King, and presses the old King about it.
That amongst all the Evils he sustained under his Anger and indignation, as
Banishment, spoiling, and Oppression of the Church of Canturbury, etc. there
was one thing which he neither ought nor could leave unpunished, And That was
the Archbishop of York his Crowning of his Son in the Province of Canturbury,
whic he caused him to do, and so spoiled his Church of this Dignity, The King
^aves it to him to take ^atisfaction of the Archbishop of York, etc.
where he by the Unction of the mercy of God, was anointed King, and which
amongst all her Dignities, she had peculiar, proper, and special, to her self,
ever since the time of St. Augustine. And after a little further Discourse, the
King left it to him, to take satisfaction of the Archbishop of York, and other
Bishops, for the Ibidem. p. 48. Col. 2.
injuries done to the Church of Canturbury, and himself.

The Pope thought the Archbishop made not Have Enough, and therefore Ibid. p.
51. Col. 2.
sent a Messenger with Letters of Exhortation to him to go to his Church, and
with them he received Letters of severe Justice concerning the presumptuous
Coronation of the new King, by which the Chron. Gervas. Col. 1413. N. 40. The
Pope writes to Thomas to make have to his Church, and sends him his Letters of
suspension and Excommunication of the Bishops, which he pronounced against them.
Archbishop of York and Bishop of Durham were suspended, and the Bishop of
London, Salisbury and other Bishops of England were Excommunicated. He set Sail
from Witsand, and Landed at Sandwich in Kent on the first of December. He
pronounced the Sentence of suspension and Excommunication against the Bishops,
at which the people that came to meet him Ibidem. N. 60.
were much Troubled, and asked him why at his first coming into England, he
would in Reproach of the King, suspend and Excommunicate the Bishops, and
threatened him with the Kings displeasure; he answered the King ought not to be
offended, for it was done by his permission. The Bishops Ibid. Col. 1414. N.
10, 20, 30, 40. The suspended and Excommunicated Bishops, apply themselves to
the King, and complain of the Difficulties they were in by reason of the Peace.
He in a passion upbraids the Sloathfulness of his Servants, that none would
vindicate the Injuries and affronts done to him.

A. D. 1171. Four of his Knights Murder the Archbishop.


sent to him very earnestly desiring Absolution. He said they were bound by a
Superior Judge, and it was not in his power to release a Sentence given great a
Judge; yet he would Confide in the Clemency of the Pope, and absolve them, if
they would give Caution to stand to the Judgment of the Church concerning those
things for which they had been Excommunicated. The suspended and Excommunicated
Bishops went to the King into Normandy, and threw themselves at his feet, and
told him he had made an ill Peace for them, saying, that they, and all such as
were present at the Coronation of his Son were Excommunicated: At which words
the King was mightily moved, and in great With which Words four of the Kings
Noble Domestic Knights, being highly Provoked, Combined together to Kill him,
and when he would not absolve the suspended and Excommunicated Bishops, nor
submit in some other things to the Kings Will, as they Demanded of him, on the
thirtieth of December, They went into the Church, and at Vespers with their
Swords Clove his head and murdered Cathedral at Canturbury, when he neither
would save himself by flight, or have the doors shut against them. Ib. N. 50.
Their names were, Reginald Fitz Vrse, William de Traci, Richard Brito, and
Hugh de Morvill.

Fitz-Stephan says, The Archbishop of York p. 58. Col. 1. The Archbishop of
York exasperates the King against Thomas.
told the King, That so long as Thomas was alive, he neither would have good
Days, nor a peaceable Kingdom, nor Quiet times, at which words the King
conceived indignation against him, and show it so much by his Countenance and
gesture, That four of his Domestic Barons (the persons before named)
understanding what was the Cause of his Trouble, and seeking to please him,
conspired the Death of the Archbishop, etc.

All men avoided Hoved. f. 299. a. n. 30. The Four Murderers obtained Penance
from the Pope. They dye at Jerusalem.
the Company and Conversation of these Murderers; at length they got to Rome,
and obtained penance of the Pope, who sent them to Jerusalem, where according
to his injunction, doing Penance in the Black Hill or Mountain, they Dyed.

Concerning Hoved. f. 299. a. n. 40. The King of France writes to the Pope to
Revenge Thomas his Death.
the Death of the Archbishop, The King of France wrote to the Pope to unsheath
the Sword of St. Peter to Revenge it, and to think of some new kind of Justice,
and informed him, That as it had been related to him, The Divine Glory had been
revealed in Miracles done at his Tumb, by which it appeared for whose name he
contended.

William Archbishop of Sens Ibidem. b n. 10. The Archbishop of Sens writes to
the same purpose.
wrote also to Pope Alexander concerning the same, and lays the Cause of his
Death upon the King urges him for the safety of the Church, and the honor of
God to confirm and Renew the Sentence of interdict against his Dominions.

Likewise Theobald Ibidem f. 300. a. n. 10. 20, 30. Theobald Earl of Blois
wrote to the same purpose: And avers he heard the King give Thomas leave to
sentence the Bishops as the Pope and he pleased.
Earl of Blois wrote to him, That he was present at the Agreement between them,
and that the Archbishop complained to the King, that he had too hastily, and
with too hot a zeal caused his Son to be Crowned, for which he promised to do
him right, and give him satisfaction. That he then also complained of the
Bishops, who contrary to the Right and Honor of the Church of Canturbury, had
presumed to Thrust a new King into the Royal Throne, not for the Love of
Justice, or to please God, but to please a Tyrant, and That the King gave him
leave to sentence them according to the Popes and his own pleasure. This he
said he was ready to prove by his Oath, or any other way, and told him the
Blood of the just called to him for vengeance.

In the mean while Rotrod Ib. f. 301. a. N. 10. A. D. 1171. Several Bishops and
others sent to the Pope from the King.

He promises to send two Cardinals into Normandy, to hear and determine
matters concerning the Death of Thomas.


Archbishop of Roven, Giles Bishop of Eureux, Roger Bishop of Worcester,
Richard Bar, and many other Clercs and Servants of the King went to the Pope,
on the behalf of him and his Kingdom. The Archbishop of Roven was very old and
infirm, and therefore returned, the others went on, and with great Difficulty
obtained of the Pope, That two Cardinals Theodin and Albert should on his
behalf come into Normandy to hear the Cause between the King and the Church of
Canturbury concerning the Death of the Archbishop, and Concerning other
Ecclesiastic Dignities, and to Judge according as God should Direct.

Four only of this Embassy Ibidem N. 20.30, 40, 50. and b. N. 10, 20. The Kings
Envoy with great Difficulty get to Rome.

They stopped at Siena.


got through to Rome, Robert Abbat of Valace near Litlebone in Normandy and
Archdeacon of Salisbury, Robert Archdeacon of Lisieux, Robert Bar, and
Master Henry. Richard de Bar went before them, and with much Trouble and
Danger arrived at Rome, where he acted prudently and Diligently in his Masters
Cause, though the Pope would not receive him, or others of note see him. They
were all stopped at Siena (now in Tuscany) and by Earl Macharius his Command
all the passages from thence were Guarded in the night; these four got away,
and left the Bishops there, and going over steep hills and places almost
unpassable they in great fear and Danger arrived at Tusculum (now Frascati) on
Palm Sunday Eve, The Pope would not see the Kings Messengers. The Court of Rome
would not endure to hear the King named.

They obtein private Audidience of the Pope, and then Public, before the
Cardinals.


where the Pope would not see them, nor most of the Cardinals scarce vouchsafe
them a word. With great importunity by the means of such as they thought had
any Kindness for the King, at length they obtained, That the Abbat of Valace,
and Robert Archdeacon of Lisieux might be heard, as being less suspected; but
when they mentioned the Kings name, The whole Court Cried out, hold, hold, as
if it had been an abominable Thing for the Pope to hear it, and so they went
from Court; in the Evening they had a private of the Pope, when they Declared
the Message they had from the King, and afterward in Public before the Pope
and Cardinals, where they were opposed, by Alexander, and Gunther a Flemming,
two Clercs of the Church of Canturbury. On Tuesday following (Feria quinta ante
Pascha) according to the Custom of the Roman Church, the Pope publicly absolved
and Excommunicated, and being certain there were designs against him and his
Kingdom, they Consulted such as were most addicted to the King, The Bishop of
the Roman Port, (a City Bishop of Pavia, the Bishop of Tusculum (all Cardinals)
and others, Without Success.
Earnestly soliciting them to know the Popes Resolutions, by whom they were
informed, That the Pope by the Common Advice of his Brethren the Cardinals
intended by name to pronounce the Sentence of Interdict against him, and all
his Dominions, and to confirm the Sentence given against the Bishops. Being in
this straight, they plied the Cardinals, by themselves, and their Servants,
endeavoring to Remove them from this Sentence, or at persuade them to defer
it until the Bishops (that were left behind at Siena) should come to Court. In
which when they could not prevail, by Importunity, At length they found a good
and secure I have read this Business cost the King 40000 Marks in Silver, and
5000 marks in Gold at the Court of Rome.

But at length by close Application to some of the Cardinals prevailed.


way (not mentioned in this Epistle) for the safety and Honor of the King,
profitable to the Nation, and necessary for the Bishops, by means of some
Cardinals. By which they averted the impending danger upon him, his Nations,
and the Bishops, very far engaging themselves, believing the whole Business
would proceed according to his mind, or according ought to be his mind.
Certainly Knowing his Ruin was designed by the Court, and mightily fearing the
Use and Custom of that Day.

At the same Ibidem, n. 20, 30. Two Cardinals at the same time sent into
Normandy to threaten the Inderdict. A. D. 1171.
time there came two Cardinals, Gratianus and Vivianus, Legates sent by the Pope
into Normandy, who mightily troubled and vexed the King, threatening to put him
and his Nations under interdict, which was prevented by this Application to
Pope; yet the King fearing that severity, hastened to the Sea, and took Ship for
England, where he Commanded that no Brief-bringer or Messenger from the Pope of
what Condition or Order soever should be suffered to pass out of England into
Normandy, or out of Normandy into England, without giving Security, That he
would do no Injury to the King or Kingdom, and with as much Expedition as could
be with a great Fleet passed into Ireland from Milford Haven on the 16th of
October.

The King being thus far toward his Reconciliation Ibm. f 302 a. n. 30, 40,
50. The Archbishop of Bourges, and Bishop of Nevers had power to absolve the
Bishops of London and Salisbury.
the Bishops of London and Salisbury, sent to Rome, and easily obtained Letters
of Absolution directed to the Archbishop of Bourges, and Bishop of Nevers, or
to whom they should substitue, if they either could not, or would not absolve
them their selves.

Ralph de Diceto says Col. 560. n. 10. A. D. 1172. The Bishop of London how
restored.
the Bishop of London was called before the Archbishop of Roven and the Bishop
of Amiens at Albemarle on the first of May, and then and there, did Swear, with
many religious persons his Compurgators, That neither in fact, word, or
writing, Knowingly procure the death of Thomas the Martyr, and so was restored.

And Mat. of Westminster A. D. 1171. f. 250. n. 30. The Archbishop of York
upon what Terms, restored to the exercise of his function.
says, That Roger Archbishop of York, in the feast of St. Nicholas, or sixth
of December, the year before at Albemarle, did swear, that he received not the
Popes Letters of Prohibition, before the Coronation of the new King, and that
he never bound himself to the Observations of the Customs of the Kingdom, or
Secular Government, (de consuetudinibus Regni observandis) nor that he did in
Word, Writing, or Deed, Knowingly procure the Death of Thomas Archbishop of
Canturbury. And so was mercifully restored to the Exercise of his Office: When
he had committed no fault, if his Oath was true.

At Christmas Ibidem b. n. 20, 30. A. D. 1172. King Henry goes into Ireland,
and goes from thence through England into Normandy to meet the Cardinals. His
Son and his Wife Margaret Crowned at Winchest. A. D. 1172. They return into
Normandy.
the King was at Dublin in Ireland, and there remained until the beginning of
Lent, and then removed to Wexford, Easter. Then Knowing, That the Cardinals
Theodin and Albert were sent into Normandy from the Pope, He settled the affairs
in Ireland as well as he could, and passed to Milford Haven, from thence to St.
David's, from thence to Portsmouth, from whence carrying along with him his Son
Henry, he passed into Normandy, and found the Cardinals at Caen, and by their
advice made an agreement with the King of France, about the Crowning of his
Daughter, and also by their Consent and advice sent back his Son into England,
and with him Rotrod Archbishop of Roven, Giles Bishop Eureux, and Roger Bishop
of Worcester to Crown him and Margaret his Wife the Daughter of King Lewis, and
They Crowned them at Winchester in the Church of St. Swithen on the 27th of
August: And presently after the Coronation, The King, the Son, and the Queen
his Wife, The Archbishop of Roven, and the Bishops of Eureux, and Worcester,
Returned into Normandy.

About a month after Append. N. 61. King Henry's Purgation for the Death of
Thomas.
on the 27th of September, Henry King England the father, and King Henry his
Son, and Rotrod Archbishop of Roven, and all the Bishops and Abbats of
Normandy, met at Abrinces (now Auranches) in the presence of Theodin and Albert
the Cardinals; In whose Audience, The King of England the Father, in the Church
of St. Andrew the Apostle, purged himself, and asserted his innocence by Oath
upon the Relics of Saints, and the holy Gospels, That he neither Commanded
nor desired the Archbishop should be Slain, and when he heard it, he Grieved
vehemently. But because those Malefactors that Killed him, could not be had,
and because feared, they might have perpetrated that Profane Deed, by Reason
of the Commotion and Trouble they Observed in his mind, he made the following
Oath of Satisfaction.

H^s Oath of satisfaction and Penance.
First he Swear, That he would not D^part from Pope Alexander, nor his Catholic
Successors, so long as they Acknowledged him a Catholic King.

He Swear also, That he would not Hinder nor Suffer to be hindered Appeals: but
that they might freely be made in his Kingdom, to the Pope in Ecclesiastical
Causes, But so as if any persons were suspected by give security, they would do
no injury to him, nor his Kingdom.

He Swear That from Christmas following, he would undertake the Crusado, and
go to Jerusalem for three years; and That if he were Diverted by going into
Spain against the Saracens, he would Give the Templars so much money, as by
their own judgment, should be sufficient for the Mainteining 200 Soldiers one
year for the Defense of Jerusalem.

He Pardoned all Clercs and Laics which were in Exile with Thomas, and Granted
they might freely and in Peace return to their own again.

He Swear also, That he would Restore the possessions of the Church of
Canturbury, if any had been taken away, as fully, as it enjoyed them,
Archbishop went out of England.

He Swear also, That the Customs, which were brought in Contrary to the
Churches of his Land in his time, should be wholly laid aside and dismissed.

All these things he Swear to Observe in good Faith and without Deceit, Caused
his Son Henry to do the like, except in such things as referred to his own
person. And That they might remain in the memory of the Roman Church, The King
the Father caused his Seal to be put to the Writing which contained these
Articles or Heads, together with the Seals of the Cardinals. Who upon this
Purgation, Submission and Satisfaction, Granted him a Append. N. 62.
Chart of Absolution.

On the Morrow after the Cardinals held a great Hoved. f. 303. b. n. 50. A
great Council in Normandy, with the Decrees.
Council with Archbishop and Bishops, and Clergy of Normandy, and then and
there the following Decrees were made and enjoined to be observed inviolably by
all men,

I. That Children Append. n. 63. A. D. 1172.
should not be admitted to the Government and administration of Churches with
Cure of Souls.

II. The Sons of Priests should not be placed in the Churches of their Fathers.

III. Lords of Manners that built Churches upon their fee, put in Priests to
serve the Cure, and received such profits of the Church, as they and the Priest
agreed upon, and the Priests only staid in the Cure as long as they pleased.
Laics should not receive part of the oblations of the Church.

IV. This fourth Canon was to the same purpose, for they let them out annually
to such as would serve the Cure, and give most for them.
That Churches should not be Committed, to annual V^cars.

V. That the Priests of great Churches, which had sufficient Revenues, should
be Compelled to have another Priest under him.

VI. That Priests should not be Ordained without a certain Title.

VII. Churches should not be let to annual farm.

VIII. That nothing of the third part of the Tithes, should be taken from the
Priest that officiated.

That is, such as built the Churches, and were Patrons, had liberty to present
the first Clerc, not afterward; that was against the Liberty of the Church,
and Canons for investitures.
Those which held Titles by haereditary right, might have leave, to give them
to what qualifyed Clerc he would, upon Condition, that i e. after the first
presentation.
after him, They should revert to the Church, to which they belonged.

X. The Husband ought not to turn Monk, or Religious, his wife staying in the
World, or remaining Secular. Nor on the Contrary, unless they were both past
the works of the Flesh.

XI. In the Advent of the Lord, fasting and abstinency from flesh was Commanded
to all that could bear it, Especially to Clercs, and Knights or Military Men.

XII. Jews or Jewish Clercs should not Exercise secular Authorities, i. e.
Covetous and Usurers.

Item de These were French, not English pounds.
novis libris Excommunicationis, etc. And the Goods of Dying people which the
Priests carried away, and the Blessings in Marriage and Baptism, and of the
Forty and Eight pounds which were Exacted for the absolution of Excommunicated
persons, nothing was perfected, because the Bishops of Normandy would not
receive that Decree.

King Henry the Father Hoved. f. 307. a. n. 40. King Henry gives the
Arch-Bishopric to Richard Prior of Dover, etc.
against the Prohibition of King Henry his Son, and after an Appeal made to the
Pope, gave to Richard the Prior of Dover, the Arch-Bishopric of Canturbury. To
Reginald the Son of Iocelin Bishop of Salisbury the Bishopric of Bath. To
Richard of Ivecester Archdeacon of Poictiers the Bishopric of Winchester. To
Robert Foliot the Bishopric of Hereford, and To John Greneford the Bishopric
of Chichester.

After this Gervas Act. Pontific. Cantuar. Col. 1674. n. 10. The young King
Appeals to Rome, and prohibits his Consecration. He obteins it from the Pope,
and his Pall, and is made Legate.
Richard had been Solemnly Elected at London, he went to Canturbury where all
things were ready for his Consecration. But Letters being brought from the
Young King, prohibiting, by Reason of his Appeal to the Pope, That no man
should Consecrate him or any other, without his Consent who Bare the Crown of
the Kingdom. The Bishops that were there ready to perform the Ceremony,
trembling departed one from another, and the Arch-Bisho Elect went to Rome; and
there after diverse disputes with his Adversaries, was Consecrated by the Pope,
and received his Pall and the Primacy of all England, and was also Constituted
his Legate. Upon his Return to England he Consecrated the other Elects.

The King Hoved. f. 307. b. n. 10, 20 Rad. de Dicet. Col. 561. n. 60.562. n.
10. etc. The King humbles himself before the Sepulcher of Thomas.
being in great streights by reason of the Rebellion of his Sons, the
Confederacies of the King of France, and the King of Scots against him, and the
Desertion of his own Nobility and Subjects, England, and humbled himself before
the Sepulcher of the Archbishop.

He Ibid. f. 308. a. N. 30, 40, 50. A. D. 1174. The manner of the approach to
the Tomb of St. Thomas and his humiliation before it
Landed at Southampton on the 8 th of July, and the next day went toward
Blessed Thomas of Canturbury the Martyr, (the words of the Historian) and when
he came so near as he could see the Church where the Body of the Blessed Martyr
was Buried (in qua Corpus beati Martyris sepultum fuit) he left his Horse, and
pulled off Shoes, he went Barefoot three Miles to the Sepulcher, in such
Humility and Compunction of heart, That it was believed undoubtedly, to have
been his Work, That beholds the Earth and makes it Tremble, (qui respicit
terram, and facit eam tremere.) When he came to the Tomb, it was Pious to
behold in what affliction he appeared with Weeping and Sobbing, and the That
is, he was whipped by the Bishops Priests, and, Monks, and had three or five
lashes from every one.
Discipline he received from the hands of the Bishops, many Priests, and the
Monks (cum autem ad tumbam veniret, Pium erat intueri, afflictiones quas
faciebat, cum fletu singultuoso, and Carnem suam Nudam Disciplinae virgarum
suppone^s, a singulis viris religiosis, quorum multitudo magna Convenerat,
ictus ternos, vel quinos accepit. Mat. Paris f. 130. l. 6
Disciplinas, quas de manu Episcoporum, Sacerdotumque plurimorum and Monachorum
recepit.) And staid all night before the Sepulcher of the Blessed Martyr, in
Prayer, Fasting and Weeping, being assisted by the Suffrages of many holy men.
The Gifts and Revenues he bestowed upon that Church for the Remission of his
Sins (says the Historian) can never be forgotten. Next Morning early July 13
th he heard Mass, and went toward London. And because he was mindful of God
with his whole heart, (Et quia memor fuit Domini in toto Cord suo) gave him
Victory over his Enemies, and delivered them Captive into his hands: Ibm. f.
308 a. n. 50.
For that very day he left Canturbury, William King of Scots was taken at
Alnwi^. And his Successes followed so fast one after another, that Ibid. b. n.
30, 40. here f. 319. B, C, D, E, F. The Successes of the King ascribed to the
merits and intercession of Thomas.
within three weeks England was in Peace, and all the Strongholds were
delivered up to the King. All which were ascribed to his Devotion and
Humiliation, but principally to the Mat. Paris. f. 130. N. 40.
merits and intercession of this New Saint thereupon.

For before this time he had been Append. n. 64. He is Canonized for a Saint
Sainted or Canonized by the Pope, who for the Glory of his Merits, and the
Miracles he had done, which were attested by the two Cardinals, and many
others, having had a deliberate treaty with his Brethren, (the Cardinals about
it) solemnly Canonized him, and Decreed him to be numbered Holy Martyrs,
Commanding all the Faithful of England, by his Apostolic Authority, They should
Celebrate the day of his Glorious Passion, every year with due Veneration, That
they should by Solemn Procession place his Body upon an Altar, And the Pope
Commanded he should be worshipped and Prayers made to him, etc.
or Elevate it on high in a decent Shrine; and by fervent Prayers to him
endeavor to merit Pardon for their sins. That he which in life suffered
Banishment, and in his Death Martyrdom for Christ, being solicited by the
Continual supplications of the faithful, might intercede with God

Amongst the several hundreds of Miracles he did, and wonders he wrought, take
three or four of them from the Hoved. f. 300. b. N. 30. His Miracles.
Epistle of William Archbishop of Sens in France, which he wrote to the Pope
against King Henry, Concerning the Death of Thomas. That after his Death he was
seen by, and appeared to many, especially to one Neel an old Monk. That a Blind
man anointed his Eyes with his Blood and received wax Tapers which stood about
his Dead Body having been Extinguished, were by him lighted again. That after
all funeral Ceremonies had been performed about his Carcass, (circa Corpus
humanitatis) as it lay upon the Bier or Bearer, in the Chore, in the Morning he
lift up his right hand and gave the Blessing. f. 125. n. 50.
Paris says he restored the Dead to Life, and not only men and women but also
Birds and Animals Restituitur vita mortuis (speaking of his Miracles) and non
solum utriusque sexus homines, verum etiam Aves, and animalia

He was at first but indifferently Somn* Antiqu. of Canturbury, p. 177, 178.
Buried, and laid in an Ordinary Tomb, about the Lady-Chappel in a Vault called
Vndercroft; But fifty years after, ( A. D. 1220.) the year of his first Jubilee
Ibidem. p. 245, 246. Thomas his Translation.
his Body was taken up with great Solemnity, and laid in a most Rich and
Sumptuous Shrine at the East End of the Church, at the Charge of Stephan
Langton his Successor. Concerning this Translation f 310. n. 10.
Mat. Paris says his Body was taken out of a Marble Coffin, by Stephan
Archbishop of Canturbury, the King being present, and almost all the Bishops
of the Kingdom, with the Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Clergy, and much
People, and placed honorably in a Shrine wonderfully wrought with Gold and
precious Stones. There were present at this Translation, Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, and many others of France, and diverse other Nations, who came
cheerfully to so great a Solemnity in Honor and Reverence of the Blessed who
shed his Blood for the Universal Church. (Qui pro Universally Ecclesia Sanguinem
suum fundere non timuit.) Paris says this Translation was in crastino Octavarum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli. That is, the 7 th of July, on which day says Mr.
Somner in the p. 246.
Antiquities before cited, there is a Fair at Canturbury Called Beckets Fair.
Beckets Fair.
And in Norfolk, there is on the same day one at Bromhill near Brandon- Ferry,
and another at West-Acre about four Miles Distant from Swifham, both called
Beckets Fair, and in both places there are old R^nous Chapels, which were
undoubtedly Erected and Dedicated to him.

The Jewels That belonged to this Ibid. p. 247. The Ric^es of his Shrine.
Shrine were shown, being touched with a White Rod, and their Names, Price, and
Donor Declared, and the spoils of it in Gold and Jewels of an inaestimable
Ibid. p. 247. The Ric^es of his Shrine.
value filled two great Chests, one of which six or eight strong men could do
Shrine had a Clerc and certain reteinors that constantly attended upon it, Ib.
p. 248.
in Regard of the Treasure that was about it, and also of the continual
offerings thereunto, by such as came to visit it, or came on Pilgrimage to it.
Mr. Somner says he had seen the Accounts of the Annual profits of it, which
above 300 years since amounted to 200 l. per Annum, and within six or Eight
years afterward they were more than Trebled.

This Saints Ibidem. His Jubilee once in fifty years.
Iubilee was kept every fiftieth year after his Death, and it is almost
incredible what numbers of people flocked to Canturbury to the Solemnizing of
it. In the Year 1420. there were by Estimation an hundred thousand people,
English and Strangers, Irish, Welsh, Scots, French, Normans, and from Garnsey
and Jersey, as appears upon Append. n. 65. The vast number of people that
flocked at a time to Canturbury.
Record, That came thither to procure the health or salvation of their Souls,
and for whom the Bailiffs Commanded the Citizens to provide sufficient
Lodgings, and the Victuallers, Tavernors, Brewers, Bakers,

The Archbishop of Canturbury Hoved. f. 310. a. n. ^0. A. D. 1175.
held a Council at London in Westminster before the two Kings, and by their
assent and desire on the Sunday before Ascension day, upon the 15 th of the
Kalends of June, (that is the 18 th of May.) Celebravit Ben. Abb. p. 62. a. An
Eccle^iastic Council held at Westminster.
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus Richardus Consilium apud Londonias
Westmonasterio, coram predictis xv. Kal Jami. For the Canons of this Council
see the Append. N. 66.
Appendix.

In this Council, Hoved. f. 311. a. n. 40. A Controversy in that Council about
bearing the Cross between the two Archbishops, etc.
The Clercs of the Arch-B^shop of York claimed a right of That Church to carry
up the Cross in the Province of Canturbury; They claimed also on behalf of
their Archbishop, The Bishoprics of Lincoln, Chester, Worcester, and Hereford,
as belonging to his Province; and Appealed to Rome: They also Appealed to the
Pope Sentence of Excommunication, against the Clercs of the Archbishop of York
that officiated in the Chapel of St. Oswald in Gloucester; for that they would
not attend the Archbishop of Canturbury upon his Summons as the Clercks of his
own Province did.

A little before Ibidem fol. 313. a. N. 10. A Cardinal sent into England. The
King makes peace between the Archbishops.
the Feast of All Saints this year, Cardinal Hugezun the Popes Legate, at the
Kings request came into England, and found him at Winchester, making an
Agreement between the two Archbishops, and at length by the Kings interposing
it was Agreed, That the Archbishop of Canturbury, should release his Claym to
the Chapel of St. Oswald, and absolve the Clercs of the Archbishop of York
which he had Excommunicated. And as to carrying the Cross and other
Controversies between the two Churches, They were to stand to the Judgment of
the Archbishop of Roven and other Neighbor Bishops of France. Cardinal
Hugezun Ibidem. N. 30. The Cardinal gives the King leave to implead Clercs.
Gave the King leave to implead Clercs, for trespasses done in his Forests, and
for taking of Venison.

Upon Append. N. 67.
Agreement between the Kings of England and Scotland made at York; The heads
whereof are here recited f. 323. F. and f. 324 A. B. C. D. Richard Bishop of
St. Andrews, and Richard Bishop of Dunkelden, Geofry Abbat of Dunfirmelin,
Herbert Prior of Coldingham, and the other Bishops and Clergy of Scotland,
Granted That the Church of England should have That power in the Church of
Scotland which of right it ought to have, and That they would not be against
the right of the Church of England.

Taxes in this Kings Time.
A Scutage near the beginning of his Reign, not to be found what it was.

A Second Scutage to raise men for the Sea here f. 301. F. A. D. ^159. 5. Hen.
2.
Siege of Tholose 180000 l. Hoc Anno Rex Henricus Scotagium sive Scutagium de
Anglia accepit, cujus summa fuit, centum millia, and quater viginti millia
Librarum Argentt, and the like of his other Countries, Gervas Chron. Col. 1381.
lin. 3.

A Third Scutage in the 7th of his Lib. Rubr. in Scaccario. A. D. 1166.
Reign for the Siege of Tholose at two Marks every Knights Fee.

In the 12 th of his Reign two pence in the pound Chron. Gervas. Col. 1399. N.
10. A. D. 1166.
for the first year, and a penny in the pound for four years after, of all Rents
and Movables for Defense and assistance of the Church, and Terrae Orientalis,
of the East Land, (suppose the holy Land.)

A Fourth Scutage Lib. Rubr.
in the 14th of his Reign at a Mark a Knights Fee.

A Fifth Scutage in the 18th of his Reign not known what it was.

See here f. 342 F. and f. 344. A.
In the last year of his Reign, a Tenth of all movables for the Crusado or
expedition into Holy Land.

Many more there must have been, seeing his whole Reign France and Ireland.
Though we find no larger Account of them.

The Issue of King Henry the Second.
HE Married See here f. 291. C. D.
Alianor Sole Daughter and heir to William Earl of Poicton and Duke of Acquitan
about Whitsunday in the year 1151. after she had been lawfully divorced from
Lewis the 7th King of France, about the Close of Easter Preceding. By Chron.
Norm. f. 989. B and Mat. Westminster. A. D. 1152. William.
whom he William his Eldest Son born on the Octaves of St. Laurence (or 17th of
August) in the year following 1152. before he was King. This William Dyed in
the latter end Chron. Norman. f. 992. B.
of June, or beginning of July 1155. and was Buried in the Monastery of Reading
at the Feet of King Henry the First.

Henry.
Henry by the same Alienor was born at London on the day before the Ibidem f.
991. lin. 1.
Kalends of March (i. e. the 28th of February) 1154. Mat. Westminster. says 1155. On
the Ibidem A.
tenth of April following King Henry caused his great men of England at
Wallingford to Swear Fealty for that Kingdom unto his first born William, and
after his Death unto this Infant Henry. In August 1157 the two Ibidem. f. 994.
A. and here f. 300. D.
Kings of England treated of a Marriage between this Henry and Margaret
Daughter of King Lewis by Constance his Second Wife, Daughter of Alfonso King
of Spain. And the next year A. D. 1158. the Mat. West. A. D. 1158.
Marriage was See here f. 303. B. C.
Solemnized A. D. 1160. He Dyed without Issue.

Richard the Third Son by the same Woman was Chron. Norman. f. ^93. D. Mat.
Westminster. A. D. 1156.
born in September according to the Norman Chronicle A. D. 1156. Richard.
which could not be so, if Mat. Westminster. writes true; for he says his eldest
Daughter Maud was born that year; Richard married Berengaria Daughter to the
King of Navarre Rad^ de Diceto. Col. 657. n. 30.
whom his mother Queen Alianor carried Sicily when he was in his expedition to
the Holy Land, and was married to her afterward in the Isle of Cyprus, but
dyed without Issue. According to Ralph de Diceto Ibidem. Col. 531. n. 20.
he was born in the year 1157. at Oxford.

Geofry the 4th Son of the same King and Queen, Geofry.
was Chron. Norm. f. 994. B
born on the ninth of the Kalends of October, or 23d of September A. D. 1157.
or more truly according to Col. 531. n. 30.
Ralph de Diceto in the year 1158. He See here f. 305. C.
Married to Constance only Daughter and heir of Conan Earl of Britany and
Richmond. When he was killed he left her great with Child, of Walsingh. f. 452.
n. 30. and Hov. f. 361. b. n. 10.
which she was Delivered on Easter Day 1187. and he was named Arthur; who was
taken Prisoner in the year 1199. at Mirabell Castle in Normandy, and as it was
reported, Chron. Norm. f. 1005. D. and Walsingham ut supra f. 459. lin. 5. A.
D. 1203.
killed by his Uncle John with his own hands. This Geofry had also a Daughter
named Alianor only Sister and heir to this Arthur, she was sent by her Uncle
King John into England Mat. Paris f. 574. n. 40. John.
year 1241. in the 25th of Hen. III. a Virgin.

John the fifth and youngest Son of this King and Queen, was Genealog. Histor.
f. 81. Mat. Paris f. 127. lin. 6.
born at Oxford on Christmas Eve in the year 1166.

Their Daughters.
MAud the eldest Rad. de Diceto. Col. 531. n. 20.
born A. D. 1156. and was Married to Henry Duke of Saxony Hoved. f. 282. a. n.
40.
in the year 1164.

Alianor the Second Daughter was Rad. de Diceto Col. 533. lin. 6.
born in the year 1162. and was Married to Alphonso Hoved. f. 317. a. n. 50.
King of Castile in the year 1176.

Joan the Third Daughter was Rad. de Dicet. Col. ^39. n. 30.
born in the year 1165. she was William Hoved. f. 315. a. n. 10.
King of Sicily in the same year 1176.

His Base Issue.
WIlliam Dugd. Baron. Tome 1. f. 175. Col. 1.2.
Longespee or Long-Sword, so named from the Long-Sword he did usually wear,
begotten of fair Rosamund Daughter of Walter Lord Clifford; To whom Ibidem and
Hoved. f. 436. b. n. 50.
King Richard Ela the Daughter and heir of William Earl of Salisbury, and with
her the Earldom.

Geofry another Base Son was Born of the same Lady, he was Bishop Elect of
Lincoln from the Hoved. f. 307. b. n. 10, 20. f. 348. b. n. 30, 40.
year 1174. to the year 1181. without being in Orders or Consecrated, when he
renounced his Election, by the Kings Advice, and the Popes Mandate to the
Archbishop of Canturbury, That he should Either take Orders, and be
Consecrated, Ibidem f. 349. a. n. 10.
him his Chancery (dedit ei Cancellariam suam) and 500 marks of Rent in
England, and as much in Normandy.

Morgan was also reported to be a Son of this King Henry, but by what woman not
Known, to whom his Brother Geofry then Archbishop of York gave the
Provost-ship of Beverly Ibid. f. 468. a. lin. 1. A. D. 1^^2.
Praeposituram Beverlacensem Gaufridus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus Dedit Morgan
fratri Henrici Regis ^t Dicebatur.

THE
AFter the Funeral of his Hoved. f. 373. a. n. 10.
Father, Richard secured Stephan de Turons (of Tours) or as Mat. Paris, Stephan
de Turnham Seneschal of Anjou, and loaded him with Irons, until he delivered
the Castles and Treasure of his Father; The Castles and Treasure of his Father
delivered to Duke Richard.
which he had in his Custody, and squeezed him to the last Farthing. Then he
came to Roven, where Walter Archbishop of that Place, in Bishops, Earls, and
Barons of Normandy, girt him with the Sword of that Dukedom on the 20th of
July; He is girt with the Sword of the Dukedom of Normandy. A. D. 1189.
and the Day after he received the Oaths of Fidelity or Fealty from the Clergy
and Laity, (a Clero and Populo;) And on the 3d Day, which was the 22d of that
Month, he met the King of France between Chaumont and Try in V^uxin Francois,
in which Treaty, Ibid. n. 20.
he Demanded of the Duke the Town and Castle of Gisors, with the Country about
it, who unwilling to part with that Fortress, added Four in Silver to the
Twenty Thousand his See here f. 349. lin. 1. he pays the King of France 24000
Marks.
Father engaged to pay him, and so obtained his Love and Favor. And the King of
France Restored unto him all things which he had taken from his Father in the
last War, as well Castles, as Cities, and Fortresses, Towns, and Lands.

While he remained in Normandy, His Mother Queen Alienor released Prisoners.
his Mother Queen Alienor went from City to City, and from Castle to Castle as
she pleased; and sent Commissioners into all Counties for the Releasing of
Prisoners, for the Soul of her Lord Henry; having learnt from her own
Experience, what Afflictions Prisons were. F. 152. n. 20.
Mat. Paris says, she had been closely imprisoned by her Husband Sixteen Years,
and now her Son gave her leave to Direct and Order the Nation as she pleased in
his absence.

She Commanded Ibid. n. 30. What sort of Prisoners were released.
by Precept from the Duke her Son, That all who were taken for Trespass in
Forests should be set at Liberty, and all should be set at Liberty; Those also
that were Imprisoned upon an Appeal for any Heinous Crime, if they had Sureties
might be at Liberty. And all such as were Outlawed upon Accusations, upon
Common Fame, might return and give Security to stand Trial; and such as were
Outlawed upon Appeal, if they could make Peace with their Adversaries, might
be free. All those that were Appealed by such as confessed themselves
Malefactors, (Qui se Malefactores Cognoscunt) were Released; And those
Malefactors, who had their Lives and Limbs given them for their Appealing

After which she Commanded Ibid. n. 50. The Oath of Fidelity taken by all
Freemen.
That every Freeman of the whole Kingdom or Government should swear, (Et
praecepit Quod unusquisque liberorum hominum totius Regni juraret) That he
would bear Faith to Richard King of England, the Son of King Henry, and Queen
Alienor, (Quod fidem portabit Domino Richardo Regi Angliae, filio Domini Regis
Henrici, and Dominae Alienorae R^ginae de vita and membris suis, and honor
terreno) As to their Liege Lord against all Men and Women that could Live and
Dye, (sicut ligio Domino suo, contra omnes homines and foeminas, Qui vivere
possunt and Mori) and That they would be obedient to his Laws, and would assist
him in all things, for the Conservation of his Peace and Justice. (Et quod ii
ad pacem and Justiciam suam per omnia Servandam.)

The Duke Ibid. b. lin. 2. He restores Robert Earl of Leicester to his Estate,
etc.
returned to Robert Earl of Leicester all his Lands which his father had taken
from him, and all those his Father had disinherited he restored to their former
rights. He hated all those Clercs and Laics, which left his Father, and adhered
to him, and turned them out of their Offices or Services, but such as served
his Father faithfully, he retained, and enriched them by his Bounty.

On the 13th of Ibid. n. 10.
August he came to Barbe^let (now Bar^leur) and sent before him Walter
Archbishop of Roven; Henry Bishop of Bayeux, and John Bishop of Eureux, Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury, Gilbert Bishop of Rochester, and Hugh and Hugh
Bishops of Lincoln and Chester: He comes into England.
and presently with his Brother John followed them into England, and landed
them at Portsmouth Ibid. n. 20.30. His great Bounty to his Brother John.
. To whom he Moreton in Normandy, the Earldoms of Cornwall, Dorset, Somerset,
Notingham, Derby, and Lancashires, with the Castles of Marleburgh and
Ludgarshal, with their Forests and all Appurtenances. The Castles de Pec and
Bolsover; yet the Duke kept in each County some Castles and Honors. He also
gave Earl John the Honors of Walingford, Tikhil, and Hay; and likewise the
Daughter and Coheir of the Earl of Gloucester, with that Earldom. He gave to
William Marshall the Daughter and Heir of Richard Earl of Striguil, and with
her that Earldom.

While Ibid. n. 50. The Bishop of Ely's Estate came to him, he dying Intestate.
the King and his Court were at Winchester, Geofry Bishop of Ely Died there
Intestate the 21st of September, and the King seized his Estate, which amounted
to This in those Days was accounted a vast Estate.
3000 Marks in Silver, and 200 Marks in Gold, besides his Vessels, Jewels, and
Gold. At that time he caused his Bishops, Earls and Barons, to look into his
Fathers Ibid. f. 374. a. lin. 1. His Fathers Treasure of great value.
Treasuries, where they found great Sums, which according to Tale and Weight,
much exceeded 100000 Marks. F. 152. n. 40. Winchester then was the Kings
Treasury.

He makes choice of Ships for his Expedition into the Holy Land.


Mat. Paris says there were found above 900000 Pounds in Gold and Silver,
besides Vtensis, Jewels, and Precious Stones.

Having taken an Account of his Fathers Treasure, he sent his Officers Bailiffs
to all the Seaports in England, Normandy, Poictou, and his other Dominions, to
make Choice of the Ships of greatest Burden, and caused them to be Victualled,
Armed, and Furnished for his Expedition into the Holy Land, according to his
Agreement with See here f. 348. F.
the King of France.

From Winchester he came to London, and there was Hoved. f. 374. a n. 10.20 His
Magnificent Coronation.
Crowned at Westminster on the Third of September, by Baldwin Archbishop of
Canterbury. Narrative whereof the Reader may find in Hoveden, and Matthew F.
153. n. 10, 20* 30. etc.
Paris, who related it from him; also in John Brompton, who Col. 1157.1158,
1159.
transcribed it verbatim from Paris, and may find it Translated in Mr.
Sandford's Genealogical History of the Kings of England, Fol. 74.

Hoved. ut supra. n. 50. His Coronation Oath.
Swear he would keep Peace, Honor, and Reverence to God, Holy Church, and the
Clergy all Days of his Life: Juravit quod ipse omnibus Diebus Vitae suae, pacem
and honorem atque Reverentiam Deo, and Sanctae Ecclesiae and ejus ordinatis
portaret. Then he Swear, That he would Exercise right Justice, and Equity,
toward or amongst the People committed to him. Deinde Juravit Quod rectam
Justitiam, and aequitatem Exerceret in populo sibi Commisso. Lastly he Swear,
That he would abolish all Evil Laws and perverse make and Establish good Laws,
and without fraud or art would preserve them. Deinde Juravit, Quod malas Leges,
and consuetudines perversas, si quae in Regno suo inductae sunt, Deleret, and
bonas Leges Conderet, and sine fraud, and malo Ingenio eas custodiret.

After which, the Archbishop having anointed, put on his Vestments, and Robed
him, Ibid. b. lin. 6. The Archbishop delivers him the Sword of the Kingdom to
suppress Evildoers to the Church.

He forbids him to take upon him such Royal Honor, unless he meant to keep his
Oath.


Delivered him the Sword of the Kingdom to suppress (Tradidit ei idem
Archiepiscopus Gladium Regni ad Malefactores Ecclesiae Comprimendos.) And then
the Archbishop forbad him in the Name of God, to take such Royal Honor upon
him, unless he intended inviolably to Keep the Oath he had made. Ibid. n. 10.
The King answered he would by the help of God keep it without fraud. And then
he took the Crown from the Altar and Delivered it to the Archbishop, and he
placed it upon his Head. (Archiepiscopus prohibuit ei ex part omnipotentis
Dei, ne hunc honorem Paris and Brompton have the same things in their Relations
of this Coronation in the places before-cited.

The Report of this Solemnity by Ralph de Col. 647. n. 40.50.
Diceto then Dean of St. Paul's, who in the vacancy of the B^shopric of London,
assisted at this Coronation, Ralph de Dice^o his Account of this Coronation.
and Delivered the Oil and Chrism with which the King was anointed, to the
Archbishop as he used it, Differs from the precedent Account; As to the Oath,
and as to the Circumstance of the Archbishops prohibition, he has not one
word of it: his words are only these. Comes Pi^avorum Richardus, Haereditario
And of his Coronation Oath.
promovendus in Regem, post tam Cleri quam Populi solennem and Debitam
Electionem involutus est triplici Sacramento, scilicet, quod opem impendet pro
viribus, ut Ecclesia Dei, populusque Christianus, veram pacem obtineat; Quod
interdicet omnibus Rapacitatem, Quod in Judiciis aequitatem praecipiet and
Misericordiam. Richard Earl of Poictou, being by Hereditary right to be
Crowned, after a Solemn and due Election by the Clergy and Laity, took a
threefold Oath, That he would do his utmost, that the Church of

Many Jews came to this Coronation against the Kings Mat. Paris f. 154. n. 10.
Hoved. f. 374. b. n. 30.
prohibition; The Courtiers beat them cruelly out of the Church, and pillaged
them; The City Rabble hearing of it, fell upon them in the City, killed many of
both Sexes, pulled down their houses and Jews cruelly abused, and Murdered.
and under pretense of being Jews burnt and pulled down many Christians Houses:
Next Day the King sent his Officers, and apprehended several of the Chief
Malefactors; and caused them to be hanged.

The Second Day of his Coronation Richard King of England Received the Hoved.
ut supra. and f. 375. a. n. 10.
Homages and Fealties of the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons, and then
exposed to sale his Castles, Towns and Lands. Hugh Bishop of Durham, and by his
Charter gave and granted to the Church of Durham in pure and perpetual Alms, He
receives the Homages and Fealties of his Nobility, and exposes his Castles and
Towns to sale.
The Manner of Sadbergh with the Wapentac and Knights Fees belonging to it. For
600 Marks of Silver Ibid. f. 37^. a. n. 10.
Godfrey de Luci, when Bishop of Winchester bought of him Weregrave, and Menes;
and Samson Abbat of St. Edmunds-Bury bought of him the Manner of Mildenhal for a
1000 Marks, and any other people that would, purchased of him, by which means
he raised a great Sum of Money, Ibid. f. 375. a. n. 40. and Mat. Paris, f. 154
n. 50. He makes the Bishop of Durham Justiciary for a Sum of Money.
The Bishop of Durham bought of the King the Earldom of Northumberland for a
great sum of Money, and gave him a 1000 Marks for to be Justitiary of England.

On the 16th of Paris and Hoveden ut supra, n. 50. He disposed of the
Bishoprics by the ^ice of his Bishops and Great (...).
September the King went to the Abbey of Pipewel in Northamptonshire, and by
the advice of his Bishops, and other great men, gave unto his Brother Geofry
the Arch-Bishopric of York, to Godfrey de Luci the Bishopric of Winchester, to
Richard Archdeacon of Ely the Bishopric of London; To Hubert Walter the Dean
of York, the Bishopric of Sa^isbury, and to William Longchamp the Bishopric of
Ely.

In this Hove^. f. 375. b. n. 20.
Council the King constituted Hugh B^sh^p of Durham, W^lliam Earl of Albemarle
his Chief Justi^es of England, and associated to them in the Government of the
Kingdom, William Mares^all, and Geofry Fi^z-Peter, William Bruer, Robert de
Whitefield, and Roger Fitz-Remfrid.

In the mean while he had Ibid. n. 30* He writes to the Pope to acquit some of
his Subjects from the Service of the Cross.
sent to Pope Clement, and obtained Cross they had sworn to perform, by which
power and indulgence, he acquired very great Sums of Money.

In the Month of November Ibid. f. 376. a. n. 20.30. A. D. 1189. The King of
France gives him notice he had undertaken the Crusado, and would be ready by
Easter.
Rotrod Earl of Perch, and other Envoys of the King of France, came into
England and acquainted King Richard, that he in a great Council at Paris, and
all the great Crusado, had Sworn (God Willing) to be at Now Vice^iacum.
Vizeliacum ( Vezelay in Burgundy) in the close of Easter, to go forward to
Jerusalem, and in Testimony he had made such Oath, he sent him his Chart,
desiring that he and his Earls and Barons would give him the like security to
be there at the same time. Whereupon King Richard and his Earls and Barons,
which had undertaken the service of the Cross (in generali Concilio apud
Londonias) in a General Council at London (or as F. 155. n. 50. He and his
Great Men promise the same.
Paris, Westmonasterium, etc.) did swear That by the help of God they would be
there at the same time, ready to go on as Desired; and Rotrod Earl of Perch and
the King of France his Envoys did swear the same thing on behalf of him in that
Council: and William Mareschall and other on behalf of the King of England took
the same oath before the King of France his Envoys in that Council, whereof
King Richard sent to him the Chart.

A Controversy between the Archbishop of Canturbury and the Monks of Holy
Trinity.
between Baldwin Archbishop of Canturbury, and the Monks of Holy Trinity there
(of which the Reader may see Gervase of Canturbury his Chronicle in this year)
and in this Month John Anagninus a Cardinal was Ibid. f. 377 n. 10. The Pope
sends one to determine it, but is prohibited by the King.

The King comes to Canturbury and composes it.


sent from the Pope to Determine it; he came as far as Dover, and was
prohibited to proceed further unless by the King's Command; in the mean while
the King came to Canturbury and made concord between them, upon these Terms,
That Roger le Norreis whom the Archbishop, against the will of the Monks had
made Prior in the Church of Canturbury should be Deposed, and the Chapel which
the Archbishop had, built in the Suburbs of the City, against their mind also
should be Demolished, and that the Monks should perform their obedience and
profession to the Archbishop as their predecessors had done. Upon the Accord
the King at the Request of the Archbishop made the deposed Prior Abbat of
Evesham.

After this Ibid. n. 30.
peace made the King sent for John Anagnin the Cardinal, who came to
Canturbury, and was received with Solemn procession, yet took it ill, that the
Agreement was made between the Archbishop and Monks, in his Absence.

In the same Ibid. n 40.50.
Month of November Geofrey Elect of York, with the Barons of Yorkshire, and the
Sheriff, by the Kings Command went to the River Twede, and there received
William King of Scots, The King of Scots does Homage to King Richard.

He delivers Roxburgh and Berwic Castles to him.

And releases the subjection of the Kingdom of Scotland.


and conducted him to the King at Canturbury, where he arrived in the Month of
December, and did him Homage for the Dignities he was to have in England, as
his Brother Malcolm had them before. And King Richard delivered him the Castle
of Roxburgh, and the Castle of Berwic, and Quiet claimed, and acquitted him and
his heirs for ever from all Allegiance to himself, and the Kings of England,
and also released the Subjection of the Kingdom of Scotland. And for this
Restoring of his Castles, and quiet-claiming Fealty and Ligeance of the Kingdom
of Scotland, and that he might have King Richards Append. n. 68.
Chart thereupon, he gave him ten thousand Marks Sterling.

On the Hoved. f. 377. b. n. 30. Geofry Elect of York Appealed against by the
Bishops of Durham and Salisbury.
same day at Canturbury, Hugh Bishop of Durham and Hubert Bishop of Salisbury
Appealed against Geofrey Elect of York to the Pope before the said Cardinal
endeavoring to prove his Election void, because they who were to have had the
first suffrages Bucard Treasurer of the Church of York, and Henry Dean of the
same Church, did also appeal against him, denying his Election to have been
Canonical for that he was a Manslayer, begot in Adultery, and born of an
Harlot. (Tum quia homicida erat, His Election confirmed by the Cardinal Legate.
tum quia erat in adulterio genitus, and de Scorto natus) But although these
things were objected against him, yet John Agnin Cardinal and Legate of the
Apostolic See Confirmed his Election.

After these Dispatches on the Ibid. n. 40.50.
fifth of December the King went to Dover, where a Fleet attended to waft him
over into France: and the next day Roger Elect of the Abbey of St. German at
Seleby, by the Kings Command received his Benediction from Hugh Bishop of
Durham, against the Prohibition of Geofrey Elect of York: who seeing without
Money he could not obtein his Brothers favor, He promises the King 3000 l. and
is restored to the Archbishopric.
promised him Three Thousand Pounds Sterling, and the King restored him the
Archbishopric, ( i. e. the Temporalities) and Confirmed Chart: he also
restored all his Lay-Fees in England, and beyond Sea which King Henry his
Father had given him. Ibid. f. 3 8. a. lin. 3. Many Privileges and Immunities
granted and confirmed to the Church of York.
He also Quiet Claimed to God, Saint Peter of York, and to Geofry the Elect and
his Successors, all their Lands, and the Lands of their Canons for Ever from
all Exactions and Grievances of the Forest, or Foresters, and gave them free
leave and power to hunt in all their Lands in Nottingham and York-shires.

Then also Ibid. n. 10. The Appeals against the Elect of York released.
Hugh Bishop of Durham, Hubert Bishop of Salisbury, Henry Dean of York, and
Bucard Treasurer of the same Church, by the Kings Command Released their
Appeals, which they had made against the Elect of York; and he at the Request
of the King Confirmed to Henry the Deanery of York, and to Bucard the Treasury,
and to Hugh Bishop of Durham all those Privileges and Agreements which had been
between him and Roger Archbishop of York; promising to Confirm all those things
with the Seal of his

From Dover the Ibidem.
King with the Cardinal, Walter Archbishop of Roven, Henry Bishop of Bayeux,
and John Bishop of Eureux, passed to Calais on the 11th of December, where
Phillip Earl of Flanders met, and received him with great Joy, and Conducted
him into Normandy.

He left behind him Ibid. n 20.
Hugh Bishop of Durham, and William de Magnavil Earl of A^bemarl Dyed at Roven
in November. See Hov. f. 376. a. n. 20. The Bishops of Durham and Ely made
Chief Justices. They contend about Power.
William Bishop of Ely his Chief Justices, and associated to them before his
Departure Hugh Bardolf, William Marshall, Geofry Fi^z Peter, and William
Breuer. He Delivered to the Bishop of Ely his Chancellor Seals, by which He
Commanded his Precepts should be made in the Kingdom, (per quod fieri
praecepit, Mandata sua in Regno.) He Delivered him also in Custody the Tower of
London; and to the Bishop of Durham the Castle of Windsor in Custody, with the
Forests and County. The King was no sooner gone, but his two Chief Justices
contended about Power; that which pleased one, displeased the other.

King Richard kept the Hoved. f. 378. a. n. 40.50. A. D. 1190.
first Christmas after his Coronation at Bure in Normandy, with the Great Men
of that Nation. After that Solemnity, Phillip King of France and he met and
Established a firm Peace between themselves and Kingdoms, A firm Peace
Established between the Kings of England and France.
which was Written and Confirmed by their Oaths and Seals on the Feast of St.
Hillary (Jan. 13th) and the Archbishops and Bishops of both Kingdoms agreed to
it, In the word of Truth, (in verbo veritatis) and the Earls and Barons of both
Kingdoms, swore they would faithfully Append. n. 69. The Articles of the Peace.
That they should both preserve the Honor of each other, and keep Faith to one
another, in Defending their Lives, Limbs, and Terrene Honor. That neither
should fail the other in the Management of their Affairs: But that the King of
France should help the King of England to Defend his Land as if he were to
Defend the City of Paris, if it were Besieged. And so King Richard was to
Defend the King of France his Dominions as he would Defend Roven if that were
Besieged. Ibid. b. lin. 3.
The Earls and Barons of both Kingdoms swore They would not Depart from their
Fealty to Word of Truth, That they would Anathematize the Transgressors of this
Peace and Agreement. They further agreed, That if either of them Died, the
Survivor should have the Money, and Men of the Defunct, to carry on the Service
of God. And because they could not be ready by the Close or Octaves of Easter,
they Deferred their Voyage until Midsummer.

After Ibid. n. 30. King Richard sends for his Mother, his Bishops and Brother
to come to him into Normandy. The Bishop of Ely Chancellor made chief
Justiciary by the King.
Candlemass the King sent for Queen Alienor his Mother, Alice Sister to Phillip
King of France, Baldwin Archbishop of Canturbury, John of Norwich, Hugh of
Durham, Godfrey of Winchester, Reginald of Bath, William of Ely, Hubert of
Salisbury, Hugh of Chester, Bishops, and Geofrey Elect of York, and his Brother
John Earl of Moreton, to come to him into Normandy, and having advised with
them, he constituted William Bishop of Ely his Chancellor Chief Justice of
England ( Summum Justitiarium and granted to Hugh Bishop of Durham, the Office
of Justitiarie from the River Humber to the confines of Scotland, (and
Concessit Hugoni Episcopo Dunelmensi Justitiarium a fluvio Humbri usque ad
Terram Regis Scotiae.) Ibid. n. 40. His B^others John and Geofry swear they
would not go into England in three years without his ^ave.

John Earl of Moreton released from his Oath.


And made his Brothers John Earl of Moreton and Geofrey Elect of York swear
they would not go into England within three years next following without his
leave, yet soon after he released his Brother John from his Oath, and gave him
leave to return to England; Upon his making another Oath that he would
faithfully serve him.

From Ibid. and n. 50. He writes to the Pope to make his Chancellor Legate.
Normandy he sent his Chancellor into England, to prepare all things necessary
for himself and his Expedition; and designing to Exalt him above all the Clercs
and Laics of his Kingdom, He sent to Pope Clement and prevailed with him to
Commit to him the Sea Append. n. 70.
^cest the King or his Chancellor 1500 Marks. See Hoved. f. 380. b. n. 10.
Legantin Power of all England and Scotland, or rather Wales. Chancellor at his
return encompassed the Tower of London with a Deep Ditch, intending the Thames
should flow about it; and Ibidem. The Chancellor encompassed the Tower of
London with a Ditch.

And levies an Aid for the Kings use.


Took for the Kings use of every City of England two Palfreys, or Saddle
Horses, and two Sumpters, as an Aid, and of every Abbey one Palfrey, or Saddle
Horse, and one Sumpter, and of every of the Kings Manners, as of the Abby's.
These horses undoubtedly were to be employed in the War he was undertaking,
though it is not said so in the Historian.

On the 16th of Ibidem, f. 379. a. lin. 1. The Jews shut themselves up in the
Tower of York for fear of the Christians. They refuse to deliver it upon
d^mand. They cut one another throats rather than yield.
March, and upon the Eve of Palm Sunday, the Jews of the City of York, by
consent of the Constable and the Sheriff shut themselves up in the Tower there
for fear of the Christians, and when the Constable and Sheriff Demanded the
Tower of them, they refused to deliver it, whereupon the Citisens, and
Strangers which came to the County Court, (Populus Civitatis, and Extranei, qui
ad Comitatum venerant,) at the Request and by the encouragement Sheriff and
Constable made an assault upon them, which they continued Night and Day, so as
the Jews offered a great Sum of Money for Liberty to be gone, but the people
would not accept it. These Jews were all destroyed. The Historian reports that
finding they must fall into the Hands of the Christians, by agreement and
Consent they cut one another throats, rather than they would Dye by the hands
of the incircumcised, and enemies to their Law. However it was, Ibid. n. 20.30.
The Sea Append. n. 71. what Power he gave him.

The Chancellor comes to York and displaces the Sheriff and Constable of the
Tower.


Chancellor, now also the Popes Legate and Justitiarie of all England, after
Easter came to York with a great Army to take those malefactors which destroyed
the Jews, and knowing it was done by the Command of the Sheriff and Constable,
he Displaced them both, and took of the Citisens an hundred Pledges for the
keeping of their faith and peace to King and Kingdom, and that they would stand
to the Law in the Kings-Court concerning the Death of the Jews. And the Knights
or Military Tenants of the County, That is, the Strangers which were Suitors
and came to Milites autem provinciae, Qui ad Rectum noluerunt venire, praecepit
Comprehendi.)

At this time by the Ibid. n. 40. The Bishop of Durham returns into England.
Kings leave Hugh Bishop of Durham returned into England and met the Chancellor
at Blithe in Nottinghamshire, and delivered him the Kings Letters Patents by
which he had Justitiarie from the River Humber, unto the confines of Scotland:
He told him he was ready to obey the Kings Commands, and carried him with him
to Suthwell in the same County, and kept him until he had delivered Windsor
Castle, and the rest which the King had given him in Custody. He also Delivered
his Son Henry Pudsey ( de Puteato) and Gilbert de Lalea pledges for his faith
to the King and Kingdom or Government Ibid. n. 50.
when the Bishop was free, he went to his Town of H^vedene; where when he had
staid some days came Robert Longchamp, Brother to the Chanchellor, and William
de Stutevill with many armed people, He is ill treated by the Chancellor.
and would have taken him away by command of the Chancellor: But he gave
security he would not stir from thence without leave of the King or Chancellor.
The Bishop sent his Messengers to the King to inform him of all things
Chancellor had done. The King was at Marseille, where the Bishops Ibidem. f.
380. a. n. 20. He informs the King of it, and is by his precept restored to his
possessions.
Messengers came to him; and having heard the Injury done to him by the
Chancellor, he sent a Precept for the Delivery and possession of the Earldom of
Northumberland, and Manner of Sadberg, according to the Charter he had made, and
that these were detained, in all probability, was the only Complaint of the
Bishops Messengers, and the quarrel between him and the Chancellor; for the
King takes no notice of any thing else, not the least of any other injuries

From Normandy the King went to Ibidem. f. 379. b. l. 5.
Chinon in Anjou, and there made Gerard Archbishop of (...) Bernard Bishop of
Baion alias Bayeux, Robert de Sabloil, Richard de Camvil, and William de Forz
de Vlerun, the Commanders of his whole Fleet. Deinde perrexit Rex Angliae in
Andigaviam ad Chinonem, and ibi Constituit Girardum What Archbishop this was,
whether it might not be of Angiers or Auxe^^e, I know not.
Anxiensem Archiepiscopum, and Bernardum Episcopum False Printed, it should be
Baioce^sem, See there f. 380. b. n. 40.
Baiona, and Robertum de Sabul, and Ricardum de Canvill, and Willielmum de Forz
de Vlerun Ductores and Constabularios totius Navigii sui.

The Commanders, or as the Historian calls them, Constables of his Fleet being
appointed, by the Advice of heroic Discreet men, He made See Append. n. 72.
Laws made for preservation of Peace and Amity in the Fleet and Army.
Laws for prevention of Quarrels and Mischief, and preservation of Peace and
Amity in it, which were, That if any one Killed a Hoved. ut supra n. 10, 20.
And in another Edict or Writ (in alio Brevi suo) That all persons in his Fleet
should obey the Commands and Orders of the Officers he had appointed (ut
obedirent Dictis and Preceptis praedictorum Iustitiariorum Navigii sui.)

From Chinon he went to Ibid. n. 20, 30. King Richard receives the Scrip and
Staff of Pilgrimage. A. D. 1190.
Tours, and there received the Scrip Staff of Pilgrimage from the hands of the
Archbishop, and passed on to Vezelay, where he met the King of France, where
they stayed only two Days, and left that place on the first of July, and went
forward to Lions, and passed the River Rhosne, and there parted, their numbers
not permitting them to keep the same course; the King of France taking his way
to Genoa, and the King of England to Marseille. To which place Ib. b n. ^0.
Baldwin Archbishop of Canturbury, Hubert Bishop of Salisbury, He had a
presperous Voyage to Acon.
and Ranulf de Glanvill sometime Justiciarie of England came with the King, and
shipped themselves and had a prosperous Voyage to Acon. John Ibidem. The Bishop
of Norwich is absolved by the Pope and returns home. He pays the Kings 1000
Marks.
Bishop of Norwich repented him, went to the Pope, was absolved from his
Engagement, and had License to return home; which being known to the King, he
received of him a thousand Marks for his Redemption, or to be freed from his
promise of undertaking the Crusado.

When the King had Ibidem. f. 380. a. n. 30.40
staid at Marseille Eight Days, in expectation of his Fleet, he was out of
patience, and there hired ten Great Busses, and twenty well armed Galleys, and
Shipped as many as he could, and Sailed from thence upon the seventh of August,
and Coasted it along toward Sicily. His Fleet came not thither until the 22d of
Ibid. f. 383. a. n. 50.
August, and there staid Eight Days, to Mend and Cleanse their Ships, and then
followed the King, and on the 14th of Ibid.
September arrived at Messina.

Here the two Ibid. b. n. 30. The English by force take Messiua.
Kings met again. King Richard Demanded his Sister Joan of Tancred King of
Sicily, the Widow of William the late King, and she was Delivered to him out of
Custody. And afterward the English by Ibid. f. 384. a. n. 30. What was
demanded of Tancred King of Sicily by King Richard
force took the City of Messina which King Richard kept until Tancred had
satisfied all his Demnads, which were, That he should permit his Sister to
enjoy the Dower settled upon her William of Sicily her Husband. That she should
have the Gold Chair according to the Custom of the Queens of that Country. Also
the Gold Table 12 Foot long and one Foot and half Broad, and two Golden
Tressels belonging to that Table, Ibid. b. n. 50. f. 385. a. lin. 1. etc.
and a Silk Tent in which 200 Knights might be entertained, and 24 Silver Cups,
and so many Silver Dishes, and 60000 Measures of Wheat, and as much Barley and
Wine accordingly: And an hundred Gally's armed, with their whole Furniture and
Victuals for the Mariners or Gally-men for two years. All these King Henry, to
whom King William had devised them on his Death bed.

Tancred Ibid. n. 10. What Tancred gave to him.
by advice of his wise men gave him 20000 ounces of Gold in lieu of his Sisters
Dower, and 20000 to be Quit of his other Demands, and for a Marriage to be
contracted between Arthur Duke of Britany King Richards Nephew, and his
Daugther. And upon Executing the Charter of Peace between them Ibid. b. n. 50.
Tancred twenty thousand ounces of Gold to be free from all his Questions and
Demands whatsoever. And that for Tancreds greater security he should Ibid. f.
386. a lin. 2. and n. 10.
write to the Pope and give him an Account of their Agreement, which Epistle
bare Ibid. 40. A. D. 1190. King Richard declares his Nephew Arthur his heir if
he dyed without issue.
date at Messina November 11th wherein he Declares his Dearest Nephew Arthur
his next Heir if he dyed without Issue.

This year Dyed Ibid. f. 390. b. lin. 5. and n. 10. The Death of Robert Earl of
Leicester, Ranulph Glanvill, and Baldwin Archbishop of Canturbury.
Robert Earl of Leicester in Romania, going to the Holy Land, and Ranulph de
Glanvill Dyed at the Siege of Acon, and then and there also Dyed Baldwin
Archbishop of Canturbury, and left Hubert Bishop of Salisbury his Executor,
who performed his Office faithfully, and Distributed his Goods according to his
Desire.

In the month of February King Richard sent his Gally's from Messina to Naples
for his Mother Ibid. f. 391. b. n. 10, 20.
Queen Alienor, A. D. 1191.
and Berengaria Daughter of San^^us King of Navarre whom he was to Marry, They
came through France and I^aly to Naples over

Not long before this time, There happened in Ibid. A great Dissension between
the Chancellor John the Kings Brother and other Noble men.
England great Dissension between the Chancellor and Earl John the Kings
Brother, and the other great men of the Land, and it came to such an height, as
they all wrote to the King, Concerning the State of his Kingdom, and the
Grievances the People sustained by the Chancellors Government, who sent from
Messina Ibid. n. 30.
Walter Archbishop of Roven, and William Marshal Earl of Striguil, Commanding
his Chancellor, See Append. n. 73, 74. A. D. 1191. The Chancellors haughtiness.
That all things in the Kingdom should be done by the advice and assistance of
the Archbishop of Roven, and the joint undertaking and Direction of William
Marshal, Geofry Fitz-Peter, Hugh Bardolf, and William Bruer. When they came
into England they dare not deliver him the Kings Letters, for he Despised all
the Kings Mandates, and would have no Peer or aequal in the Kingdom.

On the first of March King Richard Hoved. ut supra, n, 40, 50.
went from Messina to Catania another City of Sicily 60 Miles from it, to visit
Tancred, where he staid three Days, and at his Departure they presented one
another with Gifts. Tancred brought him on his Journey toward Messina, and
before they left one another he gave him a Letter he had Ibid. f. 392. a. lin.
a. and n 10, 20.30 The Treachery of the King of France to King Richard
discovered by Tancred.
received from the King of France by the Duke of Burgundy, in which he told him
the King of England was a Traitor and would not keep the Peace he made with
him; And that if he would King of England and his Army. To whom the King of
England said he was not, had not been nor would be a Traitor, And that what
Agreement he had made with him he would observe it so long as he Lived. And
that he could not easily believe the King of France would send him such a
Letter. To whom King Tancred Answered, That if the Duke of Burgundy denied he
gave him those Letters from the King of France, he was ready to disprove Dukes.
The King at his return to Messina mightily Estranged himself from the King of
France, who inquiring into the reason of it, King Richard let him Know by the
Earl of Flanders, That he had received such a Letter, and the Contents of it,
and let the Earl peruse it. The King of France was silent for a while, and then
said the pretended Letter and Lie, was a Trick of King Richards to get rid of
his Sister Alice (whom he had Sworn to Marry) and threatened that if he did
Leave her and Marry another Woman, he would be his Enemy so long as he Lived.

The King of England Ibidem King Richard refuses to Marry the King of France
his Sister.
Replied he could by no means make ^is Sister his Wife, because his Father had
Known her, and begotten a Son of her, and produced many Witnesses to prove it.
And the matter of fact appearing to the King of France to be so; By the Advice
of the Earl of Flanders, and others of his great men, a Composition was made
between them. The King of France was to acquit him of his Oath and Agreement h^
had made concerning his Sister Al^ce and King Richard was to pay him in five
years time 10000 Marks, The difference between the Kings of England and France
composed.
whereof he paid him 2000 down, and was to deliver G^sors and what else the
King of France had given in respect of the intended Marriage, and then he was
at Liberty to Marry who he pleased; and the Agreement further was, That by his
Chart the King of France Granted, The Duke of Britany a ^e^^a^a^ie to France.
That the Dukedom of Britany, should for ever belong to the Dominion of the
Duke of Normandy, and that the Duke Britany should always be his Man or
Feudatary; and should answer all things to him as to his Liege Lord. And that
the Duke of Normandy should answer to the King of France for both Dukedoms, and
so they were made friends, and the Agreement confirmed by their Oaths and
Seals, with the Addition of many Witnesses.

On the 30 th of March Ibid. n. 40 The King of France with his Army arrives at
Acon.
the King of France Sailed from Messina, and two and twenty days after arrived
at Acon, with his Army. King of England staid there with his Army after his
Departure, and the very Day he set Sail, Queen Alienor came thither with
Berengaria, and the Ibid. n 50. King Richard sends to the Pope to confirm and
Consecrate his Brother Geofry.
fourth day departed toward England, and went by Rome, and by her the King sent
to the Pope and humbly Requested, he would confirm the Election of his Brother
Geofry, and Consecrate him Archbishop of York, or permit it to be done by some
over person. When she went away she left the King of Navarre his Daughter with
Joan Queen of Sicily.

In April next following Ibid. f. 393. 10, 20. Hi^ Fleet separated by a great
Storm.
on Good Friday Eve, King Richard with his whole Army set Sail from Messina
with 150 Great Ships, and 53 Gally's well armed; on Saturday happened a great
Storm which separated the Fleet, The King with part of it was driven into
Crete, and from thence Sailed to Rhodes. The great Buss (Bussia magna) in which
was the Queen of Sicily and Berengaria, and many of the Kings Servants, with
two other Busses were driven to the Isle of Cyprus. Ibid. Many Soldiers were
drowned
After the tempest, the King sent out Gally's to seek for the Busse, and found
it without the Port of Limezun in Cyprus. Such as escaped were imprisoned and
Robbed by the Emperor of Cyprus.
The other two perished at the Entrance of the Port, and in them many Knights,
and Kings Servants. All their Goods, Isaac or as others Cursac the Emperor (as
he called himself) of Cyprus, seized, and all such as Escaped he imprisoned and
robbed, and would not permit the great Busse to enter into the Harbor.

When the King heard where the Busse was, he came to their assistance with many
Gally's and a great Fleet of Ships, Ibid. He sends to the Emperor to release
his prisoners, but is refused.
and found it without the Port exposed to the Wind and Sea. He sent to the
Emperor, and humbly requested him with much earnestness, the first, second, and
third time, to Release the Prisoners and restore their Goods. He returned
haughty answers, and would not do what was begged of him.

King Richard provoked with these Barbarous actions Ibid. and b. n. 10, 20, 30.
etc. He takes the Town by assault, and the Emperor and his Daughter Prisoners.
presently calls for his Arms, bids his Soldiers follow, and causes them to
land in Boats, leads them on, and takes the Town, and in a short time Conquers
the whole Island; and took the Emperor Prisoner and his Daughter.

Here he was Ibid. s. 394. a. 10, 20. A. D. 1991. King Richard married to
Berengaria. He sends the Emperor Prisoner to Tripoly.
Married to Berengaria on the 12th of May by his Chaplain Nicholas, and was
busied in settling the Island until the first of July, which was the Eve of
Pentecost, and that day he sent the Emperor bound in Gold and Silver Chains to
Tripoly, and gave the Government of the Island to Richard de Camvill and Robert
de Turnham. And on the same day Ibid. n. 30.
the Queens of England and Sicily Emperors Daughter Landed and appeared before
Acon with the greatest part of the Kings Fleet.

Who staid Ibid. n. 40 He settles the Government of Cyprus, and went to the
Siege of Acon.
behind and took one half the Goods of all the inhabitants of the Island, and
Confirmed the Laws and institutions they had in the time of Emanuel Emperor of
Constantinople, and went from thence with his Gallys on Thursday in
Whitsun-week, and next day arrived at Tire, and from thence went to the Siege
of Acon,

This City being Ibid. f. 396. ^. n. 10, 20, 30. Acon taken aft^^ two years
Siege. The King of France desires leave of King Richard to return into his own
Country.
taken after almost two years Siege, King Richard desired of the King of
France, That they might mutually Swear they would stay in the Land of Jerusalem
with their Army's for three years, and wholly subdue it. He would make no such
Oath but two days after sent to the King of England the Bishop Beavais and Hugh
Duke of Burgundy etc. by whom he asked Leave of him (Et per illos pettit
Licentiam redeundi in Regionem suam.) To whom he objected the Disgrace it would
be to the King of France if he returned and left the Business they came for
undone. But if he found himself infirm or weak, or was afraid to dye there, he
might do his pleasure. Ibid. f. 397. a. lin. 4. n. 10.
The King of France was mighty uneasy, and about a week after sent again to
the King of England for leave to Return, (petiit iterum a Rege Angliae
licentiam repatriandi) but could not obtein it, until he had made King of
France made the Duke of Burgundy his General, and left with him the greatest
part of his Treasure to pay the Soldiers, Departed from Acon on the 31st of
Jul^.

After the Cities and Towns Ibid. f. 408. a. n. 10, 20. Rad. de Dicet. Col.
667. n. 60. King Richard desires the French to join with him in the Siege of
Jerusa^em, but is refused.
upon the Sea Coast of Palestine Courage and Conduct of King Richard were all
in the possession of the Christians, He urged the Duke of Burgundy and French
to join with him and besiege Jerusalem, and would have engaged them by Oath,
not to have stirred from before it until it had been taken; They refused his
proposition, and told him they must leave that Country as soon as they could,
as their Master the King of France had commanded them, and so left the King and
went to Acon.

Hoved. ut supra, n. 30. Saladin offers a Truce for three years, which was
accepted by King Richard.
Saladin Emperor or General of the Saracens offered a Truce for three years,
upon such Terms as King Richard with the Advice of the Templars, and whole Army
thought fit to accept; seeing his Army grew sickly, and he wanted men and
money. And then Ibid. n. 40, 50. What moved him to hasten his return to
England. A. D. 192.
by reason of the ill news he had received, concerning the King of France, The
Expulsion of his Chancellor, and his Brother John, That he had seized many of
his Castles, and would take from him his Kingdom if he Could; left Palestine on
the 8th of October, and made as much have homeward as he could. But thinking it
not safe to come through France, he took his way through Germany from Aquilea
(upon the North Shore of the Venetian Gulf) and on the 20th of Rad. de Diceto
Col. 668. n. 30, 40. King R^chard taken Prisoner in his return home. He is
delivered to the Emperor for a Sum of money.
December was in Disguise taken at Vienna by the Duke of Austria, and afterward
on Wednesday in Passion Week Delivered to the Emperor for a Sum of Money.

It was observed Ibid. Earl John well pleased with his Brothers imprisonment.
His contrivance to secure the Crown for himself.
That Earl John was very Brisk when he heard his Brother was made Prisoner, and
conceived great hopes of being King; and therefore he wheadled in many through
the whole Kingdom with great promises, and with great Diligence fortifyed his
places of Strength, and went over into France and entered into a Confederacy
with that King, that he might secure his Nephew Arthur from enjoying the Crown;
and it is no hard matter to believe this from his precedent actions.

In the Absence of the King, there happened great f. 398. b. n. 20. A. D. 119^.
A discord between him and the Chancellor.
discord between Earl John and the Chancellor about Lincoln Castle, which was
in the Custody of Gerard de Camvill Sheriff of Lincolnshire, who was turned out
of his Expulso Girardo de Camvil a a Baliva Vicecomitatus Lincolniae. Composed
by the mediation of the Bishops.
Office by the Chancellor, and William de Stutevill put into it, but would not
part with the Castle; and while he Besieged it, the Castle of Nottingham, and
the Kings Castle of Tikehill were delivered to Earl John, who sent to the
Chancellor that Earls Message raised the Siege, and by the Mediation of the
Bishops and other friends, an agreement was made between them, which the Reader
may find in the Append. n 75.
Appendix with the Translation of it.

Not long after this Agreement, Geofrey the Elect of York, was Archbishop of
Tours, by the Popes Command, who not regarding the Hoved. ut supra f. 399. a n.
30. Geofry Elect of York comes into England before the three years were expired.
Oath he had made to his Brother the King, That he would not come into England
in three years, after the King should leave it, came to Witsan (perhaps at this
Day Calais) and was there ready for his passage over. The Chancellor sorbad him
to come into England contrary to his Oath he made to the King. He regarded not
the Chancellors Prohibition, and Landed at Dover in the month of September,
where the Chancellor had appointed Officers Monastery of St. Martins belonging
to that Town, and put himself into the Church: Ibidem. n. ^0, 50. He is taken
by the Chancellors Officers and delivered Prisoner to the Constable of Dover
Castle.
The Chancellors Officers Guarded the Church so as he could not go out, and
after Mass took him while he was standing at the Altar in his Sacerdotal
vestments, and carried him out of the Church through the Dirty Streets, and
Delivered him to Matthew Clear the Constable of Dover Castle. Ibidem, b. n. 10.
But is released by Earl John's Order.

The Chancellor is summoned to appear in the Kings Court, but refuses.


Earl John hearing of this, ordered the Chancellor to release him. And then
coming to London, he complained to Earl John, and to the Bishops and great men
of the injury he had received from the Chancellor. The Earl commanded he should
stand to the Law in the Kings Court for that, and also for the Injury he had
done to Hugh Bishop of Durham. The Chancellor deferred his appearance, the
Earl, the Archbishop of Roven, the Bishops and chief men of the Kingdom
appointed him a Peremptory day at Reading, whither Earl John, and almost all
the Bishops, Earls, and Barons of the Kingdom came in expectation of him: but
he neither came nor sent any one to appear for him. Then the Earl and the
Bishops that were with him went toward London, A Skirmi^h between the Earls and
Chancellors retinue.

One of the Earls Knights Slain.


That they might consult before a great Audience of the Citizens, what they
should do with Chancellor That had so troubled the Kingdom, and would not stand
to Law. He hearing of it, left Windsor, and went to London, and by the way his
and the Earls retinue, their Milites or Knights met and fought, in which
Skirmish one of the Earls Knights Roger de Planis was Killed, yet he had the
better, and the Chancellor fled to London, and he and his Retinue got into the
Tower.

On the 10 th of Ibidem n. 20. The Chancellor accused of high Misdemeanors.
October Earl John, the Archbishop of Roven, Bishop, Earls, Barons, and
Citizens of London, met in Paul's Churchyard, and accused the Chancellor in
many things, but especially for the injuries he had done to the Archbishop of
York and Bishop of Durham. Those also the King had associated with him in the
Government accused him, saying, That he Depised their advice, and managed all
the Business of the Kingdom by violence, and according to his own Will. And
then the Archbishop of Roven, and William Marshall Earl of Striguil, first
show before the People Messina, by which they were associated with the
Chancellor and others in the Government of the Kingdom, and that he was to do
nothing without their advice, and if he did, and it was to the detriment of the
Kingdom, he was to be No such thing in the Letters.

See Append. n. He is deposed.


deposed and the Archbishop of Roven put in his place. And it pleased the
Earl, and all the Bishops, Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, and the Citizens of
London that it should be so; for that the Archbishop of Roven would do nothing
without the Advice of his associates, and the Barons of the Exchequer.

And the same Day the Earl of Moreton, Ibidem. n. 40.
and the Archbishop of Roven and the other Justices (That is, the Commissioners
in the Government) of the King Granted to the Citizens of London to have their
Comunity. Et eodem die Comes Moretonii, and Archiepiscopus Rho^amagensis, and
alii Regis Justiciarii Concesserunt Civibus Londoniarum habere Comunam suam.
And the same year the Earl and Archbishop and almost all the Bishops, Earls
and Barons of the Kingdom did Swear Comunity, The Citizens of London Swear
fealty to King Richard and Earl John as his heir.

The Tower and Windsor Castle delivered up to him by the Chancellor.


so long as it pleased the King. Et eodem Anno Comes Moretonii, and
Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis, and fere omnes Episcopi, and Comites, and Barons
Regni Juraverunt Comunam illam firmiter and inconcusse servaturos, quamdiu
Domino Regi placuit. And the Citizens of London did Swear faithful service to
King Richard and his Heir, (and haeredi suo). And if he should Dye without
Issue, That they would receive Earl John his Brother for their King and Lord,
and they Swear Fealty to him against all men, saying their Fealty to King
Richard his Brother. Castles of England, and he presently delivered to him the
Tower of London, and Windsor Castle, with some others.

The different Characters of this Chancellor.
The Character of this Chancellor is various according to the inclinations of
men of that time. Ibid. f. 400. a. in his Epistle de Dejectione Willielmi
Eliensis.
Hugh de Nunant Bishop of Coventry one of his prosecutors, says he was of a
proud, haughty, imperious temper, profuse and extravagant beyond measure, a
consumer of the Kings Revenue, and injurious to all sorts of men. Peter of
Blois then Archdeacon of Bath, a man learned and famous, Ibid. f. 401 b. in
his Epistle pro Willielmo Elien. Episcopo.
Defends the Chancellor against the sharp pen of the Bishop of Coventry, and
Quondam Domino and amico Hugoni Coventrensi, and Cestrensi dicto Episcopo,
Petrus Blesensis, Bathoniensis Archidiaconus, Dei Memoriam cum Timore; Livor
quo tendat, Invidia quo feratur, proditoriae factionis hodie patefecit
immanitas. Dilectus Deo and hominibus Episcopus Eliensis vir sapiens, amabilis,
generosus, benignus, and Mitis, and in omnes liberalitates Effusus. Juxta
Divinae Gratiae Dispositionem, and suorum Exigentiam morum, and meritorum,
Reipublicae administrationem and summam rerum fuerat assecutus, in English
thus, To his Quondam Lord and friend Hugh called Bishop of Coventry and
Chester, Peter of Blois Archdeacon of Bathe. The Memory of God with fear: What
Detraction and Envy may do, The fury of a Traiterous faction has at this time
discovered; The Bishop of Ely beloved of God and men, a wise, loving, Generous,
Kind and Mild man, abounding in all Instances of Liberality, according to the
Disposing of Divine Grace, and his own due Qualifications and Merits, obtained
the Administration of the etc. And proceeds to reprove him for his virulent
Language against him without Cause.

After Eight Days Ibid. f. 402. a. n. 10. He is released from his imprisonment,
and goes into Normandy. He complains to the Pope and King, and offers to stand
a Trial.
Imprisonment, Earl John gave Order he should be released and go beyond Sea. He
went into Normandy, where by Command of the Archbishop of Roven he was reputed
as an Excommunicated person, and in all places where ever he came in that
Arch-Bishopric all Divine Offices ceased during his abode there. Pope Celestin,
and to the King of England, letting them know how Earl John and his Accomplices
had thrown him out of the Kingdom, complaining of the Injury, and desiring
restitution of what had been taken from him; and offering to stand to the Law
(or Trial.) And that if what he had done, or his Exspenses should not please
the King, he would in all things satisfy him according to his own mind.

At which Complaint the Ibid. n. 20. The Pope writes to the English Bishops to
excomunicate Earl John.
Pope was much moved, and wrote to the Archbishops and Bishops of England to
Excommunicate Earl John, and all his Advisers, Accomplices, and Favorers. And
William Bishop of Ely as Legate and Chancellor wrote to the Bishop of Lincoln to
put in Execution the Popes Brief, and sent him the Ibid. b. n. 30.
names of such as he would have him Excommunicate, videlicet, Walter
Archbishop of Roven, Godfrey Bishop of Winchester, Hugh Bishop of Coventry,
William Marshal, Geofry Fitz-Peter, William and many others. Ibid. f. 403. a.
n. 10. The Bishops refuse to do it.
But none of the Bishops would Execute either the Popes, or his Command, as not
owning him as Legate or Chancellor. Ibidem.
And the Archbishop of Roven, and the other Justices of England, and alii
Justiciarii Angliae, (That is the Commissioners for the Government) disseized
him of his Bishopric, and Collected the Rents to the Kings use, to make good
the money he had Wasted: [5] And then the foresaid Justices, and all the
Bishops, Earls, and Barons of England sent to the King, and by one Common
Letter acquainted him how his Chancellor had destroyed the Kingdom and his
Treasure, and how he had been put out of his Office by the Common Council of
the Kingdom. The Chancellor King, That his Brother John had Seized the Kingdom,
and would Crown himself, if he returned not speedily: Yet the King trusting in
God, would not Desert his Service, until men and Money failed.

In Lent following Ibid. f. 408. b. n. 30. A. D. 1192.
Queen Alienor, the Archbishops of Roven and York, and all the great men of
the Kingdom met, and Swore Fealty and faithful Service to King Richard, and to
his Heir against all Ibid. n. 40. Earl John endeavors to restore the
Chancellor, but the great men would not consent.
At the same time the Earl for 500 pounds having promised to restore the
Chancellor to his Office, sent for him into England, and tried to induce the
great men to consent to it, who would not, but sent to him that unless he
Departed the Kingdom they would imprison him, he not daring to stay, passed
over the Sea on Good Friday.

While these Commotions were in England King Richard was Germany, Ibidem. f.
412. a. n. 20. King Richard gave the Emperor his Kingdom to gain his Liberty.

He is reinvested by the Emperor to hold it of him by an annual tribute. Before
his death he is acquitted.


and for his liberty he gave the Emperor his Kingdom, and invested him in it,
by the Delivery of his Hat or Cap, and he presently, as they had agreed before
the great men of Germany and England, redelivered it unto him, to hold of him
by the annual Tribute of 5000 pounds Sterling, and invested him by a Double
Cross of Gold. But before his Death acquitted and Discharged King Richard and
his heirs of this and all manner of Bargains.

Alice the King of France his Sister was in the Ibid. f. 408. b. 10, 20. The
King of France demands his Sister of the Norman Nobili^y*
Custody of the Seneschal and great men of Normandy, and he had Demanded her of
them, but they would not deliver her without order from their King Richard, at
Ibid. f. 412. a. n. 20, 30. They refuse to deliver her without King Richards
order
which he was much troubled and disturbed, and sent into England to Earl John,
That if he would submit to his pleasure and advice, he should Marry his Sister
Alice, and with her he should have Normandy, Aquitan and Anjou, and all the
Lands which his Father had been possessed of in France, and that he should make
King of England.

Earl Ibidem. Earl John refuses to treat with the Norman Nobility about the
Kings release.
John soon after Christmas, passed into Normandy, where the Seneschal, and
other great men met him, and desired he would go to Alencon to treat with them
about the Kings affairs, and the freeing him from Imprisonment; Ibid. n. 40
Unless they would accept him for their Lord, which they refuse.
he told them if they would receive him as their Lord, and Swear Fealty to him,
he would go with them, and undertake their Defense against the King of France,
but otherwise not. The Noblemen of Normandy refused his proposals, King again.

From thence Ibid. He does Homage to the King of France for Normandy, etc.
the Earl went to the King of France and did Homage to him for Normandy and the
other Dominions of his Brother beyond Sea, and as it was reported, for England,
and Swore he would take to Wife his Sister Alice, and then quiet Claymed or
Released to the King of France Gisors, and whole Veuxin Norman. And he gave him
with his Sister, That part of Flanders he had in his possession, and Swore he
would do his utmost to help him to Gain England, and his Brothers other
Dominion.

Then he Ibid. n. 50. He returns into England and demands the Kingdom,
alleging the King was dead
returned into England carrying many strangers with him, and had the Castles of
Windsor and Wallingford delivered to him; from whence he came to London; and
demanded the Kingdom from the Archb^shop of Roven and the other Justices, (that
is Commissioners for the Government) of England, and the Fealties of the
Military Tenants, Vassals or Feudataries of the Kingdom, Affirming his Brother
the King was Dead. ( Deinde ipse Comes venit Lundonias and a Ro^homagensi
Archiepiscopo, and caeteris Justiciariis Angliae petiit sibi Regnum, and
fidelitates hominum Regni, affirmans, Q^od Rex Angliae frater suus mortuus
Erat. But they believed him not. And when he saw he was Ibidem. b. lin. 1. etc.
The Justiciaries reject him and secure all the Ports.
rejected by the Justiciaries and great men, he swelled with fury, Portifyed
his places of Strength, and Hostile manner. The Justiciaries had so well
secured the Ports as neither French or Flemmings that had promised him
assistance, dare attempt to Land in England. They Besieged Windsor Castle.
Ibid. n. 20. They raise an Army to oppose him.
The Archbishop of York, Hugh Bardolfe one of the Kings Justiciaries, and
Sheriff of Yorkshire, and William de Stutevill raise an Army in that Country,
and marched to Doncaster, which they fortifyed. Ibid. n. 30.
The Archbishop would have gone on and Besieged Tikehill a Castle belonging to
Earl John: but men or Feudataries, (quia erant homines Comitis Iohanis.)

After Easter the Ibid. n. 10
Abbats of Boxley and Roberts-Bridge, that had been sent by the Justiciaries to
the King came Back, and reported the Agreement made between him and the
Emperor: But the King not returning, all men wondered at his stay in Germany,
and doubted A^chbishop of Roven and the other Justiciaries, although they had
forced Earl John to a Compliance, A truce made with Earl John.
and even taken the Castle of Windsor; yet they made a Truce with him until the
Feast of All Saints, Ibid. f. 413. a. lin. 1. etc.
The Castles of Notingham and Tikehill remaining in his Custody as they were
before, and the Castles of Windsor, Walingford, and Pec, were Delivered to the
Queen Mother, and were to be Redelivered to the Earl, if the King returned not
the mean While.

Soon after this Ibid. n. 10. The King writes to his Subjects to send money for
his Release
Truce the King sent to the Archbishops, all the Bishops, Abbats, Earls,
Barons, Clercs, and Free-tenants ( and Francos tenentes) or Tenants in Capite,
and desired all the Clergy and Laity, would give him such an aid to redeem him
as he might thank them for it. The Emperor wrote to the same purpose, and the
Pope, who Threatened the Kingdom with an Interdict, unless the King were
speedily freed from Prison, and wrote to the King of France that he would
anathematize his Kingdom, unless he forbear to trouble the King of England
while he was Prisoner. Ibid. n 30.
The great instrument of reconciliation between the Emperor and King Richard
was the Chancellor. The price of his Redemption was 140000 marks
(Charissimus Cancellarius noster Willielmus Eliensis Episcopus) as the King
Styles him in his Letter. And the price of his Redemption was Seven score
thousand Marks of Silver. The Emperor and Kings Ibid. and b. n. 20. Append. n.
76. A. D. 1193.
Letters both bear Date the 19th of April at Hagenou.

By Authority of the Ibid. f. 413. b. n. 10. How and upon whom this Sum was
levied and raised.
Kings letters, the Queen Mother and the Justices determined That all Clercs
and Laics should pay a fourth part of their Revenues that year for the
Redemption of the King, and that they should add so much of their Movables, or
upon their Movables, or Ken them thanks, and upon every Knights Fee they
charged 20 s. and ordered the Abby's and Houses of the Cistertians, and the
order of Semplingham should contribute all their Wool that year, and That all
the Gold and Silver, the Churches were possessed of, should be brought forth
and delivered for the same purpose. Autoritate Literarum istarum (these words
follow immediately after the Date of the Kings Letters) Matter Regis and
Justiciarii Angliae statuerunt, quod universi tam Clerici quam Laici
Cistrensis, and de Domibus Ordinis Semplingham, totam lanam suam de hoc Anno,
and Vniversum Aurum and Argentum Ecclesiarum, sicut Rex in Mandato suo
praeceperat. f. 413. a. n. 40. The Gold and Silver taken out of the Churches to
be restored.
The Gold and Silver that belonged to the Churches the King only Borrowed, and
his Justiciaires and Barons made Oath he should fully

About this Ibid. b. n. 40. The Chancellor returns into England to manage the
Kings business.
Matter the Chancellor came into England, and in great humility went to St.
Albans, where the Queen Mother, the Archbishop of Roven, and the other
Justiciaires (and alii Justiciarii Domini Regis) met him, and there produced a
Ibid. n. 30.
Golden Bull, containing an indissoluble league between the Emperor and the
King, and told them he came not as a Justice, or a Legate, or a Chancellor*
Bishop only and the Kings Messenger. And enjoined some Barons they should go
with him to the King, as Gilbert Bishop of R^thester, Sefrid Bishop of
Chichester, Benedict Abbat of Peterburgh, Richard Earl of Cl^re, Earl Roger
Bigod, Geofrey de Say, and many others.

On the 25th of Ibid. n. 40. and f. 414. a. n. 20. A. D. 1193. A Treaty betwe^n
the Emperor and King of France.
June the Emperor and the King of France had appointed a Colloquium or Treaty
which if it should proceed, England knew, they two would con^aederate against
the Archbishops of Colon and Men^s, and against the Dukes of Lovain, L^mburgh
and Saxony, and many other Great Men, and Nobles, who had conspired against
the Emperor, for the Bishop of Liege, Brother to the Duke of Lovain, his Death,
which he had contrived, and suspected, That if the Treaty should take effect he
should be Delivered to the King of France. Ibid. n. 30. It Is broke off by the
King of Englands policy.
After great pains, and at the instance of the King of England a Peace was made
between Emperor and great men before mentioned, and so the Treaty or Colloquium
between the Emperor and King of France was Defeated.

This done the Emperor on the Day after St. John Baptist came to Ibid. n. 40. A
Treaty between the Emeror and King Richard
Worms, where the King of England then was; and there was celebrated a
Colloquium or Treaty between them four Days. There were present the Bishops of
those parts, the Dukes of Lovain and Limburgh with many Earls and Barons: There
were on the Kings behalf the Bishops of Bath and Ely, and on the fourth Day,
that is to say on the Vigil or Eve of St. Peter and Paul, came to the King
William Briwer, and Baldwin de Bretun, and as yet they all dispaired of the
Kings Freedom. Ibid. n. 50. The Agreement between them.
But next Day they came to a final agreement, upon these Conditions, That the
King of England should give the Emperor 100000 Marks of Pure Silver according
Colon, and other 50000 as an aid toward his Reducing Apulia. That the King
should give the Sister of Arthur Duke of Britany his Nephew, as wife to the son
of the Duke of Austria; and that he should Deliver the Emperor of Cyprus and
his Daughter. Ibid. b. lin. 2.
The 100000 Marks were to be brought into the Empire at the Hazard of the King
of England, and when they were there he was freely and Quietly to return into
England under safe Conduct, and this all the Bishops, Dukes, Earls and Barons
there present swear on The form of this Bargain or Composition follows in the
Ibid. n. 10.
same place.

So soon as the King of France heard these things, he Ibid. n. 40. The King of
France gives Earl John notice of it.
sent to Earl John, that he might have a Care of himself, for the Devil was got
loose; who knowing he wrote it of his Brother, he passed into Normandy, and
adhaered to the King of France not Daring to expect the coming of his Brother,
and soon after the King of England sent Bishop of Ely his Chancellor, and
William Briwer and other wise men to the King of France to make peace with him,
Ibid. n. 50. A Peace between England and France concluded.
which was done accordingly and the claims settled on both sides, in which peace
there was ample provision made for the security of Earl John and all his
Matters.

The Money was Ibid. f. 416. b. lin. 1. etc. How the Money for the Kings Ransom
was Collected.
Collected for the Kings Ransom, Twenty Shillings of every Knights Fee, The
fourth part of all the Rents of Laics, and all the Chalices and other Riches of
the Churches, the Bishops Collected of their Clercs, of some a fourth part of
some a tenth, and so it was in all the Kings Dominions beyond Sea, by which
there was gathered together an infinite Sum of Money, and then the Ibid. lin. 7.
Emperors Envoyes received at London the greatest part of the Kings Ransom, And
paid to the Emperors Envoyes.
in weight and measure, and sealed it up and Delivered it to such as were to
carry it to the Borders of the Empire at the hazard of the King of England.

The Emperor at this time Ibid. n. 10. What the Emperor gave to King Richard.
Gave unto the King of England by his Chart, the Country of Provence, Viana and
Vianois, Marseille, Narbon Arleblan^ and Lions upon the Rhone and as far as the
Alps, and whatsoever he had in Burgundy, and the Homage of the King of Arragon,
the Homage of the Earl of Disders, and the Homage of the Earl of St. Giles in
which Lands and Dominions there were Five Archbishoprics, and thirty three
Bishoprics, but the Emperor never had them in his possession, nor would the
people ever Receive a Governor from him.

The King sent into England Ibid. n. 20.30. Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury
made Chief Justice of England.
for his Mother Queen Alienor, and for Walter Archbishop of Roven, and many
others to come to him into Germany, and made Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury
Chief Justice of England, and wrote over that the Day appointed for his
Delivery and Freedom, was the first Monday, after twenty Days after Christmas
Day.

Before the Agreement was Ibid. f. 417. a. lin. 1. etc. Earl John swears Fealty
to King Richard.
Confirmed between the Emperor and King Richard, he sent William Bishop of Ely
his Chancellor, and others into France to his Brother Earl John, and so
effectually Normandy and swore Fealty to the King his Brother against all men,
and the King commanded that all the Castles belonging to the Honors he had
given him, should be Delivered to him, as well in England as beyond Sea. But
those who had them in Custody would not deliver them upon the Writ. Whereupon
in Anger he went back to the King of France, and staid with him and he gave him
the Castles of Driencourt, now Dancourt, and Arches, which should have been
delivered to William Archbishop Remes.

King Richard was to Ibid. n. 20.30. A. D. 1194.
remain at Spire until the time of his delivery, and to that City came the
Emperor with the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, and Great Men of his Empire; and
when they had Treated a long time about the Freedom of the King of England,
Thither came Envoys from the King of France and Earl John, The King of France
and Earl John offer the Emperor 1000 a month to keep King Richard prisoner.
and offered from the King 50000 Marks to the Emperor, and from the Michaelmass
following, or if the Emperor had rather, they would give him a thousand Pounds
a Month so long as he should keep him Prisoner; or if, it pleased him better,
the King of France would give him 100000 Marks and Earl John 50000 to deliver
him Prisoner into their hands, or at least that he would keep him one year; The
Emperor prevailed upon to differ his Release.
upon these Offers the Emperor put off the Day of his Liberty, and ordered it
to be upon the Purification of St. Mary at Ments.

At that Day and place Ibid. b. n. 30.40.
Henry Emperor of the Romans with the Great Men of his Empire, and Richard King
of England, with his Mother Queen Alienor, and Walter Archbishop of Roven,
William Bishop of Ely his Chancellor, and Savaric Bishop of Bath met and held a
Council about the Liberty of the King of England. The Emperor out of
Covetousness tempted with the money the King of France and Earl John offered,
would have gone from his Agreement, Messengers, amongst which, The King of
France and Earl John's letters given to King Richard to read.
was Robert Nunant Brother to Hugh Bishop of Coventry, he gave the King of
France and Earl John's Letters, which they wrote against his Liberty, to the
King of England to read, at which he was much troubled and confounded
dispairing of his Freedom. He by his Friend and Counselor Sollicites the
Archbishops of Ments, Colon, and Saxeburgh (who this Archbishop was I find not,
unless Treves or Trier had ever that name) the Bishops of Worms, Spire, and
Liege. The Dukes of Suavia the Emperors Brother, of Austria, and Lovain. The
Earl Palatin of the Rhene, and other Great Men of the Empire, who were
^idejussors or undertakers for the Emperor upon the Agreement between him and
the King of England, The Emperors Fidejussors rebuke him for his Covetousness.
who boldly went to him, and rebuked him for his Covetousness, and for that he
would so impudently run back from his Bargain (Qui ita impudenter a pacto suo
resilire volebat) and wrought so effectually with him, as he Freed the King
from his imprisonment Ibid. n. 50. He thereupon consents to King Richards
release.
he giving Walter Archbishop of Roven, Savaric Bishop of Bath, and Baldwin Wa^,
and many other sons of his Earls and Barons hostages, or Pleges for the Residue
of his Ransom Money unpaid, and that he should keep peace to the Emperor his
Empire and all his Dominions, and the Archbishops of Men^s, and Colon Delivered
him free into the Hands of his Mother Alienor, A. D. 1194. Robert Nunant
refuses to be plege for the King.
on the fourth of February. The King asked Robert Nunant to be a Plege for him,
he answered he was Earl John's Man or Vassal, and therefore would not be Plege
for him. Respondet Ibid. f. 418. a. lin. 4.
Quod esset homo Comitis Iohannis, and ideo noluit pro ipso obses Esse, for
which answer the King caused him to be taken, and imprisoned.

The same Day the Ibid. n. 10. The Emperor writes to Earl John to restore King
Richard all his rights and possession.
Emperor, the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes and Earls of the Empire, by their
common Writing to which they put their Seals, sent to the King of France and
Earl John, that presently King of England the Castles, City's, Fortresses,
Towns, Lands, and whatsoever they had taken from him while he was the Emperors
Prisoner, and if they did not, to let them know they would help him to recover
what he had lost. Ibid. n. 20.30. King Richards generosity to the German
Bishops, and Nobility.
Hereupon, King Richard, by his Charts granted to several Archbishops, Bishops,
Dukes, Earls, and Barons, and others of the Empire annual Rents or stipends,
for their Homages, Fealty's, and aids or assistance against the French King,
and received the Homage of the Archbishops of Ments and Colon, of the Bishop of
Liege, the Dukes of Austria, and Lovain, the Marquess of Montferrat, the Duke
of Lemburgh and the Duke of Swavia the Emperors Brother, of the Earl Palatin of
the Rhene, the Son of the Earl of Haynault, of the Earl of Holland and many
others, saving their Fealty to the Emperor, He is conducted to Antwerp and from
thence came to Sandwich.
who gave the King a safe conduct or Passport to Antwerp, where he was under
the protection of the Duke of Lovain; from thence he came to England and landed
at Sandwich on the 13th March.

Not long before the Kings Ibid. n. 40.50.
Arrival, one Adam of St. Edmund, a Clerc and servant to Earl John was sent by
him into England, with Letters and Directions, That his Castles should be
fortified against his Brother. He came to London and went to the Palace of
Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, and dined with him, where he Boasted much of
the prosperity of his Master, The Insolence of one of Earl John's Servants.
and the intimacy he King of France, telling that he had given him the Castles
of Driencurt and Arches, which should have been given to the Archbishop of
Rhemes, and talked at a great Rate what his Lord could do if he had but
Faithful Men. His Bragging discourse much exasperated the Archbishop and all
that heard him, He is apprehended, and Earl John's designs are discovered.
but for the Deference to the Table he was not apprehended; But after Dinner in
his Major of London took him, and all his Briefs or Commissions, which
contained all Earls John's design, and delivered them to the Archbishop of
Canturbury, Ibid. b. lin. 4.5.6.7.
who on the Morrow called before him the Bishops, Earls, and Barons of the
Kingdom, and showed them those Letters, and declared the Tenor of them, and
presently it was Determined by the Common Council of the Kingdom, Earl John
disseized of all his Tenements in England.
That Earl John should be disseized of all his Tenements in England, and that
his Castles should be besieged, and statim per Commune Consilium Regni
Definitum est, Quod Comes Johannes Dissaisiretur de omnibus Tenementis suis in
Anglia, and ut Castella sua obsiderentur, and factum est ita) and so it was
done.

The same Day Ib. b. n. 10. He, his Advisers, and Abettors Excommunicated.
Archbishop Hubert, the Bishops of Lincoln, London, Rochester, Winchester,
Worcester, and Hereford, and the Elect of Excester, and many Abbats and Clercs
of the Province of Canturbury, Anathematized Earl John, and all his Abetters
and Advisers, which had or should Disturb the Peace of King and Kingdom, unless
they laid down Arms and gave satisfaction.

All to whom the Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40, etc. His Castles and Towns in England
Besieged.
Reducing of his Castles was Committed went into the Countries in and near
where they were, and levied Forces. The Bishop of Durham, went into Yorkshire
and Northumberland, Tikehill, Earl David the King of Scots Brother, Ranulph
Earl of Chester, and the Earl Ferrers Besieged Notingham, and the Archbishop
of Canturbury with a great Army Besieged Merleburgh, Lancaster, and St.
Michaels Mount in Cornwall. The three last Castles were Rendered presently,
Ibid. and f. 419. a. n. 10, 20
the two former not until the Kings Return, for the Constables and Defendants,
would not believe the King was in England, until they sent out some of their
own Company, to see whether And Surrendered to the King.
and assuring them it was so, they delivered the Castles, and put themselves in
the Kings Mercy for Life and Limbs, and terrene honor. Ibid. lin. 18.
Notingham Castle was delivered on the twenty eighth day of March.

And on the Ibid. n. 20.30. A. D. 1194. King Richard Held a great Council at
Notingham. Who were the Constituent parts of it.
Thirtieth Day of March King Richard held the first day of his Council at
Notingham, (Tricesima Die Mensis Martii Richardus Rex Angliae celebravit primum
Concilii sui Diem apud where were present Alienor the Queen Mother, Hubert
Archbishop of Canturbury who sat on the right hand of the King, Geofry
Archbishop of York who sat on the left hand, Hugh Bishop of Durham, Hugh
Bishop of Lincoln, William Bishop of Ely the Kings Chancellor, William Bishop
of Hereford, Henry Bishop of Worcester, Henry Bishop of Excester, and John
Bishop of Whithern in Scotland. Earl David the King of Sco^s Brother, Hamelin
Earl of Warren, Ranulph Earl of Chester, William Earl Earl of Salisbury, and
Roger Bigod.

The same day the King disseised Ibidem Gerard de Canvil, and Hugh Bardolph
disseized of their Castles and Sherifwic's.
Gerard de Canvil, of the Castle and Sherefwic of Lincoln (eodem die Rex
dissaisivit Girardum de Canvilla de Castello and Vicecomitatu Lincolniensi) and
Hugh Bardolph of the Sherifwic of Yorkshire and the Castles of York and
Scarburgh, and the Custody of Westmerland, and exposed them all to Sale. The
Chancellor offered ready money down, for the Ibidem. Geofry Archbishop of York
out bids the Chancellor for their Sherifwic's.
Sherifwics of Yorkshire, and Northamptonshire 1500 marks, and an hundred marks
every year for each of them. Ibid. n. 40.
Geofry the Archbishop, bad three thousand marks for the Sherifwic of Yorkshire
only, and 100 marks by the year, and obtained it, by which means he was ma^d
^he Kings Servant, and subjected himself to his power.

The second day of the Council.
The Thirty first day of March, was the Second day of the Kings Council,
(Tricessima aie Martii Rex Angliae celebravit secundum diem Concilii sui,
Ibidem. The King demands Judgment against Earl John, and Hugh Nunant Bishop of
Coventry.
) in which he required Judgment to be given of Earl John his Brother, who
contrary to the Fealty he had Sworn to him, had seized his Castles, Destroyed
his Dominions as well in England as beyond Sea, and had made a League with his
Enemy the King of France. He also demanded Judgment of Hugh Nunant Bishop of
Coventry, who Conscious of his secrets, Deserted him, and adhered to his
Enemies Earl John and the King of France, and contrived all the mischief he
could against his Government or Kingdom. And it was Ibid. n. 50. The Council
gives Judgment against both.
adjudged They should be peremptorily Cited; and if within forty days they
appeared not, nor stood to the Law, They judged Earl John had forfeited the
Kingdom (That is, he ought not to return into the Kingdom) and That the Bishop
of Coventry was to be judged by the Bishops as he was a Bishop, and by Laymen
as he was the Iohanem Demeruisse Regnum, and Episcopum Conventrensem subjacere
Judicio Episcoporum, in eo quod ipse Episcopus erat, and Judicio Laicorum in eo
quod Vicecomes Regis extiterat.

On the first of April, the King held the Ibidem, b. lin. 1. The third day of
the Council.

An Aid ordained to be Levied.


third day of his Colloquium, in which he Ordained, there should be given him
of every Plough-land, of all England two-shillings (Kalendis Aprilis Rex
celebravit tertium diem Colloquii sui, in quo Constituit sibi Dari de unaquaque
carucata terra duos solidos) Ibid. l. 3.
Then he commanded every one should perform the third part of his Military
Service, according to what every fee would bear, and should go with him into
Normandy. After that he Ibid. l. 4.
required of the Cistertian Order all their Wool of that year: but because the
Demand was grievous and importable, they made a pecuniary fine or Composition.

The Second day of April was the Ibid. l. 6. The fourth day of the Council.
fourth and last day of his Council. (Secunda die mensis Aprilis celebravit
diem quartum and ultimum Concilii sui) in which many Clercs, and Laics
Complained of the Rapin and unjust Exactions of the Archbishop of York, but he
gave them no Answer. Gerard de Camvil accused for Harboring Thieves,
Then by the advice of the Chancellor (as it was said) Gerard de Camvill was
acused for receiving Thieves, who had robbed the They called Merchants then
such as our ordinary Tradesmen are now that keep Fairs and Markets, especially
the better sort of them.
Merchants going to Stanford Fair. That they came from him when and appealed of
Treason.
because he would not appear upon the Summons of the Kings Justice, nor stand
to the Law concerning the receiving of the Robbers, nor would bring them to
Justice. (Praeterea appellaverunt eum Ibid. n. 10. His Answer to his Accusation.
de Laesione Regiae Majestatis, in eo quod ipse advocationem Justitiarum Regis
venire noluit, nec Juri stare, etc.) His Answer was, he was Earl John's Man, or
Feudatarie Vassal, and would stand to the Law in his Court. (Respondet se esse
hominem Comitis Iohanis and velle in Curia sua Juri stare) he was also accused
that he was with Force in the assistance of Earl John and other the Kings
Enemies when the Castles of Notingham were surprised. Gerard denied all things,
and his accusers gave security of Prosecuting, and he of Defending himself, by
one of his Freemen.

On the same day the King Ibid. n. 20.
declared the day of his second Coronation Easter Day was this year on the
tenth of April.

What the King of Scots Demands of King Richard were


Easter at Winchester, and on that day went to Chipston in the same County to
meet William King of Scots, who as they Journyed together toward Winchester,
Demanded of the King the Dignities and Honors his Predecessors had in England,
and also Demanded the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, and
Lancaster to be restored to him, as the right of his Predecessors. The King
Ibid. n. 30. King Richards Answer.
answered him he would satisfy him by advice of his Earls and Barons. They
staid at Northampton on the tenth and eleventh of April, where the King having
deliberated and advised with his Bishops, Earls, and Barons; (Rex habito cum
Episcopis and Comitibus and Baronibus suis cum Deliberatione Consilio Respondet
etc.) gave him this Answer, That as to his Demand of Northumberland, he ought
not then to have made it, when all the Princes of France were become his
Enemies, for if he granted it, it would seem he did it out of fear, and not out
of Affection.

Yet the King Ibid. n. 40.50. His Grant to the King of Scots.
then by his Chart granted to him and his Heirs for ever in the presence of the
Queen Mother, Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, Hugh Bishop of Durham, Iocelin
Bishop of Glasco, and many other Clercs and Laics of both Kingdoms. That when
ever they were summoned to the King of Englands Court, The Bishop of Durham and
Sherif of Northumberland should receive him at the River Twede, and bring him
to the River Tese, and there the Archbishop of York, and Sherif of Yorkshire,
should receive and conduct him to the Borders of that County, and so the
Bishops of the Diocese and Sherifs should Conduct him from County to County,
until he came to the Kings Court. And from the Time he Entered England, he was
to receive every day of the Kings Purse an hundred Shillings (de Liberatione)
of allowance or Livery,; and after he came to the King, and so long as he staid
there, he was to have every day, (de Liberatione) of Allowance thirty
Shillings, and twelve of the Kings fine Loaves or Cakes, (duodecim Wastellos
and twelve of the Kings Biscuits, or Simnel Loaves, made of fine Wheat flower
and twice baked, duodecim Simenellos Dominicos) and four Gallons of the Kings
Wine, and eight Gallons of Ordinary Wine; and two pounds of Pepper, and two
pounds of Cumin; and two Cakes of Wax weighing each eight or twelve pounds,
(and duas petras de Cera,) and four wax Candels, and forty great long Candels
of the Kings Candels, (and quadraginta longos grossos Colpones de Candela
Dominica Regis) and fourscore Ordinary Candels, Twede; and to be allowed an
hundred shillings a day. This Charter was Ibid. f. 4^ a. n. 10.
Delivered to William King of Scots at the Town of Northampton on the 12th of
April 1194. being Easter Tuesday, by the hands of William Bishop of Ely the
Kings Chancellor: Ibid. n. 30. Godfrey Bishop of Winton disseised.
On the 15th the King came to Winchester, and Disseised Godfrey the Bishop of
the Castle and County of Winton, and the two Manners he had bought of him before
his Expedition to Jerusalem, and the greatest part of his Patrimony.

After the Coronation Ibid. b. n. 20.
on the 19th of this month Hugh Bishop of Durham on his own Accord would have
Delivered to the King the County of Northumberland, with the Castles and other
Appurtenances. The King ordered him to deliver them to Hugh Bardolf. The King
of Scots offered 15000 Marks for them, saying his Father Malcolm held them of
the Gift of King Henry the Second, he might have had the County without the
Castles for that money, but refused it.

The Prisoners Ibid. n. 30. The Prisoners taken in Earl John's Castle were some
imprisoned, and others gave security.
that were taken in Earl John's Castles were brought to Winchester, where the
King caused the better sort of them to be Imprisoned, That they might compound
or be fined, and the others gave security every one in an hundred marks, for
Appearance upon Kings Court, and standing to Judgment there.

On the 24th of April Ibid. n. 40. An Agreement made between the Archbishop of
York and the Chancellor.
the King made Peace and final Concord between the Archbishop of York, and the
Bishop of Ely his Chancellor, concerning all Controversies had happened between
them, as well about the Archbishops Imprisonment at Dover, as the Chancellors
being forced out of England, so as he when he was called to it by the
Archbishop should Swear with an hundred Priests his Compurgators (cum That he
neither Commanded nor desired he should be imprisoned.

That day Ibid. n. 50. and f. 421. a. n. 10. The King and his Mother pass over
to France. He raises the Siege of Vernuil, and repairs its breaches.
he and his Mother went to Portsmouth to pass beyond Sea, but Shipped not
themselves until the 12th of May, and with an hundred great Ships laden with
Warri^rs, Horses, and Arms, and landed at Barbfleet; The King of France had
besieged Verneuil Eighteen days, and when he heard of his Arrival, fled; the
King of England came thither and repaired and strengthened the Breaches and weak
places.

Earl John Ibid. n. 20. He and Earl John are made friends.
by the Mediation of his Mother came to his Brother, and they were made
friends, but the King would neither restore him to Castle or Lands.

Commissioners Ibid. b. n. 10, 20. The two Kings ravage and burn each others
Country.
on both sides were appointed and met, but could Truce: So as afterward the two
Kings destroyed one another Countries with Rapin and Burning more then before.
The King of France came to Eureux and totally destroyed and pulled down that
City with the Churches, not sparing Age or Sex, and carrying away the Relics
of the Saints. And this he did because the Citizens had left him, and returned
to the Faith and Service of their Lord the King of England. From thence he
marched with his Army to Freteval, and the King of England that he might be
near him, and attend his Motions came to V^ndosme. He had been there but one
night, when the King of France next morning sent him word, that day he would
visit him with his Army: The King of England Joyful to hear the News, told the
Messenger he would expect him, and if he did not, That next morning he would
visit him with his Army. The King of France was not so good as his word;
Therefore next morning early, the King of England marched toward him, he having
notice of it, fled with his Army in such haste, as many of it were killed and
taken, all the Paris, fol. 176. n. 50. Hoved. ^. 421. b. n. 40. The King of
France flees, and leaves his Camp a prey to the English.
Wagons and Baggage fell into the Hands of the English, and much Treasure; the
Kings portable Chapel was there taken, and the Charts of all the Men or
Vassals of the King of England, by which they gave themselves up to the service
of the King of France and Earl John, against him, (and Chartae universorum
Hominum Regis Angliae, qui se dederant Regi Franciae, and Comiti Iohanni,
contra eum.) He persued the King of France, but not finding him, returned to
Vendosm with great Booty of Men and Horses, and very much Money. (Rediit
Vendomiam cum praeda magna hominum, and Equorum, and pecunia Magna.) Ibid. n.
50. and f. 422. a. lin. 1.2.3. King Richard persues his victory with succ^ss.
From thence he went into Poictou, and subdued Geofrey de Ran^une, Vicecomes of
Engolesm, who had declared for the King of France and Earl John.

Upon this success followed a Ibid. 9.10* 20. A Truce made for one year.
Truce for one year, agreed on by Comissioners on both sides, Dated the 23d of
July 1194. The particulars are long and tedious, and not much to our purpose
now. They are to be found in Hoveden, f. 422. a. b* When the Hoved. f. 423. a.
n. 10. Hugh Bardolphs Demands of the Bishop of Durham.
King was beyond Sea, Hugh Bardolf demanded the County of Northumberland,
Newcastle upon Tine, and the Castle of Bamburgh of the Bishop of Durham, which
he had promised the King to deliver; he delayed to do it while a Messenger he
had sent to the King returned, by whom he offered him 2000 Marks for the County
and those Castles. The Messenger brought Letters to Hugh Bardolf, that if the
Bishop gave security for the 2000 Marks he should deliver him, the County and
Castles. When he had the Kings Letters, he told the Bishop if he would have him
execute the Kings Command, he was to Deliver him the County and Castles First,
and then he would redeliver Bishop replied there was no need of that, because
he had them in his possession. Hugh Bardolf sent the King his Answer, upon
which he commanded the Bishop should be disseized of the County and Castles,
and that he should pay the 2000 Marks; he also in his fury commanded he should
be Disseized of the Manner of Sadbergh, with the Knights Fees and Wapentach,
which he had by his Chart granted to the Church of Durham in pure Alms, (and
factum est ita) and so it was done.

About this Time, Ibid. n. 20.30. The Canons of York their Complaint against
their Archbishop.
The Canons of York complained to Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, the Kings
Justiciary, of several Injuries they had received from their Archbishop; he by
the Royal Authority which he received sent to York Earl Roger Bigod, William de
Warenna, William de Stutevilla, Hugh Bardolf, William Bruer, Geofrey Haget, and
William Fitz-Richard a Clerc, to hear and determine according to right the
Controversy between them. Commissioners sent by Hubert to determine the
Controversy.
They heard the Accusations and the Bishops Answer, and Answers of such Men
that were accused of Robbery to be imprisoned, and although he warranted what
they had done, he could not Bail them, praeceperunt homines Archiepiscopi qui
calumniati fuerant de robberia capi and incarcerari; The Archbishop disseized
of his Manners, and the Canons are restored.
and quamvis Archiepiscopus opera eorum warrantizaret, non tamen potuit eos
plegiare. Then they summoned him to come and hear Judgment, and because he
would not, they Disseized him of all his Manners Except R^pon where he was then
withdrawn, and caused the Canons to be placed again in their Stalls, of which
he had disseized them, and at their Departure put the Archbishop, and Sherifwic
of Yorkshire under the Custody of William Stutevil and Geofrey Haget.

Itinerant Justices so it through England.
In September the King sent Itinerant or Errant Justices through every County of
England: The form of proceeding then used in Pleas of the Crown, and the
Articles or Heads of such Pleas are to Append. n. 77.
Appendix, where they are translated, for the advantage of such as might not
otherwise clearly understand them, who desire to know the Difference between
the Ancient and Modern Pleas of the Crown, and the Institution of Itinerant or
Circuit Justices.

At the same time the King Hoved. f. 424. a. n. 20.30* 40. Articles concerning
the Jews given to the Itinerant Justices.
Directed several Articles to the Justices Itinerant about the Jews. That all
their Debts and Pawns Jew concealed any of these matters, he should forfeit his
Body (that is, should be imprisoned) and the Concealment (That is, what they
had concealed) and all their Possessions and Goods: Nor should it be lawful for
any Jew to recover the concealment; That is, to have it restored. That six or
seven places should be allowed where the Jews should lend their Money, and take
Pawns, and there should be two Legal Christians, and two Legal Jews, and two
Legal Scribes appointed, before whom These in all probability were the Justices
of the Jews: for in those ancient times they had particular Justices assigned
them by the King.
William of St. Mary's Church, and William de Chimelli, the Money lent upon the
Pawns, and the Pawns taken should be transacted, and that the Charts of the
Money lent and Pawns taken should be in form of a Chirograph, and one part
should remain with the Jew, sealed with his Seal that Borrowed the Money, and
the other part to remain in a Common Chest, to which there were three Locks, of
which two Christians were to have one Key, and two Jews another, and the Clercs
of William of St. Mary's Church, and William de Chimelli, the Third, and
besides those Locks, three Seals were to be affixed by those that kept the
Keys, and that the Clercs of William, and William should have a Transcript; and
as the Charts were changed, the Roll was to be changed. For every Charter three
pence was to be paid, half from the Jew, and half from him that Borrowed the
Money; of which the Scribes were to have two pence, and the Keeper of the Roll
one penny, and for the future no security should be given, or Pawns taken, nor
no payment made to the Jews, nor no changing of Charts, but before the
Christians should have one Roll of the Payment of the Jews to them for the
future, and that the two Jews should have one, and the Keeper of the Rolls one.
Also every Jew was to swear upon his Roll, (he did not believe the Gospels)
That he would cause all his Debts, Pawns, and Rents, and all his things and
possessions to be Inventoried; and that he would conceal nothing, and if he
knew any thing another man concealed, he would reveal it to the Justices sent
about that Affair; made, by occasion of the Seisin made of the Lands of Earl
John, and his Favorers, who received them, and what; and the Delay they
received by the Archbishop of Canturbury, then Iusticiary of the King.

King Hoved. f. 424. a. n. 50. The King forces his Officers to a Composition.
all this while was in France, and having finished his Business in Poictou
according to his desire, returned into Anjou, and forced all his Officers to a
Composition; and did the like in Main; and from Ibid. b. lin. 1.2.3. etc. The
Seal taken away from the Chancellor, and a new one made.
thence coming into Normandy, took it ill, whatever had been done in the late
Truce; and imputing it to the ill Management of his Chancellor, took his Seal
from him, and made a new one, and sent into, or caused it to be published in
all his Dominions, That nothing should be firm or of force, that had been
sealed with his old Seal.

The King then Ibid n. 10.
ordered there should be Torneaments, that is, Tiltings, and Feats of Arms,
shown in These Hasti^udes or Tiltings were brought out of France, and probably
before this time, but seldom if at all used in England.

What was paid for License of Tilting.

And to whom it was paid.


England; and by his Chart confirmed it: So as every one that would Tilt or
show Feats of Arms, should pay according to the following Rates; An Earl for
Licen^e of Tilting Twenty Marks of Silver, Barons Ten Marks of Silver, every
The Chart of this Grant, the King gave to William Earl of Salisbury to keep;
and Hubert Walter the Kings Chief Justice, appointed Theobald Walter his
Brother Collector of this Money.

Ibid. f. 425. a. n. 40. The Archbishop of York is reconciled to the King.
The Archbishop of York went into Normandy to his Brother, and was reconciled
to him for 2000 Marks. Ibid. f. 428. a. n. 20. A. D. 119^. Earl John is
pardoned by the King, and is restored to his Honors and Possessions.
And also pardoned Brother John, and restored him the Earldom of Moreton, the
Honor of Ey, and Earldom of Gloucester, with every thing belonging to them,
except the Castles; and in lieu of his other Earldoms and Lands, he allowed him
8000 l. of That is, ^000 l. Sterling. Hugh Bishop of Coventry is pardoned.
An^ou Money. The same year he pardoned Hugh Bishop of Coventry, Ibid. n. 30.
And restored to his Bishopric for a Sum of Money.
and restored his Bishopric for 5000 Marks of Silver: And that year Hubert
Archbishop of Canturbury at the Kings Request was made the Ib. b* n. 40. ^he
Archbishop Hubert made the Popes Legate.
Popes Legate of all England.

The next year there happened a Dissension amongst the Ibid. f. 135. b. n. 2.
Citi^ens of London about an Aid imposed upon them. f. 181. n. 20 A. D. 1196. A
Dissension among the Citizens of London about paying an Aid or Tallage.
Matthew Paris says it was a Tallage exacted of them by the Officers of the
Kings Exchequer. The Rich and best Citizens to spare themselves, cast the whole
or the greatest part of it upon the ordinary People. A certain Lawyer called
William with the Beard, the Son of Os^ert, became the Advocate of the ordinary
People, and would have had the Tallage paid equally, according to the Estates
and Abilities of King, and obtained of him that the ordinary People should be
freed from it. Hubert the Archb^shop and Kings Justitiary was much moved at it;
and commanded that where any ordinary Citizens were found out of the City, they
should be taken as Enemies to the King and Kingdom. At Stanford Fair in Lent
some of the ordinary Tradesmen of London were taken by the Kings Justitiaries
Warrant; who also commanded That William with the Beard should be taken, and
brought before him. One Geofry a Citizen was sent to take him, whom he killed;
and when others would have taken him, he fled with some of his Company, and
shut themselves up in Bow- Church in Cheapside; and when they would not come
out, there was force used, yet they would not render themselves, but defended
the Steeple, where by Command of the Archbishop a Fire was made under them, and
so they were smoaked out; and William with the Beard was taken, and Tower, and
there judged to be Hanged; and was drawn through the City to the Gallows, and
there Hanged with eight of his Companions; and the other Citizens that were in
the same Tumult or Riot, cast themselves upon the Kings Mercy, and found
Sureties for the Peace.

The Archbishop as he thought Hoved. f. 436. b. n. 30. The Archbishop begs of
the King to ease him of the Secular Government, but was not granted.
was over-burthened with the Care of the Government of the Church and Kingdom,
and therefore made it his request to the King to ease him of the Secular
Government: He was very unwilling to do it, as knowing there was not one like
him for the Preservation of the Laws and Rights of the Kingdom or Government.
But he repented, and having looked into the Rolls of Accounts, he let the King
know, That the last two years only, he had out of the Kingdom of England,
procured to his use, Eleven More than five Millions Sterling now, according to
the price of things then. A. D. 1197.
Hundred Thousand Marks of Silver: and added, That if he thought his Service
necessary, and it was his pleasure he should still

In the year 1197. King Richard made an Assise of Measures, (Assisa De Ibid. f.
440 b. n. 10. One Assise of Measures and Weights appointed over England.
Mensuris facta per Richardum Regem Angliae.) He appointed one Measure
throughout all England for all sorts of Grain, as well in Cities and Boroughs,
as without. Also, That the Measures of Wine and Ale, and other Liquors, should
be the same all the Nation over, according to the Diversity of Liquors. And the
Weights to be the Keepers of the Assize made in Cities and Boroughs.
He also ordered there should be Four or Six; according to the largeness of the
City or Borough, assigned in every City or Burgh, who should see and search,
That all things were sold according to these appointed Measures and Weights:
And if they found any one that confessed, The Penalties inflicted upon
Transgressors of the Assise.
If the keepers of the Assise were negligent, and were convicted before the
Kings Justices, they were to be in the Kings Mercy concerning their Goods. And
he commanded, That no Man in any County after the Feast of Purification, should
sell any thing but by the Measure prescribed: Nor that any Man after the Fair
at Stanford in Mid-Lent should sell any Cloth that was not Two Yards

The year following King Richard desired of the Ibid. f. 441 b. n. 40. A. D.
1198.
Feudataries or Military Men of England, by Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury,
(Richardus Rex Angliae per Hubertum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum petiit, ut
Homines Regni Angliae invenirent ei, etc.) That they would find him 300 Horse
(trecentos milites) to remain in his service for one year, The Kings
Feudataries to find 300 Horse, or pay so much as would maintain them.
or that they would let him have so much money as would maintein so many
Knights and milites) and give them for their Livery or Wages (de Liberatione in
die) every day three shillings of English money. All present (not daring to
deny it) consented to the proposition, except Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, least for
the future it might do injury to his Church.

The same year the King took an Aid of Ibid. f. 442. b. n. 50. A. D. 1198. The
King takes an Aid of every Hyde in England. Who were appointed, and the Manner
how it was Collected.
five shillings of every Carucate or Hyde in England, Eodem Anno Richardus Rex
Angliae accepit de unaquaque Carucata terrae sive Hyda totius Angliae quinque
solidos de auxilio; and sent into every County, one Clerc and one Knight to
Collect it, They were Directed to the Sherif, which three, with certain legal
Knights chosen for that purpose, and Sworn faithfully to Execute the Kings
Business, caused to come before them the Stewards Barons of that County, and
the Lord of every Town, or the Baylif of the Town, and the Reeve with four
lawful men of the Town, whether Freemen or Rustics (sive liberis, sive
Rusticis) and two of the most legal Knights of the Hundred who did Swear, and
faithfully Discover how many Plough-Tilths there were in every Town, how many
in Demeasn, how many in Villanage, (Quot in Dominico, quot in Vilenagia) how
many the Religious held in Alms, and what Services they did for them. And upon
every Plough-Tilth two shillings, then three shillings, and enrolled them all;
whereof the Clerc had one Roll, the Knight another, the Sherif a third, and the
Barons Steward a fourth. The money was Received by two Knights, and the Baylif
of every Hundred, and they answered it to the Sherif, and he according to his
Roll answered it at the Exchequer before the Bishops, Abbats, and Barons,
assigned for that purpose.

Ibid. 443. a. n. 10. Penalties inflicted upon Concealers against their Oath.
punishment appointed for such as concealed any thing against their Oath was,
if he was a Rustic, That is a Villan (si Rusticus Convictus fuerit) he was to
give his Lord the best Ox in his plough, and pay as much of his own to the
Kings use, as by his Perjury he had Concealed. If a Free man was Convicted, he
was in the Kings Mercy, and was to answer as much of his own to the Kings use
as he had Concealed. It was also ordained that the Barons with the Sherif
should Distrein their Tenants, and if they did not, so much should Demeasnes,
as the Tenants were in Arrear. All free fees, That is Manners and Military fees
belonging to Parochial Churches, and Serjeanties, which were not settled upon
Knights Fees were excepted out of this Aid, What Fees were excepted out of this
Aid.
yet the names of the Sergeants and the value of their Lands were enrolled, and
they were Summoned to be at London 15 Days after Whitsunday to hear and do the
Kings Command. According to the Estimation of legal men, they which were to
give in the Number of Plough-Tilths, allowed to every one Hundred Acres. A. D.
1198.


The Monks of the holy Trinity in Canturbury not well pleased with some of
Archbishop Huberts Actions, Ibidem. n. 30. A complaint made to the Pope
against Archbishop Hubert by the Monks of Canturbury.
sent some of their Number to Rome and complained to Pope Innocent, That
contrary to his Order and Dignity he was Justiciarie of the Kingdom, and a
Judge in Causes of Blood, and so involved in Secular Business, That he could
not but neglect the affairs of the Church. Particularly they accused him, That
the Peace or Sanctuary of the Church of St. Mary del Arch, or Bow Church
London, was violated by his precept, and that William with the Beard was
violently taken out thence with nine of his Companions, adjudged to Death, and
tied to Horse Tails, Drawn to the Gallows and Hanged.

Upon this Complaint Ibid. n. 40. The Pope sends to the King to remove him from
Secular business.
the Pope sent a Paternal Admonition to Richard, That for the heal^h of his own
Soul, he should remove him from all Secular Business, and that for the future
he should neither admit him nor any other Bishop or Priest to any Worldly
employment or Administration, and Commanded all Prelates by virtue of their
Obedience they should not dare to undertake them. Ibidem. He is set aside.
And thus the Archbishop was set aside, and Geofry Fitz-Peter succeeded him in
the Government of the Kingdom.

They accused him also, Ibid. n. 50.
That in prejudice of the Mother Church of Canturbury he had built a Chapel at
Lambhithe, and placed secular Canons in it, and endowed them with their Rents
and Goods, and contrary to the Custom and Dignity of the Church of Can^urbury
had Consecrated Bishops in it, so as they feared, unless timely prevented, the
Dignity of the Mother Church would be Diminished, and transferred to that
Apostate Chapel, (ad Cappellam istam Apostatricem transferri videretur.) Ibid.
and b. n. 20, 40.
Pope Innocent much moved at this thirty days, after the Receipt of his Letters,
and let him know if he did not, he was thereby suspended from his Episcopal
Dignity and Function, until he should appear before him and make satisfaction.
His Letters Bare Date the 8th of May at Rome in the first year of his
Pontificate or Popeship. Coelestin Dyed on the eighth of January, and he was
chosen next Day by the Cardinals, being then a Deacon Cardinal, and Ibid. ^ol.
442. a. n. 10. Innocent made Pope at 30 years of Age.
Coelestinus Papa senio and gravi Morbo laborans obiit Romae, mense Januarii,
sexto Idus ejusdem mensis, feria sexta (Saturday) septimo Anno Papatus sui and
Laterani sepultus est; Crastino autem obitus illius Convenientes in unum
Cardinales Eligerunt in Summum Pontificem Lotharium Diaconum Cardinalem Juvenem
triginta annorum, vel paulo amplius; Qui vocatus est Papa Innocentius.

The Archbishop Ibid. f. 444. a. n. 10. The Archbishop seizes the Revenues of
the Monks, and the Oblations at Tho. Beckets Tomb.
thought himself so well Guarded by the Monks, and the Oblations made at Thomas
Beckets Tomb; and little valuing the Popes Commands, shut up the Monks in their
Cloisters. Yet at length by the advice of his friends he Demolished the Chapel
at his own Charge.

The Truce Ibid. n. 50. A. D. 1198. The Truce between the two Kings expired.
between the two Kings for the Time of Harvest being expired, they entered one
another Countries, wasting them with Fire and Sword, carrying many Prisoners
away on both sides. Ibid. b. l. 3. The King of France causes the eyes of the
English to be pulled out.
The King of France found a new way of Exercising his Cruelty upon the King of
Englands people, by pulling out their Eyes, which provoked him to do the like.

At this time Ib. lin. 6. Many Noble men desert him, and adhered to the King of
England.
The Duke of Lovain, the Earl of Brene, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, the Earls of
Ghisnes and Bologn, Geofry Earl of Perch, the Earls of St. Giles and Blois, and
Arthur Earl of Britany, left the King of France and adhered to the King of
England, Swearing to him, and he to them, That he would not make Peace with the
King of France unless by Common Advice.

The Earl Ibid. n. 10.
of Flanders Besieged St. Omars, and took it by Force, as also Air, and many
other Towns of the King of France.

In September, the two Kings Ibid. n. 10. The King of France put to Flight.
skirmished between the Castles of Gamache in Veuxin and Vernon, in which
Congress the King of France was put to flight, and lost twenty Knights, sixty
Esquires, and Castle of Vernon.

On the 27th of the same month Ibid. n. 20.30.40. He is again routed by King
Richard. He hardly escaped drowning.
King Richard took by Assault the Castle of Courcelles, between Gisors and
Dangu, and another small Castle called Burriz; on the 28th the King of France
Marched with a great army from Mant toward Curcel, which he thought had not
been taken; The King of England met and fought with him Castle and Gisors. The
French were routed, and their King fled to the Castle of Gisors. When he came
upon the Bridge, it was so laden with the Numbers that strove to enter the
Castle with him, That it Brake, and the King fell into the River Ept, and if he
had not suddenly been drawn out had been drowned. In this Engagement the King
of England with his own Lance overthrew three Knights Ibid. n. 50. and f. 445.
a.
Matthew Mountmorency, Alan de Rusci, and Fulk de Gilerval, and took them
Prisoners. Besides there were taken Ibid. n. 50. and f. 445. a.
hundred Knights: The names of above forty of them of greatest note the King
sent in a Letter, wherein he gives an Account of this Victory to the Bishop of
Durham: Also seven score horses covered with Iron, and many ordinary horse and
foot (septies viginti Equos ferro Coopertos, and servientes Equites, and
pedites Multos. During four years and somewhat more, from King Richards first
going over into France after his imprisonment, Several Treaties between the
Kings of England and France* prove ineffectual.
until the five year Truce made at the Treaty between Andely and Vernon; the
two Kings had harassed and destroyed each others Country with Fire and Sword,
many Treaties had been ineffectual, and the Truces that were made, were almost
as soon broken as Concluded. The first Treaty Ibid. f. 421. b. n. 10. A. D.
1194.
was about a Truce for three years at or near his first going over. And when
all things were agreed, The King of France would have all that had been of one
side or other, and were of the same Country or Dominion included, so as they
might not take Revenge or molest one another for acts of hostility or injuries
in the King Richard would not violate the Customs and Laws of Poictou, or his
other Dominions, in which it was from Antiquity Customary, for the Great Men to
Decide their Controversies one with another by their Swords. Impeditae Ibid. n.
20.
sunt Treugae quia Rex Angliae violare nolebat Consuetudines and leges
Pictaviae, vel aliarum Terrarum suarum, in Quibus Consuetum erat ab antiquo, ut
Magnates Causas proprias invicem Gladiis allegarent; and soon after happened
the Engagement near Vendosme and Freteval before related.

Next year they came to this Ibid. f. 431. a. n. 40. A. D. 1195. Lewis the King
of France his Son to Marry King Richards Neice.
Agreement, That Lewis Son and Heir of the King of France should Marry the
Sister of Arthur Duke of Britany Neice to the King of England, who was to
release to them and their Heirs Gisors, Neafle, Baudemont, and Vexin Norman,
also Vernon, Iveri, and Passi, and besides should give them 20000 King of
France was to Ibidem.
release all things he claimed in the Earldom of Engolesm, and was to restore
the Earldoms of Albemarle and Ou, the Castles of Arches, and many other Castles
he had taken in Normandy and his other Territories by War. But the perfecting
of this Agreement was deferred until the eighth of November, because the
Emperor Ibid. n. 50.
prohibited the King of England he should not make peace with the King of
France without his Advice and Consent. In this Treaty Alice Sister King Phillip
was delivered to him, and he presently married her to the Earl of Pontive.

The King of England Ibid. b. n. 10. The Emperor is against King Richards
concluding a Peace with France.
sent to the Emperor, William Bishop of Ely and others, and found him not
pleased with the Terms of the Peace; and rather then it should be perfected, he
offered to remit, 17000 Marks, of his Ransom which was unpaid, toward his
charge in recovering what was lost; yet King Richard kept his Day, and Ibid. n.
20. King Philip promises King Richard a meeting, but fails.
meeting the King of France near Verneuil. The Archbishop of Rhemes met him and
told him from the King of France, he ought to make so much have, for he was
then busy with his Council. The King of England believed him, and expected at
a place near by, while he would expect to hear of the King of France no longer,
and then went that he might speak with him. When Philip Bishop of Beavais
before him, told the King of England, that the King of France challenged him of
Breach of faith and Perjury,

Within Ibidem. The French enter Normandy, and ravage and burn Towns and Ships.
three Days the French entered Normandy, and made great Ravages there, they
burnt Diep and the Ships and Vessels in Port. King Philip rambling up and down
with his Army, came to Issoudun in Berry, took the Town and besieged the
Castle. The King of England hearing of it, made what have he could out of
Normandy, came thither and entered the Castle, where a great many armed men
flocked to him. Ibid. n. 30.40. They desire a Treaty, which was granted, and a
Peace concluded.
The King of France liked not his Station, and desired he might march away
without any interruption to his Army, which being denied, he desired a Treaty,
which was granted. This was on or about the Ibid. n. 30.40. They desire a
Treaty, which was granted, and a Peace concluded.
Sixth of December, and by the Mediation of the Archbishops and Bishops on both
sides there present, it was sworn on both parts, That there should Men or
Vassals, and their Dominions, (inter se, homines suos, and terras suas) until
the Feast of St. Hilary next coming, and that then they should meet at Loviers,
to make final Peace and Concord (ad pacem and finalem concordiam faciendam)
before a greater Audience or Convention of their people.

After the Ibid. f. 435. a. n. 10. A. D. 1196. The Articles of the Peace.
Feast of St. Hilary, or on the 14th of January, they met at Loviers, where by
advice of their Men, or Great Feudataries, (ubi inter eos Concilio Hominum
suorum) They agreed, That the King of France and his Heirs, should Quiet-Claim
or Release to the King of England and his Heirs, Issoudun with its
Appertinencies, and all the Right he had in Berry, Avergn, and Gascony; and
That Arches, the Earldoms of Albemarle and Ou, and the other Castles he had
taken by War. Ibid. n. 10.
The King of England for this was to Quiet-Claim or Release to the King of
France Gisors Castle, and all Veuxin Norman: And for the Performance of this
Peace, they were bound to each other in 15000 Marks of Silver, and found
Sureties one to another for that Sum.

The King of France Repented him of this Agreement, and Levied Ibid. n. 40.50.
The King of France breaks the Peace made between him and King Richard.
and besieged Albemarle; he took the Castle and demolished it, and received of
the King of England 3000 Marks for the Ransom of his Knights and Esquires
there taken: For which the King of England caused the Goods and Possessions of
the Abbats of the great Monastery of Clugni, St. Denis, and la Charity, in all
places of his Dominions to be seized, as being Sureties to him for the 15000
Marks. Ibid. b. lin. 1.
Afterward the King of France took Nonan Court, and John Earl of Moreton the
Kings Brother took the Castle Gamache.

Andeli sur Seine, or the Isle of Andeli sur Seine belonging to the Archbishop
of Roven, was a Ibid. f. 437. a. n. 10. A. D. 1196.
notable pass, or Inlet into Normandy, through which the King of France used
often to take his way over the Seine, to waste and harass that Country. The
King of England to hinder his getting over the River that way, and for the
safety of his People, built a Castle in it, contrary to the mind, The sentence
of Interdict pronounced against Normandy.
Archbishop; and because he would not desist upon his prohibition, he
pronounced the sentence of Interdict against Normandy, and went to the Pope.

There happened the same year a Ibid. and n. 20. A Skirmish between the
Domestic Servants of both Kings.
Skirmish between the Domestic Servants of each King, Hugh de Chaumout, a stout
Rich Knight, and Favorite of the King of France, was taken, and delivered to
the King of England, and delivered him to Robert de Ros to be William de
Espinai to be kept in the Castle of Bon-Ville upon Took. In the night by his
consent and permission he made his escape. The King angry at it, imprisoned
Robert de Ros, and caused him to pay a Composition of 1200 Marks for his
Liberty, and William de Espinai a Traitor to his Master was Hanged upon a
Gallows.

On the 19th of May, Ibid. n. 40. A. D. 1196. Earl John defeats Philip Bishop
of Beavais.
John Earl of Moreton and Marchades, Brabanters, with a good Body of Horse
appeared before the City of Beavais: When they came to plunder and waste that
Country, Philip the Bishop and William de Merlou with his Son, and many
Knights, and ordinary People went out armed to oppose them: They were presently
routed, the Bishop, William de Merlou his Son and some Knights were taken, and
most part of the ordinary People were killed. The same day they marched to
Milli, a Castle belonging to the Bishop, and took it by assault, and demolished
it; and so returned in Triumph into Normandy, and delivered their Prisoners to
the King.

The Bodies of the Dead lay Ibid. n 50. A. D. 1197.
unburied in the Streets of the Cities of Normandy; and the King being mightily
Troubled, the Archbishop would not Release the Interdict, Ibid b. lin. 2. and
n. 10. King Richard sends Messengers to the Pope to make his defense.
sent the Bishop of Lisieux and Philip the Elect of Durham after Christmas to
the Pope, Archbishop, He asserted his Right he had in Andeli, and complained of
the Injury King Richard had done by Building a Castle upon the Patrimony of the
Church of Roven without his assent, and contrary to his pleasure. To which they
answered, Ibid. n. 10.^0. Their Plea in the Kings beha^f.
The King had often offered him by the Mediation of his Bishops and Abbats,
Earls and Barons, full satisfaction by the Estimation of discreet understanding
Men; and did affirm on behalf of the King, he could Island of Andeli in which
the Castle was built, because the King of France made his passage that way into
Normandy, and often wasted it; and therefore the King of England fortified it
for the Defense of his Country against the King of France. N. 20.30. The Popes
advice to the Archbishop of Roven.
The Pope and Cardinals after long Deliberation, attending the Damages which
might accrue to Normandy, if there were not a Castle built there, Advised the
Archbishop amicably to compose the Matter, and to accept Recompense according
to the Estimation of (Secundum proborum and sapientum virorum Aestimationem)
Saying, It was lawful for Kings and Princes to fortify the weak places of
their Countries to avoid Damage to themselves and People. The Interdict
released.
This done, the Pope Released the Interdict.

The Messengers and Archbishop being Returned with the Determination of the
Pope and Cardinals, Ibid. n. 40. What the King gave the Archbishop for a
recompense.
the King summoned the Bishops, Abbats, Earls and Barons of Normandy together,
and gave to Walter Archbishop of Roven in Recompense of his Town of Andeli, the
Town of Deipe with its Appertenencies, the Mills of Robec in the City of Roven,
and Loviers with its Appertenencies, and much more according to the Kings Chart
and the Popes Confirmation in Col. 701. n. 40. and Col. 702.
Ralph de D^ceto; by which exchange the Archbishop confesses the Church got
above Five Ibid. Col. 700. n. 30.
hundred Pounds.

The same year Hoved. f. 437. b. n. 50. A. D. 1197. He plundered and burnt St.
Valeri.
Richard came to St. Valeri, and burnt the Normandy the Shrine and Relics of
St. Valerie; in that Port he found Ships from England laden with Grain and
Victuals, he hanged the Mariners, burnt the Ships, and distributed the Corn and
Victuals amongst his Soldiers.

Then came into King Richard Ibid. f. 438. a. lin. 2. Several People
Confederate with King Richard against King Philip.
the People of Champaign, the Flemings, and Britans, they gave Pledges mutually
they would King of France, but by common advice. The King of England Bribed
with Gifts many of the Great Men of France; he gave to the Ibid. n. 10.
Earl of Flanders 5000 Marks for his assistance, and he gave Hostages, he
should not make Peace with the King of France without his consent; and the same
the King of England did to him. Ibid n. 20.30.
The King of France made him great Offers to leave the King; but not being able
to effect it, he again Capitulated with the King of England.

The Sons of Ibidem. Hubert composes the Differences between the Welsh Princes.
King Rese the Son of Gr^ffin, contended after the Death of their Father who
should Reign; Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury Wales and made them Friends.

Philip Bishop of Beavais Ibid n 50. The Bishop of Beavals his complaint to the
Pope against King Richard.
sent his Brother the Bishop of Orleans with his Epistle to the Pope, informing
him he was made Prisoner by the King of England; and complaining how he was
bound and laden with Irons, notwithstanding the Dignity of his Order; and, as
he says, petitioned him with Tears for Relief.

Pope Ibid. b. n. 20. etc. The Popes Answer.
writes back to him, That he had put on a Soldiers Armor in stead of a Priests
Habit and Vestments: That the King of France was bound by Oath not to do any
Damage to the King of England's Towns and Countries, during the Time of his
Peregrination; and That he had impudently against his Faith and Oath, by force
seized his Towns, and cruelly wasted his Countries: That Humility against
Pride, Right and Equity against Wrong and Injury, and Modesty against
Arrogance, fought for the King of England: That he was not only a foolish
Adviser England in his behalf, for in such a case he neither could nor ought to
Command.

But whether the Pope wrote in his behalf, or notwithstanding what he wrote, he
remained in Prison, and toward the latter end of the year 1198, offered King
Richard for his Ibid. f. 449. a. lin. 4.
Liberty 10000 Marks of Silver.

Kings made a Truce again for one year from the Feast of St. Hilary, Ibid. f.
439. a. n. 10. A. D. 1198. And presently broken.
designing to make Peace, A Truce made between the two Kings.
and final Concord between themselves. But in September following this Truce
was broken, as has been said in the Relation of the Skirmish between Gamache
and Vernon, and the Battle between Curcels and Gisors; yet in November that
Ibid. f. 446. b. n. 40.
year they made Truce again, until the Feast of St. Hilary: from this time to
the Death of Richard all Hostility ceased between the two Kings.

These are some of the Battles, Skirmishes and Engagements, and the most
notorious, that were fought and happened between King Richard and King Philip
in France; some of the Truces that were as soon broken as made; some of the
Barbarous Devastations and Plunderings; some of the Inhumane Killings, and
Leadings into Captivity, committed and practiced there, during those last five
years King Richard was in that Kingdom, from the middle of May 1194, to the 6th
of April 1199, the time of his Death. Let us now take England.

In the year 1198. Geofrey Fitz-Peter, A. D. 1198.
the new Justitiary of England, sent forth Ibid. f. 445. b. lin. 7. Itinerant
Justic^s sent forth by the Chief Justic^y.
Itinerant Justices; and Hugh Bardulf, Mr. Roger Arundel, and Geofrey Haget,
had committed to them, and journeyed through Lincoln, Nottingham, Derby, York,
and Lancashires, Westmerland, Cumberland, and Northumberland, and held Pleas of
the Crown and Forest. The Articles of Heads whereof see in the Append. N.
Appendix with their English version.

There was a Controversy Depending between the Bishop of Durham, A
Controversy between the Bishop of Durham, and Robert Turnham.
and Robert de Turnham for the Manner of Clif, which was Tried before these
Justices. At the Ibidem. n. 50.
Request of Robert de Turnham the Bishop granted him he should have a
Recognition or Verdict of 12 Lawful men of the Neighborhood of Clif,
(Philippus Episcopus ad petitionem Roberti de Turnham concessit ei coram Rege
Recognitionem Duodecim Legalium hominum, de visneto de Clif) who had the
greater right in that Manner of Clif, That is to say, whether he Robert ought to
hold that Manner of the Bishop, and thereof to be his Man or Vassal, (and inde
Homo suus esse) or the Bishop ought to have it Demeasn. The Twelve men
recognized or gave in their Verdict upon Oath, The Jury give in their Verdict
for Robert de Turnham.
That that Manner was the haereditary right of the Wife of the foresaid Robert,
the Daughter of William Fossard, Bishop lost that Manner of Clif, which his
Predecessors had peaceably enjoyed a long time, (multo tempore) Ibid. f. 447.
a. l. 1.
These things were done before Hugh Bardulf, Mr. Roger Arundel, and Geofry
Haget at that time Justices of the Pleas of the Crown at York.

The religious this Ibid. f. 446. a. n. 50. A. D. 1198.
same year gave the King five shillings of every Plough-Tilth, as the other men
of the Kingdom had done.

The King this year Commanded all men as well Clercs as Laics, That had any
Charts or Confirmations of Charts, under his old Seal, should carry them to his
Ibid. f. 446. b. l. 1. King Richards New Seal.
New Seal to have them renewed, or they should be of no force. Upon this Edict
Mr. Pryn says in his first Tome of his f. 1133. All Charts to be renewed.
Chronological Vindication, etc. That he found most of his Charters to
Monasteries renewed in the 7 th and 10 th years of his Reign, which he had
granted in the first, or any other year before it. f. 195. h. 20.
Mat. Paris says they were Renewed that year about Michaelmass.

As it had been appointed, the two Kings met to Ibid. f. 449. a. n. 20, 30 A.
D. 1^99. King Richard treats with King Philip on Horseback.
Treat on the Feast of St. Hilary or 14th of January, between Andeli and
Vernon, The King of England came thither up the River Seyn in a Boat, and not
willing to come on Shore, spoke with the King of France as he Sat on
Horseback upon the River Bank. They appointed another day of Treaty; When by
the Mediation of Peter of Capua Cardinal of St. Mary, and the Popes Legate, and
by the advice of other great men on each party, agreed upon a Truce for five
years from that Feast: A Truce agreed upon for five years.
Upon this only Condition, That things and possessions should remain as they
then were on both sides. Rebus and Tenementis sic se habentibus ex utraque
part, ut tunc erat, and confirmed the Agreement with their Oaths.

Matthew Paris f. ^94. n. 40, 50. Mat. Paris his Account of the Treaty.
gives a more particular Account of this last Treaty, and tells us, That after
the Battle between Curceles and Gisors in the latter end of September or
beginning of October 1198. wherein the King of France his Troops were routed,
and much weakened; Compelled by necessity, he sent to the Pope to Request his
interposition, That a Peace, or at least a Truce for some time, might be made
between him and the King of England. That such as were willing to undertake the
Crusado, might with the greater liberty and forwardness do it; and that it
might be accomplished, with more firm security, he desired a Cardinal might be
sent with such full power, That if need were, he might force either of them, if
obstinate, to peace and Concord. Pope Innocent who much affected the Business
of the Cross, induced thereto more by money then Devotion, (Innocentius Papa,
qui negotium Crucis plurimum affectabat, plus pretio quam precibus inductus,
Misit etc.) sent Peter de Capua a Cardinal to make Peace between them, who when
he came to the King of France, by his Advice took some Bishops of both Nations
with him, and went to the King of England; and Opened to him, what injuries,
damages, and depredations had been, and might be done in both their Dominions,
if a firm Peace was not established.

King Richard Ibid. f. 195. lin. 1. King Richard refuses to do any thing upon
the Popes accou^
answered with indignation, That he was not of Popes Account, especially seeing
he had often requested him, To compel the King of France by Ecclesiastical
Censures, to restore him his Dominions and Castles, he had unjustly seized
upon, Despising the Oath he made, not to give him any Trouble, while he was in
the Holy Land, reducing it to the Obedience of the Christians: And therefore in
regaining his Inheritance, by reason of the Popes Remisness, he was forced to
consume a vast Sum of Money, when as the King of France had not only been
Perjury, but deserved to have had the Sentence of Excomunication pronounced
against him: Neither did he know whether he desired a Truce or not.

Then the Ibid. n. 10 The Cardinal advice to King Richard.
Cardinal calling the King aside, and injoyning him secrecy, acknowledged,
That he was sent from the Pope at the instance of the King of France, That he
might compound the Differences between them; and Advised the King, for that
time to acquiesce in Popes Desire, and to be certainly assured, That he would
hear him as well concerning the King of France, as in all his other affairs.
Otho his Nephew Crowned King of the Romans.
King Richard was mightily pleased his Nephew Otho had been Crowned King of the
Romans, and did hope by the Popes favor to promote him to the Empire; and
therefore, being also urged by the importunity of many others, he yielded and
confirmed it by Oath, That for five years the Subjects and Tradesmen of both
their Dominions might have free intercourse, pass and repass peaceably to
Fairs, and buy

After this Truce King Richard Paris f. 195. n. 30. and Hoved. f. 449. b. n.
10, 20. King Richard wounded in the Arm by an Arrow. He Dyed of the Wound.
went into Poictou and the parts adjoining, to settle his Affairs there;
Widomar the Viscount or Sherif of Limosin had found a great Treasure of Gold in
his own Ground or Land, and sent a good part of it to him; he Demanded all as
Due to him, and believing it to have been secured in the Castle of Chalus near
Limoges belonging to that Vicecomes, he Besieged it, and April 1199. When he
found himself ill, and Despaired of Life, he Ibid n. 30 40. He devised the
Kingdom of England, etc. to his Brother John
Devised to his Brother John the Kingdom of England and all his other
Dominions, and caused those that were present to Swear fealty to him, and
Commanded they should Deliver him his Castles and three parts of his Treasure.
And all his Baubells (that is Gemms and Jewels) omnia Baubella sua, he gave to
his Nephew Otho King of Alman. His generosity to his Servants and the Poor.
And the Fourth part of his Treasure he Commanded to be Distributed amongst his
Servants and the Poor.

There is nothing Considerable to be found concerning Ireland in this Kings
Reign. f. 439 b. n. 40.
It was in the Keeping, and under the Government and Direction of Earl John's
Deputies and Officers.

Church Affairs.
THere was little done in Church matters in this Kings Reign. Hubert
Archbishop, went to York to correct and amend all things Province, and on
Hoved. f. 429. b. n. 10, 20. A. D. 1195. Hubert received at York only as the
Popes Legate. He caused Assizes to be held there.
St. Barnaby's Day he was met by the Clergy in Solemn Procession, as the Popes
Legate, but not as Archbishop of Canturbury or Primat, and brought into the
Cathedral Church there. On the Monday following he caused Assizes to be held of
all Pleas of the Crown, and of Novel Disseisins, and Death of Ancestors, by his
Ministers: whilst he and his Officials held Pleas in Court Christian. Sequenti
die Lunae, fecit ipse teneri Assisas de omnibus placitis Coronae Regis, and de
Qova dissaisina, and de Morte per Ministros suos; ipse vero and Officiales sui
tenuerunt placita Christianitatis; which were dispatched in that one day.

In two following days, which were Wednesday and Thursday, with the Clergy of
the Province, he held a famous Ibid. n. 20.30. A great Council held by him in
the Province of York.
Council, in which were made 18 Decrees, most about the Behavior of the
Clergy, and matters of small moment, which are therefore omitted. This was
Ecclesiastic Council I find in England in this Kings Reign. But in Normandy the
Clergy obtained their wishes and desires of King Richard, and the Church there
was freed from Servitude as they called it. Mat. Paris says f. 161. n. 10.
Ecclesia Dei in Normania, de longo servitutis jugo liberata^st; glorioso Rege
Richardo Annuente, and omnia Disponente. The Church of God in Normandy, was
freed from a long servitude, by the Order and Grant of King Richard. First
Ibid. n. 20. Several privileges granted by the King to the Clergy in Normandy.
That no Clercs should be taken by Secular power as they had been formerly,
etc. These and many other things altogether to the Advantage of the
Ecclesiastics, were agreed in a Convention of the Clergy Seneschal and Barons
of Normandy. The particulars whereof are noted in the Append. n. ^9.
Appendix, and it is not to be doubted but this Usurpation Rights of the Duke of
Normandy, and his Barons, was the Ground of the Sea Append. n. 42.
Establishment of those Rights made by the Oaths of the Barons at Roven A. D.
1205. in the sixth of King John.

Taxes and Moneys Raised in this Kings Reign.
A Scutage Lib. Rubr^ in Scaccario. A Scutage o^ ten shillings for every
Knights Fee.
for Wales of ten shillings every Knights fee in the first year of his Reign,
which probably happened upon this Account. Richard was Crowned September the
3d. In Hoved. f. 377. a. l. 6. A. D. 1189.
October Rhese Fitz-Griffin King of South Wales came into England as far as
Oxford Conducted by Earl John of Moreton: And because King Richard would not
meet him as his Father had done, he fell into a passion and returned into his
own Country and would not speak with King Richard. This might be taken or
granted for some Forces to Reduce Rhese into a better Temper.

Next year toward his Expedition to the Holy Land, An Aid granted for the
expedition into the Holy Land.
two Saddle-Horses, two Sumpter-Horses were taken of every Ibid. f. 378. b. n.
50. A. D. 1190.
City, of every Abbey one Saddle-Horse, and one Sumpter, and of every of the
Kings Manners as of the Abbeys for an Aid.

For his Ransom when Prisoner to the Emperor; Ibid. f. 4^3. b. n. 10. f. 416.
b. l. 1. A. D. 1193. A Tax for the Kings Ransom.
Of every Knights Fee 20 s. The fourth part of the Rents of the Laics, (That is
of the Husbandmen or Tenants) a fourth part of the Rents of some Clercs, and a
tenth of others; all the Gold and Silver the Churches had, Cistertian Monks,
and the Order of Semplingham.

Carucage Ibid. f. 419. b. lin. 1. A. D. 1194. An Aid for his expedition into
Normandy.
of every Plough-land two shillings, of the Husbandmen or occupiers of every
Knights Fee a third part of the service, for his Expedition into Normandy, the
King Demanded all the Wool of the Cistertians this year also, for which they
made a fine or Composition in Money.

For Liberty of Ibid. f. 424. b.n. 10. A. D. 1194.
Torneament, or Tilting, every Earl was to give 20 Marks, every Baron 10 Marks,
every Landed Knight 4 Marks, every Knight of fortune or without Land 2 Marks.

Eleven hundred Ibid. f. 436. b.n. 30. A. D. 1196. 1100000 Marks raised by
Hubert the Kings Justiciarie.
Thousand Marks Raised in two years A. D. 1195, 1196. but not said how, by
Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury the Kings Justiciarie, for the Kings use.

An aid of five shillings Ibid. f. 412. b n. 50. A. D. 1198. The Occasion of
these Taxes.
of every Carucate of Plough-Land.

The cause of this great Tax, besides the Kings Exigencies abroad might be two
Expeditions into Wales this year, Ibid. f. 440. b n. 50. A. D. 1198.
one by Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury when he was Justitiary about
Christmas, when he turned out the Constables of the Castles of Hereford,
Bridgnorth and Ludlowe, and put in others to keep them to the Kings Ibid. f.
444. a. n. 40. A. D. 1198.
The other by Geofrey Fitz-Peter, to the assistance of William de Bruosa an
English Baron, whom Wenhunwin son of Cadwalan had Besieged in Maud Castle,
where above 3000 welsh were in fight and slight.

Much Money was Raised by Seizures, Fines, and Compositions, and the Sale of
his Demeasnes.

His Issue.
By the Procurement of his Ibid. fol. 392. a. n. 10.
Mother Alienor, he Married Berengaria Daughter of Sanctius King of Navarre in
the Isle of Cyprus Ibid. f. 394. a. n. 10. A. D. 1190.
on the 12th of May, and there was Consecrated and Queen of England by John
Bishop of Eureux with other Foreign Bishops his assistants, but by her he had
no Issue. She was with him in the Holy Land, and came as far as Sicily in her
passage to England: But afterward we hear not of her, until the third of King
John when he compounded with her for her Dower.

Philip he had, a Base Son as Hoveden f. 452. b. n. 30.
affirms, to whom he gave the Castle and Honor of Cuinat, but of whom begotten,
or Philippus filius Richardi Regis Angliae Nothus cui praedictus Rex pater suus
dederat Castellum and Honorem de Cuinac, etc. Other Issue of his I find not, or
what became of this Philip.

THE
AFTER the Death of King Richard Hoved. f. 450. b. n. 10. A. D. 1199.
John Earl of The old Monks never call any one King of England, or Duke of
Normandy, until Crowned or invested; for it was their opinion he was not so,
and that he Received his Kingship, etc. from his Consecration, Unction and
Coronation, and by that means from the Archbishop as an Instrument, and the
Church of Rome, as the Original of it, and all Secular Government.
Moreton the fourth and youngest Son of King Henry the Second came into
Normandy and presently sent Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, and William
Marshal Earl of Striguil England, who with Geofrey Fitz-Peter the Justiciary,
and other Barons were to Keep that Nation in Peace. Out of Normandy he went to
Chinon in Tourain where was the Treasure of his Brother in the Keeping of
Robert de Turnham, who delivered it to him, with the Castles of Chinon and
Saumur and other Castles.

At the same Ibid. n. 20. The Nobility of Normandy adhere to Arthur Duke of
Britany.
time his Nephew Thomas de Furnes Delivered the City and Castle of Angers to
Arthur Duke of Britany; for in a Convention of the Chief men of Anjou, Tourain
and Main, They right and Custom of their Countries for the Son of the Elder
Brother to succeed in the Patrimony due to him, and That Arthur ought to
possess the Inheritance which his Father Geofrey should have had, if he had
outlived his Uncle Richard; and therefore owned and adhered to him as their
Liege Lord, and Delivered to him Anjou, Tourain, and Main. Ibidem.
Constance the Mother of Arthur brought him to Tours, and Delivered him to
Philip King of France, he sent him to his Son Lewis to be Kept at Paris, and
Castellans, and Governors of his own.

In Revenge Ibidem. John Earl of Moreton takes and demolishes Main.
John Earl of Moreton came to Main, took the City and Castle, and Demolished
the Walls of the City, the Castle, and all the Stone Houses, and made many of
the Citizens Prisoners; for that they had received Arthur contrary to the
Fidelity made to him. From thence he went to Roven, and on the 25th of April
Ibid. n. 30. He is girt with the Sword of Normandy.
was girt with the Sword of the Dukedom of Normandy by Walter Archbishop of
that City. And he Swore before the Clergy and Laity (coram Clero and populo)
upon the Relics of Saints, and the holy Gospels: This was the Oath of the
Dukes of Normandy, and if the Conqueror took any, it was this, and in Substance
it is he same with the Oath of all our Ancient Kings.
That he would preserve from Injury holy Church, and the Dignities thereof,
That he would exercise right Justice, Destroy evil Laws, and ordain good.

In the mean time Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, and William Marshal who had
been sent into England Ibidem. n. 40, 50. The Nobility and Free Tenants of
England Swear Fealty to him.
Caused the men of the Kingdom or Government (fecerunt homines Regni) as well
of Cities as Burghs, and Earls, Barons, and free Tenants, to swear fealty and
peace to John Duke of Normandy, the Son of King Henry, the Son of Maud the
Empress, against all men, yet all the Bishops, Earls and Barons that had
Castles provided and furnished them with Men, Victuals and Arms. And therefore
the Archbishop William Marshal and Geofry Fitz-Peter Justiciary of England met
at Northampton, and called before them such as they most suspected, who were
David the King of Scots Brother, Richard Earl of Clare, Ranulf Earl of Chester,
William Earl of Tutesbury, Walran Earl of Warwic, Roger Constable of Chester,
and William de Mowbray, and many Earls and Barons, and there assured them, that
Duke John would restore to every one their right. Upon that See Exact History
of Succession fol.
Bargain or Condition, (sub hac igitur conventione) the foresaid Earls and
Barons swore Fealty to John Duke of Normandy, and faithful Service against all
men.

William King of Scots sent his Ibid. f. 451. a. lin. 2. The King of Scots sent
Envoys to demand his Patrimony of Duke John. But are denied passage into
Normandy.
Envoys to Duke John to demand his Patrimony, That is, Northumberland and
Cumberland, Appertinencies, and promised then to swear fealty and faithful
service to him against all men. But the Archbishop, William Marshal, and
Geofrey Fitz-Peter would not suffer them to pass into Normandy, and sent to him
by his Brother David, That he should wait patiently until he came into England.
The like Message Duke John sent to him by his Son in Law Eustachius de Vesci,
That in all things he would satisfy his Requests, when he came into England,
if in the mean time he kept the Peace.

On the 25th of May Duke John Ibid. ^. 20. Duke John Landeth in England and is
Crowned King.
Landed at Shoreham in Sussex, the next Day went to London, and on the 27th of
May being Ascension Day was Consecrated and Crowned by Hubert Archbishop of
Canturbury at Westminster. For the particulars of his Coronation I refer the
Reader to the Exact f. 375. B. C.
History of the Succession of the Crown.

The same day King John Hoved. f. 451. a. n. 40. The ancient way of Creating
Earls, and investing them in their Earldoms.
girt William Marshal with the Sword of the Earldom of Striguil, and Geofry
Fitz-Peter with the Sword of the Earldom of Essex, who though before they were
called Earls; and had the Administration of their Counties or Earldoms; yet
were not Girt with the Sword of their Earldoms. The same day also he made
Ibidem.
Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury his Chancellor.

The King of Scots Ibid. n. 50. The King of Scots renews his Demands.
by three Priors of his own Nation Renews his Demand of Northumberland and
Tumberland, and made the same promises, King John Answered them, That when
their Lord the King of Scots his Dear Cousin came to him, he would do what was
just concerning that, and all his other Demands; Ibid. b. lin. 5.
And sent Philip Bishop of Durham to meet him, hoping he would come, having
sent Roger Bishop of St. Andrews, and Hugh Malevise for him, and went himself
to Nottingham at Whitsunday, and staid in those parts in Expectation of him,
but he would not come; he only sent back the two Messengers to him, with demand
of the two Counties, and to let him Know, if he denied his demands, he would
endeavor to acquire them by force, and expected his Answer within Forty Days.
In the mean time King John committed Northumberland and Tumberland with their
Castles to the keeping and defense of William Stutevil.

And having dispatched his Affairs in England passed into Normandy, and landed
at Diepe, King John passes into Normandy.
and was at Roven on Ibid. n. 30, 40. And makes a Truce with the King of France.
Midsummer Day, where came to him a Multitude of Soldiers Horse and Foot, and
presently there was a Truce made between him, and the King of France, until the
Morrow after the Assumption of St. Mary (that is August) and here Philip Earl
of Flanders did Homage to King John six days before that Feast, Philippus comes
Flandriae devenit homo Regis Iohannis apud Rothomagum, etc.

Henry Ibid. f. 452. a.n. 10. France and Normandy interdicted.
Earl of Namur brother to Philip Earl of Flanders, Peter of Donay a Famous
Soldier, and his Brother the Elect of Cambray, were taken by some of the French
Kings Soldiers and delivered to him. Peter of Capua a Cardinal and the Pope's
Legate interdicted France for the taking of the Elect of Cambray, as also
Normandy for the Detention of Philip Bishop of Beavais, and before he would
release the Sentence, the King of France was forced to Release the Elect, and
King John the Bishop of Bravais, But because he was taken in Arms, he gave King
John 2000 Marks ( Paris f. 198. n. 50.
says 6000) and took an Oath never to bear Arms again, against Christians.

Philip King of France Hoved. f 452. a. n. 10.20. The King of France Knighted
Arthur Duke of Britany and received his Homage.
Knighted Arthur Duke of Britany, Homage for Anjou, Poictou, Tourain, Main,
Britany, and Normandy. In the Morrow after the Assumption of St. Mary (August
16th) the two Kings treated two Days by their Commissioners between Buravant
and Ga^llon, and the third Day they spoke by themselves, but the King of France
show no Kindness to the King of England; and the reason was because he had
possessed himself of Normandy, and other Countries without his License, whereas
he ought first to have come to him, and demanded his Right Homage.

In this Treaty Ibid. n. 30. His Demands of King John.
the King of France Demanded all Veuxin, That is all between the Forest of
Lions, the Seyn, the Isle of Andeli, and the River Ept. Affirming that Geofry
Earl of Anjou, the Father of Henry, Son of Maud the Empress, had given it to
Lewis the Gross King of France for his assistance in gaining Normandy from King
Stephan of England. And Demanded that Poictou, Anjou, Tourain, Main might be
rendered to Arthur Duke of Britany, and made other Demands the King of England
could not Grant, King Richards riches adhered to King John.
and so they Departed. The Earls and Barons of France that had adhered to King
Richard, became the men of King John, and Swear to him they would not make
Terms with the King of France unless with his Consent, and he Swore to them he
would not make Peace with him unless they were comprehended in it.

In October the King of France Ib. b. l. 1.
took the Castle of Balun, which was taken ill by William de Rupibus, (or
Roche,) General of Duke Arthurs Forces, was sent to him, that there was no such
Agreement between his Lord Arthur, and him. The King replied, he should not
omit to do his pleasure, notwithstanding his Lord Arthur, and then went and
besieged Lavardin, Ibid. l. 7.
but hearing the King of England was coming with his Army left Man's; King John
followed him, and he left that place. In the mean time William de Roche, had
craftily gotten Arthur out of the Ib. n. 10. Arthur reconciled to King John,
and made Governor of Man's.
custody of the King of France, and reconciled him to his Uncle King John, and
delivered to him the City of Man's, of which he was made Governor by them both;
and the very same day it was told Duke Arthur, that King John would put him in
prison; whereupon he and his Mother that night made their escape to Angers.
Paris f. 198. n. 30.
says, he went privately to the King of France.

William Hoved. f. 453. a. n. 30. A. D. 1199. William King of Scots admonished
by a Revelation not to invade England.
King of Scots, in pursuance of his Claim to the Counties of Northumberland and
Cumberland, raised an Army with intention to invade England, but coming to the
Shrine of St. Margaret, sometime Queen of Scotland, which was at Dunfermlin,
where he stays all night, he was admonished by a Revelation in his Sleep, That
he should not invade England with his Army, and so he permitted it to depart
home, or discharged it. Permisit exercitum suum Domum redire.

After Christmas the two Hoved. f. 454. b. n. 10.20. A. D. 1200. A Treaty
between King John and King Philip.
Kings met at a Treaty between Andeli and Gaillon, in which Treaty they agreed,
That Lewis, Son to the King of France should take to wife Blanch the Daughter
of Alfonso, the Eighth, King of Castile, King John's Niece, with whom he was to
give, and quiet claim the City of Eureux, and the whole Earldom, and all the
Fortresses and Castles which King of France had in Normandy, at the time of the
death of King Richard, and besides, give her 30000 Marks of Silver, and did
Swear, That he would not give any assistance to his Nephew Otho in Men or
Money, whereby he might obtain the Roman Empire, to which he had been chosen by
the Popes procurement; but the execution of these points was delayed until the
Octaves of, or Eight days after Midsummer; after the Treaty King John sent his
Mother Alienor to Alfonso, King of Castile, for his Daughter that was to be
married Lewis, An Aid of 3 ^. every Plough-land.
Son of Philip King of France; and in the mean time he passed into England, and
took of every Plough-land of all England, Three shillings for an Aid, Et cepit
de unaquaque Carucata totius Angliae tres solidos de auxilio. In Lent he went
to York, expecting the King of Scots would meet him there, but he came not, and
then he returned into Normandy.

In the mean time Ibidem. f. 456. a.n. 30. A. D. 1200.
his Mother Alienor had brought her Grandchild Blanch as far as Bordeaux. The
old Queen, wearied with the length of the Journey, took in at the Abbey of
Font-Ebrald to refresh her Self, Articles of the Treaty between the two Kings
executed.
and the young Lady passed on under the Conduct of the Archbishop of that City
into Normandy, and was by him delivered to her Uncle King John. Eight days
after Midsummer, as it was appointed, the two Kings met and Treated,
(Convenerunt ad Colloquium) in which Treaty the King of France delivered to
King John the City of Eureux, with the Earldom, and all the Castles, Cities and
Lands he had possessed himself of by War in Normandy, and the other Dominions
of the King of England, and King John presently became his Man, or did him
Homage Ibid. n. 40.50. King John does Homage to King Philip.
and Johannes Rex Angliae statim devenit inde homo Philippi Regis Franciae, and
forthwith gave all these things to Lewis his Son in Niece, who the next day
were Married in Normandy by the Archbishop of Bordeaux, in the presence of
many Bishops and Religious persons, and many Earls and Barons of France, which
was then under the Sentence of Interdict for the Kings Repud^tion of Isemburg
of Denmark. The same day the Ibid. b. l. 1, 2, 3, 4. Duke Arthur does Homage to
King John.
two Kings were at a Colloquium, or Parle at Vernon, where Duke Arthur did
Homage to his Uncle King John, by consent of the King of France, for Britany,
and his other Countries; but was delivered King of France in custody.

And that this Peace might remain the more firm, the particulars of it were put
in writing, and it was Agreed, that if in any thing, The conditions of the
Treaty between the two Kings.
the King of France did violate it, then the Barons of France, which he
assigned his Fide-jussors, or Security, for the preservation of it, and their
Men or Homagers, were to be free from the Fealty they ought him, and were
obliged by Oath to go into the service of the King England to assist him; and
in like manner the Barons of the King of England, that were his Undertakers and
Security, obliged themselves to desert him, and help the King of France, and
were freed from their Fealty, if he brake it. The particulars of this Peace are
now of small moment, unless that they show the manner of Estates, and way of
Living was then the same all France over, in Normandy and in England; and
perhaps in most parts of Europe. That part which the King of France executed,
and remained with the King England, is to be found in Hoveden. f. 463. a. n.
10. And that part which the King of England executed, and remained with the
King of France, is to be found in the Norman Writers, put out by D^ Chesne A.
D. 1619. f. 1055. B.

This year there happened a famous Trial about the Title of a Barony, which
Hoveden has misplaced, A Trial about the Title of a Barony.
for it was before the King when he was in England, before he returned into
Normandy to Marry Niece, and perfect the Treaty which he had begun with the
King of France. Soon after Christmas, as appears by the day and time when it
was, and for many circumstances, and particulars in it., may not be unworthy
the relating.

William de Stutevill Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40, 50.
gave King John three thousand Marks of Silver, to have a Judgment, or
determination concerning the Barony of William de Mowbray, which he claimed
against Robert Grundebeof, the great Grandfather of that William Stutevill
had that Barony from, or by the Acquest of England (de Adquisitione Angliae.)
But that Robert Grundebeof leaving King Henry, Son of William the Bastard, who
conquered, or subdued England by the Sword, (Qui Angliam B^llo sibi subjugavit)
and adhering to Robert Curthose Duke of Normandy, claiming the Kingdom of
England (De Jure paterno) by Right from his Father, against Henry his younger
Brother, who was taken prisoner in the Battle between them at Tenerchebray in
Normandy, and kep in prison to the end of his Life; as also was Robert de
Grundeveof, whose Barony King Henry gave to Nigell de Alvery, the great
Grandfather of William de Mowbray. This Barony Robert de Stutevill, Father of
the said William de Stutev^ll, claimed in the time of Henry the Second against
Roger de Mowbray, Father of the said William de Mowbray, and they came Roger de
Mowbray gave to Robert de Stutevill Kirkeby in Moresbevev, with their
Appertenances, for Ten Knights Fees, and for the Release of his claim; but
because this was not confirmed and strengthened in the Kings Court; The
foresaid William Stutevill renewed the controversy concerning that Barony, in
the Court of King John. And the matter had been long discussed, at length by
the Counsel of the Kingdom, and Will of the King, (Consilii Regno, The
determination of the Controversy.
and voluntate Regis) Peace, and final Concord was made between them in this
manner: That William de Stutevill renounced Barony, and William de Mowbray gave
to him for his Homage, and renouncing his Right, nine Knights Fees, and twelve
pounds Rent by the year, and so releasing all Plaints or Actions on both sides
(Et sic remissis omnibus Querelis hinc and inde) they were made friends before
King John, A. D. 1200.
(facti sunt amici coram Iohanne Rege Angliae) in the Second year of his Reign
at Louth in that Division of Lincolnshire, called Lindsey, on the first Sunday
of Septuagesima, That is, Sunday forthnight, before Shrovesundy.

Presently after the Ibid. f. 457. l. 4. King John Divorced from his Wife.
Peace beforementioned was made between the King of France and King John, he
went with a great Army into Aquitan, and found none that resisted him. Ibid. n.
10.
The same year he was divorced from his Wife Hawis; or Avis, Daughter to
William Earl of Gloucester, by Elias Archbishop of Bordeaux, William Bishop of
Poictiers, and Henry Bishop of Saints, for that they Consanguinity. Being
thus divorced by the advice of his Lord Philip King of France, He is Married to
Isabell, Daughter to the Earl of Engolesme.
he Married Isabell the Daughter of Aymer Earl of Engolesme, whom he had first
given by the request, and direction of King Richard, to Hugh le Brun Earl of
March; they had promised one another, and were betrothed, but because she was
not of years of Marriage, Earl Hugh would not Marry her in the face of the
Church; and her Father perceiving King John had an affection for her, he took
her from Earl Hugh, and gave her to him, and they were Married at Engolesme, by
the Archbishop of Bordeaux.

The same year Ibid. f. 458. a. l. 5. etc. A. D. 1200. the Earl of St. Giles
does Homage to King John.
the Earl of St. Giles did Homage to King John, for the Lands and Castles which
King Richard had given him in Marriage with his Sister Joan, so as his Son
Raymund by her, should have them, and do Homage to his Uncle John, when he came
to years of Discretion; and if he should decease without Issue, then Earl of
St. Giles, and he and his Heirs should hold them by Hereditary Right of the
Earl of Poictou, by the service of coming with 500 Knights or Horsemen to him,
for one Month at his own charge, whenever he went with his Army into Gascony,
but if he staid longer, they were to remain at the charge of the Earl of
Poictou. From Ibid. n 10.
thence King John went to Angers, and took One hundred and fifty Pleges or
Hostages for their Fidelity, and put them in Custody, and the same year King
John took of Ibid. n. 20.
Walter Archbishop of Roven i. e. 200 l. English.
600 pounds of Anjou Money to confirm by his Chart all those things which King
Richard had given him in Exchange for Andeli (to wit) The Town of Diepe, with
its Apertinences, and Lovers with its Apertinences; the Forest or Wood of
Aliersmont, and the Mills of Robech.

The Pope sent Cardinal Ibid. f. 461. n. 1.
Octavian Legate into France to hear and determine the Cause of Divorce between
the King of France and his Queen Botilda, (as Hoveden calls her) The French
Writers name her Happily she might have two, and both these Names: du Serres
calls her Gelberge; Rigord calls her Ysamburg.
Isemberg, with this direction, That first before he heard the Cause, he should
compel him to put away his German Adulteress, and receive Botilda or Isemberg,
and treat her like his Wife; (ut ipse imprimis ante Ingressum litis compelleret
Regem Franciae dimittere Adulteram suam Teutonicam, etc.) On the Vigil of the
Nativity of the Virgin Mary, or 7 th. of September, the Cardinal, the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Clergy of France met at Nibell, and the King of
France, with his Queen, and Teutonick Lady came thither, and by the admonition
of the Cardinal, and advice of his Friends he dismissed her, and received again
his Queen; King Philip receives his Queen again.
and then made his complaint, That she ought not of right to be his Wife, for
they were near related in Consanguinity, and affirmed he could prove it
Cardinal gave him the time of six Months, six Weeks, six Days, and six Hours to
consider of it; and appointed the place of Hearing the Cause at Soissons
according to the Queens desire. Ibid. n. 20. The Interdict released.
France by procurement of the King of Denmark was under an Interdict for the
Kings Repudiating his Queen, which, so soon as he received her again, was
released by the Cardinal.

Ibid. f. 462. b. n. 20.30. etc. King Philip demanded to be Divorced.
Lent next following, Philip and his Queen met again before the Legate at
Soissons, and the King by his Lawyers demanded to be Divorced for the reason
beforementioned. On the Queens behalf there were present several Bishops, and
other honest and discreet Men (Et alii honesti viri and disereti) sent from her
Brother Cnute King of Denmark, who after Security given them, that they might
freely answer, allege, and safely return home; they said the King of France had
sent to the King of Denmark, Great Men of his Kingdom was done. That the
Messengers which came for her did Swear on behalf of the king, and for
themselves, That she should be honorably used as a Queen, and of this they
could produce his Chart, and the Charts of the Great Men that came for her, and
therefore Appealed them of Perjury and breach of Faith before the Pope. They
also Appealed from Cardinal Octavian the Judge, to the Pope, for that he was
related King of France, and would favor his Cause; and the Queen likewise
Appealed, which when Octavian had heard, he desired them to stay a while until
his Colleague came, that was joined in Commission with him from the Pope, and he
should hear and determine the Matter; after three days he came, and did hear
it, and found no cause of a Divorce between them, of which the King of France
having notice, He could not obtain it.
and that he would give a definitive Sentence against him, he departed before
he had pronounced it, and carried his Queen with him, and put her into more
straight Custody than before.

In the Ibid. f. 4^1. a. ^. 30.40. King John and Queen Isabel Crowned.
month of October King John having settled his affairs in Normandy and his
other Transmarine Countries, came into England, and brought with him Isabel his
Wife, and upon the eighth Day of that Month they were both Crowned at
Westminster by Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury.

Presently after his Ibid. b. lin. 4. and n. 10.20.30, 40. He sends to the King
of Scots to meet him at Lincoln.
Coronation King John sent Philip Bishop of Durham, Roger Bigot Earl of
Norfolk, Henry de Bohun Earl of Hereford, David Earl of Huntington, Roger de
Lasci Constable of Chester, William de Vesci, Roger de Ros, and Robert
Fitz-Roger Sherif of Northumberland, to William King of Scots with Letters
Patents of safe Conduct, and to wait upon him into England, to meet King John
at Lincoln on the Morrow after the Feast Edmund; the King (November 21st) they
met accordingly, and the next day, they came to a Treaty or Parley upon a steep
Hill (convenerunt ad Colloquium super Montem arduum) without the City, and
there in the view of all the people, William King of Scots became King John's
Man, The King of Scots does Homage to King John.
or did homage to him, as it was his right, or for his right, (Willielmus Rex
Scotorum, devenit homo Regis Iohanis de jure suo) and Swore Fealty to him upon
the Cross of Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury to preserve his Life, Limbs, and
Terrene against all men, and keep Peace toward him and his Kingdom, saving his
own right. These being Witnesses, Hubert of Canturbury, John of Dublin, Bernard
of Raguse Archbishops; Philip of Durham, William of London, Gilbert of
Rochester, Eustacius of Ely, Savaric of Bath, Herbert of Salisbury, Godfry of
Winchester, Giles of Hereford, John of Norwich, Roger of St. Andrews, Henry of
Landaf, and Roger of Bangor Bishops; Geofry Fitz-Peter Justiciary of England
Earl of Essex, Roger B^got Earl of Norfolk, Hamlin Earl of Warren, Baldwin de
Behun Earl of Albemarle, William Earl of Salisbury, Henry de Bohun Earl of
Hereford, Richard Earl of Clare, William Earl Ferrers, David Earl of
Huntington, Rolland or Rowland Son of Huctred, Son of Fergus Prince of Galway,
Patrick Earl of Lona^s, Griffin Son of Rese King of Southwales, and many others
of the Kingdom of Scotland. And before these Barons of England and Normandy,
Constable of Chester, Eustachius de Vesci, Robert de Ros, William de Stutevill,
Ralph Chamberlan of Tanquervit, Warin Fitz-Gerold, Stephan de Turnham,
Seneschal of Anjou.
Robert his Brother, Gilbert Basset, Thomas and Alan his Brothers, Roger of
Hutingfield, Sayer of Quinci, William of Hastings, Iolan de Nevill, Simon de
Chanci, Girard de Camvil, and many other Barons of England and Normandy.

After King Ibid. n. 40. His demands of King John.
William had done his Homage, he Demanded of King John his Lord Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmerland, as his right and inheritance, and when they had
long Discoursed the matter, and could not agree, the King of England desired
time to consider of it until Whitsunday following; A. D. 1200.
and early on the morrow Morning (November. 23d.) the King of Scots returned
toward his own Country under the Conduct of the same persons that brought him
into England.

King John kept his Christmas at Guilford, where he distributed many fine
Clothes to his Knights or Military men. Mat. Paris f. 205. n. 50. Hoved. f.
464. b. n. 10.
The Archbishop did the same at Canturbury, as it were vying and contending
with him in the magnificence of that Solemnity, which not a little Kings
Indignation. Ibid. and 20.30. A. D. 1201. King John and his Queen made a
progress through most of England.
After Christmas the King with his Queen went into the North as far as
Northumberland, and made a Progress through much of England, and fined many men
for wasting his Forests. The Historian names several particular places, and
days, and nights, where the King was, and lodged, in this progress or
perambulation; which takes off the incredibility of the Journey, to have been
undertaken at that time of the year.

Easter Ibid. f. 465. b. lin. 1.
which happened that year on our Lady Day the King and Queen Isabell were at
Canturbury, and there Crowned by Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury in the
Cathedral, in the presence of John Arch B. of Dublin, William Bishop of London,
Gilbert Bishop of Rochester, Eustachius Bish. of Ely, and John Bish. of
Norwich. Ibidem. lin. 6. He Summoned his Earls and Barons to be ready with
Horse and Arms to go with him over Sea.
And presently after Easter he Commanded the Earls and Barons of England should
be ready with their Horse and Arms at Whitsunday at Portsmouth to pass with him
beyond Sea. The Poictovins had Warin de Glapion Seneschal of Normandy, by order
of King John Besieged the Castle of Dancourt, which King Richard had given to
Ralph de Isondon Earl of Ou, Brother of Hugh le Brun. But Philip King of France
hearing of the King of Englands preparations, raised the Sieges before he came
into Normandy. Ibidem. n. 10. They refuse unless their Rights be first restored.
In the mean while the Earls of England met at Leicester, and by Common
Agreement sent to the King, They would not go with him beyond Restore to them
their Right. f. 206. lin. 8.
Mat. Paris says they came at the appointed time, and many for leave to stay at
home, gave the King two Marks in Silver for every Knights Fee.

At Whitsunday Ibid. Hoved. f. 466. a. lin. 5.
or some time before King John sent Geofry Bishop of Chester, Richard
Malevisse, and Henry de Putearo (Pudsey) to the King of Scots, That the time of
Giving his Answer Northumberland, etc. might be put off until Michaelmass:
Ibid. n. 10 He passes over into Normandy, and treats with King Philip.
In Whitsun week he and his Queen Sailed from Portsmouth, and landed in
Normandy; and presently there was a Treaty between him and the King of France
near the Isle of Andeli, and they agreed well between themselves, no man
knowing the subject of their Discourse, and within three days King John was
invited by the King of France to his Palace at Paris, where he was splendidly
and honorably entertained; from whence he went to Chinon; Ibid. and n. 20.
where Queen Berengara the Relict of King Richard, to whom upon the Testimony
of Philip Bishop of Durham, and others that were present at her Marriage, he
gave her during Life the City of Ibid. f. 467. b. n. 30. He gave Berengara King
Richards Relick, a large Dower.
Bayeux with its Appurtenences, two Castles in Anjou, and a 1000 Marks Sterling
every year, 500 to be paid at the Exchequer in England, and 500 at the City
Caen in Normandy, for her Dower.

King John had a Design to Ibid. f. 468 a. n. 30.40. His Design to Appeal the
Barons of Poictou of Treason.
Appeal the Barons of Poictou for Treason against his Brother Richard and
himself; and had hired many men, who had been taught the Art of Duelling; (who
without doubt he intended should Appeal them, or at least be his Champions,)
Sed Barons Pictaviae inde praemoniti ad Curiam illius venire Noluerunt,
Dicentes, Quod nemini Responderent nisi pari suo. But the Barons being
forewarned, would not come to his Court, saying Peers or aequals, and so his
Design came to nothing; and the Poictovins by that project were made more his
Enemies than before; and to Repress their Violence, he appointed Robert de
Turnham his Seneschal or Lieutenant of that Country.

This Year Hugh Bardolf, and Ibid. n. 20.
other the Kings Justices went to Boston Fair, intending to Seize to the Kings
use all Woollen King Richards Assise or Statute. The Merchants so prevailed
with the Justices, that their Clothes were not Seized, nor the Assise of King
Richard to be kept concerning the Breadth of Cloth, or the Measure of Grain,
King Richard^ Assise for the Measure of Cloth and Grain made void by the
Justices.
so as for the future they might make their Clothes as Broad and Narrow as they
pleased; from whence to the Damage of many, the Justices procured a great Sum
of Money to the Kings use.

This Year the Ibid. f. 466. a. n. 20. The Pope wrote to the Clergy to
Contribute to the Relief of the Holy Land
Pope wrote a pressing Epistle to the Archbishops and Bishops to contribute a
fortieth part of their Ecclesiastical Revenues to the Relief of the Holy Land,
and to take care that the Clercs in every Diocese did the same. Ibid. f. 470.
a. n. 40. He sent to the same purpose to the King of England and France.
The Master of the Hospital of Jerusalem wrote another lamentable Epistle to
the Prior and Brethren of the same Hospital in England, moving them very
earnestly for Relief, and that they would induce the King and great men to Pope
reflecting seriously upon the Contents of these Letters, sent a Cardinal to the
Kings of England and France, requiring them to make a Subsidy or Tax in their
Dominions for the Relief of the Land of Jerusalem, Ibid. f. 471. a. lin. 3.
King John grants a fortieth part of his Revenue for one year.
upon which Message and Request, the two Kings consented to give the fortieth
part of all their Revenues for one Year. And the King of England would have it
Levied of all his Revenue, and of the Ward Lands and Escheats in his hands, and
Commanded that all Laymen of his Dominions ( and praecepit) should give a
fortieth part of all their Rents, as an Alms, for the Relief of the Land of
Jerusalem. Whereupon Geofry Fitz-Peter then Chief J^sticiary of England, wrote
Append. n. 80.
to the Sheriffs of England, to admonish and induce the Earls and Barons in
every of their Sherifwicks, and others, to give a fortieth part as aforesaid,
and to Collect it.

In Lent the Year following, the two Kings Mat. Paris f. 207. lin. 2. King
Philips Demands refused by King John.
Parleyed near the Castle of Goleton, where the King of France armed with
mortal hatred against the King of England, in Scorn commanded him forthwith to
Deliver to Arthur Earl of Britany, Normandy, Tourain, Anjou, and Poictou, and
Exacted of him many other things which King John refused to do. The day
following, the King of France attacqued the Castle of Butavant, took and
Demolished it, from whence he went to Ou and took that Town, He besieged, took,
and demolished many of King John's Towns and Castles.
with the Castle of Lim^s, and many other Castles: Ratepont Castle seated upon
the River Andell in Veuxin he Besieged Eight Days, and hearing the King of
England was coming toward him, he left it; but within few days after took the
Town of Gournay, and then returned to Paris, Ibid. n. 10, 20.
and sent Arthur, and the Governors he placed over him with two hundred French
Knights into Poictou to subdue that Queen Alienor Mother to King John, was in
the Castle of Mirebeau, with a small Company, they besieged and took it; but
the Tower in which the Queen was they could not obtein, those few that were in
the Castle having retreated thither. Here came into Arthur all the chief men,
and more noble Knights or Military men of Poictou, especially, Hugh le Brun
Earl of March, who was a public Enemy to King John, in Respect of Isabel his
Queen, Queen Alienor reduced to great streights by Arthur.


The Queen in this straight Ibid. n. 30. She sends to her Son for speedy
relief. The French and Poictovins put to flight. Arthur and all the Nobility of
Anjou and Poictou taken Prisoners.
sent to her Son passionately pressing him to come to her Relief. He marched
night and day, and came sooner then it was believed he could be there. The
French and Poictovins went to meet and give him Battle; the King put them to
flight, and pressed so hard upon them, as he entered the Castle with them, where
English. In this Fight were taken 200 French Knights, and Duke Arthur, with all
the Nobles of Poictou and Anjou, who were fettered and manacled with Iron, and
part of them sent into Normandy, and part into England. Arthur was sent to
Falais to be kept safe there.

The King of France had Besieged the Ibid. n. 40.
Castle of Arches, and Arthurs misfortune, he raised the Siege and went to
Paris, and did nothing more that Year.

After a short time King John went to Ibid. n. 50 Arthur Demands the Kingdom of
England of King John his Uncle.
Falais and caused his Nephew Arthur to be brought before him. Many fair words
he gave him, and promised him many Honors to quit the King of France, and stick
to him as his Lord and Uncle, but he answered him Disdain, and with threats
Demanded the Kingdom of England, and all the Dominions King Richard died
possessed of, as his right of Inheritance, and Swore he should never enjoy
Peace unless he Restored them. King John very much troubled at his Demands, He
is sent Prisoner to Roven and never heard of more
sent him to Roven to be made close Prisoner in the new Tower, where he
suddenly vanished. Ibid. f. 208. n. 10.
And it presently began to be the Opinion of France, and the suspicion of all
Transmarine Countries, That King John Killed him with his own hands; whence
many

This Year the King caused to be proclaimed Ibid. n. 20. A. D. 1202. A legal
Assize of Bread to be observed.
a legal Assise of Bread, to be inviolably observed under pain of Pilloty, as
it was tried and approved by the Baker of Geofry Fitz-Peter Justiciary of
England, and it was to be so as the Bakers might gain in every Quarter three
pence. Besides the Bran, and two Loaves at the Oven, and four Half-peny's for
four Servants, and for two Boys one Farthing; and an Allowance for Salt an
halfpenny, and for Yest or Beer-good an Halfpenny, for Candel a Farthing, for
Fagots three pence, and for Bulter and Sieve an Halfpenny. And according to
this gain and allowance, The weight of Bread proportioned to the price of Corn.
when Wheat was at six Shillings the Quarter, a Farthing White-Loafe well Baked
was to weigh sixteen shillings, and a Farthing Loaf of the whole grain as it
came from the Mill, was to weigh twenty four shillings; when Wheat was at
Eighteen pence the Quarter, then a Farthing White-loafe was to weigh sixty four
shillings, and a Farthing loaf of the whole Grist as it came from the Mill was
to weigh ninety six shillings. This is the highest and lowest price of Wheat
mentioned in the Historian; and the intermediate weight of Bread was
proportionate to the intermediate price of Wheat, and the Assise did rise and
fall, as the price of Wheat did rise and fall, according to six pence in every
Quarter; and this Assise was Proclaimed

The King kept his Ibid. n. 40, 50. A. D. 1203. King John's Luxury and
Negligence.
Christmas at Caen in Normandy, where laying aside the Thoughts of Warlike
attempts, he Feasted splendidly every day with his Queen, and lay in Bed till
Noon, ubi postpositis incursionibus Bellicis, cum Regina Epulabatur quotidie
splendide, somnosque matutinales usque at prandendi Horam protraxit. After
Easter the King of France raised a great Army, and took many of his Castles;
King John was told what the King of France had done, he only Replied, let him
alone, whatever he now takes, I will one day have again. The English Nobility
obtein leave to go home.
The English Earls, Barons, and other Noblemen, hearing what he said, and
observing his irremediable Sloth, obtained f. 209. lin. 2.
leave to go home, and left him but with few Knights or Military men in
Normandy. Hugh de Gournay yielded to the King of France the Castle of Montfort
with the whole Honor, which King John had Roven, so as people said he was
bewitched, ita quod ab omnibus diceretur ips^m fore sortilegiis and maleficiis
infatuatum: For he was as brisk and merry as if he had lost nothing, King
Philip Besieges and takes his Castles and Towns.
nor no ill had happened to him. The King of France proceeds, and invests Le
Chasteau du Vau de Ruil within the Jurisdiction of Roven with a mighty Force:
Robert Fitz-Walter, and Saber de Quincy, in whose keeping it was, delivered
that Noble Castle so soon as he appeared before it. Normandy being defenseless,
Ibid. 10.20. Normandy and his other Transmarine Dominions left without Defense.
and his other Transmarine Dominions, the King of France went where he would
without Contradiction, and received many Castles under his power and
protection. At the same time he Besieged the Excellent Castle upon the Rock in
Andeli which King Richard Built: But by the incomparable Courage and Fidelity
of Roger de Lasci, to whose Defense the Castle was Committed, he prevailed
little against it. Sed probitate Rogeri de Lasc^ and fidelitate incomparabili,
in illa obsidione parum profecit. In this Juncture Normans revolted from the
King of England, and others dissembled and staid with him.

King John Ibid. He came into England and accused his Nobility for deserting
him. He severely Taxed both them and the Religious.
seeing his Condition, and that he had no force to support him, Shipped himself
and Landed at Portsmouth, (in die Sancti Nicholai) on the 6th of December, and
then accusing the Earls and Barons that they had left him amongst his Enemies
beyond Sea, and that through their neglect he lost his Castles and Territories
there. He took of them the seventh part of all their movables. Neither did he
in this Tax spare Conventual, or Parochial Churches.

For he had (says the Monk) Ibid. n. 30. Hubert and Fitz-Peter were the
instruments of his Rapine.
those who Executed this Rapin upon the Ecclesiastics, Hubert Archbishop of
Canturbury; and upon the Laics Geofry Fitz-Peter Iusticiary of England, who
spared no man in this Execution. ( Qui in Executione dicta Nulli pepercerunt.)

The King of France taking his Ibid. n. 30, 40. King Philips attempt to bring
his transmarine Dominions under his obedience.
advantage when King John was absent, came with great Force before the several
Citys and Castles Dominions, declared to the Citisens and Castellans their King
had left them, and that he was chief Lord of their Countries, and seeing the
King of England had deserted them, he must preserve the principal Dominion,
that was his own, from injury; and therefore friendly desired them to receive
him as their Lord, when they had no other. Upon what Conditions they consented
to yield.
And if they would not submit to his Proposition; he Swore if they fought
against him, and were subdued, he would hang or flay them alive. At length
after many disputes, they unanimously consented Hostages for one years Truce;
and if the King of England Relieved them not, in that time, they would
recognize him their Lord, and render their Citys and Castles to him.

On the Morrow after Ibid. ^. 50 A. D. 1204. A Parliament called at Oxford, and
an Aid granted.
Epiphany or the 2d of January, the King and great men of England Convened in
Parliament at Oxford, in Crastino Circumcisionis Rex and Magnates Angliae
convenerunt ad Colloquium apud Oxonium, where was granted to the King a
Military Aid Knights Fee, nor did the Bishops or Abbats, or Ecclesiastic
persons depart without promise of the same.

The Knights that were in the City of Scriptor. Norm. f. 1057. B The Knights
and Burgesses of Roven capitulate with King Philip.
Roven, and Burgesses entered into Covenants with the King of France, Dated June
1. and gave 40 Hostages for the performance of them, That if the King of
England did not make Peace with the King of France according to his liking, or
remove him from the place where he was, (before Roven) within 30 days, they
would deliver the City. The Covenants are long, and contein many things
stipulated between the King of France, and the Knights and Burgesses, which
were to be performed upon Rendition of the City, Paris f. 211. n. 40. Roven
yielded to him.
which for want of assistance came under the King of France his power.

The Castle upon the Rock in Andeli, Ibid. Andeli Castle Surrendered after a
years Seige.
after almost a years Siege, a great part of the Walls falling down, the
Foundation having King of France his hands; But before the Delivery, Roger
Constable of Chester, choosing rather to Dye with his Sword in his hand, then
be starved with several other of his stout Companions, when they had not meat
for one Meal left, The great Courage and Bravery of Roger de Lasci.
mounted their Horses and Sallyed out, and Killed many of the French, and
mainteyned an obstinate fight with them before they were taken. After the
Castle was yielded up, Roger de Lasci was carried into France, but for the
Courage and Bravery he showed in the Defense of the Castle, the King commanded
he should only be a Prisoner at large, propter probitatem suam quam in Castri
custodia fecerat, Jubente Rege, sub libera Custodia detentus est.

Upon this the Castellans and Citisens Ibid. n. 50. and f. 212. l. 1. King*
John denis Relief to his Transmarine Subjects.
subject to the King of England, sent to him to let him know in what streights
they were. The time of Truce was almost Expired, and they must either deliver
up their City's and Castles, or permit their Hostages to be destroyed. they
could expect no help from him, and therefore left it to them to do what they
thought best. So that for want of Relief, They generally submit to the King of
France.
all Normandy, Tourain, Anjou, and Poictou came under the Dominion of the King
of France, with their City's and Castles, except Ro^hel, Tuarz, and Nioris. The
King knew these things, yet lived in all delight with his Queen, and thought
with her he enjoyed all things.

The next year Ibid. n. 10. A. D. 1205. King John's policy to get Money from his
Subjects.
about Whitsunday, the King levied a great Army as if he would pass beyond Sea;
he was Prohibited by the Archbishop of Canturbury and many others. He caused a
great Number of Ships to come to Portsmouth; on the fifteenth of July he went
on Board, with a small Company, and put to Sea; but changing his mind the third
day after he Landed near Warham in Dorset-shire. Ibid.
Upon his Return^ he took of the Earls, Barons, Knights, and Religious persons,
a vast Sum of Money, upon pretense they would not follow him beyond

On the thirteenth of July Ibid. n. 30. Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury dies.
Dyed Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury, to the great Joy of the King, as having
been suspected for holding correspondency with the King of France. Ibidem. The
Monks choose their Supprior Archbishop without the Kings Knowledge.
Before the Archbishop was Buried, some of the Monks chose their Supprior
Archbishop, without the Kings Knowledge and sent him away privately to Rome, to
procure his confirmation; when he came there, and showed the Pope and Cardinals
his Instruments of Election, and petitioned him to confirm

The Monks had obliged their Supprior to Ibid. n. 40. He breaks his Oath of
Secrecy.
Secrecy, but so soon as he got into Flanders he divulged his Election, and
told he was going to Rome to get it confirmed, and showed the Instrument of the
Convent testifying his Election. They having Ibid. f. 213. n. 20, 30, 40. They
choose the Bishop of Norwich upon the Kings recommendation.
notice he had Broke his Oath of Secrecy, were mightily moved against him, and
sent to King to desire his License to choose an Archbishop; the King gave them
free leave without any Condition, but secretly let them know, That if they
would choose John Bishop of Norwich, they would do him acceptable service. The
Monks unanimously choose him, and in due form, and then sent for him to come
with all speed to Canturbury. The King and he went to Canturbury together, and
the next day the Prior, in the presence of the King and all the multitude
declared John de Grai Bishop of Norwich duly Elected, and then the Monks placed
Archiepiscopal Throne or Seat, and the King put him in possession of all things
that belonged to the Archbishopric. This double Election happened to be the
Foundation of many great mischiefs that followed.

*The King Ibid. n. 50. and f. 214 l. 1. A. D. 1206.
sent some of the Monks of the Church of Canturbury to Rome, to obtein the
Popes Confirmation of the Election, at the same time the Suffragans of that
Province sent their Procters to Rome, who made a grievous complaint to the
Pope, The Suffragans of the Province Complaint against the Monks to the Pope.
That the Monks had presumed to choose an Archbishop without them, when they
of Common Right, and ancient Custom (de jure communi and consuetudine Antiqua)
ought to have been present with the Monks at the Election. They alleged Decrees
and Precedents, produced Witnesses, and exhibited Testimonials, That the
Suffragans together with the Monks had chosen Archbishops. Ibid. n. 10. The
Monks Answer to their Complaint.

The Pope pronounces Sentence in favor of the Monks.


The Monks on the contrary affirmed, That by ancient and allowed Custom, and by
special privilege of Popes, they used to make Elections without them, which
they offered to prove by sufficient Witnesses. The Allegations on both sides
having been heard, and the Witnesses Examined, the Pope appointed, (the 12th of
the Calends of January) or 21st of December, for pronouncing Sentence; which
was in favor of the Monks; and by which he for ever Append. N. 81.
excluded the Suffragans or Bishops of that Province, from having any
Archbishop. Append. N. 82.
In the mean time, the King had very submissively Written to the Pope, not to
disturb him in that right he and his Ancestors had in the Election of
Archbishop and Bishops.

This Paris ut supra, n. 20. King John Besieges Mont-Auban Castle, and takes
it.
year on the 25th of June, King John with a great Army takes Ship at
Portsmouth, and on the 9th of July Lands at Rochell. The Poictovins came in to
him, and promised their assistance. After he had subdued a considerable part of
Poictou, he marched to the strong Mont-Auban, which he Besieged, and after he
had Battered it fifteen Days, took it on the first of August, and wrote to his
Justices, Bishops, and Nobility of England, what, and how many, great and
illustrious Prisoners, what Horse and Arms, and what innumerable spoils he had
taken. After this the Religious Ibidem. n. 30. A truce for two years agreed upon
persons of those parts mediating between the two Kings, on the Feast of All
Saints, procured a two years Truce, so as King John returned into England, and
Landed at Portsmouth on the 12th December.

About this Ibid. n. 30.
time John Ferentin the Popes Legate came into England and scraped up a great
Sum of Money, and the Morrow after St. Luke held a great Council at Reading,
and soon after left England.

Rigord f. 206. n. 20, 30. A. D. 1206.
says, King Philip hearing King John was Landed at Ro^hell, Raised a great Army
and Marched into Poictou, and fortified and Garrisoned Mirebeau, London, and
other Castles he held in Paris, That the Viscount or Vicecomes of Touars
Confaederated with King John, which caused him to return again into Poictou,
and destroyed the Lands of that Viscount, and then both Army's being ready to
engage, a Truce was made from the Feast of All Saints for two years.

On the 2d of Mat. Paris f. 221. n. 50. A. D. 1^07. ^ Johannis* A thirteenth
part of all Movables and other things levied.
February next following his Return, he took the 13th part of all movables,
and other things as well of Laics, as E^cl^siastics Prelates, all murmuring but
not daring to Contradict it: (cepit tertiam decimam partem ex omnibus mobilibus
and rebus aliis, etc. Cunctis murmurantibus sed contradicere non audentibus)
only Geofry A. B. of York consented not, but plainly contradicted it, and
privately left England and at his departure anathematized all such as should
Collect it in the Province of York, and in general all invaders of the Churches
possessions. The Record Append. n. 83.
says, this 13th was granted by the Comune Council, and assent of his Council
at Oxford; By whom Assessed.
for the Defense of his Kingdom, and recovery of his right: where see the
manner of assessing, collecting and paying it into the Exchequer.

All this while Paris f. 22. n. 20, 30. The Popes ^e^initive Sentence against
both the Elects of Canturbury.

He recomends Stephen Langton to their Choice.


the Monks and Procurators of each party who were for one Election or the
other, remained at Rome, and the Pope observing both of them to be vicious, and
not according to the Canons by advice of his Cardinals Nulled both; forbidding
by Definitive Arch^Bishopric, and then persuaded the Monks Append. n. 84. The
Pope persuades King John to receive him.
to choose Stephen Langton an Englishman and Cardinal their Archbishop; who
Answered, they could not make a Canonical Election without the Consent of the
King and their Convent. The Pope told them they had full power in the Church of
Canturbury, and that in Elections made at the Apostolic See, the Consent of
Princes was not Expected; and then Commanded those present, being (as
sufficient number, in virtue of their Obedience, and under pain of a Curse, The
Monks though unwillingly choose him Archbishop.
to chose him Arh-Bishop, whom he had given them as a Father and Pastor of
their Souls. The Monks fearing the Sentence of Excommunication although
unwillingly, and with Grumbling gave their assent; only Elias de Brantefield
amongst them all, would not Consent. Upon this Election the Pope Consecrated
him at Viterbo on the 17th of June.

Soon after this the Pope Append. n. 84. The Pope persuades King John to
receive him.
sent King John a wheadling Letter and four Gold Rings set with precious
Stones; and with them, or immediately after, another Letter Mat. Paris f. 223.
n. 30.
in which he exhorts him to receive Stephan Langton, (one Born in his own
Kingdom) into the Archbishopric; and while by Flattery and persuasion, he
would have obtained the Kings consent, he sent his Command to the Ibid. n. 4.
Prior and Monks to receive and obey him, as their Archbishop as well in
Spirituals as Temporals.

When the King received the Popes Letters he was in great Ibid. King John
^ighly displeased with the Monks choice.
Wroth, and endeavored to make them Traitors. First, That in prejudice of his
Liberty, without his License they had chosen their Sup-Prior, and afterward,
that they might seemingly satisfy him, they chose the Bishop of Norwich, and
Receiving Money out of the Exchequer, they went to Rome to get the Election
Confirmed, and there chose Stephan Langton his Public Enemy, and caused him to
Archbishop. Ibidem. n. 50.
For this Cause in his Fury he sent Fulk Cantelup and He was Sherif of Kent.
Reginald de Cornhulle, most Cruel Knights and void of Humanity (says Paris)
with some armed men to drive the Monks of Canturbury out the Nation, The Monks
forced to leave their Monastery.
as if they had been Traitors When they came there, they threatened to Fire the
Monastery, and them in it, if they would not depart England, and so affrighted
them, that without any Violence, they passed over into Flanders; some to the
Abbey of St. Bertin, others to other Monasteries

The Monks thus leaving their Monastery, the Ibid. f. 22^ n. 1^, ^0. King John's
resolute Letter to the Pope concerning the late Election.
King wrote to the Pope by his Messengers, to let him know what Injury he had
done in Cassating the Election of the Bishop of Norwich, and consecrating
Stephan Langton Archbishop, a person altogether unknown, and one that had his
Education in France, and Conversation there with his most Public Enemies,
without his consent, to the prejudice and Subversion of the Liberties of his
Crown, affirming he could no ways recede from the Election and Promotion of the
Bishop of Norwich, and if he might not be heard at Rome in his behalf, he would
preclude all persons from passing thither, by shutting up his Ports. And since
he had Archbishops, and Bishops, and other Ecclesiastic Prelates in his own
Nations, abounding in all sort of Learning, he told him if he Justice or
Judgment of Strangers out of them.

The Pope Ibid. n. 30.40.50. etc. The Pope's Answer and Reproof.
wrote back to him, and reproved him for his stiff way of Writing; yet told
him (though it was not necessary in Elections made at Rome) that he, the Monks,
and others had sent for his Consent, but their Messengers were stopped or
otherwise hindered, so as Ib. f. 225. n. 30.40. The same Controversy or Quarrel
between King John and Stephen Langhton, that was between Henry 2. and Thomas
Becket.
and therefore advises him to submit to his pleasure, which would be much for
his Honor, and not resist God and the Church, in this Cause, for which the
Blessed Martyr, and glorious Bishop Thomas, (they are the Historians Words)
Spill his Blood; Especially since his Father and Brother had abjured that Evil
Custom.

The Pope Ib. f. 226. lin. 3.

A. D. 1208. King John would not be prevailed upon by the Pope's advice.


finding the Kings Heart so far hardened ( Cor Regis adeo) as not being able to
prevail upon his Courtship, advice, and Comminations, to receive Stephan as
Archbishop, being touched with an Inward Grief of Heart, by advice of his
Cardinals Commanded William Bishop of London, Eustachius Bishop of Ely, and
Mauger Bishop of Worcester, to go unto the King, and with a pious care and
solicitude, Ibid. n. 10.
to treat with him about the Business of the Church of Canturbury, and if they
found him Contumacious and Rebellious as thitherto he had been, His Kingdom
threatened to be Interdicted.
(Quod si forte ipsum Contumacem, sicut Hactenus Extitit invenirent and
Rebellem,) they should interdicted, and if by that he would not amend his
pertinacy, he should press him with a more heavy hand. He wrote at the same
time to the Suffragans of Canturbury, and other Prelates of that Province, to
receive and obey him as their Pastor and Archbishop.

Hereupon, The Ibid. n. ^0. The Bishops Solicit him to receive the Archbishop.
Bishops as they were enjoined, repaired to the King, Supplicating him with
Tears; That as he had God before Archbishop and Monks to their Church, Honor
and Love them with perfect Charity, that so he might avoid the Scandal of the
Interdict, (ut Interdicti Scandalum vitare curaret.)

The King condescended as far as he could to Gratify the Pope, King John's
condescension to receive the Archbishop.
in receiving Stephen Langton to be Archbishop of Canturbury, upon these
Bishops acquainting him with the Popes Injunctions to them, promising by his
Append. n. 85.
Letters Patents attested by seven Earls and three Barons, above two Months
before the Interdict, to do any thing therein, which his Council should think
fit and reasonable, saving in all things to him and his Heirs the Right and
Dignity of his Crown.

But it seems these Terms and Conditions pleased not the Bishops; The Bishops
not pleased with the Terms offered by the King.
they press him further Paris ut supra* n. 20
which drove the King into a great passion of fury, and caused him to speak
Hard words against the Pope and Cardinals, The King provoked to passion and
threats.
Swearing by the Teeth of God, That if they or any others whatsoever, should
dare to put his Countries under Interdict, He would forthwith send all the
Prelates, Clercs, and Men in Orders to the Pope, and Confiscate their Goods;
And added, that whatever Romans he could find, he would cause their Noses to be
cut off, and their Eyes pulled out, and send them to Rome; That by those marks
they might be Distinguished from Men of other Nations, and Commanded the
Bishops out of his presence, lest their Bodies might suffer.

After these Threatening words the Bishops Ibid. n. 30.
finding no fruits of Repentance in the King (says Paris) left him, and in Lent
following on the In prima Die Lunae in passione Domini: That is the Monday
after the 5th Sunday in Lent. His Kingdom is Interdicted.
first Monday in the Passion of the Lord (which is the Monday before Palm
Sunday) and was on the 10th of the Kalends of April, or 22d of March, they
Interdicted all the Kingdom of England. Then all Ecclesiastic Sacraments
ceased, ( cessaverunt omnia Ecclesiastica Sacramenta) except Confession and the
last Viaticum, or Eucharist given Baptism of Infants. The Bodies of the Dead
were carried out of Cities and Towns and Buried in Highways and Ditches,
without Service or the Ministry of Priests.

Whereupon the day following the King Commanded them to deliver the Append. n.
86.
Letters Patents he had given them, concerning what he promised in the Business
of the Church of Canturbury, in which he had saved his Right and Dignity, to
his Justitiary Geofry Fitz-Peter. Paris fol. 226. n. 40.
And William Bishop of London, Eustachius of Ely, Mauger of Worcester, Iocelin
of Bath, and Giles Bishop of Hereford, privately went beyond Sea.

The King during this Treaty with the Bishops, to preserve the rights of his
Crown, committed the Custody of Append. n. 87. The King commits the Custody of
the Church of Canturbury to his Chief Clerks.
Christ-Church in Canturbury and all things within it, to Ralph of St. Martin,
and Robert of London one of his Chief Clercs; and likewise the Custody of
Appertinencies belonging to the Priory, to the same Robert, and Henry de
Sandwich. And committed also to the Custody of the said Ralph and Robert, and
Ralph de Arden the Custody of the Manners with their Appertinencies belonging to
the Archbishopric, during his Royal Pleasure.

Also Append. n. 88.
during this Treaty with the Bishops, Simon Langton, Stephans Brother came to
the King at Winchester, desiring him Bishops to admit his Brother to the
Archbishopric, He offers to receive the Archbishop, saving his own Right and
Dignity. Simon Langton's insolent Reply to the King.
which he offered to do saving his Right and Dignity. When the King first
mentioned it, he presently replied, he (that is, his Brother) would do nothing
for the King, unless he would wholly Refer himself to him; And lest upon
Sinister and Partial Reports of this matter the Peoples affections in Kent
especially might be alienated from the King, he wrote to them to let them know
what mischief and injury he had done to him.

The King Mat. Paris f. 226. n. 40.50.

The King revenges himself upon the Church and Churchmen.


much confounded at the Sentence of the Interdict, sent his Sheriffs, and other
Ministers of Iniquity into all parts of England: (Rex ob causam Interdicti
mente nimis Confusus misit Vicecomites suos and alios iniquitatis Ministros in
omnes fines Angliae) and Commanded every Prelate, and their inferior Clergy
with terrible Threats, That forthwith they should depart the Kingdom, and
require the Pope to do him Justice for this Injury; and also put Bishoprics,
Abbeys, Priories under the Custody of Laymen, and Commanded all Church Rents to
be Confiscated.

But in this matter the Ibid. He Seizes their Temporalties and goods.
Bishops were so Wary, as not to go out of their Monasteries unless Expelled by
force; and the Kings understanding it, would not do violence to them, nor had
they Command from the King to do it. Their Goods they converted to the Kings
use, and moderately provided for them Food and Raiment out of their own
Estates. The Clercs Barns were every where locked up and the Grain Confiscated.
Ib. f. 227. li^. 1.
The Concubines of the Priests and Clercs (Presbyterorum and Clericorum
Focariae) through all England, were imprisoned by the Kings Officers, and
forced to pay great Compositions for their Liberty. Ibid. l. 2.
The Religious and all Men Kings Soldiers, nor was there any one to do them
right. The Parents also of the Archbishop and Bishops, who declared the
Sentence of Interdict, were spoiled of their Goods and cast into Prison.
Amongst these Evils (says Paris) the foresaid Ibid. n. 10.
Bishops remained beyond Sea, living in all manner of Delights, not opposing
themselves as a Wall of Defense for the House of the Lord, but when they saw
the Wolf coming

After this general Seizure of the Temporalties and Goods of the Bishops and
Clergy, But restored them to those who refused to comply with the Interdict.
to such of them as submitted to the King and refused to comply with the
Interdict, who celebrated Divine Service, and administered the Sacraments, the
King by Special Writs Append. N. 89, 90, 91.
restored their Temporalties, Goods and Chattels, keeping in his hands the
Lands and Goods of all Abbots, Priors, Religious, and Clercs, Interdict; nor
did he seize the Lands or Goods of any other Religious Persons or Clercs, but
such as Append. n. 92.
refused to perform Divine Service after the publishing of the Interdict, which
was upon the Monday next before Palm Sunday, or the sixth Sunday or last Sunday
in Lent.

And for the security of their Persons, he Issued his Append. N. 93. He sent
out his Precept for their Protection.
Precept, That no Man against his Peace should abuse either Clercs or
Religious, word or deed, and if they did, and could be taken, they should be
hanged upon the next Oak. Likewise for their Grain he Append. N. 94.
permitted all Archbishops, Bishops, Priors, Religious Persons, and Clercs,
after their Barns were shut up, to sell it until the Feast of St. Catherin,
that is, the 25th of November.

King John Reflecting upon the Circumstances he was in, fearing Paris f. 2^7.
n. 10. He requires pleges of his great men for security of their Fidelity.
the Pope might absolve his Subjects from their Allegiance to him, Pleges of
all the Great Men he suspected, to be delivered to him for their future
fidelity; Many complied with his Commands, some delivered their Sons, others
their Nephews, or nearest Relations, to the Messengers or Commissioners he sent
for them, Ibid. n. 20.
some of which coming to William de Braosa, his Wife Maud told them she would
not deliver her Children to their Master King John, because he ought honorably
to have provided for his Nephew Arthur, whom he Basely Killed.

Next Year Ibid. n. 50. A. D. 1209. He forces the King of Scots to desire peace.
the King raised a great Army, and marched toward Scotland; and when he came to
Norham Castle in Northumberland, the King of Scots there met him and desired
Peace; King John Reproves him for Receiving, favoring, or assisting his
Fugitives, and public Enemies; but by the Mediation of Friends to both Nations,
Ibid. f. 228. lin. 1. The Terms upon which the peace was agreed.
they agreed upon these Terms, That the King of Scots should pay unto him
Eleven thousand Marks of Silver, and that his Daughters should be delivered
Pleges for the securing of Peace between

Afterward Ibid. lin. 6. He received the Homages of all free Tenants in the
Kingdom.
he received the Homages of all Men that were Free Tenants, and Boys of 12
years of Age of the whole Kingdom (suppose their Sons only) whom after they had
done their Fealty, he received Kindly, and dismissed them with the Kiss of
Peace. Deinde cepit Homagia de omnibus hominibus libere tenentibus; and etiam
Duodecim Annorum pueris totius Regni, Quos omnes post fidelitatem Ibid. lin. 8.
The Welchmen came to him at Woodstock and did their Homages.
The Welchmen also, (which was never heard of before) came to the King at
Woodstock, and did their Homages to him, although it was Burdensome as well to
the Rich as Poor.

After two years Ibid. n. 20. Pope Innocent commanded the Bishops to
Excommunicate King John by name.
continuance of the Interdict, and there seemed no hopes of King John's
amendment, or his giving Satisfaction, Pope Innocent could no longer suffer his
Rebellion to go unpunished, (Papa Innocentius ipsius Rebellionem Diutius multam
Dissimulare non potuit,) whereupon by advice of his Brother Cardinals, he
Commanded the Bishops of London, Ely and Worcester by name, to Pronounce him
Excommunicate; That so by Publishing the Sentence every Sunday and Holy Day in
all Conventual Churches through England, they might cause him more strictly to
be avoided by all men; Ibid. n. 30
But when those Bishops committed the publication of the Sentence to their
Brother Bishops and other Prelates that remained in England, Dumb Dogs either
by favor or fear of the King, and dare not Bark, The Bishops in England durst
not pubblish the Sentence.
(Effecti sunt universi metu regio, vel fa^o^, Canes muti, non audentes
Latrare,) and therefore Dissembling to Execute what was enjoined them, they did
not proceed in doing the Popes Commands according to due Form of Law.
Nevertheless the Sentence was known to all men, and filled their mouths with
Discourse; Ibid. n. 40. Geofry Archdeacon of of Norwich leaves the Kings
Service.
Amongst whom Geofrey Archdeacon of Norwich as he sat in the Exchequer
managing the Kings business, Discoursed Beneficed men to remain any longer in
the Service of an Excommunicated King, and so departed without leave: The King
having notice of it, sent William Talebot a Knight after him with some Forces,
who took him, put him in Prison and in Bonds, His punishment.
where after a few Days, by the Kings Command he had a Leaden Cope put on, with
the pressure whereof, and want of Victuals he Dyed.

In this Time of the Interdict one Master Ibid. n. 50. A. D. 1209. Alexander
Caementarius maintained the Kings cause against the Pope.
Alexander, called Caementarius, a counterfeit Divine (Speudo-Theologus)
maintained the Kings Cause against the Pope; Mat. f. 269. n. ^0.
Westminster says he was at Paris a famous Master, Rector, and Reader in
Theology. Parisijs celebris haberetur Magister, and Rector, and Lector in
Theologia, and that he Defended the Kings Cause out of Ambition. And for that
Reason by Paris f. 229. lin. 6. His Goods and Benefices taken from him.
procurement of the Pope, his Goods and Benefices were taken from him, and was
reduced to so great Misery, as in a poor habit he was forced to beg his Bread
from Door to Door.

In the Year 1206 Dyed Mat. West. f. 267* n 20. and f. 268. n. 50.
William Bishop of Lincoln, and this Mat. West. f. 267* n 20. and f. 268. n.
50.
Hugh de Wells the Kings Chancellor was chosen Bishop, who obtained leave of
the King to go into France that he might receive his Consecration from the
Archbishop of Roven. Mat. Paris f. 229. n. 10, 20.

Hugh Bishop of Lincoln received his Consecration from Stephan Langeton.

The King Seized his Bishopric.


So soon as he came into Normandy, he forthwith went to Stephan Langeton,
performed his Canonical Obedience to him, and was Consecrated by him on the
20th of December. And when it was Known to the King, he seized the Bishopric,
and confiscated the Profits: and Delivering the Seal to Walter de Gray made
him Chancellor.

King John kept his Christmas at Windsor, Ibid. n. 20. A. D. 1210. The great
men attend upon the King notwithstanding the Interdict.
where all the great men of England attended upon, and conversed with him,
notwithstanding the Sentence of Interdict, but whether out of Loyalty or Fear
it remains Doubtful. The Historian says, (Omnibus sese subtrahentibus Rex
nocive insidebatur) the King sat upon the Skirts of all such as withdrew or
absented themselves.

Ibid. f. 230. lin. 6. and n. 20.
King passed over with an Army into Ireland, and having Ibid. f. 230. lin. 6.
and n. 20.
disposed all things according to his mind, returned and Landed in England on
the 30th of August, and making great speed to London, caused all the Prelates
of England to appear before him. Upon this Ibid. and n. 30.

He Summons all the Prelates of England to appear before him.

All Ecclesiastics forced to a Composition.


general Summons there came Abbats, Priors, Abbesses, Templars, Hospitallers,
the Guardians of the Towns of the Order of Clugny, and other Transmarine Aliens
of what Order or Dignity soever, who were all forced to so great a Composition,
as it hundred thousand pounds Sterling. And the White Monks only, all other
excepted, were forced to pay to the King 40000 l. of Silver.

The King Ibid. n. 40. A. D. 1211. He raised a great Army, and Marched into
Wales.
Summoned a great Army to meet him at VVhitchurch in Shrapsh^re, with which on
the eighth of July he marched into Wales as far as Snowdun, and carried all
before him; the Kings and Nobles he subdued without Resistance; for their
future VVhitchurch on the 15th of August, He subdued them and received Pleges
for their obedience.
and proceeding from thence to Northampton, where the Popes Nuntio Pandulph,
and Durand a Templar met him, who came into England to make Peace between the
Secular Government and the Ecclesiastic. (Qui ad hoc venerunt, ut pacem inter
Reg^um and Sacerdotium Reformarent). At the Request of these men the King Ibid.
n. 50. This willingness to receive the Archbishop and all the proscribed
Bishops.
freely granted that the Archbishop of Canturbury, and the Monks, and all
Proscribed Bish^ps, might return in Peace and Security to their own places But
because the King would not make satisfaction for the Damages done to, and the
Goods of the Archbishop and Bishops, which were Confiscated. The Treaty came
to nothing, the Nuntio and his assistant returning into France. Ibid. He ^axed
those that did not go with him in h^s Welsh expedition.
So soon as they were gone the King took of these M^litary men that were not
present in the Welsh expedition for every Knights Fee two Marks of Silver.

About Ib. f. 231. lin. 1. A. D. 1211. Reginald Earl of Bologn ill used by the
King of France He is kin^ly received by King John.
this time Reginald de Domino Martino (Dan Martin) Earl of Bologn was thrust
out of his Earldom, and deprived of all his Goods by the King of France, who
gave it to his own Son Philip in perpetual right, with the Daughter and Heir of
that Earl, who came into England and was Honorably received by King John, by
whose Bounty he received 300 l. a Year in Land, and did Homage and Fealty to
him. Ibid. l. 7. and Tho. Walsin. Hypodig. Neust f. 460. n 20.
Leolin Prince of North Wales made some incursions into England, but was
repelled and forced to subjection.

The Pope Paris f. 231. n. 10. The Pope absolveth all his Subjects from their
Allegiance.
much admiring the Contumacy of King John, That he would not comply with the
Dictates of his Nuntio, absolved all his Subjects high and low, from their
Fidelity and Subjection to him, Forbidding all and singular under the pain of
Excommunication, strictly to avoid him at his Table, in Counsel, Discourse and
Conversation.

At Dinner on Ibid. n. 30. A. D. 1212.
Mid-Lent Sunday the King Knighted Alexander the King of Scots Eldest Son and
Heir. And about that time Mauger Ibid.
Bishop of Worcester Dyed at the Abbey of Pontigny in France.

Not long after Ibid. n. 40. The Welsh make Incursions into England.
the Welsh made hostile irruptions, and took several Castles in England, and
cut off the heads of the Defendants, burnt many Towns, and returned with great
spoils into their own Country. The King was much moved at this action, and
levied a exercitum innumerabilem) of Knights, and ordinary Horse and Foot,
resolving to harrass all Wales, and exterminate the Inhabitants, and in Revenge
Ibid. King John Hanged the Welsh Hostages.
Hanged up the twenty eight Hostages or Pleges he had Received the year before.
Just as he was ready for the Expedition, he received Ibid. n. 50. He has
notice of a Conspiracy against him, but slights it.
Letters from the King of Scots, and his Daughter Wife to Leolin King of
Northwales, and others of a Traitorous Conspiracy formed against him, all which
he neglected and slighted, and went on to Chester, where again he received
Letters, Ibid. f. 232. lin. 1.
That if he Marched forward, he would either Slain by his Noblemen, or
delivered to his Enemies to be Destroyed. At these Repeated Letters he was much
Troubled, and when he understood his great men of England were absolved from
their Obedience and Fealty, he gave more Credit to the Letters. Ibid. lin. 3.
At length he was convinced, and sent to his Great men for Pleges.
Atque cum intellixisset Magnates Angliae a sua esse Fidelitate absolutos,
majorem literis sibi destinatis Fidem adhibuit) And then changing his Design,
Disbanded his Army, and came to London, Commissioners, to all the Great Men he
suspected to send him Pleges. That thereby he might know who would or would not
obey him. Those who dare not resist the Kings Commands, Some sent their Sons,
etc others refused and fled.
sent their Sons, Nephews, and nearest Relations, That so they might in some
measure appease his indignation. But Eustachius de Vesci, and Robert
Fitz-VValter being accused of the Treason, fled out of England, Eustachius into
Scotland, and Robert into France.

Some while after, one Ibid. n. 10. Peter the Hermit his Prophecy.
Peter an Hermit in the Diocese of York (after he could not but see the Pope
would Depose King John) Prophesied that before Ascension Day he should be no
King: much Credit was given to what he said, notwithstanding the King kept him
in Bonds, and Close Prisoner. And (the Ibid. n. 20. King John's dissolute Life.
Monk says) the King Defiled many Noblemens Wives and Daughters, laid great
Taxes on others, and Confiscated the Estates of others, so as he made to
himself almost so Enemies as there were great men. And therefore at this time,
Ibidem.
when they knew themselves absolved from their Fealty and Allegiance, they
rejoiced much: (and says the Monk further) if common same was to be credited,
they every one sent the King of France, a Ibid. n. 30.
Chart Sealed with their Seals, That he might safely come into England, receive
the Kingdom, and be Crowned with honor and glory.

About this time Ibid. A. D. 1212. The Bishops inform the Pope against the King.
Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury, William Bishop of London, and Eustachius
Bishop of Ely, went to Rome, and informed the Pope of the many Rebellions and
Enormities King John had committed since the Interdict (inuerunt Papae
multimodas Rebelliones, and Enormitates quas fecerat Rex Anglorum Johanes)
lifting up the hand of oppression and Cruelty against God and Holy Church; and
therefore humbly supplicated him in this Extremity to commiserate and assist
the English Church. The Pope was very Sorrowful, when he had heard their
Narrative, and by advice of his Cardinals, Bishops, wise men, Ibid. n. 40. The
Pope pronounces the Sentence of Deposition. And writes to King Philip to put it
in Execution.
he pronounced the Sentence of Deposition against King John, and ordered a more
worthy person to succeed him; and wrote to Philip King of France to put this
Sentence in Execution; and that he might undertake it, he granted to him the
Remission of all his sins, and the Kingdom of England to him and his Successors
in perpetual right, when once he had Dethroned and expelled him. Ad hujus
quoque sententiae executionem, scripsit Dominus Papa, potentissimo Regi
Francorum Philippo, Quatenus Remissionem Rege Anglorum a Solio Regni expulso,
ipse and successores sui Regnum Angliae Jure perpetuo possiderent.

He Ibid. n. 50. The Popes zeal to have King John dethroned.
wrote also to all great men, Knights, and other Warriers of diverse Nations,
That they should undertake the Crusado, (ut sese Cruce signarent) for the
Dethroning of the King of England, and follow the King of France the General in
this Expedition, and labor to vindicate Universal Church, and Decreed that
whosoever should contribute either Money or other assistance, toward the
subduing of that Contumacious King, should remain secure as well in their Goods
as persons, and in the Suffrages of their Souls, or Prayers for their Souls, in
the Peace of the Church; as those who visit the Sepulcher of the Lord. Sicut
illi qui Sepulchrum Domini visitant, Tam in Rebus, quam in personis, and
animarum suffragiis in pace Ecclesiae securi permaneant. Ibid. Pandulph sent
into England.
And with this Commission and Instructions he sent Pandulph his Nuntio, with
the English Bishops, that in his presence they might be executed.

But when Ibid* and f. 233. l. 1.
they were all gone out, Pandulph asked the Pope privately what he might do, if
the King of England should repent, and make satisfaction to God and the Roman
Church, and all others concerned in this business? He presently gave him a form
of Peace, to which if the King would assent, he might find favor at the
Apostolic See.

In January Ibid. n. 20. Ann. Dom. 1213. The English Bishops pronounced the
Sentence in France. They exhort King Philip to execute it. He accordingly
prepares to go into England.
next year Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury, William Bishop of London, and
Eustachius Bishop of Ely, in a Council in France before the King, Bishops,
Clergy, and Laity solemnly promulged the Sentence that had been pronounced
against the King of England for Contumacy, and then exhorted the King of France
and all with him, and for the Remission of their Sins enjoined them to Depose
King John, and set up another by the Popes Authority. He had now what a long
time he desired, and prepares accordingly, and Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights,
and Esquites, to be ready with their Horse and Arms at Roven eight days after
Easter, Rex Francorum omnes suae ditionis h^mines, duces, videlicet, Com^es and
Barons, Milites and servientes cum equis and armis, etc.) under the Disgrace
of being reputed Turn-tayls or Run-aways, (sub nomine Du Fres^ says, these
words, sub nomine Culvertagil, are of the same import with sub Poena
Confiscationis.
Culverragii) or least they should be disinherited as Traitors. At the same
time he caused all

King Ibid. n. 40.
John having notice of this great preparation against him beyond Sea, took care
to prevent the Danger of it, by fitting up all the Ships in all the Ports of
England, and by sending to all the Append. N. 95.
Sheriff^ of every County of England to summon all the Earls, Barons, Knights,
and all Freemen and Esquires or Sergeants, whoever they were, and Homage and
Ligeance to him. Paris 234. n. 10, 20* King John's preparation to oppose King
Philip.
There were several Rendezvouses at Dover, Feversham, and Ipswich, where the
numbers were so great as they wanted Victuals; therefore the unarmed multitude
was sent home, and the Knights, Esquires, Freemen, Crosse-Bow-men and Archers
staid upon the Coast. The Bishop of Norwi^h came out of Ireland with 500
Soldiers, and many Horse to the King, and was kindly received. The whole Force
that was Barham Down, consisted of sixty Thousand strong French Fleet, and
fight them with his Navy which was greater and stronger then that of France.

While King Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. Pandulph affrighteth King John.
John expected the arrival of the King of France upon the Coast of Kent near
Dover, Pandulph sent two Templars to let the King know he would speak with him,
by whom the King desired Dover, when Pandulph tells him, what a vast Navy and
Army the King of France The French Historians Rigord and Mez^ra^ and our
Hypodigm. Neustria.
Walsingham in this Year 1213. say that of all the Nobility of France, Ferrand
Earl of Flanders only refused to assist the King of France in this Expedition,
so that he resolved before he took Shipping, to put him into a Condition not to
be able to hurt him. He subdued the Towns of ^yre, ^asse^, and all the Country
to Bruges, which he took also, and Besieged Gan^, at which time his Navy which
consisted of seventeen Hundred Ships, King Philip prepares a great Navy.
as many of it as could put into Dam, English Fleet put to Sea under the
Command of the Earl of Bologne, and William Longs^ee Earl of Salisbury the
Kings Brother, which took all those which lay upon the Coast, and Besieged the
Town of Dam, with the Ships in the Harbor. The King of France leaves Gant, and
beats them on Shore, The English blocked up his Ships in Dam.
and Killed Two thousand, nevertheless, they keeping the Sea, the French
Vessels could not get out without falling into their hands, and therefore the
King of France caused the Furniture to be taken out, and all the Ships to be
Burnt, and afterward Fired the Town of Dam.
had at the Mouth of the River Seyn, ready to set Sail, and take possession of
his Kingdom, and doubted not but to make short work of it; having as he
Boasted, Charts or assurances from most of the great men of England of their
Fidelity and obedience to him.

Being Ibid. and f. 235. lin. 1. and n. 10, 20. A. D. 1213. He submits to a
Form of Peace drawn up by the Pope.
Terrifyed and Confounded with this News, King John by the persuasion of
Pandulph submitted to the form of Peace Pope, in which he swear to stand to the
Commands of the Pope before his Legate or Nuntio, in all things for which he had
been Excommunicated, and to make full Restitution and Recompense, for all
things which had been taken away from the Clergy or Laity by reason of the
Interdict or present Quarrel; and to pardon and receive into favor not only the
proscribed Bishops, the Prior and Monks of Canturbury, but also Robert
Fitz-Walter, and Eustachius de Ves^y, and all other Clercs or Luics concerned
in it. Append. N. 96.
Letters Patents to be made, by which he would confirm these things, and cause
as many Bishops and Barons, as the Archbishop and Bishops should choose, to
Swear, and give their Append. N. 97.
Letters Patents for the security of the Peace. And that if he, or any others
by his Order should violate this Agreement, Then those Bishops or Barons, on
behalf of the Church, should adhere to the Popes Commands against them, and
that he would for ever lose the Custody of vacant Churches. And obliged himself
to Paris f. 235. lin. 46.
send all Archbishop and Bishops before their Return into England. And further
upon this Agreement he was forced to disclaim his right to Outlaw any
Clergyman, as appears by his Letters Patents in the Appendix, N. 108.

The greatest part of the Form of Peace Drawn by the Append. N. 98.
Pope, or his Order was the Resignation of his Crown, and the form of his Doing
Homage to him; For his Offense was so great against God, and his Mother holy
Church, That nothing but Granting his Kingdoms of England and Ireland to the
Pope, and making them St. Peter's Patrimony, and becoming his Vassal could
expiate it. And he must also declare, That he did all this freely and
voluntarily by the advice of his Barons, and not compelled by fear or force of
the Inderdict. Append. N. 99.
And after he had given away his Crown and Kingdoms, and done Homage to the
Pope, he took them again in Fee to hold them of him by Homage Fealty, and a
thousand Marks by the year Rent for all other Services, That is 700 Marks for
England, and 300 Marks for Ireland. Append. N. 100.
Saving to him and his Heirs the power of Executing all Justice, and Creating
Justices, and all their Liberties and Royalties. Salvis nobis, and haeredibus
nostris, Justiciariis, Libertatibas and Regalibus nostris. Two or three
Exemplars of this Grant of the Crown and Kingdom are to be found in the
Appendix at the Numbers last mentioned.

This done, and the Charts, or Letters Patents of the Grant delivered to
Pandulph, he returned into Paris f. 237. n. 40. Pandulph returns into France
with 8000 l.
France with 8000 l. Sterling part of the Restitution-money for what had been
taken from them, which was to be paid to the Archbishop and Bishops: The Monks
of Canterbury, and others, which were in Exile, by reason of the Interdict Ibid.
the Tenor of the Charts, and form of Peace pleased them all; and Pandulph
earnestly persuaded them to return into England,

He went from them and applied himself to the Ibid. n. 50. He advised the King
of France to desist from his purpose.
King of France, who was ready with an Army to invade England, and advised him
to desist from his purpose, for that now he could not prosecute his design
without offending the Pope, seeing King John was ready to make satisfaction to
holy Church, and obey the Popes The King was not well pleased with what he
said, and told him he had expended more then Sixty thousand pounds in Arms,
Victual, and fitting out of Ships, and had undertaken the enterprise at the
Popes Command for the remission of his sins; and indeed he would not have much
valued what Pandulph said, if it had not been for the Ibid. f. 238. lin. 2.
Earl of Flanders, who refused to follow him, or join in this Expedition, with
whom he was confederated, and would not forsake his Engagement.

Paris in this Ibid. 10, 20, 30.
place reports what was noted before concerning the French Fleet at Dam, and
upon the coast of Flanders, and says, when King John heard of it, he was very
joyful and pleasant, and having no present fear or apprehension of danger from
the King of France, he gave Ibid. 40.
leave to his great men and others, that lay upon the coast to depart home.

The King thought he had an Ibid. n. 50.
opportunity to recover what he had lost in France, and sets the Earl of
Flanders, with the assistance of the Emperor, to invade the East part of that
Kingdom, while he invaded the West, and to that purpose assembles a great Army
at Portsmouth; King John raises Army to invade France. His great men refuse to
go unless he was first Absolved.
but when they came together, the Append. n. 101. He sends for the exiled
Bishops to return.
Great men and Barons refused to follow him, unless he were absolved from the
Sentence of Excommunication. The King much moved at this denial; Append. n.
101. He sends for the exiled Bishops to return.
sent for the Archbishop and Bishops, these persons following, H. Archbishop
of Dublin, John Bishop of Norwich, William Earl of Arundel, Mat. Fitz-Herbert,
and William Archdeacon of Huntingdon, in whose Commission, The King told them
he had long expected and desired their coming, requesting them to make haste.
Paris Paris. f. 239. lin. 2.
adds, the King sent the Charts or Letters of Assurance of 24 Barons that they
might return into England without the least Fear, and receive recompense for
all Damages according to the form of Peace. They landed at Dover the Ibid. lin.
9. He is Absolved.
16th of July, and on St. Margarets day, the 20th of the same Month the King
was Absolved.

The Bishops that came over were Ibid. lin. 6. His submission to the Bishops.
Stephan Archbishop of Canterbury, William of London, Eustachius of Ely, Hugh
of Lincoln, and Giles of Hereford. The King when he knew they were come, went
forth to meet them, and threw himself at their Ibid. n. 10
Feet with Tears, beseeching them to have mercy on him and the Kingdom of
England. They seeing his great Humiliation, lift him up from the Ground with
Tears also, leading him to the Cathedral at Winchester, where before he was
Absolved he made this Oath, Ibid. and n. 20. His Oath before he was Absolved.
That he would Love, Defend, and Maintain Holy Church, and the Clergy, against
all their adversaries to the utmost of his power. That he Edward, and destroy
the wicked ones; That he would Judge all his Men according to the just Judgment
of his Court; and would give every man his Right. He also made Oath, he would
make full satisfaction to all concerned in the Business of the Interdict, for
what had been taken from them before Easter next, if not the Sentence of
Excommunication was to be renewed. Furthermore he Swore Fealty and Obedience to
Pope Innocent and his Catholic Successors, as it was contained

On the Ibid. He sends to all his Sheriffs to enquire what damages the Bishops
had sustained.
morrow afte his Absolution, he sent his Precept to all the Sheriffs of
England, That they should cause to meet at St. Albans on the 4th of August four
Lawful men with the Reeve, (Quatuor Legales Homines cum Preposito) of every
Town they kept in their own hands, that by those and their other Ministers, he
might inquire and be informed, what Damage every Bishop had sustained,

And then he made Ibid. n. ^0. He prepares to go over Sea.
haste to Portsmouth, That he might pass into Poictou, committing the
Government of the Kingdom to Geofry Fitz-Peter and the Bishop of Winchester,
with Direction they should order all the affairs of the Nation with the Advice
of the Archbishop of Canturbury. Ibid. His great men excuse themselves from
going with him.
When the King came to Portsmouth, his Great men, Knights, and such as held by
Military tenure, complained King refused to do; yet he Shipped himself with his
private Family, and after three days, arrived at Iersey, his Great men
returning home, and when he saw himself deserted, came back into England, so
that nothing was further done in this Expedition.

King Ibid. n. 40. A Council held at St. Albans.
was busied in this Affair, his Commissioners or Vice-Royes held a Council at
St. Albans, with the Archbishop and Bishops and Great men of the Kingdom,
where the Kings Peace was Proclaimed to every Man, on whose behalf the Laws of
King Henry his Grandfather were commanded to be observed by all men, and that
all injust Laws should be abrogated. It was further ordered that no Sheriffs,
Foresters, or other the Kings Officers, as they loved their Lives or Limbs,
should Extort any thing violently from any Man, From Scot. and Alla as it is
commonly said* Sed Qu^re. It was an abuse put upon the People by Forest
Officers, who invited them to drink Ale, and then made a Collection not to vex
or inform against them for pretended crimes committed in the Forest.
Scotalls in any part of the Kingdom, as they used to do, (aut Scotalla alicubi
in Regno faciant, etc.)

King John seeing himself deserted by some of the Great men, gathered a great
Army together that he might force the Rebels or Refractory Nobility, to the
performance of their wonted Service. (Magnum Congregavit Exercitum, ut Rebels
ad consuetum obsequium revocaret.) When he began to raise Force to Reduce them,
the Archbishop came to him to Northampton, The Archbishop threatens the King
if he made war upon any without the judgment of his Court.
and told him he violated the Oath he took at his Absolution, if he made War
upon any one without the Judgment of his Court, (si absque Judicio curiae suae
contra Q^empiam B^ll^ moveret.) Ibid. n. 50.
The King with a loud voice answered, he should not lay aside the business of
the Kingdom for him, when as he had nothing to do with Lay-matters. Next
morning King went toward Nottingham; the Archbishop followed him and
threatened, That unless he did quickly desist, he would Anathematize Ibid. f.
240. lin. 1.
all those, but himself, that should take up Arms against any man before the
Relaxation of the Interdict, by which means he caused the King to give over
prosecuting the Barons by force, and left him not, until he had obtained a
Competent day for them to Answer in his Court, to be Tried there. But that they
were ever summoned to, or appeared in the Kings Court, we no where

For probably before that time came, viz. on the 25th of August next following,
the Barons by the Ibid. lin. 6.
Archbishops instigation, made a Confederacy against the King; For he with the
Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Deans, and Barons of the Kingdom, Stephanus
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis cum Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Decanis, and
Baronibus Regni, met at Ibid. lin. 7.

The Archbishop privately told the Great Men he had Absolved the King.


London in St. Paul's that day, where the Archbishop Chant their Canonical
hours with a low voice, and then says Paris in this Colloquium or Parliament,
(as it was reported) The Archbishop called aside some great men of the
Kingdom, and secretly told them, That he had Absolved the King, and forced him
to Swear (Apud VVintoniam, Regem Absolvi, and ipsum jurare compulerim, etc.)
That he would abolish all unjust Laws, and cause the Good Laws, that is to say,
the Laws of King Edward to be observed Ibid. n. 10.
Charter of King Append. n. 102.
Henry the First, by which, if they would they might assert their Liberties
they had long time lost, and producing the Charter, he caused it to be read
before them. And they all Swear in the presence of the Archbishop Ibid. f.
241. n. 10.
That upon a fair oppurtunity, they would strive to Death for those Liberties;
And the Archbishop promised them his most faithful assistance to the utmost of
his power: And so the Confederation being perfected, Conference or Parliament
was Dissolved. (Et sic Confederatione inter eos facta Colloquium solutum est.)
Not long after, on the Second day of October, Ibid. f. 243. lin. 3. A. D. 1213.
dyed Geofrey Fitz-Peter Justiciary of England, To the great detriment of the
Nation, who I find not a party to the Confederation.

Next follows this Monks Ibid. f. 243. n. 20. etc. King John's offer of his
Kingdom to the Emperor of Morocco, and to turn Mohammedan, a malicious Calumny.
story of King John's offering his Kingdom to the Emperor of Morocco, to
relinquish the Christian Religion, Mohammedan; but since he had in less time
then a year before, Granted his Kingdom to the Pope, and received it again as
Feudatary to him, and seeing in this Story he reports Robert of London, the
Kings own Clerc, and one of his Envoy's sent upon this Errand to the Emperor,
in his discourse with him, to have made the most horrid Invective against his
own Prince and Master, that perhaps was ever heard. I shall pass it by as a
Legend only, as a most improbable thing, if not a malicious calumny, and false
Tale raised against him to Alienate the affections of the People from him.

About Michaelmass this Ibid f. 246. n. 30. A. D. 1213. Nicholas the Popes
Legate sent into England to take an estimate of the Clergys Damages.
year, Nicholas Bishop of Tusculum (now Frascati) the Popes Legate came into
England with his Authority to compose the Dissentions between the Secular and
Eccl^siastic Regnum and Sacerdotium reformaret) The Archbishop of Canturbury,
with the Bishops and great Men of the Kingdom, met him at London, where in the
presence of the King and Cardinals, there was a Treaty for three days ( inter
Regnum and Sacerdotium) between the Secular and Ecclesiastic State, concerning
the Damages the Bishops had sustained, and what had been taken from them, at
what time the Ibid. n. 50.

King John's offer.


King offered an hundred thousand Marks to be forthwith paid as a full
Restitution Bishops; yet so, as if it should afterward appear by Inquisition,
That the Sea Mat. Paris. f. 245 lin. 1.
Guardians the King had placed in Churches, or his other Officers, had taken
away more, he further offered to Swear with Fide-jussors, or undertakers for
him, That he would before Easter following by the Judgment of the Legate himself
and the Bishops make full satisfaction for what had been taken from all men.
and f. 247. lin. 1. etc. The Legate accused as a favourer of the King.
The Legate consented to his Proposition, and would have had it presently* put
in execution, and took it ill 'twas not accepted. Whereupon Legate was suspected
to favor the King^ and the Bishops gave a Dilatory Answer to his Proposal,
having agreed, there should first be an Inquisition made of the Damages, and
what had been taken from them, and then the Value or Sum thereof to be
presented to the King. He consented to their Agreement, and there was no more
done that day.

On the Ibid. lin. 7. The King renews his subjection to the Pope.
Morrow they all met in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, where after many and
various discourses about the Relaxation of the Intedict. The King before the
great Altar, in the sight of the Clergy and Laity (Coram Clero and Populo)
renewed the famous subjection of the Lordship or Dominion of Ireland, and his
Crown and Kingdom of England to the Pope. Ibid. n. 10.
And the King's Charter which was formerly sealed with Wax, and delivered to
Pandulph, was now Bulled with b. Gold, and delivered to the Legate, to the use
of the Pope and the Roman Church ( Charta quoque Regis, Cera signata fuit, and
Pandulpho tradita; nunc auro Bultata est, and Legato ad opus Domini Papae, and
Ecclesia Romanae resignata.)

There were two Charters, the First whereof was Sealed with Wax, and delivered
to Pandulph, Templars near Dover, May the 5th. in the Fourteenth of this Kings
Reign, but rather Fifteenth; And this other Bulled or Sealed with a Golden
Bull, or Seal, Dated at St. Paul's London, A. D. 1213. on the third of October,
in the Fifteenth year of his Reign. They are both to be found in the Appendix,
with the Popes Re-grant of the Dominion of Ireland, and Kingdom of England to
King John, N. ^8, 99, 100.
But as to Ibid.
the Restitution of what had been taken from the Clergy, The Third of November
was appointed to Treat of it at Redinge, and when they all met there that day,
the King came not; yet they assembled at VValingford three days after; upon the
sixth of that Month, where the King, as he had done before Ibid. n. 20.
voluntarily offered to satisfy the Bishops and all others whatsoever; but
this was a small matter to such as had their Castles demolished their Houses
pulled down, He offered to make satisfaction to all that were damaged, and
referred it to four Barons.
and their Orchards and Woods stubbed King and Bishops agreed to refer the
Matter to the Arbitration of four Barons, so as the King should make
satisfaction according to their Judgment.

After this the King and Legate, the Archbishop with the Bishops, Great Men,
and all the Religions persons concerned in the Business Ibid. n. 20.
met again at Redinge on the 6th of December, where every one produced a Chart
or Catalogue of what had been taken from him, with Legate favoring the King,
they were put off, and payment was delayed; except that the Archbishop and
Bishops that were out of England with him, received there 15000 Marks of Silver.

What these four Baron^ did, I find not, or what they were, or whether they
undertook the Arbitration. An ^nquiry of Damages appointed by the King.
But the King, according to the ^reement which the Bishop before recited,
issued Inquisitors appointed to make Inquisition in every Bishopric, before
the Archbishops, Clercs, what had been taken from the Bishops, Clercs, and
other Ecclesiastical persons, and Laics, and to return it to the King, as
appears upon Append. n. 103.104.
Record, though the Inquisitions themselves are not to be found; which in all
probability, were the Charts or Catalogues abovementioned.

About this time the Pope Append. N. 105. The Pope writes to his Legate to fill
all vacancies of Abbys and Bishopric's.
wrote to his Legate Nicholas, to Abbacies and Bishoprics, with fit persons,
and wrote to all Chapters, Commanding them to rest in his Advice and
Determination; and if there were any Rebels, or such as contradicted him, that
he should compel them to Obedience by Ecclesiastic censure, without benefit of
Appeal.

The Legate armed Mat. Paris f. 247. n 40. He executes the Popes Letter.
with this power, despised the Archbishop and Bishops of the Kingdom, and went
to the vacant Churches with unfit persons; such as appealed to the Court of
Rome he suspended, and suffered them not to have one penny of what was their own
to bear their charges thither: In many places he gave the vacant Parochial
Churches to his own Clercs, without the consent of the Patrons.

After the Ibid. n. 50. A. D. 1214. The Archbishop and Prelates are troubled
at the Legates practice.
Octaves of Epiphany, the Archbishop of Canturbury, with his Suffragans, met
at Dunstable, to Treat of the Affairs of the English Church, for it much
troubled them, That the Legate without their Advice, and in favor to the Kings
Inclinations, should place insufficient Prelates in the vacant Churches, rather
by Intrusion then Canonical Election: At length when the matter had been
variously discussed, the Archbishop sent two Clercs to the Legate then at
Burton upon Trent, who by appealing, prohibited him on behalf of the
Archbishop of Canturbury, least he might presume to institute Prelates in his
Province, to whom of right it belonged to do it.

The Legate not valuing the Appeal, Ibid. f. 248. lin. 4. The Legate opposes the
Appeal of the Archbishop and Bishops. His Character of the King.
dispatched Pandulph with the Kings assent to the Court of Rome, that he might
defeat the purpose of the Archbishop and Bishops; and when he came there, he
Archbishop with the Pope, and so much extolled the King, affirming he never
saw a more Humble and Modest Prince, that he obtained great favor with the
Pope. Simon de Langeton the Archbishops Brother opposed Pandulph, but because
he brought the Kings Charts Bulled, or Sealed with Gold (Sed Quoniam Charta
Regis auro bullata, a Pandulpho nuper delate fuerit, etc.) containing the
Subjection and Tribute of the Kingdom of England and Ireland, Master Simon in
what he offered against him could Pandulph affirmed also, That the Archbishop
and Bishops were too Rigid and Covetous in the Exaction, and for the
Restitution of what had been taken away in the time of the Interdict; and that
they had beyond Equity depressed the King himself, and the Liberties of the
Kingdom, or the Temporal Liberties, and so for a while the Archbishop and
Bishops designs were put off, or received delay.

King had Ibid. n. 10.
sent a great sum of Money to the chief Commanders of his Forces in Flanders,
that thereby they might be enabled to invade and waste France on that side;
they did so, and took several Towns and Castles, and much harassed the
Country. And the King having sent Messengers to Rome about releasing of the
Interdict, He with his Queen took Shipping at Portsmouth on the Feast of the
Purification of the Virgin Mary, and within few days arrived with a great Army
at Rochel, where came Barons of Poictou, and swear Fealty to him; and presently
after his landing, there were Ibid. n. 20. King John's success beyond Sea.
surrendered to him, and quitted, Twenty six Castles and Fortresses, and while
he was besieging Millesen Castle, there came to him Friar William of St. Owen,
with the Popes Form of Releasing the Interdict, which he sent to Peter Bishop
of Winton his Justiciary of England, with an account of his Successes to
Append. n. 106.
William Earl Marshal, and all the Earls, Barons, and great Men of England with
Directions to them to hear, and Justiciary should say to them concerning the
Form, and Relaxation of the Interdict.

The Messengers or Commissioners Mat. Paris. f. 249. lin. 3.

The Commissioners sent by the King, and Archbishop, urged the Relaxation of
the Interdict.


sent by the King to Rome about this Affair, were John Bishop of N^rwich,
Robert de Marisco Archdeacon of Northumberland, Thomas de Hunting^una, or
rather Herdingtona, and Adam two Noble Knights; Those on the behalf of the
Archbishop were Simon de La^getuna his A. and G. his Clercs; all which
unanimously affirmed in the presence of the Pope, it was very much for the
advantage of the Secular and Ecclesiastic State, that the Interdict should be
released; Append. n. 107.
and by their consents he invented, and appointed the Form of it, by which he
ordered 40000 Marks to be paid to the Archbishop of Canturbury, the Bishops of
London, Ely, and others, they should assign discounting what they had received
before, which being paid, and further caution give, as it is noted in the Form
it self. The Legate without any obstacle of Appeal or Condition, was to release
the Interdict, which Caution was, That Append. N. 109, 110
the King should bind himself by Oath, and his Letters Patents, with six
others, Bishops and Earls, his Fide-jussors, or Sureties for the payment of
12000 Marks a year at two Terms, until the 40000 Marks were fully paid.

At the time Paris ut supra. n. 20. A Council assembled by the Legate at St.
Paul's in London.
when Nicholas the Popes Legate received this Authentic Message from the Pope,
the King was still beyond the Sea, but in his departure from England, he left
the Legate and William Marshal his Commissioners in this Business; and the Legate
assembled a great Council at St. Paul's in London Ibid. n. 30.
where were the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, and
others concerned in this Affair of the Interdict, before whom he propounded the
Form of Restitution for Damages, and what had been taken a way from the
Bishops, etc. which was drawn up by the Pope at Rome, with the consent of the
Parties, Commanding he might be certified what Money had been paid to the
Bishops or others, by the Kings Officers, upon occasion of the Interdict; and
it was proved that the Archbishop, and the Monks of Canterbury, together with
the Bishops of London, Ely, Hereford, Bath and Lincoln, before they returned
into England, received by the hands of Pandulph 12000 Marks Sterling; and in
the Council holden at Reding, December (7o Idus Decembris) after their return,
the same Bishops and Monks received 15000 Marks to be divided between them;
Ibid. n. 40.
so that there remained to be paid only 1^000 Marks, for which they had the
Kings Letters Patents, and the Security of the Bishops of Winchester and
Norwich for the payment of it.

And then after the accomplishment of all these things Ibid. n. 50. A. D. 1214.
16 Johan. Regis.

The Interdict released.


The Legate on the Feast of St. Peter and Paul, ( June 29.) solemnly Interdict,
after it had continued six years, three Months, and fourteen days, to the great
joy of the whole Nation.

The Interdict thus released, Ibid. and f. 250. lin. 1. etc.

The Religious make their suit to the Legate for Restitution.

The Legat's Answer.


There came to the Legate, Abbats, Priors, Templars, Hospitalers, Abbesses,
Nuns, Clercs and Laics an innumerable multitude, ( innumera multitudo)
Requiring Restitution for the Damages and Injuries they had received. But the
Legate Damages and Injuries in the Popes Letters, and that he neither ought or
could transgress the bounds of his Authority; yet advised them to complain and
apply themselves to the Pope, and petition him to do them Justice. Ibid. f.
250. lin. 7.
When the Prelates (that is all the Bishops, Abbats, Priors, etc.) that put in
their Complaints heard this; they returned home without hopes of better
success: nor perhaps most of these, the Religious especially, could really
require nothing, for Paris says, violently extorted, was freely given him. f.
23^. n. 30.
Rex vulpina calliditate ab omnibus Religiosorum Domibus, Chartas exegit Quibus
testarentur se gratis contulisse, Quaecunque ab eis violenter extorsit. And
upon the Patent Roll of the 16th of this King, there is a Append. n. 11.
Form of an Acquittance entered for the Abbats and Convents, by which they
acknowledged satisfaction for what he had received of them during the time of
the Interdict.

About this time King John Paris. f. 250. n. 10, 20. A. D. 1214. King John
would have fought Lewis, but his Barons of Poictou refuse.
marched his Army out of Poictou into Britany, and Besieged the Castle de la
Roche au Moin upon the River Loir between Nants and Angiers, and Lewis the King
of France his Son came with a great Army to Relieve it; King John sent for his
Scouts to discover their Numbers and str^ngth, who returned to him, and
informed him, they were inferior to his, and persuaded him to give them Battle.
He commands his Soldiers to Arm, That he might March and meet him, but the
Barons of Poictou would not follow the King, saying they were not prepared for
a Field Battle; They he suspected their accustomed Treason, and when he was
upon the point of sacking the Castle raised the Siege. Ibid. n. 30.
Lewis also when King John began to March, fearing he would set upon him, fled.
Sicque utterque Exercitus ignominiosa Dilapsus fuga, alter alterum a Tergo
salutavit. And so both Armies having sheaked away by an ignominious flight,
turned their Backs one upon another.

The French Historians, f. 215. n. 30. A. D. 1214.
Rigord especially, and others from him, Report this Action otherwise. They say
Prince Lewis assembled an Army at Chinon Castle, and marched toward King John,
who so soon as heard he was within one days March of him, fled and left the
Lewis afterward took the Castles of Beaufort and Mon^onter, wasted many Rich
places belonging to the Vicecomes or Viscount or Toars, and Demolished the new
Walls of Angiers with which King John had encompassed it.

Within less then a Month after Rigord. f. 216. u. 10, 20, ^0, etc. Paris ut
supra, f. 250.40, 50. etc.

A League against the King of France


upon the 27th of July (sexto Kalendarum Augusti) was fought the famous Battle
of Bovines, between Tournay, Lens, and Lis^e, now in Ar^ois. At this time
Emperor, the King of England, the Earl of Flanders, Dukes of Lovain and
Brabant, Leagued against the King of France, and invaded his Kingdom, while his
Son Lewis was engaged in Poictou and Britany against King John. The person of
the King of France was in great Danger having been beaten off his Horse and
trod under his Feet, yet at length his Enemies were all vanquished, Otho the
Emperor put to flight; his Standard being a Dragon, under an Imperial Eagle
gilt, The King of France vanquisheth Otho the Emperor. Ferrand Earl of
Flanders, and Reginald Earl of Bologn^ taken Prisoners.
Earls, two whereof were Ferrand Earl of Flanders, and Reginald Earl of
Bologne, with twenty five Noble men that carried Banners. Ferrand was
imprisoned in a strong Tower in Paris, and Reginald in a strong Tower in Perone
in Picardy laden with Irons, and Chained to a great piece of Timber. The
Parisians made the King a most splendid Reception at his Entrance into their
City, and celebratred this Victory with great Joy for several Rigord, who was
the King of France his Chaplane, and with him in i^. And may also have a
further account of it in Matthew Pari^, though not so large, yet no ways
interfering with that of R^gord.

After this Victory, by the Industry of Ranulph Earl of Chester and mediation
of Robert the Popes Legate (says f. 224. n. 20. Paris f. 250. n. 30.

A t^uce made for five years between England and France.


Rigord) of religious persons (says f. 224. n. 20. Paris f. 250. n. 30. A
t^uce made for five years between England and France.
Paris) a Truce was made between the two Kings for five years; and King John
Ibid. n. 50.
returned into England (14 Calendarum Novembris) or 19th of October.

About the Ibid. The Earls and Barons Confederate against King John at St.
Edm^nds Bury.
same time, the Earls and Barons under pretense of Edmunds Bury; For when they
had a long time, whispered and talked privately together, the Charter of King
Henry the first was produced, which the Barons received from Steppan Archbishop
of Canturbury at London (ut praedictum est) as was said before, which contained
certain Laws and Liberties of King Edward granted to the Holy English Church,
and the great men of the Kingdom with some other Liberties the King added of
his own, (continebat autem Charta qu^sdam Libertates and Leges Edwardi Sanctae
Ecclesiae Anglicanae pariter, and Magnatibus Regni Concessas, Exceptis
Quibusdam Libertatibus, Quas idem Rex de suo adjecit.)

When they all met in the Ibid. f. 253. lin. 2.
Church of St. Edmund, the great Barons begun to Swear first upon the great
Altar, That if the King Refused to grant them those Liberties, They would make
War upon him, and withdraw themselves from his Fealty, until he should by
Charter Sealed with his Seal, confirm all they Demanded. And they all Agreed,
That at Christmas they would all go to the King together, to Demand, That the
Liberties before mentioned might be Confirmed. And in the mean time they would
provide themselves with Horse and Arms. That if perchance the King should start
from his own Oath (as they believed he would, for his Doubleness) They might
compel him to satisfaction by taking his Castles. Quod si forte Rex a proprio
vellet Juramento (Quod been Credebant) resilire, propter suam Duplicitatem:
ipsi protinus per Captionem Castrorum suorum eum ad satisfactionem compellerent.

In the Ibid. f. 253. n. 30. A. D. 1215. They demand of the King a restitution
of certain Laws and Liberties.
year One Thousand two hundred and fifteen at Christmas the King kept his
Court at Worcester one day only, and hasting from thence to London, remained in
the New Temple, where the great men came to him in Luxurious Military Habits,
and desired certain Liberties and Laws of King Edward, with other Liberties
Granted to Kingdom of England, and the English Church, might be confirmed, as
they were contained and written in the Charter of Henry the first, and the
foresaid Laws. Moreover they affirmed, That at the time of his Absolution at
Winchester, he promised those Laws and Liberties, and was bound by Oath to the
Observation of them. Ibid. n. 40. The Kings Answer.
The King observing the earnestness of the Barons, and their readiness for War,
was startled, and for the greatness and difficulty of the matter required time
to Answer until the close of Easter; King (though unwillingly) found Sureties
the Archbishop of Canturbury, the Bishop of Ely, and William Marshal, That on
the day prefixed, he should with reason satisfy them all. Upon which the great
men returend home.

The King Ibidem. Fealty Sworn and Homage renewed to the King through all
England. He took upon him the Cross.
intending to secure himself for the future, caused Feal^y to be Sworn, and
Homages to be renewed through all England to himself alone, against all men.
And that he might the better provide for himself, on Candlemass day he took
upon him the Cross, (timore potius quam Devotione) out of Fear rather than
Devotion, That he might be more safe under the protection of it.

In Easter Week, Ibid. n. 50 The great men me^t at Stanford.
The great men met a Stanford with Horse and Arms, and had drawn into their
party almost all the Nobility of England, who made up a very great Army, in
which there were numbered two thousand Knights, besides other Horsemen, and
Foot, armed with diverse Weapons.

The Ibid. f. 254. lin. 1. The names of the chief Conspirators.
Chief of the Presumption and Incendiaries, (fuerunt autem) were Robert
Fitz-Walter, Eustathius de Vesci, Richard de Percy, Robert de Ros, Peter de
Bruis, Nicholas de Stutevil, Saher Earl of Winchester, Robert Earl of Clare,
Roger Earl Bigod, William de Mumbray alias Mowbray, Roger de Creissy, Ranulph
Fitz- Robert, Robert de Ver, Fulk Fitz-Warin, William Mallet, William
Montacute, William de Beauchamp, S. de Rhyme, William Marshal the Younger,
William Manduit, Roger de Mont-Begon, John Fitz-Robert, G. de Laval, O.
Fitz-Alan, W. de Hobrug, O. de Vallibus alias Vaus, G. de Gant, Mauritius de
Gant, R. de Braleste, R. de Montfichet, William de Lanvalei, Geofrey de Mande^^
Earl of Essex, William his Brother, William de Huntingfield, Robert de Gresley,
G. Constable of Meurum, Alexander de Pointun, Peter Fitz-Iohn, Alexander de
Sutum, Osbert de Bovi, Stephen Archbishop of Canturbury the head of the
Conspiracy.
John Constable of Chester, Thomas de Muletun, Conanus Fitz-Ely, and many
others, who Conspired together, and Confederated under Stephan Archbishop of
Canturbury ( isti comunes Con^urati and Confederati, Stephanum Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum Ibid. n. 10.
Capitalem Consentaneum habuerunt.

At this Ibid. n. 10, 20.
time the King was at Oxford expecting the coming of the great men. On Monday
after Easter they Rendezvouzed at Brackley in Northamptonshire. To whom he sent
the Archbishop of Canturbury, and William Marshal Earl of Pembroke with other
wise Liberties and Laws they were they desired; A Schedule of the Laws and
Liberties they desired, delivered to the King.

He refused to grant then.


and they delivered unto them a Schedule or Writing, ( nunciis Schedulam
p^rrexerunt) which for the most part contained the ancient Customs of the
Kingdom. Affirming that if the King would not forthwith Grant and Confirm them
under Seal, they would compel him, by Seizing his Castles, Lands and
Possessions. They Returned to the King with the Schedule, and read to him all
the Articles contained in it; which when the King heard, he in Fury asked, Why
the Barons with unjust Exactions did not Demand the Kingdom? They are vain
things (says he) and without Foundation, and then affirmed Oath, He would
never Grant such Liberties as would make him a Servant or Slave.

When Ibid. n 30. The great men choose Robert Fitz-Walter their General.
the Archbishop, and William Marshal, could not bring the King to consent to
the Barons Demands; By his Command they returned to them, and gave them an
account what he had said; And the great men thereupon chose Robert Fitz-Walter
their General, calling him, The Marshal of the Army of God, and of Holy Church,
(Apellantes eum Mareschallum Exercitus Dei and Ec^lesiae Sanctae;) They Marched
to Northampton, and Besieged that Bedford Castle, where they were kindly
received by William Beuchamp.

Hither Ibid. 40, 50. The Londiners invite them to take possession of their
City.
came to them Messengers from the City of London, secretly showing them, that
if they would possess themselves of the City of London, they must make haste;
Forthwith they March to Ware, and from thence march all night to London, and on
the 24th May, early in the Morning, and in the time of Mass, without Noise
entered the City, by the favor of the Rich Citisens, the poor not daring to
speak against it.

The Barons Ibid. n. 50.
having thus possessed themselves of London, after they had placed their own
Guards upon every Gate, and taken security of the Citisens, Disposed of all
things in the City as they pleased; They sent their Letters to the Earls,
Barons, and Knights, that really King, exhorting them with Threats, Ib. f. 255.
lin. 1. and n. 10. The Barons exhort all to desert the King.

They threaten to ruin all that shall adhere to him.


That if they would not Desert the perjured King, and faithfully close with
them in asserting their Liberties, they would proceed against them as Public
Enemies, beat down their Castles, burn their Houses, and destroy their Warrens,
Parks, and Hortyards. Those who had not yet Sworn the Liberties were William
Marshal Earl of Pembroke, Ranulph Earl of Chester, William Earl of Salisbury,
William Earl Waren, William Earl of Albemarl, H of Cornwall, William de
Albeney, Robert de Vipont, Peter Fitz-Hubert, Brien de Lis^e, G. de Luci, G. de
Furnival, Thomas Basset, Henry de Braibroke, John de Bassinghorn, William de
Cantilupe, Hen. de Cornbusse, John Fitzhugh, Hugh de Nevile, Philip de
Albiney, John Marshal, William Bruwer. The most of whom upon the Command of the
Barons left the King, went to London and Confederated with them.

The King Ibid. n. 20, 30. The King promised to grant the Liberties they
desired.
seeing himself Deserted, and fearing they would Seize his Castles, sent
William Earl of Pembr^ke, and other faithful Messengers to them, to let them
know he would Grant them the Laws and Liberties they Desired. And sent to them
also to appoint a day and place for a meeting to prosecute this affair. The
Barons (immenso Gaudio recreati, statuerunt Regi Diem ut veniret contra eos ad
Colloquium in pratum inter Stanes and Windleshores situm, Decimo quinto die
Junii) being Transported with great Joy, A. D. 1215.17 Johannis Regis.
appointed the King a Stanes and Windsor, upon the 15th of June.

The King and great men Ibid. n. 40. He met the Barons at the Day appointed.
met at the Day and place appointed, and each side being by themselves, they
began to Treat of Peace and the Liberties aforesaid. There were of the Kings
party in Appearance (Fuerunt autem Quasi ex part Regis) Stephan Archbishop of
Canturbury, Henry Archbishop of Dublin, William Bishop of London, Peter Bishop
of Winchester, Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, Iocelin Bishop of Bathe, Walter Bishop
of Worcester, William Bishop of Coventry, and Benedict Bishop of Rochester,
Master Pandulph the Popes Old Servant, and Brother Almaric Master of the
Militia of the Temple in England, with the following Noble men, William
Marschal Earl of Pembroke, the Earls of Salisbury, Waren and Arundel, Alan of
Galaway, W. Fitz-Gerold, Peter Fitz-Herbert, Thomas Basset, Matthew
Fitz-Herbert, Alan Basset, Hugh de Nevile, Hubert de Bur^ Seneschal of Poictou,
Robert de Ropeley, John Marshall, de Albiney.

Those of the Barons Ibidem. and n. 50.
party were so many of the Nobility as they were not easily numbered, and
therefore at Length, the King perceiving his Forces to be inferior to those of
the Barons, without difficutly Granted the Laws and Liberties in two Charters,
because they were so Ibidem. f. 259. n. 30. He granted them two Charters of
Liberties.
many they could not be contained in one Schedule: The first of them was called
Charta Communium Libertta^um, Magna Charta, The Charter of Liberties, or the
Great Charter: The Second was called Charta Forestae, The Charter of the
Liberties and Customs of the Forest, and are both to be found in the Append.
n. 112, 113.
Appendix turned into English.

Before the making of this Charter of Common Liberties (as it was called) on
the fifteenth of January in the 16th of this King, he Append. n. 114. He
granted the Clergy liberty to Elect their Prelates.
Granted the Freedom of Elections to Bishoprics and Abby's, to Cathedral and
Conventual Churches to choose their Prelates great and small, without his
Nomination or Recomendation of such as were faithful to him, etc. contrary to
the usage of his Predecessors and procured the Popes Append. n. 115. And to go
beyond Sea when they pleased.
Confirmation of it, which Grant is particularly confirmed by the first Article
of this Charter.

The Clergy also by this Charter obtained Liberty under general Words, to
depart beyond the Seas, and go and Return at their pleasure, King, before which
time they could not Depart without his License.

There was also inserted into this Charter, an Article, That no Ecclesiastic
person should be Amerced according to the Quantity or Value of their Benefices,
but only according to his Lay-Tenement or Possession, of which they seldom had
any: This Article was freedom and immunity, for the perpetration of all Penal
and Pecuniary Crimes.

From the further Append. n. 16. Twenty five Barons to be chosen to see the
Peace and Liberties kept.
Establishment of these Charters and greater security of the Barons, The King
yielded that they should Choose twenty five Barons, who should cause the peace
and Liberties he had Granted to be Conserved, and so as if he, or his
Justiciarie, broke any of the Articles, and their fault was Discovered to four
of the twenty five Barons, those four should come to them and demand amends,
which if not made within forty Days, they should inform the twenty five, and
they with the Community of the whole Land, should force them by taking of their
Castles, Lands and Possessions, or saving the persons of himself, Queen and
Children, and whoever would Swear to obey the Barons in the Execution of these
things might, nay that he would Command them to do it. If all the Barons could
not Agree, or all upon Summons could not, or would not appear, what the Major
part did was to be firm and allowed. He bound himself also that he would obtein
nothing whereby any of the Liberties or Concessions should be Revoked and
Diminished, and that if any such thing were obtained, it should be void, and
that he would not use it, and then pardons all his men, or Feudataries, Clercs
and Laics. And the better to enable them to do this, the four Castellans or
Governors of the Castles of Northampton, Kenelworth, Nottingham and Scarburgh
should be Sworn to the twenty five Barons, to do with those Castles what they
or the greater part of them Commanded, and that there should always be such
Governors placed in those Castles, as were faithful or well affected and would
keep their Oaths. And then he firmly Commands, That the English Church should
be free, That all men or Feudataries of the Kingdom or Secular Government should
have and hold all the Liberties, Laws and Customs, contained in the Charters,
Well and in Peace, Freely and Quietly, fully and wholly to them and their
Heirs, of him and his Heirs in all things and places for ever; And he and the
Barons Swore to the Observation of them, of all these matters, without fraud or
Deceit; and this Grant Meadow between Stanes and Windsor, on the same day the
Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest were Granted and Confirmed, That is,
on the 15th of June in the 17th year of his Reign.

The five and twenty Mat. Paris f. 262. n. 10. The names of the twenty five
Barons.
Elected Barons were these, The Earl of Clare, the Earl of Albemarle, the Earl
of Gloucester, the Earl of Winchester, the Earl of Hereford, Earl Roger of
Norfolk and Suffolk, Earl Robert of Oxford, the Earl Marshal the Younger, or
William Marshal the Younger, Robert Fitz-Walter Senior, Gilbert de Clare,
Eustachius de Vescy, Hugo Bigod, Willielmus de Munbray alias Mowbray, the Mayor
of London, Gilbert de La-Val, Robert de Ros, the Constable of Chester, Richard
de Perci, John Fitz-Robert, William Malet, Geofrey de Say, Roger de Munbray,
William de Huntingfield, Richard de Munfichet, William de Albeney. Ibid. They
Swear to Compel the King to keep the Peace and agreement.
These five and Twenty Barons Swore by the Isti viginti quinque Barons
Juraverunt, Rege hoc Disponente) That in every Instance, they would obey their
Orders and Directions, and would Compel the King, if perchance he should Repent
him of these things.

On the 18th of June the Append. n. 117. A. D. 1215. 17 Johan. Regis.
same year, the King by his Writ Dated at Runemed Directed to Stephan Harengod,
let him know, That a firm Peace was there made, between him and his Barons,
(inter nos and Barons nostros) on Friday next after the Feast of Holy Trinity,
so as he had received their Homages, and therefore Commanded him to do no
injury to his Barons, or others, by Reason of the Discord between them. And
further Commanded him, that so much of the Fines and Penalties set by reason of
that Discord which remained unpaid should not be Levid, and if any thing had
been taken after that Friday, it was to be restored. He was also to release all
Prisoners and Hostages, taken and detained by reason of the War.

On the 19th of the same Month, Append. n. 118. He gives notice to all Sherifs
and other Officers of the Peace, and Commands them to cause all within their
Jurisdiction to Swear to be obedient to the 25 Barons.

He also Commanded 12 Knights to be chosen in every County to inquire of Evil
Customs, etc.


by his Writ dated at the same place, he signified to all Sheriffs, Foresters,
Wareners, Keepers of Rivers, Bailiffs or Officers, That there was a firm Peace
made between him, the Barons, and Freemen of his Kingdom, (inter nos, and
Barons, and liberos homines Regni nostri) as appeared by his Charter, which he
Commanded publicly to be read in his Bayliwicks, VVilling and straightly
Charging the Sherif, That he should cause all of his Bayliwic according to the
form of the Charter to Swear to the five and twenty Barons or their Attorneys
constituted by their Letters Patents, at such Day and time as they should
appoint, and also Willed and Commanded, That Twelve Knights should be chosen
in every County, at the next County, i. e. County Court, which should be holden
after the receipt of these Letters, To inquire of the Evil Customs or Practices
of Sherifs, and their Ministers of Forests and Foresters, Warens and Wareners,
of Rivers or Riverbanks, and their Keepers, or Tribute gatherers toward the
Repairs of Bridges and Banks, and to extirpate them.

Winchester he Directs his Writ particularly to the Append. n. 119. Such as
refused to Swear to obey the 25 Barons to be imprisoned, and to have their
Lands and Goods seized.
Sherif of Warwicshire, and the 12 Knights there Elected, to Inquire after, and
root out all Evil Customs and Practices of the Sherifs, and their Officers, of
Forests and Foresters, Warens and Wareners, Rivers and their Keepers,
Commanding them, That without delay they Seize the Lands, Tenements, and
Chattels, of all those in the County of Warwic which refused to Swear to the
twenty five Barons or their Attorneys, and to detein Established by the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and Barons of this Kingdom.

And as he had been forced to these things, so he for the performance of them,
was Compelled to Engage and put into their possession the Append. n. 120. The
King gives Caution for the observation of such t^ings as the 25 Barons exacted
of him.
City and Tower of London, and Covenant with Robert Fitz-Walter Marshal of the
Army of God, and of Holy Church in England, Richard Earl of Clare, Geofrey Earl
of Essex and Gloucester, Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Saher Earl
of Win^hester, Earl of Oxford, H. Earl of Hereford, and the Barons following,
William Marshal the younger, Eustace de Vescy, William de Mobray, John
Fitz-Robert, Roger de Mont-Begon, William de Lanvalay, and other Earls and
Barons, and Freemen of the whole Kingdom. That they should hold the City of
London of the Livery of the King, until the 15th of August that year; saving to
him his Farms, Rents, and Clear Debts. And that the Archbishop of Canturbury,
should hold the Tower in like Manner, for the same Term: Saving to the City
it is Liberties, and Free Customs, and saving to every one his right in the
Guard of the Tower of London and so as the King should not put in Ammunition or
New Forces into the City or Tower in the mean time. And further that within the
said Term, Oaths should be made through all England to the 25 Barons or their
Attorneys, according to the Writs for Choosing Twelve Knights in every County
to Destroy evil Customs, etc. And also that Earls, Barons, and other Free Men
do require of the King, which he says ought to be restored, or which ought by
the Judgment of the Twenty Five Barons, or Greater Part of them, to be
restored, shall be restored, and if these things were done, or the King
hindered not the Doing of them within the said Term, then the City and Tower of
London were to be Re-delivered to him, etc. And if they were not done, or the
King hindered the doing of them, then the Barons should hold the City, and the
Archbishop Tower until the Covenants were performed, and in the mean time all
on both parts to repossess, their Lands, Castles, and Towns, which they had in
the Beginning of the War between the King and Barons.

On the 27th of June by his Writ Directed to the Sheriff of Warwic we find King
John at Winchester from whence he passed privately Isle of Mat. Paris* f. 264*
n. 40. King John goes into the Isle of Wight.
Wight, where considering how to free himself from the Fetters of the Barons,
the Hardships they had put upon him, and how he might make himself King again,
Ibidem. Sends to the Pope to void his Engagements, and what the Barons had
done. And sends beyond Sea for Forces.
He sent Pandulph with others to the Pope, that he might by his Apostolic
Authority make void, what the Barons had done and Frustate their Design. He
also sent Walter Bishop of Worcester and Chancellor of England, John Bishop of
Norwich, Richard de Marisco, or Marsh, William Gernon, and Hugh de Boves, to
all the Transmarine with his Seal, to procure Military assistance, Ibid. f. 265
lin. 1. etc.
promising such as would Arm themselves for him, possessions and Money good
Store; And for the greater Credit, if it were needful, they might make Charts
to such as were Willing to come, for their Greater security, and their Military
Stipends, and appointed them to meet him at Dover on Michaelmass Day with as
many as they could bring over Ibidem, lin. 4. etc.
he sent also to all his Castellans or Governors of his Castles to Fortify,
Man, and Victual them, as if Seamen of the Five-Ports of his Party, and Friends.

In the mean time Ibidem, f. 265. n. 20.
the Barons which were in London thinking their Work completed, appointed to
meet at a Torneament, or Trial of Feats at Arms, at Stanford. Whereupon Robert
Fitz-Walter, and other Great Men, wrote to William de Albeney, what great
convenience it was to them all, to keep in the City of Append. n. 121. London
the Receptacle of the Barons. The Torneament which was to be at Stanford put
off; and to be holden upon Hounslo-^eath.
London Receptacle, and what disgrace and damage it would be to them, if by
their negligence it should be lost, etc. And therefore by Common Council they
deferred the Iusts which were to be at Stanford on the Monday after the Feast
of Peter and Paul the Apostles, (i. e. the 29th of June) until Monday after the
Octaves of that Feast: And that they should be holden upon the Heath between
Stanes and Hounslawe; and this they did for the security of themselves and
City. And therefore they sent to, and required them diligently, That they
should come so well provided with Horse and Arms to the Tilting, as they might
receive Honor: And he that behaved himself best, should have the Bear a Lady
would send thither.

Mat. Paris. f. 265. n. 40, 50. and f. 266. lin. 1. etc. The King by his
Messengers complains to the Pope of the hard usage of the Barons.
the Messengers of the King appeared before the Pope complaining of the Barons,
what affronts and injuries they had done to, and Rebellions they had raised
against him. Exacting from him such Wicked Laws and Liberties as were not fit
for his Royal Dignity to Grant. (Exigentes ab eo quasdam Leges and Libertates
iniquas, Quas Regiam Dignitatem non Decuit Confirmare.) And that after the
Discord between them, when the King and Barons often met to Treat of Peace, he
publicly protested before them, That the Kingdom of England in Respect of
Dominion belonged to the Roman Church, and That without the Popes Consent he
could ordain nothing New, or Change any thing in his Kingdom to his Prejudice.
And Therefore by Appealing put himself, And puts himself under his Protection.
and all the Rights of his Kingdom under the Protection of the Apostolic See.
That the Barons taking no notice of the Appeal, were then in Possession of the
City of London Delivered to them by Treason, and then armed themselves, and
Exacted the foresaid Liberties; and the King fearing force, dare not deny what
they required. And then they delivered the Articles of the Charter in Writing
to the Pope, which when he Diligently perused, he Knit his Brows and said, What
do the Barons of England endeavor to Dethrone a King that has taken upon him
the Croysado, and is under the protection of the Apostolic See, and to Transfer
the Dominion of the Roman Church to another? By St. Peter this Injury we cannot
pass by unpunished. And Deliberating with the Cardinals, Damned and Cassated
for ever by a Definitive Sentence, The Pope makes void the Charter of Liberties.
the Charter of Liberties so often mentioned, Bull which Contained the Sentence
to the King: But before we speak further of it, 'its necessary to take notice
of some Precedent Records which it refers to, not to be found in the Historians.

After the Barons had appeared in a Warlike Posture before the King at
Christmas (as has been related) and made their Demands of the Liberties, they
required of him. He gave the Pope Notice of March following Append. n. 122,
123. The Pope charge the Barons for raising new Questions and Controversies;
and exhorts them not to enter into Conspiracies against the King, but to behave
themselves dutifully toward him.
wrote to the Archbishop, and his Suffragans, or the Bishops of his Province,
and the Barons, that they raised new Questions and Controversies against the
King, such as were not heard of in the time of his Father or Brother: That they
should not enter into Conspiracies against him, but humbly and Dutifully apply
themselves to him, and perform their accustomed Services, which were Due, and
had been performed by their Predecessors, to him, and his Predecessors. Upon
which he would enjoin Remission of his sins, To deal Mildly with his Nobles,
and admit their Just Petitions.

On the 10th of May next following, He Published a Append. n. 124.
Declaration, That he would not take the Barons or their Men, That is, their
Tenants, nor Disseise them, nor pass upon them by force and Arms, But by the
Law of the Land, and Judgment of their Pears in his Court, The King offers to
refer the Differences between him and the Barons.
while Things should be Determined, by Four to be chosen on his part, and four
by the Barons, and the Pope to be Vmpire, and for the Performance of this he
offered as S^curity, the Bishops of London, Worcester, Chester, Rochester, and
William Earl Waren.

On the 29th of May following King John Append. n. 125. The Archbishop and his
Suffragans neglect the Popes Commands. The Barons refuse to hear what he wrote.
King John claims the Privilege of the Cross, and refers himself to the Popes
Discretion.
wrote to the Pope that the Archbishop of Canturbury and his Suctragans had
neglected his Commands, and that the great men and Barons altogether refused
hear what he wrote. And attending what the Barons said, He replied to them,
That England was the Patrimony of St. Peter, and that he held it, as the
Patrimony of St. Peter, the Church of Rome and the Pope, and had taken upon him
the Crusado, and required the Privilege of such who had taken upon them that
Expedition: And after having recounted the Effects of his Former Offers to the
Barons and Bishops, upon which he could obtein no Remedy, he Refers himself to
the Popes Discretion to relieve him.

Upon the Consideration of all these Offers, Declarations, Matters and Things,
and the Recapitulation, and brief Mention of them in his Append n. 126. The
Pope by consent of the Cardinals Damns the Charter of Liberties.
Bull, and the Information of King John's Messengers lately sent to him, the
Pope by the Common Consent of the Cardinals, Damns the Charter of Liberties,
and all obligations and Cautions, which he had given and entered into for the
performance of it, and Declares them Null and void.

By Append. n. 127. The Pope writes to the Barons, and charge them with evil
Practices against the King.
Letters of the same date with this Bull, ( viz. Aug. 24. 1215.) the Pope wrote
to the Barons, They had not well considered their Oath of Fidelity, when they
rashly persecuted their Lord the King. That all men Detested their proceedings,
especially in such a cause where they made themselves, both parties and Judges;
When the King was ready to do them Justice by their Peers in his Court,
according to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom or to proceed by arbitrators
chosen on both sides, with a Reference to him, if they agreed not. And
therefore commands them to Renounce that unlawful and unjust Composition they
had extorted from him, by fear and force, and satisfy him and such as adhered
to him for the Injuries they had done them. That by this means, the King might
be induced to Grant whatsoever of right ought to be granted to them. And
further advises them to send their procurators, or Deputies to the next
General Council which he intended suddenly to call about Business of the Cross,
where would be the Archbishop and other English Bishops, and there Commit
themselves to his good pleasure, who by the Favor and God intended so to
Determine things as to do away all oppressions and Abuses in the Kingdom, that
so the King being Content with his own Right and Honor, the whole Clergy and
Laity might rejoice in their Just Repose and Liberty.

The Popes Letters or Mediation prevailed not with the Barons; Mat. Paris, f.
268. n. 10. The Popes Letters prevail not upon the Barons. They consult how to
secure London, and make William de Albiney Governor of Rochester-Castle.
persued what they had undertaken, and sent for William de Albiney a stout man,
and experienced Soldier several Times before he came; at last upon a Chiding
Letter, having secured the Castle of Belvoir, or Beauvoir, he came to them to
London, where he was received with great Joy by the Barons; who immediately
consulting how to secure the City of London from being besieged by the King,
and shutting up all passages to it, raised a considerable Force, and put them
with William de Albiney into Rochester Castle whereof he was made Governor.

But before they had provided for their Defense so well as they intended, the
King after three Months stay in the Ibid. n. 30.
Isle of Wight was Sailed from thence to Dover, where he met his Messengers or
Commissioners he had sent beyond Sea, with Forces from Poictou, The King with
forces from beyond Sea besieges Rochester Castle

The Barons offer to relieve it.


Gascony, Brabant, and Flanders, with which he Besieged the Castle of
Rochester. The Barons had Sworn to William de Albiney, That it the Castle
should happen to be besieged, they would use their utmost endeavors to Relieve
it; they Marched as far as Dartford, and then retreated to London. They within
Defended the place with great Courage and Resolution, and at last after almost
three Months, were forced to yield without Conditions for want of Victuals; It
yields for want of Victuals.
The Siege was very Expensive to the King and many of his Men were slain in it,
for which reasons he would have hanged all the Noble Men or Knights had it not
been for the persuasion of Savaric de Malo Leone, and some others, who told him
the War might prove long, and some of his own Knights might be taken, and put
to Death after the same manner. Whereupon he sent William de Albiney, The King
Imprisons the persons of best Quality;
W. de Lancaster, W. de Emeford, Thomas de Mulecon, Osbert Giffard, Osbert de
Bonbi, Odinell de Albiney and others of the Corf Castle, and others to Diverse
other Prisons, all the Ordinary Men, but the Cross Bow-Men, And Hanged the
Ordinary Soldiers.
he caused to be Hanged.

The Pope upon notice Ibid. n. 40.
That the Barons persisted in the persecution of the King Append. n. 128. The
Pope Excommunicates the Barons.
Excommunicated them, and Committed the Execution of the Sentence to Peter
Bishop of Winchester, the Abbat of Reding, and Pandulph Subdeacon of the Roman
Church, Brief of Excommunication he enjoined the Archbishop, and Bishops by
virtue of their Obedience, That they should cause the Sentece to be Published
every Lords Day, and Holy Day, with Ringing of Bells, and Lightning of Candels,
throughout all England, while the Barons fatisfyed the King for the Injuries
done to him, and returned to their Obedience.

The Bishop of Paris f. 271. n. 50.
Winchester and Pandulph personally attended Archbishop of Canturbury, and in
the Name of the Pope Commanded him to Direct the Bishops of his Province, to
Publish this Sentence against the Barons: He was ready to take Ship to go to
the Council at Rome, and desired Respit until he spoke with the Pope;
affirming, The Archbishop suspended for Disobedience to the Pope.
the Sentence had been obtained, by Concealing Truth, and therefore he should
by no means Publish it, until by Discourse with the Pope, he Knew his Mind
concerning it. Ibid. f. 272. lin. 2. The Barons declared Excomunicated. They
value not the Sentence because not named particularly.
These two when they found the Archbishop Disobedient to the Popes Command,
suspended him entering the Church and Celebrating Divine Service, and then the
Bishop of Winchester Declared all the Barons that had indeavored to Drive the
King out of the Kingdom Excommunitate, and continued to do so every Lords Day
and Festival. But they because not Named in the Popes Brief valued not the
Sentence, Reputing it Null and Void.

In Ibid. n. 10. A. D. 1215. The Kings Procurators appear against the Archbishop
November following the Great Council before mentioned was held at Rome, in
which the Procurators or Comissioners of King John, the Ibid. fol. 273. n. 20.
in the great Council at Rome.

They accuse him with holding Correspondency with the Barons, etc.


Abbat of Beaulieu, and Thomas de Huntingdon, and Godfry a^ Craucomb Knights,
appeared against Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury, and accused him of holding
Correspondency with the Barons, and that by his Favor and Assistance they
indeavored to De^hrone the King: That when he received the Popes commands
restrain the Barons from persecuting the King by Ecclesiastic Censures,
Refusing to do it, he was suspended; confounded with these Accusations he
answered nothing, but Desired to be absolved from his Suspension.

To whom the Ibid. n. 30.
Pope in Anger replied by St. Peter, he should not easily obtein the Benefit of
Absolution, that had done so many affronts, not only to the King of England,
but also to the Roman Church; Ibid. The suspension of the Archbishop confirmed
by the Pope and Cardinals.
and having held a Consultation with the Cardinals, Subscribed, and he
Confirmed the Sentence of Suspension against the Arcbishop, which was dated the
4th of November, and sent to all the Clercs and Laics of that Province, to let
them know, they Ratified what the Append. 11.129. A. D. 1215.
Bishop of Winchester and Pandulph had done, commanding ready Obedience to it.

The Ibid. n. 50.
Canons of York chose Simon Langton Brother to Stephan, Walter Gray Chosen
Archbishop of York gives 10000. l. for his Pall.
Archbishop of York, and presented him to the Pope for his Confirmation of the
Election; But he voided it, and recommended to them Walter de Gray, whom they
chose, and he at the Receipt of his Pall Ibid. f. 174. lin. 4.
obliged himself to Pay Ten Thousand Pound Sterling to the Court of Rome.

The King having Ibid. n. 10. The King causes the Sentence against the
Archbishop to be Published.
notice of the Sentence against the Archbishop, went to the Monastery of St.
Albans, and there caused it to be published, sent to all Cathedral and
Conventual Churches through England to be Published.

At this place the King Ibid. n. 20.30. The King Divides his Army,
raised two Armies, or Divided his former Army into two parts, with one he
Marched Northward, with the other (under the Conduct of his Brother William
Earl of Salisbury,) he indeavored to restrain the Excursions of the Barons in
London.

The King with his Army Marched to Notingham, and Ibid. n 40. and Marches to
Nottingham, and wastes the Barons Estates. Their Castellans quit their Castles.
sending several parties abroad, in his March wasted the Barons Estates, Seized
their Goods, and Burnt their Houses, imprisoned their Tenants, such as were
found out of Churches and Churchyards, and forced them to Redemption; the
Barons Castellans upon the Kings Approach every where left their Castles
without Defense.

William Ibid. n. 50. The other part of his Army wastes the Barons Estates in
the East and South.
Earl of Salisbury and Falcasius de Brent with the Forces left under their
command at St. Albans, after they had put very strong Garrisons into the
Castles of Windsor, Hertford, and Berchamsted, to observe the Barons in the
City of London, and to hinder People, and Victuals from going and being Carried
into it, Marched into the Counties of Essex, Middlesex, Hertford, Cambrige and
Huntingdon Shires, were they make the like Ibid. f. 275. lin. 3.
wastes upon the Barons Estates as the King did Northward, and further destroyed
their Parks and Warens, and cut down their Hortyards: The Garrison of Ibid. n.
20. Tonebrige and Redford Castles surrendered.
Rochester took the Castle of Tonebr^gge, and Falcasius de Brent the Castle of
Bedford.

At Ibid. n. 20. A. D. 1216.
Christmas the King was at Notingham, and on the Day Belvoir Castle, The King
takes Belvoir Castle.
threatening to put William de Albiney the Lord thereof to Death, if it were not
forthwith Surrendered without Capitulation; The Governors of it for the safety
of their Lord carried Ibid. n. 30.40.
the Keys of it to the King, who took possession of it on St. John's Day, and
Gave his Letters Patents of indemnity, and for the enjoyment of all their
Goods, to all That were in it.

Bitter and sharp against King John) Ibid. f. 276* lin. 5. and n. 10.
Brands him and his Followers (whom he calls, the Soldiers of Satan, Sons of
Belial, and ministers of the Devil) with the most Inhumane Barbarous Cruelties
that ever were heard of unless in this Historian. He reports they took Priests
from the Altars with Crosses, and the Lords Body in their Hands, Tortured, King
John charged with inhumane Cruelties by Mat. Paris.
Robbed and wounded them; That to extort Money from Knights, and men of all
Conditions, they hanged them up by their Reins and Privities, under Ice to Cool
them.

While the Barons lay Ibid. n. 30.40. The King gets possession of the Barons
Castles and Estates.
still the King got possession of almost all their Castles and Estates, from
the South Sea to the Scottish Sea; all the Castles and Lands between the River
Tiese and Scotland, he committed Hugh Bailiol and Pat. 18. Johan. M. 7. Dors.
n. 66.
Philip de Hulecotes, and left Soldiers sufficient to Defend that Country. The
Castles and Land^ in Yorkshire, were committed to Robert de Veteri ponte, or
V^pont, (i. e. at the Old Bridge) Brien de Lisle, and Geofry de Luci, with
armed Men sufficient to Defend them. To William Earl of Albemarle he gave the
Castles of Rockingham and Bitham, to Faulx de Brent he gave the Custody of the
Castles of Oxford, Northampton, Bedford, and Cambridge, and the Castle of
Hertford he committed to Walter de a Knight and Reteiner of Faulx, and to
Ranulph the German the Castle of Berchamstede; With command to them all, as
they loved their Bodies, and all they had, That they should destroy all things
that belonged to the Barons, their Castles, Houses, Towns, Parks, Warrens,
Ponds, Mills, Hortyards, etc.

From the North parts the Ibid. The King takes Berwick.
King went into Scotland, and took Berwick and other places, which were then
thought invincible, and Castle of Montsorrel, and another belonging to Robert
de Ros in Yorkshire, in the Power of the Barons, and so marching by the Ibid.
n. 50.
Borders of Wales he took in many of his Enemies Castles, Demolishing some, and
fortifying others.

The Ibid. and f. 277. lin. 1. The Pope Excommunicated the Chi^fell of the
Barons by name, etc.
Pope having notice from the King that the Barons valued not his General
Excommunication of them, Excommunicat^d the chiefest of them by name, and
committed the Execution of his Brief to the Abbat of A^^ndune, the Archdeacon
of Poictou, and Master Robert Official of Norwich, Append. n. 130.
by which he Excommunicated and Anathematised all the Barons with their
assistants, and Favorers, which persecuted the illustrious King John of
England, Vassal Church of Rome, and Furthermore he Excommunicated, and
Anathematized all those, who helped them to invade and possesss the Kingdom, or
hindered any persons from going to, and assisting the King, He excomunicated the
Citisens of London.

And put the City under Interdict.


and put all the Barons Lands under interdict; he also Excommunicates the
Citisens of London that were principal Actors against the King, and one and
Thirty others by name and their Accomplices, and puts the City of London under
Ecclesiastic Interdict, and all this without Remedy of Appeal. This Brief bears
January (i. e.) December 16th 1215.

The Append. n. 131. Cathedral and Conventual Churches enjoined to Declare and
publish the excommunication against the Barons.
Commissioners upon the Receipt of the Brief, writ to all Cathedral and
Conventual Churches, injoyning them to Publish this Brief of Excommunication
against the Barons, and to order it to be Published in the Parish Churches
within their several Jurisdictions upon Lords Days, and Festivals, and enjoined
them to Publish thirty other Barons by name excommunicate, which were contained
in the Sentence drawn up by Peter Bishop of Winchester, Pandulph, and the Abbat
of Reding.

Upon the Publication of this Brief, only the Mat. Paris. f. 278. lin. 7. and
n. 10. The City of London Contumacious.
City of London stood Contumacious and Despised it, so as the Barons resolved
not to observe it, nor the Bishops to urge it, for that it was generally said
the Briefs were obtained by false Suggestions, and therefore of no moment,
Pope, to Direct and Govern in Lay-Matters, when as the Power and Disposition of
Eccclesiastic affairs only was Collated by God to Peter the Apostle, and his
Successors; how came the insatiable Covetousness of the Romans to extend it
self to them? (said they) how to our Apostolic Bishops, our Barons and Knights?
behold the Successors of Constantine not Peter, they do not the Works of Peter,
nor are they to be alike to him in Power.

About the same Time, Ibid. n. 20.30 The Isle of Ely taken and plundered.
Walter Buuk with his Brabanters entered the Isle of Ely, by Audrey Causeway.
(Walterus Buuk cum Brabantiis suis versus This Herebie, that is, the
Army-Habitation, or abiding place, was the Old Fortification; where part of the
Conquerors Army lay at the end of Audrey Causeway against the Isle of Ely, now
called by the Country people Belsars Hills.
Herehie Elyensemintrans Insulam.) While William Earl of Salisbury, Faulx, and
Sabari^ de Malo Leone passing over the Ice entered it on the contrary side, by
Stuntney Bridge, and wasted and plundered the whole; many that fled thither as
to a place of Safety were taken and put to Ransom, the Cathedral redeemed from
fire, by the Prior for the sum of an Hundred and Nine Marks of Silver.

The Barons Ibid. n. 40. and f. 279. lin. 8. The Barons choose Lewis Son to
Philip King of France their King,
being brought this low Condition, Consulted together, and resolved to choose
some Potent Person for their King. They pitched upon Lewis Son to Philip King
of France, because the foreign forces, which were King John's greatest strength
came out of his Territories, so that he would be deprived of their assistance,
and left as it were to their Mercy. This generally pleased them, and Ibid. n.
20.
sent Saher Earl of Winton, and Robert Fitz-Walter, to King Philip, and Lewis
his Son, with Letters sealed with the Barons Seals, earnestly Imploring the
Father to send his Son to be King of England, and the Son that he would
forthwith come, and be Crowned. The King of France having perused the Barons
letters, told their Commissioners, he should not send his Son, until for his
greater security, and send 24 hostages for his Security.
he should receive Twenty Four Hostages or Pleges of the most noble persons of
the Kingdom. And the Barons having no Hostages, according to his own Will,
Ibid. n. 30.
which so soon as Received, and put into Safe Custody, Lewis prepared for the
Expedition he desired above all things, He sends forces before his own coming.
A. D. 1216.
and sent before him into England the Castellan of St. Omar, the Cas^llan of
Arras, Hugh Chacun, Eustace de Nevill, Baldwin Breul, Giles de Melun, W. de
Bellomonte or Beaumont, Giles de Hersi, Bise^ de Fersi with a great Troup of
Soldiers to encourage the Barons, who came up the Thames to London, and were
received great Joy on the Twenty seventh of February.

About the same time Ibid. n. 40.
Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury having given Caution at Rome, that he would
stand to the Judgment and Determination of the Pope, concerning the things
before expressed, was absolved from the Sentence of Suspension, The Archbishop
of Canturbury absolved.
upon Condition he should not return into England, until there was a firm Peace
Established between the King and Barons.

At Easter Ibid.
The Abbat of Abbendon and his fellow Commissioners, finding the Contumacy of
the Barons and City of London, (cum Contumaciam Baronum and Londinensis
Civitatis Cognovissent) wrote to all the Conventual Churches of England,
Append. n. 132. The Dean of St. Martins and several Chapters in London
excommunicated.
to Publish the Sentence of Excommunication against the Chapters of St. Paul's
and St. Martins, and G. Bo^land Dean of St. Martins, and the Convent of Holy
Trinity, for their Contempt to the Pope in not publishing the Sentence
persecutors of King John, and also Commanded them to Excommunicate the
Castellan of St. Omar with all his Company that came to invade, and possess the
Kingdom of England, together with all Canons and Clercs within the City, under
Danger of falling into the Popes displeasure.

This Mat. Paris f. 245. n. to. The Description of the Pope.
Monk is very Sharp upon the Pope, concerning these Excommunications, and
says, that King John knew, and had learnt by ambitious and proud above all
Mortals, and insatiably thirsty after Money, and prone and Flexible toward all
Mischief and wickedness, for Rewards either received or promised: (Noverat
autem Rex and multiplici didicerat experientia, Quod Papa super omnes Mortales
ambitiosus erat and superbus, pecuniaeque si^or insatiabilis; and ad omnia
scelera pro praemiis datis vel promissis Ceream and Proclivum.) And therefore
sent Messengers to him, who carried with them a great Sum of Money and
promised a greater, and engaged he should become his Tributary Subject, if he
would find an occasion to Confound the Archbishop of Canturbury, and to
Excommunicate the Barons, which formerly he had Cherished and Encouraged.

The Barons Append. N. 133. Prince Lewis incour^geth the Barons.
for their better encouragement, received Letters of Thanks from Prince Lewis,
for their stout behavior in his caus^, with an exhortation to them to proceed
in the same course, and a promise

In the mean while the Pope sent Mat. Par. f. 280 n. 30. The Pope sends his
Legate to diswade the King of France from permitting h^ Son to invade England.
Wal^ or Gualo his Legate into France to prevent the expedition of Lewis into
England, who delivered to King Philip his Letters, by which he endeavored to
persuade him, not to permit his Son to invade England, nor Disturb the King
thereof, but to protect, Defend and Love him as a Vass^ of the Roman Church;
The Dominion of whose Kingdom belonged unto

To which the Ibid. n. 40 The King of France his Answer to the Pope.
King of France hastily answered, That the Kingdom of England never was, nor
is, nor ever shall be the Patrimony of Peter; for King John several years
since, endeavored to Dethrone his Brother Richard, for which he was accused of
Treason, and Convicted in that Kings Court, Hugh de Pudsey Bishop of Durham
pronouncing the Sentence against him, and therefore he never was a ^rue King,
nor could give his Kingdom. Also, if at any time he was a true since that he
had been Condemned in his Court for the Death of his Nephew Arthur. Also that
no King or Prince could give away their Kingdom without the Assent of their
Barons who are bound to defend it. These were the Arguments of the King of
France, to invalidate and null the Popes Title.

The next day Ibid. n. 50 and f. 281. lin. 1. n. 10. The Pope^ Legate diswades
the King of France and his Son from the Invasion of England.

The King of France his Answer to him.


by means of the King of France, Prince Lewis was present in the Conference,
where the Legate began to persuade England, the Patrimony of the Roman Church,
and also applied himself to his Father according to the Effect of the Popes
Letters. To whom the King said, he always was much Devoted to the Pope, and the
Roman Church, and always effectually promoted their affairs. Nor should his Son
now by his advice or assistance attempt any thing against them* But if he
Challenged any right to the Kingdom of England let him be heard, and what is
just, Granted unto him.

Upon which Word a Ibid. n. 10. The Arg^ments of Prince Lewis against King John
and the Pope.
Knight stands up and Argues for Lewis against King John, and the Pope. 1st,
That King John as before had Destroyed his Nephew Arthur with his own hands,
and was therefore Condemned to Death by his Peers of France. 2. Afterward for
many Murders or Mans^aughters (pro multis homicidis) and other Enormities
Committed in England, he was by the Barons Rejected, and not suffered to Reign
over them. 3. That without the Consent of his Barons he gave the Kingdom of
England to the Pope and Church of Rome, to take it again, and hold it of them
under the Annu^l Tribute of a Thousand Marks. 4. Although he could not give
away the Crown of England without the Consent of the Barons, yet he might Quit
it, and Renounce his Right, which so soon as he had done, and resigned, he
Vnkinged himself, and the Kingdom was void, and the Vacancy of the Kingdom was
not to be provided for without the Barons; His claim to England.
whereupon they chose Lewis by reason of his Wife, whose Alienor second
Daughter to King Hen. 2. married to Alphonso King of Castle, was Mother to
Blanch Lewis his Wife.
Mother the Queen of Cast^le, was the only child living of all the Sons and
Daughters of the King of England. These were the Arguments used by Lewis his
Advocate, against the Titles of King John and the Pope.

Legate Ibid. n. 20. The Popes Legate pleads for King John.
urged that King John was signed with the Cross (Cruce signatus erat) or had
undertaken the Crusado, and therefore according to a Constitution of the
General Council ought to be free from Disturbance for four years, and under the
protection of the Apostolic See. Lewis his Advocate Answered, That King John
before he was signed with the Cross, had made War upon him, taken his Castles,
and wasted his Countries with Fire and Sword; and had taken many Knights and
others which Lewis, and therefore the War he intended against him was just.

The Legate Ibid. n. 30. He is unsatisfied,
not satisfied with his Reasons, forbad Lewis under pain of Excommunication to
enter England, and his Father to permit him to do it. Lewis begged of his
Father not to hinder his Design in prosecuting his Right; for that he resolved
Inheritance of his Wife, and then departed from the Colloquium or Conference,
Ibid. n. 40 and leaves the Court of France.
which the Legate observing, desired safe passage from the King of France to the
Se^, which the King willingly granted through his own Lands, but would not
undertake to secure him, if he should fall into the hands of his Son Lewis his
friends, that Guarded the Sea: at which the Legate was Angry and departed from
Court.

Lewis Ibid. Lewis receives his Fathers Blessing,
on the Morrow after St. Mark, went to his Father then at Mehun, and beseeched
him with Tears not to hinder his Design. He gave him not his consent openly,
but privately permitted him to go, and dismissed him with his Blessing. He sent
his Envoyes to the Roman Court, to Declare to the Pope his right to the Kingdom
of England. And Ibid. n. 50. and goes with his Army for England.
then with all Diligence Marched to Caleis with the Earls, Barons, Knights and
others, that had Sworn to go with him in this Expedition, that he might come
England before the Legate.

At that Port Ibid. and f. 282. lin. 1. He Lands in the Isle of Thanet. A. D.
12^6.
they found ready to receive them six Hundred Ships and Fourscore Cogs, which
Eustace the Monk had gathered together. They Shipped themselves with all speed,
and Landed in the Isle of Thanet upon the 21st of May.

King John Ibid. lin. 3. King John dare not hinder his Landing.
at this time was at Dover with his Army which Consisted of Strangers, and
therefore he dare not attempt to hinder the Landing of the French, least his
men should leave him, and go off to Lewis. From hence he marched, (leaving
Hubert de Burgh Governor of the Castle) to Guilford, and from thence to
Winchester.

Lewis finding none Ibid. n. 10. Lewis subdues Kent,
that resisted, presently subdued all Kent but Dover Castle; in his March he
took in Rochester Castle, and coming to London he was received by the Barons
with all imaginable Demonstrations of Joy: is Joyfully received at London.

The Barons do Homage and Fealty to him.


And there he received the Homages and Fealty of all the Barons and Citisens
that were in Expectation of his coming, and he Swore to them upon the Holy
Gospells, that he would give every one good Laws, and restore their lost
Estates.

When the Append. n. 134.
Peace was made between the King and Barons, at Runemead, the Barons promised
they would give the King any security he should desire for the Observation of
it; Except their Castles, and Pleges or Hostages. The King not long after
Demanded of them Charts by which they were to acknowledge, The Barons break
their promises with the King.
they were bound by Oath and Homage, to keep Faith to him, for the preservation
of his life and Limbs and Terrene Honor, against all men, and to preserve and
Defend the Rights of him, and his heirs to the Kingdom, and they Refused to do
it. When as Most of the same men without Summons, and others at the first
notice came flocking in to Swear the same things to Lewis.

For by the 14th of Mat. Paris ut supra. Lewis sends to the King of Scots to
come and do him Homage.
June he had got Possession of so much of the Kingdom, as he had the Confidence
to Summon the King of Scots, and all the Great Men of England to come and do
him Homage, or, and with great speed upon his Ibid. n. 20, And to the Barons.
Several of them Desert King John.
Edict, There came into him William Earl Waren, William Earl of Arundel,
William Earl of Salisbury, William Marshal the Younger, and many others, who
Deserted King John, with full assurance that Lewis would obtein the Kingdom of
England.

Who made Ibid. Simon Langton is made Chancellor He preaches against the
Interdict.
Simon Langton his Chancellor, by whose Preaching the Citisens of London, and
all the Excommunicated Barons Divine Service to be Celebrated, and Drew in
Lewis himself to consent to it.

Gualo the Legate Ibid. and n. 30. Gualo the Popes Legate comes into England. He
Excommunicates Lewis by name, etc. And Simon Langton.
followed Lewis into England with all speed, and got safe to King John, who was
then at Gloucester, and there calling together as many Bishops, Abbats, and
Clercs, as he could, excommunicated by Name Lewis, with all his accomplices,
and Favorers, and especially Simon de Langton, commanding all the Bishops and
others to Publish the Sentence against them every Lords and Festival. But Simon
de Langton and Master Gervase de Hobrugge Praecentor of St. Paul's London, said
they had Appealed, for the Right and Title of Lewis, and therefore the Sentence
was null and void.

At this Time Ibidem. The Flemings, etc. leave King John.
all the Knights and Ordinary Soldiers of Flanders and other Transmarine
Countries left King John, except the Poictovins; some whereof went over to
Lewis and others returned home.

In the mean time Ibid. n. 40. Lewis marches through Kent into Sussex.
Lewis with a Great Army Marched through Kent into Sussex, and Reduced that
Country, with its Towns and Fortresses and City of Winchester with the Castle;
only one Brave Young Man, Ibid. And subdues that Country. The Bravery of
William de Colingeham.
William de Colingeham, defied Lewis, and refused to Swear Fealty to him, who
with a Thousand Archers, all the time of Hostility, kept himself in the Woods
and Fastnesses of that Country, and Killed several Thousands of the French.

Hugh de Nevill Ibid. and. n. 50. Hugh Nevill Delivers Marleborough Castle to
Lewis and did Homage to him.
came to Lewis at Winchester, Delivered him the Castle of Malborough, and did
Homage to him, so that he was possessed of all the South Parts of the Nation,
except the Castles of Dover and Windsor, which were well Manned and fortified,
and prepared to receive him. Ibid. f. 283. lid. 1. Robert Fitz-Walter, etc. by
force subdue Essex and Suffolk*
William de Mandevil, Robert Fitz-Walter, and William de Huntingfield by Armed
force the Counties of Essex and Suffolk.

In the Ibid. lin. 3. King John fortifies and strengthens his Castles in the
West.
mean time King John took care to Furnish and Strengthen as well as might be
with Men, Victuals, and Arms, several Castles in the West, Walingford, Corf,
Warham, Bristoll, the Devises, and others.

In the Midst of these Successes, Lewis received an Account from Ibid. n. 10.
The Popes Answer to Lewis his Messengers.
Messengers he had sent to the Pope, that upon their Application to him and
presenting his Salutation or Complement, he told them, he was not worthy the
return of his Salutation. They replied when his Holiness had heard his Reasons
and Apology, they doubted not but he would find him a Catholic Christian and
much Devoted to him and the Roman Church, and at length after many addresses
Append. 135. He is wavering in his Thoughts and favors between King John and
Lewis.
found him wavering, Pendulous, and Fluctuating in his stability and affection
between himself and King John, having on both sides considered Interest.

The Reasons and Arguments presented to the Pope in behalf of Lewis by his
Messengers were these. First, The Mat. Paris fol. 283. n. 30.40. The weak
Arguments and answers mutually propounded, and given between the Pope and Lewis
his Envoyes, for and against him.
Murder of Duke Arthur his Nephew as before, and King John's being adjuged to
Death by his Peers for that fact. To which the Pope Answered, the Barons of
France could not Judge him because he was an anointed King, and their Superior,
and that it was against the Canons to To which the Envoyes of Lewis answered,
It was a Custom in the Kingdom of France, that the King had all Jurisdiction
whatsoever (omnimodam Jurisdictionem) over his Liege Men. That the King of
England was his Liege Man, as an Earl and Duke. Therefore though he was a King
anointed, yet as he was an Earl or Duke, he was under the Jurisdiction of his
Lord the King of F^ance. But if an Earl or Duke Committed a Crime in the
Kingdom of France, he might and ought to be Judged by his Peers; Ibid. n. 40.
and if he were neither Duke or Earl, or Liege Man of the King of France, and
had Committed a Crime in the Kingdom of France, yet by Reason the Crime was
Committed in France, the Barons might Judge him to Death; otherwise if the King
of England, because he was an anointed King (who was then a Peer of France)
could not be Judged to Death, might safely enter the Kingdom of France, and
Kill the Barons of that Kingdom, as he had Killed his Nephew Arthur.

The Monk Ibid. n. 50. Quere. Why the Monk said this?
tells us the truth of the Matter was thus: That King John was not justly
adjudged from the Dukedom of Normandy, because he was not Judicially, but
Violently thrust out of it. For that he sent Eustace Bishop of Ely, and Hubert
de Burgh, to let the King of France know, The Mutual Objections, Answers and
Replys, etc.
That he would Willingly appear in his Court, ready to stand to the Law in all
things, if he might have a safe Conduct. The King of France answered he should
come safely. The Bishop then asked him, And shall he return safely? Ibid. fol.
284. lin. 1. Of the King of France, and the Envoys of the King of England.
To which the King returned, If his Peers would permit him. And when the King
of England's Envoys pressed that he might safely come into, and return out of
France, King Philip swear by the Saints of his own Country, he should not
depart without Judgment, or Trial. Ibid. lin. 4. Concerning his Answering in
the Court of France,
The Bishop urged the Dangers that might happen by his coming without
Safe Conduct, and that he could not come to his Court as Duke of Normandy, but
he must come as King of England; when as the same person was both King and
Duke; which the Baronage of England would no ways permit, though the King would
submit to it: For he must either run the Hazard of Imprisonment or Death. as a
Peer of that Kingdom.
To which the King of France Rebutted, And what is this, my Lord Bishop? It Is
well known the Duke of Normandy my Tenant has violently acquired England; and
if he suddenly has acquired Honor, shall this prejudice his Capital Lord?
shall He lose by it? Certainly not. Ibid. n. 10.
To which (says the Monk) the King of England's Messengers could Surrebutt, or
answer nothing, and so returned home.

But adds, Ibid. Mat. Paris his Opinion about the Condemnation of King John in
the Court of France.
The Monk notwithstanding what the King of England's Envoys said, the Great Men
of France proceeded to Judgment; which justly they ought not to have done;
because he that was judged absent, and would have appeared if he could. And
therefore King John being condemned by his Adversaries, was not justly
condemned. Ibid. n. 20. The Popes Opinion about the Death of Duke Arthur.
The Pope says Duke Arthur was taken by his Uncle at the Castle of Mirebel,
after he had done Homage and Ligeance to him; and therefore might be put to
Death without Judgment.

Secondly, Ibid. n. 30.40. The second Objection against King John, and the
Popes answer. The Replies of Lewis his Envoys to the Pope.
'Twas Objected against King John, That he was often Cited to appear in the
Court of the King of France; and neither appeared personally, nor sent any one
to appear for him. The Pope answered, This was only Contumacy, and not a Mortal
Crime, and was otherwise to be punished; and therefore the Barons could not
judge him to Death. Lewis his Messengers replied, That it was the Custom of
France, That if any one was accused of Murder, and appeared not, but sent his
excuse, he was judged as Convicted in all things; and the Issue of him barred
from Inheriting. To which the Pope answered again, That suppose King John had
been Judged to Death, and his Issue barred, (which could only be for his
Territories in France; His Answers to them again.
) yet Blanch the Wife of Lewis ought not to succeed; but either the Sister of
Arthur, or Otho Son of Henry Duke of Saxony by her Eldest Sister Maud; or the
King of Castile her Brother, or the Queen of Leon her Eldest Sister. Ibid. f.
285. lin. 1.
To which Lewis his Envoys again Replied, That she had a Title, which was good
while others appeared, and if any nearer to it afterward claimed, Lewis might
do what he thought fit, or what he ought to do.

3. To these things the Ibid. l. 5. The Pope asserts his own Title.
Pope said the Kingdom of England was his property, and that Lewis ought not to
spoil him of his Kingdom by War; To this Lewis his Commissioners Answered The
War was begun before the Pope could pretend to it. Ibid. n. 10. Lewis his
Envoys endeavor to invalidate it.
For William Longe-spee came and invaded Lewis his Territories, Therefore his
War was just against the King of England that sent him. Ibid. The Popes Answer
to their Argument for War against King John.
The Pope answered Lewis ought not to make War upon him for what his Vassal had
done, but to make his complaint to him as his Lord. To this the Commissioners
Replied, Ibidem. The Reply of Lewis his Envoys.
There was a Custom in France, That when any Vassal made War upon any one by
Authority of his Lord, he might make War upon him again without complaining to
his Lord. Ibid. n. 30. The P^pes Argument against the War.

The Reply of Lewis his Commissioners.


The Pope urged further, That the Barons were Excommunicated, and all their
Favorers, by which means Lewis would incur the pain of Excommunication; To this
his Commissioners replied he did not favor or Cherish the Barons of England,
but prosecuted his own right: And that he believed neither the Pope nor so
great a Council would Excommunicate any man injustly, for that at the time of
declaring the Sentence, they knew not what right he had to the Kingdom of
England. Ibid. n. 40 The Popes Resolution.
And after all, the Pope said he would determine nothing until that he heard
from his Legate Walo. Pope and Lewis his Envoyes, their mutual Objections,
Answers, Replies, etc.

Lewis Ibid. and n. ^0. Lewis wa^^s Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk, and returns
with the Spoils to London.

He makes Gilbert de Gant Earl of Lincoln, and sends him to Block up Notti^gham
and Newark Castles.


made a great Cavalcade into the East of England, the Counties of Essex,
Norfolk and Suffolk, and miserably wasted them, put a Garrison into the Castle
of Norwich, which Thomas de Burgh had deserted. This done, the French returned
with great Booty and Spoils to London; where Gilbert de Gant came Lewis, by
whom he was Girt with the Sword of the County of Lincoln, and made Earl
thereof, and was then sent to restrain and block up the Forces in the Castles
of Nottingham and Newark.

At the Ibidem. York and Yorkshire, subjected to Lewis.
same Time, Robert de Ros, Peter de Brus, and Richard de Perci reduced York and
Yorkshire to his Obedience. Gilbert de Gant and Robert de Ropesle took the City
of Ibid. f. 286. lin. 1, 2. Holland in Lincolnshire Plundered.
Lincoln Annual Tribute. Then they Plundered Holland, and made it Tributary.
Ibid. lin. 4 A great part of Northumberland made subject to him
The King of Scots made subject to Lewis all Northumberland, except the Castles
which Hugh de Bailiol, and Philip de Huleco^es Defended.

About Ibid. n. 10. A. D. 1216. Lewis Besieges Dover Castle.
Midsummer Lewis Besieged Dober Castle, where Hubert de Burgh was Governor,
after he had Battered it for some time, beaten off by the Defendants, and
forced to remove his forces to some Distance, where they lay Quiet, and
intended to starve those they could not Conquer.

At the Ibid. n. 20. Part of the Barons made an inrode into Cambridgshire,
Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. Yarmouth, Dunwich and Ipswich redeem themselves.
same time part of the Barons made a Cabalcade into Cambridgeshire, wasted the
whole Country, and took the Castle; from thence they marched into Norfolk and
Suffolk, and plundered them and all the Churches, and forced the Towns of
Yarmouth, Dunwich, and Ipswich, to most Grievous Redemption; and Returning by
^chester Committed the like Outrages there, and came again to their known
lurking places of London, ad Ibid. n. 30. They return with their Plunder to
London.
not a Londoniarum latibula reversi sunt.

After this the Ibid. n. 30. The Barons Besiege Windsor Castle.
Barons gathered together a great force under the Command of the Earl of
Nevers, and Besieged Windsor Castle, in which were Sixty Knights with their
several Retinues. The French applied their Battering Engines against the Walls,
and the Defendants endeavored to Beat them off.

Mat. Paris says Ibid. n. 40, 50. King John raises an Army out of his
Garrisons, with which he marched up and down the Countries and wasted the
Barons Estates.

The Barons leave the Siege of Windsor Castle and follow the King.

When they could not take him they plunder the Countries,


so soon as King John knew Dover and Windsor Castles were Besieged, out of his
Garrisons raised a great Army, and for one Month Marched speedily up and down
the Countries, and wasted the Lands of the Earls and Barons, Burnt their
Houses, Destroyed their Fruit and Corn. That at Length, he wandered into the
Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and there wasted the Estates of the Earl of
Arundel, Roger Bigod, William de Huntingfield, and other great men. And that
the Barons seeing they could make no progress Siege of Windsor, left it in the
night, and their Tents behind them, and Marched in all have toward Cambridge,
that they might shut up, and surprise the King: But he having notice of their
Coming that way, made his Escape to Stanford, and from thence went toward
Lincoln, the Castle whereof was then Besieged by Gilbert de Gant, who upon his
Appearance fled with all his Forces. The Barons hereupon having Missed the
King, Plundered and Wasted the Countries, and Ibid. fol. 287. lin. 1. and bring
their prey to London.
returned to London with their Spoils and Prey; placing a Garrison, they went
to Lewis then busied in the Siege of Dover Castle, where came to him Alexander
King of Scots, and did him Homage for the Lands he held of the King of England.

It Ibid. n. 10, 20. The Viscount of Melun Discovers Lewis his Designs and
intentions against the English Barons, and English Nation.
happened at this time, That the Vicecomes or Viscount of Melun a French
Nobleman that came with Lewis into England, fell sick in the City of London,
and when he saw Death approaching, he called to him some of the Barons of
England that remained there for the security of the City; and told them he was
sorry for the Destruction and Ruin that was coming upon them, which they
understood not. For Lewis had Sworn with sixteen Earls and Barons of France,
that when he had Conquered England and was Crowned, he would for ever Banish
all those that fought for him, and persecuted King John as Traitors, Destroy
all their Generations, and that they might not Doubt of it, he affirmed in
words of a Dying man, and as he hoped for Salvation, That he himself was one of
those, That Swore with Lewis, and so wished them not to Discover what he said,
but provide for their safety, he presently Dyed.

When these things Ibid. n. ^0. The Barons begin to repent of their usage of
King John, and despair of pardon from the greatness of their Crimes.
were whispered amongst the Barons, they were much troubled; for they observed
that when Lewis took any of their Castles from the King, he placed in them
French Governors, notwithstanding their Oppositions. But it Grieved them most,
That he had Stigmatized them with the Character of Traitors: And it added to
their grief not a little, That they were Excommunicated. Reflecting upon their
Condition, Thought of returning to their obedience, but feared they had so
highly provoked King John, That he would not admit of their Repentance.

Upon the Patent Rot. Pat. 18 Johan. The King was up and down in the West
Country most part of the Summer.
Roll of this year we find King John Busied in the West all this Summer, from
almost the beginning of May, to the beginning of September; for by the Grants
there made, the Protections and other things there Granted, we find he was in
perpetual motion, Tests of the Patents, where the place of his being is always
Expressed. Sometimes at the beginning of the Summer he was at Winchester, at
the Divises, at Bristol, Wells, Shirborn, Warham, Corf- Castle, Lutgars^al,
Berkeley Castle, and very many other places in the West Country; and backward
and forward to and from the same places. While he was here in the West, he made
Append. N. 136. Lin in Norfolk a place of Refuge for the Kings persecuted
Subjects, his Treasure there secured, etc.
Lin in Norfolk, as it were a place of Refuge or Defense to those of his party,
and his Loyal and there also without doubt secured his Treasure, Crown, and all
his portable and moveable Royalties, as appears by the sequel of the Story.

When he left the West he came to Rot. Pat. 18 Johan m. 2, 3. N. 37.
Oxford, where he was September 3d and 4th, and thereabouts until the 8th of
that Month, when he was at Ibid. M. 2. N. 25.
Sunning, Ibid. M. 1, 2. The several places where King John was almost every
day for a month before his Death.
September he was at Walingford. At Aylesbury on the 15th. At Bedford the same
day. At Cambridge on the 16th. At Clare on the 18th. Apud Clivam the 20th. At
Boking the 21st. At Lincoln the 22d day. Stow in Lincolnshire 27th. At Lincoln
28th. At Lincoln 2d of October. At Grimesby the 4th of October. At Spalding the
7th of October. At Lin the 9th and 11th of October. At Wisbech the 12th of
October. At Lifford alias Sleford the 15th of October. Newark Castle the 16,
17, 18th, of October.


Upon the Patent Rolls of this year, we find the Grants dated at the places and
days above written, for a proof whereof see the N. 137.
Appendex, where three or four of the last Grants being very short are inserted.

It Is probable See here a little before The Barons Hunt the King from place to
place, and cannot take him.
as Paris reports, That the Barons might Rise from before Windsor Castle about
the Middle of September, and march after the King, and Hunt him from Cambridge
to Clare, from thence to Clive, (where that is I know not) and from thence to
Bokinge near Manitte in Essex, where he was September 21st, and from thence
that day he might march Cross the Country to Royston, and so to Huntington,
Stanford, and to Lincoln the next day. And Barons were marched back to London,
and from thence to Dover, to Lewis, he then came to Spaldinge, and so over the
Wash to Lin, for his Carriages and Treasure which were secured there, and to
recruit his Army with such of his Loyal people that had Fled thither.

For Paris f. 287. n. 40. The Patent Rolls agree not with Paris his Report.
tells us further, That when Lewis had a long time in vain Besieged Dover
Castle, King John came into the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and miserably
wasted them; and going by Peterburgh and Coyland, plundered those Abbys; at
length in his passage toward the North he took his way through Lin, etc. This
does no ways agree with the Patent Rolls, which say he was at Grimsby in
Lincolnshire upon the 4th of October, at Spalding in the same County, upon the
7th, at Lin on the 9th and 11th, at Wisbeth on the 12th, from whence he went
back to Lin, and went over the Wash on the 14th of October, to Swineshead Abbey,
which agrees with the latter of the Story in Paris, and the Patent Rolls.

For he says, Ibid. and n. 50 King John received with great Joy at Lin, etc.
That the King coming to Lin, was Received with great Joy and Presents At this
time it must be that this King as a Mark of his Favor and Affection to this
Town for their signal Loyalty, gave them one of his Drinking Bowls, and a Sword
from his own side, which now does, and ever since has remained with the Mayor
The Sword has this Inscription, King John gave a Cup and Sword to the Town of
Lin.
Ensis hic. Donum Regis Johanis,


by the Inhabitants. And that passing from thence toward the North, he lost
all his Wagons, Carts, Sumpter Horses, with their Lading, and all his Treasure,
precious Vessels, and Regalia, his portable Royalties in the River called That
which was then called Well-Stream, was the River of O^s^, whose Current now
Discharges it self into the Sea by Lin, but then it Dugdal. Histor. of
Imbanking and Drayning, f. 256. Col. 1 and f. 300. Col. 1.
passed under the Town of Littleport in the Isle of Ely, and so on to
Wellenhee, and through the two Towns of Vp-Well and Out-Well, (from whence its
name) and so under Walsoken Sea Bank, through the Washes between Lincolnshire
and Marshland into the Sea, where the River of Nene that comes from Peterburgh
through Wisbech, and runs through those Washes now, and slides into the Sea.
Well-Stream, where, says Mat. Paris f. 287. n. 50.
the Monk, the By the opening of the Earth in the midst of the Floods, and the
Gulf of the Abyss. The Monk means and describes the Washes between the Cross
Keys in the Parish of Terrington in Marshland in Norfolk, and Fosdike in
Holland in Lincolnshire, over which at this day Passengers and Travelers go
with Guides; and sometimes through the Ignorance or Negligence of the Guides
they miscarry, The meaning of the Earth opening in the midst of the Floods, and
the Gulf of the Abyss.
either by falling into Quicksands; or being taken by the Tide: That is, the
Tide coming too fast upon them in their passage, and overflowing the Washes,
That they lose their Way and Perish: And this most certainly was the Case with
King John's Carriages. For this was the nearest way, and most direct passage
from Lin to the Cross Keys, and so over the Washes to Fo^dike, from thence to
Sleford and so to Newark, and the most secure from his Enemies, though the
passage it self not so safe.
Earth opened in the Midst of the Floods, He loses all his Carriages and
Treasure in the Washes between Marshland and Holland.

He falls sick at Swineshead Abbey.


and they all passed into the Gulf of the Abyss with men and horses; only the
King with his Army hardly Escaped. And that night got to Swineshead Abbey and
there lodged: where through Grief of mind, for the loss of his Carriages he
fell into a Fever, and increased it by Eating Peaches, and Drinking new Bracket
that night. Yet early in the morning he departed from thence, and with great
Trouble got to Sleford Castle, from whence next day, he could Ibid. f. 288.
lin. 1. Dies at Newark.
Newark Castle (which was but 10 or 15 Miles from thence) in which place his
Fever increasing, Ibid. lin. 8.
he Dyed on St. Lukes Day, or the 18th of October at Night, after he had
Reigned, says Paris, eighteen years, five months, and four days.

His Body was Buried Ibid. n. 10.
with due Solemnity in the Cathedral at Worcester.

Ibid. The Barons would have returned to their obedience.

The King gives the Barons Estates to his Loyal Subjects.


Forty of the Barons sent their Messengers and Letters to the King, signifying
their Desires to Return to their Obedience; But his Condition was such, as he
could not take notice of them.

And besides their Growing Jealousies of Lewis, One great Motive of their
Returning to their Duty, might be, That they saw the King Disposing of the
Estates of those which held of him in Capite (at Loyal Subjects. As to give an
Instance or two of many That are upon the Rolls; He gave the Estate of Append.
N. 138. See Cl. 17 Johan M, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and per ^otum Rotulum
William de Landa in Coleby in Lincolnshire, who was with his Enemies, to
Oliver de Albiney; and all the Estate of Roger de Crimplesham in Norfolk, to
John de Pavilly his Clerc.

Ireland and Irish Affairs.
The Government of Ireland, according to the Government of England.
OF these much cannot be said in this Kings Troublesome Reign, only we may see
his Intention was the same with his Fathers, to have the Government of that
Nation according to the Government England, and the same Dependencys there, by
the same Tenures as in this Nation, as appears by the Grant of the Honor of
Append. N. 139. The Honor of Limeric Granted for the Service of sixty Knights
Fees.
Limeric to William de Braosa in the Second of his Reign, and to his Heirs, as
his Father King Henry had given it to Philip de Braosa Uncle to the said
William, To hold of him and his Heirs by the Service of sixty Knights Fees;
except the City of Limeric, the Donation of Bishoprics and Abbys, The Cantred
of the Ostmans and Holy Island which King Henry Retained in his hands; and
except the Services of William de Burgh, etc.

In the sixth year of his Reign Append. N. 140. Vlster granted to Hugh Lascy.
he signified to Meiler Fitz-Henry his Justiciary, and the Barons of Ireland,
That he had Granted to Hugh Lascy for his Homage and Service, The land of
Vlster with its appertenencys, to hold as John de Curcy held it, the day that
the said Hugh See that Story related in the beginning of this Reign.
seized him in the Field, Saving to him the Donations of Bishoprics and Abbys
in that Country.

In the 7th year of his Reign he wrote to Append. N. 141. A third part of
Conaught granted to the King thereof, to hold of King John as a Barony.
Meiler Fitz Henry his Justice of Ireland, That Dermut on the behalf of the
King of Connoc had declared to him, That that King desired to hold of him a
third part of the Land of Connoc, to him and his heirs as a Barony, and by the
Rent of an hundred Marks by the year; and the other two parts by the yearly
Tribute of three Hundred Marks. It should seem by this, that at this time
Conaught was not fully reduced to the Obedience of the English.
That he would grant to King John Two Cantreds in the two parts with the
Inhabitants, and Liberty to Build Castles, and to do what he pleased in them.
The King thought this offer a good expedient to secure the King of Connaught,
and left it to his Justiciary to do what was best for him, with Direction to
get if he could 400 Marks as a Fine or Income, and a Tribute of Cows and other
things every year, toward the maintenance of the Castles he might build in
those Cantreds.

In the ninth of his Reign he Confirmed to Append. N. 142. Three Cantreds in
the Land of Cork granted for the Service of ^on Knights.
William Barry, Grant made to his Father Philip de Barry by Robert Fitz-Stephan
(he was Justiciary to Hen. 2d) of three Cantreds in the Land of Cork; That is
to say Olethan with all its appurtenancies, and the other two, Musckerie
Dunegan, and the Cantreds of Killede, with all their Liberties, and free
Customs by the service of ten Knights, excepting the Rights of the Crown.

For several years, Things by the Care and Circumspection of the Iusticiaries
or Lieutenants, remained without any very Notable Commotions. In the thirteenth
year of his Reign Mat. Paris f. 23^. lin. 6. A. D. 1211. King John goes into
Ireland and received the Homage of twenty petty Kings.
King John Sailed with an Army from Milford Haven, and arrived in Ireland on
the sixth of June. When he came to Dublin more than twenty petty Kings of that
Nation met him, and did Homage and Fealty to him; some disdained to come, That
were got into inexpugnable Fastnesses.

He caused the English Ibid. n. 10. The English Laws Established in Ireland.

John Gray Bishop of Norwich made Justiciary.


Laws and Customs to be Established there, and placed Sherifs and other
Officers in diverse parts of that Nation, that should Govern and judge the
people according to those Laws, and made John Gray Bishop of Norwich
Justiciary, who made the money of Ireland of the same weight with that in
England, for the Convenience of Traffic between the two Nations.

This done, the King Ibid. n. 20. King John's severity to his Enemies.
Marched toward his Enemies, and took many of their Fortresses, Walter Lascy
and many others fled before him, fearing they might fall into his Hands: At
length he came into the Province of Mead, and Besieged a Castle, in which were
Maud the wife of William de Braosa, and William his Son with his Wife, and took
it, but these persons had escaped before, yet were taken again in the Isle of
May, and presented to the King, For the Reason of this Kings severity against
these people, see the History in the latter end of the year 1208.
who caused them Prisoners into England to Windsor Castle, where they were
starved to Death.

And having Disposed and settled the Ibidem. King John returns to England.
Affairs of Ireland according to his pleasure, he Returned into England on the
30th of August.

In the Pat. 14. Johan. M. 9. Dors. The Duke of Limeric reconciled to him.
fourteenth year of his Reign the Duke of Lemburic or Limeric, and several
other great persons by the mediation of the Earl of Bologn were reconciled to
the King, and doing Homage, and performing their Services had their Fees
restored unto them.

Church Affairs.
THese were so mixed and interwoven with the Secular Affairs of this Kings
Reign, That they could not be Distinguished in Writing the History. There were
but two Councils of any note during the whole time, The one National (...) in
(...).
in the Year 1200, held by Hubert Archbishop of Canturbury against the
Prohibition of Geofry Fitz-Peter the Kings Iusticiary, and the other for the
particular Diocese of Salisbury held by that Bishop, Richard Pore, Spelm.
Council Vol. 2. in that year. ult. Johannis.
about the year 1217. in which were very many Canons or Decrees made for the
Regulating of Ecclesiastic matters within that Jurisdiction, upon several
heads, drawn from the then Explication, and Doctrine of Seven Sacraments. But
in neither is there any thing of considerable notice.

Taxes in this Kings time, and Money Levied by him for Scutage Service, etc.
SOon after his first Coronation, which was on the 27th of May 1199. Rot. Pip.
1 Johanis, Civit. London and Middlesex.
He had a Scutage Tax of two Marks of every Knights Fee.

In the year 1200. he had of every Ploughland in England Hoved. f. 454. b. n.
20.
three Shillings.

In the year 1201. he had two Marks of every Knights Paris f. 206. lin. 9.
Fee for Scutage Service of such as had his License to stay at home, upon
Summons to pass beyond Sea with him.

In the year 1203. he took a 7th part of all the Earls and Barons Ibid. f. 209.
n. 20.
Goods that left him in Normandy.

In the year 1204. in a Parliament at Ibid. n. 50
Oxford there was granted to him a Scutage Tax of two Marks and half of every
Knights Fee.

In the year 1205. he Ibid. f. 212. n. 20.
levied of the Earls and Barons that would infinitam pecuniam) a vast Sum of
Money.

In the year 1207. he took a thirteenth part of all the Ibid. f. 221. n. 50.
movables and other things as well of Laics as of Ecclesiastics and Prelates,
all Murmuring, but none dared to contradict it.

In the year 1210. he forced from the Ibid. f. 230. n. 10.
Abbats, Priors, Abesses, 100000 l. and from the White Monks or Cistertians
40000 l.

In the year 1211. he had two Marks Ibid. n. 50
Scutage Service of every Knights Fee, which furnished not out its Service to
the Expedition of Wales.

In the year 1214. he Cl. 16 Johan. m. 24. Dat. apud Partenay 26 Maii.
took of every Knights Fee of those that were not with him in Poictou, as well
of Bishoprics in his hands, as of Wards and Escheats three Marks.

The Issue of King John.
HEnry his Paris f. 225. n. 50.
Eldest Son, afterward King Henry the Third, was Born on St. Remigius his Day
(That is the first of October)

Richard his Second Son, afterward King of the Romans and Almain, Earl of
Poictiers and Cornwall, was Ibid. f. ^ 226. lin. 1.
born in the year 1208.


JOane the Eldest was Married to Pat. 10. Hen. 3. n. 1. Dor^.
Alexander King of Scots, as appears upon the Patent Roll, 5 Hen. 3. M. 6.
Dors. Dated at York, June 28. 1221.

Alienor his Second Daughter Pat. 10. Hen. 3. n. 1. Dor^.
Married to William Marshall A. D. 1231. and was remarried to Simon Monfort
Earl of Leicester, on the Paris f. 465. n. 40.
Morrow after Epiphany A. D. 1238.

Isabell his third and youngest Daughter was Married to Ibid. f. 414. n. 30, 40.
Frederi^ the 2d, Emperor of Germany at the Age of One and twenty Years, on the
Twenty Seventh of February, A. D. 1235.

His Natural, or Base Issue.
RIchard Ibid. f. 298. n. 40.
the Eldest.

Geofrey Sand. Genealog. Hist. f. 86.
Fitz-Roy.

Osbert mentioned as King John's Sandf. ut supra f. 87.
Son in Rot. Pat. 17 Johan. Part. 2. M. 16.

Olivar. mentioned as King John's Son in Rot. Cl. 1 Hen. 3. part. 2. M. 23. and
as King Henry's Brother in Rot. Cl. 2. Hen. 3. part. 1. M. 9.

Joan Sandf. ut supra f. 87.
Married to Llewellen the Great Prince of North Wales.

THE REIGN
IN the Eve of Simon and Jude, Paris fol. 289. n. 10. A. D. 1216. Henry the 3.
Declared King
Eight days after the death of King John, in the presence of Walo the Popes
Legate, Peter Bishop of Winchester, Iocelin Bishop of Bath, Sylvester Bishop of
Worcester, Ranulphe Earl of Chester, William Marshal of Pembroke, William Earl
of Ferrars, John Marshall, and Philip de Albeney, with Abbats, Priors, and a
very great multitude met at Gloucester to advance Henry the eldest Son of King
John to the Crown of England. The day after, all necessaries being in a
readiness for his Coronation, His Coronation.
The Legate accompanied with the aforementioned Bishops, and Earls, brought
him in Solemn Procession, into the Conventual Church, Declaring him King. Being
placed before the great Altar, in the presence of the Clergy and Laity ( Coram
Clero and Populo) laying his Hand upon the Holy Gospels and Relics of many
Saints, Iocelin of Bath dictating the Oath, He Ibid. n. 20. His Oath.
Swear, That he would bear Honor, Peace, and Reverence to God, Holy Church, and
all its Clercs, all days of his Life; That he would administer due Justice to
the People; That he would abolish all bad Laws and ill Customs if any were in
his Kingdom, and would observe, and cause to be observed all good ones. He does
Homage to the Pope.
Then he did Homage to Holy Church of Rome, and to Pope Innocent, for the
Kingdoms of England Ireland; And Swear Faithfully to pay the Thousand Marks
yearly to the Sea of Rome, which his Father King John had given: After this,
And receives the Homage of all his Bishops, Earls, and Barons present.
Peter Bishop of Winchester, and Iocelin Bishop of Bath anointed and Crowned
him King with the usual Solemnities. The day after he received the Homages and
Fealties of all the Bishops, Earls and Barons, and all others who were present,
all promising him most faithful Obedience.

After his Ibid. n. 40. The Earl of Pembroke Protector.
Coronation, he remained in the Protection of William Earl of Pembroke, Great
Marshall, who forthwith sent Letters to all Sherifs, and Castellans of the
Kingdom of England, Commanding Obedience to the new Crowned King, and promised
many Gifts and Possessions to all such as should faithfully adhere to him; upon
this, all those Noblemen and Castellans, who had continued firm to his Father,
stood the more close and faithful to him, Lewis and his Adherents
Excommunicated.
and every one prepared to fortify his Castles, as well as he could; and they
were the more encouraged, when they saw that Lewis his Accomplices and
Favorers were Excommunicated every Sunday and Holy Day.

All endeavors were used by the Protector, the Bishop of Winchester, and
others, to reduce the Barons to their Allegiance and Obedience Append. N. 143.
Hugh de Lacy, and gave him a safe Conduct to return to his Fealty and Service,
and that he might come to speak with the King, and return safely, and promised
him the Restitution and enjoyment of all his Rights and Liberties, if he
complied with that invitation, which bears the Earls Test, and is Dated
November 18, the First of his Reign.

Lewis and the Barons who besieged Dover Castle, heard certainly that King John
was dead, Ibid. n. 50. Lewis and the Barons summon Dover Castle.
They were possessed with a fallacious Joy, that the Kingdom of England would
soon be subdued; Therefore Lewis summons Hubert de Burgo, Constable of the
Castle, to surrender it, Telling him King John was dead, and that he could not
defend it against him; and therefore if he would deliver the Castle, and Swear
Fealty to him, He would not only reward him with Honors, but also make him one
of his Counselors. To Hubert gave this Answer, That although his Master was dead,
Hubert de Burghs Resolute Answer.
yet he had Sons and Daughters who ought to succeed him; but would not hear of
surrendering the Castle, till he had consulted his Knights; who unanimously
resolve in the Negative, lest by a shameful Surrender Ibid. fol. 290. n. 10.
They should be branded for Traitors; when this Resolution was made known to
Lewis, he raised the Siege, and marched toward London.

th of November following Ibid. Lewis takes Hertford.
He came before Hertford, and besieged it, which at first was well defended by
Walter de Godardvill, and many French were slain, but at last was yielded unto
Lewis, upon Condition they might be secured of their Goods, their Horses and
Arms. Robert the Son of this Walter claimed the custody of this Town, as
belonging unto him by Ancient Right; To whom the French Men replied, That such
English were never to be trusted, who had been Traitors to their own Master;
However, Lewis subdued the Kingdom, every one should have their Rights
restored. From hence he proceeded to Berchamstede- Castle Ibid. n. 30. and
Berchamstede. Spoils the Country.
, and after some small skirmishes and a few Sallies made by the besieged, he
took it. After this he ravaged the Country, and spoiled the Inhabitants, until
he came to St. Albans, and required the Abbat to do him Homage, which he
refused, unless released from his Homage to the King of Ibid. n. 50.
England. Lewis enraged at this Answer, Swear He would burn both the Abbey and
Town, unless he did what he required. Whereupon the Abbat (by the Mediation of
Saher Earl of Winton) made a composition with him for himself and the Town,
till the Candlemass following, Returns to London.
and gave him Fourscore Marks of Silver to spare the Abbey and Town until
Candlemass, and then he returned to London.

In the year 1217. the young King Henry Ibid. fol. 29^.10. A. D. 1217. The King
and Protector at Bristol.

The English, doubtful whether they should adhere to King Henry or Lewis.


kept his Christmas at Bristol, with Walo the Legate, and William Marshall,
the Protector or Governor of the King and Kingdom; At this time there was a
fluctuation in the Nobility, whether they should submit to young Henry or
Lewis. The French they hated and despised, and the more because Lewis contrary
to his Oath, had entered upon their Lands, Possessions, and Castles, and placed
Soldiers and Strangers in them. And at the same time were ashamed to return to
the King, deserted; being thus perplexed, they could not tell which way to
steer their course.

Mount Sorrel Castle Plunderers defeated.
On the Twentieth of January several Knights and Esquires, or other Horsemen,
went out of Mount-Sorrel Castle, to plunder the Country: The Garrison in
Nottingham Castle had notice of it, and sent out a party that engaged them,
killed Three of their number, and took Ten Knights, and Twenty four Esquires
(Servienses) prisoners.

About this time Lewis Ibid. n. 50. A Truce between King Henry and Lewis.
had notice from his Envoys at Rome, that unless He departed out of England,
the Sentence of Excommunication pronounced against him by Walo the Popes Legate
would be confirmed by the Pope: Whereupon a Truce was made between King Henry
and Lewis, until a Month after Easter; and that all things were to remain in
the same State they were in that day. The Truce was made until the term was
expired. He pas^eth over Sea.
In Lent Lewis passes over Sea, by which he lost the affection of the English
Barons; And thereupon William Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of Arundel,
William Earl of Warren, Many of the English Barons return to their Allegiance.
and William Son of the Great Marshall returned to their Allegiance, and
afterward firmly adhaered to young King Henry, which very much weakened Lewis
his party.

After Ibid. fol. 293. n. 40. William Marshal and Ranulph Earl of Chester, etc.
Besiege Mount Sorrel Castle.
the Solemnity of Easter was past, at the instigation of William Marshall,
Ranulph Earl of Chester, William Earl of Albemarle, William Earl of Ferrars,
Robert de Veteri Ponte, Brian de Insula, W. de Cantelupo, Philip Mart, Robert
de Gaugi, Falcasius with his Castellans, and many other Garrison Soldiers met
to besiege the Castle of Mount Sorrel, wherein Henry de Braibrot was Governor,
and with him were Ten stout Knights, and many other Soldiers; There were many
vigorous Assaults made, and Sa^er Earl of Winton contrives with Lewis how to
raise the Siege
But the Besieged being close pressed, sent to Saher Earl of Winton, the Lord
or Proprietor of the Castle, who was then at London, for relief; He applies
himself to Lewis, (who was lately returned from beyond Sea to London) that he
would send Assistance, and raise the Siege, and they agreed to send such Force
as might not only Relieve the Castle, but also subdue the Country; There went
out of London Ibid. n. 50.
Six hundred Knights, and above 20000 Armed Men (Qui omnes aspirabant in who
all gaped after Plunder; the chief of them were the Earl of Perch, Marshall of
France, Saher Earl of Winton, and Robert Fitz-Walter, and many others who were
judged very fit for that Expedition. They set forth the last of April, and
marched toward St. Albans, Burning and Robbing Towns and Churches, spoiling
all sorts of Men, and cruelly tormented them, that they might force from them
excessive Ransoms; Neither did they spare Ibid. fol. 294. n. 10.
the Abbey of St. Albans, notwithstanding a little before the Abbar satisfied
Lewis. They marched from thence to Dunestaple, where they took away the Monks
Clothes, and with their polluted Hands Ibid. n. 20.
snatched away the Holy Relics from the Altar. After many Spoils, and much
Rapine, they went directly to the Ibid. n. 40.50. Mount-Sorrel Castle relieved.

Lewis his Army besieged Lincoln Castle.


Castle of Mount-Sorrel, and raised the Siege without any opposition. From
Lincoln, and set down before the Castle, which Gilbert de Gant had a long time
in vain Besieged, and made many Assaults, but were vigorously repulsed.

Upon this Ibid. n. 50 William Marshal, etc. raise an Army for the relief of
Lincoln Castle.
William Marshall, Walo the Legate, and Peter Bishop of Winchester, and
others, who then managed the Affairs of the Kingdom, Summoned all the Kings
Castellans, and Knights, and those that were in Garrisons in diverse parts, to
meet at Newark Whisun-Tuesday, to go along with them to raise the Siege of
Lincoln Castle. They all showed a great readiness to Fight with the
Excommunicated French, and very joyfully met at the place and day appointed.
With them went the Legate, and many other Prelates, to pursue with Prayers and
Arms all such as were disobedient to the King, and Rebels to the Pope. When
they were all come together, they were 400 Knights, 250 ( Balisharii)
Cross-Bow-men, and such Ibid. fol. 295. n. 10.
Esquires and Horsemen without number; That if necessity required, supply the
place of Knights. The chief were William Marshall, and William his Son, Peter
Bishop of Winchester, well skilled in Martial Affairs, Ranulph Earl of Chester,
The chief persons in that Army.
William Earl of Salisbury, William Earl of ^errars, William Earl of Alb^marle;
And the Barons were William de Albiny, John Marshall, William de Cantelupo,
and William his Son, Falcasius, Thomas Basset, Robert de Veteri-Ponte, Bryan de
Insula, Geofry de Lucie, Philip de Albiney, with many Castellans well exercised
Military Discipline; They stayed three days at Newark.
They stayed three days at Newark for the refreshment of their Men and Horses,
where they were Confessed, and fortified themselves, by the Perception of the
Lords Body, and Blood ( Corporis and sanguinis Dominici perceptione sese
muni^bant) against the Assaults of their Enemies.

On Friday in Whitsun-week after their Confession, and receiving the Sacrament,
The Legate Ibid. n. 20.
showed how unjust that cause was, which Lewis and the Barons his Adherents had
undertaken to defend, for which they had been Excommunicated, and separated
from the Unity of the Church; And then by name Excommunicated Lewis, The Legate
encouraged the King's Army.
and all his Accomplices and Favorers, and especially all those that Besieged
Lincoln; But to those who had undertaken this Expedition, he gave a full
Pardon, and the promise of Eternal Salvation. This so animated the Army, that
they triumphantly marched toward Lincoln, fearing nothing but the Enemies
flight before they came thither; Ibid. n. 30, 40.
Barons and French which were in the City, heard of their approach, they
received the news with Scoffs and Laughter, thinking themselves to be secure.
However Robert-Fitz-Walter, and Saher Earl of Winton went out of the City to
observe the motions and number of the Kings Forces; when they returned, They
march in great order toward Lincoln.
they reported their March to be very orderly, but that they exceeded them in
number. This Account gave no satisfaction to the Earl of Perch, and the
Mareschall: Ibid. n. 50.
Wherefore they went out to take a View of the Kings Army, The Advices and
Counsels of the French Officers various.
which marched in such order, that they were mistaken in their Observations,
and returned both deceived and uncertain; the advices upon this were various,
at last it was agreed the Gates should be Locked up, and Watches set to keep
out their Enemies, and every one to make ready for a defense, and in the mean
time to Batter and Assault the Castle, which they thought could not long hold
out.

When the Kings Ibid. f. 296. n. 10. The Kings Army Assaults the City of
Lincoln.

The Barons and French are heaten.


Army was come before that part of the City where the Castle stands, the
Castellans by a private Messenger gave them notice of every thing that was done
within, and moreover told them, that if they would, they might enter at the
Postern gate of the Castle, which was left open for them. Falcacius accepts the
offer, and enters with all such as he commanded, and the Cross-Bow-men, (whilst
the rest of the Army made an assault upon the Northern Perch Ibid. n. 30. The
names of the chief Prisoners that were taken.
refusing to yield to any Englishman that had been a Traitor to his own King,
was slain. Of the Chiefest Barons were taken, Saher Earl of Winton, Henry de
Boun Earl of Hereford, Gilbert de Gant whom Lewis had lately made Earl of
Lincoln, Robert Fitz-Walter, Richard Munfichet, William Mumbray, William
Beauchamp, William Mandut, Oli^er Harcourt, Roger Cressy, William Colevill,
William de Ros, Robert Ropesle, Ranulph Cheinduit, and about 400 Knights, 400
Knights etc. taken.
besides Esquires, Ordinary Horsemen and foot. This Victory was obtained on the
19th of May, being Saturday in Whitsun-Week.

The spoil of the Ibid. fol. 297. n. 10, 20. The City and Cathedral Plundered.
City and Cathedral was given to the Soldiers; for the Legate had commanded they
should treat all Canonical persons as Excommunicated: When they had made an end
of Plundering, William Mareschall commanded all his Castellans to return home
with their Prisoners, and keep them under a strict guard till they knew the
Kings pleasure.

Lewis Ibid. f. 2^7. n. 50. Lewis sends to his Father and Wife for more Forces.

He afraid to Anger the Pope, leaves all to his wife.


hearing of this great overthrow, forthwith sent Messengers King of France, and
to his Wife the Lady Blanch to send some speedy Succors. The King fearing he
should anger the Pope if he should assist his Son who was Excommunicated, left
it wholly to Lewis his Wife Ibid. fol. 298. n. 10. She sends 300 Knights with
other Forces. They were met and Beaten at Sea.
who speedily sent 300 stout Knights with a great many Armed men under the
Conduct of Eustachius a Monk. After they were Shipped, a brisk wind drove them
England, but by the way several of the Kings Ships under the Command of Philip
de Albiney met with them, between whom was a bloody Sea fight. Ibid. n. 30. And
most taken Prisoners.
At length the French seeing no hopes of Success or Escape, some desperately
leaped into Sea, and the rest yielded themselves Prisoners. When the News of
this defeat came to Lewis, it more grieved him than the overthrow at Lincoln.
Ibid. n. 40. Eustachius the Monks Head cut off.
Eustachius the Monk offered a great sum of Money for his Life; but Richard
the Bastard Son of King John calling him wicked Traitor, Told him he should
never deceive any man further with false promises, and so cut off his head.

After this Ibid. n. 50. William Earl Marshal Besieges London
the Mareschall encompassed London with a great Army and Besieged it both by
Land and Water; Lewis finding himself reduced to great streights, signified to
the Legate, and Mareschall, that he would submit to their advice, and consent to
any thing Ibid. f. 299. n. 10. Lewis offers a Treaty.
consistent with his own Honor, and without Scandal to his Friends.

They being very willing to be rid of him, send him a f. 299. n. 10. The Legate
and William Marshal send him a Form of Peace. He accepts it. King Henry and
Lewis meet at Stanes A. D. 1217.
Form of Peace, to which if he would Consent, he should have free passage and
conduct out of England; if not, they would endeavor the destruction of him and
his Accomplices. Lewis and his Counselors accepted the offer, and sent to the
Mareschall and Legate to fix upon a place and day, that a speedy Peace might be
concluded. They appoint a place Stanes by the River Thames, where King Henry,
the Legate, and the Mareschall, with many others on the one side; And Lewis with
the Barons on the other side met, and agreed upon this Form of Peace on the
Eleventh of September.

Lewis Ibid. n. 20.30.40. The Form of Peace.
Swore that he and all with him that were Excommunicated, would stand to the
Judgment of Holy Church, and for the future, would be faithful to the Pope, and
Church of Rome. That he would England, and never more return again with any ill
design during his Life. And that he would endeavor what he could to induce King
Philip his Father, to restore to King Henry all his rights beyond the Seas, and
that when he should come to be King, he would quietly restore them. And that he
should immediately deliver to the King all those Castles, with their Lands, he
had possessed himself of in England during this War. King Henry with the Legate
and Mareschall Swore they would restore to the Barons of England, and to all
others Lewis Borrowed 5000 l. of the Citizens of London and passes into France.
That all Prisoners either taken at Lincoln, or at Sea, whether of the Kings or
Lewis this Lewis and all his Followers were absolved, and returned to London,
where having borrowed 5000 l. Sterling of the Citizens, he was by the great
Mareschall conducted to the Sea, and so passed over into France.

When the Legate Ibid. n. 40, 50. The Bishops, Abbats, etc. that assisted Lewis
excepted from absolution.

The Legate sent out Inquisitions to find out all Clercs that were inclined to
Lewis, and deprived them of their Benefices


absolved Lewis and his followers, he excepted all such Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, Secular Canons, and Clercs who assisted or favored Lewis and the
Barons, particularly Simon de Langton and Gervase de Hobrugge, who caused Holy
Mysteries to be performed by such as were excommunicated. They were first
deprived of all their Benefices, and then forced to go to Rome. Soon after
Lewis his departure, The Legate sent Inquisitors all over England, and
whomsoever they found the least engaged or inclined to Lewis and the Barons of
what order and Dignity soever they were, They first suspended them, and then
sent them to him; who deprived them of all their Benefices, The Bishop of
Lincoln paid 1100 Marks for his Bishopric.
and bestowed them on his own Clercs. Hugh Bishop of Lincoln paid to the Popes
use 1000 Marks, and 100 to the Legate for his Bishopric, whose Example many of
the Bishops and Religious followed.

This year on the sixteenth of July dyed Ibid. fol. 297. n. 40. A. D. 1218.
Pope Innocent the Third. To whom succeeded Honorius the Third.

King Henry Ibid. fol. 300. n. 20, 30. Several of the Barons were loath to part
with the Lands they had gotten in the late Wars
kept his Christmas at Northampton, and Fal^asius supplied him with all
necessaries for the Festival. In those days several of the Nobility and others,
The chief of which were, William Earl of Albemarle, Falcasius with his
Castellans, Robert de Vipont, Brian de Lisle, Hugo de Bailluel, Philip Marc,
and Robert de Gaugi, having in time of War accustomed themselves to Rapine,
could not forbear exercising the same in time of Peace, but forcibly Castles
with the Lands and Possessions belonging to them, of some Bishops and great men
contrary to the Kings Will and Command; Robert de Gaugi refused to deliver the
Castle and Town of Newark to the Bishop of Lincoln.

The King Besieged it, and is yielded upon Terms.


but especially Robert de Gaugi (though Admonished several times by the King)
refused to yield up the Castle and Town of Newark to Hugh Bishop of Lincoln.
Whereupon the Great Mareschall at the Kings Command, raised an Army and
Besieged the Castle; after eight days Siege, Robert de Gaugi capitulated with
the Bishop to Deliver the Castle to him upon payment of an Hundred pounds
Sterling Bishop with the Kings consent did accept the Terms, so the Siege was
raised, and every one went to their own home.

This Year on the 18th of February, the Protector Append. N. 144. Clercs that
adhered to Lewis, Banished.
wrote in the Kings Name to the Sheriffs to make Proclamations in their
Counties, That all Clercs that had adhered to Lewis, and were therefore
Excommunicated, and not absolved, should be Banished; and if they Absolved, if
they remained Friends to Lewis, etc. they were however to be Imprisoned.

He wrote on the 22d of the same Month also to the Append. N. 145. The Charter
of Liberties to be observed.
Sherifs of the several Counties, for the better satisfying the minds of men,
That they should look after the observation of the Charter of Liberties, and
the Forest, and see all Castles built in the time of War Demolished.

On the 16th of March in the same year, Llewellen Prince of Northwales Cl. 2.
Hen. 3. M. 4. The Prince of North Wales, receives in Custody the Kings Castles,
etc.
Received in Custody from Gualo the Popes Legate, the Kings Castles of
Kaermarden and Kaerdigan with their Lands and all appurtenances in the presence
of Peter Bishop of Winchester, William Marescal Earl of Pembroke, and many
other Bishops, Earls and Barons there named, and others not named, to hold and
keep them King until he came at Age, and then they were freely to be delivered
to him. He was to hold the Kings Courts in these Castles and Lands as the Kings
Baylif, Deputy or Officer ( ut Ballibus Domini Regis) and do right to the
English according to the English Law, and to the Welsh according to their Law:
And for the performance of these things, he gave Pleges or Hostages, Mailgo the
Son of Rese, and Rese the Son of Griffin, Mado^ the Son of Griffin, and Mereduc
the Son of Ren.

This year also it was Ordained Append. N. 146. No Chart or Letters Patents to
be Sealed with the Great Seal before the King was at full Age.
by the Council of the Kingdom, that no Chart, or Letters Patents containing
the Confirmation, Alienation, Sale or Donation of any thing in perpetuity,
should be Sealed with the Kings Great Seal, until he were of full Age; and if
any such Charts Letters Patents were made and Sealed, they were notwithstanding
to be void. This Ordinance is Witnessed by Gualo the Popes Legate, the
Archbishops of Canturbury and York, the Earl of Pembroke Protector, and Hubert
de Burgh Justiciary, thirteen other Bishops, nine great Abbats, eight other
Earls, and fifteen Barons, but not one ordinary person.

In the year 1219. the King kept his Christmas Ibidem f. 304. n. 10. William
Earl Marshal Dies, Peter Bishop of Winchester Protector. A. D. 1220.
at Winchester: At William Mareschall the Elder Dyed, after whose Death, Peter
Bishop of Winton was made the Kings Protector or Guardian.

King Ibid. f. 309. n. 40. King Henrys Second Coronation.
Henry was at Christmas at Marlebergh, being still under the Protection of
Peter Bishops of Winchester. At Whitsuntide following, being the 17th of May,
and the fifth year of his Reign, he was Crowned again at Westminster by Stephen
Archbishop of Canturbury, in the presence of the Clergy and Laity of the whole
Kingdom, ( presentibus Clero and Populo totius Regni.)

King f. 310. n. 30, 40, 50. William Foret Seiseth (...) Castle of Biham in
Lincolnshire.
Henry at Christmas kept his Court at Oxford with the Earls and Barons of the
Kingdom. A. D. 1621.
At this time William Foret without the Kings knowledge left the Court, and
went to the Castle of Biham, where after some few days, having gathered
together some Armed men, he came in a Hostile manner to the Town of Tenham and
plundered it; and caused the Grain of the Canons of Bridlington to be carried
into the Castle of Biham; he likewise plundered the Town of Deeping with many
other Towns, and by grievous Torments forced the Inhabitants to redeem
themselves. It was said that Falcasius, And plunders the Country.
Philip Mart, Peter de Malo Leone, and Engelard de Achie, were the chief
Abbettors of this Faction; who privately sent him Armed men to disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom. In the mean time the Great Men of England (Magnates
Angliae) met the King at Westminster to treat of the Affairs of the Kingdom (
ut Tractarent de negotiis Regni) The Earl of Albemarle was Summoned, and
pretending to come, The Earl of Albemarle seized Fotheringay Castle.
went privately to the Castle of Fotheringey and took it, and having Fortifyed
it with Armed men, he betook himself to Biham Castle: When the King and Council
heard of this, a great Army was raised, and sent to Besiege the Castle of
Biham; Biham Castle taken.

The Earl of Albemarle pardoned


After some short time the Besieged seeing no hopes of relief or escape,
submitted themselves to the Kings mercy on the 8th of February, who commanded
they should be kept Prisoners Earl of Albermarle was introduced to the King by
the Archbishop of York, and at the intercession of Pandulf the Legate, the King
was reconciled to him, Ibid, l. 57. Too much Lenity gives encouragement to
Rebels.
because he had faithfully served both the King his Father and him. All the
Knights and other Horsemen or Servants ( Milites omnes and Servientes) were set
at liberty without punishment or redemption, which gave encouragement to others
to rebel, and to expect the same favor in the like Case.

Gualo left England and Mat. Westminster. f. 279 lin. 6.
returned to Rome in August or September in the year 1218. the 3d of King
Henry; and Pandulph Elect of Norwich succeeded him as Legate, and came to St.
Paul's in London on the Monday after the Feast of St. Andrew next following.

The same year about the 8th of September, Ibid. fol. 312. n. 10. Lewelin King
of Wales Besieges Buet Castle,
Lewelin King of Wales with a great Army Besieged the Castle of Buet, which
belonged Reginald de Braiosa, who sent to the King and importunately craved his
assistance: The King having raised an Army marched thither; But the Welsh
raised the Siege and fled at his approach: Then he marched toward Montgomery,
where after he had plundered the Welsh, and got forage for his Army, he Or
rather Repaired it.
built Montgomery Castle to hinder their incursions; for this Expedition the
Great Men granted him a Scutage of two Marks of Silver of every Knights Fee
(Concedentibus Magnatibus de quolibet Scuto duas Marcas Argenti.) This year
Ibid. f. 313. n. 10. The King of Scots marries Joan King Henrys Sister.
Marriage between Alexander King of Scots, and Iohanna the Kings Eldest Sister
was Solemnized at York the day after the Feast of St. John Baptist; At the same
time and place Hubert de Burgh Married the King of Scots Sister. The two Kings
met there to treat of this Claus. 5* Hen. 3. part. 1. m. 11. Dors. Her Jointure
1000 l. per Annum.
Marriage, and a stricter Alliance then was before between them, on the Monday
Sevenight after Trinity Sunday, and the Ioynture made to this Joan Queen of
Scots, which was in Lands, to the value of One Thousand Pounds by the Year,
bears Pat. 5. Hen. 3. M. 6. Dors.
Date at York on the 18th of June M.CC.XXI.

A. D. 1222.
In the Year 1222. the King Ibid. n. 20.
kept his Christmas at Winchester, Peter the Bishop of that City provided all
necessaries for him.

This year a great Riot fol. 315. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. A great Riot in London.
happened in the City of London, upon the following Occasion, A great Wrestling
was appointed between Citizens and the Country people near adjoining, on St.
James's day, wherein the Citizens were Conquerors; which was much stomached by
the Steward of the Abbat of Westminster, he therefore appoints an other meeting
at Westminster, on the 1st of August, to which the Citizens flocked in great
Numbers; but found they had weapons, as well as men to contend withal, for the
Steward and his Assistants being Armed, came upon them unawares, wounded many,
and put the rest to flight.

The Citizens returned into the City meditating revenge, and met in great
Numbers. Serlo the Major hearing of their tumultuous proceedings, came to them,
and advised them to make their complaint of the injury they had received to the
Abbat of Westminster, and if he would punish the Offenders to take that for
sufficient satisfaction; Constantine a popular Citizen the chief Author of that
Riot.
But Constantine a man very popular among them, opposed this method, telling
them, the Abbat and Steward deserved Counsel was approved of, and executed by
the rabble to the great prejudice of the Abbat. When Hubert de Burgh the
Justiciary had notice of these Ryotous proceedings, he came to the City with
some Troops of Soldiers, and Commanded the Principal Citizens should with speed
come to him, of whom he inquired who were the Authors of this Sedition and
Subverters of the Kings City, His Answer to the Justiciary.
and who they were that thus dare presume to break the Kings Peace. Constantine
answered, They had done less then they ought to have done, and would stand to
what they had done: Adding, The King had violated his Oath; whereupon Lewis
justly refused to perform what was covenanted between them. When the Iusticiary
heard this Confession, he dismissed all but Constantine, and his Nephew, He is
Hanged with two others.
and one Geofry Constantine's Edict, whom he ordered to be hanged next day
Morning. When the Rope was about Constantine's Neck, he offered 15000 Marks of
Silver for Pardon, but to no purpose. When the Sentence had been pronounced
without noise or the knowledge of the Citisens, Falcasius with a Guard carried
him by Water upon the Thames to the place of Execution.

After this, Ibid. n. 50.
the Iusticiary and Falcasius (i. e. Fawks de Breant) Guard, went into the
City; and whosoever he found Guilty of the Sedition he imprisoned, and caused
either their Feet or Hands to be cut off, and then set them at Liberty; many
fled for fear and never returned; The King punishes the City of London for the
Riot. And turns out the Officers.
and for a greater punishment to the City, the Kings turned out all the City
Magistrates, and appointed new Prefects, Governors, or Officers in their place.
( Rex in majorem vindictam omnes Vrbis Magistratus deponens, novos in Civitate
constituit Praefectos.)

Not long after, the King Append. n. 147. Thirty Hostages given for the
security of the City of London.
named Thirty persons to be Security, and Hostages for the Good Behavior,
preserving the Peace, and faithful Service of the City of London; The
University or Community whereof, bound themselves to the King by a Chart,
Sealed with their Commune Seal, to deliver them or more, to the King or
Justiciary, whenever they were called for, and if any of them dyed, to add
others.

On the 29 th of January following, the King Append. n. 148. The King Lets the
Office of Chamberlan of London at 100 l. per annum.
Let out to Farm to William Ionner Citisen of London, the Office of Chamberlan
of London, with all things belonging to it, for two years, at One hundred
pounds a year, to be paid into the Exchequer, Reserving to himself the Prizes
or Customs of Gray Work, (that is Gray Cloth) of Wax, and Silk Clothes, to be
delivered to the King for his own use, by the Hand of the Farmer.

In the year 1223. the King kept his Ibid. f. 316. n. 50. The Archbishop and
great Men desire a Confirmation of their Liberties.
Christmas at Oxford, A. D. 1223.
and on the 13th of January met his Barons at London in a Parliament or
Conference (apud Lundonias veniens cum Baronibus ad Colloquium) where the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and other Great Men (Et alii Magnates) Requested,
that the King would confirm the Liberties and free Customs ( Libertates and
liberas Consuetudines) for which a War was made with his Father; urging
moreover, that when Lewis departed from England, both he and all the Nobility
of the Kingdom had sworn to observe, and cause to be observed those Liberties,
and therefore could not R^fuse to do it; William Briwere one of the Kings
Counselors replied, That the Liberties they desired, were violenely Extorted,
and therefore ought not to be observed; The Archbishop in a Passion reproved
him, and said, if he loved the King he would not hinder the Peace of the
Kingdom. The King Ibid. f. 317. l. 3.
seeing the Archbishop moved, The King promises to preserve their Liberties.
assured them, that he had bound himself by Oath to preserve their Liberties,
and what was Sworn should be observed: And having called a Council, he
forthwith sent his Letters to all the Sherifs of the Kingdom to make inquiry by
the Oath of Twelve Knights or Legal Men in every County, And causes
Inquisition to be made what they were.
what were the Liberties in England in the time of King Henry his Grandfather,
and to make a return of them to London, Fifteen days after Easter.

The Contents of the Append. n. 149. The Writ of Inquiry directed to Twelve
Knights, etc.
Writ it self, do in many things differ from this report of Mat. Paris, by
which the Sheriffs were commanded to make diligent inquiry by the Oaths of
Twelve of the most legal and discreet Knights of their Counties in a full
County Court, what Customs and Liberties King John his Father had, the day in
which the War began between him and his Barons concerning Lands and other
things, within Burghs and without, and cause them to be proclaimed observed in
their Counties, and to cause the Inquisition and Writ to be returned to the
King at Westminster on the Morrow of the close of Easter.

This year while William Marshall fol. 317. n. 10. Lewelin King of Wales takes
two of the Marshals Castles.

The Marshal retakes them, And kills 9000 Welsh.


Earl of Pembroke was busied in Ireland, Leolin King of the Welsh, took Two of
his Castles, and put all to the Sword that he found in them, and placed
Welch-men in their room; The Marshall having notice of what was done, returned
with great speed into England, and forthwith Besieged these Castles, and retook
them, and cut off the Heads of all the Welch-men, and then marched into
Leolin's Country, and wasted all before him with Fire and Sword: Having
totally defeated the Welsh, He took and slew about 9000, few escaping by flight.

After this the same Lewelin, Prince of North Wales, acknowledged by his Pat.
7. Hen 3. M. 2. dors. Lewelin binds himself to give King Henry satisfaction for
the damages done him.
Chart, Sealed with his Seal, and witnessed by many Bishops, and Barons, That
he had Sworn to give satisfaction to his Lord Henry King of England, and his
People, within a reasonable time to be prefixed by the Archbishop of
Canturbury, for the Damage done them by him and his People, from the day of the
taking of the Castle of Kynardesly, unto the day of his Absolution, that is to
say, Saturday the 7th of October, in the 7th year of King Henry's Reign; and
for the performance hereof were bound with him Mereduc the Son of Robert, and
many others.

This year about the First of August dyed Ibid. n. 30 Philip King of France
dies.
Philip King of France; when King Henry had notice of it, he sent the
Archbishop of Canterbury, with three other Bishops to King Lewis, to demand the
restitution of Normandy, King Henry demands the restitution of Normandy from
King Lewis*
with all other his Transmarine Dominions, according to his Oath when he left
England; King Lewis justly possessed of Normandy and other Dominions, and was
ready to make it appear in his own Court, if the King of England would come
thither ( Et ibidem juri parere) and stand to the Law; Who refuses to restore
them.

And taxes him with violation of his Oath.


Adding that the King of England had violated his Oath, in putting those of his
party he had taken at Lincoln to a a grievous Ransom; And also that those
Liberties for which the War was begun, that were Granted and Sworn to at his
departure, were not observed; when the Archbishop and the other Bishops could
obtain no other Answer, they returned into England, and gave the King an
Account of it.

This year the Great Men of fol. 318. n. 20. The Great Men complain of Hubert
de Burgh.
England (Magnates Angliae) complained and murmured against Hubert de Burgh the
Justiciary, alleging that he exasperated the King against them, and that he
did not duly administer Justice. But that which more especially provoked
Messengers he had sent to Rome were returned with a Bull from the Pope,
directed to the Archbishops of England, and their Suffragans, declaring the
King to be of full Age, The Pope declares the King of full age.
and that all the Affairs of the Kingdom should be managed by him and his
Council. The words of the Bull were as follows, Quatenus Authoritate
Apostolica denunciarent, Comitibus, Baronibus Militibus, and aliis Vniversis,
qui custodias habebant Castrorum, Honorum, and Villarum Quae ad Regis Dominium
spectabant, ut contnuo visis Literis That by Apostolic Authority they should
declare to the Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others who had the Custody of
the King's Castles, Honors, and Towns; That upon sight of these Letters they
render them to the King: And whoever refused, they should compel by
Ecclesiastical Censure. Notwithstanding the greatest part of the Ibid. n. 30
The Earls and Barons refuse to deliver up the King's Castles. etc.
Earls and Barons (although admonished by the Bishops) did not render up their
several Trusts, disturb the Peace of the Nation, then give the King
satisfaction in the premises.

In the year 1224. the King The Earl of Chester threatens the King and
Justiciary.

The Archbishop threatens to Excommunicate him.


kept his Christmas at Northampton, A. D. 1224.
together with the Archbishop of Canturbury and his Suffragans, and a great
number of Military Men; But the Earl of Chester with his Conspirators, kept
that Feast at Leicester, swelling against, and King and the Justiciary, because
he was required to deliver up to the King the Castles and Lands he had in his
Custody. The next day the Archbishop with his Suffragans Excommunicated all
disturbers of the King and Kingdom, and Invaders of the Church, or its Rights,
and gave notice to the Earl of Chester and his Accomplices, that unless the next
day they resigned into the Kings hands all the Castles and Honors that belonged
to the Crown, they should be all excommunicated by name, as the Pope had
commanded. Earl and those that were with him, fearing the Kings power, He
yields up all the King's Castles and Lands.
and dreading the Church Censures, came to Northampton, and submitted, and
rendered the Castles and Honors that were in their custody into the King's
hands; However, their indignation was not appeased, because the Iusticiary was
not removed. The Authors fol. 320. n. 10. The chief disturbers of the Peace.
of this disturbance were the Earl of Chester, the Earl of Albemarle, John
Constable of Chester, Falcasius with his Castellans, Robert de Vipont, Brian de
Lisle, Peter de Malo-Leone, Philip Marc, Ingelrard de Athie de Cantelupo, and
William his Son, and many others, which did very much endeavor to disturb the
Peace of the Kingdom.

This year Lewis* Ibid. The King of France appears before Rochel.
King of France gathered together a great Army, and went to Rochel, and offered
them a great Sum of Money to Surrender the Town and Swear Allegiance to him.
The Rochellers seeing themselves See Hubert de Burghs answer in Append. n. ^

He Buys the Town.


forsaken by the King of England, consented, and delivered up the Town to the
King of France, who placed a Garrison in the Town and Castle, and returned home
without shedding one drop of Blood.

In the Octaves of Holy Trinity, the King at a Parliament Ibid. n. 30 A
Parliament at Northamton, to consider of ^he Kings Dominions beyond Sea. Their
intentions frustrated by the Rebellious Practices of Falcasius de Brent, A. D.
1224.
at Northampton, met the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and many others,
to treat about the Affairs of the Kingdom, (Convenerunt Colloquium apud
Northampton, Rex cum Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus and multis
aliis de Regni negotiis tractaturi.) The King being willing to take the advice
of his Great Men, (uti consilio Magnatum) concerning his Dominions beyond Sea,
which the King of France had in his possessions. But the following Rebellious
Practice broke those measures. Martin de Pateshulle, Thomas de Muleton, and
Henry de Braibo^, the Kings Iusticiaries at Dunstable, had set a very great
Fine upon Falcasius de Brent for Rapine and Spoils he had committed. As soon as
he heard of it, he Fortified his Castle at Bedford, and sent out some Armed men
to take the Iusticiaries and bring them Prisoners to Bedford: who Imprisoned
one of the Kings Justices in Bedford Castle.
But having notice of his Design, two of them made their Escape, and Henry de
Braibrock was taken and imprisoned in the Castle.

Ibid. n. 40
The King and the Council being highly displeased at this insolence and injury
offered to his Justiciary; it was unanimously resolved to reduce the Castle.
But first the Kings Messengers summoned them to Surrender, and were answered by
William de Brent, Falcasius his Brother, They did not look Ibid n. 50. The King
Summons Bedford Castle
upon themselves obliged to deliver it unless commanded by their Lord
Falcasius; because they were not bound by Homage and fealty to the King. The
King being enraged at this Answer, ordered the Castle to be Besieged, The
Answer ^o the Summons.

The Arch Bishop Excommunicates Falcasius and the Garrison. The Castle taken by
Assault.


and threatened (if taken by force) not to spare one man. The Archbishop and
Bishops Excommunicated Falcasius, Garrison in the Castle. But neither the Kings
threats, nor Ecclesiastical Censures could prevail with them to yield; After
many Assaults the Kings Soldiers entered the Castle.

Many were slain and wounded, and the rest submitted to the Kings mercy, f.
321. n. 30. Twenty Four of the Garrison Hanged.
whereof Twenty Four were Hanged for their insolence to the King after the
Castle was taken; Falcasius beforehand had made his Escape out of the Castle,
and fled into Wales, but by the intercession Alexander Bishop of Coventry Ibid.
n. 40. Falcasius submits to the Kings Mercy. He is committed to the Custody of
the Bishop of London.
he was introduced to the King, where falling down at his feet, he implored his
mercy, urging his Services to the King and his Father in times of Hostility.
Then the King by the advice of his Council, having first taken from him his
Castles, Lands, and Goods, committed him to Custody of Eustachius Bishop of
London till further Order, and caused the Ibid. f. 322. l. 7.
Castle to be Demolished, but gave the houses and ground to William de
Beauchamp. After this the Parliament granted to the King 2 shillings of every
Plough Land; and the King granted to the Great men Scutage, two Marks Sterling
of every Knights Fee, to be levied of their Tenants. f. 322. l. 3. The King
Grants to the great men Scutage from their Tenants.


In the year 1225. King Henry A Parliament at Westminster.
. A. D. 1225.
kept his Christmas at Westminster (Praesentibus Clero and Populo cum
Magnatibus Regionis) The Clergy and Laity and the Great Men of the Kingdom
being present; In this full Assembly Hugo de Burgh the Kings Justiciary in the
presence of the Archbishops, Bishops, and Earls, Barons, and all others (Coram
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, and aliis Vniversis) declared
the Damages and Injuries the King sustained Dominions beyond Sea, wherein not
only the King, but also many Earls, and others were outed of their Possessions;
And seeing many were concerned, the Assistance ought to be proportionable;
therefore he required their Counsel and Aid, That the Royalties of the Crown,
and their Ancient Rights might be recovered, for the retrieving of which, He
thought the Fifteenth part of all Movables, A Fifteenth granted.
both of Ecclesiastics and Laic's might be sufficient. This being propounded
Ibid n. 20.
the Archbishop and all the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, and Priors, after some
deliberation, returned this Answer to the King; They would readily gratify his
desires, if he would Grant to them their long desired Liberties, (Si libertates
din petitas concedere voluisset. The Charter of Liberties, and of the Forest
granted.
) The King agreeing to what the Great Men desired, Charters were forthwith
Writ, and Sealed with the King's Seal, and one directed to every County in
England. And to the Counties in which there were Forests, Two were directed;
One concerning their common Liberties, the other concerning the Liberties of
the Forest: The tenor of these Charters, is to be found in the History of King
John, both being exactly alike. A Month after Easter a day Ibid. n. 30.
was set to choose Twelve Knights and Legal Men, (Duodecim Milites and Homines
Legales) who upon Oath should distinguish the new Forests from the old ones;
and what ever Forests were found to be made after the first Coronation of Henry
the Second, were forthwith to be Disforested: The Council being ended, Charters
were carried to every County, and by the Kings Command every one sworn observe
them. The way and manner of Levying this Fifteenth, was directed by the King,
and because it was very particular, and worth noting, how Fifteenths were taxed
in those times; the Record it self is Printed in the n. 150.
Appendix.

On Candlemass-day following, the King Ibid. n. 40, 50. The King Knights his
Brother Richard, and makes him Earl of Cornwall and Poictou.

He with others is sent into Gascoigny.

The Knights and Soldiers of that Country come into him.

He reduces Gascoigny to Obedience.


Knighted his Brother Richard, and Ten Noblemen with him, and made him Earl of
Cornwall and Poictou; In the Spring he sent him, accompanied with William Earl
of Salisbury, Philip de Albiney, and Sixty Knights into Gascoigny, who arrived
at Burdeux on Palm Sunday, and was Honorably received by the Archbishop and
Citizens. Then Richard opened the Kings Letters, in which he desired ( Omnes
Homines and Fideles sui de Regionibus illis) All his Men, and those that had
sworn Allegiance to him, in those Countries, should give Aid and Advice to his
Brother Richard, for the recovery of his lost Dominion. Upon this a great many
Knights and Soldiers resorted to him, and received Wages from him. Then he
marched with a great Army through all Gascoigny, and seized the Castles, of
such as refused to do Homage and swear Fealty to King Henry, and wherever he
met with opposition, he reduced them by force; and in a short time subdued all
that Country, having first obtained a great Victory over the Earl of Mar^h,
who was sent by the King of France to raise the Siege of Reole Castle.

Rigord De Gestis Ludowici. A. D. 1224. f. 399. n. 20.30.
tells this Story otherwise, and the later French Historians follow him, He
says that Lewis sent an Army under the Command of his Marshal to raise the
Siege, and that when Earl Richard had notice of its coming to the River
Garonne, he raised it, and shipped himself and Men, and went for England.

In March following f. 324. n. 20. Falcasius his Sentence.
the Great Men met the King at Westminster at a Parliament or Conference
(Convenerunt apud Westmonasterium ad Colloquium Rex and Magnates sui) where the
King Commanded Sentence should be given against his Traitor Falcasius; what was
to be done to him, the Nobility agreed with the King in this, ( Proceres in hoc
cum Rege consenserunt) That because both his Father and he had done faithful
Service to the Crown many years, lose neither Life nor Limb; For ever to abjure
the Kingdom,
but should for ever abjure the Kingdom; Whereupon the King commanded William
Earl of Warren safely to conduct him to the Sea, and as he entered the Ship, he
adjured the Earl with Tears in his Eyes, to let the King know, that what ever
he had done, He was encouraged in his Treason by the Great Men of England.
was by the contrivance and encouragement of the Great Men of England; so he
passed over into Normandy only with Five Servants or Horsemen, and as soon as he
landed, he was taken and delivered to the King of France, where he was
Sentenced to be hanged for the injuries he had done the French; But purging
himself by Oath, and having taken upon him the Crusado, he was dismissed, and
went forthwith to Rome, and with his Clerc Robert Pastelewe, was presented to
the Pope.

The same year about Easter, Ibid. n. 40. Twelve Knights, etc. to walk the
bounds of the Forests.
Hugo de Nevill, and Brian de Lis^e, with others, were sent by the King through
England, to cause Twelve Knights, or Free and Legal Men ( Duodecim Milites vel
Liberos and Legales Homines) to be chosen in every Province or County of the
Forests, What was not ancient Forest was to be disforested.
to walk the bounds of them, and by Oath of those that lived therein, to find
out which were the Ancient Forests, and which were to be Disforested. The Kings
Command was in a short time Executed, but not without some opposition, every
one using the Liberties that were granted; They sold their own Woods, Hunted in
them, and stubbed up, and ploughed such of them as were disforested at
pleasure. The Great Men, the Knights, and Free Tenants, use of the Common
Liberties, that not one tittle contained in the Charter was pretermitted.
Communibus libertatibus Magnates Milites, and libere tenentes adeo usi sunt,
(quod nec Iota unum in Regis Charta Contentum extitit praetermissum.)

This year Ibid. n. 50. A Decree against Priests Concubines.
came forth a Decree from the Archbishop, and his Suffragan Bishops, that the
Concubines of Beneficed Priests and Clerks within Orders, ( Infra sacros
ordines constituti) should be denied Christian Burial, unless they repented
whilst in health, or gave such testimonies of their penitence at the hour of
death, ( in extremis earum) as to deserve a Dispensation; And also so long as
the Priests f. 325. l. 1.
kept them in their Houses or Publicly out of their Houses, they should be
denied (the Osculum pacis in the Service of the Mass, anciently after the
Consecration of the Host, The Kiss of Peace, what it was.
when these words were pronounced, Pax Domini si^ semper vobiscum, the Priests
and People kissed one another with a soft gentle Kiss, which was called Osculum
pacis, the Kiss of Peace, instead of which now they use a little Image which is
called the Pax, and is delivered to the Priests and People by the Deacons and
Subdeacons to be kissed. And People that were in Discord or Enmity one with
another, used this Kiss as a token of Reconcillation.
osculum pacis, and panem. Panis Benedictus, The Blessed Bread, what it was.
was Bread that was Blessed by the Priest and given to the Catechumens
benedictum) The Kiss of Peace, and Blessed Bread.

And also that after Childbirth they should not be Churched, till they had
given sufficient Security to the Archdeacon or his Official, to make
satisfaction the next The Latin word is Ca^itulum, and in this place signifies
a Convention of all the Curates, The Rural Deans Chapter, what it was.
or Parish Priests within their Rural Deanery every First day of the Month, to
Discourse of the Penitents and other Ecclesiastic Matters of every Parish
within the Deanery; These meetings were called D^ Fres^^ in verbis.
Capitula Rura^ia or ^ale^ae, from meeting on the First day of the Month.
Chapter after their Churching. All Priests in whose Parishes any such
Concubines dwelt, if they did not notice to the Archdeacon or his Official,
were to be suspended, and not to be Absolved without some severe penance. And
if it could be proved a Priest had carnally fol. 325. n. 10.
known his Concubine, He should do public and solemn Penance: And if she were
convicted of Adultery she was to be doubly punished, lest impunity in so great
guilt, should give encouragement to others to offend in like manner.

This year the Pope sent Otho Ibid. n. 50. Otho the Popes Legate comes with
Letters from the Pope to the King.
his Legate into England with King Henry, which when he had read and understood
the tenor of them, He answered the Legate, that he neither could or ought to
determine any thing that generally concerned the Clergy and Laity of the whole
Kingdom. Then by the Advice of the Archbishop, He appointed on the Octabes of
Epiphany, to meet his Clergy and Laity at Westminster, to Treat upon the
aforesaid business.

Then the Legate moved the King in behalf of Falcasius, urging great and
faithful Services both to him and his Father in the late Wars. The King
replied, that his Sentence passed, Note here the Omnis Clerus and Populus
Regni, were the Magnates only, or Great Men; See his Sentence before.
and he was condemned to perpetual banishment by the whole Clergy and Laity of
the Kingdom by the Judgment of his Court (Ab omni Clero and Populo Regni per
Judicium curiae suae). And although the Government of the Kingdom ( Cura Regni)
did more especially belong to him; yet he ought to observe the good Laws and
Customs of the Land. When the Legate heard this, he forbore soliciting the
King any further for Falcasius. Then the Legate fol. 326. lin. 2. A. D. 1226.
took of every Conventual Church Two Marcs of Silver for Procurations.

In the year 1226. King Henry fol. 328. lin. 1. The King taken sick at
Marleborough.
kept his Christmas at Winchester, some Bishops, and many of the Great Men
being present. When the Solemnity was ended, the King went to Merleberge, where
he was taken desperately ill, and continued so for many days; In the mean while
the Feast of St. Hilary the prefixed time was come, That the King, with the
Clergy and Great Men (Cum Clero and Magnatibus Regni) of the Kingdom, were to
hear the Message from the P^pe. But however, according to the King's
appointment, many Bishops with other Prelates, and a great number of the Laity
met at Westminster on that day.

Then the Legate opened his Letters, wherein the Pope complains, That it was an
Ancient Scandal and Reproach cast upon the Church Rome, That nothing could be
transacted without great sums of Money, and plenty of Gifts; And seeing that
which caused this Infamy was her poverty, it became Dutiful Children to supply
their Mothers wants, The Pope desires an allowance of two Prebendaries of every
Cathedral. And two Monks portions of every Abbey.
which might easily be done, if out of every Cathedral Church two Prebendaries
might be set apart for this purpose, One by the Bishop, the other by the
Chapter; And also out of every Monastery where there is an Abbot and Convent,
One Monks Portion from the Convent, and as much from the Abbot; and persuaded
the Prelates Consent to what the Pope desired.

Ibid. n. 30. The Bishops Answer to this Demand.
When the Bishops and other Prelates had heard this Proposal, after some
deliberation they gave their Answer by John Archdeacon of Bedford, who in the
presence of the Legate, replied, That what was proposed, concerned the King
specially, and generally all Patrons of Churches in England, besides
Archbishops, Bishops, and innumerable Prelates; And seeing the King upon the
Account of his infirmity, Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates were absent,
they neither could nor ought to give an Answer which might tend so much to
their prejudice. Then came John Marshall, and other Messengers from the King
to the Prelates which held Baronies of the King in Capite, strictly forbidding
them, from obliging their Lay-Fees to the Church of Rome, lest he should
thereby lose his accustomed Service. Then the Legate desired another day might
be appointed in Mid-Lent, and he would take care, the King and the Prelates who
Ibid. n. 40.
Kings Consent. So they all went to their own home.

At the same time fol. 329. n. 20. The Pope makes the same demands in France.
Romanus was by the same Pope sent Legate into France upon the like occasion;
when he called an Assembly of the Clergy at Bourges, he finding the Popes
Demands would be opposed by them, craftily dismisses the Procurators of the
Conventual imagining they should find a ready acceptance among the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbats, and Prelates. When this contrivance was perceived by the Ibid.
n. 40. and 50. They are opposed.
Procurators, they sent to the Legate Procurators of all Cathedral Churches,
who told him, they heard he had special Letters from the Court of Rome, to have
Two Prebendaries assigned in every Conventual Church; wherefore they much
wondered, seeing it more specially concerned them, it was not propounded while
they were present; Adding, that they were very sensible it would be a great and
an inestimable damage to the Gallican Church, and could never be effected,
seeing the King, the Nobility, and generally all his Subjects were resolved to
oppose it ( usque ad expositionem Capitis, and omnis honoris privationem) even
to the loss of Life and Honor; especially when it hazzarded the subversion both
of the Kingdom and Church. When the Legate heard their thoughts, he then showed
them the Popes f. 330. l. 4.
Bull, urging them to a compliance* upon the same reasons Otho the Legate
offered to the English Clergy: To which the Archbishop of Lions Ibid. n. 20.
40. The Archbishop of Lions answers all the Legates Arguments.
gave such a full and satisfactory Answer, that the Legate professed he never
consented to these exactions, but received these Letters after his entrance
into France; ading he would urge nothing more, until he saw what the Prelates
in other Kingdoms had done in this business.

The same year Otho the Popes Legate Ibid. n. 50. Otho revoked.
came into Northumberland in Lent, to Collect the Procurations that were in
Arrear; He soon after (by the procurement of the Archbishop of Canturbury was
revoked by the Pope) and an Injunction was laid upon the Archbishop (Vt
Convocatis Rege and omnibus Angliae Prelatis. The King and Prelates meet about
the Popes proposals.
) The King and all the Prelates of England being Assembled to receive their
Answer upon the business Otho was sent, and to transmit it to him. King, after
Consultation with the Prelates, and some of the Great Men, returned this Answer
f. 331. n. 10. They return a dilatory Answer.
That though what the Pope urged concerned the Universal Church, yet he was
ready to follow the example of other Kingdoms, and would see first what they
did; and with this Answer the Assembly was dismissed.

The King was very Ibid. n. 40, 50. Earl Richard prospers in Gascoigny.
sollicitous about his Brother Richard and his affairs in Gascoigny, and much
desired to pass over thither with some force: But while he was thus thoughtful
concerning them, Express came from his Brother, That he was well, and all
things secceeded prosperously there; if so, Rigord and others were much
mistaken, in affirming that he unsuccessfully returned into England.

This year in September dyed Lewis fol. 335. n. 10, 20. King Lewis dies.
King of France, at the Siege of Avignion, and his Son Lewis was fol. 335. n.
10.20. His Son Lewis is Crowned. A. D. 1227.
Crowned at Paris the 30th of November following.

King Henry fol. 336. n. 10.20. London paid 5000 Marks to the King. Northampton
paid 1200 l. The Religious and Beneficed Clercs paid the Fifteenth.
kept his Christmas at Reading, but soon after came to London, and accused the
Citizens for giving 5000 Marks of Silver to Lewis the late King of France, at
his departure out of England, and compelled them to pay the same sum to him,
and Levied, besides the Fifteenth part of all their Movables and Goods, as it
had been granted unto him by the whole Nation: From the Burgesses of
Northampton, he took for an Aid 1200 l. besides the Fifteenth, which all other
People paid. The Religious and Beneficed were forced to pay the same, as well
out of their Ecclesiastic as Lay-Goods. Their Appeal to the Pope did not avail
them any thing; for those whom the Kings Authority could not, the Papal Power
by Ecclesiastical Censure forced them to pay.

In February following the King Ibid. n 30. The King declares himself of age.
called a Council at Oxford, where He declared that He was then of He was born
on the First of October. A. D. 1206. And Cancels the Charters.
full Age, and would take the management of Public Affairs into his own hands,
and by the Advice of Hubert de Burgh his Justiciary, he removed from his Court,
Peter Bishop of Winchester, His Protector in his Minority; In the same Council
He Cancelled and Voided all the Charters of the Forests in every County, which
for two years before had been observed in the whole Kingdom; alleging that
what was then done was in his Minority, (Cum nec sui Corporis aut Sigilli
aliquam potestatem habuerit) when he had no power of his Person or Seal, and
upon that account was invalid. The people Murmur and accuse Hubert de Burgh.
This occasioned great Murmurings, every one accusing the Justiciary, and
looking upon him to be the Author of this disturbance, because the King was
wholly guided by him. Soon after the Ibid. n. 40
Religious, and all others had notice, that if they would enjoy their
Liberties, they should renew their Charters, otherwise the Old ones should be
no advantage to them; and what they were to pay for them, was left to the
discretion of the Justiciary.

This year Dyed Ibid n. 50. Honorius the Pope Dies, Gregory the ninth chosen.
The King sends to his Great men in France.
Pope Honorious, and Gregory the Ninth, Bishop of Hostia succeeded him March
18th.

About Easter the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Carlisle, and Philip de
Albiney returned from beyond Sea; They were sent to the Great men of those
Countries, which of Ancient That is, Normandy and Anjou, Britany and Poictou,
To induce them to return to his Obedience. They had before done Homage to the
King.
right belonged to the King of England; And were to induce them by large
promises to receive King Henry and Acknowledge him their Natural Lord. But the
King of France, by his Mothers Contrivance made Peace with those Barons, and
had received their Homages, before King Henry's Messengers came thither, so
they returned without effecting any thing; In May following Richard the f. 337.
n. 10. Richard Earl of Cornwall returns into England.

Hubert de Burgh is made Earl of Kent. The King and his Brother Richard
Disagree.


Kings Brother came into England and was joyfully received both by the King and
the Great men. This year Hubert de Burgh the Justiciary was made Earl of Kent
by the King, and by Cincture, with the Sword of the County.

In the same year on the 9th of July a great difference arose between King [3]
Henry and his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall upon this occasion; King John
had given to Waleran Castellan of Berchams^ead a German, a Manner that belonged
to the Earldom of Cornwall; which when Earl Richard understood, he seized it,
until Waleran made out by what right he claimed it. As soon as Waleran had
notice of it, he made his complaint to the King, whereupon the King Brother,
forthwith upon sight of his Letters to render the Manner to Walran. Earl Richard
in great have went to the King, and pleaded his right to the aforesaid Manner,
offering to stand to the Judgment of his Court (and Magnatum Regni) and of the
Great men of the Kingdom; The King and the Justiciary hearing him name the
Great men, were highly enraged, and commaded him either to yield the Manner, or
for ever depart the Kingdom; to which Earl Richard replied, That he would
neither part with the Manner, nor leave the without the Judgment Ibid. n. 30,
40, 50. The Justitiary advises the King to secure his Brother.
of his Peers, and forthwith made what have he could to his own House. The
Justiciary when he heard his Answer, fearing he might Disturb the Peace of the
Kingdom, advised the King to Secure him, and set a Guard upon him. The Earl
having notice of this Design, went immediately to Redding, and from thence to
i. e. Marlborough. He Confederates with the Great men against the King.
Merleberg, where he met with his Friend and Sworn Confederate William
Mareschall, to whom he declared what passed between the King and him; together
they went Earl of Chester and gave him an account what had happened; from
thence they went to Stamford, where in a short time according to appointment
met with Horse and Arms, Ranulph Earl of Chester, William Mareschall, Richard
Earl of Cornwall, Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, William Earl of Warren, Henry Earl
of Hereford, William Earl of Ferrars, William Earl of Warwick, with many Barons
and a great multitude of Armed men, They Demand the Charters which were
Cancelled, may be new Sealed.

The King gives his Brother satisfaction.


who entered into a Confederacy to force the King both to satisfy for this
injury that was done to his Brother Richard, which they imputed to the
Iusticiary, and to restore those Charters of Liberties lately cancelled at
Oxford, Sealed with his own Seal. Upon this the King appointed them to meet him
at Northampton the 3d of August, where he gave all his Mothers Ioynture to his
Brother Richard, the Great men urging all the Lands that belonged to the Earl
of Britain in England, which were the Earl of Bologn's lately Deceased; so
every one departed peaceably and satisfied.

In the year 1228. the King Ibid. f. 344. n. 20. The King appoints new Measures
of Grain, Wine, and Ale.
kept his Christmas at York; but soon after came directly to London: In his
journey he found the Measures of Grain, Wine and Ale to be false: He commanded
some of them to be broken, and the rest to be burnt, and ordered others of a
larger size to be made, and the weight of bread to be increased; and Commanded
the Offenders to be severely fined.

This year July 9th Dyed f. 350. l. 1 Stephan Langton Dies. The King Refuses
to accept the person the Monks did choose. The Suffragan Bishops also refuse
him. All parties Appeal to the Pope,

He defers the Confirmation.


Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canturbury, and the Monks of Canturbury
obtained leave of the King to choose one of their own Church: They having made
choice of Walter de Hemesham, presented him to the King, who refused to accept
him, both because his Father was hanged being Convicted of Theft, and also
because in the time of the Interdict, he had appeared against his Father King
John. The Suffragan Bishops of Canturbury refused to accept him, because he had
corrupted a Nun, and had Children by her, and also because he ought not to be
chosen without them. Both sides apply themselves to the Pope, One to get the
Election confirmed, and the Other to hinder it. When the Pope saw both parties
vigorously prosecuted their Suit, by the Advice of his Cardinals he determined
nothing, but put it off till the Day after Ash Wednesday

In August following the Knights and Soldiers that were in Montgomery Castle,
Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. The Welsh disturb the English in making a way through the
Woods.
by the Assistance of the Country people designed to make the way through an
adjacent Wood, more passable and secure for Travelers; and when they were at
work in clearing the Thickets, the Welsh on a sudden came upon them, killed
some and forced the rest to retire into the Castle, and presently besieged it.
King Henry had notice of it, he and the Justiciary (to whom the King had given
the Castle) came speedily with a small Army and raised the Siege. When he had
received additional Forces, he Marched toward the aforesaid Wood: And having
cleared the way by great labor and burning so far as to a Religious House
called Cridie, the Receptacle of the Welsh, he commanded it to be Fired. A new
Castle built by the English.

King Henry makes a disadvantagious Peace.

The new Castle Demolished.


When the Iusticiary upon view of the place found it to be of an Impregnable
Situation, commanded a Castle to be built there: But all the time interrupted,
and many killed by the Welsh, and the King finding many of his own Army
inwardly favored Leolin, was forced to make a disadvantagious Peace, whereof
this was one Article; That this Castle should be demolished, and Leolin should
give the King for his charges three Thousand Marks.

A. D. 1229.
In the year year 1229. the King f. 353. n. 20 The Archbishop of Bordeaux comes
to invite the King into France.

With large promises of assistance. The King gave him a slight dilatory Answer.


kept his Christmas at Oxford, the Great Men being with him; while he was
there the Archbishop of Bordeaux came to him from the Great Men of Gascoigny,
Aquitan, and Poictou, and also Messengers from Normandy to solicit the King
to come in person into those Countries, assuring him that they would be all
ready, with Men, Horse and Arms to assist him in recovering his ancient
Inheritance, ( Vt posset revocare amissas Haereditates.) The King by the advice
of his Justiciary, (whose Counsel he Answered them, he could not comply with
them at present, but would wait for a more convenient opportunity. So the
Messengers returned without any other Answer.

f. 355. l. 4. The King's Messengers attend in vain, The Popes resolution
without Money. They promise him a Tenth of all Movables in England and Ireland.
Alexander Bishop of Chester, Henry Bishop of Rochester, and Master John de
Houghton Archdeacon of Bedford, the Kings Messengers at the Court of Rome,
according to appointment attended on Ash Wednesday for the Popes determination,
concerning the Elect of Canturbury; But finding both the Pope and the Cardinals
very difficult to be prevailed upon by Petitions, promised on the King's behalf
( Ex part Regis) a Tenth of all Movables from all England and Ireland to be
paid to the Pope toward his carrying on the War against the Emperor. The Pope
joyfully embraced this offer, and forthwith caused the Election made by the
Monks to be Ibid. n. 20. The Pope voids the Monks election.

And makes Richard Chancellor of Lincoln Archbishop.


voided, and Richard Chancellor of the Church of Lincoln, was promoted by Pope
to the Archbishopric, without Election, by the consent of the King and the
Bishops, and his Election confirmed by the Pope.

This year the Pope sent his Chaplain f. 361. l. 1. Stephan the Popes Chaplan
comes into England to collect the Tenth.
Stephan into England, to Collect the Tenths that were lately promised, toward
the defraying the charges of his War against Frederic the Emperor. As Soon as
the King understood his Message, He Ibid. n. 40. The King calls a Parliament or
Conference of the Great Men.
caused the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Templars, Hospitallers,
Earls, Barons, of Churches, (Et qui de se tenebant in Capite) and those which
held of him in Capite, to meet him at Westminster ( The Second Sunday after
Easter.

Stephan declares his Message from the Pope.


Dom^nica qua cantatur Misericordia Domini) to treat upon the abovementioned
business and other Exigencies. When they were met, Stephan* opened and recited
to them the Popes Letters, urging both the Occasion, Necessity, and Expediency,
which required, that what was promised by the Kings Messengers, should be
consented to, and Granted. When he had ended his Speech, all expected the King
f. 362. l. 4. The King obliged by his former promise, did not oppose the
collection of the Tenth.
opposed it, but he being tied up by the forementioned promises, (Factus est
Baculus arundineus cujus fragmenta vulneraverunt in se confidentes) became like
a broken Reed, which wounded those that leaned upon it, by his Silence seemed
to consent. But the Ibid. n. 10. The Bishops, Abbats, etc. consented to avoid
Excommunication.
Earls and Barons, and all the Laity opposed it, resolving they would not
oblige their Baronies, and Lay-Fees to the Court of Rome. But the Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, and other Prelates, after three or four days deliberation, and
no small reluctance, consented, least (if they opposed,) they should incur
the Sentence of Excommunication.) Then Stephan Ibid. n. 20. The Tenth was to be
paid without any deductions.
showed them the Popes Letter, whereby he was Commissionated to Collect the
aforesaid Tenths, which were to be paid out of all their Profits whatever,
without any deductions either of Debts or Expenses, and was empowered to
Excommunicate whoever refused; and also to interdict their Churches: And
because the business required speed, he gave notice to the Prelates that they
should forthwith pay down what was due upon the Tenths, and afterward levy it
upon every one by way of Tax, which Exaction proved so grievous, that they were
forced either to Sell Ibid. n. 40. Stephan brought over Usurers to lend money
to such as were not able to pay the Tenth down.
or Pawn their Vestments, Chalices, and other holy Vessels belonging to their
Churches. Moreover, he exacted the Tenths of the Autumnal fruits of the Earth
while they were yet in the Bud; All which they were forced to procure and pay
to avoid Excommunication, and Interdict. certain wicked Usurers, (quosdam
foeneratores nequissimos) who supplied the Indigent with money, which they were
compelled to borrow, although they were thereby irrecoverably ruined. Ranulph
Earl of Chester f. 363. l. 3. Ranulph Earl of Chester. The Clercs and Religious
that depended upon him only opposed it.
was the only Man that opposed this Exaction, not permitting any Religious Man,
or Clerks, upon his Lands to pay any of the abovementioned Tenths,
notwithstanding they were paid every where besides in England, Wales, Scotland
and Ireland.

The same year on Michaelmass Day, the King f. 363. n. 30 The King Summons the
Nobility of England to pass beyond Sea with him. There wanted Ships to
Transport them.
caused the whole Nobility of England, viz. the Earls, Barons, and Knights to
meet together at Portsmouth, (congregavit apud Portesmue totam Nobilitatem
Regni Angliae, Comites, videlicet Barons, and Milites) with such a great
Number of Horse and Foot, that none of his Predecessors ever gathered so great
an Army together. The King intended to pass over Sea to recover those Dominions
his Father had lost. But when Chiefs and Mareschalls of the Army came to
Victual the Ships, there were not enough to carry over one half of the Army.
When this came to the Kings knowledge he was highly enraged, and laid the whole
blame upon Ibid. n. 40 The King accuses the Justiciary, for that Defect. The
Earl of Britan comes for the King.
Hubert de Burgh his Justiciary, and openly called him Traitor, reproaching him
for receiving 5000 Marks from the Queen of France to put a stop to his design;
at length the King was raised to such a height of passion, that he drew his
Sword and would have Killed the Iusticiary, had nor Ranulph Earl of Chester,
October following, Henry Earl of Britain landed in England, to conduct the
King over Sea, as he was bound by former Agreement and Oath, who advised the
King to lay aside all thoughts of passing over Sea till Easter following,
because it was dangerous Sailing, and a Winter Voyage might be to his loss.
Upon this the King gave Ibid. n. 50. The Justiciary reconciled to the King.

The Earl of Britan restored to his rights in England.


every one liberty to go home again, and the Justiciary was reconciled to him.
Then that Earl did Homage to the King (contra omnes homines de Britannia)
Britain, and the King restored to him all his right in England, and having
given him 5000 Marks for the defense of his own Dominions, he dismissed him.

In the year 1230. A. D. 1230.
the King f. 364. n. 40. The King of England, and King of Scots, meet at York
at Christmas held his Court at York with the King of Scots, who was invited
thither together with the Archbishop of the place, Earls, Barons, Knights, (Et
familia magna nimis) and an over great multitude of their followers. Having
Festivity with great joy and liberality for three days the King of Scots
returned into his own Country, and the King of England to London.

This year f. 365. n. 10. A great Sum of Money Granted to the King.
the Archbishops, Bishops,, Abbats, and Priors, throughout all England gave
the King a great Sum of Money for the recovering his Rights which were taken
from his Father beyond Sea; And upon the same Account the Citisens of London
were put to a grievous Redemption, and the Jews forced to pay the third part of
all their substance.

On Easter following, the King f. 365. n. 20. The King passes over into
Britany.

The Earl thereof delivers up his Towns and Castles to him.

Many of the Nobility did Homage, and Swear fealty.


gathered together a very great Army of all that ought him Military Service at
Reding; and Marched from thence to Portsmouth the 30th of April, and there took
Ship with the greatest part of his Army, and Landed at St. Malo on the 3d of
May. He was very kindly received by the Earl of Britain, who delivered up to
him the strong Towns and Castles of that Country, and many of the Nobility did
Homage, and Swore Fealty to him; Andrew de Viteri with some others refused, and
fortified their Castles. As soon as the King of France heard of this, he raised
an Army and came to An^ou, and posted himself there to hinder King Henry's
March into Poictou, who continued yet at Nants expecting the residue of his
Army.

About this time Ibid. n. 50 Discord between the French Nobility.
there happened a great discord among the French Nobility, many of them (as was
reported) being Confederated King of England, and Earl of Britain, the chief
of which were the Duke of Burgundy, the Earl of Bologne, the Earl of Drius, the
Earl of Mascu, the Earl of St. Paul, the Earl of Bar, They Arm against the
Earls of Champaign and Flanders.
Engeram de Curci, and Robert de Courteney, these declared War against the
Earls of Champagne and Flanders, and having been forty days in the Siege of
Anjou, obtained leave of their King and returned home; The King seeing he could
not keep them there, presently followed, and endeavored to make Peace between
them, and Earls of Champagne and Flanders, but could not; They entered Champagne
and destroyed all before them with Fire and Sword: The Earl of Champaign
Defeated.
The Earl raised an Army to oppose them, but was soon defeated and put to
flight, whom they persued to the Gates of Paris. fol. 366. n. 10. Suspected for
Poisoning of King Lewis, and of too much Familiarity with the Kings Mother.
That which moved these Great men so much against the Earl was, That they
suspected him to have a hand in poisoning King Lewis at Abignion, of which they
had accused him before the young King, and challenged him to answer it by Duel;
But through the powerful influence of the Queen the Kings Mother, he would hear
nothing against him. Hereupon they left the Court, and occasioned great
Commotions in France, disdaining to have such a Mistress as had polluted
herself with the unchaste actions both of this Earl and the Popes Legate.

While King Henry and William Marshal were busied in France, Ibid. n. 20 The
Irish endeavor to Extirpate the English.
the Irish thought they had a fair opportunity to rid themselves of the
English, gathered a great Army under the Conduct of the King of Connaught, who
ravaged and destroyed with Fire and Sword the King of Englands Country. When
Gaufrid de Marisco the Kings Justiciary in those parts, heard what they had
done, by the assistance of Walter de Lasci, They are Defeated.
and Richard de Burgh raised an Army, and by Stratagem defeated them, and slew
20000 of them, and took their King and kept him close Prisoner.

About the same time Ibid. n. 40. Several Noblemen of Normandy invite King
Henry into that Country.
Fulco Paganel, and William his Brother, Noblemen of Normandy, came to King
Henry in Britain, and swore Fealty, and did Homage to him; and also about
Sixty Knights, stout and powerful Men, who persuaded him to enter Normandy with
an Army, and he should not in the least doubt success. Advice, but Hubert de
Burgh the Iusticiary would not suffer him to follow it, alleging the Attempt
to be every way dangerous; He was unseasonably diverted, to their ruin.
So these Noblemen went away miserably disappointed; for the King of France
forthwith seized their Castles and Estates.

After this, by the Ibid. n. 50. The King receives the Homages of many People
in Anjou, Poictou, and Gascoigny.
advice of Hubert de Burgh, the King marched with his Army through Anjou into
Poictou, and from thence into Gascoigny, where having received their Homages,
and Country, he returned into Poictou, and received the Homages of many
persons; in this Cavalcade, he took the Castle of Mirebean.

In the Month of Ibid. f. 267. n. 10. A Parliament or Colloquium in France.
Peace made between the Noblemen. The Conditions of the Peace.
September, the King of France and his Mother met at a Parliament or Conference
(Convenerunt ad Colloquium, etc.) with the Honorable and Great Men of that
Kingdom, who after the death of the Kings Father had made War one upon another;
in which Peace was made upon the following Conditions, First, That the Earl of
Champaigne, the principal Author of this Discord, should undertake the Croysado
to the Holy Land, and there with an Hundred Knights fight against the Enemies
of Christ. Secondly, That the King of France and his Mother should swear upon
the Holy Gospels, That they would restore to every one their Rights, and that
they would Judge all Men of that Nation according to right Custom or Law, due
to every Man.

In the mean time King Ibid. n. 20.30. The English Army lies idle in France.
Spend their Money, pawn their Horses. The King returns into England.
Henry with his Army lay idle at Nantes doing nothing but spend his Treasure.
The Earls and Barons seeing Hubert de Burgh would not permit them to fight with
their Enemies, Feasted according to the English manner, and invited one
another, and Drank as if it had been Christmas; Those which were poor, having
spent all their Money, Sold or Pawned their Horse and Arms: At length the King
in October having provided for the defense of that Land, left 500 Knights, and
1000 Stipendiary Servientes, or Horsemen, under the Command of Ranulph Earl of
Chester, William Marshal, and William Earl of Albemarl, shipped himself and
Landed at Portsmouth on the 26th of that Month.

After the Kings departure Ibid. n. 40. The English make an inroad into Anjou
and Normandy.
the Earl of Chester and others whom he had left the Chief Governors of his
Army, made an Incursion with Army into Anjou, and took Gontier Castle,
demolished it, and burnt the Town* and soon after entered Normandy in like
manner, and took the Castle of Pontorsun, and levelled it with the ground, and
burnt the Town; they returned into Britain with great spoils, without any loss
to themselves.

A. D. 1231.
In the year 1231. Ibid. n. 50. A Parliament or Conference.

The King demands three Marks Scutage of every Knights Fee.


The King at Christmas kept his Court at Lambeth, and on the 26th of January
He met his Prelates and Great Men at Westminster, (Convenerunt ad Colloquium
apud Westmonasterium Rex cum Prelatis, and aliis Magnatibus Regni) where the
King required a Scurage, three Marks of every Knights Fee, of all that held
Baronies of him, whether Laics or Prelates. But Richard Archbishop of
Canturbury, and some Bishops opposed it, alleging Ecclesiastics were not to
be Taxed, by, and with Laymen, for that in Transmarine Countries, Scurage was
Granted by Laics without them; However, all the rest, as well Laics and Clercs,
as Prelates, readily submitted to the King's pleasure.

Soon after the Archbishop of Canturbury fol. 368. n. 10.20. The Archbishop
Complains to the King of the Justiciary. The King asserts his Prerogative.
complained to the King that Hubert the Justiciary had possessed himself of the
Castle and Town of Tonebridge, and other Lands that belonged to the late Earl
of Gloucester, deceased, for which Homage was due to the Church of Canturbury:
To whom the King replied, That the abovementioned Earl held of him in Capite,
and that it was his Prerogative to dispose of the Wardships of Earls and
Barons, and of their Heirs, to whom he pleased, till they should come to full
Age. When the Archbishop could obtain no other Answer, He Excommunicated all
that had entered upon the aforesaid possessions, The Archbishop goes to Rome.

The King sends to defend his cause. Richard Earl of Cornwall Marries the
Countess.


and also every one (except the King) that should converse with them, and then
went Rome to prosecute his Suit in that Court; The King likewise sent Roger de
Canteln with some others, to plead his Cause before the Pope. This year at
Easter Richard the Kings Brother Married Isabel Countess of Gloucester, Sister
to William Marshal Earl of Pembroke; which William dyed immediately after that
Solemnity.

This year in May the Ibid. n. 30. The Welsh make incursions into England.

The Bishops Excommunicate them.


Welsh under their King Leolin made many Incursions and great spoils upon the
Borderers of Wales, sparing Sacred Persons nor Places; when the Bishops and
Prelates heard of it, they Excommunicated Leolin and all his Favorers, and
Abettors; and the King having raised an Army to repress them, built Maud-
Castle, which the Welsh had formerly demolished, and placed a strong Garrison
in it, to hinder their incursions: Having finished this Castle in October, he
returned into England, Ibid, fol. 370. n. 30.

This year in June fol. 369. n. 30. The King of France designed to invade
Britany.

His Carriages, Victuals, and Warlike Engines taken.

A Truce for three years.


the King of France with a great Army designed to invade Britain; but was
prevented by the Earls of Britain and Chester, who had prepared an Ambush to
intercept the Carriages of his Army, with the Victuals and Engines, which so
effectually succeeded, that they took and destroyed them all. The French being
thus surprised and discouraged, a Truce was agreed upon and concluded for three
years, between the two Kings. On the King of France his part by the Archbishop
of Rhemes, and Earl of Bologne; and on the King of Englands part by the Earls
of Britain, and Chester, who soon after came into Ibid. n. 40. Richard Marshal
offers Homage for his Brothers Estate.
England with Richard Marshall, and were very honorably received by the King.
Then Richard Marshall offered to do Homage to the King, and whatever else was
required of him, as Heir to his Brother William Marshall deceased. To whom the
King by the advice of his Justiciary gave this Answer, That He heard his The
King refuses to receive his Homage, and Commands him to depart the Kingdom.
Brothers Wife was with Child, and would not determine any thing till that was
certainly known; adding moreover, that He had confaederated with his Enemies in
France, and upon that Account commanded him to depart the Kingdom within
fifteen days; and never to return again, upon pain of perpetual imprisonment.
When he received this Answer passed over into Ibid. n. 50. He resolves to
recover his Inheritance by force
Ireland, where he was kindly received, had all his Brothers Castles delivered
to him, and had Homage with Fealty done him. Also Pembroke Castle, with the
Honor belonging to it, was yielded to him; After this he got together a great
number of Armed Men, resolving, if necessity required, to recover his
Inheritance by force. The King upon this changed his Thoughts, and accepted his
Homage and Fealty, The King accepts his Homage.
and granted him all his Rights, taking only the accustomed Relief.

fol. 370. lin. 1. The Archbishop of Canturbury goes to Rome to complain of the
King and the Justiciary.
Richard Archbishop of Canturbury arrived at Rome, and in the Popes presence
made the following complaints, viz. That the King was wholly guided by Hubert
the Justiciary; that the Affairs of the Kingdom were transacted by his advice,
without consulting his Great Men. That the Justiciary had Married his former
Wives Kinswoman, and had invaded the Rights of the Church of Canturbury, and
refused to restore them. That the Bishops his Suffragans neglected their
Pastoral care, and had betaken themselves to Lay-Causes in the Exchequer, and
gave Judgments in Cases of Blood. That Beneficed Clerks, and such as were in
Holy Orders, had many Churches with Care of Souls, and according to the
examples of Bishops, intruded themselves upon Secu^^r business. On the other
side the Kings Messengers pleaded many things on the Kings and the Justiciaries
behalf, but to very little purpose; The Pope favors him.
for the Pope had Commanded that the Archbishop should have his business
forthwith dispatched, according as he desired. He dies in his return home.
But in his return home he dyed St. Gemma, three days journey from Rome, the 3
of August, and the whole Transaction expired with him.

In October Ibid. n. 30. The King desired to have Married the King of Scots
Sister

Is persuaded not to do it.


the King offered to Marry the King of Scots Sister, but the Earls and Barons,
and especially the Marshall opposed it; alleging it did not become the King
to Marry the Younger, when his Justiciary had married the Elder Sister. At
length he was prevailed upon by the Earl of Britain and the Marshall desist.
After this he gave to the Earl of Britain 5000 Marks of Silver, and so he
returned into his own Country.

The Monks of Canturbury having chosen Ibid. n. 40. The Monks of Canturbury
choose Ralph Bishop of Chichesher, Archbishop. The King accepts their choice.
Ralph de Nevill Bishop of Chichester, and Chancellor of England, Archbishop,
presented him to the King on the 19th of September; The King accepted their
choice, and forthwith invest^d him with the Manors, and other Rights belonging
to the Archbishopric, Then the Monks desired their Elect to allow them Money
for their expenses in their journey, and at the Court of Rome to procure the
Election to be confirmed. He replied, He thought it was Simoniacal, and upon
that account would not consent to allow one Farthing. However, the Monks
proceeded in their journey, and petitioned the Pope to confirm their choice.
But he being before informed of the Person by Simon Langton, fol. 371. lin. 1.
gave them this Answer, That he was an illiterate Man, and a Courtier, and if
he were promoted to that Dignity, he would concur with the King and Kingdom to
shake off the Papal Yoke that King John had put the Kingdom under. Upon this,
the Pope voided the Election, The Pope voids the Election.
and Commanded the Monks to proceed to a new choice, of one who would be
faithful and devoted to the English and Roman Church.

A. D. 1232.
In the year 1232. King Henry Ibid. f. 372. n. 40. The King calls a Colloquium,
or Parliament. D^mands a general Aid. The Earl of Chester said none was due from
the Barons and Knights, because they had served the King in person.

The Laics depart from the Parliament. The Clergy, because many were absent,
desire another time to treat about the Aid.


kept his Christmas at Winchester, and upon the 7th of March He met the Great
Men, as well Prelates as Laics at Westminster (Convenerunt ad Colloquium, apud
Westmonasterium ad vocationem Regis Magnates Angliae tam Praelati quam Laici)
to whom the King declared, That his late Expedition beyond Sea, had involved
him in great Debts; whereupon he was now forced to require of every one a
general Aid. (Vnde necessitate compulsus, ab omnibus generaliter Auxilium
postulavit.) To Ranulph Earl of Chester replied in the Name of the Great Men:
That the Earls, Barons, and Knights, which held of him in Capite, had
personally served him, and had been at great expenses to no purpose, whereby
they were reduced to poverty, (Vnde Regi de jure Auxilium non debebant) and
therefore of Right they ought no Aid to the King. And then having asked leave,
all the Laics departed; But the Prelates answered the King, That many Bishops
and Abbats who were summoned, were not yet come come thither, and therefore
desired it might be deferred, and a day appointed for all to meet together, and
consult what ought to be done in that business; which was agreed to, and the Sea September 14 th. of this year.
Fifteenth day after Easter, was appointed for their meeting.

This year fol. 375. n. 10. A. D. 1232. Corn and Money taken from the Italian
Clergy, and distributed to the Poor.
many Armed Men of good quality, with others of less reputation, violently
entered into the Barns of the Roman Clergy that were Beneficed in England, and
carried away, and largely Corn, and sometimes Money among the poor. There were
about Fourscore, and sometimes fewer, that were the Authors of this
presumptuous Attempt: But William Witham, or Robert Alias Twenge, the chief
Author of that Attempt.
Thing a Knight, was their chief Governor, to whom they paid a ready
Obedience. When these disorders had reached the Popes Ears, He sent very severe
Letters to the King, blaming him for permitting such Rapine to be executed on
Clergymen; and Commanding him upon pain of Excommunication, and Interdict,
close inquiry after the Authors of this violence, and to punish them according
to their offense, that others might be terrified from committing the like. The
Pope by his Letters Commissioned Ibid. n. 30. The Pope sends a Commission to
inquire of the Transgressors, who were to be Excommunicated.
Peter Bishop of Winchester, and the Abbat of St. Edmunds, to make an
Inquisition in the South of England; and in the North the the Archbishop of
York, the Bishop of Durham, and John a Roman and Canon of York, to make a
strict search, and whomsoever they found Transgressors, they should
Excommunicate them, and send them Rome to be Absolved.

When the Ibid. n. 40, 50. Many are accused and imprisoned.
Inquisition was executed, and Witnesses examined upon Oath, a great many were
found, either actually guilty of the abovementioned Rapine, or consenting to
it; there were some Bishops, and some of the Kings Clerks, with some
Archdeacons and Deans; with many Knights and Laymen, many High Sheriffs,
their Bailiffs, and other Ministers, were by the Kings Command taken up, and
committed to prison; Hubert de Burgh is accused.
others through fear fled and could not be found. But Hubert de Burgh the
Justiciary, was accused as a Transgressor, for that he had Granted the Kings
Letters Patents, and his own, that they should not be hindered in their violent
actings; amongst King William Thing, Robert de Twenge justifice what he had
done.
who had caused himself to be called Robert Wither, or Witham, and brought with
him five Esquires, who were his Coadjutors, and openly professed that he had
plundered the Roman Clergy, to revenge the Injury he had formerly received by
the Popes Sentence, whereby, he endeavored by manifest fraud, to force from
him the only Church he had in his Gift; adding, he had rather for a time be
unjustly Excommunicated, than to lose the Patronage of his Benefice without
Judgment: Then the King and Inquisitors advised him to go to Rome, and make out
his Right before the Pope, and pray his Absolution. The King gave him
Testimonial Letters of his Right to the Pope, desiring him earnestly for his
sake to give the Knight Audience.

The Convent of Canturbury fol. 372. n. 50. and fol. ^76. lin. 1. The Monks of
Canturbury choose their Prior Archbishop.

He renounceth his Election.

The Pope commands the Monks to choose another.


chose John their Prior Archbishop, who married at Rome in Whitsun-week, and
when he had delivered Letters of Election to the Pope, he commanded some
Cardinals to examine him; After three days Trial, they professed before the
Pope they could find no cause of rejection. However, the Pope looked upon him
to be too Old, and Weak for so great a Trust; and persuaded him to renounce his
Election, which he did, and begged leave to go home again. Then the Pope
granted License (Concessa Licentia Monachis) to the Monks of Canturbury, and
Commanded them ( Ipsis praecepit) to choose such an one, to whom he might
Communicate his own Burden, and commit the Pastoral care.

This year about Whitsun-week, Ibid. n. 20, 30. The Welsh make inroads into
England.

His Counselors upbraid him for suffering of it. He pleads poverty.


the Welsh, under the Conduct of Leolin, made several inroads into England, and
began to burn and plunder as they used to do. Peter Bishop of Winchester, and
some other Cousellors told the King, it was a great Scandal to his Crown, to
suffer the Welsh, an inconsiderable People, thus to rob and spoil his Subjects.
To whom the King replied, That his Treasurers told Revenues would scarce afford
him Meat and Clothes, and to satisfy the accustomed Note upon the old
Pipe-Rolls there was always entered in discharge so much yearly to such and such
Monasteries as the Kings constant Aims. The King calls his Officers to account,
and gets much Money from them.
Alms, (Vix mihi sufficient ad simplicem victum, Amictum, and Eleemosynas
consuetas,) much less any thing for warlike expeditions. They answered him, he
made himself poor, by giving away Honors, Wardships, and vacant Dignities,
which ought to come into the Exchequer, so that He only had the Name, and not
the Wealth of a King. Adding, that His Antecessors were Magnificent, both in
Glory and Wealth; and this proceeded from the great care Revenues and Profits.
The King took this Hint, and presently called his Sherifs and Baylifs to an
Account, and whoever was convicted of Fraud, was removed from his Office, and
forced to pay the whole into the Exchequer with Usury. He also removed Ranulph
Brito, Treasurer of his Chamber, from his Office, and Fined him 1000 l. of
Silver, and by the advice of Peter Bishop of Winchester (whose Counsel the King
in all things followed) Peter de Orivallis his Nephew, a Poictovin, was placed
in his room; by this means the Kings Coffers were plentifully supplied.

About this time Ibid. n. ^0, 40. Hubert de Burgh turned out of the Office of
Justitiary.

He is called to an Account for what he had received.


by the advice of Peter Bishop of Winchester, Hubert de Burgh, was removed from
the Office of Justiciary, although (as it was said) he had the Kings Patent for
it during Life, and Stephen de Segrave placed in his Room the 29th of July.
Some few days after the King being very much incensed against Hubert, required
him to give an Account of all that had passed through his hands ever since he
had been Justiciary, and also in the time of King John. To which Hubert
Answered, f. 377. l. 1.
That he had King John's Chart, whereby he was discharged of all Accounts, who
having so often experienced his faithfulness, would not receive any Account
from him. The Bishop of Winchester replied, That that Chart was not valid after
King John's Death, and did not at all bind the present from Exacting an Account
from him. To this was added, Ibid. n. 10 and charged with other Crim^s.
That he had been guilty of several Treasonable Practices, and had given
treacherous advice to the King, much to the prejudice both of King and Kingdom.
To all which the King required him to answer, and stand to the Judgment of his
Court. Ibid. n. 3. Has time to Answer until the 14th of September. He takes
Sanctuary.
Hubert seeing himself much pressed and straightened, required some time to give
in his Answer, which was with difficulty obtained, and the 14th of September
following was the day appointed. In the mean time he took Sanctuary in the
Priors of Merton. Being now deserted of all his Friends, (but the Archbishop of
Dublin) his Enemies daily increased, and many other Crimes were laid to his
charge: Ibid. n. 40. Many more Crimes charged upon him.
Namely, That he had procured William Earl of Salisbury, William Marshall,
Earl of Pembroke, Falcasius de Brent, and Richard Archbishop of Canturbury, to
be Poisoned; That he had gained the Kings Affection by Sorcery and Witchcraft.
Others accused him of Injustice, Extortion and Rapine. And the Londoners entered
their Complaint against Condemning their Fellow Citizen Constantin to be hanged
without Legal Process. All which Crimes were so highly aggravated before the
King, That he caused it to be Proclaimed in London, that whoever had any
complaint against Hubert, should come to him, and he should have Justice done
him.

In Autumn Master John Ibid. n. 50. Master John etc. chosen Archbishop.
Surnamed Blund, a Clerc and Student, Reader in Divinity in Oxford was chosen
Archbishop; and accepted by the King, and went to Rome for his Confirmation.

On the 14 of September, the King Ibidem. A.D. 1232. A Parliament or Colloquium
at Lambeth The Fortieth part of all movables Granted to the King.
Assembled the Bishops and other Prelates of Churches, with the Nobility of the
Kingdom at Lambeth, (Convenerunt apud Lamheiam, ad Colloquium in Exaltatione
Rege Episcopi and alii Ecclesiarum Prelati, cum Proceribus Regni.) by whom the
fortieth part of all movables, of Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Clerks and Laics,
was granted to the King, for the payment of the debt he Ought the Earl of
Britain. f. 378. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. Hubert keeps in Sanctuary, and would not
Answer.
Hubert the late Justiciary being now to answer, the Articles objected against
him, fearing the King would put him to some shameful Death, kept in Sanctuary
among the Canons of Merton, and did not appear in the Kings Court, to See
Append. n.
plead to the Articles against him until the King should be in a more mild
temper. The King in a great rage sent to the Major of London to force him from
thence, The King sends the Major of London to fetch him D^ad or Alive.

The Discreet Citisens feared the Consequences of the gathering together of the
Rabble. Ranulph Earl of Chester persuades the King to Revoke his Orders to the
Major of London.


and bring him either dead or alive. The Londoners glad of this opportunity to
revenge themselves upon Hubert, upon R^nging the Common-B^ll, gathered together
in great Numbers (as it was reported 20000 of of the Rabble.) But some of the
more discreet Citisens, dreading the ill Consequences of such tumultous
proceedings, went to the Bishop of Winchesters House in Southwark, and desired
his Advice, who told them, that whatever came of it, they must execute the
Kings Precept. But Ranulph Earl of Chester, hinted to the King, that if such
tumultous proceedings were Countenanced, such a Sedition might be raised, as
would not easily be appeased, adding that it would be a great reproach to him
abroad, when they heard he thus treated those that had been his Favorites:
which so wrought upon the King, that he presently dispatched a Messenger, with
Letters to revoke his former Precept. At this the Citisens were startled, being
disappointed of their

After this the Ibid. n. 50. Hubert had time given him to put in his Answer.
Archbishop of Dublin prevailed with the King to grant Hubert till the Octaves
of Epiphany to prepare his Answer. In the mean time he designed a visit to his
Wife, who was then at St. Edmunds Bury. When the King heard of it, he sent
Godfrey Craucumbe with three hundred armed men to apprehend him, and bring him
Prisoner to the Tower. They found him in Essex in a small Chapel f. 3^9. n.
10. He is drawn out of Sanctuary.
with the Cross in one hand, and the Body of our Lord in the other: They wrung
the Cross and Body out of his hands, and without any respect to the Place, they
violently drew him out, and having Fettered him, and Chained his Feet under the
Horses Belly, they brought him in a most despicable manner to London, and put
him into the Tower. When Roger Ibid. n. 30, 40. The Bishop of London rebuked
the King for taking Hubert out of Sanctuary.
Bishop of London heard how Hubert had been treated, he hasted to the King, and
very severely rebuked him for breach of the Churches Peace, and if he did not
presently set Liberty, and send him again to the Chapel from whence he was
taken, he would excommunicate all that were concerned in this violation of the
Churches Peace.

The King being made sensible of the fault, He is sent back into Sanctuary. The
Sheriffs of Hertford and Essex, to keep him, from escaping and from Victuals.
sent him back again to the Chapel out of which he was taken. But at the same
time sent to the Sherifs of Hartford and Essex upon pain of hanging, to go in
their own person, with all the men of both Counries (cum omnibus hominibus and
encompass the Chapel, that Hubert might neither make his Escape, nor receive
any Victuals from any one. Then the Archbishop of Dublin his only friend
Supplicated the King with Tears, to know his pleasure concerning Hubert. f.
380. l. 1. He refuses to abjure.
The King offered him three things, For ever to abjure the Kingdom, Perpetual
Imprisonment, or openly to own himself a Traitor. But Hubert would choose
neither of them, being conscious to himself, that he had done nothing to
deserve so great Confusion. Yet to satisfy the King, he would be content to go
out of the Kingdom for some time, but would not abjure. But rather then be
starved, he Ibid. n. 20. He yields himself to the Sherifs, is carried Prisoner
to the Tower.
yielded himself to the Sherifs abovementioned, who brought him up to London,
Fettered and Chained, and delivered him Prisoner to the Tower there.

The Fortieth part with the form of collecting it.
About this time was Collected the fortieth part lately granted to the King in
the Parliament at Lambeth. The form of the Commission to the Sherifs of the
several Counties, and the manner how it was to be Levied and Collected, is
noted in the n. 151.
Appendix; and the Commission to the Collectors is to be found in Mat. Paris f.
380. n. 30.

About fol. 381. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. A. D. 1232. The King was informed Hubert
had great Treasure in the Temple.

He sends for it.


the Feast of St. Martin following ( instanti Festo Beati) The King was
informed, that Hubert had much Treasure lodged with the Templars; whereupon the
King sent for the Master of the New-Temple to know the Truth of it, who
acknowledged the Money, but could not tell the Sum, but refused to deliver it,
unless authorized by Hubert. Then the King sent the Treasurer with the Justices
of the Exchequer to Hubert, who in the Kings Name Demanded of him all the
Treasure he had lodged with the Templars. Hubert Replied he would readily
submit himself, and all Kings pleasure, and presently authorized the Templars
to deliver all the Keys of his Treasure to the King; which when he had
received, and receives the Keys of the place where it was.
he Commanded an Inventory to be be made and delivered to him, and all the
money to be paid into his Exchequer. When his Enemies saw his Great Treasure,
they accused him to the King of theft and fraud, urging he deserved a shameful
Death. To whom the King seriously replied, That Hubert had faithfully served
his Uncle Richard and his Father (as he had heard) and if he had been otherwise
appear too Easy than too cruel to him, who had so often preserved both his
Predecessors and himself in great danger. The King now softened into
compassion, The King moved to compassion toward him.
granted to him all the Lands his Father had given him, and those he had
Purchased for his present support; and soon after Richard the Kings Brother,
William-Earl of Warren, Richard Earl Mareschall, William It was John Earl of
Lincoln, according to the Record.

He is prisoner in the Castle of Divises, under the keeping of four Sureties.


Earl of Ferrars, became Sureties for Castle of Divises, under the Custody of
four of their Knights, and made Lawrence a Clerc of St. Albans, Steward of the
Lands Granted him, who had been a faithful friend and great comfort to him in
all his Afflictions.

The Substance of this Composition or Judgment, is to be found upon Record,
though it does not well agree with the exact Circumstances of time, and the
Crimes objected in every Punctilio during this Transaction Append. n. 152.
Record says That the Pope wrote to King Henry, To correct the Injuries Hubert
de Burgh had done to the Roman Chucch, and the Sea before for this Matter.
Italian Clercs here in England, and That thereupon the King s^nt to Arrest his
Body, and bring him to Answer before him, for that very thing Especially.
Hubert having notice of this, fled into a Chapel, and those that followed him,
though they had him out of the Chapel and carried him to London: when the King
heard of this, being Desirous to maintein the liberty of the Church, Commanded
him to be carried back to the same Chapel; in which when he had staid many
days, he was asked whether he would remain in the Chapel, or go out, and stand
Trial in the Kings Court, concerning the same Injury and others, which should
there be objected against him by the King, and many others, who many ways
complained of him. At length he voluntarily chose to come out, and stand to
Law; yet he begged the Kings Mercy, and so went out, and the Kings Officers
that were there present, received him, carried him to London, and delivered him
to the Constable of the Tower. The King not satisfied, sent Stephan de Segrave,
then Justiciary, John de Lascy Earl of Lincoln, Brian de Lisle and others, to
know whether he was forced, or went out voluntarily; He answered he went out
freely, and not for want of Victuals, King Commanded he should be out of the
custody of the Constable of the Tower, that he might come freely to his Court;
and so he came to Cornhul in London upon the Eve of St. Martin, and appeared
before Richard Earl of Cornwall, William Earl Warren, Richard Marshal Earl of
Pembroke, John Earl of Lincoln, Stephan Segrave Justiciary, Ralph
Fitz-Nicholas, and others the Kings Tenants or Feudataries there being; where
when he was accused, The King at the instance of the Great Men, and the
Petition of Hubert and his Friends and Relations, and by the permission of
those that accused him, Respited the Judgment, notwithstanding it was drawn up
in Court, and voluntarily Granted him these Terms; That having delivered to the
King, all the Lands, Tenements, and Liberties, which he held of him in Capite,
and of King John his Father, and all Writings and Instruments that concerned
them, Then he should have and retain the Lands and Tenements which descended to
him from his Antecessors, and all the Lands and Tenements he held of others,
then the King; yet so as he should answer to all his other Accusers, according
to the Custom of the Kingdom, and all his Chattels wheresoever they were, as
well Gold, Silver, Money, or other Goods, and his Body to remain at the Castle
of Divises, in the custody of Richard Earl of Cornwall, William Earl Warren,
Richard Earl of Pembroke, and John Earl of Lincoln, until he was delivered by
the Commune Council of the King, and of all the foresaid Barons his Keepers,
and of all the Great Men of the Land. And if he should by any ways or means
Break, or endeavor to Break Prison, then the Judgment was to take effect; and
wheresoever, or by whomsoever he should be found, he was to be used as an
Outlaw.

December, Lewelin Append. n. 153.
Granted, and promised to stand to the determination of Ralph Bishop of
Chichester, and Chancellor, Alexander Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry, Richard
Marshal Earl of Pembroke, John de Lascy Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of
Chester, Stephan de Segrave Justiciary of England, and Ralph Fitz- Nicholas the
Kings Steward; together with Jolenevet Lewelin's Steward, Werrenoc his Brother,
Iman Vachan, and David a Clerc, concerning Amends to be made for the excesses
on

In the year 1233. King Henry at Christmas fol. 384. n. 20, 30, 40. A. D.
1233. The English Nobility removed from the Kings Counsels.
kept his Court at Worcester, where by the advice of Peter Bishop of Winchester
(as it was reported) he removed all Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Noblemen from
his Council, and would trust no one, but the aforesaid Bishop, and Peter de
Rivallis his Kinsman: So that the management of all public Affairs was
committed to them. The Poictovins and Brittans were now invited into England,
Poictovins and Brittans called into England. The Wardships of the Nobility
committed to them The English complain of it in vain.
and there came over 2000 Knights and Servants, wh^, were placed in several
Castles in Garrison, to whom the easy King committed the Wardships of the
Nobility, which afterward much degenerated, through the ignoble Marriages with
Foreigners. And when any Englishman complained of their burdens, and
oppression, to the King, they were hindered Bishop of Winchester.

When Ibid. n. 50. Richard Earl Marshal speaks boldly to the King. Concern in
the Poictovins.
Richard Earl Marshall saw both the Noble and Ignoble oppressed, and the Laws
of the Kingdom laid aside, He, as a lover of Justice, with some other Great Men
(Associatis sibi quibusdam Magnatibus) went boldly to the King and told him
publicly, that by pernicious Counsels he called in Poictovins and Strangers,
to the Great Men would withdraw themselves from his Counsels, so long as he
made use of Foreigners. To whom the Bishop of Winchester replied, The Bishop
of Winchesters Answer to him.
That the King might call whatsoever Strangers he pleased for the defense of
his Kingdom and Crown; and also such, and so many, as might reduce his proud
and rebellious Subjects to due Obedience. When the Marshall fol. 385. lin. 2.
they retired from Court, promising faithfully to stand by one another in that
cause, (usque ad divisionem corporis and anima) to the very parting of Body and
Soul.

The last year in Autumn Ibid. n. 40. The Pope voids the Election of John Blund
to the Archbishopric of Canturbury.
John Blundus a Student in Divinity at Oxford was elected Archbishop of
Canturbury, and this year about the beginning of April the Pope voided his
Election, because he had given 1000 Marks of Silver to the Bishop of
Winchester, for his promotion Archbishopric.

Soon after fol. 386. n. 10. The Earls and Barons refuse to obey the Kings
Summons.
^he King summoned all the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom to meet him at
Oxford on the Feast of St. John Baptist, but they refused to obey his Summons,
both because they feared and hated the Foreigners which were placed about him.
Then he was advised to send out a Second, and Third Summons, to try whether
they would come or not, to Westminster, on the 11th of July, Ibid. n. 30. They
pretend fear of Strangers that were insensibly landed in the Nation.
Great Men heard, that upon the Kings invitation, many Strangers in small
numbers with Horse and Arms were landed in England (Paulatim applicuerunt in
Regnum) and seeing not the least prospect of accommodation, they laid aside all
thoughts of meeting the King on the day appointed, and by Solemn Messengers
declared Their Insolent Message to the King.
That unless, forthwith the Bishop of Winchester and the Poictovins were
removed from his Court, they would by the Common Counsel of the Kingdom, force
both him and his evil Counselors out of the Realm, and would Treat about
creating a new King. Ipsi omnes de communi Consilio totius Regni, ipsum cum
iniquis Consiliariis suis a Regno depellerent, and de novo Rege creando
contrectarent.

The Ibid, n. 40, The Bishop of Winchesters advice to the King.
King and the Court being startled at this Message, He was advised by the
Bishop of Winchester to reduce his rebellious Subjects by force, and dispose of
their Castles and Lands to the Poictovins, who would defend the Kingdom of
England from his Traitors (Qui Regnum Angliae a suis proditoribus tuerentur.)
The First King's displeasure was Gilbert Basset a Nobleman, who applying
himself to the King for a Manner he had taken from him, was called Traitor, and
threatened, if he did not depart the Court he should be hanged. The next was
Richard Sward a Knight, who had Married Gilberts Sister or Neice. The King
commanded him to be apprehended and brought before him; and from every Noble or
powerful Man, he suspected, He required pledges for their Fidelity, and by his
Letters ordered them to be presented to him before the beginning of August.

On the First of August the fol. 387. lin. 3. The Earls and Barons come Armed
to London.

The Earl Marshall retired into Wales.


Earls and Barons came with a great number of Armed Men ( In magno Militi^
apparatu) to London to a Conference or Parliament ( Ad Colloquium) according to
the day prefixed. But Richard Earl Marshall having received advice from his
Sister Isabel, Wife to the Earl of Cornwall the Kings Brother at whose House he
lodged in London, that snares were laid for him, Wales. But the Earls of
Chester, Lincoln, Ferrars, and Earl Richard the Kings Brother, with many other
Earls and Barons came thither, but nothing was done, because Earl Marshall and
Gilbert Basset were absent. Then the King, by the advice of the Bishop of
Winchester, and Stephan Segrave Ibid. n. 20. The King summoned all that ought
him Military Service to meet him at Gloucester. Upon their refusal they are
proscribed and Treated as Traitors.
summoned all that ought him Military Service, to come to Gloucester on the
Sunday before the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin (that is the 15th. of
August) with Horse and Arms. But Richard Marshall and others who were
confederated with him, refused to come. Upon this the King, as if they had been
Traitors, burnt their Towns, destroyed their Parks and Warrens, and besieged
their Castles; and without judgment of his Court, or their own Peers,
proscribed them, and disposed of their Lands to the Poictovins, and commanded
their Bodies should be taken where ever they were found in the Kingdom.

The Ibid. n. 30. Several of the Nobility deserted the Marshall.
Bishop of Winchester by 1000 Marks gained the Earls of Chester and Lincoln to
the Kings ^de; the Earl of Cornwall had before Marshall, and returned to his
Brother. When the Marshall saw himself deserted by the aforesaid Earls, he
entered into a Confederacy with Leolin Prince of Wales, and other chief Men of
that Country, He confederated with Leolin Prince of Wales.
and entered into an Oath to make no Peace but by general consent. Then the King
fol. 388. lin. 1. The King besieged one of the Mareschals Castles, but without
success.

It is delivered upon condition to be restored in Fifteen days.


defied him by the Bishop of St. David's, and commanded his Army to March
against him, and besiege his Castles, one of which was so well defended, that
the King feared he should be baffled, and with disgrace forced to raise Bishops
to the Earl, to offer him, that if he would surrender the Castle to the King,
it should be restored entirely again within Fifteen days to him, and he would
correct what was amiss in his Kingdom by the Counsel of his Bishops, who should
be his Sureties; Upon these Conditions the Castle was delivered to him; and the
day appointed for the doing of these things was the Sunday next after
Michaelmass-day.

When the Ibid. n. 50. The Marshall demands restitution of his Castle.

The Kings Answer.


Fifteen days were expired, the Marshall according to agreement, and Oath,
expected the restitution of the Castle, and sent to the King to demand it, but
the King answered he would not restore it, but would endeavor to subdue his
other Castles. The Marshall seeing neither Promises nor Oaths were observed by
the Kings Counselors, besieged the Castle, and without difficulty gained it.

On the 9th of October, fol. 389. lin. 1. The Great Men and Preaching ^y^rs
supplicate the King to be reconciled to hi Nobility.
the Great men met the King at Westminster to reform what was amiss in the
Kingdom according to appointment, who humbly supplicated him to be reconciled
to his Barons and Nobles; also the Preaching Friars and Minors, (whom the King
much reverenced) exhorted him to extend his affection to his Native Subjects,
and not to Banish, Spoil, and destroy them without Legal Process, and not to
call them Traitors who endeavored the Peace, and by whose Counsels the
Management of the Affairs of the Bishop of Winchester replied, Ibid. n. 10. The
Bishop of Winchesters Reply.

The Bishops threatened to Excommunicate him and the rest of the Kings
Counselors.

He slighted their Threats and appealed to the Pope.


That there were no such Peers in England, as in France, and therefore it was
lawful for the King of England by the Justices he appointed, to Banish any
guilty persons out of the Kingdom, and by Judgment to condemn them. When the
Bishops heard this, they unanimously Threatened by name to Excommunicate all the
Kings principal Counselors. In the top of the list stood Peter Bishop
Winchester, de Rivallis, Stephen Segrave Justiciary, and Robert Passelew
Treasurer. The Bishop of Winchester alleged for himself, That he was
Consecrated Bishop by the Pope, and was thereby exempt from their Authority;
and to prevent the Sentence, appealed to the Pope. Then the Bishops
Excommunicated all those who alienated the Kings mind from his Natural
Subjects, and all those that disturbed the Peace of the Kingdom.

When in that Conference by an express the King was certified the Marshall
Ibid. n. 30. The King commanded the Bishops to Excommunicate the Marshall, but
they refused.
had retaken his Castle, he was much troubled, and Commanded all the Bishops to
Excommunicate him; but they utterly refused it, because (as they said) he did
thereby only recover what was his Right. Then the King Summoned all that ought
him Military Service, to meet at Gloucester with Horse and Arms the Day after
All Saints.

The Ibid. n. 40.
King having gathered together a great Army at Gloucester, Marched toward
Wales, but the Marshall had before destroyed all the Forage, so that in a
short time, through want of Provision, the King was forced to retire with his
Army to the Castle of Grosmund; when the Marshall by his spies understood that
the King lodged within the Castle, and the greatest part of his Army Quartered
without in Tents, he came by Night and entered the Camp, The Kings Army defeated
by the Mareschals policy.
and put the whole Army into such disorder, that Marshall, who would not
suffer any of the Kings Soldiers either to be taken or hurt, so that only two
of the whole Army (and they through their own indiscretion) fell by the Sword.
The King seeing himself left alone, and encompassed with Enemies, placed his
Ravaging Poictovins f. 390. l. 2.
( Ruptarios Pictavenses) in his Castles to hinder the Incursions of the Welsh,
under the Command of John de Monmouth, and Radulph de Toeny, and returned to
Gloucester.

Then the Marshall fol. 390. n. 10. The Marshall surprised by ambush, and
difficulty escaped*
Marched toward Monmouth, which was Fortified and defended by Baldwin de
Gysnes, with his Poictovins and Flemmings, to whom the King had committed the
Marshall viewing the Castle with some few Soldiers, by Ambush almost surprised
him; and he had been taken Prisoner, had not his own Valor, and the Bravery of
some that were with him, rescued him out of their hands; in this Skirmish,
Baldwin was so desperately wounded, that he was taken up half Dead, which made
them to leave the Marshall and retire with their Captain into the Town. When
the rest of the Army Ibid. n. 50.
h^ard what had befaln their General, they came with great fury, and revenged

Hubert de Burgh fol. 3^^. n. 10, 20, 30.
being prisoner in the Castle of Divises in Wiltshire, had notice from a friend
at Court, That the Bishop of Winchester his great Enemy, had earnestly desired
of the King the custody of that Castle; that so (as it was said) he might have
an opportunity to dispatch him. Upon this Information Hubert, Hubert de Burgh
endeavored his escape, but without success.
by the Michaelmass-Eve out of the Castle, and got into the Parish Church: So
soon as it was known he was gone out of the Castle, many of the Garrison went
out with Lanters, Clubs, and Arms, to seek him. How he was Treated by the
Soldiers.
They found him in the Church before the Altar, with a Cross in his Hand; they
beat and banged him, driving him and the two that helped him to make his
escape, into the Castle, and put him under a strict Guard.

When the Bishop of Salisbury heard what was done, The Bishop of Salisbury
Excommunicated them for violating the Churches privilege.
he went to the Castle, and Commanded those that had violated the privi^dge of
the Church, that they should carry him back, and leave him in the same state
they found him. They told the Bishop, they had rather Hubert should be hanged
then themselves; Whereupon he Excommunicated all by Name that refused to do
what he bad them, and with the Bishop of London and other Bishops obtained his
liberty King, and he was sent back to the Church ( Decimo quinto Calendarum
Novembris) That is, on the 18th of October. Ibid. n. 40.
The King upon this being very angry, ordered the Sherif of the County so to
guard the Church, as he might be starved for want of Victuals.

It Is certain Hubert made his escape, and as certain he was sent back to the
Church before the 18th of October: For on the 15th King Append. n. ^54.
Letter to the Good Men of Wiltshire, to let them know he had sent Ralph de
Bray and Ralph de Norwich his Justices, to receive the Abjuration of the
Kingdom from Hubert de Burgh, if he would not come out of the Church, and stand
to the Law, in the Kings Court* or to do him Justice in the Kings Court if he
would come out of the Church and answer there, as he had agreed to do. But if
he would do neither, the Wiltshire Men were commanded diligently to guard the
Church and Churchyard, as the Justices should direct.

On the 30th of the same Month Hubert by the Paris f. 389. n. 30. Hubert
escaped into Wales habited like a Soldier.
assistance of his Armed Friends, was taken out of the Church by force, and
having been by them Armed like a Soldier made his escape in that disguise into
Wales, and joined himself to the Kings Enemies.

In the year 1234. the King kept f. 393. n. 4^. A. D. 1234.
his Christmas at Gloucester, with a very small Court, because many of the
Great Men that suffered so much at the Castle of Grosmund, were retired, and
could make no appearance.

On the day after Christmass-day Ibid n. 50. The Marescal defeats John of
Monmouth.
John de Monmouth having gathered together a great number of Soldiers, designed
privily to attaque the Marshall, but being Countertricked by the Mareschals
Policy, he was defeated, and a great number of his Soldiers slain, and he
narrowly escaped. fol. 394. n. 10* 20. And spoiled the Estates and Goods of the
Kings principal Counselors.
Then the Marshall, and those that were confederated with him, ravaged,
spoiled and burnt the Lands, Goods and Houses of the Kings principal
Counselors, so that nothing escaped them, from the borders of Wales to
Shrewsbury, which they also burnt; And all the time King Henry remained with
the Bishop of Winchester at Gloucester, not having sufficient force either to
oppose, The Bishops urge the King to make peace with the Marshall, but he
refused.
or repress these Devastations. From Winchester, and left those Countries to
his Enemies. The Bishops urged the King to make peace with the Marshall, he
refused, unless he would acknowledge himself a Traitor, with a Halter about his
Neck.

When the King's Ibid. n. 40, 50.
Counselors saw their Houses burnt, their Fields destroyed, and their Friends
the Poictovins in great numbers slain, and themselves without remedy; They
studied to ruin the Marshall by Treachery, whom they could not conquer by
force, which they compassed by this means. The Kings Counselors contrive the
Mareschals destruction.
They composed and wrote Letters in the Kings Name without his privity, Sealed
with (...) and Eleven of their own Seals, and directed them to Maurice
Fitz-Gerold, the Kings Justiciary in Ireland, to Walter and Hugo de Lascey,
Richard de Burgh and Geofrey Mar^h, and to several others ( Juratos Marescalli
Homines) the Marescals sworn Men, showing, that although the Marshall was
proclaimed a Traitor, Kings Court Proscribed, and Divested of his Paternal
Inheritance, yet he ceased not to pursue the King with his wonted Malice;
wherefore they willed them as the Kings faithful Subjects, to use their utmost
endeavors, when ever the Marshall should come thither, to take him alive or
dead, and present him to the King, which if they carefully performed, all his
Inheritance and Possessions in Ireland should be divided among them, Their
Proposals to the Irish.
for which they had the Kings promise, and they would become

When the fol. 395. n. 10.
Irish heard the tenor of these Letters, they sent private Messengers to the
Counselors with Letters, assuring them That if they could be secured by the
Kings Charter, of what was promised, they would undertake to effect what was
desired; Then the Counselors stole the Seal form Ralph Bishop of Chichester
the Chancellor, and Sealed a Charter without his knowledge, by which all the
Rights and Possessions of the Marshall, were to be divided among them; and
dispatched a Messenger w^h it to the abovenamed Irish Great Men, who no sooner
received it, but they confederated, and resolved the destruction of the
Marshall. Then they raised a great Army, and entered his Lands, took his
Castles and plundered them, Ireland.

On Candlemass-day Ibid. n. 40. The King rebuked some Bishops, for
corresponding with his Marshall.
the King came to a Conference (Rex venit ad Colloquium) at Westminster, wherein
the King severely rebuked Alexander Bishop of Chester, and some other Bishops,
for having too much correspondence with the Earl Marshall, and for
endeavoring to dethrown him. The Bishop in a great heat Excommunicated all
those that suggested such things to the King. Ibid. n. 50.
Edmund Elect of Canturbury was present at this Conference, who with many
Bishops of that Province went to the King, and represented to him the miserable
state both He and the Kingdom was brought into, by his following the Counsels
of Peter Bishop of Winchester, The Bishop^ advise the King to remove
Foreigners from his Counsels.
(upon whose Advice and Counsels, they charged all the Events, Wars, and
Calamities that happened to King John, and the Nation in his time, and also
what had happened in this Kings time) and Peter de Rivallis, and their
Accomplices: fol. 396. n. 40.
Adding, That if he did Counselors, and receive his Native and Liege Subjects
to his Counsels, and management of the Affairs of the Realm, as is the custom
of other Nations, they must proceed to Ecclesiastical Censures against all
Gainsayers. The King answered, He could not Reform his Council, His Answer.
until he had taken their Accounts, and desired a small Respite. So the
Colloquium or Conference was dissolved, and every one went away satisfied, and
full of hopes of a speedy accommodation.

On the Second of April f. 397. l 7. A.D. 1234.
Edmund was Consecrated Archbishop of Canturbury, the King being present.

On the 9th of April, the fol 397. n. 10, 20, 30. He proceeds to reform his
Court and Council.
King, the Earls and Barons, the new consecrated Archbishop with his
Suffragans, and other Prelates, met at a Conference (ad colloquium convenerunt)
at Westminster, wherein he promised to be directed by their Counsels; and some
few Bishop of Winchester to retire to his Bishopric, and mind the care of
Souls, and not concern himself any further in the Affairs of the Kingdom. He
likewise commanded Peter de Rivallis to give up his Accounts, and yield up his
Castles and depart the Court, assuring him upon his Oath, if he were not a
Beneficed Clerc, he would cause his Eyes to be bored out. He also discharged
the Poictovins from his Service, both in his Court and Garrisons, commanding
them to go into their own Country and evil Counselors, and cleared his
Kingdom of Strangers, he submitted himself to the Advice and Counsels of the
Archbishop and Bishops, by whom he hoped to reduce his unsettled Kingdom to a
prosperous condition.

After this he sent Append. N. 155.
Edmund the Archbishop of Canturbury with the Bishops of Chester and Rochester,
to Leolin Prince of Wales, and Richard Earl Marshall (...) Treat about Peace.
(...) n. 40. The Marshall passes over into Ireland to secure his Lands and
Castles.
But the Marshall receiving notice of the spoils and rapine that was committed
upon his Lands and Castles in Ireland; and seeing the King was gone Southward,
and had left his design against Wales, took with him only fifteen Knights, and
passed over Sea, and as soon as Geofry Marsh, with the other Great Men that
were confederated against him, came to him, and advised him to reduce his
Enemies by force, and he might thereby easily bring all Ireland to his
Obedience. Ibid. n. 50.
The Marshall fearing the innate Treachery of the Irish, was not willing to
close with the Advice given. But Geofry having at first reproached him for his
cowardice, and telling him of, and urging his Right by lineal Descent from
Strongbowe, that had conquered Ireland, and then giving him full assurance of
their He reduced the Irish to his Obedience.

He is treacherously betrayed, and desperately wounded.


He raised a great Army, and proceeded with such suceess, that no one durst
withstand him; He took the City of Limeric, and the Kings Castles, as well as
those of his Enemies. The Irish let him know by certain Templars sent to him,
That he acted traitorously against his Prince in Ireland, as he had done in
England, and by Geofry Marsh or de Marisco his contrivance, was desperately
fol. 400. lin. 4.
wounded in Fight, and taken prisoner, where after some days continuance, he
dyed of his wounds. fol. 403. n. 10. The King laments his death.
When the King received Ibid. n. 30. He inviteth the proscribed Noblemen to an
accommodation.
equal in the Kingdom.

The Archbishops and Bishops returned from Lewelin to the King at Gloucester,
and informed him, That before any Treaty, he desired the Noblemen that were
confederated with him, might be received into Favor: Then the King sent out his
Ibid. n. 40. A. D. 1234.
Letters to all those that were Gloucester on the 29th of May, to be reconciled
unto their King* and to be restored to their Inheritances; The Archbishop and
Bishops promising them safe Conduct. Ibid. n. 50.
The first that came to the Kings Peace was Hubert de Burgh, late Justiciary of
England, and Earl of Kent, whom the King received with Kisses and Embraces.
fol. 404. n. 10, 20. They accept the Offer, and are reconciled to the King.
After him came Gilbert Basset, and Richard Sward, with many others, who were
proscribed with them, and were all received with the Kiss of Peace, and
reconciled to the King, Append. N. 155. Several of them received into his
Council.
and Restoration he gave Lewelin speedy notice; and also at the Intercession of
the Archbishop, He Granted to Gilbert Brother to Richard Earl Marshall, late
deceased, all his Inheritance both in England and Ireland, and received his
Homage; And on Whitsunday following at Worcester He Knighted him, and gave him
the Mareschals Staff of his Court, and received Hubert de Burgh, Gilbert
Basset, and Richard Sward into his

The Archbishop and Bishops that were sent to Treat with Lewelin, made a Ibid.
n. 156. A Truce made between the King and Lewelin Prince of Wales.
Truce for two yeas, from the Feast of St. James, or 25th of August following,
upon these conditions, That all injuries done on both sides since the last
Truce, should be referred to those ^at made it: That all Lands taken from any
one in the late War, should be restored; That all Men and Tenants that had
receded from the Fealty of their Lords, and adhered to the contrary party,
might return again without damage, or being questioned for it; Of this Truce he
gave notice to his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall, and Ralph de Tony, that
they might be taken into it, if they would, for their Lands in the Marches.

At the same meeting the Archbishop, produced a Copy (...) n. 30, 40.
of that Treacherous Letter that was sent into Ireland against Richard Earl
Marshall; And the King, The treacherous design against the Life of Richard
Earl Marshall discovered The King summoned his old Counselors to give up
their Accounts, and to stand to the Law.
before the whole Assembly of the Bishops, Earls, and Barons, protested, that
through the importunity of the Bishop of Winchester, Peter de Rivallis, and
other Counselors, he consented his Seal should be put to those Letters; but
assured them upon his Oath he never saw the Tenor of them: Bishop of
Winchester, Peter de Rivallis, Stephan Segrave, and Robert Passelew, to appear
on the Feast of St. John Baptist, to give up their Accounts, and to answer to
such Crimes as should be objected against them, and stand to the Law. But being
conscious of their own wickedness, and not daring to stand a Trial, some took
Sanctuary in Cathedral or Conventual Churches, and others fled, as was
believed, but hid themselves in the New Temple.

Then the King fol. 405. n. 10, 20, 30. Peter de Rivallis severely rebuked and
threatened by the King.
at the request of the Archbishop promised them safe Conduct, and appointed
the 14th of July for them to appear at Westminster, to answer to the Articles
against them. Peter de Rivallis was the First that appeared in a Clercs Habit,
and saluted the King sitting upon the Bench with his Justices, who as soon as
he saw him, called him Traitor, and accused him for giving him pernicious
Counsel, and required him to give an account of his Treasuryship, the Wardships
of young Noblemen and Women, and Escheats, and other Profits of the Crown, and
then told him he would commit him to the Tower. He said he was a Priest and
ought not be imprisoned, or be in the custody of Laymen. The King told him he
had hitherto behaved himself as a Layman, and as such he exacted what was
committed to him; yet said, the Archbishop was present, and if he would
undertake for him he should be delivered to him. He was silent, and the King
sent him to the Tower, He is committed to the Tower.
Knights Falchion at his Girdle, which did not become a Clerc; he remained
there only two days, and then was taken out by the Archbishop, carried to
Winchester, But ta^en out by the Archbishop.
and put into the Cathedral.

The same Ibid. n. 40. Stephen Segrave called to an Account,
day appeared Stephan Segrave before the King; He called him Traitor, and
added, that it was by his wicked Counsel, Hubert Earl of Kent was removed from
the Office of Justiciary, and imprisoned; And that many of the Nobility were
proscribed: He required him also to give an Account of his Justiciaryship; and
by the Mediation of the Archbishop and Bishops, gave him time till Michaelmass
following to prepare for it: Hugo de Pa^eshulle, named Justiciary.
Then the King named Hugo de Pateshulle a Clerc, his Justiciary, Son of Simon
de Pateshulle, who had formerly managed that Office with great integrity.

This year about the Feast of St. John Baptist, The fol. 406. lin. ^. The King
sends Aid to the Earl of Britain.
Truce between the Kings of England and France expiring, King Henry sent over
to the Earl of Britain Sixty Knights, and 2000 Welsh, to enable him to
strengthen the weak places of his Dominions, because the King of France had
raised a great Army, and had actually besieged one of the Earl of Britains
Castles, but was soon defeated by the English Forces, Their success against the
French.

The King of France resolves to invade Britain.


and many of the French were slain, and all their King of France, that he
gathered together what Forces he could, and was resolved to invade Britain.
This affrighted the Earl so much, that he desired a Truce till All Saints
following, which was granted upon delivery of three Castles, and upon
condition, that i^ in that time the King of England came not personally to his
Relief, he should deliver all Britanny, and his Castles there to the King of
France. In the mean time he sent to the King of England to know whether he
would Britanny to the King of France. King Henry refused to assist the Earl of
Britain any longer.
King Henry answered, the Revenues of his Crown were not sufficient for the
Defense of that Country, as he found by the three last years expenses, and was
wearied in being at so great charge to so little purpose. When the Earl had
received this Answer, he went directly to the King of France with a Rope about
his Neck, and Ibid. n. 40. Brittanny surrendered to the French.
acknowledged himself a Traitor, and then surrendered to him all Britanny, with
the King of France told him he was a most wicked Traitor, and accordingly
deserved a most shameful death, yet he would grant him Life, and Britanny to
his Son as long as he lived, and after his death it should be annexed to the
Crown of France.

When King Henry heard what he had done, Ibid. n. 50. The Earl of Britain
turns Pyrate.
He seized on all Rights and Honors that belonged to him in England. This
miserable Earl being thus spoiled of all his Honors and Revenues, betook
execrable Pyrate.

In the year 1235. King Henry at Christmas kept his Court at Westminster, with
very many Bishops fol. 409. n. 40. A. D. 1235.
and great Men of the Kingdom. About Candlemass Ibid. n. 50.
Stephen Segrave and Robert Passelew paid each 1000 Marks, but were not
received into the Kings former Favor, as they expected.

About Easter following, Peter fol. 410. n. 50. Peter Bishop of Winchester
goes to Rome to assist the Pope in his Wars.
Bishop of Winchester, at the Popes command went to Rome, to assist him in his
Wars against the Citizens of Rome, (between whom and the Pope there was a very
great difference) The Pope well knew the Bishop was very rich, and also
experienced in Military Affairs, being brought up under the Magnificent and
Warlike King Richard in his Youth, and understood

This year Isabell the Kings Sister was fol. 414. n. 40. Isabell the Kings
Sister Married to the Emperor.
Married to Frederic Emperor of Germany, and was conducted to the Emperor by
the Archbishop of Cologne and Duke of Lovain, fol. 417. n. 30. Her Portion
0^^00 Marks.
for whose Marriage the King received two Marks of every Plough-land, and gave
to the Emperor for her Portion 30000 Marks. The Words are in Paris, Rex cepit
carucag^um, du^s Marcas de Caruca. But it ought to have been Rex cepit
Scutagium, duas Marcas de Scuto. For there was never so great a Tax upon a
Plough-land. See the Prior of Coventry 's Plea, Communia de Termino Sancti
Hillarii 17 E. 3. with the Kings Remembrance in the Exchequer. Est compertum
etiam in quodam Rotulo compotorum Regis Henrici Titulato: Auxilium Episcoporum,
Abbatum, Priorum, concessum, ad sororem Regis Henrici maritandum Freder^co
Imperatori, videlicet de quolibet Scuto duas Marcas; Two Marks of every Knights
Fee.

In the year 1236, The King at Christmas fol. 419. n. 50. A. D. 1236. The King
Marries Alienor, the Earl of Provence his Daughter.
kept his Court at Winchester, and on the 14th of January was Married at
Canturbury by Edmund Archbishop of that place, to Alienor Second Daughter to
Reimund Earl of Provence, and she was most splendidly and solemnly Crowned fol.
420. n. 30.
Queen at Westminster on the 19th of that Month. After the celebration of the
Nuptials was past, the King went from London to Merton, where he met his Great
Men, to Affairs of the Kingdom.

At this time and place were made the Laws Poultons Statutes, f. 9.
called the Statutes of Merton, by the deliberation and consent only of the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and his fellow Bishops, and the major part of the
Earls and Barons, by the Grant of the King.

Die Mercurii in crastino Sancti Vincentii in Curia Domini Regis apud Annal.
Burton. f. 287
Merton, Coram Domini Rege Henrico, and coram venerabili Edmundo Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, and Co^piscopis suis, and coram majori part Comitum and Baronum
nostrorum Angliae, pro Corona Domini Regis and Reginae pro cummuni utilitate
totius Angliae, Provisum fuit tam a praedicto Archiepiscopo, Episcopis,
Comitibus and Baronibus quam a nobis, and concessum, Quod de caetero isti
articuli teneantur in Regno nostro Angliae.

Emperors Messengers with Letters from him to desire the King without delay, to
send over Paris f. 421. n. 50. The Emperor desires the King to send Richard his
Brother to his assistance against France.
Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother to his assistance against the King of
France, whereby the King of England might not only recover what he had lost,
but also much enlarge his Transmarine Dominions. To whom the King by the advice
of his Great Men returned this Answer, That they could not judge it safe or
expedient to permit one that was so young, and the only and Apparent Heir
(Vnicus and manifestus Haeres of the Crown, and hope of the Kingdom, to expose
his person to the hazards of War. The Kings Answer and Excuse.
But if his Imperial Excellency would make choice of any other of the Nobility
or Great Men of the Kingdom, they would readily yield to his commands, and give
what assistance they were able. Then the Messengers returned with this Answer
to the Emperor.

Notwithstanding the Solemn Truce that had been made for two th of July, The
Truce between England and Wales violated.
of the Feast of St. James in the 18th of Hen. A. D. 1234. to the same day in
the 20th of his Reign, A. D. 1236. yet there were many Land Piracys committed
in the time, much Plundering and Robbing, which they Termed interception; for
on the sixth of March that year Ralph Append. n. 157. Commissioners appointed
to inspect Damages.
Bishop of Hereford, the Dean of Hereford, Walter de Clifford, and Walter de
Beuchamp were again constituted Dictators of amends to be made, for Damages
done on both sides, and for the Interceptions made (as was said) Prince Lewelin
of Averfrau, and Morgan of Carleon concerning the Castle of Carleon.

And after this Arbitration or Determination what amends was to be made on both
sides, Edmund Archbishop of Canturbury renewed the Append. n. 158. The Truce
renewed.
Truce for one year longer, That is until the Feast of St. James in the One and
Twentieth year of his Reign, between King Henry Prince Lewelin, and all that
were openly concerned on either side, so as the King and Prince should be in
the same possession of Lands and Tenements, Men and Homages as they were the
Day of the making this Truce; Saving to Morgan de Carleon his Lands and
Chattels, which Gilbert Earl Mar^hal possessed himself of, within the time of
the Truce. If any Lands or Castles had been seized During the Truce, no Amends
were to be expected for them; but for goods or movables, amends was to be made
for them by the Arbitrators, which were sometime called Correctors, sometimes
Dictators of amends. The Conditions on which it was to continue.
The Truce still to continue, so as no Namia, Reprisals or Distresses were to
be taken, for any Interception made of movables within the time of the Truce,
nor for any contention before the making of it. No new Castles were to be Built
or Fortified in the Marches, or those which were Demolished repaired, during
the Truce, and the Lands in the Marches were to remain Commune according to the
Stipulation in the last Truce.

A. D. 12^6.
On the 29 of April the King fol. 429. n 30. A conference at London.
called the great men of England (Congregati sunt magnates Angliae ad
Colloquium) together at London, to treat about the Affairs of the Kingdom, and
on the first day of the Assembly, he removed into the Tower of London; but not
one of the Great men would come to him, whereupon he came again to his Palace,
and in treating of many things, for the Good of the Realm, Unjust Sherifs
removed, and Corruptions in that Office prevented.
the King laudably performed one thing, which was to Assembly the King of Scots
by his Messengers required of the King, the restitution of such Rights as
belonged to him by Charter, The King of Scots Demands.
and the Testimony of many great men, but nothing was determined in that
Affair. At the same Richard Earl of Cornwall, and Richard Sward, which the King
endeavored to compose, but could not, Several of the Court Officers removed.
and thereupon he Banished Sward the Kingdom. He likewise removed Ralph
Fitz-Nicholas the Steward of his House, and many other great Officers of his
Household, both from their Offices and his Council; and f. 430. l. 1. The
Chancellor refused to deliver the great Seal.
required the Bishop of Chichester his Chancellor, Common Council of the
Kingdom (Communi Consilio Regni) and would not resign it up to any one without
their Consent. At this time the Emperor sent to demand the Money King Henry had
promised with his Sister.

Some time in May fol. 431. n. 20.
Peter de Rivallis, Rivallis and Segrave received into favor.
and Stephan Segrave were received into the Kings Favor.

On the 8th of Ibid. The King thought such grants invalid, that wanted the
Popes Confirmation.
June the King called the Great men of England together at Winchester; where
the King by virtue of the Popes endeavored to void some Grants he had made
before he was Married, alleging they were invalid because they wanted the
Popes Confirmation, to whom the Right of the Kingdom belonged, ( ad quem jus
regni Spectabat confer.) The Great men were much surprised at the Kings
endeavors to enslave his Kingdom to such base Conditions.

This year the f. 432. n. 40. The King of Scots meets the King of England at
York.
King by the advice of his Great men went to York to compose the difference
between him and Alexander King of Scots; who affirmed he had not only a
Charter, but the Testimonies of many Bishops, Earls and Barons of King John's
Grant of the County of Northumberland to him upon the Marriage of his Daughter
Iohanna. Adding, That if he would not peaceably restore unto him his Right, He
would recover it by force. That which encouraged the King of Scots to make this
Demand at this time was, What encouraged him to offer such demands to King
Henry.
that Leolin Prince of Wales would be easily induced to break Peace with King
Henry, and the Affinity of Gilbert Marshall who had Margaret his Sister, and
also the present Hostilities beyond Sea. Ibid. n. 50. King Henry gives him
satisfaction.
The King of England having consulted his present Circumstances, for the
preservation of the Peace of his Realm, offered the King of Scots in lieu of
the County of Northumberland the yearly revenue of LXXX Marks in some other
place, which gave satisfaction to all, and so this Colloquium or Conference was
Dissolved.

f. 433. l. 1. The Popes Policy to gain Money from the English.
Friars Predicants, and Minors, went through Cities, Towns, Castles, and
Villages in England, and offered plenary Indulgences to any who were confessed,
and truly penitent, that would undertake the Cross; and soon after the Pope
sent into England Friar Thomas a Templar and one of his Domestics with his Bull
to absolve any one from his vow upon payment of a certain Sum of Money toward
the defraying the Expenses of the Holy War, and whoever should pay any Money
for this end, although he was

In the year 1237. at Christmas the King kept his Court at fol. 435. n. 10,
20, 30, 40, 50. A. D. 1237. A Parliament at Winchester.
Winchester, from whence he sent out his Writs, Commanding all that belonged to
the Kingdom or Government, namely Archbishops, Bishop, Abbats, Installed
Priors, Earls and Barons. That all without fa^l should meet at London on the
That is Jan. 13th.
Octaves of Epiphany, to treat Rex praecipiens omnibus ad regnum Angliae
spectantibus videlicet Archiepiscopis Episcopis Abbatibus Prioribus
installatis, Comitibus and Baronibus, ut omnes sine Omissione in Octabis
Epiphan^ae convenirent regia negotia tractaturi totum Regnum contingentia. The
Great men yielded a ready obedience to the Kings Summons, believing some very
great and difficult affairs were to be transacted, and accordingly on St.
Hilary's day an infinite Number of the Nobili^y, that, is the whole University
of the Kingdom met at London, Infinita Nobilium multitudo, scilicet Regni
totalis Vniversitas Londonias venit. When they were all met and Seated in the
Kings Palace at Westminster, William de Kele Clerc, and a Domestic of the
Kings, a discreet man, and well skilled in the Laws, arose, and as a Mediator
between the King and Great Men, The Kings gracious offer and Demand.
declared the Kings Pleasure and intention. That the King Commanded him to tell
them that whatever he had done hitherto, He Natural and Faithful Subjects. That
those who had been his former Treasurers, had been unfaithful in that Office.
That the Kings necessities at this time pressed him to require an Aid of them,
but he would consent that whatever was granted should be both Collected and
Disposed of for the necessary uses of the Kingdom, by such whom they should
name and choose for that purpose. To this they replied, The Reply made to him.
That they had very often Granted and paid sometime a Twentieth, then a
Thirtieth, and again a Fiftieth part to the King; yet h^ could never be
prevailed with to remove or banish from him any one of the Enemies of the
Kingdom. That he had never enlarged but had straightened his Dominions; And for
the Assistance of others, had extorted very frequently great Sums of Money
from his own natural men (a naturalibus suis hominibus) as from the meanest of
Slaves. The King Answered, The Kings Answer.
That his Sisters Portion Paid to the Emperor, and his own Wedding had emptied
his Pockets, and if they would Thirtieth part, He assured them upon Oath, He
would never more give them an Occasion to Complain. They replied, That these
things were done without their consent, and seeing they were free from the
fault, they ought not to partake of the punishment. After this they retired to
consider how they might moderate and also satisfy the Kings desires. And on
the other side, the King being much fol. 436. lin. 1. He is concerned how to
gain the good will of his Barons.
concerned how he should gain the good will of his Barons; assured them, that
he never endeavored by the Popes Bull to void those Charter; and if any such
thing had been Suggested to him, he altogether disallowed it, and that he would
inviolably observe all the Liberties of the Great Charter. (Omnes Libertates
Magnae Chartae observare) and for their better security, Commanded the same
Sentence that Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury denounced against the infringers
of this Charter, to be again solemnly pronounced, that the Violators might be
the more inexcuseable. After this he added the Earl of Warren, William Ferrars,
John Fitz-Geofry to his Council, who Swore they would never be corrupted by
gifts to deviate from truth, and would always give the King good and wholesome
Counsel. A Thirtieth part of all Movables granted to the King.
Then a Thirtieth part of all movables was granted to the King, excepting
every man's Gold and Silver, and his Horses and Arms, which were to be used for
the Benefit of the Commonwealth.

And for the due See Append. n. 159.
Collection of the aforesaid Thirtieth part Milites fide dignos) Ibid. n. 20,
30. The manner how it was to be Collected and Secured.
were to be chosen in every County. To whom the King was to add one Clerc in
every County in England, who were all Sworn duly to Collect and Secure the
Money in some Abbey, Church, or Castle, That if the King should recede from his
promise, it might be restored to every one again. So that when the Collectors
came to Levy, it was paid on this condition, On what conditions paid.
That from thence forward the King should reject all Counsels and Advices of
Foreigners and Strangers, and adhere to those of his Faithful and Natural Men.
Annexum fuit in condition quod ex tunc and deinceps consilio alienigenarum,
and omnium innaturalium derelicto, suorum fidelium and Naturalium hominum
consiliis adhaerebit.

About this time Ibid. n. 50. vid. fol. 403. n. 40. Leolin Prince of Wales puts
himself under the Kings protection.
Leolin Prince of Wales, being wearied out with continual Wars and Age, sent
Messengers to the King to desire a confirmation of the League that was between
them, and also to put himself and all his under his protection, and that he
would hold his Lands of him in Fealty and Friendship, by an indissoluble
League, promising to assist him in all his Expeditions with Men, Horse, and
Money, as far as his ability would reach. The King accepted his Offer, and sent
the Bishops of Hereford and Chester to Hen. 3. m. 11. Dors. Dated June 16.
seems to give much credit to this Relation.

This year fol. 437. n. 10, 20. Hubert incurs the Kings displeasure. but is
soon again reconciled.
Hubert Earl of Kent incurred the Kings displeasure in Marrying Richard Earl of
Gloucester his Ward, to his Daughter Margaret, without the Kings consent, but
was soon reconciled again; Hubert protesting that he did not know the King had
designed another for him: And also promised to pay a sum of Money, Kings Anger.

About the Nativity of St. John Baptist, fol. 439. n. 30, 40. A. D. 1237.
Frederick the Emperor invited all Christian Princes to meet at Vantulur, to
Treat about some difficult Affair, which concerned as well other Kingdoms as
the Empire. The King of England designed to send Richard Earl of Cornwall his
Brother, with other Great Men, under the conduct of the Archbishop of York,
and the Bishop of Ely to be his Deputies Bishop of Winchester was chosen, but
he refused to go, because the King had formerly accused him to the Emperor, as
one that disturbed the Peace of his Kingdom. When every thing was prepared for
their Journey, they had notice from the Emperor, that the Assembly was deferred
till Christmas following.

About the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, June 29. fol, 440. n. 10. Otto the
Popes Legate comes into England at the Kings request.
Cardinal Otto the Popes Legate came into England at the request of the King,
but without the Knowledge of his Great Men, for which (it was Archbishop of
Canturbury very much blamed the King, as a thing prejudicial to his own
Dignity, and a great damage to the Kingdom. However he would not hearken to his
Counsel, but received him, as also did the Clergy, with great Pomp, Ceremony,
and large Gifts, fol. 443. n. 10. He reconciled the Noblemen that were at
^ariance.
Some of which he refused (contrary to the usage of those which came from Rome)
which very much abated the Hatred conceived against him; and by his endeavors
Peter Bishop of Winchester, Earl of Kent, Gilbert Basset, Stephen Segrave, and
Richard Sward were reconciled to one another, as likewise many others.

According to the fol. 445. n. 30, 40.
Act made in the late Assembly of the Great Men at London, on St. Hilary's day,
The Thirtieth part that was granted to the King, was to be Collected and
secured in some Monasteries or Castles, The King guided by Foreigners and his
Liberality toward them.
to be disposed of toward the defraying the necessary expenses of the Kingdom;
but the King bestowed it upon Strangers, who carried it out of the Realm, and
was now wholly Governed again by their Counsels, which much moved the Great
Men, and more especially Ibid. n. 50. Earl Richard represents to him the state
of the Realm.
Richard Earl of Cornwall, who went to the King, and represented to him the
miserable state of his Realm. That He had scraped from and spoiled his natural
Subjects of their Money and Goods, and had inconsiderately bestowed
Foreigners. Adding, that the Archbishopric, and all the Bishoprics of England
had been void in his time, except that of York, Bath, and Winchester, beside
what arose from Abbeys, Earldoms, Baronies, Wardships, and other Escheats, and
yet his Treasury never increased. Moreover he had lately called in the Popes
Legate, whereby he had so inslaved himself, that He could do nothing in his
Realm without his consent, and was no longer fol. 446. lin. 4. His principal
Counselors
King, but a Feudatary of the Pope. His principal Counselors and advisers in
John Earl of Lincoln, Simon Earl of Leicester, and Friar G. a Templar, all of
them born within the Kingdom, which rendered them the more odious to the
Nobility of England. Quos idcirco magis habebant Nobiles Angliae exosos, Quia
de Regno ipso duxerunt Originem: Yet Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and John
Lascy Earl of Lincoln were of French and Norman Extraction.

On the 14th of September the King Ibid. n. 30, 40. A D. 1237. A Parliament
assembled at York.
summoned his Great Men to meet him and the Legate at York, to Treat upon some
great Affairs that concerned the Kingdom, Rex scripsit Magnatibus suis ut coram
eo and Domino Legato in exaltatione S. Crucis apud Eboracum convenirent de
arduis negotiis regnum contingentibus tractaturi. The King of Scots met him
there to make an end of the difference that was depending between them. An
agreement between King Henry and the King of Scots.
After much consultation and debate, it was agreed That the King of Scots
should have (Trecentas It was but Two hundred pounds by the year as appears
upon Record, for Pat. 22. Hen. 3. Thomas Muleton and others were appointed to
set it out in the Counties o^ Cumberland and Northumberland, and such Lands
upon which there was no Castles. Dated March 16. 1238. Another Order to John
Fitz-Philip and others to set them out. Pat. 22. Hen. 3. M. 5. Dated May 29.
Another Pat. 25. Hen. 3. M. 11. Dors. to Hen. de Nokescn and others, Dated Nov.
21. And another to the Bishop of Durham, Pat. 26. Hen. 3. M. 9. to set out 200
pounds per annum in the Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmerland,
according to an agreement made in Writing between the two Kings, Dated Feb. 16.
But that they were settled at last, and that he was in possession of them it
appears by Claus. 36. Hen. 3. M. 23. Dors. Dated Feb. 21.
Three hundred pound Lands by the year in England, Homage to King Henry, but
should not build any Castles upon it, and was to quit all pretenses to any
farther claim. Ibid. n. 40. The Legate signifies his desire to visit Scotland.

The King of Scots Answer.


Then the Legate signified to the King of Scots, that he would go into
Scotland, to Treat upon Ecclesiastical Affairs there, as in England, to whom
the King answered, That He never remembered a Legate called into his Kingdom,
and (He thanked God) there was no need of any now; for neither his Father, nor
any of his Antecessors; and withal advised him, to take heed how, and when he
entered into his Land, for he had an ungovernable people, whose violence and
fury would not be restrained. When the Legate heard these things, The Legate
alters his Thoughts.
he altered his thoughts of seeing Scotland, and kept close to the King of
England, whom he found very obsequious in all things.

In the year 1238. King Henry at Christmas kept f. 465. n. 40. A. D. 1238.
Simon Montfort Marrys Alienor the King's Sister.
his Court at Westminster, and on the day after Epiphany Simon Montfort Married
Alienor the Kings Sister, the Relict of William Marshall Earl of Pembroke.
Soon after the f. 466. n. 20, 30, 40. The Pope revoketh Otto his Legate in
England.

His own contrivance to continue his stay.


Pope hearing great disturbances were like to arise in England, upon the
calling in, and continuance of his Legate there, He sent his Letters to revoke
him: but he being very unwilling to part from England, where he reaped such
advantages, prevailed with the King, Earl Richard and all the Bishops to
certify to the Pope under their Hands and Seals, that his continuance here in
England would be of great advantage to the King, the Church and the Realm.

f. 467. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50. The Nobility Stomached Montfort's Marriage.

Earl Richard rebuked the King for adhering to the Counsels of Foreigners.


Earl Richard and the Great Men heard that Simon Montfort had privately Married
the Kings Sister Alienor, they very much stomached it, because it was done
without their privity and consent, and Earl Richard went to the King and gave
him hard words, because he still adhered to, and was guided by the Counsels of
Strangers, contrary both to his Promises and Oaths. Gilbert Earl Marshall, and
all the Earls and Barons of England, seconded Earl Richard, whom they looked
upon to be the Man that should Romans and other Strangers. No one now stood
close to the King but Hubert Earl of Kent. When the Legate saw the danger the
Kingdom was in, He applied himself to Earl Richard, The Legat's advice to Earl
Richard rejected.
and advised him to desist, and promised him very large possessions from the
King, and a confirmation of them to him from the Pope. To whom the Earl
answered, That he had nothing to do with the Estates of Laymen, or their
Confirmation, and might concern himself with Ecclesiastical Matters: But would
not have it seem strange apparent Heir to the Crown, (Cum simsolus Haeres
Apparens); And although so many profits, accrued every way to the King, yet the
Treasury was empty, when the Kingdom was on every side encompassed with
Enemies, and Strangers, enriched with Church Revenues and Benefices, Given and
Founded by our pious Ancestors.

Legate heard this f. 468. n. 10.
he endeavored by admonition, Entreaties, and threats, to allure or affright
them into a compliance, but to no purpose, for the King saw their inclinations
were bent toward his Brother. He therefore when he could prevail nothing,
desired time till the day after the first Sunday in Lent to give his Answer.

Ibid. n. 20. The Great Men come armed to meet the King at London.
Accordingly on the day appointed the Great Men met at London, Horse and Arms
(Equis and Armis Communiti) to constrain the King, if he refused to the
performance of the promises. After many Debates, the King promised to submit
himself (Provisioni quorundam de gravioribus viris) To the Determination or
direction of some of the most discreet Men; which was reduced into writing, and
Sealed both by the Legate, and the other Great Men. At thi^ time Simon Montfort
and the Earl of Lincoln, by their humble submission, and the intercession of
others, and some Gifts, Earl Richard brought ^ver to the Kings side.
so wrought upon Earl Richard, that he was reconciled to them, having first
given caution to satisfy for the injuries committed, yet it blasted his
Reputation, and his Integrity was suspected. This year on the 4th of March dyed
Joanna Queen of Scots; eldest Sister to King Henry.

Simon f. 468. n. 40. Montfort goes to Rome to procure a Confirmation of his
Marriage.
Montfort seeing himself neglected by the King, Earl Richard and the Great Men,
and his late Marriage with the Kings Rome, hoping to procure a Confirmation of
his unlawful Marriage. The Countess of Pembroke remaining at Kenilworth great
with Child, expecting the event of the Journey. With his f. 471. n. 10. His
success there.
Money he so prevailed with the Pope, that notwithstanding it pleased not
Edmund Archbishop of Canturbury, and his opposition, He wrote to his Legate
Otto to give Sentence for Simon Montfor^, Ibid. f. 47^. n. 10. He is kindly
received by the King.
October he returned into England, and was received by the King with a Kiss and
great Joy, and likewise by all the Courtiers.

This year f. 469. n. 30, 40. Otto the Legate honorably received at Oxford. An
unfortunate quarrel between his Servants and the Scholras. The Legate's Cook
slain. His flight and complaint to the King.
the Legate went to Oxford, and was Honorably received by the Scholars, and
lodged in the Abbey of Osney. One day after dinner the Scholars came to pay
their Respects to him. but were uncivily repulsed by the Porter, and ill
Treated by the Irish Scholar begging for some relief at the Kitchen Hatch, the
Legates chief Cook cast a Ladle full of boiling water on his Face; A Welchmnn
standing nigh him, and seeing this affront, cried out, How long shall we endure
this? and forthwith shot the Cook through the Body with an Arrow, who
immediately fell down dead. When the news came to the Legate, He secured
himself in the Church till night, and then by the benefit of the darkness King,
and with many complaints and Tears, related what had befallen him at Oxford f.
470. n. 10. The Earl of Warren sent to repress the insolence of the Scholars.

Oxford Interdicted.


Upon this, the King being moved, sent the Earl of Warren with some Armed Men
to Oxford to relieve the Legates Servants who were still in the Abbey, and to
repress the insolence of the Scholars; the Earl took about Thirty and
imprisoned them in Walingford- Castle; the Legate after he had recovered his
fright, called some Bishops to him, Interdicted Oxford, and Excommunicated all
that were Abettors or Bishops of England to meet him at London, A. D. 1238.
on the 17th of May, to Treat with them about Ecclesiastical Affairs. The
Bishops offered something in behalf of the Scholars of Oxford, urging, the
Quarrel was begun by the Legates own Servants, although in the event the fault was
on the Scholars side, whereof a great number of them were at his pleasure
imprisoned, and the rest in a readiness to make their submission to him; Ibid.
n. ^0.
At length the Legate was prevailed Scholars should meet at St. Paul's Church
(which was about a mile from the Legates Lodgings) and go on foot till they came
to the Bishop of Carlisle's House, On what conditions rest^red.
and there should put off their Coaps, Mantles, and Shoes, and go to the
Legat's House, and humbly beg his Mercy and Pardon; which being done by the
Scholars, the University was restored, and the Legate promised it should be no
infamy or reproach to them.

This year soon after Easter the King sent assistance Ibid. n. 40. The King
sends men to the Emperors Assistance
to the Emperor against his Rebellious Subjects in Italy, under the conduct of
Henry de Trubleville, an expert Soldier, who were very successful in their
attempts, and reduced many Cities to the Emperors Obedience. Pope in the
Emperors behalf, which was taken very ill at the Court of Rome, It is ill taken
at Rome.
and put a stop to all English Affairs for some time.

This year f. 472. l. 3. Peter Bishop of Winchester Dies.
on the 9th of June Dyed Peter Bishop of Winchester at Fernham, after he had
governed that Church about 32 years. The King endeavored what he could to f*
473. n. 20, 30. The Monks refuse to choose him, the King recommended.
incline the Monks to choose William the Elect of Valence to succeed in that
Bishopric, but could William Rale, but the King refused him, and Swore he would
never accept him. Then they proceeded to treat about another choice. When the
King heard of it, he endeavored to influence or affright them to compliance
with him by promises and threats, but to no purpose, for they elected Ralph
Ibid. n. 50. They choose the Bishop of Chichester the Chancellor. The Seal
taken from him. His Election voided at Rome.
Neville Bishop of Chichester the Chancellor, which raised the Kings
indignation to such a height that he bitterly reviled and reproached both the
Monks and him, and violently forced from Great Seal, and delivered it to
Galfrid a Templar, and John de Lexington, but the Profits of the
Chancellorship, belonged still to the Bishop. Then the King sent two Lawyers
Simon and Alexander, to the Court of Rome, who by Money and promises procured
this Election to be voyded.

This year when the fol. 474. n. 40, 50. A. D. 1238. A Plot against the Kings
life discovered, and the Traitor taken.
King was at Woodstock, on the 8th of September, there came one to his Court,
who feigned himself mad, requiring King to resign his Kingdom to him; when the
Ministers about the King would have forced him away with blows, he hindered them
from offering any violence to him, affirming, he did nothing but what became a
Mad man. But about Midnight it was discovered by one of the Queen; Maids,
Margaret Biseth, who was at her Devotions, that he made a close search for the
King, who that night lay with the Queen; she cried out, and with her noise
alarumed the Guards, who broke in upon him, and secured him till next morning,
He confessed who employed him, and is Executed.
that he was employed by William de Marisco the Son of Geofry de Marisco, to
assassinate the King, and that many others were in the Conspiracy. Then he was
Condemned to be drawn asunder by Horses at Coventry.

In the year 1239. A. D. 1239.
King Henry at Christmas kept his f. 48. l. 3.
Court at Winchester while he was at Dinner one Day, Gilbert Earl Marshall
came with several of his Friends to the Palace; Ibid. n. 20, 30. Gilbert Earl
Marshall refused entrance into the Kings Palace.

He is very severely checked and reprimanded by the King.


but were Earl (suspecting something had been whispered to the King to his
prejudice) sent to the King next day to know the reason why such an Affront was
offered him the day before. To whom the King replied, That R^chard his Elder
Brother was a Traitor and a Rebel, and continued so till Divine Vengeance
overtook him, and that through the importunate intercession of the Archbishop
of Canturbury, not for his own merit, He had restored to him both his Brothers
Office and Inheritance, but could recall it when he pleased. When the Earl
heard the Kings Answer, he retired from Court, and went into the North of
England. On Candlemass day following, the King made Simon Montfort Ibid. n. 40.
Montfort made Earl of Leicester.
Earl of Leicester, and received Stephen de Segrave again into his Council.

This year the Pope by his Letters fol. 484. n. 10. Otto again revoked, but at
the Kings request, is continued.
revoked Otho his Legate; Great Men would unanimously oppose him next
Parliament, sent away Messengers to the Pope to permit him still to continue in
England to appease the Troubles he expected.

Soon after Easter the f. 485. n. 30. The King inviteth the Bishop of
Chichester to return to his Office.

But he refused.


King being sensible of his own indiscretion, in discharging the Bishop of
Chichester from the Chancellorship, and King in procuring his Election to
Bishopric of Winchester to be voyded; when he had served both him and his
Father so long with Fidelity and integrity.

This year in Lent Pope Gregory fol. 486. n. 40. The Emperor Excommunicated by
the Pope.
Excommunicated and Anathematized or Cursed Frederick the Emperor, because he
justified himself,

On the 16 of June following Queen f. 488. n. 40. A. D. 1239. Prince Edward
born.
Alienor was safely brought to Bed of Prince Edward at Westminster, and on the
4th day after war Baptized by the Legate (although he was no Priests,) and the
Archbishop of Canturbury confirmed him in the Conventual Church, in the
presence of many Bishops and Great Men.

This year f. 490. n. 10, 20, 30. Ranulph Canon of St. Paul's falsely accused of
Treason, by the Kings Writ he is Imprisoned in the Tower.
William one of the Kings Messengers being convicted of many Crimes, was
Condemned to Dye; but to prolong his own Life, he accused several of the Court
of Treason, and among the rest Ranulph Brito, Canon of St. Paul's and Treasurer,
who was by the Kings Writ to the Major of London, apprehended and Imprisoned in
the Tower. Whereupon the Dean of London with the Canons in the absence of the
Bishop, proceeded to excommunicate all that were actually concerned in this
violation of the Church's Peace. And the King being Bishop to correct his
Error, neglecting it, the whole City of London was threatened to be Interdicted
by the Legate, London threatened to be interdicted.
Archbishop, and Bishop of London Then the King (though against his Will)
released him, but on this condition, that he should appear when ever he should
call him to his Trial, but the Church would not consent to it, so at length he
was set at liberty, but discharged Stephen Segrave was now become one of the
Kings chief Counselors, and behaved himself with more modesty and prudence
then formerly. Soon after the person that defamed Ranulph, and many others, was
executed on a Gibbet; and then confessed that he accused them only to prolong
his own Life.

On the 9th of August f. 497. n. 50. The King shows his passion and
displeasure against Simon Montfort.
the Great Ladies met to accompany the Queen to her Churching; when the King
saw Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester, and his Wife there, He told him he was an
Excommunicated person, and prohibited both him and his Wife to be present at
that Solemnity; adding, that he had first corrupted Sister, and to avoid
scandal had Married her; and then went to Rome to procure the Popes
Confirmation of this unlawful Marriage: when the Earl heard these words from
the King f. 498. n. 10. He and his Wife retire from Court and pass over Sea.
he was much abashed, and that Evening took Ship with his Wife, and some few
attendants, and passed over Sea.

On the last of July the f. 498. n. 10. And f. 515. n. 10. The Bishops consult
how to relieve the Church from the exactions of the Legate B^ to no purpose.
Bishops met at London to consider how they might relieve the Church of England
from those oppressions it lay under, by the perpetual exactions of the Popes
Legate. But instead squeezed by him, and others from Rome, that they could
endure it no longer; so the Council was dissolved, not without Murmurs and
Complaints, yet he extorted much Money from the Religious.

Soon after the Legate went toward. Ibid. f. 498. n. 20. A. D. 1239. The
Legate refused entrance into Scotland.
Scotland with a guard of English to secure him from any treacherous attempts.
But King of Scotland, who told him, That never any Legate had entered there
before, and there was no occasion for any at this time, for Christianity
flourished there, and the Church was in a prosperous condition. But when words
began to multiply on both sides, and the King ready to prohibit his Entrance,
At last he is admitted, but under conditions.
through the intercession of the Great Men of England, it was agreed under Hand
and Seal of the Legate that this should not be drawn into a president.

This year several f. 525. n. 50. Articles of High Treason drawn up against
Hubert Earl of Kent
Articles of Treason, and high misdemeanors were by the Kings Order drawn up
against Hubert Earl of Kent, pretended to be committed by him while the
management of the Kings Affairs passed through his hands. To all which he
answered by f. 51^. n. 29.
Lawrence a Clerc of St. Albans (his close Friend in all his Adversities,) with
such modesty and submission, that all that heard him, were satisfied with the
Earls Innocence; although the Licet Rex cum omnibus prolocutoribus Bane^, He
resigned into the Kings hands four of his Castles.
Quos narratores vulgariter appellamus, in contrarium niterentur. However, the
wrath of the King was not appeased, until he had resigned into the Kings Hands
four of his Castles, namely Blanch, Grosmund, Screnesrith, and Hatfield. The
Articles, and the Earls Append. n. 160.
Plea to them are to be seen at large in Lib. Additament. Paris f. 149.

This year the Pope f. 517. n. 50. Robert Brother to the King of France chosen
Emperor by the Pope and his Conclave.
wrote to the King of France, to let him know that He had by the advice of his
Brethren, excommunicated and deposed Frederic the Emperor, and had made choice
of Earl Robert his Brother to succeed in the Empire, and promised not only his
own, but also the assistance of the Universal Church, to establish him in the
possession of the Imperial Crown. To which the King of France answered; That he
knew not Ibid. f. 518. lin. 4. The King of France refused to be engaged in the
Affair.
by what Authority so Great a Prince was deposed, nor was satisfied that the
crimes objected against him were ever proved; and if they were, it ought to be
done by the Act of a General Council, and not by the Pope who was his Capital
Enemy; nor had he found so much Religion in the Pope as in him; and therefore
would not be engaged in so dangerous an Affair.

In the year 1240. A. D. 1240.3. f. 523. n. 30.
King Henry kept his Christmas at Winchester, where he Knighted Baldwin de
Ripariis (that is Rivers) and then made him Earl of Wight, and Married him to
the Daughter-in-law of his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall.

In the Octaves of Epiphany (or 13th of January) Ibid. n. 50. The Bishops
complaint before the King of injuries offered to the Church.
the Archbishops and Bishops with many Great Men (Cum multis aliis Magnatibus)
met at London, the Legate being present; where before King in his own Court
they made grievous Complaints of the Injuries, Oppressions, and Desolations
that were brought upon the Church by his means, contrary to his Charters and
Oath, in keeping many Churches void for a long time, and taking the Profits of
them, and for hindering Canonical Elections. And about 30 Chapters, The Chapters
second the Bishops.
(30 Circiter Capitulae) seconded the Bishops in their complaints against the
King, and at length they proceeded to Excommunicate all those Counselors of
the Kings who had inclined his Mind to such Enormities.

At this time the King received Letters by Messengers from f. 524. n. 20. The
Emperors complaint against the King.
the Emperor, wherein he complained that he had forgotten he had Married his
Sister, when he suffered the Popes Sentence of Excommunication against him to
be published in his Realm, and had inconsiderately called in, and continued in
his Kingdom the Popes Legate, and Coadjutor in these practices against him.
Wherefore he desired he might England as an Enemy, and pillager of his
Subjects; to whom the King most shamefully answered, The Kings Answer.
That he ought to obey the Pope and his Ecclesiastical Commands, because he was
His Tributary and Feudatary. Ibid. n. 30. He advises the Legate to depart his
Kingdom.

The Legates reply.


However, after some consultation with himself, he advised the Legate to leave
his Kingdom, lest by his stay here he should incense the Emperor. He replied,
that he had called him into his Kingdom, and therefore required safe conduct
for his return; but in the mean while he was not idle in collecting and Append.
161.
forcing the Clergy to pay Procurations; Moreover, hearing (as he said) that
some that had undertaken the Croysado, and were unable to fight, went to Rome
for Absolution from their Vow; by his Letters he invited all such that were
desirous of Append. n. 162. His policy and contrivance to get Money.
Absolution, and willing to spare their labor and expenses to come to him, and
upon the payment of a sum of Money they should be Absolved from their Oath, for
that he had received the Popes Command, that he ought not barely to Absolve
them, but also to compel them to redeem their Vow.

In April following, Simon Ibid. n. 20. Montfort kindly received by the King
and Court.
Montfort Earl of Leicester returned again into England and was very kindly
received by the King and Court; but designed to make no stay here, but only to
furnish himself with Money from his Tenants, and other necessaries for his
journey to the Holy Land. At the same time there arose such a difference
between the Scholars and Citizens of Oxford, that many of them removed from
thence and came and settled at Cambridge, Ibid. A great difference between the
Scholars and Townsmen of Oxford.
where the Scholars obtained certain Liberties from the King against the
Townsmen, and had his Grant or Charter of them.

About this time also the King Ibid. n. 40. Allegiance sworn to Prince Edward.
caused the Citizens of London Wardens of the Cinque Ports to Swear Allegiance
to Prince Edward his first Born.

On Tuesday before the Append. n. 163. A. D. 1240. David, Prince of Wales
offers Homage to King Henry for that Principality.
Feast of St. Dunstan, which was May the 14th, David the Son of Lewelin Prince
of Northwales offered King Henry his Homage for that Principality, and the
Lands which King Henry's Barons held there; And they both submitted themselves
to the Arbitrament of Cardinal Otto the Popes Legate, and the Bishops Norwich
and Worcester, the Earl of Cornwall, and John de Monmouth on the Kings part;
and the Bishop of St. Asaph, Idenevet Vaghan, and Eynguan Vaghan on Prince
David's part; And both parts bound themselves by Oath, to stand to this
Arbitration; and furthermore they both submitted themselves to the Jurisdiction
and Determination of the Legate so long as he staid in England, The agreement
between both parties.
to compel either part by Ecclesiastical Censure, that should not observe the
Articles of the Arbitration, or refuse to make amends for any Transgression
against it as he should award. And after this Legantin Office was determined,
or that he was Recalled, then they submitted themselves to the Jurisdiction and
Coertion of the Archbishop of Canturbury and his Successors, and Church of
Canturbury. And by this Peace all the Homages of the Barons of Wales were to be
performed to the King, and all Burnings, Slaughters, and other mischiefs done
on both parts were to be remitted,

About that time f. 526. n. 20. An assembly of the Bishops and great men at
Reading. The Legate demands a Fifth part of all Goods.
the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, and some of the Great Men of England met at
Reding, to hear from the Legate what the Popes demands were. When they were come
together, and Silence made, The Legate declared the Popes care, and charge in
securing the Peace of the Church against the assaults of Frederick the Emperor;
and for his support he required one Fifth part of all Goods. The King had
before given his consent, affirming he neither Ibid. l. 9. The Bishops at first
oppose it.
would nor durst oppose the Pope: But the Bishop looked upon this as an
insupportable burden, and that it concerned the Universal Church; wherefore
they desired time to deliberate upon an Affair of so great weight f. 527. n.
30. But at last consent to pay it.
. After some consideration, the Archbishop of Canturbury consented to pay the
Fifth part of his Rents, which amounted to 800 Marks, f. 532. n. 50. The
Archbishop leaves England.
and the rest of the Prelates of England followed his example. But when they
saw the Church of England was every day more and more oppressed, spoiled, and
Liberties, without hopes of remedy, and that the 800 marks he gave to the Pope,
availed nothing, he left England, and settled himself in the Abbey of Pontiniac
in France.

This year the Ibid. n. 40.
Pope sent his Precept directed to the Archbishop of Canturbury, and to the
Bishops of Lincoln and Salisbury, Three ^u^dred Romans sent into England by the
Pope to be Beneficed.
commanding them to prefer 300 Romans to the first vacant Benefices in England,
and not to collate any others till they were all sufficiently provided.

This year Ibid. n. 50. Peter Ruby sent hither to be the Popes Collector. His
contrivance to squeeze Money from the Religious.
the Pope sent into England Peter Ruby, to be his Collector in England, who
went about to the Chapters of Religious Houses, and of some he gained a promise
to pay so much Money for uses not mentioned, as such a Bishop, or such an Abbat
had done; and then urged to others their examples, whereby many Abbats were
sensible of this detestable practice, f. 534. n. 10.
two of them, namely the Abbats of St. Edmund^, and of Battle-Abby, went to the
King and made known their grievance to him, urging, if such Exactions were
suffered, the Baronies they held of him would not answer the Services that were
due to his Crown; Two Abbats represent the Oppressions to the King. He received
them with frowns and threats
and therefore they humbly supplicated him for remedy and redress. But the King
received them with frowns, and told the Legate, who was then present, that He
Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. The Bishops steady resolution not to consent.
Then the Legate with Peter Ruby Assembled the Bishops at Northampton, but could
gain no positive Answer from them, but only several exceptions against the
Contributions. Then he summoned the Rectors of Churches in Berkshire to meet
him and his Accomplices, and endeavored The Clergy of Berkshire refuse to
comply with the Legate.
But they resolutely stood it out, affirming they ought not f. 535 l. 5. and n.
10, 20, 30, 40, 50. Their reasons against paying any Money.
to contribute any thing against the Emperor, because he was neither convicted
or condemned by the judgment of the Church, nor because he possessed himself of
the Patrimony of the Church, which used not Secular force against Heretics,
although he was Excommunicated by the Pope: Item, That as the Roman Church had
its own Patrimony, so other Churches had theirs also, by the Grants Beneficence
of Kings, Princes, and other Great Men, no ways Tributary to the Church of
Rome. Item, That although the care of the Church belonged to the Pope, yet the
Dominion and Propriety did not. Item, That their Revenues were so small, that
they would scarce supply them with necessaries; therefore they ought not to be
compelled to any Contribution.

When the f. 536. n. 30. The Legat's policy ^o gain his ends.
Legate and his Accomplices saw the steadiness and Legate went to the King, and
soon inclined him to favor the Popes cause; and his Associates, went to the
Bishops and Archdeacons, some of whom they gained by promises of preferments,
and rewards; and by this means the unanimity and strength of the University of
the Clergy was broken.

This year Gilbert f. 540. n. 20, 30. Gilbert Earl Marshall reconciled to the
King.
Earl Marshall, was through the powerful intercession of Richard Earl of
Cornwall reconciled to the King. And Mauritius Justiciary of Ireland came to
London, and by the Kings means the Earl Marshall and He were made friends; and
soon after f. 542. n. 30, 40. He removed Simon Norman from being Chancellor.
Simon Norman the Chancellor, and the Kings chief Favorite, and the Legates
close Friend, was removed from the Chancellorship, and all other preferments,
but the Archdeaconary of Norwith.

This year fol. fol. 545. n. 30.
Edmund Archbishop of Canturbury dyed beyond Sea.

In the year 1241. A. D. 1241.
King Henry fol. 548. n. 50. Otto the Popes Legate leaves England.
kept his Christmas at Westminster, where he Knighted the Legat's Nephew, and
a Provincial; and gave them plentiful Revenues. Four days after the Legate
received Letters from the Pope, commanding him without delay to come to Rome.
After he had taken his solemn leave of the King, Dover the day after Epiphany,
and left England; no one but the King fol. 549 n. 20. His great Oppression and
Extortion from the English Clergy.
lamenting his departure; for he had so pillaged the Clergy, that (setting
aside the Holy Vessels, and Ornaments of the Church) he left them not so much
as he had extorted from them; besides 300 Rich Benefices and Prebendaries were
appropriated to his own and the Popes use.

550. n 30. The Jews fined and forced to pay great sums to the King.
the Jews were fined, and forced to pay the King 20000 Marks, or were to be
banished, or perpetually imprisoned.

This year the Pope fol. 554. n. 40, 50. The Pope's demand of the Abbat and
Convent of Burgh.
wrote to the Abbat and Convent of Burgh, Commanding them to Grant unto him One
of their Parsonages of the yearly Rent of 100 Marks, but if it were double that
value it would please him better; and He would Rent it to them again, at 100
Marks by the year, and the residue should be their own. He likewise Romans that
were Beneficed in England, to solicit and further it by admonition, if not,
to compel them to a compliance with his desires. The Monks answered, they could
do nothing without the Kings consent, who was their Patron and Founder; The
Monks Answer. They refuse to comply.
and also their Abbat was now absent. Then the Italian Clercs came into England
to Peterburgh, and urged them to do it without either the Privity of the King
or their Abbat. This the Monks utterly refused, but desired they might not be
pressed for an Answer till their Abbat came home; and then they sent Ibid. 555.
lin. 8. The King displeased at the practice of the Italian Clerc:
and acquainted their Abbat with the whole business, who sent William de Burgh
his Clerc to the King, to let him know how dangerous the consequence of such a
thing might prove. The King being made sensible of the detriment the Church
would hereby sustain, and detesting the Covetousness of the Court of Rome,
strictly prohibited them from proceeding any further in such enormous Attempts.

In April following the Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. A. D. 1241. Boniface the Queens
Uncle elected Archbishop of Canturbury.
Monks of Canturbury by the Contrivance great industry used by the King in that
affair, elected Boniface Queen Alienors Uncle, Archbishop of the placr, who was
approved of, and confirmed both by the King and the Pope. This year June the 27
Gilbert Earl Marshall was fol. 565. n. 30. Earl Marshall slain in a Turnament
at Hertford.
killed by the unruliness of his Horse after the Rains were broken in a
Tournament at Hertford. At the same time Robert Say one of his Knights was
likewise slain, and many Esquires wounded and hurt.

Otto the Popes Legate at his Departure left behind him fol. 566. lin. 7.
Peter and Peter Supin, and with them the Popes Bull, by which they had power
to Collect Procurations, to Excommunicate, Interdict, and by several ways to
Extort Money from the English Church.

On Ibid. n. 20.
Midsummer day June 24th, when Richard Earl of Cornwall and Poictou was in the
Holy Land, the King of France invested his Brother with the Honor of that
Earldom.

This year fol. 569. n. 50. Griffin treacherously de^lt with by his Brother
David.

The Bishop of Bangor Excommunicates David.


Griffin the Son of Leolin Prince of Wales was treacherously Imprisoned by his
Brother David, who would not be persuaded to release him. Upon this Richard
Bishop of Bangor first Excommunicated him, and then applied himself to King
Henry for Remedy, who sent to David and severely blamed him for his Treachery
and unkindness to his Brother, and urged and commanded him to give him his
liberty; to whom David returned a malepert Answer, Affirming Wales would never
enoy peace if he were s^t fol. 750. lin. 1. Griffin offers to become Tenent to
King Henry for his liberty.
Griffin understood this, He sent privily to King Henry, That if he would free
him from his imprisonment, He would become his Tenent, and pay him 200 Marks a
year for his Land, and swear Fealty to him, and would assist him in subduing
the rebellious Welsh: At the same time also Griffin the Son of Madoch, the most
potent Man of the Welsh promised the King his utmost assistance, if he would
enter Wales with force.

The King having so advantageous an Offer made him, joyfully accepted Ibid. f.
570. n. 10. The King accepts the offer, and prepares to enter Wales.

David affrighted into a Capitulation.


summoned all who ought Military Service, to meet him at Gloucester with Horse
and Arms in the beginning of Autumn; and from thence with a great Army he
marched toward Chester, which so affrighted David, that he capitulated, and
freed his Brother from his imprisonment, and delivered him to the King, whom He
sent with several other Noblemen of Wales, that were the Hostages of David, and
other Wel^hmen to London, under the conduct of John de Lexintun, to be secured
there in the Tower. Eight days after Michaelmass, David came to London, and
having done his Allegiance, and taken on Oath of all manner of Fealty and
Security to the King, he was dismissed in peace, and so returned home. These
things were done between the 8th of September, and Michaelmass.

The exact History of this Welsh Transaction was thus. The King had Append. N.
164. The King summons David Prince of North Wales to appear before him. A. D.
1241.
summoned David Prince of North Wales, to appear before him at Worcester, to
appoint Arbitrators in the room of such that were named in the Instrument of
Peace made between them the year February, Commands him by virtue of his
Allegiance, all excuses laid aside, personally to appear at Shrewsbury on the
Sunday before Palm Sunday before such as he should send thither to transact
that Affair.

On Sunday Append. n. 165.
next before the Invention of Holy Cross, in the year May) the day assigned to
him, and the Marchers to appoint Arbitrators in place of those beyond Sea, to
do, and receive Justice according to the form of Peace between the King and
him; his Procurators or Commissioners appeared with full power to do what was
desired. Ralph Mortimer, Roger Steward of Chester, and Griffin for themselves,
and other Marchers appeared, and desired Justice might presently be done,
according to the proof of Witnesses at Shrewsbury, before Stephen de Segrave,
New Arbitrators chosen between the King and Prince David.
fellow-Judges, who were there instead of the King: After two days wrangling,
instead of Otto the Legate, the Bishops of Worcester and Norwich, the Bishop of
Coventry, John Fitz-Geofry, Herebert Fitz-Mathew, and Walter de Clifford were
appointed Arbitrators: And a day was appointed a Month after Whitsunday at
Maneford- Bridge beyond Shrewsbury, to hear what could any ways be proved
concerning the injuries done on either side, and on that day, another day was
appointed for Judgment to be given by the Arbitrators, according to the proof
before them.

Not long after this, the King was informed, That Append. n. 1^6. The King had
notice of a Confederacy against him by Prince David.
David drawn off the Brothers of Griffin Son of Madoch, and certain of the
Kings Men in Kers, who had done Homage to him, from their Service and Fealty,
and had received them into his Country; and that he intended to commit
Burnings and Slaughters in the Lands of Ralph Mortimer, and other his
Feudataries; That he had ^y force seized the Lands of O. Vaghan and his
Nephews, against Justice, which were adjudged to them in his Court; That he had
caused a Ship of Chester to be stayed in his Country, laden with Wheat and
other Shrewsbury, in contempt of the King, he neither came, nor sent any
Procurators to meet them. The King writes to him concerning them.
Whereupon he wrote to him on the 14th of July, that he should not omit to let
him Know before the First of August, what satisfaction he would give for these
Injuries.

Before the 15th of that Month Append. n. 167.
Senana the Wife of his Brother Griffin came and complained to the King, That
David had imprisoned Owen, and in the name of her Husband, offered the King 600
Marks, to cause her Husband and Son to be released out of prison, so as he
might stand to the Judgment of his Court, whether he ought to be kept in
prison; and that the King afterward would by the Judgment of his Court
according to the Law of Wales, cause him to have that part of his Fathers
Inheritance, which he ought to have, which David by force withheld from him.
And Senana undertook that her Husband and Third part in Money, a Third part in
Oxen and Cowes, and a Third part in Horses at Shrewsbury, to the Sherif of
Shropshire. She undertook further for her Husband, That if at any time any
Welch-man rebelled against the King or his Heirs, he would at his own cost
compel him to give satisfaction; and for the performance of all this, in the
name of he Husband Griffin, gave to the King as Pledges, Ralph Mortimer, Walter
de Clifford, Roger de Montealto Steward of Chester, Mailgun Son of Mailgun,
Mereduc Son of Robert, Griffin Son of Maddok de Baunfeld, Howel and Mereduc his
Brothers, Griffin Son of He was Lord of Powis.
Wennuwen, who all undertook for Senana, and gave the King their Append. n. 168.
Charts, That what she propounded should be performed.

And all the Noblemen of Wales that favored Griffin, swore Fealty to King
Henry, and gave him their Append. n. 169.
Charts That they would faithfully serve him with all their force and power all
days of their life, when ever he wanted their assistance; and that they would
observe the Truce between them and Ralph Mortimer: And for the observation of
these things, they put themselves under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Hereford, or Bishop of Coventry, which the King should choose, to Excommunicate
them, and all theirs, and Interdict their Lands, if they did any thing contrary
to this Agreement, which was Signed August the 16 th.

On the 29th of the same Month Prince David Sealed his Append. n. 170.
Charter of Submission to the King; First, That he would deliver his Brother
Griffin or Gruffith and his Son to him.

Secondly, That he would stand to the Judgment of the Kings Court, whether
Griffin ought to be prisoner or not; and also for the Portion of his Fathers
Inheritance, which he claimed according Custom of Wales, and should hold that
Land of the King in Capite.

Thirdly, That he should restore to Roger de Monte-Alto Steward of Chester, his
Land of Montalt, (or as it is commonly called) Mauthaut, or Mould, with its
Appurtenances.

Fourthly, That he should restore to other Barons, all such Lands, and Castles,
as had been taken from them, since the beginning of the Wars, between King John
and his Father Lewelin, Prince of Wales.

Fifthly, That he would defray all the charges of King Henry in the last
Expedition against him.

Sixthly, That he would make satisfaction for all the Injuries done Homages
which King John had, or that he ought to have, especially of the Noblemen of
Wales.

Seventhly, The Land of Ellesmer with the Appurtenances, was to remain to the
King for ever.

Eighthly, That he should not receive any of the Kings Subjects Country of
Wales, that were Outlawed, or Banished.

Ninthly, And that for the performance of this, he would give Pleges and
Security according to the Kings Will and Pleasure, and would do all his
Commands, and stand to the Law in his Court.

After this, on the 31 of August Append. n. 171.
he made his Chart to the King, freely and willingly: That he and his Heirs
should faithfully King and his Heirs, and assist him all days of their lives;
and if at any time they should act contrary to that engagement, then all his
Lands or Country should be forfeited to him; and He and his Heirs should enjoy
them for ever. And for the greater Declaration of this Matter, he caused the
Bishops of Bangor and St. Asaph to put their Seals to this Chart.

This year fol. 570. n. 40. Tinn-Mines first discovered in Germany.
Tinn-Mines were first discovered in Germany, Purity and Quantity of that Tinn,
the price of that Metal was much lessened here, for before that time none had
ever been heard of but in England.

About this time fol. 57^. n. 40. Walter at first is refused, but afterward is
restored to the Earldom and Mareschalcy of his Brother.
Walter Marshall, Brother to to Gilbert late deceased, applied himself to the
King for his Office and Inheritance. But the King in great rage and fury denied
him both, urging against him the Treasons and disobedience of his Brothers, and
his own undutifulness fol. 573. n. 10. A. D. 1241
. But at length through the intercessions of the Queen, the Bishop of Durham
and some other Noblemen, He All Saints, to restore him to the Honors, Office,
and Estate of his Brother, and to invest him with his Earldom, and Marescalcie,
reserving only to himself two Castles in Wales, Kaermarden and Cardigan, which
he Garrisoned to secure his new Acquisitions there.

This year fol. 574. n. 10. and fol. 573. n. 50. Pope Gregory's death. His
Collectors were too nimble for King Henry.
August the 22. dyed Pope Gregory, and the Emperor dispatched a Messenger to
give King Henry speedy notice of Money the Popes Collectors in England had
gathered for his use; but they were too quick for him, and escaped into France
with all their prey, but were met with by the Emperors Servants, taken and
imprisoned, and all their Money and Treasure paid into the Imperial Exchequer.

About the same time dyed f. 574. n. 40. A. D. 1241.
Alienor the Daughter of Geofry Earl of Britany, having been kept in prison
many years; by whose King Henry had a direct Title to the Crown, which he had
not before.

In the year 1242. A. D. 1242.
King Henry at fol. 578. n. 50. Peter of Savoy resigns up all his Castles into
the Kings hands.

But is forced to be Governor of Dover Castle.


Christmas held his Court at Westminster, where Peter of Savoy Earl of
Richmond resigned up into the Kings Hands all those Castles that were committed
to his custody, lest his sudden advancement should displease the Great Men of
England, and then designed to return into his own Country, King, and was
constreined to be Governor of Dover -Castle.

This year the fol. 579. n. 10, 20, 30. The Earl of March refuses to do Homage
to the Earl of Poictou.
Earl of March refused to do Homage to Alphonsus Earl of Poictou, the King of
France his Brother, and applied himself to the King of England for Protection,
persuading him, that by the help of the Poictovins and Gascoignians King of
Arragon, Earl of Toulouse, he might easily recover those lost Dominions.

The King giving credit to these fair pretenses Ibid. n. 40. King Henry is
engaged in the quarrrel, and calls a Parliament at London.
Scripsit omnibus suis Magnatibus Angliae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus and Baronibus districte praecipiens ut omnes
generaliter Londinum die Martis proxi^ ante P^rificationem B. Virginis
convenirent de Arduis negotiis dilationem non capientibus cum summa
deliberatione tractaturi, Wrote to all his Great Men of England, Archbishops,
and Barons, straightly Commanding them, That they should all meet at London, on
Tuesday before Candlemass-day, to Treat with great Deliberation of such
difficult Matters as would not bear any delay.

The day after Ibid. n. 50. Earl Richard returns into England.
Epiphany Richard Earl of Cornwall the Kings Brother, Landed at Dover, and was
received by the King, Quen and Nobility with all demonstration of Affection and
Joy, together with variety of presents. Soon after his return to Court, the
Poictovins endeavored what they could to incline him to a War with France
Poictou, and had confirmed the King in his resolution to Attempt it.

At the day appointed the fol. 580. n. ^0, 20, 30, 40, 50. The Parliament are
against the Kings engaging in a War with France.
Nobility of all England, as well Prelates as Earls and Barons met at London,
according to their Summons. Totius Angliae Nobilitas tam Praelatorum quam
Comitum ac Baronum secundum Regium praeceptum est Londini congregata. When they
were assembled, and understood that the Earl of March had moved the King to
undertake a War against France, they resolved to oppose both him and the
Poictovins who advised it, adding That they and therefore would not consent any
more Money should be granted, to be so vainly wasted and consumed. The King's
contrivance to gain their con^ent, ineffectual.
When the King saw he could not prevail with the whole, he would try what he
could do with them severally, and sent for them one by one, urging that such an
one had promised so much, and another the like; but this stratagem only took
with a few, and proved ineffectual, as to the Majority. Then he attempted those
Great Men that were his Favorites and Domestics, urging that they were Military
men, and ought to be very desirous to have the ancient Rights of the Kingdom
recovered, and to have injuries repressed by force of Arms, therefore he
wondered with what confidence they could oppose and desert him, when he had
promised and sworn to prosecute what he had undertaken. They answered, that
great sums of Money had been granted already, and the Profits of the Crown had
been extraordinary, and all this Treasure was wasted and spent; fol. 581. lin.
1. Reasons against undertaking the War at that juncture.
Moreover, they very much wondered he should undertake so hazardous a War,
without ever consulting his natural Subjects; and that the Truce between him
and France was not yet expired, which they had both sworn inviolably to
observe. Besides, those Great Men that advised him to this War, were the King
of France his Subjects, and he could expect but little faith from such, who had
proved Traitors to their natural Prince: Adding, the unsuccessful Attempts that
many of his Predecessors had made in this nature. Ibid. n. 10. The King
resolved to pursue the War.
When the King heard their Answer he was much moved, and in great passion
swore, That their words should neither affright nor hinder him from prosecuting
what he had designed; but that after Easter he would pass over Sea, and try the
fortune of War and so the Parliament was Dissolved.

Paris inconsistent with himself in this matter.
This is the Monks own account of this Colloquium or Parliament, wherein he
mentions much ill and harsh Language which was given unto the King by the Great
Men Face to Face: But in the Relation that immediately Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40, 50.
A different Account of this Conference.
follo^s this, which he says was Written as a perpetual Memorial of the Baron^
Answer to the King, it appears they never spoke, or had Conference with the
King, but heard his Pleasure and the Business he had with them, from his
Commissioners or Messengers, Walter Archbishop of York, Richard Earl of
Cornwall, and Walter Provost of Beverly: By whom they advised the King to send
to the King of France for amends, if he had done any thing contrary to the form
of the Truce between them, and not to Declare War until the time of it was
expired: If he had done any Injury, and that it could be proved, and denied
Restitution, they would assist him according to their Abilities: They counted
many Aids they had given him, and remembered especially the last of a 30th part
of their four Barons for the Benefit of the King and Kingdom. And seeing they
had not heard of any expended by their Advice, they did believe the King had
all that Money by him, which he might now make use of; and told them the King
by keeping many Bishoprics in his hands, by the Escheats of the Lands of Earls
Barons, and Knights, by Fines and Amerciaments, his Itinerant Justices had set
upon Counties, Hundreds, Cities, Burghs, and Towns, had Kings Commissioners
asked them, What if the King of France should break the Truce before it
expired? And promised them in behalf of the King, That if he had done any
Injury to any of the great men, he would make satisfaction according to the
Judgment of Peter of Savoy, and others of his Council: To the first the Barons
Answered, as they had before concerning him. To the Second they said, they had
heard those things formerly, when they Granted the 30th part of their King
himself, and so remained Resolute in not Granting the King an Aid. Not one Word
here of any Billingsgate Language, or Revileing of the King, with which the
Monks report does very much abound.

When King Henry's fol. 582. n. 40. King Henry prepares for his Expedition The
Earl of March his promise.
Designs were known to the King of France, he prepared 24 Galleys to hinder the
English from landing at Rochel; in the mean time King Henry was only busied in
providing money; for the Earl of March had promised to procure Men enough; Then
Peter of Savoy, Earl of Richmond, and Peter f. 583. n. 10. The Kings Messengers
to the Poictovins hardly escaped the French
Bishop of Hereford were sent into Poictou, to secure the King of England what
assistance and friends they could among the Poictovins; But both of them very
hardly escaped being taken by the French, returned again to England without
effecting any thing to purpose.

Easter Ibid. n. 20. The Kings Summons to the Military Men not in the usual
Tenor. He commits the Kingdom to the Archbishop of York, and passes over Sea.

A contract between his Daughter and the King of Scots eldest Son.


the King sent out Summons to those that ought him Military Service, to meet
him at Portsmouth, not with Horse and Arms according to the usual tenor, but
(in lieu of their Service) with a great Sum of Money (cum Magna pecuniae
summa.) Then the King having committed the custody of the Kingdom to the
Archbishop of York, and received into his favor the Bishop of Chichester,
formerly his Chancellor, and recalled Ralph Fitz^Nicholas, and Godfrey
Craucumb, he took Ship at Portsmouth^ with Queen Alienor, Richard, and seven
other Earls, and landed in Gascoigny, where they were received by Reginald de
Pontibus, and the Great Men of that Country; and for the better secu^y of his
Affairs at home, a Marriage was agreed upon between ^lexander Eldest son to the
King of Scots, and Margaret his Daughter; and that part of the Kingdom which
bordered upon Scotland, was committed to the Care of that King, at the time he
should be beyond Sea.

The King of France was not idle all this while, but fol. 584. n. 30, 40. The
number and quality of the French Army.
prepared a great Army, which consisted of 4000 Knights exactly Armed, and
20000 Esquires or Servants, Crossbow men, and Common Soldiers, besides a daily
confluence of men from all parts of his Dominions toward Poictou. He marched
with his Army, and set down before Fonten^y a Castle of the Earl of March. In
the time of the Siege, the King of England sent Ralph Fitz Nicholas, and
Nicholas de Molis to the King of France, to fol. 587. n. 10 King Henry sends
Messengers to the King of France They are kindly received, and Answered.
declare War unless he would submit to his desires. King of France received
them very kindly, and answered, that he was so far from breaking the Truce,
that he was willing it should be continued Ibid. n. 30.
three years longer, and would consent he should have delivered to him the
greatest part of Normandy and Poictou; but wondered his Cousin of England should
think that he infringed the Truce in the least, when he endeavored only to
correct and repress the insolence of his own men (suos homines) that proved
Rebels and Traitors to him; and that he should be so much concerned for the
Earls of March and Thoulouse, and thought he had violated the Truce in
receiving and encouraging his Rebellious Subjects and Enemies. With this Answer
the fol. 588. lin. 1. King Henry refuses the offers of the King of France
Messengers returned to the King of England, who would not hear of renewing the
Truce, but sent some Hospitallers in his Name to defy the King of France; who
now began to Ibid. n. 10. The King of France concerned for the Oath of his
Father Lewis to King Henry. His scruples are satisfied. His Successes against
the Earl of March his Castles.
repent he had made so fair Overtures for Peace, and expressed his Sorrow that
the King of England should be thus wheadled by the Earls of March and Toulouse,
and showed himself most concerned Oath his Father Lewis had made to King Henry
when he left England. But one of his Great Men replied* That that Oath was
mutual, and that the King of England had violated his part, when he broke his
promise to Lewis his Accomplices, and caused Constantine a Citizen of London to
be hanged, for defending your Fathers Honor. This satisfied the Kings Scruples,
and then he proceeded to make a vigorous attack upon the Castle, which after 15
days Siege was taken by assault, contrary to the confidence of all the
Poictovins, Earl of March his Son, and all his Accomplices were made Prisoners.
When some that were about the King advised that they might be executed for a
Terror to other Rebels, He replied; The Son obeyed his Father, They all
Surrender or Capitulate.
and the rest the Command of their Lord, and upon that Account neither of them
deserved Death* however he sent them Prisoners to Paris, and there to be
secured. This put the rest of the Defendents of the Earl of March his Castles
into such an Affright, that some of their own accord came in, and delivered up
King of France, and others capitulated upon his appearing before them.

These uninterrupted Successes made the fol. 589. l. 1. The Earl of March
repents him that he had engaged himself against his own King. King Henry put
upon great difficulties and distresses.
Earl of March and his Poictovins almost desperate, who now began to repent
they had engaged themselves against their own Lord the King of France. In the
mean time the King of England came before the City of Tailleburgh, and pitched
in a Meadow over against it. When the King France heard of it, he marched with
his Army toward that place; As soon as the Citizens had notice of his
approach, they went out to meet him, and surrendered their City to him, and
invited him to take possession of it. When the King of England saw himself thus
disappointed, and that he must now fight the French with the men he had with
him, Ibid. n. 50
He called to the Earl of March, and asked how he had performed his promise of
procuring Men enough to baffle the French, if he supplied them with Money: The
Earl replied, He never made any such promise. The Earl of March denies his
promise made to him.
Then Earl Richard produced the Chart of Agreement between them. He denied that
it was ever made or sealed by him, or that he had ever encouraged the
undertaking this expedition; but it was fol. 590. lin. 1, 2, 3, 4.
the contrivance of his Wife and Mother. When the King heard the Earl's Reply,
he was very much concerned, and Earl Richard seeing the danger the King was in,
of being made prisoner, fol. 590. n. 10. Earl Richard goes to the French Camp*
and obtains a Truce.
disarmed himself, and with a Staff in his Hand went to the French Camp, where
he was kindly and honorably received: and being introduced to the Kings
Presence, he desired a Truce, which the King granted for one day, and a night
following: As Soon as the Earl had obtained this Truce, he returned to King
Henry, and advised him to make his escape with as much speed as he Ibid. n. ^0.
King Henry's flight to Xaints.
. The King followed his advice, took Horse at night, and never stopped till he
came to Xaints; the whole Army followed him, but with great hazard, and some
loss: Next day the King of France decamped, and marched with his Army toward
Xaints; after some few days both Armies met and fought, and had the English
Ibid n. 40. A Fight between the English and French.
equalled the French in number, they had gained an entire victory. The number
of those that were slain on either side is not mentioned, but the Prisoners
that were taken were exchanged. Those that behaved themselves with Simon
Montfort Earl of Leicester, the Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Norfolk, Roger
Bigod, John de Burgo, Warin de Mon^chensy, Hubert Fitz-Matthew, Ralph
Fitz-Nicholas, with some others.

When the fol. 591. n. 10, 20. The Earl of March endeavors to be reconciled to
the King of France.
Earl of March saw how successful the King of France was in every thing he
attempted, and that his strength daily increased; He began to consider how he
should regain his Favor, Earl of Britain, that he with the Bishop of Xaints,
would use their endeavors with the King of France to procure his Pardon. Upon
this they both went to the King, and assured him, That the Earl of March was
sensible how much he had offended against him, and his Crown, and implored his
Mercy and Favor; adding, he might receive him under what conditions he pleased.

King of France Ibid. n. 30, 40. The Terms upon which he made his Peace.
accepted the offer, and was reconciled unto him, upon these Terms* That
whatever that King had possessed himself of the Earls, during this War, should
be for ever annexed to the Crown; and also, That all those Castles that were in
his possession, whether they were his own or his friends, which were thought to
be injurious to the King of France, should be delivered into his hands for
three years, and then not to be restored unless the King was satisfied of his
Fidelity: That He should with 200 armed Service, and faithfully serve him for
three years, at his own charges, against all enemies of the Church or Crown of
France. Moreover, he should surrender up his Charter, whereby the King of
France was obliged to pay him 10000 l. a year for defense of the Marches, and
should quit any such claim for the future. Ibid. n. 50. He enters into the King
of France his Service.
To these hard Conditions he was forced to consent to obtain his pardon, and
was presently sent against the Earl of Toulouse his old friend, and the King of
Englands Confederate. This was all done without the knowledge of King Henry;
who had by fol. 592. n. 10. King Henry loses the affections of the Citizens of
Xaint.
Charter given the City of Xaints to Hugh Bruno the Earl of March his Son, and
his younger Brother, without the privity of the Citizens, whereby the King lost
their Affections, for that they hated Hugh. However, he thought himself safe
and secure there, till he was informed by one from the French Camp, that that
King Ibid. n. ^0. He is certified the King of France designed to besiege that
City,

His flight to Blaie.


designed to come and City very suddenly, and was resolved not to rise till he
had made him prisoner, which was confirmed by another, who likewise assured
him, that the Earl of March was revolted to the French, and if He continued
there one night longer he would be besieged. King Henry being by this Second
Messenger confirmed in his belief that the news was true, fled to Blaie, a Town
in Gascoigny, about 40 or 50 English miles from Xaints, and his Army followed,
but were so harassed with the length and suddenness of the March, that All
Poictou submit to the King of France.
Upon this Xaints, Ponz, and all Poictou forthwith submitted to the King of
France; only Hertoldus Governor of fol. 593. n. 50. Hertoldus his Fidelity to
King Henry.
Mirabell Castle, went to the King of England, and implored his protection; to
whom the King replied, He was betrayed by the Earl of March, and was scarce
able to secure his own person, and therefore gave him leave to act according to
his own discretion. Then he went to the King of France, and submitted himself
to his Mercy and Protection; to whom the King replied fol. 594. n. 20. He is
kindly received by the King of France.
faithfully to his King, and therefore received the Castle and himself very
kindly; and having first taken his Oath of Fealty, he restored it to him again.

William de fol. 411, 412, 413, 414. William de Nangis his relation of this
story.
Nangis in the Life of King Lewis, in this year, and in the relation of this
Story, in some things is more particular, in some things less than Paris, in
the main of the Story they agree. The French Historian says, The Earl of March
sent his eldest Son Hugh, who made peace with the King of France upon these
Terms, That such Lands as the King of France had taken from his Father, should
remain to the Earl of Poictou, the King of France his Brother, and his Heirs;
That concerning the Rest of Land, the Earl of March and his Wife, with their
Children, were to stand to the Pleasure and Courtesy of the King of France;
and for the security of the King of France, the Earl was to deliver his three
strong Castles, M^lpinum, Merpin, Crosanum, his Castle* upon the River Crosa or
Creuse, and Castrum A^hardi, Castle-Achard, which presently received his
Garrisons, and most of the Barons and Great Men of Poictou did Homage to the
King of France.

The day after Paris fol. ^94. n. 30.
Midsummer, Queen Alienor was brought to bed of a Daughter at Bordeaux, Queen
Alienor brought to Bed of a Daughter at Bordeaux. A Truce between England and
France for five years.
which was named Beatrix. In the mean time the King of France purposed to
pursue the King of England to Blay, and from thence to Bordeaux, if he fled
thither. But want of Victuals and Forage, and the Pestilence which raged in
his Army, England for Nangis de Gestis, Lud. ix. f. 414. n. 40
five years, and then returned into France by Xaints, and in a short time
recovered his health.

This year the King of England required Paris fol. 595. n. 30. and fol. 597. n.
20. Three Marks upon every Knights Fee. Several Great Men desire leave to
return into England.
Scutage to be paid him throughout all England, of every Knights Fee three
Marks; or as others, but Twenty Shillings. About Michaelmass Earl Bigod, Roger
Earl of Winchester, and many other Great Men came to the King, and desired
leave to return into England, which was granted. Ibid. n. 50. The King's
unkindness to William de Ros.

Earl Richard represents his hard usage to the King.


King Treated William de Ros very unkindly, who after he had spent his Money in
the Kings Service, and not having wherewithal to maintain himself, had his
Lands seized without judgment of his Peers. When Earl Richard perceived how
hardly he was dealt withal, He went to the King and blamed him for it, but the
King received him with great Passion, and Threats. Earl Richard made no return,
but when he saw the King continued resolute, and would not be guided by his
advice, fol. 596. n. 10.
He, William Earl Marshall, the Earl of Hereford, and many other Great Men,
left the King at Burdeux, with his Queen, and took Ship and came over into
England.

In October King Henry Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40. A. D. 1242. The King writes to the
Archbishop of York to send him Provisions.
sent to the Archbishop of York (to whom he had committed the Government of the
Kingdom in his absence) Commanding him to take the Grain of the Archbishopric
Canturbury, and all other Bishoprics that were void, with Bacon, Salt, and
other winter Provision, together with Cloth to make Garments, and without delay
to send them to him at Burdeux, He sent 10000 Quarters of Wheat 5000 Quarters
of Oats, and as many Bacons.

And to enter upon their Estates who left his Service.

The ^ing trusts to Foreign Counsels, and is deceived by them.


which was done according to his desire: Moreover, he Commanded the
Archbishop, that he should seize and confiscate the Estates of those that
withdrew themselves from his Service; but the Archbishop prudently declined to
execute his Command, because necessity forced them to retire; and also they
that continued with the King at Burdeux, namely Simon Earl of Leicester,
William Earl of Salisbury, and some other Noblemen, contracted such great Debts
that they were reduced to penury. The King likewise gave himself wholly up to
softness, and unprofitable expense of Money, and was now altogether guided by
the Counsels of the King of Arragon, and Earl of Toulouse, who never stood by
him at any time, when necessity pressed him, but was ever deluded and defrauded
by them, the Poictovins, and Gascoignians; fol. 597. n. ^0.
so that Money, and Provision, and Clothes for his Soldiers, yet he was Ibid.
n. 30, 40, 50. He desires one ^ears profit of the Cistercians Wool their
Answer to the King's desire.
reduced to so great and urgent necessities, that He again wrote to the
Archbishop of York, to desire of the Cistercian Order One years profit of all
their Wool; from which they endeavored by plausible pretenses to excuse
themselves; but when pressed by the Archbishop to a compliance with the King's
desires, who always was ready to succor their necessities, One of the Abbats of
that Order answered, King was sworn to do Justice, and they never desired any
thing of him in special, which he was not obliged to do for them in general. If
fol. 598. lin. 3.
he would give them any thing for the Health of his Soul, or of his Ancestors
Souls, or the state of his Kingdom; they were ready to receive it.

An. D. 1243.
In the Year 1243. King fol. 598. n. 10.
Henry remained all Winter at Bordeaux; from whence in the beginning of March
following he again Ibid. n. 40, 50. The King sends to the Archbishop for a
supply of Provision of Victuals and Money.
wrote to the Arch- Bishop of York to send him Provision and Money, complaining
he had ^eceived neither, since the Abbat of Evesham came to him. This amazed
the Archbishop who had so lately sent such large supplies of both; from hence
he conjectured the Sea Victuals, and Money, and designed to send it unto him;
but the Ibid. n. 50. The Wardens of the Cinqu^ Ports refuse to carry it.
Wardens of the Cinque Ports refused to undertake it, unless he would provide a
Convoy of ships sufficient to protect them against the Pyracies of the Earl of
Britain, and his Calesians, who had already thrice set upon them, and spoiled
them to their irreparable loss, and damage, both of Men, Ships, and Goods. When
the Archbishop heard their Answer, He signified the same to the King, and
desired fol. 599. n. 10.
him to hasten his England.

On St. Gregory's Day ( March 12th) the Fol. 600. n. 10. The Truce between
England and France confirmed.
Five years Truce between the King of England, and France, were confirmed; and
by Agreement, the King of France was to retain what he had got by the Sword;
and what the King of England had acquired by the help of the Gascoins was to be
Restored to him.

About this time, Ibid. n. 40, 50. The Kings passage into England delayed by
many Accidents.

He commit's the Government of Gascoigny to Nicholas de Molis.


the King wrote to the Archbishop, to provide passage into England, commanding
all the Great men to be in a readiness at Portsmouth to receive him at his
Landing, but by many accidents his passage was delayed; the Queen was scarce
recovered from her Childbed; the Citisens of Bordeaux, and all the Gasconians
were unwilling to part with so profitable a Guest, who was so generous in his
distributions; and after he was shipped, he was forced to return again to
Bordeaux, to quiet the Tumults that arose among the Gascoinians; whereby the
Archbishop and Great men of England were wearied out with long attendance. At
length after he had settled Gascoigny, and committed the Government of that
Country to Nicholas de Molis, he again took Ship, and landed at Portsmouth on
the 25 of September, and was received at fol. 604. n. 20, 30. The King received
by his Subjects with the greatest instances of Gratitude and Joy.
Winchester by almost all the Nobility, with all demonstration of Joy and
thanks, and by the Citisens of London with variety of Inestimable Gifts, and by
the Clergy, with a Pompous and Sumptuous Procession on the 13th of October
following.

This Year on the Nativity of St. John Baptist Innocent the 4th was chosen
Pope, after One Year, and Nine Months vacancy.

This Year the Jews fol. 605. n. 50. The Jews forced to pay great Sums of money
to the King.

The Religious made him great presents.


were forced to pay to the King great Sums of Money, the Abbats also and Priors
presented him with great Gifts, which if they did not in value answer his
expectation, He rejected them, and required others of more value.

On the first of November fol. 606. n. 40.
Beatrix Countess of Provence, the Queens Mother, came into England, and
brought with her, her Daughter Cincia, who was soon after Married Ibid. n. 40.
Earl Richard married to Cincia Daughter to Beatrix. Countess of Provence.
to Earl Richard at Westminster on Saint Clements-Day, the 23d of that Month;
and (...) th Weding was celebrated with great Pomp and Feasting, there being no
less than 30000 Dishes provided for one Dinner. Triginta Millia Ferculorum
prandentibus parabantur.

In the Year 1244. King Henry at fol. 613. n. 30. The King and Court treated by
Earl Richard at Wallingford
Christmas was entertained at Wallingford by his Brother Earl Richard, and
nobly treated, as likewise were most of the Nobility of the Nation; his Wife
C^ncia was there, with Beatrix her Mother, who soon after took her solemn Ibid.
n. 40.
leave of the King and Court, took Ship at Dover, and passed into her own
Country.

About this Time the Pope sent Master Ibid. n. 50. Innocent the 4th. Martin the
Pope's Legate sent into England with an Exorbitant power. He Exercise's it
accordingly.
Martin his Legate into England with power to Excommunicate and Suspend
whomsoever he should find refractory to his Commands; by which Authority He
suspended several Praelates until they should make such a provision for the
Popes Clerks and Kinsmen as he desired, who thought any Revenue Marks by the
Year, not worth his receiving, lest he seem to be a Collector of Triffles. Ne
quisquilias colligere videretur. Moreover he directed his Letters to several
Abbats and Priors, strictly injoyning them to send him such Horses as were fit
for the Popes special Clerk, and if they refused or made any Excuse, though
never so reasonable, they were forthwith suspended, (as the Abbat of Malmsbury,
and Prior of Merton were) until they should make full satisfaction, and when
any Prebendaries of Churches became void, He presently seized them, and by
Virtue of the Popes Authority disposed of them as he pleased, and gave one of
the rich Praebendaries of Salisbury to a little Boy that was his Nephew,
against the Will of the Bishop and the whole Chapter.

Near the beginning of this Year the King of France fol. 614. n. 50. The King
of France his Offer to his Subjects that had Estates in England and France.

The King of England would not consent to it.


assembled at Paris all such of his Subjects that had possessions in England,
and declared to them, That He thought they could not serve faithfully different
Lords at the same time, and then gave them their Choice to whom they would
adhere, and after that to relinquish their possessions and Lands in the other
Princes Dominions. Upon this, some kept their Estates in France, and left those
in England; others kept their Estates in England, and left those in France.
When this was known to the King of England, He commanded the Normans Estates in
his Realm to be forthwith Seized, and would not give them their Liberty of
Choice, as the King of France had done; this was by French looked upon to be a
breach of the Truce. But their King was not so well recovered, or at leisure to
prosecute the violation by a new War, but endeavored to appease, and repress
the querulous Invectives His Norman Subjects made against the King of England.

In February King Henry received fol. 616. n. 50. Several new Counselors made.
Sir Paulinus Piper, Steward of his Household, and John Mansell Chancellor of
St. Paul's into his Council; and Master Lawrence of St. Martins was made
Praesident Council, and his Procurator in all Ecclesiastical Affairs. fol. 617.
n. 20. The Unfortunate End of Griffin Prince Leolins Son.
About the same time Griffin, Son of Leolin Prince of North Wales, Prisoner in
the Tower of London, endeavored to make his escape out of Prison, by a Rope
fastened to the Top of the Tower; but being a Man of great bulk and weighty,
the Rope brake in his descent, and he perished by that fall, which happened on
the 1st. of March.

A. D. 1244.
This Year notwithstanding their Oaths Engagements and Charts the Welsh men and
their Prince had made to King Henry, fol. 638. n. 10. The Welsh revolt from
King Henry.
they Revolted from his Obedience, and made War upon him and his Marchers; who
were opposed by the Earl of Clare, the Earl of Hereford, John de Monmouth,
Roger de Monthault, and other potent Marchers; by the Kings Command they came
to such an Engagement as in those Days was called a Battle, in which there fell
an hundred on both sides.

The King on Barnaby Day, or the Eleventh of June, was at St. Albans Ibid. n.
20. The King of Scots denies to hold any part of his Kingdom of the King of
England.
when he heard this news of the Welsh; at which time likewise the King of
Scots, let him know, That he neither did, would, or ought to hold the least
Particle of the Kingdom of Scotland of him.

This year (says Paris) the King Ibid. fol. 639. n. 20, 30.
Summoned the great of the whole Kingdom; the Arch- Bishops, Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, Earls, and Barons, to meet at Westminster; and with his own mouth,
asked a pecuniary Aid; privately intending to reduce the King of Scots; The
King Summons a great Council, or Colloqiuum.

Desires an Aid.


but openly pretending, that the year bebefore he had by their Advice passed
into Gascoigny, and upon that undertaking contracted great Debts, from which he
desired them to relieve him. The Barons Answered they would treat about his
Proposal.

The Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats and Priors, Treated apart by themselves; The
Clergy treat by themselves.
and after that, they asked the Earls and Barons to consent to what they had
resolved upon, in Giving the King an Answer; and what they would do upon his
Demands. They answered, That without the Common University they would do
nothing; and then by Common assent, there were Elected on behalf of the Clergy
(Ex part Cleri) Boniface Elect of Canterbury, The Bishops of Winchester,
Lincoln and Worcester; On behalf of the Laity (ex part Laicorum) Earl Richard
the Kings Brother, Earl Bigot, the Earl of Leicester, Twelve chosen to treat
for the whole Community.
Simon Monfort, and the Earl Marshal. On Behalf of the Barons, (ex part
Baronum) Richard de Munt^ichet, John de Baliol, and the Abbats of Ramsey and
Bury; and what these Twelve should do, was to be communicated to the whole,
That nothing might be offered to the King with Common assent.

And because the Ibid. n. 40. Their Complaints.
Charter of Liberties, which the King had Granted some time since, for the
Observation whereof Edmund Archbishop of Canturbury, had sworn and undertaken,
was not Kept; nor were the Aids so often given, used to the advantage of the
King and Kingdom, and by the Defect of the Chancellor, Writs were Granted, and
Issued, contrary to Justice. It was Desired, That such a Justiciary, and such a
Chancellor might be made, as would fix the state of Basis, (per quos status
Regni solidaretur ut solebat). And lest the King should seem to do any thing
new by Compulsion of the Council, he would not Grant the Petition of the great
Men; but promised to amend what he had heard from them: Whereupon the meeting
was adjourned until three Weeks after the Man. Paris has jumbled things so
strangely together this year, that is not possible to make his History, and
Chronology meet.
Purification of the Virgin, (That is, the 2d of February) That if in the mean
time, the King on his own accord should Choose such Counselors, How the
Government of the Kingdom was to be managed.
and so Manage the Rights or Laws of the Kingdom as to satisfy the Great men,
then they might give him an Aid; yet so as it should be Expended for the
Benefit of the Kingdom by Advice of the Twelve.

When the King saw he could do nothing with them all together; he Ibid. n. 50,
and f. 640. line 1. The Clergy required by the Pope to give the King Money.
tried the Clergy apart, what they would do upon the Popes Engaged, and could
do nothing without the Common Consent of the Great men.

This great Council had contrived a new Ibid. f. 641. n. 10, 20. A new
Government projected.
Government, which they intended to have offered to, and put upon the King, if
they could; To wit, That Four of the most potent and discreet of the Kingdom
should be chosen by Common assent, and sworn of the Kings Council; who should
transact all the affairs of King and Kingdom, and should do Justice to all
without acception of Persons. These should follow the King, and Two of them at
least were always to be present with him; that they might hear the Complaints
of, and relieve Sufferers. The Kings Treasury was to be managed by them, and
all Aids were to be expended as they thought it most to the advantage of King
and Kingdom. They were to Conversators of the Liberties; and as they were
chosen by Common assent, so they were not to be removed out of their Office,
but by Common assent, when one Dyed, another was to be Chosen by the three
Survivors: Without their Consent, the great Council was not to meet; But if
they should think it necessary or Expedient, it was to be convened when they
pleased.

This project did not then take Effect, because the Ibid. n. 30. and f. 642. n.
10. The Popes Legate demands Money of the Clergy.
Counsels of Clergy were distracted by the Popes Legate, Martin, who came with
his Letters to Require a great Sum of Money of them, for to pay the Debt that
had been contracted by his Predecessor Pope Gregory, in the War for the
Catholic Faith, Ecclesiastical Liberty, and the Patrimony of the Church Ibid.
f. 645. n. 30.
, and suspended all Men from presenting to Benefices which were of Thirty Marks
Annual value and upwards.

great Men and Prelates f. 643. line. 8. The Kings promise to the Great men.
Met at London according to the Time of Adjournment, three Weeks after
Candlemass day, to Treat about the Demands of an Aid, where he again Renewed
them, and promised entirely to keep the Charter of Liberties which he had Sworn
to at his Coronation; and gave Ib. n. 10. Twenty shillings of Every Knights Fee
granted to the King.
the Bishops leave in their Respective Dioceses to Excommunicate himself and
all others that should act Contrary to it in any Article: Yet for all this he
could only obtain Twenty shillings of every Knights fee, to Marry his Eldest of
all those which held of the King Ibid. n. 20.
in Capite; half to be paid at Easter, and the other half at Michaelmass.

The Controversy between the two Kings of England and Scotland came to such an
height, A. D. 1244.
That King Henry Ibid. f. 645. n. 40, 50. and cl. 28. Hen. 3. m. 8. Dors.
Summoned every Baron of England, as well Bishops and Abbbats, as lay-Barons
which held of him in Capite, (Quilibet Baro tenens ex Rege in Capite) to have
all their Service ready at Newcastle upon Tine; to force the King of Scots to
give satisfaction, unless he would hear their Advice; where they appeared
accordingly, Congregata igitur Vniversitate totius Angl^ae Nobilium, apud
Memoratum Castrum; About the Assumption of the Virgin (that is, the 15th of
August) they had a serious Treaty about this Weighty Affair: Where by the Earl
Richard and other great Men, there was a Peace made upon these Terms, Append.
n. 171. Articles of the Peace between the Kings of England and Scotland.
That the King of Scots and his Heirs should keep Perpetual Faith and
Friendship toward King Henry and his Heirs: That he should not League with the
Kings Enemies: That the Peace should stand Good, that was made in the presence
of Otto the Popes Legate; and the Agreement concerning a Contract of Marriage to
be had between the King of Scots Son, and the King of Englands Daughter.

The f. 647. n. 30.40. The Welsh spoil the Borders.
Welsh at this time made great Slaughters, Devastation, King having notice, he
sent Herebert Fitz Matthew with Three hundred Horse to subdue them, Disbanding
the rest of his Army, and going to London himself. The Welsh took Courage upon
this Discharging the Army, They rout those that were sent to repress them.
and had routed and destroyed the forces of the Earl of Hereford and Ralph de
Mortemer before Herebert got up to them; and when he attacqued them the Day
after, they put him to flight.

On the Morrow of all Souls, ( November 3d) the f. 650. n. 50. The Great men
deny the King an Aid. against the Welsh.

Prince David offered to hold his Kingdom of the Pope.


great Men of England met, of whom the King required an Aid against the Welsh,
which they denied him.

David Prince of North Wales, intending to cast off the Yoke of his Subjection
to the King of England, sent to the Pope, and offered his Country to him, so as
he would defend it against him, and that David and Heirs might hold it of him
Paying yearly 500 Marks; and for a great Sum of Money obtained the Popes ^ll
directed to the Abbats of Aberconwey and Kemere, by which he Constituted them
his Inquisitors, whether Prince David by force and fear was compelled to
subject himself, and swear Fealty to the King of England, and if they found it
to be so, to Dispense with, release, and make Null and void his Oath and
Engagements; and by Virtue of this Bull they Append. n. 172.
summoned the King to appear before them on the Vigil or Eve of St. Agnes
(January 21) Keyrus in Wales, to answer Prince David concerning the Contents of
the Bull. This enraged the King, and also the Great Men, so as they urged him
to March against David without Delay.

On the Paris f. 654. n. 50. The Welsh overthrown
first Sunday in Lent the Constable of the Castle of Montgomery, with such
forces as he had with him, by stratagem overcame the Welsh, and killed above
300 of them* David to make Castle of f. 255. n. 30. David besieged and took
Monthalt Castle.
Monthalt, and took it by assault, and killed most he found in it, but missed
of Roger de Montealto, the Proprietor of it, whom he thought to have found
there.

About f. 658. n. 50. The yearly revenue of the Roman and Italian Clergy in
England.
Whitsunday the King caused diligent Inquiry to be made in Every County, whose
Revenues the Romans and Italians were possessed of in England, f. 659. line 4.
by Gift of the Court of Rome, and they were found to be 60000 Marks by the
year: The Consideration of which great Sum moved the King both to Admiration
and Anger; and the University of the Kingdom composed an Elegant f. 659. lin. 4.
Epistle, in which they set forth the Execrable Papal Extortions, The English
Complaint at the Council of Lions, and by whom made.
and the Exactions of the Legates; (in qua Extortiones Papales Execrabiles,
etc.) And sent it to the Council of Lions, by Earl Roger Bigod, John
Fitz-Geofrey, de Cantelupe, Philip Basse^, Ralph Fitz-Nicholas* and Master
William Poweric a Clerc, in the Name of the whole University, who were to
declare the importable Burdens of the Kingdom by reason of the Popes Exaction
of Tribute, to which the University thereof never consented, and to seek for
Redress.

On the 30 th of f. 659. n. 10, 20. Fulke Fitz-warrin sent to Martin the Pope's
Legate.
June the University of Military Men, that intended a Torneament (which was
prohibited by the King) met at Luton and Dunstable, (in Bedfordshire) sent Fulk
Fitz Warin, Temple at London, to Mr. Martin the Popes Clerc, and Instrument of
his great Exactions; when he came to him, he looked upon him with a stern
Countenance, He treats the Legate roughly.
and bad him be gone out of England immediately: Who commands me to do this,
said Mr. Martin? Is it your self? To whom Fulk answered, the University or Body
of armed men, that lately appeared at Luton and Dunstable, by me do Command you
to do this; and bad him again be gone, or he and his Followers would in three
Days be cut in Pieces: Mr. Martin much Authority: The King told him he was not
the Author of any such thing; but my Barons (says he) can scarce contain
themselves from an insurrection against me, for that I have so long suffered
your Depredations and Injuries in my Kingdom. Upon this Discourse with the King
he Requested his Pasport, which was readily granted, The Legate leaves England.
and for his greater security the King sent with him Robert Noris, one of his
Marshals to conduct him to the Sea.

The f. 666. n. 40. A. D. 1245. The English Procurators complaint in the
Council of Lions.
Procurators of the University or Body of the Nobility of England before named,
sitting in the Council at Lions, Mr. William Poweric their Clerc stood up, and
propounded the Grievances of the Kingdom of England in behalf of the said
University, lamentably complaining of a Tribute injuriously imposed on the
Kingdom by the Court of Rome, to which the Fathers of the Nobility, nor they
themselves had ever consented; nor did at present, or ever should Pope made no
answer; yet William Power^c produced the Append. n. 173.
Epistle, which de^lared the many Extortions made in England by the Roman
Church, which was read in the Council. After some time of Waiting, the
Procurators returned without f. 681. n. 30.
a satisfactory Answer: yet at length he f. 696. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. The Popes
Grant to Patrons of Benefices i^ England.
Granted that all Patrons both Lay and Ecclesiastic, should present whom they
would to Ecclesiastic Benefices without the Let or hinderance of him, or his
Legates. But afterward, Non f. 668. n. 20.
Obstante to this privilege he totally destroyed it, when ever he had a Mind to
prefer any of the Italian Clergy.

About the Beginning of July, the King fol. 660. n. ^0* and Clau. 29. Hen. 3 M.
8. D. The King prepares for an Expedition into Wales.
Summoned all the Earls, Barons, Knights, and others that held of him in
Military Service, and Serjeanty, to March with him into Wales, or to send their
Service: The Welchmen kept themselves upon their Mountains, and in their Woods
and fastnesses, and took their Opportunities now and then to Destroy some
Parties of the English; and all that King Henry did in 10 Weeks time, was to f.
682. n. 20. f. 683. and f. 684. n. 30.
build the Castle of Bannoc, which when he had finished, and put a strong
Garrison into it, he returned into England, having destroyed all the Victuals
and Forage upon the Borders, and in those parts of Wales where he had been;
and returned into England with his Army: At Irish by the King's Command landed
in the Isle of Anglesey, which was the place of Refuge for the Welsh, and
burnt, and destroyed the whole Country.

In the Spring following, f. 695. n. 40. A. D. 1246 Prince David dies without
Issue.
died David Prince of The Prince of Northwales was the Dr. Pow. Hist. of Wales,
p. 315.
Superior of all the Princes of Wales, to whom the other Princes of South Wales
and Powls paid a certain Tribute yearly, as appears in the Laws of Howel Dha.
Northwales, without Issue; in whose place the Welchmen chose the Son of
Griffin Prince of Wales. Dr. Powel says from the British History, That the
Lords and Barons of Wales upon the Death of David came History of Wales. p. 314.
Owen and Lewelin, who divided the Principality between them, and received
their Homages.

This year in a Parliament at London there were severe A Parliament at London.
Laws made against such as Robbed Parks or Warrens. Paris ut supra f. 695. n.
50. and lib. Additam. f. 156. n. 10. Laws made against Robbers of Warrens and
Parks
If the Malefactor fled and was Killed, there was neither Law or Appeal allowed
for his Death: If an Earl, Baron, or Knight complained to the King Kings Writ,
if he that was Indicted was Convicted, he was to lie in the Kings Prison a Year
and a Day, and to pay three years value of his Estate, having just sufficient
allowed out of it, to maintain him; after which the King was to have two parts,
and he that received the injury, one; and then he was to find twelve Sureties,
that he should never do the like again, in Parks, Warrens, or Forests; nor do
any thing against the Kings Peace, who were to answer for his Body and
Transgression. And if any one were taken in a Park or Warren without the Kings
Writ of Inquisition, he was to be Imprisoned, Fined, and to give Sureties as
before.

On Mid-Lent Sunday a most General Parliament of the whole Kingdom met at London
according to Summons, Paris f. 698. n. 40, 50. A General Parliament held at
London.
where the King Conferred with the Bishops apart, the Earls and Barons apart,
and the Abbats and Priors apart, about the Popes not keeping his promises
concerning the Removal of their Grievances, which were these,

Papal Exctions and Oppressions.
First, That the Pope not content with the payment of Peter Pence, oppressed
the Kingdom by Extorting from the Clergy great Contributions, without the Kings
Consent, against the Ancient Customs, Liberties, and Rights of the Kingdom,
and against the Appeal of the Procurators of the King and Kingdom in the
General Council of Lions.

Secondly, The Church and Kingdom were oppressed, in that the Patrons of
Churches could not present fit persons to them, because they were given by the
Popes Letters to Romans, who understood not the English Language, and carried
all the Money out of the Kingdom to the Impoverishing of it.

Thirdly, The Nation was oppressed by the Popes Exaction of Pensions from
Churches.

Fourthly, The Church and Nation suffered, for that Italians succeeded
Italians, and the English were forced to prosecute their right out of the
Kingdom, against the Customs and Written Laws thereof, and against the
Indulgencies of the Popes Predecessors granted to the King and Kingdom of
England.

Fifthly, The Church and Nation infinitely suffered, by reason of the Clause of
Non obstante, which weakened and enervated all Oaths, Ancient Customs, Written
Laws, Grants, Statutes and Privileges.

Sixthly, The Church and Kingdom suffered, for that in the Parishes where the
Italians were Beneficed, there was no Alms, no Hospitality, Preaching, no
Divine Service, no care of Souls, nor Reparations done to the Parsonage Houses.

The Result of the Conferences upon these Grievances was, That yet, The result
of this Conference upon these Grievances.
for the Reverence due to the Apostolic See, they should again Supplicate the
Pope by Letters, to remove the intolerable Grievances, and importable yoke, and
this was done according to the Kings separate Discourse with them. The King
wrote by f. 699, 700, 701.
himself, the Bishops by Abbats by themselves, and the Earls and Barons by the
name of the University of England, by themselves, as appears by their
particular Letters extant in Mat. Paris.

But notwithstanding this Appeal, f. 681. n. 40. The English Bishops at the
Council of Lions imposed upon by the Pope.
the Pope just before the Dissolution of the Council of Lions, caused the
English Bishops to put their Seals to the Instrument of King John, by which he
engaged himself and Heirs, to pay a Thousand Marks a year to Innocent the
Successors. Fulk Bishop of London was very unwilling to do it, yet at last he
suffered himself to be overcome. They then also Signed the Instrument of the
Deposition of Frederic the Emperor.

And yet further to the great prejudice of the King and Kingdom he f. 701. n.
50. A new Oppression of the English Bishops by the Pope.
sent his Apostolic Commands to the Bishops, That some of them should find him
15, others 10, others 5 stout men well Horsed and Armed one year, as the Pope
should direct. And lest the King should make provision against this Exaction,
the Bishops were Commanded not to discover it, under pain of Excommunication.

This year by great f. 705. n. 30. The Office of Marescalcie granted to Earl
Roger Bigod.
Intercession the Marescalcie with the Office and Honor, was Granted to Earl
Roger Bigod, by reason of his Countess (ratione Commitissae suae) the Eldest
Daughter of William the great Earl Marshal.

Against the great Grievances and Exactions of the Pope, f. 706. n. 30.
Messengers sent to Rome to complain of Grievances.
William and Henry de la Mare were sent to Rome by consent of King, Bishops,
Earls, and Barons. And in the mean time fol. 707. n. 40.
he sent for 6000 Marks which had been charged upon the Bishops by his Clerc
Master Martin, which so exasperated the King, That he Append. n. 174. The Kings
Command to the Bishops not to pay any Aid or Tallage to the Pope.
wrote to the Bishops, and Reproved them for not observing his Letters Patents,
and close, by which he had Commanded them to pay no Aid or Tallage to the Pope,
and in that Writ commanded them again not to comply with any of his Exactions
contrary to the Prelates, the Earls and Barons made in the Council at London.

On the 7th of July there was a Council holden at Winchester, between the King
and Paris f. 709. n. 30. A Council held at Winchester.

The King prohibits from contributing to the Pope.


Great men about the Desolation of the Church; William de Poweric and Henry de
la Mare that had been sent to the Court of Rome, were then returned, bringing
back nothing of moderation from the Pope, concerning the oppressions England,
of which they had complained; He continued resolute in forcing his Demands,
which Resolution so moved the King and Great Men, That he commanded
Proclamation to be made in all Towns, Markets, and public places, no man of the
Kingdom should consent to any Contribution to the Pope, or send him any Aid.

Ibid. n. 40, 50. The Pope writes severely to the English Prelates.

The King forced to consent to the Popes Exactions.


But he sharply wrote to the Prelates after he had been advertised of this
Proclamation, and under pain of Excommunication and Suspension Nuncio at the
New Temple London. And whereas the King was fixedly prepared to defend the
freedom of the Kingdom and Church by the Threats of his Brother Earl Richard,
and some Bishops, but especially of the Bishop of Worcester, who (as it was
said) had power to Interdict the Nation, he was Baffled, and fell in the cause,
so as the Contribution was paid, and the whole endeavor and hope of mainteining
the freedom of the English Church and Kingdom came to nothing.

The Pope takes an advantage of his easiness.
And the Pope taking a greater Confidence from what he had already done,
commanded more f. 716. n. 10 And treats the Clergy rigorously.
Imperiously than he were wont to do, That all Beneficed Clercs that resided
upon their Livings, should pay unto him a third part of their Goods, and such
as did not Reside, were to pay one half, and appointed the Bishop of London to
Execute this his project.

Who Ibid. n. 20
with some others met at St. Paul's to consider of this matter, to whom the King
sent John de Lexinton a Knight, and Lawrence of St. Martin his Clerc on the
Morrow after St. Andrew or 8th of December, strictly prohibiting them to
consent to that Contribution; and so they broke up their meeting to the great
satisfaction of all such as were called before them: If any man thinks it worth
his labor, to peruse the Answer of the Ibid. n. 30, 40 50.
Clergy to this unreasonable Exaction, may see it in Mat. Paris.

About this time the Bishop of Ibid. lin. 1. The Bishop of Lincoln makes an
inquisition into the lives of the People.
Lincoln by the Instigation of the Friars Preachers, and Friars Minors, made
strict Inquisitions, by his Archdeacons and Rural Deans, concerning the
Continency and Manners of Noble and ignoble, to the great Scandal of them, and
the blasting King hearing the grievous complaints of his people concerning
these proceedings, by advice of his Court, sent his Append. n. 175. The King
forbid's the Execution of it.
Writ to the Sherif of Hertfordshire, commanding him, That as he loved himself
and all he had, That he should not permit any Laymen of his Baylywic for the
future to meet in any place to make Cognitions, or Attestations upon Oath at
the pleasure of the Bishop of Lincoln, his Archdeacons or Rural Deans, unless
in Matrimonial, and Testamentary Causes.

In fol. 719. n. 20. The King reconciled to the Bishop of Winchester.
the year 1247. A. D. 1247.
King Henry with many of his Great men was the day after Christmass-day
entertained at Winchester by the Bishop of that place. By this the King
signified he had forgotten all former offenses, and in the presence of the
whole Court received the Bishop into his favor.

At the same time the King Ibid. n. 30. A Council called at London. The Bishops
absent themselves.
summoned his Great men ( Magnates and the Archdeacons of England to meet at
London, to consider how the Contributions the Pope required should be raised.
At the day appointed all the Bishops designedly absented themselves, that they
might not appear openly to confront the Popes desires.

These Continual exactions of the Ibid. n. 40, 50. A general Clamor against
the Pope and his Ministers.
Popes Legates and Collectors opened every ones Mouth against him, but
especially in France, Holiness, but loaded him with bitter reproaches and
revilings for the Extortion and Rapine that was practiced by his Ministers:
Insomuch that the fol 720. n. 20. A Decree of the Great men of France against
Papal jurisdiction.
Great men of the Kingdom (Omnes regni Majores) Decreed, and by Oath
Established it, That No Clerc or Laic for the future should compel any one to
appear before an Ordinary, Judge or Delegate, unless upon the Account of
Heresy, Matrimony, or Usury, upon Forfeiture of all his Goods and loss of one
of his Members.

This resoluteness of the French very much Troubled the Pope, Ibid. n. 30. The
Popes method to regain the good will of the French.
so that he endeavored by all means to soften them into a compliance with him;
he bestowed many Ecclesiastical Benefices among their Relations, and gave them
license to obtain more, and other Indulgences; besides, he was bountiful in his
gifts among the Noblemen, which brought many over to him from their former
Resolution.

Ibid. n. 50. A Parlen^ at London.
Candlemass the Parliament met at London, where the King was informed, that the
King of France had a design upon Gascoigny, and that it would not be only a
great reproach, but a prejudice to him to suffer it to be lost, seeing he
received yearly from Bordeaux 1000 Marks: The Archdeacons of England, and very
many of the Clergy met the Great men there: They complained of the frequent and
intolerable Exactions of the Pope, affirming to the King, The Clergy's
complai^t to the King of the oppressions and Exactions of the Pope.

What was resolved in this Affair.


That if these were suffered, His Kingdom would be endangered, and both Laity
and Clergy would be ruined by a desolution that former times had not known.
Upon this, It was resolved that discreet Messengers should be sent to the Court
of Rome, with Letters, both to the Pope, and Cardinals, on the behalf of the
Community of the whole Clergy and Laity of the Realm, showing their Greivances
and Oppressions.

The Append. n. 176. The Sum of their Letter to the Pope.
Sum of that to the Pope, was a profession of their readiness to obey his
Holiness; but desire his Pardon if they could not then comply with his Demands;
for although their Country yielded Plenty of Fruits for the Nourishment of its
Inhabitants; yet it afforded no Money, neither was it sufficient to Supply what
was required; for their own Kings Necessity urged what they could spare toward
the defense of his own Dominions against the assaults of his Enemies, and so
concluded That any further burdens would prove insupportable to them.

Their Letter to the Append. n. 177. The Communities Letter to the Cardinal.
Cardinals was to this Effect. They first give a hint of their grievances, and
what they had contributed since the last Lateran Council, first a Twentieth
part for three years for an Aid to the Holy Land; then a Tenth to the Pope;
afterward several other payments for different Uses at the Command of the
Apostolic See. Then they urge the great necessity and wants their own King lay
under, whom they were bound to Assist as their Lord and Temporal and that they
themselves were now reduced to such penury, that if all they had were exposed
to sale, it would not be sufficient to answer what was demanded: Wherefore they
humbly beseech them, to represent their condition to the Pope, and endeavor to
divert his Thoughts, his hands, and his Counsels, from such grievous
Oppressions.

About the same time the Pope fol. 722. lin. 3.
granted to King Henry (Vmbratile a Because he cut off all the advantage with a
( non obstante) at any time when he pleased.
pretended and deceitful privilege: That No Italian, or Nephew of His, or
Cardinals, should henceforward be sent into England to be beneficed, unless He,
or his Cardinals first ask, and obtain leave of the King, to have him provided
for.

Before the Council was ended, Peter of Ibid. n. 10. The Kings Wards married to
Foreigners.
Savoy Earl of Richmond, came to the Kings Court at London, and brought with
him several young Women from his own Country to be married to the young
Noblemen that were the Kings Wards, which thing much disgusted his own Native
Subjects.

This year Ibid. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. Two Friars Minors sent into England, to be
the Popes Collectors.

Their Arrogant behavior to the English Prelates.


John and Alexander, Two Friars Minors, Englishmen by birth, were sent from the
Pope with his Authority to be his Collectors or Exactors of Money in England;
and pretending to ask Charity only, and use no force, they obtaind the King's
License; And then went to the chief Prelates, and very sawcily required of them
Lord the Pope, and sometimes demanded xx s for a Procuration, which was to be
paid without delay; if not, they produced the Popes Thundering Letters (Literas
fulminantes) to affright and constrain them to it. When they came to the Bishop
of Lincoln, who was a great Admirer of that Order, He stood amazed at their
habit (which was more Souldier-like, than Religious.) But when they had showed
him the Popes Letters, Their Demands of the Bishop of Lincoln and Abbat of St.
Albans.
and demanded of him 6000 Marks to be forthwith paid out of his Bishopric: He
Answered with great grief of Heart, That such Exactions were never heard of
before, and very unjust, because it was impossible to answer them. And seeing
it concerned the University of the Clergy and Laity (Vniversitatem Cleri and
Populi) of the whole Kingdom, He could give them no Answer in such a Difficult
Affair until he had first consulted the Community of the Kingdom. Then they
parted from him and went to St. Albans, and demanded of the Abbat 400 Marks to
be paid to them for the Popes use. But they received much the same Answer from
him, they had before from the Bishop.

About the same time, the fol. 723. lin. 3. The Pope sends to borrow money of
the French, Prelates.
Pope by his Messengers, the Friars and Minors, sent to all the Chief Prlates
in France, and desired them to Lend him Money according to Every ones Ability,
and whatever they Lent should be repaid them without fail when He was able to
do it. When this was known to the King of France, He prohibited them under pain
of forfeiting all their Goods, But are forbidden by the King.
from lending any such Sums, lest thereby his own Kingdom should be
impoverished.

Ibid. n. 30. A Legate sent into Scotland.
Godefrid was sent Legate into Scotland, although there was no Occasion for any,
and John Rufus into Ireland (quasi Legatus) in stead of a Legate, that he might
thereby elude the Privilege lately granted to King Henry, who so well managed
his Master the Popes business there, that He extorted from them 6000 Marks,
which sum was conveyed to London by the Religious, The Popes Extortions in
Ireland.
and paid into the Popes Treasury.

fol. 727. n. 20, 30.
King Henry followed the Example of the Great men of France, who by their Kings
approbation had entered into a Confederacy, and made a Decree against the
insatiable Avarice and Oppression of the Court of Rome, That the same Exactions
and Extortions might for the future be prevented here, The Jurisdiction of the
Clergy restrained.
and the Jurisdiction of the Spirituality restrained, He ordained, that these
following Orders should inviolably be observed through England. That No Laic
should bring any Case before an Ecclesiastic Judge unless it concerned Marriage
or Testaments. The King likewise gave the Bishops a certain Form to proceed in
Cases of Bastardy, To inquire whether they were born before, or after Marriage.
Clerc's were prohibited by the Kings Writ to Commence any Actions for Tithes
before an Ecclesiastic Judge, and that Writ by which they were to proceed was
called Indicavit. That an Oath should be given to Clerc's, to Discover whether
they had proceeded in any Case contrary to the Kings Prohibition: Whereas they
are not bound to Swear but before an Ecclesiastic in Spiritual Causes. Also
concerning Clercs, for Crimes imposed upon them by Laics.

In the beginning of Lent the forementioned fol. 728. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. The
Abbat of St. Albans cited to London by the Popes Collector.
John a Minorite, Demanded of the Church of St. Albans 400 Marks, the Second
time, and by Virtue of his Authority cited the Abbat of St. Albans to appear at
London three Days after, either in Person or by his Proxy, to satisfy the Popes
Demands that were lately made to him: The Abbat sent his Archdeacon to appear
for him at the day appointed; He Appeals to the Pope
who after he had demanded and with difficulty obtained a Copy of the Brief;
Answered, That the Abbat designed to send special Messengers to Rome to
acquaint the Pope with these grievances, and for remedy appealed to him;
because fol. 729. n. 30, 40, 50. But without Remedy.
both the Abbat Pope than they could expect from him. When they came to Lions
(where the Pope then resided) They were coldly received and met with great
difficulties, and some checks; Namely, That they did not give that respect, and
pay that reverence, which was due to the Popes Messenger, and that their Abbat
was the only person amongst all the Abbats of England, that refused to yield
Obedience to his Commands. When they saw their entertainment, and no remedy to
be expected, they compounded for 200 Marks, and their expenses amounted to 100
more.

Friar John writes to the Pope for additional Powers.
When Friar John the Minorite saw the Clergy, especially the Abbats, so
unwilling to yield to his demands, He wrote to the Pope, to have his power
enlarged; The Popes Answer, together with the Letters of additional powers are
in Additament. Matt. Par. fol. 159, 160.

About the same time, the King finding the fol. 730. lin. 6. The Nobility and
Clergy meet the King at Oxford.
State of his Realm Papal exactions, and the Money carried out of his Kingdom
without any advantage to the Church, He commanded the whole Nobility of the
Kingdom [ omnem Totius Regni Nobilitatem) to meet at Oxford; But the Prelates
were in a more especial manner called, that they might consult, how the Church
might be relieved from such oppressions as it now lay under. But they contrary
to all expectation presently consented to a Contribution of 11000 Marks, The
Prelates consent to contribute 11000 Marks to the Pope.
and the Clergy were constrained to pay it into the hands of Bishops of
Winchester and Norwich, and such as refused were wearied into a compliance, by
the troubles and damages, they received from John the Minorite; nor did the
Abbat of St. Albans fare the better for that he had sent the Pope fourscore
Marks the year before.

In the year 1248. King Henry Fol. 742. n. 30.
kept his Christmas at Winchester, with many of his Great men.

A. D. 1248.
Soon after, fol. 743. n. 40, 50. A Parliament called at London.
He summoned the Nobility of the whole Kingdom of England to meet him at London
Eight days after Candlemass. Besides a great Number of Barons, Knights,
Noblemen, Abbats, Priors, and Clercs, there came thither Nine Bishops, and as
many Earls; The Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Winchester, Lincoln,
Norwich, Worcester, Chichester, Ely, Rochester and Carlisle; Earl the Earls of
Gloucester, Leycester, Winchester, Hertford, Roger Bigod Marshall, and Oxford;
besides, the Earls of Lincoln, Ferrars, Warren and Richmond. The Archbishop of
Canturbury was beyond Sea, the Bishop of Durham was infirm, and the Bishop of
Bath was lately dead. When they were assembled, the King required of them an
Aid. But they fol. 744. line. 1. The King required an Aid, but is denied. And
is reproved by his Great men for miscarriages.
reproved him for asking it without Blushing (as says the Monk), seeing when
they granted the last, he promised by his Chart, he would not any more burden
his Great men. Moreover they blamed him for his repeated kindness, and
Liberality to Foreigners, and contempt of his Native Subjects, for not
encouraging the trade of his own Kingdom, Ibid. n. 20.30.
for keeping Bishoprics, and Abbys void, in his own hands: To these they added,
That neither the Justiciary, Chancellor or Treasurer were made by the Common
Counsel of the Kingdom (per Commune Consilium Regni) as they There are no
Instances to be found of that in his Predecessors times
were in his Predecessors Reigns.

When the King heard these things, Ibid. n. 40. His concern, and promise to
correct what was amiss.
he was much concerned, and promised that what was amiss should be speedily
corrected; To which the University of England Answered, That as they had often,
so they would now patiently wait a short time, and see whether he meant as he
spoke; and according as he performed his promise, so they would their obedience
to him in all things. So the further consideration of this Affair was put off
till fifteen days after Midsummer.

At the day fol. 748. n. 30, 40, 50.
appointed, The Answer He received.
the Nobility of all England ( Nobilitas totius Angliae) met at London, and
were received by the King with this following Speech, That they did not treat
their King civily, but would have him submit to their pleasure, and yield to
any Terms they should offer him; and did deny that Liberty and Authority to
him, which every Master Exercises in his own Family; every Master of a Family
may use, whose and what Counsel he please, The Kings Speech to the Parliament.
Difficulties upon their Lord, so neither Vassals on their Prince; and
therefore was resolved, neither to remove the Chancellor, Justiciary or
Treasurer at their pleasure, nor to appoint others. And then added, that he
expected from them a pecuniary Aid, for the defense and recovery of his Rights,
which concerned them beyond the Seas. To all which they unanimously Replied,
That they would impoverish themselves to enrich Strangers, Their Answer, and
Resolve against granting any Aid.
as they had formerly done, when they gave money toward his Expedition in
Gascoigny and Poictou: So the Parliament was dissolved in great disorder,
without any satisfaction, either to the King or themselves. But the King was
hereby fol. 749. lin. 1. The King reduced to great streights.
reduced to so great necessities, that he was constreined to expose to Sale his
Jewels, Plate, and other Vtensils of his House; and such Vessels as were
curiously wrought and Gilded, were Sold, not according to their value, but
weight. When the King enquired where he should meet with Buyers, it was
Answered, At London. The King replied, If the Treasury of Octavian were to be
sold, the City of London were able to purchase it.

This year on the 13th of October, fol. 751. n. 10, 20. A new Fair proclaimed
at Westminster to hold 15 days.
the King with many Prelates and Great met at London to celebrate the Memory of
the Translation of St. Edward, and caused a New Fair to be proclaimed at
Westminster, to continue 15 days, and prohibited all other Fairs England, and
also all Trading in the City of London, within Doors and without, during that
time; That this Fair at Westminster might be the more plentifully stored, and
frequented with all sorts of Goods and People.

This year the Pope fol 754. n. 30, 40, 50. The Pope sends his Italians to be
Beneficed in England.
continued his Extortions from, and Oppressions of the English, and sent his
Italians to be without delay beneficed in England, whereof One was sent to the
Abbat of Abendune, who made choice of the Church of St. Helens in the same
Town, worth 100 Marks by the year; and the same day it became void the King
send's his Mandate to the Abbat to confer it upon Adelmar, afterward Elect of
Winchester.

The Abbat of St. Albans cited to Rome for refusing to accept one.


Ethelmarus his Brother, by the Mothers side, and the King would Abbat yielded
to the Kings Command. Upon this the Pope cited the old Abbat to appear before
him at Rome, who being deserted by the King, was constrained to take that
wearisom, and tedious Journey; where after many difficulties and expenses, he
compounded for fifty Marks.

A. D. 1^49.
In the year 1249. the King kept his fol. 757. n. 20.
Christmas at London, and required of the Citisens New Years gifts. Then he
sent to the fol. 758. n. 10, 20, 30, 40, 50. The Kings wants press him to ask
Money of his Subjects.
Citisens of London, to supply him with Money, which they received with a heavy
Heart, and complained, That that Liberty which was so often bought, granted,
and Sworn to, would not now distinguish them from Slaves of the meanest rank;
but at length with great reluctance were constrained to pay 2000 pounds; but
this would not satisfy the Kings wants, therefore he was forced to apply
himself to his Great men one by one, and requested them to Lend him Money, both
to supply his Necessities, and pay his Debts, and also to enable King of France
had invaded: And in a most Submissive Manner made his urgent Necessities known
to the Prelates and Abbats, and begged of them either to give or lend him such
or such a Sum of Money; but could obtain nothing but Excuses or denyals, unless
from the Abbat of St. Albans, from whom he received Sixty Marks. This
encouraged the King to hope the like success from other Prelates and Abbats,
and accordingly fol. 759. lin. 3.
wrote to those of Essex and Hertford, to Lend him Money for his Faithfully to
repay the same.

This year Ibid. n 20. Nicholas Bishop of Durham resigned his Bishopric.
Nicholas Bishop of Durham being sensible of his great Age, and infirmity,
resigned his Bishopric, and withdrew himself from all public Affairs, to a
private Life. The King recommended Ibid. n. 50. The King recommended his
brother Ethelmar to the Convent. The Monks refuse to choose him.
Aethelmarus his Brother to the Convent, and by Messengers, and repeated
Entreaties would have persuaded them to choose him Bishop. To whom they
replied, that He had at his Coronation sworn to preserve the Church's Liberty,
and that the person recommended, was neither of sufficient Age, or Learning,
for so great a Charge. The King Answered, fol. 760. lin. 4.
Then He would keep the Bishopric eight or nine Years in his hands, and by that
time He would be capable of it.

This year in June fol. 767. n. 20. S. Montfort Earl of Leycester subdued the
rebellious Gascoigns.
Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester (although Crusado) passed over Sea into
Gascoigny, and subdued all that were in rebellion against King Henry, and in
every thing behaved himself with such fidelity and Courage, that he gained the
applause of all the Kings friends, and the Name of a trusty Patriot.

This year on the 3d of July fol. 770. n. 40. The King of Scots death.
dyed Alexander King of Scotland.

In the year 1250. King Henry kept his fol. 772. n. 10. The Countess of Cornwall
brought to bed of a Son.
Christmas at Winchester, and after the celebration came to London. At the
same time fol. 772. n. 10. The Countess of Cornwall brought to bed of a Son.
Cincia Earl Richards Wife was brought to bed of a Son, who Edmund.

Soon after many of the Ibid. n. 50. Many of the Nobility and Bishops go over
Sea.
Nobility of England, for reasons not known, passed over Sea; Among whom were
Richard Earl of Cornwall, and the Earl of Gloucester, Henry de Hastings a Baron,
Roger de Turkebi, and many other Nobles; Besides the Bishops of Lincoln, London
and Worcester; And with them the Archdeacons of Oxford, and Bedford, and many
other Clercs.

On the Seventh of March the King and many of the Nobility and Clergy undertook
the Crusado; The King, Noblemen, and Clercs undertake the Crusado.
Ibid. n. 50.
There were in all about 500 Knights, besides an innumerable Number of Esquires
and Common Soldiers.

In May fol. 777. n. 30, 40, 50. Earl Richard kindly received and treated by
the Pope.
Earl Richard returned into England from the Court of Rome, where he was
received and treated, both by the Pope and the Cardinals, in a most Pompous and
Magnificent manner, to the admiration not only of the Citizens, but of all
strangers that were present at his entrance, and saw his entertainment; which
Occasioned various Conjectures, but most then thought, That the Pope knew he
was both Rich and Ambitious, and at that time designed to promote him to the
Empire. At the same time the fol. 779. n. 40. The Great men return into England
again.
Earls of Gloucester and Leycester, with many other Great men, and Prelates,
returned into England.

About Midsummer there was great fol. 783. n. 10. Great Stirs in London about
some Liberties of the City.
Stir in the City of London about some Liberties of the Citisens, the King had
granted to the Abbat of Westminster; the Mayor with the whole Community of the
City, made their complaint to the King, but could obtain no Remedy: Then they
applied themselves to Earl Richard, and to the Earl of Leycester, and some
other Great men, who went to the King and severely blamed him for infringing
those Charters his Predecessors City, and also severely Reproved the Abbat, as
one that occasioned, and moved the King to this Violation: By this means the
King was restrained from proceeding any further in his Grant.

Soon after the King fol. 785, n. 20. King Henry's complaint to the Pope
against his Great men.
complained to the Pope, that his Great men who had undertaken the Crusado,
designed to begin their journey to the Holy Land before he was prepared, and
that they were more King of France his Capital Enemy, than him. Upon this the
Pope by his Letters, under pain of Excommunication, prohibited any from going
without the Kings leave; and for the better Security, Ibid. n. 30.
He sent to the Wardens of his Ports to hinder any of his Great men from
passing over Sea.

This year a certain Jew, Ibid. n. 40. Aron a Jew severely fined for falsifying
a Charter.
Named Aron, being convicted of Counterfeiting or falsifying a Charter, was
severely fined and paid to the King 14000 Marks, and to the Queen an answerable
proportion in Gold: So, that it was Computed, That this Jew had paid to the
King 30000 Marks of Silver since his coming from beyond Sea, and to the Queen
200 Marks of Gold; as the same Jew informed our Author Matthew Paris, Ibid. n.
50.
who says they were not to be pitied, because the Jews were manifestly proved
to be corrupted, and forgers of the Kings Seals and Charts.

This year about the Feast of St. Matthew, fol. 800. n. 20, 30. The Bishop of
Winchesters Death at Turon.
William Bishop of Winchester died at Turon; The King after some short sorrow
for his Death, sent very kind and soft Letters to the Monks of that Cathedral
to persuade them to choose Ethelmarus his Brother, their Bishop. f. 801. n. 20.
The Monks were under great difficulties how to manage themselves; Kings
request, lest further inconveniences should ensue; for they thought the Pope
the Kings close Friend; neither were they willing to Elect one whom they knew
to be altogether insufficient for so great a charge: Ibid. n. 50. Ethelmarus
the Kings Brother chosen Bishop of Winchester.
At last after many disputes the Kings powerful request prevailed, and
Ethelmarus was chosen Bishop, and forthwith Solemn Fol. 802. Lin. 5.
Messengers were sent to give the Pope notice of it, with Letters full of
entreaties and promises to induce him to approve of what was so very pleasing
to the King.

Soon after the King received fol. 803. n. 40, 50. The Pope ask's King Henry's
leave to reside at Bordeaux.
Solemn Messengers from the Pope, to desire leave of him, to let him reside
some time at Bordeaux; for the Earls of Poictou and Provence, Brothers to the
King of France (who was lately taken Prisoner by the Saracens) looked upon the
Pope to be the principal Author of this misfortune, because he had hindered
those who had undertaken the Crusado, from proceeding absolved many from their
Vow. There passed hard words between the Pope and them, and they parted from
each other in great anger. The Earls made what have they could into England to
solicit the King to give them what assistance He could in this juncture, for
the Relief of their Brother, urging to him the Vow he at present lay under.
This reduced the King to great streights; The King take's time to consider of
an Answer.
for if he consented to the Popes request, he made the Emperor his Enemy; If he
refused him, King took longer time to consider what Answer he should return.

A. D. 1251.
In the year 1251. King Henry kept his fol. 807. lin. 5. and n. 20. The King
retrencheth the Expenses of his Household.
Christmas at Winchester, but the usual plenty and Hospitality was laid aside,
and the accustomed distribution of gifts was omitted, and no one was an
acceptable guest at Court, who did not bring some gift or present to the King,
Queen, Prince Edward, or some Courtier.

On Epiphany day f. 810. n. 10. Monfort requires a supply of men and money for
Gascoigny.
Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester, he had in a great measure reduced Gascoigny
to the Kings obedience, came into England, accompanied only with three
Esquires, and went to the King, and acquainted him with the great charge and
expense he had been at, to repress those Rebels, but could no longer maintain
it out of his own Revenues; therefore He required a supply both of Men and
Money from him, Ibid. n. 40. His request granted by the King.
which was granted; and having received of the Kings Treasury 3000 Marks, and
gathered together what Money he could among his own Tenants, and those of his
Wards, He prepared to return into Gascoigny.

On fol. 811. n. 40, 50. Henry of Bath Justiciary accused of Bribery and
Extortion.
Candlemass day following Henry of Bath the Kings Justiciary Bribery and
Extortion, whereby he had raised a very Great Estate upon the ruin of others;
Upon this he was Attached, and when John Mansel Clerc, one of the Kings
principal Counselors offered to be his Bail, the King refused him, adding that
his fault was little less than Treason. But upon the importunate intercessions
of the Bishop London and many others, he was set at liberty, and Twenty four
Knights bound for his Appearance at a time appointed, statuto Termino.

On the 17 of February fol. 814. n. 40, 50. A Parliament assembled at London.

Crimes that were objected against the Justiciary.

The King shows his displeasure against him.


according to appointment the Parliament met at London, where appeared the
above mentioned Henry of Bath, who (beside other Crimes) was accused for
incensing the whole Baronage against the King (Vniversum Baronagium contra
ipsum Regem exaspiravit,) upon which a general Sedition was like to ensue. The
King was so highly provoked against him, that he caused it to be openly
proclaimed in his own Court, and in London, Action or Complaint against him, he
should come in, and be fully heard. One of his fellow Justices laid to his
charge, that for Money he acquitted and discharged one convicted of Notorious
Crimes; which so enraged the King, that he publicly declared, That if any one
should Kill Henry of Bath, he would pardon him. And he had been soon
dispatched, had not the prudence of John Mansel and the threats of the Bishop
of London, secured him from violence. But at length having made Earl Richard,
fol. 815. lin. 6. Earl Richard, stood his friend.
his Friend, through his powerful mediation, and the promise of a good Sum of
Money, he gained his Liberty. fol. 820. n. 30. And reconciled him to the King.
About the 21 of July following, he returned again to Court, and was reconciled
to the King upon the payment of 2000 Marks.

About this time fol. 815. n. 10. Ethelmar's Election confirmed by the Pope.

The Pope's unreasonable Message to to King Henry.


Ethelmarus the Kings Brother by the Mothers side, was by the Pope approved of
and confirmed in the Bishopric of Winster. At the same time the Pope sent to
the King to make a yearly of 500 Marks for the maintenance of the Duke of
Burgundy's Son, a Young Child.

This year Wales was fol. 816. n. 10. Wales receives the English Government
and Laws.
wholly subdued, and received the English Laws; and that part of it which
Borders upon Cheshire, was committed to the Government of Alan de Zouch, who
answered to the King 1100 Marks by the year.

fol. 817. n. 50. and fol. 818. lin. 1. The Pope violateth his own Indulgence
granted to the English.
the Pope sent fol. 817. n. 50. and fol. 818. lin. 1. The Pope violateth his
own Indulgence granted to the English.
John de Camecava his Nephew and Chaplain, into England with Letters to the
Abbat and Convent of St. Albans, commanding them to confer upon him the
Parsonage of Wendgrave, or any other Benefice that belonged to their Patronage,
if desired by the above Named John, when it became void; notwithstanding that
Indulgence or Privilege lately granted to the English, that Benefices of Roman
Clerc's, that should become vacant either by Cession, or Death, should not be
conferred on any Italians.

After that Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester fol. 825. n. 50. The Earl of
Leycesters success against the Rebellious Gascoigns.
had by various successes against the Rebels in Gascoigny broken their
strength, and had taken Chastellion, a Castle of great importance to them, and
their common refuge; He, together with his Wife, and fol. 828. lin. 1. He
returned into England with Guido the Kings third Brother.
Earl Guido de Lusignan, the Third Brother of the King by the Mothers side,
Landed at Dover in November. When the King had Notice of it, He commanded his
Great men and Citisens of London to receive his Brother with all solemnity, and
signs of joy. And after he had supplied his wants by the Kings bounty, he
returned home plentifully furnished with Riches.

A. D. 1252.
In the year 1252. King Henry kept his fol. 829. n. 10, 20, 30. Margaret the
Kings Daughter is married to Alexander King of Scots.
Christmas at York, Daughter Margaret being now of full age, was to be
solemnly married to Alexander the Young King of Scots. And for the more
glorious celebration of these Nuptials, there met a very great confluence of
the Clergy and Nobility, not only of England, and Scotland, but several from
France. On Christmas day King Henry Knighted Alexander King of Scots, and the
next day very soon in the Morning, He was Married to the Kings Daughter: Ibid.
n 50. He does Homage to King Henry for lands held of him. King Henry requires
his homage for the Kingdom of Scotland. The King of Scots Answer.
Then He did Homage to the King of England, for Lowthian and some other Lands
he held of him, and after that, It was demanded that he same Homage and
Fidelity to his Lord the King of England for the Kingdom of Scotland, as his
Predecessors had formerly done. To which the King of Scots replied, That he
came thither in a peaceable manner, and by Marriage of his Daughter, to unite
himself more close to him; but not prepared to give an Answer to such hard
Questions, for he had not consulted his Nobility about so difficult an Affair.
When the King heard this modest reply, he would not press him any further at
present; lest the designed Nuptial Solemnity should be thereby disturbed.

Soon after the Pope fol. 83. n. 50. The Pope sollicite's King Henry to assist
the King of France.
wrote to the King to hasten his preparation for the Holy Land, to prosecute
the Vow he lay under, and give what Aid and Relief he could to the King of
France. And if He would not go in person, not to hinder others, who stood
obliged by the same Vow. The King to show his readiness to answer the Popes
Jews, nor were his Christian Subjects spared.

In the Spring following the fol. 832. n. 30, 40, 50. The Gascoigns accusation
against the Earl of Leycester.

He pleads his innocence and Merits before the King. He is again sent into
Gascoigny.

He executes his Malice and revenge on his Accusers.


Noblemen of Gascoigny, sent over their complaints to the King against Simon
Earl of Leycester, accusing him of Unfaithfulness and Treachery. When the Earl
heard of what was laid to his charge, He went to the King and pleaded his
Innocence, and wondered he should give more Credit to his Rebellious Gascoigns,
than to him, who had given such proofs of his Fidelity. To whom the King
replied, That if he were Innocent, a strict inquiry would render him the more
Eminent; The Earl being calmed and humbled by this Answer of the Kings, was
again furnished with Money for his return into Gascoigny, which he hastened as
much as possible, that he might execute his Malice and revenge on those that
had accused him to the King: And He did it with such rigor at his return, that
all Gascoigny had fol. 833. lin. 4.
revolted from their Allegiance to the King of England, and sought out a New
Lord, could they have found any other Country to have sold their Wines with
such advantage to themselves.

Soon after the Great men of Gascoigny agreed to send 836. n. 10. The Gascoigns
repeat their complaints against him to the King.
solemn to the King of England, to acquaint him how his faithful Subjects in
that Country were inhumanely treated by the Earl of Leycester; and drew up the
charge or Accusation against him, which was Testified by the Seals of their
Cities, Great men, Castellans, and Bailiffs. And this was carried to the King
by the Archbishop of Bordeaux, and several Great men Ibid. n. 30.
who landed in England about Whitsuntide, and found the King at London, before
whom, they laid a lamentable fol. 838. n. 40, ^0. The King not very ready to
credit them.
complaint of the Treachery and Tyranny of the Earl of Leycester. The King
would not give a hasty belief to their complaints, because he had found them
Traitors when he was in Gascoigny; But waited till the return of Nicholas de
Molis, and Dr^g^ Valentin, whom he had sent thither to enquire into the Truth
of their accusation.

At their Return they fol. 836. n. 40, 50.
reported to the King, that they found some had been inhumanely treated by the
Earl, but, as they believed, according Merits: The Archbishop of Bordeaux, and
such have as came with him, required they might prove their Accusation, They
desire they may have a fair Trial against him.
and then have Judgment, and protested by Oath they would never obey the Earl,
and begged of the King to provide them a new Governor; but that was not
enquired into because the Earl was Absent: Then a day was appointed to examine
further into this Affair. Earl Richard and several other Great men side with
Montfort.
The Earl of Leycester had procured Earl Richard, and the Earls of Gloucester
and Hereford together with many other Noble and Great men, who prefixed the
Earl appeared, and so pleaded his Innocence, and vindicated himself, that he
stopped some of his Adversaries Mouths; and when the King saw that his Brother
Richard, favored the Earl, He also moderated his Anger he had conceived
against him. After long debates, and reflections upon each other, The Earl fol.
837. lin. 1. n 10, 20. Montfort urges his services were unrewarded.
repeated the Services he had done the Crown, and the promises and Grants the
King had made him, and the Expenses he had been at in his Service; and boldly
demanded of King performance of his Bargain, and recompense for his charges.
The King replied he would not stand to any promise made to one that was a
Traitor. The Earl told the King He lied, and were he not a King would make him
eat his Words. Adding in a most reproachful manner, and Questioning, Whither
any many could believe he was a Christian, or whether he had ever been at
Confession? The Kings Answer; and Montforts impudent reply.
The King replied, Yes. The Earl answered, what avails confession without
Penance and satisfaction? To which the King replied, repent of any one thing so
much, as that he had permitted him ever to enter into England, and that he had
given Honors and possessions to One so ungrateful. The King had forthwith
caused him to be apprehended and imprisoned, The Great men abet and support him.
but that he had Notice that some of the Great men would abet, and support him:
At length by the interposition of friends they parted from each other.

Soon after the King ordered the fol. 844. n. 40. S. Montfort Earl of Leycester
returned into Gascoigny.
Earl of Leycester to return into Gasco^gny, and seeing he was such a lover of
War, he might there find Employment enough, and also a reward answerable to his
Merits, as his Father had done before him. To which the Earl boldly replied,
That he would go, and not return till he had wholly subdued the Enemies, and
reduced the rebellious Subjects of an ungrateful Prince; and presently made all
preparation possible to hasten his Expedition.

Then the King called to him fol. 845. n. 10. A. D. 1252. Prince Edward made
Governor of Gascoigny. The Gascoigns do Homage to him.
the Archbishop of Bordeaux, and the Gascoigns that were with him, and those
about London, and declared that his Brother Richard, whom he had made Governor
of their Country, neither valued it, nor cared to see it; whereupon he gave
them Notice that he conferred it upon Prince Edward his Eldest Son. This much
rejoiced the Gascoigns, and forthwith all that were present did their Homage
and swore Fealty to him; the King reserving to himself Allegiance. Then after
they had received many gifts and presents from Prince Edward, they prepared for
their return into Gascoigny, Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. A Skirmish between the Earl
of Leycester and the Gascoigns.
where they found all pleased with their new Governor, and very busy in their
Preparations, both to receive and Countermine the Earl of Leycester; between
whom and the Gascoigns was shortly after a smart Skirimish, in which the Earl
very difficultly escaped being taken or killed; but being relieved, he soon
gained the advantage, and having taken five of their principal men Prisoners,
he put the rest to flight.

This year was a general fol. 846. n. 10. A general complaint against
Foreigners.
Complaint among all sorts of People, both Clercs, and Laics, of the
Oppressions and Exactions they suffered from Forreiners, and more especially
Poictovins; and when any complained he was injured, and sought remedy by Law,
the Poictovins would relpy, What did the Law, or Assise or Customs, of the
Kingdom concern them? (Quid ad nos de lege, de Assisis, vel regni hujus
consuetudinibus?) which very much fretted the Kings Natural Subjects, English
tread in the same steps.

On fol. 849. lin. 3. The Popes command to the English Clergy.
the 13th of October, (being the Feast of the Translation of St. Edward) all
the Prelates of England, (except the Bishop of Chester, who was infirm, and the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of Hereford, that were beyond Sea, and
the Archbishop of York) met the King at London; where was propounded to them (
Papale) the Popes Command, That the Ibid. n. 10, 20, 30.
Tenth of the whole Church, for three years should be set apart and paid
toward the defraying the Kings Expenses in his journey to the Holy Land. And
this not to be levied according to the old value of the Church Revenues, but
according to the new value, and strictest inquisition, and judgment of the
Collectors, or Kings Officers (ad inquisitionem strictissimam, et voluntatem
and arbitrium Regiorum Satellitum.) Moreover the Kings Agents offered, That if
they would pay down two years value Popes Precept, that of the third year, or
at least half of it, (although it was not granted in the Bull) should by the
Kings bounty be remitted. To all which the Bishop of Lincoln replied, The
Bishop of Lincoln's Reply.
That they proceeded upon a supposition that was not granted, Namely, that they
had consented to this cursed contribution (ad maledictam contributionem.) The
Elect of Winchester Replied to him, How can we gainsay both the Pope and the
King? The general opposition of the Bishops. The King ill^ resenteth it.
and moreover the French have consented to the like contribution. The Bishop of
Lincoln Answered, upon that very Account we ought Not to consent, for we see
the effect of that contribution; a Double act begets a Custom: With him agreed
the Bishops of London, Chichester, and Worcester, the Elect of Winchester, and
almost all Salisbury fluctuated.

When the King had received their Answer, he replied; They do not only oppose
the Pope, and their King, but also Jesus Christ, and the Universal Church. To
which the Bishops Answered, That if the Pope did but truly understand, Ibid.
n. 50.
how they had been impoverished and oppressed on every side, he would not think
it strange, that they should oppose this contribution. And when the King with
great importunity urged the Payment of it, f. 850. n. 30, 40. But could not
gain a compliance.
they answered him, That both the Archbishops of Canturbury, and York were
absent, and they could not do any thing without the consent of their Primate's.

At the same time the King f. 852. n. 10, 20.
demanded of the Citizens of London Twenty Marks of That is, 9 or 10 score
Marks in Silver.
Gold, and also to their prejudice continued the Westminster Fair for fifteen
days, and would not allow them to

Soon after he f. 853. n. 40, 50. The Great men called to consult about the
Gascoign Affairs.

They reflect upon the Gascoigns, and favor Leicester.


called his Great men together to consult with them about the Affairs of
Gascoigny: When they were met, they urged on the behalf of the Earl of
Leycester, That the Gascoigns were infamous and rebellious, as appeared by
their treating of their King when he was among them; and that they had
practiced Robery and depredations on Travelers; and that the Earl of Leycester
three years and a half, yet remaining in his Charter, by which the Government
of that Country was committed to him. The King was not at all pleased to find
his Great men so ready to excuse the Earl, for he determined to have dealt with
him as a Traitor: When the Earl had Notice of the Kings design, he replied;
fol. 854. l. 1.
I am very well satisfied that the King would destroy me to enrich some
Provincial, or Poictovin with my Earldom: And so the Council was dissolved, the
King being equally dissatisfied with the Secular Great as with the Prelates, so
as he thought to send for a Legate, who might force the Clergy by Apostolic
Authority to answer his Demands.

On the 11 of November f. 856. n. 40. Albert the Popes Notary his offer to Earl
Richard.
Albert the Popes Notary came into England to persuade Earl Richard, who was
known to be wealthy above all the Great men of the West, to accept the Popes
Offer of the Kingdoms of Apulia, Sicily and Calabria; neither was he unmindful
Bishops fol. 859. n. 40.
know that he was the Popes favorite, and that Presents, and Benefices would
be very grateful, and acceptable to him.

This year fol. 859. n. 40. The yearly revenue of the Italian and Foreign
Clercs.
the Bishop of Lincoln employed one of his Clercs to take an exact account of
the yearly Revenue that Italians and Foreign Clercs were possessed of in
England, and it was found to amount to above 70000 Marks by the Year, and the
Kings bare Revenue at the same time scarce reached to one third of that Sum.
Reditus Regis merus non ad ejus partem tertiam computatur.

Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester this year Paris f. 863, lin. 1. Montfort
resigns his Patent of the Custody of Gascoigny. Alphonso King of Castile his
pretenses to it.
Resigned his Chart or Patent of the Custody or Stewardship of Gascoigny, which
he had obtained of the King for five years: He purchasing him out of the
remainder of his Term, which was three years, and conferred that Government
upon his Son Edward. Alphonso King of Castile, so soon as he found the Earl of
Leicester had quitted his Charge, and it was left to the management of a Child,
Ibid. n. 10.
pretending a Grant of that Country from King Henry the Second, confirmed by
Richard the First King John. Many of the Nobility of Gascony left King Henry
and joined themselves to Him. The Citizens of Bordeaux that were faithful to
the King of England, gave him notice, That unless he sent them a quick and
powerful assistance, he would lose the whole Country. Ibid. n. 20.
The King was troubled he had removed Montfort who was gone into France, and
then past Recalling, and Earl Richard had been supplanted after he had obtained
a Patent of that Government, so as he behaved himself warily and silently.

In Lent many Reports came from f. 864. l. 4. The English Affairs in Gascoigny
in an ill condition.
Gascony, That Reole Castle and several others were taken from the English. The
King was startled at this News, and caused Proclamation to be made, and sent
his Append. n. 178.
Writs into every County, that all men should be Armed and Mustered according
to Ancient Custom, and that Watch should be kept in Cities and Towns. About the
Paris f. 864. n. 40.
middle of April the Gascoigns fell one upon another, invaded each others
Castles, made Captives

The King being in great streights, had Ibid. n 50 The King reduced to great
streights for want of Money.
taken Extraordinary Courses to raise Money, no ways agreeable to the people,
nor according to use and Custom, and yet wanted a very large Sum for the
Expedition he intended into the Holy Land: Thereupon called a f. 865. n. 40. A
Parliament called at London.

Ibid. n. 50. The Bishops offer the King Money, but upon conditions.


Parliament to consult about the Difficult Affairs of the Kingdom, fifteen Days
after Easter. (In Quindena Paschae tota Edicto Regio convocata Angliae
nobilitas convenit Londini, de arduis Regni negotiis simul cum Rege) The
Nobility met accordingly, and he demanded a very great supply of Money from
them: After much Controversy, f. 865. n. 40. A Parliament called at London.

Ibid. n. 50. The Bishops offer the King Money, but upon conditions.


the Archbishop of Canturbury, the Bishops of Carlisle, Salisbury, and the
Elect of Winchester, were sent to the King by the Bishops and all the Prelates,
to persuade and induce him, (as he had often promised upon Oath) to permit Holy
Church to enjoy all her Liberties, and especially those concerning Elections,
in which chiefly (as they said) Ecclesiastic Liberty Consisted, and if he
would Correct this Liberties contained in Magna Charta, they would strain hard
to satisfy his desires.

After f. 866. n. 20, 30. The business of the Cross encouraged. A Tenth of all
Church Revenues granted to the King for three years.

The Military men grant an Aid of three Marks for that year.


fifteen days Debate of this and other things, they came to this Resolution by
unanimous agreement, That the Kings Intentions of taking upon him the Cross
were Pious, and that they should not want their effect; nor should the state of
the Church or Kingdom receive Detriment, and therefore the Clergy Granted him
the Tenth of all Church Revenues for thr^e years for the Relief of the Holy
Land God, to be Received by the oversight of Great Men. And the Military men
gave him for that year three Marks of every Knights Fee. Upon which the King
promised in good Faith, and without Cavil, to observe the great Charter and
every Article contained in it: And the same which his Father King John had
Sworn to keep many years before, and which he in like manner had Sworn to at
his Coronation. Append. n. 179.
And then all that opposed, violated, diminished, or changed, the Liberties and
Customs, contained in the Charter of Liberties, were Excommunicated and
Anathematized on the third of May, (the Append. n. 18^. Magna Charta solemnly
confirmed.
Record says on the thirteenth of May) in the great Hall at Westminster, in the
presence and by the Assent of the King, Richard Earl of Cornwall his Brother,
the Earl of Norfolk Marshall of England, the Earl of Hereford, the Earl of
Oxford, the Earl of Warwick, and other chief men of the Kingdom, by the
Archbishops and Bishops with Candles lighted in their Hands, and the Paris f.
867. n. 10.
Charter which King John Granted was produced, and read King regranted; and
then they put out their Candles and threw them down smoking upon the Ground,
and every one wished, That such as Deserved that Sentence might so stink and
smoke in Hell.

The Council was no sooner Ibid. n. 30, 40. The Gascoigns desire assistance
from the King.
Dissolved, but the Gascoigns renewed their Suit to the King for assistance,
who promised to come to them in person with considerable Force about the Ibid.
f. 868. n. 20. The King prepares for an Expedition into Gascony.
first of June; Military Tenants to be ready with their Horses and Arms at
Portsmouth eight days after Trinity Sunday, with all ^ecessaries to pass the
Seas with him; he took up a 1000 Ships of English and Foreign Merchants, and
lay Wind-bound above a Month, to his great Expense and prejudice of his Affairs
beyond Sea. Ibid. n. 50
About the sixth of August, having appointed his Queen and Brother Richard to
Govern the Nation in his Absence, and left his Son Edward under their care, he
set Sail with a fair Wind, and on the 15th of f. 870. n. 30.
Bordeaux, and presently commanded Reole Castle to be Besieged, and by the End
of Summer, the King had f. 873. l. 1. His Success there.
recovered all his Castles in Gascony by Composition, the Defendants often
sending to the King of Spain for Relief, but never receiving any.

Yet the King not daring to rely upon the Ibid. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. He desires a
League and Friendship with Spain. The King of Spain quitteth all claim to
Gascony.
Fidelity of the Gascoigns, and suspecting they might revolt to the King of
Spain, Bishop of Bathe, and John Mansel his especial Clerc to him, to desire a
League and Friendship with him, and that he would yield to Marry his Sister to
his Son and Heir Prince Edward, to whom he had given Gascony. His Envoys
dispatched this Affair, and with his Favor and Friendship, brought back a Chart
Sealed with a Golden Seal, by which he quiet claimed whatever Right he had, or
could have in Gascony, by the Grant of Henry the Second, Richard the First, or
King John; and upon John Mansels persuading him into a good Opinion of the King
of Spain, he sent for his Queen and Prince Edward to come to him.

In the mean time the Earl of Leicester f. 879. n. 30. The Earl of Leicester
offers his Service to King Henry.
came with some Troops of his own, and offered his service to the King, which
when the Gascoigns understood, and that the King of Spain was reconciled to
him, by degrees they returned to due obedience, and the King

On St. Julians day, or the Twenty Seventh of January f. 881. n. 30. A. D.
1254. A Parliament Convened,
almost all the Great Men of England were Convened, and there came to that
Parliament, (ad Parliamentum venientes) on behalf of the King his three
Messengers from Gascony, the Earl Marshall, Roger Bigod, and Gilvert de
Segrave to declare his desires to the University of England. There were present
Richard Earl of Cornwall, and Queen, The Kings Message to them.
with all the Bishops of England, except those with the King. The Message
delivered in this Meeting from him was, That he was deceived in the King of
Spain, whom instead of a Friend, he had found an Enemy, and therefore required
a powerful assistance from them. What was done upon this Message best appears
by the Queens and Earl Richards Letter to the King to be found in the fol. 189.
n. 50.
Additaments of Mat. Paris.

The Sum of the Queens and Earl Richards Letters to the King.
They wrote they had received his Letters at Christmas before, and
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons of the Kingdom on the Morrow after St.
Hilary, to acquaint them with his Condition, and that the King of Castile was
coming against him into Gascony; and because of the shortness of the time, the
said great men could not meet at that Day, they called the same together at
Westminster fifteen days after that Feast ( i.e. the 27th of January;) That the
Earls and Barons, after they had heard the cause of their coming together,
offered to be ready at London three weeks after Easter, to march from thence to
Portsmouth, and Ship themselves, to relieve him in Gascony, if the King of
Castile invaded that Country; That the Archbishop of Canturbury, the Elect of
Winchester, Bishops of London and Worcester promised they would personally come
to him with a good strength; That the other Bishops and Abbats promised a large
supply in Money: At last Earl Richard signified to him in the same Letter that
he would not fail him of a supply answerable to his Necessity and his own
Honor, if the King of Castile did Kingdom in good Hands by advice of the Queen,
and bring her and the Prince with him: But they would not Paris Hist. f. 882.
n. 10.
believe the King of Castile had any such Design, and so the Council was
Dissolved without effect.

Fifteen Ibid. f. 887. lin. 1. and n. 10. The King renews his demands to his
Great men.
days after Easter the Great Men were called again to London, when the King
upon the same Reasons, made the same Demands, and received the same Answer; for
then their suspicions that King of Castile had no Design against King Henry,
was confirmed by Simon Monfort Earl of Leicester, who was just come to them
from beyond Sea.

Notwithstanding the Ibid. f. 889. n. 30. The Queen and her two Sons pass over
Sea.
Queen had received order from the King to the contrary, yet she with her two
Sons Edward and Edmund, and her Uncle the Archbishop of Canturbury, Shipped
themselves at Portsmouth on the 28th of May, and arrived at Bordeaux the last
of the same Month.

Not long after their Landing, f. 890. n. 20. Prince Edward married to Alienor
the King of Spains Sister.

What Settlement the King made upon Prince Edward his Son.


Prince Edward was sent in great Alphons King of Spain, where when he had
Married his Sister Alienor he was Knighted by him: At his Return with his Bride
to his Father, he brought with him the King of Spains Release or Grant of
Gascony (before mentioned,) and King Henry forthwith settled upon him and his
Wife, Gascony, Ireland, Wales, Bristol, Stamford, and Grantham. And from that
time the King began to prepare for his Voyage into England, Ibid. n. 30 The
Kings expenses in his late Expedition.
when upon stating the Account, it appeared his Expenses, in those Expeditions
had been Twenty Seven Hundred Thousand Pounds and more, besides the Lands,
Wardships and Rents he had given to Strangers, and besides thirty thousand
Marks he had given to, and expended upon his Poictovin half Brothers.

About this time Master Albert returned to Rome, and f. 892. n. 30. Albert
acquainteth the Pope on what conditions Earl Richard would accept the Kingdoms
of Sicily and Apulia.

The Pope offers them to Edmund King Henry's Second Son.


certified the Pope, That the proposals made to Richard Earl of Cornwall,
concerning the Kingdom of Sicily and Apulia, would take Effect. He Pope
Security and Pleges for what he should undertake; Money also toward his charge
of subduing that Kingdom, and some of his Castles for places of retreat. Upon
this Report f. 893. n. 30.
the Pope sent private Messengers to King Henry, and offered him that Kingdom
to the use of his Son Edmund, who very forwardly embraced the seeming favor,
and received it with much satisfaction, and to make way for him, Innocent the
4th had accused f. 893. n. 30.
Conrad Son of Frederic the King, of Heresy, Murder, and other great Crimes.
To which accusation he gave a very clear Paris Additament. f. 192 n. 50.
Answer, yet Dyed not long after, to the great Joy of the Pope, who presently
subdued almost all Apulia: But both Sicilian and Apulian Nobility, rather than
be under his Government, set up Paris Hist. f. 893. n. 50. and f. 897. n. 40.
Manfred a Natural and Legitimated Son of Frederick, and did Homage, and Swear
Allegiance to him.

King Henry having made Peace with the King of Spain, and settled Gascony, asked
leave of the King of France to Ibid. f. 896. lin. 4.
pass through his Kingdom, which was Granted. The King of England Ibid. f. 898.
n. 50. and 899, 900, etc. A glorious interview between the Kings of England and
France.
had with him 1000 brave Horse and Noble Riders, besides Sumpter Horses and
other Carriages. There was with him his Queen, and her Sister the Countess of
Cornwall, and the King of France with his Queen, and her other Sisters, the
Countesses of Anjou and Provence; and the Mother of them all, the old Countess
of Provence, met them at Char^res. Paris, where for Eight Days they remained
together in great Splendour, and with mighty Entertainments, after which time
the King of France brought him one days Journey toward the Sea. Ibid. f. 901.
n. 10, 20, 30, ^0 A. D. 1255. King Henry returns into England.
When the King of England came to Bologn he found the Wind Cross, so as he was
forced to stay there on Christmas day, which was Friday; on the Sunday
following, the Wind came fair, and he Landed at Dover, where his Brother
Richard Earl of Cornwall met him, with many of the Nobility, the Bishops also,
and the Abbats and Priors, all making him great and Rich Presents in Gold and
Silver; which went toward the Payment of his Debts which were great.

Fifteen days after Easter, f. 904. n. 40, 50. All the* Nobility of England
Assembled at London. The King acquainteth them with his necessities and Debts.

Their Answer.


all the Nobility of England, as well Ecclesiastics as Seculars met at London,
so as there had not been seen Populous Multitude: In Quindena Paschae
Convenerunt Lond^ni omnes Nobiles Angliae, tam viri Ecclesiastici quam
Seculares, ita quod nunquam tam populosa Multitudo ibi antea visa fuerit
Congregata; The King acquainted this great Convention with his Debts, letting
them know, without their assistance he could not pay them, and therefore
earnestly Requested an Aid sufficient. They were very Querulous, recounting old
Grievances, and withal, demanded that the Justiciary, Chancellor and Treasurer
might be chosen by the Common Council of the Kingdom, as had been justly and
anciently So says the Mo^k, but neither he nor any of his Brethren, if then
demanded, could have given two Instances of the Practice.
used (sicut ab antiquo Consuetum and justum,) and likewise that they might not
without notorious Faults be removed, but by the Common Consent and Deliberation
of the Kingdom, which the King not Granting, Ibid. f. 905. l. 6.
They Generally declared to the King, that Business should be deferred until
Michaelmass, and the Council was Dissolved.

This Summer f. 906. n. 10, 20, 30, 40. Cardinal Octavian defeated by Manfred
King of Sicily.
Pope Alexander the Fourth, following the steps Predecessor Innocent, in
prosecuting the Business of Sicily and Apulia, sent Cardinal Octavian with an
Army of sixty thousand men to destroy the City of Nocera, and Manfred that was
then in it; who upon their approach to it, Marched out with a great Body of
men, and utterly Defeated Octavian and the Popes Army: The News of this Defeat
put the Pope into great Disorder and Confusion, seeing the Church had promised
the Kingdom of Sicily and Apulia to the King of England (who as all the Writers
of this time Report paid Son Edmund, Ibid. n. 40.
to whom the Pope had sent a Ring of Investiture, by the Bishop of Bononia, who
was then upon his Journey toward England.

The King having f. 908. n. 20, 30, 40, 50. and f. 909. n. 10. King Henry goes
into Scotland to give remedy to his Daughters complaints of her hard usage.
received many Complaints from his Daughter the Queen of Scots, of her hard
usage in that Nation, went to Edinburgh to Visit her; and when he came upon the
Borders of Scotland, sent before him Richard Earl of Gloucester, and John Mansel
his Clerc, to see how things were, and to inquire and examine, whether Robert
Ros and John Bailiol (who had been with others appointed Governors of the King,
Queen, and Kingdom) were true: At first Robert Ros withdrew himself, but
afterward appeared, and with John Bailiol submitted to a Fine for their
Miscarriages: And then the King and Queen being put into such a Condition as
they liked, King Henry returned into England.

Peter Egeblank Bishop of Hereford, and the Queens Uncle f. 910. n. 20, 30, 40.
Annal. Burton. f. 348. A. D. 1255. Peter Egeblanke Bishop of Hereford his
project to supply the Kings wants. Paris ut supra, 5. n. 50.
observing the King uneasy by reason of his Debts, and for want of Money, had
a strange Invention for a supply, with which he acquainted him, and with the
Kings leave went to Rome toward the end of Summer to perfect his Design, [5]
where he found the Pope likewise in Dumps, for the great Debts he had
contracted, (which he said the King of England was obliged to Discharge, under
the pain of being disinherited) and the ill posture of the Church affairs. He
comforted the Pope, with a way he had to help him; and by the assistance of
some [5] Cardinals, by whose advice the Pope persued the projects of his
Predecessor, who could bend him any way, he obtained from him what he pleased.
His device was to Forge Obligations from as many Bishops, Abbats, and Priors as
he pleased, in the Sum of 500, 600, or 700 Marks or more, Ibid. f. ^11. lin. 1.
to this or that Siena, or Florentine or rather Usurer, for Money pretended to
be Borrowed of them, which was Append. n. 181.
expended at Rome, about Transacting the affairs of their particular Churches.

About the Feast of St. Edward, (the 13th of October) the Bishop of Bononia
came to the King, and brought the Ibid. f. 911. n. 50. Edmund the Kings Son
invested with the Kingdom of Sicily and Apulia.
Ring which the Pope sent to his Son Edmund, with which, in a numerous
multitude of Great Men, he solemnly Invested him with the Kingdom of Sicily and
Apulia, with which (says the Monk) the King was as much pleased, as if he had
received the Homages of the Sicilians and Apulians, or had been possessed of
their Cities and Castles.

About this time Pope Alexander f. 913. n. 20, 30. The Pope sent Rustand a
Gascoign into England.
sent Master Rustand a Gascoign, a Lawyer, and one of his Subdeacons into
England, giving him and the Archbishop of Canturbury power to gather a Append.
n. 182. The Powers granted to him and the Archbishop of Canturbury.
Tenth in England, Scotland and Ireland; to the use of the Pope or King
Letters, Indulgencies, form of Words, Cause or Thing whatsoever. He also gave
them power to absolve the King from his Vow of undertaking the Expedition of
the Cross to Jerusalem; yet so as he should change it into an Expedition into
Apulia against Manfred Enemy to the Church of Rome: and to this he was Sworn by
the Bishop of Bononia; and to draw him on, the Pope Append. n. 183.
gave him all Moneys in England, which were to be collected toward the
Maintenance of the Expedition to the Holy

Upon the Feast of St. Luke (or 18th of October) most of the great men of
England were at Westminster; Paris ut supra, n. 40, 50. The King desires his
Brother and Great Men either to grant or lend him money, but could prevail with
neither.
amongst whom the King first bespoke his Brother Richard, earnestly pressing
him to give him an Aid in Money, to whom the Pope also wrote, supplicating him
to lend his Brother forty thousand, either Marks or Pounds, (not said what)
that he might show a pious Example to others. The Earl was neither moved by the
Prayers of the King or Pope, and for that especially he had undertaken an
expedition into Apulia, being wheadled by the Whispers of the Italians, without
his Advice, or the assent of his Baronage. When he accosted others about the
same matter; They answered, That then all had not been Summoned according to
the Tenor of their great Charter, and therefore they would then Ibid n. 40.
make no Answer, or Grant any Aid without their Peers which were absent. The
Parliament (says the Monk) by many fictitious Delays, (fictis occasionibus) was
continued a Month, while the great men had emptied their Purses at London, who
then returned home, having done nothing.

A. D. 1256.
On the fifth Sunday in Lent, the Archbishop of Messina, before the Prelates,
Clergy, and Laity, Annal. Burton. f. 372.
Convened in a great Multitude, in the Chapter House at Westminster, propounded
to them the Business Sicily, for which he was sent hither by the Pope, and
endeavored by his Letters, and own persuasions, to induce them to undertake
the prosecution of it with the King; after some Days Deliberation, the Clergy
and Laity drew up their Reasons against it, and delivered them to the King and
Archbishop in French and Latin.

The Reasons of the Great Men against the King, Ibid. Reasons of the Great men
against the Kings undertaking an expedition into Sicily.
Magnatum contra Regem.
FIrst, the Distance of that Kingdom from England.

Also the passage through the Territories of Potent men that were Enemies to
the King.

Also the possession of and other places by the Enemy, which were passes to
other parts of the Kingdom.

Also the Confirmation of a Prince in the Kingdom.

Also his Confederation and Amity with the Natives and Neighbors.

Also the possession of almost all the Cities, Castles, and Fortresses against
him.

Also the great Revenue of the Kingdom.

Also the great Charge the King had then been at, and had received no
advantage, but rather loss.

Also the vast and necessary expenses yet to come for the payment England
sufficed not.

Also the Destruction and Impoverishing of the Kingdom of England, by many and
frequent Iters or Circuits of Justices, and by Extorsions, and many sorts of
prises, and other oppressions.

Also the small stock of Money the King and his Son were furnished with for
this Attempt, the Poverty of the Inhabitants of England, both Clergy and Laity.

Also the Troubles of Gascony, Ireland and Scotland.

Also the Incursions of the Welsh.

Also the Diminution of the power of the Kingdom of England, in Counsel, Money,
and Men, which was like to happen by Richard Earl of Cornwall's leaving of it.

Also the King of France, and the Great men of Neighbor Nations, especially
such as heretofore had Lands in England, would be encouraged to attempt upon
it, if for the Design of Sicily, it was

Also we will not, nor do we agree, That the King take upon him the Burden of
this Expedition, lest it may seem he delivered himself into the Hands of his
Enemies by our consent. Neither can, or will we undertake the Burden of the
said Affair with the King, for the Reasons aforesaid, and for the great Hazard,
and vast expenses, which we can never hope to bear or overcome.

Also for the difficult and grievous conditions imposed upon the King, upon his
acceptance, and first undertaking of this Business, by reason whereof, after
infinite Charge and Labor, he may easily be laid aside, or As holding it in
Feud of the Church.
fall from the right of that Kingdom.

The Kings Annal. Burton. f. 374.
Demands.
WHereas the King by the Common Advice of the whole English Church upon the
Grant of the Kingdom of Sicily to his Son Edmund, had obliged himself to the
Pope, The Kings demands for that Expedition.
to pay all past and future Charges of acquiring that Kingdom, he desired that
the whole Clergy and Laity (universus Clerus and populus in totum, etc.) would
become obliged for the whole, or at least for the interest or penalties for the
whole, to which he had bound himself.

Also he Demanded of the Clergy, That the Tenths of all their Benefices might
be continued for five years, according to the new Taxations, Append. n. 184.
extended value) only necessary expenses deducted.

Also he demanded the first years profits of all Benefices that should become
void for five years.

Also he required half the profits of the Benefices of Non-Residents.

Benefices of privileged persons (such as had Sine Cures, or had Dispensations
to hold Livings without performing service) except one which the privileged
person might choose.

Also he desired all uncertain Legacies, such as were indistinctly given
without naming any particular Charity, and left to be disposed of, according to
the Discretion of the Priest, Confessor, or Ordinary.

Reasons of the Bishops and Clergy against the Kings Demands.
Annal. Burton. f. The Bishops Answers to the Kings Demands.
the Kings Demands cannot take effect, because so great a Sum of Money has
been already unprofitably spent, and utterly lost.

Also we were not required to contribute to the payment of that Money from the
Beginning, nor are we any ways bound; nor did the King contract or make this
Bargain with the Pope, by our Consent either Tacit or Express, yea we knew
nothing of it, and therefore we neither will nor ought to be urged to the
Consummation of of this Business.

Also when we have nothing but the Patrimony of Christ, whose Divine Law we are
bound to give to the Poor, we cannot give to Kings, unless we may mock God, and
convert Ecclesiastic Goods into prohibited uses, which for no reason we will or
ought to do.

Also the whole Kingdom suffices not for such a Burden, although Gold might
be made of Dirt, ( etiamsi de Luto fabricaretur A^rum) especially since the
Kingdom of Sicily is inexpugnable, and inaccessible to our Army; and although
we might have stipendiary and hired Faith might justly be suspected.

Also if the English Militia should be conducted to those parts, with so much
Money as was necessary for them, we might fear the neighbor Kingdoms would
invade ours, and so both Kingdoms might be lost; that in possession, and that
which is desired: Especially when as the King of Romans that is to be ( Rex
Romanorum futurus) will carry a good part of our Militia with him.

Also we see the Inroads of the Welsh, and it is most necessary to defend our
own Kingdom, rather than to look to obtein another.

Also it is said there is a Composition between the Church and Manfred,
concerning the Kingdom of Sicily, and all that belongs to it, as Public fame
relates and Witnesses.

Yet notwithstanding these Reasons, the Clergy being Canonically admonished by
Rustand, they submitted, and firmly Append. n. 186.

They at length submit to the Kings desires.

The Pope claims a great Debt of the King.

Hard conditions put upon the King by the Pope.


promised to obey the Popes Commands, which was to do what the King desired,
That he might be furnished with Money to pay him what he demanded, as expended
in the Reduction of Sicily and Apulia.

The Debt the Pope claimed of the King, besides what Money he had received of
him, was 135000 Marks principal, and 540 for Interest, Michaelmass then next
coming, before which time also the King was either to come in person, or send a
General with Competent Forces; and the whole Contract, Bargain and Concession
were void, nor was he to come or send thither after that time; and yet
nevertheless, the King was to be, and remain Excommunicated, and his whole
Kingdom put under Ecclesiastic Interdict. The fear of the Execution of which
Sentences, had such effect upon the King, as he prayed further time of the Pope
for performance of the Contract; And Hard Conditions imposed upon him; he
resolved to prosecute this unfortunate undertaking, against the sense of his
Council and Nobility: All which matter of Fact is very evident from his Append.
n. 185, ^86.
Letters to the Pope and some of the Cardinals.

According to the Bishop of Herefords Contrivance of binding Abbeys,
Monasteries, Prelates, and Churches to Foreign Merchants before mentioned: The
Mat. Paris f. 924. l. 6. A. D. 1256. The Bishop of Herefords project put in
execution by the Pope.
Abbat and Convent of St. Albans on Palm Sunday received Letters from the Pope,
to let them know That they were to pay 500 Marks to certain Merchants to whom
they were bound in that Sum, within a Month, otherwise they were to
understand Monasteries, that were also thrust under the Yoke of of
Merchant-Vsurers; And that the Exactors might more effectually extort the
Money, they said it was for the Kings use, who was preparing for his Voyage of
Peregrination or Pilgrimage, as then they called all Military Expeditions to
the Holy Land.

Fifteen days after Easter, Ibid. n. 10
the Bishops in great perplexity met at London to Answer Master Rustand upon
See before the Bishops resolution.
his and the Kings Demands, who at first by reason of their disagreement, were
about to Break up and Depart; but being encouraged by the Barons, they denied
Rustand, and would not contribute any thing to the King from their See Append.
n. 184.
Baronies.

Abbat of Westminster, and Master Rustand with the Elect of Salisbury, Mat.
Paris f 946. n. 30. and Cl. 40. H. 3. M. 9 intu^.
passed beyond Sea upon the Kings private affairs in the beginning of June; and
the Bishops of Ibid.
Bath and Rochester went afterward for the composing and extirpating secular
Discords and Dissensions.

In August the f. 930. n. 40, 50. The King and Queen of Scots come into England
to visit their Parents.
King and Queen of Scots came into England, and gave their Parents a Visit at
Woodstock, from thence they came London with a mighty Train, so as both Courts
were constreined to take two different Roads, the whole Country being
overspread with the great appearance of Nobility, Gentry, and their Retinues.
On the 15th of the same Month when they came to London, their reception was as
great as their Retinue, and Expectation, by all Demonstrations of welcome in
that City and Westminster.

The f. 934. n. 10, 20. The Priors and Convents of Durham and Giseburn opposed
the Popes exaction.
Prior and Convent of Durham, and the Prior and Convent Giseburn, stood out
against the Knavish Obligation, and Popes Suspension, and would not bow their
Knees to Baal. (licet omnes fere alii genua Baal incurvarunt) But at last
having none to assist them, they submitted to the persecution of the Roman
Court, and Merchant Usurers.

This year on the 9th of October f. 935. n. 40, 50. Sheriffs of Counties Cited
by the King to pay their Rents into the Exchequer.
the King came to the Exchequer while the Barons were sitting, and with his own
mouth pronounced Sherif that did not appear eight days after Michaelmass, and
brought his Money, as well Farm-Rent, as Amerciaments, and other Debts, should
be amerced the first day five Marks, the second day ten Marks, the third day
fiteen Marks, and the fourth day he was to be grievously Fined if absen^, (and
quarta sit Redimendus si absens fuerit.) And the King pronounced the same thing
against Cities that had Liberties, And also ^ayliffs of Cities.
and answered at the Chequer by their own Bailiffs: So as the fourth day they
were to lose their Liberties, if they appeared not as the Sheriffs were bound
to appear. And all the Sheriffs of England were Amercied each five Marks, All
that had ten pounds by the year forced to be Knighted.
because they did not Distrein every one that had ten pounds a year in their
several Counties, to come to the King and be Knighted; but they obtained
Respite of the King according to his Writs to them Directed.

The Bishop of Ely being Dead, f. 936. l. 1. Henry de Wengham recommended by
the King to be Bishop of Ely.

The Convent refuse him, and choose Hugh Balesham.


the King by his Letters recommended Henry de Weingham the Keeper of his Seal,
to the Election of that Convent, and sent special Messengers to that purpose.
The Convent complied not with the Kings Request, but chose Hugo de Balesham
their Prior, Bishop. The King would not accept him, and caused John Waleran, to
whom he had committed the Custody of the Bishopric, to cut down the Woods, and
Sell the Stock upon their Lands.

The Exactors or Usurers being Ibid. n. 10. The Church of St. Albans
interdicted.
severe upon the Church of St. Albans, about the Feast of Simon and Jude; (the
28th of October) it was under Interdict fifteen days, not that it wanted great
privileges, but that the Detestable Addition of (non obstan^e) annulled the
pious Concessions and Authority of all the Holy Fathers: Therefore the Convent
rather chose to comply with an injust and violent Sentence, than be Guilty of
Contempt.

The Ibid. f. 937. l. 4. The Welsh take Arms and invade the English borders.
Welsh having been injuriously used, and the Government of their Country Sold
to such as would give most for it; and at length oppressed above measure, by
Geofrey de Langley Knight, the Kings Exactor and Assessor of Taxes, about the
Feast of All Saints took Arms for the Defense of their Country and Laws, and
invaded the English Borders or Marches, and destroyed the Tenants of Prince
Edward, whom as yet they had not acknowleged to be Richard, that he might raise
such a Force as to repress their incursions, and enter their Country to make
Reprisals, but the whole Winter was so wet and Stormy, and the places whether
the Welsh had retired so Boggy and impassible, that the English could not
attempt them, so that this Expedition proved ineffectual, and the Princes
Expenses in vain.

About this Time Ibid. n. 40 The Kings kindness to his Brothers.
the King commanded the Chancellor that he Writs which might be prejudicial to
his Brother Richard, or to Richard Earl of Gloucester, Peter of Savoy, or any
other of his Brothers, which, says the Monk, was manifestly contrary to the Law
and Peace of the Kingdom. Quod manifest patet esse omni Juri and paci Regni
contradictorium.

The n. 40, 50. Several ways made use of by the King to raise money.
King at the same time being necessitated for Money, forced such as he thought
fit, to be made Knights, or Fine to be excused; Amercied, and Taxed all Lands
that held in Serjeanty. He also caused Inquiry to be made into Liquid Measures
of Wine and Ale, and dry measures of Grain, as Gallons and Bushels, and also
into Weights, and grievously punished those whose Measures and Weights answered
not the Standard; by which means he raised much Money, but lessened the
Affections both of Clergy and Laity toward him.

Yet this course could not preserve him from extreme poverty, for he had Ibid.
f. 938. lin. 1. etc. The Kings great Debts.
borrowed so much Money of the Popes Merchant-Vsurers, for the promotion of his
Son Edmund to the Kingdom of Sicily,

At Christmas Ibid. f. 939. n. 50. Earl Richard elected King of the Romans.
in the year 1257. The King was at London, A. D. 1257.
where came to him several of the Great Men of Germany, who Declared, That
Richard Earl of Cornwall was rightfully chosen, by unanimous Consent, King of
Almain, or of the Romans.

Fifteen days Annal. Burton. f. 376.
after Easter, the King held a Parliament at Westminster, to Treat of the The
same with that of Sicily.
Business of Apulia, in which the Archbishop of Messina was present, and then
and there the King received the same Answer from the Clergy and Laity, he had
the year before.

From this Parliament Earl Richard went toward Germany. He Ibid. and f. 377. He
goes to Germany, and is Crowned King at Aken.
Yarmouth, and took Ship there, with all his Retinue, on the Sunday after St.
Mark; and upon Tuesday following, being the first of May, he landed at Dort,
from whence on Ascension-day, he came to Aken, and on the same day was Crowned
King, and his Countess Queen* of the Romans, with great splendour, in the
presence of the Archbishops of Colon, Ments, and many Earls, Barons, and
Noblemen, and was placed in the Seat of Charles the Great, with the usual
Solemnity.

It is reported by f. 942. n. 10. The Great Riches and Treasure of Richard King
of the Romans.
Mat. Paris, That this King and Earls Treasure was so great, that he could
spend an hundred Marks every day for Ten years together, not accounting the
Revenues he received from England and Germany.

The Welsh Ibid f. 949. n. 50. The Welsh ravage and destroy the English Borders.
this year plundered and burnt the English borders, Earl of Gloucester, and
remained triumphant in those parts. Ibid. f. 951. n. 56. The King raises all
his Military Service to repress them.
About the Feast of St. Mary Magdalene, or 22 of July, the King marched into
Wales, with his whole Military Service, which he had summoned by his Writ, to
repress their incursions; who having notice of his coming, fled to the
Mountains, and inaccessible places, carrying with them their Wives and
Children, and driving their Cattle thither, they Plowed up their Meadows,
destroyed their Mills, Ibid. f. 953. n. 40, 50. Part of the Army ba^led.
South Wales, by the treachery of Griffin de Brun (who was a Welchman that
served the King) made an Assault upon part of the Kings Army, and Baffled it.

The King, with the residue of his Military Men, making a great Army, marched
toward Ibid. f 954. n. 30, 40. The Welsh offer to submit upon Terms, but are
refused.
Chester, and burnt all the Corn in the borders thereabouts. The Welsh offer to
submit, so as they might enjoy their Laws and ancient Liberties, and not be
subject to Prince Edward, or any but the King himself, who refused the Terms;
and toward Ibid. f. 955. n. 40.
Winter made a shameful Retreat into England, having spent much Treasure, and
done nothing.

About Ibid. f. 956. lin. 1. The Elects of Ely and St. Edmunds-Bury return from
Rome.
Michaelmass this year, the Elects of Ely and St. Edmunds-Bury returned from
Rome, where they had spent, given, and promised vast sums of Money for
obtaining their Rights, by which the Historian (I suppose) means their
Confirmations. Electus Eliensis and Electus Ecclesiae Sancti Edmundi, Tantam
pecuniam in Curia Romana dando and promittendo effuderunt pro jure suo
obtinendo, ut in considerando Thesauri Quantitatem, poterunt prudentes
admirari, And then it was that a new Law was made at Rome, That every Elect,
whether Bishop, Abbat, or Prior should come thither and compound for this
Confirmation. Ecce Ibid. l. 6.
Statutum Romae cruentissimum quo oportet Quemlibet Electum personaliter
transalpinare, and in suam laesionem, imo Eversionem, Romanorum loculos
impraegnare.

Soon after Ibid. f. 958. n. 20.
that time the Bishop of Worcester, the Elect of Winchester, the Abbat of
Westminster, the Earl of Leicester, Earl Hugh Bigod, the Marshall Peter of
Savoy, and Robert Waleran, were sent to the King of France to demand the
Restitution of King Henry's Rights in Normandy, King Henry's Rights in Normandy
and France demanded.
and the other parts of France, but returned without success.

A. D. 1258.
In the year 1258. and Forty second of Henry III, he kept a magnificent
Christmas at Mat. Paris. f. 959. lin. 5. The Bishop of Ely, and Abbat of Bury
Confirmed by the Pope.
London: and about that time, notwithstanding King and Archbishop could make
at Rome, The Bishop of Ely, and Abbat of Saint Edmunds-Bury returned from
thence Confirmed. So as (says the Monk) the King using ill advice every day,
lost somewhat of his Royal Dignity, and studied how to damnify the Church.

The Ibid. n. 30.
Noblemen sent by the King to the King of France, to Demand Normandy and his
other Rights in that Kingdom, were Brothers and other Great Men much opposed
them, so as they returned as they went, on the 6 th. of January, or Twelfth-day.

About this time, Ibid. n. 50. The Welsh destroy some of Prince Edward's Towns.
the Welsh despairing of Peace, and distrusting the Kings Mercy, seized some
good Towns of Prince Edwards, and other Great Men's in the borders of Wales, and
plundered them, and afterward burnt them, and killed all the People.

It was about this f. 960. n. 30. The Pope is angry with the King for his
Excesses.
time also, that the Pope was in great passion with the King, because he
observed not his repeated Promises, when he had bound himself (says the Monk)
under pain of losing his Kingdom to correct his Excesses: and at the instance
of Lawrence Bishop of Rochester, and many others, He propounded after many
fruitless Admonitions to Excommunicate him, He threatens to proceed to
Ecclesiastic Censures, but is appeased.
Interdict his Kingdom, and proceed further as he should see cause. The King in
great Confusion sent him Five thousand Marks to bring him into temper, and put
off the Sentence for a time, with which, and the Kings earnest Petitions he was
satisfied.

In Mid-lent Ibid. n 40 Rustand accused and removed from his Dignity and power.
Master Rustand returned from Rome, Deprived Rivals, That he was too Rapacious,
and had (laying aside the fear of God) gained many great Rents and Estates. And
that he might obtain the Kings favor in acquiring of them, he affirmed he was
born at Bordeaux, and promised, as the Kings Liege and Natural Subject,
effectually to procure the Dominion of the Kingdom of Apulia, and transact
other Business for him at the Court of Rome, and otherwhere; with such
flattering Promises he circumvented the easy King (Regis simplicitatem
circumveniens), so as he was endowed with great Revenues; yet was sent for to
Rome, and severely chidden by the Pope, being hardly restored to his former
Favor; however, he was removed from the Dignity and Power he had enjoyed.

Soon after, or before his departure in the week before Easter, Master Ibid. n.
50. Herlot the Popes Notary comes into England with great power.
Herlot, or Arlot, the Popes Notary, and special Clerc, came England, furnished
with great power, who though he was not styled a Legate, yet wanted not his
greatness.

On the 14 th of March, King Henry Cl. 42. Hen. 3. M. 11. Dors.
Summoned all that ought him Service, both Clergy and Laity, to meet him at
Chester eight days before Midsummer, to march into Wales against Lewelin the
Son of Griffin, and his Accomplices, who had seized on, All that ought the King
service, summoned to meet at Chester to repress the Welsh.
Edward, and other his Liege Subjects, against the Homage and Fealty they had
sworn to him.

The Welsh made these incursions at this time upon Paris f. 963. n. 30. What
moved the Welsh to Rebel at this time.
Confidence the King would be diverted by the Scots: For whereas, that King
upon Marriage with King Henry's Daughter, had put himself and Kingdom Cl. 42.
Hen. 3. M. 11. Dors.
under his Protection and Government, until Counselors and Curators King Henry
had set over him, and detained him against his Will: For repressing of this
Insolency and Rebellion, the King issued out Ibid. and M 10.
Summons on the 17 th of January before, to all his Military Tenants of the
North, especially those of Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Northumberland, to march
with Horse and Arms, and all their Force into Scotland, with such as he should
send to them.

After Paris ut supra n. 40. A Parliament called at London.

The Kings demands rejected by the Great men.


Hoke Tuesday (That is Tuesday fortnight after Easter-Tuesday) a Parliament was
convened at London, Post diem Martis, quae vulgariter Hoke-Daie appellatur
factum est Parlamentum Londini, wherein the King pressed with the Affairs of
the Kingdom of Apulia, (concerning which, Master Herlot was sent to urge him to
a direct and positive Answer) Demanded a very great Sum of Money which the Pope
had upon his Request obliged himself to pay to the Merchants. The Great Ibid.
f. 965. n. 50.
Men stiffly denied to assist him with Money.

And in this Ibid. f. 968. n. 10, 20. The Barons complaints against the King.
Parliament there arose great Heats and Contentions between the King and Barons,
who made great complaints against him, That he nighted the Keys and Power of
the Church, and did not observe the Tenor of his Great Charter; That he had
Dignities and Riches his half Brothers, against Law and Right, as if they had
been the Natural People of the Land, and would not su^^er any Writ to issue out
of Chancery against them; That although the pride of his Brothers and other
Poictovins were intolerable, Montfort appeals to the University, and upbraideth
the King.
yet William de Valentia exceeded them all. Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester
making his advantage upon these Debates and Wranglings, complained very
heartily not to the King but to the University, calling for Justice; And up-
braided the King Strangers, and despised and wasted his own People, to the
Subversion of the whole Kingdom, by which means he became unable to Repel the
injuries of the inconsiderable Welsh.

These Heats and Wranglings Ibid. n. 20. The Parliament Adjourned to Oxford.
continued until the Sunday after This year 1258. and 42 of Hen. III.
Easter Day was March 24. and Hock-Tuesday was April 10. Ascension-Day was May
2. Whitsun Tuesday May 14. So that St. Barnaby's Day, or 11th of June was just
Twenty eight days after that, upon which the Parliament was to meet at Oxford by
Adjournment.
Ascension-day, when the Parliament was adjourned unto St. Barnaby's-day, to be
holden at Oxford; but before the Adjournment Ascension-day, or Second of May,
the Barons promised Append. n. 188. The Barons Proposals to the King.
That if he would reform the state of the Kingdom, according to their Advice,
and that the Pope would make the conditions about the affair of Sicily The same
with that of Apu^ia. The King yields to them.
more easy, so as it might be prosecuted with effect, They would then endeavor
to procure him a Common Aid, or Tax for that purpose. And the King agreed, That
before Christmas next coming, the State of the Kingdom should be ordered by
them and the Popes Legate, if in England. And for the performance Popes Power,
so as he might compel him to it which way he pleased by Ecclesiastic Censure,
and caused his Son Edward to Swear, That he would observe and keep what he had
Granted.

Moreover, he Append. n. 189. What the King Granted to the Barons.
Granted at the same time to the Barons, That the State of the Kingdom should
be rectified and reformed, by Twelve faithful persons of his Council then
chosen, and Twelve others Barons, who should meet at Oxford a Month after
Whitsunday next coming, as they should think fit, to the Honor of God, and
Profit of the Kingdom. And promised inviolably to observe whatsoever should be
ordained by them, 24, or the greatest part of them, under such Security as they
should Direct; and caused his Son Edward to Swear, he would inviolably observe
the same things; whereupon the Earls and Barons promised to endeavor, that the
Community of the Kingdom should Grant a Tax to

These Twenty Four had Append. n. 190.
power to choose four that were to choose the Kings Council, which was to
redress and amend all matters appertaining to the King and his Kingdom, and
this Council or the greater part of it was to choose one or more in the place
of such as should make Default, etc.

Barnaby Day approaching, Paris f. 970. n. 40, 50. The Great men come Armed and
Guarded to the Parliament at Oxford.
the Great Men and Nobles of the Land hastened to the Parliament then to be
holden at Oxford, and commanded all such as ought them Military Service to
accompany them, so prepared, as if they were to defend their Bodies from the
attempts of their Enemies; And they did so, ( Quod and fecerunt) palliating
their coming thus armed, under pretense of going against the Kings Enemies the
Welsh. But fearing, as they pretended an Intestine War, and that the King and
his Brothers the Poictovins should bring Foreign Troops against them, and
therefore they caused the Ibid. f. 971. n. 10.
Ports to be strictly Guarded. The chief Transactions of this Parliament were
these following, First the Election of the 24 according to the Kings Grant, who
were to amend and reform what they should think amiss in the Kingdom.

The twelve Annal. Burton. f. 412.
chosen by the King were
The Bishop of London. The Elect of Winchester. Henry Son to the King of
Almaign. John Earl of Warren. Guido de Lusignan the Kings half-Brother. William
de Valentia the Kings half-Brother. John Earl of Warwic. John Mansel. Friar J.
de Derlington. The Abbat of Westminster. Henry de Wengham Dean of St. Martins
London. The Twelfth not mentioned, Q. Archbishop of Canturbury, Peter of
Savoy, or James Audley.
The twelve chosen by the Earls and Barons were
The Bishop of Worcester. Simon Earl of Leicester. Richard Earl of Gloucester.
Humfrid Earl of Hereford. Roger Earl of Norfolk and Marshall. Roger Mortimer.
John Fitz-Jeofry. Hugh Bigod Brother to the Marshall. Richard de Gray. William
Bardolfe. Peter Montfort. Hugh D'espenser.
These Twenty Four Ibid. f. 414.
chose Four of their own Number, who named the Kings Council, and were these,
The Earl of Warwic. John Mansel. Earl Roger the Marshall, Hugh Bigod his
Brother.
These Four named the Kings [2] Council, in Number Fifteen, who were these,
The Archbishop of Canturbury. The Bishop of Worcester. The Earl of Leicester.
The Earl of Gloucester. Earl Marshall, Comes Mareschallus. Peter of Savoy Earl
of Richmond. The Earl of Albemarle. The Earl of Warwic. The Earl of Hereford.
John Mansel. John Fitz-Geofry. Peter Montfort. Richard de Gray. Roger Mortimer.
James de Aldithlege or Audley.
The Great men or Twenty Four Paris f. 970. n. 50. What the Great men or 24
required of the King.
Require the Kings Confirmation of the Charter Granted by King John his Father.

Secondly, They Ibid. f. 971. lin. 2.
Require such a Justiciary, as would do Justice such as suffered wrong as well
to the poor as Rich.

Thirdly, That they should Mat. West. f. 391. lin. 8.
choose the Justices, Chancellors, Treasurers, and other Officers and Ministers
from year to year for ever.

Fourthly, That Ibid. l. 9.
they themselves or friends should have the Custody of the Kings Castles.

Fifthly, By Ibid. n. 10.
Edict they made it Capital for any of what degree order soever to Refuse to
Consent to these things, and against such the Archbishops and Bishops also
pronounced Excommunication.

They ordain three Parlements to be held every year.
The Twenty Four ordained there should be three Parlements in a year, and when
and how they should be holden, which order I find drawn up in these words,

Il Annal. Burton. f. 415.
fet a remember Ke les xxiv unt ordene Ke treies Parlemenz utaves de Sein
Michel; le second le Demein de la Chandelur, le terz le premer Ior de June, Ceo
est a Saver treis semeines devant le Seint John. A ces treis Parlemenz vendrunt
les Cunseilers le Rei es^uz tut ne scient il paz Mandez purver le Estat del
Reaume, and pur treter les communs Bosoignes del Reaume, quant Mester Serra per
le Mandement le Rei. That is,

Be it Remembered, That the Twenty Four have ordained there may or shall be
three Parlements in a year; When the Parlements were to be holden.
The first on the Octaves or eight days after St. Michael; The second on the
Morrow after Candlemass day; The third on the first day of June, that is to
wit, three Weeks before St. John. To these three Parlements shall come all the
chosen Counselors of the King, though they be not i. e. Whether they had
particular Summons, or not.
sent to, to provide for the State of the Realm, and to Treat of the common
Business of the Realm, when need shall be, by the command of the King,

The Commons then, or Community, The Community choose twelve to represent them
in the Parlements.
chose twelve persons to Represent them in these Parlements, etc. to save the
Charges of the Community. The Entry or Record (as I may so call it) of which
Elections was in these words.

Si fet a Ibid. f. 416
remembrer Ke le Commun Eslise xii prodes homes Ke Parlemenz and autre for fois.
fez Quant Mester Serra, Quant Rei u sun Cunseil les Mandera pur treter de
Bosoignes le Rei and del Reaume. E Ke le Commun tendra pur Estable Instead of
ce qu^.
cer Ke ces xii frunt. E ceo serra fet pur Espanier le Cust del Commun, That is,

Be it remembered, That the Commons or Community have chosen twelve wise men, to
come to Parlements, and at other times, when there shall be need, when the King
or his Council shall command or King and Realm, and that the Commons or
Community will hold for established, what the twelve shall do, and this shall
be done to spare the cost or charges of the Commons or Community, which twelve
prodes ^omes, provi homines, or viri prudentes, which the Reader pleases, were
these underwritten, and entered according to this Form.

Ces sunt les Ibid. f. 414.
Duze Ke sunt Es^u par les Baruns a treter a per an, oveke le Cunseil le Rei
pur tut le Commun de la tere de Commun Bosoine, That is,

These are the twelve which are chosen by the Barons, to treat in the three
Note, these twelve and the Kings Council, were only to be present in these
Parlements.
Parlements in a year, with the Kings Council, for all the Commons, or whole
Community of the Land, upon Commune Business, which twelve here do follow, as
in the Ibid. Who the Twelve were.
Annals of the Monastery of Burton.

The Bishop of London. The Earl of Winchester. The Earl of Hereford. Philip
Basset. John de Bailol. John de Verdun. John de Gray. Roger de Sumery. Roger de
Montalt. Hugh D'espenser. Thomas de Grestey. Aegidius de Argenten.
Barons and great Tenants in Capite, not one Commoner, as now reputed, amongst
them. Not one Commoner among the Twelve.


Many other provisions and ordinances were made in this Parliament, about Feudal
Tenures, about Custody of Wards, Marriages and Escheates, about Suits to the
Kings Courts before Justices Itinerant, What other Ordinances and provisions
were made in this Parliament.
County Courts, Hundred Courts, Sheriffs Turns, Writs of Right, Wast of Estates
in Custody, Taking of Distresses, etc. all in abatement of the Rigor of the
Feudal Law, and for their own Ease and Benefit, which are to be found in the
Annals last cited, f. 428. and most of them in the Close Roll 44. Hen. 3. M.
17. Dors. and in the Patent Roll 47. of the same King M. 14. in Schedula Dors.

All these provisions and Ordinances made in eleven days.
All this was done, and Commissions for the Governors of the Kings Castles were
issued in eleven days time, as appears by the the Records in the n. 191, 192,
193.
Appendix that bear Date June 22d, and are worth noting.

Twenty four chosen to treat of an Aid for the King.
There were also appointed at this meeting by the Community Twenty four persons
to treat of an Aid for the King, which choice is thus to f. 414.
Annals, save only the Names of the 24 are rendered in English.

Ces sunt les vint and quatre, Ke sunt mis per le Commun a Treter de Aid de Rei.
The Bishop of Worcester. The Bishop of London. The Bishop of Salisbury. The
Earl of Leicester. The Earl of Gloucester. The Earl Marescal. Peter of Savoy.
The Earl of Hereford. The Earl of Albemarle. The Earl of Winchester. The Earl
of Oxford. John Fitz-Geofry. John de Gray. John de Bailol. Roger Mortimer.
Roger de Montalt. Roger de Sumery. Peter Montfort. Thomas de Greley. Fulco de
Kerdiston. Aegidius de Argenton. John Kyriel. Philip Basset. Aegidius de
Erdington.
All Barons or Knights and great Tenants in Capite, not one such Commoner, as
in these times amongst them.

But instead of Granting or providing an Aid for the King, when their own Turn
was served, The Barons Paris f. 971. n. 20, 30, 40, 50.

A. D. 1258. The Barons quarrel with the King about his half Brothers and other
Strangers.

They oppose the Provisions and are forced to leave Oxford, and the Realm.


Quarrelled with him about his four half Brothers, Ademar or Athelmar Elect of
Winchester, de Lezignan, Geofry de Lezignan, and William de Valentia, his Son
Edward, John Earl of Warren, and Henry his Nephew Son to the King of Almaign,
who Boggled at, and Refused at that time to Swear and give their Consent to the
provisions, and fell into great Heats against the Poictovins and other
Strangers; Insomuch as they forced the Kings Brothers from Oxford, who (as Mat.
Westminster f. 391. n. 10. The Barons choose Hugh Bigod Justiciary.
says) in the beginning Resisted the Rebellious Faction. The Barons no sooner
heard of their Hugh Bigod their Justiciary, and Summoned all their Followers to
attend them, and with Horse and Arms to pursue them, which was done so Swiftly,
and by such numbers, as the Parliament was thereby dispersed and broken up, and
never left persuing and menacing of them, until they quitted the Kingdom, who
for their security in their passage beyond Sea, obtained the Kings Append. n.
safe Conduct, (which bears Date July 5th) and had Humfry de Bohun Earl of
Hereford and Essex, John Earl Warren, William de Earl of Albemarle, and other
Nobles assigned to Guard them.

The Oath of Confederacy or Association, which the Community of England entered
into at this meeting at Oxford, we find transmitted to posterity in the same f.
413.
Annals, with this Title, and in this Form,

Ceo jura Commun de Engleterre a Oxford.
Nus tells et tells fesum a saver a tute genz, The Oath of Confederacy taken by
the Comunity at Oxford.
Ke nus avum Iure sur Seintes Evangeles, e sumus tenu ensemble par tell serment,
e promettuns en bone fei, Ke chescun de nus e tuz ensemble nus Enter Eiderums,
e nus, e les nos Cuntre tute genz, Dreit fesant Salve a Fei le Rei, was that
Faith and Obedience they had Sworn to him, when they did their Homage and
Fealty.
fei le Rei, e de le Corune. E premet^uns sur meime le serment, Ke Nus de Nus
ren ne prendre de Tere, ne de Moeble par Que cest serment purra estre Desturbe,
u en Nule ren Empire. E si null fet en Cuntre ceo, nus le tendrums a Enemy
Mortel.

This the Community of England did swear at Oxford.
We Such and Such, make it known to all People, That we have Sworn upon the
Holy Gospels, and that we are obliged, or bound together by that Oath, and we
promise in Good Faith, That every one of us, and all together shall Aid one
another; And that we will do Right to our Selves and Ours against all Men,
taking nothing therefore, which cannot be done without Misdoing, Saving the
Faith we owe to the King and the Crown. And we promise upon the same another,
either Land or Moveable ( i. e. Goods) whereby this Oath may be disturbed, or
any ways impaired. And if any Man shall do contrary hereunto, we will hold him
for our Mortal Enemy.

In the same place is to be found the Oath of the Twenty four.

Ceo est le Serment a Vint e Quatre.
Chescun jura sur seintes Evangeles, Ke il al honur de Deu, The Oath of the
Twenty four.
e al a fei le Rei e al profit del Reaume, Ordenera e tretera Ovekes les avaunt
dit jures sur le Refurmement e le amendment del Estar del Reaume. E Ke ne lerra
pur dun, ne pur premesse, pur amur, ne pur hang, ne pur pour de nulli, ne pur
Gain, ne pur perce, Ke leaument ne face solum la tenur de la Letire Ke le Rei
ad sur ceo Done e sun For fei.
fez ensement. That is,

This is the Oath of the Twenty four.
Every one Swear upon the Holy Gospels, That to the Honor of God, and by
keeping their Faith to the King, and to the profit of the Realm, He would
Ordain and Treat with those that had Sworn before ( That is, the Comunity*)
about the Reformation and Amendment of the State of the Kingdom. And that he
would not desist from that (that is faithfully or justly) do according to the
Tenor of the Kings See Append. n. 189.
Letter, which he had granted, and also made.

There also is to be found the Oath, at that time, Given to the Chief Justice
of England.

Ceo Jura Le haute Justice de Engleterre.
I^ Iure Ke ben et leaument a sun poer fra ceo Ke apent a la Iustierie de
Dreiture tenir a tute genz al prou le Rei e del Reaume Hauz Humes de la tere,
Ke li Iurrunt en cestes chooses a aider e a Menteinir, That is,

This the High Justice of England did, or shall Swear.
The Oath of the Chief Justice.
He Swears, or Swore, That Well and Loyally to his Power, he would do what
apperteined to his Office of Justice, and do Right to all Twenty four, and by
the Council of the King, and the Great Men of the Land, who had sworn to Aid
and Maintain him in these things.

With these is to be found the Oath of the Chancellor of England.

Ceo Iura le Chanceler de Engleterre.
Ke il ne Enselera null bref fors Bref de Curs sanz le Mandement, The Word here
wanting, I suppose to be Marriage.
...... ne de Eschaetes sanz le assentement del Grant Cunseil u de la greinure
party. Ne Ke il ne enselera ren Ke seit en Contre le Ordinement Ke est fet, et
serra a fere par les Vint et Quatre u par la greinure party. Ne Ke il ne
prendra null Loer autrement Ke il nest divise as autres. E lem li baudra un
Companiun en la furme Ke la Cunseil purverra. That is,

This the Chancellor of England did Swear.
That he should Seal no Writs without the Command of the King and his Council,
that shall be presentt, except Writs of The Oath of the Chancellor of England.
Course, nor should Seal the Gift or Grant of a Great Ward, or Great...... or
of Escheats without the assent of the Great Council, or the greater part of
them. Nor that he should Seal any thing which was contrary to the Twenty four,
or the greater part of them. Nor that he should take any Reward, but what had
been given to others. And that if he took to him an assistant or Deputy, it
should be according to a form provided by the Council.

When by their Ordinances, and having procured their Friends to be made
Governors of all the Kings Castles and Places of strength, Justiciary, and
Chancellor for their purpose, and bound them by Oath to act according to their
Dictates, They then (if any credit may by given to f. 391. n. 20. The Barons
Practices* to enrich themselves and Relations.
Math. Westminster) held continual Parlements, took to themselves the Escheats
and Wards, and gave to their Sons and Relations all Churches in the Patronage
of the King.

And when they had driven the Kings Brothers out of the Kingdom, the Baronage,
or Paris f. 978. n. 10. and lib. Addit^ment. f. 215. n. 30* 40. A. D. 1^58.
Comunity of England, sent Letters to the Pope to excuse themselves, which were
Append n. 195. Their Letter to the Pope to excuse themselves.
to this effect. That although he had lately sent Mr. Herlot, or Arlot his
Subdeacon and Notary, who admonished, and induced them to assist the King in
the prosecution of the Affair of Sicily, which he had undertaken Advice and
Consent, and against their Wills. Yet, out of Reverence to him and the Holy
See, they thought fit to Answer, That if by their Advice he would Reform the
Kingdom, and he would mitigate the Conditions contained in his Bull, of the
Grant of Sicily; Then according to the Terms of the Reformation, and his
Mitigation, they would effectually help him. But when the King had consented to
choose Twelve, and that they should choose Twelve others, by whom the
Reformation of the Nation Adomar the Elect of Winchester, and his Brothers, in
the number of his Twelve; And that they, but more especially the Elect,
dissuaded the King from consenting to their Ordinances, and encouraged Prince
Edward, and some of the Nobility to oppose them, so as they delayed the
Reformation. And they also signified to the Pope, That their Offenses were so
great, as the Cry of the Poor ascended to Heaven against them, That their
Ministers and Officers were rather to be called Thieves and Ruffians, A
Commonwealth was a certain Body that grew up by Divine Beneficence, and that it
was not Expedient, there should be clashing amongst the Members of the same
Body, made the King call the said Elect and his Brothers, as Perturbers of the
public Peace, to Answer their Accusers according to the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom. Elect from returning again, who they said, was the chief cause of
their Disturbance, and would certainly undo, what they had had taken so much
pains to do, by Infatuating the King and his Son Edward if he came again. And
at length, heaping more Crimes upon him, As that he damnably violated the
Liberties of the Church, imprisoned Men, and wounded Clercs, to the prejudice
of the Crown, which had the sole power of imprisoning; They beseech his
Holiness wholly to remove him from the Administration of the Church of
Winchester, by the Fullness of his Power (he having received it by the
Munificence of the Apostolic See) lest worse things might happen, and they his
most Devoted Supplicants be forced to do it otherwise; and told him for
certain, That though the King and greater Men of the Kingdom, were willing he
should Comunity would in no wise permit his Entrance: And that he might be
removed without scandal, seeing he was not Consecrated Bishop.

To these Letters Eleven Persons put to their Seals, and witnessed them on
behalf, and in the stead of the whole Comunity. Eleven Persons put their Seals
to this Letter.


Of these Eleven, Eight were of the number of the Twenty four Reformers, viz.

Richard of Clare Earl of Gloucester and Hertford. Simon Montfort Earl of
Leicester. Roger Bigod Marescal of England. Humfry Bohun Earl of Hereford and
Essex. John de Placeto Earl of Warwick. Hugh Bigod Justiciary of England. John
Fitz-Geofry. Peter Montfort.
The other Three were of the Number of the Fifteen of the Kings Council, chosen
by Four of the Twenty four, viz.

William de Fortibus Earl of Albemarl. Peter of Savoy Earl of R^chmond. James
Aldithley, or Audeley.
The Great Men Paris. Additam. f. 217. n. 30, 40, 50. Four Knights sent to the
Pope with this Letter from the Great Men.
fearing lest the Elect of Winchester should make haste to Rome, and by the
promise of a great sum of Money to the Pope and Cardinals, procure his
Consecration, That so he might more effectually hurt them; sent Four Skilful,
Eloquent Knights, Men of Worth and Credit, to present this Epistle to the Pope,
and whole Roman Court; with further instructions, to Calumniate Kings Brothers.
Who when they had fully Declared the cause of their Errand to the Pope, they
added other Offenses, and great Wickednesses the Elect and the others had
committed, That is to say, Their complaints against the Kings Half Brothers.
Homicide, or Murder, Rapine, Oppressions, and Injuries; and that the King
would not restrain their violence. Nor did they omit to tell the Pope of one
great injury they did to Mr. Eustace of Len, the Archbishop of Canturbury's
Official, for which all present, when it was done, were Excommunicated, through
all Province of Canturbury, and at Oxford before the That is, the University of
Barons.
University; and they further told the Pope, That one of the Brothers, Geofry
of Lesignan, Roasted the Kings Cook, and Tortured him to death, with studied
Torments.

After these things Paris f. 974. lin. 1.
on the Feast of St. Mary Magdalen (that is July 22.) they sent their Agent to
London, who in full meeting of the Citizens in the Guild Hall, Demanded of
them, Whether immutably adhere unto, and faithfully obey the Statutes of the
Barons, The Citizens of London confederate with the Barons.
and Manfully resist such as should oppose them, and likewise give them
effectual assistance; Whereunto they freely consented, and bound themselves, by
a Chart Sealed with the Common Seal of the City.

About the Ibid f. ^76. n. 40. Herlot the Popes Notary retires.
Feast of the Assumption of the Glorious Virgin (That is August 15.) Herlot,
the Popes Clerc, Special Counselor, and Notary, when he saw the Broils and
Disturbances in the Nation, privately and prudently withdrew himself, while the
Storm should be over.

It had been Append. 195 All Grievances were to be inquired into by four
Knights of every County.
agreed in this Parliament held at Oxford, That all Excesses, Transgressions,
and Injuries done or committed, as well by Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, and
other persons in the Kingdom, should be inquired into by four Knights in every
County by Jury or Juries to be summoned by the Sheriffs to come before them.
And the Inquisitions so made were to be Sealed with their own Seals, and
Jurors, and to be delivered in their own proper persons at Westminster to the
Kings Council there, eight days after Michaelmass. And Ibid. The Return of
their inquisitions to be made to the Kings Council.
Writs were issued to Four Knights in every County to that purpose, Dated on
the 4 th of August, who made their Inquisitions and Returns accordingly: But
what was done upon the Return of these Writs and Inquisitions I find not.

But do find, That by the Kings Append. n. 196, 197. The Knights had their
expenses allowed them by the Counties.
Writs the four Knights of every County, had their expenses allowed them by the
Counties for coming to Westminster, Returning home, and attendance upon the
Kings Council or Parliament.

About the beginning of November this year, the King received the Paris f. 979.
n 30, 40. Manfred chosen and Crowned King of Apulia.
News that Manfred, Son of the Emperor Frederic, was by the Bishops and Great
Men, contrary to the Popes mind, Chosen, and Crowned King of Apulia, who made
Archbishops, and Bishops Popes consent; and they contemning his Prohibition,
gave to the King all due Reverence and Obedience. The Great Men also, not
taking notice of Edmund the Kings Son (to whom the Pope had given that Kingdom)
did their Homage and Fealty to Manfred, and gave him Seisin or Possession of
the Cities and Castles.

In the year 1259. the Ibid. f. 981. n. 50. A. D. 1259. Richard King of the
Romans desires to return into England.
Nobles were in London at Christmas King, where they Treated amongst
themselves with great trouble, and doubting, how they might carry on their
design, and satisfy the Request of Richard King of Almaign, Ibid. f. 982. lin.
1.
who had given them notice, he very much desired to return into England to
visit his Friends, and look after his own Affairs. They suspected his coming
might be Ibid. l. 3.
to pour out his Indignation and Revenge upon the Barons, for their behavior
toward his Father King John, his Brother King Henry, and his Half Brothers;
they were afraid

About the Ibid. n. 50.
Feast of St. Hilary (that is January 13.) they again entered into a common and
solemn Deliberation and Debate, concerning his coming into England, and sent
the Bishop of Worcester, the Abbat of St. Edmunds-Bury, Peter of Savoy* and
John Mansel to him, That he might certify them of the cause of his so England,
and how long he would stay there, and to acquaint him he must take an Ibid. f.
983 n. 10, 20. The conditions upon which he was to come into England.
Oath to go along with, and assist the Barons, in completing and establishing
their Provisions and Reformation. He came toward the Seacoast with a good
Guard of Horse, well armed, and carried himself very loftily toward these
Messengers, and swear by the Throat of God, he would not take the Oath they
required of him, nor would he tell them how long he intended to stay in
England, His Answer to the Messenger sent to him.
and told them the Nobles of England ought not to Reform the Kingdom without
him, or presumptuously to go about such a difficult Business without his
Presence and Assent.

The Barons hearing Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. The Barons determined to oppose his
Landing.
this, fitted out Ships and Galleys to Fight with him, and impead his Landing,
and raised an Army of Horse and Foot to oppose him after it; of which when he
had certain Chart, to take such an Oath as the Barons exacted; On the 27th of
January, he with his Queen landed at Dover, but was not permitted to go into
the Castle. Ibid f. 984. lin. 2.
On the next day King Henry met him at Canturbury, and both Kings went into the
Chapter House there, where Richard Earl of Gloucester called upon Richard Earl
of Cornwall to take the Oath, which was in these words,

Hear ye Ibid. l. 8. The Oath he took.
all People, That I Richard Earl of Cornwall do here Swear upon the Holy
Gospels, That I will be faithful and diligent to reform the Kingdom of England
with you, hitherto too much deformed by the Counsel of Evil Men (Hactenus nimis
malorum Consilio deformatum): And I will be your effectual Helper to Expel the
Rebels and Disturbers of the same Kingdom; And will observe this Oath
inviolably, under pain of losing all the Lands I have in England.

Eight days after Ibid. f. 984. n. 30.
Candlemass the Noblemen met at London, as they had agreed before at Oxford.
About the beginning of November Ibid. f. 979. n. 20. Several Noblemen sent to
meet the King of Almaign.
The Earl of Leicester, with the Bishops of Worcester and Lincoln, and Roger
Earl Marshall, were sent by advice of the Baronage to meet the Kings of France
and Almaign at Cambray; The two Kings came not, and so the other three returned
Earl of Leicester behind, who went into France, and having been long Ibid. f.
984. n. 40.
expected by the Barons, appeared in this Council, and brought with him the
Dean of Bourges, one of the King of France his Privy Council, where there was
an earnest Debate of the Matters between the two Kings of England and France,
and what had been Treated of was approved of, and a Peace concluded on
Valentines-Day, if both parties would consent to what their Agents had agreed
and Determined.

In the Ibid. f. 986. n. 10. Several English Noblem^n sent to a Parliament held
in France.
beginning of April, by the Command and Advice of the King and whole Baronage,
the Earls of Clare and Leycester, John Mansel, Peter of Savoy, and Robert
Walerand were sent to the King of France, and his Great Parliament holden at
that time, and carried with them King Henry's Chart of the Resignation of
Normandy, with Letters of Credit, to put an end to all differences that were,
and had been a long time depending between the two Kings; and also to Confirm
and Establish what had been Agents. But because these Envoyes were Q. Whether
they fell out, or went not, or came not together.
dispersed ( Sed quia ob eorundem Nunciorum dispersionem, Quid super hoc actum
est, etc*) What was done in this Matter, was not certainly known, or made
public. When Ibid. f. 987. n. 10.
all things were agreed, the Countess of Leicester would not Resign some Rights
she pretended to in Normandy; whereupon there arose a great Quarrel between the
two Earls, which with much difficulty was taken up by the Mediation of Friends.

This year Cl. 43. H. 3. M. 10. Dors. Lewellin invadeth England. All Military
Tenants Summoned to Chester and Shrewsbury.
Lewelin Son of Griffin in a hostile manner invaded the Kings, his Son Edwards,
and other his Subjects Lands, and for that the Truce between them was to
determine on August, by Advice of the Great Men of his Council, he summoned all
that held of him in Capite, to be at Shrewsbury and Chester with their Service,
upon the First of that Month.

Adomar, the Elect of Winchester, had prevailed with the Cl. 43. H. 3. M. 4.
Dors. Adomar desires to be admitted into England, but is denied.
Pope, to send Velastus his Penitentiary and Chaplain, by Advice of his
Cardinals, with his Letters directed to the King and Barons, to intercede with
them for his admission into England, and enjoyment Bishopric of Winchester. The
Answer of the King and Barons to this Letter and Mediation, was a flat denial,
but modestly drawn up, as it is to be found in my Answer to Mr. Petit's Rights
of the Commons, etc. f. 83.

It is Reported Paris f. 989. n. 10. Why King Henry omitted ^e Titles of Duke
of Normandy and Earl of Anjou.
by the continuer of Mat. Paris, That King Henry, upon pretense that Rollo Duke
of Normandy, obtained that portion of France by Force, and Extortion, when the
King of France was unable to assert his Right, having neither Money or Army to
defend it. Therefore says he, the King of England resigned the Dukedom of
Normandy and Earldom of Anjou, upon payment of 300000 pounds of Turon Money,
for which he promised him the Restitution of 20000 pound yearly Rent in
Gascoigne; and from thence-forward he left out of his Style, the Title of Duke
of Normandy, and Earl of Anjou.

Ibid f. 982. n. 40. A. D. 1259. Quare how this agrees with the Record above.

Henry de Wengham, chosen Bishop of Winchester, but refuses it.


of Aethelmar, or Adomar, Elect of Winchester, the Monks chose Henry de
Wengham, then Chancellor, to be their Bishop; the King consented, saving the
Right of Adomar, if he could obtain Consecration to that Bishopric from the
Pope; He refused it because the Title was Litigious, and excused himself; That
he was not fit for such a Dignity, or the Cure of Souls, having read little
Divinity, or studied the Scriptures as he ought. Yet Fulke Bishop of London
dying about that time, he accepted that Bishopric, notwithstanding his
insufficiency, and procured the Kings Append. n. 199.
Letters Patents, by Advice of his Council (he being one of the 24) to hold and
retain all his former Ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices, whereof the King
was Patron, together with his Bishopric, for so long time as the Pope should
please to give him a Dispensation.

Notwithstanding Athelmar was forced to quit the Kingdom; The King while he was
beyond Sea, judged the Bishopric void, Temperalties and Stock thereof, Append.
n. 200. Adomars Bishopric Seized by the King, but on conditions.
and Granted 5000 Sheep, 200 Cows, and 10 Bulls to this Bishop of London Elect,
to stock that Bishopric, warranting them against the Bishops of Winchester,
Provided always, That if Adomar should recover Possession of his Bishopric,
they should be restored to him.

In the year 1260. King Paris f. 989. n. 30. A. D. 1260. 44. of Henry. 3.
Henry was at London with a multitude of Strangers, Says the Continuer of Mat.
Paris; But that could not be, for by the close Rolls of this year, M. 5. Dors.
it appears he was in France at Paris Treating of Peace, etc. with that King,
the 19 th, and 28 th of December, at Paris, and 17 th of January at St. Denis;
and was there, and in Flanders a great part of this year, as is clear from the
Patent, and close Rolls, being dated

This year Dyed Ibid. and Annal. Burton. f. 446. Pope Alexander dye's and Urban
Succeeded him.
Pope Alexander the 4th, to whom Urban the 4th succeeded, and was Consecrated
the fourth of September.

In the Kings absence the Great Paris f. 990. n. 40. Revenues of the Italians
Churches to be paid to the Barons receivers.
men Commanded all the Religious, who farmed the Revenues of the Churches
possessed by the Italians, not to answer any of the Rent to them, but to pay it
at a time and place appointed to such as should be assigned by the Barons to
receive it, which if they refused to do, they threatened to burn their Houses
and Goods, and to inflict the same punishment upon their persons, which was
prepared for the Romans. Ibid. n. 50. Simon Montfort reported to have dyed a
Martyr. A. D. 1261.
They likewise commanded the Bishops, not to interpose or concern themselves,
for any of the Romans or their Revenues upon like penalty. By this Provision or
Decree of the Barons (says the Monk) England for Simon Montfort was slain, (
Et Martyrio, ut Creditur, Coronatus) and as it was believed, Crowned with
Martyrdom.

In the year 1261. King Henry was at Ibid. fol. 990. n. 50. King Henry employs
the Treasure in the Tower for its repair.
Christmas in the Tower at London with his Queen, who after he had broke his
promise made to the Great Men, was constreined to retire thither to secure
himself. He commanded the look^ of the Treasure which had a long time been
forced, and employed it to repair and strengthen the Tower, where it was
thought most fit and convenient. Moreover he ordered the City of London to be
fortified round about, and called all the Fol. 991. lin. 2. The Citizens of
London above 1^ years Old Swear ^n fealty to the King.
Citizens from twelve years old and upwards together, and caused them to Swear
fealty to him, and commanded it to be Proclaimed, that whoever would take Arms
under him should be maintained at his own charge; upon this many Barons from
all parts, came with many Armed men, who were lodged without the Walls, because
the Citizens refused to give them any entertainment.

Those which had no kindness for the King, raised reports Append. n. 201. False
Stories reported of the King.
That he would impose upon, and exact from the Great Men and Community of the
Kingdom, undue and unheard of Taxes and Talliages to make discord between him
and them. He therefore Commanded the Sheriffs of every County to make
Proclamation he intended no such thing, and if they found any such reporters of
Lies, to Arrest and keep them until they could produce the Authors, or that
they received

About this time the King received from the Pope Paris fol. 991. n. 10. The
King Absolved from his Oath by the Pope.
Letters of Absolution of himself and his Son Prince Edward from their Oaths,
which the Prince refused to accept, but the King received it. When the Great
Men had notice thereof, they sent Messengers to the King humbly beseeching him
to observe inviolably the Oath he had made, and if any thing displeased him,
and he would show it, they would amend it. To which the King with great passion
replied, That they had fallen from their Agreement, and he would be obliged no
longer, but left every one to provide for himself. At length through powerful
mediation, it was agreed that two men should be chosen, one by the King the
other by the Barons, who should make choice of a Third, and these three were to
hear Complaints on both sides, and settle a lasting Peace. But nothing in this
Affair was determined, because Prince Edward was beyond Sea, therefore it was
adjourned till his return.

Prince Ibid. n. 20. Prince Edward returns into England. He adheres to the
Barons.
Edward having notice that the Establishment of a firm Peace between the King
and the Barons depended upon his return, he England, and brought with him
William of Valence lately forced out of the Kingdom, who could not obtein
entrance into it again, until he had Sworn he would be obedient to the
Provisions of the Barons, and answer such complaints as should be made against
him. And when he understood by what Counsels his Father was Governed, he was
very angry and retired from his presence, and adhered to the Barons according
to his Oath, and entered into a Confederacy with them, to search out and drive
away evil Counsello^s and their favorers (Quod malos Consiliarios and eorum
fautores adquire^^nt and a Rege pro viribus elong arent. When this came to the
Kings knowledge, He and his Counselors secured themselves forthwith in the
Tower of London and Prince Edward remained with the Great Men.

The Disturbers of the quiet of the Nation Append. n. 202. False reports spread
of the King.
endeavored by false and Crafty Suggestions to lessen the affections of the
People toward King, and withdraw their hearts from him, raising reports that
he would destroy the just Ancient Customs of the Nation, and the Rights of the
People, and oppress them with grievous exactions, that he would call in
Strangers into the Kingdom and depress his own people. And all these false
reports were e^aised, because he provided for his own Safety, the Security of
the Nation, the maintaining of the Laws and the Rights of his ^ubjects, by
removing of Sheriffs and Governers of Castles, and appointing others that were
more able to Oppressors. And to secure his good Subjects from the jealousies
and fears, That he would not do, nor intended ^o any such thing, he gave them
his Letters Patents.

The Bishop of Worcester, the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, and other Great
men had caused Append. n. 203. Three Knights of every County Summoned by the
Great Men to meet at St. Albans. A D 1262. 5. Paris ut Supra fol. 991. n. 40.
three Knights of every County to be Summoned to meet them at St. Albans on the
Feast of St. Matthew the Apostle (that is the 21 of September) to treat with
them about common business of the Kingdom. But seeing the King had appointed
the Great men to meet him that day at Windsor, to treat of an accommodation
between him and them, he commanded all Sheriffs to enjoin them to come to
Windsor, and prohibit them from going to any other place, that they might
understand and see, he should propound nothing but what was for the Honor and
Advantage of the Kingdom.

In the year 1262. King Henry A D 1262. 5. Paris ut Supra fol. 991. n. 40. The
King forced to secure himself in the Tower.

A Reconc^liation made between the King and his Great Men.


was with his Queen and Counselors at Christmas in the Tower at London, who
were forced to take that place for refuge, and to continue there to secure
themselves from violence. But at length by the Mediation of the Queen, the
breach between the King and the Great Men was made up, and Terms of
reconciliation accepted on both sides. After that, the King departed from the
Tower, and left the keeping thereof to John Mansel, and from thence he went to
Dover Castle, which was yielded without any resistance, and Robert Walerand was
by the King made Governor of it; from thence he came to Rochester Castle and
some others; and to whatever place the King sent, an easy access and entrance
was granted according to his own wishes.

The King to gain an Aid from his Nobility in Parliament, and engage them in the
Affairs of Sicily (though deceived in both) did Ordinances made at Oxford, but
craved Claus. 42. Hen. 3. M 4. Dors. The King confirms the Oxford Ordinances.
the Popes Confirmation of them, as very beneficial to him and his Heirs.

But when those hopes were blasted, Append. n. 204. He sends to the Pope to
Absolve him from his Oath.
he sent to Pope V^han the 4th to Absolve him from his Oath taken to observe
those provisions, as prejudicial to the Rights and Prerogatives of his Crown,
from which Pope Alexander his Predecessor had Absolved him, but Dyed Absolution
was completed. He also wrote to him not to confirm the Barons Statutes, if
pressed to it, revoking the Commission of his former Procters sent to Rome when
the Seal was out of his power, (which he did not approve) who acted rather
against, than for him.

Now the King thinking himself secure on every side Paris. fol. 991. n. 50. He
takes the advantage of the Popes Absolution.

He displaces his great Officers of State.


resolved to take the advantage of the Popes Absolution, and went to several
Cities and Castles, and took possession of them and the Government of the
Kingdom, encouraged to this by the promise of assistance he received from the
King of France and his Great men. Afterward the King came to Winchester, and
removed from their Offices the Justiciary and Chancellor, that were appointed
by the Baronage, and constituted He made Walter de Merton his Chancellor, and
Philip Basset his Chief Justice. Mat. Westminster. fol. 380. lin. 7.
others in their places according to his own pleasure, and sent his Append. n.
205. Reason why he could not stand to his Oath.
Writ to all the Sheriffs of England, wherein he relates his own Submission and
the Affairs of his Realm to the Provisions Oxford, under certain conditions
which the Barons performed not; the injustice of their Ordinances to the
prejudice and depression of his Royal power and D^mage of his People; his
Absolution from his Oath to observe them both by Pope Alexander and Urban his
Successor: His readiness to do justice to all men Great and Small in his
Courts, to which they might freely resort with security, and to observe the
Articles contained in the great Charter and Charter of the Forest, which they
were commanded to proclaim in all former Ordinances, or presumed to speak or
act any thing prejudicial to the Rights of his Crown, Honor, or Dignity, or to
his Execution of his Office. Upon this the Paris. ut Supra. The Barons come
Armed to Winchester.
Barons came Armed to Winchester, and John Mansel went privately to the King,
and acquainted him with the danger he was in, The King retires to the Tower.
and constrained him to hasten his return to the Tower of London.

In the year 1263 at Christmas Paris, f. 992. lin. 1. n. 10. A. D. 1263. 47th
Hen. 3.
the King, Queen and Council were in the Tower of London, at which time both
the English and French Bishops took great pains to make peace between the King
and Barons, and at length Both sides referred their Differences about the Sea
the Compromise it self on the Kings behalf in Append. n. 206. and observe the
date of it, on Sunday after St. Lucy's day 13th of December 1263. so that it
had been agreed to Refer these Differences to the King of France before
Christmas.

The King of France nulleth the Oxford Provisions.


Oxford provisions to the King of France, who calling together his Bishops,
Earls and great men at Amiens on the 22 d of January, in that Assembly
pronounced sentence for the King of England against the Barons, and Nulled
those provisions; But by Evacuating of them, he did not intend altogether to
abrogate King John's Charter. Upon which Exception S. Montfort, and others, took
advantage, and said, The provisions were founded upon that Charter, and
therefore would not submit to the King of France his Sentence.

This Parliament of the King of France (as the Monk calls it) being Dissolved,
the Ibid. Several noble men desert Montfort.
King of England and his Queen, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
Hereford, and John Mansel, who were all there returned home. And from that time
Ibid. n. 20.
Henry Son to the King of Almain, Roger de Clifford, Roger de Leybourn, John de
Vallibus or Vaus, Hamo L'estrange, and many other Barons left Montfort, and
Roger Mortimer wasted his Lands and Estates. But he confederating Leolin Prince
of Wales, the Kings great Enemy, sent an Army thither, that invaded, destroyed
and burnt the Estate and Lands of Roger.

In the mean while the Mat. Westminster. f. 382. n. 40.
Barons in other parts of the Kingdom by advice, and under the conduct of the
Earl of Leycester, Resolving to make good the Oxford provisions, armed
themselves, The Barons Arm themselves and seize the Kings Towns.
and on a sudden, when they thought not of it, fell upon the Strangers, the
Kings and all they knew adhered to him, and in an Hostile manner seized upon
their Estates, Places of Strength, Castles, Towns and Goods; Ibid. f. 384. n.
50. 385. n. 10.
Montfort with his Army took in Gloucester, Worcester, Bridgnorth and
Shrewsbury; Prince Edward and the Noble men that were of the Kings party took
in the Castles of Hay, Huntington, Brecknoc, etc. and on both sides they
wasted, burnt and destroyed their Lands and Estates.

Londoners also Ibid. f. 385. n. 20. The Londoners second the Barons.
going out of their City in great numbers, wasted and burnt the farms and
possessions of the King of Almain, Philip Basset, and many others, that were of
the Kings party, and imprisoned the Kings Clercs, the Barons of the Exchequer,
and Justices of the Bench.

The King was at this time in the Ibid. f. 383. n. 20, 30. Mat. Paris, f. 993.
lin. 2. n. 10. The King makes peace with the Barons.
Tower of London with his Queen, and John Mansel, one of his chief Counselors,
who fled from Barons, and when he was gone, the King fearing he should be
besieged by their Army against all the power and persuasion of the Queen, by
the mediation of some Honorable persons made peace with them, the Articles
whereof were these:

First, That Ibid. The Articles of the peace.
Henry, Son of the King of Almain, should have his Liberty.

Secondly, That the Kings Castle should be put into the Hands of the Barons.

Thirdly, That the Statutes and Provisions made at Oxford should King as others.

Fourthly, That all strangers, except such as the Well-Affected should think
fit to stay, should presently avoid the Nation never to return again.

A. D. 1264. 48. Hen. 3.
But this peace did not hold long, for the Soldiers that were within Windsor
Castle Paris, f. 993. n. 20.
furnished it with Arms and Victuals, which raised Barons; and it added much to
it, that when Prince Edward, had desired of the Bishop of Worcester, who was of
the Barons party to conduct him from Bristol to his fathers Court, when he came
near Windsor, he left the Bishop and went into the Castle, which he took very
ill; Ibid. n. 30. Prince Edward kept prisoner by Montfort.
and Simon Montfort coming to besiege it, Prince Edward met him at Kingston,
and offered a Treaty of Peace. But by advice of the Bishop, Simon kept him
prisoner until the Castle was delivered to him, upon condition, that such as
were in it strangers, and such others that had a mind to go beyond sea, should
have Pass-ports.

On the 20th day of Append. n. 207.
March the King was at Oxford, and empowered the Bishop of Coventry, and
Nicholas Archdeacon of Norfolk, on the behalf of him and the Barons with him,
to treat with Simon Montfort, and the Barons with him, at Brackly, before John
de Valencinis, about establishing a firm Peace; but whether they ever

To the King at Paris, f. 993. 40, 50. and f. 994. lin. 1* etc. Northampton
taken by the King and Prince Edward.
Oxford came his son Edward, where they united their forces, and marched toward
Northampton, where then were a Considerable part of the Barons forces. They
made a Breach in the Town Wall and took it by assault upon the Sunday before
Palm Sunday, in it he took fifteen Bannerets, (Milites vexilliferos) or as F.
385. n. 30.
Mat. of Westminster (Barons vexilliferos) besides forty Ordinary which were
imprisoned in several Castles, and their names are to be found in Paris.

From hence the King Paris, f. 994. n. 10, 20. His success against several
places.
marched to Notingham, increased his Army, and laid waste the Lands of his
Enemies. The Earl of Leycester marched toward London, with design to go and
besiege Rochester Castle, which John de Warenna defended: It was in some
distress, but the King came very opportunely to the relief of it. Montfort
King, who left London, and marched toward Kingston Castle, which belonged to
the Earl of Gloucester, and took it; and from thence went to Rochester, and
killed many of those Simon Montfort had left there, and caused the rest to
flee. From thence he marched to Tonebridge and took in that Castle, and from
thence to Pevensey, where he received into favor the Barons and Officers of
the Five ports. (Vbi portuenses ad pacem receipt) And from thence proceeded to
Jews, where he was received in the Priory, and his Son in the Castle, where
the Barons wrote to him:

Professing Ibid. n. 20. The Barons Letters to the King.
to observe their oath and fidelity to him, and desiring that he would not
believe the lies many about him told of them; affirming Arms, not only against
their own, but his Enemies, and the Enemies of the whole Kingdom. Sealed by the
Earls of Leycester and Gloucester, at the Request of the others of the Faction.

To which the King returned, Ibid. n. 30. The Kings the Answer.
That they were the cause of all the War, Destruction, Rapine and Misery that
had befaln the Nation. That their Intentions were not according to their
Profession, nor their Jews, May 12th 48 of Hen. 3d 1264.

In like manner Ibid. n. 50 and f. 995. lin. 1. Richard King of the Romans
defieth the Barons.
Richard King of Romans, Prince Edward and all the Barons and Knights that
adhered to the King, charged them with lies, and defied them; but withal,
provoked them to stand to the Judgment of the Kings Court, to which they were
ready to submit and make their Innocence appear. These Letters were dated the

After this the Barons sent Henry Bishop of London, and Walter Bishop of
Worcester, their Ibid. f. 995. n. 10. The Barons Offer to the King.
Mediators, for peace to the King, and offered for damages done by them through
the Kingdom 30000 l. so that the Statutes of Oxford might stand good.

The King not accepting their offer, they March toward Jews, The King
refuses their Offer.
Ibid. n. 30, 40, 50. The Battle at Jews.
The Battle being joined, Prince Edward engaged the Londoners, and beating them
made too great a pursuit, so that before his Return, the other part of the
Kings Army was Routed, and his Father having his Horse Ibid. f. 996. lin. 1.
The King and his Brother Richard taken prisoners.
killed under him, was, with Richard King of Almain, taken prisoners, and many
other Barons, and many slain. But still the Castle of Jews making a stout
defense against the Barons, at which the Prince took Courage, and rallied Ibid.
n. 10.
his Forces, Montfort and his Confederates perceiving, sent Messengers for
Peace, promising the next day they would effectually treat of it, which was
done by the Mat. Westminster, f. 393. n. 40. Montfort refers himself to the
King of France to make a peace.
Mediation and Intercourse of Friars Minors, between both parties, and the
Issue was this; That they should apply themselves to the King of France, and
procure him to choose three Prelates, and three Noblemen of France: which six
should nominate two French men, who coming into England should choose a third
person an Englishman: King* and Barons, and order all things concerning the
State of the Kingdom, and for the Ibid. n. 50.
performance of this, they were to take their Corporal Oaths on both sides, and
an Instrument was so to be made of it, sealed with the Kings Seal, and the
Seals of others, and that the Eldest Sons of both Kings should be delivered
Hostages for the Security of this Agreement, which was called the Mise of
Jews. And so the King committed himself to his Enemies, The King was to commit
himself to his Enemies. Prince Edward and Prince Henry delivered Hostages
and they carried him to Canterbury, and sent the Hostages, Prince Edward, and
Henry Son to the King of Almain, to Dover Castle, and so came to London, and
sent Richard King of Almain to the Tower; and their other Prisoners taken in
that Battle, to several Castles to be imprisoned: Ibid. f. 394. lin. 2.
And then plundered and spoiled all those that faithfully adhered to the King,
or Clercs, as Laics, of all their moveable Goods.

This Battle was Mat. Westminster. f. 387. lin. 5.
fought, May the 14th; and on the 17th of the same Month, the King sent his
Append. n. 208.
Writ to Drogo de Barentin, Constable of the Castle of Windsor, to Release
Simon Montfort, Son to the Earl of Leicester, and Peter Montfort Senior,
according to the Agreement made between him and the Barons, who had been taken
at Northampton, and Committed to him by his Son Edward.

After the same manner he wrote to William la Zouthe, to deliver Peter Montfort
the younger; and to James And ^he^ey, or Audley, to deliver Robert Montfort his
Brother, both Sons of Peter Montfort.

On the 28th of May, Append. n. 209. Montforts Son made Constable of Dover
Castle.
Henry Montfort, Eldest Son to the Earl Leicester, was made, by the Kings
Commission, Constable of Dover Castle, Warden of the Cinque ports, and had the
Chamberlain-ship of Sandwich committed to him, during pleasure.

On the 4th of Append. n. 210. The King appoints Conservators of the Peace.
June, the King relating, That by Divine Grace, there had been a firm Peace
made between him and his Barons to be inviolably observed through the whole
Kingdom, did by the Advice and Assent of his Barons Constitute and Appoint in
all Counties of England, Keepers and Conservators of that Peace, during
pleasure; Faith and Allegiance, that they strickly looked after the
Conservation of the Peace in their Counties, and prohibited in his name any one
under the penalty of disinheriting, and danger of Life and Members, to set upon
any man, or Plunder him, to Commit Homicide, Burning, Roberies, Tolts, ( i. e.
Thefts or Rapine) or perpetrate any the like Enormities, nor do Damage to any
man contrary to his Peace. Also that for the future, no man should bear Arms in
the Kingdom, without his special License and

In the Body of these Commissions, there was a Precept to every of these
Conservators of the Peace, Four Knights to be chosen in each County to be sent
to London.
to send four of the most legal and discreet Knights of each County, to be
chosen by the Assent of that County, for the whole County, to the King at
London, to be there on Note the Octaves of holy Trinity this year, were June
22d. Ea^ter day being April 10th.
Octaves, or Eight days after the Feast of Holy Trinity at furthest, to treat
with Him, his Prelates, Great Men and others, in Parliament, about his own
Business, and the Business of the Kingdom.

On the same 4th of June, the King sent his Append. n 2^1.
Writ to James Alo^thele, or Audley, acquainting him, that by Divine Grace,
there was a firm Peace concluded between him and his Barons; and that for the
keeping of that Peace, by Advice and Assent of his Barons, it was provided;
That no man under Penalty of losing his Lands and Tenements, and also under
danger of his Life and Limbs, should wear Arms without the Kings special
License and Command; None to wear Arms without the Kings License.
and that all the Prisoners taken at Northampton, should be brought to him to
London, in whose Custody soever they were. And whereas there were certain
difficult Matters which concerned him and his Kingdom, Faith and Homage he
ought him, upon receipt of the Writ, to come to him, to treat of the Matters
aforesaid; and to bring with him Robert de Sutton, Robert Fitz Walter, Philip
de Covel, and John de Wiavill, and all others in his Custody, whosoever
committed them; that if it were thought fit, they might be exchanged Prisoner
for Prisoner, with those taken at Jews, or otherwise Released upon Security.

Roger Mortimer Ibid.
received the same Precept, which was delivered to Simon Watervill; and that he
should bring with him Reynald de Watervill, John le D'espenser, Adam le
D'espenser, Roger de la Hide, Humfry de Bassingburn, and all other such
Prisoners, etc.

Roger de Clifford Ibid.
received the same Command; and to bring William de Eyvill, Henry de Penbregg,
and Baldwin de Drayton.

A Append. n. 212.
Writ in the same Form, and of the same Date, was directed to John de Gray,
Constable of Nottingham Castle; and he was commanded to bring with him Baldwin
Wake, Anchor de Freschenvill, Hugh Gobion, Roger de Mortein, Richard de
Hemington, and all other Prisoners in his Custody, etc. This Writ was delivered
to Philip Driby, by the Earls of Leycester and Gloucester.

The same Ibid.
Command was to Drogo de Barentin, Constable of Windsor Castle; that he should
bring William de Furnivall, and all other Prisoners, etc. This Writ was given
to Charles the Kings Valet, to be delivered to the aforesaid Constable.

The same Ibid.
Precept was directed to John de Vallibus (that is, Vaus) Constable of the
Castle of Norwich, or his Sub-Constable to come, etc. and bring with him Ger.
de Furnivall, William de Elyesford, Ralph de Bruton, John Estormy, and all
other such Prisoners, etc.

The main Business for which four Knights were to be sent, by the Conservators
of the Peace of each County, and the Barons were particularly summoned to
Parliament eight days after The business for which the four Knights were
summoned.

Trinity Sunday was this year June 15. and the Sunday following was eight days
after inclusive, reckoning Trinity Sunday for the first.


Trinity Sunday, d of June 1264, 48th of Henry the Third, was to Unking the
King, which was done in this manner: There was an Instrument ready drawn
against their time of Meeting, That for the Reformation of the State of the
Kingdom, there should be chosen three Discreet, and Faithful, or Well-Affected
Men of the Kingdom, who should have Power and Authority from the Append. n. 213.
King of naming and choosing nine Counselors, of which nine, three by turns
should always be present in the Court; Nine Counselors to be chosen for the
King.

All great Officers to be chosen by them.


and the King, by the Advice of those nine, should Order and Dispose of the
Custody of his Castles, and all other Business of the Kingdom; and the King
should make his Justiciary, Chancellor, Treasurer, and all other great and
small Officers, that belonged to the Government of the Court and Kingdom, by
the Advice of those nine. The first Electors were to Swear, That according to
their Conscience, they would choose and nominate such Counselors, as should be
faithful to the Honor of God and the Church, and profitable to the Kingdom.
The Counselors also, and all Officers both great and small, were to Swear at
their Creation, That they would, to the utmost of their Power, execute their
Offices, to the Honor of God and the Church, and to the profit of the King and
Kingdom, without any other reward than Meat and Drink, which commonly was
presented upon Tables. And if the Counselors, When and by whom Officers ought
to be displaced.
or any of them, so behaved themselves, as they were to be laid aside and
changed; then the King, by the Advice of the three might change and remove as
many as he thought fit; and in the place of them so removed, Subsistitute other
fit and faithful Person or Persons. If the great or small Officers behaved
themselves ill, they were to be removed by the Council of nine, and other or
others, by them to be appointed in their places. And if the three Electors
agreed not in the Choice of Counselors, or they agreed not in the Creation of
Officers, or Disposing of, or in Dispatching other Business of the King and
Kingdom, then what should be ordained by two parts, should firmly be observed,
so as of those two parts one should be a Prelate, in Matters concerning the
Church: And if it should happen, that two parts of the nine should not agree in
any Business; then it was to be determined by the three first Electors, or the
major part of them. And if it shall be thought expedient by the Community of
Prelates and Barons, that all, or any of the three first Electors, should be
removed, and others substituted; the King should substitute them by the Advice
of the Community of the Earls and Barons. All these things the King was to do
by the Council of nine, in Form, as it was to be Subscribed by King, or by them
instead of, and by Authority of him. And this Ordinance was to endure, until
the Mise made at Jews should be Completed, The Witnesses that set their Hands
and Seals to the Ordinance.
or another Form provided and appointed by the Agreement of All Parties. In
witness whereof, Richard Bishop of Lincoln, and Hugh Bishop of Ely, Roger Earl
of Norfolk, and Marescal of England, Robert de Veer Earl of Oxford, Humfry de
Bohun, William Montchensey, and the Major of London put their Seals to the
Writing; Done in the Parliament at London, in the June 1264. that is, according
to the Writ directed to the Conservators of the Peace of each County, to send
four Knights to Treat in Parliament, etc. on the Octaves of Trinity, June the
22d. Easter day being that year, April the 20th. as has been before noted in
the Margin. And that this Instrument was ready drawn, and that there could be
little or no debate about so great and weighty Affair, appears clearly by the
next Append. n. 214. Nine to be named to the King for his Council.
Record; by which it is Manifest, That the King gave Power to Stephen Bishop of
Chichester, Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of
Gloucester and Hertford, to name nine, as well Prelates as others, by whose
Advice he would Govern the Nation, and commanded them to proceed to the
Nomination: Which Record is dated, June 23d. the day after their first Meeting.

The short Account f. 394. lin. 3. Mat. Westminster his Account of this Affair
agrees with the Record.
Mat. of Westminster gives of this Matter, in many things agrees with the
Records; The Prelates, Earls and Barons (says he) of that party, which
seditiously held their King Prisoner, met at London, and unmindful of the
Compromise at Jews, the Oath they had taken, and their own Salvation,
bethought themselves of new Ordinances for the Government of the Kingdom: And
Ordained two Earls, and one Bishop, Elected by the Community, should Choose
nine Persons, of which three should Assist the King; and by the Counsel of
those three and nine, all the Affairs, as well of the Kings Household as of the
Kingdom, should be directed. And that what the King should do without the
Advice of them, at least of the three, should signify nothing: And so the
Earls of Leycester, and Gloucester, and Bishop of Chichester ( Ibid. n. 10. The
Bishop of Chichester's promised to such as should die fighting against the King.
who promised all that fought stoutly against the King, and were killed in the
Battle Jews, immediate entrance into Heaven) were Constituted the three chief
Counselors. Then Ibid. lin. 16. They send Letters to the Pope's Legate, and
King of France, to acquaint them with their proceedings.
threatening the King they would choose another, and the Prince to keep him
perpetually in Prison; Commento fraudis consentire coacti sunt, they were
compelled to consent to this Cheat.

Having contrived and perfected these Ordinances, they sent Ibid. lin. 16. They
send Letters to the Pope's Legate, and King of France, to acquaint them with
their proceedings.
Letters to the Bishop of la Sabina a Cardinal, and then the Popes Legate
France, and to the Illustrious King of France, That they would utterly annul
the Compromise made at Jews, and Establish this New Peace made by an Amicable
Consent of both Parties; And the Bishops of London, Winchester and Worcester,
and some others of the Province of Canterbury earnestly beseeched the foresaid
Legate, That he would be very ready to promote that Peace. And upon the
Saturday, after the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin, which is September the 8th.
the Bishops of London, Worcester and Winchester, with Hugh Justiciary of
England, Peter Montfort, and Richard de Mepham, Archdeacon of Oxford, were
Append. n. 215. Procurators and Commissioners appointed to Treat of the Peace.

The King to be obliged to whatever Peter Montfort should swear.


Constituted Procurators, and Commissioners to treat in the presence of the
Magnificent Prince, the Illustrious King of France, and the venerable Father G.
Bishop of la Sabina, and Legate of the Apostolic See, or either of them, about
the Reformation of the State of the Kingdom of England, with Power to do
whatever they thought fit in this Matter, and give Security for the Performance
of it, with a special Clause of Power to Peter that what he should swear to,
the King must be obliged to it. What these Commissioners did, I find not, it is
probable the Barons kept themselves to the Instrument of Government made at
London without Alteration.

About the beginning of this 48th year of this King, Montfort and his
Confederates, had caused it to be spread abroad, That he intended to bring an
Append. 216. Montfort causes false reports to be spread of the Kings design;
And then Taxes the people.

Four or five to be sent out of every Town to the Seaside.

The Kings endeavor to undeceive his people.


Army of Strangers into the Kingdom to destroy the Nation, Kings Privity or
Knowledge, especially in Warwic and Leycestershire, to maintain four or five
men out of every Town to march to the Seaside, and defend the Nation against
Strangers. And to undeceive the People, the King Wrote to all the Sheriffs of
England, to make Proclamation at the County Courts, and in every Hundred, and
good Town of the County, That he intended no such Thing, but resolved to Keep
the Nation in Peace, and commands the People not to believe any such
Suggestions, nor to pay the Taxes and Tallages, made o^ imposed on them,
against their Liege Lord, nor to Arm themselves, nor go out of their County,
without his Special Command.

Montfort continues to create jealousies and fears, among the People.
But now when Montfort had the King in his Power, about the beginning July,
these Suggestions and Rumors were renewed and spread abroad to keep the peoples
Heads warm with Jealousies and Fears; and that an Army might always be ready
(for they had made the Country) to Baffle all Attempts, to Rescue the King out
of the Power of the Barons, He was made to own them, and Append. n. 217. The
King forced to own whatever Montfort suggested.
D^clare to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Freemen, and to the whole Community of Counties, That it did certainly appear
to him, that a great Multitude of Strangers (who, or of what London on Sunday,
after the first of August, to March with him from thence, for the Defense of
himself, themselves, and the whole Kingdom against Strangers. And also
Commanded every Sheriff to take with him the Keeper of the as they could, so as
they might be at the place and time aforesaid; letting them know, That if he
should find any Contemners of his Command, or any that should be negligent, or
remiss in the performance of it, that he would seize their Persons and Goods,
as of those that would not preserve him and his Kingdom from confusion, and
perpetual Disinheritance. This Declaration and Command was dated at St. Paul's
London, on the sixth of July.

July Pat. 48 Hen. 3. M. 11. Dors.
he sent his Writ to the Good, best, or stout Men, (probis hominibus) of Len,
Yarmouth, Donwich, Oxford, Ioswich, and all other Cities, Burghs, and Towns,
upon the Coast of Norfolk and Suffolk, to be obedient to the Directions of Hugh
le D'espenser his Justiciary, in securing the Coasts of those Counties, whom he
had sent to them to that purpose.

The Earl of Leicester would be thought a strict observer of the Kings
Commands, that others might really be so, and therefore obtained the Kings
Append n. 218. Montfort rides with a Body of Horse about the Kingdom.
License to Ride with a Body of Armed Horse about the Kingdom, when he had
prohibited all others to do it, by reason of the Hostages and Prisoners he
carried about with him. This License is Dated at St. Paul's London July 16th.

The Forces to be raised against the Invasion of Foreigners, came not in such
numbers as was expected, and therefore the King on the August, Pat. 48 Hen. 3.
M. 7. Dors. The King hastens the March of the new raised Forces.
wrote to the Sheriff of Cambridge and Huntington Shires, to make Proclamation,
That all which were Commanded to be at London, on Sunday next after the first
of August, with their Horse and Arms, and other Force, etc. should march
thither in all have both night and day, under pain of losing all their Lands,
Tenements and Goods, and Danger of Life and Limbs. And if within three or four
days after Proclamation made, they did not March, then he was to take and
detein them in Prison until further Order, and out Lands, Tenements and Goods,
to send as many Armed Men as they would maintein.

People being wearied with Watching, Guarding, The People wearied out with
watching and guarding the Coasts.
and securing the Coasts in Norfolk, Suffolk and Essex against Foreigners,
designed to go to their own Homes, pretending they had been there forty days,
and would stay no longer. The King had notice of their Intentions, and, on the
seventh of September, Pat. 48 Hen. 3. M. 5. Dors.
wrote to all that were assembled for Faith in which they were obliged to him,
and in pain of losing all they had in the Kingdom, they for his, their own,
They are commanded by the King to stay, to keep out Strangers.
and the Defense of the Kingdom against Strangers should stay there, and not
depart, until they received his License. And commanded the Sheriffs to provide
Money from the County, for such as were not able to bear their own Nativity of
our Virgin Mary, (that is, September the eight) or longer, if need should be.
And also commanded the Sheriffs, to seize all the Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels of such as were summoned and appeared not, nor sent, and of all such
as depart without his License, and keep them safe until further Order.

On the 24th of September, the King Pat. 48 Hen. 3. M. 3. Dors.
wrote to the Sheriff of Oxford and Buckingham Shires, to Command and Enjoin
all Knights, and Free-tenants, in his Bailywic, that were able to bear Arms,
and had Lands to the value of an Hundred Shillings, or Ten Pounds a year, under
the penalty of losing all the Lands and Tenements they held in the Kingdom,
that they should come to him in their proper Persons with Horse and Arms,
wherever he was in England, in all Strangers that were to come from beyond
Sea, who were to be furnished with Money for their Expenses in the Army until
Three Weeks after Michaelmass; and the Sheriffs were to provide for the
Expenses of such as were not Able, by taxing the County, and also for the
Expenses of the Foot. Matthew Westminster f. 385. n. 10. What the King of
France thought of the English.
says, That almost all France as far as the Alps, by the Instigation of the
King of France, Peter Earl of Savoy, Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Elect of Lions, and other of the Queens Relations, English, that behaved
themselves Seditiously toward, and Traitorously opposed their King, which might
raise a Suspicion in them, of the Inclinations and willingness of those People
to Assist the King, but speaks not of any Shipping provided, or Forces raised
there to reduce them to Obedience.

Though the Paris, f. 996. n. 40, 50. A. D. 1265. 49th Hen. 3.
King was in the Custody of the Earl of Leicester, and under his Power, Richard
King of Almain Prisoner in the Tower, and their two Eldest Sons Prisoners and
Hostages in Dover Castle: Some Loyal Barons take up Arms against Montfort.
Wales, several Stout and Loyal Barons, Roger Mortimer, James Audley, Roger de
Leyburn, Roger de Clifford, Hamo L'estrange, Hugh Turbervile, and many others,
being much troubled at the Usage of the King and Prince, with one Consent took
Arms against the Earl of Leicester. They brake down the Bridges upon the River
Severn, and secured themselves in the Borders of Wales, on the West side of it.

To Reduce these, Mat. Westminster. f. 389. n. 40, 50. Montfort carries the King with
him to oppose them.
Assumpsit secum Regem Henricum, quem habuit adeo acclivem, etc. Montfort
carried with him the obsequious King (made so by Threats) and marched with a
great Army to Worcester: And having his Fast Friend, Leolin Prince of Wales, to
come upon the back of them, they were forced to make a Peace on Condition, they
should leave the Nation for a year, and deliver up their Castles to Leicester;
The Barons constreined to deliver up their Castles to him.
To which Terms they the more readily consented, that Prince Edward might be
freed of his Imprisonment: by this Means Leicester became possessed of almost
all the Castles upon the Marches from Bristol to Chester; which City and
Castle, with the Earldom and Honor, and the Appurtenances, Prince Edward
granted to him Pat. 49 Hen. 3. M. 6. He made a plentiful provision for himself
and Family.
under pretense of an Exchange, before his Liberty could be Treated of: which
Grant was Confirmed by the King, on the 20th of March following, and also the
Cart 49 Hen. 3. M. 4.
Castle and Honor of Pe^, the Castle and Town of Newcastle Underline in
Staffordshire, were then granted with them, to him and his Heirs.

And now all things being quiet in the Mat. Westminster. f. 390. lin. 7.
Marches of Wales, the King went toward Woodstock to keep his Christmas there;
And the Earl, Fortune favoring him in all things he had contrived, celebrated
the same Ibid lin. 9. He Governs and Orders every thing in the Kingdom.
Feast at his Castle of Kenelworth. At this time all England, but the utmost
North Parts of it, which as yet held out against him, by the Instigation of the
King of Scots, and John Baliol, was subject to him, Ibid n. 10. The King only
as a Shadow and always under a Guard.
all things were ordered by him, all the Kings Castles were put into his hands;
Nor was the King, that had now Reigned near fifty years, any more than a
Shadow, so that he could not walk in his own Land without a Keeper and Guard,
and under the total Disposition of some other person. And his Ibid. f. 394. n.
30. Who were his Keepers.
Keepers usually were Montfort's Sons, Hugh D'espenser, and John Fitz-John; the
Earl of Gloucester being excluded from the Custody of him, whom they only feared
as able to break this Confederacy. They divide the Kings Castles and Forts
among themselves.
All the Kings Castles and strong Forts of the Kingdom, they divided amongst
themselves, and made the Kings capital Enemies Officers of his House.

There was also at this time much Discourse of Ibid. n, 40. Prince Edward
purchases his Liberty.
Releasing Prince Edward, which had continued almost a year, until he had given
him for his Liberty, of being a Prisoner only at large, the Earldom Chester.

And for this The Writ of Summons.
Cause chiefly, and to Treat of some other Difficult Matters of the Kingdom,
was the famous Parliament of the 49th of this King, called, the first Though the
Keepers of the Peace in each County had Writs directed to them to send four
Knig^t^ to that Convention, called a Parliament in June, 48th of this King, yet
that was not a Parliament, according to this Method, and the Usage afterward;
for there was neither Citizens nor Burgesses, nor any to Represent the Chapter
of Cathedral Churches, or the Ordinary Clergy; and without doubt these four
were of the Number of the small Barons, or Tenants, or Community in Capite, and
called to Represent them, to give the more Credit to the Traitorous Ordinance
then made.
Pattern of our Parliament, since that time, or from the eighteenth of Edward
the First. For the History whereof, how it was summoned, why called, and the
old way of Parlements at this time changed, I refer the Reader to my Answer
Petyts Book of the Rights of the Commons asserted, in my Introduction to the
Old English History, from fol. 136. F. to fol. 143. D.

But Prince Edwards Release could not be agreed upon in this Parliament,
whatever other Business might be dispatched, for there was another Treaty about
it with the Great Men, upon Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 100.
Thursday the morrow of Ash Wednesday, and the Discharge from the King to Henry
his Keeper, for the Append. 219. Prince Edward still a Prisoner at large.
Receipt of his Body bears Date 10th of March; and when he was released out of
Dover Castle, he was but a Prisoner at large, and under a Guard, and carried
about with his Father, whethersoever the Earl of Leicester went; and the
Castles of Dover, Scardeburgh, Bamburgh, Nottingham and Corf, were to remain in
the hands of the Barons for five years, as security for him, as well as for the
Peace of the Kingdom, Castra Pat. 49 H. 3. n. 87.
nostra, Dovor, Scardevurgh, Bamburgh, Nottingham and Corf tradenda in Ostagium
etc. who was now grown so great, Paris, f. 997. n. 10.
that the Earl of Gloucester envied him, and thought he was negl^cted, and not
well used by him; for it was not enough for him, thus to carry about the
Captive King, Montfort and the Earl of Gloucester disagree.
but he ordered all the Affairs of the Kingdom as he pleased: Yet that which
most offended the Earl of Gloucester, was, that he took to his own use all the
Profits and Revenues of the Kingdom, and all the Money paid for the The Money
paid for the Ransom of Prisoners was very considerable, and those that took
them challenged it as their own. Append. n. 220.
Marmaduke was taken Prisoner at Jews by Hugh D'espenser; and Compounded with
him for his Liberty, and found Sureties for the payment of seven hundred Mark,
and for their Security engaged his Manor of Lun^.
Ransom of Prisoners which by Agreement, ought to have been divided between
them.

For these Causes there happened a great Difference and falling out between
these two Earls, which the Pat. 49 Hen. 3. m. 13. n. ^4. The King endeavors to
reconcile the two Earls.
King, by Monforts own Contrivance, endeavored to reconcile, by the mediation
of some Bishops; and so confident was he, That he caused the King to Ibid. n.
61.
write to all the Keepers of the Peace and Sheriffs in England, to apprehend
Earls, and affrighted the people with Jealousies and Fears of a new War. And
particularly to Ralph Basset of Drayton, Ibid.
Keeper of the Peace in the Counties of Salop and Stafford, and the Sheriffs of
the same Counties to suppress the Forces Roger Clifford and other Great Men of
the Marches were Raising: These Writs bear Date at Hereford, May the 10th. and
were issued by the Command of the King, the Earl of Leicester, Justitiary,
Peter Montfort, Roger John, and Giles Argenten; and Sciendum est quod liter^
istae emanarunt per preceptum Regis, Commitis Leicestriae Justiciarium, Petrum
de Monteforti, Rogerum de Sancto Iohanne, and Aegidio de Argenten.

The Earl of Gloucester would not be reconciled to Montfort.
But Simon Montfort, who put forth every thing in the Kings Name, was deceived;
for notwithstanding all the Labor of the Mediators, the Earl of Gloucester
would not be Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 54.
reconciled to him, but withdrew John de Warrenna Earl of Surrey and Sussex,
and William de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, who a while before had come from
beyond Sea, and landed with some small Forces at that Town, who marched from
thence, with what numbers they could, to the assistance of the Barons Marchers:
To whom also came Prince Edward, after he had made his Escape from Hereford on
Thursday in Whitsun-week, which Easter day April 5th.
was on the 28th of May that year.

On the 30th of the same Month, the King Append. n. 221. The King esteems his
Son, Prince Edward, a Rebel.
wrote to all his Tenants in Capite, as well Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, as Earls Barons, Knights, and all others, except those that were of the
party of the Earl of Gloucester; That whereas he, and certain of his Great Men
and Feudataries, sometime since came to Hereford, to take care of the Peace of
those Parts, hoping to have found his Son Edward a great and cheerful Assistant
in that Business: He on the Thursday in Whitsun-week, Knights which accompanied
him out of Hereford, to take the Air, and were his Guard, by the contrivance of
two Knights, and four Esquires, that were privy to the Design, and carried him
off, intending, as he certainly believed, to go to John Waren, and William de
Valentia, and the Barons Marchers, his Rebels and Disturbers of his Peace; He
therefore commanded them by the Faith, Homage and Love, in which they were
bound to him, to come with all haste, by Night and by Day with Horse and Arms,
and all their Service and Force to Worcester, to go with him against his
Enemies and Rebels.

On the 7th of June, he Append n. 222. He prohibit All from Aiding or A^sisting
his So^
wrote to the Guardians of the Peace, and Sheriffs of every County, to Prohibit
by Proclamation, all People of Aid or Assistance to his Son Edward, the Earl of
Gloucester, or any Rebels of their Confederacy: But whereas he had lately sent
his Letters into all Counties, and commanded all men should take an Oath to
observe the Ordinances made at London, therefore all men in every County should
rise against the Rebels, Disturbers of the Peace, and Transgressors of that
Ordinance, and Arrest their Bodies, and have them in safe Custody. These
Letters or Writs were directed into the several Counties by the King, Earl of
Leicester Justiciary, Peter Montfort, Giles Argenten, and Roger St. John. On
the same Cl. 49 He^ 3. M. 4. Dors.
day he wrote to Roger Bigot Earl of Norfolk, to hinder all Combinations and
Attempts to annul those Ordinances and Provisions in Norfolk and Suffolk.

On the 8th of the same Month, a Letter in the Kings Name was Pat. 49 Hen. 3.
m. 13. n. 54. The Bishops commanded by the King to Excomm^cate his Son*
written to the Bishop of London, and the other Bishops of the Province of
Canterbury, Rex venerabilibus in Christo patribus H. London, and caeteris
Episcopis, etc. in which they were required to Excommunicate by name, in their
several Diocesses, his Contumacious, Rebellious Son, and other Rebels: Et est
litera Duplicata per Comitem Leicestriae Justiciarium, Petrum de Monteforti,
Egidium de Argenten and Rogerum de Sancto Iohanne: And this Letter was double,
by the Earl of Leicester, Peter Montfort, Giles Argenten, and John St. John; no
mention of the King.

On the 26 of the same, a Letter in the Kings Name was Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 46.
directed to the Major, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the whole Community of London,
Rex Majori, Aldermanis, Vicecomitibus, and toti Communitati London. Salutem,
etc. wherein he thanks them for their Fidelity and Constancy to him and his
friends, and desires them to continue in them, and to contribute their utmost
assistance, to Suppress and Destroy his Rebels where and of what Quality
soever, and their Favorers, by all ways and means they should think expedient.
Signed King, the Earl of Leicester, etc. as before. Dated at Monemuth.

On the 28th of June, a Writ was Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 45. The King constreined t^
declare his Loyal Subjects Rebels.
directed to Simon Montfort the Younger, (second Son of the Earl of Leicester)
Guardian of the Peace in Surrey and Sussex, in the Kings Name: That whereas his
Son Edward, and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, together John de Warenna,
William de Valentia, Roger Mortimer, James Audley, and other Rebels adhering to
them, had seized diverse Towns and Castles, and raised New War in the Kingdom;
He Commanded and Enjoined him to give his utmost help to him, and all of his
Party to Destroy and Suppress those Rebels, and all others, and all their
Favorers. Dated at Monemouth. The same Letters were directed to Brian Goniz
Guardian of the Peace for Summerset and Dorset-shires, To Hugh Peverel Guardian
of the Peace for Devonshire, to Ralph Arundel and Adam de Gurdun: Per Regem,
Comitem Leicestriae, etc. By the King, the Earl of Leicester, and the others as
before.

All July, Montfort, with the King in his Custody, was in Herefordshire and
South Wales; in the mean time his Son Simon got together what Forces he could
out of Surrey, Sussex, Kent, Hamshire, and the South of England, and Paris, f.
998. n. 10. and Mat. Westminster. f. 393. n. 10. Prince Edward surpriseth Montforts
Son.
marched toward Kenelworth Castle Warwickshire, there to meet his Father, and
join their Forces. But Prince Edward having notice of it, he and the Earl of
Gloucester marched from Worcester in the night, and surprised them in their
Quarters early in the Morning, on the first of August, before they reached the
Castle, and took the Earl of Oxford and thirteen Bannerets Prisoners, Simon and
a few others escaping into the Castle. Paris ut supra.
On that day the Earl of Leicester came from South Wales, to a Manor of the
Bishops of Worcester, within three Miles of it, and staid Prince then returned
from Kenelworth to Worcester; Montfort hearing of it, in the Evening when it
grew dark, left his Quarters and went to Evesham.

Next day Ibid. He hinders their joining their Forces.
the Prince passed the River Avon, and intercepted all Intercourse between
Montfort and his Son Simon, then at Kenelworth, and kept them from joining
their Forces. On the day following, he marched toward Evesham, and came before
one part Earl of Gloucester with his Forces came before another part; and Roger
Mortimer, with his Troops, before a third: The Earl of Leicester being thus
surrounded, must either yield or fight. Ibid. n. 20. Montfort defeated and
slain.
On the fifth of August both Armies were drawn up in a large Field without the
Town; after a sharp Fight, the Barons Army began to give way, and the Earl of
Leicester was killed, and with him twelve Bannerets, Milites vexilliferi
duodecim; To wit, Henry his Son, Peter Montfort, Hugh D'espenser, William
Mandev^ll, de Crepping, William York, Robert de Tregos, Thomas de Hostilee,
John Beuchamp, Wido de Bailiol, Roger de Roulee, and many others of Inferior
Degree with Foot, and in great number. And so (says Rishanger, the Continuer of
Paris) this Ibid. n. 30. His Character by Rishanger.
Magnificent Earl finished his labors, who not only laid out what he had, but
himself also, to Rescue the Poor from Oppression, to assert Justice, and the
Right of the Kingdom. Sicque labores finivit vir ille Magnificus Simon Comes,
qui non solum sua, sed seipsum impendit pro oppressione pauperum, assertione
Justitiae, and: And then proceeds to tell what a Religious and Devout Person he
was in the Religion of those times, what Deference he gave to the Clergy, and
how they loved and honored him. And says further, it was Reported, he was
famous for many Ibid. n. 40.
Miracles after his Death, but for fear of the King they were not published.

Into this Battle, Montfort and the Barons forced the King, Mat. Westminster. f. 395.
n. 20. The King wounded in this Battle.
Exeuntes Comes Leicestriae and Barons, una cum Domino Rege) where he was
dangerously wounded, by a Dart thrown at him unawares. In presenti Paris, f.
999. lin. 1.
bello, Dominus Rex extitit vulneratus, and Morti pene vicinus Jaculo in eum ex
improviso dijecto.

After this Battle we have a full Discovery of Montforts Practices to write
what he pleased, A Discovery of Montforts Villainous Practice.
and send forth what Writs he pleased in the Kings Name, and Seal them against
his Will with his Seal. King Henry would have given the place of Treasurer of
Y^rk to Edmund Mortimer, when in his Custody; but against his Will, the Earl of
Leicester sealed a Patent of it to Almaric Montfort; and now when the King had
regained the Liberty of his Person and Seal, Edmund Mortimer* Pat. 49 Hen. 3.
m. 11. intus in cedula consuta. Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 33. Pat. 49 Hen. 3. m. 1.
Cum post Bellum habitum inter nos and Quosdam fideles nostros ex part una,
and Simonem de Montiforti, quondam Comitem Leicestriae, and fautores suos ex
altera apud Jews extiterimus in Custodia prefati Simonis, and aliorum fautorum
suorum, per Quod Tempore istius Custodiae, contra voluntatem nostram, prefatus
Comes literas sigillo nostro, Quo non nos, sed Comes ipse utebatur pro suo
Arbitrio, formari fecit, Continentes, Quod nos Thesaurariam Eboracensem
Almarico de Monteforti Concessimus, etc. This Grant bears Date August 7th at
Worcester, two days after the Battle, and gives us the true Reason why, in the
Kings Name, so many Writs and Commissions issued against his Son and Friends,
and against their own Interests.

Upon the next day, by the Mediation of some Bishops and others, the Pat. 49
Hen. 3. m. 11. The Burgesses of Hereford received into favor upon Condition.
Burgesses of Hereford were received into Favor, and their Kings Will, for
their Transgressions against him and his Son Edward; and upon the 24th of the
same Month they were Pat. 49 Hen. 3. n. 38.
Fined 560 Marks.

The King willing to show Pat. 49 Hen. 3. m. 11. Dors.
Mercy and Favor to Offenders, rather than take Revenge of them, on the 26th
of August, appointed Commissioners to receive into Favor all such of the
Cinque Ports that adhered to Montfort, as would submit to his Pleasure, and
Compound

On the Paris, f. 999. lin. 3. The Liberties of London seized.
eighth of September he called a Parliament at Winchester, by Advice whereof,
the Liberties of the City of London were seized for their Rebellion, and the
greatest Offenders committed to Prison, to be punished at the Kings Pleasure.

This Parliament also Append. n. 223. The Parliament gave the King the Rebels
Lands.
gave the King all the Rebels Lands, and Commissioners in each County, who with
the Sheriff were to Extend them, and return the Extent, with the names of the
Lands, and the names of those whose Lands they were, to him at Westminster by
the Feast of St. Edward (that is the 13th of October) and they were to appoint
two Collectors in every Hundred to Collect Michaelmass Rent, and to deliver
them a Note what it was. This Commission bears Date at Winchester the 21st of
September. Paris says, The King grants them to his faithful Subjects.
The King on the Feast of St. Edward Disinherited Montfort, and gave their
Lands to those that had faithfully served him, according to their Merits, f.
999. lin. 7.

On the sixth of October the King Append. n. 224. His Writ to the Guardians of
the City of London.
wrote to his four Guardians of his City of London, Humfry de Bohun Earl of
Hereford, John de Bailol, Roger de Leyburn, and Robert Walerand, That whereas
the Mayor, Citizens and whole Comunity of the City aforesaid, had as well
concerning their Lives, and Limbs, as their Lands, Tenements, Goods, and other
things whatsoever; submitted themselves to the Kings pleasure. Therefore they
were to cause Proclamation to be made, That his Peace should be firmly kept in
the City and parts adjoining, to preserve it from being plundered.

On the same day the King Append. N. 225. He makes Philip de Covel Sheriff of
Middlesex.
directed his Writ to all such as had Business at the County Court for
Middlesex, that because he had not then appointed a Sheriff in that County, he
commanded them to submit to and obey Philip de Conel, or Covel, as his Sheriff,
who

On the same Pat. 49. H. 3. N. 21. He gave the Lands of two Citizens of London
to his Son Edward.
day he declares he had given all the Lands and Goods of Thomas Diwelesdon, and
Michael Th^ny Citizens of London, to his Son Edward.

On the 15th of October the King Pat. 49. H 3. M. 4. He commits the Custody of
London to Hugh F^tz-Oto during pleasure.
committed the Custody of City and Tower of London to Hugh Fitz Oto, during
pleasure, answering the profits of them at the Exchequer, and Roger Leyburn was
commanded to deliver them, and the Citizens and Community of London were
commanded to be answerable, and submit to him in all things appertaining to his
Guardianship.

This year died Pope Urban the 4th, to whom succeeded Mat. Westminster. f. 396. N.
50. Pope Urban the 4th dies, and Clement the 4th Succeeds.
Clement the 4th, before his Consecration he was Guido Bishop of la Sabina, a
Cardinal and Legate sent for England; but the Ibid. f. 397. lin. 6. Ottob^n sent
a Legate into England.
Barons Bishops would not suffer him to Land there when he was come as far as
Bologne in France, and therefore he Excommunicated several of the Bishops. He
at the Request of King Henry sent Ottobon Deacon-Cardinal of St. Adrian Legate
into England, and Crowned Paris f. 999. n. 50. A. D. 1266. 50 Hen. 3. Those
that were forced to serve against the King had their Lands restored
Charles Brother to the King of France, King of Sicily at Rome.

Many persons pretended and pleaded for themselves, That against their Wills
they were forced into the Service of Simon Montfort: The King directed his Writ
to the Claus. 50 H. 3. M. 10. Dors.
Sheriffs of several Counties to make Inquisition whether it was so or not, and
if found to be so, they had seisin of their Lands again, so as they stood to
Right in the Kings Court. Dated November 6.

The men of the Cinque Ports that were the Kings Enemies and Earl of Leycester,
committed Rapin and Piracy at Sea: The King Claus. 50. H. 3. M. 9. Dors.
wrote to the Bailiffs and Good men of Yarmouth to set forth 20 Ships, with 40
men in every Ship at least, to be at Sandwich by the first of January, to
Chase, and Fight with and take his Enemies. Dated November 24.

The City and Tower of London and County of Middlesex, with all Appertinencies,
were Pat. 50. H. 3. M. 41. n. 117. The King appoints two Keepers of London
during pleasure.
committed to the Custody of John Walerand, and John de la Lind, during
pleasure, to answer the Profits Exchequer; and Hugh Fitz- Oto was commanded to
deliver them. Dated November 28.

The King sent his Claus* 50. ^ 3. M. 8. Dors. He commands all his Military
Tenants to attend him at Northampton.
Precepts to all the Sheriffs in England, to make Proclamation in their
respective Counties, That all who held of him in Capite and ought him service,
should be at Northampton on the 27th of January, to go against his Enemies in
the Castle of Kenelworth and other Straglers that would renew the War if not
prevented. Dated December the 20th at Northampton. The Abbot of Peterburgh
Ibidem.
made fine, and compounded with the King

The King at Paris f. 1000. n. 20. Simon Montfort the younger submits to the
Kings pleasure.
Christmas was at Northampton with his Queen, The King of Almain, and the
Legate, by the mediation of friends, Simon Montfort the younger, submitted
himself to the Judgment of the Legate, the King of Almain his Uncle, and Philip
Basset, and left it to them to make what Terms for him they thought fit with
the King, saving to himself his Life and Limbs, and excepting perpetual

Simon was brought to the King, and it was Ibid. n. 30. Kenelworth Castle
refuse to yield.
Determined he should deliver the Castle of Kenelworth to the King, and depart
the Kingdom, and receive out of the Exchequer every year 500 Marks, until there
should be a Peace established. But those within the Castle, not liking these
Conditions, would neither yield it to the King nor Simon; who was yet under a
Guard, and said they received Simon, but from the Countess his Mother, and
would surrender it to none but her, and that in her presence.

The Citizens of London made Pat. 50. H. 3. M. 35. Cedula. The City of London
Fined, and pardoned and restored under Conditions.
Fine to the King for their Offenses toward him, his Queen, Richard King of
Almain his Brother, and his Son Edward 2000 Marks, for which he pardoned their
Transgressions and Excesses, omnes Transgressiones and Excessus eisdem Civibus,
etc. And gave them leave to receive the Rents of their Houses and Tenements,
within the City and without, due from Christmas then last past: and granted
they should have the Goods and Chattels of such Malefactors as had been against
himself, or his Son Edward in the late War, and had been, or were to be
indicted, Except the Goods and Chattels of those whose Bodies he had given to
his Son Edward. Exceptis Bonis and Catallis eorum quorum Corpora eidem filio
nostro concessimus. And except the Houses, Lands, Pleges of Citizens, for the
security of the City which had been delivered to the King, except such as were
Pleges or Hostages to his Son for his Prisoners, and except the Pleges of
Citizens that were fled. And further he Granted the Citizens liberty to
Quousque de Statu Civitatis praedictae de Consilio nostro before Ordinetur.
And directed, That no Citizen who in the late Troubles appeared by manifest
proof to have been Enemy to himself or Son, for the future, should remain or be
Conversant in the City. Dated at Northampton the 10th of January.

There was an Ibidem.
Order from the King to John Ibidem.
Walerand, and John de la Lind his Guardians of the City of London, reciting,
That whereas he had received into his Peace, or Favor, the Citizens of London,
according to a Form Granted in his Letters Patents, That they should release
the Pledges of the Citizens they had in their custody, and permit them to go
whether they would, Except, etc. Witness the King at Northampton the 11th of
January.

The like Letters were directed to the Constable of Rochester Castle, with the
same Test.

All the Pat. 50. H. 3. M. 29. Dors. The Disinherited had a time set to make
their peace with the King.
Disinherited, (for by that name now all the Rebellious Barons and their
Confederates were known and distinguished) had leave and safe conduct to come
to the King until Easter, to Treat with him, and make their peace, and to
return without injury or affront to the place from whence they came. Witness
the King at Westminster the 11th of February.

The King Pat. 50. H. 3. M. 24.
wrote to the Bishops and all other Praelates, (that is, Abbats, Priors, etc.
these were called Praelati) in England* That when he was in the Custody of
Simon Montfort, they had Collected a Claus. 48. H. 3. M. 3. Dors. Dated the
first of September, by which Record it appears to be so.
Tenth of all the Church Revenues in England for one Year, for the Defense of
the Kingdom, and Church of England, as it was said (pro Defensione Regni
Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae, sicut Dicebatur,) He now being willing it
should be expended for the true Tenth so Collected, unto the Bishops of Bath
and Wells, and Lichfield and Coventry appointed receivers of it by himself and
Ottobon the Legate, according to the Form of the Mandate of the said Legate to
them directed. Witness the King at Westminster the 15th of March.

The Kings Forces though they were before Paris f. 1000. n. 30. Kenelworth
Castle refuse to submit.
Kenelworth Castle, yet they had not so straightened it, but the Defendents,
which Claus. 50. H. 3. M. 5. Dors. Their barbarous usage of one of the Kings
Messengers.
made Excursions, plundered and burnt the Countries, and took one of the Kings
Messengers passing by them, and cut off his Hand, and in contempt of the King
sent him to him. Ibidem.
(Quendam de nunciis nostris, nuper per parts illas transeuntem, (that is, by
Kenelworth Castle) Ceperint and ei manum truncarint, ac ipsum sic truncatum and
turpiter Mutilatum, ad majorem nostri contemptum ad nostri praesentiam
transmiserint, etc.) Ibidem. He resents it very ill.
To revenge such an impious affront the King commanded all and singular
(omnibus and singulis) Sheriffs of England, should publish in their Counties,
and all Market Towns of their Counties, and also then and there make
Proclamation, That all who ought him Service, should Personally appear with
Horse and Arms, and besides their Service, with all the Force they could make
to Oxford within three weeks after Easter, to go with him against his Enemies
and Rebels in Kenelworth Castle and other where, and ordered Watches to be set
in Towns and Burghs of every County, that if any of his Enemies passed through
them, Sheriff, and if they would not or could not be taken, then the Watchmen
and others to levy Hue and Cry every way, and follow them night and day with
the Inhabitants of the Towns through which they passed, until they were taken.
Dated at the same time and place as the last.

April 30th, this year Pat. 50* Hen 3. m. 1^ m. 49. The Kings Grant to the City
of London to choos^ a Sheriff for Middlesex.
the King Granted the Barons and Citizens of London might choose one of their
Fellow Citizens, who had been Loyal to him, and his Son Edward, (Qui nostrae
and Edwardi primogeniti nostri fidelitati hactenus adhaesit) to the Office of
Sheriff of Middlesex, and Keeper or Guardian of the City of London, so as he
should Exchequer, and take his Oath of Fidelity or Fealty (Sacramentum
Fidelitatis) there as had been accustomed, and should also answer the Farms of
them at the Exchequr, as the Sheriffs of Ancient Time had done. Dated at
Northampton, 30 April.

It was spread Cl. 50. Hen. 3. m. 5. Dors.
about the Kingdom, that the Barons and Confederates were Disinherited without
Judgment of the Kings Court, in Detraction to his Justice. He therefore caused
Proclamation to be Burghs and Market Towns, He promised remedy to such as found
themselves injured.
that if any of them found themselves injured by himself, or any of his
Counselors, in that behalf, he should come to his Court, and do and receive
Right, according to the Law and Custom of the Kingdom. Witness the King at
Northampton, May 3d. Nay so just he was, that when Cl. 50. Hen. 3. m. 10. Dors.
An instance o^ his Justice.
Robert de Andewerk was accused by his Enemies, that he was in Arms against him
and his Son, yet he would not give his Lands to any one, until it appeared by
Inquisition it was so.

The Continuer of Paris f. 1000. n. 40.
speaking of the Accommodation, that was to have been perfected between the King
and young Simon Montfort about Christmas, when it took not effect, says, the
King went and besieged Kenelworth Castle, which held out against him half a
year, yet at last for want of Victuals was surrendered to him, His kindness to
the Defendents of Kenelworth Castle.
saving to the Defendants their Lives and Limbs, and necessary Goods. And adds,
it was a wonder the King should be so kind to them, when as Kingdom, and but a
little before cut off an Hand of one of his Messengers, they had taken, and
then sent him to him in scorn.

According to this Relation, it is probable, the Castle was surrendered about the
middle, or toward the 20 th. of July: for by a Cl. 50. Hen. 3. m. 2.
Writ dated the 21st of that Month, directed to the Sheriff of Stafford and
Shropshire, not to disturb, or suffer to be disturbed several therein named,
who were admitted to the Kings Peace, by the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry
in his own Diocese, according to the Kings Commission to that purpose, he was
then in the possession of it.

The same Historian Vt supra. n. 50. The Disinherited enter the Isle of Ely.
tells us, That on the Eve of St. Lawrence, August the 9th, the Disinherited
entered the Isle of Ely, having first Wasted and Plundered the Counties of
Huntington and Cambridge.

Soon after the King Pat. 50. Hen. 3. m. 7. Dors.
wrote to the Inhabitants of Essex and Hertfordshire, to assist John de Burgh,
and other Loyal Men, that he had appointed to pursue, take and imprison his
Enemies, that had gotten into the Isle of Ely, with Horse and Arms, and all
their Force, as the said John and others should direct. Witness the King at
Kenelworth the 18 of August.

Upon the Pat. 50 Hen 3. m. 9. Dors. Answer to Mr. Petyts Rights of the
Commons, etc. f. 34, 35, 36.

A Parliament called at Kenelworth.


Octaves of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin (that is August 22d) at the
Request of Ottovon the Legate he summoned his Parliament to meet at Kenelworth,
where it was Agreed and Granted by Common Assent of the Bishops, Abbats,
Priors, Earls, Barons, and all others, that Six Persons, That is to say, the
Bishop of Excester, the Bishop of Bath, the Elect of Worcester, Sir Alan
Zouthe, Sir Roger Suine^y, and Sir Robert Walerand, by their Oath there made,
should choose Six others, no ways suspected, who knew best, and would according
to their understanding, do Fact of the Disinherited, Dictum de Kenelworth where
and upon what what account made.
with Full Power from the King and Great Men to Determine and Conclude
concerning it, which Determination was called the Dictum In Biblioth. Cotton.
Claud. D. 2. f. 132. ^. the most perfect amongst the old Stat. of Ber^^lats
Edition 1540. in 2d Part. p. 66. b. imperfect, and in the Old Statutes at large.

Who were to compound for their Estates.


de Kenelworth; and if there arose any Difference between the Twelve, that was
to stand Good and Firm, which received the Assent and Approbation Legate, and
Henry Son to Richard King of Almain; and they were to finish their Work by the
Feast of All Saints.

This Determination or Award was made to better the Condition of the
Disinherited, and to turn the Forfeitures and loss of their Estates into a
Composition for them; and therefore

All who began the War, and persevered in it.

All who violently and maliciously kept Northampton against the King.

All that Fought against the King at Jews.

All that were taken at Kenelworth, under the Command of young Simon Montfort,
who had Plundered Winchester, or were in any other

All fighting against him at Evesham.

All that were in the fight at Chesterfield.

All that freely sent their Service, (that is, their Horse and Arms) against
the King or his Son.

All Bailiffs and Servants of the Earl of Leicester, that plundered their
Neighbors, burnt their Houses, or killed them, or did other mischiefs.

What their composition was.
Should pay the value of their Lands for five years; and if they paid it, they
were to have their Land again. The Money was to be paid at two or three short
payments; if they paid the whole, all their King had given them, till the Money
was raised; and out of these Compositions, by the persuasion of the
Arbitrators, the King was to gratify such as had done him faithful Service.

The Earl Ferrars, and Henry Hastings, were to pay seven years profits of their
Lands.

Those who had committed less Falts than those above named, Such as had no
Lands were to be punish^ed in their Goods.
compounded for, or were fined, three years, two years, one year, or half a
years, Rent of their Lands according to the Nature of their

All Obligations, Writings or Instruments made by the King or his Son
concerning Oxford provisions, or made or entered into by any of the Kings
faithful Subjects, by reason of the Troubles, were declared null and void by
this Award: Whereby it was declared, the King might and ought to exercise his
Royal Power and Authority, without the set, or contradiction of any one, by
which, contrary to the Laws and Customs Royal Dignity might be offended: Yet
the Great Charter, and Charter of the Forest, were to remain in full force by
this Judgment.

The Commissioners humbly beseech the King and Legate, None to call Simon
Montfort a Saint.
that under danger of Corporal Punishments, and Ecclesiastic Censures, they
would strictly forbid any to speak of Simon M^ntfort as a Saint, or to spread
abroad the vain and foolish Miracles reported of him.

They also reverently and humbly beseech the Legate to Absolve the King, and all
others of the Kingdom both great and small, All who had sworn to observe the
Oxford Provision to be Absolved.
from the Oaths they had taken to observe certain Charters (concerning Oxford
provisions) to the observation whereof they were bound by the Sentence of
Excommunication pronounced against such as did not observe them.

Award, or Dictum de Kenelworth, A. D. 1266. 51 of Hen. 3. who began his Reign,
October. 19.
was finished and published in the Castle of Kenelworth, on the 31 of October,
in the year of Grace 1266, and of the Reign of King Henry 51.

This Award had not its desired Effect, The Disinherited in the Isle of Ely
would not submit.
for many of the Disinherited, that had got into the Isle of Ely, as was said
before, continued there, and made Excursions, and wasted, and plundered the
Countries round about, and would not submit unto it.

Paris, f. 1001. n. 40. Bishops that favored Simon Montfort excommunicated by
the Legate.
the Legate called a Council at Northampton, and Excommunicated all the Bishops
and Clercs which favored Simon Montfort, and gave him Assistance against the
King, and by name John Bishop of Winchester, Walter of Worcester, Henry of
London, and Stephan Bishop of Chichester; the Bishop of Worcester dyed, Febr. 5
th next following, and the other three went to Rome to Beg the Popes Favor: At
the same time also, he Excommunicated

After that he sent Ibid. ^. 1003. n. 30* 40, 50, and f. 1004. lin. 1. The
Disinherited in the Isle of Ely admonished by the Legate. Their Answe^ to him.
Messengers to the Disinherited in the Isle of Ely, and admon^shed them to
return to the Faith and Unity of the holy Mother Church. To this they answered,
They firmly held the same Faith they learned from the holy Bishops, Saint
Robert (that is Grostest or Grou^head, of Lincoln) St. Edmund, and St. Richard,
(both Archbishops of Canterbury) and other Catholic men, That they believed
the Articles of Faith contained in the Creed; the Gospels also and Sacraments,
which the Universal Church held and believed, they did Believe, and in that
Faith would live and die.

Secondly, He admonished them to return to the Obedience of the Roman Court:
(Romanae Curiae). To this they Answer, They did Obey the Roman as the Head of
all Christianity, but not the Lust, Covetousness and Exactions of those that
ought to Govern it.

Thirdly, He admonished them to return to the Kings Peace, according to the
late Award. To this they Answer, First, That the Legate was sent into England to
make Peace, but he rather kept up the War, because he manifestly joined with
the Kings party and encouraged it, and in so doing, maintained the War.
Secondly, they Answer, The Award was void, for that the Pope commanded the King
and Legate that none should be Disinherited, and they had such a Fine set upon
them as it amounted to a Disinheriting.

Fourthly, He admonished them to receive Absolution from the sentence of
Excommunication pronounced against them according to the Form of the Church. To
this they Answer, Their first Oath (that was to maintain Oxford provisions) was
for the Advantage of the Kingdom, and the whole Church, and all the Prelates of
the Kingdom Excommunication against all those that should act contrary thereto;
that they resolved to stand to that Oath, and were ready to Die for it, and
Exhort the Legate to revoke his Sentence, otherwise they would Appeal to the
Apostolic See, or to a General Council, or the Supreme Judge.

Fifthly, He admonished them not to commit any more Roberies, nor damnifie any
one. To this they answered, That when as they fought for Benefit of the Kingdom
and Church, they ought to live upon the Goods of their Enemies which detained
their Lands.

From Answering, they proceed to Ibid. n. 10, 20. They urge the Legate to
admonish the King.

Their insolent Demands.


urge the Legate to admonish the King to remove Strangers from his Council, and
they themselves admonish the Legate, that their Lands may be Restored without
Composition, that Oxford provisions might be observed, that they might have
Pledges or Hostages sent them into the Isle for Security, that they King would
keep his promises; and then make the same Complaints that Montfort and the
Barons made many years before, and enumerated the common pretended Grievances
of men of their temper, and desire they might be Redressed.

A. D. 1267. 51 Hen. 3.
Toward the Spring the King was in extreme want of Money, and the Legate being in
the Tower of London, he wrote to him from Cambridge Pat. 51 Hen. 3. m. 24.
Dor^. The King forced to pawn his Jewels for money.
Jewels, and other precious things he had there, and in the Abbey of
Westminster, and to pawn for as much as he could, and caused those that had
them in their Custody, to deliver them to him; and in the same Letter wrote to
him, that concerning the State and Liberties of the City of London he would do
what was expedient ( in instanti Parliamento apud Sanctum Edmumdum) in the
Parliament forthwith to be holden at St. Edmunds Bury. This Letter is Dated,
March the 8th, Test Rege apud Cantebrigiam.

Some, or it may be all the Transactions of this Parliament, the f. 1002. n. 30,
40, 50.
Continuer of Mat. Paris relates thus, (though somewhat preposterously, King
caused to be summoned the Earls, Barons, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, all
that ought him Military Service, A Parliament called at St. Edmund Bury*
to meet at St. Edmunds Bury with their Horse and Arms, to go against those
which against his Peace had seized the Isle of Ely; All others obeyed the Kings
Command, but the Earl of Gloucester, who was in the Confines of Wales raising a
great Army, and did not come. John Waren and William de Valentia were sent to
admonish him to come ( ad illum Parliamentum) Letters Patents sealed with his
Seal (literas patentes, sigillo suo signatas acceperunt) in which he promised
never to bear Arms against his Lord the King, nor his Son Edward, unless in his
own Defense. When those that were summoned to the Parliament met, ( Abadunatis,
Qui ad Parliamentum citati fuerant) except those in Rebellion. The King and the
Legate required their compliance with these Articles.

First, That the Prelates and Rectors of Churches, What demands were made by
the King and Legate, and the Answer to them.
should grant them (sibi conciderent) the Tenths of their Churches, for three
years next to come, and for the year last past, as they gave the In September
the 49 of Hen. 3. See in the year before.
Barons to keep the Coast against the Invasions of Strangers. To this they
answered, That the War began by Evil Desires, and did then continue, and for
that Reason it was necessary to lay aside these Evil Demands, and Treat of the
Peace of the Kingdom, and make use of the Parliament to the Benefit of and
Kingdom, and not to Extort Money, especially, when the Nation was so much
destroyed by War, that if ever, it must be a long time before it could recover
it self.

Secondly, They required the Churches might be Paris, ut supra.
Taxed by Laymen, according to the just and true value. They answered, It was
not reasonable, but contrary to Justice, that Laymen should meddle with
Collecting of Tenths, nor would they ever consent to a new way of Taxing,

Thirdly, That the Bishops and Abbats would pay the Tenths of their Baronies
and Lay-fees fully according to the true and highest value. To this they
answered, They were impoverished by Ibid. f. 1003. lin. 1.
Depredations and Plundering, That they followed the King in his Expeditions,
and spent so much Money, that they were grown very poor, and their Lands lay
Untilled by Reason of the War.

Fourthly, They required that all Clercs, Ibid. n. 10.
holding Baronies or Lay-Fee, should go armed in their own Persons against the
Kings Enemies, or find so much Service, (Tantum Servitium) as belong to their
Land or Tenement. To this they answered, They ought not to fight with the
Material, but Spiritual Sword; to wit, with Prayers and Tears. And that by
their Benefices or Fees, they were bound to maintain Peace, not War. And that
they held their Barony in Frank-Almoign (in puris Eleemosynis) in pure Alms,
and therefore ought no Military Service, but what was certain, and would not
perform any that was new.

Fifthly, They required on the behalf of the Ibid. n. 20.
Pope, That with all speed the Expedition of the Cross might be Preached
through the whole Kingdom. To this they answered, That a great part of the
People had been killed in War; and that if now they should undertake the
Crusado, few or none would be left to defend the Nation.

At last it was said, that the Ibid.
Prelates, Will they, Nill they, were bound to comply with all these Demands,
by the Oath they had taken at Coventry, that they would assist the King by all
means they might or could. To this they answered, That when they made that
Oath, they only meant it of Spiritual help and wholesome Counsel. (Quando
Juramentum fecerunt non intelligebant de alio Auxilio quam spirituali,
Consilioque salubri.) What was done further in Parliament I find not, there was
then no attempt made against the Disinherited within Isle of Ely, only they
were Mat. West. f. 198. n. 20.
restrained from making Excursions by the Forces the King had with him at
Cambridge.

In the mean while the Ibid. n. ^0, 40. The Earl of Gloucester enters London
with a great Army. He sent to the Legate to deliver up the Tower to him.
Earl of Gloucester came with a great Army out of Wales to London, and
pretending to serve the King, by the help of the Citizens that were his
Friends, entered the City, and sent to the Legate to Deliver the Tower to him
forthwith, and Rabble of the Cities, and Country near it, joined with him, they
Plundered and spoiled what Citizens they pleased, that they thought were not,
or they would not have their friends, wasted the Countries, and Robbed, and
Pillaged by Water and Land. The King when first he heard of his preparations,
sent into the North and other parts for Recruits, and his Son Ibid. f. 399.
lin. 4. The King raises an Army to reduce him.
Edward brought from thence and from Scotland to his Father at Cambridge 30000
Men, with which, leaving a sufficient Guard there against Disinherited in the
Isle of Ely, they marched to Windsor, where their Army Daily increased. Ibid.
lin. 6, 7, 8.
The Earl with his Company in London began to fear the King, and sent a Message
to him for Peace, upon their own Propositions, which they could not obtain.
Then they Challenged and provoked the King to a Battle upon Hundeslawe (now
Hunds^o) Heath. Next Day the King Marched thither but found no Enemy. From
thence the King Marched to Ibid. n. 10.
Stratford, where came to him the Earls of Bolongn and St. Paul out of France,
with 200 Knights and their Retinue; the Gascoins likewise, with many great
Ships furnished with all sorts of Warlike, Naval Arms, fit for fight, arrived
near the Tower, expecting the Kings Command. Ibid. n. 20
The Earl seeing he could not get the Tower out of the Legates Hands, and that
his Army was like to be shut up in the City, applied himself to Richard King of
Almain, and Philip Basset, Pat. 51. Hen. 3. M. 16. n. 49. De pace inter Regem
and G. Com. Gloucestr. He sues for peace and pardon and obtains it for himself
and his followers.
who made his Peace with the King, he resolving to believe whatsoever they
should Londoners likewise, and all his favorers were Ibid.
Pardoned for all Deeds done, from his first motion out of Wales, as well by
Water as by Land, in the City, and without, and in diverse Counties, which
Pardon was not to Extend to the Disinherited that were not in the Kings Peace,
the Day the Earl began to March from Wales toward London; And that the King
might be assured he never should make War against him afterward, he Ibid. What
secur^ty he gave t^ King for his future beha^viour.
offered his Oath, his Chart, Pleges, and the penalty of 10000 Marks for
security. This Accord bears Date at Stratford, June the 15 th. the 51 st. year
of this Kings Reign, and the Pardon June 16 th. From the beginning of April
when he set forth from Wales, to this time, he had been harrassing of the
Countries wherever he came, and the City during his being there.

The King seeing he could not prevail with the Bishops and other Prelates to
assist him with Money in his very great Necessity, The Bishops refuse to as^ the
King wi^ Money.
applied himself to the Pope, who by his Cart. 5 Hen. 3. M. 1* in C^dula.
Bull, wherein he recites all the affronts and injuries done to the King, Queen
and Prince, by the Barons, and the Miseries that befell them and the whole
Kingdom and Church by those Wars, with the Kings Extreme want of Moneys and
Debts by reason thereof, and the necessity of supplying him for the better
support and defense of his Kingdom, the Churches, and his Peoples Liberties;
Especially by the Clergy, The Pope grants the King a tenth of all
Ecclesitastic Reven^nues for thr^ years.
who had received such Bountiful Gifts and Endowments from him and his
Ancestors, Granted the Tenth part of the Profits and Rents of all
Arch-Bishopricks, Monasteries, and all Ecclesiastical persons whatsoever, as
well Regular as Secular, Exempt as not Exempt, England Wales and Ireland, for
three years, according to the true and highest value, notwithstanding all
former Bulls and Exemptions to the contrary, This Bull was Dated at Viterbo in
Italy 5. Idus Junii (9 th. of June) in the 2 d. year of his Pontificate, which
was A. D. 1267. the 51 st. of this King, and Directed to his Legate Ottobon, but
not put in Execution until after Christmas following.

English and Welsh every year almost, and sometimes often in the same year,
made inrodes into each others Countries, The Welsh and English destroy one
^others Countries.
fired and burnt Houses, took possession of each others Lands and Goods, and
more especially spoiled and wasted the Borders on both sides; of which Actions
seeing they were Ordinary and frequent, I have not taken notice for many years.
But Lewelin Son of Griffin having been a great Friend to Montfort, The King
d^^signed to ch^stise Lewelin Prince of Wales.
and a great support to him in his Rebellious practices, in September this year
the King came with a great Army to Shrewsbury, with Design to March into Wales,
and Chastise him for his Unfaithfulness to him; who now wanting the help of the
Rebellious Barons by Diverting the King, applied himself to the Legate, He
desires peace and o^tains it.
by whose Mediation a Peace was made, Cart. ^1 Hen. 3. M. ^ De Reform^tion^ pa^
i^ter Regem ^ Lewelinum Principem Wallia. The Articl^ of the peac^
so as all Lands should be restored on both sides, and that the Customs of the
Marches should still remain; That King Henry should grant unto him and his
heirs the principality of Wales, and that they should be, and be called Princes
of Wales; That they should receive the Homage and Fealty of all the Barons of
Wales, who were to hold their Lands of them in Capite, except the Homage of
Meredu^ the Son of Rhese, which the King retained to him and his Heirs; and if
ever the King should grant it to him he should pay for it 5000 l. He likewise
Granted him the four Cantreds of Borthwlad, to hold and possess them as fully
as ever the King and his Heirs had possessed them. For which Principality,
Lands, Homages, and Grants, the same Prince and his Successors were to swear
Fealty, and do Homage, and perform the accustomed Services due to the King and
his Heirs, as they had been done by him and Predecessors to the King and his
Ancestors. And further was to give him 25000. Marks. This Agreement bears Date
at Shrewsbury, 25 th. of September, 1267. The Record is long, but this is all
that is material in it.

A. D. 1268. 52 Hen. 3.
The Pope having in his Bull of the Grant of the tenths of all Arch-Bishopricks,
Bishoprics, etc. before mentioned, Commanded his Legate to Collect or Receive
it, or cause it to be Collected or Received by other fit persons; Cart. 51.
Hen. 3. M. 10. in Cedula. The Legate appoints Collectors of the tenth lately
granted.
He assigned Walter the Elect of York, Stephen of Canturbury, and Ruffin Clivel
Archdeacons, in that Church to receive and pay it to the King, one third part
at Easter following, another third part at Midsummer, and the last at
Michaelmass, and so for every of the three years, and the King Legate appointed
Pat. 52. Hen. 3. M. 32. intus and M. 33.
Collectors of this tenth in every Diocese.

The Dean and Chapter of Salisbury Pat. 52. Hen. 3. M. 9. intu^. Salisbury and
Bath and Wells compound by the year with the King.
compounded with the King for 1000 l. a year for all the tenths arising out of
that Diocese, and the Dean and Chapter, Abbats and all the Clegy of the Diocese
of Bath and Wells Ibid. M. 2. intus.
compounded with him for 500 Marks down, and 350 l. 4 s. ob. each year for
their own tenths.

The King with his Army this year Marched Paris fol. 1004. n. 30.40. The King
Marches against the disinherited in the Isle of Ely. He soon reduced or
dispersed them.
toward the Isle of Ely to reduce or disperse such as had taken refuge there,
and by the assistance and advice of such as inhabited thereabout, he made
Bridges with Planks and Hurdles at convenient places, so that the Soldiers with
little difficulty entered the Isle, and presently brought many of them to the
Kings obedience, and put the rest

In the year 1269. King Henry was at London Ibid. fol. 1005. lin. 1. A. D.
1269. Edward and Edmund the Kings Sons undertake the Cross.
with his Queen and Ottobon the Legate, who called a Council at London, and
there constituted many things for the Reformation of the Church of England.
Soon after at Northampton he signed with the Cross Edward and Edmund the Kings
Sons, the Earl of Gloucester, and many other Noblemen of England, and then with
an inestimable returned to Rome.

At the same time the King Ibid. n. 10. The Kings Proclamation for the security
of his subjects goods.
caused it to be proclaimed throughout all England in every County, that
whoever should invade or injustly usurp any ones goods or possessions, he
should be liable to a Capital Punishment which was soon after executed upon one
at Dunstable, who had driven away twelve Oxen that were the Villans of Colne,
belonging to the Abbey of St. Albans, Baylif of the Liberties of St. Albans, who
read to him in English the Kings Letter before the whole Multitude, and then by
virtue of the Kings Command, Sentenced him to be beheaded.

This year the King of Ibid. n. 20. The King of France his invitation to Prince
Edward.
France sent Messengers into England to invite Prince Edward to accompany him
into the Holy Land; Prince Edward accep^ his offer.
to whom the Prince replied that the late Wars between the King and his
Great-men had exhausted the English Treasury, so that he had not sufficient to
supply his necessary Expenses for such an Expedition. The King of France
offered, that if he would comply with his desires, he would furnish him with
30000 Marks; To which Prince Edward consented, and forthwith offered Gascoigny
England to obtain leave of his Father King Henry, which he granted with Tears
and gave him his Blessing.

In the same year Fol. 10^ lin. 4. A Parleme^ at Merleber^ Statutes m^ there.
in the Octaves of St. Martin (or the 19 th. of November) a Parliament was held
at Marlebergh, in which by the Assent of the Earls and Barons were made the
Statutes of Merlebergh, in quo assensu Comitum and Baronum edita sunt Statuta
Marleberwe vocantur.

In the year 1270. King Henry 1006. n. 10. A. D* 1270. Prince Edmund Marri^
with his Queen and the Chiefs of the Kingdom was at Christmas at Eltham. On
the eighth of April Edmund the Kings Second Son Married Auelin the Daughter of
William de Albamarla Earl of Holderness.

This whole year proved very quiet and peaceable, Prince Edwards preparation
for t^ Holy Land.
and nothing Prince Edward, and others who had undertaken the Cross made for
their Journey to the Holy Land. The King as well as Appen^ n. 226. King Henry
signed with the Cross.

He commits his Cross a^ aid to his S^ Prince Edward.


Prince Edward was Signed with the Cross, for this Expedition, but the
Prelates, Great-men and Community of the Land did not think it expedient nor
safe for them both to be absent at that time, and therefore by the advice of
the said Prelates and Great-men, he committed the business of the Cross and the
Sign of his Cross to his Son Edward, and twentieth part of Movables granted
for the Aid of the Holy Land.

In the year 1271. King Henry Paris f^ 1006. n. 30* A. D. 127^
with his Queen, Sons and many of the Nobility, kept his Christmas at London.

On the Second of April Ibid. 1007. n. 30. Richard Kin^ of the Roman dyed at
Ber^chamsted Cas^
Richard King of the Romans dyed at Berkamstede Castle, His heart was buried in
the Friars at Oxford, and his Body in the Church he built at his own Charges
for the Monks of the Cistercian Order de Hailes.

In May following Prince Edward, his Brother Edmund, Prince Edward begins his
Journey (...) the Holy-la^ He lands at Tunis and is kindly recei^ed by the King
of Fran^
four Earls and as many Barons, besides a great number of Noblemen, began their
Journey to the Holy Land, and after ten days sail from France, he landed at
Tunis, where he was met by the King of France and his Chief men, with great joy
and kindness. Fol. 10^ n. 40.
In August Diseases and great Infirmities seized and afflicted the French Kings
Army, which took away many of great Note, whereof the Chief were John Earl of
Nevers the Kings Son, and the Cardinal of Albania the Apostolic Legate, and on
the day after St. Bartholomew King Lewis Ibid. n. 5 The King o^ France dies at
Tunis.
departed this life at Tunis. At the same time Henry the Son of Richard King of
the Romans desired leave of his Cousin Prince Edward to return into England,
and having obtained License in his Journey homeward, he was Fol. 1007. n. 20.
Prince Henry slain at Viterbo.
slain at Viterbo while he was at Mass in the Church of St. Lawrence, by Guido
the Son of Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester, to revenge his Fathers death.

All these misfortunes could not discourage Ibid. n. 30.
Prince Edward Acon, where Alienor his Wife was brought to bed of a Daughter
which was Named Fol. 1006. n. 30. Joan de Acres Prince Edwards Daughter born at
Acon.
Joan de Acres, afterward Married to Gilbert Earl of Gloucester. When the
English saw the undaunted Spirit of their Prince, they resolved cheerfully to
accompany him in all his undertakings.

In the year 1272. while Prince Fol. 1007. n. 40. A. D. 1272. Prince Edward
escapes a great danger at Acon.
Edward continued at Acon, the Admiral of Ioppa (or Consul, as we call that
Dignity,) sent to him several Letters and Messages of Friendship and kindness
Anzazim, who had been ever Educated underground, that he might prove the more
undaunted in any Attempt of desperate wickedness. One time he pretended to have
some private business to Communicate to him, upon this the Prince Commanded all
that were present to retire, and as he was looking out of the Window, on a
sudden the Assassine drew out a poisoned Knife, and gave him two wounds in the
Arm, and one in the Arm-hole. The Prince having presently recovered himself,
threw him on the ground, and Assassine to be Hanged upon the Walls of the City,
with a live Dog by it, to be a Terror to others. When the Admiral heard of it
he showed great sorrow, and assured the Prince he was no way Privy to it. But
when the Soldiers heard how their Prince was Saracens, but were hindered by the
Prince.

Next year there arose a great quarrel between the Fol. 1008. n. 40.50. A. D.
1273. A great quarrel between the Citizens of Norwich and the Monks.

The Cathedral burnt. The Citizens punished.


Citizens of Norwich and the Monks, which was increased to such a height that
the Citizens set fire to the Church, which together with the adjoining
Buildings were all consumed, except the Chapel of St. Walter nigh the
Infirmary, and sacrilegiously carried away the King was much moved at this
wickedness, and sent Justiciary Tribet down to Norwich, who Convicted a great
Multitude of the Offenders, and Condemned them all to be drawn at Horses Tayls
and Hanged. Soon after the King went thither in person, and when he beheld the
Ruins of the Church, he could scarce refrain from Tears. The Bishop of
Rochester Excommunicated all that were concerned in, or abetted this
wickedness, and the King Community of the Town to pay 3000 Marks of Silver, And
fined.
toward the rebuilding of the Church, besides Ten pounds in Gold, and the
value of one hundred pounds in Silver for a Golden Cup, ad restaurandam Cuppam
Auream. Matt. Westminster, says they were drawn and Hanged Judicially, and then
burnt, and the Goods of those that fled Confiscated.

For the due Prosecution of these Criminals, the King sent his Pat. 56. Hen. 3.
M. ^ intus. The Knights and Freeholders of Nor^folk and Suffolk summoned to
meet the King at Norwich.

As also the Knights and freeholders Cambridge a^ Huntingtonshires.

King Henry falls sick.


Precept to William Gifford Sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk, Dated September
the 6 th. at St. Edmunds-Bury, to Summon all the Knights and Freeholders of
both Counties that had twenty pounds a year and above, to appear before him at
Norwich on the th. of the same Month, to do as they should be directed by him,
with advice of his Council. The same Writ issued to the Sheriff of Cambridge
and Huntingtonshires, to summon Twenty four Knights and Freeholders, Milites
and Libere tenentes that had Twenty pounds a year or above, to be at Norwich
the same day.

Then the King returned to London, and as he passed by the Abbey of St. Edmunds,
he was seized on by a languishing distemper Paris. 1009. n. 10. And dies.
Earls, Barons and Prelates, came to him that they might be present at his
death. He desired his Debts might be first paid, and what remained might be
given to the relief of the Indigent. He dyed on the Feast of St. Edmund (or the
20 th. of November) after he had Reigned Fifty six years and twenty days, and
was buried at Westminster.

Church Affairs.
THere were in this Kings long Reign many Councils holden, and in them all many
Canons made, about the then Ordinary Matters of the Church. These I shall pass
by, and note those things, which Inter Regnum and Sacerdotium, between the
Secular and Ecclesiastic States, and are contained in the Canons made at Annal.
Burton. f. 388.
Merton by Boniface the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops and Clergy of
the Kingdom both Secular and Regular, (who met there on Thursday before It was
this year on Tuesday, month after Whitsun-tuesday, and was the very day on
which the Barons met at Oxford, and made the Provisions there, which were the
cause of all the mischiefs that insued.
Barnaby day, Anno Domino 1258, and 42d of Henry the Third) as Provisions
against the Fifty Articles of Grievances, which were like to those St. Thomas
the Martyr and Archbishop of Canterbury contended for, and became Qui Articuli
vel capitula, similia fuerunt illis, pro quibus Beatus Thomas Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis, Martyr Dimicavit, Victor effectus Gloriosus. Paris, f. 951. n.
30. who in his f. 199. n. 30.
Additaments says, They were the Articles for which the Bishops had, and were
to fight for: Two year after they were again Reviewed and Confirmed at London.
Linwood Oxford, f. 15.

1. That no Annal. Burton. f. 389. Paris Additaments, f. 204. n. 40.
Archbishop, Bishop, or inferior Prelate be forced Secular Court upon Summons
from the King or any Layman; But the greater Prelates shall signify to the
King they cannot obey any such Summons, without danger of their Order or
Subversion of Ecclesiastical Liberty. And if the King or his Officers shall
proceed to Attach or distrein any Prelate thus refusing, they shall be
obnoxious to Excommunication and Interdict.

2. That no Clerc of any Condition or Order do by his own power or any
Lay-authority thrust himself in, or be possessed of any Ecclesiastical Benefice
or Dignity; And every one so offending shall be for ever deprived of his
Benefice, and Excommunicated by his Diocesan. And if any such Intrusions shall
be made by the Kings Authority, the Diocesan shall admonish him to revoke them,
and upon refusal to Interdict all his Lands and Places lying in that Diocese;
if by any Great Man, then to Interdict and Excommunicate him, and he is not to
be released till he has made sufficient satisfaction.

3. That no Persons Excommunicated and Imprisoned, shall be set at Liberty by
any Sheriff or Bailiff without the consent of the Prelates. And every such
Sheriff or Bailiff so offending, unless he makes satisfaction to the Church,
shall be Excommunicated; but if they do it by the Command of the King, then
they are to be more favorably dealt withal, according to the Discretion of the
Ordinary. And if the usual Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo, shall according to
the Custom Prelates shall admonish the King to grant it, and upon his refusal
to Interdict all his Cities, Castles, Burghs and Villages in that Diocese.

4. That if any Layman do apprehend and detein any Clerc, that is known to be
so, and of good fame, and do refuse to set him at liberty upon demand of the
Ordinary, let him be Excommunicated, and the place Interdicted. Whoever shall
falsely accuse any Clerc, let him be subject to the same Censure. Whoever shall
apprehend any Clerc's that are vagrant and unknown, and do refuse to deliver
them to the Ordinary upon his Demand, shall be censured as aforesaid. If any
Clerc be amerced for any personal Transgression by a Secular Judge, he shall
not be compelled by the They were to force the payment of Amerc^aments by
Ecclesiastic Censures.
Prelates to pay the Amercements, because they were not set by his proper
Judge: But if he be Canonically convicted by his Ordinary, he shall make
satisfaction according to the quality of his Transgression and Discretion of
the Ordinary.

Layman shall bring the Kings Prohibition to remove his Action from the
Ecclesiastic to a Secular Court, let him be Excommunicated, and if he does not
desist, then let his Land be Interdicted.

6. That any Jew, though Interdicted Trade and Communion with the Faithful, yet
may be compelled to answer before an Ecclesiastical Judge; and whoever does
forbid or hinder him from so doing, let Excommunicated and Interdicted.

7. Whoever shall forceably take away or kill any that have taken refuge in any
Church or Churchyard, or shall hinder them from receiving any Victuals for
their maintenance, while they are under Ecclesiastical protection, let them be
Excommunicated.

invade or infringe Ecclesiastical Goods or Liberties, let them be
Excommunicated by the Ordinary of the Place. And if they do persevere, let the
places wherein they live be Interdicted; And neither of the Sentences to be
released till they have made competent satisfaction.

9. If any Great Men shall violate the Privileges of Sanctuary, either by
invading and carrying away their Goods; or by reproaching, evil treating the
Religious, let them be solemnly Excommunicated till they make Restitution and
Satisfaction.

10. If any of the Kings Bailiffs shall in the vacancy of any Cathedral or
Conventual Church make any waste of the Woods, Warrens, Houses, Corn,
Furniture, Tenths or Oblations appropriate to Bishoprics and Monasteries, let
them be Excommunicated. And if they persevere, Sentence denounced against
Infringers of Magna Charta be solemnly pronounced against them, and upon
contempt of these Censures let them be Interdicted. And if the King be
competently admonished; and does refuse to make restitution, let him be
proceeded against as is usual in such Cases.

11. If any Itinerant Judge does not accept of the Appearance of any
Arch-B^shop or Bishop, by his Attorney or Proxy, but shall proceed to Distrein
or Attach them, or does not accept their Plea of long Possession to a Quo
Warranto why they use their Liberties, but shall suffer their Persons to be
Attached, and their Goods Distreined, let the Attachers and Distreiners be
Excommunicated. And if they do not dismiss any Prelate, when he is required by
the Archbishop and Bishops, let them proceed to Interdiction.

12. If Justiciaries, or any Secular Judges shall by perverse interpretation
Charters (saying they are void, because the Express The Clergy extended those
general words, The Church shall be free, and shall enjoy all her Liberties, to
whatever they called, or had a mind to make a Liberty of the Church.
Article or words were not in it) Defraud and Wrong any Church or Religious
place of their Liberties, Goods and Possessions, let them be admonished by the
Ordinary of those places where such Judgment is given, that such a Sentence
will be to the Churches prejudice: And if they do Admonitions, let them be
Excommunicated and Interdicted.

13. If the King, his Great Men, or any Capital Lords, or their Heirs, who have
been Founders or Benefactors to Religious places, shall Distrein any
Ecclesiastical Person, because he does not Suit or Service to their Secular
Courts, let them be proceeded against by the aforesaid Ecclesiastical Censures.

14. If any Lay-Lord do hinder the Ordinary from distributing the Goods of any
one that died Intestate, either for the payment of his Debts, or for the
Maintenance of his Children or Parents, or for Pious and Charitable Uses, let
him be Excommunicated; And also such as hinder That they might not be hindered
to give to the Churchmen and Monasteries.
Villans from making their Wills.

The King Append. n. 230, ^31.
wrote to the Pope to revoke these Provisions and Constitutions, as being made
to the great Prejudice, Hurt and Damage

Taxes in this Kings Reign.
THe Parliament called at Northampton, Matt. Paris, fol. 322. lin. 3. 9 Hen. 3.
A. D. 1224.
in the Octaves of Holy Trinity 1224. granted the King two Shillings of every
Plough

The Parliament called at Westminster at Christmas 1224. granted the King a
Fifteenth of all Movables, 9 H. 3. fol. 323. n. 10. A. D. 1224. Fol. 324. n. 40
as well of the Clergy as Laity of the whole Kingdom, for the Grant or
Confirmation of Magna Charta. One half of this Fifteenth was Collected foon
after Easter, and the other half was to be gathered Michaelmas following.

A fortieth part of Movables granted. 16 H. 3. A. D 1224.


A. D. 1226. the 11th of Henry the Third, Pat. 11 ^. 3. m. 11. A. D. 1226.
he wrote to the Bishops and Clergy to give him a Fifteenth of all their
Movables, as the Bishops and Clergy of England had then done.

King Henry compelled the Citizens of London to pay him Five 12 H. 3. A. D
1227. fol. 33^ n. 10, 20.
because they had given so much to Jews late King of France, when he left
England, and levied a Fifteenth.

At the same time he took for an Aid from the Burgesses of Northampton Twelve
hundred pound, besides one Fifteenth.

He likewise forced all Religious and Beneficed Clerks to pay a Fifteenth as
well out of their Spirituals as Temporals, and they

Soon after the Religious and others had notice, 12 H. 3. ibi^ n. 40.
that unless they renewed their Charters, the old ones should be of no
advantage to them, and for the renewing every one paid according to his
Faculty, at the Justiciaries Discretion.

Fol. 365. n. 1^ 15th H. 3. A. D. 1230.
Abbats and Priors gave a great sum of Money for recovering his Rights beyond
Sea. At the same time he put the Citizens of London to a grievous Redemption,
and forced the Jews to pay the third part of what they were worth.

In the year 1231. the King required a Scutage of three Marks of every Knights
Fee, of all that held Baronies, 16 H. 3. fol. 367. n. 50. A. D. 1231*
as well Laics as Prelates. It was opposed by the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and some other

On the 14 of September, in a Parliament held at Lambeth, A. D. 1232* 17 H. 3.
for 377. n. 5. a^ fol. 380. n.
a fortieth part of all Movables, as well of Ecclesiastics as Laics was
granted to the King, and was Collected the latter end of October following.

A. D. 1235. 20 H. 3 fol. 417. n 30.
A. D. 1235 He took two Marks of every Plough Land at the Marriage of Isabel his
Sister to Frederic Emperor of Germany, and gave with her Thirty thousand
Marks. Quaere, Whether this was not the same which was granted Pat. 20 H. 3. m.
8. n. 12. That Tax was two Marks upon a Knights Fee. Claus* 21 H. 3. m. 1. and
m. 21. Dors.
There was at the same time a Thirtieth of Movables granted by the Bishops and
Lay Great Men.

Cl 21 H. 3. m. 1. and m. 21 and 22. Dors. A. D. 1236.
A. D. 1236. 21st of Henry the Third, he sent into Ireland to the Bishops
England, who had given him Scutage two Marks of every Knights Fee for the
Marriage of his Sister to the Emperor of Germany, and a Thirtieth part of their
Goods.

Pat. 20 H 3. m. 8. n. 12. A. D. 1236.
Scutage two Marks of every Fee granted by Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors
and other Ecclesiastical Persons, etc. It Is very probable,

F. 435. n. 10. 21 H. 3. A. D. 1237.
A. D. 1237. A Thirtieth part of all Movables was granted to the King.

A. D. 124^. Fol. 595. n. 30. and 597. n. 20.
In the year 1242. about Michaelmas the King required Scutage three Marks of
every Knight through all England. So Paris, but as

Fol. 643. n. 20. A. D. 1244.
In a Council held at London three Weeks after Candlemass, twenty Shillings of
every Knights Fee was granted to the King for the Marriage of his Eldest
Daughter, one half to be paid at Easter, the other at Michaelmass following.

A. D. 1253. 37 H. 3. Par. f. 866. m. 20, 30.
The Clergy grant the Tenth of Ecclesiastical Revenues for three Magna Charta.

A. D. 1^67.
Cart. 51 Hen. 3. m. 10. Cedula. Three years Tenths of all Church Revenues
granted to the King by the Pope.

A. D. 1270.
Cl. 54 Hen. 3. m. 11. Dors. A twentieth part granted to the

Ireland and Irish Affairs.
KIng Henry by his Counselors in the App(...) n. 227.
first year of his Reign, William Marshall his Governor, to gratify the The
En(...) Irish. King Joh(...) Charter o(...) (...)berties gr(...)ed to the Irish.
Irish for their firm Loyalty, to his Father, and himself, Granted out of his
special Grace, that they and their heirs for ever, should Enjoy the Liberties
granted by them to the Kingdom of England, which were written and sent sealed
thither, under the seals of the Popes Legate, and William Earl Marshal, the King
then not His Fat(...) seal was (...) with his (...) Regalia, (...) passage
o(...) the Wath(...)
having a Seal of his own.

Citizens of Dublin against their Cl. 7 Hen. 3. m(...) Dors. The King
(...)hibits the Arch-Bis(...) of Dubli(...) (...) meddle w(...) secular ca(...)
in Spiritu(...) Courts.
Archbishop, (who was then the Kings Chief Justice,) for proceeding against
the Laws and Customs of the Nation used in all places of England; and for his
Usurpation upon the Rights of the Crown, against his Trust, and Duty, as Chief
Justice, in drawing several causes, belonging to the Kings Temporal Courts, to
his Ecclesiastical Courts, to Enlarge his Jurisdiction, to the Grievance and
Dishonor of the King. There Ibid.
writ sent to him to forbear such things for the future, or that he would be
severely dealt with for such practices.

In the 11 th. of his Reign Cl. (...) Hen. 3. Pa(...) m. 21. The same to be in
I(...)land as En(...)land conce(...)ing Excom(...)nicate Pe(...)
there was a Writ sent to Geofry de Marisco Justice of Ireland for observing
the same Customs and Law there, for taking persons continuing Excommunicate by
the space of forty days, upon the Archbishops and Bishops Certificate by a
Capias Excommunicatum, as was used in England.

In the 12 th. of his Reign he wrote to Cl. (...) Hen. 3. M
Richard de Burgh his Justiciary, to call together the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights and Freetenents, and his Officers in
Every County, and cause the Charter of King John to be read before them, and
then to enjoin them to the strict observation of the Laws contained in it.

th. year of his Reign about Pari(...) 366. n. 20 The King Conaught his Army
routed. 2000 Men and the Ki(...) made pris(...)er.
July, an Irish King of Conaught, knowing, that the King, William Marshal and
Maurice Fitzgerald were gone over into France, so that Ireland was left
without any great force to Defend it, raised a mighty Army, or rather a great
number of people, and entered into the Dominion of the English, spoiling and
Burning the Country; The news whereof was brought to Geofrey de Marisco, (then
Deputy Justiciary), and he calling to his assistance, Walter Lacy and Richard
Burgh, raised a considerable force, with which he fought and beat Irish, killed
twenty thousand of them, and took their King Prisoner.

In the 19 th. of his Reign the Cl. (...) Hen. 3. M Dors. Free Commerce and
trade betw(...) England a(...) Ireland.
King issued a writ to Maurice Fitzgerald his Justiciary, for free Commerce
and Trade, between his Subjects of both Nations, without Restraint.

The next year Cl. 20. Hen. 3. m. 13. Dors. The Statutes of Merton concerning
Bastardy to be observed in Ireland.
he wrote to the Archbishop of Dublin, and his justiciary, for the Observation
of the Statutes of Merton especially concerning Bastardy, and in a Case then
depending before them.

In the 24 th. of his Paris. f. 526. n. 40. Coheirs females how they were to
hold in Knights service.
Reign the King sent instructions under his seal, how lands holden in Knights
service that Descended to Sisters Coheirs, should be divided, and how and by
whom Homage should be done, and in what manner, and of whom the younger should
hold according to the Statute of Ireland made the 14 th. of his Reign.

In the 29 th. of his Reign, the Welsh putting King Henry to great Trouble, he
intended wholly to destroy them, Ibid. f. 685. n. 20. Maurice Fitzgerald put
out of the place of Justiciary.
and sent to Maurice Fitzgerald his Justiciary, to come to his assistance with
Ireland, who not coming so soon as he was expected having a fair and prosperous
wind, was put out of his place of Justice, and John Fitz-Geofry de Marisco
substituted in his stead.

In the thirtieth of his Reign, he Append. n. 228. The Laws of England to be
strictly observed in Ireland.
directed a Writ to the Archbishops and others in Ireland, that the Laws of
England should be strictly observed in Ireland, as King John his Father had
formerly commanded.

Yet notwithstanding this Command, this privilege of using the English laws in
Ireland, was Append. n. 229. Those Laws not intended for the Benefit of the
native Irish.
never intended by King John or King Henry, that it should extend to all the
native Irish, but only to the English Inhabitants, transplanted thither, or
there born; and to such native Irish, as faithfully adhered to these Kings, and
the English in Ireland, against the Irish, that complied not with them who were
not to receive any Benefit by them.

The King in the 38 th. year was in Gascoigne, and wanting Forces Cl. 38. Hen.
3. M. 9. Dors. The King sends into Ireland for forces to be brought to him from
thence into Gascony.
sent his Writ to John Fitz-Geofry his Justice of Ireland, to come to him in
person, with a good number of Men, if there were no danger of an insurrection
in Ireland, otherwise to send Maurice Fitzgerald with the same force, and to
borrow Money from the Popes Collector in Ireland for that affair, with his
consent, to be repaid him at a certain day.

Prince Edward had the Kingdom of Ireland Committed to him for his support,
with power to make, put in and out what Justices and other Officers he pleased;
when the Barons were at Oxford and had made their provisions in the 42 d. year
of this Kings Reign, he Pat. 42. Hen* 3. M. 5. Prince Edward put out of the
Command of Ireland, by the power of the Barons.
wrote to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Barons, Knights, etc. That
he heard his Son intended to make a new Justice there, and put his Castles into
such hands, as it might be great Damage, and not without fear of their
Disinheriting, and therefore Commands them not to be obedient, to any such
Justice, Constables or Keepers of Castles, made or appointed without his
Letters Patents by assent and advice of his Council.

After the same manner, he wrote to all Majors and Communities of Cities and
Towns in Ireland, and to the Constables of Castles, and Commanded Alan Zousche
his Justiciary not to obey, or give up his Authority to any new Justiciary or
Constable that should come without his Letters Patents.

The King wrote to the Cl. 49 Hen. ^. m. 7 Dors. The Kings Writs to several
great men to secure the Peace of Ireland.
Archbishop of Dublin, the Bishop of Mead his Treasurer; Walter de Burgh, and
Maurice Fitz-Maurice Gerald, that he heard there was like to be great
Dissension between the great Men of Ireland, and therefore ordered them to
secure the peace of that Nation, and sent them further private instructions by
Roger Waspail who carried these Letters, to whom he Commanded them to give
credit.

This is all I find worth noting concerning Ireland, in this Kings

The Issue of King Henry the Third.
EDward his Paris, f. 488. n. 30.
Eldest Son, by Queen Alienor of Provence, who was King of England after his
death, was born at Westminster upon the 16th of June 1239.

Edmund his Second Son by the same Queen, Ibid. f. 654. n. 20.
born January 16th A. D. 1245. in the Thirtieth year of his Fathers Reign: He
was Earl of Lancaster, Leicester, Derby, and Campaign, Lord of Monmouth and
Steward of England.

There are by some four more Sons named, but if he had them, they died young.

Margaret his Pat. 36 Hen. 3. m. 1.
Eldest Daughter was Married to the King of Scots, Alexander the Second, a
Child of nine years old.

Beatrice his Second Daughter, so named of her Grandmother Beatrice Countess
of Provence, was Paris, f. 5^4. n. 20.
born at Bourdeaux in Gascoigne on the 25th of June A. D. 1242. and was Married
to John de Dreux Duke of Britain in France, and Earl of Richmond in England.

Katherine the Third Daughter was born Ibid. f. 879. n. 10.
at London, on St. Katherines day, or the 25th of November A. D. 1253. and died
at five years of Age.

FINIS.
THE APPENDIX. CHART. XCIX.
VAUCO.

IN nomine Dei, Forma progre^su^ in judicio. Antiquitates Alaman. Tom* 2. fol.
3.
cum resideret Vnfredus vir inluster Rhetia was toward the foot of the Alps.
Retiarum incurte ad campos in Mallo publico ad universorum causas audiendas,
vel recta judicia terminanda: ibique veniens bomo aliquis nomine Hrothelmus,
proclamavit, eo quod in Contra Dire^tum, Co^ Dr^ctum, Co^tra Drutum, Contra
Dro^ Gallic^. Testimonia (...) T^s^e^, common in Barb^rous ^^tin.
Contradrutum suum Mansum ei tollutum fuisset, quod ei advenit a par^e Vxoris
su^ simul and Flavino and propri^ suum fuisset, and legibus suum esse deberet,
quin jam de Tradavio Vxoris suae fuisset, ^dcirco suum esse deberet; Comes
Convocatis illa Testimonia, qui de ipso B^go erant, interrogavit eos per ipsum
fidem and Sacramentum, quam nostro Domino datam haberet, quicquid exinde
scirent veritatem di^e^ent. At illi dixerunt per ipsum Sacramentum quod Domino
nostro datum habemus scimus, quia fuit quidem homo nomine Mado* qui ibi habuit
suum solum proprium cujus con^inium nos sci^us, qui^ adjacet and confine^ ^d
ips^m Mansom unde iste proclamat in qu^ illi arbore durem, and de uno l^t^re
aqu^ c^ng^t, and inter eos terminum est in petr^s, and in Avii illorum Quinti.
Tunc praedictus Comes jussit ut ipsa Testimonia supr^ irent and ipsos terminos
ostenderent quod d^ebant. Quod (...) fe^erunt and ipsos terminos firmaverunt,
qui inter illa d^ Mansa ^ernebant. Sed and plu^imi ibidem adfuerunt Nobiles,
quos ipse Comes cum ^s dire^erat, quod and omnia pleniter factum fuit. Vt autem
haec ^i^ita ^unt interrogavit ipse Comes ill^s Scabinios quid illi de hac causa
judicare testimonium, and secundum vestram inquisitionem judicamus. Vt sicut
davisum and finitum est and terminis posit^s inter ipsos Mansos, ut isti
homines illorum proprium habeant absque ulli^ contradictione in perpetuum, and
quod in Dominico dictum, and termin^ divisum coram testibus fuit, re^eptum sit
ad partem Domini nostri. Proptere^ oppor^num fuit Hrothelmo and Flavino cum
Hieredibus eorum ut exinde ab ipso Comite vel Scabinis tale Scriptum
acciperent, About the year of our Lord 807. in the Reign of Charles the Great.
qualiter in postmodum ipsom Mansom absque ullius contrarietate omni Tempore
valiant possidere.

Actum curte ad campos Mallo Publico Anno 7 Imperii Caroli Augusti and 37 regni
ejus in Francia and 34 in Italia. Datum VII id. Feb. sub Umfredo Comite
faeliciter. Amen. Haec nomina Testum.
Valeriano, Burgolfo, Vrsone, Stefano, Majorino, Valerio, Leontio, Victore,
Maurestone, Frontiano, Florentio, Stipfone, Valentiano, Quintello, Stradario.
Et haec nomina Scabiniorum.
Flavino, Orsicino, Odmaro, Alexandro, Eusebio, Maurentio,
quam etiam and aliis plurimis. Ego itaque VAUCO rogitus Scripsi and Subscripsi.

All old Judgments, Processes, and Charts were draw^ up in Barbarous Provincial
Latin, without Congruity, Syntax, Propriety, or Elegancy.

The Process and Judgment is thus Englished.
Humfry the Illustrious Person, Earl of Rhaetia, in his Pavillion in the
Fields, in a public Mall or Court, sat to hear the Causes of all Men, or to
determine according to right Judgment, there came a certain Man called
Hrothelm, and complained, That against his Right, he had an House or Farm taken
from him, which came to him by his Wife, and Flavino, and was properly his own,
and by Law ought to be his, because he had Witnesses or Jurors were the same in
the old Feudal German Law.
Jurors that were of the very Country or Vicinage, he asked them by the Faith
and Oath they had made to our Lord, that whatever they knew of this Matter,
they should speak the truth. They said, By the very This Oath was made to the
Emperor, who is here meant by Dominus Noster.
Oath we have given to our Lord, we know, because there was a certain Man
called Mado, who had there his proper Soil, the bounds whereof we know, because
it adjoyns, and lies next to the very That is Hrothe^m.
He is the Master, Lord, Owner, or Proprietor of it; For as those Buildings are
joined above, they are the Propriety of those Men, and ought to be theirs by
the Law in right of their Grandfather Quintus. Then the foresaid Earl
Commanded, That the Witnesses or Jurors should go upon the place, and show the
Bounds they mentioned; which they did, and fixed Habitations or Farms, so those
Men may have, or possess their Propriety for ever, without the contradiction of
any Man; And what the Imperial Land was, or the Demeasns of the Empire, as it
was divided by Bounds before Witnesses, let it be received, or possessed to the
use of our Lord (that is the Emperor, or happily the Earl.) Wherefore it were
fit for Hrothelm, and Flavin, with their Heirs, to have such a Writing
concerning this Determination, either from Charles the Great* about the year of
our Lord 807


Done at the Court in the Fields, in a public Mall, or Convention for the
dispatch of Controversies, in the Seventh year of the Empire of Charles the
August, and the Thirty seventh of his Reign in France, and the Thirty fourth in
Italy, Dated the Eighth day of February, happily, under Humphry the Earl. Amen.
These are the Names of the Witnesses or Jury.
Valeriano, Burgolfo, Ursone, Stefano, Majorino, Valerio, Leontio, Victore,
Maurestone, Frontiano, Florentio, Stipfone, Valentiano, Quintello, Stradario.
And these the Names of the Scabines or Assessors with the Earl.
Orsicino, Odmaro, Alexandro, Eusebio, Maurentio,
as also many others. Therefore I VAUCO, having been Required to do it, have
Written and subscribed this Judgment.

Charta W. Regis Primi de Restitutione ablatorum in Episcopatibus and Abbatiis
totius Angliae.
W. Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum. In the Appe^dix to Somne^ Gavelkind, p. 191.
L. Archiepiscopo Cantuar. and G. Episcopo Constantiarum and R. Comiti de Ou,
and R. Comiti Gil. and H. de Monte-Forti, suisque aliis Proceribus Regni
Angliae, salutem. Summonete Vicecomites meos ex meo praecepto, and ex part mea
eis dicite, ut reddant Episcopatibus meis, and Abbatiis totum Dominium,
omnesque Dominicas terras, quas de Dominio Episcopatuum meorum, and Abbatiarum,
Episcopi mei, and Abbates eis, vel lenitate, vel timore vel cupiditate
dederunt, vel habere consenserunt, vel ipsi violentia sua inde abstraxerunt,
and quod hactenus injuste possederunt de Dominio Ecclesiarum mearum. Et nisi
reddiderint, sicut eos ex part ejusdem querelae fuerit, reddat similiter quod
de Dominio Episcopatuum, vel Abbatiarum mearum habuit, ne propter illud quod
inde aliquis vestrum habebit, minus exerceat s^per meos Vicecomites, vel alios
quicunque teneant Dominium Ecclesiarum mearum quod praecipio.

The Chart or Writ of King William the First for the Restitution of such things
as were taken away from Bishoprics and Abbeys.
WIlliam by the Grace of God King of the English. To Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Gorisfrid, or Galfrid Bishop of Constance, and Robert Earl of
Ou, and Gul. Pict. f. 187.
Richard the Son of Earl He was Earl of Brion^a in Normandy, Ancestor of the
Earls of Clare in England.
Gilbert, and Gul. Pict. f. 187.
Hugh Montfort, and to his other Great Men of the Kingdom of England, Greeting.
Summon ye my Sheriffs by my Precept, and on my behalf speak to them, or Command
them, That they restore to my Bishoprics and Abbeys their whole Demain, (or
perhaps rather, all their Lordships) and all their Demain Lands, which my
Bishops and Abbats, by fear or easiness granted away, and consented they should
enjoy them; or that they by violence took away, and what they as yet unjustly
possess, of the Demain or Possessions of my Churches. And unless they restore
them, according as you shall on my behalf give them notice, you may then
constrain them to restore them, whether they will or not; and if any other, or
any of you, to whom I have committed the doing of Justice

Historia Elien. Penes Doctorem Gale. p. 87 a.
Willielmus Anglorum Rex Omnibus fidelibus suis and Vicecomitibus in quorum
Vicecomitatibus Abbatia de Heli terras habet, salutem. Praecipio Abbatia habeat
omnes confuetudines suas, scilicet Saccham and Socham Toll and Team, and
Infanganetheof, Hamsoc^a and Grithbrice Fithwite, Ferdwite ^nfra burgum and
extra and omnes alia^ forisfacturas quae emendabiles sunt in terra sua super
suos homines: Has inquam habeat sicut habuit die qua Rex Aedwardus fuit vivus
and mortuus, and sicut mea Jussione dirationata sunt apud Kene^eford per plures
Scyras ante meos Barons, videlicet Galfridum Constantiensem Episcopum and
Baldewinum Abbatem and Abbatem aeilsi, and Wifwoldum Abbatem and Ivonem
Taillebois and Petrum de Valoniis and Picotum Vicecomitum and Telielum de
Helium and Hugonem de Hofdeng, and Gocelinum de norwloo, and plures alios.
Test Rogere Bigot.

Ibid. p. 94. a.
Willielmus Rex Anglorum Lanfranco Archiepiscopo and Rogerio Comiti and
Gaulfrido Constantiensi Episcopo, salutem. Mando vobis and praecipio ut iterum
faciatis congregari omnes Scyras quae interfuerunt placi^o habito de terris
Ecclesiae.
Ecclesiae de Heli ^ntequam Normaniam novissime veniret, cum quibus etiam sint
de Baronibus meis, qui competenter adesse poterint and praedicto placito
interfuerint and qui terras ejusdem Ecclesiae tenent, Quibus in unum
congregatis eligantur plares de illis Anglis qui sciunt quomodo terrae jacebant
praefatae Ecclesiae die qua Rex Edwardus obiit. Et quod inde dixerint, ibidem
jurando testentur. Quo facto restituantur Ecclesiae terrae quae in Dominico suo
erant die obitus Edwardi, exceptis his quas homines clamabant me sibi dedisse.
Illas vero literis mihi significate quae sint, and qui eas tenent. Qui autem
tenent Theinlandes, quae procul dubio debent teneri de Ecclesia, faciant
concordiam cum Abbate quam meliorem poterint. Et si noluerint terrae remaneant
ad Ecclesiam, Hoc quoque detenentibus Socam and Sacam fiat. Denique praecipite
ut illi homines faciant pontem de Heli qui meo praecepto and dispositione huc

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Golfrido Episcopo and Rodberto Comiti Moritoniae,
Ibidem.
Facite simul venire omnes illos qui terras tenent de dominico victu Ecclesiae
de Heli. Et volo ut Ecclesia eas habeat sicut habebat die qua Edwardus Rex fuit
vivus and mortuus. Et si aliquis dixerit, quod inde de meo dono aliquid habeat;
Mandate mihi magnitudinem terrae, and quomodo eam reclamat, and ego secundum
quod audiero escambitionem reddam, aut aliquid faciam. Facite etiam, ut Abbas
Symeon habeat omnes consuetudines quae ad Abbatiam pertinebant, die quo Rex
Edwardus fuit mortuus. Si illi qui eas habent secum concordare noluerint, and
ad istud placitum summonere Willielmum de Guaregna and Richardum filium Comitis
Gilberti and Hugonem de Monte-Forti and Golfridum de Magnavilla and Radulfum de
Belfo and Herveum Bituriensem, and Hardewinum de Escalers and alios quos Abbas
vobis nominabit.

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Lanfranco Archiepiscopo and Golfrido Constantiensi
Episcopo, salutem. Ibid. 94. b.
Facite Abbatem de Heli resaisiri de istis terris, quas isti tenent Hugo de
Monteforti unum Manerium nomine Bercham, Richardus filius Comitis Gilleberti
Brochesheue, Picotus Vicecomes Epintonam, Hugo de Berneriis 3 hidas. Remigius
Episcopus 1 hidam. Episcopus Baiocensis 2 hidas, Frodo frater Abbatis 1
Manerium, Duo carpentarii 1 hidam and 3 virg. Si ipse poterit ostendere
supradictas terras esse de dominico suae Eclesiae: Et si supradicti homines non
poterint ostendere ut eas terras habuissent de dono meo. Facite etiam quod
Abbas praedictus habeat Sacam and Socam and alias consuetudines, sicut
Antecessor ejus habuit die qua Rex Aedwardus fuit vivus and mortuus.

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Lanfranco Archiepiscopo Goisfrido Constantino Episcopo
and Roberto Comiti de Moritonio, salutem. Ibidem.
Facite Abbatem habere Sacam and Socam suam, prout suus Antecessor habuit
tempore Regis Aedwardi, videlicet de quinque Hundret de Suthfulch, and ab
omnibus viris qui terras tenent in illis Hundrez. Videte ne Abbas praedictus
quicquam injuste perdat, and facite ut omnia sua cum magno honor teneat.

Willielmus Rex Anglorum Lanfranco Archiepiscopo and G. Episcopo and R. Comiti
Moritonio, Ibidem.
salutem. Defendite ne Remigius Episcopus novas consuetudines requirat infra
Insulam de Heli. Nolo enim ut ibi habeat nisi illud quod Antecessor ejus
habebat tempore Regis Aedwardi, scilicet qua die ipse Rex mortuus est. Et si
Remigius Episcopus inde placitare voluerit, placitet inde sicut fecisset
tempore Regis Aedwardi, and placitum istud sit in vestra praesentia. De
custodia de Norguic Abbatem Symeonem quietum esse dimittite; Sed ibi municionem
suam conduci faciat and custodiri, Facite remanere placitum de terris quas
calumniantur Willielmus de Ou, and Radulfus filius Gualeranni and Robertus
Gernon; si inde placitare noluerint, sicut inde placitassent tempore Regis
Aedwardi, and sicut in eodem tempore Abbatia consuetudines suas habebat, volo
ut eas omnino faciatis habere, sicut Abbas per cartas suas, and per testes suos
eas deplacitare poterit.

The Conquerors Charter of Liberties to the City of London, gronted to William
Bishop of London: Given in the Saxon Language, but thus Englished.
Stowe, f. 535.739, 740.
WIlliam King greeteth William Bishop, and Godfrey Portgrave, London, French
and English, and I grant that they be all Law-worthy, as they were in Edwards
days the King; and I Will that each Child be his Fathers Heir, and I will not
suffer that any Man do you wrong. And God you keep.

An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Names of all the great Tenants that held all
the Lands, Towns, Manners, and Farms in England of William the Conqueror,
mentioned in the Survey Doomesday-Book.
Numb. 10. A
Monachi ejus. Abbatia de Berchinges. Abbatissa de Eodem. Abb. de Ely. Abb.
Sancti Edmundi. Abb. de Bello. Abbatissa de Eodem. Abb. Sancti Adoeni. Abb.
Sancti Benedicti Ramesii. Abb. de Hulmo. Abb. de Bernai. Abbatissa de Ceterich.
Abb. Sancti Augustini. Abb. Fiscamiensis. Abb. Wintoniensis. Abb. de Certesis
alias Certesig. Abb. Sancti Wandregesili. Abb. de Cruce Sancti Leutfredi. Abb.
Glocestrensis. Abb. Gemeticensis. Abb. Middletunensis. Abb. de Grestam.
Abbatissa de Wincestre. Abbatissa de Romesig. Abbatissa Romesiensis. Abbatissa
de Warwelte. Abb. de Lire. Abb. Wiltuniensis. Abb. Abindoniensis. Abb. Sancti
Albani. Abb. Sancti Petri super Divam. Abbatissa de Ambresberie. Abb.
Malmesburiensis. Abb. Creneburnensis. Abbatissa Skeftesberiensis. Abb. de
Cernel. Abb. de Abbedesberie. Abb. de Sancto Wallerico. Abb. de Adelingi. Abb.
Sanctae Trin. de Cantorberia. Abb. de Hortune. Abb. de Tavestoch. Abbatissa de
Monasterio villarum. Abb. Sanctae Trin. Rothomagi. Abb. de Winthelcumbe. Abb.
de Pratellis. Abb. Sancti Stephani de Cadomo. Abbatia de Evesham. Abb. de
Persore. Abb. de Coventre. Abb. de Cormelies. Abb. de Eglesham. Abb. de Torni.
Abb. de Croyland. Abb. de Burgh. Abb. de Berton. Abb. de Eborace. Willielmus
filius Ansculfi. Willielmus Alisius. Willielmus Arcuarius. Willielmus filius
Azor. Goscelinus filius Azor. Gilo frater Ansculfi. Ainulphus Vicecomes.
Albertus.
Theodericus Aurifaber. Roger. Arundel. Robertus de Albamarle. Ruald. Adobed.
Ainulphus.
Nigellus de Albinio. Vrso de Abatot. David de Argentoun. Henricus filius Azor.
Robertus Albus. Walterus de Aincourth. Goisfridus Alscelinus. Osbernus de
Arcis. Odo Arbalistarius. Norman de Adreci. Ansgotus.
Edmundus filius Algoti. Humfridus filius Alberici. Aluredus. Aldit.
Willielmus de Archis. Alsi alias Elsi.
Rabellus Artifex. Gislebertus Arbalistarius. Bernardus Arbalistarius. Radulfus
Arbalistarius. Robertus Arbalistarius. Hugo Alabarle. Bernardus Accipitrarius.
Ansgerus.
Eldricus Aucipiter. Adelina Vxor Hugonis.
B
WIllielmus de Braiose. Willielmus de Bertram. Gislebertus de Breteville. Hugo
filius Baldrici. Willielmus filius Balderon. Willielmus Belet. Rogerus de
Berchelai. Rogerus de Belmont. Serlo de Berci. Hugo de Boscherberti. Rogerus de
Busli. Robertus Bastard. Aluredus Brito. Nicholas Balistarius. Robertus
Blundus. Radulfus Baignard. Hugo de Bello-campo. Goisfridus de Bech. Goisbertus
de Belvaco. Maigno vel Maimo Brito. Hugo de Bolebech. Nigellus de Bereville.
Gozelinus Brito. Vrso de Berseres. Radulfus de Berchelai. Walterus Balistarius.
Baldevinus.
Humfridus de Buivile. Hugo de Berners. Vxor Bosselini de Dive. Robertus de
Buci. Drogo de Beureria. Willielmus Buenvalet. Ogerius Brito. Rainaldus de
Balgaiole. Badulfus de Burun. Rainerus de Bruemont. alias Brunon.
Waldinus Brito. Odo Balistarius. Willielmus Blandus. Heppo Balistarius.
Tibellus Brito. Rogerus Bigotus. Radulfus de Bello-fago. Humfridus de Bohun.
Herveius Bituricensis. Gislebertus Balistarius. Radulfus Balistarius. Rainaldus
Brito. Bezelinus.
Tedbaldus filius Bernerii. Burgenses de Bedford. Willielmus Buenwasteth.
Erneis de Burun. Odoardus Balistarius. Rainaldus Balistarius. Regis Bedelli.
C
CAnonici Sancti Pauli Land. Canonici de Waltham. Canonici Sancti Martini Land.
Canonici de Oxenford and alii Cleri. Canonici Lisiansenses. Clericus Albertus.
Canonici de Twinham. Canonici Constantienses. Clerici de Wrehauton. Canonici de
Bedford. Capellanus Ansgerus. Canonici de Stadford and Handon. Clericus Sanson.
Clerici Tenentes de Rege in Somersetshire. Canonici Eboracenses. Canonici
Baiocenses. Comes de Mellent. Comes Eustachius. Comes Willielmus de Ow. Comes
Moritoniensis. Comes Alanus. Comes Hugo. Comes Ebroicensis. Comes Albericus.
Comes Ivo Talbois. Comes Albericus Northumb. Comitissa Juditha. Comitissa
Godeva. Comitissa de Albamarla. Comitissa Bononiensis vel Boloniensis.
Albericus Capellanus. Milo Crispin. Humfridus Camerarius. Turstinus Camerarius.
Gozelinus de Cormelies. Goisfridus Camerarius filii Regis. Robertus and
Willielmus filii Corbutionis vel Corbet. Willielmus de Calgi. Rogerus de
Curcelles. Rainaldus Canus vel Canud. Walterus de Clavile. Willielmus filius
Constantini. Albericus de Coci. Willielmus Chieure. Giraldus Capellanus. Sigar
de Cioches. Christina.
Ansfridus de Cormelies. Humfridus Cocus. Willielmus de Cahanges. Gunfridus de
Cioches. Gislebertus Cocus. Wido de Credun. Colsuaine.
Normannus Crassus. Colegrin.
Herbertus Camerarius. Carpentarii Regis. Carbon alias Carbonet. Walterus
Cocus. Angerus Cocus. Hubertus de Canesio. Colvin. Chetelbern. Chenvin.
Albertus Capellanus.
D
WAlterus de Doai vel Doway. Walscelinus de Duay vel Doway. Robertus
Dispensator. Walterus Diaconus. Herman de Drunes. Eudo Dapifer. David.
Haimo Dapifer. Adam filius Durandi mala opera. Godricus Dapifer. Rogerus Deus
salvet Dominas. Galfridus Diaconus. Willielmus Diaconus. Darman.
Radulfus Dapifer.
E
ARchiepiscopus Eboracensis. Episcopus Londinensis. Episcopus Dunelmensis.
Lisiacensis. Herefordensis. Baiocensis. Tedfordensis and Feudum ejusdem.
Episcopus Osbertus. Rovensis vel Rofcestrensis.
Episcopus Ebroicensis. Cicestrensis. Excestrensis. Wintoniensis.
Saresberiensis. Constantiensis. Wellensis. Cestrensis. Lincolniensis. de
Wirecestre.
Ecclesia de Lantheige. Sancti Nicholai. Beccensis. de Bada. Miceleniensis.
Sancti Petri Romae. de Monteburg. de Buckfesth. Sancti Martini Rothom. de Monte
Sancti Michaelis de periculo Maris. Aliquorum Sanctorum. Sancti Dionysii
Parisiis. De Troar. De Lire. De Cirecester. Sancti Remigii Remensis.
Adelingensis. De Cadomo Sancti Stephani. De Cadomo Sanctae Trinitatis. De
Glastingberie. De Skeftesberie. De Tavestoke. De Hortune. De Crenburn. De la
Bataigle. De Coventreu. Sancti Ebrulfi. De Cormelies. Sancti Guthlaci. De
Gloucester. De Westmonaster. De Pertore. De Evesham.

Several of these Churches, in diverse Counties in Doomsday-book, are sometimes
entered as Abbeys, and sometimes as Churches, according to the fancy of the
Clerks of the Commissioners that made the Survey, as Abbatia de Coventre,
Abbatia de Persore, Abbatia de Evesham, Abbatia de Croyland, in stead of
Ecclesia Sancti Guthlaci, etc.


Richardus Esturmi. Eldredus.
Swainus de Excessa. Richardus filius Erfasti. Eudo filius Esperwic. Eldricus
Accipitrarius. Edwardus.
Baldwinus de Excestre. Hardvinus de Escalers. Rainaldus filtus Archebaldi.
Elsi alias Alsi. Edgar. Eldeva. Eddie alias Edith.
Regis Elemosynarii.
F
FRodo frater Abbatis. Radulfus de Felgeres. Willielmus de Felgeres. Henricus
de Ferrariis. alias Ferier.
Willielmus de Falaise. Robertus Fasiton. Walterus Flandrensis. Willielmus
Froisseleu. Hugo Flandrensis. Richardus Forestarius. Baldwinus Flandrensis.
Ranulfus Flammar. Robertus Flavus. Henricus de Felgeres. Hermar. de Ferrariis.
Ad nullam Firmam pertinet. Fulcherus.

G
RIchardus filius Gisleberti Comitis. Robertus filius Geroldi. Durandus de
Gloucester. Walterus Giffart. Godescallus.
Odo filius Gamelini. Godeballus. Goscelinus. Giraldus.
Robertus Gernon alias Greno. Hugo de Grentmaisnil. Willielmus Goizinboded.
Picotus de Grentbridge. Girbirtus. Gerinus. Gospatric.
Robertus filius Goberti. Godvinus. Grimbaldus.
Berengarius Giffart. Gislebertus de Gand. Griffin. Gudmund. Gonovinus.
Osbernus Giffart.
H
HAimo Vicecomes de Chent. Ernulfus de Hesding. Radulfus filius Huberti. Eudo
filius Huberti. Aluredus Hispaniensis. Hainricus vel Haimericus. Radulfus
filius Huberti. Willielmus Hostiarius. Hago vel Hugo.
Tibellus Herion. Ilbodus frater Ernulfi de Hesding. Hachebernus alias Hagebus.
Radus filius Hugonis. Herveius.
Eustachius de Huntedune. Drogo de Holdernesse. Godvinus Haldenus. Herbertus.
Homines Domini Regis. Comitis de Mellent.
Homines Episcopi Dunelmensis. Homines Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis.
I
ROgerus de Iveri. Humfridus de Insula. Radulfus de Insula. Iseldis.
Ranulfus frater Ilgeri. Richardus de Ingania. Ilbodus. Isaacus.
Rainaldus filius Ivonis. Waldinus Inganiator. Invasiones.

L
WIllielmus Levet vel Loves. Rogerus de Laci. Hugo Lasne. Radulfus de
Limeseio. Roger. de Luri vel Leuri. Willielmus Luric. Richardus Legatus.
Albertus Lothariensis. Aluredus de Lincolnia. Hugo de Luri vel Luci. Gozelinus
filius Lamberti. Goscelinus Loremanus. Herveus Legatus. Lewena.
Homines Liberi.
M
HVgo de Montfort. Goisfridus vel de Magna villa. Galfridus de Magna villa.
Robertus Malet. Aluredus de Merlebergh. Radulfus de Mortemer. Willielmus filius
Manne vel Magni. Goisfridus Marescallus. Nigellus Medicus. Robertus filius
Murdrac. Mathaeus Mauritaniensis. Willielmus de Moion. Gunfridus vel Mauldoit.
Humfridus Mauldoit. Robertus Marescall. Turstinus Mantell. Martinus.
Hascoit Musard. Humfridus de Madehalle. Rogerus de Mucelgros. Durandus Malet.
Hubertus de Monte-Canitio. Rogerus Marescallus. Modovinus.
Giroldus Marescallus. Willielmus de Maldwith alias Mauduit. Maci de Moritania.
Willielmus de Moimi. Regina Mathildis. Madoth Edric Elmer. Regis Ministri.
Monachi de Scireburn and Winton.
N
WIllielmus filius Normanni. Nigellus perhaps Nigellus Medicus. Normannus.
Willielmus filius Nigelli. Nicholas.

O
WAlterus filius Otheri. Goisfridus Ortale vel Orlateile. Radulfus filius
Osmundi. Wido de Olgi. Willielmus de Ottburvilla. Robertus de Olgi. Odo.
Ogerius.
Rogerus de Odburvilla. Willielmus de Ow.
P
RAnulfus Piperellus. Hugo de Port de Rege and de Episcopo Baiocensi.
Hubertus de Port. Willielmus de Perci. Bernardus Pancevolt. Ricardus Punigiant
alias Puniant. Willielmus Peurel alias Peverell. Piperell.
Walterus filius Ponz. Drogo filius Ponz. Ranulfus de Pomerei. Radulfus
Paganel. Radulfus Pomerei. Willielmus de Poilgi. Hugo Pincerna. Osbernus
Piscator. Walterus Pontz. Erchinger Pistor. Rogerus Pictaviensis. Theodericus
Pointell. Radus Pinell. Herbrandus de Ponte Adomari. Erminius Presbyter.
Colebertus Presbyter. Gislebertus Presbyter. Reinbaldus Presbyter. Godricus
Presbyter. Giraldus Presbyter de Wiltune. Godwinus Presbyter. Inichellus
Presbyter. Lewinus Presbyter. Aluredus Presbyter. Robertus Piscator. Osbernus
Presbyter. Edmundus filius Pagani. Regis Praefecti.
R
GIslebertus filius Richerii. Turstinus filius Rolf. Herbertus filius Remigii.
Willielmus filius Richardi. Robertus filius Rolf. Goscelinus de Rivere. Wido de
Reinbodcourth. Reinbaldus.
Heraldus filius Radulfi Comitis. Osbernus filius Ricardi. Richardus.
Rainaldus. Restoldus.
Robertus filius Roscelini. Rogerus filius Reinardi. Rohais Vxor Ricardi.
Roger. de Ramis.

EDwardus de Sareberie. Willielmus filius Stur. Robertus de Stadford. Radulfus
filius Scifrid. Hugolinus Stireman. Ricardus Sturmie. Willielmus de Scoies
alias Scohies. Osbernus de Salceid. Gislebertus filius Salomonis. Willielmus
Speck. Walterus frater Seiherii. Siboldus.
Nigellus de Stadford. Saisselinus.
Hugo de Sancto Quintino. Starcolfus. Swain. Sortebrand.
Sanctus Stephanus de Cadamo. Eudo filius Spirwic. Regis Servientes.
T
HEnricus Thesaurarius. Durandus Tonsor. Radulfus de Todeneio. Gislebertus
filius Turoldi. Judahel de Todenais. Robertus de Todeneio. Richardus de
Todeneio. Radus Tailebosch. Berengarius de Todeni. Turchillus.
Ilbertus filius Turoldi. Gislebertus Tisun. Ivo Tailebosch. Willielmus
Tailebosch. Filia Radi Tailebosch. Azelina Vxor Ejus. Adelina faemina Ejus.
Ricardus de Tunbridge. Tovi. Tonnus.
Ricardus filius Turolfi. Oswaldus Theodericus. Regis Taini.
V
WAleranus Venator. Croc Venator. Ainulfus Vicecomes. Swain Vicecomes. Haimo
Vicecomes. Baldewinus Vicecomes. Durandus Vicecomes. Humfridus vil. de Leci.
Albericus de Ver. Petrus Valoniensis. Bertram de Verdono. Robertus de Veci vel
Vesci. Walterus Vernon. Vlchetellus. Vlmarus. Vlveva. Vinemarus.
Vxor Hugonis. Vxor Rogeri de Luri. Vxor Radulfi Capellani. Vxor Hervei de
Helion. Vxor Geri. Willielmus de Verci. Regis Valvasores. Robertus de Verli.
W
WIllielmus de Warrenna. Willielmus filius Widonis. Ranulfus de Sancto
Walerico. Walterus de Sancto Walerico. Aluredus Nepos Wigoti. Johannes filius
Walerani. Willielmus.
Osbernus filius Walteri. Winemarus.
Goisfridus de Wirce. Turchillus de Warwice. Robertus filius Willielmi.
Johannes Nepos Walerani. Willielmus de Watevilla. Walterius.
Odo de Wirecestre.
For further satisfaction, any man may compare this Alphabetical William the
First, and that they held all the Lands in England of him, by immediate, and
others of them by mediate Tenure.

Charta Regis Willielmi Primi, qui secernit placita Ecclesiastica a Causis
Civilibus.
W. Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum R. Bainardo, and G. de Magnavilla, Spelm. Co^ vol.
2. fol. ^ A. D. 10^
Communi Concilio, and Concilio Archiepiscoporum, and Episcoporum and Abbatum
and omnium Principum Regni mei, emendandas judicavi; propterea Mando and regia
authoritate praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel Archidiaconus, de legibus
Hundret placita teneant: Nec causam, quae ad regimen Animarum pertinet, ad
judicium Secularium hominum adducant: Sed quicunque secundum Leges Episcopales,
de quacunque causa vel culpa interpellatus fuerit, ad locum quem ad hoc
Episcopus elegerit, and nominaverit, veniat; ibique de causa vel culpa sua
respondeat, and non secundum Hundret, sed secundum Canones and Episcopales
leges, and rectum Deo, and Episcopo suo faciat: Si vero aliquis per superbiam
elatus, ad justitiam Episcopalem venire contempserit and noluerit* vocetur
semel, and secundo, and tertio. Quod si nec sic ad emendationem venerit,
excommunicetur; and si opus fuerit ad hoc vindicandum, fortitudo and Justicia
regis vel Vicecomitis adhibeatur: ille autem qui vocatus ad Justitiam Episcopi
venire noluerit, pro unaquaque vocatione Legem Episcopalem emendabit: Hoc etiam
defendo, and mea authoritate interdico, ne ullus Vicecomes aut Praepositus seu
Minister Regis, nec aliquis Laicus homo, de Legibus quae ad Episcopum pertinent
se intromittat: Nec aliquis laicus homo alium hominem, sine Justicia Judicium
vero in nullo loco portetur nisi in Episcopali sede, aut in alio loco, quem
Episcopus ad hoc construeret.

Willielmus Dei Gratia Rex Anglorum, tam Clericis, quam Laicis Ibid. fol. ^
Notum sit vobis* me concessisse and confirmasse, assensu Lanfranci
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, and Stigandi Episcopi Cicestrensis; and Concilio
etiam Episcoporum ac Baronum victoriam quam mihi Deus in eodem loco contulit,
libera sit and quieta in perpetuum ab omni servitute, and omnibus quaecunque
humana Men's excogitare possit cum omnibus dignitatibus and consuetudinibus
regalibus, quas ei regali authoritate concessi, sicut Chartae meae testantur.
Volo itaque and firmiter praecipio, quatenus Ecclesia illa; cum Leuga
circumquaque adjacente, libera sit ab omni Dominatione, and Oppressione
Episcoporum, sicut illa quae mihi coronam tribuit, and per Nec liceat Episcopo
Cicestrensi, quamvis in illius Dioecesi sit, in Ecclesia illa, vel in Maneriis
ad eam pertinentibus, ex consuetudine hospitari, contra voluntatem Abbatis, nec
Ordinationes aliquas ibidem facere, nec Abbatiam in aliquo gravare, sed neque
super illam Dominationem aliquam, aut vim vel potestatem exerceat, sed sicut
Dominica mea Capella, libera sit omnino ab omni exactione. Ad Synodum vero
Abbas ire non summoneatur, nec compellatur nisi propria voluntate pro aliquo
negotio ire voluerit. Nec Monachos suos, ubi sibi opportunius viderit, ad
sacros ordines promoveri facere prohibeatur. Nec Altarium Sacrationes,
Confirmationes, vel quaslibet Episcopales benedictiones Abbatis vel Monachorum
requisitione a quolibet Episcopo ibidem libere fieri ab aliquo contradicatur.
Hoc etiam regali authoritate, and Episcoporum and Baronum meorum attestatione
constituo, quatenus Abbas Ecclesiae suae, Leugae circumjacentis per omnia Judex
sit, and Dominus. Defuncto Abbate, de adem Ecclesia Abbas eligatur, nisi forte
(quod absit) ibidem idonea persona reperiri non possit. Hanc Constitutionem
meam, sic voto and regali authoritate confirmatam nullus successorum meorum
violare vel imminuere praesumat. Quicunque igitur contra libertates vel
dignitates ejusdem Ecclesiae fecerit, forisfacturae Regiae Coronae subjaceat.
Hujus rei testes sunt Lanfrancus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis. Stigandus
Cicestrensis Episcopus. Walkelinus Episcopus Winton. Wulstanus

Seldom. Not. in Eadmer, f. 164.
Excellentissimo Sanctae Ecclesiae Pastori Gregorio, gratia Dei Anglorum Rex and
Dux Normannorum Willielmus, salutem, cum amicitia. Hubertus Legatus tuus,
Religiose Pater, ad me veniens ex tua part me admonuit, quatenus tibi and
successoribus tuis fidelitatem facerem, and Unum admisi, alterum non admisi;
Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec volo; quia nec ego promisi, nec Antecessores meos
Antecessoribus tuis id fecisse, comperio: Pecunia tribus firm annis in Galliis
me agente, negligenter collecta est. Nunc vero Divina misericordia me in Regnum
meum reverso quod Collectum est per praefatum Legatum mittitur. Et quod
reliquum est per Legatos Lanfranci Archiepiscopi fidelis nostri cum opportunum
fuerit, transmittetur. Antecessores vestros dileximus, and vos prae omnibus
sincere diligere and obedienter audire desideramus.

Eadm. Histor. Nov. f. 12.
Lanfrancus Gratia Dei Archiepiscopus, dilectissimo Fratri Stigando, Cicestrensi
Episcopo, salutem. Clerici villarum nostrarum qui in vestra Antecessorum
nostrorum, and vestrorum vobis concessimus, eisque imperavimus quatenus ad
vestras Synodos irent, and ea quae ad Christianae Religionis notitiam prodesse
possunt sine interpellatione vel discussione aliqua a vobis audirent. Si quae
in ipsis culpis invenirentur, suspensa interim vindicta, ad nostrum examen
servarentur, and nobis vel in miserendo vel in ulciscendo, sicut semper
consuetudo fuit, obnoxii tenerentur. Mandavimus itaque vobis, ut male accepta
sine dilatione reddi jubeatis and Ministris vestris Nos vero Presbyteris
nostris qui extra Cantiam constituti sunt omnino praecipimus ne ad vestram vel
alicujus Episcopi Synodum amplius eant, nec vobis nec aliquibus ministris
vestris pro qualibet culpa respondeant. Nos enim cum ad Villas nostras
venerimus quales ipsi, vel in moribus, vel in sui Ordinis scientia sint,
pastorali authoritate vestigare debemus. Chrisma tamen a vobis accipiant and ea
quae antiquitus instituta sunt, in Chrismatis acceptione persolvant, sicut
namque ea quae antiquitus usque ad nostra Tempora, Antecessores nostri
habuerunt, solerti vigilantia cupimus illibata custodire, ita aliis debita
aliqua, quod absit, usurpatione denegare nolumus.

The Ecclesiastical Constitutions made in Normandy, Append.
Anno Domini Order. Vital. fol. 552, etc.
ANno ab incarnatione domini 1080. Rex Guillelmus in festo Pentecostes
Illebonam resedit, ibique Guillelmum Archiepiscopum and omnes Episcopos and
Abbates Comitesque, cum aliis proceribus Normannie simul adesse praecepit. Vt
Rex jussit factum est. Igitur octavo anno Papatus domini Gregorii Papae 7
Celebre Concilium apud Baronum suorum consilio utiliter Tractatum est. Statuta
vero concilii, sicut ab his qui interfuerunt veraciter annotata sunt, volo hic
inserere; ut posteri discant, quales in Normannia leges fuerunt sub Guillelmo
Rege.

Pax Dei (quae vulgo trevia dicitur) sicut ipse Princeps Guillelmus eam in
initio constituerat, firmiter teneatur, and per singulas Parrochias, domino in
^ujus terra habitat, Episcopus hoc demonstret, and ille subdat eum Episcopali
justitiae. Quod si and dominus facere contempserit, Regis Vicecomes, per
Episcopum inde requisitus, omni remota excusatione faciat.



Presbyteri, Diaconi, Subdiaconi, and omnes Canonici, and Decani nullam omnino
feminam habeant. Quod si aliquis post eandem culpam visus fuerit incurrisse, si
per ministros Episcopi inde prior fuerit accusatus, curia Episcopi se purgabit.
Si vero parrochianorum vel dominorum suorum aliquis, eum prius accusaverit,
habeat accusatus inducias ut cum Episcopo possit loqui: and si se purgare
voluerit, in eadem parrochia cui servit praesentibus parrochianis pluribus,
ante Episcopi ministros, and eorum judicio se purgabit. Si vero purgare se non
potuerit Ecclesiam perdet irrecuperabiliter. Hoc praedictus Rex Statuit, non
perenniter Episcopis suis auferendo debitam justitiam; Sed quia Episcopi eo
tempore, minus quam convenisset inde fecerant, donec ipse

Nullus laicus in redditibus altaris, vel in Sepultura, vel in tertia part
decimae aliquid habeat; nec pecuniam per horum venditionem aliquatenus habeat,
nec Presbyter inde servitium faciat, nisi legationem domini sui portet. Ita ut
in eadem die ad servitium Ecclesiae revertatur, and ad orationes (per
Normanniam solummodo) victum domini sui habens, si dominus voluerit, secum
vadat: Servitium Ecclesiae Presbyter interim curet.

Presbyteri ab Episcopis vel ab eorum ministris praeter justos redditus
Episcopi, vi vel minis dare mihil cogantur, propter eorum feminas nulla
pecuniae Emendatio exigatur.

Archidiaconi per Archidiaconatus suos semel in anno Presbyterorum
suffraganeorum suorum vestimenta, and calices and libros videant: designatis ab
Episcopo in unoquoque Archidiaconatu solummodo tribus locis, ubi vicini
Presbyteri ad haec monstranda convocentur.

Quando Archidiaconus ad haec videnda venerit, a Presbyteris qui convenient
triduo, si Expedit, victum sibi habeat.

Si Presbyter forisfacturam fecerit de forestis Regis, vel Baronum ejus, nullam
inde emendationem habebit Episcopus.

Presbyteri semel in anno circa Pentecosten cum processionibus suis ad matrem
Ecclesiam veniant, and de singulis domibus cerae denerata, vel idem valens ad
illuminandam Ecclesiam altari offeratur. Quod qui facere noluerit, a Presbytero
suo per ministerium suum cogatur hoc solvere, sine emendatione pecuniae.

Laicus Presbyterum non det, vel adimat Ecclesiae, nisi ex consensu Praesulis.
Quem tamen, si recipiendus est, Episcopus non repellat, and si repellendus est,
non retineat.

In Cimiteriis Ecclesiarum, quae in Civitatibus, vel Castellis, vel Burgis
sunt, quicquid Episcopi tempore Rodberti Comitis vel Guillelmi Regis ejus
consensu habuerunt, Episcopi rehabeant.

In Cimeteriis vero quae in marchis, si guerra fuerit, and aliqui ad habitandam
ibi faciant mansionem, dum guerra duraverit, and ipsi propter guerram in atrio
manserint, nullam forisfacturam, ab eis Episcopus habebit, nisi quam habuisset
antequam ad atrium confugissent. Cum autem pax facta fuerit, qui propter
guerram illuc confugerant, de atrio exire cogantur, aut Episcopalibus legibus
supponantur. Qui vero in praedictis Cimeteriis antiquitus manserunt, in antiqua
quietudine permaneant.

Ecclesiae villarum quantum Cimeteriis tempore Rodberti Comitis habuerunt, vel
usque ad illud supra scriptum Concilium habuerunt, tantum habeant: and in eis
illas consuetudines habeant Episcopi, quas tempore Rodberti comitis vel
Guillelmi Regis ejus consensu habuerunt, nisi Episcopi concedente Rege
Guillelmo aliquam i. c. Legem.
consuetudinem fecerint.

Si post concilium aliqua nova fit Ecclesia intra villam, faciat Episcopus
Cimeterium, consideratione dominorum, and parrochianorum ejusdem Ecclesiae, si
vero extra villam nova fit Ecclesia, undique habebit quinque perticas cimeterii.

Si monachis donatur Ecclesia, Presbyter qui eandem tenet Ecclesiam honorifice
teneat quicquid de eadem Ecclesia habuit; antequam monachi eam haberent; and
tanto melius quanto sanctioribus associatur hominibus. Eo autem mortuo vel
aliquatenus deficiente, Abbas idoneum Presbyterum quaerat, and Episcopo eum vel
per se, vel nuncium suum ostendat. Q^em si recipiendus est, Episcopus recipiat.
Si vero Presbyter cum monachis religiose vivere voluit: videat ut Ecclesia,
quam Episcopali licentia vestimentis quam libris, and caeteris Ecclesiae
serviendae necessariis, secundum ejusdem facultatem Ecclesiae. Quod si
Presbyter cum monachis vivere noluerit, tantum det ei Abbas de bonis Ecclesiae,
unde and been vivere, and Ecclesiae servitium convenienter valeat Presbyter
adimplere. Quod si Abbas facere noluerit, ab Episcopo convenienter cogatur, ut
faciat. Presbyter vero Episcopo suo just subditus sit, Episcopales redditus
persolvat, quae vero superabundant, in usus monasterii sui Abbas habeat. Hoc
idem in Ecclesiis Canonicorum

Violatio Ecclesiae and atrii sicut superius determinatum est, and commissa pro
quibus divinum officium remanet, Episcopis per pecuniam emendetur. Assultus in
Ecclesiae itinere similiter.

Si quis iratus persequitur alium in atrium vel in Ecclesiam, similiter.

laicus arat vel adificat in atrio, sine licentia Pontificali, similiter.

Si Clericus raptum fecerit, vel furtum, vel aliquem percusserit, aut
vulneraverit, aut occiderit: Si duellam sine licentia Episcopi, susceperit; aut
namium ceperit, aut assultum fecerit, aut aliquid injuste saisierit, aut
incendium fecerit: aut manupastus ejus, aut habitator

Si Clericus Adulterium fecerit, aut incestum, similiter.

Si Presbyter de ministerio suo forisfecerit, similiter.

Presbyteri qui ad Synodum venire neglexerint, similiter.

Et qui Synodum and circadam Statutis terminis non reddiderit, similiter.

Si Clericus Coronam suam dimiserit, similiter.

Si Monachus vel Monacha, qui sunt sine regula, habitum suum dimiserint,
similiter.

Si Presbyteri, praeter Treviae dei infractores, and latrones, sine licentia
Episcopi Excommunicaverint, similiter.

Si erraticam habere (quod vulgo dicitur vueridif) in curiam sacerdotis, vel
Clerici, qui in atrio manent, venerit, vel in Eleemosynam ejusdem Ecclesiae,
vel in atrium Episcopi erit. Si quid per contentionem in domo Presbyteri, vel
Clerici* vel in atrio sacerdoti vel Clerico, vel eorum manupasto relictum
fuerit* Episcopi erit.

Si quis Presbyterum, aut Monachum, aut Monacham assallierit, aut percusserit,
aut ceperit, ^ut occiderit, aut domos eorum in atrio incenderit, similiter
emendabit, si quid in Ecclesia vel in atrio inveniatur, vel relinquatur,
Episcopi erit. Si quis adulterium vel incestum fecerit, vel cum matrina, vel
cum matre, vel filiola coterit, similiter. Si mulier hoc idem fecerit,
similiter. Si quis uxorem suam, vel si qua mulier virum suum sine judicio
praesulis reliquerit, similiter. Qui mortuos consulunt maleficia tractant,
similiter. Qui intentum sibi crimen inficians, vel negans, ferri judicio
convincitur (excepta dei trevia) similiter. Qui justitiae resistens
excommunicari se patitur, similiter. Parrochianorum crimina Episcopo
pertinentia ubi consuetudo fuit, Episcoporum judicio examinentur.

Si contradictio judicationis facta fuerit, ante Episcopum definiatur.

Si ferri judicium fuerit judicatum, ante matrem Ecclesiam terminetur.

Si plana lex erit facienda, ibi fiat ubi placitum prius fuit.

In Parrochia Episcopi sine licentia ejus, nullus audeat praedicare.

Qui in praedictas culpas inciderit si sponte ad paenitentiam venerit,

Si laicus raptum in atrio fecerit, Episcopo emendabit, si vero alibi fecerit,
quocunque modo faciat, Episcopus nihil habebi^.

Has consuetudines habeant Episcopi in illis locis, in quibus eas tempore
Rodberti Comitis vel Guillelmi Regis ejus concessione hactenus habuerunt.
quieta fuerunt, eam quietudinem habeant, quam huc usque solid tenuerunt in his
omnibus, justitiis and consuetudinibus Rex sibi retinet quod huc usque habuit.

Si Presbyter domini sui judicio contradixerit de Ecclesiastica causa, and eum
in curiam Episcopi eundo injuste fatigari fecerit, domini suo X. solidos
emendabit.

Si Episcopi aliquid quod non sit hic Scriptum, in Regis Curia, monstrare
possunt, se habuisse tempore Rodberti Comitis, vel Gulielmi Regis, ejus
concessione. Rex eis non tollit, quin habeant: tantummodo illud nullatenus
faisiscant: donec in Curia ejus monstrent quod habere debeant, similiter and
laicis propter hoc scriptum, Rex nil tollit, quod in Curia ejus monstrare
possint Episcopos non debere habere: tantummodo Episcopos inde non
disaisiscant, donec in Curia Regis monstratum sit, quod Episcopi inde habere
non debeant.

Eadm. Hist. nov. fol. 16.
Anselmo Dei Gratia Anglorum Archiepiscopo, Clerus and Populus Oppidi
Wataferdiae cum Rege Murchertacho and Episcopo Dofnaldo, salutem similitudines
ad mentem revocamus, quia sine regimine, nec exercitus Bellum, nec navis
marinum audet attemptare periculum. Navicul^ ergo nostra Mundanis dedita
fluctibus sine pastore contra callidum hostem, qua ratione pugnabit? Propterea
nos and Rex noster-Murchertachus and Episcopus Dofnaldus, and Dermeth Dux
noster frater Regis eligimus hunc Presbyterum Malchum Walkelini Wintoniensis
Episcopi Monachum, nobis sufficientissime cognitum, natalibus and moribus
nobilem, Apostolica and Ordinari Pontificem, quatenus regulariter nobis
praeesse valeat and prodesse, and nos sub ejus regimine salubriter Domino
militare possimus. Vt autem omnium nostrorum vota in hanc electionem convenire
noscatis, hinc decreto canonico promptissima voluntate singuli Manibus

Ego Murchertachus Rex Hiberniae subscripsi. Ego Dermeth Dux frater Regis
subscripsi. Ego Dofnaldus Episcopus S. S. Ego Idunan Episcopus Midiae S. S. Ego
Samuel Dunelmensis Episcopus S. S. Ego Ferdomnachus, Laginiensium Episcopus S.
S. Subscripserunt hic multo plures, quos nos brevitate students notare non
necessarium duximus.

faciebat quaedam, quae facienda non videbantur, Eadm. Hist. f. 43. n. 30.
de Ecclesiis, quas post obitum Praelatorum aliter quam oporteret tractabat.
mortem Archiepiscopi Lanfranci, cum in manu sua Archiepiscopatum teneret,
militibus suis dederat, mihi sicut eas idem Archiepiscopus tenuerat non
reddebat, sed insuper alias secundum libitum suum, me Nolente dabat. Servitia
gravia and Antecessoribus meis inusitata ultra quam far possem aut pati
deberem a me exigebat. Legem Dei, and Canonicas and Apostolicas authoritates,
voluntariis consuetudinibus obrui videbam. De hiis omnibus cum loquebar, nihil
efficiebam, and non tam simplex Rectitudo quam voluntaria consuetudines
obtendebantur. Sciens igitur quod si haec ita usque in finem tolerarem, in
damnationem animae meae successoribus meis tam pravam consuetudinem
confirmarem, nec de his placitare poteram ( nullus enim aut consilium aut
auxilium mihi ad haec audebat dare) petii a Rege licentiam adeundi vestram
Paternitatem, quatenus illi and cordis mei angustias ostenderem, securum illum
facerem, me deinceps nullo modo requisiturum, pro aliqua necessitate,
Apostolicum, nec saltem inde locuturum, aut si unquam hoc facturus eram, in
praesenti hoc facerem. Sic itaque mare transii causa ad vos veniendi. Quod
sicut dixi facere non possum. Quoniam aut impossible est me hujusmodi vitae
concordare aut animam meam in tali Episcopatu salvari, tum propter rerum quas
dixi summa supplicationis meae propter quam ad vos ire volebam, ut sicut Deum
animae meae, and animam meam Deo desideratis, per paternam and Apostolicam
pietatem, quae Cor vestrum inhabitat, animam meam de vinculo tantae servitutis
absolvatis eique libertatem serviendi Deo in tranquillitate reddatis, ne
abundantiore tristitia sicut jam nimis passa est absorbeatur, and de dolor
temporali ad aeternum pertrahatur; deinde ut Ecclesiae Anglorum secundum
prudentiam, and a^ctoritatem Apostolatus vestri consulatis. Omnipotens Dominus
vestram sanctitatem Nobis in suae gratiae prosperitate diu servet incolumem,
and conterat Sathanam, and portas inferi sub pedibus vestris. Amen.

Eadm. Hist. f. 59. n. 40.
Paschalis Episcopus servus servorum Dei, Dilecto filio Henrico Regi obedientiam
promittentis. In quibus nimirum Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae illa in tuo regno
pollicebaris, quae tempore tui Patris habuerat, eos requirens honores quos
Antecessorum nostrorum tempore Pater tuus habuerat. Quae profecto omnia grata
in superficie viderentur, interius requisita and Legati tui vocibus exposita,
gravia and vehementissima paruerunt. Quaerebas enim ut tibi Episcoporum,
Abbatumque per Investituram constituendorum and facultas a Romana indulgeretur
Ecclesia, and quod per se solum fieri omnipotens Dominus perhibet, hoc Regiae
potestatis fieret. Ait enim Dominus. Ego sum ostium; Per me si quis introierit,
salvabitur. Cum autem Ecclesiae ostium Reges esse arrogant, fit profecto ut qui
per eos Ecclesiam ingrediuntur, non pastores sed fures and latrones habeantur,
eodem Domino dicente. Qui non intrat per ostium in ovile ovium sed ascendit
aliunde, fur est and latro. Et quidem si a nobis magnum aliquid tua dilectio
postularet, Facilius ad extrema quaelibet beatus Ambrosius cogi potuit quam
Imperatori Ecclesiae permittere potestatem. Respondit enim. Noli gravare te
Imperator, ut putes mea quae divina sunt, imperiale aliquod jus habere. Noli te
extollere, sed si vis diutius imperare, esto Dei subditus. Scriptum est, Quae
Dei Deo, quae Caesaris Caesari. Ad Imperatorem Palatia Deum enim Episcopos
eligi, cum canonice eliguntur, testatur Apostolus Paulus, dicens, Nec quisquam
sumit sibi honorem sed qui vocatur a Deo, tanquam Aaron. Et beatus Ambrosius.
Merito, inquit, creditur quod divino esset electus judicio, quem omnes
postulavissent. Et post pauca. Vbi universorum postulatio congruit, dubitare
Ecclesia filios genuit. Ecclesia Principes statuit. Possemus alia de scripturis
sacris testimonia and exempla proponere, quibus constaret Ecclesiae sponsos ac
pastores Episcopos non saecularium potestatem nutu, sed Christi dispositione
and Ecclesiae indicio praeponendos. Vnde etiam Imperator Justinianus sanxit in
legibus sic. Debet enim prius disceptari de vita Episcopi utrum bona sit, an
reprehensibilis, and utrum bonis testimoniis muniatur, an non. Et infra. Fiat,
inquit, facultas unicuique si velit contradicere. Et siquidem ante
consecrationem fuerit contradictio facta, non prius consecretur Episcopus, nisi
disceptatio de contradictione sit facta, ut undique appareat innoxius is qui ad
Episcopatum Quem ergo in Curia tua sine Metropolitani literis admittere non
debes, eum vis, o Rex, in Ecclesia principem constituere? Monstruosum profecto
est, ut Patrem filius generare, homo Deum creare debeat. Sacerdotes namque in
Scripturis Sanctis Deos vocari tanquam Dei vicarios manifestum est. Vnde
sanctae memoriae Propter hoc sancta Romana Ecclesia and Apostolica per
Praedecessores nostros Regiae Usurpationi, and investiturae abominabili
vivaciter obviare curavit, and gravissimis persecutionibus per Tyrannos
affecta, usque ad tempora nostra non destitit. Confidimus autem in Domino,
quoniam nec in nobis confidentiae suae virtutem, Ecclesiae Princeps Petrus and
Episcoporum primus amittet. Porro saecularium Potestatum and Regum in Ecclesia
quod sit officium, exponit Apostolus Immo si ab hoc propter Deum desistas, quod
contra Deum esse manifestum Nec exstimes quod potestatis tuae columen
infirmetur, si ab hac profana usurpatione desistas. Immo tunc validius, tunc
robustius, tunc honorabilius regnabis, cum in regno tuo divina regnabit
autoritas. Tunc amicitiam and familiaritatem nostram firmius obtinebis, and
regni tutores beatos Apostolos habere praecepta ejus tuas disposueris actiones,
ipse regnum tuum pacis and honoris sui stabilitate ac sublimatione disponat.
Amen.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadem. (...) fol. 63. N. ^
charissimo ^ilio Henrico Regi Anglorum, salutem, and Apostolicam
benedictionem. Regi Regum impietatem, quam divino conspicis judicio
terribiliter vindicatam Ecclesias libertati restituisti, Clerum honorare
coepisti, and Cleri Principes Episcopos immo in his Christum Dominum venerari.
Confidimus itaque quoniam usque in finem eadem sapies and in eadem probitate
persistes nisi sunt aliqui perversae mentis homines qui cor Regum per
Episcoporum and Abbatum Investituras Divinae indignationi aptare conantur.
Quorum in hac part consilia tanquam virus tibi sunt evitanda, ne illum
offendas per quem Reges regnant, and potentes justa decernunt. Quem profecto si
propitium habueris faeliciter regnabis potestatemque integram and divitias
obtinebis. Quem si, quod absit, offendis, non Procerum consilia, non Militum
subsidia, non arma, non divitiae ubi subvertere caeperit, poterunt subvenire.
Porro in honor Domini, in Ecclesiae liberate, Nos familiares, Nos adjutores
habebis. Nec opineris quia quisquam Nos a tua divellet amicitia, si ab
Investituris abstinere, si honorem debitum and libertatem a Domino institutam
conservaveris. Ecclesiarum siquidem Investituras nos sancti Spiritus judicio
Regibus and Principibus, Investitures of Churches taken away from Kings,
Princes, and all Laics by the Pope.
immo Laicis omnibus interdicimus. Nec enim decet ut a filio matter in
servitutem addicatur, ut sponsum quem non optavit accipiat. Habet sponsum suum
Regem ac Dominum nostrum qui te misericordia sua in potentia and probitate
custodiat, and a terreno ad

Eadm. Hist. fol. 67. N. 30.
Primum itaque ex auctoritate sanctorum Patrum Simoniacae haeresis surreptio in
eodem Concilio damnata est. In qua culpa inventi, depositi Godricus de Burgo,
Haimo de Cernel, Egelricus de Mideltune, absque simonia vero remoti sunt ab
Abbatiis pro sua quisque causa, Richardus Heli, and Robertus de sancto Edmundo,
and qui erat apud Micelenei.

Statutum quoque est, ne Episcopi saecularium placitorum officium suscipiant,
and ut non sicut Laici, sed, ut religiosas personas decet, ordinatas vestes
habeant, and ut semper and ubique honestas personas testes habeant suae
conversationis.

Vt etiam Archidiaconatus non dentur ad firmam.

Vt Archidiaconi sint Diaconi.

Vt nullus Archidiaconus, Presbyter, Diaconus, Canonicus uxorem ducat vel
ductam retineat. Subdiaconus vero quilibet qui Canonicus non est, si post
professionem castitatis uxorem duxerit, eadem regula constringatur.

Vt Presbyter quandiu illicitam conversationem mulieris habuerit, non sit
legalis, nec missam celebret, nec si celebraverit, ejus missa audiatur.

Vt nullus ad Subdiaconatum aut supra ordinetur sine professione castitatis.

Vt filii Presbyterorum non sint haeredes Ecclesiarum Patrum suorum.

Ne quilibet Clerici sint saecularium praepositi, vel Procuratores, aut Judices
sanguinis.

Vt Presbyteri non eant ad potationes, nec ad pinnas bibant.

Vt vestes Clericorum sint unius coloris, and calciamenta ordinata.

Vt Monachi vel Clerici qui ordinem suum abjecerunt, aut redeant, aut
excommunicentur.

Vt Clerici patentes Coronas habeant.



Ne Ecclesiae aut Praebendae emantur.

Ne novae Capellae fiant sine consensu Episcopi.

Ne Ecclesia sacretur donec provideantur necessaria and Presbytero, and
Ecclesiae.

Ne Abbates faciant Milites, and ut in eadem domo cum Monachis suis manducent
and dormiant, nisi necessitate aliqua prohibente.

Ne Monachi poenitentiam cuivis injungant sine permissu Abbatis sui, and quod
Abbates eis licentiam de hoc dare non possunt, nisi de eis quorum animarum
curam gerunt.

Compatres, vel Monachae Commatres fiant.

Ne Monachi teneant villas ad firmam.

Ne Monachi Ecclesias nisi per Episcopos accipiant, neque sibi datas ita
expolient suis redditibus, ut Presbyteri ibi servientes in iis quae sibi and
Ecclesiis necssaria sunt, penuriam patiantur.



Vt criniti sic tondeantur, ut pars aurium appareat, and oculi non tegantur.

Nec cognati usque ad septimam generationem ad conjugium non copulentur, vel
copulati simul permaneant, si quis hujus incestus conscius fuerit,

Ne corpora defunctorum extra parochiam suam sepelienda portentur.

Vt Presbyter parochiae perdat, quod inde illi just debetur.

Ne quis temeraria novitate corporibus mortuorum, aut fontibus, aut aliis
rebus, quod contigisse cognovimus, sine Episcopali auctoritate, reverentiam

Ne quis illud nefarium negotium, quo hactenus homines in Anglia solebant velut
bruta animalia venundari, deinceps ullatenus facere praesumat.

Sodomiticum flagitium facientes, and eos in hoc voluntary juvantes, in hoc
eodem consilio gravi anathemate damnati sunt, donec paenitentia and confessione
absolutionem mereantur. Qui vero hoc crimine publicatus fuerit, statutum est
siquidem fuerit persona religiosi Ordinis, ut ad nullum amplius gradum
promoveatur, and si quem habet ab illo deponatur. Si autem Laicus, ut in toto
regno Angliae, legali suae conditionis dignitate privetur. Et ne hujus criminis
absolutionem iis qui se sub regula

Statutum quoque est ut per totam Angliam in omnibus Dominicis diebus
Excommunicatio renovetur.

Eadm. Hist. fol. 71. lin. 8.
Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Anselmo Cantuariensi venerabili gratia
Dei tibi praestante auxilium, te nec minae concutiunt, nec promissa sustollunt.
Dolemus autem quia cum fratres nostros Episcopos Legatos Regis Anglorum benign
suscepissemus, quae nec diximus eis nec cogitavimus, redeuntes ad propria
retulerunt. Audivimus enim eos dixisse, quod si Rex in aliis been ageret, Nos
investituras Ecclesiarum nec prohibere nec virgam Pastoralitatis signum, De
inv^stitura.
si Annulum signaculum fidei tradit Laica manus, quid in Ecclesia Pontifices
agunt? Ecclesiae honor atteritur, solvitur disciplinae vigor, and omnis religio
Christiana conculcatur si quod novimus Sacerdotibus solis deberi, Laica
patiamur Jure ergo privandus est patrimonio qui matrem polluit adulterio, nec
meretur Ecclesiasticae benedictionis consortium, qui eam impia infestatione
insequitur. Laicorum enim est Ecclesiam tueri non tradere. Ozias quidem cum
illicitum sibi Sacerdotium vendicaret, lepra percussus est. Filii quoque Aaron
quia alienum ignem imposuerunt, igne Divino consumpti sunt. Alienum est ab
Ecclesia, and a sacris Canonibus est inhibitum, ne Principes and saeculares In
septima quippe Synodo, ut nostis, scriptum est. Sancta and universalis Synodus
definivit neminem Laicorum Principum, potentumve semet inserere Electioni
Episcoporum vel promotioni eorum. Si ergo filii Aaron, qui ignem alienum
intulerunt, corporaliter puniti sunt, isti qui a Laicis a quibus alienum est
Ecclesiam susceperunt, spirituali gladio feruntur. Episcopos autem qui
veritatem in mendacio invocarunt, ipsa veritate quae Deus est in medium
introducta a beati Petri gratia, and a nostra societate excludimus donec
Romanae Ecclesiae satisfaciant and reatus sui pondus agnoscant. Quicunque vero
intra praedictas inducias Investituram seu Consecrationem acceperunt, a
Consortio, fratrum and ordinatores and ordinatos alienos habemus, nec eis ad
excusationem deceptio sufficit, quia and Propheta ab alio Propheta deceptus nec
ideo mortem evasit. Rogamus interea caritatem tuam II Id. Decembr. apud
Beneventum.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadm. Hist. f. 73. n. 40.
Venerabili fratri Anselmo Cantuariensi Episcopo, salutem, and Apostolicam
Benedictionem. Fraternitatis primatum, ita tibi plenum concessimus sicut a tuis
constat Praedecessoribus fuisse possessum. Nunc autem petitionibus tuis
annuentes jam tibi quam legitimis successoribus tuis eundem Primatum, and
quicquid dignitatis seu potestatis eidem Sanctae Cantuariensi seu Dorobernensi
Ecclesiae pertinere cognoscitur, literis praesentibus confirmamus sicut a
temporibus beati Augustini Predecessores tuos habuisse Apostolicae sedis
auctoritate constiterit. Datae Lateranis XVI Kl. Decembris XII.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadm. Hist. f. 74. n. 10.
Illustri and Glorioso Regi Anglorum Henrico, salutem, and Apostolicam
Benedictionem. In literis quas nuper ad Nos per familiarem tuum nostrae
dilectionis filium Willielmum Clericum transmisisti, and personae tuae
sospitatem cognovimus, De investitu^
grave nobis, quia id a Nobis videris expetere, quod praestare omnino non
possumus. Si enim aut consentiamus aut patiamur investituras a tua excellentia
fieri, and nostrum proculdubio, and tuum erit immane periculum. Qua in re
contemplari te volumus quid Imperatorium, non est Regium sed Divinum. Solius
illius est qui dixit. Ego sum ostium. Vnde pro ipso rogo te, cujus hoc munus
propter hoc tuo lateri adhaerere, tuo veretur in regno consistere. Qui tanta de
te hactenus bona audierant, quid de te sentient, quid loquentur, cum hoc fuerit
in regionibus divulgatum. Ipsi qui coram te tuos excessus extollunt, cum
praesentia tua caruerint, hoc profecto validius infamabunt. Redi ergo fili
Karissime ad cor tuum propter misericordiam Dei, and propter amorem unigeniti
deprecamur revoca Pastorem tuum, revoca Patrem tuum. Et si quid quod non
opinamur adversus te gravius gesserit, siquidem Investituras aversatus fueris,
Nos juxta voluntatem, quantum cum Deo praeberi facultas sit, profecto
consequeris, and pro te Dominum, ipso adjuvante, exorare curabimus and de
peccatis tam tibi quam Conjugi tuae Sanctorum Apostolorum meritis absolutionem
and indulgentiam faciemus. Filium etiam tuum quem ex spectabili and gloriosa
conjuge suscepisti, quem, ut audivimus, egregii Patris Willielmi vocabulo
nominasti, tanta tecum imminentia confovebimus, ut qui vel te vel illum IX Kl.
Decembris.

Eadm. Hist. f. 74 n. 30.
Suo Reverendo Domino Henrico Regi Anglorum, Anselmus Cantuariensis
Archiepiscopus fidele servitium, cum orationibus. Quamvis per De investituris.
Romam veni, causam pro qua veneram statutis Antecessorum suorum, and insuper
praecepit mihi ut nullam haberem communionem cum illis, qui de manu tua
Investituras acceperunt Ecclesiarum, post hujus prohibitionis notitiam, nisi
paenitentiam agerent, and sine spe recuperationis quod acceperant desererent,
neque cum Episcopis qui tales consecrarunt, nisi ad Apostolicae sedis judicium
se praesentarent. Willielmus, si vult. Qui Willielmus quando ab invicem
discessimus, ex vestra part commemorans amorem and benignitatem quam semper
erga me habuistis, summonuit me sicut Archiepiscopum vestrum, ut talem me
facerem quatenus sic intrarem in Angliam, ut esse possum vobiscum, sicut fuit
Antecessor meus cum Patre vestro, and vos me eodem honor and liberate
tractaretis, qua Pater vester Antecessorem meum tractavit. In quibus verbis
intellexi quia nisi me talem facerem, reditum meum in Angliam non velletis. De
amore ita sim vobiscum, sicut Antecessor meus fuit cum Patre vestro, facere non
possum, quia nec vobis Homagium facere, nec accipientibus de manu vestra
Investituras Ecclesiarum propter praedictam prohibitionem me audiente factam
audeo communicare. Vnde precor ut mihi vestram, si placet, mandetis voluntatem,
utrum sic quemadmodum dixi possim in pace vestra and officii mei potestate
redire in Angliam. Paratus enim sum and vobis and populo divina mihi
dispositione commisso officii mei servitium pro viribus and scientia mea,
servata

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadm. Hist. fol. 79. lin. ^
Venerabili Fratri Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Anselmo, salutem, and Apostolicam
Benedictionem. De illata tibi injuria membra Ecclesiae non modicum patiuntur,
quia, sicut dicit Apostolus, si compatitur unum membrum compatiuntur and
caetera membra. Licet enim corporali seperemur praesentia, unum tamen in capite
sumus. Tuas namque injurias ac repulsas aeque ac nostras portamus. Illud etiam
nos vehementer affligit, quod tua religio regno sublata est Anglico. Quae
Concilio nuper habito ex communi Fratrum and Coepiscoporum sententia
deliberatum est, and Regis Consiliarios qui ad Investiturae ^lagitium illum
impellunt, and eos qui ab eo Investiti sunt, ab Ecclesiae liminibus
repellendos, quia de libera facere conantur Ancillam. Quam nimirum sententiam
nos Sancti Spiritus judicio, in Comitem de Mellento, and ejus accomplices
promulgavimus, and eandem ipsam in eos qui sunt Investiti a Rege, ejusdem
Sancti confirmamus. Regis vero sententia, ea ex causa dilata est, quia suos ad
Nos Nuncios in praeteritae Paschae tempore debuit destinare. Datae Lateranis
VII Kl. Aprilis. Anno Dom. 1104.

Patri dilectissimo Anselmo Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Eadm. Hist. fol. 84. n.
20.
Gerardus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, and Robertus Cestrensis, and Herbertus
Sustinuimus pacem, Sancta Sanctorum, and ad ipsam Aram irruperunt Laici. Exurge
ut olim senex ille Mathathias. Habes in filiis tuis virtutem Judae,
strenuitatem Jonathae, prudentiam Simonis. Hii tecum praeliabuntur praelium
Domini, and si ante Nos appositus fueris ad Patres tuos, de manu tua
suscipiemus haereditatem laboris tui. Sed jam non est tibi pigritandum. Vt quid
enim peregrinaris, and oves tuae sine Pastore pereunt? Jam apud

Henrico suo Karissimo Domino, gratia Dei Regi Anglorum, Eadm. Hist. fol. 85.
n. 30.
Anselmus Archiepiscopus Cantuariae, fideles orationes, cum fideli servitio.
pertinet, si audio quod faciatis aliquid, quod animae vestrae non expediat, ut
hoc vobis non taceam, ne, quod Deus avertat, Deus irascatur, and vobis, si
facitis quod illi non placeat, and mihi, pro taciturnitate mea. Audio quod
vestra excellentia, vindictam expercet super Presbyteros Angliae, and
forisfacturam exigit ab eis, qui non servaverunt praeceptum Concilii quod ego
cum vestro favore tenui apud Lundoniam cum aliis Episcopis, and religiosis
personis. Quod hactenus inauditum and inusitatum est in Ecclesia Dei, de ullo
Rege, and de aliquo pertinet secundum legem Dei hujusmodi culpam vindicare,
nisi ad singulos Episcopos per suas I.c. Dioeceses.
Parochias; aut si and ipsi Episcopi in hoc negligentes fuerint, ad
Archiepiscopum and Primatem. Precor igitur vos sicut charissimum Dominum, cujus
animam diligo, plus quam praesentem vitam corporis mei, and consulo sicut vere
fidelis corpori, and animae vestrae ne vos contra Ecclesiasticam Consuetudinem
in tam grave peccatum mittatis, and si jam incepistis, ut omnino d^si^tatis.
Dico enim vobis quod valde timere debetis, quod pecunia taliter accepta, ut
taceam quantum noceat animae, non tamen cum expendetur, adjuvabit terrena
negotia, quantum postea perturbabit. Denique vos scitis quia me in Normannia in
pacem vestram suscepistis, and de Archiepiscopatu meo, me resaisistis, and quod
cura and vindicta talis offensae maxim pertinet ad Archiepiscopatum, quoniam
plus sum Episcopus pro spirituali Cura, quam pro terrena possessione.
Omnipotens Deus sic and in hoc, and in aliis actibus vestris dirigat cor
vestrum secundum

Eadm. Hist. fol. 87. lin. 4.
Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Venerabili fratri Anselmo Apostolicae
sedis obedientiam, Omnipotentis Dei dignatio inclinavit, eidem miserationum
Domino gratias agimus, in cujus manu Regum corda versantur. Hoc nimirum tuae
caritatis gratia, tuarumque orationum instantia factum credimus, ut in hac
part populum illum cui tua sollicitudo praesidet, miseratio superna
respiceret. Quod autem and Regi, and iis qui obnoxii videntur, adeo
condescendimus eo affectu and compassione factum noveris, ut eos qui jacebant
erigere valeamus. Qui enim stans jacenti ad sublevandam manum porrigit, nunquam
jacentem eriget nisi and ipse curvetur. Caeterum quamvis casui propinquare
inclinatio videatur, statum tamen rectitudinis non amittit. Te autem, Frater in
Christo Venerabilis and Karissime, ab illa prohibitione, sive, excommunicatione
absolvimus quam ab antecessore nostro, Sanctae memoriae Vrbano Papa adversus
Investituras aut Hominia factam intelligis. Tu vero eos qui Investituras
acceperunt, aut Investitos benedixerunt, aut Hominia fecerunt, cum ea
satisfactione qua tibi per communes Legatos, Willielmum and Baldvinum viros
fideles ac veridicos significamus, Domino cooperante, suscipito, and eos vice
nostrae authoritatis absolvito, quos vel ipse benedicas vel a quibus volueris
benedici praecipias, nisi aliud in eis forte repereris propter quod a sacris
sint honoribus Eliensi Abbati tuae communionis consortium subtrahes, quamdiu
Abbatiam retinere praesumpserit, quam, concepto nostri oris interdicto, quod
praesens audierat, per repetitam Investituram praesumpsit invadere. Si qui vero
deinceps praeter Investituras Ecclesiarum, praelationes assumpserint, etiam si
Regi Hominia fecerint; nequaquam ab hoc a benedictionis munere arceantur, donec
per Omnipotentis Domini gratiam, ad hoc omittendum, cor regium, tuae
praedictationis imbribus moliatur. Praeterea super Epistolis qui falsum ut
nosti a nobis rumorem flagitium, Domino cooperante, non patimur. Verum tamen
quia filii nostri Regis instantia pro eis nos pulsat attentius, etiam ipsis
communionis tuae participium non negabis, Donec veniendi ad nos praeceptum
accipiant. Sane Regem, and ejus conjugem, ac Proceres illos qui pro ho^ negotio
circa regem ex praecepto nostro laboraverunt and laborare nitentur, auxiliante
Domino Deo nostro, per tuae sollicitudinis studium corrigantur. Qua in re ita
dilectioni tuae nostrum sentias adesse praesidium, ut quae solveris,
absolvamus, quae ligaveris, alligemus. Rotomagensis Episcopi causam and
interdictum meum justitia dictante prolatum tuae deliberationi commisimus. Quod
ei indulseris, indulgemus. Fraternitatem tuam superna dignatio per tempora
longa conservet incolumem. Datae X. Kl. Aprilis.

Henricus Rex Anglorum, Anselmo Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Eadm. Hi^ fol. 90.
li^
salutem and amicitiam. Paternitati and Sanctitati Vestrae significamus, Robert
E^ of Norma^ was his el^ Brother.
Robertum Comitem Normanniae, cum omnibus copiis militum, and peditum quos
prece and pretio adunare potuit, die nominata and determinata, mecum ante
Tenerchebraiam acriter pugnasse; and tandem sub misericordia dei vicimus, and
sine multa caede nostrorum. Quid plura? Ducem Normanniae, and Comitem
Moritonii, Willielmum Crispinum, and Willielmum de Ferreris, and Robertum de
Stutevile senem, and alios usque ad quadringentos milites, and december millia
peditum in manus nostras, and Normanniam dedit. De illis autem quos gladius
peremit, non est numerus. Hoc autem non elationi, vel arrogantiae, nec viribus
meis tribuo, sed dono Divinae dispositionis, attribuo: quocirca, Pater
reverende, supplex and devotus genibus tuae Sanctitatis advolutus te deprecor,
ut supernum Judicem cujus arbitrio, and voluntate triumphus iste tam gloriosus,
and utilis mihi contigit, initium bonorum operum and servitii D^i, and sanctae
Dei Ecclesiae statum, tranquilla pace tenendum, and corroborandum, ut amodo
libera vivat, and nulla concutiatur tempestate bellorum.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadm. Hist^ fol. 91. lin. ^
venerabili Fratri Anselmo Cantuariensi Episcopo, salutem and Apostolicam
benedictionem. De filiis quid in Romana Ecclesia constitutum sit, Fraternitatem
tanta hujusmodi plenitudo est, ut major pene and melior Clericorum pars in hac
specie censeatur nos dispensationem hanc sollicitudini tuae, committimus. Eos
enim quos scientia and vita commendat apud vos, ad sacra officia promoveri, pro
necessitate temporis, and utilitate Ecclesiae, concedimus; ut in posterum
constitutionis Ecclesiasticae praejudicium caveatur De persona quoque Richardi
Heliensis Abbatis, petentibus filiis nostris, Henrico Rege and Willielmo de
Warlewast, permittimus ut eam in communionem tuam, praemissa satisfactione,
suscipias, and si ad Mona sterii regimen utilis ejus persona conspicitur tuae
dispensationi committimus, caetera etiam quae in regno illo pro necessitate
temporis dispensanda sunt, juxta gentis barbariem, juxta Ecclesiae
opportunitates, sapientiae ac religionis tuae sollicitudo dispenset. Datae III.
Kl. Junii.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Seldom ad Eadm. fol. 2^ n. 10.
Dilecto in Christo filio Henrico glorioso Regi Anglorum, salutem and
Apostolicam benedictionem. talem te Regem nostris temporibus Ely dicitur, novus
ex Apostolica authoritate Episcopatus constituatur, qui Lincolniensem Episcopum
tantae magnitudinis esse dixisti, ut ad peragenda ea quae Episcopalis sunt
officii unus Episcopus nullatenus sufficere possit. Pro quo, and devotionem
tuae voluntatis laudamus and dispositioni assensum praebemus ita tamen ut in
celebri loco constituatur, ne nomen Episcopi, quod absit, vil scat. Ad hoc enim
Episcopus constituitur, ut populum Dei and verbo doceat, and vita informet, and
ad verum Pastorem Domini commissarum sibi animarum, lucra reportet. In hiis
quoque de quibus rogasti, licet quaedam ibi inordinata videantur, tuae tamen
voluntati refragari nequaquam valemus. Novit praeterea gloria vestra, Dompnum
Hervaeum Episcopum quem vita and scientia commendat non modica, nimia
barbarorum ferocia, and XI. Kal. Decembris.

Eadm. Hist. fol. 102. lin. 8.
Anselmus Minister Ecclesiae Cantuariensis, Thomae electo Archiepiscopo
Sacerdotale officium, quod meo jussu in Parochia mea per suffraganeum meum
suscepisti, tibi, interdico, atque praecipio ne te de aliqua Cura Pastorali,
ullo modo praesumas intromittere, donec a rebellione quam contra Ecclesiam
Cantuariensem incepisti, discedas, et subjectionem quam Antecessores tui,
Thomas videlicet, et Girardus Archiepiscopus, ex antiqua Antecessorum
consuetudine, professi sunt, profitearis. Quod si in iis, quae coepisti magis
perseverare, quam ab eis desistere, delegeris, Omnibus Episcopis totius
Britanniae sub perpetuo Anathemate interdico, Ne tibi ullus eorum manus ad
promotionem Pontificatus imponat, vel, si ab externis promotus fueris, pro
Episcopo vel in aliqua Christiana communione te suscipiat. Tibi quoque Thoma
sub eodem Anathemate ex part Dei interdicto, ut nunquam benedictionem facias:
Si autem Episcopatum Eboracensem ex toto dimiseris, concedo, ut officio
Sacerdotali, quod jam suscepistis, utaris.

Eadm. Hist. fol. 120. lin. 3.
Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Venerabilibus fratribus Episcopis
Angliae, et charissimo filio Henrico illustri Regi, salutem, et Radulfo
Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, vestram ad nos Legationem missam per venerabilem
Fratrem Herbertum Norwicensem Episcopum novimus. Et quidem gravibus
infirmitatum molestiis impediti idem Fratres, et Co-episcopi pervenire ad
nostram praesentiam minime potuerunt. Sed nuntiorum honestis, venerabilibusque
personis, pervenientibus, eorum scripta suscepimus, in quibus et ipsorum
postulationes, et vestrae Legationis vota inspeximus. Id enim optabatur, id
poscebatur, ne Ecclesia Cantuariensis temporibus nostris sua dignitate
privetur, ne nos eandem dignitatem suscepimus, quia vobis in Domino, propter
Dominum placere optamus, Vestrae igitur dilectioni notum haberi volumus, quia
Cantuariensis Ecclesiae dignitatem n^c imminuimus, nec imminuere deliberamus.
Beatum namque Gregorium, Apostolicae sedis Pontificem, tanquam praecipuum
Christi membrum, tanquam Christiani populi Pastorem, and Doctorem, tanquam
salutis aeternae Ministrum in omnibus veneramur. Et rata esse, cupimus, quae ab
ejus institutionibus processerunt. Illam ergo dignitatem Anselmus jure, ac
possessione legitima tenuisse cognoscitur, nos profecto nullatenus imminuimus,
sed in eodem statu esse Cantuariensem Ecclesiam volumus, nec autentica ejus
privilegia, juxta Canonum sanctiones, nullis perturbationibus violentur. Data
Beneventi XI. Kl. Aprilis.

Paschalis Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Eadm. (...) 121. li^
Dilecto filio Henrico illustri probitate tua, non tantum bona, sed etiam
meliora confidimus, Idcirco monemus excellentiam tuam, ut divinae gratiae
semper memor existas, quae tibi, and Regni pacem and justitiae notitiam
tribuit. Honorem igitur Dei and Ecclesiarum ejus in regno tuo diligenter
observa and justitiam efficaciter exequere, quia per honorem Dei tuus profecto
honor augebitur. Audivimus electum Eboracensis Ecclesiae, virum sapientem, and
strenuum, sine judicio, ab Eboracensi Ecclesia sequestratum, quod nimirum
praejudicium volumus pati, sed eam constitutionem, quae a Beato Gregorio,
Anglicae gentis Apostolo, inter easdem Ecclesias constituta est, firmam
censemus illibatamque servari. Idem ergo electus, ut justitia exigit, ad suam
Ecclesiam revocetur. Si quid autem quaestionis inter easdem Ecclesias agitur,
praesentibus utrisque partibus, in nostra praesentia pertractetur ut,
praestante Deo, utraque Ecclesia finem suae justitiae consequatur.

Ben. A^ p. 59. a.
Haec est Concordia facta inter Regem, and filios suos.
Notum sit tam praesentibus quam futuris, Hoved. f. ^ a. n. 30.
quod pax enter Dominum Regem, and filios suos Henricum, viz. and Richardum,
and Gaufridum, Henricus Rex filius Regis, patrem suum, and ad servitium ejus
sicut ad dominum suum redierunt, liberi, et absoluti ab omni juramento, et in
ipsa, quam inter se, vel cum aliis fecerunt contra eum, v^l homines suos et
omnes homines et barons, qui a fidelitate patris causa eorum recesse rant,
clamaverunt quietos ab omni juramento, quod iis fecerant, et ita quieti et
liberi ab omni Juramento, et absoluti ab omni Conventione quam iis fecerant, in
Dominium, et Ligantiam Domini Regis redierunt. Et dominus Rex debet r^habere,
ipse, et homines sui, et Barons sui, omnes Castella sua, quae habuerunt
quindecim diebus antequam filii sui recederent ab eo. Similiter et Barons et
homines sui qui recesserunt ab eo, et secuti sunt filios suos, debent rehabere
terras suas, quas habuerunt quindecim diebus antequam ab eo recederent, et
dominus Rex remisit omnem malevolentiam baronibus et hominibus suis, qui
recesserunt ab eo, ita quod propter hoc nullum malum eis faciet, quamdiu
fideliter ei servient, sicut ligio domino suo. Et Rex filius ejus simili^er
perdonavit omnibus tam Clericis quam Laicis, qui cum patre suo fuerant omnem
malevolentiam, and adsecuravit in manu Domini R^gis patris sui, quod illis qui
servierunt ei nec malum nec damnum aliquod hac de causa faciet, vel p^rquiret
in tota vita sua. Et dominus rex per hanc conditionem donat Regi filio suo duo
Castella idonea in Normannia ad voluntatem Patris illius, and singulis annis
quindecim millia librarum Andegavensium, and Richardo filio suo duo receptacula
idonea in Pictavia, unde Regi damnum non possit provenire: and medietatem
reddituum Ganfrido vero filio suo dat in Britannia in denariis medietatem
maritagii filiae Comitis Conani, quam ducere debet in uxorem, and postquam
concessione Romanae Ecclesiae eam in uxorem duxerit, habebit omnes redditus
illius maritagii, sicut continetur in Charta Comitis Conani. Prisones vero qui
cum domino Rege finem fecerunt, ante factam pacem cum domino Rege: Videlicet,
Rex Scotiae, et Comes Leicestriae, and Comes Cestriae, and Radulfus de
Fulgeriis, and obsides eorum, and obsides aliorum Prisonum, quos prius
habuerat, sint extra istam. Alii autem prisones ex utraque part deliberari
debent, ita scilicet, quod dominus rex obsides accipiet de prisonibus suis, de
quibus habere voluerit, and qui dare poterunt. Et de aliis habebit securitatem
per fidem and Sacramentum suum, and amicorum suorum. Castella vero quae firmata
sunt, vel infortiata postquam guerra incepit, in terra domini Regis, pro
voluntate sua debent redigi in illum Statum in quo fuerunt quindecim diebus
ante guerram. Praeterea sciendum est quod Rex Henricus filius Regis concessit
domino regi patri suo, se quam firmiter donationes eleemosynarum quas dederat
vel daturus erat de terris suis, and donationes terrarum quas dederat hominibus
suis, vel daturus erat pro servitio suo. Concessit etiam se firmiter and
inconcusse observaturum donationem, quam Rex pater suus fecit Johanni fratri
suo; videlicet, mill libratas reddituum in Anglia de dominico suo, and de
excaetis suis ad voluntatem suam, cum pertinentiis suis, and Castellum de
Notingham cum Comitatu, and Castellum de Merleberga cum pertinentiis suis: and
in Normannia mill libratas reddituum Andegavensium, Castella in Normannia, ad
voluntatem patris, and in Andegavia, and in terra quae fuit Comitis Andegaviae
mill libratas reddituum Andegaviae, and unum Castellum in Andegavia, and unum
Castellum in Turonica, and unum Castellum in Cenomannia. Concessum est autem a
domino rege, pro amore filii sui, quod omnes illi, qui recesserunt ab eo post
filium suum and in recessu suo forisfecerunt, in terra domini Regis ad pac^m
ejus revertantur. Ita quod de catallis, quae asportaverunt in recessu suo, non
respondeant: de morte vel proditione, vel perditione membri respondeant
secundum Judicium, and consuetudinem terrae. Qui autem ante guerram quacunque
de causa aufugerunt, et ad servitium filii sui venerunt, pro amore filii sui,
ad pacem revertantur, si vadium et plegium dederint standi judicio de his, quae
ante guerram forisfecerunt. Illi autem qui in placito erant quando recesserunt
ad filium suum ad pacem revertantur, ita quod in eo statu placita sua sint, in
quo erant quando recesserunt.

Ben Abb^ p. 108. a.
Haec est pax and concordia facta inter Regem Franciae and Regem Angliae.
SCiant omnes tam praesentes quam futuri, Hoveden. f. 325. b. n
quod ego Lodowicus Dei gratia Rex Francorum, and ego Henricus eadem gratia Rex
Angliae, servitium Christianitatis, and crucem suscipiemus ituri Jerosolymam,
sicut in scripto de susceptione crucis inter nos facto continetur. Volumus
etiam quod omnes sciant, quod sic sumus and amodo volumus esse amici, quod
uterque nostrum alteri conservabit vitam, and membra, and terrenum honorem suum
contra omnes homines, pro posse suo. Et si quaecunque persona alterutri nostrum
malum facere praesumpserit, ego Henricus juvabo Lodowicum dominum meum, contra
omnes homines pro posse meo. Et ego Lodowicus juvabo Henricum Regem Angliae
contra omnes homines pro posse meo, sicut hominem, and fidelem meum, salva
fide, quam debemus hominibus nostris, quamdiu ipsi fidem nobis servabunt. Et
neuter nostrum amodo retinebit inimicum alterius in terra sua, ex quo
requisitus inde fuerit. Et ut inter nos amodo tollatur omnis materia
discordiae, concessimus ad invicem quod de terris and possessionibus, and aliis
rebus, quas quisque nostrum modo possidet, alter adversus nihil a modo petet,
excepto eo de Alvernia, unde contentio inter nos est, and excepto feodo de
Castro Radulfi, and exceptis minutis feodis and divisis terrarum nostrarum de
Beria, si homines nostri aliquid inde interceperint inter se vel adversus
alterum nostrum. Si autem super his, quae superius excepta sunt, per nosmet
ipsos convenire non poterimus: ego Lodowicus rex Francorum elegi tres
Episcopos, Claremontensem, Nivernensem, Treternensem; and tres Barons, Comitem
Theobaldum, and Comitem Robertum, and Petrum Turtenei fratres meos. Et ego
Henricus Rex Angliae elegi tres Episcopos, Willielmum Cenomanensem, Petrum
Petragorensem and Robertum Nannatensem: and tres Barons, Mauricium de Croun,
Willielmum Maingot and Petrum de monte Rabel ex part mea, qui inquisita
diligenter hinc and inde veritate, tam per seipsos, quam per juramenta illarum
terrarum praed^cti Episcopi in verbo veritatis asservabunt, and laici jurabunt,
quod quaecunque cognoverint de jure cujusque nostrum esse, hoc inter nos
dicent, and nos eorum dicto bona fide Si vero omnes illi Episcopi, quos ego
Lodowicus elegi interesse non poterunt, nihilominus stabimus dicto illorum
duorum qui intererunt. Et si omnes Barons ex mea part nominati non
interfuerint, pro eo non remanebit, quin stemus dicto aliorum duorum qui
interfuerint, Et similiter erit de illis, quos ego Rex Henricus elegi, tam de
Episcopis, quam de Baronibus. Juravimus etiam quod nullum malum faciemus eis
propter hoc, quod veritatem inde dixerint. Et si forte, quod Deus avertat,
inter nos de terris nostris aliqua querela a modo peregrinationis arripere
voluerit, alter qui remanebit, terram illius qui in peregrinatione erit, and
homines sicut sua propria and dominica, fideliter custodiet, and manu tenebit.
Postquam vero Deo volente crucem susceperimus, homines nostros, qui nobiscum
ibunt faciemus jurare, quod si alteruter nostrum in via decesserit, quod Deus
avertat, ita illi qui superstes erit, fideliter servient, sicut servirent
domino suo, si vivus esset, quamdiu in terra Jerosolymitana morari voluerint.
Pecuniam vero defuncti habebit vivus ad faciendum Servitium Chr^stianitatis,
praeter partem illam, quam ante iter suum certis locis and certis personis
dandam decreverit. Et si uterque nostrum decesserit, eligemus si Deus nobis
spatium indulserit de probis and fidelibus hominibus nostris, quibus comitetur
pecunia utriusque nostrum; ad faciendum Servitium Christianitatis, and qui
ducent and regent homines nostros, antequam etiam iter arripiamus post
susceptam crucem, faciemus illos jurare, quos custodes and gubernatores
constituemus terrarum nostrarum, Quod ipsi bona fide, cum omne posse suo, si
necesse fuerit sese ad invicem juvabunt ad defendendum terras nostras, cum ab
invicem requisiti fuerint, Quod illi, quos ego Henricus Rex Angliae praefecero
ad gubernandum terras meas cum omni posse suo juvabunt ad defendendum terras
Lodowici Regis Franciae domini mei, quemadmodum terras meas defenderent si
civitas mea Rothomagi obsessa esset. Et eodem modo quod illi quos ego Lodowicus
Rex Franciae praefecero, ad gubernandum terras meas cum omni posse suo juvabunt
ad defendendum terras Henrici regis Angliae, quemadmodum terras meas
defenderent, si civitas mea Parisius obsessa esset. Volo etiam quod mercatores,
and omnes homines tam clerici quam laici de terra sua cum omnibus rebus suis
securi sint and pacem habeant per omnes terras meas. Et ego Henricus Rex
Angliae similiter volo, quod mercatores, and omnes homines tam Clerici, quam
laici de terra regis domini mei, cum omnibus rebus suis securi sint, and pacem
habeant per omnes terras meas. Haec autem suprascripta nos firmiter
observaturos promisimus, and juravimus, in praesentia venerabilis Petri tituli
S. Chrysogoni presbyteri Cardinalis, Apostolicae sedis legati, and in
praesentia Richardi Wintoniensis Episcopi, and Johannis Carnotensis Episcopi.
and Henrici Baiocensis Episcopi, and Frogerii Sagiensis Episcopi, and Egidii
Ebroicensis Episcopi, and Henrici Regis Angliae filii, and Comitis Theobaldi,
and Comitis Roberti, and Petri de Curterai, and Comitis Simonis Ebroicensis,
and Willielmi de Humez, and multorum aliorum tam clericorum quam laicorum.

Adrianus Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Carissimo in Christo filio illustri
Anglorum Regi, Salutem, and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Rad. de Diceto. Col. 529. n. 60.
LAudabiliter satis and fructuose de glorioso nomine propagando in terris and
aeternae felicitatis praemio cumulando in coelis, tua magnificentia indoctis
and rudibus populis Christianae fidei veritatem, and vitiorum plantaria de agro
Dominico extirpanda sicut catholicus Princeps intendis, and ad id convenientius
exequendum consilium Apostolicae sedis exigis and favorem. In quo facto quanto
altiori consilio and majori discretione procedes, tanto in ardore fidei and
religionis amore principium acceperunt. Sane Hiberniam and omnes insulas quibus
sol Justiciae Christus illuxit, and quae documenta fidei Christianae
receperunt, ad jus beati Petri and Sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, (quod tua
etiam nobilitas recognoscit) non est dubium pertinere, unde tanto in eis
libentius plantationem fidelem and germen Deo gratum inserimus, quanto id a
nobis interno examine districtius prospicimus exigendum.

Significasti siquidem nobis, fili in Christo Karissime, te Hyberniae insulam,
ad subdendum illum populum legibus, et viciorum plantaria inde extirpanda velle
intrare, and de singulis domibus annuam unius denarii Petro velle solvere
pensionem, and jura Ecclesiarum illius terrae illibata et integra conservare.
Nos itaque pium et laudabile desiderium tuum favore congruo prosequentes, et
petitioni tuae benignum impendentes assensum, gratum et acceptum habemus, ut
pro dilatandis Ecclesiae terminis, pro viciorum restringendo decursu, pro
corrigendis moribus et virtutibus inserendis, pro Christianae religionis
augmento insulam illam ingrediaris, et quae ad honorem Dei et Salutem illius
spectaverint exequaris, et illius terrae populus honorifice te recipiat, et
sicut dominum jure nimirum Ecclesiarum illibato, et integro permanente, et
Salva beato Petro et Sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae de singulis domibus annua
unius denarii pensione.

Si ergo quod concepisti animo effectu duxeris prosequente complendum, stude
gentem illam bonis moribus informare, et agas, tam per te quam per illos quos
ad hoc fide, verbo, et vita idoneos esse perspexeris, ut decoretur ibi
Ecclesia, plantetur et crescat fidei Christianae religio, et honorem Dei et
Salutem pertinent animarum taliter ordinentur, ut et a Deo sempiternae mercedis
cumulum consequi merearis, et in terris gloriosum nomen valeas in seculis
optinere.

Anno igitur Dominicae Incarnationis MCLXXII primo autem anno, Girald^ Ca^ lib.
1. Ex^ Hibern. c. ^ f. 776. n. ^
quo illustrissimus Anglorum Rex et Hiberniae triumphator ipsam insulam
acquisivit, Christianus Lismoriensis Episcopus and Apostolicae sedis Legatus,
Cassiliensis, Laurentius Dubliniensis, et Catholicus Tuomenensis,
Archiepiscopi, cum suffraganeis suis et Co-episcopis, Abbatibus quoque,
Archidiaconis, Prioribus, et Decanis et multis aliis Hiberniensis Ecclesiae
Praelatis, ex ipsius triumphatoris mandato, in civitate Cassiliensi convenerunt
et de utilitate Ecclesiae, et Statu ejus in meliorem formam producendo, ibidem
concilium celebrarunt. Huic consilio interfuerunt isti a rege missi:
venerabilis vir Radulfus Abbas de Buldewas, Radulfus Archidiaconus de Landaff,
Nicolaus Capellanus, et alii Clerici, et nuncii domini Regis. Concilii autem
Statuta subscripta regiae sublimitatis autoritate firmata.

Capitula.
I. Vt fiant legitima Matrimonia, nec inter cognatos et affines.

Primo, Statutum est, quod universi Fideles i^ Christo.
fideles per Hiberniam constituti, repudiato cognatorum et affinium
contubernio, legitima contrahant Matrimonia et observent.

II. Vt infantes catechizentur, and in ipsis Ecclesiis baptizentur.

Secundo, quod infantes ante fores Ecclesiae catechizentur, and in Sacro font
in ipsis baptismalibus Ecclesiis baptizentur.

III. Vt decimae persolvantur.

Tertio, quod universi fideles Christi decimas animalium, frugum, caeterarumque
proventionum, Ecclesiae, cujus fuerint parochiani persolvant.

IV. Vt terrae Ecclesiasticae ab omni saecularium exactione sint immunes.

In quarto, quod omnes terrae Ecclesiasticae, and earum possessiones, ab
Reguli, nec Comites, nec aliqui potentes viri Hiberniae, nec eorum filii cum
familiis suis, cibaria and hospitalitates, in territoriis Ecclesiasticis,
secundum consuetudinem exigant, nec amodo violenter extorquere praesumant; and
quod de villis Ecclesiarum cibus ille detestabilis, qui quater in anno a
vicinis Comitibus exigitur de caetero nullatenus exigatur.

V. Vt quando aliqui componunt pro homicidio, clerici licet cognati nihil
persolvant.

In quinto, quod pro homicidio a laicis perpetrato, quoties inde cum suis
inimicis componunt, clerici videlicet eorum cognati nihil inde persolvant, sed
sicut in homicidii perpetratione, sic in pecuniae solutione sint immunes.

VI. Vt omnes faciant testamentum.

Sexto, quod universi fideles in infirmitate positi, confessore suo and vicinis
astantibus, cum debita solemnitate testamentum condant, bona sua mobilia,
dummodo uxores and liberos habeant (aere alieno and servientium mercede
exceptis) in tres parts dividant: unam liberis, alteram uxori legitimae,
tertiam propriis exequiis relinquentes. Et si forte prolem legitimam non
habuerint, bona ipsa inter ipsum and uxorem in duo media dividantur.

VII. Vt extrema officia mortuis reddantur.

Septimo, ut cum bona confessione decedentibus, and Missarum and vigiliarum
exhibitione, and more sepeliendi, obsequium debitum persolvatur.

VIII. Vt divina officia ritu Anglicano fiant.

Octavo, itaque omnia Divina ad instar Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae juxta quod
Anglicana observat Ecclesia, in omnibus partibus Ecclesiae am^odo tractentur.
Dignum etenim and justissimum est, ut sicut dominum Regem ex Anglia sortita est
divinitus Hibernia; sic etiam exinde vive^ndi formam accipiat meliorem. Ipsi
namque regi magnifico tam Ecclesiam quam Regnum Hibernia debet, quicquid de
bono pacis and incremento religionis hactenus est assecuta. Nam ante ipsius
adventum in Hi^erniam, multimoda malorum genera, a multis retro temporibus
ibidem emerserant, quae ipsius potentia and munere in desuetudinem abiere.

Ardmachiensis vero primas, ob corporis imbecillitatem, and grandaevitatem,
Dubliniam venit, regiae dispositioni per omnia favorem praebens, vulgi opinione
vir sacer, vaccam candidam, cujus solum lacte vescebatur, secum, quocunque
venerat, circumducens.

The Reason of the first three Constitutions is rendered by Benedictus Abbas,
p. 39. b. and 40. a.
Hiberniae, quod statim cum puer nasceretur, pater ipsius vel quislibet alius,
Eum ter mergeret in aqua, and si divitis fuerit filius, ter mergeretur in
Lacte, and postea solebant Aquam illam and lac illud projicere in Cloacis suis
vel aliis locis immundis.

Praeceperant etiam in illo Concilio decimas dari viris Ecclesiasticis de
omnibus quae possidebant; plerique enim illorum nunquam decimas dederant, nec
etiam sciebant, si dare debent.

Preterea praeceperunt in eodem Concilio, ut Laici qui uxores habere vellent,
eas sibi Copularent, Jure Ecclesiastico. Plerique enim illorum, quot volebant
uxores habebant, and etiam Cognatas suas germanas, habere solebant sibi uxores.

This is all this Author has of this Council.


Hic est finis, and Concordia, Hov. f. 3^ b. n. 20. ^ Abb. p. 69.
quae facta fuit apud Windeshores in octabis Sancti Michaelis, anno gratiae
millesimo centesimo septuagesimo quinto, inter dominum Regem Angliae Henricum
filium Matildis Imperatricis and Rodericum Regem Conactae per Catholicum
Tuamensem Archiepiscopum and Abbatem Cantordem Sancti Brandani, and magistrum
Laurentium cancellarium Regis Conactae. Scilicet quod Rex Angliae concedit
praedicto Roderico ligio homini suo, Regi Conactae, quamdiu ei fideliter
servitium suum, sicut homo suus, and ut teneat terram ita been, and in pace
sicut tenuit antequam dominus Rex Angliae intraret Hiberniam; reddendo ei
tributum, and totam aliam terram, and habitatores terrae habeat sub se, and
justiciet ut tributum Regi Angliae integre persolvant, and per manum ejus; and
sua jura sibi conservent, and illi qui modo tenent, teneant in pace quamdiu
manserint in fidelitate Regis Angliae, and ei fideliter and integre
persolverint tributum and alia jura sua, quae ei debent per manum Regis
Conactae, salvo in omnibus jure and honor domini Regis Angliae and suo. Et si
qui ex eis Regi Angliae and ei rebels fuerint, and tributum and alia jura
Regis Angliae per manum suam solvere noluerint, and fidelitate Regis Angliae
recesserunt, ipse eos justitiet and amoveat. Et si eos per se justitiare non
poterit, constabularius Regis Angliae and His Forc^
familia sua de terra illa, juvabunt eum ad hoc faciendum, cum ab ipso fuerint
requisiti, and ipsi viderint quod necesse fuerit. Et propter hunc finem reddit
praedictus Rex Conactae domino Angliae tributum singulis annis scilicet, de
singulis december animalibus unum corium placabile mercatoribus, tam de tota terra
sua quam de aliena. Excepto quod de terris illis, quas dominus Rex Angliae
retinuit in dominio suo, and in dominio Baronum su^rum, nihil se intromittet,
scilicet Divilina cum pertinentiis suis, and Mida cum omnibus pert^nentiis
suis, sicut unquam Murchar^ Mac Leghlin eam melius and before tenuit, aut
aliqui, qui eam de eo tenuerunt. Et excepta Wexfordia.
Wasefordia, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis scilicet cum tota Lagenia. Et
Wa^erfordia, cum tota terra illa quae est a Waterforde usque ad Duncaruan, ita
quod Dunecaruan sit cum omnibus pertinentiis suis infra terram illam. Et si
Hibernenses qui aufugerunt, redire voluerint ad terram Baronum Regis Angliae,
redeant in pace, reddendo tributum praedictum quod alii reddunt, vel faciendo
antiqua servitia, quae facere solebant pro terris suis. Et hoc sit in arbitrio
and voluntate dominorum suorum. Et si aliqui eorum redire noluerint ad dominum
eorum Regem Conactae, ipse cogat eos redire ad terram suam, and ibi remaneant,
and Rex Conactae accipiat obsides, ab omnibus quos ei commisit dominus Rex
Angliae, ad voluntatem domini Regis and suam. Et ipse dabit obsides ad
voluntatem domini Regis Angliae, illos vel alios, and ipsi servient domino regi
de canibus and avibus suis singulis annis, de praesentiis suis. Et nullum
omnino de quacunque terra domini Regis sit, retinebunt contra voluntatem and
mandatum domini Regis. His testibus. Richardo Episcopo Wintoniae: Gaufrido
Episcopo Eliensi: Laurentio Diviliniensi Archiepiscopo, Gaufrido, and Nicholao,
Rogero capellanis Regis; Willielmo Comite de Exesse, Richardo de Luci, Gaufrido
de Pertico, Reginaldo de Cortinea and aliis multis.

Charta R. Henr. II. de Libertatibus Ecclesiae and Regno concessis, Anno ejus
primo, vel circiter.
A. D. 1155.
HEnricus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae et Aquitaniae, Francis et
Anglis salutem. Spelm. Council. Vol. 2. f. 51. Concedit omnes Consuetudines,
quas Rex Hen. I. concessit.
Sciatis me ad honorem Dei, et Sanctae Ecclesiae, et pro communi emendatione
totius regni mei, concessisse et reddidisse, et praesenti Charta Comitibus et
Baronibus, et omnibus hominibus meis, omnes consuetudines quas Rex Henricus,
avus meus, eis dedit et concessit. Similiter etiam omnes malas consuetudines,
quas ipse delevit et remisit, ego remitto, et deleri concedo, pro me et
haeredi^us meis. Praecipit, ut Ecclesia, and omnes homines sui eas teneant
quiet.
Quare volo et firmiter praecipio, quod Sancta Ecclesia, et omnes Comites et
Barons, et omnes mei homines, omn^s illas consuetudines, et donationes et
libertates, et liberas consuetudines, habeant et teneant, libere et quiet,
been et in pace et integre, de me et haeredibus meis, sibi et haeredibus suis,
adeo libere et quiet et plenarie in omnibus, sicut Rex Henricus avus meus eis
dedit et concessit, et Charta sua confirmavit. Test Richardo de Luci.

Consuetudines quas avitas Vocabant, Assisa, vel Ordinationes de Clarendon,
Anno Domini 1164.
ANno ab Incarnatione Domini millesimo centesimo sexagesimo quarto Papatus
Alexandri anno quarto illustrissimi Regis Anglorum Henrici secundi anno decimo.
Quadrile^ lib. 5. in ^cipio.
In praesentia ejusdem Regis facta recordatio recognitio cujusdam partis
consuetudinum and libertatum and dignitatum antecessorum suorum, videlicet
Regis Henrici avi sui, and aliorum, que observari and teneri debent in regno.
Et propter dissentiones and discordias que emerserant inter Clerum, and
Iustitias Domini regis, Barons regni, de consuetudinibus and dignitatibus:
Facta est ista recognitio coram Archiepiscopis and Episcopis, and Clero, and
Comitibus, and Baronibus, and Proceribus regni; Et easdem consuetudines
recognitas per Archiepiscopos, and Episcopos, and Comites, and Barons, and per
nobiliores and antiquiores regni; Thomas Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, and
Rogerus Eboracensis Archiepiscopus, and Gilebertus Londoniensis Episcopus, and
Henricus Wintoniensis Episcopus, and Nigellus Eliensis Episcopus, and Willelmus
Norwicensis Episcopus, and Robertus verbo veritatis, viva voce firmiter
promiserunt tenendas and observandas Domino Regi and heredibus suis, bona fide,
and absque malo ingenio praesentibus istis, Roberto Comite Leicestriae,
Reginaldo Comite Cornubie, Conano Comite Britanie, Johanne Comite de Augo,
Rogerio Comite de Hastinga, Hugone de M^ravilla, Alano de Newilla, Simone filio
Petri, Willielmo Malduit Camerario, Johanne Malduit, Johanne Mariscallo, Petro
de Mara; and multis aliis Proceribus and Nobilibus regni, tam Clericis quam
Laicis. Consuetudinum vero and dignitatum regni recognitarum quaedam pars
praesenti scripto continetur. Cujus partis Capitula sunt hec.

I. DE Advocatione and Praesentatione Ecclesiarum, Chronic. Gervas. ^robern.
(...) 1386. n. (...) Mat. Part 100 n. 30^ Quadrilo^ supra.
si Controversia emerserit inter Laicos, vel Laicos and Clericos, in Curia
Domini regis tractetur and terminetur. Primum hoc damnavit Sancta Romana
Ecclesia sub Alexandro Papa tertio.

II. Ecclesiae de feudo Domini Regis non possunt in perpetuum dari absque
assensu and consensione ipsius. Hoc Toleravit.

III. Clerici rectati, and accusati de quacunque re summoniti a justitia Regis,
venient in Curiam ipsius, responsuri ibidem de hoc unde videbitur Curiae Regis
quod sit ibi respondendum, and in curia Ecclesiastica, unde videbitur quod sit
ibi respondendum, ita quod Iustitia Regis mittet in curiam Sanctae Ecclesiae,
ad videndum qua ratione res ibi tractabitur. Et si clericus convictus vel
confessus fuerit, non debet de caetero Ecclesia eum tueri. Hoc damnavit.

IV. Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and personis regni, non licet exire de regno
absque licentia Domini Regis, and si exierint, si domino regi placuerit,
assecurabunt quod nec in eundo, nec in moram faciendo nec in redeundo
perquirent malum, vel dampnum Domino Regi, vel regno. Hoc damnavit.

V. Excommunicati non debent dare Vadium ad remanens, nec praestare Vadium, et
plegium standi Iudicio Ecclesiae ut absolvantur. Hoc damnavit.

VI. Laici non debent accusari, nisi per certos and legales accusatores and
testes in praesentia Episcopi, ita quod Archidiaconus non perdat jus suum nec
quicquam quod inde habere debeat, and si tales fuerint qui culpantur, quod non
velit, vel non audeat aliquis eos accusare, Vicecomes requisitus ab Episcopo,
faciet jurare xii legales homines de visneto, seu de villa coram Episcopo, quod
inde veritatem secundum conscientiam suam manifestabunt. Hoc toleravit.

VII. Nullus qui de Rege teneat in Capite, nec aliquis Dominicorum ministrorum
ejus excommunicetur, nec terrae alicujus illorum sub interdicto ponantur, nisi
prius Dominus Rex si in terra fuerit conveniatur, vel Iusticia ejus si extra
Regnum fuerit, ut rectum de ipso faciat, and ita ut quod pertinebit ad Curiam
Regiam ibidem terminetur, and de eo Ecclesiasticam Curiam ad eandem mittatur,
ut ibidem tractetur. Hoc damnavit.

VIII. De appellationibus si emerserint, ab Archidiacono d^bent procedere ad
Episcopum, ab Episcopo ad Archiepiscopum. Et si Archiepiscopus defuerit in
justitia exhibenda, ad Dominum Regem est perveniendum postremo, ut praecepto
ipsius in Curia Archiepiscopi controversia terminetur, ita quod non debet
ulterius procedere absque assensu Hoc damnavit.

IX. Si calumpnia emerserit inter Clericum and laicum, vel inter laicum and
Clericum de ullo tenemento quod Clericus velit ad elemosinam attrahere, laicus
vero ad laicum feudum, recognitione xii legalium hominum per capitalis
justitiae regis consuetudinem terminabitur; utrum tenementum sit pertinens ad
elemosinam sive ad feudum laicum, coram ipsa Iustitia Regis. Et si recognitum
fuerit ad elemosinam placitum erit in Curia Ecclesiastica: Si vero ad laicum
feudum, nisi ambo de eodem Episcopo vel Barone advocaverint, erit placitum in
Curia Regis. Sed si uterque advocaverit de feudo illo, eundem Episcopum vel
Baronem erit placitum in curia ipsius, ita quod propter factam recognitionem
saisinam non amittat, qui prius saisiatus fuerat. Hoc damnavit.

X. Qui de Civitate, vel Castello, vel Burgo, vel Dominico Manerio domini Regis
fuerit, si ab Archidiacono vel Episcopo de aliquo delicto citatus fuerit unde
debeat eis respondere, and ad citationes eorum noluerit satisfacere, been licet
eum sub interdicto ponere, sed non debet excommunicari priusquam Capitalis
minister regis villae illius conveniatur, ut justitiet eum ad satisfactionem
venire. Et si minister inde defecerit misericordia Domini Regis, and exinde
poterit Episcopus accusatum Ecclesiastica justitia coercere. Hoc damnavit.

XI. Archiepiscopi, and Episcopi and universae personae regni, qui de rege
tenent in Capite, habent possessiones suas de Domino rege sicut Baroniam, and
inde respondent justiciis, and ministris regis, and sequuntur and faciunt omnes
rectitudines and consuetudines regias, and sicut Barons caeteri debent
interesse Iudiciis Curiae Regis cum Baronibus, perveniatur in judicio ad
diminutionem membrorum vel ad mortem. Hoc toleravit.

XII. Cum vacaverit Archiepiscopatus vel Episcopatus, vel Abbatia, vel
Prioratus de Dominio regis, debet esse in manu ejus, and exinde percipiet omnes
redditus and exitus sicut Dominicos. Et cum ventum fuerit ad consulendum
Ecclesiae, debet Dominus Rex mandare propter potentiores personas Ecclesiae,
and in capella ejus debet fieri electio assensu Domini Regis Hoc damnavit.

XIII. Si quisquam de proceribus regni defortiaverit Archiepiscopo, vel
Episcopo, vel Archidiacono de se vel de suis justiciam exhibere, Dominus Rex
debet justiciare. Et si forte aliquis defortiaret Domino rectitudinem suam,
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and Archidiaconi, debent eum justitiare, ut Domino
regi satisfaciat. Hoc toleravit.

XIV. Catalla eorum qui sunt in forisfacto regis non detineat Ecclesia vel
cimiterium contra Justiciam regis, quia ipsius regis sunt sive in Ecclesiis,
sive extra fuerint inventa. Hoc toleravit.

XV. Placita de debitis quae side interposita debentur, vel absque
interpositione Justicia Domini regis. Hoc damnavit.

XVI. Filii Rusticorum non debent ordinari absque assensu Domini, de cujus
terra nati esse dignoscuntur. Hoc toleravit.

These Ordinances o^ Statutes of Clarendon, were sent to Pope Alexander the
Third to be confirmed; but notwithstanding the great importunity used to
persuade him to it, he damned most, and only tolerated Labbe 's Tenth Tome of
the Councils, Col. 1431. C. etc. and according to the Addition to every Article
as above noted.

Stabilimentum factum apud Rothomagum inter Clericos and Barons Normanniae.
Historiae Norman. Antiqu. s^riptor. f. 1059.
EGo Reginaldus Comes Boloniae, and ego Gulielmus Martel, and ego juravimus
super Sacrosancta, quod jura quae Henricus and Richardus quondam Reges Angliae
habuerunt in Normannia adversus Clerum, and apud Lexovium and alibi, and jura
nostra diceremus. Nos autem per Sacramentum nostrum diximus, quod vidimus
tempore Henrici and Richardi quondam Regum Angliae, quod si Ecclesia pertinens
ad donationem laicae personae vacaret, si ille ad quem donatio illius Ecclesiae
pertinebat, praesentaret idoneam personam Archiepiscopo, Episcopo, in cujus
Diocesi sita esset Ecclesia illa; Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus eandem personam
de jure recipere tenebatur, nisi alius contenderet praesentationem illius
Ecclesiae ad se pertinere. Si vero de jure patronatus contentio oriretur,
Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus nunquam posset alicui confer Ecclesiam illam,
nec aliquem recipere ad Ecclesiam illam, donec contentio in Curia Domini Regis,
vel in Curia illius, de cujus Feodo movet Ecclesia, terminaretur. Quando vero
causa terminata esset in Curia Domini Regis, aut in Curia illius, de cujus
feodo movebat Ecclesia, Archiepiscopus, vel Episcopus, ad testimonium literarum
patentium Domini Regis, vel Baillivi sui in cujus Curia causa esset terminata,
vel illius de cujus Feodo movebat Ecclesia, deberet recipere idoneam personam,
quam praesentaret ille, cui adjudicatum esset jus patronatus illius Ecclesiae.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum, quod Archiepiscopus, vel Episcopus, vel
alia inferior Ecclesiastica persona non debet ^erre sententiam in Barons, vel
in Baillivos, aut in Servientes Domini Regis, aut in Clericos domus suae, Rege
non requisito, vel suo Senescallo.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum, quod nulla Ecclesiastica persona debet
aliquem trahere in causam pro fide, vel pro Sacramento quod ^iat de laico
feodo, vel catallo hominis laici. Sed si fides data fuerit de catallo
maritagii, vel de legato mortui, vel de catallo Crucesignati, de causa illa
been possunt judicare.

Item diximus per Sacramentum quod non vidimus tempore Henrici and Richardi
quondam Regum Angliae, quod aliquis redderet decimas de feriis, aut de
genestis, aut de fossis, ubi prius fuerint demosmatae.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum, quod vidimus Henricum, and Richardum
quondam Reges Angliae tenentes placitum spatae in civitate and banleva Lexovii,
postquam Arnulfus Lexoviensis Episcopus recessit a N^rmannia exul hac de causa.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum, quod in feodo terrae Gornaii, Feritatis,
and Gallefontis, non debet Archiepiscopus tenere nisi tantum tria placita,
scilicet de maritagio, de Legato mortui, and de Catallo Clerici.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum super hoc quod Archiepiscopus petit apud
Lovers, quod Richardus quondam Rex Angliae fecit ei excambium, and inde dedit
ei Cartam suam. Et Dominus Rex faciet ei justitiam secundum tenorem Cartae
suae, si ei placuerit.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum de Clerico, qui tenet laicum feodum, quod
si Clericus injuriosus existit Domino, a quo tenet feodum, super feodo illo;
Dominus feodi potest saisire omnia catalla clerici, quae invenerit super
feodum, de quocunque loco venerint, donec ei satisfecerit de his quae pertinent
ad laicum feodum.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum, quod si Clericus teneat laicus, and
Clericus dicat se tenere illud nomine eleemosynae, per Sacramentum legalium
hominum patriae recognoscetur, utrum sit laicum feodum an eleemosyna, and hoc
in Curia Domini Regis. Similiter si laicus tenet rem, quam Clericus dicat esse
suam nomine eleemosynae, recognoscetur similiter in Curia Domini Regis, per
Sacramentum legalium hominum patriae.

Item diximus per Sacramentum nostrum de rebus usurarii, quod quandiu usurarius
est in lecto aegritudinis, si distribuat res suas propria manu sua, stabile
est. Post mortem vero usurarii, omnes res suae Domini Regis erunt, si probatum
fuerit quod infra annum ante mortem commodaverit ad usuram.

Item diximus de illo qui moritur intestatus, si jacuerit in lecto aegritudinis
per tres dies aut per quatuor; omnia mobilia ipsius Domini Regis debent esse,
aut illius in cujus terra est, de illo qui se interficit

Item diximus de treuga, quod si aliquis vulnerat alium, unde deb^t perdere
membrum, aut vitam, placitum remanebit in Curia Domini Regis, si conquerens
vult prosequi causam; and Ecclesia habebit emendam suam usque ad IX. libr. si
accusatus fuerit convictus, and Dominus Rex habebit totum residuum. Treuga vero
durat a die Mercurii sero, usque ad diem Lunae mane.

Item diximus, quod si Clericus capiatur quacunque ex causa and Ecclesia eum
requirat, reddi debet Ecclesiae. Et si convictus fuerit de furto, vel de
homicidio, degradabitur, and abjurabit terram, nec aliter pro delicto illo
punietur, nec poterit postea intrare terram sine licentia Domini Regis, quin de
ea fiat Justitia. Si vero postea aliquid foris fecerit, Dominus Rex de illo
faciet justitiam sicut de laica persona.

Notum facimus praeterea, quod jura Domini Regis, and nostra, qu^e n^bis
memori^e occurrebant, sicut vidimus tempore Henrici and Richardi Regum ea
observari, advocato consilio pruden^um virorum, scilicet Richardi de
Villequier, Richardi de Argentiis, Richardi de Fronteneto and Radulfi Labe, and
quorundam aliorum, bona fide scripsimus, pro jure Domini Regis, and nostro
conservando. Et quia jura Domini Regis and nostra nobis memoriae non
occurrebant, and quia quidam de Baronibus decrevimus inter nos, quod ad aliam
diem conveniremus, and Barons absentes advocaremus, si Domino Regi placeret.
Et tunc jura Domini Regis and nostra, quae hic scripta non sunt, per
Sacramentum nostrum scribemus. Huic autem scripto sigilla nostra dignum duximus
apponenda. Actum Rothom Anno Domini MCC. quinto, mense Novembr. Dominica post
octavam omnium Sanctorum.

Mat. Paris, f. 101. n. 50. A. D. 1164.
Alexander Episcopus, etc. Ad aures nostras, fraternitas tua noverit fuisse
perlatum; quod occasion cujusdam excessus, a Missarum proposueris
consecratione corporis and sanguinis Domini abstinere. Quod utique quam grave
sit, praecipue in tanta persona, and quantum inde possit Scandalum provenire,
sollicita meditatione consideres; and hoc ipsum vigilantia tuae discretionis
attendat. Debet autem prudentia tua diligenter advertere; quod plurimum
interest, quando ex deliberatione and propria voluntate, and quando ignorantia
vel necessitate aliqua committuntur. Sacerdoti, qui discretus and providus
habetur, tibi consulimus per poenitentiam confiteri: quo facto miserator and
misericors Dominus, qui multo plus ad cor respicit quam ad actus; tibi,
consueta pietatis suae misericordia dimittet* Et nos de Beatorum Petri and
Pauli Apostolorum ejusque meritis con^identes; te, ab eo quod est commissum,
absolvimus: and Missarum celebratione, propter hoc non debeas abstinere.

Quadrilog. lib. 5. Hoved. f. 284. b. lin 4. A. D. 1165.
Hae sunt constitutiones quas constituit Rex Henricus in Normannia; and mandavit
Iusticiis suis Richardo de Lucy and duobus Archidiaconis Galfrido Ridel
Cantuariensi Archidiacono, and Richardo de Ivelcestria Pictavensi Archidiacono
and omnibus principibus and populis jurandas, and servandas. Latores earum
fuerunt Guimerus Presbyter, and Galterus de Grimesby.

Si quis inventus fuerit ferens litteras Domini Pape vel aliquod mandatum
Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis continens interdictum Christianitatis, in Angliam,
capiatur and de eo sine dilatione Justitia fiat, sicut de traditore Regis and
regni.

Cap. 2. Praeterea nullus clericus vel monachus vel conversus, vel alicujus
conversionis permittatur transfretare vel redi^e in Angliam nisi de transitu
suo habeat litteras Justiciae and de reditu suo litteras Domini Regis. Si quis
aliter inventus fuerit agens capiatur and incarceretur.

Cap. 3. Ne aliquis appellet ad Papam vel ad Archiepiscopum.

Cap. 4. Ne aliquod placitum teneatur de mandatis Pape, vel Archiepiscopi vel
aliquod mandatum eorum in Anglia ab illo homine recipiatur. Si quis inventus
fuerit aliter agens capiatur et incarceretur.

5. Generaliter quoque interdictum est, quod nullus ferat aliquod mandatum
clerici vel laici Domino Pape vel Archiepiscopo, si talis inventus fuerit
capiatur et incarceretur.

Cap. 6. Si Episcopi vel clerici, vel abbates, vel laici sententiam interdicti
tenere voluerint, sine dilatione de terra ejiciantur, et tota eorum cognatio:
ita quod de catallis suis nil secum ferant.

7. Vt Catalla omnium Pape vel Archiepiscopo faventium et omnes possessiones
eorum, et omnium eis pertinentium, cujuscunque gradus sint vel sexus vel
conditionis capiantur, et Dominica manu Domini Regis confiscantur.

Cap. 8. Vt omnes Clerici qui redditus habent in Anglia sint summoniti per
omnes comitatus; ut infra tres menses veniant in Angliam ad redditus suos,
sicut diligunt suos redditus, et si non venerint ad terminum redditus in manu
Regis capiantur.

Cap. 9. Vt denarii Beati Petri non reddantur ulterius Apostolico sed
diligenter serventur in Thesauro Regis, expendanturque ad ejus praeceptum.

Cap. 10. Londoniensis et Norwicensis Episcopi sint in misericordia Regis, et
summoneantur per vicecomites et bedellos ut sint Vel cora Justiciariis Regis.
contra Justicias Regis, ad rectum faciendum Regi, et Justiciis ejus de eo quod
contra Statuta de Clarendonia interdixerunt ex mandato Pape terram Comitis
Hugonis, et excommunicationem quam dominus Papa in ipsum fecerat per suas
parochias divulgaverint sine licentia Justiciarum Regis.


THome Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo quidam anticus suus. Quadrilog^ lib. 4.
Sciatis hunc esse tenorem mandatorum que Henricus Rex in Angliam misit.
Scilicet, ut omnes portus cautissime custodiantur ne littere interdictionis
pedibus truncetur. clericus, oculos and genitalia amittat, si laicus
suspendatur. Si leprosus comburatur. Et si quis Episcopus ejus interdictum
metuens recedere voluerit nichil secum deferat, praeter baculum; Vult etiam ut
omnes Scolares repatriare cogantur, aut beneficiis suis priventur, et qui
remanserint sine spe remeandi remanebunt, et Presbiteri qui cantare noluerint
genitalia amittant, omnesque rebels sibi beneficiis omnibus priventur. Valete.

Epistola beati Thomae Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi ad Suffraganeos suos.
Hoved. f. 285. b. n. 40. A. D. 1165.
THomas Dei gratia Cantuariensis Ecclesiae minister humilis, venerabilibus
fratribus suis Lundoniensi, caeterisque totius Cantuariensis Episcopis, sic
transire per bona temporalia ut non amittant aeterna. Fratres mei dilectissimi,
quare non consurgitis mecum adversus malignantes? Ut quid non statis mecum
adversus operantes iniquitatem? An ignoratis quoniam dissipat Dominus ossa
eorum, qui hominibus placent? confundentur, quoniam Dominus sprevit eos. Satis
novit discretio vestra, quoniam error cui non resistitur, approbatur, and
veritas Periculosum and intolerabile de caetero nobis visum est, and tantos
illius officialiumque suorum circa Ecclesiam Dei, and Ecclesiasticas personas
excessus, ut hactenus impunitos relinquere. Praesertim cum saepissime literis,
and nuntiis, modisque aliis prout decuit, studuerimus Et quoniam vix ab eo
auditi sumus, nullatenus tamen exauditi, scriptum illud, in quo illae non
consuetudines, sed potius pravitates, quibus perturbatur and confunditur, ad
praesens Anglicana Ecclesia, continentur, ipsiusque scripti Auctoritatem,
invocata Spiritus Sancti gratia, public condemnavimus and cassavimus universos
etiam observatores, exactores, consiliatores, adjutores, seu defensores earum
excommunicavimus. Omnesque vos Episcopos a promissione qua contra institutionem
Ecclesiasticam, Nonne miserabilis insaniae esse cognoscitur, si filius patrem,
discipulus magistrum sibi conetur subjugare, and iniquis obligationibus illum
potestati suae subjicere: A quo credit non solum se in terra, sed etiam in
coelis ligari posse, and solvi? Proinde ne in hujus sententiae commissum
incidamus, auctoritatem ipsius scripti, ipsumque scriptum cum pravitatibus
Praesertim his. Quod non appelletur ad sedem Apostolicam super aliqua causa,
nisi licentia Regis. Quod non liceat Archiepiscopo, vel Episcopo, exire de
regno, and venire ad vocationem Domini Papae, sine licentia Regis. Quod non
liceat Episcopo excommunicare aliquem, qui teneat de Rege in capite, sine
licentia Regis. vel aliquem alium officialium suorum sub interdicto ponere:
Quod non liceat Episcopo coercere aliquem de perjurio, vel side Denuntiamus
etiam excommunicatum, and excommunicavimus ex nomine JOHANNEM de OXENEFORD, qui
in haeresim damnatam incidit, parando juramentum scismaticis, per quem scisma
jam fere emortuum in Alemannia revixit; communicando etiam nominatissimo illi
scismatico Reginaldo Coloniensi; et quia contra mandatum Domini Papae, et
nostrum Salesbiriensis Ecclesiae decanatum sibi usurpavit. Quod quidem factum,
tam detestabile tam juri contrarium, tam Ecclesiae Dei exemplo perniciosum
penitus cassavimus, et devocavimus in irritum. Praecipientes Episcopo
Salesbiriensi, et capitulo in virtute obedientiae, et in periculo ordinis sui,
ne de caetero, visis literis nostris, ex eo facto eum Similiter and Richardum
de Ivecestre denuntiamus excommunicatum, and excommunicavimus, eo quod in
eandem haeresim damnatam inciderit, communicando Reginaldo Coloniensi
scismatico, machinando etiam, and fabricando omnia mala cum scismaticis et
Theutonicis illis in perniciem Ecclesiae Dei, et praesertim Ecclesiae Romanae,
ex pactis contrariis inter Dominum Regem et ipsos. Excommunicavimus etiam
Richardum de Luci, Iocelinum de Bailol: qui pravitatum illarum auctores and
fabricatores extiterunt. Ranulfum de Broc, qui bona Ecclesiae Cantuariensis,
quae alimenta de jure sunt pauperum, occupavit, et detinet, hominesque nostros
tanquam laicos cepit, et in captione detinet. Excommunicavimus etiam Hugonem de
Sancto Claro, and Thomam filium Bernardi, qui ejusdem Ecclesiae Cantuariensis
bona, et possessiones absque conniventia sive assensu nostro occupaverunt.
Omnesque qui de caetero in possessiones et bona Ecclesiae Cantuariensis contra
voluntatem nostram, et consensum manus violentas extendent, eadem
excommunicationis Juxta illud Papae Lucii, Omnes Ecclesiae rapto res, atque
suarum facultatum alienatores a liminibus ejusdem matris Ecclesiae sequestratos
anathematizamus damnamus, atque sacrilegos esse judicamus. Et non solum eos,
sed etiam cum iis comprehendit consentientes. Et alibi dicit Scriptura. Qui
consentit peccantibus and alium peccantem defendit, maledictus erit apud Deum,
and apud homines; corripieturque increpatione severissima. Et iterum. Si quis
peccantem defendit: Acrius quam qui peccavit coerceatur. Sane in Domini Regis
personam sententiam Et inde est, quod fraternitati vestrae mandamus atque in
virtute obedientiae prae^ipimus, quatenus viros praetaxatos, qui a nobis
excommunicati sunt, vos quoque prout excommunicatos habeatis, et denuntiari
faciatis. Juxta illud decretum Honorii Papae: Licitum sit omnibus Episcopis
excommunicatorum suorum nomina, tam vicinis Episcopis, quam Parochianis suis
pariter indicare, eaque in celebri loco posita (frater Episcope Londoniensis)
mandamus and in vi obedientiae injung mus, quatenus literas praefentes aliis
fratribus, et Coepiscopis nostris, omnibus de provincia nostra manifestes and
ostendas. Valete in Christo and pro nobis Constanter orate.

Has litteras misit Henricus Rex Angliae singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae in
principio perscutionis beati Thomae.
Quadrilog. lib. 4. A. D. 1166.
PRaecipio tibi quod si aliquis Clericus vel Laicus Baillivae tua Romanam Curiam
appellaverit eum capias and firmiter custodias donec redditus and possessiones
Archiepisc^pi saisias in manum meam sicut Radulphus de Brock and alii ministri
mei tibi dixerint; and omnium Clericorum qui cum Archiepiscopo sunt, patres and
matres, fratres and sorores, nepotes and neptes ponas per salvo^ plegios, and
catalla eorum, donec voluntatem meam inde percipiant,

Epistola Alexandri Papae, ad Gillebertum Londoniensem Episcopum, pro beato
Thoma.
Hoved. f. 287. a. n. 30. A. D. 1166.
ALexander Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, venerabili fratri Gilleberto
Londoniensi Episcopo, Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Rogamus
fraternitatem tuam, monemus atque mandamus, quatenus Nos enim si eam, quam
incepit, beato Petro et nobis reverentiam exhibuerit et honorem eum ferventi
affectione

Epistola Gilleberti Londoniensis Episcopi ad Alexandrum Papam de Responso
Regis super negotio Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi.
PAtri suo and Domino summo Pontifici Alexandro, Ibid. b. li^
frater Gillebertus Londoniensis Ecclesiae minister, debitum sincerae
Charitatis humilisque Richardo Herefordensi Episcopo, juxta vestri formam
mandati Cui singula, quae vestris nobis sunt expressa literis, ante oculos
ponentes, ipsum obsecrando, and quantum regiam decebat majestatem arguendo,
constanter, and instanter hortati sumus ut de propositis sibi satisfaceret, and
si a rationis tramite deviaverat, ad viam veritatis and justitiae redire vestra
per nos revocatus admonitione non tardaret. A patre pie commonitus a pravis
actibus omnino desisteret, Deum puro cord diligeret, and matrem suam sanctam
Romanam Ecclesiam solita veneratione respiceret: nec eam visitare volentes
inhiberet, in beati Petri and vestra rever^ntia firmus immobilisque
persisteret, and pietatis intendens operibus Ecclesias and Ecclesiasticas
personas tam regni quam terrae suae non gravaret, nec per se nec per alium
gravari permitteret. Sed ipsas diligens r^gia protectione conservaret, ut ille
per quem Reges regnant temporale regnum sibi conservaret in terris, and
aeternum largiretur in Coelis. Alioquin nisi monitis salutaribus adquiesceret
Sanctitas vestra quae hucusque Ad haec adjecimus timendum sibi fore, ne si
errata non corrigeret, iram omnipotentis Dei cito incurreret, ut nec regnum
ejus diu staret, nec suos prosperari permitteret. Sed qui humilem exaltaverat
jamjam exaltatum ab ipso regni culmine durius allidendo dejiceret. Ipse vero
correptionem vestram multa gratiarum action suscipiens, multa animi
temperantia multaque modestia consequenter respondit ad singula. Impr^m^s
asserens, mentem suam a vobis se nullatenus avertisse, nec id unquam
jussionibus vestris, salva si^i sua regn que sui dignitate, humiliter
obtemperet and obediat. Quod si vos aliqua jamdiu reverentia non respexit, hanc
hujus rei causam asserit, quod cum vobis in necessitate toto cord, tota mente,
totis viribus astiterit, sibi postmodum per nuntios in necessitate recurrenti
ad vos, digne pro meritis Sanctitas vestra non respondit. Sed se repuisam
susti^uisse conq^er ^u^ and erubescit. De paterna tamen confisus gratia, quae
filium cum volet exaudie^, vultus sperans and expectans laetiores in beati
Petri, and vestra, ut dictum est, ^idelitate, immobili constantia perseverat.
Inde est, quod Sanctitatem vestram visitare volentem nullum impediet: sed nec
hactenus ut a^^erit impediv^t. In appellationibus ex antiqua sui regni
institutione, id sibi vendicat honoris and oneris, ut ob ^^visem cau^am, nullus
cler^corum regni sui, ejusdem regni fines exeat, nisi, an ipsius auctoritate
and mandato jus suum obtinere queat, prius experiendo cognoscat. Quod si nec
sic obtinuerit ad excellentiam vestram ipso in nullo reclamante, cum volet,
quilibet appellabit. In quo si Iuri vestro vel honor^ praejudicatur in aliquo,
id se totius Ecclesiae regni sui ^o filio correcturum in proximo, Domino
juvante, poll^^etur. Imperatorem illum, etsi scismaticum noverit, a vobis tamen
excommunicatum esse usque hodie non rescivit. Quod si denuntiatione and hoc
Ecclesiae regni sui judicio, similiter and consilio se ^orrecturum promittit.
Patrem nostrum dominum Cantuariensem suo se regno nequaquam expulisse asserit.
Unde sicut abscessit ultroneus, sic ad Ecclesiam suam, cum sibi sederit in
animo, plena pace sua revertendi sibi liberum erit. Dum tamen in satis^aciendo
sibi super his, unde conqueritur, regias sibi and iniquas ipse juratus est,
velit dignitates integre conserbari. Siqua vero Ecclesia vel Ecclesiastica
persona ab ipso vel a suis se gravatum ostenderit, satisfactione plene totius
Ecclesiae judicio paratus erit. Haec a Domino nostro Rege in responsis
accepimus, qui utinam ad omnem voluntatem vestram uberius aliquid accepissemus.
Eadem vero sublimitati vestrae notificanda duximus, ut ex responsis ipsius
advertat discretio vestra, quo negotium hoc fine concludat, causam namque suam
dominus Rex plurimum sibi justificare videtur, cum in omnibus quae dicta sunt
Ecclesiae regni sui consilio simul and judicio se pariturum, and Vnde vestrae
supplicandum aestimavimus excellentiae, quatenus illud prae oculis habentes,
Calamum quassatum non conteret, and linum fumigans non extinguet. Zelum illum,
qui ad ulsciscendam omnem, quae Ecclesiae Dei irrogatur, injuriam, laudabiliter
igne divini Spiritus accensus est, si placet, ad tempus intra fines modestiae
cohibeatis, ne vel interdicti sententiam vel ultimum illud praec^sionis elogium
proferendo, Ecclesias innumeras subverti misere toleratis, Unde si placet bonum
est, ut sanando vulneri, si quod est, ad praesens operam detis, quam Ecclesiae
Dei partem nobili^simam praecidendo, quae turbata sunt hoc tempore, long supra
quam possit exprimi perturbetis. Quid enim si sermo vester nondum plene capit
aut capitur. Nunquid divina desperanda est gratia? quia tempore accepto and
capiat and capiatur? Nunquid abbreviata est manus Domini ut salvare nequeat?
aut auris ejus aggravata ut non exaudiat? currens ille sermo velociter:
potenter cum vult immutat omnia, and dat Sanctorum precibus etiam insperata.
Sanguis regius tunc s^it demum vinci cum vicerit, nec erubescit cedere cum
superaverit. Mansuetudine leniendus est monitis and patientia superandus. Quid
enim si jacturam quandam temporalium inf^rt, Si hic rei finis extiterit, ut
amissis suis dominus Cantuariensis exilium juge sustineat, and vestris, quod
absit, mandatis ulterius Anglia non obediat, fuisset satius patienter in tempus
sustinuisse, quam tanto zelo severitatis partibus institisse. Quid enim si
plures e nobis ab obedientia vestra persecutio seperare non possit? Non deerit
tamen qui genu curvet ad Baal, and de manu idoli pallium Cantuariae, non habito
religionis and Justitiae delectu suscipiat. Nec deerunt, qui seeds nostras
occupantes, and cathedras insidentes ipsi tota mentis Devotione obediant. Jam
multi praemasticant ad talia, optantes ut veniant Scandala, and directa

Epistola Suffraganeorum Cantuariensis Ecclesiae ad beatum Thomam Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum.
VEnerabili patri and domino Thomae, Hoved. f. ^ b. n. i. A^ 1167.
Dei gratia Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Suffraganei ejusdem Ecclesiae Episcopi
and personae per eorundem Dioeceses locis variis constitutae, debitam
subjectionem and Quae vestro pater discessu in longinqua inopinata rei ipsius
novitate turbata sunt, vestra sperabamus humilitate and prudentia in pacis
pristinae serenitatem, cooperante gratia revocari. Erat quidem nobis solatio,
quod post discessum vestrum, ad omnes fama divulgante vos in Dominum nostrum
Regem aut regnum ejus nulla machinatione insurgere, sed sponte susceptum
paupertatis onus cum modestia sustinere. Lectioni and orationi insistere,
praeteritorumque jacturam temporum jejuniis, vigiliis, lachrymisque redimere,
and spiritualibus occupatum studiis ad perfectum beatitudinis virtutum
incrementis ascendere. Ad pacis bona reformanda nos studiis hujusmodi
gaudebamus insistere; ex quibus spes erat, vos in cor Domini Regis nostri hanc
posse gratiam desuper evocare, et ex discessu vestro injurias ad cor de caetero
non revocaret. Erat amicis vestris and benevolis ad ipsum aliquis accessus, dum
haec de vobis audirentur, and ob conciliandam vobis gratiam supplicant^s
benign quemque sustinuit. Jam vero quorundam relatione didicimus, quod ad
memoriam anxie revocamus, Vos scilicet in eum comminatorium emisisse, quo
salutationem omittitis, quo non ad obtentum gratiae consilium prece sue
porrigitis, quo non amicum quid sentitis aut scribitis, sed intentatis Quod si
quam dure dictum est tam fuerit severe completum: quae turbata sunt non jam
speramus ad pacem redigi, sed in perenne quoddam odium and inexorabile
pertimescimus inflammari. Rerum vero finem prudentia sancta considerat, dans
^peram solicit, ut quod prudenter inchoat, bono quoque fine concludat.
Advertat itaque (si placet) Disc^etio vestra, quo tendat, an conatibus
hujusmodi finem queat obtinere, quem optat. N^s qu^dem his ausis a spe magna
cecidimus, and qui pacis obtinendae spem quandoque concepimus, ab ipsis jam
spei liminibus gravi quadam desperatione repellimur. Et dum velut extracto
gladio pugna conseritur, pro vobis supplicandi locus utique non invenitur. Unde
Patri scribimus ex charitate consilium, ne labores laboribus, injurias
superaddat injuriis: sed omissis minis, patientiae, et humilitati inserviat.
Causam suam divinae clementiae, domini sui gratiae, misericordiae committat, et
sic agendo carbones ignis in multorum Accenderetur hoc modo charitas, and quod
minae non poterant, inspirante Domino, Bonorumque consilio suadente, de
paupertate voluntaria gloriose laudari, quam de beneficii ingratitudine ab
omnibus in commune notari. Insedit alte cunctorum mentibus, quam benignus
Dominus noster Rex vobis extiterit, in quam vos gloriam ab exili provexerit,
and in familiarem gratiam tam laetam vos mente susceperit, ut dominationis suae
loca, quae a boreali Oceano Pyreneum usque porrecta sunt, adeo potestati
nostrae cuncta subjecerit, ut in his solum hos Et dissuadente matre sua, regno
reclamante, Ecclesia Dei, quoad licuit, suspirante, et ingemiscente, vos in eam
qua praeestis dignitatem modis omnibus studuit sublimare, sperans se de caetero
regnare foeliciter, et open vestra et consilio summa securitate gaudere. Si ergo
securim accepit, unde securitatem sperabat, quae de vobis erit in cunctorum ore
narratio? Quae retributionis Quid enim si vestra Ipsum namque in hoc, quae
supplicationes, quae dona, quot quantaque promissa sollicitant? In petra cum
huc usque firmus perstitit, and totum quod mundus offerre potest, victor alta
mente calcavit. Vnum nobis timori est, ut quem oblatae divitiae, and totum quod
in hominum gloria praetiosum est, flectere nequiverunt, animi sui valeat
indignatio sola Rex a Domino constitutus Paci providet subjectorum per omnia ut
hanc conservet Ecclesiis et commissis sibi populis, dignitates regibus ante se
debitas et exhibitas sibi vult exhiberi et exigit. In quo si inter ipsum and
vos aliqua oborta est contentio, a summo super hoc Pontifice paterna gratia per
venerabiles fratres nostros Lundoniensem et Hereford^nsem Episcopos conventus
et commonitus, non in coelum os suum posuit. Sed de omnibus in Ecclesia vel
Ecclesiastica persona quaecunque se gravatam ostenderet se non alienum
quaerere, sed Ecclesiae regni sui pariturum judicio humiliter and mansuete
respondit. Quod quidem and factis implere paratus est, and dulce reputat
obsequium, cum monetur ut corrigat si quid offenderit in Deum. Nec solum
satisfacere, sed et si jus exigat in hoc satis dare paratus est. Si et satis
dare satisque facere volentem Ecclesiae se judicio in his, quae Ecclesiae sunt
nec in modico subtrahentem, colla Christi jugo subdentem, quo jure; qua lege,
quove canone, aut interdicto gravabitis, aut secu^i, quod absit, evangelica
praecidetis? Non impetu quidem ferri sed judicio prudenter regi laudabile est.
Unde nostrum omnium una est in commune petitio? Ne consilio praecipiti mactare
pergatis et prodere. Sed commissis ovibus, ut vitam, ut pacem, ut securitatem
habeant, Movet quidem nos omnes quod in fratrem nostrum Dominum Salesbiriensem
Episcopum, and Decanum ejus, praepostere, ut quidam aestimant, nuper actum
audivimus. In quos suspensionis, aut damnationis poenam ante motam de culpa
controversiam, calorem, ut videtur, iracundiae, plus quam Justitiae secuti
tramitem, intorsistis. Ordo judiciorum novus hic est, hucusque legibus, et
canonibus, ut speramus, incognitus, damnare primum, et de culpa postremo
cognoscere. Quem ne in Dominum nostrum Regem, et regnum Ecclesias, and
Parochias in Domini Papae Damnum, Sanctaque Ecclesiae Romanae dedecus, and
detrimentum, Vestraeque confusionis augmentum non modicum exercere tentetis and
extendere: Remedium vobis appellationis opponimus, and qui contra metum
gravaminum, in facie Ecclesiae, viva jamdudum voce ad Dominum Papam
appellavimus; Iterato jam nunc ad ipsum scripto, etiam appellamus, et
appellationi terminum diem Ascensionis Dominicae designamus. Quanta quidem
possumus Devotione supplicantes, ut inito salubriori consilio, vestris,


PAtri suo, and Domino summo Pontifici Alexandro, Hoved. f. ^ b. n. 40. A^ 1167.
Provinciae Cantuariensis Episcopi, et personae per eorundem Dioeceses locis
pluribus Londoniensem; et Herefordensem Episcopos directis jamdudum literis
convenisse, and de corrigendis quibusdam, quae Sanctitati vestrae, in ipsium
regno corrigenda videbantur, paterna gratia commonuisse. Qui mandatum vestrum
debita veneratione suscipiens, ut satis notum est, ad vestra quidem mandata non
iratus intumuit, non ^latus obedire contempsit: Verum gratias agens paternae
correptioni, Ecclesiae se statim summisit examini; asserens de singulis quae
juxta vestri formam mandati sibi diligenter expressa fuerunt; Ecclesiae regni
sui se pariturum judicio; a qua corrigenda decerneret, ipsius se consilio
laudabili quidem, and in principe digne commendabili devotione correcturum. Ab
hoc vero non recedit proposito, nec mentem revocat a promisso. Sed qui sedeat,
qui cognoscat, and judicet: ipse divini reverentia timoris, seque legibus
alligatum principem, praesto est in omnibus exhibere, filius obediens. Vnde nec
interdicto, nec minis nec maledictionum aculeis ad satisfactionem urgere
necesse est divinarum se legum examini subdentem. Ejus enim opera nequaquam se
luci subtrahunt: nec occultari tenebris aliqua ratione deposcunt. Rex namque
fide Christianissimus in copula castimoniae conjugalis honestissimus, pacis et
Justitiae conservator, and dilatator incomparabiliter strenuissimus, hoc votis
agit totis, in enormi insolentiam quorundam clericorum excessu, non mediocriter
aliquando turbari cognosceret: Clero debitam exhibens reverentiam, eorundem
excessus ad Ecclesiae judices retulit Episcopus, ut gladius gladio subveniret:
and pacem, quam regebat and fovebat in populo, spiritualis potestas fundaret,
and solidaret in clero. Qua in re partis utriusque Hinc non dominationis
ambitu, non opprimendae Ecclesiasticae libertatis intuitu; sed solidandae pacis
affectu, eam progressus est, ut regni sui consuetudines and dignitates regibus
ante se in regno Angliae, a personis ecclesiasticis observatas et pacifice
reverenter exhibitas Dominus noster Rex deduci vellet in medium. Et ne super
his contentionis funis traheretur in posterum, notitiae publicae delegari,
adjuratis itaque per fidem, and per eam, quae in Deum spes est majoribus natu
episcopis, aliisque regni majoribus retroacti Haec est domini nostri regis in
Ecclesiam Dei toto orb declamata crudelitas, haec ab eo persecutio, haec opera
ejus, inter nos vel undique divulgata malignitas. In his tamen omnibus si quid
sive periculosum animae, si quid ignominiosum Ecclesiae continetur, id vestra
monitus atque motus auctoritate, ob reverentiam Christi, ob Ecclesiae sanctae,
quam sibi matrem profitetur, honorificentiam, ob animae suae remedium,
ecclesiae regni sui consilio Et quidem pacis optatum finem, nostra pater, ut
speramus, obtinuisset jam postulatio; si non iras jam sopitas, et fere prorsus
extinctas, patris nostri domini Cantuariensis de novo suscitasset exacerbatio.
Verum his, de cujus patientia pacem, de cujus modestia redintegrationem hujusce
gratiae sperabamus, ipsum quem monitis emoll^re, quem meritis and mansuetudine
s^perare debuerat, per tristes et terribiles literas, devotionem patris aut
pontificis patientiam minime redolentes, cum in pacis perturbatores exercitium
nuper ageret, dure satis et irreverenter aggressus est. In ipsam
excommunicationis sententiam in regnum ejus interdicti poenam acerrime
comm^nando; cujus si sic remuneratur humilitas? Quid in contumacem statuetur?
Si sic aestimatur obediendi prompta devotio, in obstinacem perversitatem quonam
Salisbiriensem Episcopum, absentem and indefensum, non confessum, aut convictum
sacerdotali prius and episcopali Si hic itaque judiciorum ordo circa regem,
circa regnum, tam praepostere, ne dicamus, inordinate processerit: quidnam
consequi posse putabimus? Dies enim mali sunt, and occasionem habentes
malignandi quamplurimam nisi ut tenor pacis, and gratiae, quo regnum and
Sacerdotium usque modo cohaerent, abrumpatur, and nos cum commisso nobis clero
in despersionem abeamus exilii, aut a vestra, quod absit, fidelitate
recedentes, ad scismatis malum in Compendiosissima quippe via haec est ad omne
religionis dispendium, ad cleri pariter populique subversionem et interitum.
Vnde ne Apostolatus vestri tempore tam misere subvertatur Ecclesia; ne dominus
noster rex and servientes ei populi a vestra, quod absit, avertantur
obedientia: ne totum, quod privatorum consilio machinatur, possit in nos Domini
Cantuariensis iracundia adversus eum and ejus mandata, domino nostro regi aut
regno ejus, nobis, aut commissis nobis Ecclesiis gravamen aliquod importantia;
ad sublimitatem eligentes apud vos in omne quod Sanctitati vestrae placuerit
humiliari, quam ad sublimes ipsius animi motus, nostris non id exigentibus
meritis, de die in diem taediosissime pergravari. Conservet incolumitatem
vestram Ecclesiae suae in longa tempora profuturam omnipotens Dominus, in
Christo dilecte Pater.

Epistola beati Thomae Cantuar. Episcopi ad Gillebertum Lundoniensem Episcopum
de sententia in eum prolata.
THomas Dei gratia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus and Apostolicae sedis legatus,
Gilleberto Lundoniensi Episcopo, Hoved. f. 2 b. n. 20. A. 1168.
utinam vero fratri, declinare a malo, and facere bonum. Excessus vestros dum
licuit patientia nostra semper abusi estis, et neque dominum papam nec nos in
verbo salutis vestrae voluistis audire: sed obduratio vestra in deteriora
semper crevit, vos urgente necessitate officii, and ratione juris persuadente,
ex justis et manifestis causis anathematis sententia percellentes
excommunicavimus; et a corpore Christi; quod est Ecclesia, donec condign
satisfaciatis amputavimus. Precipimus igitur in virtute obedientiae, in
periculo salutis, dignitatis, and ordinis, quatenus prout forma Ecclesiae
praescribit ab omnium communione fidelium abstineatis; ne vestra participatio
Dominicum contaminet gregem ad ruinam,

Epistola beati Thomae Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi ad capitulum Lundoniensis
Ecclesiae de vitandis
Ibidem, n. 40. A. D. 1168.
THomas Dei gratia Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, and Apostolicae sedis legatus,
Decano and Archidiacono, and clero Lundoniensis salutem, and a communione
excommunicatorum fideliter abstinere. Vestram non debet latere prudentiam, quod
fere totus Latinus orbis Gillebertus Lundoniensis Episcopus frater noster,
utinam verus, in causa Ecclesiae versatus sit, and pacem ejus studuerit
perturbare. Supportavimus enim in multa patientia hactenus, qua ille semper
abutens, jugis inobedientiae crimen multiplicatis excessibus incorrigibiliter
cumulavit. Nos ergo quibus ultra dissimulare non licuit, eum urgente
necessitate officii, and ratione juris persuadente public excommunicavimus and
vobis precipimus, in virtute obedientiae, and in periculo ordinis, and salutis
ut a Simili quoque sententia Deo auctore, eos, qui a nobis solemniter citati
sunt, nisi interim satisfecerint condemnabimus in die Ascenscionis; scilicet
and Gillebertum Cantuariensem Archidiaconum and Robertum Vicarium ejus,
Richardum de Ivecestre, Richardum de Luci, Willielmum Gi^^ardum, Adam de
Cheringes, and eos qui ex mandato regis, vel propria temeritate, nostra vel
clericorum and eos qui open, vel consilio domini regis animum adversus
libertatem Ecclesiae, and innocentum proscriptionem, and depopulationem
instigasse noscuntur, and qui nuntios domini Papae, and nostros ne persequantur
Ecclesiae necessitates impediunt. Non turbetur cor vestrum in his, neque
formidet, quia contra tergiversationes malignantium and appellationum
subterfugia Deo propitio sedis Apostolica munimine tuti sumus. Haec sunt nomina
excommunicatorum. Iocelinus Saresbiriensis Episcopus; Comes Hugo, Ranulphus de
Broc, Thomas Bernardi, Robertus Ecclesiae de Br^c, Hugo de Sancto Claro,
Letardus clericus de Norflicta, Nigellus de Saccavilla, Richardus frater
Willielmi de Hastinges, qui Ecclesiam nostram de novo Cotona occupavit. Valete.

Si quis a festivitate Sancti Dionisii inventus fuerit in Angliam f^rens
litteras Domini Papae vel Thomae Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, Chron. G^ vas.
Doro^ Col. 140 lin. 1. A. ^ 1169. See Hov^ f. 295. a. ^
vel aliquod mandatum ex part eorum de interdicto, capiatur and statim fiat de
eo justitia, sicut de traditore Domini Regis and regni sui. Veruntamen illi qui
capti sunt cum mandato vel litteris hujusmodi ante festum Sancti Martini,
custodiantur usque ad eundem terminum, and postea fiat de eis justitia,

Si Episcopi vel Abbates cujuscunque ordinis sint vel quicunque clerici vel
laici sententiam interdi^i tenuerint, statim ejiciantur a terra and tota
cognatio eorum, and tali modo ut nil ferant de catallis suis secum, sed omnia
catalla eorum and omnes possessiones suae in manu Domini Regis seisiantur.

comitatus and provincias, quod infra festum Sancti Hylarii redeant in Angliam,
and si non venerint ad terminum illum, omnes redditus eorum capiantur in manus
domini Regis and ipsi sint sine spe revertendi, and Vicecomites faciant hoc
scire Archiepiscopis, Episcopis de provinciis suis.

Nulla fiat appellatio ad dominum Papam, neque ad Thomam Cantuariensem nec
aliquod placitum eorum mandato teneatur. Et si quis a festo Sancti Dionisii
inventus fuerit hoc faciens capiatur, and retineatur, and omnia catalla ejus
and possessiones capiantur in manu Domini Regis, sive Episcopus fuerit, sive
Abbas vel Monachus, aut canonicus, aut clericus, vel cujuscunque ordinis fuerit.

Si quis laicus venerit de ultra mare ubicunque applicuerit intent exquiratur
utrum portet aliquid quod sit contra honorem domini Regis. capiatur and
incarceretur. Et similiter fiat de laicis qui veniunt ad mare transfretare.

Si clericus, vel canonicus, vel monachus, vel conversus seu cujuscunque
religionis fuerit de ultra mare venerit, exquiratur, and si nihil hujusmodi cum
illo inventum fuerit, nisi habeat litteras domini Regis de passagio suo non
procedat ulterius, sed quam citius poterit revertatur;

Nullus clericus, vel canonicus, vel monachus, vel cujuscunque religionis Dei
fuerit permittatur transfretare, nisi habeat litteras de passagio suo.

Si quis Walens^s clericus vel laicus applicuerit, nisi habeat litteras domini
Regis de passagio suo, capiatur and custodiatur, and omnes Walenses Scolis in
Anglia e^ic^antur. Omnes vero vacecomites totius Angliae faciant omnes milites
and libere tenentes, and omnes illos qui quindecim annos habent de comitatibus
suis jutare in pleno comitatu, and per omnes civitates and burgos, quod haec
mandata super vitam et membra sua servabunt, and missis servientibus suis per
omnes villatas Angliae faciant jurare omnes illos qui ad comitatus non suerunt,
quod haec mandata cum caeteris tenebunt.

Epistola Alexandri ad Henricum Regem Angliae.
Ibidem. f. 295. a. n. 20 A. D. 1169.
ALexander Episcopus servus servorum Dei, illustri Anglorum Regi Henrico,
sal^tem et Apostolicam benedictionem. Magnificentiae tuae Nuntios, scilicet
dilectos filios nostros Iohannem Cumin, and Radulfum Tamewrde nobis, et
Ecclesiae Dei devotos, et regiae sublimitati (sicut credimus) per omnia
fidelissimos, et literas, quas excellentia tua nobis per eosdem transmisit,
tanto benigniori mente suscepimus, et tanto eos majori gratia praevenimus, et
honor, quanto pl^nius scivimus ipsos a magnifico principe, et rege
Christianissimo fuisse transmissos: cui utique omnem, quam cum Deo possumus,
gratiam cupimus et honorem, et ad cujus incrementum modis omnibus, quibus
honest poterimus, nos et fratres nostri ac tota Ecclesia quanto devotissimae
sinceritatis tuae affectum in majori Personas siquidem de latere nostro, juxta
quod rogasti, licet nobis gravissimum, a^ difficillimum hoc destinandas cum
plenitudine potestatis, Ecclesiasticas causas, quae inter te et venerabilem
fratrem nostrum Archiepisc. Cantuariensem hinc inde vertuntur, et illa quae
inter eundem Archiepisc. et Episc. regni tui super appellatione ad nos facta
movetur, nec non alias causas tres quas noverint literas ipsas, aut earum
tenorem a nullo sciri permittas, sed eas habeas omnino secretas. Illos autem
familiares and consiliarios tuos, quos jam dictus Archiepiscopus sententiae
excommunicationis subjecit, personae de latere nostro transmissae, domino
auctore, absolvent. Si autem aliquis illorum interim metu mortis laboraverit,
praestito secundum Ecclesiae consuetudinem juramento, quod nostro si
convaluerit debeat parere

Rescriptum Thome Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi ad omnes suffraganeos suos.
FRaternitatis vestre scriptum, Quadrilo^ lib. 5.
quod tamen prudentie vestre communi non facile credimus emanasse: nuper ex
insperato mordacitatis, In this R^ script are any faults (...) incongru^ yet
seeing (...) they do (...) little alte^ sense and (...) meaning (...) I have
Pri^ it, as I f^ it in the A^thor.
quam Solatii and utinam magis esset emissum de pietatis studio, de Caritatis
affectu; quam de inobedientia voluntatis. Caritas enim non querit que sua sunt:
sed que Jesu Christi. Erat quippe de jure officii vestri. Si veritatem habet
evangelium, quod quidem habet, si recte agitis ejus officium. Si fideliter ejus
negotium geritis cujus representatis figuram, Magis eum timere, qui potest
corpus and animam mittere in Gehennam, corpus occidere. Magis obedire Deo quam
hominibus. Patri quam Domino, ejus exemplo qui factus est patri obediens usque
ad mortem. Mortuus utique ipse est pro nobis: nobis relinquens exemplum: ut
sequamur vestigia ejus. Commoriamur ergo and nos, and ponamus animas nostras,
pro liberanda Ecclesia sua a jugo servitutis, and oppressione trubulantis quam
ipse fundavit, cujusque comparavit libertatem sanguine suo proprio, nae si
secus egerimus: merito nos comprehendat illud Evangelicum Qui amat animam suam
plusquam me, non est inspiraret vobis Dominus, ut resumeretis vires: qui
conversi estis retrorsum in die belli. Si forte saltem aliquis ex omnibus vobis
ascenderet ex adverso, opponere se murum pro domo Israel. Simularet saltem
inire certamen contra eos qui non cessant quotidie exprobare agnum Dei; Exurge
Domine judica causam meam, vindica sanguinem Ecclesie que eviscerata est, que
facta est oppressione exanimis. Superbia eorum qui oderunt ejus libertatem:
ascendit super, nec est de cetero qui faciat bonum, non est usque ad unum.
Vtinam fratres dilectissimi esset vobis affectus in defensionem libertatis
Ecclesie, qui paretur expertus sum etiam pro vobis omnibus proscriptionem;
Expediebat quidem unum affligi pro Ecclesia ista, ut vel sic excutiatur a
servitute. Discutite mente simplici tamen ista, examinate nego^ium, diligenter,
attendite ut deducta Majestate imperii: postposita penitus personarum
acceptione, quarum acceptor Deus non est: faciat vobis ipse intelligere
quicquid egeritis, quid intenditis agere. Auferat ipse Deus velamen de cordibus
vestris: ut cognoscatis quid agere debeatis. Dicat ex omnibus vobis qui noverit
si unquam post promotionem meam, alicui vestrum tuli bovem vel asinum, si
pecuniam. Si causam alicujus inique judicavi. Si alicujus vestrum dispendio
operavi, in compendium reddo quadruplum. Si vero non est quod offenderim: ut
quid me derelinquitis? solum in causa Dei: Quare vosipsos nobisipsis opponere
curatis, in ista causa: qua nulla specialior est Ecclesie. Nolite fratres,
Nolite vosipsos and Ecclesiam Dei, quantum in vobis est confundere. Sed
convertimini ad me and salvi eritis. Dominus enim dicit. Nolo mortem
peccatoris: sed magis ut convertatur and vivat. State mecum viriliter in
prelio. Apprehendite arma and scutum: and exurgite in adjutorium michi. Accing
imini gladio verbi Dei potentissimi: eos qui querunt tollere animam Ecclesiae:
que est libertas. sine qua nec viget Ecclesia, nec valet adversus eos qui
querunt hereditate Sanctuarium Dei possidere. Festinemus ergo omnes simul id
agere: ne ira Dei ascendat super nos, tanquam super negligentes pastores and
desides: nec reputemur muti canes, non valentes latrare: ne exprobretur nobis a
transeuntibus, a Senioribus Babilonis egressa est iniquitas. Revera defendendam
Ecclesie libertatem. Alioquin judicet Dominus inter me and vos and requirat
Ecclesie confusionem de manibus vestris. quam velit nolit mundus necesse est
stare firmiter in verbo Domini in quo fundata est: donec veniat hora ejus and
transeat ex hoc mundo ad patrem. Judicabit quidem eo quod reliquisti me Solum
in certamine, nec est qui mecum velit ascendere ad pugnam ex omnibus caris
meis. Adeo solum Northamtoniam, cum iterum judicaretur Christus in persona mea,
ante tribunal Cum artar^tur Cantuariensis ob injurias sibi and Ecclesie Dei
passim illatas, and sine delicto Romanam appellare audientiam. bona sua? male
dicimus sua, cum habet bona pauperum, patrimonium crucifixi que potius sunt
commendata, quam donata: sub Dei protectione ponere, and Ecclesie Roman. Quis
unquam and si aliquando injuste prescriptum declaravit divina clementia: vidit,
audivit Cantuariensem judicari, condemnari, cogi, ad fidejussionem, in Curia
Regis, a suis precipue Suffraganeis, ubi est inventu juris ista, vel canonum
auctoritas? erubescentiam: non immittit vobis confusionem: confusio non elicit
poenitentiam: penitentia excutit satisfactionem, coram Deo and hominibus. Ob
tot quidem and tantas Deo and Ecclesie sue illatas injurias, in me nisi propter
Deum, quas sustinere non debui, salva conscientia mea, nec sine discrimine vite
me potui emendare nec dissimulare sine periculo anime; elegi potius declinare
ad tempus ut habitarem salubrius in domo Domini, quam habitare in tabernaculis
peccatorum secundum ea que proponebantur adversum me, que agebantur m^cum. Si
veritatem loquimini qui novistis debuit fuisse inopinatus ne impediretur
prescitus. Sed Domino vertente causas adversus nos in melius prospectum est
Domini nostri Regis honori and suorum ne quid fieret in me in ipsius ignominiam
and generationis sue. Melius etiam consultum his qui suspirabant, in necem
meam, and qui sitiebant sanguinem meum qui aspirabant in fastigium Ecclesie
Cantuariensis: ut vulgo dicitur and creditur in nostram perniciem utinam minus
ambitiose quam avide appellavimus and appellati sumus, rebus Cantuariensis
Ecclesie nostrisque and nostrorum sicut juris exigit ratio, in tuto manentibus
nostram prosecuti sumus appellationem. Si nobis recedentibus, and in discessu
nostro prout dicitis omnia turbata sunt: sibi imputet qui causam dedit, qui hoc
procuravit, facientis proculdubio culpa hec est: non recedentis, persequentis,
aut declinantis injurias. Damnum enim dedisse videtur, qui causam damni dedit.
Quid plura? presentavimus nos Curie nostras and Ecclesie proposuimus injurias.
Adventus nostri and appellationis causam etiam exposuimus, non fuit qui nobis
responderet vel in aliquo. Expectavimus nec venit qui nobis aliquid objiceret,
nulla adversus nos reportata sententia antequam frater Londoniensis, cum
Ricardo de Yvecestria and eboracensi sicut dicitur dictante sententia
festinatum est inde ad dominum regem, viderit ipse in caput ejus convertatur
qui hoc dedit consilium, sive judicio sive ratione, post appellationem nobis
adhuc in Curia manentibus, Spoliata and nos, cum nostris. proscripti and ipsi
clerici cum laicis, viri cum mulieribus, mulieres cum infantibus and cunabulis:
addita sunt fisco bona ecclesie, patrimonium crucifixi, pars pecunie conversa
est in usus regios, parsque in tuos frater Londoniensis, si vera sunt que
audivimus, and ecclesie tue. Quod si ita est, exigimus te, precipientes tibi in
virtute obedientie quatinus infra quadraginta dies, post istarum susceptionem
litterarum, quicquid inde tulisti vel in usus ecclesie tue conversum est:
remota omni occasion, and dilatione infra tempus prenominatum in integrum
ecclesiam ditari, de alterius ecclesie incommodo. Si laudas auctorem, scire
debes super rebus ecclesie ablatis, eum legitime non posse prestare
auctoritatem, qui violentam facit injuriam. Quo ergo jure perverso? quo canonum
ordine transposito? poterunt se tueri raptores sacrilegi bonorum
ecclesiasticorum invasores, non restitutis ablatis ecclesie. Opponentne
appellationis obstaculum? Absit. Que nova, imo que juri contraria introducitis
in ecclesia ista. videte quid agatis. Certe excutitur in vos faba ista. and in
ecclesias vestras, si non juri non obtemperat, immo qui juri est contrarius.
Suntne iste injury quas addimus injuriis, labores quos laboribus adicimus,
quod ista and alia enormia que fiebant, and fiunt in ista ecclesia non
sustineamus: quod gravati appellavimus: quod recessimus a Curia, quod ausi
sumus super injuriis ecclesie and nostris conqueri: quod super his omnibus non
tacemus: quod ista speramus Que auctoritas? que Scriptura? contulit hanc
prerogativam principibus in ecclesiasticis, quam vos vultis eis infer. Nolite
fratres, nolite, jura ecclesie, and regni confundere: discrete quidem sunt
potestates iste, quarum una vim and potestatem est sortita ex alia. Legite
scripturas, and invenietis quot and qui periere reges, qui sibi visi sunt
sacerdotale officium usurpasse. Provideat ergo discretio vestra ne ob istam
pressuram divina vos atterat injuria, quam si venerit non fugietis de facili.
Consulite etiam Domino nostro Regi, qui ejus comparatis gratiam super ecclesie
dispendio, ne quod absit pereat ipse and domus ejus tota: sicut and ipsi
periere qui in consimili delicto comprehensi sunt. Si vero ab hoc incepto non
destiteritis, qua animi conscientia non puniemus regno clamante, Ecclesia etiam
suspirante, and ingemiscente fuisse promotum. Scitis quid dicat veritas. Os
quod mendacium scienter loquitur, occidit animam, verba vero Sacerdotis semper
comitem debent habere veritatem. Deus bone nunquid non erubesceret aliquis de
plebe, ista dicere. Consulite ergo conscientias vestras, advertite formam
electionis, consensum omnium Filii etiam cum omnibus regni primatibus: si
aliquis eorum contradixit: si aliquis reclamavit vel in aliquo loquatur qui
novit: dicat qui conscius est. Si vero turbatus inde fuerit aliquis non dicat
pro sua molestia, toti regno and ecclesie factam fuisse injuriam. Litteras vero
Domini Regis and omnium vestrum diligentius attendistis postulantes cum multa
instantia pallium obtinuisse. Sic se habet rei veritas: Verum si quem torsit
invidia: si quem afflixit ambitio. Si cui causa exili sublimatum ab ipso in
gloriam. Non sum revera attavis editus regibus, Malo tamen is esse in quo
faciat sibi genus animi nobilitas, quam in quo nobilitas generis degenerat.
forte natus sum in tugurio de paupere. Sed cooperante divina clementia, qui
novit facere humilia ut confundat fortia in exilitate mea, antequam accederem
ad ejus obsequium satis copiose, satis habundanter, satis honorifice, sicut
ipsi novistis, prout habundantius inter vicinos meos and notos cujuscunque
conditionis fuerint conversatus sum. Et David de post fetentes assumptus
constitutus est ut regeret populum dei, cui aucta est fortitudo, and gloria,
quum ambulavit in viis Dei. Petrus vero de art piscatoria electus factus est
ecclesie princeps, qui sanguine suo meruit pro nomine Christi in celis habere
coronam, and in terris nomen and ingratitudinis notam per quandam
insinuationem. Credimus quod nullum peccatum criminale est quod importet
infamiam, nisi processerit ex animo. Vnde si quis homicidium nolens commiserit,
and si ingratitudinis notam and penam. Sepissime certe beneficium confertur
invito. Vnde commodius ejus prospicitur indamnitati qui etsi non alias urgente
necessitate revocatur a perpetratione delicti. Preterea defendit nos ab
ingratitudinis nota, pater noster and patronus qui est ipse Christus Jure
paterno tenemur ad ejus obedientiam: qua non servata puniemur exheredationis
pena. Potest enim pater exheredare filium ex justa causa. Ipse dicit: Si non
annunciaveris impio iniquitatem suam, and moriatur in delicto ejus salva fide,
tenemur obnoxii si sit contra eum in dispendium ecclesie pertinaciter merito si
non punimus commissum pro ea part sollicitudinis in quam vocati sumus collatum
fidelitate ecclesie Roman. Absit inquam ut Domini nostri Regis unquam devotio
and fides ob temporale commodum, vel incommodum, a fidelitate and reverentia
Roman discedat ecclesie quum quidem criminale and damnabile esset in privato
nedum in principe qui multos ecclesia etsi sepius concussa in ea fortitudine,
and firmitate in qua firmita fundata temporalibus agitur plus timere debemus
jacturam anime, quam temporalium. Scriptura vero dicit. Quid prodest homini
totum mundum lucrari: anime vero sue detrimentum sustinere. periculum itaque
nostrum and nostrorum p^nitus abjicimus. Non enim timendus est ille qui corpus
perdit, sed qui corpus and animam perdit. Arguitis nos super suspensi ne
manifestis, and notoriis, non desiderat ista cognitio: perpendite diligentius
quid actum sit a Salesberiensi super Decanatum post Domini Pape prohibitionem,
and nostram sub excommunicatione factam: and tunc rectius intelligetis si de
manifesta inobedientia suspensio recte sequatur. Vnde beatus Clemens. Si
prelatis suis non obedierint cujuscunque libet ordinis, universi omnesque
principes tam inferioris quam superioris ordinis, atque reliqui populi non
solum infames: sed etiam extorres a regno Dei and consortio fidelium and a
liminibus Sancte Dei De Johanne vero de Oxenfordia dicimus quod diversis modis
excommunicantur diversi. Alii lege eos denunciante excommunicatos: alii
sententia notati: alii ex communicatione et participatione excommunicatorum.
Ille vero qui in heresim incidit damnatam communicando Scismaticis and a Domino
Papa excommunicatis, reatum and maculam excommunicationis in se traxit, que
pestis more lepre infixit and intingit, consimilique pena facientes confundit.
Et quum contra Domini Pape mandatum, and nostrum expressum sub anathemate
Decanatum excommunicatus usurpavit; Denunciavimus, excommunicavimus and
excommunicatum firmiter tenemus. Et quod per eum factum est in Decanatum, and
super decanatum quassavimus and quassum tenemus, sicut Dominus Papa ipsemet jam
quassavit, auctoritate octave Sinodi cujus hec est sententia. Si quis palam vel
absconse excommunicato locutus fuerit aut junctus communione, statim in se
traxit excommunicationis penam, and Consilium Carthaginense dicit. Qui
communicaverit excommunicato si clericus est deponatur. Videat ergo Calixtus
Papa dicit. Excommunicatos quosque a sacerdotibus nullus recipiat ante
utriusque partis examinationem justam: nec tamen eis in oratione aut cibo aut
potu aut osculo communicet aut ave eis dicat. Quia quicunque ex his vel aliis
prohibitis excommunicatis scienter communicaverint juxta Apostolorum
institutionem, simili and ipsi excommunicationi jacebunt, hic est ordo
canonicus non canonibus ut credimus incognitus, scilicet auctoritate canonica
sultus. Et ne miremini si quandoque condamnatur Legite Paulum qui absens
public fornicantem cum noverca sua convictum testibus non confessum etiam
absentem excommunicavit. cujus crimen omnes sciebant et non arguebant sicut vos
istius quem non de jure defendit Regia potestas: ejecit a cetu fidelium, et
judicavit eum tradi Sathane in interitum carnis ut spiritus ejus salvus fieret
sicut nos istum. Ceterum quum hoc tempore in partibus illis multa hujus and
satis gravia in absentia nostra fuerint enormia que de cetero licet absentes
corpore presents tamen auctoritate salva animi nostri conscientia preterire
frater Londoniensis qui nosse debueras illud Gregorii septimi. Si quis
episcopus fornicationi presbyterorum, Diaconorum; vel crimen incestus in sua
parrochia pretio, precibusve, sine gratia interveniente consenserit: Vel
commissum auctoritate officii sui non impugnaverit, a suo suspendatur officio.
Illud quoque Leonis. Si qui episcopi talem consecraverint sacerdotem qualem
esse non liceat. and si aliquo modo damnum proprii evaserint: ordinationis jus
ulterius non habebunt: nec illi sacramento intererunt Quum in istorum sententia
canonum sicut pro certo audivimus dupliciter deliquisti. mandamus tibi, and in
virtute obedientie mandato injungimus: quatinus si ita est infra tres menses
post nostrarum susceptionem litterarum, venerabilium fratrum nostrorum
coepiscoporum consilio de tanto excessu. sic studeas te offere correctioni: and
satisfactioni: ne ceteri in tuo, exemplo in consimile delictum incidant: and
nos pro negligentia tua debeamus tibi severius proponere mandatum. opponit^s
nobis contra metum gravaminum: non remedium per appellationem, sed
impedimentum: quo minus sicut intelligimus exerceamus adversus malefactores,
invasores bonorum ecclesiasticorum, discipline censuram ecclesice, ne in
D^minum Regem nostrum vel terram suam in personas vestras and ecclesias vobis
commissas aliquid statuamus eo ordine quo progressi sumus contra Salesberiensem
sicut dicitis, and ejus decanum. Absit eo delinquitis modo vel consimili, quo
jam deliquit Salesberiensis: nunquid hac appellatione potestis suspendere
auctoritatem nostram ne in vos vel ecclesias vestras severitatis disciplinam
exerceamus: si delicti enormitas hoc exigit. Advertite diligentius si hec sit
legitima appellatio. and que sit appellationis forma. Scimus quod omnis
appellans: aut suo nomine appellat aut alieno. si suo: aut a gravamine quod ei
infertur: vel quod timet sibi inferri. Si hec sit appellatio que debeat
suspendere omnem auctoritatem and potestatem nostram quam habemus in vos, and
ecclesias vestras. Creditur ergo a sapientibus: credimus and nos eam nullius Si
alieno appellastis nomine aut Domini regis, aut alterius. Si non alterius,
Domini Regis. Si Domini Regis certe nosse debuerat discretio vestra: quomodo
introducte appellationes sunt ad propulsandam injuriam, non ad inferendam. vel
ad sublevandos oppressos: non amplius opprimendos. Vnde si quis non confidentia
just cause, sed causa auferende more, ne contra eum feratur sententia
appellaverit hujus appellationem subversa liberate, si rebus ejus occupatis
and detentis: episcopis a sede propria expulsis vel non pacifice cum omni
securitate omniumque ablatorum restitutione admissis. raptores invasores ne
coherceantur licite appellaverint and se defenderint per appellationem. Q^e
erit ista ecclesie destruction. Videte quid egeritis quidque dicatis. Nonne
vicarii Christi estis? nonne vices ejus in terra geritis? nonne vestrum est
corripere? cohercere malefactores: ut vel sic desistant ecclesi^m Dei persequi.
Vt quid non minus est si ipsi Et audietur and predicabitur in omni populo, and
gente, suffraganeos Cantuariensis ecclesie, qui cum Metropolitano suo ob
defensionem ecclesie ejusque libertatis haberent vivere and mori: omniaque
sustinere dispendia: velle ad mandatum regium quantum in ipsis est suspendere
ipsius auctoritatem ne severitatis disciplinam exercent in delinquentes
adversus ecclesiam: Vnum certe scio duorum personam simul gerere recte non
potestis certamen satis legitimum: satis canonicum: ut qui membra sunt ecclesie
ineant certamen cum capite suo, quod est Christus. Timeo fratres ne (quod
absit) dicatur de nobis. Isti sunt sacerdotes qui dixerunt ubi est Dominus: and
tenentes legem nescierunt eam. Preterea discretionem vestram latere non
credimus quomodo non solent audiri appellantes nisi quorum interest, aut quibus
mandatum est. aut qui negotium gerunt alienum. Interest vestra ut non
coherceantur delinquentes adversus ecclesiam. Absit immo certe contrarium. Si
vero qui subvertit ecclesie libertatem, qui bona ipsius invadit and occupat: ac
in suos convertit usus in sui defensionem minime super hoc auditur appellans,
multo minus and pro eo appellans. Ergo ne Domino Regi suffragatur appellatio, a
nobis pro Christo edita? ne vobis videtur prodesse pro ipso emissa. Unde sicut
in hoc casu non potest appellare, Adicimus etiam vos in part ista nullatenus
negotium gerere posse, maxim in oppressione ecclesie cujus ipse defensor est.
and presertim unde generaliter leditur ecclesie conditio. Ergo si nec interest
vestra appellare nec super hoc mandatum valetis suscipere. nec alienum gerere
negotium: non audiatur appellatio vestra. nec de jure tenetur: Estne ista
Devotio vestra: consolatio fraterne Caritatis, affectus metropolitano vestro
pro vobis omnibus exulanti, a fraternitate vestra exhibitus. Indulgeat vobis
discriminis, vel captione, vel truncationis membrorum damno ad vos transire. Et
si de nostris aliqui liberius possent, si vellent, ad nos transmeare: and
idcirco miramur quem ordinem exigitis ubi nullus ordo circa nos. circa
ecclesias vel ecclesiasticas personas, sed horror qui utinam sempiternus non
sit, and injury observentur cum spoliati sumus nostri. Quorum quidem tam
clerici quam laici capti edictum generale sit propositum, sicut dicitur ut nemo
de nostris sit inventus in tota terra Anglicana, nemo nostrorum vel aliorum
amicorum vestrorum litteras vel nuncios audeat suscipere. Est hec reverentia
appellationi debita exhibita, and observata: infra cujus tempus si justa est
nihil innovari oportet. vosipsi videritis: Quo ergo jure, quo ordine
desi^eratis a nobis litteras nostras and nuncios benign suscipi and audiri.
Non Et inde est quod vobis constanter. Dominum nostrum Regem nullatenus injuste
fore grabatum: si adversus eum a Domino Papa and a nobisipsis legitime litteris
and nunciis sepissime satisfacere cum posset nolentem severitatis censura
percusserit. Non enim injuste gravatur, quem jus punit legitime. Et ut omnia
fine brevissimo concludam certum tenete, quomodo raptores, invasores,
occupatores bonorum ecclesie, ejusque libertatis subversores nec tuetur juris
auctoritas, nec appellatio defendit. Propterea fratres si cupitis ei prodesse
illo procurante subvenire modo quo non offendatis in Deum non in Ecclesiam, non
in ordinem nostrum, quatinus etiam expeditius and salubrius anime sue,
periculum quod jam in foribus est valeat evadere. Hec idcirco dixerimus, si
inspirante ei divina clementia, de consilio nostro satisfaceret ecclesie,
gaudebit ipsa de filii sui reversione: ac cum gratiarum action ac devotione
multiplici parata fuit and est semper eum suscipere. gaudebimus and nos.
judicium vero vestrum quo dicitis esse satisfacere volentem: paratum etiam
satis dare: si super aliquo de libertatibus ecclesie inter ipsum and nos, sicut
dicitis orta est contentio. quod quidem satis miramur. Si alicui vestrum hoc
est indubium, cum toti mundo fere notum sit, quomodo non est consentaneum
rationi, immo penitus and juri contrarium: si non suscipimus immo quod non
suscipimus adversarii ejus estis, and esse debetis in ea ob defensionem
libertatis ecclesie, cujus partis defendende, officii nostri necessitate
commissa est nobis and sollicitudo credita. quam si negligenter omittitis: si
periculose dissimulatis: vos ipsi videtis. tamen quia non legimus superiores
tum quod nobis and ecclesie quidam vestrum suspecti sunt: utinam non omnes
rationibus diversis quas in presenti tacemus. Audiat itaque Dominus meus
postulationem fidelis sui: Consilium Episcopi: patris excommunicationem: ut
benefaciat ei Deus and augeat dies suos and annos filiorum suorum in tempora
longa. permittat ecclesiam frui pace, and liberate: sub ipso tanquam sub Rege
Christianissimo, ecclesiam Romanam uti liberate, and jure, in terra sua quam
habere debet, omnia ablata cum omni pace and securitate nostra: ut libere and
quiet possimus deo militare sub ipso, and ipse debeat obsequio nostro uti
prout ei licuerit. Salvo honor dei, and ecclesie Roman, and ordine nostro.
Iste sunt dignitates regie, leges optime, quas petere debet, and florere sub
ipso ecclesia. Iste sunt leges obtemperantes legi divine, non derogantes, quas
qui non observat inimicus constituitur. Lex enim Domini immaculata convertens
animas. De legibus Non erubescat ergo Dominus meus redire ad cor, and humiliari
in cordis contritione, and humilitatis mansuetudine coram Domino satisfacere
ei, and ecclesie sue, de illatis injuriis. Cor enim contritum and humiliatum
Deus non despicit, sed amplectitur sincerius, sicut and Sanctus David: qui cum
peccasset humiliavit se coram Domino. petivit misericordiam Orate pro nobis ut
non deficiat in tribulatione and securius possimus dicere cum Apostolo, neque
mors, neque vita, neque angeli, neque creatura aliqua, poterit nos separare a
Caritate Dei: qui subjecit nos tribulationi, donec veniat, qui venturus est,
qui faciet nobiscum misericordiam suam, and inducet nos in terram promissionis:
terram fluentem lacte and melle: quam non dabit nisi diligentibus se. Valete
semper in Domino omnes: and instantius oret petimus pro nobis tota Anglicana
ecclesia.

Alexander Papa Rothomagensi Archiepiscopo and Lo. Nivernensi Episcopo.
Quadrilog. lib. 5.
QVoniam de nostre devotionis ac sinceritatis fervore, dilectione quoque, Regem
Anglorum per hoc duximus transmittendos. Vnde quod eundem Regem postmodum
audivimus transfretasse, ne forte negotium Archiepiscopi possit impediri,
quolibet modo sive protendi. fraternitati vestre per Apostolica scripta
mandamus et in virtute obedientie injungimus: quatinus sicut gratiam beati
Petri et nostram caram habetis, et nos, et ecclesiam sic de honestate, et
constantia volueritis aliqua de cetero part consid^re: ut in unum, pariter
convenientes ad memoratum Regem eundem infra viginti dies post harum
susceptionem literarum omni occasion, et dilatione postpositis iter
arripiatis: et ad eum festinare curetis. Cum presentiam ejus habueritis:
vosipsi ea quae vobis in aliis litteris expresserimus, sicut viros pontificalis
constantie decet: omni dubitatione et timore semotis, instantissime proponatis,
et eundem ad illarum executionem ex part nostra studeatis modis omnibus
invitare. Quod si Rex ea que adimplere noluerit: aut art aliqua, seu ingenio
per se, vel per suos effecerit quo minus ad eum juxta preceptum nostrum
possitis accedere. et ipsi ea que a nobis super his vestre sollicitudini sunt
injuncta cum liberate et securitate proponere. Vos in totam terram ejus
cismarinam auctoritate Beati Petri et nostra omni contradictione Appellationum
remota interdicti proferatis. et in ea omnia divina preter baptismum
parvulorum, and penitentiam morientium prohibeatis, officia celebrari, quomodo
in litteris quos eidem regi direximus constat fuisse expressum. Litteras quoque
nostras quas super observationem interdicti Archiepiscopis, et Episcopis, terre
sue que citra mare consistit transmittimus eisdem omni occasion postposita
destinetis, et ipsis ex part vestra firmiter injungatis quod interdictum
nostrum nullius timoris prohibitione, vel appellatione obstante, per parochias
irrefragabiliter servent, ne contra Archiepiscopus vel episcopus vel al qua
persona interdictum nostrum observare contempserit, vos eum ab officii sui
executione, sublato appellationis remedio, suspendetis, si nec sic resipuerit,
in eum excommunicationis sententiam promulgetis. Supradicto vero regi preterea
que scripta sunt viva voce vel litteris nostris constantissime proponatis; quod
si nec sic resipuerit person sue, sicut nec Friderico regi, Imperatori dicto,
fecimus nequaquam parcemus. Sed in eum excommunicationis et si uterque vestrum
adesse non poterit vel noluerit, quod tamen non credimus, nec conveniens aut
tolerabile esset, alter non minus ea que dicta sunt omni dubitatione et timore
sublato jus adimpleat. Datum 6 idus Maii.

Alexander Papa servus servorum Dei Archiepiscopo Eboracensi and universis
Episcopis Angliae Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.
ILlius dignitatis and Majoritatis Ecclesiam Cantuariensem ab antiquo fuisse
audivimus, Quadrilog lib. 5.
ut Reges Angliae ab ejusdem ecclesiae Archiepiscopis and promotionis sue
principio coronari^ proinde si quid est quod nos cum ex officii nostri debito,
tamen ex consideratione venerabilis fratris nostri Thomae ejusdem sedis
Archiepiscopi, viri siquidem religiosi, honesti, and discreti, ecclesiae jam
dictae jura, and dignitates antiquas, illibatas, universitati vestre,
auctoritate Apostolica penitus inhibemus ne quisquam vestrum novo Regi
coronando si sort hic casus emerserit, absque memorati Archiepiscopi, vel
successorum suorum, and ecclesiae Cantuariensis convenientia, contra antiquam
ejus consuetudinem, and dignitatem manum apponere quali occasion presumat, aut
id aliquatenus audeat attentare. Datum Lateranis 4 Non. Aprilis.

Epistola Alexandri Papae ad Rogerum Eboracensem Archiepiscopum and Hugonem
Dunelmensem episcopum.
ALexander Episcopus servus servorum Dei venerabilibus fratribus Rogero
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, Hoved. f. a^ b. n. 50.
and Hugoni Dunelmensi episcopo Si loquente me ad impium, morte morieris, nisi
annunciaveris ei, neque locutus fueris, ipse quidem in peccato suo morietur,
sanguinem autem ejus de manu tua requiram. Depressio siquidem Anglicanae
Ecclesiae, and diminutio libertatis illius, quae per Regem vestrum, sive
proprio motu, sive potius aliis suggerentibus facta dignoscitur, plurimum
jampridem animum nostrum afflixit, and non modicum nobis sollicitudinis, and
doloris ingessit. Cum enim oportuerit eum de corrigendis his, quae ab
antecessoribus suis male commissa prevaricationibus prevaricationes adjiciens,
tam iniqua constituta sub regiae dignitatis obtentu, et posuit et sirmavit. Sub
quibus and libertas perit ecclesiae, and Apostolicorum virorum statuta, quantum
in eo est, sub robore vacuantur. Nec credidit debere sufficere, si sub eo
divinae leges in regno Angliae silentium and vacationem acciperent, nisi
peccatum transmitteret ad haeredes, and longo tempore faceret suum regnum sine
Ephod, and sine superhumerali sedere. Inde fuit quod illas iniquas
usurpationes, absque ulla exceptione, vestro, and aliorum fratrum, and
coepiscoporum nostrorum juramento, f^cerit firmare, and plectendo judicavit, ut
hostem, quicunque vellet ab iniquis illis constit^tionibus dissentire. Indicat
hoc venerabilis fratris nostri Thomae Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi exilium.
Demonstrat et hoc clericorum et consanguineorum ejus, illorum etiam, qui adhuc
pendentes ab uberibus matris, vagiebant in cunis, miseranda proscriptio. Et
metus mortis incutitur, si ad hoc cujusque animus erigatur, ut contra statuta
quorum judicio, praevaricationes illae corrigendae fuerant, aut plectendae, ad
confirmationem illarum sub occasion temporis impacati multa fuimus instantia
provocati. Et laboratum est apud nos exactione non modica, ut usurpationibus
illis, cum nondum nobis expressae fuissent, auctoritatis conferremus
Apostolicae confirmationem. Et hoc quidem a principio. Processu vero temporis
exulante pro debito pastoralis officii jam dicto Archiepiscopo, and consuetum
Romanae Ecclesiae subsidium ab officio nostro saepius misimus ad jam dictum
Regem de melioribus and majoribus fratribus nostris, misimus and alias
ecclesiasticas personas, and putavimus quod duritia ejus in nostra humilitate
and mansuetudine frangeretur: and sieret, quod Solomon dicit, Patientia
lenietur princeps: and lingua mollis frangit iram. Ipse vero sufferentiam
nostram multiplici legatorum art deludens, usque adeo contra monita nostra
videtur animum obdurasse, ut nec contra praenominatum Archiepiscopum deferveat,
nec de perversis statutis illis quicquam minui patiatur: immo and ipsam filium
suum coronari voluerit, contempto eodem Archiepiscopo, ad cujus hoc officium de
antiquo jure dicitur pertinere, per manum tuam, frater Archiepiscopus ei in
aliena provincia diadema regni fecit imponi. In Coronatione autem illius, nulla
ex more de conservanda ecclesiae liberate cautio est praestita, vel sicut
aiunt exacta: sed juramento potius asseritur confirmatum, ut regni
consuetudines, quas avitas di sub quibus dignitas periclitatur ecclesiae,
illibatas debeat omni tempore conservare. In quo etsi multum praenominati regis
nos vehementia conturbat: amplius tamen de vestra and aliorum coepiscoporum
nostrorum possumus infirmitate moveri, qui, quod dolentes dicimus, facti sicut
arietes non habentes cornua, abiistis absque fortitudine ante faciem
subsequentis. Et si enim hoc tibi licere forte (frater Archiepiscope) in
propria provincia potuisset, quomodo tamen hoc in provincia aliena, and illius
praecipue, qui exulare pro justitia, and fere solus exire, and dare nullum
adhuc regnum in tantum divinae legis contemptum invenimus corruisse, ut
scriptis and juramentis episcoporum tam manifestas enormitates fecerit
communiri; nisi quisquam illud impudenter alleget, quod Scismati postmodum a
fidelium communione praecisi inaudita, and damnabili superbia commiserunt. in
usurpationibus suis, and post tam iniquas consuetudines juramento firmatas, non
adjecistis resumere scutum fidei, ut staretis in Domo Domini in die praelii:
sed posuistis corpus vestrum in terram, ut per vos fieret via transeunti. Et ne
si diutius tacuerimus una vobiscum in die judicii damnationis sententia
involvamur, auctoritate Sacrosanctae Romanae, cui auctore Domino ministramus
Ecclesiae, ob omni officio episcopali vos suspendimus dignitatis; sperantes
quod sub disciplina saltem, and paterno verbere constituti redire tandem ad
cor, and de tuenda de beatis Ecclesiae libertatis satagere. Si vero nec sic
zelum Episcopalis officii resumpseritis, nos adhuc auctore Domino, quod vobis
imminet faciemus. Vos videle, ne illud vobis dicatur, quod cuidam dictum per
Prophetam dicitur, Quiae tu sanctam repulisti,

Henricus Rex Anglorum Henrico filio suo Regi Anglorum Salutem.
Thomas Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis pacem mecum fecerit ad voluntatem meam:
Quadril^ lib. 5.
and ideo praecipio ut ipse and sui pacem res suas been, and in pace, and
honorifice, sicut habuerunt, tribus mensibus antequam ipse exiret de Anglia:
and faciatis venire coram vobis de melioribus et antiquioribus militibus, de
honor de Salwde. and eorum Sacramento faciatis recognosci quid ibi habetur de
feudo Archiepiscopatus Cantuarie: and quod recognitum fuerit esse de feudo
ejus: ipsi Archiepiscopo Retroto Archiepiscopo Rothomagensi.

Purgatio Henrici Regis pro morte Beati Thomae.
Hoved. f. 302. b. n. 40.
HEnricus Rex Angliae pater, and Henricus Rex filius ejus, and Rotrodus
Rothomagensis Archiepiscopus, and omnes Episcopi and Abbates convenerunt apud
Abrincam civitatem, in praesentia Theodini Alberti Cardinalium. In quorum
audientia Rex Angliae pater, quinto Kalendarum Octobris, feria quarta, festo
Sanctorum Cosmae and Damiani Martyrum, in ecclesia Sancti Andreae Apostoli
purgavit innocentiam suam, coram praedictis Cardinalibus and omni clero and
populo, praestito Sacramento, super Sanctorum reliquias, and super Sacrosancta
evangelia, quod ipse nec praecepit, nec voluit, quod Archiepiscopus
Cantuariensis occideretur: and quando audivit vehementer inde doluit. Sed quia
malefactores illos, qui sanctae memoriae Thomam Cantuariensem occiderunt,
habere non poterat, and quia timebat ipsos illud profanum opus impetrasse causa
animi motus et turbationis, quam in eo viderant de satisfactione tale
praestitit Sacramentum. Iuravit itaque inprimis quod ab Alexandro summo
Pontifice, et catholicis successoribus ejus non recederet, quamdiu ipsum sicut
regem Catholicum habuerint. Juravit etiam quod neque appellationes impediret,
neque impediri permi^teret, quin libere fierent in regno suo ad Romanum
Pontificem, in ecclesiasticis causis, ita tamen, ut si ei suspecti aliqui,
securitatem faciant, quod malum suum, vel regni sui non quaerant. Juravit etiam
quod ab instante nativitatis Domini, usque in triennium crucem accipiet, and in
proxima sequenti aestate in propria persona Ierosolymam iturus nisi remanserit
per Alexandrum summum Pontificem, vel per catholicos successores ejus. Sed si
interim pro urgente necessitate in Hispaniam super Saracenos profectus fuisset,
quantum temporis in illo itinere consummaret, tantundem Jerosolymitanae Spacium
profectionis posset prolongare. Praeterea juravit, quod interim tantum
Templariis, quantum ad arbitrium fratrum Templi possit sufficere ad retinendum
ducentos milites, ad defensionem terrae Jerosolymitanae per spacium unius anni.
Praeterea perdonavit iram and malevolentiam suam omnibus tam clericis quam
laicis, qui pro Sancto Thoma erant in exilio. Et concessit eis libere and in
pace ad propria redire. Juravit etiam quod possessiones Cantuariensis
Ecclesiae, si quae ablatae sunt, in integrum restituet, sicut habuit uno anno
antequam ab Anglia egrederetur beatus Thomas Cantuarienfis Archiepiscopus.
Iuravit etiam quod consuetudines, quae inductae sunt contra ecclesias terrae
suae in tempore suo, penitus dimittet. Et haec omnia juravit se fore
observaturum bona fide and sine malo ingenio. Fecit etiam Henricum Regem filium
suum haec omnia capitula jurare tenenda: praeter illa quae propriam ejus
personam contingebant. Et ut haec in memoria Romanae ecclesiae haberentur, rex
pater fecit apponi sigillum suum scripto illi, in quo supradicta capitula
continebantur, una cum sigillis praedictorum Cardinalium.

Charta absolutionis Domini Regis.
HEnrico Dei gratia illustri Regi Anglorum, Ibidem, f. 303, a. n. 30.
Albertus tituli Sancti Theodinus tituli Sancti Vitalis Presbyteri salutem in
co, qui dat salutem regibus. Ne in dubium veniant, quae geruntur and usus
habet, and communis consideratio utilitatis exposcit, ut scripturae serie
debeant annotari. Inde quidem est quod nos mandatum illud in scriptum duximus
redigendum, quod vobis pro eo facimus, quia malefactores illos, qui Sanctae
memoriae Thomam quondam Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum occiderunt, occasion
motus and turbationis, quam viderant in vobis, ad illus purgationem in
praesentia nostra de voluntate propria praestitistis, quod videlicet nec
praecepistis nec voluistis ut occideretur. Et quando pervenit ad vos plurimum
condoluistis. Ab instanti festo Pentecostes usque ad annum, tantam dabitis
pecuniam, unde ad arbitrium fratrum templi ducenti milites valiant ad
defensionem terrae Jerosolymitanae, per spacium unius anni teneri. Vos autem a
sequenti natalis Domini, usque ad triennium accipietis crucem, proxima tunc
aestate illuc in propria persona, ducente Domino, bona fide and absque fraud,
and malo ingenio, ut per Romanum Pomisicem causae tractentur, and consequantur
effectum suum: sic tamen, ut si vobis suspecti malum vestrum vel regni vestri
non quaerunt; consuetudines, quae inductae sunt contra ecclesias terrae vestrae
in tempore vestro penitus dimittens. Possessiones Cantuariensis ecclesiae, si
quae ablatae sunt, in plenum restituetis, sicut habuit uno anno, antequam
Archiepiscopus de Anglia egrederetur. Clericis praeterea and laicis utriusque
sexus pacem vestram in gratiam and possessiones suas restit^etis: qui occasion
praenominati Archiepiscopi destituti fuerunt. Haec autem vobis, authoritate
Domini Papae, in rem stionem peccatorum vestrorum injungimus and praecipimus
observare, absque fraud and malo ingenio. Hoc sane coram multitudine
personarum juravistis vos pro divina reverentia Majestatis. Juravit and filius
vester, excepto eo, quod personam vestram specialiter contingebat. Et jurastis
ambo, quod a Papa Domino Alexandro and catholicis successoribus ejus, quamdiu
vos sicut antecessores vestros; and catholicos regis habuerint, minime
recedetis. Atque ut in memoria Romanae ecclesiae firmiter habeatur sigillum
vestrum praecepistis apponi.

Decreta per Theodinum and Albertum Cardinales apud Abrincas promulgata.
Ibidem, f. 304. a. n. 10.
1. PVeri ad Regimen illarum Ecclesiarum and ad illa administranda,

2. Item filii Sacerdotum non ponantur in Ecclesiis patrum suorum.

3. Item laici partem oblationum in Ecclesia non percipiant.

4. Item Ecclesiae Vicariis annuis non committantur.

5. Item Sacerdotes majorum Ecclesiarum, quibus ad hoc suppetunt facultates,
alium sub se Presbyterum cogantur habere.

6. Item Sacerdotes non ordinentur sine certo titulo.

7. Item Ecclesiae ad firmam annuam non tradantur.

8. Item de tertia part decimarum nihil Presbytero, qui servit ecclesiae,

9. Item his, qui Decimas haereditario jure tenent, licentia sit cui voluerint
idoneo clerico dare, eo quidem tenore, ut post eum, ad ecclesiam, cui de jure
competunt revertantur.

10. Vir ad religionem non transeat, uxore in seculo remanente, vel e converso,
nisi ambo vacandi operibus carnis tempus excesserint.

11. Item in adventu Domini, omnibus qui poterunt, maxim autem Clericis and
militibus, jejunium and abstinentia carnium indicatur.

12. Item Clerici Judaei non ponantur ad jurisdictiones secularium potestatum
administrandas: qui autem hoc praesumpserint, a beneficiis ecclesiasticis
arceantur.

13. Item de novis libris excommunicatorum, and rebus morientium quas auferunt
Sacerdotes, and benedictionibus sponsarum, and baptismo, and de quadraginta and
octo libris, quae pro absolutione excommunicatorum exiguntur, nihil perfectum
est, quia Episcopi Normanniae illud decretum recipere noluerunt.

Littera Alexandri Papae de canonisatione beati Thomae Martyris.
ALexander Papa capitulo Cantuariensis Ecclesie. Rad. de Diceto Col. 569. n.
10. Quadrilog. lib. 4.
Gaudendum est universitati fidelium de mirabilibus illius Sancti and reverendi
viri Thomae quondam Archiepiscopi vestri. Sed vos exinde tanto ampliori gandio
et exultatione debetis repleri, quanto ipsius miracula occulta fide saepius
intuemini, et ejus sacratissimo corpore ecclesia vestra spiritualius
considerata gloria meritorum ejus quibus in vita sua magnanimiter claruit, et
de mirabilibus ejus non solum communi celebri fama, sed et dilectorum nostrorum
filiorum Alberti tituli: Sancti Laurentii, et Theodini tituli Sancti Vitalis
Presbyterorum cardinalium Apostolicae sedis Legatorum: et aliarum plurium
personarum testimonio certitudinem plenam habentes: praefatum Archiepiscopum in
capite jejunii, multitudine clericorum et laycorum praesente in ecclesia,
deliberato cum fratribus nostris consilio, solenniter canonizavimus, eumque
decrevimus Sanctorum Martyrum collegio annumerandum; vobis et universitati
fidelium de Anglia Apostolica auctoritate ut natali eje^ die quo vitam suam
gloriosa passione finivit, annis singulis cum veneratione debita celebretis.
Quum igitur dignum est et nobis plurimum expedit ut Santum corpus ejus cum ea
qua decet reverentia, et honor condatur, discretioni vestrae per Apostolica
scriptae mandamus, quatinus devote et reverenter corpus ejus facta solenni
processione, aliquo solenni die congregato clero et populo, in altari
honorifice recondatis: aut ipsum in aliqua capsa decenti ponentes prout
convenit elevetis in altum Et aput eum Rad. de Diceto ut supra n. 50.
Votivis Orationibus satagatis, veniam peccatorum promereri. ut qui pro Chris^o
in vita Exilium, et in Morte, virturis Constantia, Martyrium pertulit; Fidelium
jugi Supplicatione pulsatus, pro nobis apud Deum intercedat. Dat. S^goniae 3
Idus Ralph de Diceto, and this is the difference between the two Copies in him,
and Quadrilogus; A. D. 1173.
which last in the same place has an Epistle from the Pope of the same Tenor,
to all Bishops of the Christian Church, directing and commanding the same
things.
et patrocinio ejus pro salute fidelium et vestris piis orationibus impetrare.

De anno Jubilaeo apud Cantuariam, out of the City Chamber Book. Somner as
cited in the Margin.
Somner's Antiquities of Canturbury, p. 248.
MEmorandum quod anno ab incarnatione Domini 1420. and anno 5. a conquestu
Angliae octavo, tempore Willielmi Bennet and Willielmi Ickham tunc Balivorum
Cantuariae, Henrici Chichele tunc Archiepiscopi Sedis Cantuariae, and Iohannis
Woodnesverwe ad tunc Prioris ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, die Dominica in
festo translationis Sancti Thomae Martyris extitit apud Cantuariam annus
Jubileus in Ecclesia Christi Cantuariae, qui tunc extiterat sextus annus
Jubileus a translatione praedicti Thomae Martyris gloriosi. Cujus quidem
Jubilei Solemnizatio incepit ad horam duodecimam vigilia dicti festi, and
continuavit per 15 dies continuos proximo and immediate sequentes; quo tempore
idem Rex and princeps illustrissimus fuit in Francia cum suo honorabili
exercitu ab obsedionem villae Millon quae distat a Civitate Parisiensi triginta
milliaria. Qui quidem vero Ballivi praelibati universaliter praeceperunt
Civibus Civitatis illius sufficientiam domorum ad herbigandum and ad
hospitandum populum ad tunc pro salute animarum suarum adipiscenda venturum,
divina gratia suffragante, tam infra Civitatem prae^ctam, quam infra suburbia
Civitatis vitellariis dictae Civitatis, viz. Tabernariis, Pandoxatoribus,
Pistoribus, Carnificibus, Piscinariis, Cocis and hospitatoribus quod ordinarent
contra tempus praedictum victualia populo praedicto tunc suffectura, qui quidem
populus ut aestimabatur ad tunc attingebant a^ numerum Centum millia hominum
and mulierum tam Angliginentium quam alieniginentium exterorum, viz.
H^bernicorum, Wallicorum, Scotticorum, Francorum, ad eandem Civitatem, pro
gratia praedicta habenda ad tunc affluentium, pace vero et tranquillitate inter
populum praedictum opitulatione Dei omnipotentis suaeque gloriosissimae
gen^tricis Dei Mariae, precibus quoque gloriosi Martyris Thomae sociorumque
ejus sanctorum Curiae Celestis, veniendo, morando and redeundo, toto tempore
Jubilei illius habitis and optentis. Qui quidem vitellarii ordinarunt victualia
pro populo praedicto co piosa, ita quod lagena vini rubii de Vasconia tunc
vendebatur ad octo per quae Civitas praedicta and totus Comitatus Kanciae
exinde per totam Angliam favente altissimo magnum and diutinum revera
optinuerunt honorem.

Thomas Chirch fecit et scripsit, et ad hoc per plenam Curiam de Burgemoto, tam
per Ballivos, Aldermannos, xii Juratos, cum xxxvi hominibus in numero consueto,
specialiter requisitus fuerat, and in forma redegit in scriptis.

SI quis Sacerdos vel clericus, in sacris ordinibus constitutus, Hoved f. 310.
a. n. 50.
ecclesiam vel ecclesiasticum beneficium hab^ns public fornicariam habeat, and
semel, secundo, and tertio commonitus fornicariam suam non dimiserit,
immunditia sua duxerit persistendum; omni officio and beneficio ecclesiastico
spolietur. Ex Decretali Epistola Alexandri Papae tertii ad Rogerum Wigorn.
Episcopum.
Si qui vero infra subdiaconatum constituti matrimonia contraxerint; ab
uxoribus suis nisi de communi consensu ad religionem transire voluerint, and
ibi in Dei servitio jugiter permanere, nullatenus separentur: sed cum uxoribus
viventes ecclesiastica beneficia nullo modo percipiant. Qui autem in
subdiaconatu vel supra ad matrimonia convolaverint, mulieres etiam invitas and
renitentes relinquant. Decrevimus etiam ejusdem epistolae auctoritate, ne filii
sacerdotum in paternis ecclesiis a modo personae instituantur, nec eas qualibet
occasion media non intercedente persona obtineant.

Clerici in sacris ordinibus constituti, Ex Council. 3 Provincial. Carthagin.
Can. 27.
edendi vel bibendi causa tabernas non ingrediantur, nec publicis potationibus
intersint, nisi peregrinationis necessitate compulsi. Si quis vero tale quid
fecerit, aut cesset aut deponatur.

His qui in sacris ordinibus constituti sunt judicium sanguinis agitare non
licet. Ex Council. Toletano, 3 Can. 3.
Unde prohibemus ne aut per se membrorum truncationes faciant, aut inferendas
indicent. Quod si quis tale fecerit, concessi and loco. Inhibemus etiam sub
interminatione Anathematis, ne quis Sacerdos habeat Vicecomitatum, aut
praepositi secularis officium.

Clerici qui comam nutriunt, Ex Council. Agathensi* Can. 20. A. D. 506.
ab archidiacono etiam inviti tondeantur. Vestimentis etiam vel calceamentis,
nisi quae honestatem and religionem deceant, eos uti non liceat. Si quis autem
contra hoc fac^re praesumpserit, commonitus emendare noluerit, excommunicationi
subjaceat.

Quia quidam clerici desperantes ab episcopis suis ordinari, Ex Diversis
Decretis Urban. Innocentii. and Council. Chalcedon and Carthaginen.
vel propter impe^i^iam, vel vitae incontinentiam, vel Nativitatis conditionem,
aut tituli defectum, aut aetatem minorem, extra provinciam suam, interdum etiam
a transmarinis Episcopis ordinantur, vel ordinatos se mentiuntur, ignota
sigilla episcopis suis deferentes: Statuimus talium ordinationem irritam esse
habendam: sub interminatione anathematis inhibentes, quoquam ad officii sui
executionem suscipiantur. Episcopum quoque nostrae Jurisdictionis, qui talem
sciens and prudens ordinaverit vel susceperit ab illius ordinis collatione ad
quem eum ordinavit vel suscepit, usque ad condignam satisfactionem se noverit
esse suspensum. Item: Cum Ecclesia Dei, secundum evangelicam veritatem, domus
orationis esse d^beat, and non Spelunca latronum, and sanguinis forum:
seculares causas, in quibus de sanguinis effusione vel de poena corporali
agitur in ecclesiis vel in coemiteriis agitari, sub interminatione anathematis.
ibi sanguinis judicium exerceri, ubi et reis constituta est tutela refugii.

Dictum est, Ex Concilio Tiburiensi* Can. 16. A.D. 895.
solere in quibusdam locis pro perceptione Chrismatis nummos dari: Similiter
pro baptismo and communione. Haec Symoniacae haeresis esse detestata est Sancta
Synodus, and anathematizavit. Statuimus ergo ut de caetero nec pro ordinatione,
nec pro Chrismate, nec pro baptismo, nec pro extrema unctione, nec pro
Sepultura, nec pro communione, nec pro dedicatione, quicquam exigatur: sed
gratis dona Christi gratuita dispensatione donentur. Si quis contra hoc facere
praesumpserit anathema sit.

Ex Decreto U^ban. Papae.
Nullus Praelatus, in recipiendo Monacho, vel Canonico, vel sanctimoniali
pretium sumere, vel exigere ab his, qui ad conversationem veniunt, aliqua pacti
occasion praesumat. Si quis autem hoc fecerit anathema sit.

Decretum novum.
Nulli liceat ecclesiam nomine Dotalicii ad aliquem transfer, vel pro
praesentatione alicujus personae pecuniam, vel aliquod emolumentum pacto
interveniente accipere. Quod si quis fecerit, and inde in jure vel confessus
vel convictus fuerit, ipsum, tam regia quam nostra freti auctoritate,
patrocinio ejusdem ecclesiae in perpetuum privari statuimus.

Ex Decretis Patrum.
Secundum instituta patrum nostrorum sub interminatione anathematis monachi vel
clerici causa lucri negotientur: and ne monachi a clericis vel laicis firmas
teneant, neque laici ecclesiastica beneficia ad firmas suscipiant.

Ex Concilio Meldensi.
Quicunque ex clero videntur esse, arma non sumant, nec armati incedant: sed
professionis suae vocabulum religiosis moribus ex religioso habitu praebeant.
Quod si contempserint, tanquam sacrorum Canonum contemptores, and
ecclesiasticae auctoritatis prophanatores, proprii gradus amissione

Ex Decreto Alexand. Papae tertii Episcop. Norwicen. Misso.
Illud etiam de Vicariis, qui personis fide and Sacramento obligati sunt,
duximus statuendum, quod si fide vel Sacramenti religione contempta personatum
sibi falso assumentes contra personas se erexerunt, super hoc in jure vel
confessi vel convicti fuerint, de caetero in eodem Episcopatu ad officii sui
executionem non admittantur.

Ex Concilio Rothamagensi
Omnes decimae terrae, sive de frugibus, sive de fructibus, Domini sunt, and
illi sanctificantur. Sed quia multi modo inveniuntur decimas dare nolentes:
statuimus ut juxta Domini Papae praecepta admoneantur semel, secundo, and
tertio, ut de grano, de vino, de fructibus arborum, de foetibus animalium, de
lana, de agnis, de butyro, and caseo, de lino, and canabe, and de reliquis quae
annuatim renovantur, decimas integre persolvant* quod si commoniti non
emendaverint anathemati se noverint subjacere.

Item. Calumniam and audaciam temere litigantium condemnando in expensas and
alio multiplici remedio imperialis sanctio compescat. Quoniam igitur hoc sacris
institutis consonare dignoscitur: praecipimus ut de caetero in causis
pecuniariis, quae inter clericos agitabuntur, victus victori condemnetur in
expensis. Qui autem solvendo non fuerit, eum in arbitrio episcopi sui puniendum
relinquo.

Ex Decreto Pelagii Papae.
Invenimus tantum december praefationes in sacro Catalogo recipiendas: Qui salutem
humani generis. Nonam de jejunio quadragesimali tantummodo dicendam. Qui
corporali jejunio. Decimam de Beata Virgin. Et te in veneratione beatae
Mariae. Hujus igitur decreti and domini Papae Alexandri auctoritate districte
praecipimus, ne quis praefatis praefationibus aliquam omnino praesumat adjicere.

Inhibemus ne quis quasi pro complemento communionis intinctam alicui Ex
Decreto Julii Papae.
Nam intinctum panem aliis Christum praebuisse non legimus, excepto illo tantum
discipulo, quem intincta buccella magistri proditorem ostenderit, non quae
sacramenti hujus institutionem signaret.

Praecipimus ne consecraretur eucharistia, Ex Concillo Remensi.
nisi in calice aureo vel argenteo, and ne stanneum calicem aliquis episcopus a
modo benedicat, interdicimus.

fidelis cujusque conditionis sit occulte nuptias faciat, Ex Decreto Hormisdae
Papae.
sed benedictione accepta a sacerdote public nubat in Domino. Si quis ergo
sacerdos aliquos occulte conjunxisse inventus fuerit, triennio ab officio
suspendatur.

Vbi non est consensus utriusque non est conjugium, Ex Decreto Nicholai primi
Papae, Tit. 18. de Matrimonio.
ergo qui pueris dant puellas in cunabulis nihil faciunt, nisi uterque puerorum
postquam venerint ad tempus discretionis consentiat. Hujus ergo decreti
auctoritate inhibemus,

devenit homo ligius domini regis contra omnes homines de Scotia, and de
omnibus aliis terris suis: Hoved. f. 311. b. n. 40.
and fidelitatem ei fecit ut ligio Domino suo, sicut alii homines sui ipsi
facere solent. Similiter fecit homagium Henrico Regi filio suo, In the History
f. 324. D. this Agreement is referred to in Number 36. by mistake.
salva fide Domini Regis patris sui. Omnes vero Episcopi, Abbates, and clerus
terrae regis Scotiae and Successores sui facient Domino Regi sicut ligio Domino
fidelitatem, de quibus habere voluerit, sicut alii Episcopi sui ipsi facere
solent, and Henrico Regi filio suo and haeredibus Concessit autem Rex Scotiae,
and David frater ejus, and Barons, et alii homines sui Domino Regi, quod
Ecclesia Scotiae talem Subjectionem a modo faciet Ecclesiae Angliae, qualem
illi facere debet, et solebat tempore Regum Angliae praedecessorum suorum.
Similiter Richardus Episcopus Sancti Andreae, and Richardus Episcopus de
Dunkelden, et Gaufridus Abbas de Dunfirmelin, et Herbertus Prior de Coldingham,
concesserunt ut etiam Ecclesia Anglicana illud habeat jus in Ecclesia Scotiae,
quod de jure debet habere, et quod ipsi non erunt Et de hac concessione, sicut
quando ligiam fidelitatem Domino Regi et Henrico filio suo fecerunt, ita eos
inde assecuraverunt. Hoc idem facient alii Episcopi, et Clerus Scotiae, per
conventionem inter Dominum Regem et Regem Scotiae, et David fratrem suum, et
Barons suos factam. Comites etiam et Barons et alii homines de terra Regis
Scotiae, de quibus Dominus Rex habere voluerit, facient et homagium contra
omnem hominem, et fidelitatem ut ligio Domino suo, sicut alii homines sui
facere ei solent, et Henrico Regi filio suo, et haeredibus suis, salva side
Domini Regis patris sui. Simil^ter haeredes Regis Scotiae et baronum et hominum
suorum homag um et ligantiam facient haeredibus Domini Regis contra omnem
hominem. Praeterea Rex Scotiae et homines sui nullum a modo fugitivum de terra
Domini Regis pro felonia receptabunt in Scotia vel in alia terra sua, nisi
voluerit venire ad rectum in curia Domini Regis, et stare judicio Curiae. Sed
Rex Scotiae et homines sui quam citius poterunt eum capient, et Domino Regi
reddent, vel Justitiariis aut ballivis suis in Anglia. fugitivus fuerit pro
felonia in Anglia, nisi voluerit venire ad rectum in curia Domini Regis
Scotiae, et stare judicio Curiae non receptabitur in terra Regis, sed
liberabitur hominibus Regis Scotiae per b^llivos Domini Regi^, ubi inventus
fuerit. Praeterea homines Domini Regis habebunt terras suas, quas habebant et
habere debent de Domino Rege, et hominibus suis, et de Rege Scotiae et de
hominibus suis. Et homines Regis Scotiae habebunt terras suas, hominibus suis.
Pro ista vero conventione et fine firmiter observando Domino Regi, et Henrico
filio suo et haeredibus suis, a Rege Scotiae et haeredibus suis, liberavit Rex
Scotiae Domino Regi Castellum de Rokesburc, et Castellum de Berewic, et
Castellum de Geddewurde, et Castellum Puellarum, et Castellum de Striveline in
misericordia Domine Regis. Et ad custodienda Castella illa assignabit Rex
Scotiae de redditu suo mensurabiliter ad voluntatem Domini Regis. Fraeterea pro
praedicta conventione, fine exequendo, liberavit Rex Scotiae Domino Regi David
fratrem suum in obsidem, et Comitem Dunecanum, et Comitem Waldevum, et Comitem
Gilbertum, et Comitem de Anegus, et Richardum de Morevile constabularium, et
Nes filium Williemi, et Richardum Cumin, et Walterum Corbet, et Walterum
Olifard, et Iohannem de Vals, et Willielmum de Lindesei, et Philippum de
Colevile, et Philippum de Valvines, et Robertum Frenbert, et Robertum de
Burnevile, et Hugonem Giffard, et Hugonem Ridel, et Walterum de Berkelai,
Willielmum de la Haie, et Willielmum de Mortimer. Quando vero Castella reddita
fuerint, Willielmus Rex Scotiae, et David frater suus liberabuntur. Comites
quidem et Barons praenominati unusquisque postquam liberaverit obsidem suum,
scilicet filium legitimum, qui habuerit, et alii nepotes suos vel propinquiores
sibi haeredes, et Castellis ut dictum est reddi^is liberabuntur. Praeterea Rex
Scotiae et Barons sui praenominati assecuraverunt, quod ipsi bona fide, et
sine malo ingenio, et sine occasion facient, ut Episcopi et Barons et caeteri
hom^nes terrae suae, qui non affuerunt quando Rex Scotiae cum Domino Rege
finivit eandem ligantiam, et fidelitatem Domino Regi et Henrico filio suo, quam
ipsi fecerunt, et ut Barons et homines, qui affuerunt, obsides liberabunt
Domino Regi, de quibus habere voluerit. Praeterea Episcopi, Comites et Barons
conventionaverunt Domino Regi, et Henrico filio suo, quod si Rex Scotiae aliquo
casu a sidelitate Domini Regis et filii sui et a conventione praedicta
recederit, ipsi cum Domino Rege tenebunt, sicut cum ligio Domino suo, con^ra
Regem et contra omnes homines Regi inimicantes. Et ipsi sub interd^cto ponent
terram Regis Scotiae, donec ipse ad fidelitatem Domini Regis redeat. Praedictam
itaque conventionem firmiter observandam bona fide, et sine malo ingenio,
Domino Regi et Henrico filio suo et haeredibus suis, a Willielmo Rege Scotiae,
et David fratre suo, et a Baronibus suis praedictis, et haeredibus eorum
assecuravit ipse Rex Scotiae, and David frater ejus, and omnes Barons sui
praenominati sicut ligli homines Domini Regis, contra omnem hominem, and
Henrici filii sui, salva fidelitate Patris suis. His testibus, Richardo
Episcopo Abrincensi, and Iohanne Salisbiriense Decano, and Roberto Abbate
Malmesburiae, and Radulfo Abbate de Mundeburg, and Herberro Archidiacono
Northamtoniae, et Waltero de Constantiis, and Rogero Capellano Regis, and
Deberto clerico de Camera, and Richardo filio Domini Regis Comite Pictaviae,
and Gaufrido filio Domini Regis Comite Britanniae, and Comire Willielmo de
Es^sexe, and Hugone Comite Cestriae, and Richardo de Humez^ constabulario, and
Comite de Mellent, and Iordano Thessun, and Humfrido de Boun, and Willielmo de
Curci Senescallo, and Gilleberto Male^ Senescallo apud Falesiam. His itaque
recitatis in Ecclesia Sancti Petri Eboraci coram praedictis Regibus Angliae,
and David fratre Regis Scotiae, and universo populo, Episcopi Comites and
Barons, and Milites de terra Regis juraverunt Domino Regi Angliae, and Henrico
filio suo, and haeredibus suis, fidelitatem contra omnem hominem sicut ligiis
Dominis suis.


RIchardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, Hoved. f. 377. b
and Aquiran^ae, Andegavtae Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus,
and Baronibus, Justiciariis and Vicecomitibus, and omnibus ministris and
fidelibus suis totius Angliae, salutem. Scialis nos Willielmo eadem gratia Regi
Scottorum reddid^sse castella sua Rokesburh, and Berewic tanquam ejus propria
jure haereditario ab eo, and haeredibus suis in perpetuum possidenda. Praeterea
quietavimus ei omnes conventiones, and pactiones, quas bonae memoriae pater
noster Henricus Rex Angliae per novas chartas, and per captionem suam extorsit,
ita videlicet ut nobis faciat integre, and plenarie, quod Rex Scottorum
Malcolmus frater ejus antecessoribus nostris de jure fecit, and de jure facere
debuit. Et nos faciamus ei quicquid antecessores Malcolmo de jure fecerunt, and
facere debuerunt, scilicet in conductu, veniendo ad Curiam, and redeundo a
Curia, and in morando in Curia, and in procurationibus, and in omnibus
libertatibus, and dignitatibus, and honoribus eidem jure debitis, secundum quod
recognoscetur a quatuor proceribus nostris ab ipso Willielmo Rege electis, and
a quatuor proceribus illius a nobis electis; Si autem fines, sive marcias Regni
Scotiae aliquis nostrorum hominum, postquam praedictus Willielmus Rex a patre
nostro captus fuerit, usurpaverit absque judicio; terris suis, quas haberet in
Anglia, seu Dominicis, seu feodis, scilicet in Comitatu Huntendoniae, and in
omnibus aliis: in ea liberate and plenitudine possideat, and haeredes ejus in
perpetuum, qua Malcolmus possedit, vel possidere debuit, nisi praedictus
Malcolmus, vel haeredes sui aliquid postea infeodaverint: Ita tamen quod si qua
postea infeodata sunt, ipsorum feodorum servitia ad eum, vel haeredes ejus
pertineant. Et si quid Pater noster praedicto Willielmo Regi Scotiae donaverit,
ratum and firmum habere volumus: Reddidimus etiam ei ligantias hominum suorum,
and omnes chartas, quas Dominus Pater noster de eo habuit, per captionem suam:
Et si aliquae aliae for^e per oblivionem retentae, aut inventae fuerint, eas
penitus viribus carere praecipimus. Ipse autem ligius homo noster devenit de
omnibus terris, de quibus antecessores sui ligii homines antecessorum nostrorum
fuerunt, and fidelitatem juravit nobis, and haeredibus nostris, testibus his:
Baldewino

Forma Pacis inter Richardum Regem Angliae, and Philippum Regem Franciae.
Hoved. f. 378. ^. n. 50.
QVod uterque illorum honorem alterius servabit, and fidem ei portabit vita, et
membri^, and terreno honor suo, et quod neuter illorum Rex Franciae juvabit
Regem Angliae ad terram suam defendendam, ac si ipse vellet Civitatem suam
Parisius defendere, si esset obsessa; et Richardus Rex Angliae, juvabit Regem
Franciae ad terram suam defendendam, ac si ipse vellet civitatem suam Rothomagi
defendere, si obsessa esset. Comites autem and Barons utriusque regni
juraverunt, quod a fidelitate Regum non discedent, nec guerram movebunt ullam
in terris illorum, quamdiu ipsi fuerint peregrinatione sua. Et Archiepiscopi,
et Episcopi firmiter promiserunt in verbo veritatis, quod in transgressores
hujus pacis, et conventionis, sententiam anathematis dabunt.

Clemens Papa Willelmo Eliensi Episcopo salutem.
desiderium and salubrem postulationem Karissimi in Domino filii nostri
Richardi illustris Regis Anglorum, Rad. de Diceto, Col. 655. n. 30.
fraternitati tuae legationis officium in tota Anglia, Wallia, tam per
Cantuariensem Eboracensem Archiepiscopatum, and in illis partibus Hyberniae in
quibus nobilis Vir Johannes Comes Moritoniensis frater ipsius Regis
jurisdictionem habet and dominium, auctoritate duximus Apostolica committendum.
Dat. Laterani Non. Junii Pontificatus nostri anno iii.

Richardus Rex Anglorum omnibus fidelibus suis salutem.
MAndamus vobis, and praecipimus quod sicut de nobis confiditis, Ibidem, n. 40.
and sicut vos ipsos and omnia vestra diligitis, sitis omnino intendentes
Cancellario nostro Elyensi Episcopo super omnibus quae ad nos spectant, and pro
ipso faciatis sicut pro nobismet ipsis faceretis, de omnibus his quae vobis ex
part nostra dixerit. Test meipso aput Baionam vi. die Junii.

Charta Richardi Regis Angliae de statutis illorum qui per mare ituri erant.
Angliae, and Dux Normanniae, Hoved. f. 379. b. n. 10.
and Aquitaniae, and Comes Andegaviae, omnibus hominibus suis Jerosolymam
proborum vicorum consilio, fecisse has justitias subscriptas. Qui hominem in
navi interfecerit, cum mortuo ligatus projiciatur in mare. Si autem eum ad
terram interfecerit, cum mortuo ligatus in terra infodiatur. Si quis autem per
legitimos testes convictus fuerit, quod cultellum ad alium percutiendum
extraxerit: aut quod alium ad sanguinem percusserit pugnum palma percusserit
sine effusione sanguinis: tribus vicibus mergatur in mari. Si quis autem socio
opprobrium, aut convitia, aut odium Dei injecerit: quot vicibus ei convitiatus
fuerit, tot uncias argenti ei det. Latro autem de furto convictus, tondeatur ad
modum campionis, and pix bulliens super caput ejus effundatur, and pluma
pulvinaris super caput ejus excutiatur ad cognoscendum eum, and in prima terra,
qua naves applicuerint, projiciatur. Test meipso apud Chinonem.

Richardus Rex Anglorum, Willielmo Marescallo, Galfrido filio Petri, and Hugoni
Bardolf. and Willielmo Briwerr. apparibus.
i. e. He wrote to every one of them, and sent to them a Copy of the

Rad de Dice^o Col 659. ^n. 10.
SI forte Cancellarius noster negotia regni nostri, juxta consilium vestrum, and
aliorum praedictorum quibus curam regni nostri commisimus, praecipimus ut
secundum dispositionem vestram de omnibus agendis regni nostri, tam de
Castellis quam de escaetis,

Walterus Archiepiscopus Rothomagensis a Sicilia rediens venit in Angliam v.
Call. Maii aput Soreham litteras deferens in haec verba.

Richardus Rex Anglorum Willelmo Cancellario and Hugoni Bardolf. and Willielmo
Briwerr. apparibus. (As above.)
^bidem, n. 30.
SCiatis quod quia nos diligimuus venerabilem patrem nostrum Walterum
Rothomagensem Archiepiscopum, and de eo ad plenum considimus, eum de
peregrinatione sua, de consilio and assensu summi Pontificis, propter consilium
and defensionem Regni nostri ad vos transmittimus, quoniam constat aput nos,
ipsum esse ad hoc ydoneum, and quia eum virum esse cognovimus prudentem, and
discretum and nobis semper fidelem: under vobis mandamus and firmiter
praecipimus, quatinus in procurandis negotiis nostris, and in custodiendo and
defendendo regno nostro, communicato cum eo in omnibus negotiis nostris
consilio operemini; Volentes and praecipientes mandamus quod ea quae sibi vobis
de Archiepiscopatu Cantuariensi exponenda commisimus faciatis, sicut ipse vobis
ex part nostra proponet. Test meipso xxiii. die Februarii aput M^ssanam.

Forma Pacis inter Cancellarium, and Johannem Comitem Moretonii.
Hoved. f. 398. b. n. 30.
contraversiam illam inter Comitem Moretonii, and dominum Cancellarium Domino
Rothomagensi Archiepiscopo, and Dunelmensi, Londoniensi, Wintoniensi,
Bathoniensi, Roffensi, Coventrensi, Episcopis, and aliis fidelibus domini Regis
mediantibus, esse Sopitam; Scilicet quod Comes Moretonii castella de Tikehil
and de Notingham, quae ceperat, reddidit domino Regi per manum Domini
Rothomagensis, tradenda custodiae Willielmi Marescalli, and Willielmi de
Wendewal: scilice^ Willielmo Marescallo castellum de Notingham, and Willielmo
de Windeval castellum de Tikehil: qui praedicta castella ad honorem and
fidelitatem domini Regis, usque ad reditum ejus praestito juramento custodient:
and cum redierit, ad suam inde voluntatem operabuntur. Et si forte Dominus Rex
(quod absi^) in hac peregrinatione sua decesserit, praedicta castella praedicto
Comiti sine ulla detentione, and dilatione reddent. Et si forte dominus
Cancellarius interim erga praedictum Comitem excesserit, and excessum ad
consilium and considerationem Domini Rothomagensis, and aliorum familiarium
Domini Regis, and Curiae suae requisitus emendare sine dilatione noluerit,
praedicta castella praedicto Comiti reddent and restituent. Sed and alia castra
de honoribus a Domino Rege sibi datis, quae fidelibus Domini Regis tradita sunt
custodienda, scilicet domino Rothomagensi castrum de Wallingforde; Domino
Londoniensi castrum de Bristou; Domino Coventrensi castrum del Pec; Richardo
del Pec castrum de B^lleso^res; and si Richardus recipere noluerit, dominus
Coven^rensis Waltero filio Roberto castellum de Epa; Comiti Rogero Bigoth
castellum de Hereford; Richardo Revel castellum de Exonia, and de Lanstavetun;
qui similiter fidelitatem Domini Regis de ipsis ad opus ipsius fideliter
custodiendis, and si forte decesserit (quod Deus avertat) Domino Iohanni
reddendis, juraverunt. Sed and tria castella ad coronam Domini Regis
pertinentia, scilicet castellum de Windesoure Comiti de Arundil; castellum de
Wintonia Gilberto de Lasci; castellum de Northampton Simoni de Pateshille
tradita sunt custodienda; qui fidelitatem Domini Regis de ipsis ad opus ipsius
fideliter custodiendis juraverunt. Sed and concessum est quod Episcopi, and
Abbates, Comites, and Barons, Vavassores, and libere tenentes non ad
voluntatem Iusticiarum, vel ministrorum Domini Regis de terris, and caballis
suis dissaisientur, sed Iudicio Cutiae Domini Regis secundum legitimas
consuetudines, and assisas regni tractabuntur, vel per mandatum Domini Regis.
Et similiter Dominus Iohann^ i^ sua terra faciet observari. Et si quis aliter
facere praesumpserit petitionem praedicti Comitis, per Dominum Rothomagensem,
si in Anglia fuerit, and per Justicias Domini Regis, and per eos, qui pacem
juraverunt, emendabitur: and similiter Dominus Johannes ad petitionem eorundem
emendabit. Nova castella, post transfretationem Domini Regis ad peregrinationem
suam, facienda vel inchoata vel perfecta delebuntur, nec alia usque ad reditum
Domini Regis nova firmabuntur, nisi in Dominicis maneriis Domini Regis, si opus
fuerit; vel ad opus alicujus nominatae personae per praeceptum Domini Regis
factum per literas, vel per certum nuncium. Resaisina vicecomitatus Lincolniae
fiet Girardo de Camvilla: and eadem die dies ei conveniens praefigetur standi
in Curia Domini Regis ad judicium, quod si contra eum monstrari poterit, quod
judicio Curiae Domini Regis vicecomitatum castelli Lincolniae perdere debuerit,
perdat; sin minus, retineat, nisi interim alio modo pax inde fieri possit. Nec
dominus Johannes ipsum contra juvicium Curiae Domini Regis manu tenebit: nec
uthlagos, vel inimicos Domini Regis, qui ei fuerint nominati, receptabit, nec
in terris suis receptari permittet. Sed si quis retatus fuerit de aliquo
forisfacto rectum in Curia Domini Regis. Hanc ergo pacem bona fide sine malo
ingenio tenendam, and servandam propriis manibus affidaverunt in manu Domini
Rothomagensis praedicti, Comes, and Cancellarius, and quatuordecim Barons ex
utraque part juraverunt. Scilicet ex part Cancellarii Comes de Arundel,
Salesbiri, Comes Rogerus Bigot, Comes de Clare, Walterus filius Roberti,
Willielmus de Braosa, Rogerus filius Rainfrai; et ex part Comitis Stephanus
Ridel Cancellarius, Willielmus de Wennevat, Robertus de Mara, Philippus de
Lurescestre, Willielmus de Kahannes, Gilbertus Basset, Willielmus de monte
acuto. Et si quid infra Treugas captum fuerit, aut interceptum ab utraque
part, legitime reddetur and emendabitur. Et haec facta sunt salva in omnibus
auctoritate, et mandato Domini Regis; Ita tamen quod si Dominus adventum suum
hanc concordiam teneri noluerit, praedicta castella de Notingham and Tikehil
Domino Iohanni reddentur, quicquid Dominus Rex inde praecepit.

BE it known unto all Men unto whom this present Writing Moreton and the
Chancellor by the Mediation of the Archbishop of Roven, the Bishops of Durham,
London, Winchester, Bath, Rochester and Coventry, and other of the Kings
Liegemen, was compounded upon these Terms.

That the Castles of Notingham and Tikehill which the Earl had taken should be
restored to the Archbishop of Roven for the Kings Notingham should be kept by
William Marshall, and Tikehil by William Wendeval until the Kings Return, and
then they were to be disposed of according to his Direction. But if the King
should die in his Peregrination, Then the Castles were to be re-delivered to
the Earl without delay. And if the Chancellor shall offend against the Earl,
and will not mend his offense, according to the advice and Judgment, of the
Archbishop of Roven, and other the Kings Servants, (et aliorum familiarium
Regis) That is the Justices, Court, Then without Delay those Castles shall be
Restored to him.

Also the other Castles belonging to the Honors give him by the King, which
were in the keeping of the Kings Liegemen. That is Wallingford in the custody
of the Archbishop of Roven, Bristou of the Bishop of London. The Castle of Pec
of the Bishop of Coventry. B^lsover of Richard del Pec. The Castle of Ey of
Walter Fitz-Robert, The Castle of Hereford in the Custody of Earl Roger Bigod.
Castles of Ecester and Launceston of Richard Revel, who were all sworn to keep
them faithfully to the Kings use, and if he should die to render them to Earl
John.

Also the three Castles belonging to the Kings Crown; Windsor was to be
delivered to the Earl of Arundel, The Castle of Winchester to Gilbert de Lacy,
and Northampton to Simon Pateshul, faithfully to be kept for the Kings use.

Also it was agreed that the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, Barons Vavassors (that is
Knights) and Free Tenants, should not be Disseised of their Lands or Goods, at
the pleasure of the Justices or Kings Ministers, but by the Judgment of his
Court, according to the lawful C^stomes and Statutes of the Kingdom, or by the
Kings Mandate, and the like the Lord John shall cause to be observed in his
Lands and possessions, and if any one presumes to do otherwise, at the Request
Earl he shall be punished or fined by the Archbishop of Roven, if in England,
and by the Justiciaries, and such as have been sworn Conservators of the Peace,
and in like manner the Lord John shall punish and fine at their Request.

The New Castles which have been built or begun since the King went beyond Sea
were to be Demolished, nor any other to be raised, any where, unless it should
be thought fit to do it upon the Demeasnes, unless some famous person might do
it by the Kings Command signified by his Brief or Letters, or an unsuspected
Messenger.

The Re-Scisin of the Sherifwic of Lincolnshire shall be given to Gerard de
Camvill, and the same Day, he shall have a time set, of standing to the
Judgment of, or appearing in the Kings Court, and if it could be made appear he
was to lose the Sherifwic of the Castle Lincoln by the Judgment of the Kings
Court, he was to lose it; if otherwise he was to keep it, unless some other
Agreement could be made.

Neither was the Lord John to protect him contrary to the Judgment of the Kings
Court, nor receive any Outlaws, nor any of the Kings Enemies which were named
to him, or permit them to be received in his Lands. But if any one was accused
of any forfeiture offered himself to stand Trial, in the Kings Court.

The Earl and Chancellor putting their own hands within the hand of the
Archbishop of Roven gave security for the observation of this Agreement in
good faith, and without any evil Artifice, and fourteen Barons of both parts
swear the same. On the Chancellors part, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of
Salisbury, Earl Roger Bigod, the Earl of Clare, Walter Fitz-Robert, William de
Braiosa, Roger Fitz-Rainfrai. On the Earl's part Stephan Ridel his Chancellor,
William de Wenneval, Robert de Mara, Philip de Wirescestre, William de
Kahannes, Gilbert Basset, William Montacute; and if any thing should be taken,
or intercepted by either party during the Truce, it should be lawfully
restored, or Satisfaction given for it.

These things were done saving the Kings Authority and Command in all things;
yet so, as if the King before his Return was not satisfied Agreement, the
Castles of Notingham and Tikehil should be delivered to the Lord John,
whatsoever the King should command concerning them.

Epistola Richardi Regis Angliae ad Alienor Reginam matrem suam, and ad
Justitiarios suos Angliae.
Hoved. f. 413. a. n. 20.
RIcharuds Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae, et Aquitaniae, Comes
Andegaviae, Alienor eadem gratia Reginae Angliae charissimae matri suae, et
Iustitiis suis, et omnibus fidelibus suis per Angliam constitutis, Salutem.
Notum sit Vniversitati vestrae, quod postquam recesserunt a nobis dilecti
nostri, Hubertus venerabilis episcopus Saresbiriensis, et Willielmus de Sanctae
Mariae ecclesia protonotarius noster, venit ad nos charissimus Cancellarius
noster Willielmus Eliensis episcopus: et eo inter Dominum Imperatorem, et nos
fideliter interloquente, eo usque res pervenit, quod de Castello de Trivellis,
in quo Imperatori apud Hagenou, ubi honorifice ab ipso Imperatore, et tota
Curia recepti fuimus. Ibique Dominus Imperator, et Domina Imperatrix nos
magnis, et variis muneribus honoraverunt; et, quod praecipuum est, mutuum
feodus amoris et ind^ssolubile inter Dominum Imperatorem contractum est, et
nos. Ita quod uterque nostrum, alterum contra omnes viventes in jure suo
obtinendo, et retinendo, juvare debet. Honoste autem circa ipsum Imperatorem
moram facimus; donec ipsius et nostra negotia perficiantur, et donec ei
Septuaginta millia solverimus. Quare vos rogamus, et in fide, qua nobis
tenemini, adjuramus, quatenus in hac pecunia perquirenda solliciti sitis, et
vos Iustitiarii nostri, qui aliis in regno nostro praeestis, exemplum aliis
praebeatis: ut ita honorifice et magnifice de proprio nobis subveniatis, et
etiam de his, quae de aliis mutuo accipere poteritis, et aliis fidelibus
nostris exemplum detis similia faciendi. Universum autem aurum, et argentum
Ecclesiarum diligenti Observatione, et scripti testimonio ab ipsarum
Ecclesiarum Praelatis accipiatis: eisque per Sacramentum Baronum nostrorum quos
volueritis, affirmetis, quod eis plenarie restituentur. Vniversorum etiam
Baronum nostrorum obsides recipiatis, ut cum fidelissimus Cancella^ius noster,
quam cito peractis in Alemannia negotiis nostris in Anglia venerit, eosdem
obsides penes charissimam matrem nostram Reginam reperiat, ut eos, de quibus
inter nos, et Dominum Imperatorem convenit, expedite possit ad nos
transmittere: ne liberatio nostra per absentiam obsidium, and n^gligentiam
vestram moram patiatur. Pecunia autem collecta similiter matri meae, and illis,
quibus ipsa voluerit, tradatur. Quem autem in necessitate nostra promptum
inveniemus in suis necessitatibus amicum nos rereperiet, and remuneratorem;
gratiusque nobis erit, si quis in absentia nostra in aliquo nobis subveniat,
quam si in praesentia nostra in duplo quis nobis subveniret. Volumus autem ut
singulorum Magnatum nomina, and subventiones, quae praesentialiter fient, per
sigillum matris nostrae nobis significentur, ut sciamus, quantum unicuique in
gratiarum actionibus teneamur. Sciatis pro certo, quod si in Anglia in libera
potestate nostra essemus constituti, tantam vel majorem pecuniam Domino
Imperatori daremus, quam modo damus pro pactionibus consequendis, quas per Dei
gratiam consecuti sumus: and si etiam pecuniam non prae manibus haberemus,
proprium corpus nostrum Imperatori traderemus, donec pecunia solver^tur;
antequam quod factum est relinqueretur imperfectum. In bulla autem Domini
Imperatoris aurea fert vobis Cancellarius noster praedictam testificationem.
Testibus nobis ipsis apud Hagennou, 13 Call. Maii.

Justitiarii errantes, Hoved. f. 423^ a. n. 30.
and secundum subscriptorum formam capitulorum processerunt in justiciis
exequendis.

Forma Procedendi in Placitis Coronae Regis.
IN primis eligendi sunt quatuor Milites de toto Comitatu, Ibidem. n. 40.
qui per Sacramentum suum eligant duos Legales Milites de quolibet Hundredo,
Wapentacco, and illi duo eligant super Sacramentum suum, December Milites de
singulis Hundredis, vel Wapentaccis, vel si Milites defuerint, Legales, and
Liberos Homines, ita quod illi duodecim insimul Capitulis de toto Hundredo, vel
Wapentacco.

Capitula Placitorum Coronae Regis.
Justitiariis Domini Regis. Item de omnibus recognitionibus, and omnibus
Placitis, quae summonita sunt coram Justitiariis per breve Regis, vel Capitalis
Justitiae, vel a Capitali Curia Regis coram eis missa. Item de eschaetis, quae
sunt and quae fuerunt, postquam Rex arripuit iter versus terram Jerusalem, and
quae fuerunt tunc in manu Regis, and iterum sunt modo in manu ejus, vel non,
and de omnibus eschaetis Domini Regis, si a manu sua sunt remotae, quomodo, and
per quem, and in cujus manus devenerunt, and qualiter, and quis exitus inde
habuerit, et quos, and quid valuerint, and quid modo valiant; and si aliqua
exchaeta sit, quae ad Dominum Regem pertineat, quae in manu ejus non sit. Item
de ecclesiis quae sunt de donatione Domini Regis. Item de Custodiis puerorum,
quae ad Dominum Regem pertinent. Item de Maritagiis puellarum, vel viduarum,
quae ad Dominum Regem pertinent. Item de Malefactoribus and eorum receptoribus
and eis consentientibus. Item de Falsonariis. Item de interfectoribus
Iudaeorum, qui sint; and de vadiis Iudaeorum interfectorum, and catallis, and
terris, and debitis, and chartis, and quis ea habuerit, and quis quantum eis
debuerit, and quae vadia habuerint, and quis ea teneat, and quantum valiant,
and quis exitus inde habuerit, and quos: and omnia vadia, and debita Iudaeorum
interfectorum capiantur in manu Regis; and qui ad occisionem Judaeorum fuerunt,
and non fecerunt finem cum Domino Rege, vel Justiciariis suis, capiantur, and
non deliberentur nisi per Dominum Regem, vel Justitiarios suos. Item de omnibus
auxiliis datis ad redemptionem Domini Regis, quis quantum promiserit, and
quantum reddiderit, and quantum a retro sit. Item de fautoribus Comitis
Iohannis, qui finem cum Domino Rege fecerunt, and qui non. Item de Catallis
Comitis Iohannis, vel fautorum ejus, quae ad usum Domini Regis non sunt
conversa, and quantum vicecomites receperunt, vel ballivi sui, and quis aliquid
contra antiquas consuetudines regni dederit. Item de omnibus terris Comitis
Iohannis, de Dominicis, and Wardis, and exhaetis, and de donis suis, and qua
dona Comitis Iohannis capiantur in manu Domini Regis, praeterquam illa quae per
Regem confirmata sunt. Item de debitis and ^inibus, quae debentur Comiti
Johanni, and qua de causa; and omnia exigantur ad opus Domini Regis. Item de
foeneratoribus and eorum catallis, qui mortui sunt. Item de vinis venditis
contra assisam, and de falsis mensuris tam vini, quam aliarum rerum. Item de
cruciatis mortuis ante iter suum arreptum versus Jerusalem, and quis eorum
catalla habuerit, and quae, and quanta. Item de magnis quae sunt de centum
solidatis terrae, and infra. Item de defaltis, Praeterea in quolibet Comitatu
eligantur tres milites, and unus Clericus custodes placitorum Coronae, and
nullus Vicecomes sit Iustitiarius in Vicecomitatu suo, nec in Comitatu, quem
tenuerit post primam Coronationem Domini Regis. Praeterea tailleantur omnes
Civitates, and Burgi, and Dominica Domini Regis: Iusticiarii vero nominati, una
cum baillivis Willielmi de Sanctae Mariae Ecclesia, and Gaufridi Filii Petri,
and Willielmi de Chimelli, et Willielmi Bruere, Hugonis Bardulfi, and
Vicecomitis Locorum summoneri faciant milites in Comitatu in rotulo nominatos;
ut ad diem and locum, quem eis scire faciant, veniant, and coram eis jurare
faciant illos, quod legale posse suum ponent ad Wardas, and exhaetas Domini
Regis instaurandas, and ad appretiendas ad commodum Domini Regis, nec alicujus
odio, favore, vel gratia illud omi^tent; and quod praedicti milites nominati
super sacramentum suum eligent duodecim legales milites, vel liberos, and
legales homines, si milites ad hoc inventi non fuerint, per diversas Comitatuum
in itinere praedictorum Iusticiariorum, sicut expedire viderint; qui similiter
jurent, quod ad Wardas, et exchaetas de partibus illis instaurandas, et
appretiandas, et affirmandas suum legale posse, et consilium, et auxilium
apponent ad commodum Regis, ut praedictum est; et praedicti jurati supra
sacramentum suum eligent de liberioribus hominibus exchaetarum, et Wardarum,
quot, et quales noverint esse sibi necessarios, ad praedicta Domini Regis
negotia, sicut melius fieri potest ad commodum Domini Regis, exequenda. Et
sciendum est, quod praedictae Wardae, et exchaetae instauravuntur de exitibus
ex eis provenientibus, usque ad festum Michaelis. Item de exitibus ejusdem
Termini, et si hi non sufficient, supplebitur deficiens de Telonio Domini
Regis, ita quod illi, qui tenebunt Wardas, et exchaetas illas ad firmam,
respondebunt inde a festo Sancti Michaelis, de stauratis. Dominus autem Rex
illis, qui Wardas illas et exchaetas ad firmam tenebunt, eas usque ad terminum
suum de anno in annum Warrantizabit; ita quod licet Dominus R^ aliquam illarum
alicui dedisset, firmarius firmam suam tenebit, usque ad finem anni per firmam
ei reddendam, cui Rex eam dederit, quam Dominus Rex inde perceperit. Justitia
vero exchaetae, quam dederit, remaneat Domino Regi, nisi Dominus Rex illud
nominatim dederit, firmarius vero cum firmam suam dimiserit, instauramentum
suum, et omnia sua, firmis posuerit ultra instauramentum Regis, libere et sine
diminutione habebit, et inde habebunt literas Domini Archiepiscop^ patentes,
continentes tenorem Chartae Domini Regis super hoc factae: inquiretur item
diligentissime quantus sit assisus redditus per singula maneria in Demenio, et
quantum valiant omnia alia in praedictis maneriis assisa, et quot sunt carucae,
et quantum singulae valiant, non aestimantes eas ad pretium viginti solidorum
tantum: sed secundum quod terra fuerit vel bona, vel mala, crescat, vel
decrescat pretium. Illi vero qui firmas suscipient, firmas suas instaurabunt,
ut praedictum est, secundum pretium supradictum de exitibus exchaetarum, et
Wardarum. Inquiratur item de quot bobus, et averiis singulae carucae valiant
instaurari, et quot, et quantum instauramentum singula maneria possit
sustinere, et tunc aperte, et distinct in scriptum redigantur. Erit autem
pretium bovis 4 Solidi, et vaccae similiter, et averi similiter, and ovis
crispae 10 Denarii, et ovis lanae grossioris 6 Denarii, et suis 12 Denarii, et
verris 12 Denarii, et cum firmarii firmas suas dimiserint de praedicto
animalibus pacavilibus in optione firmariorum; et cum omnia praedicta
instaurata fuerint, et appretiata, omnia imbrevientur apert^, et distinct, et
deferantur ad Scaccarium. Excipiuntur autem de hac assisa Episcopatus, et
Abbatiae, et terrae Baronum, qui proximi sunt aetati. Inquiratur etiam per
Sacramentum praedictorum de omnibus Wardis, et exchaetis, quae non sunt in manu
Domini Regis, et capiantur in manu Domini Regis, et de illis fiat, sicut de
aliis exchaetis, et Wardis.

In the Month of September ^. 1194.
the King sent Itinerant Justices through all the Counties of England, who were
to proceed in doing Justice according to the underwritten Heads or Articles.
The Form of Proceeding in Pleas of the Crown.
FIrst, Four Knights are to be chosen of the whole County, which upon their
Oath shall choose Two Legal Knights, of every Hundred or Wapentach, and those
Two shall choose upon their Oaths Ten Knights in every Hundred or Wapentach;
and if there be not Knights enough, Lawful and Freemen, so as those Twelve
together may answer Articles which concern that Hundred or Wapentach.

Articles of Pleas of the Crown.
THe Justices shall inquire and determine New and Old Pleas of the Crown, and
all such as were not determined before the Kings Justices. Also of all Pleas of
In those ^as the Ver^ct was called Recognition, ^d the Jurors ^ecognitors.
Novel Diseisins, and all Pleas which were summoned or brought before the
Justices by the Writ of the King or Chief Justice, or sent before them from the
Kings Capital Court. Also concerning They are ^nds or Pro^s that fall to ^e
King or lord of a Man^er, by For^iture, or ^eath of a Te^ant without ^eirs.
Escheats what they were, and had been since the Kings Expedition to Jerusalem;
and what were then in the Kings Hands, Issues and Profits of them, and what the
Profits are, and what was, and now is their value; and if there be any Escheat
which belongs to the King, and is not in his possession. Also of Churches which
were in the Kings Gift; Also of Wardships of Children, and Young Men that
belong to the King. Also of the Marriages of Maidens and Widows that belong
Also of Malefactors, their Receivers and Incouragers. Also of Falsonars, such
as forged and counterfeited false Charts and Writings. Also of the Killers of
Jews, who they were; and of the Pawns of the Jews that were slain, of their
Goods, Lands, Debts, and Charts, who had them in their possession, and what
their value. The Pawns and Debts of the Jews to be taken into the Kings Hands;
and those that were present at the Killing or Murdering of the Jews, and have
not made Fine or Composition with the King, or his Justices, King or his
Justices. Also of all Ayds given for the Redemption of the King; who and how
much every one promised, how much paid, and how much in Arrear. Also of the
Favorers or Abettors of Earl John, who have made Composition with the King,
and who not. Also of the Goods and Chattels of Earl John and his Favorers,
which are not yet converted to the Kings use, how much the Sheriffs and their
Bailiffs have received, and whether any one has bribed them contrary to the
Ancient Customs of the Kingdom. Also of all the Lands of Earl John, such as he
had in his own Hands, his Wardships and Escheats, of such as had been given
him, and for what cause they were given him, all to be taken into the Kings
Hands, unless such as the King confirmed to him. Also of the Debts and Fines
due to Earl John, and for what cause due. Also of Usurers that were dead, and
their Goods. Also of Wines sold contrary to the Assise, and of False Measures
of Wines and other things. Also of such as undertook the Crusado, and died
before they set forward toward Jerusalem, who had their Chattels, what, and how
much. Also of So called from the Trial of Right, which was the greatest Trial,
and was brought into Court by a Writ of Right, by which the Jurors were
directed to discover who had more right to the Land in question, whether the
Demandant or the Tenant and Possessor.
Great Assizes which were of Land worth an Hundred Shillings a year and under.
Also of Defaults, (that is, non-appearances in Court, chiefly at a day
assigned.) Furthermore, they were to choose, or see Three Knights and one
Clerc, in every County, who were to note and set down, or hold the Pleas of the
Crown, and no Sheriff was to be a Justitiary in his own County, nor in any
County he held since the first Coronation of the King. Furthermore, all Cities,
Burghs, and the Kings Demeasns, were to be Taxed by the Justices Itinerant. The
Justices
named, together with the Bailiffs of William of the Church of Saint Mary, and
Geofry Fitz-Peter, and William de Chimelli, William Bruer and These were
Commissioners for the Management of the Kings Wardships and Escheats
undoubtedly in the Iter assigned to these Justices; or perhaps all over England.
Hugh Bardolf, and the Sheriffs of the Places, should cause the Knights in the
County named in a Roll to be summoned, that they come at the day, and to the
place they shall have notice of, to swear before them, That they would use
their utmost lawful endeavor to stock all the Kings Ward-Lands, and Escheats,
and improve them to the Kings best profit, and not omit, for the hatred, fear
or favor of any Man: And the Knights named in the Roll were to choose upon
their Oaths Twelve Lawful Knights, or Lawful and Legal Freemen, if Knights
were not to be Iter of the foresaid Justices, as they should think fit, who in
like manner were to swear, That they would Apply their utmost lawful Endeavor,
Counsel and Help, to stock, improve, and let to Farm the Kings Ward Lands and
Escheats in those parts, to the profit of the King as aforesaid. And the said
Jurats or sworn Persons were upon their Oaths to choose, of the best Freemen
residing upon the Escheat or Ward-Lands, so many, and such as they thought fit
for their purpose, to manage the Kings In these times, and two or three
hundreds of years afterward, the King, but especially the Bishops, Abbats, and
Temporal Nobility and Knights, kept much and many of their Manners and Lands in
their own Hands, and stocked and managed them by a Praepositus and Servants,
and sometimes let them to Farm stocked.
stock the Ward-Lands and Escheats with the Issues and Profits of them until
Michaelmass, and if that was not sufficient, what Wanted, was to be supplied
out of the Kings Tolls, so that they which took to farm those Ward-lands and
Escheats, were to answer for them from Michaelmass as Stocked. And the King
would Warrant to such as held them in farm, those Ward-Lands, and Escheats,
from year to year during their Term. So that although, the King gave any of them
to any one, yet the Farmer should hold his farm, until the end of the year,
paying what should be due from the King, but the Justice, as Royalties, which
happened upon the Escheat the King Granted, were to remain to the King, unless
the King granted them particularly and by name (that is by express words.) The
Farmer when he leaves his farm, shall take of all his own stock he set upon it,
besides the Kings stock, freely without Diminution, and they shall have the
letters patents of the Archbishop (as chief Justice) containing the Tenor of
the Kings Chart made concerning this matter. They were to inquire, what was the
Rent of This was such, as are now called White, or Quit-Rents.
Assise or Constant Rent in every Demesns, and the value of all things upon
those Manners, and how many Ploughlands or Caracates they contained, and what
their value, non-estimating them at 20 s. only, the Plough-land; but more or
less, according as the land was better or Worse. Those that took farms, might
stock them with the Profits of the Lands as aforesaid. They were also to
inquire how many Oxen and Horses ought to be kept for the Tilling of every
plough-land, and what stock every Manner would maintein, and clearly and
distinctly to put them in Plough-Ox was then valued at 4 s. a Cow and
Plough-Horse at the same Rate, a Sheep with fine Wool at 10 d. and with course
Wool 6 d. a Sow at 12 d. and a Boar at 12 d. and when the Farmers left their
farms, they were to pay so much money, or leave so many Saleable-Beasts at
their choice; and when all the Ward-lands and Escheats, were Stocked, improved
and valued, they were to be inventoried clearly and Distinctly, and the
Inventory carried into the Exchequer. Bishoprics, Abbacy's, and the Lands of
Barons near Age excepted out of this Constitution. They were to inquire by the
Oaths of the persons aforesaid, of all Wards and Escheats, that were not in the
Kings Hands, that they might be taken into his possession, and ordered as the
others.

Capitula placitorum Coronae Regis.
Hoved. f. 445. b. n. 10.
DE placitis Coronae novis, and veteribus, quae non sunt finita coram De morte
antecessorum. De nova dissaisina. De magnis assisis usque ad 10 libratas
terrae, and infra. Et de advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and capientur coram De
Ecclesiis vacantibus, vel non vacantibus, quae fuerunt de donatione Domini
Regis, quis eas donaverit, vel quis eas habeat, and per quem and quantum
valent. De excaetis Domini Regis and eorum valentiis, and quis eos habeat and
per quem. De dominabus, and de valectis, and puellis quae sunt, vel esse debent
in donatione Domini Regis, and de valentiis terrarum suarum; and si quis eorum,
vel earum sit maritaetus; and inquiratur, cui and per quem and a quo tempore.
Inquirendum est etiam, quae viduae non sinierunt pro se maritandis, and finis
capiatur ad opus Domini Regis. De Sergentariis Domini Regis quis eas habet, and
per quem, and quantum valent, and qui finem non fecerunt ad auxilium Domini
Regis, and qui fecerunt, and finis capiatur. De usuris Christianorum, and eorum
catallis, qui sunt mortui. De illis sunt in De praepresturis Domini Regis. De
viis Domini Regis estreciatis. De thesauris inventis. De malefactoribus, and
eorum receptoribus. De fugitivis retatis reversis post ultima^ assisam. De
omnibus ponderibus, and mensuris, and ulnis renovatis, and si quatuor homines,
qui sunt attornati ad haec custodienda, in unaquaque villa fecerint, quod inde
statutum est, and si attachiaverint transgressores illius assisae; and si non
attachiaverunt, prout debent, puniantur sicut ipsi transgressores. Totum vinum
illius, qui vendidit and praeterea Dominus Vini and venditores sint in
misericordia Regis. Inquirendum est per omnes Comitatus de hidis, and
carucatis, and si Justitiarii, qui ad haec attornati fuerunt, se been
habuerint, and si de omnibus receperunt, and si aliqua concelaverunt. De
custodibus portuum maris, si quid receperunt, quod non reddiderunt, and si
mercedem aliquam receperunt pro jure Regis retinendo, and si quis aliquid
receperit, qui non fuerit ad hoc attornatus. Inquirendum est, si omnes venerint
ad summonitiones

Assisa Domini Regis de Forestis.
HAec est assisa Domini Regis, and haec sunt praecepta de Forestis suis in
Anglia facta per assensum, and Consilium Archiepisc. and Episcoporum, and
Abbatum, Comitum and Baronum, and Militum totius regni sui, Dominus Rex primum
defendit, quod si aliquis ei forisfaciat de venatione sua, vel de forestis suis
in aliqua re, non vult, quod confidant in hoc, quod habuit misericordiam de
illis per eorum catalla venatione sua, and de Forestis suis. Nam si qui a modo
ei forisfecerint inde, and inde convicti fuerint, plenariam vult de illis
Justitiam fieri, qualis facta fuit tempore Henrici avi patris Domini Regis,
viz. ut amittant oculos, and testiculos. Item Dominus Rex defendit, quod nullus
habeat arcus, vel sagittas, neque canes, neque leporarios in forestis suis,
nisi habeat ipsum Regem ad warrantum suum, vel aliquem alium, qui eum possit
inde warrantizare. Item Rex defendit, quod nullus donet, vel vendat aliquid ad
destructionem visum forestarii sui, and viridariorum suorum. Item praecipit,
quod omnes illi, qui Boscos habent infra metas forestae Domini Regis, quod
ponant idoneas Wood-men.
forestarios in Boscis suis, de quibus forestariis, ipsi quorum Bosci fuerint,
sint plegii, vel tales inveniant plegios idoneos, qui possint emendare, si
forestarii in aliquo forisfecerint quod Domino R^gi pertineat. Item praecipit,
quod sui forestarii curam capiam super forestarios militum, and aliorum, qui
Boscos habent infra metas forestae Domini Regis, quod Bosci non destruantur.
Nam si super hoc Bosci ^orum destructi fuerint, sciant been illi, quorum Bosci
fuerint, quod de ^psismet vel de eorum terris capietur emendatio, and non de
alio. Item praecipit Rex, quod sui Forestarii jurent, quod secundum omne posse
suum tenebunt ejus assisam, qualem eam fecit de forestis suis, and quod non
vexabunt milites, neque probos homines de hoc, quod Dominus Rex iis concessit
de Boscis eorum. Item praecipit, quod in quolibet Comitatu, in quo venationem
habet, ponantur 12. Milites ad Custodiendam venationem 4. Or Tenants in
Military Service, alias Free Tenants.
Milites ponantur ad adgistandos Boscos suos, and ad recipiendum pannagium
suum, and custodiendum, and defendendum. Item praecipit, quod nullus adgistet
Boscos suos infra metas forestae suae, antequam Bosci eorum adgistentur: and
est sciendum quod incipit adgistamentum Domini Regis 15 dies ante festum S.
Michaelis, and durat 15 diebus post festum S. Michaelis. Item praecipit Item
praecipit, quod nullus clericus ei forisfaciat de venatione sua, neque de
forestis suis: et praecipit been forestariis suis, quod si invenerint eos
forisfacientes, non dubitent, in eos manus imponere, ad eos resistendos et
capiendos: ipse enim eos inde warentizabit. Item Rex praecipit, quod omnia
es^arta videantur in quolibet 3. anno tam nova, quam vetera intra reguardum, et
omnes purpraesturae similiter, et omnia wasta Boscorum, et quod quodlibet
illorum per se imbrevietur. Item Rex praecipit quod Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
Comites, Barons, et Milites, et Livere Tenentes, et omnes homines de terra sua
veniant ad summonitionem magistri forestarii sui ad placitanda placita de
forestis suis. Prohibendum est etiam ad placita forestae, ne aliqua caretta
exeat chiminum in foresta Regis, neque porci sint in ^oresta Regis tempore de
Foinesun; Scilicet, 15 diebus ante Nativitatem 15 diebus post idem festum. Est
au^em sciendum quod qui forisfecerit in foresta Regis de venatione sua, et inde
attaintus fuerit, erit in misericordia Regis ad oculos et testiculos perdendos.
Qui autem forisfecerit in foresta Regis de viridi sive per culpaturam, si ver
per esbrancaturam sive per foditionem turvarum sive per escoriationem motae,
sive per culpationem de sub, nemore, sive per essartum, sive per novam
purpresturam per sepem, vel fossatum, vel per renovationem molendini, vel
cursus aquae, vel Bercariae, vel aliarum domorum, foenum fal^andum extra sepes,
vel extra fossata; erit in misericordia R^gis de pecunia sua, nisi habet
viridarios, vel forestarios Regis ad warrantum. Similiter qui arcus, vel
sagittas portaverint, vel canes duxerint sine copula per forestam Regis, et
inde attaintus fuerit, erit in misericordia Regis. Statutum etiam est, quod
semper in 3. anno fiat visus forestae: in reguardo autem forestae haec
supradicta videnda sunt. Et videnda sunt in reguardo nova essarta, et vetera in
bladata post ultimum reguardum, et quo blado, vel legumine in bladata sint.
sarta erunt in manu Regis; si vetera sarta inbladata sunt de frumento, vel
siligine, unaquaeque acra dabit Regi 12 denarios de illa vestitura; et si
inbladata fuerint de avena vel hordeo, vel fabis, vel pisis, vel alio legumine,
unaquaeque acra dabit Regi 6 denarios de illa vestitura.

Articles of Pleas of the Crown.
THE Judges Itinerant were to hear and determine all Pleas of the Crown New and
Old which were not determined before the Kings Justices. And all By Assizes
here are meant the Ancient Writs by which Actions were brought, either for
Right or Propriety, by a Writ of Right or Possession, by a Writ of the Death of
an Ancestor, or of Novel Disseisin, by a Writ of that Title, etc.
Assizes, Death of Ancestors, Novel Disseisins, and of great Assizes so far as
Ten Pounds by the year of Land and downwards, and of Advowsons of Churches. The
Actions of the Great Assise (or a Writ of Right by which the property was
tried) was brought by the Mandate or Writ of the King, or his Capital Justice.
They were to inquire of vacant and full Churches, which were in the Kings Gift,
who gave them, and who had them, and what their value. Of the Kings Escheats,
their value, who had them, and by whom. Of Ladies, Young Gentlemen, and Women,
which were or ought to be in the Kings Gift, (that is, as to Marriage) what the
value of their Lands, and whether they were Married. To whom, by whom, and how
long. They were also to inquire, what Widows had not Fined or Compounded for
License to Marry themselves, and the Fine to be taken to the Kings use. Of the
Kings Lands held by many Men in all Counties for some particular Services
performed to the King, see Append. to the Introduction to History, f. 22. A.
Serjeanties, who has them, and from whom, and their value, and who of them
contributed Of the Usury of Christians, and of their Goods, and what The King
had the Goods of Usurers after their Death.
Usurers were dead. Of those that were in the Kings Mercy and were not
amercied, or fined. Of Encroachments upon the Kings Lands, his Highways,
diverting or stopping Watercourse, incroaching upon Streets in Cities and
Burghs, etc.
Purprestures, or the Kings Ways straightened. Of Tre^sure found. Of
Malefactors, and their Receivers. Of Fugitives who had been accused, and were
returned since the last Assise. Of all Weights and Measures, and Else renewed,
and if See the Statute o^ Assise of Weights and Measures before.
Four Men that were appointed to look City, Burgh, or Mercate Town) had done as
the Statute required, and had attached or prosecuted the Transgressors or not:
if not, they were to be punished as the Transgressors. All his Wine, that sold
contrary to the Assise or Statute, was to be seized to the Kings use, and the
Owners and Sellers of the Wine were to be in the Kings Mercy, (that is, to be
punished by him.) They were to inquire how many Hydes and Plough-Lands there
were in every County, and whether the Officers appointed to assess and collect
Of the Officers of Seaports, if they had received any thing they had not given
an account of, or taken any thing for concealing the Kings Right, or if any one
had received any thing that was not appointed a Receiver. They were to inquire
if all came as they ought, that were summoned by the Kings Justices, and what
they were that came not, and what their Names.

Before Hove^. f. 445. b. ^. 30.40.
this Iter, or these Circuits of the Justices were over, the Iter or Circuit of
the Forests began. The King commanded Hugh Nevill, Chief Justice of All the
Forests in England, Hugh Wac, and Ernis Nevill, That in every County through
which they went They should Summon to appear before them at the Pleas of the
Forest, Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all Free Tenants, and the
Reeve, and Four Men of every Town to Hear the Kings Commands.

This is the Assise of the Lord the King, and these are his Precepts concerning
his Forests in England, made by the Assent and Advice of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Knights of the Whole Kingdom.
THe King Declares That if any one forfeits to him concerning his Venationem,
Venaison, Fren. Venison. Engl.
Venison, or his Forests in any thing, he is not to trust to Henry his
Grandfathers time. That is, he should Lose his Eyes, and Testicles. Also the
King forbids that any one have Bows and Arrows, or Hounds, or Greyhounds
within his Forests, unless he had the Kings Warrant, or the Warrant of any
other that was of right able to protect him. Also the King forbids, That no man
give or sell any thing to the Destruction But he Grants, that any Man may take
of his own Wood, as much as he shall have need of, without wast, and this by
the oversight of his Forester and Verders. Also the King Commands that they who
have Woods within the Bounds of the Forest, do set good Forestarios, must be so
translated here, and the word will bear it; for Foresta, in a strict fence,
signifies Silva Saltus, etc.
Woodmen to look after them, and such as they will be answerable for, or such
as can give security to make satisfaction, if they offend in any thing that
belongs to the King. Also he Commands that his Foresters, take care of the
Woodmen destroy the Woods. For if their Woods were destroyed, he let them know,
whose Woods they were, he would take satisfaction of their Lands, and not from
any other Person. Also the King Commands, that his Foresters shall Swear that
according to their whole power, they shall keep his Assize (or Law) which he
has made concerning his Forests, and that they shall not vex or trouble the
Knights, or Worthy men, about what he granted Also he Commands that in every
County wherein he has Venison, there shall be twelve men appointed to preserve
his Venison, and Viride, that is the Green-Wood, and Herbage of the Forest.
Green-hue in his Forests. And that there shall be Four Knights appointed to
Agist his Woods, (that is, take in a certain number of Cattle to feed there a
certain time, or to assign the number of Cattle to such as had right to feed in
the Forest) and to Receive his Pasnage or Pannage (that is the money due for
such feeding) and to preserve it, that it should not be diminished. Also he
commanded no man might agist his Woods, (that is, put their cattle into them)
within the bounds of his Forest, before their own Woods were agisted. And it is
to be noted that the Kings Agistment (or right of feeding Catrel in the Woods
and Forest) begins fifteen days before Michaelmass, and continues fifteen days
Here must be some mistake, but how well to rectify it I know not.
after. Also the King Commands, Demeasn were destroyed, and his Forester could
not tell how, his Body should be Imprisoned. Also he commanded that no Clerc
should offend concerning his Venison, or Forests, and that if his Foresters
found them offending they should take them, and he would Warrant them therein.
Also the King commanded that all Essarts as well old as new (this is places
where underwood, and bushes had been Stubbed up, and the land ploughed and
sown) which were within Regard or View of viewed once in three years, and in
like manner all purprestures and Wastes in Woods, and that every one should be
in rolled by it self. Also the King Commanded that the Archbishops, Bishops,
Earls, Barons, Knights and Free-Tenents, and all men of his land, should come
to the Pleas of the Forest at the summons of his Master Forester. It was also
forbidden at the pleas of the Forest that no Cart or Wagon should go out of the
way in the Forest, nor Hogs be in the Forest at the time of Fannatio, the time
when the Does Fawn. Foineson, or Faoneson, from the French Faon, a Fawn.
Foinesun; that is to say, John Baptist, and fifteen days after; and it is to be
noted that he which takes Venison in the Kings Forest, and shall be thereof
attainted, shall be in the Kings Mercy as to the losing of his Eyes and
Testicles, and he that offended in the Kings Forest, in the Green-hue or Vert,
by chopping down Trees, or lopping of the Branches, by Digging Tarves, or
slaying, that is, taking the Green-Sword of the Ground, by cutting away the
under part of Thickets, by Essarts, or new purprestures, by hedges or Ditches,
by erecting Mills, making new Watercourse, erecting sheep Coats or lodges,
or other houses, by mowing Hey beyond the Hedges and Ditches, shall be in the
Kings mercy for his Goods, unless he has the Kings Verders or Foresters to
warrant him. In like manner he that carried Bows and Arrows, or Dogs uncoupled
thorough the Kings Forest, and was thereof attainted, was in the Kings Mercy.
It was also Decreed, that once in three years there should be a view of the
Forest; and in the Regard or view of the Forest these things were to be
observed; What old or new Essarts Grain. The new Essarts were to be taken into
the Kings hand. If the Old Essarts were sown with Wheat or Rye, every Acre was
to yield the King twelve pence for that Crop, and every Acre that was sown with
Oats, Barley, Beans, or Pease, was to yield the King six pence for that Crop.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus clerus totius Normanniae Salutem.
Rad. de Diceto, Col. 657. n. 40. A.D. 1190.
AD universitatis vestrae notitiam volumus pervenire, contentionem motam inter
matrem nostram Rothomagensem Ecclesiam, procurante J. de and Willielmum filium
Radulfi Seneicallum Normanniae: super quibusdam capitulis de quibus Ecclesia
Dei conquerebatur, sub praesentia nostra, and baronum Domini Regis,
assistentibus quoque quam pluribus Normanniae ministris, hoc tandem sine
conquievisse.

1. Inprimis, determinatum est de clericis, quod nulla occasion a secularibus
potestatibus capientur, nisi pro homicido, furto, and incendio, vel hujusmodi
enormi flagitio quod ad placitum gladii pertineat, and tunc cum requisiti
fuerint ab Ecclesiasticis judicibus quieti reddentur in Ecclesiastica curia
judicandi.

2. Item, generaliter omnes de fidei laesione, vel juramenti transgressione
quaestiones in Ecclesiastico foro tractabuntur. Super treugae vero violatione
antiqua consuetudo, and Cartarum H. and R. illustrium regum Angliae tenor
observabitur.

3. Item, Quaestiones de dote vel donatione propter nuptias quando mobilia vel
se moventia petentur, ad Ecclesiam referentur. Quaestio vero super eisdem de
immobilibus, Dominis nostris Regi and Archiepiscopo determinanda reservatur.

4. Item, In Conventualibus Ecclesiis, Abbates, vel Priores, aut Abbatissae cum
assensu Diocesani Episcopi eligentur.

5. Item, Nulla fiet recognitio in foro Seculari super possessione quam viri
religiosi, vel quaecunque Ecclesiasticae personae xx. annis vel amplius
possederint. Similiter nulla fiet recognitio si carta vel alio modo
eleemosinatam esse possessionem probare poterint. Sed ad Ecclesiasticos Judices
remittentur.

6. Item, distributio eorum quae in testamento relinquuntur auctoritate
Ecclesiae fiet, nec decima pars ut olim subtrahetur. De bonis vero clericorum
etsi dicantur fuisse usurarii, vel quocunque genere mortis praeventi, nihil
pertinet ad secularem potestatem, sed Episcopali auctoritate in pias causas
distribuentur.

7. Item, Quicquid laici in vita sua donaverint vel quocunque titulo

8. Item, Si mortuus^ habuerit aliquod vadium unde sortem suam perceperit,
portio ipsius libera ad eum qui invadiavit, vel ad haeredes ipsius revertetur.
Idem fiet de portionibus uxoris and filiorum ejus post mortem ipsorum.

Si quis vero subitanea morte vel quolibet alio fortuito casu prae^ccupatus
fuerit, ut de rebus suis disponere non possit, distributio bonorum ejus
ecclesiastica auctoritate fiet.

Epistola Galfridi de quadragesima part redituum colligenda, in Subventionem
terrae Sanctae.
GAlfridus silius Petri Comes Essexae universis Vicecomitibus balliae suae,
Salutem. Sciatis, quod Dominus Rex Angliae, ad instantiam, Hoved. f. 471. a. n.
10.
praedicationem cujusdam Cardinalis a summo Pontifice missi in Franciam, de
Consilio magnatum suorum de partibus transmarinis concessit ad Sanctee
Jerusalem subsidium quadragesimam partem Valoris omnium redituum, and terrarum
suarum unius anni, tam de Wardis, quam de excaetis in manu sua existentibus.
Quod etiam ipsi magnates sui ultra mare voluntary concesserunt. Ad eorum etiam
instantiam scripsit Magnatibus per literas patentes; rogans, and inducens eos,
quatenus puro cord, and Charitatis intuitu idem illud de valor omnium
redituum, and terrarum suarum unius anni concederent; quod quidem nec. debito,
nec de consuetudine, nec de coactione, nec de aliqua alia Authoritate
Apostolica conceditur, vel postulatur. Vnde praecipit, quod omnes Comites and
Barons de qualibet balliva in primis admoneantur, and inducantur diligenter,
quatenus pro se hanc Collectam faciant in terris suis hoc modo; scilicet, ut
quilibet quadragesimam valoris cujuslibet villae suae, sicut posset poni ad
firmam per annum. Et si in eadem villa fuerint per servitium Militare tenentes,
dent quadragesimam portionem modo praedicto; si autem fuerint libere tenentes,
similiter dent eandem portionem modo praedicto, computato reditu, quem dominis
suis solverint per annum. Hanc autem collectam colligi faciant per tam
discretos, and legales, qui ad hoc possint, and sciant sufficere, qui eam
recipiant tam de Comitibus, quam de Baronibus praedictis. Et postquam per manus
eorum fuerit collecta, receptores praedictae collectae faciant Comitibus, quam
de Baronibus, and Militibus, and libere tenentibus; and nomina singulorum, and
villarum, quantumcunque de singulis villis, and quorum quaelibet sit,
imbreviari faciant. Summam autem de Dominicis, and de wardis, and excaetis, and
reditibus Domini Regis faciant separatim imbr^viari. Si quis vero clericus
laicum feodum habuerit in ballia aliqua, vel homines tenentes laicum feodum, in
eorum terris siat haec collecta per praedictos Collectores modo praedicto. De
terris autem cruce signatorum praedicta collecta fiat modo praedicto, ita tamen
quod eorum pecunia separatim reponatur ab alia; and summa pecuniae, and nomina
singulorum, quorum ipsa pecunia fuerit, subscribantur; ut illi qui iter
arripuerint, p^cuniam suam prompte recipiant. Provideatur autem, quod pecunia
illa sit collecta, ita quod unusquisque Vicecomes simul cum Collectoribus
habeat eam apud Novum Templum Lundoniae a die Sancti Hilarii in quindecim dies,
and imbreviamentum modo praedicto ordinatum, viz. de summa pecuniae, and
nominibus eorum, qui eam dederint, and nominibus Villarum, de quibus data
fuerit pecunia praedicta, and quantum de qualibet datum fuerit. Si qui autem
contra dixerint huic collect^e assensum praebere, nomina eorum imbrevientur,
and coram nobis repraesententur apud Lundoniam ad terminum praedictum, and hoc
breve, and nomina collectorum ibidem habeantur. Valete.

Mat. Paris, f. 214.11.40.
MAjores ecclesiae causas ad sedem Apostolicam referendas; and Canonica
authoritas, and approbata consuetudo declarat. Cum igitur inter vos and
dilectos filios nostros Priorem and Monachos Cantuariensis Ecclesiae, super
jure illius Archiepiscopi eligendi controversia verteretur: proponentibus vobis
quod tum ex jure communi, tum ex antiqua consuetudine, una cum illis debetis
ipsius Archiepiscopi electionem respondentibus, quod de jure communi and
privilegio speciali, and de consuetudine approbata and antiqua; Cantuariensem
Archiepiscopum eligere deberent sine vobis: Lite coram nobis per procuratores
idoneos super hoc legitime contestata, diligenter audivimus, quae parts in
praesentia nostra proponere curaverunt. Pars siquidem vestra and deereta
pariter and exempla studuit allegare; quosdam testes producens, and
testimoniales literas exhibens, quibus ostendere nitebatur, quod vos tres
Metropolitanos elegeratis una cum illis: cum per literas attestationes sit
probatum, vos and alio loco and alio tempore non sine illis, electiones
hujusmodi celebrasse. Testes autem producti ex part Monachorum, legitime
probaverunt, quod Prior and Conventus Cantuariensis Ecclesiae, a longis retro
temporibus electiones Episcoporum in Capitulo suo, sine vobis usque ad haec
tempora celebrarunt: and easdem obtinuerunt a sede Apostolica confirmari. A
nobis etiam and praedecessoribus nostris, per privilegii paginam est statutum;
ut decedente Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, nullus ibi qualibet surreptionis
astutia seu violentia praeponatur: nisi quem communi consilio major pars
Monachorum Consilii sanioris, secundum Dominum and sacrorum Canonum sanctiones
providerit eligendum. Nos igitur his and aliis, quae coram nobis allegata sunt,
auditis and perspicaciter intellectis; quia constat evidenter, quod vos sine
illis secundum assertionem vestram eligere non debetis, Monachis exclusis,
vestra non valet electio; and electio Monachorum sine vobis celebrata, quia a
sede Apostolica meruit confirmari, valebat. Cumque necessarium fuerit
alterutrum confirmare; de communi fratrum nostrorum Consilio, vobis ab
impetitione ac molestatione vestra and successorum vestrorum per sententiam
definitivam absolvimus. Authoritate Apostolica decernentes, ut Monachi
Cantuariensis Ecclesiae and Successores, eorum de caetero Archiepiscopum
eligant sine vobis. Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum, duodecimo Kalendas
Januarii; Pontificatus nostri anno nono.

SAnctissimo Patri and Domino Innocentio Dei gratia summo Pontifici, Johannes
eadem gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Pat. 8. and 9. Johannis M. 4. n. 18.
Destinamus ad pedes Sanctitatis vestrae latores praesentium, nuncios nostres
attentius rogantes dignitates quas nos et Antecessores nostri habuimus super
provisionibus tam Ecclesiae Cantuariensis quam aliarum Cathedralium sedum
literas Episcoporum Angliae, et aliorum fide dignorum constare poterit,
integras et illaesas conservare velitis et Ecclesiae Anglicanae et Regno in
Arcto constitutis, paterna provisione providere. Test G. filio Petri Comite
Essex apud Poret. Vicesimo sexto die Maii.

Pat. 8. and 9. Johannis M. 3. Dorso.
Sciatis quod per commune consilium et assensum Concilli nostri apud Oxonium
provisum est ad defensionem regni nostri et recuperationem juris nostri
concessum est quod quilibet laicus homo totius Angliae de cujuscumque feodo
sit, qui habet in Anglia redditus et catalla det nobis in auxillium de
unaquaque mercata redditus sui annualis duodecim denarios et de unaquaque
mercata cujuslibet catalli mobilis quam habuit in Octabis Purificationis Beatae
Mariae scilicet ad terminum Concilii, duodecim denarios et sic secundum plus et
minus; Senescalli et Ballivi Comitum et Baronum jurabunt coram Justiciariis
nostris de valentia reddituum et Catallorum mobilium dominorum suorum et de
suis propriis similiter. Et quilibet homo prater Comites et Barenes jurabit de
suis propriis redditibus et catallis secundum quod Commissioners.
Justiciarii nostri ad hoc transmissi utilitati nostrae melius viderint
expedire. Et si aliquis convictus fuerit quod ad evitandum commodum nostrum
fraudulenter amoverit catalla sua vel in aliquo loco celaverit vel in alicujus
alterius potestate posuerit, vel minus quam valuerint omnia catalla ejus
capientur ad opus nostrum quieta, et corpus ejus in prisonam nostram ponetur,
donec per nos deliveretur. Quodlibet autem hundredum in Comitatu nostro
imbrevietur per se et quaelibet parochia in quolibet Hundredo per se. Ita quod
Justiciarii nostri sciant de qualibet villa per se respondere. Cum autem
Justiciarii nostri auxilium ^stud in quolibet hundredo, Civitate, vel villa
assederint statim transcribere facient a rot^lis suis omnes particulas auxilii
assisi et liberetur Vicecomiti Comitatus colligendum per terminum quindenae
Justiciarii nostri rotulos suos salvo penes se custodiant donec ad nos eas
afferant. Statutum est etiam quod omnes Clerici nostri, et omnes Justiciarii
nostri, et Clerici eorum et omnes qui se in aliquo de negotio isto intromittent
jurabunt quod fideliter ex toto posse suo hoc negotium facient, sicut
constitutum est, et quod pro nulla re hoc omittent. Praecipimus autem super
vitam et membra quod quilibet denarius bonus et de legali pondere capiatur,
quamvis non sit novus tam ad opus nostrum quam ad omnium al^orum regni nostri.
Ad auxilium in Comitatu vestro assidendum mittimus loco nostro Robertum de
Berkeley, Ricardum de Mucegros, W^liielmum de Falen. Magistrum R. de Gloceslr.
Walterum de A^ra, Adamum filium Nigelli, etc. Et vobis praecipimus quod eis de
hoc tanquam nobis sitis intendentes. Test me ipso apud Northampton. xvii die
Februarii.

^at. Paris, ^^. n. 10.
INnocentius Papa tertius, Iohanni Regi Anglorum, etc. Inter opes terrenas,
quas mortalis oculus concupiscit and quasi cariora desiderat, aurumobrizum and
lapides pretiosos principatum credimus obtinere. Licet autem his and aliis
divitiis, vestra Regalis abundet excellentia; in signum tamen dilectionis and
gratiae, quatuor annulos aureos cum diversis lap dibus preti^sis, tuae
magnitudini destinamus. In quibus formam, numerum, materiam and colorem, ut
mysterium potius quam donum attendas. Rotunditas enim aeternitatem significat,
quae initio caret and sine. Habet ergo Regalis discretio quod in forma
requirat: ut de terrenis transeat ad coelestia, de temporalibus ad aeterna
procedat. Quaternarius autem qui numerus est quadratus, constantiam mentis
significat; quae nec deprimi debet in adversis, n^c in prosperis elevari: quod
tunc laudabiliter adimplebit, cum quatuor virtutibus principalibus fuerit
ordinata; videlicet Justitia, Fortitudine, Prudentia, Intelligas ergo in primo
Justitiam, quam exerceas in judiciis; in secundo Fortitudinem, quam exhibeas in
adversis; in tertio prudentiam, quam observes in dubiis; in quarto
Temperantiam, quam in prosperis non demittas. Per aurum vero Sapientia
designatur: quia sicut aurum praeminet metallis universis, sic sapientia donis
omnibus antecellit, Propheta testante: Requiescet super eum Spiritus
Sapientiae, etc. Nihil est autem quod Regem magis oportet habere. Vnde Rex ille
pacificus Solomon, solam a Domino sapienti^m postulavit, ut populum sibi
Smaragdi viriditas, fidem; Saphiri serenitas, spem; Granati rubicunditas,
Charitatem; Topatii claritas, operationem bonam significat, de qua Dominus,
Luceat Lux vestra. Habes igitur in Smaragdo quod credas, in Saphiro quod
speres, in Granato quod diligas, in Topatio quod exerceas, ut de virtutue in
virtutem ascendas, donec Dominum Deorum videas in Sion.

^at. 9. Johan^is Regis, M. 3. ^. 22.
REx, etc. Londoniensi, Elyensi, and Wigorniensi Episcopis, Salutem. Sciatis
quod parati sumus obedire Domino Papae sicut debemus, negotio Cantuariensis
Ecclesiae ad nos directum, quod nobis ostendistis implere, cum Consiho fidelium
nostrorum sicut decet, secundum rationem: Salvis nobis in omnibus and
haeredibus nostris, in jure nostro, and dignitate nostra, and libertatibus
Testibus G. filio Petri, Comite Essex, R. Comite Cestriae, W. Comite Arundel,
W. Comite Sarisburiensi, Fratre nostro, R. Comite de Clara, S. Comite Winton,
A. Comite Oxon, Roberto filio Rogeri, R. Constabulario Cestriae, W. Briewer,
apud Lameh. vicesimo primo die Januarii.

Pat. 9. Johan. Regis, M. 2. n 7
REx, etc. W. Londoniensi Episcopo, etc. Mandamus vobis quod literas quas
fecimus vobis and sociis vestris, executoribus mandati Apostolici super negotio
Cantuariensis Ecclesiae adimplendo, salvo jure et dignitate nostra, trada^is
Justiciario nostro G. filio Petri. Et in hujus rei testimonium vobis has
literas nostras Patentes inde Mittimus. Test meipso apud Suhant, Vicesimo
tertio die Martii.

REx Fulconi de Kantilup et Reginaldo de Cornhul, etc. Pat. 9. Johannis, M. 3
n. 21.
Sciatis quod commisimus Magistro Radulpho de Sancto Martino, et Roberto London
tustodiam Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, cum omnibus quae ad interiora ejusdem
Ecclesiae spectant et commisimus eidem Roberto et Henrico de Sandwic tustodiam
omnium Maneriorum Prioratus ejusdem cum omnibus pertinentiis suis. Et
commisimus praedictis Magistro Radulpho et Roberto et Radulpho de Arden
custodiam omnium maneriorum Archiepiscopatus Cantuariensis cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis quamdiu nobis placuerit. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod ea illis
tanquam Custodibus nostris statim visis literis istis ita liberari faciatis et
been imbreviari omnia quae eis liberaveritis. Test filio Petri apud
Westmonasterium Vicesimo tertio die Januarii Anno Regni nostri nono.

REx omnibus hominibus totius Kantiae, etc. Pat. 9. Johannis. M. 2. n. 15.
Sciatis quod Magister Simon de Langeton venit ad nos apud Winton die Mercurii
proximo rogavit nos quod Magistrum Stephanum de Langeton fratrem suum
reciperemus in Archiepiscopatum Cantuariensem and cum loqueremur ei, de
salvanda Hoc autem vobis mandamus, ut Sciatis malum et injuriam nobis in hac
part factam and mandamus vobis quod credatis hiis quae Reginaldus de Cornhul
vobis dixerit ex part nostra de facto praefato ibidem inter nos and praedictos
Episcopos and ipsum Simonem facto and de faciendo super hoc praeceptum nostrum.
Test meipso apud Winton. decimo quarto die Martii.

REx, etc. Roberto Lupo, et G. de Serland. Claus. 9. Johannis Regis. M. 5.
Sciatis quod reddidimus Domino Wintoniensi Episcopo, Episcopatum Wintoniae,
and omnes terras, res, redditus and possessiones suas, and wardas suas, et
omnia occasion Interdicti. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ei Episcopatum suum,
et omnia sua in Balliva tua habere pace terrae faciatis; Retentis in manu
nostra, terris, redditibus, et rebus omnibus Abbatum, Priorum, et domorum
Religiosarum, et etiam Clericorum de Episcopatu suo. Test W. Briwer. apud
Waverle, Quinto die Aprilis.

Sub eadem forma scribitur aliis in quorum Ballivis habet terras, res vel
tenementa.

REx H. de He was Sheriff of Hampshire. Claus. 9. Johannis, M. 3.
Nevil, etc. Mandamus vobis quod permittas Domino Winton Episcopo habere in
bona pace omnes terras tes and redditus Prioratus Winton captas in manum
nostram in Balliva vestra occasion and si quid inde amotum est occasion illa
id eis sine dilatione integre reddi faciatis. Test W. Briwer apud Merleb. 10.
die Aprilis.

Eodem modo scribitur aliis in quorum Ballivis habet terras.

Claus. 9. Johannis, M. 5.
MAndatum est Roberto de Burgata, quod faciat habere Episcopo Norwicensi, totum
Regale, quod ad Episcopatum suum pertinet, and omnia Maneria sua, and omnes
terras and wardas suas, and omnia sua capta in manu Domini Regis occasion
Interdicti, retentis in manu Episcopatu suo. Mandatum est etiam eidem quod
faciat habere Comiti Rogero omnes redditus, and res Clericorum habentium
redditus de feudo suo, and donatione sua, and omnes terras, redditus, and res
Abbatum de feudo suo, si alicujus Crocia signifies often a Pastoral Staff.
Crotiae habent de dono suo, and Priorum seu cujuscunque domus religiosae si
sit de dono suo, quia ipse Domino Regi inde respondebit.

Pat. 9. Johannis, n. 11.
REx omnibus de Episcopatu Lincolniensi Clericis and Laicis salutem. Cornhull
Archidiacono de Huntingdon and Gerar. de Camvilla Episcopatu Lincolniensi qui
divina extunc celebrare noluerint and mandamus vobis quod eis extunc sicut
Ballivis nostris sitis intendentes and credatis eis de hiis quae vobis inde
dixerint interim ex part nostra. Test meipso apud Clarend. decimo octavo die
Martii.

Sub eadem forma scribitur omnibus de Episcopatu Elyensi quod sint intendentes
ab illo die Comiti Sarr.

PRaecipimus tibi quod clamari facias sine dilatione per Comitatum tuum quod
nulli sicut diligunt corpora sua and catalla malum faciant dicant viris
Religiosis vel Clericis contra pacem nostram, Rot. Claus. 9. Johannis M 3.
and si quem inde attingere possimus ad proximam quircum eum suspendi faciemus.
Test meipso apud Merleb. undecimo die Aprilis.

This Writ has no particular Direction to any Person, but probably it might be
to Hen. de Nevill, Sheriff of Hampshire, mentioned Number 90: for this is the
next Record to that upon the Close Roll, and is dated at the same place, and
the next day after.

MAndatum est omnibus Vicecomitibus Angliae, quod permittant, Claus. 9. Johan.
Regis M. 10. Dors.
From the Greek Sagma, a Burden, whence Salma, Sauma, Somma, Summa, the French
Saume, and perhaps our Saxon Seam, a Load or Burden, which now is usually
taken for a Quarter of Grain; hence Equus Sagmarius, Saumarius, Soumarius,
Sommarius, Summarius, a Summer, or as we corruptly call it, a Sumpter Horse.
summas, usque ad

JOhannes Rex Angliae, etc. Summone per bonos summonitores, Mat. Paris, f. 233.
n. 50.
Comites, Barons, Milites, and omnes liberos homines and servientes, vel
homagium nobis vel ligantiam fecerunt. Quod sicut nos and seipsos and sua omnia
diligunt, sint apud Doveram ad instans equis and armis, and cum toto posse suo
ad defendendum caput nostrum, and capita sua, and terram Angliae. Et quod
nullus remaneat qui arma portare possit, sub nomine Culvertagi^ and perpetuae
servitutis. Et unusquisque sequatur Dominum suum, and qui terram non habent and
arma habere possint, illuc veniant ad capiendum solidatas nostras. Et tu omnem
attractum victualium, and omnia mercata Bailivarum tuarum venire facias and
sequantur exercitum nostrum, ita quod nullum mercatum de Bailivis tuis alibi
teneatur; and tu ipse tunc praedictis Summonitoribus. Et scias quod scire
volumus, quomodo venerint de Bailivis tuis, and qui venerint and qui non. Et
videas quod tu ita effortiate venias cum equis and armis, and haec ita
exequaris, ne inde ad corpus tuum nos capere debeamus. Et tu inde habeas
Rotulum tuum, ad nos certificandum qui remanserint.

JOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, omnibus praesentes literas inspecturis, Mat.
Paris, f. 235. n. 10.20. etc.
Salutem. Per has patentes literas, sigillo nostro munitas, volumus esse notum,
quod nobis praesentibus hi quatuor Barons nostri, Willielmus scilicet
Saresberiae frater noster, and Reginaldus Comes Bononiae, Willielmus Comes
Warrennae, and Willielmus Comes de Ferrariis, juraverunt in animam nostram,
quod nos subscriptam pacis formam bona fide per omnia curabimus observare. In
primis itaque solenniter and abs lute juravimus stare mandatis Domini Papae,
Coram ejus Legato aut nuncio, super omnibus, pro quibus excommunicati sumus ab
ipso; and veram pacem and plenam securitatem praestabimus venerabilibus viris,
Stephano Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Willielmo Londinensi, Eustachio Elyensi,
Aegidio Herefordensi, Jocelino Bathoniensi, and Huberto Lincolniensi Episcopis,
Priori quoque and Monachis Cantuariensibus, and Roberto filio Walteri, and
Eustachio de Vesci, nec non and caeteris Clericis and Laicis ad hoc negotium
contingentibus: praestando simul coram eodem Legato vel Delegato public
juramentum; quod ipsos cum suis nec laedemus, nec laedi faciemus, vel
permittemus in personis vel rebus, illisque dimittemus omnem indignationem, and
in gratiam nostram eosdem recipiemus, ac tenebimus bona fide: quodque praefatos
Archiepiscopum and Episcopos non impediemus, nec faciemus, vel permittemus
aliquatenus impediri, quo minus ipsi libere suum exequantur officium, and
plenae jurisdictionis suae authoritate, prout debent, utantur. Et super his,
tam Domino Papae, quam Ecclesia, contra violatores securitatis and pacis,
mandatis Apostolicis inhaerebunt, nosque perpetuo vacantium Ecclesiarum
custodias amittamus. Quod si forte nequiverimus ad hanc ultimam mandatis
Apostolicis inhaerebunt. Nos propter hoc Domino Papae, ac Ecclesiae Romanae per
nostras patentes literas obligavimus omne jus Patronatus, quod habemus in
Ecclesiis Anglicanis. Et sic omnes literas quae pro securitate praedictorum
sunt exhibendae, praefatis Archiepiscopo and Episcopis ante suum ingressum in
Angliam transmittemus. Si vero nobis placuerit, saepe fatus Archiepiscopus and
Episcopi praestabunt salvo honor Dei Ecclesiae, juratoriam cautionem and
literatoriam, quod ipsi nec per se nec per alium contra personam nostram vel
coronam nostram aliquid attentabunt, nobis praedictam eis pacem and securitatem
servantibus illibatam. De ablatis autem plenam restitutionem, and de damnis
recompensationem sufficientem omnibus impendemus, tam Clericis quam Laicis ad
hoc negotium pertingentibus, non solum rerum, sed omnium libertatum, and
restitutas conservabimus libertates. Archiepiscopo quidem and Episcopo
Lincolniensi a tempore suae consecrationis; aliis autem a tempore discordiae
inch^atae. servitii, quod nobis debucrat impendi, sed postea nobis debita pro
servitio recompensatio tribuetur. Statimque omn^s quos detinemus Clericos,
faciemus absolutos dimitti, ac restitui propriae libertati, cum laicis qui
hujus occasion negotii detinentur. Incontinenti quoque post adventum illius
qui nos debet absolvere, faciemus de part restitutionis ablatorum octo millia
librarum legalium Esterlingorum Stephano Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, duo millia
et quingentas libras; Willielmo Londinensi septingentas et quinquaginta libras,
Eustachio Elyensi septingentas and quinquaginta libras, Jocelino Bathoniensi
septingentas and quinquaginta libras, Huberto Lincolniensi septingentas and
quinquaginta libras, Priori and Monachis Cantuariensibus mill libras. Et
protinus postquam pacem illam duxerimus acceptandam, assignari faciemus absque
mora, Archiepiscopo and Episcopis, Clericis ac Ecclesiis universis, in manibus
nunciorum vel procuratorum ipsorum, mobilia omnia cum administratione libera
eorundem, and in pace dimitti. Interdictum vero Utlagatio Ecclesiasticas
personas, nullatenus faciemus proponi: revocantes praeterea utlagationem
laicorum ad hoc negotium pertinentium, and remittentes omnia quae post
interdictum recepimus ab hominibus Ecclesiasticis, praeter regni consuetudinem
et Ecclesiae libertatem. Si vero super damnis vel ablatis, aut eorum
quantitate, vel aestimatione, quaestio sententia Interdicti: Super caeteris
autem capitulis, si que fuerint dubitationes subortae, de quibus merito debeat
dubitari, nisi per Legatum vel Delegatum Domini Papae, de partium fuerint
voluntate Sopitae, ad ipsius referantur arbitrium, ut super his quae ipse
decreverit, observentur. Test meipso, apud Doveram, decima tertia die Maii,
Anno regni nostri decimo quarto.

REx Stephano Dei gratia Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Pat. 15. Johannis part
prima n 84.
totius Angliae Primati, and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinali salutem.
Sciatis quod secundum formam mandati Domini and Venerabilis Patris Innocentii
Dei gratia summi Pontificis veram pacem ac plenam securitatem vobis praestamus,
nec non caeteris tam Clericis quam Laicis hoc negotium quod inter nos and
Ecclesiam Anglicanam versatam est contingentibus nec vos nec vestros laedemus,
vel laedi faciemus, ant permittemus, in personis vel rebus, vobisque dimittimus
omnem indignationem and in gratiam nostram vos recipimus and te^ehimus bond
side and quod vos non impediamus, nec faciemus aut permittemus aliquatinus
impediri quo minus vestrum libere exequamini officium, and plena jurisdictionis
vestrae auctoritate prout debetis utamini. Et super hiis vobis juramenta and
litteras sidelium nostrorum venerabilium Patrum Domini H. Dublinensis
Archiepiscopi, Petri Wintoniensis, Johannis Norwicensis, Episcoporum, and
praeterea duodecim Baronum nostrorum, scilicet, Galfridi filii Petri Comitis
Essex, Justiciarii nostri, Reginaldi Comitis Boloniae, Ranulphi Comitis
Cestriae, Willielmi Comitis Marescalli, Comitis Penbroc, Willielmi Comitis
Warennae, Willielmi Comitis Arundel, Willielmi C^mitis de Ferrariis, Willielmi
Briwer, Roberti de Ros, Gileberti filii Re^nfri, Rogeri de Mortuo mari, et
Petri filii Hereberti fecimus exhib^ri quod pax and securitas firmiter
observetur; et si forte, quod Deus a vertat, per nos ipsos, vel alios contra
venerimus, ipsi pro Ecclesia contra violatores securitatis and pacis ma^datis
Apostolicis inhaerebunt. Nosque perpetuo Ecclesiarum v^cantium custodiam
amittamus. Et ideo vos rogamus quod ad nos secure et sine dilatione in Angliam
venire festinetis. Si quid vero in hoc scripto omissum fuerit, vel minus plene
factum cum in Angliam veneritis id secundum formam mandati Apostolici
perficietur. Et in hujus rei testimonium, etc. Testibus H. Dublinensi
Archiepiscopo, Petro Wintoniensi Episcopo, Galfrido filio Petri, Willielmo
Marescallo Comite Penbroc apud Templum de Ewell; Vicesimo quarto die Maii, Anno
Regni nostri decimo quinto.

Eodem modo scribitur singulis Episcopis ultra mare existentibus cum
Archiepiscopo scilicet Londinensi, Herefordensi, Elyensi, Bathoniensi,
Lincolniensi Episcopis, et Priori et Monachis Cantuariensibus.

Pat. 15 Johan. part prima, n. 1. Dorso.
VEnerabili in Christo Patri Stephano Dei gratia Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo
totius Angliae Primati et Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinali, Galfridus filius
Petri Comes Essex, Reginaldus Comes Boloniae, Ranulphus Comes Cestriae,
Willielmus Marescallus Comes Penbroc, salutem et debitam Reverentiam. Sciatis
quod bona fide studebimus quod Dominus noster Johannes Rex Angliae pacem et
securitatem vobis et aliis tam Clericis quam Laicis negotium quod inter
Anglicanam Ecclesiam et ipsum Regem versatum est contingentibus, firmiter
observabit secundum formam pacis a Domino Papa ei transmissam et ab eo
acceptatam. Et convenerit nos pro Ecclesia, contra violatores securitatis, et
pacis, mandatis Apostolicis inhaerebimus et ipse perpetuo Vacantium Ecclesiarum
Custodiam amittat. Praeterea promittimus quod si quid omissum est, vel minus
plene factum circa hoc negotium in hoc scripto propter accelerationem adventus
vestri in Angliam, id post adventum vestrum secundum formam praedictam
perficietur. Et in hujus rei testimonium, etc. Valete in Domino. Haec autem
omnia supradicta nos firmiter observaturos, nos de mandatis Domini Regis tactis
sacro-sanctis spontanea voluntate corporali Sacramento firmasse.

Eodem modo scribitur singulis Episcopis cum Archiepiscopo existentibus,
scilicet, Londinensi, Herefordensi, Elyensi, Bathoniensi, et Lincolniensi, et
Priori et Monachis Cantuariensibus.

JOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Mat. Paris, f. 236. n. 40.
and caetera omnibus Christi fidelibus hanc Chartam inspecturis, salutem in
Domino. Universitati vestrae Deum and Matrem nostram Sanctam Ecclesiam
offenderimus in multis, and proinde divina misericordia plurimum indigeamus,
nec quid digne offerre gratia Sancti Spiritus inspirante, non vi interdicti,
nec timore coacti, sed nostra bona spontaneaque voluntate, ac communi consilio
Baronum nostrorum conferimus, and libere concedimus Deo and Sanctis Apostolis
ejus Petro and Paulo and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae matrone nostrae; ac Domino
Papae Innocentio, ejusque Catholicis Successoribus; totum regnum Angliae and
totum reguum Hyberniae, omni jure and pertinentiis suis, pro remissione omnium
peccatorum nostrorum, and totius generis nostri, tam pro vivis quam pro
defunctis; and amodo illa ab eo and Ecclesia Romana, tanquam secunoar us
recipientes and tenentes; in praesentia prud^ntis viri Pandulphi Domini Papae
subdiaconi and familiaris. Exinde praedicto Domino Papae Innocentio, ejusque
Catholicis Successoribus, and Ecclesiae Romanae, secundum subscriptam formam
fecimus and juravimus, and homagium ligium in praesentia Pandulphi: Si coram
Domino Papa esse poterimus, eidem simili modo summo Pontifici qui pro tempore
fuerit, and Ecclesiae Romanae, sine contradictione debeant fidelitatem
praestare and homagium recognoscere. Ad indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae
obligationis and concessionis, volumus and stabilimus, ut de propriis and
specialibus redditibus nostris praedictorum regnorum, pro omni servitio and
consuetudine quae pro ipsis facere debemus, salvis per omnia denarils beati
Petri, Ecclesia Romana mill Marcas Esterlingorum percipiat annuatim: Michaelis
quingentas Marcas, and in Pascha quingentas, septingentas scilicet pro regno
Angliae, and trecentas pro regno Hyberniae: Salvis nobis and haeredibus
nostris, justities, libertatibus, and regalibus nosiris. Quae omnia sicut supra
scripta sunt, rata esse volentes atque firma, obligamus nos and successores
nostros contra non venire; and si nos vel aliquis successorum nostrorum contra
haec attentare praesumpserit, quicunque ille fuerit, nisi rite commonitus
resipuerit, cadat a jure regni, and haec Charta obligationis and concessionis
nostrae, semper firma Doveram, coram H. Dublinensi Archiepiscopo, Johanni
Norwicensi Episcopo, Galfrido filio Petri, W. Comite Sarisberie, Willielmo
Comite Penbroc, R. Comite Bononiae, W. Comite Warenne, S. Comite Winton. W.
Comite Arundel, W. Comite de Ferrariis, W. Briwere, Petro filio Hereberti,
Warino filio Geroldi, xv. die Maii, anno regni nostri decimo quarto.

Ego Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Dominus Hyberniae, Ibid. f. 237. n.
20. The Form of King John his doing Homage to the Pope.
ab fidelis ero Deo and beatro Petro and Ecclesiae Romanae, and Domino meo
Papae Domino Innocentio, ejusque Successoribus Catholice intrantibus. Non ero
in facto, in dicto, consensu vel consilio, ut vitam perdant vel membra, vel
mala captione capiantur. Eorum damnum si Scivero, impediam, and remanere faciam
si potero: Alioquin eis quam citius potero intimabo, vel tali personae dicam
quam eis credam pro certo dicturam Consilium quod mihi crediderint, per se vel
per nuncios suos seu literas suas, secretum tenebo; and ad eorum damnum nulli
pandam me sciente. Patrimonium beati Petri, and specialiter regnum Angliae, and
regnum Hyberniae adjut^r ero ad tenendum and defendendum, contra omnes homines
pro posse meo. Sic me adjuvet Deus, and hac Sancta Evangel^a, Amen.

In B^bliotheca Cottoniana, sub Effigic Cleopatrae. E 1.
INnocentius Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei Charissimo in Christo filio Johanni
illustri, Anglorum Regi, ejusque de sua Vxore, Haeredibus, in perpetuam
memoriam. Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium, Jesus Sacerdos in aeternum
secundum Ordinem Melchisedech, ita regnum and Sacerdotium in Ecclesia
stabilivit, ut sacerdotale sit Regnum, and Sacerdotium sit Regale; Sicut in
Epistola Petrus and Moses in lege testantur, unum perficiens Vniversis, quem
suum in terris Vicarium Ordinavit, illi omnes obediant and intendant ut sit
unum Ovile, and unus Pastor. Hunc itque Reges seculi propter Deum a Deo,
venerantur, ut non reputent se rite regnare nisi studeant ei devote servire.
Quod tu Fili Charissime prudenter attendens, illo misericorditer inspirante, in
cujus manu sunt Corda Regum, and quo voluerit vertit illa, teipsum and tua
etiam temporaliter ei subjicere deorevisti, cui noveras spiritualiter esse
subjecta, and in unam Vicarii Christi personam, quasi Corpus and Anima, Regnum
and Sacerdotium uniantur, ad magnum utriusque Commodum and augmentum. Ille
utique hoc dignatus est operari qui cum fit Alpha, and Omega sinem retulit ad
principium, and principium protraxit ad finem; ut illae Provinciae quae olim
Sacrosanctam Romanam Ecclesiam proprium in Spiritualibus habuere Magistram,
nunc etiam in Temporalibus, Dominam habeant Specialem. Tu quippe quem Deus ad
hoc idone^m Ministrum elegit, tam te, quam etiam Regna tua Angliae videlicet,
and Hiberniae cum omni jure, ac pertinentiis suis devota, and Spontanea
voluntate, Communi Consilio Baronum tuorum Deo, and Sanctis Apostolis ejus,
Petro, and Paulo, Sanctaeque Romanae Ecclesiae, nobisque and successoribus
nostris, in jus and proprietatem sub annuo Mill Marcarum censu offerens
concessisti, sicut in tuo continetur autentico scripto c^jus de verbo ad verbum
talis tenor existit. Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux
Normanniae, and Aquitaniae, Comes Andegaviae, Omnibus Christi Fidelibus
praesentem Cartam inspecturis, salutem. Vniversitati vestrae per hanc Chartam
nostram sigillo nostro munitam volumus Deum, and Matrem nostram sanctam
Ecclesiam, offenderimus in multis, ac proinde divina miserecord a plurimum
indigere noscamur, nec quid digne offerre possimus pro satisfactione Deo, and
Ecclesiae debita facienda, nisi nosipsos habeamus, and Regna nostra, volentes
nosipsos humiliari, pro illo qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad mortem,
gratia Sancti Spiritus inspirante, non vi inducti, nec timore Coacti, sed
nostra bona spontaneaque voluntate, ac Communi Consilio Baronum nostrorum
offerimus, and libere concedimus Deo, and Sanctis Apostolis ejus Petro, and
Paulo, and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Matri nostrae, ac Domino nostro Papae
Innocentio Tertio, ejusque Catholicis Successoribus, totum Regnum Angliae, and
totum Regnum Hiberniae, cum omni jure, and pertinentiis suis, pro remissione
peccatorum nostrorum and totius generis nostri, tam pro vivis, quam defunctis.
Et amodo illa a Deo, and Ecclesia Romana tanquam Feodatarii recipientes, and
tenentes in praesentia. Patris nostri Pandulsi Domini Papae Subdiaconi, and
familiaris, fidelitatem exinde Domino nostro Pape Innocentio, ^jusque
Catholicis Successoribus, et Ecclesiae Romanae, secundum scriptam formam
fecimus et juravimus et Homag um ei ligium in praesentia Domini Papae, si coram
eo esse poterimus, eidem facie^us, Successores et Haeredes nostros de Vxore
nostra in perpetuum Obligantes, ut simili modo summo Pontifici qui pro tempore
fuerit, et Ecclesiae Romanae, sine contradictione debeant fidelitatem
praestare, Homagium recognoscere. Ad indicium autem hujus perpetuae nostrae
oblationis, et Concessionis, volumus, et stabilimus, ut de propriis et
specialibus redditibus praedictorum regnorum nostrorum pro omni Servitio et
consuetudine quod pro ipsis facere deberemus (Salvo per omnia Denario Beati
Petri) Ecclesia Romana Mill Marcas Sterlingorum percipiat annuatim; scilicet
in festo Sancti Michaelis quingentas Marcas, et in Pascha quingentas Marcas;
Septingintas scilicet pro Regno Angliae et trecentas pro Regno Hiberniae. Et si
nos, vel aliquis successorum nostrorum jure regni, et haec Carta oblationis et
concessionis nostrae semper firma permaneat.

Ego Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae et Dominus Hiberniae ab hac hora in ante,
fidelis ero Deo, et beato Petro, et Ecclesiae Romanae, ac Domino meo Papae
Innocentio, ejusque Successoribus Catholice intrantibus; Non ero in facto,
Dicto, Consensu vel Consilio, ut vitam p^rdant vel membra patrimonium beati
Petri et specialiter regnum Angliae, et regnum Hiberniae, adjutor ero ad
tenendum, et defendendum contra omnes Homin^s pro posse meo. Sic Deus me
adjuvet et haec Sancta Dei Evangelia. Test meipso apud Domum Militiae
Doveriam, coram Domino Huberto Archiepiscopo Dubliniensi, Domino Johanne
Episcopo Norvicensi, Galfrido filio Petri Comite Essexiae, Justiciario nostro,
Willielmo Comite Saresberiae fratre nostro, Willielmo Marshall Comite
Pembrociae, Reginaldo Comite Boloniensi, Willielmo Comite Wa^enniae, Saero
Comite Winton. Willielmo Comite Arundelli, Willielmo Comite de Ferreriis,
Willielmo Briewer, Petro filio He^berti, Warino filio Geroldi, etc. xv die Maii
anno regni nostri xiiii. Nos autem oblationem et Concessionem hujusmodi pie ac
beati Petri, et nostra protectione suscipimus tibi, et ipsis secundum
praescriptam formam de communi Consilio fratrum nostrorum supradicta regna
concedentes in feodum, et praesenti privilegio confirmantes, ita quod quilibet
haeredum tuorum, cum regni coronam ac^eperit, feodum bujusmodi summo Pontifici
et Romanae Ecclesiae public recognoscat, et eis fidelitatis exhibeat
Concecessionis et Confirmationis infringere, vel ei, ausu temerari^ contraire.
Siquis aut hoc attemptare prasumps^rit indignationem omnipotentis Dei et
beatorum Petri et Pauli Apostolorum se noverit Mansuram.



Ego Innocentius Catholicae Ecclesiae Episcopus. Ego Cinthius Titulo Sancti
Laurentii in Lucina Presbyter Cardinalis. Ego Cencius Sanctorum Johannis and
Pauli Cardinalis Titulo Pamachii. Ego Petrus, Sanctae Pudentianae Titulo
Pastor, Presbyter Cardinalis. Ego Guala Sancti Martini Presbyter Cardinalis
Titulo Equitis. Ego Johannes Titulo Sanctae Praxedis, Presbyter Cardinalis. Ego
Stephanus Basilicae 12 Apostolorum Presbyter Cardinalis. Ego Johannes
Sabinensis Episcopus. Ego Guido Prenestensis Episcopus. Ego Hugo Hostiensis
Episcopus. Ego Guido Johannis Nichol. in Carcere Tullo. Diaconus Cardinalis.
Ego Octavianus Sanctorum Sergii and Bachi Diaconus Card. Ego Johannes Sanctorum
Cosmae and Damiani Diaconus Cardinalis. Ego Angelus Sancti Adriani Diaconus
Cardinalis. Ego Petrus Sanctae Mariae in Aquiro Diaconus Cardinalis. Ego
Bicinus Sancti Georgii Diaconus Cardinalis.

Dat. Laterani per manum Rainaldi Acolyti and Capellani Domini Innocentii
Tertii Papae i. e. 4 Novembris.
ii Non. Novembris Indictione Secunda, Incarnationis Dominicae M. C. C. XIII.
Pontificatus vero ejusdem Domini Innocentii Anno Decimo sexto.
JOhannes Dei gratia, etc. Cart. 15. Johannis, n. 31.
Omnibus Christi fidelibus praesentem Cartam inspecturis Salutem. Universitati
vestrae per hanc Cartam aurea bulla Dominum, and Matrem nostram Sanctam
Ecclesiam offenderimus in multis and proinde divina misericordia plurimum
indigere noscamur, nec quid quod digne offerre possimus Deo and Ecclesiae
debita facienda nisi nos ipsos habeamus and regna nostra. Volentes nos ipsos
humiliari pro eo qui se pro nobis humiliavit usque ad mortem gratia Spiritus
Sancti inspirante non vi Inducti nec timore coacti set nostra bona spontaneaque
voluntate ac communi Consilio Baronum nostrorum offerimus and libere concedimus
Deo and Sanctis Apostolis ejus Petro and Paulo and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae
Matri nostrae ac Domino nostro Papae Innocentio tertio ejusque Catholicis
Successoribus totum Regnum Angliae and totum Regnum Hiberniae cum omni jure and
pertinentiis suis pro remissione peccatorum nostrorum and totius generis nostri
tam pro vivis quam defunctis and amodo illa a Deo and ab Ecclesia Romana
tanquam Feodatarii recipientes and tenentes in praesentia venerabilis Patris
nostri Domini Nicholai Tusculani Episcopi Apostolicae Sedis Legati and
Pandulphi Domini Papae Subdiaconi and familiaris fidelitatem exinde praedicto
Domino nostro Papae Innocentio ejusque Catholicis Successoribus ac Ecclesiae
Romanae Secundum scriptam formam fecimus and juravimus and homagium ei ligium
pro praedictis regnis and Sanctis Apostolis Petro and Paulo and Ecclesiae
Romanae and eidem Domino nostro Papae Innocentio tertio per manum praedicti
Legati loco and vice ipsius Domini Papae recipientis public f^cimus
Successores and Haeredes nostros de uxore nostra in perpetuum obligantes ut
simili modo Summo Pontifici qui pro tempore fuerit and Ecclesiae Romanae sine
contradictione debeant fidelitatem praestare and hamagium r^cognoscere. Ad
Indicium autem hujus nostrae perpetuae oblationis and Concessionis velimus and
stabilimus ut de propriis and specialibus redditibus praedictorum mill Marcas
Sterlingorum, percipiat annuatim scilicet in festo Sancti Michaelis quingentas
Marcas, and in Pascha quingentas Marcas; Septingentas scilicet pro regno
Angliae and trescentas pro regno Hiberniae. Salvis nobis and haeredibus nostris
Iusticiariis libertatibus and regali^us nostris. Quae omnia sicut supradicta
sunt rata volentes esse perpetuo and firma obl^gamus nos et Successores nostros
contra jure regni et haec Carta oblationis and Concessionis nostrae semper
firma permaneat. Ego Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Dominus Hiberniae ab
hac hora in ante fidelis ero Deo et Beato Petro et Ecclesiae Romanae ac Domino
nostro Papae Innocentio tertio ejusque Successoribus Catholice intrantibus non
ero in facto dicto consensu vel Consilio ut vitam perdant vel membra vel m^la
captione capiantur. Eorundem dampnum si Patrimonium Beati Petri and specialiter
regnum Angliae, et regnum Hiberniae adjutor ero ad defendendum et tenendum
contra omnes homines pro posse meo, sic me Deus adjuvet et haec Sancta
Evangelia de omnibus ne possit in posterum dubitari, ad majorem securitatem
praedictae oblationis et concessionis nostrae praesentem Cartam nostram fecimus
sigillari, ac pro concessu hujus praesentis et primi anni mill Marcas
Sterlingorum per manus praedicti Legati Ecclesiae Romanae persolvimus. Testibus
Domino Stephano Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, Willielmo Londoniensi, Petro
Wintoniensi, Eustachio Elyensi, Hugone Lincolniensi Episcopis, Waltero de Gray
Cancellario nostro, Willielmo Comite Sarr fratre nostro, Ranulpho Comite
Cestriae, Willielmo Marescallo Comite Penbroc, Willielmo Comite de Ferrariis,
Sahero Comite Wintoniensi, Roberto de Ros, Willielmo Briwer, Petro ^ilio
Herberti, Matheo filio Herberti, Briano de Insula Richardi de Marisco apud
Sanctum Paulum. London tertio die Octobris anno ab Incarnatione Domini, M. CC.
xiii. regni vero nostri quinto decimo.

Rot. Claus. 15 Johan. part prima, M. 8. D^rs.
VEnerabilibus in Christo Patribus Stephano Dei gratia Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo totius Angliae Primati et Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae Cardinali et
omnibus suffraganeis suis Episcopis cum eo existentibus, Johannes etc. Mandamus
vobis quod been veneritis in Angliam scientes quod jamdiu vos expectavimus et
adventum vestrum desideravimus, unde in occursum vestrum mittimus fideles
nostros Dominum H. Dublinensem Archiepiscopum, Johannem Norwicensem Episcopum,
Willielmum Comitem Arundel, Matheum filium Herberti, Willielmum Archidiaconum
Huntudoniae rogantes quatinus ad nos venire festinetis sicut praedicti fideles
nostri vobis dicent. Test meipso apud Stokes Episcopi primo die Julii.

HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Mat. Paris, f. 55. n. 40. Ibid. f. 240. n. 10.
Hugoni de Boclande Vicecomiti, and omnibus fidelibus suis, tam Francis quam
Anglicis in Herefordsyre, salutem, etc.

Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae Hugoni de Boclande Justiciario Angliae,
Francigenis quam Anglis in Hertfordsire, salutem. Sciatis me Dei misericordia,
and communi Consilio Baronum regni Angliae, ejusdem regni Regem esse coronatum.
Et quia regnum oppressum erat injustis exactionibus ego respectu Dei and amore,
quem erga vos omnes habeo, Sanctam Dei Ecclesiam inprimis liberam facio, ita
quod nec eam vendam nec ad firmam ponam, nec mortuo Archiepiscopo vel Episcopo
sive Abbate aliquid accipiam de Dominio Ecclesiae vel de hominibus donec
Successor in eam ingrediatur. Et omnes quibus regnum Angliae injuste
opprimebatur, inde auf^ro; quas malas consuetudines in part hic pono.

Si quis Baronum meorum, Comitum vel aliorum, qui de me tenent, mortuus fuerit,
haeres suus non redimet terram suam, sicut facere consueverat tempore patris
mei: Sed legitima and justa relevatione relavabit eam. Similiter and homines
Baronum meorum, legitima and justa relevatione relevabunt terras suas de
Dominis suis. Et si quis Baronum hominum meorum, filiam suam tradere voluerit;
sive Sororem, sive Neptem, sive Cognatam, mecum inde loquatur; Sed neque ego
aliquid de suo pro hac licentia accipiam, neque defendam ei quin eam det.
Excepto si jam dare vellet inimico meo.

Et si mortuo Barone vel alio homine meo filia haeres remanserit: dabo illam
cum Consilio Baronum meorum, cum terra sua. Et si mortuo marito, Uxor ejus
remanserit, and sine liberis fuerit; dotem suam and maritagium corpus suum
legitime servabit: Et eam non dabo marito, nisi secundum velle suum; and t^rrae
liberorum custos erit sive uxor, sive alius propinquior qui justus esse debet,
and praecipio ut Barons mei similiter se contineant erga filios and filias,
vel uxores hominum suorum.

Monetagium commune quod capiebatur per Civitates vel Comitatus, quod non fuit
tempore Regis Edwardi; hoc ne amodo fiat, omnino defendo. monetarius, sive
alius cum falsa moneta, Justitia recta inde fiat.

Omnia placita, and omnia debita quae Regi fratri meo debebantur, condono:
Exceptis firmis men's, and exceptis illis quae pacta erant pro aliorum
haereditatibus; vel pro illis rebus, quae justius aliis contingebant: Et si
quis aliquid pro haereditate sua pepigerat, illud condono: and omnes
relevationes, quae pro rectis haereditatibus pactae erant.

Et si quis Baronum vel hominum meorum infirmabitur; sicut ipse dabit, vel dare
disposuerit pecuniam suam, ita datam esse concedo. Quod si ipse praeventus, vel
armis, vel infirmitate, pecuniam suam nec dederit nec dare disposuerit: Vxor
sua sive liberi aut parents and legitimi homines ejus, pro anima ejus eam
dividant, sicut eis melius visum fuerit.

Si quis Baronum vel haminum meorum foris-fecerit, non dabit vadium in
misericordia pecuniae suae, sicut faciebat tempore patris vel fratris mei, sed
secundum forisfacturae modum: nec ita emendabit, sicut emendasset retro tempore
patris mei; Quod si perfidiae vel sceleris convictus fuerit; sicut erit culpa,
sic emendet.

Murdra etiam retra ab illa die, qua in Regem coronatus fui, omnia condono: Et
ea quae amodo facta fuerint, just emendentur secundum lagam Regis Edwardi.

Forestas Communi Consilio Baronum meorum, in manu mea ita retinui; sicut pater
meus eas habuit.

Militibus qui per Loritas terras suas defendunt, terras dominicarum carucarum
suarum quietas: ab omnibus geldis, and omni opere proptio, ut apti and parati
sint ad servitium meum, and ad defensionem regni mei.

Pacem firmam pono in toto regno meo, and teneri amodo praecipio.

Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis reddo, cum illis emendationibus, quibus pater meus
eam emendavit, Consilio Baronum suorum.

Si quis aliquid de meo vel de rebus alicujus, post obitum Regis Willielmi
fratris mei cepit, totum cito reddatur absque emendatione, and si quis inde
aliquid retinuerit, ille super quem inventum fuerit graviter mihi emendabit.
Testibus Mauritio Londoniensi Episcopo, Willielmo Wintoniensi electo, Gerardo
Herefordensi Episcopo, Henrico Comite, Simone Comite, Waltero Giffard Comite,
Roberto de Monte Forti, Rogero Bigod, and aliis multis.

There are to be found in Matthew Paris Two distinct Copies of this Charter,
according to the Citations above in the Margin, in one of which, Hugo de
Bocland is said to be Sheriff of Herefordshire, and the Chart is directed To
the French and English of that County; in the other he is said to be Justiciary
of England, and the Chart is directed To the French and English in
Hertfordshire, by mistake (I suppose) for Herefordshire; of which his being
Sheriff, and Justiciary of England at Order. Vital. f. 805. B. A. D. 1101.
Norman, and an Order. Vital. f. 805. B. A. D. 1101.
Ordinary Man, and Order. Vital. f. 805. B. A. D. 1101.
raised to this great Preferment by Henry the First. There were so many Mat.
Paris. f. 56. n. 30.
Copies of this Charter, as there were Counties in England, and by the Kings
Command were kept as a Record or Monument in some one Abbey therein. And it was
only a Relaxation of the strict rigid Feudal Law in many points. See the Answer
to Argumentum Antinormanicum, f. 265. C. etc.

REx Vicecomiti Somerset, and Dorset, etc. Rot Pat. 15. Johan. p. 2. M. 8. Dors.
Tibi praecipinius quod sine Dilatione ex part nostra praecipias Roberto de
Berkeley, Rogero de Penton, and Osberto filio Willielmi, quod omni occasion
post veniant ad Diem and locum, quos Dominus Episcopus Bathoniensis tibi scire
fecerit, ad audiendam Inquisitionem de ablatis and Damnis Episcoporum and
Clericorum et omnium virorum Ecclesiasticorum, et aliorum Negotium Ecclesiae
contingentium, Note, This Writ was issued on behalf of the Bishop of Bath, who
had been beyond Sea with the Archbishop, not long after the Kings Absolution,
in pursuance of the Oath he then took.
Faciendam Coram Clericis Domini Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, quos ad hoc per
literas suas patentes assignaverit. Et summone ex part nostra omnes illos de
Balliva tua, qui Custodiam vel aliquam Ballivam habuerunt de Rebus
Ecclesiasticis a Tempore Mote Discordie inter nos and Clerum Angliae, quod tunc
coram praedictis Clericis Domini Archiepiscopi Compareant, ad praedictam
Inquisitionem audiendam. Test meipso apud Northampton, 31 Die Augusti.

And then there were these Inquisitors appointed in every Bishopric.

in Archiepiscopatu Cantuar.
Galfridus fill. Petri Comes Essex. Simo de Pateshull --
in Episcopatu Wintoniensi.
Willielmus Briwere Walt. de Aundely
in Episcopatu Exoniensi.
Richardus Flandrensis Eudo de Bello Campo Robertus de Alba Marla
in Episcopatu Elyensi.
Comes Roger. le Bigod Robertus de Burnvill
in Episcopatu Wigornniensi.
Petrus silius Herberti Willielmus de Ardern
in Episcopatu Bathoniensi.
Robertus de Berkeley Osbertus filius Willielmi
in Episcopatu Cestrensi.
Thomas de Estleg Willielmus de Waur.
in Episcopatu Norwicensi.
Galfridus de Aumbly Willielmus fill. Rocelini
in Episcopatu Landavensi.
Richardus Flandrensis de Glamorgan. Walterus Culye --
in Archi-Episcopatu Eboracensi.
Jordanus Foliot Johannes de Birkin
in Prioratu Cantuariensi.
Math. filius Herberti Willielmus de Cirinton Willielmus de Risseteford
in Episcopatu Cicestrensi.
Simo de Rohingham Robertus de Savage Robertus de Petro-Ponte
in Episcopatu Londinensi.
Comes Willielmus Marescal. Jacobus de Poterna
in Episcopatu Lincolniensi.
Radulphus de Neunamul Thomas de Muleton Alexander de Pointon
in Episcopatu Herefordensi.
Robertus de Mortuo Mari Walterus de Clifford Rogerus Huscarl
in Episcopatu Sarisberiensi.
Godefridus de Sancto Martino Petrus de Skudemor Henricus filius Aucheri
in Episcopatu Menevensi.
Thomas de Landa Willielmus de Barry
in Episcopatu Roffensi.
Galfridus de Sundernesse Richardus de Valle Bedonis
in Episcopatu Dunholmensi.
Rogerus de Andree Walterus de Monasteriis
Ibid. M. 7. Dors.
REx Galfrido de Aumbly, Willielmo filio Roscelini, and Philippo Burnham, etc.
Mandamus vobis, quod Conveniatis ad Diem and Locum, quos Officialis Domini
Norwicensis Episcopi, vobis scire faciet coram Clericis Domini Cantuariensis
Episcopi, quos per literas suas assignavit ad Inquisitionem faciendam, de
omnibus Ablatis and Damn^s, illatis Ecclesie et Clero, et Laicis hanc causam
Contingentibus, de praedicto Episcopatu. Et vos sitis cum illis ad
Inquisitionem illam Ballivas habuerint in praedicto Episcopatu de rebus
Ecclesiasticis vel aliis hanc causam Contingentibus, quod veniant ad praedictos
Diem and Locum, Inquisitionem illam audituri, and si non venerint Nichilominus
Inquisitio illa procedat. Et si quod Damnum evenerit, per defectum ipsorum non
nobis sed illis eveniet. Test meipso apud Novum Templum London. Sexto Die
Octobris.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Inquisitoribus supradictis.

Note, The Date of this second Writ answers the Time of the General Council
holden in St. Paul 's London, soon after Michaelmass this year, and also the
Time of the Agreement between the King and Bishops for making a General
Inquisition as delivered in the History.

CVm non possit Ecclesiis Domini melius provideri, Mat. Paris, f. 247. n. 30.
quam si eis pastores praeficiantur idonei, qui non tam praeesse cupiant quam
prodesse; Apostolica scripta Mandamus; quatenus Episcopatus and Abbatias
Angliae nunc vacantes, facias cum tuo consilio de personis idoneis per
Electionem, vel postulationem ordinari; qui non solum vita, sed and scientia
sint praeclari, verum etiam Regi fideles et regno utiles, nec non ad auxilium
and consilium efficaces, assensu Regio requisito. Cum ergo vacantium
ecclesiarum Capitulis, nostris literis demus in mandatis, ut tuo consilio
adquiescant; tu Dominum habens prae oculis, consulas super his viros providos
and honestos, qui plene norint merita personarum; ne te cujusquam astutia
circumveniri contingat. Si qui vero contradictores fuerint vel rebels, tu eos
per censuram ecclesiasticam, appellatione remota, compellas. Calendis Novembris
Pontificatus nostri anno Decimo Sexto.

REx dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo Comiti Marescallo salutem. Rot. Claus.
15. Johan. part prima, M. 1. Dors.
Sciatis quod sani Dei gratia et incolumes apud Rupellam applicuimus, capud
Jejunii cum magna part gentis nostre statim ex quo advenimus tum reddita nobis
fuerint, tum relicta et fortelicia and post paucas dies processimus ad Castrum
de Millesen obsidendum, and cum Castrum illud cepissemus venit ad voluntatem et
misericordiam nostram Johannes Porcelinus, et continuo post illum venit
similiter ad voluntatem et misericordiam nostram Savaricus de Malo Leone quem
consilio Domini Burdegalensis Archiepiscopi, and aliorum fidelium nostrorum in
pacem nostram admisimus die autem Martis proximi ante mediam quadragesimam dum
adhuc moram fecissemus circa Castrum illud funditus prosternendum venit ad nos
a Curia Romana frater Willielmus de Sancto Andoeno afferens nobis Litteras
Domini Pape de forma interdicti relaxandi in Anglia, quas venerabili patri
nostro Domino Petro Wintoniensi Episcopo destinavimus unde vobis mandamus
rogantes quatinus ad negotium illud exequendum ad honorem Dei et nostrum et
vestrum, Consilium et Auxilium efficax inpendatis, et faciatis super negotio
isto id quod Dominus Wintoniensis Justiciarius noster vobis dicet ad fidem and
commodum nostrum, ut honorem inde habeamus, et Regni nostri Status in melius
commutetur, unde merito vobis ad perpetuas teneamur gratiarum actiones. Test
me ipso apud Rupellam Octavo die Martii.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus Comitibus, Baronibus, et Magnatibus Anglie, Data
eadem.

Mat* Paris, f. 249. l n. 2,
INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Venerabilis frater noster Johannes Norwic^nsis
Episcopus, and dilectus filius noster Robertus de Marisco and Nobiles vtri
Thomas de Alias Herdingtona.
Hundintuna and Adam nuncii nostri Charissimi in Christo filii nostri Johannis
Regis Angliae illustris ex una part; Magister Simon de Langetuna, A. and G.
Clerici, nuncii venerabilis fratris Nostri Stephani Can^uariensis Archiepiscopi
ex altera part, in praesentia nostra constituti, asseruere concorditer and
constanter: Quod pro vitando grandi rerum dispendio, and Regno quam Sacerdotio
ut sine dilatione relaxetur sententia interdicti. Vnde nos pro affectu paterno,
solicit inter eos ad salutem and utilitatem super his quae pacis sunt cum
illis tractavimus diligentur: Et tandem ipsis adquiescentibus, formam
invenimus, and statuimus infra scriptam. Sane praedictus Rex tantam Pecuniam
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Londoniensi, Elyensi Episcopis vel aliis, quos ad
hoc assignare voluerint faciat assignari: Computatis his quae idem Rex noscitur
persolvisse: Quod summa impleat quadraginta millia Marcarum. Quibus solutis, et
cautione praestita inferius adnotata; Protinus sublato cujuslibet Appellationis
et conditionis obstaculo, relaxes sententiam, interdicti. Ac deinde singulis
Annis duodecim millia marcarum, in duobus terminis; in commemoratione videlicet
omnium Sanctorum sex millia Marcarum, and totidem in festo Dominicae
Ascentionis, apud Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli Londoniensis, tota summa fuerit
persoluta. Et hoc fideliter exequendum, obligavit seipsum, Ipse Rex per
proprium juramentum, and per literas Patentes sigillo suo communicas: N^c non
per fide jussionem Wintoniensis and Norwicensis Episcoporum, Cestrensis and
Wintoniensis, and Willielmi Mareschalli Comitum: Ita quod tam haeredes ipsius
Regis, quam Successores eorum tenebuntur astricti. Quocirca per Apostolica tibi
scripta praecipienda mandamus, quatenus secundum formam praescriptam procedere
non postponas, parts aliter duxerint componendum. Datum Laterani.

Chart. 16. Johannis, n. 67.
EGo Johannes, Dei gratia Rex Anglie Dominus Hibernie Dux Normannie, quod tantam
pecuniam in manus venerabilium Patrum Stephani Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi et
Gulielmi Londinensis Hugonis Lincolniensis ac Eustachii Elyensis Episcoporum
vel eorum quos ad hoc duxerint deputandos restituam iis quibus facienda est
restitutio computatis illis que persolvi eidem Archiepiscopo and Episcopis aut
aliis hoc negotium contingentibus de ipsius Consilio vel mandato quod summam
quadraginta millium Marcarum complebo, quibus solutis and cautione prestita
inferius nec non relaxata sententia interdi^i deinde singulis annis duodecim
ni^llia Marcarum in duobus terminis Commemoratione videlicet omnium Sanctorum
sex millia and totidem festo Ascensionis apud Ecclesiam Sancti Pauli Londonie
ejusdem faciam exhiberi, donec tota summa fuerit persoluta que taxante summo
Pontifice declarabitur per inquisitionem de mandato ejus proinde faciendam, and
ad hoc fideliter exequendum obligo me per proprium Juramentum ac per patentes
literas sigillo meo munitas nec non pro fidejussione venerabilium patrum Petri
Wintoniensis and Johannis Norwicensis Episcoporum, ac nobilium virorum
Cestrensis and Wyntoniensis Comitum and Willielmi Briwerr and Willielmi
Marescalli Comitis de Pembroc si fuerit presens in Anglia vel Comitis de
Ferrariis seu Comitis Arundel si Dominus Willielmus Marescallus forsitan absens
fuerit eorum Juramentis and literis roboratam. Ita quod tam heredes mei quam
apud Andegavum xvii. die Junii, Anno regni nostri xvi. Coram Magistro Pandulfo
Domini Papae Subdiacono and familiari ad hoc sp^cialiter destinato in presentia
venerabilium Patrum Johannis Norwicensis and W. Andegavensis Episcoporum,
Ranulphi Comitis Cestriae, Willielmi Comitis de Ferrariis, Magistri and Walteri
Clericorum Domini Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Reginaldi de Pontibus Senioris,
Pagani de Rupeforti and Thomae de Erdinton.

WIllielmus Comes de Ferrariis Omnibus presens scriptum visuris Pat. 16.
Johannis, part prima, M. 17. Dors.
Noveritis quod cum Dominus meus Johannes Rex illustris Anglorum Singulis annis
post relaxationem interdicti and totidem in ascensione Domini in manus
venerabilium patrum Stephani Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi Londinensis Elyensis
ac Lincolniensis Episcoporum vel eorum quos ipsi ad hoc duxerint deputandos in
Ecclesia Sancti Pauli London teneatur solvere donec tota summa fuerit persoluta
que taxante summo in Solido pro ipso Rege, and heredibus suis, per solennem
stipulationem promitiens, quod si ipse aut here is suus, quod absit, in solutione
antedicta cessavit, ego infra quatuor menses postquam fuero ammonitus vel
requisitus, sine dilatione and difficultate qualibet inde satisfaciam eisdem,
pro quo observando obligavi me and omnia bona mea Renuncians in hoc privilegio
fori, and nove constitutionis beneficio, omnique alii exceptioni vel
competiture. Insuper tactis Sacro-Sanctis Evangeliis juravi in presentia Domini
Pandulfi Domini Papae Subdiaconi and ejus familiaris ad hoc destinati and
Johannis Norwicensis Episcopi Thome de Erdinton et Magistri Alani et Walteri
Clericorum Domini Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, me bona fide, and sine fraud
observaturum, hec omnia antedicta, and in hujus rei Testimonium huic Scripto
Sigillum meum apposui. Actum apud Rochfort.
Rupem fortem xvii. die Junii, Anno regni Regis Johannis 16.

Pat. 15. Johan. part secunda, M. 8. Intus.
REx venerabili Patri in Christo Stephano Dei Gratiae Cantuariensi
Archiepiscopo, etc. Johannes eadem gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Sciatis quod per
has literas nostras patentes protestamur, quod ad nos Nullatenus

These Letters Patents bear date the same day with the Resignation Pandulph, at
the House of the Temple near Dover; See here N. 98. which House might be in
this Temple Ewell.

Ibid. M. 8. Dors.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit E. Dei Abbas et
Conventus R. Salutem in Domino Vniversitati Johannes Dei gratia Rex, etc. Nobis
and Ecclesie nostre plene satisfecit super universis quae per ipsum vel aliquem
suorum ad opus suum ex bonis domus nostre percepta sunt, ab initio currentis
Interdicti, usque ad talem diem, anni regni ejusdem xvi. Et in hujus sue plene
satisfactionis and nostre quiet clamationis robur et Testimonium presenti
scripto Sigillum Capituli nostri, duximus apponendum.

King JOHN's Great Charter, as it is to be found in Matthew Paris, Fol. 255. N.
50. Compared with the Manuscript in Bennet College
JOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Archiepiscopis and Episcopis, etc. in a
Manuscript Book of Laws in Corpus Christi Coll. Library in Cambridge.
etc. Sciatis nos intuitu Dei, and pro salute animae nostrae and antecessorum
omnium and haeredum meorum, and ad honorem D^i and exaltationem S. ecclesiae
and emendationem regni nostri, per consilium venerabilium patrum nostrorum
Stephani Cantuariensis

JOHN, By the Grace of God King of England, etc. To the Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. Know ye, That We in the presence, or for the sake of God, and for the
Health of our Soul, and the Souls of all my Antecessors and Heirs, and to the
Honor of God, and the Exaltation of Holy Church, and Amendment of our Kingdom
by advice of our Venerable Fathers, Stephan Archbishop of Canturbury, Primat of
all England, and Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church, Henry Archbishop of Dublin,
William Bishop of London, Peter of Winchester, Jocelin of Bathe and
Glastonbury, Hugh of Lincoln, Walter of Worcester, William of Coventry,
Benedict of Rochester Bishops; And Master Pandulph the Popes Subdeacon, and
ancient Servant, Brother of the Master of the Temple of England, and the Noble
Persons, William Marshall, or Marshal Earl of Pembroke, William Earl of
Salisbury, William Earl of Warren, William Earl of Arundel, Alan de Galewey
VVarin Fitz-Gerard, Peter Fitz-Herebert, and Hugo de Burgh Senescal or Steward
of Poictou, Hugh de Nev^l, Matthew Fitz-Herebert, Thomas Basset, Alan Basset,
Philip de Albeney, Robert de Ropesle, John Marshal, John Fitzhugh, and others
our Feudataries or Liegemen; Have first of all, Granted to God, and by this our
present Charter Confirmed for Us, and our Heirs for ever.

I. Quod Anglicana Ecclesia libera sit, and habeat jura sua integra, suas and
libertates illaesas, and ita volumus observari, quod apparet ex eo, quod
libertatem electionum, quae maxima and magis necessaria reputatur Ecclesiae
Anglicanae, mera and spontanea voluntate, ante discordiam inter nos and Barons
nostros manifest motam, concessimus, and charta nostra confirmavimus, and eam
obtinuimus a domino Papa Innocentio Papa tertio confirmari: quam and nos
observabimus, and ab haeredibus nostris in perpetuum bona fide volumus
observari.

That the English Church shall be free, and enjoy her whole Rights, and her
Liberties unhurt, and we will have them so observed, as it may appear, That the
Freedom of Elections, which was reputed most necessary for the English Church,
which we Granted, and Confirmed by our Chart, and obtained the Confirmation of
it, from Pope Innocent the Third, before the Discord between Us and our Barons
was of our mere Free Will. Which Chart of Freedom, we shall Observe, will it to
be faithfully observed by our Heirs for ever.

II. Concessimus etiam and omnibus liberis hominibus nostris Regni Angliae, pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum omnes libertates subscriptas;
habendas and tenendas eis and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris.

We have also Granted to all our Freemen of the Kingdom of England, for Us and
our Heirs for ever, All the underwritten Liberties to Have and to Hold to them
and their Heirs, of Us and Our Heirs.

III. Si quis Comitum vel Baronum nostrorum sive aliorum tenentium de nobis in
capite per servitium militare, mortuus fuerit, and cum decesserit, haeres suus
plenae aetatis fuerit and relevium debeat; habeat haereditatem suam per
antiquum relevium; scilicet haeres vel haeredes Comitis de Baronia Comitis
integra per centum libras; haeres vel haeredes Baronis de Baronia integra
centum marcas; haeres vel haeredes m^litis de feudo militis integro p^r centum
solidos ad plus; and qui minus debuerit minus det, secundum antiquam
consuetudinem feudorum.

If any of our Earls, or Barons, or others which hold of us in Chief, by
Military Service, shall die, and at the time of his Death his Heir shall be of
Full Age, and owes a Relief; He shall have his Inheritance or Estate by the
Ancient Relief: That is to say, the Heir, or of an Earl, for a whole Earls
Barony, an Hundred Pounds: The Heir, or Heirs of a Baron, for a whole Barony,
an Hundred Marks: The Heir or Heirs of a Knight for a whole Knights Fee, an
Hundred Shillings; and he that owes less, shall give less, according to the
Ancient Custom of Fees.

IV. Si autem alicujus haeres talium fuerit infra aetatem, and fuerit in
custodia, dominus ejus non habeat custodiam ejus nec terrae suae antequam
homagium

But if the Heir of any such shall be under Age, and shall be in Ward, his Lord
may not have the Wardship of him, nor his Land before he Homage. And after such
Heir shall be in Ward, and shall attein to the Age of one and twenty years, he
shall have his Inheritance without Relief, or without Fine: Yet so, that if he
be made a Knight while he is under Age, nevertheless the Land shall remain in
the Custody, or Guardianship of their Lords until the foresaid time.

V. Custos, terrae hujusmodi haeredis, qui infra aetatem fuerit, non capiat de
terra haeredis, nisi rationabiles exitus, and rationabiles consuetudines
hominum vel rerum, Et si nos commiserimus custodiam alicui talis terrae
Vicecomiti vel alicui alii, qui de exitibus terrae illius nobis debent
respondere, and ille destructionem de custodia fecerit, vel vastum: nos ab illo
capiemus emendam, and terra committatur duobus Legalibus and discretis
hominibus de feudo illo, qui similiter nobis respondeant, sicut praedictum est.

The Warden or Guardian of the Land of such Heir which shall be reasonable
Issues or Profits, reasonable Customs, and reasonable Services, and these
without the Destruction, or Waste of the Tenants, or things upon the Estate.
And if we shall Commit the Guardianship of those Lands to the Sheriff, or any
other, which ought to answer to us for the Issues or Profits of the Land, and
he shall make Destruction and Waste upon the Ward-Lands, we will force him to
give Satisfaction, and the Land shall be committed to lawful and discreet, or
understanding Tenants, of that who in like manner shall be answerable to us, as
has been said.

VI. Custos autem quamdiu custodiam terrae habuerit, sustentet domos, parcos,
vivaria, stagna, molendina, and caetera ad illam terram pertinentia, de
exitibus terrae ejusdem. Et reddat haer^di, cum ad plenam aetatem pervenerit,
terram suam totam instauratatam de carucis and omnibus aliis rebus ad minus
secundum quod illa recepit. Haec omnia observentur de custodiis
Archiepiscopatuum, Episcopatuum, Abbatiarum, Prioratuum, ecclesiarum, and
dignitatum vacantium, quae ad nos pertinent: excepto

But the Warden so long as he shall have the Wardship of the Land, shall uphold
and maintein the Houses, Parks, Warrens, Pools, Mills, and other things
belonging to the Land, with the Profits of the same Land; and shall restore to
the Heir when he comes of full Age, his whole Land stocked with Ploughs and all
other things, at least whatever he received. All these things shall be observed
in the Custody or Wardship of vacant and Dignities, which do belong to us.
Except that these Wardships ought not to be sold.

VII. Haeredes maritentur sine disparagatione: ita tamen quod antequam
contrahatur matrimonium, ostendatur propinquis de consanguinitate ipsius
haeredis.

Heirs shall be Married without Disparagement; and so, That before shall be
Contracted, those which are nearest to him in Blood shall be acquainted with it.

VIII. Vidua post mortem mariti sui, statim and sine difficultate aliqua habeat
maritagium suum, and haereditationem suam; nec aliquid det pro dote sua, vel
pro maritagio suo, vel haereditate sua, quam haereditatem maritus suus and ipsa
tenuerunt, die obitus ipsius mariti. Et maneat in capitali mesuagio mariti sui
per quadraginta dies, post obitum ipsius mariti, estoveruun suum interim de
communi. Assign^tur autem ei pro dote sua, tertia pars totius terrae mariti
sui, quae sua fuit in vita; nisi de minori dotata fuerit ad ostium ecclesiae.

A Widow after the Death of her Husband, shall forthwith and without any
Difficulty have her Marriage-Goods, and her Estate of Inheritance; nor shall
she give any thing for her Dower, or Marriage-Goods, or Inheritance, which her
Husband, and she, held at the day of his Death: And she may remain in the
Capital Message, or Mansion of her Husband, by the space of Forty Days after
his Death; in which time her Dower shall be Assigned, if it was not Assigned
before: Unless the House shall be a Castle, and if she departs from the Castle,
there reasonable Estovers (i. e. Competent Provision or Maintenance) in the
mean time out of the Common Stock, or whole Revenue. But there shall be
assigned to her for her Dower the Third Part of the whole Land of her Husband,
which was his in his lifetime, except she was endowed with less at the
Church-Door.

IX. Nulla vidua destringatur ad se maritandum, dum voluerit vivere sine
marito; ita tamen quod securitatem faciet, quod se non maritabit sine assensu
nostro, si de nobis tenuerit; vel sine assensu Domini sui de quo tenuerit, si
de alio tenuerit.

No Widow shall be distreined (i. e. compelled by taking her Goods) to Marry
her self, while she will live without an Husband; yet so as she shall give
security, she will not Marry without our Consent, if she holds of us; or
without the Consent of the Lord of whom she holds, if she holds of another
Person.

X. Nos vero vel Ballivi nostri non seisiemus terram aliquam, nec reditum pro
debito aliqu^, quamdiu catalla debitoris praesentia sufficient ad debitum
reddendum; and ipse debtor paratus sit inde satisfacere. Nec plegii ipsius
debitoris destringantur, quamdiu ipse capitalis debtor sufficiat

But we, or our Bailiffs (i. e. Officers) will not seize any Land or Rent, for
any Debt, so long as there shall be Chattels (i. e. Goods) of the Debtors upon
the Premises, sufficient to discharge it, and that the Debtor be ready and
willing to satisfy it: Nor shall the Sureties of the Debtor be distreined (i.
e. forced to pay the Debt by taking their Goods) so long the Capital Debtor be
able to pay the Debt.

XI. Et si capitalis debtor defecerit in solutione debiti, non habens unde
reddat, aut reddere nolit cum possit, plegii respondeant de debito: and si
voluerint, habeant terras and reditus debitoris, quousque sit ei satisfactum de
debito, quod ante pro eo solvitur; nisi capitalis debtor monstraverit se inde
esse quietum versus eosdem plegios.

And if the Principal, or Chief Debtor makes default in Payment Pleges or
Sureties shall answer it, and they shall have the Lands, and Rents of the
Debtor, so long as they shall be satisfied for the Debt they paid for him;
unless the Chief Debtor can show himself discharged thereof, and the Payment of
it undertaken by the Sureties.

XII. Si quis mutuo acceperit aliquid a Judaeis, plus vel minus, and moriatur

If any one borrowed any thing of the Jews, more or less, and dies before the
Debt be paid; there shall be no Use paid for that Debt, so long as the Heir is
under Age of whomsoever he holds: And if the falls into our Hands, we will take
only the Chattel contained in the Chart or Instrument, that is, the Pawn for
the Money lent, mentioned in it.

XIII. Et si quis moriatur, and debitum debet Judaeis, uxor ejus habeat dotem
suam, and nil reddat de debito illo. Et si liberi ipsius defuncti qui fuerunt
infra aetatem remanserint, provideantur eis necessaria secundum tenementum quod
fuerit defuncti, and de residuo solvatur debitum; salvo tamen servitio
dominorum, simili modo fiat de debitis, quae debentur aliis quam Judaeis.

If any one shall die indebted to the Jews, his Wife shall have her Dower, and
pay nothing of that Debt: And if the Defunct left Children under Age, they
shall have Necessaries provided for them, according to the Tenement (i. e. the
Real Estate) of the Defunct, and with the Residue or Overplus the Debt shall be
paid; saving the Service of the Lords, on whom his Tenement is holden. In like
manner the Debts due to other Persons than Jews shall be satisfied.

XIV. Nullum Scutagium vel auxilium ponam in regno nostro, nisi per commune
consilium Regni nostri, nisi ad corpus nostrum redimendum, and

I will not Exact or Levy any Scutage or Aid in our Kingdom, without the Common
Advice or Counsel of our Kingdom, unless to Redeem our Body, and to make our
eldest Son Knight, and once to Marry our eldest Daughter; and for this there
shall only be paid a Reasonable Aid.

XV. Simili modo fiat de auxiliis de Civitate Londinensi: and Civitas
Londoniensis habeat omnes antiquas libertates and liberas consuetudines suas,
tam per terras quam per aquas.

In like manner it shall be concerning the Ayds of the City of London; and the
City of London shall have all its Ancient Liberties, and Free Customs, as well
by Land as by Water.

XVI. Praeterea volumus and concedimus, quod omnes aliae Civitates, and Burgi,
and Villae, and Barons de quinque portubus, and omnes portus, habeant omnes
libertates and omnes liberas consuetudines suas, and ad habendum commune
consilium Regni de auxiliis assidendis, aliter quam in tribus casibus
praedictis.

Furthermore, We Will and Grant, That all other Citi^s, and Burgh^, and Towns,
and Barons of the Cinque, or Five Ports, and all Ports, shall have all their
Liberties, and Free Customs; and shall have the common advice of the Kingdom
concerning the Assessment of their Ayds, or shall send their Representatives,
or Commissioners to the Common Council of the Kingdom for the Assessment of
their Ayds, otherwise than in the three Cases aforesaid.

XVII. Et de Scutagiis assidendis, submoneri faciemus Archiepiscopos,

And for the Ass^ssing of Scutages, We shall cause to be summoned the
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and great Barons of the Kingdom, singly
and personally, by our Letters, (i. e. Writs.)

XVIII. Et praeterea faciemus submoneri in generali, per Vicecomites and
Ballivos nostros, omnes alios qui in capite tenent de nobis, ad certum diem;
scilicet ad terminum quadraginta dierum ad minus, and ad certum locum, in
omnibus literis submonitionis illius, causam Submonitionis illius exponemus.

And furthermore we shall cause to be summoned in general by our Sheriffs and
Bailiffs, All others which hold of us In Capi^e at a certain Writs of such
Summons, We will declare the cause of it.

XIX. Et sic facta submonitione, negotium procedat ad diem assignatum, secundum
consilium eorum qui praesentes fuerint, quamvis non omnes submoniti venerint.

And Summons being thus made, the Business mentioned in them shall proceed,
according to the Advice of such as shall be present, although all that were
summoned come not.

XX. Nos non concedimus de caetero alicui, quod capiat auxilium de liberis
hominibus suis, nisi ad corpus suum redimendum; and ad faciendum primogenitum
filium suum militem, and ad primogenitam filiam suam semel maritandam; and ad
hoc non fiat nisi rationabile auxilium.

We will not for the future grant to any one, That he may take Aid of his
Freemen, unless to Redeem his Body, and to make his eldest Son Knight, and
once to Marry his eldest Daughter; and for this there shall only be paid a
reasonable Aid.

XXI. Nullus distringatur ad faciendum majus servitium de feudo mllitis, nec de
alio libero tenemento, De est verbum quam.
quod inde debetur.

No Man shall be distreined to perform more service for a Knights Fee, or other
Free Tenent, than what is due from it.

XXII. Communia placita non sequantur curiam nostram, sed teneantur in aliquo
loco certo. Recognitiones de nova disseisina, and de morte antecessoris, and de
ultima praesentatione, non capiantur nisi in So in a Manuscript Book of Laws in
Corpus Christi Library in Cambridge.
Comitatibus suis, and hoc modo. Nos (vel si extra regnum fuerimus) capitalis
Justitiarius

Common Pleas shall not follow our Court, but shall be holden in some certain
place. Trials upon the Writs of Novel Disseisin, Death of the Ancestor, and
last Presentment to Benefices, shall not be but in their proper Counties, and
after this manner: We, or if out of the Capital or Chief Justiciary, shall send
our Justiciaries through every County once in a year, who with the Knights of
the Counties, shall hold those Pleas and Trials, or take Verdicts concerning
them.

XXIII. Et ea quae in illo adventu suo in Comitatibus per Justiciarios
praedictos, ad praedictas assisas capiendas missos, terminari non possunt, per
eosdem propter difficultatem articulorum aliquorum terminari non possunt,
referantur ad Justiciarios nostros de Banco.

And those things which at the coming of the Justices into the Counties, sent
to take or hold the said Trials or Assizes, cannot be determined, shall be
determined otherwhere in their Circuit or Iter: And those things which for the
difficulty of some Articles cannot be determined, are referred to our Justices
of the Bench.

XXIV. Assisae de ultima praesentatione Ecclesiarum, semper capiantur coram
Justiciariis de Banco, and ibi terminentur.

Assizes of the last Presentation of Churches, shall always be taken before the
Justices of the Bench, and there determined.

XXV. Liber homo non amercietur pro parvo delicto, nisi secundum modum ipsius
delicti; and pro magno delicto, secundum magnitudinem delicti; salvo From the
word Continere, signifying Alere, sumptus facere, from whence Contenementum
signifies Livelihood, or way of Living. Du Fresa in the word Contenementum.
contenemento suo. Et mercator eodem modo, salva marchandisa sua.

A Freeman shall not be amercied for a small fault, but according to the manner
of the fault, and for a great Crime according to the heinousness of it, saving
his Livelihood; and after the same manner a Merchant, saving his Ability to
Trade or Merchandise.

XXVI. Et villanus alterius quam noster, eodem modo amercietur; salvo From
Gagnagium, a French word, thence Wagnagium, Wannagium. Gaignage Agriculture, or
Tillage, sometimes it signifies Horses, and all Implements for Tillage, and
sometimes the Crop.
Wannagio suo, si inciderit in misericordiam nostram. Et nulla praedictarum
misericordiarum ponatur, nisi per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de
Visneto Comitatus.

And a Villan (i. e. a Rustic or Husbandman) other than ours, shall be amercied
after the same manner, saving his Ability to Till his Land, Exercise Husbandry.
If he falls under our Punishment, and none of the foresaid Amerciaments shall
be set, but by the Oath of twelve knowing and lawful Men of the Vicenage, and
of the same County.

XXVII. Comites and Barons non amercientur nisi per pares suos; and non nisi
secundum modum delicti.

Earls and Barons shall not be amercied but by their Peers, and Quality of the
Crime or Offense.

XXVIII. Nullae Ecclesiastica persona amercietur secundum quantitatem beneficii
sui, sed secundum laicum tenementum suum, and secundum quantitatem delicti.

No Ecclesiastic Person shall be amercied according to the Quantity of his
Benefice, but according to his Lay-Tenement, and the Quantity of

XXIX. Nec villa nec homo destringatur facere pontes ad riparias; nisi qui de
antiquo and jure facere debent.

Neither Town nor any particular Person shall be distreined to make Bridges
over Rivers, unless that anciently and of right they ought to do it.

XXX. Nulla riparia de cetero defendetur, nisi illa quae fuerat in defenso
tempore Henrici Regis avi nostri.

No River for the future shall be imbanked, but what was imbanked in the time
of King Henry our Grandfather.

XXXI. Nullus Vicecomes, Constabularius, Coronator, vel alii Ballivi nostri,
teneant placita Coronae nostrae.

No Sheriff, Constable, Coroner, or other Officer of ours, shall hold Pleas of
the Crown.

XXXII. Omnis Comitatus and Hundredi and Wapentag and Thretingi, sint ad
antiquas firmas absque ullo incremento, exceptis Dominicis maneriis nostris.

All Counties, Hundreds, Wapentachs, and Trihings, shall stand at the Old Farm,
without any increase, except our The Sheriffs anciently used to let, and manage
the Kings Manners, and answer the Profits.
Demeasn Lands.

XXXIII. Si aliquis tenens de nobis laicum feudum, moriatur; and Vicecomes vel
Ballivus noster literas nostras ostendat patentes de submonitione, This word
non ought not to be here.
non de debito quod defunctus nobis debuit: liceat Vicecomiti vel Ballivo
nostro attachariare and imbreviare catalla defuncti inventa in laico Forsan
potius, Executori.
defuncto; salvis uxori ejus and pueris suis rationabilibus partibus.

If any one that holds of us a Lay-Fee dies, and the Sheriff or our Bailiff
shows our Letters Patents of Into the Exchequer.
Summons concerning the Debt Defunct, it shall be lawful for the Sheriff or our
Bailiff to Attach and Register the Chattels of the Defunct found upon his
Lay-Fee to the value of the Debt by the view of Lawful Men; so as nothing be
removed, until our clear Debt be paid, and the rest shall be left to the
Executors to fulfill the Will of the Defunct; and if there be nothing due from
him to us, all the Chattels shall remain to the Defunct, (rather Executor)
saving to his Wife and Children their reasonable shares.

XXXIV. Si aliquis liber homo intestatus decessit, catalla sua per manus
propinquorum, parentum and amicorum suorum per visum ecclesiae distribuantur;
salvis unicuique debitis quae defunctus ei debebat.

If any Freeman dies intestate, his Chattels shall be distributed by the Hands
of his nearest Relations and Friends by view of the Church, (i.e. the Ordinary)
saving to every one his Debts due from him.

XXXV. Nullus Constabularius vel Ballivus noster capiat blada vel alia catalla
alicujus, qui non de villa ubi castrum situm sit, nisi statim inde reddat
denarios, aut respectum inde habeat de voluntate venditoris: si autem de villa
ipsa fuerit, infra quadraginta dies pretium reddat.

No Constable of a Castle, or Bailiff of ours shall take Grain, or other
Chattels of any Man, who is not of the Town where the Castle is, unless he
presently gives him Money for it, or has Respite of Payment from the Seller:
But if he be of the same Town, he shall pay him within Forty Days.

XXXVI. Nullus Constabularius destringat militem aliquem ad dandum denarios pro
custodia castri, si ipse eam facere voluerit in propria persona sua, vel per
alium probum hominem; si ipse eam facere non possit per rationabilem causam.

No Constable of a Castle shall Distrein any Knight to give Money for
Castle-Guard, if he will perform it in his own Person, or by another stout Man,
if he be hindered by any reasonable Cause.

XXXVII. Et si nos duxerimus eum vel miserimus in exercitum, erit quietus de
custodia, secundum quantitatem temporis quo per nos fuerit in exercitu, de
feudo pro quo fecit servitium in exercitu.

And if he shall follow us, or we shall send him into the Army, he shall be
free from Castle-Guard, according to the time he shall be in the Army, by our
Command, for the Fee for which he performed his Service in the Army.

XXXVIII. Nullus Ballivus noster vel Vicecomes, vel alius, capiat equos ^el
caretas alicujus pro c^iagio faciendo, nisi reddat liberationem antiquitus
statutam; scilicet pro careta ad duos equos, dec^^ denarios per diem: and pro
careta ad tres equos, quatuordecim denarios per diem.

No Officer of ours, or Sheriff, or other, shall take Horses or Carriages of
any one, to convey our Goods, unless he shall pay according to the Rate
anciently appointed; that is to say, for a Cart and two Horses ten Cart with
three Horses fourteen pence a day.

XXXIX. Nullus Vicecomes vel Ballivus noster capict carectam alicujus liberi
hominis pro Carriagio faciendo nisi de voluntate ipsius liberi hominis, etc. in
lib. MSS. in Bibliotheca Coll. Corpor. Christi Cantabrig.
Nulla careta Dominica alicujus ecclesiastica persona vel militis, vel alicujus
Dominae capiatur per Ballivos praedictos; nec nos nec Ballivi nostri nec alii
capiemus bosoum alienum ad castra vel agenda nostra, nisi per voluntatem ill us
cujus Boscus ille fuerit.

No proper Cart of any Ecclesiastic Person, or Knight or Lady, shall taken by
our Officers; neither shall We or our Officers, or others, take any other Man's
Timber or Wood for our Castles or other uses, unless by the consent of the
Owner.

XL. Nos autem non tenebimus terras eorum, qui convicti fuerint de Felonia,
nisi per unum annum and unum diem; and tunc reddantur terrae Dominis feudorum.

We will hold the Land of those which are Convicted of Felony, but and one day,
and then they shall be rendered to the Lord of the Fee.

XLI. Omnes Kidelli de caetero deponantur penitus per Tamisiam and per
Medewisiam and per totam Angliam; nisi per costam maris:

All Weres for the future shall be destroyed in the Rivers of Thames and
Medwey, and through all England unless upon the Seacoast.

XLII. Breve quod vocatur Praecipe, de caetero non fiat alicui de aliquo
tenemento, unde liber h^mo perdat causam suam.

The Writ which is called Praecipe, for the future shall not be granted to any
one, of any Tenement, whereby a Freeman may lose his Cause, or rather his
Court, (Vnde liber homo possit amittere This Writ seems to have been such, as
would take the Cause or Trial of Right out of the Lords Court, where all Titles
of Right were anciently Tried; and this Liber homo was a Lord of a Manner that
was in danger to lose his Court by this Writ, by having Trials of Right taken
from it.
Curiam suam) in MSS. Collegii Corp. Christi Cantab.

XLIII. Vna mensura vini and cervisiae sit per totum regnum nostrum, and una
mensura bladi, scilicet quarterium Londinense. Et una latitudo pannorum
tinctorum and russeccorum and haubergetorum, scilicet duae ulnae infra listas.
De ponderibus vero sit ut de mensuris.

There shall be one Measure of Wine and Ale through our whole Kingdom; and one
Measure of Grain, that is to say, the London-Quarter: And one Breadth of Dyed
Clothes, and Russets, and Haberjects; that is to say, Two Else within the
Lists; and the Weights shall be as the Measures.

XLIV. Nihil detur In the same Manuscript.
vel capiatur de cetero pro brevi inquisitionis, ab eo qui inquisitionem petit
de vita vel membris; sed gratis concedatur and non negetur.

Nothing shall be given or taken for the future, for a Writ of Inquisition,
from him that desires an Inquisition of Life or Limbs, but it shall be granted
gratis, and not denied.

XLV. Si aliquis teneat de nobis per feudi firmam vel socagium vel bungagium,
and de alio teneat terram per servitium militis; nos non habebimus custodiam
haeredis vel terrae suae; quae est de feudo alterius, occasion illius feudi,
firmae, vel socagii vel Burgagii; nec habebimus custodiam

If any one holds of us, by or in Fee-Farm, Soccage, or Burgage, and holds Land
of another by Military Service, We will not have the Wardship of the Heir or
Land, which is of, or belongs to another Man's Fee, by reason of what he holds
of us in Fee-Farm, Soccage, or Burgage. Nor will we have the Wardship or
Custody of that Fee-Farm, or Burgage, unless the Fee-Farm is bound to perform
Military Service.

XLVI. Nos non tenebimus custodiam haeredis vel terrae alicujus quam tenet de
alio per servitium militare, occasion alicujus parvae Serganteriae, quam tenet
de nobis per servitium reddendi cultellos vel sagittas vel hujusmodi.

We will not hold the Wardship of an Heir, or any Land which he holds of
another by Military Service, by reason of any petit or small Serjeanty he holds
of us, by the service of giving us Daggers or Arrows, or the like

XLVII. Nullus Ballivus ponat aliquom de caetero ad legem, nec ^d juramentum,
simplici loquela sua; sine testibus fidelibus ad hoc inductis.

No Bailiff or Officer for the future shall bring any Man under the Sentence of
the Law, nor to his Oath, (i. e. Purgation, or Canonical Purgation by his Oath)
upon his single Accusation or Testimony, without Credible and honest Witnesses
produced to prove it.

XLVIII. Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur aut disseisietur de Q.
Whether not destruatur.
destituatur; nec super eum ibimus nec eum in carcere mittemus, nisi per Legale
judicium parium suorum, vel per legem terrae.

No Freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or disseised of his Free Tenement,
or Liberties, or Free Customs; or Outlawed, or Banished, or any way destroyed,
nor will we pass upon him, or commit him to Prison, unless by the Legal
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, (i. e. by Legal Process, etc.)

XLIX. Nulli vendemus, nulli negabimus, aut differemus rectum vel justitiam.

We will not sell to any Man, we will not deny any Man, or delay Right or
Justice.

L. Omnes Mercatores nisi public prohibiti fuerint, habeant salvum and securum
There wants the word Conductum.
exire de Anglia and venire in Angliam, and morari and ire tam per terram quam
per aquam ad emendum vel vendendum sine omnibus toltis malis, per antiquas and
rectas consuetudines, praeterquam in tempore Werrae, and si sint de terra
contra nos Werrina.

All Merchants, unless they be publicly prohibited, shall have safe England,
and to stay there, and pass as well by Land as by Water, to Buy and Sell, by
the ancient and allowed Customs only, without any Male-tolts (i. e. Illegal
Exactions) except in Time of War, or when they shall be of any Nation in War
with us.

LI. Et si tales inveniantur in terra nostra in principio Warrae, attachientur
sine damno corporum vel rerum; donec sciatur a nobis, vel a capitali

And if there be found such Merchants in our Land in the beginning of a War,
they shall be attached, or secured, without Damage to their Bodies or Goods,
while it may be known from us, or our Chief Justitiary, how our Merchants are
dealt with in that Nation in War with

LII. Liceat unicuique de caetero exire de regno nostro, and redire salvo et
secure per terram and per aquam, salva fide nostra; nisi in tempore Guerrae per
aliquod breve tempus propter communem utilitatem regni; exceptis imprisonatis
and utlagatis, secundum legem Regni, and Gente contra nos Guerrina and
Mercatoribus, de quibus fiat sicut supradictum est.

It shall be lawful for any one for the future, to go out of our Kingdom, and
return safely and securely by Land or by Water, saving his Faith or Allegiance
to us; unless in time of War by some short space, for the Commune Profit of the
Kingdom, except Prisoners, and Outlaws, (according to the Law of the Land) and
People in War with us, and Merchants, who shall be in such Condition, as
aforesaid.

LIII. Si quis tenuerit de aliqua escheeta, sicut de honor Walingfordiae,
hominum nostrorum, nisi alibi tenuerit de nobis in capite ille qui tenuit
Baroniam vel Eschaetam.

If any Man holds of any Escheat as of the Honor of Walingford, Bologne,
Lancaster, Nottingham, or of other Escheats, which are in our Hands, and are
Baronies, and dies, his Heir shall not give any other Relief, or perform any
other service to us, than he did to the Baron, if the Barony had been in
possession of the Baron; and we will hold it after the same manner the Baron
held it. Nor will we by reason of such Barony or Escheat have any Escheat or
Wardship of any of our Men, unless he that held the Barony or Escheat, held of
Us in Capite in another

LIVE. Homines qui manent extra Forestam, non veniant de caetero coram
Justitiariis nostris de Foresta per communes submonitiones; nisi sint in
placito, vel plegii alicujus vel aliquorum qui attachiati sunt propter Forestam.

Those Men which dwell without the Forest, for the future shall not Justices of
the Forest upon Commune Summons, but such as were concerned in the
Controversy, or were Pleges for any that were Attached for any thing
concerning the Forest.

LV. Omnes autem bosci qui fuerunt afforestati per Regem Richardum fratrem
nostrum, statim deafforestentur; nisi fuerint * domini bosci nostri.

All Woods that were taken into the Forest by King Richard our Brother, Demeasn
Woods.

LVI. Nullus liber homo de caetero det amplius alicui, vel vendat de terra sua,
quam ut de residuo terrae suae possit sufficienter fieri Domino feudi servit^um
ei debitum, quod pertinet ad feudum illud.

No Freeman for the future shall give or sell any more of his Land, Service
due to the Lord of the Fee may be sufficiently performed.

LVII. Omnes Omnes Barons qui fundaverunt Abbathias. In MSS. Coll. Corp.
Christi.
Patroni Abbatiarum, qui habent Chartas regum Angliae de advocatione, vel per
aliquam antiquam tenuram vel possessionem, habeant earum custodiam cum
vacaverint; sicut habere debent, and sicut supra declaratum est.

All Patrons of Abbeys, which have Charts of the Kings of England of the
Advowson, or by any ancient Tenure or Possession, may have the Custody of them
when void, as they ought to have, and as was declared before.

LVIII. Nullus capiatur vel imprisonetur, propter appellationem foeminae,

No Man shall be taken or imprisoned upon the Appeal of a Woman, for the Death
of any other Man, than her Husband.

LIX. Nullus Comitatus teneatur de caetero, nisi de mense in mensem; and ubi
major terminus esse solebat, major sit.

No County Court for the future shall be holden, but from month to month; and
where there used to be a greater space, let it be so.

LX. Nec Vicecomes aliquis, vel Ballivus suus faciat terminum suum per
Hundredum, nisi bis in anno, and non nisi in loco debito and consueto;
videlicet semel post pascha, and iterum post festum Sancti Michaelis. Et visus
similiter de Franco plegio, tunc fiat ad illum terminum Sancti Michaelis sine
occasion, ita scilicet quod quilibet habeat suas libertates, quas habuit

Neither any Sheriff, nor his Bailiff shall keep his Turn oftener than twice in
a year, and only in the accustomed place, that is to say, once after Easter,
and once after Michaelmas; and the View of Franc Pleges, or Sureties for the
Peace of the Freemen one for another, or of the Tithings, shall be then after
Michaelmas, without oppression, and so have his Liberties, which he had and was
wont to have in the Time of King Henry our Grandfather, or such as he obtained
afterward.

LXI. Fiat autem visus de Franco plegio sic, ut pax nostra teneatur, and quod
tething integra sit sicut esse consuevit;

But the view of France Pleges, shall be so made, That our Peace may be kept,
and That the Tithing, be whole and full, as it wont to be.

LXII. Et quod Vicecomes non quaerat occasiones; and quod contentus sit de eo
quod Vicecomes habere consuevit de visu suo faciendo, tempore Henrici Regis avi
nostri.

And that the Sheriff shall not oppress or vex any man, and that he shall be
Content with what the Sheriff wont to have for his view, in King Henry our
Grandfather.

LXIII. Non liceat de caetero, alicui dare terram suam domui religionis; ita
quod illam resumat tenendam de eadam domo.

For the future it shall not be lawful for any man to give his Land to a House
of Religion, so as he may take it again, and hold it of that House.

LXIV. Nec liceat alicui domui religionis terram sic accipere, quod tradat eam
illi a quo illam recepit tenendam. Si quis autem de caetero terram suam sic
dederit domui religiosae, and super hoc convincatur; donum suum penitus
cassetur, and terra illa domino suo illius feudi incurratur.

Nor shall it be lawful for any Religious House so to receive Land, as to pass
it to him again, of whom they received it, to hold of them. If any Man for the
future shall so give his Land to a Religious House, and Convicted, his Gift
shall be void, and the Land shall be forfeit to the Lord of the Fee.

LXV. Scutagium de caetero oapiatur, sicut capi tempore Regis Henrici avi
nostri consuevit; and quod Vicecomes non quaerat occasiones, and quod contentus
sit de eo quod Vicecomes habere consuevit.

Scutage for the Future shall be taken, as it used to be taken, in the time of
King Henry our Grandfather, and that the Sheriff vex no Man, and be content
with what the Sheriff was wont to receive.

LXVI. Omnes autem consuetudines praedictas and libertates quas concessimus in
regno nostro tenendas, quantum ad nos pertinet erga omnes homines nostros de
regno nostro, tam Clerici quam Laici nostri observent, quantum ad se pertinet
erga homines suos.

All the foresaid Customs and Liberties which we have Granted to be holden in
our Kingdom, as much as it belongs to us toward our Men of the Kingdom; Our
Clercs and Laics shall observe as much as it shall belong to them, toward
their Men.

LXVII. Salvis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Templariis,
Hospitalariis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and, omnibus aliis

Saving to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Templars, Hospitallers,
Earls, Barons, Knights, and all others, as well Ecclesiastics as Seculars, the
Liberties, and Free Customs which they had before, these being Witnesses, etc.

King JOHN's Charter of Forests, as it is to be found in Matthew Paris, Fol.
250. N. 40. Translated and Divided into Articles or
JOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. Sciatis quod intuitu Dei, Mat. Paris, f.
259. n. 40.
and pro salute animae nostrae, and animarum antecessorum and successorum,

JOHN, by the Grace of God King of England, etc. Know ye, That for the Ho^our
of God, and the Health of our Soul, and the Souls of our Antecessors and
Successors, and for the Exaltation of Holy Church, and the Amendment of our
Kingdom, We have of our Free and Good Will Gi^en and Granted for Us and our
Heirs, these Liberties underwritten, To Have and to Hold in our Kingdom of
England for ever.

I. In primis omnes forestae, quas Rex Henricus avus noster afforestavit,
videantur per probos and legales homines, and si boscum aliquem alium quam suum
dominicum afforestaverit ad damnum illius, cujus hoscus fuerit, statim
deafforestetur. Et si boscum suum proprium afforestaverit, remaneat foresta,
salva communia de herbagi^ and rebus aliis in eadem foresta, illis qui eam
prius habere consueverunt.

First of all, Whatsoever our Grandfather King Henry made Forest, or Forested,
shall be viewed by knowing and lawful Men; and if he turned any other than his
own proper Wood into Forest, to the damage of him whose Wood it was, it shall
forthwith be laid out again, and disforested: And if he turned his own Woods
into Forest, they shall remain so, saving the Common of Herbage in the same
Forest to those, who formerly were wont to have it.

II. Homines qui manent extra forestam, non veniant de cetero coram
Justiciariis nostris de foresta p^r communes submonitiones; nisi sint in
placito, vel plegii alicujus vel aliquorum qui attachiati sunt propter
forestam. Omnes autem bosci qui fuerunt afforestati per Regem Richardum fratrem
nostrum, statim deafforestentur; nisi fuerint Dominici bosci nostri.

They which dwell without the Forest, for the time to come, shall Common
Summons appear before our Justices of the Forest, unless they shall be
concerned in the Controversy, or be Pleges or Sureties for such as are
attached or arrested for any matter concerning the Forest: All Woods that were
turned into Forest by our Brother King Richard, shall be forthwith Disforested,
unless they are our Demeasn Woods.

III. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Comites, Barons, Milites and
Libere Tenentes, qui boscos habent in foresta; habeant boscos suos, sicut eos
habuerunt tempore primae Coronationis praedicti Regis Henrici avi nostri; ita
quod quieti sint in perpetuum de omnibus purpresturis, vastis and assartis
factis in illis boscis post illud tempus, usque ad principium secundi anni
coronationis nostrae. Et qui de caetero vastum purpresturam vel essartum
facient sine licentia nostra in illis boscis, de vastis purpresturis and
assartis respondeant.

The Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights and Free
Tenants, which have Woods in any Forest, shall have their Woods as they had
them in the time of the first Coronation of our said Grandfather King Henry, so
as they shall be discharged for ever of all Purprestures, ( i. e. Encroachments
upon the Kings Lands, Highways, etc.) Wastes, and Assarts, (i. e. stubbing up
Wood, clearing the Ground, Coronation. And those which for the time to come
shall make Waste, Purpresture, or Essart in those Woods without our License,
shall answer for them.

IV. Regard^ores nostri eant per forestas, ad faciendum regardum, sicut fieri
consuevit tempore primae coronationis praedicti Regis Henrici avi nostri, and
non aliter.

Our Regarders or Viewers shall go through the Forests, to make a View or
Regard, as it was wont to be at the time of the first Coronation of our said
Grandfather King Henry, and not otherwise.

V. Inquisitio vel visus de expeditione canum existentium in foresta de caetero
fiat, quando fieri debet regardum; scilicet de tertio anno in tertium annum;
and tunc fiat per visum and testimonium legalium hominum,

The Inquisition or View for Lawing of Dogs, which are kept within Regard is
made, that is every three years, and then it shall be done by the View and
Testimony of lawful Men, and not otherwise. And he whose Dog at such time shall
be found unlawed, shall be punished three Shillings. And for the Future, no It
should seem before this time an Ox was taken of him whose Dog was found
unlawed.
Ox shall be taken for Lawing, and such Lawing shall be according to the
Common Assise or Establishment, so as three fore-Claws of the Dogs Foot shall
be cut off, or the Ball of his Foot cut out. For the Future Dogs shall not be
Lawed, unless in such where they were wont to be Lawed in the time of King
Henry our Grandfather.

VI. Nullus forestarius vel Budellus, faciat de caetero Scotallum, vel colligat
garbas, vel avenam, vel bladum aliud, vel agnos vel porcellos, nec aliquam
collectam faciat; and per visum and sacramentum duodecim regardatorum quando
facient regardum, tot forestarii ponantur ad forestas custodiendas, quot ad
illas custodiendas rationabiliter viderint fussicere.

No Forester or Bedell for the time to come shall make any It was where an
Officer of the Forest sold Ale, causing men to spend their money, for fear he
should inform against them.
Ale-Shots, or Collect Sheafs of Corn, or Oats, or Wheat, or Lambs, or Pigs,
nor shall make any Gathering or Imposition whatsoever. And by the and Oath of
Twelve Regarders, when they make their Regard, so many Foresters shall be
appointed to keep the Forests, as they shall reasonably think sufficient.

VII. Nullum A Court of Tenants within the Forest before the Verderers.
suanimotum de caetero teneatur in regno nostro, nisi ter in anno; videlicet in
principio quindecim dierum ante festum Sancti Michaelis, quando agistatores
veniunt ad agistandum Dominicos boscos; and circa festum Sancti Martini, quando
agistatores nostri debent accipere panagium soenatione bestiarum nostrarum; and
ad istum suanimotum convenient Forestarii, viridarii, and non alii per
districtionem.

No Swainmote for the time to come, shall be holden in our Kingdom oftener than
thrice in one year: That is to say, in the beginning of Fifteen St. Michael,
when the Such as took in Strangers Hogs and Cattle to Feed in the King's Woods
and Forests, and received the money for them.
Agisters come to Agist the Demeasn Woods; and about the Feast of St. Martin,
when our Agisters ought to receive their Panage, (i. e. Money for the Mast of
Hogs in the King's Woods and Forests:) And in those two Swainmotes, the
Foresters, Verderers and Agisters shall meet, and no other by Compulsion: And
the third Swainmote shall be holden in the beginning of Fifteen days before the
Feast of St. John Baptist, concerning the Fawning of our Does, and at this
Swainmote shall meet the Foresters and Verderers, and

VIII. Et praeterea singulis quadraginta diebus, per totum annum, convenient
viridarii and forestarii ad videndum attachiamenta de Foresta; tam de viridi
quam de venatione per praesentationem ipsorum Forestariorum, and coram ipsis
attachientur. Praedicta autem suanimota non teneantur, nisi in Comitatibus in
quibus teneri consueverunt.

And furthermore, every forty days throughout the whole year the Verderers and
Foresters shall meet to View the Attachments of the Forest, as well of Vert as
Venison, (i. e. to see what Offenses had been committed concerning the Herbage
or Venison) by Presentment of the Foresters themselves, and they who committed
the Offenses shall be forced to appear before them: But the aforesaid
Swainmotes shall be holden, but in such Counties as they were wont to be holden.

IX. Vnusquisque liber homo agistet boscum suum in Foresta pro voluntate sua;
and habeant pannagium suum.

Every Freeman shall Agist his Wood in the Forest (that is, take in Strangers
Hogs and Cattle, or put in his own to feed in them) at his pleasure, and shall
receive his Pannage.

X. Concedimus etiam quod unusquisque liber homo possit ducere porcos suos per
Dominicum boscum nostrum, libere and sine impedimento; and ad agistandum eos in
boscis suis propriis vel alibi ubi voluerit. Et si porci alicujus liberi
hominis una nocte pernoctaverint in Foresta nostra, non inde occasionetur; ita
quod aliquid de suo perdat.

We Grant also, That every Freeman may drive his Hogs through our Demeasn
Woods freely and without Impediment; and to agist them in his own proper Woods,
or otherwhere as he will. And if Hogs of any Freeman shall remain one night in
our Forest, he shall not be troubled for it, so as he may lose any thing, (i.
e. pay any thing for it)

XI. Nullus de caetero amittat vitam vel membra pro venatione nostra; sed si
aliquis captus fuerit and convictus de captione venationis, graviter

No Man for the time to come shall lose Life or Limb for taking our Venison:
but if any one be taken and convicted of taking Venison, he shall be grievously
punished, if he has wherewithal; and if he have year and a day: And if after
that time he can find Sureties, he shall be released; if not, he shall abjure
our Kingdom of England.

XII. Quicunque Archiepiscopus, Episcopus, Comes vel Baro veniens ad nos per
mandatum nostrum transierit per Forestam nostram, licet illi capere unam vel
duas bestias per visum Forestarii si praesens fuerit; sin autem, faciat
cornari, ne videatur hoc furtive facere. Item licet in redeundo

Every Archbishop, Bishop, Earl or Baron coming to us at our Command, and
passes through our Forest, may lawfully take one or two Deer by view of the
Forester if present: If not, he shall cause a Horn to be wound, lest he should
seem to steal them. Also in their Return they may lawfully do the same thing.

XIII. Vnusquisque liber homo de caetero sine occasion faciat in bosco suo vel
in terra sua, quam habet in Foresta molendinum, v^varium, stagnum, marleram,
Fossatum vel terram arabilem, extra coopertum in terra arabili; ita quod non
sit ad nocumentum alicujus Vicini.

Every Freeman for the time to come, may Erect a Mill in his own Wood, or upon
his own Land, which he has in the Forest: Or Make a Warren, a Pool, or Pond, a
Marle-Pit, or Ditch, or turn some of it Arable, without the Covert in Arable
Land, so as it be not to the Nuisance of his Neighbor; (i. e. hurt or damage of
his Neighbor.)

XIV. Vnusquisque liber homo habeat in boscis suis, Aerias accipitrum,
spervariorum, falconum, aquilarum and heironum; and habeant similiter mel quod
inventum fuerit in boscis suis.

Every Freeman may have in his Woods the Ayries of Hawks, of Sper-Hawks,
Falcons, Eagles, and of Herons; and they shall likewise have the Honey which
shall be found in their Woods.

XV. Nullus Forestarius de caetero, qui non sit Forestarius de feudo, reddens
firmam nobis pro balliva sua, capiat cheminagium, scilicet pro careta per
dimidium annum, duos denarios; and per alium dimidium annum, summagium, per
dimidium annum, unum obolum; and per alium dimidium annum, unum obolum; and non
nisi de illis qui extra ballivam suam tanquam Mercatores veniunt, per licentiam
suam in Ballivam suam, ad buscam meiremium corticem vel carbonem emendum, and
alias ducendum ad vendendum ubi voluerint. Et de nulla careta alia vel
summagio, al^quod cheminagium capiatur; non capiatur cheminagium, nisi in locis
illis ubi antiquitur capi solebat and debuit. Illi autem qui portant super
dorsum suam

No Forester for the future, who is not a Forester in Fee, paying us Rent for
his Office, shall take Cheminage, (i. e. Money for passing upon the Ways or
Roads through the Forest) That is to say, for every Cart two pence for half a
year, and for the other half year two pence; and for a Horse that carries
Burdens, for half a year one half penny; Merchants out of his Bayliwick or
Liberty, to buy Underwood, Timber, Bark, or Char-Coal; and to carry it, to
sell it in other places where they will. And there shall be no Chiminage taken
for any other Cart or Burden, unless in those places, where anciently it was
wont, and ought to be taken. But they which carry Wood, Bark, or Coal, upon
their Backs to sell, although they get a Livelihood by it, shall for the time
to come pay no Cheminage. For passage through the Woods of other Men no
Cheminage shall be given Foresters.

XVI. Omnes utlagati pro Foresta, a tempore Regis Henrici avi nostri, usque ad
primam Coronationem nostram veniant ad pacem sine impedimento; and salvos
plegios inveniant, quod de caetero non forisfacient nobis de Foresta nostra.

All Persons Outlawed for Offenses committed in our Forest, from Henry our
Grandfather, until our first Coronation, may Reverse their Out-Lawries without
Impediment, and shall find Pleges, that for the time to come they will not
forfeit to us (i. e. commit any offense) in our Forest.

XVII. Nullus Castellanus vel alius teneat placitum de foresta, sive de viridi
sive de venatione; sed quilibet Forestarius de feudo attachiet placita de
foresta, tam de viridi quam de venatione, and ea praesentet viridariis

No Castellan (i. e. Constable, or Governor of a Castle) shall hold Pleas of
the Forest, whether of Vert, or of Venison. But every Forester in Fee shall
attach Pleas of the Forest, (that is, shall attach the Body or Goods of the
Offenders to make them appear to answer their Offenses) as well concerning Vert
as Venison, and shall present the Pleas or Offenses to the Verderers of the
several Counties; and when they shall be enrolled, and wound up in Wax, and
sealed by the Verderers, they shall be presented to the Chief Forester, when he
shall come into those parts to Hold Pleas of the Forest, and shall be
determined before him.

XVIII. Omnes autem consuetudines praedictas and libertates, quas nos
concessimus in regno tenendas, quantum ad nos pertinet erga nostros, omnes de
regno nostro tam Laici quam Clerici observent, quantum ad se pertinet,

And all the Customs aforesaid, and Liberties, which we have granted, to be
holden in our Kingdom, as much as it belongs to us, toward ours (understand
Men) all of our Kingdom, (or Government) as well Lays as Cleres, shall observe
as much as it shall appertein to them, toward Men.)

Mat. Paris, f. 263. n. 10.
JOhannes Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae and
Aquitaniae, Comes Andegavensis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and omnibus has
literas visuris, Stephanum Cantuariensem totius Angliae Primatem and Sanctae
Ecclesiae Romanae Cardinalem, Willielmum Londoniensem, Eustachium Elyensem,
Aegidium Herefordensem, Iocelinum Bathoniensem and Glastonensem, and Hugonem
Lincolniensem Episcopos, super damnis and ablatis eorum tempore Interdicti, per
Dei gratiam de mera and libera voluntate utriusque partis plene convenit;
volumus non solum eis quantum secundum Deum possumus satisfacere, verum etiam
toti Ecclesiae Anglicanae salubriter in perpetuum providere. Inde est quod
qualiscumque consuetudo temporibus nostris and praedecessorum nostrorum
hactenus in Ecclesia Anglicana fuerit observata, and quicquid Juris nobis
hactenus vendicaverimus; de caetero in universis and singulis Ecclesiis, and
Monasteriis, Cathedralibus, et Conventualibus, totius regni Angliae, liberae
sint in perpetuum, electiones quorumcumque Praelatorum, majorum et minorum;
salba nobis et haeredibus nostris, custodia Ecclesiarum, and Monasteriorum
vacantium, quae ad nos pertinent. Promittimus impediemus nec impediri
permittemus per nostros, nec procurabimus, quin in universis and singulis
monasteriis and Ecclesiis, postquam vacaverint praelaturae, quemcumque
voluerint libere sibi praeficient electores pastorem; petita tamen a nobis
prius and haeredibus nostris licentia eligendi; quam non denegabimus nec
differemus. Et si forte accidat quod denegaremus, vel differremus; nihilominus
procedant electores ad electionem Canonicam faciendam. Et similiter post
celebratam electionem, noster requiratur assensus, quem non denegabimus, Quare
volumnus and firmiter jubemus, ne quis vacantibus Ecclesiis vel Monasteriis,
contra hanc nostram Concessionem and Constitutionem in aliquo veniat vel venire
praesumat. Si quis vero contra hoc aliquo tempore veniat, maledictionem Dei
omnipotentis and nostram incurrat. His testibus Petro Wintoniensi Episcopo,
Willielmo Mareschallo, Comite Penbroc, Willielmo Comite Warrenniae, Ranulpho
Comite Cestriae, Sahero Comite Wintoniensi, Galfrido de Mandevilla Comite
Gloverniae et Essexiae, Willielmo Comite de Ferrariis, G. Briewere, W. filio
Geraldi, Willielmo de Cantelupo, Hugone de Novilla, Roberto de Were, W. de
Huntingefeld. Datum per manum Magistri Roberti de Marisco Cancellarii nostri,
decimo quinto die Januarii, apud novum Templum Londini; Anno

INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Ibidem. f. 262. n. 40.
Venerabilibus fratribus and dilectis filiis universis Ecclesiarum Praelatis
per Angliam constitutis. Salutem and Apostolicam Aquiloni, Fla, and Austro noli
pro^ibere, imperansque ventis per mare statuit procellam in auram, ut nautae
portum Quietis inveniant praeptatum. Cumque igitur inter Regnum and Sacerdotium
Anglicanum, non sine super electionibus praelatorum gravis fuerit controversia
diutius agitata; Illo tandem, eui nihil impossible est, quique ubi vult spirat
mirabiliter operante, charissimus Johannes Rex Anglorum illustris, liberaliter
ex mera and spontanea voluntate, de consensu communi Baronum suorum, pro salute
animae suae, and praedecessorum suorum and Successorum Vobis concessit, and
suis literis confirmavit: ut de caetero in universis and singulis Ecclesiis ac
Monasteriis, Cathedralibus and Conventualibus totius Regni Angliae, in
perpetuum, liberae fiant electiones quorumcumque Praelatorum, majorum, and
etiam minorum. Nos igitur hoc gratum and rarum habentes, concessionem
hujusmodi, vobis and per vos Ecclesiis and Successoribus vestris, prout in
eisdem literis Regis perspeximus contineri, authoritate Apostolica confirmamus,
and praesentis scripti patrocinio communimus. Nulli ergo omnino homini liceat
hanc paginam nostrae confirmationis infringere, vel ei ausu temerario
contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem
omnipotentis Dei, and Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum Datum Laterani,
tertio Calendas Aprilis; Pontificatus nostri anno decimo octavo.

He was chosen Pope January the 9th 1198. King John 's Grant was included and
inserted in this Popes Bull; but for the clearer understanding of them both,
they are here Printed distinctly.

Ibid. f. 261. n. 10.
CVm autem pro Deo and ad emendationem Regni nostri, and ad melius nos and
Barons nostros, haec omnia concessimus, volentes ea integra and firma
stabilitate gaudere, facimus and concedimus eis securitatem subscriptum:
Videlicet quod Barons eligant viginti quinque Barons de regno nostro quos
voluerint, qui debeant pro totis viribus suis observare, tenere, and facere
observari pacem and nos vel Iustitiarium nostrum erga aliquem in aliquo
deliquiverimus, vel aliquem articulorum pacis vel securitatis transgressi
fuerimus, and delictum fuerit ostensum quatuor Baronibus de viginti quinque
Baronibus; illi quatuor Barons accedent ad nos, and ad Iusticiarium nostrum,
si fuerimus extra regnum, and proponentes nobis excessum, petent ut sine
dilatione faciamus emendari. Et si nos excessum non emendaverimus (vel
Iusticiarius noster si fuerimus extra inter tempus quadraginta dierum,
computando a tempore quo monstratum fuerit nobis, praedicti quatuor Barons
referent causam illam ad residuos de illis viginti quinque Baronibus. Et illi
Barons cum communa totius terrae, distringent and gravabunt nos modis omnibus
quibus poterunt: scilicet per captionem castrorum, terrarum, possessionum et
aliis modis quibus potuerint; donec fuerit emendatum secundum arbitrium eorum;
salva persona nostra, and Reginae nostrae, and liberorum nostrorum. Et cum
fuerit emendatum, intendent nobis quicunque voluerit de terra, juret quod ad
praedicta omnia exequenda parebit mandatis praedictorum viginti quinque
Baronum: and quod gravabit nos pro posse cum ipsis. Et nos public and libere
damus licentiam jurandi cuilibet, qui jurare voluerit; and nulli unquam jurare
prohibehimus, Omnes autem illos de terra nostra, qui per se and sponte sua
voluerint jurare viginti quinque Baronibus de distringendo nos, and gravando
nos cum eis, faciemus jurare eosdem de mandato nostro, sicut praedictum est. In
omnibus autem istis, quae viginti quinque Baronibus committuntur exequenda, si
forte in aliquo inter se discordaverint, vel aliqui ex eis summoniti noluerint
vel nequiverint interesse; ratum habeatur and firmum, quod major pars eorum
providerit vel praeceperit, ac si omnes viginti quinque in hoc concessissent.
Et viginti quinque Barons jurent, quod omnia antedicta fideliter observabunt,
and pro toto posse suo facient observari. Et nos nihil impertrabimus per nos
nec per alium, per quod aliquid istarum concessionum and libertatum revocetur
aut minuatur. Et si aliquid tale fuerit impetratum, irritum Et omnes malas
voluntates, and indignationes, and rancores ortos inter nos and homines nostros
Clericos and Laicos a tempore discordiae, plene omnibus remisimus and
condonabimus. Et ad melius distringendum nos, quatuor Castellani, de Norhanton
scilicet, de Kenillewurche, de Notingham, and de Scardeburck, erunt jurati
viginti quinque Baronibus; quod facient de castris praedictis quod ipsi
praeceperint and mandaverint, vel major pars eorum. Et tales semper Castellani
ponantur illis Castris, qui fideles sint, and nolint transgredi juramentum
suum. Et nos amovebimus omnes alienigenas a terra, Parents omnes Girardi de
Athies, Engelardum scilicet, Andream, Petrum, Gyonem de Chanceles, Gyonem de
Cigvini, uxorem praedicti Girardi cum omnibus liberis suis, Gaufridum de
Martenni, and fratres ejus, Philippum, Marc, and fratres ejus, and G. nepotem
ejus, Falconem, and Flandrenses omnes and ruptarios, qui sunt ad nocumentum
Regni. Praeterea omnes transgressiones factas occasion hujus discordiae a
Pascha transacto, qui fuit annus decimus sextus, usque ad hanc pacem
reformatam, plene remisimus omnibus Clericis and Laicis, and quantum ad nos
pertinet, plene condonavimus. Et insuper fecimus illis sieri literas
testimoniales and paten^es Domini Stephani Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi, Domini
Henrici Dublinensis Archiepiscopi, Domini Pandulphi Subdiaconi Domini Papae
familiaris, and Episcoporum praedictorum, super securitate ista concessionibus
praefatis. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus, quod Anglicana Ecclesia
libera sit, and quod omnes homines de regno nostro habeant and teneant omnes
libertates praefatas, jura and consuetudines been and in pace, libere and
quiet, plene and integre, sibi and haeredibus suis, de nobis and haeredibus
nostris, in omnibus rebus, and locis in perpetuum, ut praedictum est. Iuratum
autem est tam ex part nostra quam ex part Baronum, quod haec omnia
supradicta, bona Riningemade, inter Stanes and Windeleshores, decimo quinto die
Junii, Anno Regni nostri decimo Septimo.

Pat. 17. Johan. M. 23. n. 111.
Sciatis quod firma pax facta est per Dei gratiam inter nos and Barons nostros
die Veneris proxima post festum Sanctae Trinitatis apud Rimemed prope Stanes,
Ita quod eorum

REx Vicecomitibus Forestariis Warrennarits Custodibus Ripariarum and omnibus
Ballivis suis in eodem Comitatu Salutem. Pat. 17. Johan. M. 23. Dors.
Sciatis pacem firmam esse reformatam per Dei gratiam inter nos and Barons and
vel attornati ab eis ad hoc. Volumus etiam et praecipimus quod duodecim Milites
de Comitatu tuo qui eligentur de ipso Comitatu in Primo Comitatu qui tenebitur
post susceptionem Literarum istarum in partibus tuis jurent de inquirendis
pravis consuetudinibus tam de Vicecomitibus quam eorum Ministris forestis
forestariis, Warennis et Warennariis Ripariis et earum Custodibus et eis
delendis sicut in ipsa Carta Continetur. Vos igitur omnes sicut nos et honorem
nostrum diligitis et pacem Regni nostri omnia in Carta contenta inviolabiliter
observetis et ob omnibus observari faciatis ne

Pat. 17. Johan. M. 21. n. 105.
REx Vicecomiti Warwic et duodecim Militibus Electis in eodem Comitatu ad
inquirendum et delendum pravas Consuetudines de Vicecomitibus

Idem mandatum est Omnibus Vicecomitibus Angliae.

Claus. 17. Johan. M. 21. Dors.
HAec est conventio inter Dominum Johannem Regem Angliae ex una suo in C^stodia
Turris London. Et ita quod interim non ponat Dominus Rex munitionem vel vires
alias in Civitate praedicta vel in Tu^ri London. Fiant etiam infra praedictum
terminum Sacramenta per totam Angliam viginti quinque Baronibus sicut
continentur in Carta de libertatibus and securitate regno concessis vel
attornatis viginti quinque Baronibus sicut con^inentur in Literis de duodecem
Militibus eligendis ad delendas malas Consuetudines de forestis and aliis and
praeterea infra eundem terminum omnia

RObertus filius Walteri, Mareschallus exercitus Dei and Sanctae Ecclesiae, and
alii Magnates ejusdem exercitus; Ibid. f. 265. n. 20.
nobili viro Willielmo de Albineto salutem. Been scitis quam magnum commodum
sit vobis and nobis omnibus, servare Civitatem Londoniarum qua est receptaculum
nostrum; and quantum dedecus esset and damnum nobis, si per defectum nostrum
eam amitteremus. Sciatis etiam certissime quod praemoniti fuerimus, quod quidam
sunt qui nihil aliud expectant, nisi quod commune consilium prolongavimus
Torneamentum, quod captum fuit apud Stanfort, die Lunae proxima post festum
Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, usque ad diem Lunae proximam post octavas
praedictas. Erit autem Torneamentum juxta Londinum in Bruera de Stanes, and
villam de Hundeslawe, and hoc fecimus propter securitatem nostram and Civitatis
praedictae. Et ideo mandamus vobis and rogamus diligenter, quod ad Torneamentum
praedictum, cum equis and armis ita provide veniatis, honorem inde habeatis.
Qui melius ibi faciet, habebit ursum, quem Domina quaedam mittet ad
Torneamentum. Valete.

INnocentius Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Pat. 16 Johan. part prima, M. r.
Dors. n. 3.
Venerabilibus Fratribus Stephano Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Sanctae Romanae
Eccl siae Cardinali Suffraganeis ejus salutem, and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
Mirari Magnates atque Barons nec non Accomplices eorundem dissimulastis hactenus
and conniventibus oculis pertransitis ad sopiendas illas non curantes
interponere parts vestras quamvis nullatenus ignoretis quod nisi feliciter
fuerint p^udenti consilio ac studio diligenti sopitae tantum ac ^ale scandalum
earum occasion possit accidere toti regno quod forte nequiret absque multo
dispendio ac magno labor sedari nonnullis suspicantibus and dicentibus quod
super quaestionibus contra ipsum Regem noviter suscitatis vos illis praebetis
auxilium and favorem, cum temporibus clarae memoriae Patris and Fratris sui nec
non ipsius usque post pacem inter vos and ipsum nostra mediante sollicitudine
reformatam hujusmodi quaestiones non fuerint suscitatae. Illud autem reprobamus
omnino si quemadmodum a multis asseritur conspirationes and conjurationes
diligens studium impendatis and operam efficacem omnes conjurationes and
conspirationes Regnum and Sacerdotium Apostolica denunciantes auctoritate
cassatas and per excommunicationis sententiam inhibentes ne talia de caetero
^raesumantur, praefatos Nobiles movendo prudenter and efficaciter injungendo ut
per manifesta devotionis and humilitatis indicia ipsum Regem sibi placare ac
reconciliare procurent exhibentes ei servitia consueta quae ipsi and
praedecessores sibi and suis praedecessoribus impendant. Ac deinde siquid ab eo
duxerint postulandum non insolenter sed reverenter implorent, regalem ei
conservantes honorem, in remissionem sibi peccaminum injungentes quatinus
praedictos Nobiles benign pertractet and justas petitiones eorum clementer
admittat ut and ipsi congaudentes cognoscant eum divina gratia faciente in
meliorem statum esse mutatum. Ac per hoc ipsi and haeredes eorum sibi and
successoribus suis promptius and devotius debeant famulari. Datum Laterani
decimo quarto March 1^. 121^.
Kalendas Aprilis Pontificatus nostri anno octo decimo.

Ibidem, n. 4.
INnocentius, etc. dilectis filiis Magnatibus and Baronibus Angliae Grave
gerimus and molestum quod sicut accepim^s inter Karissimum in Christo fil^um
nostrum Johannem Regem Anglorum illustrem and quosdam vestrum prop^er
quaestiones suscitatas dissensio est suborta grave dispendium paritura nisi
feliciter fuerint prudenti consilio ac studio diligenti sopitae. 19 Martii,
1215.
Illud autem reprobamus omnino si quemadmodum a multis asseritur conspirationes
aut Conjurationes feceritis ausu temerario contra ipsum quodque cum armis
irreverenter and indevote repetere praesumpsistis quae cum humilitate and
debotione si opus esset vos repetere debebatis. Ne igitur ipsius bonum
propositum hujusmodi occasionibus vale^t impediri, nos omnes conspirationes and
conjurationes praesumptas a tempore subortae discordiae Regnum and Sacerdotium
Apostolica denunciamus auctoritate cassatas and per excommunicationis
sententiam inhibemus ne talia de caetero praesumantur vos movendo prudenter and
efficaciter inducendo ut per manifesta devotionis and humilitatis indicia ipsum
Regem vobis placare and reconciliare curetis, exhibentes ei servitia consueta
quae vos and praedecessores vestri sibi et suis praedecessoribus impendistis.
Ac deinde si quid ab eo duxeritis postulandum non insolenter sed cum reverentia
imploretis regalem ei conservantes honorem ut sic quod intenderitis valeatis
facilius optinere. Nos enim eundem Regem p^r scripta nostra rogamus and
obsecramus in Domino in remissionem ei peccaminum injungentes ut vos benign
pertractet et justas petitiones vestras clementer admittat ut and vos ipsi
congaudendo nosca^is eum divine gratia faciente in meliorem statum esse
mutatum, ac per hoc vo^ and haeredes sibi and successoribus suis debeatis
promptius and devotius famulari. Quocirca Nobilitatem vestram rogandam duximus
and movendam per Apostotica vobis scripta mandantes quatinus tales in hoc vos
exhibere curetis quod regnum Angliae optata pace laetetur and vos in
necessitatibus vestris cum opus fuerit necessarium vobis impendere debeamus
auxilium et favorem.

Datum Laterani decimo 19 Martii, 1215.
quarto Kalendas Aprilis, Pontificatus nostri

REx omnibus ad quos litterae praesentes pervenerint salutem. Pat. 16. Johannis
part prima, M. 3. Dors. n. 2.
Sciatis Baronibus nostris qui contra nos sunt quod nec eos nec homines suos
capiemus nec dissaisiemus nec super eos per vim vel per ibimus nisi per legem
Regni nostri vel per Judicium Parium suorum in Curia nostra donec consideratio
facta fuerit per quatuor quos eligemus ex part nostra, et per quatuor quos
eligent ex part sua, et Dominum Papam qui Superior erit super eos, and de hoc
securitatem eis faciemus quam poterimus, and quam debebimus per Barons nostros
et interim volumus quod Episcopi Londoniensis, Wigorniensis, Cestrensis, et
Willielmus Comes Warrennae interim eos securos faciant de praedictis. Et si
forte contra aliquod interceptum fuerit infra competens tempus per praedictos
Octo emendetur. Et in hujus, 10 Maii, 1214.
etc. eis fieri fecimus. Apud Windeshore x die Maii, Anno Regni nostri xvi.

DOmino Papae salutem, Claus. 17 Johannis, M. 24. vel 32. Dors. Pryn^ second
Vol. f. 345.
et debitam tanto Domino ac Patri cum devotione reverentiam. Sanctitati vestrae
grates referimus multiplices, de literis vestris pro nobis a paternitate vestra
Domino Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, et ejus suffraganeis porrectis, nec non
magnatibus et Baronibus terrae nostrae, pro certo scituri, quod Barons ipsi
Nos vero attendentes praemissa, 29 Maii, 1215.
asserebamus Baronibus nostris, quod terra nostra Patrimonium erat Beati Petri,
et eam de Beato Petro et Ecclesia Romana, et de vobis tenebamus. Adjecimus
etiam quod Cruce signati eramus, and petebamus beneficium and privilegium Cruce
signatorum, ne turbaretur terra nostra et ne consumeretur in malos usus quam in
subsidium terrae Sanctae expendere proposueramus, and appellavimus, per
Willielmum Maraschallum, Comi^em Pembrock, et Willi^lmum Comitem Warren, contra
perturbatores pacis terrae nostrae. Verum quia cruce signati fuimus volentes in
omn^bus cum humilitate et mansuet^dine proced^re, salva appellatione nostra,
obtulimus Baroni^us illis, quod omnes malas consuetudines suscitatas, et per
quemcunque introductas temporibus nostris penitus aboleremus, nec non et malas
consuetudines tempore Regis Richardi, fratris nostri, subortas extirparemus; de
consuetudinibus autem tempore Patris nostri suscitatis, consitium fidelium
nostrorum operaremur. Sed nec hiis nec aliis supradictis conten^i, omnia
praemissa recusarunt. Videntes ig^tur quod ipsi manifest nitebantur ad
turbationem Regni nostri, rogavimus Dominum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum, et
ejus Suffraganeos, quod exequerentur mandatum vestrum, scilicet, quod secundum
tenorem Literarum vestrarum consueta nobis exhibere et servitia. Et postea si
quae a nobis petere vellent, cum humilitate et sine armis ea a nobis peterent,
denunciantes eos excommunicatos qui Episcopo Exoniensi et Magistro Pandulpho
qui praesentes erant, quod de jure per sententiam excommunicationis eos
composuere debebant: Sed Archiepiscopus respondens ait, quod sententiam
excommunicationis in eos nullo modo proferret, quia been sciebat mentem
vestram, et videbatur nobis similiter, quod ita facere debebat, quia mandavimus
gentem copiosam de terris extraneorum ad succursum terrae nostrae. Et promisit
nobis quod si eos revocare vellemus, non solum sententiam excommunicationis
Postmodum autem obtulimus eis per Literas nostras Patentes, per Dominum
Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum, et duos vel tres suffraganeos ejus eis delatas,
quod nos eligerimus ex part nostra quatuor, et ipsi ex part sua quatuor; Ita
quod vos superiores constitueremini, de omnibus querelis Libertatum quas ipsi
proponerent et ad suas nos responderemus, quod quicquid vos una cum illis Octo
statueretis super omnibus quae ipsi peterent a nobis, nos Et quamvis se
humiliare noluerunt versus nos sicut debuerunt, nos tamen pro Servitio Dei, and
succursu Terrae Sanctae in tantum nos humiliavimus, quod haec praedicta eis
obtulimus. Et praeterea eis obtulimus quod de omnibus petitionibus suis per
considerationem parium suorum Justitiae plenitudinem eis exbiberemus. Quod ipsi
recusarunt. Ad haec Domine, die Veneris in Crastino Ascensionis Domini, venit
ad nos Frater Willielmus de Camera vestra, vester familiaris, deferens nobis
literas vestras continentes, perversis Baronum praedictorum inquietationibus ut
ex praemissis vobis innotuit affligamur, nec possumus in eis bonum pacis
invenire, quo saltem concordes afficiamur, ut sic facilius proposito
insisteremus, Vos de itinere nostro, et itineris nostri expeditione certos
reddere non possumus: Praeterea Pater Reverende in praesentia praedicti fratris
Willielmi vestri familiaris, nec non et venerabilium Patrum Wygorniensis et
Coventrensis Episcoporum, obtulimus praedictis Baronibus, quod de omnibus
petitionibus suis quas a nobis exigunt in vos benignissime compromitteremus, ut
vos qui plenitudine potestatis gaudetis, quod justum foret Statueretis, et haec
omnia efficere renuunt. Igitur pie Pater dominationi vestrae praesentia duximus
declaranda, ut de consueta benignitate vestra quod

Test meipso
^pud Odiham xxix die Maii.
INnocentius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, universis Christi fidelibus hanc
paginam inspecturis, Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem, Ibidem, f. 266. n.
10. and Claus. 17 Johannis, M. 19. Dors.
Etsi charissimus in Christo filius noster Johannes Rex Anglorum illustris,
Deum and Ecclesiam vehementer offenderit; unde nos eum vin eulo
excommunicationis innodavimus, and regnum ejus ecclesiastico ipse tamen (illo
misericorditer inspirante) qui non vult mortem peccatoris, sed ut convertatur
and vivat, tandem converjus ad Cor, Deo and Ecclesi^ humiliter satisf^cit; in
tantum, quod non solum recompensationem pro damnis, and restitutionem exhibuit
pro ablatis, 24 Aug. 1215.
verum etiam plenariam libertatem contulit Ecclesiae Anglicanae. Quinimo
utraque sententia relaxata, regnum suum tam Angliae quam Hyberniae, Beato Petro
and Ecclesiae Romanae concessit: recipiens illud a nobis in feudum sub annuo
censu mill marcarum, fidelitatis nobis inde praestito privilegium ejus apparet
aurea bulla munitum. Adhuc etiam omnipotenti Deo amplius placere desiderans,
signum Vivificae Crucis reverenter accepit, profecturus in subsidium terrae
Sanctae; ad quod se magnifice praeparabat. Sed humani generis inimicus, qui
semper consuevit bonis actibus invidere; suis cullidis artibus adversus eum
Barons Angliae concitavit, ita ut ordine perverso in illum insurgerent,
postquam conversus Ecclesiae satisfecit, qui assistebant eidem quando Ecclesiam
offendebat. Orta siquidem inter eos dissentionis materia, omnes conjurationes
and conspirationes, si qu^ fuerant forte praesumptae a tempore subortae
discordi^ inter Regnum and Sacerdotium, Apostolica denanciantes Magnates and
nobiles Angliae monendo prudenter, and efficaciter injungendo; ut per manifesta
devotionis and humilitatis indicia, ipsum Regem sibi placane studerent: ac
deinde si quid ab eo ducerent postulandum, non insolenter sed humiliter
implorarent; regalem conservantes ei honorem, and exhibentes servitia consueta,
quae ipsi and praedecessores eorum sibi and praedecessor^bus suis impenderunt;
cum ab eis ipse Rex non debet absque judicio spoliari, ut sic quod intenderent,
poss^nt facilius obtinere. Nos enim eundem Regem per literas nostras rogavimus
and monuimus, and per praefatos Archiepiscopum and Episcopos nihilominus rogari
and moneri mandavimus, in remissionem sibi peccaminum injungentes, quatenus
praedictos magnates and noviles benign tractaret, and justas eorum petitiones
clementer admitteret; ut and ipsi c^ngaudendo cognoscerent, eum in meliorem
statum divina gratia esse mutatum, ac per hoc ipsi and haeredes eorum sibi and
haeredibus suis deberent promptius and devotius familiari: plena eis in
veniendo, morando, recedendo securitate concessa; ita quod si sort nequiret
inter eos concordia provenire, in Curia sua per pares eorum, secundum leges and
consuetudines regni suborta dissensio sopiretur. Verum antequam nuncii cum hoc
provido and justo mandato rediissent, illi Juramento fidelitatis omnino
contempto: cum etsi Rex eos injuste gravasset, ipsi tamen non debuissent sic
agere contra eum: ut in causa sua iidem Interim autem praefatis nunciis
revertentibus, Rex obtulit eis secundum formam mandati nostri justitiae
plenitudinem exhibere; quam ipsi omnino spernentes; coeperunt manus extendere
ad pejora. Unde Rex ipse ad audientiam Deinde obtulit illis ut tam ab ipso quam
ab illis quatuor viri eligerentur prudentes, qui una nobiscum subortam inter
eos discordiam terminarent promittens quod ante omnia revocaret universos
abusus, quicunque fuissent in Anglia suo tempore introducti: sed nec hoc illi
dignati sunt acceptare. Tandem illis Rex proposuit quod cum Regni Dominium ad
Romanam Ecclesiam pertineret, ipse non poterat nec debebat, Sed cum nullo modo
proficeret, postulavit ab Archiepiscopo and Episcopis, ut ipsi nostrum
exequerentur mandatum. Jus Ecclesiae Romanae defenderent; ac tuerentur eundem
secundum formam privilegii Cruce-signatis indulti. Porro cum ipsi nihil horum
facere voluissent, videns se omni auxilio and Consilio destitutum; quicquid
illi ausi sunt petere, Vnde compulsus est per vim and metum, qui cadere poterat
in virum etiam constantissimum, compositionem inire cum ipsis, non solum vilem
and turpem, verum etiam illicitam and iniquam; in nimiam derogationem ac
diminutionem sui juris pariter and honoris. Quia vero nobis a Domino dictum est
in Propheta: Constitui te super gentes and Regna, ut evellas and destrues,
aedifices and plants. Itemque per alium Prophetam: Dissolve colligationes
Impietatis, solve fasciculos deprimentes. Nos tantae malignitatis audaciam
Regalis Juris dispendium, Anglicanae gentis opprobrium, and grave periculum
totius negotii Crucifixi; quod utique immineret, nisi per authoritatem nostram
revocarentur omnia, quae a tanto principe cruce signato taliter sunt extorta,
and ipso volente ea servare; ex part Dei omnipotentis Patris and Filii and
Spiritus Sancti, authoritate quoque Apostolorum ejus Petri and Pauli at nostra,
de communi fratrum nostrorum consili^, compositionem hujusmodi reprobamus
penitus and damnamus; sub intimatione Anathematis prohibentes, ne dictus Rex
eam observare praesumat, aut Barons cum complicibus suis ipsam exigant
observari; tam thartam, quam obligationes seu cautiones quaetunque pro ipsa vel
de ipsa sunt factae, irritantes penitus and cass^ntes; ut Nulli igitur omnino
Hominum liceat, etc. Datum At Anagul in Italy.
Agnaniae, nono i. e. 24th of August 1215.
Calendas Septembris, Pontificatus nostri decimo octavo.

INnocentius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, Mat. Paris, f. 267. n. 30. Rot.
Claus. 17 Johannis, M. 19. Dors.
Nobilibus Viris Baronibus prudentius fidelitatis pristinae juramentum; jus
Apostolicae sedis, nostrae provisionis mandatum, and privilegium Crucesignatis
indultum. Quia Judices and executores feceritis; eodem Rege parato in Curia
sua, vobis per pares vestros secundum leges and consuerudines regni justitiae
plenitudinem arbitris eligendis, hinc, inde, una nobiscum in ipso negotio
processuris. Vnde cum nihil horum dignati fueritis acceptare, ad nostram
audientiam appellavit; Se ipsum ac Regnum cum omni honor and jure suo
Apostolicae protectioni supponens; public protestando, quod cum ejusdem Regni
dominium ad Romanam Ecclesiam pertineret, ipse non poterat nec debebat quicquam
de illo in nostrum praejudicium immutare. Cum igitur illa compositio qualis
qualis vim and metum induxistis eundem, non solum sit vilis and turpis, verum
etiam illicita and iniqua, ut merito sit ab omnibus reprobanda, maxim propter
modum: nos qui tam Regi quam Regno tenemur and spiritualiter and temporaliter
providere, per Apostolica scripta vobis preecipiendo mandamus, and in recta
fide consulimus, quatenus facient^s de necessitate virtutem, renuncietis
compositioni hujusmodi per vos ipsos, and satisfaciatis eidem Regi ac suis de
damnis and injuriis irrogatis; ut idem Rex per manifesta devotionis and
humilitatis indicia placatus a seipsum emendet quicquid de jure fuerit
concedendum. Ad quod etiam and nos ipsum efficaciter inducemus. Quoniam sicut
nolumus, quod ipse suo jure privetur; ita volumus quod ipse a vestro gravamine
desistat: ne per consuetudines pravas and exactiones iniquas, sub nostro
Dominio Regnum Angliae opprimatur. Eritque firmum and stabile in perpetuum,
quod tali modo fuit ordinatum. Inspiret igitur vobis ille, qui neminem vult
perire, ut adquiescatis humiliter nostris salubribus consiliis and mandatis: ne
si secus egeritis, in eum incidatis articulum necessitatis, grave periculum
totius negotii Crucifixi; quod utique immineret, nisi per authoritat^m nostram
revocarentur omnino, quae a tanto Principe Crucesignato taliter sunt extorta,
and ipso volente illa observari. Quare dum apud nos Archiepiscopus and Episcopi
Angliae, praesentes extit^rint in Concilio generali, quod ad expediendum Crucis
negotium principalius intendemus celebrare; procuratores idoneos ad ^n^stram
praesentiam destinetis, secure vos beneplacito nostro committentes; quia nos ea
favente Domino, statuemus, per quae gravaminibus and abusibus de regno Angliae
prorsus exclusis, Rex suo sit Jure, and honor contentus; and tam Clerus quam
Populus universus debita pace ac liberate laetetur. Datum Anagni in Italy.
Agnaniae nono Calendas Septembris, (i. e. 24 Augusti) Pontificatus nostri anno
decimo octavo.

Ibid. f. 270. n. 40.
INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Petro Wintoniensi Episcopo, Abbati Redinge and
Pandulpho Ecclesiae Romanae Subdiacono, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
Miramur plurimum and movemur, quod cum charissimus in Christo filius noster
Johannes illustris Rex Angliae, supra spem Domino and Ecclesiae satisfecerit;
and praesertim Fratri nostro Stephano Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, and Episcopis
ejus, quidam eorum minus quam oportuerit and decuerit ad Sanctae Crucis
negotium, Apostolicae sedis mandatum and fidelitatis praestitae juramentum
debitum, imo nullum habentes respectum; ei contra perturbatores regni, quod ad
Romanam Ecclesiam ratione dominii pertinere dignoscitur, auxilium non
praestiterint vel favorem, quasi conscii, ne dicamus socii conjurationis
iniquae: quia non caret scrupulo societatis iniquae: qui manifesto facinori
desinit obviare. Ecce qualiter Patrimonium Romanae Ecclesiae Pontifices
praefati Pejores proculdubio Saracenis existentes, cum illum conantur a regno
depellere, de quo potius sperabatur quod deberet succurrere terrae Sanctae.
Vnde ne talium insolentia, non solum in periculum Regni Angliae, verum etiam in
perniciem aliorum Regnorum, and maxim in subversionem totius negotii Crucifixi
valeat praevalere: Nos ex part Dei omnipotentis Patris et Filii et Spiritus
Sancti, authoritate quoque Apostolorum ejus Petri and Pauli, ac nostra; suis,
excommunicationis vinculo innodamus, et terras eorum Ecclesiastico subjicimus
Interdicto: praefato Archiepiscopo et Coepiscopis suis in virtute obedientiae
districtissime injungentes, quatenus nostram sententiam singulis diebus
Dominicis et Festivis, pulsatis campanis, and candelis accensis, solemniter per
totam Angliam publicare procurent; donec satisfecerint domino Regi de damnis et
injuriis irrogatis, et ad ejus obsequium fideliter revertantur. Universis Si
quis autem Episcoporum hoc nostrum praeceptum neglexerit adimplere, sciat se ab
episcopali officio suspensum, et subjectorum obedientiam esse subtractam: quia
justum est ut eis inferiores non obediant, qui suo superiori obedire
contemnunt. Ne igitur mandatum alicujus tergiversatione valeat impediri,
excommunicationis causam praedictorum, cum caeteris quae ad hoc negotium omni
appellatione postposita, procedatis sicut videretis expedire.

INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Claus. 17. Johannis M. 16. Dors.
Dilectis filiis Cleritis and Laicis per Cantuariensem Provinciam constitutis,
Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem. Ad communem volumus notitiam pervenire,
quod nos suspensionis sententiam quam Venerabilis frater noster Petrus
Wintoniensis Episcopus, and dilectus filius Pandulphus subdiaconus, and
familiaris electus, in Stephanum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum authoritate
Apostolica protulerun^, ratam habemus, and praecipimus inviolabiliter
observari, donec idem Archiepiscopus, qui eam humiliter servat, mereatur ipsam
juxta formam Ecclesiae canonice praestitam relaxari, uno vinculo in aliud
commutato. Quocirca universitati vestrae per Apostolica scripta mandamus
quatenus and vos ipsi praescriptam sententiam firmiter observetis, cum interim
nullam debeatis eidem obedientiam exhibere. Datum Laterani, secundo Nov. 4.
1215.
nonas

INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Abbati de Albendune, Mat. Paris, f. 277. lin. 1.
Archidiacono Pictabiensi, and Magistro Roberto Officiali Norwicensis
Ecclesiae, in generali Concilio constituti, excommunicavimus and
anathematisabimus ex part omnipotentis Dei Patris and Filii and Spiritus
Sancti, authoritate quoque Beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, ac
nostra, Barons Angliae cum adjutoribus and fautoribus suis, qui Iohannem
illustrem Regem Anglorum Crucesignatum and Vasallum Romanae Ecclesiae
persequuntur, molientes ei regnum auferre, quod ad Romanam Ecclesiam
dignoscitur pertinere. Insuper excommunicamus and anathematisamus omnes illos,
16 Dec. 1215.
qui ad occupandum vel invadendum impediendum euntes in ejusdem Regis
succursum, operam vel opem impenderunt; and terras eorundem Barenum
Ecclesiastico subjicimus Interdicto. Aggravamus etiam in eosdem fortius manus
nostras, si nec sic a suo destiterint iniquo proposito, cum in hac part
Pejores sint Saracenis: decernentes, ut si quis Clericus cujuscunque dignitatis
aut ordinis, praedictas excommunicationis aut Interdicti sententias violare
praesumpserit, anathematis se sciat mucrone percussum: and ni quantocius
resipuerit, ab omni officio and beneficio deponendum. praecipiendo mandamus,
quantenus per totam Angliam publicare faciatis praescripta: eademque faciatis
authoritate nostra, sublato cujuslibet conditionis and appellationis obstaculo
inviolabiliter observari. Volumus etiam nihilominus and mandamus, ut quosdam
Barons Angliae, quos venerabilis Frater noster Win^on^ensis Episcopus, and
dil^cti filii Abbas de Reding, and Magister Pandulphus Subdiaconus and
familiaris noster, delegati a nobis, excommu^icatos personaliter nominaverunt,
quia ipsos videlicet, c^ves illos Londinenses, qui fuerunt principales
praenominatae perversitatis augores; and Robertum filium Walteri, Saberum
Comitem Wintoniensem, R. filium ejus, Galfridum de Mandevilla, and Willielmum
fratrem ejus, Comitem de Clare, and G. (...) filium ejus, Humiridum Comitem de
Hereford, Richardum de Percy, Eustachium de Vesci, Iohannem Constabularium
Ces^riae, Willielmum de Mumbray, Willielmum de Albineto, W. (...) filium ejus,
Robertum de Ros. Et W. (...) filium ejus, Petrum de Brus, Rogerum de Cressi,
Iohannem filium ejus, Ranulphum filium Roberti, Rogerum Comitem Bigod, H.
filium ejus, Robertum de Ver, Fulconem filium Warini W. Malet, Willielmum de
Monte Acu^o, Willielmum filium Mareschalli, Willielmum de Bello Campa, S. de
Kime, Rogerum de Monte Begonis, N. colaum de Stutevill^; nec non and alios in
praedictorum That is, Peter Bishop of Winton, the Abbat of Redinge, and
Pandulph.
Judicium sententia nominatim expressos, cum complicibus and fautoribus
eorundem, auctoritate Apostolica excommunicatos per totam Angliam public
denunciare faciatis: and ab omnibus arctius evitari, singulis diebus Dominicis
and festivis solemniter innovari hujusmodi sententiam facientes ac denunciates
inviolabiliter observari: Civitatemque Londinensem Ecclesiastico suppositam
Interdido, and contradictores per censuram Ecclesiasticam appellatione
postposita compescendo. Magistrum etiam Gervasium Londinensem Cancellarium, qui
sicut a Judicibus praesatis accepimus, dicti Regis and suorum manifestissimus
persecutor, excommunicatum public denuncietis: ac suspensum, graviori etiam
poena, nisi congrue satisfecerit, puniendum. Quod si nos omnes, etc. Datum
Laterani 16 December. 1215.
xvii Calendas Januarii Pontificatus nostri anno decimo octavo.

Ibid. n. 40.
INnocentius Episcopus, etc. Hujus igitur authoritate mandati, vobis Barons
Angliae cum omnibus adjutoribus and fautoribus suis, qui Dominum Johannem Regem
Angliae persequuntur; and omnes illos qui ad occupandum vel invadendum regnum
ipsum, vel impediendum euntes in ejusdem Regis succursum operam vel opem
impenderunt, excommunicatos denuncietis; and terras eorundem Baronum
Ecclesiastico interdicto suppositas publicetis. Denuncietis etiam
excommunicatos omnes Barons, qui praemisso domini Papae rescripto personaliter
nominantur; cum aliis omnibus in praedictorum Judicum sententia nominatim
expressis. Videlicet, Walterum de Nortuna, Osvertum filium Alani, Oliverium de
Vallibus, H. de Braibrock. R. de Ropeste, W. de Hobruge. W. de Mauduit,
Mauritium de Gaunt, R. de Berkele, Adam de Lincolana, R. de Mandevilla, W. de
Lanvaleie, Philippum filium Iohannis, Willielmum de Tuintuna, W. de
Huntingfeld, Alexandrum de Pointuna, R. de Munfichet, R. de de Meutuna, W.
Archidiaconum de Hereford, I. de Fereby, R. Capellanum, Roberti filii Walteri,
Alexandrum de Suttuna, W. de Colev^lle. R. filium ejus, Osbertum de Bobi,
Osbertum Giffard, Nicolaum de Stanevile, Thomam de Muletune, Cibes illos
Londinenses, Magstrum Gervassum Cancellarium, and Civitatem Londinensem
Ecclesiastico suppositam Interdicte, public denuncietis. Has vero
excommunicationis and Interdicti sententias in Ecclesiis nostris tam
Conventualibus Parochialibus ad nos pertinentibus publicari; ac singulis diebus
Dominicis and festivis faciatis solemniter innovari, ita diligenter singula
capitula mandati Apostolici exequendo and quantum ad vos pertinet firmiter
observando, ne in poenam Canonicam and con^umacibus debitam incidatis. Valete.

H. Dei gratia Abbas Abbendunensis, etc. Ibm. f. 279. n. 40.
Exequentes mandatum Apostolicum nobis sic impositum, sicut tenor literarum
nostrarum, quas G. de Boclande ejus Ecclesiae Decano, and Conventui Sanctae
Trinitatis Londonensis, literas nostras Domini Papae rescripti
excommunicationis and interdicti sententias latas in persequentes Dominum
Regem, and Civitatem Londinensem, diligenter publicantes, inviolabiliter
observarent. Qui adeo irreverenter Apostolicum vilipendere mandatum praesumunt,
quod easdem sententias publicare vel etiam observare per contumaciam
contempserunt: In divinis obsequiis excommunicatis scienter communicantes,
sententiarum Domini Papae violatores, and mandati ejus contemptores manifestos
Clericos and nuncios ejusdem Decani nobis specialiter destinatas; and per alias
sufficientes probationes plenam habentes certitudinem, constiterit. Praeterea
de regno Francorum quidam nobiles advenerunt, cum armata manu Militum, and
Clientum; quos omnes proculdubio eadem excommunicationis sententia volumus esse
ligatos. Nam contra dominum Regem and Sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam invadunt regnum
Angliae, quotidie depraedantes illud, and pro part detinent Castellanum
scilicet de Sancto Audemaro cum suis sociis, qui contra Regem ad occupandum vel
invadendum regnum Angliae opem vel operam impenderunt. Insuper praedictum
Decanum, nec non and omnes Canonicos, and Clericos, cujuscunque dignitatis aut
ordinis, de ecclesiis praefatis, and Civitate, ad quorum notitiam mandatum
pervenerit, vel qui se absentaverunt, vel quocunque modo procuraverunt, quo
minus perveniret ad illos; authoritate Apostolica qua fungimur in denunciamus
excommunicatos: Vobis eadem authoritate injungentes, quatenus omnes praedictos
excommunicatos public denuncietis, and faciatis per totam Parochiam vestram
publicari, tam Decanum quam nobiles supradictos personaliter nominando. Ita and
circa hoc and illud quod in primis literis vobis directum continetur mandatum,
solliciti existentes ne penes summum Pontificem quod absit, possitis redargui
negligentiae, sed potius de diligentia commendari. Valete.

LOdovicus filius Philippi Regis primogenitus, Ibm. f ^80. n. 20.
universis fidelibus and amicis suis qui sunt Londini, salutem and sinceram
dilectionem Dominica Instantis Paschae erimus apud Calesiam, parati per Dei
gratiam transfretare. Super eo quod vos in omnibus negotiis meis strenue and
viriliter habuistis, vobis refero gratias Vos attente rogantes, and
attentissime requirentes, quatenus sicut semper fecistis, adhuc vos fortiter
and strenue teneatis. Volumus enim quod certi sitis, quod in brevi habebitis
nos in succursum vestrum. Et vos attente rogamus, ut super his, nullis aliis
suggestionibus, vel literis aut nunciis credatis: credimus enim quod super his
falsas literas habebitis, aut nuncios Seductores. Valete.

Pat. 1 Johan. M. 21. Dors.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, etc. Stephanus Dei gratia Cantuariensis totius
Angliae Primas and Sanctae Romanae Ecclesie Cardinalis, Henricus Dublinensis
Archiepiscopus, Willielmus Londinensis, Petrus Wintoniensis, Joscelinus
Bathoniensis, and Glastonensis, Hugo Lincolniensis, Walteius Wigorniensis,
Willielmus Coventrensis, Ricardus Cicestrensis Episcopi, and Magister
Pandulphus Domini Papae Subdiaconus and familiaris, Salutem. Noverit
universitas vestra quod quando facta fuit Pax inter Dominum Regem Johannem et
de discordia inter eos orta iidem Barons nobis praesentibus et audientibus
promiserunt Domino Regi quod quamcunque securitatem habere vellet ab eis de
pace illa observanda ipsi ei habere facerent praeter Castella et obsides.
Postea vero quando Dominus Rex petiit ab eis ut talem Cariam ei facerent.
Omnibus, etc. Sciatis nos astrictos esse per Sacramentum, et homagia Domino
nostro Johanni Et in hujus rei testimonium id ipsum per hoc scriptum
protestamur.

Mat. Paris, f. 283. n. 10.
EXcellentissimo Domino suo Lodovico, Domini Regis Francorum primogenito, D. de
Corbolio, J. de Montevisito, and G. Limeth, nuncii, salutem and fidele
servitium. Noverit excellentia vestra, quod nos die Dominica ad mensem Paschae
venimus ad dominum Papam, salvis personis nostris and rebus: and eodem die
intravimus statim ad ipsum, Quem hilarem invenimus, sed vultu tristem se nobis
exhibuit. Et praesentatis literis nostris, and proposita salutatione ex part
vestra, ipse nobis respondit: Dominus vester non est dignus salutatione nostra.
Ego vero statim respondi: Pater, credo quod auditis rationibus and
excusationibus Domini nostri, invenietis eum dignum salutatione vestra; utpote
Christianum, Catholicum, vobis and Romanae Ecclesiae devotum. Et sic illa die a
praesentia Domini Papae recessimus. Sed in recessu nostro benignissime nobis
dixit Dominus Papa; quod nos libenter audiret, quando and quoties vellemus.
Sequenti die Martis, Dominus Papa misit servientem quendam ad hospitium
nostrum, ut veniremus ad ipsum, and statim impugnare factum vestrum, and
rations vestras. Et statim finito sermon, percusso pectore suo cum magno
gemitu, infremuit spiritu, et dixit: Heu mihi, quia in hoc facto Ecclesia Dei
non potest evadere confusionem. Si enim Rex Angliae vincitur, in ipsius
consusione consundimur: quia Vasallus noster est, and tenemur eum defendere. Si
Dominus Ladovicus vincitur, quod Deus avertar, in ipsius Iaesione Iaeditur
Romana Ecclesia; and Et in fine dixit, quod melius vellet mori, quam aliquod
malum vobis accideret in hoc facto. Et sic illa die recessimus. Praeterea de
consilio quorundam Cardinalium expectamus diem Ascenscionis, ne quid statuatur
contra vos: Quoniam illa die solet Papa innovare sententias suas. Dixerat enim
nobis Papa, quod ipse expectaret nuncios Domini Walonis. Valete.

Majori and Probis hominibus Lenn Salutem. Pat. 18 Johan. M. 8. n. 6^^
Mandamus vobis quod per Consilium Fulconis De Oytry, Willielmi de and
VVillielmi Gernon Recipiatis in villa Lenn omnes quos videritis esse ad fidem
Nostram, Test apud Divis. 7 Die Junii.

REx omnibus has literas inspecturis Salutem. Ibidem, M. 2. n. 27.
Sciatis quod suscepimus in gratiam and Benevolentiam nostram omnes illos de
Comitatu qui ad fidem and servitium nostrum redire voluerint per Dilectum nobis
Nicholaum de Haya, and Robertum de Gaugy, Gratum siquidem and acceptum habemus
Finem quem ipsi qui ad fidem and servitium nostrum Redierint cum eisdem
Nicholao and Roberto fecerint pro pace nostra habenda, and in Hujus, etc. Test
Rege apud Oxon. 4

Rex omnibus, etc. Ibid. M. 1. n. 8.
Sciatis quod Die Martis proxima post festum Sancti Dionysii Anno xviii
Recepimus in Camera nostra apud Lenn Centum Marcas Argenti per manus Agathae
Trussebut uxoris VV^llielmi de Albinio de Fine ejusdem VVillielmi quem Nobiscum
fecit pro Deliberatione sua. Et in Hujus, etc. Test apud Lenn xi Die October.

Ibidem, n. 7.
Sciatis quod Res and Merchandise quae sunt in Navi quam Radulphus filius
VValteri Ducit nostrae sunt quas quidem Duci praecepimus usque Grimesby, etc.
Test apud VVysebeth xii Die Octobr.

Rex omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod suscepimus, Ibidem, n. 6.
in protectionem and Defensionem nostram Abbathiam Sancti Edwardi de
Saflesbiria cum omnibus ad eam pertinentibus, etc. Et in Hujus, etc. Test apud
Lifford This Lifford, Mat. Paris calls Laford, and the place intended both by
the Record and Historian was Sleford Castle in Lincolnshire within 10 or 15
Miles of Newarke.

Rex Constabulario Hertford Salutem, Ibidem, n. 2.
Mandamus vobis quod talem seisinam habere facias VValtero de Montgomery
militi, Comiti de Ferrariis, de terra sua in Hondesdon, qualem inde habuit ante
Guerram, and unde occasion Guerrae fuerit Disseisitus. Test meipso apud
Newere xvii Die Octobr.

Rex Henrico Belet Salutem. Ibidem, n. 3.
Mandamus vobis quod Fidem habeatis hiis quae Savaricus de Malo Leone,
Willielmus Comes Albemarliae et Fulco de Briant vobis Dicent ex part nostra
ad Fidem, Commodum, et Honorem nostrum. Test apud Newert, xviii Die Octobr.
and in the night of this Day King John died.

Pat. 18. Johan. M. 2.
MAndatum est Vicecomiti Lincoln: Quod faciat habere Ol^vero Alvinio Terram quae
fuit VVillielmi de Landa, in Coleby qui est cum inimicis Domini Regis, quam
Dominus Rex ei concessit. Test Rege apud Lincoln 28 die September.

Ibm. M. 1.
Rex Probis Hominibus de Crimplesham salutem. Sciatis quod Concessimus Dilecto
Clerico nostro Iohanni de Pavilly totam Terram Rogeri de Crimplesham cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis, and ideo nobis Mandamus quod eidem Iohanni faciatis
quod facere Tenemini, and ei sitis intendentes. Test meipso apud Lenn xi die
Octobr.

Mandatum est Vicecomiti Norffi. Quod faciat Habere eidem Iohanni plenam
seisinam de terra praedicta cum pertinentiis. Test ut supra.

In this Record the Probi Homines were Ordinary people, for it is probable there
might be no other in a small Country Village, that were Tenants to the Lord of
the Manner. But in Counties, Hundreds, Cities, and great Towns, they always were
the ablest most knowing, and best sort of people.

Cart. 2. Johan. n. 38.
JOhannes Dei gratia Rex, etc. Sciatis nos Concessisse and presenti Carta
Gulielmo de Braosa honorem de Limerit cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, retentis
in Dominico nostro Civitate Limeric and donatione Episcopatuum and Abbatiarum
and retentis in manu nostra Cantredo Osmannorum et Sancta Insula sicut Rex
Henricus pater noster honorem illum dedit Philippo de Braosa Avunculo predicti
^ulielmi Habendum et Tenendum sibi et Heredibus suis de nobis et Heredibus
nostris per servicium Sexaginta Militum Excepto Servicio Gulielmi de Burgo de
omnibus terris et tenementis suis quecunque de predicto Honor tenuit et de
quocunque ea tenuit die Natalis Domini proxima post secundam Coronationem
nostram que nos retinuimus in manu nostra et heredum nostrorum una cum
predictis que retenta sunt in manu nostra, et exceptis hiis omnibus que ad
Coronam Regiam pertinent, quare volumus et sirmiter precipimus quod predictus
Gulielmus de Braosa et heredes sui post eum habeant et teneant predictum
honorem de Limeric illis exceptis que bone memory Henricus Rex pater noster et
nos retinuimus in Dominico, et manu nostra cum omnibus pertinentiis suis in
bosco et plano in pratis et pasturis, in aquis et molendinis, in vivariis et
piscariis et stagnis, in viis et Semitis et in omnibus aliis locis et aliis
rebus ad honorem illum pertinentibus been et in pace libere et quiet integre
et honorifice cum omnibus libertatibus et Liberis Consuetudinibus suis et etiam
adeo libere ut alii Capitales Barons nostri de Hibernia liberius tenent per
praedictum Servicium Testibus Huberto R. Sancti Andrei Episcopo, Ranulpho
Comite Cestriae R. Comite Leycestrie Galfrido filio P^tri Comite Essex Gulielmo
Briwer Huberto Bardolph VValtero de Lacy Simone de Pateshull Dat. per manum
Simonis Archidiaconi Wellensis apud Lincoln duodecimo Die Januarii Regni nostri
Anno Secundo.

REx, etc. Meilero filio Henrici, etc. and Baronibus Hibernie, Pat. 6 Johan. M.
1. n. 1.
etc. Sciatis quod dedimus and Concessimus Hugoni de Lacy homagio and servicio
suo terram de Vltonia cum pertinentiis suis Habendum and Tenendum sicut
Johannes de Curcy eam tenuit die qua idem Hugo eum in Campo seisivit vel die
proximo precedenti Saluis Crocia signifies a Bishops or Abbats Staff. So that
saving the Bishops and Abbats Staves, signifies saving the Donation of the
Bishoprics and Abbeys of that Land, as in the former Record
Crociis de terra illa, et Sciatis quod retinuimus nobiscum predictum Hugonem
ipsumque nobiscum ducimus in Servicio nostro. Et Ideo vobis mandamus quod
terram suam et omnia sua custodiatis manuteneatis et defendatis sicut nostra
Dominica.

Test me ipso apud VVindlesor secundo die Maii per Archidiacanum Wigorn.

Meller was Son to Henry Fitz- Henry, Base Son of King Henry the First by Nes^a.

REx Meilero filio Henrici Iusticiario Hibernie, etc. Claus. 7 Johan. M. 5.
Sciatis quod Deremutus nobis exposuit ex part Regis Connoctiae quod Rex
exigit tenere de nobis tertiam partem terre de Connoccia per Centum Marcas per
annum sibi and heredibus suis nomine Baroniae and duabus partibus ejusdem terre
reddet nobis annuatim debitum tributum scilicet Trecentarum Marearum Et
preterea concedet nobis duos Cantredos cum Nativis eorundem Cantredorum de
predictis duabus partibus ad firmandum in eis vel ad faciendum, inde voluntatem
nostram, and ideo vobis mandamus quod si hoc videritis esse nostrum melius id
ita fieri faciatis. Quia ad hoc been assentimus si vos videritis expedire,
veruntamen curam and operam adhibeatis diligentem si poteritis apponere
incrementum de dono propter hoc concedendum, quia sicut Audivimus ipse CCCC
propter hoc dabit ad minus de Gersuma and efficiatis etiam quod donet de vaccis
and aliis rebus per Annum ad sustentandum Castra nostra que illuc sirmaverimus

Test me ipso apud Brehull vicesimo Die Decembris per G. Lutterell, per ipsum
Regem.

JOhannes Dei Gratia, etc. Cart. 9 Johan. n. 48.
Sciatis nos concessisse and presenti Carta nostra Confirmasse Gulielmo de
Barry rationabilem donationem Robertus filius Stephani fecit Philippo de Barry
patri ejusdem Gulielmi cujus here is ipse est de tribus Cantredis in terra sua de
Corcaia scilicet Olethan cum omnibus pertinentiis suis and aliis duobus
scilicet Mufcherie Dunegan and Cantredo de Killede pro servicio december Militum,
sicut Cartae praedicti Roberti quas inde habet rationabiliter volumus and
firmiter precipimus quod idem Gulielmus and heredes sui haebeant et teneant
predictos tres Cantredos cum omnibus pertinentiis suis been et in pace libere
et quiet et integre in omnibus locis et rebus cum omnibus libertaribus et
liberis consuerudi^ibus ad Cantredos illos pertinentibus sicut predictum est
Saluis nobis et heredibus nostris in omnibus hiis que ad Coronam Regiam
pertinent Ceslibus Domino Iohanne Norwicensi D. VVaterfordensi S. Midensi
Episcopis, Meilero filio Henrici Iusticierio Hibernie I^hanne Mar^schal^o
Philippo de Prendigast David de Rupe Ranulpho Comite Cestriae Sabero Comite
VVinronie R. de Veteri ponte H. de Nevill Gaufrido de Nevill Dat. per manum H.
de Well. Archioiaconi VVellensis apud VVudestok Octavo Die Novembris Anno
Regni nostri nono.

Pat. 1 H. 3. M. 16.
REx Hugoni de Lacy salutem. Mandamus vobis quod secure and sine ad fidelitatem
et servitium nostrum and concedimus vobis salvum conductum nostrum in veniendo
ad nos and nobiscum loquendo et inde salvo revertendo. Et vos scire volumus
quod si ad nos venire volueritis jura vestra et libertates vestras per
consilium dilectorum fidelium nostrorum Ranulphi Comitis Cestrie, VVillielmi
Comitis aliorum fidelium nostrorum integre vobis restituemus licet vero bone
memory Johannes pater noster in aliquo erga vos deliquerit ipsius delicti
debemus esse immunes nec delictum suum aliquatenus nobis debet imputari. Et in
hujus, etc. Quia sigillum, etc. vobis inde mittimus. Test l. e. Comite
Cestriae, his Protector in his nonage.
Comite decimo octavo die Novembris anno regni nostri primo.

Claus. 2 H. 3. p. 1. M. 6. Dors.
REx Vicecomiti Cantabr. salutem. Precipimus tibi quod sine dilatione Ballivam
tuam quod omnes Clerici qui fuerunt excommunicati, eo quod adheserunt Lodowico
vel ejus fautoribus nec adhuc sunt absoluti exeant a regno nostro ante medium
Quadragesime instantem anno regni nostri secundo. Et quicumque talis inventus
fuerit post terminum predictum in Anglia, capietur. Quoscumque Clericos
inveneris in valliva tua post eundem terminum inter excommunicatos permanentes,
occasion predicta, Capias and salvo Custodias donec aliud inde preceperimus.
Quia, etc. Test Comite apud Stok decimo octavo die Februarii.

Claus. 2. H. 3. M. 6. Dors.
REx Vicecomiti Eborum salutem. Mittimus tibi Cartas de libertatibus foresta
quam aliis Mandantes quatinus eas facias puplice in pleno Comitatu tuo
convocatis Baronibus, Militibus et Omnibus Livere Tenentibus ejusdem Comitatus
qui ibidem jurent fidelitatem nostram et tu diligenter attendens singula puncta
Cartarum ea per omnia facias jurari et observari, et id maxim quod in fine
Magne Carte appositum est, de Castris adulterinis que ab initio guerre
constructa fuerunt vel reedificata diruendis id per consilium Domini Legati et
fidelium nostrorum provisum fuit et in Carta positum ad maximam utilitatem et
tranquillitatem nostram, et regni nostri. Quia vero, etc. Test Comite apud
Sturnir. vicesimo secundo die Februarii.

HEnricus dei gratia Rex Anglie, etc. Pat. 3. H. 3. M. 6.
Omnibus has literas inspecturis salutem. Sciatis quod provisum est per commune
consilium nulla Carta nulle litere patentes, de confirmatione, alienatione,
venditione, vel donatione seu de aliqua re que cedere possit in perpetuitatem
sigillentur magno sigillo nostro usque ad etatem nostram Testibus Gilaolne
titulo sancti Martini presbitero Cardinale, et Apostolice Sedis Legato, Domino
S. Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo Domino Waltero Eborum Archiepiscopo Willielmo
Marescallo Comite Pembrochie Huberto de Burgo Justiciario nostro Anglie coram
W. London. P. Winton. R. Dunolm. I. Bathon et Glaston. H. Lincoln. S. Exon. W.
Coventr. R. Sarresbir. B. Roffen H. Heref. R. Cicestr. W. Wigorn Episcopis. H.
Carleolens. Electo H. Abbate Sancti Edmundi. W. Abbate Westminster. A. Abbate Sancti
Augustini

OMnibus ad quos presens Carta pervenerit Vniverstras Civitatis London salutem
Sciatis nos recepisse in custodiam a Domino nostro Henrico illustri Rege Anglie
filio Regis Johannis Laurentium filium Willielmi filii (...) Willielmi filii
Henrici de Sancto Albano Johannem filium Ricardi Reniger Alexandrum filium
Warini filii Nicholai, Claus. 7. H. 3. M. 14. Dors.
Nicholaum filium Johannis Travers, Rogerum filium uxoris Anulfi Johannem
nepotem Philippi Waleran qui ipsi Domino Regi liberabantur in obsides pro pace
Civitatis London conservanda et pro fideli servicio nostro. Ita quod eosdem
obsides si vivi fuerint Domino Regi vel Justiciario suo reddemus ad
summonitionem ipsius Domini Regis vel Justiciarii sui and pro eis si qui forte
mortui fuerint alios sufficientes loco eorum and etiam plures obsides si
dominus Rex vel Justiciarius suus voluerit ipsi domino Regi vel Justiciario suo
sine contradictione habere faciemus ad summonitionem suam predicto modo. In
cujus rei

Pat. 7. H. 3. M. 5.
REx omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos presents litere pervenerint
concessimus and commissimus dilecto Civi nostro Willielmo Ionner Chamberlariam
nostram London cum omnibus pertinentiis suis. Habendam and tenendam a festo
Anuntiationis beat Marie anno regni nostri septimo usque in duos annos
completos pro centum libris nobis per annum ad Scatcarium nostrum reddendis.
Salva nobis prisa nostra Grisi Operis, Cere, and pannorum sexicorum per manum
suam nobis liberanda ad opus nostrum. Et in hujus etc. Test H. etc. apud
Westminster. vicesimo nono die Januarii Anno Regni nostro Septimo.

Claus. 7. H. 3. M. 14. Dors.
REx Vicecomiti Sussex salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod diligenter pleno Comitatu
tuo per sacramentum duodecim de legalioribus and discretioribus Militibus
Comitatus tui per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit quas consuetudines and
quas libertates Dominus guerra incepit inter ipsum and Barons suos Anglie de
terris and forestis and aliis infra Burgos and extra and quas consuetudines and
libertates ipsum Regem patrem nostrum tunc habuisse didiceris per inquisitionem
predictam clamari and firmiter nobis observari facias in Comitatu tuo and
inquisitionem illam and nomina inquisitorum nobis scire facias apud
Westmonasterium in Crastino Clausi Pasche distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo
and sigillis eorum per quos inquisitio illa facta fuerit, et habeas ibi hoc

Pat. 9. H. 3. M. 7. Dorso.
REx Willielmo Basset, Radulpho de Crumbwell, Forma quinte decime assidende and
coll^gende.
Willielmo de Vernun, Thome Tuschet, Henrico de Derlegh Canonico Suwell et
Roberto de Lee Clericis salutem. Assignavimus vos Justiciarios nostros ad
quintam decimam omnium mobilium assidendam et colligendam omnes Milites
Comitatuum suorum die Dominica proxima ante mediam quadragestmam apud Notingham
ad quem diem eligi facietis quatuor legales ^tes de singulis Hundredis vel
Wapentacis vel plures vel pautiores ituros per singulos Hundredos vel
Wapentach^s ad assidendum et colligendum quintam decimam omnium mobilium
predictorum; exceptis tamen ab hac quinta deeima quantum ad Archiepiscopos,
Episcopos, Abbates, Priores et ceteros viros religionis Comites Barons Milites
et liberos homines qui non sunt Mercatores omnimodis libris suis and ornamentis
Ecclesiarum et Capellarum et equis ad equirandum and equis carectariis and
summarits and armis omnimodis Iocalibus vasis urensilibu Lardariis etiam ab hac
quinta decima quantum ad Mercatores qui de omnibus Mercandisis et mobilibus
suis quintam decimam dabunt, armis ad que jurati sunt et equis suis ad
equitandum et Vtensilibus domorum suarum Cellariis et Lardariis ad Victum suum
Exceptis; etiam quantum ad Villanos armis ad que jurati sunt et Utensilibus
suis Carne et pisce et potu suo que non sunt ad vendendum et fenis suis et
furragio suo que non sunt ad vendendum Milites Wapentacos vicinos alios Jurabit
autem Unusquisque exceptis Comitibus Baronibus and Militibus propriorum
mobilium suorum and similiter mobilium duorum Vicinorum suorum propinquorum
numerum quantitatem et valorem. Et si forte inter ipsum cujus mobilia sunt and
vicinos suos juratos de eisdem mobilibus dissensio ex hoc orta fuorit Milites
ipsi per Sacramentum duodecim proborum et legalium hominum vicinorum Servientes
vero et prepositi de terris Comitum Baronum and Militum vel prepositi tantum si
serve enties ibi non fuerint, idem and eodem modo jurabunt de mobilibus
Dominorum suorum in Singulis Villis Medietas autem hujusmodi quinte decime
perpacabitur ad festum Sancte Trinitatis Anno nono and alia Medietas ad festum
Sancti Mich. proximo sequens quam quidem quintam d^cim^m Milites illi recipient
quatuor legalium hominum and prepositorum singularum Villarum per tallias inter
eos inde factas; and sic receptam ferent ad nos, and vos eam reponetis in loco
tuto sive in Ecclesia cathedrali sive in Abbatia sive in Prioratu ejusdem
Comitatus sub sigillis vestris et sigillis Militum donee provisum fuerit quo
mitti debeat Roddent aut^m vobis Milites illi statim ex quo quinta decima
fuerit assisa scripta and Rotulos suos inde factos reservatis sibi eorum
transcriptis vos vero reservabitis vobismet aliquas p^rtes Com. predictorum in
quibus hec exequamini in propriis personis vestris quamdiu opus suerit Quatuor
ve^o Milites illi vel plures vel pauciores electi coram v^bis sicut predictum
est jurabunt tactis Sacrosanctis coram vobis quod hec omnia exequentur
fideliter and diligenter and quod nec pro amore vel odio vel pro aliqua re in
mundo hoc fa^ere omittent vos autem jurabitis cor^m Vicecomite and Militibus
congregatis ad diem illum quod h^nc formam per omnia perficietis per vos and
alios sic^t predictum est fideliter and diligenter pro posse vestro si quis
vero ex vobis sive sit Clericus sive sit laicus hiis interesse non possit
propter causam manifestam rationabilem and necessariam residui vestrum
potestatem habeatis adhibendi Dominicis and Villanis suis propriis de quibus
Archiepiscopi and Episcopi quintam Decimam assideri and colligi facient in
forma predicta and per manum suam nobis inde respondebunt

Robertus de Lexinton postea assignatus fuit eis Socius qui primo assignatus
fuit in Comitatu Lincolniae.

die Dominica ante mediam quadragesimam apud Lincoln.
Thom. de Muleton Alex. de Pointon Simon de Roppely Johan. Coleman Johan. de
Colemer Clerici. Martinus de Cybecay Clerici.
Willielmus de Ralegh assignatus fuit eis Socius per Literas Domini Regis

ad eund. terminum apud Hereford.
Walterus de Muscegros Will. fill. Warini Nich. de Seculer Rich. fill. Fulconis
Willielmus le Poer Clericus
Decanus Hereford postea assignatus fuit.

ad eundem terminum apud Wilton.
Galfr. le Salvage Hugo le Droeys Rog. de Dancressia Ric. de Cardinul Mich.
persona de Culestan. Robertus de Laimton Clericus
ad eund. terminum apud Jews.
Simon de Ethingeham Petrus de Scoteny Willielmus de Alta Ripa Magr. Jocelinus
de Alta Ripa Clericus
Thomas de Hertford postea assignatus fuit eis Socius per literas Domini Regis
eis directas.

ad eund. terminum apud Westminster.
Gilebertus de Hendon. Henr. Bucointe Thom. de la Wike
Mandatum est Militibus libere tenentibus et aliis de honor Walingford in Com.
Middl. quod eis intendentes sint et respondentes ad quintam decimam omnium
mobilium assidendam et colligendam non obstante precepto quod Dominus Rex eis
fecit ut essent intendentes et respondentes Ballivo Honoris Wallingford.

ad eund. terminum apud Coventry de Com. Warwic. et quarta die sequenti apud
Leicester de Com. illo.
Will. de Martiwast Will. de Hardredeshill Rad. Pincerna Magr. Eustachius de
Chestreton
Walterus de Preston. Magister Willielmus de Tornour. assignati sunt postea
Socii per literas Domini Regis, etc.

ad eundem terminum apud Wigorniam.
Henricus Limet Eudo de Bello Campo Will. de Millay Clericus
ad eundem terminum apud Dorchester.
Aluredus de Lincoln. Willielmus le Waleis Henr. de Lidinton.
Hugo persona de Waya assignatus est eis Socius, etc.

ad eund. terminum apud Cantuariam.
Will. de Albrincis Henr. de Cobbeham Henr. de Sandwic. Robertus de Aubervill
Thomas de Bendeng postea assignatus fuit eis Socius, etc.

ad eundem terminum apud Chelemareford de Com. illo, et quarta die apud
Hertford de Com. illo.
Mich. de Muntiny Ric. sil. Simonis Adam fill. Willielmi Hugo de Clahall
Clerici. Ric. de Stapelford Clerici.
Willielmus Brito postea assignatus fuit, etc.

ad eundem terminum apud Stafford de Com. illo et quarto die apud Salop de Com.
illo.
Will. Pantulf Vivianus le Rushal Henr. de Denton Thom. Mauduit Galfr. Griffin
Clerici. Ric. de Staneby Clerici.
ad eundem terminum apud Gloucester.
Jordanus la War Osbertus de Abbetot in Wigorn. Rad. Musard cum aliis in
Bristol. Johannes de Baalun. Ric. de Vein. Ph. de Tudinton Clericus
Robertus de Muntsorrel Ric. de Sancto Falero Clerici postea assign. fuerunt
Socii in Com. Gloucester per literas, etc.

ad eundem terminum apud Winton.
Will. de Sorewell Walt. de Rumes Rog. de Baalun. Adam de Portesya Johannes le
Poer Clericus
ad eund. terminum apud Kingeston.
Gilbertus de Abbingwurth Will. Haunsard Magr. Philippus de Hamme Clericus
Robertus de Den postea assignatus fuit eis Socius, etc.

ad eundem terminum apud Norwic. de Com. illo quarta die apud Gipeswic. de Com.
illo et apud Cateshall. de liberlate Sancti Edmundi tertia die post Gipeswic.
Oliverus de Vallibus Hugo Ruffus Willielmus Blundus Fulco Bainard Willielmus
de Gisnay Gumericus Senescal Johannes de Wurchested Clerici. Nich. Duket
Clerici.
Thomas de Blunvill assignatus est eis socius postea, etc.

Rex Constabular. Cestriae Salutem Scias quod assignavimus te unacum Roberto de
Ros Adam de Novo Mercato Johanne de Birilan Nicholao Bass^t Willielmo de
Tameton and Magistro Waltero de Tany and Magistro Alexandro de Bayeux Clericis
Justiciarium nostrum ad quintam deoimam omnium diligitis praedictis Roberto,
Ade, Johanni, Nicholao, Will, and Magistris Waltero, and Alexandro, quibus idem
mandavimus occurratis ad ^xequendum unacum illis ea que in literis illis
patentibus audieritis contineri Test Rege apud Westminster xvii die Febr.

Rex Vicecom. Essex and Hertf. Salutem assignavimus Simonem fill. Richardi,
Henr. fill. Aucheri, Hugonem de Clahall, Alexandrum de Litlebiry, and omnes
Milites Comitatus Essex and quarto die scil. apud Hertford omnes Milites de
Comitatu Hertford taliter igitur te inde intromittas ne pro defectu eorum ea
que ad te pertinent in hac part ad te nos capere debeamus Test ut supra.
Dominus Rex constituit Magistrum Nicholaum de Framelingham Justiciarium, and
adhibuit Socium Justiciariis in Com. Norff. and Suff. ad quintam decimam
assidendam and colligendam adhibitum ad hoc eis socium admittant Test Rege
apud Windlesores Primo die Aprilie.

Et mandatum est eidem Magistro Nicho. quod cum aliis Justic. ad hoc intendat.

Eodem modo Scribitur Justiciariis in Comitatu Surr. de Will. Hansart

Et mandatum est eidem Johanni de Chelesham quod ad hoc cum illis intendant.
Test ut supra.

ad eundem terminum videlicet die Dominica ante mediam quadragesimam apud
Cantebrigiam de Com. illo et quarto die apud Huntind. de Com. illo.
Ric. de Bainuill Hen. de Evessy Senescallus Abbatis Ramesey Walterus fill.
Bern. Clericus
Magister Willielmus de Banco assignatus fuit eis Socius.

ad eundem terminum apud Norhampton.
Robertus de Salceto David de Esseby Thomas de Haddon Clericus
Magister Nicholaus Belet postea assignatus fuit eis Socius per literas Domini
Regis eis inde directas.

ad eundem terminum apud Walingeford.
Walterus Foliot Alanus de Englefeld Johannes de Sancta Helena Johannes de
Wiggenholt Clericus
Petrus de Abbendon postea assignatus fuit eis Socius.

Mandatum est eisdem Justiciariis quod Dominus Rex vult quod R. Sarr. Episcopus
assideat et colligat quintam decimam de mobilibus suis et hominum

ad mediam quadragesimam apud
Willielmus Binnu Johannes fill. Richardi Warinus fill. Joel Rog. Everard
Clericus
Simon fill. Ric. Clericus postea assignatus fuit eis Socius.

in Crastino medie quadragesime apud Appelby.
Thomas fill. Johannis Rad. de Aencurt Gervasius de Ernhal Clericus
in Crastino medie quadragesime apud Eborum.
Robertus de Ros tanquam superiores. J. Constab. Cestriae tanquam superiores.
Adam de novo Mercato Johannes de Birikin Nicholaus Basset Willielmus de Tameton
Magister Walter de Tany Clerici. Magister Alex. de Baiocis Clerici.
ad eundem terminum apud Ocham.
Willielmus de Insula Hugo de Sibtot Robertus le Escrivenier
ad mediam quadragesimam apud Ivelcester.
Johannes de Remy Jordanus Oliver Matheus de Cliverdun Jacobus de Erneshull
Will. de Sour Clericus Rad. de Lidiard Clericus
in Crastino medie quadragesime apud novum Castrum super Tynam.
Roger de Merlay Roger Bertram Nicolaus de Hadham Clericus
in Crastino medie quadragesime apud Lancaster.
Willielmus Pincerna Willielmus Blundell Galfr. Balistarius Jordanus de Cestr.
Clericus
ad eundem terminum apud Eilesbiry de Com. Buking. et quarta die apud Bedeford
de Com. illo.
Will. de Bello Campo Henr. de Braibroc Rad. Hareg Richardus de Stok Hugo de
Bathon. Clericus


ad eundem terminum apud Oxon.
Walterus de Verdun Robertus de Avinaury Will. fill. Elye Ph. Clericus Richardi
de Riveriis
Thom. de Grana per literas Domini Regis aliis directas.

ad eund. terminum apud Exon. Scil. ad mediam quadragesimam.
Henr. de Trasy Will. Painel Hugo Peverel de Sandford Hugo Peverel de Ermintum
Rogerus Cole Clericus
ad eund. terminum ap. Carleol. in Crastino medie quadragesime.
Radulphus de la Ferte Jvo de veteri Ponte Gilebert de la Ferte Clericus
Et Alex. de Dorset and Robertus de Kancia postea assignati sunt eis Socii per
literas Domini Regis Patentes predictis Ade de Novo mercato and Sociis suis
directas in quibus literis Robertus de Ros and Constabularius

Mandatum fuit Ju^tic. Berkes quod se non intromittant de Villanis vel liberis
hominibus Abbatis de Bello loco, de Magna and parva Farendon Magna and parva
Cokewell, Sulton. Englesham and Langeford Quia Dominus Rex assignavit Magistrum
Nigellum Bonva. ad quintam decimam

Eodem modo Scribitur Archiepiscopo Eborum Episcopo Lincoln and Officiali
Norwic and Karleol. quod quinta decima assideatur and colligatur de dominicis
ordinis de Simplingeham and hominum suorum in Diocasi sua.

Johannes de Heriet Attornatus est ad assidendam and colligendam quintam
Ballivis Episcopi Winton. de Dominicis and Villanis ipsius Episcopi Propriis
and de dominicis Prioris Sancti Swithuni Winton and Villanis suis propriis and
de Dominicis and Villanis Abbatisse Sanctae Marie Winton. habet literas
directas Episcopo Winton.

G^lfridus de Say Clericus Attornatus est eodem modo de Dominicis and Villanis
Abbatis Sancti Albani and de Daminicis and Villanis Prioratuum de Hertford de
Hathfeild de Lianner de Bello loco pertinentium ad eandem Abbatiam habet
literas directas Episcopis Lincoln and London.

quod se inde non intromittant.
Richardus de Naffreton Clericus de Dominicis and Villanis Prioratus de
Tinemuwe habet literas directas Episcopo Du^olm. Alex. de Winton de Dominicis
and Villanis Prioratus de Binham and de Wimundeham habet literas directas
Officiali Norwic.
REx Vicecomiti Rantiae, Salutem Sciatis quod Archiepiseopi, Episcopi, Abbates,
Priores, and Clerici terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias suas non pertinent,
Comites, Barons, Milites, liberi homines, Cl. 16. H. 3. M. 2. Dors.
and That is, the Great Men gave for their Villans, Rustics or ordinary
Tenants. See Cl. 21. H. 3. M. 7. Dors. here in Append. N. 159.
Villani de Regno nostro, concesserunt nobis in auxilium quadragesimam partem
omnium Mobilium suorum apparentium, sicut ea habuerunt in Crastino Sanai
Marthaei Apostoli Anno Regni nostri decimo sexto, videlicet de bladis, carucis,
ovibus, vaceis, porcis, haraciis, equis Carectariis, deputatis ad Wannagia in
maneriis, exceptis bonis, quae predicti Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and aliae
personae Ecclesiasticae habent de Ecclesiis parochialibus, sibi appropriatis,
and de Ecclesiis prebendatis, and de prebendis, and de terris ad prebendas and
Ecclesias parochiales spectantibus; provisim est autem generaliter a predictis
fidelibus nostris quod predicta quadragesima hoc modo assideatur, and
colligatur; videlicet quod de qualibet villa integra eligantur quatuor de
melioribus, and Legalibus hominibus, una cum These prepositi or Reves are
called Ballivi in Cl. 21. H. 3. M. 7. Dors. here in Append. N. 159.
prepositis singularum villarum per quorum Sacramentum quadragefima omnium
Mobilium predictorum taxetur, and assideatur super singulos in presentia
Militum assessorum ad hoc assignatorum, and postea per Sacramentum duorum
legalium hominum earundem villarum inquiratur, and assideatur quadragesima
bonorum Mobilium quae predicti quatuor, and prepositi habent; and distinct and
aperte inbrevietur; de cujus vel quorum Baronia, vel liberate quaelibet villa
fuerit, in part vel in toto, and postquam quadragesima fuerit assisa, and in
Scriptum redacta, rotulus omnium particularum de singulis Villis, and singulis
Comitatibus, liberetur Seneschallo singulorum Baronum vel Attornato ipsius
Seneschalli, vel Ballivo Libertatis, ubi aliquis libertatem habuerit, si Baro
vel Dominus Libertatis velit and possit dictam quadragesimam colligere, and pro
ea habenda distringere, si vero nolit vel non possit, Vicecomites districtionem
predictam faciant, Ita quod nichil inde recipiant, sed tota predicta
quadragesima liberetur predictis Militibus assessoribus, in majori and
securiori villa singulorum Comitatuum, and de qualibet villa fiat summae
taillia inter Seneschallum Baronis, vel ejus Attornatum, vel Seneschallum
Domini Libertatis, and predictos Assessores and deponetur pecunia per cosdem
Assessores in aliquo loco tutiori ejusdem villae, Ita quod Assessores habeant
sigilla sua and seras and claves suas, super pecuniam predictam; Et Vicecomites
sigilla sua et seras, and Claves suas similiter, and Assessores statim ex quo
quadragesima assissa fuerit per ipsos, mittent rotulos suos de toto itinere suo
ad Scaccarium, and similiter ex quo dicta pecunia ab eis Collecta fuerit,
mittent rotulos suos de recepta sua; and predicta pecunia reservetur in locis
ubi deposita fuerit, donec ad mandatum nostrum deferatur usque ad novum Templum
London: nichil vero capietur ab aliquo nomine quadragesimae, qui non habuerint
de hujusmodi bonis mobilibus ad valentiam quadraginta denariorum ad minus; ad
predictam siquidem quadragesimam assidendam and Colligendam in Comitatu tuo
modo predicto, assignavimus dilectos and fideles nostros Thomam de Camuill,
Reginaldum de Cornhull, Robertum de Rokell, and S^monem de Craye per literas
speciales, loco aliorum; quos statim visis literis istis sine dilatione coram
te venire facias ad audiendum preceptum nostrum; quibus incontinenti porrigas
literas nostras patentes eis inde directas, quas tibi mittimus eis porrigendas:
Tu vero certis diebus and locis quos ipsi tunc providerint commodiores, venire
facias coram eis singulas villas Comitatus tui ad hec-diligenter exequenda,
negotium illud incipiatur ad ultimum a die Sancti Michaelis intres Septimanas
and sic de die in diem continuetur quousque perficiatur and taliter, and ita
diligenter te cures intromittere, in hiis quae ad te pertinet in predicto
negocio, ad mandatum ipsorum Assessorum ne pro defectu tui dilationem capiat,
pro quo ad te and tua, nos capere debeamus. Test meipso apud Westminster
Vicesimo octavo die Septembris.

NOtum sit omnibus Christi fidelibus, quod cum Dominus Henricus Rex Angliae
mandatum Domini Papae suscepisset, Pat. 17. H. 3. M. 9. Dors.
super transgressionibus Eccl siae Romanae, and Clericis Italicis, and aliis in
regno Angliae contra pacem suam, illatis, corrigendis; Idem Dominus Rex hoc
stcut decuit, emendando, a pluribus fide dignis didicisset, quod per Hubertum
de Burgo quondam Iusticiarum Angliae, videlicet, tempore transgressionis,
factae fuerunt transgressiones illae: Et Dominus Rex volens hoc emendare,
jussit quosdam de suis, ut corpus suum arestarent, and coram eo adducerent,
responsurum de transgressione illa and aliis transgressionibus and praesertim
de transgressione illa. Qui Huber^us inde praemunitus fugit in quandam
Capellam, a qua ipsum sequentes licet hoc eis non esset injunctum, timentes
Dominum Regem, extraxerunt and London adduxerunt, quod cum Dominus Rex
audivisset, ut libertas Ecclesiae, in omnibus observaretur illaesa, ipsum ad
eandem Capellam praecepit, and in eadem salvo reponi. In qua cum per dies
plures moram fecisset, requisitus utrum vellet tenere se in Capella illa, vel
exire, and stare judicio Curia Domini Regis, super transgressione praedicta,
and super aliis quae ei ibidem objicerentur, tam a Domino Rege, quam a pluribus
aliis de eo multis modis conquerentibus; Tandem sponte elegit quod exire
voluit, ad standum juri. Tamen petiit misericordiam Domini Regis and sic
exivit, and Ballivi Domini Regis qui tunc praesentes erant ipsum receperunt,
and London duxerunt and tradiderunt eum Constabulario Rex adhuc esset incertus
utrum spontanea voluntate, an coactus exivisset, misit ad eum Nobiles viros
Dominum Stephanum de Sedgrave, tunc Iusticiarum Angliae, Iohannem de Lascy
Comitem Lincolniae, and Constabularium Cestriae, Brianum de Insula, and alios
viros idoneos Clerico^ and laicos, quibus ad ipsum venientibus, and ipsum inde
alloquentibus, respondit quod gratis exiverat, and non coactus, nec pro aliquo
defectu victualium, vel aliorum, and tali modo exiv^t, ad faciendum voluntatem
Domini Regis, de terris suis, and catallis and de corpore suo, and pigebat eum
quod tam diu moram ibidem fecerat. Postea vero cum Dominus Rex nichil adhuc ei
inde concederet, eo quod multi de eo, de novo conquesti fuerunt, tam de morte
hominum, quam de multis per eum injuste exhaeredatis, and aliis pluribus
criminibus, and transgressionibus, volens de eo conquerentibus justiciam
exhibere, praecepit eum deliberari a custodia praedicti Constabularii, ut
libere venire possit ad ^uriam suam, conquerentibus de eo Domino Regi, pro
transgressione contra Dominum Papam quam contra se ipsum, and omnibus aliis
responsurus, and sic venit apud Cornbull in London Vigilia Sancti Mar^ini, and
comparuit coram Dominis Richardo Comite Cornubiae and Pictaviae, Willielmo
Comite Warrennae, Richardo Maresehal^o, Comite Pembrot, Iohane Comite
Linco^niae, and Constabulario Cestriae, Stephano de Sedgrabe Justiciario,
Radulfo filio Nicholai, and aliis fidelibus Domini Regis ibidem existentibus.
Et cum ibidem coram eisdem accusaretur de omnibus praedictis, defendens,
respondit sicut prius, quod nullo modo voluit subire judicium, set simpliciter
and de toto posuit se in voluntatem Domini Regis tam de corpore, quam de
terris, and omnibus aliis rebus. Tandem Dominus Rex pietate motus, ad
instantiam Magnatum Angliae, and ad petitionem ipsius Huberti, and suorum
parentum, and amicorum, and similiter de permissione conquerentium, Iudicium
posuit in respectum, licet judicium jam in eadem Curia Domini Regis formatum
esset, per quod ipse and sui attendentes corporis sui periculum imminere,
exhaeredationem haeredum suorum, spontanea voluntate concessit provisionem
subscriptam; scilicet quod omnes terrae, and omnia tenementa, and libertates,
in omnibus rebus, quae tenuit de Domino Rege in Capite, and de Domino Johanne
Rege patre suo, remaneant Domino Regi, quiet, in perpetuum, and haeredibus
suis tam de Wardis and Ballivis, quam de aliis rebus, and omnes cartas, and
chirographa, and instrumenta, quae habuit de praedictis, reddidit Domino Regi,
and concessit quod aliqua imposterum, inveniantur, in cujuscumque manibus
fuerint, pro nullis haebeantur; Rex de gratia sua concessit quod ipse Hubertus
and haeredes sui habeant and retineant terras, and tenementa, quae eidem
Huberto descenderant ab antecessoribus suis, and similiter omnes terras and
tenementa quae tenuit de aliis, and de alterius dono, quam de dono Regum. Ita
tamen quod omnibus inde conquerentibus secundum consuetudinem regni, sine
dilatione ipse and sui respondeant; and omnia alia catalla ubicumque sint,
remaneant Domino Regi, tam in auro and argento, quam in denariis, and aliis
mobilibus, and corpus suum remaneat apud Castrum Div. sarum and in custodia
Dominorum Ricardi Comitis Cornubiae and Pictaviae, Willielm^ Comitis Warrennae,
Richardi Mareschalli, Comitis Penbrot, and Iohanis Comitis Lincolniae, and
Constabularii Cestriae, donec habitum Templariorum susceperit, quem prius
petierat quod modo facere non potest, quia uxoratus est, vel donec per commune
consilium Domini Regis, and omnium praedictorum Baronum Custodum, necnon and
aliorum magnatum terrae, liberatus fuerit; de quibus si aliquem mori contingat,
illi qui residui erunt assument sibi alium loco ipsius defuncti, quem
voluerint, qui custos cum eis existat, sicut ille fuit qui defunctus fuerit,
and liceat eidem Huberto dum fuerit in prisona, si quam terram tenuerit
injuste, illam reddere, si voluerit, non obstante eo quod in custodia
praedictorum fuerit, and si de prisona aliquo modo exierit, nisi pro dicto
habitu suscipiendo, and de licentia and consensu Domini Regis and praedictorum
Magnatum, vel per commune consilium Custodum and Baronum, ut praedictum est,
and vel per se, vel per alios, sive per quemcunque aliquid impetrare
attemptaverit, contra praedictam promissionem, vel aliquo tempore, saltem de
facto, contra praedictam conventionem venerit, sive de conscientia sua
impetratum fuerit, sive non, and ipse vel alius uti voluerit impetratis per
quod corpus suum liberetur, tunc pronuncietur judicium praedictum contra eum,
and fiat de eo sicut de utlagato, ubicumque and a quocumque inventus fuerit,
and omnes terrae and omnia tenementa, quae Dominus Rex de gratia sua ei
concessit, forisfacta sint, and remaneant dominis feodorum de quibus tenuit.
Salvo Domino Regi, anno suo, and Catallis. Et Dominus Rex concessit pro se and
hoeredibus suis, quod eidem Huberto aliam gratiam, neque crudelitatem faciet,
quam praedictum est. In cujus rei testimonium Dominus Rex, and praedicti
Richardus Comes Cornubiae, and Pict^biae, Willielmus Comes Warrennae, Richardus
Marelcallus, Comes Penbrot, and Iohanes Comes Lincolniae, and Constabularius
Cestriae; sigilla sua apposuerunt, Hiis testibus Radulfo filio Nicholai, Thoma
de Muleton, Willielmo de Insula, Ricardo Duket, Ada^o filio Willielmi,
Willielmo de Rak, Roberto de Lexinton, Radulfo de Norwico, and Civibus London,
and aliis fidelibus Domini Regis ibidem existentibus.

REx omnibus etc. Pat. 17. Hen. 3. M. 9. n. 31.
Sciatis quod cum Lewelinus princeps de Abersrau and Dominus Snauwerden nobis
concesserit and firmiter promiserit quod stabit provisioni venerab lium Patrum
Radulphi Cicestrensis Episcopi and Cancellarii nostri, and Alexandri
Coventrensis and Lychefeld Episcopi, and dilectorum and sid lium nostrorum
R^chardi Marceschalli Comitis Penbroc, Iohannis de Lascy Comitis Lincolniae and
Constabularii Cestriae, Stephani de Segrave Justiciarii nostri, Angliae, and
Radulphi filii Nicholai Seneschalli nostri, una cum Idenebet Senescallo ipsius
Lewelini, and Werrenoc fratre ejus, Amano Vathan, and Dav^^ Clerico, quam ipsi
facturi sunt super congruis emendis nobis faciendis, de omnibus excessibus
nobis, and nostris, ab eo and suis factis, and de restitutione nobis and
hominibus nostris facienda, de omnibus terris and possessionibus nostris, and
nostrorum, per ipsum Lewelinum and Walenses occupatis, occasion Werrae inter
nos, and ipsum morae, simul etiam de recipienda restitutione a nobis and
nostris, de omnibus terris ipsius Lewelini and hominum suorum, per nos and
nostros occupatis, occasion Werrae praedictae, and de assignanda He was Son to
Lewelin, by Elianor Daughter to Simon Montfort and Elianor his Wife Sister to
H. 3.
David filio ipsius Lewelini, and Ysabellae uxori ejus, primogenitae filiae and
haeredis Willielmi de De Braosa.
Breus rationabili portione ipsam Ysabeliam contingente, de terris quae fuerunt
praedicti Willielmi patris sui, and de refusione pecuniae nobis facienda, pro
praedictis excessibus congrue emendandis, and portione praedicta assignanda;
provisa tamen super hoc ab eisdem sufficient securitate, de fideli servitio
nobis praestando, and de tranquillitate nobis, regno nostro Angliae,
observanda. Ita quod dampnum vel periculum nec nobis nec regno nostro inde
possit evenire. Et si pendente provisione praedicta, aliquid de novo emerserit
emendandum, idem Lewelinus voluerit, and concesserit, quod per praedictos
provisores emendetur. Nos provisionem eorundem quam facturi sunt super omnibus
praemissis, gratam habemus, and acceptam pro nobis, and nostris, sicut
praefatus Lewelinus pro se and suis. Et in hujus rei testimonium has literas
patentes inde fieri fecimus. Test me ipso apud Salop Septimo die Decembris
anno regni nostri decimo Septimo.

Lewelin was Prince of North Wales, but here called Prince of Aberfrau, and
Lord of Snawden, from the places of his abode.

Pat. 17. H. 3. M. 1. De Justitiariis Constitutis ad abjurationem Regni.
REx probis hominibus de Comitatu Wilts. Sciatis quod constituimus Radulfum de
Bray and Radulfum de Norwico Justiciarios nostros, ad abjurationem regni nostri
Recipiendam de Huberto de Burgo si ecclesiam exire, and in Curia nostra juri
stare noluerit, vel ad justitiam ei in Curia nostra exhibendam, si ecclesiam
exire, and in Curiam nostram ad hoc intrare voluerit, secundum conventiones,
inter nos and ipsum factas. Mandamus autem vobis, quod si praedictus Hubertus
praedictorum nec aliud facere voluerit, tunc Ecclesiam Sancti Iohannis
Divisarum, in qua se tenet, and Cemiterium ejusdem ecclesiae, cum omni
diligentia custodiatis, sicut ipsi vobis dicent ex part nostra. In cujus etc.
Test Petro Wintoniensi Episcopo apud Westmonasterium, quintodecimo die
Octobris.

Cl. 18. H. 3: M. 20. Dors.
REx etc. Lewelino Principi de Aberfrau Salutem. Sciatis quod recepimus in
gratiam nostram, Gilbertum Mareschallum and Of which the chief were Watler and
Anselm their Brothers, Gilbert and Philip Basset, and Richard Sward. See Cl.
18. H. 3. M. 19. Dors.
omnes qui fuerunt Inprisii Richardi Mareschalli, tam de Anglia quam de Wallia
qui ad pacem nostram venire voluerunt and eis reddidimus omnes terras and
tenementa sua quae de nobis tenuerunt and de quibus disseisiti fuerunt
occasion guerrae motae inter nos and praedictum Comitem and nobis remanent
quieta quaecumque super nos and nostros per dictum Comitem vel Note in these
times this Bishop sometimes had this Title, and sometimes the Title of Bishop
of Chester.
Coventrensem and Lychefeldensem, and Henricum Roffensem Coepiscopos suos ad
parts Marchiae Ita quod erunt apud Salop die Lunae in Crastino Sanctae

The Date of the next preceding Record is May 31. and the next following is
Dated June the 6th.

REx etc. dilecto et fideli suo Richardo Comiti Cornubia et Pictaviae Salutem.
Cl. 18. H. 3. M. 17. Dors.
Sciatis quod treugae captae sunt inter nos et Lewelinum dictatores ejusdem
treugae emendabuntur, et quod omnes terrae hinc inde occupatae per ultimam
guerram motam restituentur his quibus postea sunt oblatae. Homines etiam illi
qui hinc inde recesserunt a fidelitate dominorum suorum et se tennerunt ex
part adversa libere revertantur. Ita quidem quod durantibus

Eodem modo scribitur Radulpho de Thony.

RAdulphus Herefordensis Episcopus, Cl. 20. Hen. 3. M. 16. Dors.
Decanus Herefordiae Walterus

Pat. 20. H. 3. M. 5.
REx omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Sciatis quod concessimus
bona fide et sine malo ingenio et ratas habemus et gratas in The Translation of
St. Benedict the Abbat was on the 11th of July, the day of the Date of this
Record.
festo Sancti Benedicti anno regni nostri vicesimo per venerabilem Patrem
Edmundum Cantuariensem Archiepiscopum inter nos et omnes homines et imprisios
nostros apertos ex una part and Lewelinum Principem de Abberfrau and Dominum
de Snaudon and omnes homines and imprisios suos apertos tam Walenses quam

Cl. 21. Hen. 3. M. 7. Dors.
REx Vicecomiti Kantiae Salutem. Scias quod cum in Octabis Sancti anno etc.
vicesimo primo ad mandatum nostrum convenirent apud Westmonasterium
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, et Barons totius regni nostri, et tractatum
haberent nobiscum de statu nostro, et regni nostri, iidem Archiepiscopi,
Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, et Clerici terras habentes quae ad Ecclesias suas
non pertinent, Comites, Barons, Milites, et liberi homines, pro se, et suis
villanis, nobis concesserunt in auxilium tricesimam partem omnium mobilium
suorum apparentium, sicut ea habebunt in Autumpno in Crastino exaltationis That
is September 14.
Sanctae Crucis anno regni nostri vicesimo primo, quando blada sua fuerint
coadunata, videlicet de bladis, ad waignagia, et al is pecoribus, et bonis;
exceptis bonis, quae praedicti Archiepiscopi Episcopi et aliae personae
Ecclesiasticae habent in Ecclesiis parochialibus, sive praebendis, et terris ad
praebendas, et Ecclesias parochiales spectantibus; exceptis argento et auro,
palefridis, Su^mariis, dextrariis, Runcinis, armis, utensilibus, et vasis;
colligendam per manus dilectorum fidelium nostrorum Rogeri de Leburn, Simonis
de Craye, Iohannis de Adlington, per literas Huward de Bikely, et Richar^ de
W^hundon, qui ju^abunt coram te quod negotium nostrum de auxilio nostro
colligendo et assidendo pro posse suo, been et fideliter exequentur, per omnia
secundum suam conscientiam. Et ipsi quatuor milites et Clericus praedictus,
eligi facient quatuor de legal^oribus hominibus de singulis villis, quos
statutis Hundredis, Comitatu tuo, ^urtis die et loco coram eisdem, ad mandatum
eorum, coram eis venire facies; qui jurabunt coram eisdem in piaesentia *
Ballivorum de singulis villis si interesse voluerint, quod auxilium illud
fideliter ussidebunt, et rationabile pre^iu^ apparent omnibus rebus quae
appretiandae fuerint, seoundum communem et justa^ aestimationem, et valorem;
amore, gratia, vel odio vel ali^ occasion no^ impediente; et postea particulas
catallorum, omnium, et pretium estendent quatuor militibus praedictis, et
Clerico, et juxtae provisionem dictorum Militum Clerici, pecuniam illam
colligent, at ^isdim Militibus et Clerico deferent, et liberabunt per ^aillias,
et cotulos particulas continentes reponendam in Prioratu Sanctae Trinitatis
Cantuariae, et si indigerint auxilio tuo circa districtionem faciondam in
collectione dictae pecuniae, tu eis auxilium parabis. Archiepiscopi vero
Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, in terris suis, et libereatibus, in Comitatu tu^,
per quatuor legales Milites suos, vel liberos et legales homines, si milites
non habuerint, simili modo circa praedictam tricesimam assidendam, et
colligendam, liberandam, quatuor praedictis Militibus ad hoc attornatis
pr^cedent. Et scias quod praedicti quatuor homines de singulis villis, non
jurabune de propriis catallis suis, nec eisdem pretium apponent, sed alii
quatuor homines de singulis villis ad hoc electi per milites praedictos
jurabunt de caralli^ praedictorum priorum quatuor hominum, secundum forma^
praedictam. Nullus autem pauper homo, vel mulier, aliquid ad hoc conferet, nisi
habeat in bonis plus quam quadraginta denarios. Debe^ etiam reddi pecunia
praedicta, ad duos terminos, vid^licet, medietas in Crastino Sancti Andreae
anno etc. vicesimo secundo, et altera medietas in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis,
anno eodem. Tu autem ita officax auxiliumet utile consilium praedictis
militibus praebeas in praedictis exequondis, quod negotium praedictum ad
commodum nostrum, et utilitatem salubriter procedat. Nos autem concessimus
praedictis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus
^atonibus, et aliis Magnatibus, regni nostri, quod tam Car^a Fore^, quam alia
de libertatibus, quas prius eis fieri fecimu^, de ca^ero in omnibus teneantur.
Nol^mus etiam quod occasion hujusmodi auxili^ sumatur de^uceps occasio, vel
trahatur ad consuetudinem petendi alias consimile auxilium: Incipient dutem
iter praedictum in Crastino exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, quibus die et loco eis
occurras, ad sacramentum ab eis recipiendum, et auxilium eis impendendum, sicut
tibi dixerint ex part nostra. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium secundo die
Iulii anno etc. vicesimo secundo.

Articles of Accusation against Hubert de Burgh, with the Answers unto them. A.
D. 1239.
Responsiones Magistri Laurentii de Sancto Albano, pro Comite Cantiae Huberto
de Burgo, contra quem, movit Dominus Rex gravissimas
Additament. Mat. Paris, f. 149.
CVm dies datus esset Huberto de Burgo Comiti Kantiae, in octabis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae; Anno regni vicesimo tertio, ad respondendum emendas ei
faceret, eo quod non deliberavit ei maritagium Richardi de Clare, ad diem ab
eodem Domino Reg^ sibi datum, secundum conventionem inter eos factam, vel
secundum considerationem Parium suorum; Et Dominus Rex peteret ab eo, emendas
faceret, et non fecit; Propositae fuerunt ei ex part Domini Regis,
transgressiones subscriptae, simul cum praedictis, ut ad eas responderet: Ad
quod respondit idem Comes, quod ad haec nullum diem habuit. Sed et dixit, quod
ad diem certum et rationabilem satisfaceret Domino Regi, vel inde staret ad
considerationem parium suorum, et petiit, quod Dominus Rex in scriptis ei
ostenderet, super quibus articulis tenetur respondere.

Ad hoc respondit Comes, quod ad singulos dies ei a Domino Rege datos, idem
Comes venit, nec in aliquo quaesivit dilationem; sed semper recepit diem ad
voluntatem Domini Regis. Vnde videtur ei, quod omnes dies ei dati postquam fuit
apud Kenintone, pro uno die sibi debent allocari. Et semper paratus est stare
ad considerationem parium suorum, quod nunquam de maritagio se intromisit, nec
aliquis pro eo; postquam juravit apud Gloverniam quod nunquam de maritagio se
intromitteret, nec aliquid scivit, nec adhuc scit de Maritagio, nisi per
simplex dictum Comitisiae uxoris suae, dicentis quod maritagium illud
contractum fuit apud Sanctum Eadmundum, dum Comes fuit apud Mertone. Et si hoc
non sufficit, dicet aliud; et super hoc paratus est facere quod pares sui
considerabunt.

1. Quorum quidem primus articulus hic est, quod Dominus Rex exigit ob eo omnes
exitus Regni sui, de quatuordecem annis continuo sequentibu^ post mortem
Iohannis Regis patris sui, et unde suscepit custodiam et curam sine traditione
patris sui Domini Iohannis Regis, et sine assensu Domini Gwallae tunc Legati,
qui de communi consensu, et provisione totius regni, post mortem Mareschalli
fuit primus Consiliarius et Principalis totius Regni Angliae.

Ad hoc respondit, quod certae personae deputatae sunt ad respondendum de
exitibus Regni; Scilicet Thesaurarius et Camerarii; unde post mortem Eustatii
de Faucumberg, Londoniensis Episcopi, et Thesaurarii Computo suo responderet;
et fuit responsum. Postea a Carliolensi Episcopo fuit quaesitus computus totius
exitus regni tanquam a capitali receptore, et sedit ad computum. A Petro de
Rivallis fuit postmodo quaesitus computus, nunquam autem a Iusticiario debet
computus requiri: eo quod non est receptor exitus Regni. Vnde videtur quod ille
qui nihil recipit, in aliquo non tenetur respondere. Et dicit quod Dominus
Johannes Rex, tradidit ei Iusticiariam apud Runningemede coram Domino Stephano
Cantuariae Archiepiscopo, Comite Warrannae, Comite de Ferrariis, and aliis
magnatibus; and ipse toto tempore Iohannis Regis, stetit Justiciarius. Accidit
autem quod Castrum Dovoriae in adventu Domini Lodovici, quasi pro derelicto
habebatur; in quod castrum intravit, quando pauci inventi fuerunt, qui in eodem
intrare voluerunt, nisi corpus ejus intrasset, and toto tempore guerrae a
castro non potuit recedere, nec officium Iusticiarii exercere.

Defuncto vero Domino Iohanne Rege tempore guerrae, de Consilio Gwallae tunc
Legati, and magnatum tunc existentium cum Domino Rege, factus fuit Mareschallus
gubernator Regis, and Regni. Pa^e vero reformata, remansit idem Mareschallus
Gubernator Regis and Regni, and idem Hubertus Justiciarius, nullo
contradicente; Post mortem vero Marescalli, de Consilio Domini Gwallae tunc
Legati, Stephani and Magnatum terrae, remansit Justiciarius sine contradictione
aliqua, and semper scripsit ei Dominus Papa tanquam Justiciario, and ita
tenebatur ab Ecclesia, and a Regno semper Justiciarius factus a Domino Iohanne
Rege. Et ita been patet, quod non recepit Iusticiariam sine traditione. Domini
Iohannis Regis, vel assensu Domini Gwallae. Et si hoc non sufficit, dicit
aliud; and super hoc paratus est facere quod pares sui considerabunt, and etiam
si respondere deberet, habet chartam Domini Regis, que ipsum absolvit, quam
profert: quae confecta est Anno Regni Regis Henrici decimo quinto.

2. Item exigit ab eo, quod ei respondeat de collectione totius quintae
decimae, quae per commune Consilium totius Regni custodiri, and haberi debuit
in deposito; and ita in deposito, quod nihil inde caperetur usque ad aetatem
Domini Regis; nisi per visum sex Episcoporum and sex Comitum ad hoc specialiter
attornatorum, and hoc non nisi ad defensionem summa fuit circiter quater
viginti and novem millia marcarum argenti.

Ad hoc respondit, quod Domini Sarisburiensis and Bathoniensis Episcopi illam
pecuniam receperunt per commune Consilium Regni, and inde reddiderunt computum
suum, and inde quieti sunt per literas Domini Reg^: Vnde non videtur quod inde
debeat respondere. Et si hoc non suffi^ dicet aliud; and super hoc paratus est,
etc. Habet etiam Chartam

3. Item quod respondeat de terra Pictaviae, de qua Johannes Rex obiit
seisitus, and unde Dominus Rex qui nunc est fuit in seisina, quando idem Comes
suscepit custodiam Regni, scilicet, de Rupella, Nyorth, and de Sancto Iohanne,
and qui quando ad rescussionem terrarum illarum mittere debuerat thesaurum and
denarios, misit barillos lapidibus and sabulone impletos. Et ita quod quando
Barons and Magnates Domini Burgenses, videruni defaltam illam, diverterunt se
ab homagio and servitio Domini Regis, and convertebantur ad inimicos Domini
Regis, propter quod Dominus Rex amisit Pictaviam.

Ad hoc respondit, quod nunquam misit tales varillos de quibus dicitur, and hoc
praecise defendit, per quodcunque pares sui considerabunt; sed de Consilio
Magnatum Angliae ad defensionem Rupellae missi fuerunt centum milites and
amplius, and quamplures fervientes, qui fuerunt cum Domino Rege ibidem,
quousque Burgenses, and homines illius terrae diverterunt se ab homagio Domini
Regis, unde per ejus negligentiam non amittitur Rupella, nec per negligentiam
militum ibi existentium, quia illis invitis, Burgenses terram reddiderunt Regi
Francorum. Et hoc been patet, quod cum milites Domini Regis essent in villa,
Burgenses amoverunt eos a consilio illorum, and sine militibus pacem fecerunt.
Ita quod milites salvo corpore suo and hernesio, possent recedere; excessus
etiam i e. Falcasii de Brent.
Falconis amittebatur Rupella; qui Falco and sui Domino Regi eo tempore quo
Rupella fuit obsessa, insurrexerunt. Qui etiam Falco, per Willielmum fratrem
suum, fecit capi Henricum de Braybroc Justiciarium Domini Regis itinerantem;
propter quem captum, and alias injurias dicti Falconis, oportuit Regem and
Magnates terrae obsidere castrum de Berefordia, per Consilimm Archiepis^oporum,
Episcoporum and Magnatum terrae. Qui etiam Episcopi ibidem excommunicaverunt
Falconem; unde pa^et manifest delictum excommunicassent eum. Et si Falco,
impune evasisset, and castrum non esset captum, tarbatum esset regnum plusquam
fuit. Et si hoc non sufficit, etc. Et super hoc paratus est, etc.

4. Item de hoc respondeat, quod dum Dominus Rex, fuit infra aetatem and
subvenire debuit terrae Pictaviae, and exereitus funs proficisci deberet in
Pictavium; fecit ipse Comes obsidere castrum Betefordiae, ubi Dominus Rex and
Magnates sui Angliae antequam illud captum esset, maximam impenderunt pecuniam.
Quo etiam capto, illud prosterni fecit and reddi Willielmo de Bello Campo;
super quem Dominus Johannes Rex castrum illud ceperat per guerram; and unde
Johannes Rex seisitus fuit quando obiit.

Ad hoc respondit, quod per illum solummodo non fuit castrum obsessum, sed per
commune consilium regni, and per delictum Falconis and suorum, quia fecit capi
Henricum de Braybroc Justiciarium Domini Regis, per Willielmum de Breante
fratrem suum. Vnde Dominus Rex misit literas suas eidem Falconi, una vice and
alia, pro deliberando Justiciario suo; and quod frater suus pro quibus nihil
facere voluit. Rex etiam misit literas suas Willielmo de Breante; qui
respondit, quod ipsum Henricum non redderet sine Falcone fratre suo; and quod
Frater suus been advocaret quod fecit. Vnde Dominus Rex habito consilio cum
Magnatibus suis, accessit usque Berefordiam; and misit ad illos qui erant infra
castrum, Petrum filium Hereberti, and Alanum Basset; petens quod deliberarent
Henricum de Braybroc Justiciarium suum quem tenebant imprisonatum; and quod
venissent emendare delictum super captione dicti Justiciarii domini Regis. Et
ipsi responderunt, quod nihil facerent pro domino Rege, and quod ipsum Henricum
tenerent; and si possent plus caperent: unde per consilium Magnatum Angliae,
fuit castrum obsessum, captum, and dirutum. Quo diruto, fuit seeds castri
tradita Willielmo de Bello Campo per consilium Magnatum Angliae, hac ratione,
quod in forma pacis inita inter Dominum Regem, and Dominum Lodov^tum Barons
continebatur, quod quisque haberet talem seisinam quam habuit in principio
guerrae. Vnde Dominus Gwalla legatus, Archiepiscopus, and episcopi,
excommunicaberunt omnes qui venirent contra istam formam pacis. Et quia idem
Willielmus semper erat pe^ens versus dictum Falconem, dictum castrum, and jus
suum; nec habere potuit, donec fuit captum per dominum Regem: idem Dominus Rex
de consilio Magnatum suorum, propter formam pacis factae, and pro timore
sententiae latae; dictam sedem castri ei reddidit, tenendam eodem modo quo
antecessores sui tenuerunt; prout paret in rotulis Domini Regis Et etiam idem
Willielmus dedit Domino Regi de suo, ut tal^m seisinam haberet; ut patet
similiter in Rotulis Domini Regis. Et si hoc non sufficit, dicet aliud. Et
super hoc, etc.

5. Item quod de hoc respondeat; quod Romam nuncios destinavit, et aut quam
dominus Rex esset plenae aetatis, imperrabit quod esset plenae aetatis si^ut
hoc esset ad commodum domini Regis; et autoritate cujus aetatis inchartari sibi
fecit terras quae fuerunt H. de Essex et plures alias terras, dignitates, et
libertates de quibus seisinam per se ipsum cepit, post mortem ipsius Regis
Johannis; et de quibus idem Rex Johannes obiit seisitus, (ut etiam dari fecit
et confirmari viris religiosis, personis Ecclesiasticis, et aliis) multas
terras et libertates, et alia, ad minorationem deteriorationem dignitatis
Domini Regis, et Coronae suae.

Ad hoc respondit, quod non destinavit nuncios Romam, sed Episcopus
Wintoniensis misit Romam W. de Sancto Albano pro dicto negotio; magis ad
nocumentum dicti Hu^erti quam ad commodum suum; ut ipse et alii redderent
custodias suas, et ita factum fuit apud Northampton. Postea de communi consilio
Archiepiscopi et Episcoporum, sigillum, et currerent litterae suae, ut sic
majoris timoris esset Regno, and majoris authoritatis. Postea impetrata fuit
venia suae aetatis ad suggestionem Archiepiscopi, Episcoporum, Comitum et
Baronum ab H^orio Papa. Suggesserunt enim Papae, quod prudentia et discretio
sua, aetatem suam supplevit, sicut continetur in privilegio Honor^ Papae
directo Comitibus et Baronibus, quod sic incipit. Ad haec, et infra licet
Charissimi in Christo filli nostri Henrici Regis Angliae illustris adolescentia
animum induit virilem, aetate quia proficit, et prudentia, ita quod in annorum
numero sibi deest, in discretionis videatur recuperare virtute; non est ei
amodo prohibendum de regno et regni negotiis utiliter disponere, Ideoque per
Apostolica scripta mandamus, quatenus cum venerabili fratre nostro Episcopo
Wintoniensi et nobilibus viris Iusticiario Angliae, et Willielmo de Bruwera
damus nostris literis in praeceptis, ut amodo sui regni dispositionem sibi
dimittant liberam, and quietam. Et Comiti scripsit hoc modo. Per Apostolica
scripta mandamus and praecipimus, quatenus modo regni sui dispositionem illi
dimittas, terras and Castra quae ^enes nomine Custodiae, sine difficultate
aliqua resignes eidem: and ab aliis resignari procures. Sub eisdem verbis
scripsit Win^oniensi Episcopo. Cancellario vero scripsit sic. Per Apostolica
scripta mandamus, quatenus cum ejusdem Regis sigillum habeas, and ejusdem
custodiam, amodo illo secundum beneplacitum suum utaris, and super eo ipsi
tantum obedias and intendas; nullasque de caetero literas praeter voluntatem H.
de Essex dicit; quod Dominus Re^ sui gratia quando fuit plenae aetatis, and
postquam Cancellarius per Dominum Papam tantummodo ipsi intendebat, illam
terram ei dedit per cartam; and etiam terram ut jus suum ei reddidit, postquam
venit ad pacem suam. Et si hoc non sufficit, etc. and paratus est super hoc,
etc.

6. Item quod respondeat de hoc, quod cum Dominus Rex Scotiae Willielmus
aliquando tradidisset Domino Iohanni Regi duas filias suas, and unde
primogenita maritari deberet Domino Regi vel Comiti Richardo, si de Domino Rege
humanitus contingeret, and pro quo maritagio, idem Rex Willielmus quietum
clamavit Regi Iohanni totum jus suum quod habuit in terris Cumberland,
Westmeriland, and Northumberland; and praeterea dedit ei quindecim millia
argenti marcarum. Ipse antequam Dominus Rex talis esset aetatis, quod posset
discernere utrum ipsam v^llet habere in uxorem vel non, desponsavit eam. Et ita
quod cum Dominus Comitissam Gloverniae, quae aliquando desponsata fuit Domino
Johanni Regi dum fuit Comes, and quam Rex Johannes commisit ei in custodiam:
and cujus maritagium vendiderat aliquando, Galfrido Mandeville pro viginti
millibus marcarum, and unde utraque illarum conjuncta fuit alteri
consanguinitate in certo gradu.

Ad haec respondit, quod de conventione inita inter duos Reges, scilicet de
maritagio faciendo Domino Regi vel Comiti Richardo; nunquam scivit: sed quod
per Dominum Regem, de Consilio Magnatum maritari debuit: and de eorum consilio
fuit maritata, patet tam per litteras Domini Pandulfi tunc legati Angliae, quam
per literas Cantuariensis Archiep^scopi, Episcoporum, Comitum and Baronum. Nec
etiam illa conventio potuit impedire si facta fuit; quia quando maritata fuit,
Rex fuit talis aetatis quod potuit contraxisse cum illa, vel cum alia si
voluisset. De consanguinitate inter Comitissam Gloverniae and filiam Regis
Scotiae, nil scit. De ducentis libratis terrae oblatis Regi Scotiae, nihil
factum fuit per C^mitem Cantiae. De Comitissa Gloverniae dicit; quod non fuit
in Custodia Huberti; sed erat Domina de seipsa and licebat ei maritare seipsam
cui voluit post mortem G. de Mandevile; Johannes prius dicto Galfrido
maritagium ejusdem C^mitissae vendiderat. Et si hoc non sufficit, dicit aliud.
Et super hoc paratus est, etc.

7. Item quod respondeat de hoc, quod cum Dominus Papa dedit in mandatis; quod
occasion illius parentelae fieret divortium inter ipsum and Comitissam uxorem
suam, quam nunc habet, ipse fecit triturare omnia blada Romanorum, per illos
qui vocabantur Lewytheil: unde sententia Justiciarius, and per eum qui pacem
deberet observare; and ita quod pax hucusque per haec extitit perturbata.

Ad hoc respondet, quod nihil scit, quia per illum non fuit hoc factum, quod
patet manifest, quia Dominus Papa super hoc fecit fieri inquisitionem per
Episcopum Wintoniensem, and Abbatem Sancti Eadmundi, and inquisitio facta
transmissa fuit ad Papam per quam Inquisitionem Papa puniisset eum: quod non
fecit. Et si hoc non sufficit, etc. Et super hoc paratus est facere, quod pares
sui considerabunt.

8. Item quod respondeat de hoc, quod cum se poneret in prisonam Domini Regis,
and per conventionem inter eos factam quod pro utlago teneretur, si unquam de
prisona illa evaderet sine licentia ipsius Domini Regis, ipse de prisona illa
evasit, and cum per conventionem illam, and per sectam illorum de quorum
custodia evasit, utlagatus esset, and postmodum Dominus Rex an gratiam suam
illum recepisset; Ipse de utlagaria illa ei remissa, nullum breve Domini Regis
recipere volu^t. Et eo postmodum in gratiam Domini Regis taliter recepto, quod
salvae essent donationes quas Dominus Rex prius fecerat de terris quas habuit
conventionem illam; ipse nihilominus postmodum contra conventionem illam
implacitavit Iohannem de Gray, Masty, Besily, Anketillum, Malure, Robertum
Passelewe, Alanum Vrry and plures alios: and versus eos recuperav^t, and unde
Dominus Rex aliquibus ex illis fecit escambium de Dominicis suis, ad magnum
ejus incommodum, and unde videtur Domino Regi quod praedicto Comiti
conventionem tenere non debet, ex quo ei nullam tenuit.

nullam talem conventionem fecit, and dicit quod cum esset in custodia quatuor
Comitum Angliae, per sic quod in mandatis c^perunt, quod nihil periculi in suo
corpore eveniret, postmodum Cl. 17. H. 3. M. 2. his immediate Keepers were to
be removed and others placed about him.
subtracti fuerunt Custodes, qui deberent eum a malis tueri, nescit per quem;
Vnde merito sibi timuit, and praecipue cum Wintoniensis Episcopus esset
Consiliarius Domini Regis, qui minitabatur ei, sicut Anglia scit, and castrum
divisarum fuit in custodia Petri de Riballis: Vnde cum tutela sua quae eum
debuit protegere ex conventione, mirum si ad Ecclesiam confugeret; and haec
nulla ratione fecisset, si conventiones essent illi sub salva custodia
servatae. De See Pat. 17. Hen. 3. M. 9. Dors. here in Append. N. 152. where
it is said he made such an Agreement.
Vtlagatione, unde dicitur, dicit quod talem conventionem non fecit, neque
debet talis conventio aliqua reputari; quia nullus probus homo, and fidelis
potest utlagari ex conventione, quia utlagatio est paena Malefactoris, and non
been operantis, and sequitur ex malefacto illius, qui non vult stare recto.
Ipse vero, non fuit talis, quia semper rogavit and obtulit stare judicio parium
reversus ad pacem Domini Regis, remissa sunt ei omnia praemissa, and adjudicata
and proclamata est illa utlagatio nulla, per omnes Comitatus Angliae, per
literas Domini Regis. Et istud judicium fuit factum apud Gloverniam, per os
Domini W. (...) de Radelghe, coram Archiepiscopo, Episcopo, Comitibus, and
Baronibus. Ad hoc quod dicit se nelle recipere breve de remissione
utlagationis. Respondit, quod hoc fecit, ne videretur se confiteri just
tanquam malefactorem utlagatum; and dicit quod nullum implacitavit contra
conventionem, quia nullam conventionem fecit Domino Regi, nisi de Iusticiaria
Angliae, and de Castro Doboriae quae habuit per Cartam ad vitam suam. Et hoc
been patet, quia per voluntatem Domini Regis and in curia sua, recuperavit
super eos, quos implacitavit, and per Iudicium Curiae suae; unde non est in
culpa super hoc. Et si hoc non, etc. Et super hoc paratus est, etc.

9. Item quod respondeat de hoc, quod verba probrosa, and turpia Radulphi filii
Nicholai, Gadefrido de Crancumbe fratris G. (...) and aliorum, and Dominus Rex
adhuc multa habet contra ipsum proponenda and dicenda, quae adhuc reservat in
animo propositurus ea cum ei placuerit and locus ei affuerit.

Ad hoc respondit, and hoc defendit praecise, sicut contra Dominum suum, and
contra omnes alios qui hoc dicent, per quodcunque pares sui considerabunt, and
omnia praemissa in reformatione pacis, ei fuerunt relaxata, and in jure
remissa. Vnde non videtur quod super praemissis possit convenire de jure; and
si in aliquo praemissorum fuit insufficienter responsum, paratus est Comes
aliud dicere. Item videtur ei, quod non tenetur respondere, nisi restitutus
esset, de omnibus bonis suis de quibus disseisitus fuit, cum nullus tenetur
respondere in foro saeculari vel Ecclesiastico disseisitus. August 30.


Dies datus est eidem Huberto coram Domino Rege, de audiendo Iudicio suo in
crastino decollationis Sancti Johannis.
Mat. Paris f. 524. n. 50.
OTto, miseratione divina, etc. Discreto viro, illi Episcopo, vel Archidiacono,
Salutem. Cum necesse habeamus de mandato summi Pontificis, moram trahere
longiorem, nec possumus propriis stipendiis mandamus, and quae sumus, ut
procurationes nobis debitas in Episcopatu vel Archidiaconatu vestro colligi
facias nostro nomine diligenter; eas quam citius poteritis nobis transmissuri,
contradictores per censuram Ecclesiasticam compescendo. Proviso quod quaelibet
procuratio, summam quatuor marcarum aliquatenus non excedat. Et ubi una
Ecclesia non sufficut ad procurationem hujusmodi habendam, quae pariter unam
solvant. Datum Londini Febr. 15th. A. D. 1240.
decimo quinto Calendas Martii, anno Pontificatus Domini Gregorii Papae decimo
tertio.

Ibid. f. 5^5. n. 10.
ILle vel Ille Episcopus, dilectis in Christo filiis omnibus Archidiaconis
Diocesim suam constitutis, Salutem. Literas Domini Legati suscepimus in haec
verba: Otto, etc. Cum sicut intelleximus, nonnulli Crucesignati Regni Angliae,
qui sunt inhabiles ad pugnandum, ad sedem Apostolicam accedant, ut ibidem a
voto Crucis absolvi valiant: and nos nuper, recepimus a Summo Pontifice in
mandatis, ut tales non solum absolvere, verum etiam ad redimenda vota sua
compellere debeamus; volentes eorum parcere laboribus and expensis, paternitati
vestrae, qua fungimur auctoritate, mandamus, and quaesumus, ut potestatem
praedictam, a summo Pontifice nobis concessam, faciatis in vestris Diocesibus
sine mora qualibet publicari; ut praefati Crucesignati ad nos Londini decimo
quinto Calendas Martii, Anno Pontificatus Domini Gregorii Papae decimo tertio.

Claus. 24. H. 3. M. 4 Dors. in ced.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod ita convenit inter Dominum Henricum Regem
Anglia illustrem ex una part; and David filium Lewelini Principis Norwalliae
and Dominum de Abberfrau ex altera; apud Gloucestriam die Martis proximo ante
festum Sancti That is, the 19th of May.
Dunstani anno regni ipsius Regis vicesimo quarto; de homagio ipsius David quod
ipse offerebat eidem Domino Regi pro jure suo Norwalliae, and de terris quas
Barons ipsius Domini Regis scilicet Griffinus filius Wennuwan and alii Barons
Domini Regis petebant versus ipsum David, ut jura sua excepta terra de Monte
alto secundum quod continetur in scripto nuper confecto, apud Crucem Griffini
per Seneschallos Domini Regis quae ad praesens excipitur ab arbitrio. Salvo
tamen in posterum jure S^neschalli Cestriae in terra illa si quod habet.
Scilicet, quod praedictus Dominus Rex cepit homagium praefati David de
praedicto jure suo Norwalliae, and quod tam idem Dominus Rex pro praefatis
Baronibus suis de submiserunt arbitrio venerabilium Patrum Ottonis Sancti
Nicholai in Carcere Tulliano Diaconi Cardinalis Apostolicae Sedis Legati,
Wigorniae, and Norw^ci Episcoporum, and nobilis viri Richardi Comitis Pictaviae
and Cornubiae fratris ipsius Domini Regis and Iohanis de Monemue ex part
ipsius Domini Regis; Et Venerabilis patris Episcopi de Sancto Asaph -- Idenevet
Vaghan, Eynguan Vaghan ex part praefati David. Ita quod quomodolibet utraque
pars ipsorum stabit arbitrio, and illud in perpetuum firmiter observabit. Et ad
haec fideliter and sine fraud servanda Willielmus de Cantelupo de praecepto
Regis juravit in animam ipsius Regis; and idem David in propria persona sua
corporale praestitit Sacramentum: Et insuper se submiserunt jurisdictioni and
inordinationi praefati Domini Legati quam diu in Anglia Legationis fungatur
officio; ut partem contra praemissa venientem per censuram ecclesiasticam
arbitrium observandum, quam ad transgressionem contra illud perpetratam
emendandam valeat coercere, ordine juris observato. Dum tamen idem David vel
sui si forsitan contra praedicta venire praesumpserint, prius coram dicto
Domino Legato vel aliquibus aliis ad hoc ab ipso deputandis, and partibus
merito non suspectis, in confinio Marchiae loco eidem David and suis tuto
legitime communicantur, si ad hoc vocati venerint vel si legitime vocati non
venerint pro contumacibus habeantur nisi rationabile and finito vero praedictae
Legationis officio sub forma praescripta cohercioni and jurisdictioni Domini
Cantuariensis Archiep scopi, and Successorum suorum and Ecclesiae Cantuariensis
se parts praedictae submiserunt. Et Sciendum quod per hanc pacem remanent
Domino Regi and haeredibus suis omnia homagia Baro^um Walliae quieta; and
remittuntur omnia incendia, homicidia, and alia mala tam ex part Anglicorum,
quam Walensium perpetrata. Ita quod ad invicem plene reconcilientur. Salvo
praefato David jure suo, si quod habet in arbitrorum ante hoc arbitrium
completum in fata decesserit, vel per impedimentum rationabile praedicto
arbitrio faciendo non possit interesse, alius loco suo substituetur qui neutri
partium merito suspectus habeatur. Ad hoc praefati Episcopus de Sancto Aspah
Idenevet and Ignan and Griffinus filius Rocherich praestiterunt Sacramentum,
quod quantum in eis est praedicta fideliter observabunt, and ab ipso David and
suis, modis omnibus quibus poterunt facient observari: Ad majorem autem hujus
rei securitatem factum est hoc scriptum Regem and David in modo Chirographi^.
Ita quod parti remanenti penes ipsum Dominum Regem appositum est sigillum
ipsius David una cum sigillo praedictorum Episcopi de Sancto Asaph, Idenevet,
Ignan, and Griffini. Et parti penes ipsum David remanenti appositum est
sigillum Domini Regis. Hiis Testibus venerabilibus patribus Ottone Sancti
Nicholai in Carcere Tulliano Diacono Cardinali Apostolicae sedis Legato,
Waltero Eboracensi Archiepiscopo, Waltero Carleolensi, Waltero Wygornensi, and
Willielmo Norwicensi Episcopis, Richardo Comite Pictaviae and Cornubi^e fratre
Domini Regis, venerabili patre Episcopo de Sancto Asaph Willielmo de Cantilupo,
Amaur de Sancto Amando Seneschallis nostris, Johanne extraneo, Edenewet Watham,
Griffino filio Rotherich, David Archidiacono de Sancto Asaph and aliis.

^ 25. H. 3. ^ Dors.
REx David filio Lewelini, Salutem. Been recolimus qualiter nos vobis nuper in
mandatis dedimus quod coram nobis apud Wigorniam formam pacis inter nos and vos
provise singulis conquerentibus exhiberent, and in arbitrio praedicto secundum
formam debitam procederent; Et similiter ad Justiciam recipiendam de portione
uxorem vestram contingente recto super hiis de quibus Senescallus de Monte Alto
and alii vobis sunt conquesti. Et quia ad diem and locum vobis praefixos non
accessistis, set literas vestras nobis misistis continentes quod tres ex
vestris ad nos loco vestro destinastis ex quibus tantum unus ad nos accessit
qui ad praemissa adimplenda nullam potestatem habuit unde quibusdam ex nostris
visum fuerat quod hoc malitiose and ut subterfugium quaereretis per vos factum
fuit: Nos tamen hoc non credentes set fidelitatem vestram adhuc magis probare
volentes. Vobis Salop die Dominica proxima ante Dominicam Palmarum coram
fidelibus nostris quos illuc duxerimus transmittendos ad consentiendum in
personas certas ad procedendum in arbitrio praedicto loco eorum qui ad parts
transmarinas recesserunt, and ad faciendum in eodem arbitrio id quod adhuc
restat faciendum and ad recipiendam justiciam de portione uxorem vestram de
haereditate sua contingente and ad standum recto Seneschallo Cestriae and aliis
de vobis conquerentibus. personaliter ad hoc faciendum venire non possitis
tales loco vestro mittatis qui plenam potestatem habeant haec omnia nomine
vestro faciendi. Nos enim enim vobis and vestris per eos quos ibidem mittemus
aut per nosmet ipsos salvum and securum provideri faciemus conductum. Test
Rege apud Wudestoke decimo nono die Februarii.

^s. 25. H. 3. ^. Dors.
ANno Domini Millesimo Ducentesimo quadragesimo primo die Dominica proxima ante
inventionem Sanctae Crucis assignata David Lewelini quondam Principis
Norwalliae and Mar^hionibus ad consentiendum in arbitros substituendos loco
absentium and ad faciendam and recipiendam Justiciam secundum formam pacis
conventae inter Dominum Regem and dictum David comparuit Thudius Seneschallus
ipsius David, parvus David Cancellarius and Philippus filius Ivor Clericus ex
part David procuratores ostendentes literas ipsius David in quibus dictus
David promittebat se ratum habiturum quicquid per ipsos fieret secundum formam
pacis supradictae. Radulphus vero de Mortuo Mart, and Rogerus Seneschallus
Cestriae, and Griffinus pro se and aliis Marchionibus comparuerunt petentes
instanter quod secundum dicta testium productorum coram Domino Stephano de
Segrabe and conjudicibus suis vicem Domini Regis gerentibus apud Salop eisdem
exhiberetur Justitiae complementum. Set contra procuratores praefati David
asserebant dictos testes non esse receptos secundum formam pacis. Quare
secundum dicta eorum non dicebat nec poterat judicari. Tandem continuata die
and altercatione magna super hoc and aliis habita inter parts, forma pacis
praedictae producta in medio visaque and perlecta loco absentium arbitrorum
scilicet Domini Ottonts Sancti Nicholai in Carcere Tulliano Diaconi Cardinalis
Papae quondam Legati in Anglia Wigornensis and Norwicensis Episcoporum
subrogati sunt per Dominum Regem de consensu dictorum procuratorum Episcopus
Coventrensis Johannes filius Galfridi and Herebertus filius Matthaei and
Walterus de Clifford quibus data est eadem potestas quam haberent absentes, si
praesentes essent secundum formam pacis praedictae. Et assignata est Dies
partibus a die Pentecostes proximo in unum mensem apud pontem de Maneford ultra
Salop, ad probanda hinc inde sive per productos Testes non obstante productione
jam instrumenta sive alio modo quae voluerint and sibi noverint expedienda; and
illa die dabitur alia ad judicium audiendum secundum probata coram eisdem
Arbitris juxta formam pacis superius praelibatae.

David silio Lewelini quondam Principis Norwalliae Salutem. Claus. 25. H. 3. M.
7. Dors.
Ex certa quorundam relatione didicimus quod vos contra Griffini filii Madoc
and etiam quosdam homines nostros de Reri qui homagia nobis fecerunt vobis
confeoderastis, and ab obsequio and fidelitate nostra subtraxistis, and fratres
praedicti Griffini contra nos in terra vestra receptatis. Tres quidem de
Seheschallis vestris in succursum eorum qui expugnant dilectum and fidelem
nostrum Radulphum de Mortuo Mari destinastis caedes and incendia Curia nostra
abjudicatae suerunt Owena Vagban and nepotibus suis, eis contra justiciam
deforciatis, non permittentes quod executio fiat de hiis quae in Curia nostra
sunt considerata. Quandam etiam navem Cestriae quae in potestate vestra
applicuit cartata blado and aliis victualibus arestari fecistis per vos and
gentem vestram, in nullo hiis quorum bladum and victualia fuerunt inde
satisfacientes super quibus non modicum admiramur and movemur; and multo
fortius quod cum nuper misissemus Salop utpote venerabilem Patrem Henricum
Coventrensem, and Lichfeldensem Episcopum, and dil^ctos and fideles nostros
Iohannem filium Galfridi, and Henr^cum de Adithelegh paratos ad emendas
faciendas, and recipiendas de interceptionibus factis tam ex part nostra quam
ex part vestra Vos tanquam in contemptum nostrum praedictis fidelibus nostris
non occurristis nec per aliquos de vestris in eorum occursum mittere curastis.
Quod quidem aegre nos movet cum tot and tantas injurias quas longum esset
enumerare contra nos and nostros nullo fideles nostros tam fratres praedicti
Griffini quam homines nostros de Reri quos a fidelitate nostra s^btraxistis ad
fidem nostram r^dire faciatis, non impedientes quin praedictus Owe^us Vaghan
and Nepotes sui secundum quod abjudicatum est in Curia nostra terris suis
gaudere possint, and eas pacifice possidere. Id etiam quod contra dilectum and
fidelem nostrum Radulphum de Mortuo Mari and alios fideles nostros and etiam
quod de Navi illa Cestrensi attemptastis, sic emendari faciatis quod nobis non
relinquatur materia injurias praedictas gravius ulciscendi quod nollemus. Nec
omittatis quin citra festum Sancti Petri ad Vincula nobis significetis qualiter
dampna and injurias praedictas quae nullo modo dissimulare poterimus nobis
emendare volueritis. Test Rege apud Merlebergh quarto decimo die Julii.

^ 25. H. 3. Dors.
SCiant presents and futuri quod ita convenit inter Dominum Henricum Regem
Angliae illustrem ex una part and Senanam uxorem Griffini filii Lewelini
quondam Principis Norwalliae quem David Frater ejus tenet Carceri mancipatum,
eum Oweyn filio suo, nomine ejusdem Griffini ex altera; Scilicet quod praedicta
Senana manucepit pro praedicto Griffino viro suo quod dabit Domino Regi
Sexcentas Marcas, ut Oweyn filium suum liberari faciat a Carcere praedicto. Ita
quod stabit Iudicio Curiae suae si de jure debeat carcere detineri. Et ut Rex
postea judicio Curiae suae secundum legem Walensem ei and haeredibus suis
habere faciat super portione quae eum contingit, de haereditate quae fuit
praedicti Lewelini Patris sui, and quam praedictus David ipsi Griffino
deforciavit. Ita quod si idem Griffinus vel haeredes sui per considerationem
Curiae Domini Regis reciperent portionem quam se dicunt contingere de
haereditate praedicta, eadem Senana manucepit Regi and haeredibus suis
trecentas Marcas annuas. Scilicet tertiam partem in Denariis and tertiam partem
in bobus and vaccis and tertiam partem in equis per aestimationem legalium
hominum liberandas Vicecomiti Salop apud Salop and per manum ipsius Vicecomitis
ad Scaccatium Regis deferendas, and ibidem liberandas. Scilicet unam medietatem
ad festum Sancti Michaelis and aliam medietatem ad Pascham. Eadem etiam Senana
manucepit pro praedicto Griffino viro suo and haeredibus suis quod firmam pacem
tenebunt cum praefato David super portione quae eidem David remanebit de
haereditate praedicta. Manucepit etiam eadem Senana pro praefa^o Griffino and
haeredibus suis quod si aliquis Walensis aliquo tempore Regi vel haeredibus
suis rebellis extiterit praefatus Griffinus and haeredes sui ad custum suum
proprium ipsum compellent ad satisfaciendum Domino Regi and haeredibus suis. Et
de hiis omnibus supradictis firmiter observandis, dicta Senana dabit Domino
Regi David and Rothery filios suos obsides. Griffino and Oweyno filio suo qui
cum eo est in carcere humanitus contingat, antequam inde deliberentur alter
praedictorum filiorum eidem Senanae reddetur reliquo obside remanente Juravit
insuper eadem Senana tactis Sacrosanctis ewangeliis pro se and praefato
Griffino and haeredibus suis quod haec omnia firmiter observabunt. Et Manucepit
quod praefatus Griffinus idem jurabit cum a carcere liberatus fu^rit. Et super
praemissis se submisit nomine dicti Griffini jurisdictioni Herefordensis and
Coventrensis Episcoporum. Ita quod Episcopi vel alter little quem Dominus Rex
elegerit ad requisitionem ipsius Regis per sententias excommunicationis, in
personas and interdicti in terras eorum coherceant ad praedicta omnia and
singula observanda. Haec omnia manucepit praedicta Senana and bona fide
promisit se facturam and curaturam quod omnia impleantur, and quod praefatus
Griffinus cum liberatus fuerit and haeredes sui haec omnia grata habebunt, and
complebunt; and instrumentum suum inde dabunt Domino Regi in forma praedicta.
Ad majorem siquidem hujus rei securitatem factum est hoc scriptum inter ipsum
Dominum Regem and praefatam Senanam nomine praefati Griffini viri sui. Ita quod
parti remanenti penes ipsum Dominum Regem appositum est sigillum praefati
Griffini per manum praefatae Senanae uxoris suae una cum sigillo ipsius Senanae
and parti remanenti penes ipsam Senanam nomine praefati Griffini appositum est
sigillum ipsius Domini Regis. De Senana nomine praefati Griffini Domino Regi
plegios subscriptos videlicet Radulphum de Mortuo Mari, Walterum de Clifford,
Rogerum de Monte Alto Seneschallum Cestriae, Mailgun filium Mailgun, Mereduc
filium Roberti, Griffinum filium Maddok de Baunfeld, Howel and Mereduk fratres
ejus, Griffinum filium Wennuwen, qui haec omnia pro praefata Senana
manuceperunt, and Cartas suas ipsi Domino Regi inde fecerunt. Actum apud Salop
die Lunae proxima an^e assumptionem Beatae Mariae, anno ipsius Regis vicesimo
quinto.

OMnibus hoc scriptum visuris, Rogerus de Monte alto, Mat. Park f. 625. lin. 5.
Seneschallus Cestriae, Salutem. Sciatis quod ego me constitui plegium Senanae
uxoris Griffini filii Leolini, quondam Principis Norwalliae, Henricum Regem
Angliae illustrem, quod omnia quae conventionavit eidem Domino meo nomine
praefati viri sui, pro liberatione sua and Owenii filii sui, a carcere in quo
David frater ejus eos detinet, and pro portione quae ipsum Griffinum contingit
de haereditate, qua fuit praedicti Leolini patris sui, and quam praefatus David
frater ejus ei deforciat, Domino Regi firmiter observabit. In cujus rei
testimonium, huic scripto sigillum meum apposui. Actum apud Salopesbury die
Lunae ante August 15.
assumptionem Beatae Mariae.

Sub eadem forma fecerunt singuli plegii praescripti, Domino Regi chartas suas
tam Barons Angliae, quam Wallenses and eodem modo se obligaverunt.

SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Merducus filius Howel, Ibid. n. 10.
tactis Sacro-Sanctis juravi, quod ab isto die in antea omnibus diebus vitae
ero ad fidelitatem Domini Regis Angliae, and serviam ei fideliter and devote
cum omnibus viribus meis, and toto posse meo, quandocunque indiguerit servitio
meo, and treugam inter Dominum Radulphum de Mortuo Mari and me initam, usque ad
Festum Sancti Michaelis, anno Regni Regis Henrici vigesimo quinto, ex part mea
fideliter observabo: and tam ad fidelitatem Domino Regi in perpetuum
observandam, quam ad treugas praedictas observandas usque ad terminum
praedictum, supposui me jurisdictioni Domini Herefordensis Episcopi, and Domini
Coventrensis and Lichfieldensis Episcopi, vel alterius eorum quem Dominus Rex
ad hoc elegerit, ut si in aliquo contra praedictam fidelitatem Domini Regis vel
contra observantiam praedictarum treugatum venerit, liceat eis, vel eorum
alteri, quem Dominus Rex ad hoc elegerit, personam meam and omnes meos
excommunicare, and terram meam interdicere, donec de transgressione ipsam
satisfecero ad plenum. Et si forsitan infra praedictum festum Sancti Michaelis,
inter praedictum Radulfum de Mortuo Mari and me nulla pax fuerit reformata,
licet post festum illud bellum moveam praedicto Radulpho, non obligabit me
praedictum juramentum, dum tamen erga Dominum Regem fidelitatem observem
continuam, sicut praedictum est. Et si bellum post praedictum Terminum inter
nos moveatur, nihilominus Dominus Rex sustinebit, quod ego and mei receptemur
in terra sua, sicut alii fideles sui. Ad praedicta autem observanda Domino Regi
and haeredibus suis, obligo me per juramentum praedictum, and per sigilli mei
appositionem, quod huic scripto apposui, ad majorem confirmationem
praedictorum. Actum in Crastino ^th of
Assumptionis Beatae Mariae, anno regni Regis Henrici vigesimo quinto.

Sub eisdem verbis fecerunt Domino Regi chartas suas, Owein filius Howel:
Mailgun filius Mailgun: Mereduc filius Mereduc: Howel filius Cadwathlan: and
Cadwathlan filius Howel.

^. 46. ^ 25. H. 3. ^ ^ors.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesentes Litterae pervenerunt, David
filius Leolini, Salutem. Sciatis quod concessi Domino Henrico Regi Angliae
illustri, filio Domini Johannis Regis: quod deliberabo Griffinum fratrem meum,
quem teneo incarceratum, una filio suo primogenito, and aliis qui occasion
praedicti Griffini sunt in part mea incarcerati, and ipsos eidem Domino meo
Regi tradam. Et postea stabo Juri in Curia ipsius Domini Regis, tam super eo,
utrum idem Griffinus debeat teneri captus, quam super portione terrae, quae
fuit praedicti Leolini patris mei, si qua ipsum Griffinum contingere debeat,
secundum consuetudinem Wallensium, ita quod pax servetur inter me and
praedictum Griffinum fratrem meum, quod caveatur de ipsa tenenda secundum
considerationem Curiae ipsius Domini Regis: and quod tam ego quam praedictus
Griffinus portiones nostras, quae nos contingent de praedictis terris,
tenebimus in Capite de praedicto Domino Rege. Et quod reddam Rogero de Money
alto, Seneschallo Cestriae, terram suam de Monthaut cum pertinentiis: and sibi
and aliis Baronibus and fidelibus Domini Regis, seisinas terrarum suarum
occupatarum a tempore belli orti inter ipsum Dominum Iohannem Regem, and
praedictum Leolinum patrem meum, salvo jure proprietatis cujuslibet pacti and
instrumenti, super quo stabitur Juri hinc inde in Curia ipsius Domini Regis. Et
quod reddam ipsi Domino Regi expensas, quas ipse and sui fecerunt occasion
exercitus istius. Et quod satisfaciam de damnis and injuriis illatis sibi and
suis, secundum considerationem Curiae praedictae, vel malefactores ipsos ipsi
Domino Regi reddam. Et quod similiter Domino Regi reddam omnia homagia, quae
Dominus Johannes Rex pater suus habuit, and quae Dominus Rex de Jure habere
debet: and specialiter omnium Nobilium Wallensium. Et quod idem Dominus Rex non
dimittet aliquem de suis captivis, quin ipsi Domino Regi and suis remaneant
seisinae suae. Et quod terra de Englesmere cum pertinentiis Vtlagos vel Foris
banniatos ipsius Domini Regis vel Baronum suorum, de Marchia in terra mea, nec
permittam receptari. Et de omnibus articulis supradictis, and singulis,
firmiter and in perpetuum observandis, domino Regi and haeredibus suis pro me
and haeredibus meis cavebo per obsides and pignora, and aliis modis, quibus
Dominus Rex dicere voluerit and dictare. Et in his and in omnibus aliis stabo
voluntati, and mandatis ipsius Domini Regis, and juri parebo omnibus in Curia
sua. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigillum meum appendi. Actum
apud Alnetum juxta fluvium Elvey de Sancto Asapvo, in August 29.
festo decollationis Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, anno praedicti Domini Regis
Henrici vigesimo quinto. Et sciendum, quod illi qui capti detinentur cum
praedicto Griffino, eodem modo tradentur Domino Regi, donec per Curiam suam
consideratum fuerit, utrum and quomodo debeant deliberari. Et ad omnia firmiter
tenenda, ego David Juravi super crucem sanctam, quam coram me feci deportari.
Venerabilis etiam pater Howelus Episcopus de Sancto Asaph, ad petitionem meam,
firmiter promisit, in ordine suo, quod haec omnia praedicta faciet, and
procurabit modis quibus poterit observari. Edenevet siquidem Waugan, per
praeceptum meum, illud idem juravit super crucem praedictam. Actum ut supra.
Praeterea concessi pro me and haeredibus meis, quod si ego vel haeredes mei
contra pacem Regis vel haeredum suorum, vel contra articulos praedictos,
aliquid attentaverimus, tota haereditas nostra Domino Regi and haeredibus suis
incurratur. De quibus omnibus and singulis, supposui me and haeredes meos
jurisdictioni Archiepiscopi Cantuariensis, and Episcoporum Londinensis,
Herefordensis, and Coventrensis, qui pro tempore praeerunt, quod omnes, vel
unus eorum, quem Dominus Rex ad hoc elegerit, possit nos excommunicare, and
terram nostram interdicere, si aliquid contra praedicta attentaverimus. Et
procuravi, quod Episcopi de Bangor, and Sancto Asaph, chartas suas Domino Regi
fecerunt, per quas concesserunt, quod omnes sententias tam excommunicationis,
quam Interdicti, a praedictis Archiepiscopo, Episcopis, vel aliquo eorum,
ferendas, ad mandatum eorum exequentur.

Pat. 25. H. 3. M. 2. Dors.
David filius Lewelini qu^ndam principis Northwallie Salutem Noverit
Universitas vestra me Spontanea Voluntate pepigisse Domino meo Henrico dei
gratia Regi Anglie quod ego and haeredes mei eidem Domino Regi and haeredibus
suis omnibus diebus vite nostre constanter and fideliter serviemus nec aliquo
tempore contra eos erimus quod si forte evenerit quod a fideli servicio suo vel
heredum suorum quod absit recesserimus tota terra nostra erga ipsum Dominum
Regem

(...) 46.
ALexander, Dei gratia Rex Scotiae, omnibus Christi fidelibus h^c scriptum
visuris vel audituris Salutem. Ad vestram volumus pervenire ligio Domino nostro
Henrico tertio Dei gratia R^gi Angliae illustri, Domino Hyberniae, Duci
Normanniae, and Aquitaniae, and Comiti Andegaviae, and ejus haeredibus quod in
perpetuum bonam foedus inibimu^ per nos, vel per aliquos alios, ex part
nostra, cum inimicis Dom^ni Regis Angliae, vel haeredum suorum, ad bellum
procurandum vel faciendum, unde damnum eis vel Regnis suis Angliae and
Hyberniae, aut caeteris terris suis eveniat, vel possit aliquatenus evenire,
nisi nos injuste gravent; Stantibus in suo robore conventionibus inter nos and
dictum Dominum Regem Angliae initis ultimo apud Ehoracum, in praesentiam Domini
Otronis, tituli Sancti Nicolai in carcere Tulliano Diaconi Cardinalis Legati in
Anglia; Et salvis conventionibus factis super matrimonio contrahendo, inter
filium nostrum and filiam dicti Domini Regis Angliae. Et ut haec nostra
concessio and promissio pro nobis and haeredibus nostris perpetuae firmitatis
robur obtineant, fecimus jurare in animam nostram Alanum Ostiarium, Henricum de
Bailloil, David, de Lindeseie, Willielmum Gifford: quod omnia praedicta, bona
fide firmiter and fideliter observabimus. Et similiter jurare fecimus
venerabiles patres David, Willielmum, Galfridum, and Clementem, Sancti Andreae,
Glasconensem, Dunkeldensem, and Dublanensem Episcopos. Et paeterea fideles
nostros, Patricium Comitem de Dumbar, Malcolinum Comitem de Fif, Malisium
Comitem de Stratherne, Walterum Cumin de Meneteth, Willielmum Comitem de Maro,
Alexandrum Comitem de Buthan, David de Hastingia Comitem Athorl, Robertum de
Bruis, Alanum Ostiarium, Henricum de Bailloil, Rogerum de Mumbri, Laurentium de
Avrinthia, Richardum Cumin, David de Lindeseie, Richardum Siward, Willielmum de
Lindesia, Walterum Moravia, Willielmum Giffard, Nicolaum de Sully, Willielmum
de veteri ponte, Willielmum de Bevire, Aleumum de Mesue, David de Graham, and
Stephanum de Smingham: Quod si nos, vel haeredes nostri, contra concessionem
and promissionem praedictam, quod absit, venerimus, ipsi, and haeredes eorum,
nobis, and haeredibus nostris, nullum, contra concessionem and promissionem
praedictam, auxilium vel consilium impendent, aut ab aliis pro posse suo
impendi permittent. Immo bona fide laborabunt erga nos and haeredes nostros,
ipsi and Prelati, Comites and Barons nostri, praesens scriptum sigillorum
suorum appositione roboravimus. Testibus Prela^is, Comitibus, and Baronibus,
superius nominatis. Anno regni nostri etc. Ista signa apposita fuerunt in
continenti, scilicet Regis Scotiae Alexandri, Willielmi de Bevire, Willielmi de
veteri ponte, Willielmi de Lindesia, Stephani de Smingham. sigilla apposita
fuerunt postea.

ILlustri viro, Domino Henrico, Dei gratia Regi Anglorum, Mat. Paris f. 651. n.
50.
etc. Abbates Haberconwiae and de Remere, Cisterciensis ordinis, Inquisitores
Papa, Salutem in Domino. Mandatum Domini Papae recepimus in haec verba;
Innocentius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, dilectis filiis Abbatibus de
Haberconwia and de Kemere, Note, the Number before this should have been 171.
Kangorum Diocesis, Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Ex part dilecti
filii nostri, nobilis viri David, Principis Northwalliae, fuit propositum coram
nobis, quod cum inter ipsum, quem parents ejus in alumnum Romanae Ecclesiae
donaverunt, and charissimum in Christo filium nostrum Regem Anglorum illustrem,
bellum longo tempore perdurasset, tandem postquam fuit in venerabilem fratrem
nostrum Episcopum de Sancto Asaph, and collegas ipsius, de stando hinc inde
eorum arbitrio super omnibus querelis, juramento a partibus praestito,
concorditer, attendens, quod pendente illorum arbitrio, sibi super hoc aliquid
attentare non licebat, in praedictum Principem ex insperaeto hostiliter irruit,
ad praestandum quod super praedictis, de quibus compromissum fuerat, and
juratum, ac aliis ipsius Regis, mandare per vim compulit, and metum, qui cadere
poterat in constantem. Cum igitur ea quae vi and metu fiant, carere debeant
robore firmitatis, discretioni vestrae per Apostolica scripta mandamus,
quatenus inquisita super hoc diligentius veritate, si rem inveneritis ita esse,
auctoritate Principem ab observatione sic extorti juramenti penitus
abselventes, sententia, si qua occasion hujusmodi in ejus personam, vel
terram, ab aliquo forsan lata fuerit, juxta formam Ecclesiae, sine difficultate
qualibet, sicut justum fuerit, relaxetis. Testes vero, etc. Datum Januae,
septimo Kalendas Augusti. Pontificatus nostri anno secundo. Hujus igitur
autoritate muniti, vobis mandamus, quatenus in vigilia Sanctae Agnetis
Virginis, apud Creythin.
Keyrus, in Ecclesia The Church of Lian-gustenin.
Gustefend coram vobis compareatis, super contentis in autentico, dicto
Principi responsuri,

REverendo in Christo patri Innocentio. Dei gratia, Mat. Paris f. 666. n. 50.
summo Pontifici, Magnates and universitas Regni Angliae, recommendationem,
Romanam Ecclesiam refugium nos oportet temporibus opportunis; ut dolor
aggravans filialis, Materno Solatio mitigetur. Quod quidem Solatium, matter
filio eo tenetur mitius and facilius impertiri; quo ipsum maternae dulcedinis
alimento, gratum rep^tit and devotum, esse quidem non potest immemor matter illa
illius gratitudinis quam ei a long retroactis temporibus Regnum Anglicanum
impendit; concedendo eidem, ad exaltationem suam, conservationem majorem
Subsidium docens, and non modice fructuosum: ut per hoc inter Ecclesiam ipsam
and Regnum praedictum, foedus dilecti^nis firmius iniretur. Quod quidem
Subsidium, processu temporis beati Petri denarius extiterit nuncupatum. Ipsa
vero Ecclesia hujusmodi subsidio non contenta, aliis temporibus tam per
Legatos, quam per alios nuncios multiplicatos, Subsidia petebat diversa in
Regno praedicto: quae ei a filiis suis, tanquam devotis, and matrem suam
sincerae dilectionis brachiis amplexantibus; fuerunt concessa liberaliter and
libenter. Paternitatem etiam vestram non credimus ignorare, quod praedecessores
nostri, sicut vi^ Catholici, creatorem suum diligentes pariter and timentes;
animarum suarum and praedecossorum suorum, nec non and fuccessorum saluti
insistere cupientes, Monasteria fundaverunt; and bonis suis, tam terris
dominicis, quam ecclesiarum patronatibus ditaverunt: ut viri religiosi in
monasteriis illis primam religionem laudabiliter exercentes, and cum summa
devotione altissimo samulantes; pace and plena tranquillitate possent
gratulari, prout religioni dignoscitur convenire, de d^ctis dominicis
necessaria capientes and ut clerici sui patronatuum suorum ecclesias
obtinentes, sine magna molestia nostra, and gravamine intollerabili nobis
valde; praefati religiosi possent patronatibus suis, aut ecclesiarum
collationibus, aliquantenus defraudari. Sed ecce per vos and praedecessores
^estros, nullam considerationem habentes, quod praeter subsidia supradicta, jam
ditantur in Anglia I^alici patronatus, qui rectores eeclesiarum dicuntur:
praefatos religiosos, quos deberent defendere relinquentes penitus indefensos,
nullam ^am animarum gerentes, sed lupos rapacissimos gregem dispergere, and
oves rapere permittentes. Vnde vere dicere possunt, quod non sunt boni
pastores, quoniam oves suas non cognoscunt, nec pastorum notitiam oves habent.
Hospitalitati Eleemosynarumque largitioni sicut statutum est in Ecclesia, non
insistunt: sed fructus tantum percipiunt, extra regnum fratres, nepotes,
consanguinei nostri, and caeteri been meriti de Regno Angliae praedicto
beneficiari tenerentur; qui possent and vellent dicta charitatis opera, and
etiam plura alia misericorditer and pie exercere, and ecclesiis ipsis
personaliter deservire, ut qui altari deserviunt, vivant etiam de altari,
secundum dictum Pauli, ipsi vero nunc necessitate compulsi, laici and exules
sunt effecti. Vt autem vobis veritas before innotescat, Italici percipientes
in Anglia Sexaginta millia and eo amplius annuatim (aliis perceptionibus
diversis exceptis) plus emolumenti meri redditus de Regno reportant, quam ipse
Rex, qui est tutor ecclesiae, and Regni gubernacula moderatur. Porro post
creationem vestram firmiter sperabamus, and adhuc speramus, eam de vobis
fiduciam reportantes; quod vestrae paternitatis misericordia mediante,
gaudebimus eleemosynas nostras praedictas, tempore vestro fore statui debito
and pristino reformandas. Sed tacere non possumus gravamen nostrum: quo non
solum gravamur, sed etiam opprimimur ultra modum, videlicet Magister Martinus
praefatum Regnum, sine domini Regis licentia, cum majori Potestate, quam unquam
vidimus habere Legatum a Domino Rege postulatum, nuper ingressus (licet non
utens legationis insigniis, multiplicato tamen legationis officio) novas
quotidie proferens potestates inaudatas excedens excedit: quadam beneficia jam
vacantia, triginta Marcas, vel amplius, annuatim valentia personis Italicis
conferendo: quibus decendentibus, and patronis ignorantibus, alii supponuntur;
and sic patroni suis collationibus defraudantur, adhuc etiam idem Martinus
beneficia consimilia, cum ea vacare contigerit, personis nititur assignare.
Quorundam beneficiorum collationem sedi Apostolicae reservando, and a viris
religiosis pensiones immoderatas insuper extorquendo, contradictores and
resistentes excommunicationis and interdicti sententiis passim, non absque
magno discrimine and animarum periculo, supponendo. Cum igitur prafatus
Magister Martinus, non sine totius Regni perturbatione non modica,
jurisdictionem exercens memoratam, quam a conscientia vestra credere non
possumus emanasse, eo quod in m^ltis majori fungeretur officio quam unquam
fungi legatum aliquem videremus privilegio domini Regis admodum derogando, per
quod ei a sede Apostolica specialiter indulgetur, nequis in Anglia legationis
fungatur officio, nisi a domini Rege specialiter postulatus: Sanctae
paternitati vestrae supplicamus quantum possumus humiliter and pius pater ad
relevationem oppressionis filiorum manum misericordiae teneatur extendere, ab
oppressionibus and gravaminibus memoratis, nos velit vestrae paternitatis
benignitas tempestivo ac efficaci remedio, cito relevare. Quantumcunque namque
dominus noster Rex, qui est princeps Catholicus, and jugi vigilatione obsequiis
divinis intendit, corporis sui consumptionem non considerans, in obsequio Jesu
Christi sedem velit Apostolicam revereri, and Ecclesiae Romanae, sicut filius
ejus Charissimus, commodi and honoris desideret incrementum and augmentum; jure
tamen Regio dignitateque Regia before conservatis: nos tamen, qui in negotiis
suis portamus pondus dierum and aestus, and quibus una cum ipso domino Rege,
intendere conservationi Regni diligenter incumbit, dictas oppressiones Deo and
hominibus detestabiles, and gravamina nobis intolerabilia, non possumus
aequanimiter tolerare, nec per dei gratiam amplius tolerabimus, vestrae
pietatis remedio Mediante; quod festinum and tempestivum, habere credimus and
speramus; placeat igitur paternitati vestrae hanc supplicationem nostram
taliter exaudire Magnatibus and universitate Regni Angliae, tanquam a filiis in
Christo Charissimis, speciales gratias debeatis merito reportare.

HEnricus dei gratia, etc. Venerabili in Christo, tali Episcopo salutem. Mat.
Paris f. 708. n. 40.
Licet alias vobis scripserimus, semel, secundo and tertio, tam per literas
nostras clausas, quam patentes, ne ad opus domini Papae vel alterius tallagium
aliquod vel auxilium exigeretis a viris religiosis, clericis vel laicis, cum
nullum hujusm^di tallagium vel auxilium exigi possit vel consueverit, sine
magno praejudicio Regiae dignitatis, quod nullo modo poterimus aut volumus
sustinere: Vos tamen mandatum nostrum in hac part contemnentes, contra
provisionem per Magnates nostros, tam Praelatos quam Comites and Barons factam
in Consilio nostro Londonensi, and concessam, exactionem faciatis Memoratam
super quo facto vestro proprio non erubes^itis contraire, cum vos and alii
Praelati in praedicto Concilio communiter concesseritis, quod nihil de
exactione hujusmodi faceretis donec nuncii nostri and v^stri necnon and aliorum
Magnarum nostrorum and totius universi^atis Regni nostri a Curia Romana
redirent, qui pro liberatione oppressionum ad curiam illam, sicut nostis,
fuerant specialiter destinati. Vobis igitur mandatis inculcatis mandamus
injungentes, firmius and districtius inhibentes, ne ad exactionem praedicti
tallagii vel auxilii faciendam aliquatenus procedatis, sicut gaudere
desideratis Baronia vestra, and possessionibus vestris, quas in Regno nostro
tenetis; and si quid inde cepistis, extra regnum nostrum asportari nullatenus
permittatis, sed illud salvo custodiri faciatis usque ad reditum nunciorum
praedictorum, indubitanter scituri, quod si secus egeritis, nos ad poss^ssi^nes
vestras manum gravaminis, ultra quam credere vel it is, extendemus; hanc autem
inhibitionem, vobis injungimus faciendam Archidiacon^s and officialibus
vestris, quam quidem pro liberate cleri, and populi facimus, novit Deus, etc.

^em f. 716.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, etc. praecipimus tibi, quod sicut laici de
Baliva tua ad v^untatem Episcopi Lincolniensis Archidiaconorum vel Officialium
seu Decanorum ruralium, in aliquo loco conveniant de caetero, ad cognitiones
per sacramentum eorum, v^l attestationes aliquas faciendas, nisi in causis
matrimonialibus vel testamentariis.

^. Paris ^ ^1. lin. 5.
SAnctissimo patri in Christo ac domino J. Dei providentia summo Pontifici,
universitas cleri and populi per provinciam Cantuariensem constituti, devota
pedum oscula beatorum; cum Anglicana Ecclesia a tempore commendatae sibi fidei
catholicae, Deo and sacrosanctae Romanae Ecclesiae matri nostrae placere
studens, adheserit semper, and servierit devote, a coeptis obs^quiis non
recessura, per morum incrementa semper proficiens; Sanctitatis vestrae pedibus
provoluta supplicat obnixe, quatenus in petitione pecuniae, quae diversimode ab
ea requiritur, in subventionem diversarum mandato Sanctitatis vestrae cum gravi
coertione, eidem pietas vestra parcere dignetur; importabile est namque quod
mandatur, and impossible propter rerum defectus: Licet enim Regio nostra
fructus reddat interdum ad alimenta gentis suae deputatos, aeris tamen copiam
non reddit, nec redderet per tempora multa quanta requiritur his diebus. Sed
and onere simili, licet non tanto, praeteritis diebus and ob causas similes
praegravata, portare nequit aliquatenus quod exigitur; ad mandatum insuper
sanctitatis vestrae tempore praesenti, ad opus domini Regis nostri temporalis,
( cui in necessitativus suis deesse non possumus cum honestate, nec debemus)
exigitur a clero succursus; ut incursus hostiles, quos avertat Deus, propulsare
possit, and patrimonii sui jura tueri, ac recuperare promptius occupata.
Latores igitur praesentium cum supplicatione nostra, ad praesentiam Sanctitatis
vestrae destinamus; ut pericula vobis exponant, and incommoda quae in promptu
sequerentur ex praemissis, and quae nulla possumus ratione portare; licet simus
in omni vinculo charitatis obedientiae and devotionis, vobis communitas nostra
sigillum non habet, praesentes literas Signo Communitatis civitatis
Londinensis, vestrae Sanctitati mittimus consignatas.

REverendissimis patribus in Christo and Dominis, Ibid. n. 20.30.
Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae Romanae Ca^binalibus, devoti sui, etc. Salutem,
reverentiam universitatem vestram, velut ad bases ecclesiam Dei fulcientes
humiliter supplicantes confugimus, and obnixe deprecamur, quatenus pressuras
quibus mancipamur attendere dignantes, opem far velitis; ut post repetita
gravamina, quae Anglicanae Ecclesiae praeteritis diebus occurrerunt respirare
possit, ex hoc vobis assurgere teneamur ad debitas gratiarum actiones; a
tempore namque ultimi Concilii Lateranensis, primo vicesima triennii in
Subsidium Terrae Sanctae; postmodum decima in Subsidium domini Papae; postmodum
praestationibus aliis diversimode and ad usus diversos, de mandato Sedis
Apostolicae Anglicana Ecclesia pulsata profudit voluntate prompta quae potuit
habere ad manus. Regi etiam nostro ac patrono temporali, ad mandatum sedis
secundum vires suas fecit succursum, and jam per praeces vestras exigitur
succursus iterato ad opus ejusdem domini Regis, ( ^ui in necessitatibus suis
deesse, nec potest nec debet,) ut hostium incursus repellere posset, and Regni
sui jura tueri, ac recuperare promptius occupata; postremo autem, petitur ab
eadem Eccl^sia diebus istis quod portare non potest, rerum penuria negante quod
exigitur, ab aliis videlicet, medietas bonorum ab aliis tertia; and a reliquis
vicesima omnium quae possident; pars scilicet in usus Francorum, qui nos and
gentem ad conquestum Imperii Graecorum pars in Subsidium Terrae Sanctae, quae
posset ut mundus clamat, cum minori discrimine rehaberi ab hostibus, pars autem
ad usus alios, quos Apostolica seeds ordinaret. Durum quidem videtur nobis and
absurdum, ut aliis abundantibus de bonis and laboribus nostris; nos and nostri,
ac pauperes Regionis nostrae, quibus exhibitio propinquior competit, vacui
jejunmus. Hostiles etiam insidias and incursus quos Deus avertat, Rex noster
and Regni militia repellere non valeret, nec p^sset pereuntibus and inopibus
aere Regni and aerario vacuato; imo etiam and si venalia exponerentur omnia
quae clerus habet, non posset apud nos inveniri pecunia quae exigitur.
Sequerentur quidem infortunia multa ex praemissis; si ad ea, quod absit,
cogeretur pro quibus vobis exponendis, praesentium latores nuncios nostros
communes ad vestram clementiam destinamus; petentes attente, quatenus propter
Dominum and honorem sedis Apostolicae, animum Domini Papae, and manus vestras
ac consilia a grabamine tali gremium and obedientiam matris Ecclesiae sic
revocetis errantes and dispersos, ne dispergatis, and alienos reddatis, prius
in charitate and devotione collectos. Et quia communitas nostra sigillum non
habet, praesentes literas signo communitatis Civitatis Londinensis vestrae
Sanctitati mittimus consignatas.

^toria Paris ^ate post ^aria.
HEnricus D^i gratia, etc. Rex vicecomiti tali vel tali salutem. Quod ad pacem
nostram firmiter observandam, provisum est de concilio nostro quod vigi^iae
fiant in singulis Civitatibus, burgis, and villis Comitatus ^ui, a Die
Ascentionis domini usque ad festum Sancti Michaelis: scilicet in singulis
Civitatibus ad singulas portas, sex homines armis munitos, and singulis burgis
per duodecim hom^nes, and in singulis villis integris per sex homines vel
quatuor ad minus similiter armis munitos, secundum numerum inhabitantium. Et
vigilent continuo per noctem totam ab occasu solis usque ad ortum. Ita quod si
aliquis extraneus transitum per ipsos faciat, arrestent usque mane. Et tunc si
fidelis sit, dimittatur; and si suspectus sit vicecomiti liberetur; qui ipsum
sine omni difficultate and dilatione recipiat, and salvo custodiat: si vero
hujusmodi Extranei transitum facientes, se non permiserint vigiles hutesium
levent, super eos undique, and eum insequantur cum tota villata, and vicinis
villatis cum clamore and hutesi^ de villa in villam, donec capiantur: Et tunc
liberentur vicecomiti sicut praedictum est Ita quod nullus occasion hujusmodi
arrestationis vel captionis extraneorum, per vicecomitem vel per Ballivos suos
occasionetur. Et singulae civitates, burgi and villae praemuniantur ad singulas
praedictas vigilias and sectas ita diligenter faciendum, ne defectum illorum
graviter punire debeamus. Provisum est etiam, quod singuli vicecomites una cum
duobus militibus ad hoc specialiter assignatis, Circumeant comitatus suos de
hundredo in hundredum, and Civitates, and Burgos; and convenire faciant coram
eis in singulis hundredis Civitatibus, and burgis, cives, burgenses, libere
tenentes, villanos, and alios aetatis quindecim annorum usque ad aetatem
sexaginta annorum. Et eosdem faciant omnes jurare ad arma, secundum quantitatem
terrarum, and catallorum suorum, scilicet ad quindecim libratas terrae, unam
loricam, Capellum ferreum, gladium, cultellum, and equum. Ad december libratas
terrae, unum habergetum, capellum ferreum, gladium, cultellum; Ad centum
solidatas terrae, unum ^e same ^ Wam^ a Coat ^ted with ^ol, Cot^ or ^owe. ^n
Hand ^e.
purpunctum, capellum ferreum, gladium, lanceam, and Cultellum. Ad quadraginta
solidatas terrae, and eo amplius usque ad solidatas centum terrae; Gladium,
Arcum, Sagittas and cultellum. Qui minus habent quam quadraginta solidatas
terrae, jurati sint ad falces, ^e same ^ Wam^ a Coat ^ted with ^ol, Cot^ or
^owe. ^n Hand ^e.
Gisarmas, cultellos, and alia arma minuta. Ad catalla sexaginta marcarum, unam
loricam, capellum ferreum, gladium, Cultellum, and equum. Ad catalla sexaginta
Marcarum, unum An Iron ^ller or ^rget.
haubertum, capellum ferreum, and cultellum. Ad catalla viginti Marcarum, unum
purpunctum, capellum ferreum, gladium, and Cultellum. Ad catalla novem
Marcarum, gladium, Cultellum, Arcum, and sagittas. Ad catalla quadraginta
solidatarum, and eo amplius usque ad december Marcas; falces, gisarmas, and alia
arma minuta. Omnes enim alii qui possunt habere arcus and Sagittas extra
Forestam habeant. Qui vero in foresta, habeant arcus and pilatos. In singulis
civitatibus, and Burgis jura^i ad arma sint coram Majoribus Civitatis, and
Prepositis, and Ballivis. Burgorum, ubi non sunt majores. In singulis vero
villatis aliis, constituatur unus Constabularius vel duo, secundum numerum
inhabitantium, and provisionem praedictorum. In singulis vero hundredis
constituatur unus Capitalis Constabularius, ad cujus Mandatum omnes jurati ad
arma de hundredis suis conveniant, and eis sint intendentes ad faciendum ea
quae spectant ad conservationem pacis nostrae. Clamate etiam faciant singuli
vicecomites per Civitates, and burgos and omnia Mercata ballivarum suarum, quod
nulli conveniant ad turniandum vel To fight with great Staves, Clubs, or
Batoons.
burdandum nec ad alias quascunque aventuras. Nec etiam aliqui incedant armati
nisi specialiter fuerunt ad custodiam pacis nostrae deputati. Et si aliqui
fuerunt inventi sive incedentes armati, contra hanc provisionem nostram,
arrestentur and vicecomiti liberentur: Et si se non permiserint arestari, tunc
Constabularii singulorum hundredorum, villatarum, and alii quicunque sint,
uthesium levent super eos undique, and cum vicinis villis, and de villa in
villam ipsos insequantur, donec capiantur, and vicecomiti liberentur, sicut
praedictum est. Quoties autem contigerit hutesium levari, super quoscunque
perturbatores pacis nostrae, Praedones, and Malefactores in parcis vel
vivariis, statim propter eos fiat hutesium, and ipsos insequantur donec
capiantur, and vicecomiti liberentur, sicut de aliis praedictum est. Et omnes
vicecomites, and eorum ballibi, Constabularii, Iurati ad arma, cibes,
burgenses, libere and villani, talem sectam faciant propter praedictos
Malefactores, ne ipsi malefactores evadant; and ne si pro eorum defectu
evadant, hii in quibus defectus inventus fuerit graviter puniri debeant. Et sic
per consilium nostrum puniantur, quod poena illorum aliis metum incutiat, and
auferat materiam delinquendi, suspectos autem de die per quascunque
arrestationes recipiant arrestatos, Vicecomites, sine dilatione and
difficultate salvo custodiant; donec per legem terrae deliberentur. Et ideo
tibi praecipimus, quod sicut corpus tuum, and omnia tua diligis, dilectis and
fidelibus nostris Henrico filio Bernardi, Pe^ro de Goldintuna quos tibi ad hoc
assignavimus, omnia praedicta sub forma praescripta cum diligentia exequaris;
ne pro defectu tui and inde praedictorum H. and P. ad te and ad ipsos nos
graviter capere debeamus. Test Archiepiscopo Eboracensi apud Westmonasterium,
Vigesimo die Maii, anno regni nostri scilicet Henrici filii Regis Iohannis
tricesimo sexto.

The Knights or Soldiers of Mat. Paris f. 877. n. 50. A. D. 1253. H. 3.37.
Shropshire and parts adjoining, liked not this New Constitution

Mandatum Regis de juratis ad arma.
H. de Hathelokestuna vicecomes Essexiae and Hertfordiae; Mat. Paris auctar.
Additament. f. 230. n. 10. etc.
Ballivis libertatum sancti Albani salutem. Mandatum domini Regis in haec verba
suscepi. Henricus Dei gratia Rex, etc. Vicecomiti Essexiae and Hertfordiae
Salutem. Summone per bonos Summonitores, omnes milites and omnes libere
tenentes de Comitatibus praedictis; and de Villa quatuor homines and
praepositum: Et de quolibet burgo duodecim legales Burgenses, quod sint coram
dil^cto and fideli nostro Henrico de Colevilla, ad dies and loca quos tibi
scire faciet, ad audiendum and faciendum praeceptum nostrum; venire etiam
facias coram eo ad eosdem dies, and loca, omnes illos qui jurati sunt ad arma,
and jurari debent: cum armis suis ad quae jurati sunt, and esse debent:
Audituri and facturi praeceptum nostrum. Et interim diligenter inquiras, qui
fecerunt ultimo scru^inium de armis, Comitatibus praedictis, and qui ultimo
inde sacramentum ceperunt; and ubi rotuli de scrutin^o illo, and sacramento
fuerunt. Et rotulos illos habeas coram praefato Henrico, praedictis diebus, and
locis; and tu ipse tunc ibi ^^s in propria persona tua, ad exequendum ea quae
idem Henricus tibi ex part nostra praecipiet. Et si Ballivi libertatum qui
re^urnum habent brevium nostrorum, istud mandatum nostrum executi non fuerint,
non emittas quin libertates illas ingrediaris ad idem Mandatum exequendum.
Test meipso apud Portesmuthe mando, quod Mandatum istud sub amissione
libertatis Domini tui diligenter exequaris.

^m. n. 20.
HEnricus Dei gratia etc. Dilecto and fideli suo Henrico de Colevilla
assignavimus vos ad Exponendum miliribus, liberis hominibus, and aliis de
comitatibus Cantebrugiae, Huntindoniae, Hertfordiae, and Essexiae, quos coram
vobis venire praecipimus, ad dies and loca quos vicecomitibus eorundem
Comitatuum scire fecerimus; articulos quos vibis mittimus sub sigillo nostro,
and ad providendum quod articuli illi firmiter observentur, ad pacis nostrae
conservationem. Et ad videndum quod singuli habeant arma ad quae sunt jurati,
and jurari debent. Et ad ponendum modo debito omnes quos resistentes rebels,
seu negligentes in praemissis invener^tis. Et id^o vobis mandamus, quod ad dies
and loca quos duxeritis providenda, in comitatibus praedictis, sitis ad
praedicta facienda prout magis videritis expedire. Mandamus enim singulis
Vicecomitibus praedictis, quod ad dies and loca quos eis scire facietis, venire
faciant coram vobis omnes milites, libere tenentes de comitatibus praedictis,
de qualibet villa quatuor homines, and praepositum, and de quolibet burgo
duodecim legales Burgenses: and omnes illos qui jurati sunt ad arma, and jurari
debent, cum armis ad quae jurati sunt and esse debent: ad audiendum and
faciendum quae eis ex part nostra praeceperitis. Et quod ipsi vicecomites in
propriis personis suis, tunc sint coram nobis cum rotulis de ultimo scrutinio
armorum facto, in eisdem Comitatibus, ad exequendum quae eis ex part nostra
praeceperitis. Et si ballivi libertatum qui habent returnum brevium nostrorum,
mandatum nostrum in hac part executi non fuerint, non omittatis quin
libertates illas ingrediamini, ad praedictum mandatum nostrum exequendum. In
cujus rei testimonium, has literas nostras fieri patentes. Test meipso apud
Portesmuthe vicesimo die Julii, anno regni nostri tricesimo septimo.

ARTICULI
Quod vigiliae fiant per singulas villas sicut fieri consueverunt, and per
viros probos and validos.

Quod sectae de Hu^esiis fiant secundum antiquum debitum modum, ita negligentes
and utesium sequi nolentes, capiantur tanquam consentientes malefactoribus, and
liberentur Vicecomiti. Et insuper in qualibet villa provideantur quatuor
homines vel sex, secundum quantitatem villae ad utesia prompte and instanter
prosequenda; and ad malefactores prosequendos si supervenerint, and necesse
fuerit cum arcubus and Sagittis, and aliis levibus armis, quae debent provideri
ad custum totius villae, and quae semper remaneant ad opus praedictae villae.
Et super illos provideantur de quolibet hundredo duo liberi, and legales
homines potentiores, qui sint superiores: and videant quod vigiliae recte
fiant, and prosecutiones praedictae.

Quod nullus extraneus hospitetur, nisi de die, and de die clara discedat.

Quod nullus extraneus receptetur in villis campestribus, ultra unum diem, vel
duos ad plus, extra tempus messium, nisi hospes pro eo velit respondere.

Quod si aliquis malefactor, vel aliquis de quo mala suspitio habeatur,
capiatur per vigilatores, vel alios domini Regis fideles; vicecomes ballivus de
hundredo, ipsum sine dilatione vel mercede aliqua recipiet.

Quod praecipiatur Majori and Ballivis singularum Civitatum, and Burgorum, quod
si aliquis Mercator vel Extranous deferens pecuniam, and illam eis ostendat and
conductum petat, quod faciant ei conductum per malos passus, and loca ambigua
quod si aliquid amiserit, pro defectu conductus vel in eorum conductu, de
villata burgi illius, vel civitatis, ei restituatur.

NOs Bonifacius divina miseratione Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Mat. Pari^ f.
866. n. 40, 50, etc.
totius Angliae primas, F. London, H. Eliensis, R. Lincolniensis, W.
Wigorniensis, W. Norwicensis, P. Herefordiensis, W. Sarisberiensis, Episcopi,
Pontificalibus induti, candelis accensis, in transgressores liberta^um
ecclesiasticarum, and libertatum, seu liberarum consuetudinum Regni Angliae,
and praecipue earum quae continentur in Charta libertatum Regni Angliae, and
charta de foresta, excommunicationis sententiam solenniter tulimus sub hac
forma.

Auctoritate Dei omnipotentis, and filii, and Spiritus Sancti, and gloriosae
Mariae, and beatorum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, omniumque Apostolorum, and
Beati Thomae Archiepiscopi and Martyris, omniumque Martyrum, beati Edvardi
Regis Angliae, omniumque confessorum atque Virginum omniumque Sanctorum Dei,
excommunicamus, anathematizamus, and a limine Sanctae Matris ecclesiae
sequestramus, omnes illos qui amodo scienter and malic^ose ecclesias
privaverint vel spoliaverint suo jure. Item omnes illos qui ecclesiasticas
libertates, vel antiquas Regni consuetudines probatas, libertates, and liberas
consuetudines, quae in Chartis communium libertatum Angliae, and de foresta
continentur, concessis a domino Rege Angliae Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, and
caeteris Angliae Praelatis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, and libere
tenentibus, qualicunque art vel ingenio temere violaverint, diminuerint, seu
immutaverint, clam vel palam, facto, verbo, vel consilio contra illas vel earum
aliquam, in quocunque articulo temere veniendo. Item, in illos, qui contra
illas, vel earum aliquam, statuta aliqua ediderint vel edita servaverint,
consuetudines introduxerint, vel servaverint introductas, Scriptores
statutorum, nec non consiliarios and executores, and qui secundum ea
praesumpserint judicare. Qui omnes and singuli superius memorati, hanc
sententiam incursuros se noverint ipso facto, qui scienter aliquid commiserint
de praedictis, qui vero ignoranter, nisi commoniti, infra quindenam a tempore
commonitionis se correxerint, and arbitrio ordinariorum before satisfecerint
de commissis, ex tunc sint hac sententia involuti. Eadem etiam sententia
innodamus omnes illos, qui pacem Regis and Regni praesumpserint perturbare. In
cujus memoriam sempiternam nos figilla nostra praesentibus duximus apponenda.

^ 37. H. 3.^3. Dors.
NOverint universi quod Dominus Henricus Rex Angliae illustris Rogerus Comes
Norfolciensis and Mareschallus Angliae H. Comes H^reford and Essex J. Comes de
Warrwic, Petrus de Sabaudia, ceterique Magnates Angliae consenserunt in
sententiam excommunicationis generaliter latam apud Westmonasterium decimo
tertio die Maii anno Regni Regis praedicti tricesimo septimo in hac forma,
Scilicet quod vinculo praefate Sententiae ligentur omnes venientes contra
libertates contentas communium Libertatum Angliae, and de Foresta, and omnes
qui libertates Ecclesiae Anglicanae temporibus Domini Regis and praedecessorum
suorum Regum Angliae optentas and usitatas scienter and maliciose violaverint
aut infringere praesumpserint, and omnes illi qui pacem Domini Regis, and Regn^
perturbaverint and similiter omnes qui jura and liberta^es Regis and Regni
diminuere, infringere, seu immutare praesumpserint and quod omnes venientes
contra praemissa vel eorum aliqua ignoranter, and Legitime moniti infra
quindenam post monitionem premissam dictam praedictae sententiae
excommunicationis subjacebunt. Ita tamen quod Dominus Rex transgressionem illam
per Considerationem Curiae suae faciat emendari, sciendum aut^m quod si
inscripturis super eadem sententia a quibuscunque confectis seu conficiendis
aliud vel aliter appositum vel adjectum fuerit, aut articuli aliqui alii in eis
contenti inveniantur, Dominus Rex and praedicti Magnates, and communitas populi
protestantur public in praesentia venerabilium patrum Bonifacii dei gratia
Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi totius Episcoporum omnium in eodem colloquio
existentium, quod in ea nunquam consenserunt nec consentiunt sed de plano eis
contradicunt; preterea praefatus Dominus Rex in prolatione praefatae
sententiae, omnes libertates and consuetudines Regni antiquas and usitatas, and
dignitates and jura Coronae suae ore proprio specialiter sibi and Regno suo
Salvavit and excepit. In cujus rei memoriam and in posterum veritatis
testimonium, tam Dominus Rex, quam praedicti Comites ad instantiam aliorum
Magnatum, and populi praesenti scripto sigilla sua appofuerunt.

ALexander Episcopus Servus Servorum Dei, Mat. Paris f. 914. n. 30, ^0
Episcopo Herefordensi, etc. cum te sciamus pro utilitatibus Abbatis, and
Conventus Monasterii Sancti (...) pro quibus ad sedem Apostolicam accessisti,
magna oportere subire gravamina expensarum, ne pro defectu ipsarum eadem
inexpedita remanere contingat; fraternitati tuae contrahendi mutuum propter
hoc, usque ad summam quingentarum, vel sexcentarum, vel septingentarum, vel
amplius Marcarum sterlingorum, nomine dictorum Abbatis, and Conventus, and
Monasterii, and ipsos Abbatem and Conventum, ac successores eorundem, and
ejusdem Monasterii bona creditoribus obligandi, ac renunciandi constitutioni de
duabus diebus editae in Consilio generali, and beneficio restitutionis in
integrum, and omnibus literis, indulgentiis Apostolicis, impetratis and
impetrandis, nec non and conventioni judicum, si ipsorum creditorum nomine
Apostolicas super hoc cujuscunque tenoris in posterum impetrari contigerit,
plenam autoritate praesentium concedimus facultatem ita tamen quod ipsi and
successores eorum creditoribus hujusmodi pecuniam solvere, nec non ad damna and
expensas ac interesse, si a termino a te statuendo pecuniam eandem non
solverunt, super quibus juramento ipsorum vel eorum alicujus, sine aliqua
probatione, qui dictam pecuniam mutuaverint credi volumus, teneantur, and
dictis creditoribus praetextu alicujus constitutionis canonicae, vel civilis,
aut cujuscunque privilegii, vel indulgentiae, de quibus in nostris literis
plenam and expressam oportet fieri mentionem, and ne ipsi and Successores
eorum, amplius in aliquo valiant se tueri dictam pecuniam in utilitatem ipsorum
Abbatis, and Conventus, and Monasterii versam esse, probandi necessitas non
incumbat. Data, etc.

ALexander Episcopus servus servorum Dei, Annal. Monaster. Bur^n. f. 349.
venerabili fratri Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, and dilecto filio Magistro
Rostando Subdiacono, and Capellano nostro salutem. Volumus and praesentium
auctoritate mandamus, quatenus vos vel alter vestrum, redemtiones virorum cruce
signatorum qui per deputatos ad hoc praesentium facultatem, and legata
indistincte, nec non and obventiones ex quacumque causa prodeuntes, subsidio
terrae Sanctae in Regno Angliae and aliis terris carrissimi in Christo filii
Nostri illustris Regis Angliae, per vos vel per alios integre colligere,
ipsaque in tutis locis deponere, ac eisdem postmodum Regi ut votum crucis
exequi valeat efficacius integre assignare curetis; contradictores per censuram
Ecclesiasticam, appellatione postposita, compescendo, non obstante, si personis
aliquibus a sede Apostolica sit indultum, quod interdici, suspendi, vel
excommunicari non possint per literas Apostolicas, plenam and expressam aut de
verbo ad verbum non indulto hujusmodi mentionem, and constitutione de duabus
dietis in concilio generali. Data Neapoli 29th of April
tertio Kalendarum Maii, Pontificatus nostri anno primo. Ibidem.


Rus^and could not be at leisure to execute the Popes Commands himself in all
places (and the Archbishop was beyond Sea) Therefore he committed the
Execution of them to Alexander Canon of Hereford, and William de Ros Rector of
the Church of Dodelesebury, or to either of them in the Cities and Dioceses of
Worcester, Hereford, and Coventry.

^ m. f. 350.
ALexander Episcopus servus, etc. Venerabili fratri Archiepiscopo and dilecto
filio magistro Rostando capellano nostro salutem. Volumus and praesentium
auctoritate mandamus, and quatenus vos vel alter vestrum omnem pecuniam in
Regno Angliae, and aliis terris carissimi filii nostri illustris Regis Angliae,
ex quacumque causa terrae sanctae deputatam, etiamsi ad hoc deputata fuerit
priusquam idem Rex signum Crucis sumeret, ad quorumcumque manus devenerit,
detentores exhibendam eam vobis ammonitione praemissa per censuram
Ecclesiasticam appellatione postposita compellendo, integre recipere ac eidem
Regi pro executione negotii Regni Siciliae assignare curetis; contravictores
autem, si qui fuerint and rebels, censura simili compescatis, non obstante si
personis aliquibus, a sede Apostolica sit indultum quod interdici, etc. Data
Neapoli, Idibus ^ay 15.
Maii, Pontificatus nostri anno primo, cum igitur executioni praefati mandati
ad praesens intendere non possumus, dilectis nostris Magistro Alexandro and
Willielmo de Ros, etc. ut supra. Districte praecipientes, etc. in cujus rei
testimonium, etc.

^em f. 352.
VIris venerabilibus and discretis, Archidiaconis Coventrensi, Cestrensi, and
eorum Officialibus, ac Decanis Archidiaconatus constitutis, Willielmus de Ros
gerens vices Magistri Rostandi domini Papae Subdiaconi, and Capellani,
Executoris Negotii Crucis, Salutem. Auctoritate dicti Magistri Rostandi cujus
Mandata officiali venerabilis patris Episcopi Coventrensis and Lichfeldensis
mittimus inspicienda, and vobis sub sigillo suo publ^cando, vobis and singulis
vestrum mandamus, in virtute obedientiae qua sedi Romanae tenemini, and sub
poena excommunicationis secundum quod in mandati ejusdem continetur, firmiter
injungimus, quatenus singuli sua jurisdictione justas aestimationes omnium
Ecclesiarum and Capellarum exemtarum, and non exemtarum, and omnium proventuum
Ecclesiasticorum, quocumque nomine censeantur, secundum quod ad firmam poni
solebant, vel poni possint communibus annis, nullo deducto praeter expensas
necessarias circa fructus colligendos factas, receptis super hoc sacramentis
quatuor fide dignorum, de quolibet Decanatu, nobis sub sigillis vestris, and
dictorum quatuor juratorum, scriptas secundum ordinem distinct nomina and
loca, and justum valorem singularum possessionum praesentetis die Jovis proxima
post Epiphaniam Domini in majori Ecclesia L^chfeldensi de Archidiaconatu
Cestriae, die veneris sequente de Archidiaconatu Coventrensi and Staffordensi,
Die Sabbati sequente de Archidiaconatu Derbeiensi and de Decanatu Lichfeldensi.
De pensionibus vero and redditibus, and decimis seperatis quibuscumque,
Baroniis, Maneriis, and proventibus Ecclesiasticis omnimodis ad Ecclesias vel
Ecclesiasticas personas, Religiosas vel seculares quocumque modo spectantibus,
haec eadem faciatis sub poena praedicta, ita and legitimo valor singularum
possessionum distinct nobis constare poterit, and ne vos de perjurio, quod
absit, redargui possitis. Citetis etiam peremtorie vel citari faciatis, omnes
viros, videlicet de qualibet congregatione duos vel tres, speciale mandatum
habentes ad jurandum in animas omnium de ipso conventu, super fideli, legitima,
and justa aestimatione facta omnium possessionum suarum temporalium, and
Spiritualium, and vos una cum quatuor Juratis a Rectoribus, Vicariis, and a
quibuscumque aliis Ecclesiarum Pralatis, consimile recipiatis sacramentum super
justo valor omnium bonorum Ecclesiasticorum annuatim. Item citetis peremtorie
vel citari faciatis omnes collectores in singulis decanatibus existentes, tam
decimae domino Regi concessae, quam etiam pecuniae in terram sanctam ex
quacumque causa deputatae, negotium crucis quocumque modo contingentis, quod
dilectis die and loco coram nobis cum tota praefata pecunia, vel saltem cum
ipso quam pene^ se habent, et quam interim adquirere poterint, cum rationibus
et munimentis, et aliis quibuscumque quae super hoc habent, ut de ipsorum
consilio provideamus et ordinemus ubi melius et competentius deponi possit
dicta pecunia, et quid de aliis fieri debeat secundum mandata nobis super his
directa. Tantum super his facientes, ut exinde crescatis apud Deum meritis, et
penes ecclesiam Romanam Dominum Regem gratia and apud homines clara fama.
Injungentes taxatoribus Ecclesiarum et Ecclesiasticorum proventuum, quod ita
sibi prospician^ et se gera^t in hac part, ne possint de perjurio seu
falsitate, quod absit, redargui, nec etiam poenam perjurii formidare, et ne
oporteat vos et illos exploratores aliquos nobis Vigilanti studio super his
insidiantes ulterius pertimescere. Item poecuniam terrae sanctae ex quacumque
causa deputatam, etiamsi ad hoc deputata fuerit priusquam domin^s noster
illustris Rex Angliae signum Crucis assumeret, nulli alii quam assignetis, nisi
etiam de speciali mandato Magistri Rostandi supradicti. Et quid super his
feceritis, nobis, ad dictos dies et loca per literas vestras petentes harum
^^riem continentes rescribatis. Formam etiam quam sequi debent Decani et Jurati
de quolibet Decanatu, una cum praesenti mandato vobis transmittimus. Si quid
ultra elici possit quam hic teneatur, quam diligenter et efficaciter
exequantur; Scituri quod dura et diligens super, et praecipue super
taxatoribus, fiet inquisitio, et per tales quorum modum timemus, et qui
potestatem habebunt puniendi perjuros secundum formam Canonum. Valete. Datum
Londoniis anno Domini 1255.

SAnctissimo in Christo patri, Claus. 40 H. 3. M. 13. Dors. John de Diva or Dya
was a Friar Minor and came by the Popes order to Reform England. Par. f. 928.
n. 50.
etc. nuper per religiosum virum fratem Iohannem de Oya, poenitentiarlum et
Capellanum vestrum sanctitati Cap^taned transmittendo, cum pecunia et militia
competenti. Caeterum clementiae vestrae adhuc significare studemus, quod super
praemissis vigilantiam et solicitudinem adhibemus. Caeterum Proceres et Majores
Consilii nostri super casu qui post gratiam nobis factam de Regno Siciliae
contigit, per Mat. Paris tells how this Marquis betrayed the Popes Army when
Manfred totally d feated it at Nocera, f. 906.10, 20, 30, 40.
proditionem Marchionis de Herebroke, mirabiliter, stupefacti ^ix negotium
audent assumere in hoc statu, praesertim cum inter caeteras conditiones, in
privilegio v^stro contentas illa contineatur express: quod non eamus mittamus
donec vobis et Ecclesiae Romanae de 135 millibus, D. marcarum et xli. Marcarum
plene fuerit satisfactum, unde cum occasion negotii supradicti Mercatoribus
Senensibus et Florentinis in nonnullis pecuniarum summis quas Venerabilis Pater
O Sanctae Mariae inviolatae Diac. Card. Apostolicae sedis Legatus, de manu
Herefordensis Episcopi, Procuratoris, et Nuncii nostri recepit, simus sub
poenis gravissimis quas incessanter solvi facimus juxta vestri tenorem mandati,
super ordinatione Capitanei destinandi nondum potuimus complere tractatum cujus
consummatio non modicum desiderat pecuniae interventum, nec enim credimus quod
hodie Princeps aliquis regnat in terris, qui ita subito tantam pecuniam possit
habere ad manum: dicunt ergo illi apud quos laboramus ut vadent, frustra illuc
ibimus, in vanum istud negotium assumemus quousque praenominata summa plene
fuerit persoluta. Ecce quod huic negotio celeriter succurrere cupientes juxta
verum beneplacitum and mandatum, hinc vero praetactum periculum formidantes,
cujusdam perplexitatis laqueis inter grandes et graves angustias constituti:
veruntamen ad Apostolicae clementiae benevolentiam considerationis oculum
retorquentes, magis Elegimus vestrae pietatis providentiae nos and nostra
exponere liberaliter and libenter, quam in tanto periculo negotium deserere
indefensum, sperantes vos nolle beneficiis vestris nos decipi, sed jubari: hinc
est clementissime Pater, quod licet inspecto statu negotii per aliquorum
injuriam et nequitiam, sine culpa nostra non modicum deformatae conditiones sub
quibus Regnum Siciliae, est nato nostro concessum, non solum difficiles sed
fore impossibiles ab aliquibus censeantur, volentes tamen in sinceritate
cordis, and favoris promptitudine accingi ad obsequium Jesu Christi, de sedis
Apostolicae benignitate confisi, quae non consuevit irritum facere, quod semel
ratum esse decreverit; juxta formam ordinationis vestrae, negotium, et omnia
quae ipsum contingunt, complevimus per venerabilem Patrem Bononiensem
Episcopum, quem ad hoc specialiter destinastis, pribilegia nostra, et filiorum
nostrorum sub sigillo nostro et Bulla aurea Capitaneum destinandum cum militia
competenti jugiter insistendo: Vnde Sanctitati vestrae humiliter supplicamus,
quatenus attendatis quam multipliciter sumus gravati, nisi pietatis vestrae
dectra nos sublevare dignetur. Nam sicut scitis, occasion istius (...)

VEnerabili patri R. Sancti Angeli Diacono Cardinali, Claus. 40. H. 3. M 13.
Dors.
etc. Sinceritatis vestrae promptitudo quam clara probant operum testimonia in
consilium and auxilium confidenter habere speramus. Paternitati vestrae tenore
praesentium volumus fieri manifestum. Quod super negotio Regni Siciliae nuper
in adventu venerabilis Patris Bononiensis Episcopi, ad nos propter hoc
destinati, cum Proceribus and Majoribus totius Regni nostri tractatum habuimus
diligentem. Qui conditiones sub quibus ipsum Regnum Edmund filio nostro and
suis haeredibus est concessum, gravissimas reputabant, illas potissime per quas
infra festum Sancti M^chaelis proximo venturum ire teneremur, vel mittere
Capitaneum cum militia competenti, and 135 millia Marcarum; and unam, propter
damna and interesse nihilominus solvere infra eundem terminum, Subpaena
anullationis totius negotii, novis insuper remanentibus, excommunicatis, and
^oto Regno nostro supposito Ecclesiastico interdicto, has utique conditiones
and poenam durissimas judicabant, eum praeter dictam summam, sicut Nuncli
nostri referent, ad aliam summam non modicam teneamur, quis enim princeps infra
tam breve temporis spacium cum pecunia, quam eundo vel mittendo noster
desiderat apparatus, posset ita repent habere ad manum tam immensas pecuniae
quantitates: Formidantes igitur pericula quae incumbant nobis dissuadebant
omnino, ut nequaquam subjiceremus tanto discrimini statum nostrum. Nos vero
sperantes in illo qui est in se sperantium fortitudo, dictum negotium per
procuratores and nuncios inceptum, and quantum in se fuerat consummatum,
confisi, quod seeds Apostolica nullum opprimit, sed potius oppressos relevare
intendit, ad plenum comple^imus sicut per privilegia nostra, and filiorum
nostrorum quae (...) fidelem executorem officii sibi injuncti Canonice moniti,
decimam proventnum suorum, sine qua quod intendimus perficere non valemus,
hactenus reddere recusarunt; sed nunc speramus, quod obedient vestris in hac
part mandatis, sicut eidem Magistro Rustando firmiter promiserunt: hinc est
igitur, quod inter hujusmodi angustias constituti, ad vestrae circumspectionis
prudentiam recurrimus confidenter, rogantes vestram mansuetudinem ut si ita
cito Capitaneum non mittimus sicut necessitas exposcit negotii, nos excusatos
habentes, apud Dominum Papam and fratres super hoc excusare velitis. Scientes
quod quilibet in hoc statu timet hoc negotium assumere illa potissima ratione
quia inter caeteras conditiones illa habetur express, quod non eamus, nec
mittamus aliquem donec de totali summa praedicta Domino Papae and Ecclesiae
plene fuerit satisfactum; nec de isto impedimento Dominus Papa cum nobis nuper
mandavit, ut statim deberemus mittere, fecit aliquam mentionem; nec tamen
propter hoc omittimus quin super mittendo, solicit laboremus, and vos de quo
plene confidimus dignemini laborare, ut illa conditio quae quasi inclinationem
negotii continere videtur in melius ad hoc igitur laborantes fideliter nobis
per latorem praesentium quem super hoc and quibusdam aliis ad vos specialiter
duximus destinandam celeriter rescribatis vestrae beneplacitum voluntatis.
Scituri quod promotio filiorum nostrorum est vestrorum exaltatio amicorum.
Test, etc.

Eodem modo scribitur Venerabili Patri J. Dei gratia Titulo sancti Laurentii in
Lucina Presbytero Cardinali.

Eodem modo Venerabili Patri Domino Hugoni Titulo Sanctae Sabinae presbytero
Cardinali.

Eodem modo Domino Willielmo Sancti Eustachii Diacono Cardinali.

Eodem modo Magistro Jordano Domini Papae Notario.

Eodem modo scribitur Venerabili Patri Ottobono Sancti Andreae Diacono
Cardinali.

^us. 40. H. 3. 13. Dors.
REx Willielmo Bonquer, salutem, de circumspectionis vestrae prudentia Regem
Alemaniae Eligatur qui Ecclesiae Romanae devotus and nobis dilectus existat,
and maxim cum Gallici, sicut nostis in praejudicium nostri ad hoc aspirent,
qui si, quod absit, assequantur quod optant, negotium Regni Siciliae, quod ex
cord prosequimur, ut tenemur, gravem possit incurrere laesionem, unde huic
periculo obviare volentes, Domino Papae duximus supplicandum, quod unum de
tribus Cardinalibus scilicet Dominum J. Titulo Sancti Laurentii in Lucina
Presbyterum Cardinal. vel Dominum Hugonem Titulo Sanctae Sabinae Praesbyterum
Cardinal. aut Dominum Ottobenum Sancti Andreae Diacon. Cardinalem in Aleman.
destinare dignetur ut per illius providentiam quem mittet, istud negotium
feliciter ordinetur. Ad haec vestra sciat discretio, quod cum teneamur
Ecclesiae Romanae infra festum Sancti Michaelis proximo venturum solvere 135
millia Marcarum, quingentas and unam, and nihilominus illuc ire infra eundem
terminum, vel mittere Capitaneum cum Militia Competenti juxta tanti negotii
qualitatem, and propter casum qui de novo accidit legato in Regno Apul. and
propter etiam captionem Com. Sabaud. infra tam brevem Papae supplicamus
humiliter and devote quatenus dilectum nostrum Magistrum Iordanum Notarium
suum, super prorogandis hujusmodi terminis ad nos mittat, and super hoc cum
summa solicitudine laboretis, exponentes Domino Papae and fratribus qualiter
infra festum beati Johannis Baptistae proximo venturum occasion istius negotii
Octoginta millia Marcarum fere solventur si quadraginta millia Marcarum, and
unam mercatoribus Sen Item MCC Sociis pillati pro quibus omnibus est decima
obligata. Item fere 30 millia qui habent Monasteria obligata, praeter damna and
expensas quae been ascendunt ad quinque millia Marcarum and ultra Propter quod
eis probabiliter suadere potestis, ut pro residuo satis possunt and debent
terminos prorogare, maxim cum interim nihilominus totis viribus studeamus, ut
dicto negotio tam in pecunia quam militia celeriter succurramus, vel tractetis
cum Domino Papa ut super decima nobis concessa Mercatores mutuent pecuniam, cum
qua possit memoratum negotium sustentari; nam isto Anno, per Dei gratiam and
industriam Rustandi erit ab obligationibus Mercatorum Senen. penitus liberata.

REx omnibus etc. Pat. 42. H. 3. M. 10.
Cum pro negotiis nostris arduis nos and regnum nostrum proceres and fideles
regni nostri ad nos London in Note, Quindena Paschae was and is Sunday
fortnight after Easter Day, which was the Sunday before Hock-Tuesday, so that
this Parliament did not meet after, but two days before that Tuesday.
Quindena Paschae proxima praeterita faceremus convocari and cum de
prosecutione negotii Siciliae diligenter cum eisdem tractaremus ac ipsi nobis
responderint quod si statum regni nostri per consilium fidelium nostrorum
ratificandum duxerimus and Dominus Papa conditiones circa factum Siciliae
appositas melioraverit, per quod negotium illud prosequi possemus cum effectu,
ipsi diligentiam fideliter apponent erga communitatem regni nostri quod nobis
commune auxilium Natalis Domini proximum futurum per consilium Proborum and
fidelium hominum nostrorum regni Angliae, una cum consilio Legati Domini Papae
si in Angliam medio tempore venerit statum regni nostri ordinabimus and
ordinationem illam firmiter observabimus and ad hoc fideliter observandum
supponimus nos cohercioni Domini Papae ut nos ad hoc per censuram
Ecclesiasticam prout expedire viderit valeat artare, protestamur etiam quod
Edwardus filius noster primogenitus prestito sacramento corporali Edwardo filio
nostro primogenito Galfrido de Lezignan Willielmo de Valentia fratribus nostris
Petro de Sabaudia Iohanne de Plessetis Comite Warwick Iohanne Maunsell
Thesaurario Eborum Henrico de Wingham Decano Sancti Martini London Petro de
Rival Guidone de Rocheford Roberto Walerand presentibus and multis aliis
Comitibus Baronibus regni nostri Dat. apud Westmonasterium secundo die Maii.

(...) H. 3.
REx omnibus etc. Noveritis nos concessisse Proceribus and Magnatibus juramento
in animam meam per Roberium Walerand prestito quod per duodecim fideles de
consilio nostro jam electos and per alios duodecim homines fideles nostros
electos ex part Procerum ipsorum qui apud Oxonium a festo Pentecostes proximo
futuro in unum mensem convenient ordinetur rectificetur and reformetur status
regni nostri secundum quod melius viderint expedire ad honorem dei and ad fidem
nostram ac regni nostri utilitatem and si forte aliqui Electorum ex part
nostra absentes fuerint liceat illis qui presents fuerint alios substituere
loco absentium and similiter fiat ex part praedictorum Procerum fidelium
nostrorum and quicquid per 24 utrimque Electos and super hoc juratos vel
majorem partem eorum circa hoc ordinatum fuerit inviolabiliter observabimus.
Volentes and firmiter ex nunc precipientes quod ab omnibus inviolabiliter
observatur eorum ordinatio and securitatem omnimodam quam ipsi vel major pars
eorum ad hujus rei observationem providerint vel providerit eis sine qualibet
contradictione plene faciemus and fieri procurabimus protestamur etiam quod
Edwardus filius noster primogenitus prestito sacramento corporali per literas
suas concessit quod omnia Comites and Barons memorati quod expletis negotiis
superius tactis bona fide laborabunt ad hoc quod auxilium nobis commune
prestetur a communitate regni nostri. In cujus etc. hiis Testibus ut supra Dat.
2o die Maii.

^2. H. 3.
^ermes.
HEnr. par le grace Deu Roi Dengleterre etc. a touz ceus etc. Sachiez qe pur le
profit de nostre Reaume e a la request de nos hauz homes e Prodes homes e du
comun de nostre Reaume etreyames qe vinte quatre de nos homes eusent poer qe qe
tout ce qil ordeneraient del estat de nostre Reaume fust ferm e estable e ce
feimes jurrer en nostre alme e donames de ce nos lettres overtes Et ce meesmes
jurra Eadward nostre fieuz einzne vinte quatre-desus nomez eslurent quatre as
que^s quatre il donerent l'our poer de eslire nostre consiel des prodes homes
de nostre terre Le quel conseil nos a vuns promis and promettuns craire e al
adrescement e al amendment de toutes les besoignes qe a partiegnent a nos e a
nostre Reaume and nos voluns qe lavant dit conseil on la greinure party
puissent eslire prode home ou prodeshomes qe saient en lieu de celi o^ude ceus
qui defrauderunt Et nos averun ferm e estable quanque lavant dit conseil ou la
greinure party fera E commandum feaus e nos homes ausi laient e saient tenuz
ferment garder touz les establissemenz les queus ils ferant al honur de deu e
nostre foi e au profit de nostre Reaume Et en tesmoignance de ceste chose nos
avuns fet mettre nostre seel a ceste present lettre Ceste chose fu fete a
Lundr' landemaigne prochein apres la gaul haut lan de nostre corounement
quarante secund. Ceste lettre est double e liuere al Cunte le Marescal par le
Roi e sun Conseil.

La form del Serment kele Gardens des Chasteus D'engleterre Suzescriz denient
fair.
IL juirunt sur Saints Ewangilles ke eus les Chasteus le Rei leaument and Pat.
42. H. 3. M. 6.
cest a saueir par prudes humes de la terre esleuz a sun conseil ou par la
greinure party; and ceste furme desus escrite durra drekes a duzze auns and
dilenkes en auaunt par cest establissem^nt and ce Serment ne seent constreint
ke franchement nel puissent render al Rey ou a ses eirs Rei D'engleterre.

Rex omnibus ad quos praesentes Litere pervenerint Salutem Sciatis quod de
Consilio Magnatum nostrorum commissimus Dilecto and fideli nostro Ricardo de
Gray castrum nostrum Dovorr. cum pertinentiis custodiendum in forma per Nos and
ipsos Magnates provisa. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Oxonium vicesimo secundo
die Junii.

Et Mandatum est Nicholao de Mel, quod dictum castrum cum pertinentiis instauro
and armaturis ejusdem castri per Chirographum inter ipsum Nicholaum, and
Richardum praedictum. In cujus etc. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Castrum Northampton cum pertinentiis Radulpho Basset
de Sabecot custodiendum in forma praedicta. In cujus etc. Test ut supra.

Hugoni de Manby quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum Instauro, etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Stephano Lungespeye Castrum de Corf. cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Elye de Rabayne quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum Instauro
etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo comm^ssum est Gilberto de Gaunt Castrum de Scardeburgh cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Roberto de Nevil quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Willielmo Bardolph Castrum de Nottingham

Et Mandatum est Willielmo de Gray quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Iohanni de Gray Castrum de Hereford cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Henrico de Penebrig quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Henrico de Tracy Castrum Exon cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Roberto de Paytenin quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Roberto Waler and Castrum Sarrum cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Johanni de Vernun quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissa est Hugoni le Bigod Justitiario Turris London, cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Imberto Pugeis quod Turrim illam ei liberet una cum Instauro
etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Ricardo de la Rokele Castrum de Hadlegh cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Ebuloni de Geneur quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Willielmo de Clar. Castrum Winton cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta.

Et Mandatum est Jacobo le Sauuage quod Castrum illud ei liberet una
Willielmus, and die dominica post festum Beati Petri ad vincula, venit ex part
ejusdem Willielmi Johannes Extraneus junior coram Rege, and Consilio suo, and
reddidit ei Castrum praedictum Winton; Et Rex eo die de Consilio suo commisit
idem Castrum cum pertinentiis Simoni de Montefforti Comiti Leycestriae
custodiendum in forma praedicta. Et Mandatum est Thome de Don Constabulario
ejusdem Castri, quod cidem Comiti Castrum illud liberet custodiendum sicut
praedictum est.

Eodem modo commissi sunt Ricardo de Gray Quinque Portus Regis cum pertinentiis
custodiendi, in forma per Regem and Magnates praedictos provisa. In cujus etc.
Test Rege apud Oxon. vicesimo tertio die Junii.

Et Mandatum est Nicholao de Molis quod praedictos quinque Portus ei liberet
custodiendos sicut praedictum est.

Et Mandatum est Baronibus and probis Hominibus Regis de Sandvico, Hetha,
Dovor, Hasting, and Romenal quod eidem Ricardo tanquam Custodi Quinque Portuum
praedictorum in omnibus quae ad custodiam illam pertinent, intendentes sint and
Respondentes sicut praedictum est. In cujus etc. Test ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Roger^ de Saundford Castrum de Porcestre cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma per Regem et Magnates provisa. Test ut
supra. Et mandatum est Willielmo de Trublevill quod Castrum illud ei liberet
una cum Instauro, etc. ut supra.

Eodem modo commissum est Perro de Montefforti Castrum de Bruges cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma per Regem and Magnates provisa.

Eodem modo commissum est Iohanni filio Bernardi Castrum Oxon. cum pertinentiis
custodiendum in forma praedicta. In cujus. Test ut supra.

Et Mandatum est Magistro Waltero Giffard quod Castrum illud ei liberet una cum
Instauro etc. ut supra. Test Rege apud Oxon. vicesimo

Eodem modo commissum est Stephano Lungespeye Castrum de Shyreburne cum
pertinentiis custodiendum in forma praedicta. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud
Winton undecimo die Julii.

Et Mandatum est Waltero de Bruges quod Castrum illud cum pertinentiis ei
liberet una cum Instauro, etc. ut supra. Test ut supra.

REx Richardo Comiti Gloucestrie et Hertfordiae Salutem Cum nuper Pat. 42. H.
3. M. 6.
concesserimus Proceribus and Magnatibus regni nostri juramento firmato in
animam nostram quod per duodecim fideles de consilio de quibus vos estis unus
et per alios duodecim fideles nostros electos ex part ipsorum Procerum fiat
reformatio et ordinatio status regni nostri ad honorem dei Fides nostra, was
the Faith and All g^ance which the Barons swear to the King when they did
Homage, or at other times.
fidem nostram and ut^l^ratem regni nostri secundum quod melius viderint
expedire Et nih^lominus promiserimus praedictis Proceribus and Magnatibus
nostris quod reformationem et ordinationem per praedictos 24 faciendum ratam
hibebimus and firmam and ipsam faciemus teneri et inviolabiliter observari
vobis mandamus in side et dilectione quibus nobis tenemini et sub debito
juramenti prestiti quatinus ad reformationem et ordinationem praedictas
procedere non omittatis indilate cum aliis sicut volueritis nostram et
nostrorum heredum indignationem vitare in perpetuum. Nos enim vobis ^irmiter
promittimus pro nobis et heredibus nostris quod si ad hujusmodi reformationem
et ordinationem sicut superius est expressum processeritis in nullo nos vel
heredes nostri contra vos vel vestros futuris temporibus movebimur, sed nos et
praedicti heredes nostri in hac part vos conservabimus indempnes. In cujus
etc. Test Rege apud Oxonium vicesimo secundo die Junii.

Consimiles literas habet F. London. Episcopus.

Consimiles literas habet Henricus de Wengham D^canus Sancti Martini London.

(...) 42. II.
REx Johanni Mansel Thesaurario Eborum Salutem cum etc. ut supra usque quod
reformationem and ordinationem per praedictos 24 Comite de Warwico Rogero le
Bygod Comite Norfolciae and Marescallo nostro Angliae and Hugone le Bygod
electi sitis a praedictis 24 ad nominandum illos qui de nostro esse debent
consilio and postmodum ad illos in quos vos quatuor tres vestrum
concordaveritis aliis cohordinatoribus nostris presentandos ut vos omnes simul
vel major pars vestrum ipsos ad nostrum consilium deputandos confirmetis vel
infirmetis. Vobis precipimus firmiter injungentes in fide qua nobis tenemini
quatinus una cum dictis Comitibus and Hugone praedicto ad praedictum consilium
nostrum sicut superius est expressum nominandum prout Dominus vobis
inspiraverit indilate procedatis sicut nostram and Heredum nostrorum vitare
volueritis indignationem nos enim vobis firmiter promittimus pro nobis and
heredibus ordinationem and reformationem and consilii nostri nomitationem sicut
superius est expressum processeritis in nullo nos, etc. ut supra test ut supra.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Rogero le Bigod Comiti Norfolciae and Marescallo
Angliae.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Hugoni le Bigod Iustitiario Angliae.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Iohanni de Plessetis Comiti Warwici.

(...) ^2. H. 3.
REx omnibus etc. Salutem Sciatis nos suscepisse in salvum and securum nostrum
dilectos fratres Ademarum Winton. Guidonem de Lezignan. Galfridum de Lezinan.
and Willielmum de Valencinis cum tota familia sua in eundo ad parts
transmarinas citra diem dominicam proximam post festum (...) 7.
translationis Sancti Thome Martiris proximo futurum. Et ad ipsos conducendos
usque Dovorr' and sic versus Wytsand' quantum potestas nostra se extendit,
assignavimus dilectos and fideles nostros Humfridum de Bohun Comitem Herefordie
and Essexie Iohannem Comitem Warewici and Willielmum de Fortibus Comitem
Albermarlie and quosdam alios nobiles de regno nostro. Mandamus quod dictis
fratribus nostris aut familiaribus suis in divertendo per vos in conductu
praedictorum nobilium nullum interim inferatis aut ab aliis inferri permittatis
dampnum molestiam impedimentum aut gravamen. Et si quid eis forifactum fuerit
id eis sine dilatione emendari faciatis. In cujus etc. Duratur. usque ad diem
dominicam proximam post festum Translationis praedicte. Test Rege apud Winton.
quinto die Julii.

Literae Missae a Comunitate Angliae Domino Papae A. D. 1258.
SAnctissimo Patri in Christo Alexandro, divina providentia Sanctae Vniversalis
Ecclesiae summo Pontifici communitas Angliae, Additamen. Mat. Paris f. 215. n.
40. And in his History f. 978. n. 10. there only mentioned.
cum vestra Sanctitas, tam per literas quam per venerabilem virum magistrum
Arlotum Subdiaconum and Notarium, nos multipliciter monuit, and induxit; ut
Dominum nostrum illustrem Regem Angliae, in prosecutione regni Siciliae
juvaremus; sibi commune Subsidium super hoc faciendum. Licet ante id^m absque
nostri concilio and assensu, immo nobis reclamantibus and invitis, hoc negotium
assumpsisset, quod sibi impossible propter difficultatem conditionum, and alia
quae statum nostrum respiciebant, reverentiam tamen Apostolicae sedis and
vestrae, Domino Regi duximus respondendum, quod si de Procerum and Magnatum
suorum consilio, regnum suum in multis multipliciter deformatum, veilet in
melius reformare, and vos conditiones in privilegio vestro contentas, vires
ipsius Regis excedentes, quodammodo mitigare velletis; quod juxta mitigationem
and reformationem hujusmodi, optatus eventus negotii speraretur, ipsi
praeberemus and operam and effectum: ut Rex negot um quod sine nobis
assumpserat, per vestrum auxilium possit Caeterum praefatus Dominus Rex
attendens impossible pondus negotii memorati, and statum regni sui imbecillem;
See here in this Appendix N. 188.189.
voluit and express concessit ut de Procerum and Magnatum consilio (sine
quibus regnum suum gubernare non poterat, nec negotium prosequi memoratum)
dicta reformatio proveniret. Hoc videlicet modo, ut See there.
duodecim ex part ipsius electi, and alii totidem ex part Communitatis
nominati; disponerent, statuerent, ac etiam ordinarent super melioratione and
reformatione regni Angliae and ipsum regnum contingentibus melius (expediens)
videretur. Promittentes tam ipse quam Dominus Edwardus primogenitus suus,
affirmantes propriis juramentis, quod per praedictos viginti quatuor vel
majorem partem eorum ordinatum existeret, inviolabiliter observaret. Facturi
and procuraturi securit atem omnimodam, quam ipsi viginti quatuor vel major
pars eorum super hoc sieri providerent; verum cum inter duodecim ex part
Domini Regis Electos, Elegus Wintoniensis and fratres sui nominati fuissent,
idem Electus quasi salutis suae immemor, and invigilans perturbationi regem
ipsum sollicitavit, and toto posse induxit; eidem immensam promittens pecuniam
(etiam usque ad Exinanitionem substantiae and facultatum Wintoniensis
Ecclesiae) ut spreto juramento proprio, a promissionibus hujusmodi resilir^t;
in regni sui grave dispendium and irreparabile detrimentum. Cumque per hanc
viam desiderium intentionis suae explere non posset, ad alia se convertens,
Dominum Edwardum and quosdam alios de nobilioribus totius regni animavit, and
quantum in se fuit stimulavit; ad subversionem quasi in necem ejusdem and
lapsum irreparabilem conjurasset. Vt de illo posset vere dici, Est vi^ qui
tu^bavit terram, and concussit regnum. Nam cum ad reformationem qui nunc
nominati fuerant, studio vigilanti intenderent, praedictus Electus and fratres
sui, nunc per subterfugia, nunc per alias cavillationes varias, Eventum
reformationis hujusmodi retardabant: Sed mentita est sibi iniquitas. Quia
quanto plus conabantur negotium impedire, tanto ferventius and constant us alii
zelo reipublic^e inflammati, instanti vigilia and propensiori cautela, illud
promovere studebant. Attendentes, quod firma cohaerentia fidelis esse non
potuit, ubi non est tenax unio voluntatum; and ipsorum conglutinatio anim^rum.
Sed quid ultra; praedictorum electi and fratrum suorum, tam graves erant
excessus and grandes, quod clamor pauperum ad coelum ascenderet contra ipsos.
Ipsorum enim Ministri and Officiales, qui potius Praedo^es and Satellites
dicebantur, undique depraedabantur pauperes, insidiabantur simplicibus,
movebant impios, opprimebant innocents, exultabant in rebus pessimis;
laetabantur cum male fecissent, Et in tantum ipsorum effraenata rabies
invaluerat quod nec sub ipsis minores vivere poterant, nec cum ipsis conversare
pares; nec super ipsos impares majores. Nos igitur attendentes quod res^ublica
corpus quoddam est, quod divini muneris beneficio vegetatur, and summae
aequitatis nutu agitur, and regitur quodam moderamine rationis; nec expedit
quod in uno corpore dissonantia sit membrorum: dictos electum and fratres,
turbatores quietis and tranquillitatis regni totius, post multas instantias and
frequentes monitiones vocavimus, and vocari per Regem fecimus: ut judicio
sisterent suis querelantibus responsuri, juxta consuetudinem Regni and Leges.
Ita quod duo ex ipsis quos mallent, exirent, reliquis duobus remanentibus: qui
pro se and aliis responderent; ac si sibi magis expediens crederent, regnum
omnes exirent. Qui suis culpis exigentibus subire judicium formidantes
maluerunt exire quam judicii rigorem expectare. Sed nec adhuc nobis and regno
nostro, super Electus (cui totius turbationis materiam merito imputamus)
rediret in Angliam. Cujus praesentia subita posset evertere, quicquid nostra
sollicitudo multis vigiliis and infinitis laboribus studuit ordinare. Vnde
fixum est propositum omnium, and accensum desiderium singulorum; quod ille
auctor schismatis, homo dissensionis and Scandali, inter nos deinceps
nullatenus conversetur. Quia igitur praefatus Electus and fratres, Regem and
Dominum Edwardum infatuaverant, adeo quod non solum, insolentiae remanebant
penitus impunite, ipsos in suis facinoribus nutriens contra conquerentem
mirabiliter turbabatur: Et cui judex debebat esse propitius, ad eorum
suggestionem fiebat adversarius, and nonnunquam terribilis inimicus: ita quod
fulciti Regis potentia and favore, quos volebant opprimebant: Communitates and
libertates Ecclesiarum damnabiliter violando, homines incarcerando, Clericos in
praejudicium Coronae (cui soli competit hujusmodi incarceratio) Laxatis habenis
nequitiae debacchando per Regnum, pro suae libito voluntatis. Vnde si (quod
absit) electus rediret in Angliam, pejora prioribus probabiliter formidamus.
Sanctitati vestrae igitur omni affectione qua possumus, supplicamus, quatenus
sicut unitatem and pacem Regni Angliae (quod semper vobis extitit devotum and
existit) diligitis, saepe dictum electum ab administratione Wintoniensis
Ecclesiae quae ex munificentia Sedis Apostolicae sibi concessa fuerat amoveatis
omnino. devotissimi, aliud facere compellamur, scituri pro certo, quost etiamsi
Dominus Rex and Regni Majores hoc vellent, Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in
Angliam jam nullatenus sustineret, potius enim saevirent in ipsum, quam quod
ipsius intolerabilem saevitiam expectarent. Quin immo, omnibus regnicolis
onerosum, and toti regno, dispendiosum Existeret; Si proventus de quo regnum
infestare disposuit, perciperet. Quod and omnes qui qualitatem n gotii noverant
asseverant. Et certe (clementissime Pater and Domine) hoc satis credimus sine
scandalo faciendum; cum non sit in Episcopum consecratus: Sed tantum sibi
administratio est concessa. Super hiis autem and aliis, quae nuncit nostri
latores R. de Clare Gloverniae and Herefordiae. S. de Monteforti Legriae, E.
Bygod Marescallus Angliae, H. de Bohun Hertfordiae and Essex^ae, W. Albemarle,
I. de Placeto, Warevict Comites, H. Bygod, Iusticiarius Angliae, P. de
Sabaudia, I. filius Galfridi, Iacobus de Audeley and Petrus de Monteforti. Vice
totius Communitatis, praesentibus literis sigilla apposuimus, in testimonium
praedictorum. Conservet inc^lumitatem vestram altissimus per tempora longiora.

Magnates Additamen. Mat. Paris. f. 217. n. 30, 40.
igitur formidantes ne Electus Wintoniensis Romam prop^raret, and infinita
promissa Papae and Cardinalibus pecunia, suam pro curaret consecrationem; ut
sic efficacior esset ad nocendum: Elegerunt sibi quatuor Milites peritos, and
facundos, and fide dignos; qui hanc praenotatam Epistolam Romam deferrent; and
Papae and toti Curiae Denariis Electi memorati, These 1000 Marks were plundered
from him by Richard Gray Constable of Dover Castle. Hist. f. 973. n. 40.
notwithstanding the Kings Inhibition and safe Conduct, here in the foreg^ing
Number. 194.
mill Marcas absconditis pro eorum nunciorum labor, ad sua viatica, and alia
sibi necessaria exhibenda. Transalpinaturi cum venissent Parisiis, infirmatus
unus eorum videlicet, Petrus de Branche Obiit. Vnde non mediocriter doluerunt:
Nihilominus alii tres tantum iter inceptum continuaverunt. Et cum Romam
pervenissent, causam sui itineris Domino Papae before monstraverunt addentes
quaedam alia enormia, and maxima facinora, electus and fratres ejus. Videli et
de homicidiis, rapinis, and variis injuriis, and oppressionibus, nec voluit Rex
impetus eorum refraenare. Nec praetermiserunt injuriam magnam quam fecerant
Magistro Eustachio de Len, Officiali Domino Cantuariensis Episcopi: Vbi vel
omnes dicti fratres, vel major pars dicitur interfuisse. Pro qua offensa
maxima, excommunicati fuerunt omnes, qui tanto facinori interfuerunt per totam
provinciam Cantuariensem and Oxoniis coram Universitate. Recitatumque est quod
unus fratrum (scilicet Galfridus) Coquum Regis assavit and excogitatis
tormentis, usque ad mortem Cruciavit. Ad quorum auditum, omnes audientes auras
suas continentes, obstupuerunt.

Pat. 42. H. 3. M. 3.
Cum nuper in Parliamento nostro Oxon. Communiter fuit ordinatum, quod omnes
Excessus, transgressiones, J^hanni de Strada, and Willielmo de Kaynnes de
Comitatu tuo quod prestito prius hujusmodi Sacramento sicut praedictum est per
Sacramentum proborum and Legaliura hominum de eodum Comitatu per quos rei
veritas melius Sciri poterit diligenter inquirant per dictum Comitatum, de
omnimodis excessibus, transgressi^nibus, and injuriis in eodem Comitatu a
temporibus retroactis, per quascunque personas, vel quibuscunque illatis, and
hoc tam de Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, quam aliis Ballivis nostris and ceteris
quibus cunque personis, Sicut in literis nostris dictis, fidelibus nostris inde
directis, pl^nius continetur. Ita quod inquisitionem inde factam sub sigillis
suis and sigillis Milites, and alios praedicti Comitatus, per quos inquisitio
praedicta melius fieri possit ad dies and loca quae tibi assignaverint, and hoc
sicut corpus tuum and omnia tua diligis non omittas. Ne si pro defectu tui vel
inquisitorum dicta inquisitio retardetur,

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium quarto die Augusti. Per Consilium Regis.
In forma praedictarum literarum patentium Scribitur quatuor Militibus
singulorum Comitatuum subscriptis. Et in forma praedictarum literarum Clausarum
scribitur singulis Vicecomitibus Angliae. Per Consilium Regis.

Northumb.
Roberto de Kamon, Johanni filio Simonis, Johanni de Plessetis, Thome de
Fenwyke.
Essex.
Ricardo Filloyl, Henrico de Bello-Campo, Ricardo de Tany, Ricardo de Herlawe.
Southt.
Johanni Lancelonee. Johanni de Bottelee, Thome de Gymiges, Radulpho de
Haryngot.
Wigorn.
Simoni de Ribbefort, Willielmo Corbet, Ignardo de Elmerugg, Ricardo de
Ambresleye.
Leyc.
Auketino de Martinal, Willielmo de Keleby, Petro le Poter, Eustachio de
Folevil.
Hunt.
Willielmo le Moyne, Waltero de Wassingley, Simoni de Copmanford, Baldewino de
Drayton.
Oxon.
Stephano de Cheyndut, Henrico filio Roberti, Alano filio Reynardi, Petro
Foliott.
Not.
Hugoni de Capella, Simoni de Hedon, Simoni de Aslaketon, Willielmo de Morteyn.
Derb.
Willielmo de Muntgomery, Ricardo de Vernun, Ricardo de Roffa, Willielmo filio
H^
Ebor.
Willielmo de Barton, Willielmo de Buketon, Maugero le Vavasur, Thome de
Bellaye, Nicholao de Bolteby, Simoni de Lilling.
Ranc.
Simoni de Kryollis Fulconi Peyforer, Johanni de Sandwico, Galfrido de Scoland.
Wilts.
Henrico Husee, Godefrido de Skerdemor, Willielmo Husee de Kyntenton, Ricardo
de Seles.
Glout.
Nicholao Burdun, Ade de Aston, Johanni le Brun, Henrico Mustel.
Staff.
Roberto de Halcton, Ade de Brymton, Willielmo Bagod, Pagano de... asteneys.
Bucks.
Rogero de Aumary, Simoni de Sancto Lycio, Willielmo Russel, Arnaldo Biset.
Hertf.
Roberto de Ross, Alexandro de Amundevil. Galfrido de Childwyk, Henrico de
Holewel.
Somerset.
Johanni de Aure, Willielmo Everard, Willielmo de Stanton, Philoppo de Cantelu.
Westmorl.
Johanni de Morevil, Roberto de Askeby, Patritio filio Thome, Roberto de
Stirkeland.
Salop.
Thome de Roshale, Waltero de Hopton, Ricardo Tyrell, Roberto de Lacy. Quia non
fuerunt idonei sicut P. de

Northt.
Eustachio de Watford, Thome filio Roberti, Galfrido de Mara, Johanni de Wedon.
Cantebr.
Philippo de Insula, Willielmo de Bokesworth, Johanni de Coteham, Thome de
Laveham.
Berks.
Petro Achard, Sampsoni Folyot, Willielmo de Berceneles, Waltero de Riparia.
Cumbr.
Alano de Orreton, Willielmo de Vallibus, Roberto de Castelkairok, Ricardo de
Neuton.
Suff.
Osberto de Caylly, Willielmo filio Reyneri, Willielmo de Heccham, Roberto de
Valeynes.
Cornub.
Reginaldo de Boterell, Gervasio de Hormcot, Radulpho de Arundel, Alano
Blochyon.
Norff.
Fulconi de Kerdeston, Haimoni Hautein, Willielmo de Stalham, Hamoni Burd.
Surr.
David de Jarpenvil, Johanni de Wauton, Johanni Hansard, Johanni de Abernun.
Heref.
Waltero de Eyneford, Gilberto Talebot, Rogero de Chaundos, Johanni de
Lynguire.
War.
Nicholao filio Radulphi, Ade de Napton, Roberto de Grendon, Willielmo de
Waure.
Bedf.
Simoni de Pateshull, Roberto de Wauton, Willielmo de Subyri, Galfrido de
Burdeleys.
Linc.
Willielmo de Iseney, Gilberto de Sancto Laudo, Willielmo de Engelby, Egidio de
Gousle.
Sussex.
Radulpho de Raleye, Willielmo de Wistaneston, Radulpho Sanzaver, Willielmo de
Paggeham.
Rotel.
Jacobo de Paunton, Bernardo de Brus, Radulpho de Normanvil, Stephano de Nevil.
Middelsex.
Johanni de Valle Torta, Ricardo de Oxeya, Rogero de la Dune, Waltero de
Camera.
Devon.
Galfrido Dynant, Willielmo de Bykele, Rogero de Cokynton, Willielmo de
Curtiniaco Postea constitit Regi per Vicecomitem Devoniae quod G. Dinant and
Roger. Kokinton languidi fuerunt, per quod Mandatum fuit eidem Vicecomiti quod
loco eorum alios Duos substitueret ad faciendum, etc.

Lanc.
Willielmo de Forneys, Willielmo le Botiller, Galfrido de Chetham, Alano de
Wyndel.




QVia Robertus Cambhou and socii sui de Comitatu Northumbrie de praecepto Regis
venerunt ad Regem apud Westmonasterium a Die Sancti Claus. 42. H. 3. M. 1. Dors.
pro quibusdam negotiis Comunitatem totius Comitatus praedicti tangentibus.
Mandatum est Vicecomiti Northumbrie, Quod praefatis quatuor Militibus de
Comunitate

Note, The Clerks were not always very exact in their entry of Records, for
this is entered upon the Close Roll. 42 Hen. 3. when as the Writ is Dated
November. 4. in the 43. of H. 3. for he began his Reign October. 19. 1216.

The like Writs were issued to the four Knights of several other Counties by
Name, as appears upon the same Roll and Membrane.

l. 41. M. 1.
REx Vicecomiti Huntington Salutem. Quia Dilecti and fideles nostri Willi Imus
le Moyne Walterus de Wassi^gley, Simo de eundo redeundo, Et in pr^efato
Parliamento pro dictis negotiis Morando sec^runt de Comunirare Dicti Comitatus
habere facias Test, etc.

Consimile Breve habent 4 Milites de Comitatu Notingham.

Consimile Breve habent 4 Milites de Comitatu Derby.

Consimile Breve habent 4 Milites de Comitatu Buks.

Consimile Breve habent 4 Milites de Comitatu Devon.

Consimile Breve habent 4 Milites de Comitatu Dorset.

This Writ was the pattern and first Foundation of the Writs for the Wages of
Knights of Shires, Citizens and Burgesses afterward chosen, and sent to
Parliament.

3. H. 3. N, 18.
REx Vener^bilibus patribus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis ad quos praesentes literae
pervenerint, in quorum diocesibus Venerabilis Pater Henricus obsequia quae
praefatus Electus diu nobis impendit, and ipsius fidelitatem, and industriam,
nec non and aff^ctionem quam erga nos gerit diligentius attendentes, Nos de
Consilio Magnatum de Concilio nostro concedimus eidem Electo; Quod Decanatus,
dignitates and omnia alia beneficia patronatu nostro obtinuit, retinere possit
libere, plene and pacifice, quam diu ipsa per indulgentiam Domini Papae valeat
retinere; videlicet, Decana^um Sancti Martini London, cum collationibus
Ecclesiarum and Praebendarum ad eundem Decanatum pertinentium; Decanatum de
Tottenhal Coventriae and Litchfield Dioces. cum collationibus Praebendarum ad
eundem Decanatum Spectantium, Ecclesiam de Auvilliers ejusdem Diocesis quae est
Praebenda de Bruges, Ecclesiam Worefeld ejusdem Diocesis, Ecclesias de Kirkeym,
and de Preston in Augmodernesse Eborum Dioces. quae sunt in Archidiaconatu
Richmondiae, Ecclesiam de Grymmesby Lincolniensis Diocesis. Promittimus etiam
eidem bona fide, and concedimus, quod dictos Decanatus Sancti Martini London
and de Tottenhal seu etiam praedicta Beneficia Ecclesiastica, quae ex patronatu
nostro ante suam promotionem optinuit nulli conferri faciemus, nec ad dicta
Beneficia aliquem praesentabimus, quam diu ipsa per indulgentiam Domini Papae
valeat retinere. etc.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium d^cimo octavo die Julii. Ex. Per Hugonem le
Bigod Justiciarium Angliae.

REx Nicholao de Hanlou, Custodi Episcopatus Wintoniensis, Pat. 43. H. 3. M. 4.
intus.
salutem. Sciatis quod pro laudabili servitio, quod dilectus Clericus noster
Henricus de Wengham, London Electus d^u nobis impendit, instauro Episcopatus
Wintoniensis quinque millia Ovium, ducentas Vaccas, and december Tauros, de dono
nostro ad instaurandum Episcopatum suum London. Quod quidem instaurum eidem
London Electo versus quemcunque Episcopum vel Electum Winton seu alium
warrantizabimus, and ipsum inde indempnem conservabimus. Hoc tamen excepto,
quod si contingat Adomarum Fratrem nostrum possessionem Episcopatus Winton
recuperare and optinere, Nos necessario eidem Fratri nostro instaurum
praedictum restituere tunc volumus, quod idem Electus London de tanto instauro,
vel de rationabili pretio ejusdem nobis respondeat. Et ideo vobis mandamus,
Electo, vel ejus certo Atturnato praedicta quinque Millia Ovium, ducentas
Vaccas, and december Tauros liberari faciatis. Et nos liberationem illam vobis in
compoto vestro allocari faci^mus. In cujus, etc.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium Quarto die Augusti. Per ipsum Regem, and
Consilium suum.
Duplicata est ista litera, Ex.



REx Vicecomiti Cantebrigiae Salutem. Cl. 45. H. 3. M. 15. Dors.
Quia quidam aemuli nostri imposuerunt nobis, ut accepimus, quod proponimus
exigere a Magnatibus Communitate Regni nostri tallagia inconsueta and
consuetudines indebitas ad suscirandum discordiam inter nos and ipsos, tibi
Magnates and Communitatem regni nostri sincere diligimus, and ipsos in pace and
tranquillitate quanta hactenus fecimus and majori, si poterimus, tractare; and
nulla hujusmodi tallagia aut consuetudines indebitas ab eis exigere vel
extorquere proponimus. Et si quos hujusmodi mendacia referentes inveneris,
ipsos aresta^i facias quousque suos auctores invenerint and aliud a nobis
receperis in mandatis. Test meipso apud Turrim London, decimo quarto die
Martii.

Eodem modo mandatum est Singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.

REx omnibus fidelibus suis de Comitatu Eborum Saultem. Pat. 45. H. 3. M. 4. in
Schedula.
Rex Talibus Salutem. Gravi nostrae mentis amaritudine turbamur nec immerito
quod, sicut acc^pimus quidam nostrae tranquillitatis and perturbatores invidi
and iniquitatis ministri Devotionem fidelium nostrorum, and populi nostri
diminuere, and eorum corda a nostra dilectione and fidelitate per suggestiones
dolosas and omnino falsas avertere nituntur praesertim cum annis jam
quadraginta and quinque quibus volente Domino and ejus cooperante gratia Regni
nostri gubernacula tenuimus studium nostrum and labores circa universorum ac
singulorum tranquillitatem and pacem toto desiderio totisque viribus per nos
and nostros ponere non destiterimus in tantum benedictus Deus quod ubi
retroactis temporibus rebellium corda optinere non potuit potestas humana quin
per guerras and hostilitates regnum istud frequenti devastatione ad exterminium
quodammodo deduci videretur, jam diebus nostris benedictus altissimus cujus
gratia sumus id quod sumus per quem regnant Reges universi qui voluntates novit
omnium and corda scrutatur singulorum nec in Spiritualibus per interdictum
generale aut Sacramentorum quin singuli suis possessionibus and rebus gaudere
potuerint pacifice ac universi jus suum consequi seu retinere secundum quod
Justitia unicuique quod suum est reddere debuit and consuevit, Nec alicui jus
suum per vim vel voluntatem nostram abstulimus benedictus Deus aut aliquem
exulare fecimus injuste unde satis advertere potestis and debetis quod super
hujusmodi qui super vos servitutes and oppressiones dudum pro sua voluntate
imposuerunt Cum ad vestram relevationem and defensionem parati simus and
prompti semper esse vel^mus. Imponunt autem nobis dicti persecutores and aemuli
nostri, ut audivimus, quod jura vestra and aliorum de regno nostro nec non and
consuetudines vestras justas debitas and antiquas subvertere and vos indebitis
exactionibus gravare velimus, and insuper quod indigenas regni nostri deprimere
intendimus and alienigenas induce^e Vnde nec verbis nec pravis suggestionibus
hiis vel aliis aures inclinetis qui potius operibus and factis quae jam elucent
evidenter fidem adhibere and ea magis credere and ten^re debetis. Nec grave sit
vobis aut suspectum quod Castra nostra and Comitatus quibusdam commisimus qui
majoris sunt potentiae quam illi quibus antea fuerant commissa quia Scire vos
volumus quod ad vestram utilitatem hoc magis quam ad lucra nostra fieri
providimus, ut Scil cet ipsi vobis contra Servitutes and oppressiones Magnates
super vos induxerant justitiam, and defensionem exhiberent, ubi non poterant
minores; and hoc satis intelligere potestis ex eo quod ad stipendia nostra
propria and onera graviora oporteat retinere majores quam haberi possent and
consueverint minores, set ob hoc specialiter tales possumus in Ballivis
praedictis qui de nostris essent, and de quibus securi essemus quod per ipsos
defendi possetis and relevari, eo quod h^i quid dictas Ballivas prius tenuerant
p^r eos positi erant qui vobis dicta gravamina and injurias intulerunt and per
tolerantiam Ballivorum pradictorum veluti per Sacramentum quorundam ex vobis
plene didicimus plura ad nos pertinentia occupaverunt and vos ipsos ad sectas
indebitas and alias Servitutes intolerabiles compulerunt, ad nostram
exheredationem and vestram; sicut scitis manifestum. Scire insuper vos volumus
quod si dicti Vicecomites quibus Comitatus nostros jam commisimus vos gravare
aut injurias vobis infer praesumpserint eos quam cito nobis de hoc
constiterit, absque ulteriori dilatione, prorsus ab officiis praedictis amoveri
and vobis de injuriis and gravaminibus ab ipsis illatis plene Satisfieri
faciemus. Vestram igitur Devotionem requirimus and fidelitatem ne hujusmodi
Suggestoribus aut animorum vestrorum turbatoribus fidem adhibeatis, aut de
nostra benevolentia diffidatis aut aliquid contra justas and antiquas leges seu
consuetudines vestras nos facturos credatis, set in Devotione and fidelitate
nobis debita firmiter parati sumus and semper erimus vobis omnibus tam
Majoribus quam Minoribus contra omnes tam Majores quam Minores justitiam ad
plenum exhibere, and vobis omnibus leges vestras omnes jura, and consuetudines
debitas bonas and consuetas in omnibus and per omnia before observare, and nos
ipsos tam in persona nostra quam aliis omnibus quae nostra sunt pro vobis
exponere and pro vestri juris conservatione ac defensione. Et ut super hiis
securi sitis has literas nostras de propria voluntate nostra and libera
potestate fieri f^cimus patentes. Test

Consimiles Literae diriguntur per singulos Comitatus-Angliae.

Norfolciae and Suffolciae salutem. Cl. 45. H. 3. M. 6. dorso.
Cum ex part Episcopi Wigorniensis, Comitum Leicestriae and Gloucestriae and
quorundam aliorum Procerum Regni nostri vocati sint tres Milites Comitatibus
nostris quod sint coram ipsis apud Sanctu^ Albanum in instanti festo Sancti
Matthaei Apostoli secum tractaturi super communibus negotiis regni nostri and
nos and praedicti Pr^ceres nostri in eundem diem apud Windesore conveniremus ad
tractandum de pace illis Militibus de Balliva tua qui vocati sunt coram eis ad
diem praedictum firmiter injungas ex part nostra, ut omni occasion postposita
ad nos die praedicto venient apud Windesor and eis etiam districte inhibeas ne
dicto die alibi quam ad nos accedant, set eos modis omnibus venire facias coram
nobis ad diem praedictum nob^scum super praemissis colloquium habituros ut ipsi
per effectum op^ris videant and intelligant quod nichil attemptare proponimus
nisi quod honori and communi utilitati regni nostri noverimus convenire. Test
Rege apud Windesor undecimo die Septembris.

Eodem modo mandatum est Singulis Vicecomitibus citra Trentam.

DOmino Papae Rex Angliae, Salutem, cum reverentia and honor. Cl. 46. H. 3. M.
17. Dorso.
urgentibus negotiis nos and statum nostrum contingentibus opus habeamus
Apostolicae Sedis gratiam implorare, nos de consueta dictae Sedis benignitate
confisi, ad ejus Suffragia recurrimus confidenter, rogantes, and precibus
postulantes intentis, quatinus cum tempore soelicis recordationis Domini
Alexander 4 th.
Alexandri praedecessoris vestri, Apostolicae Sedis literas obtinuerimus super
reformatione status nostri, and absolutione juramenti pro observandis quibusdam
ordinationibus, colligationibus and Statutis praestiti, quae in diminutionem
and depressionem potestatis regiae cedunt manifest. Cumque impetrationes
praedictae ante obitum praedecessoris vestri memorati, ad usum minime pervenire
potuissent, easdem tam in hiis, quae personam nostram specialiter contingunt,
quam in illis quae dissolutionem colligationum praedictarum and Juramenti
praedicti in aliis recipient, jubeatis de vestrae benignitatis gratia
innovari. in vestro conspectu pro obtinenda confirmatione Statutorum hujusmodi
ac aliorum jam ut dicitur exhibitas, quae in depressionem libertatis Regiae seu
etiam juris nostri cedunt laesionem, ad exauditionem si placet nequaquam
admittentes. Rogamus insuper ut dilectos nobis Magistrum Johannem de
Hemingford, and Magistrum Rogerum Luvell Clericos ac procuratores nostros, una
cum negotiis nostris dum nostrum sigillum in potestate foret aliena, quamplures
alii constituti fuerint procuratores nomine nostro, quod non approbamus,
ipsorum potestatem omnino revocamus, presertin cum ipsi ea magis quae nobis
obesse possent quam prodesse agere moliantur.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium primo die Januarii. Ex.

^. 46. H. 3. ^. 11. dorso.
REx Vicecomiti Eboracensi Salutem. Cum nuper apud Oxon^um per voluntatem
Baronum nostrorum ordinationibus and consiliis supposuerimus nos, and statum
negotiorum nostrorum and Regni nostri, sub quivusdam conditionibus and
promissionibus nobis factis, quas minime nobis observarunt. Ac ipsi postmodum
plura in praejudicium nostrum and deoressionem potestat^s Regiae, nec non in
dampnum Subditorum nostrorum and suorum attemptare praesumpserint, and
colligationes inter se fecerint quae in praejudicium and derogationem jur^s
Regii, and turbar^onem pacis nostrae cedere perpendimus manifest, propter quod
ex forma nostrae concessionis, eis ulterius ad observationem praemissorum non
tenemur. Et cum Alexander Papa quartus, nos ab observatione dictae concessionis
nostrae postmodum absolverit, and Dominus Papa Vrbanus, qui nunc est dicti
praedecessoris sui adhaerens vestigiis, nos a juramentis, and alias dictas
ordinationes seu statuta contingentibus absolutos denunciari, and dictas
colligationes, ordinationes, seu statuta dissolvi mandaverit, quod per
venerabilem patrem Norwicensem Episcopum, and discretum virum Johannem Mansel,
Thesaurarium Eborum, dicti mandati executores, interveniente, insimul
authoritate Cantuariensis Archiepiscopi ipsorum collegae before est
denunciatum. Nos potestate nostra R^gia libere uti, and singulis tam majoribus
quam minoribus prout ad nos pertinet justitiae plenitudinem exhibere volentes;
Tibi praecipimus, quod haec in pleno Comitatu tuo, and per totam Ballivam tuam
public facias denunciari, and scire facias universitati Comitatus praedicti,
quod cum omni securitate and confidentia justitiam obtinendi, jus suum tam
contra Majores quam contra Minores, coram nobis and alibi, authoritate nostra
prosequantur, quia nulli eorum dress volumus in sua justitia, quin tam contra
majores quam minores plenam justitiam valiant obtinere; Libertates insuper tam
in Magna Charta nostra, quam in Charta nostra de Foresta contentas in omnibus
plene volumus observari. Et si forte contingat, quod aliqui in Balliba tua
dictis colligationibus adhaereant, aut contra jus Regalitatis nostrae, aut
etiam contra executionem tui Officii aliquid attemptare, aut contra nos and
honorem nostrum praedicare, aut populo suadere praesumpserint, eos arrestari
facias, and custodiri, donec aliud a nobis super hoc habueris in mandatis.
Test Rege apud Westmonasterium secundo die Maii.

Eodem modo scribitur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.

Ex.

REx omnibus, etc. Salutem, Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 18. N. 75.
Noveritis quod nos compromisimus Ludovicum Regem Franciae illustrem super
provisionibus, and obligationibus omnibus Oxon: and super omnibus
contentionibus and discordiis quas habemus and habuimus usque ad Festum omnium
Sanctorum nuper praeteritum versus Barons regni nostri and ipsi adversus nos
occasion provisionum, Ordinationum, Statutorum, vel obligationum Oxon:
praedictorum promittentes and per dilectos and fideles nostros Willielmum Biset
Militem and Robertum Fulcon Clericum de mandato nostro speciali in animam
tactis Sacrosanctis Evangeliis quod quicquid idem Rex Franciae super omnibus
praedictis seu eorum aliquibus de alto and basso ordinaverit vel statuerit nos
observabimus bona fide. Ita tamen quod idem Dominus Rex Franciae dicat super
hiis dictum suum citra Pentecosten proximo venturam. In cujus rei testimonium
praesentibus litteris sigillum nostrum fecimus apponi. Nos autem Edwardus
praedicti Domini Regis Angliae primogenitus, Henricus filius Ricardi Regis
Alemanniae Rogerus le Bigod Comes Norfolciae and Mareschallus Angliae, Johannes
de Warenna, Willielmus de Valencinis Humfridus de Bohun Comes Herefordiae and
Essexiae Hugo le Bigod, Philippus Basset, Johannes filius Alani, Robertus de
Brus, Rogerus de Mortuo Mari Johannes de Verdun, Willielmus de Breus, Johannes
de Baillol, Henricus de Percy, Reginaldus filius Petri, Jacobus de Aldithele,
Alanus de Zuche, Rogerus de Clifford, Hamo Extraneus, Johannes de Gray,
Philippus Marmion, Robertus de Nevill, Johannes de Vallibus, Johannes de
Muscegros, Warinus praedicto compromisso per praedictum Dominum nostrum Regem
facto^ sicut praedictum est; consentimus and juravimus tactis sacrosanctis
evangeliis quod quicquid praedictus Dominus Rex Franciae super omnibus
praedictis vel eorum aliquibus de alto and basso ordinaverit vel statuerit,
observabimus bona side. Ita tamen quod Idem Dominus Rex Franciae, dicat dictum
suum super hiis citra Pentecostem proximo faturam sicut superius est expressum.
In cujus rei testimonium praesenti scripto sigillo praedicti Domini nostri
Regis Angliae signato, sigilla nostra fecimus apponi. Datum apud Windesoram
dominica proxima post festum Sanctae Luciae Virginis anno Domini Millesimo
ducentesimo sexagesimo tertio. Confectioni istius instrumenti interfuerunt
Iohanne^ de Chishul, Willielmus de Wilton frater J. de Derlington Magister Ern.
Cancellarius Regis Alemanniae, Rogerus de Messenden, and plures alii.

Pat. 40. H. 3. M. 16. N. 57.
REx omnibus, etc. Salutem, Sciatis quod Venerabili Patri R. Coventriae plenam
and liberam dedimus potestatem ad tractandum apud Brackele in presentia
Johannis de Valencinis Militis and Nuncii consanguinei nostri Regis Franciae
illustris pro nobis magnatibus and proceribus nostris ex part una, and Simonem
de Monteforti Comitem Leycestriae, Barons and alios sibi adhaerentes ex altera
super securitate tranquillitate and firmitate pacis regni nostri ^atum habituri
and gratum quicquid praefati Episcopus and Archidiaconus in praemissis de
consilio and assensu dicti Johannis providendum duxerint and faciendum. In
cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Oxonium vicesimo die Martii.

Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 13. N. 49.
REx Drogoni de Barentino Constabulario Castri sui Windesor Salutem. Cum per
formam pacis inter nos and Barons nostros Simonem de Monte Forti filium
Comitis Leycestriae Petrum de Monte Forti, Petrum and Robertum filios nuper
captos apud Northampton deliberare debeamus, vobis mandamus quatinus praedictos
Simonem and Petrum de Monte Forti Seniorem quos ex commissione Edward
primogeniti nostri Carissimi in custodia tenetis sine dilatione deliberetis,
Ita quod salvo and secure possint ire quo voluerint. Et hoc nullatenus
omittatis. Test Rege apud Bellum, decimo septimo die Maii.

Eodem modo Mandatum est Willielmo la Zuth quod deliberari Petrum de Monte
Forti juniorem in forma praedicta.

Eodem modo mandatum est Iacobo de Aldithelege quod deliberari faciat Robertum
de Monte Forti in forma praedicta.

REx omnibus tenentibus de Castellaria Douorr. Salutem. Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 13.
n. 47.
Sciatis quod commisimus dilecto Nepoti nostro Henrico de Monte-Forti fil^o
Comitis Leycestriae castrum nostrum Dov^rr. Quinque portus nostros Camerariam
nostram de Sandwico cum pertinent is custod enda quamdiu nobis placuerit. Ita
quod de exitibus inde provenientibus Scaccarium nostrum. Et ideo vobis mandamus
quod eidem Henrico in omnibus quae ad custodiam illam pertinent intendentes
sitis and respondentes sicut praedictum est.

In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Maii. Per
Regem and R. Aquil^n.

Et mandatum est Ricardo de Gray quod praedicta Castrum and portus una cum
armis victualibus balistis and alia garnestura ejusdem Castri liberet praefato
Henrico de quibus omnibus chirographum inter ipsos fieri faciat. Ita quod idem
Henricus nobis de eisdem valeat respondere. In cujus, etc. Test ut supra.

Et mandatum est Baronibus and Ballivis Portus de Sandwico quod eidem Henrico
tanquam Constabulario Castri praedicti, Custodi Quinque Portuum and Camerario
Sandwici in omnibus quae ad custodiam illam pertinent intendentes sint and
respondentes sicut praedictum est. Test ut supra.

Baronibus and Ballivis Portuum Doborr. Sandwit. H^h. Romeney, Wincheles, and
la Rye and Hastings quod ei sint intendentes and respondentes sicut praedictum
est.

REx Adae de novo Mercato, Salutem. Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 12. Dors.
Cum jam sedata turbatione nos and Barons nostros divina cooperante gratia
ordinata sit and firmata ac ad pacem illam per totum Consilio and Assensu
Baronum nostrorum provisum sit, quod in singulis Comitatibus nostris per
Angliam ad tuitionem and Securitatem partium illarum custodes pacis nostrae
constituantur donec per nos and Barons nostros de statu regni nostri aliter
fuerit ordinatum, cumque nos de vestra fidelitate simul and industria fiduciam
gerentes vos de consilio dictorum Baronum nostrorum Custodem nostrum
assignaverimus in Comitatu Lincolniae quamdiu nobis placuerit. Vobis mandamus
in fide qua nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quatinus custodiae pacis
nostrae ibidem and hiis quae ad conservationem pacis nostrae pertinent
diligenter intendatis ut praedictum est, firmiter and public per totum
Comitatum praedictum inhibentes ex part nostra ne quis sub poena
exhaeredationis and periculo vitae and membrorum super aliquem currat, nec
aliquem depraedetur, nec homicidia vel incendia roberias toltas seu alia
hujusmodi perpetret Et si quos hujusmodi malefactores and pacis nostrae
perturbatores vel etiam ut praedictum est arma portantes inveneritis eos sine
dilatione arestari and salvo custodiri faciatis donec aliud inde praeceperimus.
Et ad hoc si necesse fuerit totum posse dicti Comitatus cum toto posse
Comitatuum adjacentium vobiscum assumatis custodibus ipsorum Comitatuum ad
consimilia cum opus fuerit viriliter auxiliantes. Et si forte ipsos
malefactores evadere contingat quod nulla ratione vellemus, tunc de nominibus
eorum nobis constare faciatis, ut quod justum fuerit de ipsis fieri faciamus.
Et quia in instanti Parliamento nostro de negotiis nostris and regni nostri cum
Praelatis, Magnatibus and aliis fidelibus nostris tractare necessario nos
oportebit. Vobis mandamus quatinus quatuor de legalioribus and discretioribus
Militibus dicti Comitatus per assensum ^jusdem Comitatus ad hoc electos ad nos
pro toto Comitatu illo mittatis. Ita quod sint ad nos London in Octabis
instantis festi Sanctae Trinitatis ad ultimum nobiscum tractaturi de negotiis
praedictis vos quarto die Junii.

Eodem modo constituitur Ricardus de Tany Custos pacis in Comitatibus Essexiae
and Hertfordiae.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Eyvill in Comitatu Eboracensi.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Burgo Senior in Comitatu Norfolciae.

Eodem modo constituitur Willielmus de Bovill in Comitatu Suffolciae.

Eodem modo constituitur Aegidius de Argentenn. in Comitatu Cantebrigiae.

Eodem modo constituitur Henricus Engaine in Comitatu Hunt.

Eodem modo constituitur Willielmus le Mareschall in Comitatu Northt.

Eodem modo constituitur Godefridus de Escudemor in Comitatu Wilts.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Sancto Walerico in Comitatu Southt.

Eodem modo constituitur Willielmus de Tracy in Comitatu Gloucestriae.

Eodem modo constituitur Radulphus Basset de S^perton in Comitatu Leycestriae.

Eodem modo constituitur Thomas de Estleye in Comitatu War.

Eodem modo constituitur Robertus de Stradeley in Comitatu Nolt.

Eodem modo constituitur Ricardus de Vernon in Comitatu Derb.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes filius Johannis in Comitatu Bucking hamiae.

Eodem modo constituitur Walterus de Beuchamp de Chalvester in Comitatu Bedford.

Eodem modo constituitur Gilbertus de Ellesfeud in Comitatu Oxon.

Eodem modo constituitur Robertus filius Nigelli in Comitatu Berks.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Plessetis in Comitatu Northumb.

Eodem modo constituitur Thomas de Muleton in Comitatu Cumbr.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Marevill in Comitatu Westmerl.

He was also Governor of Dover Castle and Warden of the Cinque Ports.
Item, Scribitur Henrico de Monte-Forti Vicecomiti Kantiae quod intendat
custodiae pacis, etc. quae commissa fuit Petro de Trehampton deferenda eidem
Henrico.

Eodem modo constituitur Johannes de Aur. in Comitatu Dors.

Eodem modo constituitur Brianus de Gowiz in Comitatu Summers.

Eodem modo constituitur Oliverus de Dynant in Comitatu Devon.

Eodem modo constituitur Radulphus Bass^t de Drayton in Comitatu Salop and
Staff.

REx Iacobo de Aldithele, Salutem. Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 13. Dorso.
Cum jam sedata turbatione nuper habita in regno nostro, pax inter nos and
Barons nostros divina cooperante gratia ordinata sit and firmata and ad pacem
illam per totum consilio and Assensu Baronum nostrorum sit provisum, ne quis
sub amissione terrarum and tenementorum and quod omnes qui nuper in conflictu
habito apud Northampton ut prisones capti fuerunt ad nos ducantur London in
quorumcumque custodia consistant; cumque quaedam ardua negotia nos and regnum
nostrum tangentia vobis necessario communicanda habeamus quae sine praesentia
vestra nequeunt expediri, Vobis de consilio Baronum nostrorum mandamus in fide
and homagio quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes quatenus Robertum de
Sutton, Robertum filium Walteri, Philippum de Covel and Iohannem de Wiavil and
omnes alios hujusmodi prisones, quos in Custodia vestra tam de nostra quam de
cujuscumque alterius commissione tenetis, ut de prisonibus praedictis and de
prisonibus nuper captis apud Jews si expedire viderimus prisonem pro prisone
vel prisones ipsos per sufficientem manucaptionem deliberari faciamus. Et
quarto die Junii.

Item, Mandatum est Rogero de Mortuo Mari ut supra ut adducat secum Reginaldum
de Watervill Iohannem le Despenser Adam le Despenser Rogerum de la Hide
Humfridum de Bassingburn, and omnes alios hujusmodi prisones, etc. and tradita
fuit litera Simoni de Watervil.

Eodem modo mandatum est Rogero de Clifford quod adducat secum Willielmum de
Eyvill, Henricum de Penbregg, Baldwinum de Drayton.

REx Iohanni de Gray Constabulario castri sui Nottinghamiae, Pat. 48. H. 3. M.
13. Dorso.
Salutem. Cum jam sedata turbatione nuper habita in regno nostro, pax inter nos
and Barons nostros divina cooperante gratia ordinata sit and firmata ac ad
pacem illam per totum regnum inviolabiliter observandam de consilio and assensu
Baronum nostrorum provisum sit, ne quis sub amissione terrarum and tenementorum
suorum and etiam sub periculo vi^ae and membrorum arma de caetero portet in
regno nostro sine licentia and speciali and quod omnes qui nuper in confl^ctu
habito apud Northampton and prisones capti fuerunt ibidem ad nos ducantur
London in quorumcumque custodia consistant; cumque quaedam ardua negotia nos
and regnum nostrum tangent a vobis necessario communicanda habea mus quae sine
praesentia vestra nequeunt expediri. Vobis de consilio Baronum nostrorum
mandamus in fide and homagio quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injungentes
quatinus per totam ballivam vestram public proclamari faciatis in forma
praedicta ne quis arma de caetero portet in partibus illis, and quod statim
visis literis istis omnibus aliis praetermissis ad nos in propria persona
vestra sine equis and armis veniatis nobiscum super dictis negotiis tractaturi,
Adducentes vobiscum Baldewinum Wake, Anchor de Freschenvill, Hugonem Gobion,
Rogerum de Mortein, Ricardum de Hemington and omnes alios hujusmodi prisones
quos in Custodia vestra tam de nostra quam ex cujuscumque alterius commissione
tenetis, ut de prisonibus praedictis et de prisonibus nuper captis apud Jews
si expedire viderimus prisonem pro prisone vel prisones ipsos per sufficientem
manucaptionem deliberari faciamus. Et hoc sicut nos et honorem nostrum nec non
et tranquillitatem et pacem regni nostri diligitis nullatenus omittatis. Test
Rege apud Sanctum Paulum London quarto die Junii.

Litera praedicta commissa fuit Philippo de Driby per Comitem Leycestriae,
Comitem Gloucestriae, etc.

Item, Mandatum est Drogoni de Barentin Constabulario Castri Windesor quod
Willielmum de Furnival et omnes alios prisones, etc. secum adducat, etc. ut
supra, et litera ista tradita fuit Charles Valletto Regis deferenda praefato
Constabulario.

Item, Mandatum est Iohanni de Vallibus Constabulario castri Norwici vel
ejusdem Subconstabulario ejusdem castri quod veniat in Ger. de Furnivall,
Willielmum de Eylesford, Radulphum de Bruton, Iohannem Estormy, et omnes alios
hujusmodi prisones, etc. in forma supradicta.

Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 6. Dors.
Haec est forma pacis a Domino Rege and Domino Edwardo filio suo Praelatis and
Proceribus omnibus cum Communicate tota and concorditer approbata videlicet
quod quaedam ordinatio facta in Parliamento Londini habito circa festum
Nativitatis beati Johannis Baptistae proximo praeteritum pro pace Regni
conservanda quousque Pax inter dictum Dominum Regem and Barons apud Jews per
formam cujusdam mise praelocuta compleretur duratura omnibus diebus praedicti
Domini Regis and etiam temporibus Domini Edwardi postquam in Regem fuerit
assumptus usque ad terminum quem ex tunc duxerit moderandum firma maneat
stabilis inconcussa. Dicta autem Ordinatio talis est. Ad reformationem Status
Regni eligantur seu nominentur tres discreti viri and fideles de regno qui
habeant potestatem and auctoritatem a Domino Rege eligendi seu nominandi vice
Domini Regis Consiliarios novem de quibus novem, tres ad minus alternatim seu
vicissim semper in Curia sint praesentes, and Dominus Rex de Consilio eorundem
novem ordinet and disponat de Custodia castrorum and aliis omnibus regni
negotiis. Praeficiat etiam Dominus Rex per Consilium eorundem novem
Iusticiarium, Cancellarium, Thesaurarium and alios officiales majores and
minores in hiis quae spectant ad Regimen Curiae and Regni. Iurabunt autem primi
electores seu nominatores quod secundum conscientiam suam eligent seu
nominabunt Consiliarios quos credent honori Dei and Ecclesiae, Regi and Regno
utiles and fideles. Consiliarii quoque and omnes Officiales majores and minores
in sua creatione jurabunt quod officia sua pro posse suo ad honorem Dei and
Ecclesiae and ad utilitatem Regis and Regni absque munere praeter esculenta and
poculenta quae communiter in mensis praesentari solent fideliter exequentur. Et
si praedicti Consiliarii vel aliqui eorum in administratione sibi commissa male
versati vel versatus fuerit vel fuerint vel sint ex alia causa mutandi vel
mutandus, tunc Dominus Rex per Consilium praedictorum trium nominatorum seu
electorum vel quem amovendos viderit amoveat and loco eorum vel ejus qui amotus
fuerit per eosdem, alios vel alium fidelem and idoneum subroget and substituat.
Si autem officiales majores vel minores in officiis suis male versentur Dominus
Rex per Consilium dictorum n^vem ipsos amoveat and alios seu alium sine
dilatione per consilium praedictorum loco illorum vel ejus substituat. Et si
primi ^res Electores seu nominatores in ^lectione vel nominatione
Consiliari^rum aut alicujus Consiliarii, aut forte Consiliarii in Creatione
officialium negotiis Domini Regis and regni gerendis seu disponendis discordes
fuerint quod a duabus partibus concorditer factum vel ordinatum fuerit firmiter
observetur, dummodo de illis duabus partibus unus sit Praelatus Ecclesiae in
negotiis Ecclesiam contingentibus. Et si contingat duas parts dictorum novem
in aliquo n^gotio non esse concordes, de discordia illa stabitur ordinationi
primorum trium electorum seu nominatorum aut majoris partis eorund^m. Et si
videatur Communitati Praelatorum and Baronum concorditer primorum trium
nominatorum seu Electorum subrogentur vel subrogetur, aut substituatur, Dominus
Rex per Consilium Communitatis Praelatorum and Baronum alium vel alios
substituat. Omnia autem praedicta Dominus Rex faciet per consilium praedictorum
novem in forma subscripta vel ipsi vice and auctoritate Domini Regis, praesente
ordinatione duratura, donec misa apud Lew^s facta est, and postea a partibus
sigillata concorditer fuerit adimpleta vel alia forma provisa, quam
Lincolniensis, and Hugo Eliensis Episcopi, R. Comes Norfolciae, and
Mareschallus Angliae, R. de Veer Comes Oxoniensis, Hum fridus de Bohun,
Willielmus de Monte Canisio, Major London signa sua huic scripto apposuerunt.
Datum in Parliamento London mense Junii Anno Domini MCCLXIV.

REx omnibus, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod dedimus potestatem venerabili Patri
Stephano Cy^estrensi Episcopo, Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 10. n. 37.
and dilectis and fidelibus nostris Simoni de Monte Forti Comiti Leycestriae
and Gilberto de Claro Comiti Gloucestriae and Hertfordiae nominandi nobis novem
de fidelioriobus peritioribus and utilioribus Regni nostri tam Praelatis, quam
aliis de quorum consilio negotia regni nostri secundum leges and consuetudines
ejusdem regni regere volumus, quousque misa per nos and Barons nostros apud
Jews nuper facta vel alia forma si qua melior provideri possit, compleatur. In
cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Sanctum Paulum London vicensimo tertio die Junii.

Et mandatum est in forma praedicta praefatis Episcopo and Comitibus; quod
nominent in forma praedicta. Test ut supra.

Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 4. Dorso.
REx omnibus, etc. Salutem. Noverit universitas vestra quod nos ordinamus and
constituimus venerabiles Patres Henricum London and J. Wintoniae Episcopos, and
nobiles viros Hugonem Dispensatorem Justiciarium Angliae and Petrum de Mo^te
Forti and Magistrum Ricardum de Mepham Archidiaconum Oxonii, procuratores and
nuncios nostros solempnes dantes eis potestatem tractandi in praesentia
magnifici Principis Regis Franciae illustris and Patris G. Sabin Episcopi
Apostolicae sedis Legati vel alterius eorum super reformatione Status regni
Angliae, and quod in hac part provisum fuerit acceptandi and firmandi si
viderint expedire ac omnem securitatem faciendi quam negotii qualitas requirit
and quam nobis seu regno praedicto viderint opportunam. Dantes insuper praefato
Petro potestatem jurandi in animam nostram quod nos, quicquid ipsi in
praemissis nomine nostro duxerint faciendum, ratum habebimus and acceptum.
Datum apud Cantuariam die Sabbati proxima post festum 8 th. Sep^ember.
Nativitatis

Consimiles literae emanarunt sub nomine Comitum and Baronum pro se and
Communitate praedicta quibus sigilla sua apposuerunt. Datum ut supra.

Item forma pacis superius scripta ^onsignata fuit sigillo Regis and tradita
munciis Supradictis.

Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 20. Dors.
REx Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Militibus, liberis hominibus, and omnibus aliis de movemur quod quidam ad pacis
and tranquillitatis regni nostri turbationem volis and aliis fidelibus nostris
multipliciter praedicant and perperam suggerunt nos ad vestram and al orum
fidel^um nostrorum exheredationem and status regni nostri subversionem
alienigenas in r^gnum nostrum introducere velle ut sic corda vestra a
fidelitate nostra subtrahant, and quod propter hoc versus parts Dovorr nuper
gressus nostros direximus, quod nostrae intentionis seu voluntatis nunquam
extitit sicut per tallagia inconsue^a sine assensu and voluntate nostra and
vestra ut accepimus nuper in Comitatibus praedictis facta fuerunt ad
inveniendum necessaria quatuor vel quinque hominibus de qualibet villata contra
alienigenas versus mare profecturis Vniversitati vestrae significamus quod nos
alienigenas non vocavimus nec vocabimus nec eorum auxilio indigemus, eo quod,
benedictus altissimus; omnes fere Proceres and Magnates regni nostri exceptis
paucis vel nullis nobis resistentibus nostrae fidelitati Universitati vestre
mandamus firmiter praecipientes quod hujusmodi assertionibus vel suggestionibus
fidem non adhibeatis nec de praedictis talliagiis indebitis and inconsuetis in
vestri grave dispendium and contra Dominum vestrum ligium factis nichil omnino
persolvatis nec occasion alicujus monitionis vel comminationis sine mandato
nostro speciali Comitatus vestros aliquatenus exeatis, Set Vicecomiti nostro
sicut temporibus retroactis fieri consuevit intendatis. Nos autem parati sumus
and semper erimus juramentum factum Oxon ad honorem Dei, fidem nostram and
commodum regni nostri firmiter observare and vos in juribus and libertatibus
vestris tanquam fideles and probos homines nostros contra quoscunque defendere
and tueri. Test Rege apud Windesoram vicesimo die Decembris anno regni nostri
quadragesimo octavo.

Consimiles literae patentes diriguntur per singulos Comitatus Angliae, etc.

Et mandatum est Vicecomiti Warr' and Leycestriae quod praedictas literas
patentes quas lator praesentium sibi liberabit per praeceptum Regis plenis
Comitatibus suis, hundredis and singulis bonis villis Comitatuum praedictorum
legi, and sirmam pacem Regis proclamari and teneri faciat. Test ut supra,

Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam, etc.

REx Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 9. Dors.
Comitibus, Baronibus, Vicecomitibus, Militibus, liberis hominibus Communitati
Comitatus Lincolniae Salutem. Cum pro certo nobis constiterit, quod
alienigenarum magna multitudo navigio undecunque collecto ad regnum nostrum vi
armata intrandum se praeparent ad nostram and singulorum regni ipsius
confusionem and Vobis mandamus in fide qua nobis tenemini firmiter
praecipientes quatinus vos milites omnes and libere tenentes qui ad hoc
sufficitis cum equis and armis viriliter and potenter vos praeparetis. Ita quod
ad nos sitis London cum toto posse vestro dominica proxima post festum Beati
Petri ad Vincula ad nostram and vestram ac totius regni defensi nem contra
alienigenas hujusmodi nobiscum exinde processuri. It Is vero Vicecomes assumpto
tecum Custode papis Comitatus praedicti praedictis and omnibus aliis qui
servitium nobis debent denuncies and firmiter injungas ex part nostra in fide
and homagio quibus nobis tenentur, and sicut seipsos, terras and tenementa sua
diligunt ut non solum cum servitio in quo nobis tenentur, set quilibet quanto
virilius and potentius poterit veniat vel mittat ad eundem diem cum equis and
armis and peditibus electis quos habere poterit una cum eorum adjutorio huic
periculo efficacius resistere valemus. Nec quisquam per temporis brevitatem
quod in se rationabile tempus non contineat se excuset, quia instans necessitas
tempus non patitur ulterius prorogari, nec per hoc intendimus aut volumus eis
ut hoc alias in consuetudinem trahatur praejudicium generari. Insuper de
qualibet Villata ad eundem diem venire facias octo, sex vel quatuor ad minus
secundum Villae magnitudinem de melioribus and probioribus peditibus cum armis
competentibus, videlicet, lanceis, arcubus, and sagittis, gladiis, balistis and
hachiis been munitis quibus de communi de expensis quadraginta dierum facias
provideri. De Civitatibus vero similiter castris and Burgis, ubi major copia
hominum habetur secundum cujuslibet magnitudinem and facultates homines tum
equites quam pedites prout considerata negotii qualitate duxeris ordinandum
modo praedicto transmittere non omittas. Nec alleget quisquam instans tempus
Messium, aut alicujus alterius rei familiaris occupationem, cum tutius and
melius sit cum securitate personae in bonis aliquantulum dampnificari quam cum
terrae and bonorum perditione totali per impias eorum manus qui sanguinem
nostrum sitiunt Hoc igitur mandatum nostrum per Comitatum tuum facias publicari
and in forma praedicta singulis denunciari, ut sicut nostrum and terrae nostrae
honorem and vitas proprias diligunt, and ficut suam and haeredum suorum
exhaeredationem perpetuam vitare voluerint quanto virilius and potentius
poterunt se praeparare festinent. Ita quod omni occasion postposita ad ultimum
dicta die Dominica videlicet proxima post festum Beati Petri ad Vincula ad
locum veniant contemptores invenerimus vel circa illud negligentes and remissos
ad personas and bona eorum nos graviter capiemus sicut ad ipsos per quos non
stat quo minus nos and regnum nostrum confusioni and perpetuae exhaeredationi
liberemur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Sanctum Paulum London sexto die Julii.

Eodem modo diriguntur literae consimiles Archiepiscopis, etc. In

Pat. 48. H. 3. M. 7.
REx omnibus, etc. Salutem. Cum nuper de Consilio Baronum nostrorum public
prohiberi fecerimus, ne quis sub periculo vel cum equis and armis per Regnum
nostrum incederet absque nostra licentia speciali et jam oporteat dilectum and
fidelem nostrum Simonem de Monte Forti Comitem Leycestriae propter obsides and
prisones quos secum ducit cum equis Nos ei ad hoc faciendum licentiam nostram
duximus concedendam presertim cum ex hoc nulli de regno dampnum debeat vel
periculum imminere. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Sanctum Paulum Lon^on decimo
sexto die Julii.

HEnri par le grace Deu Roys de Engleterre Seignor de Irlaund and Duc de
Aquitain a toz ceus que cest escrit veront ou orront Saluz. Pat. 49. H. 3. M.
91.
Saches qe com Edward nostre fiz and Henr le fiuz le Rois de Alemaigne bataile
de Jews pur la pes de la tere ostages a demorer en la guard Munsir Henri de
Montfort noster Neweu desque la pes avaundite feust bien a fermee and asseuree
J celeui meimes Henr de Montfort par commun acort e assentement des Prelaz and
des hauz homes de nostre tere les avauntdiz Edward and Henr rendi and delivera
a nos don't nos vos fesoms a sauer qe nos le ostages avauntdiz en la form
avaundite avoins receus and le avauntdit Henr de Montfort de la guard
avauntdite aquitoms. En temoyne de co a ceste escrit avoins

OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit Marmaducus
Twenge Salutem in Domino. Cl. 49. H. 3. M. 8. Dorso.
Noveritis me tradidisse and concessisse Dominis Petro de Brus, Adae de
Gesemue, Gilberto de Stuteville, Johanni de Halton, Willielmo de Wyvill, Hugoni
de Ever, Johanni de Burton, Ambrosio de Camera, Johanni de Oketon and Galfrido
Aquilun totum Manerium meum de Lund oustodiendum cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
sine aliquo retenemento pro plegiagio meo versus Dominum Hugonem le Despenser
ex hoc quod captus fui ad bellum de Jews and priso dicti Hugonis le Despenser
extiti and unde finivi versus dictum Dominum Hugonem septem Centenas Marcas and
unde praedicti plegii mei devenerunt versus dictum Dominum Hugonem Solvend
ducentas libras in Festo Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae Anno Regni Regis
Henrici quadragesimo nono Natalis Domini proximo sequenti ducentas Marcas and
ad Pascha proximo sequens ducentas Marcas. Et si in aliquo praedictorum
terminorum solutione defecero, volo and concedo quod occasion solutionis non
factae praedicti Domini Petrus de Brus, de Gesemue, Gilbertus Haunsard,
Robertus de Stuteville, Johannes de Halton, Willielmus de Wivill, Hugo de Ever,
Johannes Burton, Ambrosius de Camera, Johannes de Oketon, and Galfridus Aguilun
de praedicto Manerio feofentur and quod illud teneant imperpetuum per Cartam
feoffamenti quam per assensum utriusque partis tradidimus Domino Petro de Brus
custodiend' quod si in aliquo defecero terminorum been licebit Domino Petro de
Brus and ejus consociis ex mera voluntate mea illud manerium cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis and habere imperpetuum, sicut Carta feoffamenti quam inde habemus
testatur. In hujus rei testimonium huic praesenti scripto sigillum meum apposui.

Cl. 49 H. 3. M. 4. dorso.
REx Johanni de Eyvill, Salutem. Cum nos and quidam Magnates and fideles nostri
in partibus Hereford circa tranquillitatem Edwardum filium nostrum ad hoc
adjutorem praecipuum and ferventiorem prae cateris invenisse idem Edwardus die
Jovis in Ebdomade Pentecostes circa horam vespertinam a Militum Comitiva quos
secum ad spaciandum extra Hereford duxerat cum duobus Militibus and quatuor
Scutiferis spreto consilio nostro and Magnatum and fidelium nostrorum
praedictorum subito and exopinato recessit volens ut pro certo credimus se ad
Iohannem de Warrenna and Williemum de Valentia and accomplices suos qui nuper
absque conscientia nostra and voluntate and contra pacem nostram applicuerunt
in partibus Pembroc ac etiam ad quosdam Marchiones rebels nostros and pacis
nostrae perturbatores transfer ut exinde parts adeat transmarinas vel alios
illuc mittat qui adventum alienigenarum in regnum nostrum per parts Pembroc
cum alibi non pateat eis aditus ad nostram and regni nostri confusionem
procurent. Et quia praefati rebels nostri licet adhuc pauci existant per hoc
potestatem and vires suas augere possent nisi eorum insolentia antequam
ulterius invalescat citius reprimatur nos de vestra and aliorum fidelium
nostrorum fidelitate and constantia specialiter confidentes, Vobis mandamus in
fide, homagio and dilectione quibus nobis and sub periculo amissionis omnium
quae in Regno nostro tenetis, ac sub debito Sacramenti quo omnes and singuli de
Regno nostro sunt ad hoc specialiter obligati and quod volumus firmiter
observari firmiter injungentes quatinus statim visis litteris istis omnibus
aliis praetermissiis cum equis and armis et toto servitio vestro nobis debito
nec non and toto posse vestro sub omni festinatione de die and nocte usque
Wygorniam veniatis parati exinde in manu forti ire nobiscum super inimicos
nostros praedictos and hoc sicut exheredationem and vestram and perpetuam regni
nostri confusionem vitare volueritis and vitam propriam diligitis nullo modo
omittatis. Nec de summonitione exercitus brevitatem temporis allegetis, quia
urgentissima necessitas tempus non patitur ulterius prorogari ne inter moras
per adventum alienigenarum quos iidem rebels nostri expectant eorundem vires
in nostri and regni nostri perniciem augeri contingat; qui adhuc dum pauci
existant de facili nobis poterunt subjugari. Test Rege apud Hereford tricesimo
die Maii.

Eodem modo scribitur omnibus tenentibus de Rege in Capite, tam videlicet,
Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, quam Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and
omnibus aliis, exceptis illis qui sunt pro part Comitis Gloucestriae.

REx Custodi pacis in Comitatu Eborum and Vicecomiti ejusdem Comitatus,
Salutem. Pat. 49. H. 3. M. 14. Dorso.
Cum inter Simunem de Munre forti Comitem Leycestriae and Gilvertum de Clare
Comitem Gloucestriae discordia nuper exorta fuerit quam per compromissum per
fideles nostros factum, and t^m scripto quam juramento sua firmatum credebamus
pacificari, per quod ad pacandum corda subditorum nostrorum qui guerram de novo
ex hoc in re^no praedicto suseitari timebant per singulos Comitatus regni
nostri Li^^ems nostras transmisimus inter caetera continentes quod dicti
Comites ^n^nimes fuerant and concordes ac idem Comes Gloucestria Spr^ ^ro^sus
observatione juramenti sui praedicti quibusdam Ma^h^onibu^ and aliis rebellibus
nostris nec non and Willielmo de Valenciis and Iohanni Warrenna and complicibus
suis qui nuper applicue^unt in rogno, nostro contra pacem nostram adhaeserit
and ipsos in familiaritatem admiserat and insuper Edwardum filium nostrum qui
pro pace praedicta publici favoris gratiam quam sponte se dando obsidem ad
misierat ex inconsulta levitate totaliter jam amisit ad suam and eorundem
rebellium nostrorum partem jam attraxerit terram nostram in partibus Marchiae
hostiliter circumeundo quaedam castra and villas occupando, and guerras ibidem
commovendo and praedictos Marchiones and accomplices suos inducendo nos and
fideles nostri haec omnia hactenus patienter sustinuimus volentes ut eorum
excessibus and transgressionibus manifest patentibus universis causae justitia
pro nobis and eorum injuria contra ipsos patenter allegent in facie singulorum
antequam manunt apponere vellemuus ad rigo rem; Et quia tantam rebellionem
diutius sustinere nolumus nec debemus vobis praecipimus in fide and dilectione
quibus nobis tenemini firmiter injugentes quatenus omnibus de Comitatu
praedicto sicut se su^ diligun^ districtius inhibeatis ne dicto Edwardo aut
praedicto Comiti seu complicibus suis ad suae rebellionis fomentum, consensum,
consilium, auxilium vel favorem quoquo modo impendant set sicut nuper per
literas nostras per singulos Comitatus nostros directas omnes de regno nostro
ad observandum ordinationem nuper London factas juramento astringi praecepimus
omnes and singuli Comitatus praedicti contra praedictos rebels and omnes
alios pacis nostrae perturbatores and ordinationis ipsius transgressores
manifestos quicumque fuerint potenter and patenter corpora eorum arrestantes
and salvo custodientes donec aliud inde praeceperimus proclamari, etiam
faciatis per totam ballivam vestram ut omnes quos cum equis and armis in
auxilium nostrum contra rebels praedictos nuper summoneri fecimus sub ea qua
poterunt festinatione per Gloucestriam cum per Wygorniam prout alias mandavimus
propter fractionem pontium and viarum discrimina eis planus non pateat
accessus, ad nos accedere non omittant, sicut poenas in prioribus litteris
nostris eisdem nuper inde directis contentas

Consimiles litterae diriguntur per singulo^ Comitatus Angliae per Regem,
Comitem Leicestriae Justiciarium, Petrum de Monte forti, Egidium de Argentenn,
and Rogerum de Sancto Johanne.

Pat 49. H. 3. M. 8. Dors.
REx omnibus fidelibus suis de Comitatibus War. and Leycestriae Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum nuper unanimi consilio and voluntate Magnatum nostrorum apud
Winton convenientium reddita fuerit in manus nostras Seisina omnium terrarum
and tenementorum quibuscumque occupatorum de terris adversariorum and rebellium
nostrorum qui nobis manifest adversabantur in turbatione and guerra nuper in
r^gno nostro suborta, and eisdem in turbatione praedicta manifest adhaerentium
constituimus dilectos and fideles nostros Willielmum Bagod Robertum de Grendon
una cum Vicecomite nostro Comitatus praedicti ad omnes terras and tenementa
praedicta in manus nostras capienda and nomine nostro Salvo custodienda. Ita
quod illi praedicta terras and tenementa per Sacramentum proborum and fidelium
nostrorum fideliter extendant, quantum secundum rectum valorem in omnibus
exitibus eorum valiant per annum: Et extentam illam nobis sub sigillis festum
Sancti 13 Septembris.
Edwardi apud Westmonasterium, Ita etiam quod de toto redditu de termino Sancti
Michaelis instantis diligentem faciant inquisitionem and ad ipsum redditum
colligendum and recipiendum duos de discretioribus and fidelioribus qui in
singulis hundredis haberi poterunt assignent, Et eis summam reddituum
praedictorum in singulis locis and villis habere faciant, and nos de summa illa
and nominibus terrae vel tenementa dictorum rebellium nostrorum alicui alteri
postquam nobis post Diem Jovis proximam post festum Exaltionis Sanctae Crucis
fuerint restituta ad manus nostras revocentur per eosdem Willielmum, Robertum,
and Vicecomitem praedictam salvo custodienda and extendenda in forma
Supradicta. Quod si aliquis praedictorum Willielmi, Roberti, vel Vicecomitis
Willielmo, Roberto and Vicecomiti in hiis, quae ex part nostra vobis duxerit
injungenda, sitis intendentes and auxiliantes. In cujus etc. Test Rege apud
Winton vicesimo primo die Septembris.

Item in forma praedicta constituuntur omnes Milites subscripti in Comitatibus
Subscriptis.

Wilts.
Willielmus de Can, Adam de Machine.
Linc.
Antonius Bek, Alexander de Monte Forti.

Willielmus Everard, Ricardus de Bamfeld Canonicus Well'.
Cant. and Hunt.
Almaricus Peche, Willielmus de Criketon.
Lanc.
Patricius de Ulnesby, Robertus de Lathum.
Glouc.
Robertus de Santemaur, Robertus de Kingeston.
Midd.
Philippus de Conel, Johannes de Vantort.
Dors.
Radulphus de Gorg, Johannes de la Strode.
Devon.
Henricus de Tracy, Ricardus Banzan.
Cornub.
Stephanus Heym, Philippus de Bodrigan,
Buck. and Bed.
Jacobus le Sauvage, Galfridus de Rus.
Cumberl.
Robertus de Mulecastr, Ranulphus de Acr.
Westmerl.
Iidem Milites.
Wigorn.
Willielmus de Sautemar, Paulinus de Kerdif.
Southt.
Mathaeus de Columbers, Radulphus de Hotot.
Ebor.
Johannes de Oketon, Galfridus Aguilun.
Surr. and Sussex.
Johannes de Wauton, Willielmus Aguilun.
Northt.
Johannes Lovell, Willielmus le Brun.
Not. Derb.
Willielmus de Gray, Willielmus de Montgomery.
Heref.
Ricardus de Bachind, Walterus de Ailesford.
Kanc.
Henricus de Burn, Rogerus de Norwede.
Essex and Hertford.
Willielmus de Grancourt, Richardus de Herlawe.
Norff. Suff.
Henricus de Reneshal, Hervicus de Vallibus.
Rotelond.
Jacobus de Paunton, Johannes de Sproxton.
Northumbr.
Thomas de Richel, Johannes de Aulton.
Salop and Staff.
Philippus le Bret, Odo de Hodenet.
Oxon and Berk.
Thomas de Valom, Willielmus de Englefeud.


Pat. 49. H. 3. N. 22.
REx Humfrido de Bohun Comiti Hereford, Iohanni de Bailol, Rogero de Leyburn,
and Roberto Walerand, Custodibus Civitatis London, S^lutem. Quia Major, Cives,
and tota Communitas Civitatis praedictae tam de vita and membris quam terris
tenementis and bonis suis aliis quibuscumque voluntati nostrae se submiserunt,
Volumus quod pax nostra tam in Civitate praedicta quam in partibus adjacentibus
proclametur and firmiter observetur. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod pacem nostram
ibidem public clamari and firmiter observari faciatis, omnem diligentiam
depraedationes aliquae in dicta Civitate fiant, maxim cum depraedationes
praedictae in dispendium nostrum cederent and jacturam manifestam. Quod si
forte aliquos depraedatores seu pacis nostrae perturbatores ibidem inveniri
contigerit eos, arrestari and salvo custodiri faciatis donec aliud inde
praeceperimus, Ita quod diligentiam vestram exinde debeamus merito commendare.
Test Rege apud Windesoram Sexto die Octobris.

REx universis and singulis hac instante Die Jovis ad Comitatum Middlesex
conventuris, Salutem. Pat. 49. H. 3. M. 5.
Quia de Vicecomite in Comitatu praedicto nondum providimus mittimus dilectum
and fidelem nostrum Philippum de Conel ad Comitatum illum tenendum die
praedicto, ad officium Vicecomitis pertinent facienda, Et ideo vobis mandamus
quod eidem Philippo tanquam Vicecomiti nostro Comitatus praedicti quoad diem
illum intendentes sitis and respondentes sicut praedictum est. In cujus, etc.
Test Rege apud Windesor sexto die Octobris.

REx omnibus, etc. Salutem. Pat. 54. H. 3. M. 7.
Licet nos sicut Edwardus primogenitus noster totis desideriis affectemus
transfretare in subsidium quia tamen Praelatis Magnatibus and Communitati Regni
nostri non videtur expediens neque tutum quod nos ambo extra regnum istis
temporibus ageremus, nos votum nostrum quatenus possumus perfici, and regni
nostri regimini de consilio dictorum Praelatorum and Magnatum Salubritor
prospicere cupientes negotium Crucis una cum signo Crucis nostrae praefato
primogenito nostro ex plena and summa Confidentia commisimus vice nostra, and
ad idem negotium quo ad votum peregrinationis nostrae and suae prout decet and
expedit ad Christiani nominis exaltationem efficacius peragendum totam
vicesimam nobis in subsidium terrae Sanctae per totum regnum nostrum concessam
tam collectam quam colligendam eidem primogenito nostro duximus plenarie
conferendam. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Winton quarto die Augusti.

REx Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Pat. 1. H. 3. M. 13.
intus.
Baronibus, Militibus, and libere tenentibus, and omnibus fidelibus suis
Hiberniam constitutis, Salutem. Fidelitatem vestram in Domino commendantes quam
Domino patri nostro semper exhibuistis, and nobis estis diebus nostris
exhibituri. Volumus quod in signum fidelitatis vestrae Libertatibus regno
nostro Angliae a patre nostro and nobis concessis, de gratia nostra and dono in
Regno nostro Hiberniae gaudeatis vos and vestri haeredes imperpetuum. Quas
distinct in scriptum redactas de communi Consilio omnium fidelium nostrorum
vobis mittimus, signatas sigillis Domini nostri G. Apostolicae sedis Legati,
and fidelis nostri Comitis W. Mareschalli Rectoris nostri and Regni nostri,
quia sigillum nondum habuimus, easdem processu temporis de majori Consilio
proprio sigillo signaturi. Test apud Gloucestriam sexto die Februarii.

Pat. 30. H 3. M. 1. Hibern.
QVia pro communi utilitate terrae Hiberniae and unitate terrarum Regis, Rex
vult, and de communi consilio Regis provisum est, quod omnes leges and
consuetudines quae in regno Angliae tenentur in Hybernia teneantur, and eadem
terra eisdem legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut Dominus J. Rex
cum ultimo esset in Hibernia, statuit and fieri mandavit. Quia etiam Rex vult,
quod omnia brevia de communi jure quae current in Anglia similiter current in
Hybernia sub novo sigillo Mandatum est Archiepiscopis, etc. quod pro pace and
tranquillitate ejusdem terrae, per easdem leges eos Regi et deduci permittant,
and eas in omnibus sequantur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Wodestok, nono die
Septembris.

Claus. 37. H. 3. M. 15. Dors.
REx Justiciario Hiberniae, Salutem. Monstravit nobis Mamorch Offerthierun et
Rothericus frater ejus, quod Antecessores sui Hibernienses fuissent, semper
tamen firmiter fuerunt ad fidem et servitium nostrum et praedecessorum nostrum
Regum Angliae ad conquestum una cum Anglicis faciendum super Hybernienses. Et
ideo vobis mandamuus, quod si ita est, tunc non permittas ipsos Mamorch et
Rodericum repelli, quin possint terras vindicare in quibus jus quilibet
Anglicus; quia si ipsi et Antecessores sui sic se habuerunt cum Anglicis,
quamvis Hibernienses, injustum est, licet Hibernienses sint, quod exceptione
qua repelluntur Hibernienses a vindicatione terrarum et aliis repellantur.
Test, etc.

Pat. 46. H. 3. M. 19. intus.
SAnctissimo in Christo Patri Urbano Dei gratia Sacro Sanctae Romanae eadem
gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae, Salutem, Cum reverentia
et honor. Sanctitati vestrae notum facimus, quod nos constituimus et ordinamus
in vestrae Curia Sanctitatis, dilectos Clericos nostros magistros Johannem de
Hemingford, et Rogerum Luvell, et quemlibet eorum in solidum, ita quod non sit
melior conditio occupantis, nostros et Regni nostri Procuratores et Nuncios
speciales, ad exponendum, et intimandum, gravamina nobis et Regno nostro
illata, a Venerabilibus Patribus Bonifacio Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, and
Suffraganeis ejus, et ad exponendum et intimandum vobis quaedam statuta ab eis
edita in nostrum et Coronae nostrae praejudicium et gravamen nec non ad
supplicandum Sanctitati vestrae, ut praedicta gravamina tollere, ac statuta
dignetur vestra Sanctitas revocare; et ad supplicandum etiam, ut super hiis
vestrae Sanctitatis circumspectio nobis et Regno nostro gratiam adhibeat, si
necesse fuerit et remedium opportunum.

Item, Et ad impetrandum, et contradicendum et Narrandum, ac in Judices
conveniendum. Ratum habituri quicquid ipsi Procuratores vel eorum alter
duxerint vel duxerit faciendum, praesentibus post annum minime valituris. Dat.
apud London 7 Kalend. Novembris, Anno 1261.

DOmino Papae Rex Angliae, Salutem, cum reverentia et honor. Pat. 46. H. 3. M.
17.
Sanctitati vestrae notum facimus, quod nos constituimus et ordinamus in Curia
vestrae Sanctitatis, Magistros Johannem de Hemingford, et Rogerum Luvell,
quemlibet eorum in solidum; ita quod non sit melior conditio occupantis,
nostros et Regni nostri Procuratores et Nuncios speciales, gravamina nobis et
Regno nostro illata a Venerabilibus Patribus Bonifacio Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, and Suffraganeis ejus, et ad exponendum et intimandum vobis
quaedam statuta ab eis edita in nostrum et Coronae nostrae praejudicium et
gravamen; et ad supplicandum Sanctitati vestrae, ut praedicta gravamina et
statuta dignetur vestra Sanctitas revocare et ad Supplicandum, ut vestra
Sanctitas faciat nobis et Regno nostro gratiam, si necesse fu^rit, et remedium
opportunum. Item ad impetrandum et contradicendum, dicti Procuratores, vel
alter eorum super praemissis duxerint vel duxerit faciendum, praesentibus per
biennium in suo robore duraturis. Dat. apud Westmonasterium, die tertio
Januarii, Anno. 1261.

Cl. 25. E. 1. M. 6. Dors.
Quia in relevationem omnium Incolarum and populi Regni nostri pro octava
omnium bonorum Singulorum laicorum per totum idem Regnum pro urgentissima nunc
dicti regni contra Gallicos necessitate levanda concessimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris confirmare and firmiter teneri facere Magnam Cartam de
libertatibus Angliae and Cartam de libertatibus Forestae and concedere omnibus
and singulis ejusdem Regni litteras nostras patentes quod dictae Octavae
levatio non cedet eisdem in praejudicium, Servitutem, Exhaeredationem, This
Charter was made when the King was under Montforts power, when he kept him
Prisoner at large under a Guard, and made what Grants he pleased, and issued
what Writs he would, and Sealed what Charters he he pleased with the Kings
Seal, and published them under his Name, and made him own them.
probioribus and legalioribus Militibus Comitatus tui eligi, and eos plenam
potestatem pro ipsis and tota Communitate dicti Comitatus habentes ad Edwardum
filium nostrum carissimum tenentem in Anglia locum nostrum venire facias. Ita
quod sint London ad eundem filium nostrum modis omnibus in Octavis Sancti
Michaelis proximo futuris ad ultimum, Cartas super Confirmatione nostra
Cartarum praedictarum, and litteras nostras super dicta concessione pro ipsa
Communitate in forma facturi ulterius quod per dictum filium and Consilium
nostrum ibidem fuerit ordinatum Et hoc nullo modo omittas. Et habeas ibi hoc
Breve. Test Edwardo filio Regis apud Sanctum Paulum London, decimo quinto die
Septembris.

Consimiles litterae diriguntur singulis Vicecomitibus per Angliam.

The Incolae Regni, and Populus were the Laity only, as appears in this Record
by the words singulorum Laicorum: And they were called incolae regni, in
Despite to the Clergy, who were then out of the Kings Protection, and not
taken to be his Subjects, or Members of the Nation.

Cart. 49. H. ^. M. 4.
REx omnibus de Comitatu Eborum Salutem. Cum propter hostilem turbationem
habitam in Regno nostro de unanimi assensu and voluntate Edwardi filii nostri
primogeniti Praelatorum Comitum, Baronum and Communitatis regni nostri pro
Regni ipsius pace pro cujus securitate dictus Edwardus and Henricus filius
Regis Alemanniae Nepos noster obsides dati fuerunt concorditer sit provisum
quod quaedam ordinatio de unanimi assensu nostro Praelatorum Comitum and
Baronum praedictorum nostro and regni nostri statu London See Pat. 48. H. 3. M.
6. Dors. in this Append. N. 213.
Mense Iunii Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo octavo facta inviolabiliter
observetur Universitatem vestram scire volumus quod nos ordinationem ipsam and
pacem and tranquillitatem Regni bona fide observare and in nullo contravenire
ad Sancta Dei Evangelia juravimus. Hoc adjecto in eodem Sacramento specialiter,
and express quod occasion factorum praecedentium tempore turbationis aut
guerrae praecedentis neminem occasionabimus aut inculpabimus de illis aut de
part illorum quos tanquam inimicos diffidavimus puta Comites Leycestriae and
Gloucestriae and alios sibi adhaerentes ac Barons sive Cives nostros London
and Quinque Portuum nec alicui de praedictis dampnum faciemus aut fieri
procurabimus nec per Ballivos nostros aliquatenus fieri permittemus. Juravimus
insuper quod ea omnia quae pro liberatione dictorum filii nostri ac Nepotis
sunt provisa and sigillo nostro sigillata quantum ad nos pertinet
inviolabiliter observabimus and ab aliis pro posse nostro faciemus observari.
Volentes and consentientes express quod si nos vel dictus Edwardus filius
noster contra praedictam ordinationem, nostram seu juramentum, quod absit, in
aliquo venire seu pacem and tranquillitatem regni nostri turbare seu occasion
factorum praecedentium tempore turbationis ac guerrae praecedentis aliquem de
praedictis aut de part praedictorum quos diffidavimus occasionare seu alicui
de eis dampnum facere aut fieri procurare praesumpserimus, liceat omnibus de
regno nostro contra nos insurgere and ad gravamen nostrum, opem, and operam
dare juxta posse, Ad quod ex praesenti praecepto nostro omnes and singulos
volumus obligari fidelitate and homagio nobis factis non obstantibus. Et si
aliquis alius de regno nostro contra praedicta venire seu pacem and
tranquillitatem regni nostri turbare praesumpserit seu nobis vel Edwardo filio
nostro aut alicui alteri opem, Consilium, consensum vel auxilium quoquo modo
praestiterit si hoc notorium fuerit aut de hoc per considerationem Consilii
nostri and Magnatum terrae nostrae convictus fuerit sive non, tam ipse quam
haeredes sui imperpetuum exhaeredentur ac de terris and tenementis ipsorum fiat
prout de terris eorum qui de felonia convicti sunt secundum leges and
consuetud^nes regni nostri fieri consuevit. Ad haec de unanimi assensu and
voluntate nostra Edwardi filii nostri Praelatorum Comitum Baronum and
Communitatis Regni nostri concorditer Cartae So called in Respect of the
provisions made at London in the Month of June the year before, and the
Articles made at Worcester, December the 13th last foregoing.
antiquae communium Libertatum and Forestae Communitati regni nostri per nos
dudum concessae in quarum violatores ad petitionem nostram sententia
excommunicationis dudum lata est and per sedem Apostolicam specialiter
confirmata nec non and omnes articuli de nostro and Magnatum terrae nostrae
communi assensu dudum provisi quas nuper apud Wygorniam existentes per singulos
Com^tatus sub sigillo nostro transmisimus inviolabiliter observentur
imperpetuum. Ad quorum observationem Sacramento ad Sancta D^i Evangelia
praestito sponte nos obligavimus, and omnes Justiciarios, Vicecomites, and
quoscumque Ballivos de regno nostro tam nostros quam aliorum simili Sacramento
volumus obligari. Ita quod nullus teneatur al cui Ballivo obedire donec
Sacramentum praestiterit. Et si quis contra Cartas ipsas vel articulos perjurii
reatum and excommunicationis sententiam quae incurret per considerationem
Cur^ae nostrae graviter puniatur. Salvo in praemissis prout decet privilegio
cler^cari. Et quia volumus quod haec omnia firmiter and inviolabiliter
observentur, Universitati vestrae injungendo ac praecipiendo mandamus quatinus
vos omnes and singuli praedicta omnia and singula sicut superius scripta sunt
faciatis teneatis and inviolabiliter observetis and ad ea omnia facienda
tenenda and observanda ad Sancta Dei Evangelia Sacramento corporaliter ad
invicem vos obligetis. In cujus rei Testimonium Car^as and Ordinationes
praedictas cum praesentibus literis patentibus vobis sub sigillo nost^o
transmisimus in Comitatum vestrum sub custodia fide dignorum ad hoc Electorum
ad rei memoriam salvo custodiend^s, contra quas ne quis ignorantiam p^etendere
possit in futurum, ad minus bis in anno in pleno Comitatu p^as praecipimus
publicari. Ita quod fiat prima publicatio in proximo Comitatu post instans
festum Paschae, secunda vero fiat in proximo Comitatu, post festum Sancti
Michaelis and sic deinceps fiat ad honorem Dei and Ecclesiae, fidem nostram,
and regni nostri commodum observari, inviolabiliter observentur and teneantur.
Ut autem praemissa omnia and singula firma maneant and inconcussa Reverendi
Patres Episcopi per Regnum constituti ad instantiam nostram sententiam
excommunicationis fulminarunt, in omnes illos qui contra praemissa vel aliquod
praemissorum scienter venerit aut venire temptaverit In cujus rei Testimonium
has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium,
decimo quarto die Martii Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo nono.

The same Date in the same Mi^d.

Cl. ^8. H. 3. M. 10 Dor^.
REx Vicomiti Lincolniae Salutem. Quia audivimus quod tu and Ballivi tui and
etiam Ballivi aliorum quid Hundreda habent in Comitatu Hundreda and Wapentacca
ten^ri debeant in Comitatu tuo postquam concessimus omnibus de regno nostro
libertates contentas in Cartis nostris quas inde fecimus, dum fuimus infra
Cartam nuper legi fecimus in praesentia Domini Cantuariensis and Majoris and
Senioris partis omnium Episcoporum, Comitum and Baronum totius Regni nostri, ut
coram eis and per eos exponeretur haec clausula contenta in Carta nostra de
libertatibus, videlicet quod nullus Vicecomes vel Ballivus faciat Turnum suum
per Hundreda nisi bis in anno and non nisi loco debito and consueto, videlicet
semel post Pascha and iterum post Festum Sancti Michaelis sine occasion. Ita
scilicet quod quilibet habeat libertates suas quas habuit, and habere avi
nostri, vel quas postea perquisivit; unde a multis ibi dictum fuit, and
testatum quod tempore Henrici Regis Avi nostri tam Hundreda and Wapentacca quam
Curiae Magnatum Angliae Solebant teneri de quindena in quindenam. Et licet
multum placeret nobis communi utilitati totius regni and indempnitati pauperum
providere, tamen quia illi duo Turni plene non sufficient, ad pacem regni
nostri conservandam, and ad excessus tam divitibus quam pauperibus illatos
corrigendos qui ad Hundreda pertinent de communi Consilio praedicti Domini
Cantuariensis, and omnium praedictorum Episcoporum, and Baronum and aliorum.
Ita provisum est quod inter praedictos duos Turnos teneantur Hundreda and
Wapentacca and etiam Curiae Magnatum de tribus Septimanis in tres Septimanas
ubi prius teneri solent de quindena in quindenam. Ita tamen quod ad illa
Hundreda and Wapentakia, and Curias, non fiat generalis Summonitio sicut ad
Turnos praedictos sed ad Hundreda illa Wapentakia and Curias conveniant
conquerentes and adversarii sui, and illi qui Sectas debent, per quos teneantur
placita, and fiant Judicia, nisi ita sit quod ad Hundreda Wapentakia fieri
debeat Inquisitio de placitis Coronae sicut de Morte hominis, Thesauro invento,
and hujusmodi ad quae inquirenda conveniant cum praedictis Sectariis, quatuor
villatae proximae, Scilicet omnes de illis villis qui necessarii fuerint ad
Inquisitiones illas faciendas, Et ideo tibi praecipimus quod praedicta Hundreda
Wapentakia and Curias tam nostras quam aliorum teneri facias de caetero
secundum quod praedictum est de tribus Septimanis, in tres Septimanas, exceptis
praedictis duobus Turnis, qui de caetero teneantur secundum quod prius teneri
solebant. Test

The INDEX.
A
ABrincis vid. Hugh. Adala, Countess of Blois, her endeavor to reconcile the
King and Archbishop Anselme f. 260. E. William Fitz Adelin sent Procurator
into Ireland f. 365. F. His Character Ibid. He is recalled f. 369. D. Adomar
vid. Ethelmar. Aedui who they were f. 6. F. Aelfred fights the Danes with
various success f. 114. D. He is reduced to great streights Ibid. E. He
obtained a great victory over them, and forced them to beg f. 115. A. B. His
great Force at Sea Ibid. C. His design to advance learning Ibid. D.E. His
Charity, Justice and Prudence f. 116. A. B. C. D. He erected Hundreds and
Tithings Ibid. E. He made a Survey of all Counties, Hundreds and Tithings f.
117. l. 2. Agalmar Bishop of North-Elmham deposed f. 213. A. Agricola sent
Governor into Britain f. 22. D. f. 23. A, etc. His Conquests f. 24. A. B. C. He
first made use of a Fleet Ibid. D. He overthrew the Caledonians f. 25. B. And
Britains f. 26. A. B. His Policy to keep them under by Sea and Land Ibid. D. He
is recalled by Titus, and suspected to be poisoned f. 27. A. Agricola Disciple
to Paelagius propagated his Masters Opinions in Britain f. 38. E. Alans who
they were f. 37. B. F. Albamarle, vid. William de Fortibus. St. Albans
Monastery founded by King Offa f. 109. B. The Abbat thereof cited to London by
the Popes Legate f. 599. F. He appeals to the Pope, but without remedy f. 600.
A. B. The Church Interdicted f. 620. B. Alberic the Popes Legate in England and
Scotland f. 293. E. He directs the choice of an Archbishop of Canterbury Ibid.
Albert, the Popes Notary, his Offer to Earl Richard f. 609. F. William de
Albany made Governor of Rochester Castle by the Barons f. 503. lin. 2. He is
taken Prisoner by the King Ibid. B. Philip de Albiney beats the French at Sea
f. 526. F. He accompanied Earl Richard into Gascoigny f. 535. E. Alcuinus wrote
against Image worship f. 109. A. Aldermannus a general word for many Officers
f. 70. F. Alexander Caementarius maintained King John's Cause against the Pope
f. 480. F. How he was punished by the Pope f. 481. lin. 2. Alexander A Friar
Minor, the Popes Collector in England f. 598. E. Alexander King of Scotland
does Homage to Prince Jews f. 514. D. He married Joanna King Henry the Thirds
Sister f. 530. B. His Demands of King Henry f. 565. B. He refused to hold any
thing of the King of England f. 590. A. An Agreement between him and King Henry
f. 568. D. and 592. A. He refused the Popes L^gat entrance into Scotland f.
568. E. His death f. 603. lin. 1. Alexander his Son Married Margaret, Daughter
to King Henry f. 606. B. He does Homage to King Henry Ibid. C. His modest
Answer to King Henry's Demands Ibid. D. He and his Queen came into England f.
619. D. Alexander the Fourth Pope of Rome Invested Edmund the second Son to
King Henry, with the Kingdoms of Sicily and Apulia f. 614. D. He Decreed that
every Bishop, Abbat and Prior should come to Rome, and compound for his
Confirmation f. 622. B. He threatened to censure King Henry for his Excesses
Ibid. F. He is appeased with 5000 Marks f. 623. lin. 3. His death f. 636. A.
Alfred Divided Shires into Hundreds f. 83. F. Algar Earl of Northumberland
unjustly banished by Edward the C^nfessor f. 134. C. Alienor, Wife to King
Henry the Second, released a great many Prisoners, and who they were f. 419. E.
F. She set her Son Henry against her Husband f. 311. F. She caused all Freemen
to Swear fealty to her Son Richard f. 420. B. C. Alienor, Daughter to the Earl
of Provence, Married to Henry the Third f. 563. A. She is brought to bed of a
Daughter at Bordeaux f. 586. E. Almains why so called f. 58. E. Alodium what f.
204. D.E. Alphonso King of Castile his pretenses to Gascoigny f 610. B. He
quitteth them f. 611. F. Ambiani, who they were f. 35. B E. Ambrosius Aurelius
overthrows the Saxons f. 95. F. Amianus Marcellinus his Account of the Saxons
f. 57. F. Ancalites who they were f. 10. lin. 2. An Anchorites Advice to the
Monks of Bangor f. 103. C. Andeli Castle surrendered to King Philip of France f.
473 F. Anjou does Homage to Henry the Third f. 545. A. Anselme Abbat of Bec,
pressed to accept the Arch-Bishopric of Canterbury f. 225. B. He demanded
restitution of all Church Lands f. 225. C. He falls from the Kings favor f.
226. B. C. The great difference between King Henry the First and him Ibid. D.
E. and 227, 228, etc. The Bishops advise him to obey the King; his Answer f.
227. A.B. He refused to receive his Pall from the King f. 228 E. F. He refused
to appear at the Kings Court f. 229. A. B. He desired leave to go to Rome, but
is denied Ibid. C. He goes without leave, and his Arch-bishopric is seized
Ibid. D. E. F. He desired the Pope to ease him of his Dignity, but is denied f.
230. B. He is recalled by the King f. 234. E. The Case of the Queen determined
by him in a Council at Lambeth f. 235. A. B. He reconciled the Norman Nobility
to the King f. 235. E. F. He refused to do Homage to the King f. 256. A. He
denied the King the Right of Investitures, and advised him to be obedient to
the Pope Ibid. B. C. Westminster f. 257. F. He refused Consecration to such as
were Invested by the King f. 258. A. A wrangling intercourse between him and
the King Ibid. D.E.F. He goes to Rome f. 259. A. B. His Account to the King of
what he had done at Rome f. 260. A. His return into England prohibited f. 259.
F. and 260. B. Ibid. C. He is reconciled to the King f. 261. A. His Answer to
the Bishops request for relief against exactions Ibid. E. F. His sickness at
Bec, and the Kings promise to him f. 262. A.B. He is observantly treated by the
Queen Ibid. C. He exacted obedience from the Archbishop of York f. 263. D. He
refused to give his Benediction to Thomas Elect of York, Canterbury f. 264. B.
His death Ibid. C. Anzazim His treacherous attempt on Prince Edward at Acon f.
666. B. Appeals from inferior Courts to the Kings when allowed. f. 79. A. Of
Treason f. 299. E. To the Pope when first used in England f. 295. C. One by the
Dean of London Ibid. D.E.F. By the Arch-deaconry of Middlesex f. 296. lin. 1.
York Ibid. A. B. By Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury Ibid. D. Appeals why so
easily allowed at this time by the King f. 296. F. How punished by Henry the
Second f. 396. F. Aquitain pawned to William the Second by Duke Robert f. 224.
C. William de Archis takes Arms against William the Conqueror f 187. A. B. His
submission, and is received into Favor Ibid. Areani who they were, and their
Office f. 36. C. F. Arianism creeps into Britain f. 34. F. Armatura what it was
f. 47. F. Aron A Jew severely fined for falsifying a Charter f. 604 A. Arthur
Nephew to King Richard, declared his Heir f. 428. E. The Norman Nobility adhere
to him f. 461. E. He is reconciled to King John, and made Governor of Man's f.
464. A. John f. 465. A. B. He besieged Queen Alienor, is defeated and taken
Prisoner f. 471. A. B. C. His Demands of his Uncle King John Ibid. E. He was
sent Prisoner to Roven, and never more heard of Ibid. F. Artificers of all
Sorts in the Roman Army f. 5. F. Arx Brittannica what it was f. 12. F. Assise
what f. 164 B. Of Arms appointed by Henry the 2d. f. 337. A etc. Atac^ts who
they were f. 35. B. F. Edgar Atheling kindly treated by William the Conqueror
f. 191. B. He is Assisted by the Danish Fleet and Northumbrians, f. 195. B.
Athelstane obtained many Victories over the Danes, Scots, Irish and Welsh, f.
118. B. C. Foreign Princes purchase his favor with gifts Ibid. D. How he
valued every man's Life f. 119 A. etc. Augustine sent from Rome to convert the
Saxons f. 101. A. How he approached King Ethelbert, what Answer he received and
what Habitation was assigned him Ibid. C. D. F. He was Ordained Archbishop of
England f. 102. l. 3. The Questions he sent to Pope Gregory, and Answers he
received Ibid. B. C. D. E. He was empowered to ordain an Archbishop and Twelve
Suffragan Bishops f. 103. l. 1. The British Bishops oppose him Ibid. A. B. C.D.
His Death f. 104. A. Augustine an Irish man made Bishop of Waterford by H. 2. f.
365. B. Augustus attempted nothing upon Brittany f. 10. E. Ayds Capital how
many f. 166. B.
B
BAldwin de Redvers fortifieth Exeter Castle against King Stephen f. 274. A. He
is defeated, his Lands Seized, and he banished Ibid. B. Baldwin Archbishop of
Canturbury accompanied King Richard to the Holy Land f. 427. f. His death at
the Siege of Acon f. 428. f. Hugh Balesham chosen Bishop of Ely against the
Kings recommendation f. 620. A. Hugh Bardolphs Demands of the Bishop of Durham
f. 445 C The Bishops Answer to him Ibid. E. Barony a name of Office, and when
first hereditary f. 81. B. Barons refuse to obey King John unless their rights
were restored f. 469. D. They confederate against him f. 488. B.B. f. 494. A.
B. Their Oath and Demands Ibid. C.D.E. They meet at Stamford, their Names f.
495. B. C. D. What Laws and Libertis they desired Ibid. E. F. They choose
Robert Fitz-Walter their General f. 496. A. They threaten ruin to such as
adhered to the King Ibid. C.D. They meet the King and obtein their desires f.
497. A. etc. 25 appointed to see the peace and Liberties observed and kept f.
498 A. Their Names and Oath they took Ibid. E. F. All to be imprisoned that
refused to obey them. f. 499. E. What Caution they exacted of the King for
performance of his Grants Ibid. F. They call London their Receptacle f. 500. F.
They Despise the Popes Letters, and consult how to secure London f. 502. F.
They are Excommunicated by the Pope f. 503. D. and 506. A. Their Castles taken
and Estates spoiled by the King f. 505. D.E. They choose Prince Lewis for their
King, and send Hostages for his Security f. 507. A. B. f. 510. l. 4. Their
success in Norf. Suff. and Cambridgeshire, etc. f. 514. A. How Prince Lewis
designed to deal with them Ibid. E.F. They repent of their Treasons, but
despair of pardon f. 515 A. They pursue the King from place to place f. 516. A.
What moved them to return to their Obedience f. 517. B. They are doubtful
whether they should adhere to Henry 3d or Prince Lewis f. 524. A. f. Ibid. C
They refuse to deliver up their Trusts to the King when he was of age f. 533.
C. They take Soutage of their Tenants by the Kings Grant f. 534. f. They of
Normandy, Britany, Poictou and Anjou do their Homage to young Lewis King of
France f. 540. B. They of England, and Richard Earl of Cornwall confederate
against King Henry Ibid. f. f. 541. l. 4. They refuse to obey the Kings Summons
upon pretended fears of Strangers f. 554. D. E. Their insolent Message to the
King Ibid. F. They come armed to London f. 555. B. The Reply they made to the
Kings Demands f. 566. B. They come armed to London to meet the King f. 569. f.
They oppose the Kings Engaging in a War with France f. 582. B. Ibid. D. E.
Their Answer to the Kings Demand of an Aid f. 590. C. They treat separate from
the Clergy Ibid. D. Their Complaints to the King, and requests Ibid. E.F. How
they would have the Government managed f. 591 l. 1 Their project of a new
Government Ibid. B. They deny the King an Aid against the Welsh Rebels, f. 592.
C. They deny him an Aid in a Parliament at London f. 600. f. f. 601 A. D. and f.
615. F. They favor Monfort Earl of Leicester, and reflect upon the Gascoigns.
f. 609. D. They Demand to choose the Justiciary Chancellor and Treasurer f.
614. B. Their reason against the Kings undertaking an expedition into Sicily f.
616. B. etc. f. 624. l. 2 Their complaints against him Ibid. A Their proposals
to him at Oxford, and his Grant Ibid C.E.F. They came Armed thither f. 625. A.
B. 24 chosen to correct what was amiss in the Government Ib. CDE What they
required of the King f. 626. B.C. What Parlements they ordained should be
holden Ibid. E.F. They quarrel with the King about his Brothers, etc. f. 628.
D. They choose the Justiciary Ibid. E. Their Oaths of Confederacy f. 629. A,
etc. Their Practices to enrich themselves f. 630. F. Their Letter to the Pope
to excuse themselves f. 631. A. Their Complaints against the Kings half
Brothers f. 632. C. D. Several of them sent to a Parliament in France f. 633.
E. F. They summon three Knights of every County to meet them at Albans f. 637.
F. They arm themselves and seize the Kings Towns f. 639. D. The Articles of
Peace between them and the King f. 640. A. Their Letter and Offer to the King
f. 641. A. C. They force the King to consent to a new Form of Government f.
643, 644, 645. They send to the Popes Legate and King of France to confirm
their proceedings Ibid. C. They and Montfort overthrown by Prince Edward, and
the King set at Liberty f. 652. C. D. All of them that adhered to Montfort
disinherited f. 653. E. A time set them to come in and make their Peace f. 656.
B. They enter and possess themselves of the Isle of Ely f. 657. F. Their
Forfeitures turned into Compositions f. 658. B. C. Their Answers to the Legates
Admonitions f. 659. F. Their insolent Demands of the King f. 660. E. Gilbert
Basset falls under the Kings Displeasure f. 555. A. He is received into the
Kings Favor and Council f. 560. E. F. Bastardy no bar to inheritance of
Princes f. 186. A. Batavians who they were, and where they dwelt f. 26. B.
Battle or Duel, what it was, and when granted f. 66. C. D. The manner of
claiming by it f. 147. E. F. Bailiffs what they were in Normandy and their
Power f. 162. A. Bailiwick what it anciently was f. 153. F. Thomas Becket His
Birth, Education and first Preferment f. 378. C. D. E. He is made Chancellor to
Henry the Second, his popular Entertainments f. 302. C. and 379. A. Kings and
Noblemen Sons committed to his trust Ibid. B. Noblemen and Knights do him
Homage Ibid. C. He Swears Homage to Prince Henry f. 304. C. His Great Bounty,
Liberality and Retinue f. 379. C. D. He is chosen Archbishop of Canterbury f.
304. D. and 379. E. F. He altered his manner of living f. 380. A. The Kings
mind alienated from him Ibid. B. C. D. He maintained the Exemption of Clercs
from Secular Power and Jurisdiction f. 381. A. B. and 389. B. C. His Answer to
the Kings Demands whether he would observe his Royal Customs f. 381. C. and
390. A. B. He consents to own the Kings ancient Laws f. 382. C. D. and 390. C.
D. He repents of what he had done f. 382. F. 390. E. His attempt to go over Sea
hindered f. 383. A. The Controversy between him and John Marshall Ibid. B. C.
He is cited into the Kings Court, but did not appear Ibid. D. E. He is accused
of Treason for refusing f. 384. C. Judgment demanded and pronounced against
him, and his submission to the Sentence Ibid. D. and 385. A. 390. F. He is
Prosecuted in two other Cases f. 385. B. C. D. He was advised by the Bishops to
compound with the King Ibid. E. He appeals to the Pope f. 386. C. E. His answer
to the Kings demand whether he would stand to the judgment of his Court f. 393.
A. f. 387. A. He was minded of his Oath at Clarendon, and his Answer Ibid. C.
D. E. F. His Demeanor before the King f. 391 E. The Kings complaint against him
Ibid. F. His Answer to the Barons f. 388. C. He took Ship at Sandwich and
Landed at Graveling f. 389. A. He is owned and judged a perjured Traitor by the
King, Bishops f. 392. A. E. His obstinate Answer to the Earl of Leicester Ibid.
F. He was kindly received by the French King f. 393. C. 397. A. The Pope would
hear nothing against him Ibid. E. He is charged by the King with 30000 l. but
pleads his Discharge Ibid. F. He asserted Kings received their power from the
Church f. 395. A. 400. l. 2. Ibid. C. D. E. His reservations and Threats Ibid.
F. He Nulls the Kings Laws and Excommunicates the Abettors of them f. 396. A.
B. C. His Revenues and Possessions Seized Ibid. F. His Relations Banished f.
397. l. 2. The Pope writes in his behalf to the King and Bishops Ib. B. C. D.
His Suffragan Bishops write to him in the Kings behalf f. 398. His Answer to
their Letter f. 399. E. etc. He Excommunicated such as adhered to the King f.
400. D. E. F. and 406. B. C. And all that received Benefices from Laymen f.
401. A. A meeting between the King and him Ibid. C. The Kings offer to him
approved by the French King Ib. D. E. F. The great men of England and France
against him f. 402. l. 1. Ibid. E. He excites the Pope against the King f. 403.
A. He suspended the Archbishop of York for Crowning young Henry, and the
Bishop of Durham f. 404. E. F. He is again reconciled to the King f. 405. C. D.
His return into England f. 406. B. He Excommunicated all the Bishops that were
present at young Henry's Coronation Ibid. C. D. 4 Knights while he was at Mass
Ibid. E. He was Canonized for a Saint, and famed for Miracles f. 413. A. B. C
His Translation Ibid. D. E. The Riches of his Shrine f. 414. A. A Jubilee for
him once in 50 years Ibid. B. C. Becket Fair why so called f. 413 F. Robert de
Belismo Summoned to Trial by Henry 1. His Crimes f. 237. E. He fled and
fortified his Castles f. 238. A. B. His Estate and Honors taken from him in
England Ibid. E. His great strength and possessions in Normandy Ibid. F. He
burnt the Abbey of Almanisca and beat Duke Robert f. 239. B. C. Duke Robert made
a Peace with him without the Kings knowledge f. 240. A. B. His cruelty and
inhumanity to such as favored King Henry Ibid. F. He is impeached and
imprisoned by the Kings Court f. 245. E. Beneficia the same with Feuda among
the Germans f. 72. B. Stephen Berkstede Bishop of Chichester promised Heaven to
such as dyed fighting for the Barons f. 645. B. Robert Fitz Bernard made
Governor of Waterford and Wexford f. 360. F. Bibroci who they were f. 10. l. 2.
Hugh Bigot Burned Norwich f. 318. B. Roger made Earl Marshall f. 596. l. 1,
Hugh chosen Justiciary by the Baron f. 628. E. Margaret Biset discovered a Plot
against the Life of Hen. 3. f. 571. D. Bishoprics when first removed from
Villages to Cities f. 215. A. B. Bishops Chief Justices of England f. 151. B.
etc. They oppose Augustine and refuse Subjection to Rome. f. 103. D. Their
complaint to King Hen. 3. of Injuries offered to the f. 574. B. They are
Seconded by the Chapters Ibid. C. They are imposed on by the Pope in the
Council at Lions f. 595. E. A new oppression put upon them by the Pope Ibid. F.
They absent themselves from a Council at London f. 597. C. They are forced to
make large Contributions to the Pope f. 600 D. They oppose the Popes Demands f.
609. A. Their offer of money to the King upon Conditions f. 610. F. Their
reasons against the Kings Demands for his Expedition into Sicily f. 617. F.
They submit to the Kings desires f. 618. D. They, all Abbats and Priors forced
to go to Rome and compound for their Confirmation f. 622. A. B. Those that
favored Simon Monfort were Excommunicated f. 659. E. Their Answer to the Kings
Demands in the Parliament at St. Edmunds Bury f. 661. C. They refuse to assist
the King with money f. 663. A. The Pope granted the King a Tenth upon all their
Ecclesiastical Revenues for 3 years Ibid. B. C. Their Composition with the King
f. 664. C. John Blundus chosen Arch-B^shop of Canturbury f. 550. E. His
Election voyded by the Pope f. 554. D. Boadicia Barbarously treated by the
Romans f. 18. E. She appears at the Head of an Army and is overthrown by
Suetonius f. 20. B. She poisoned her self Ibid. D. E. Bockland what it was f.
66. A. The same with Allodium f. 67. A. Bodotria where it was f. 24. B. Boduni
who they were f. 12. D. Humfr. de Bohun defeated the Earl of Leicester and took
him Prisoner f. 316. A. ^ Boioarian Laws when first given f. 60. B. Boniface
Chosen Archbishop of Canturbury f. 577. E. Bordarii who they were f. 206. E.
Brabanters their Victory over the Britans f. 314. F. They Besiege Dole and
carry it f. 315. A. B. William de Breteul or Bretevil dies without Lawful issue
f. 239. C. A great contention who should succeed him Ibid. D. All parties
reconciled by Robert Earl of Mellent f. 240. A. Brief why so called f. 175. E.
F. Brigantes who they were f. 14. F. Britanniae Comes who he was f. 41. D.
Ibid. E. Britanniae Dux His Ensigns, Garrisons and Officers f. 43. D. E. F. The
Number of his Forces in his Garrisons f. 45. B. The whole Force under his
Command f. 47. C. D. E. Britain divided by the Romans into Provinces f. 36. E.
F. Discovered to be an Island f. 25. D. Britans send their Ambassadors to
Julius Caesar f. 1. E. They endeavor to prevent his Landing f. 2. D. Roman
Ships f. 3. A. They are routed by the Romans, and sue for Peace. Ibid. D. They
surprise the Romans in their foraging f. 4. E. Their manner of fighting with
Chariots f. 5. A. and 8. D. E. Their manner of fortifying f. 7. B. A fight
between them and the Romans f. 8. B. Their retreat to Hills and Woods Ibid.
They are totally routed and many slain f. 9. A. f. 10. A. A tribute imposed
upon them by Caesar Ibid. C. They fail in the payment after his Death f. 11. l.
1. They are overthrown by Plautius f. 12. D. They were vanquished by Claudius
and then Honor him as a God f. 13. D. E. They amazed the Romans with their
Habits and hideous Gestures f. 18. C. Ibid. D. They vanquished the Romans and
slew 80000. f. 19. f. They are again Conquered by Suetonius f. 20. D. E. They
are Civilized by Agricola f. 23. D. E. F. They are Amazed at his Fleet f. 24.
F. They associate with the Caledonians f. 25. D. They are totally defeated by
Agricola and are made a Roman Province f. 26 A. B. C. E. Roman Laws. f. 27. E.
They secure themselves in Fastnesses and Bogs f. 30. B. They yield part of
their Country to Severus, and make Peace with him Ibid. C. D. Many of them that
were transported by Maximus, were seated in Britany in France. f. 38. A. They
revolt from the Romans, and what Encouraged them f. 39. A. They are horribly
infested by Scots and Picts Ibid. B. They petition Honorius for Assistance, and
are relieved Ibid. C. The Romans Speech to them Ibid. E. Their miserable State
after the Romans departure f. 40. A. and 93. B. They send for Relief, but in
vain f. 40. B. They were invaded by the Scots and Francs f. 58. A. What their
Government was after the Romans Departure is f. 93. D. Their Looseness and
Debauchery Ibid. F. They were miserably destroyed by the Saxons f. 95. C. D.
Their Bishops refuse the Popes Jurisdiction f. 103. A. B. They would not accept
Augustine for their Archbishop Ibid. E. Britans in France confederate against
Henry the Second, but are subdued f. 306. E.F. Britany annexed to the Crown of
France f. 562. C. Four British Bishops at the Council of Arles f. 33. E. Three
at the Council of Ariminum f. 35. lin. 1. William Briwere, His Answer to the
Great Men's Demands of a Confirmation of their Liberties f. 531. F.
Bucinobantes, who they were f. 36. D. Burgundian, Laws when first given f. 60.
A. Byrinus converted the West Saxons f. 105. E.
C.
JUlius Caesar resolved to attempt Britain f. 1. C. He sent Caius Volusenus to
discover the Island Ibid. E. He made Comius King of the Attrebati Ibid. E. His
Arrival on the Coast of Britain f. 2. B. His Ships (where his Horse were) are
scattered by Tempest and Storm f. 4. A. His Standard-bearers Courage f. 3. B.
His Return into Gallia f. 5. E. He went every year into Italy f. 6. lin. 4. The
Senate Decree him a Supplication Ibid. E. His Return into Britain, and Success
against them f. 7. B. His Fleet suffered much by Storms Ibid. D. He Commands
the shattered Ships to be drawn on shore f. 8. lin. 1. His Ship camp what, and
where it was Ibid. F. He marched to Cassibelans Country f. 9. A. And takes it
f. 10. A. He returned to Rome through Gallia Ibid. D. His Oblation to Venus
Ibid. D. He imposed a Tribute upon the Britains Ibid. C. Caledonians who they
were f. 24. F. Caligula his Luxury and Impositions f. 11. D. His Expedition
into Gallia and Britain Ibid. His vaunting Letters to the Senate Ibid. E. f.
12. l. 1. Cambridge Castle built by the Conqueror f. 194. A. B. John de
Camecava sent hither by the Pope to be Beneficed fol. 605. F. Gerard de Camvill
appealed of Robery and Treason and his Answer f. 442. E. F. Cangi, who they
were f. 14. F.. England f. 296. F. Capitulary of Charles the Great, by whom
Collected f. 61. A. It was esteemed the Common Law of Germany Ibid. D. E.
Caracalla his Inhumanity and Cruelty f. 30. F. Carausius rebelled against
Dioclesian and assumed Britain fol. 31. E. Cartismandua betrayed Cataractus f.
15. A. She discardeth her Husband Venutius f. 17. B. Cassi, who they were f.
10. lin. 2. Cassibelan made General of the Britains f. 8. A. His Policy to
weary out the Romans. f. 9. C. Who he was Ibid. E. He was defeated in
attempting the Roman Ship-Camp fol. 10. B. He sueth to Caesar for Peace and
obtained it Ibid. C. Cataractus his Character and great Courage f. 15. B. C. D.
Ostorius with his Wife and Daughter f. 16. A. They are carried to Rome, and
honorably treated, and set at Liberty by Claudius Ibid. C. Cattuellani, who
they were f. 12. D. Celts, who they were f. 33. C. F. Cenemagni, who they were
f. 10. lin. 2. Champion from whence derived f. 150. E. f. 152. F. Charta Magna,
and de Foresta, when granted f. 497. C. To be read in all Bayliwics f. 499. B.
Charter of Liberties to be commanded to be observed f. 528. E. None to be
sealed with the Kings Great Seal till he was of Age f. 529. A. Of Liberties and
Forests granted by King Henry the Third f. 535. B. f. 611. B. C. Hugh de
Chaumont taken Prisoner by King Richard's Domestic Servants f. 453. E. Earl of
Chester threatened King Henry the Third, and Justiciary Hubert f. 533. D. He
would not permit any Religious within his Jurisdiction to pay any thing to the
Popes Collector f. 543. A. He was left General of Henry the Thirds Army in
France f. 545. E. He made inroads into Anjou and Normandy Ibid. F. He defeats
the French Kings Designs f. 546. E. His Reply to King Henry's Demand of an Aid
f. 548. B. He dissuaded the King from his severity to Hubert de Burgh his
Justiciary f. 551. A. Christian Religion not planted in Britain in Tiberius
Nero's time f. 11. B. When first planted in this Kingdom, and by whom f. 17. E.
F. Christians persecuted throughout the Empire f. 32. D. E. Chrysantas Bishops
of Constantinople made Vicar of Britain f. 38. F. Cincia, Daughter to the Earl
of Provence, Married to Richard Earl of Cornwall f. 588 F. She is brought to
Bed of her Son Edmund f. 603. A. Cistercian Monks denied King Henry the Third
one years profit of their f. 587. F. They compound with King Richard for their
Wool f. 442. C. Clamores Populi what f. 334. E. Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, deserted S. Montfort Earl of Leycester f. 650. C. He raises an Army
and enters London f. 662. C. He demands the Tower, but is denied Ibid. E. He
sues for Peace and obteins it Ibid. F. What Security he gives for his good
behavior f. 663. A. Clarendon, Statutes made there by Henry the Second f. 326,
etc. and 382. B. Claudius chooses Britain for his Province f. 12. A. His
Victory over the Britains, and is Saluted Emperor f. 13. D. E. His Triumph and
the Honors done him f. 14. A. His kind Reception of Cataractus f. 16. C. He was
surnamed Britannicus f. 13. F. He sent Aulus Diclius his Lieutenant into
Britain f. 17. A. Clement the Fourth chosen Pope f. 654. C. He granted to King
Henry the Third a Tenth for three years on all Ecclesiastical Revenues f. 663.
B. C. Clergy of Berkshire refuse to comply with the Popes Legate f. 576. C.
Their Reasons against paying any Money to him Ibid. D. Their Jurisdiction in
England restrained by Henry the Third f. 599. D. E. Italian and Roman their
yearly Revenues in England f. 592. F. f. 610. A. Clergymen, Judges and Lawyers
in the Conquerors time f. 154. E. F. They were first brought under Military
Service by him f. 212. A. Exempt from Lay-Courts f. 169. A. Not to give
Judgment in Life, or loss of Member f. 215. B. A Canon for their Security
against the Rapine of Soldiers f. 295. A. Their Insolence and Wickedness in
Henry the Second's time f. 380. F. 381. F. and 182. All such as adhered to
Prince Jews were to be banished f. 528. D. All that were beneficed to pay a
Fifteenth to the King f. 539. E. All the Italian Clergy plundered of their Corn
and Money f. 548. D. Clerus and Populus, Who f. 395. A. Clodius Albinus made
Governor of Britain f. 29. B. Cnute chosen King by the Bishops and Abbats f.
126. C. His Success against Edmund Ironside f. 127. A. He surprizeth the
Witnesses to the Agreement between them Ibid. B. C. f. 128. A. B. C. He built
Bury-Abby Ibid. D He gained Norway by Bribes Ibid. E. His great Justice in some
things Ibid. F. The Constitutions and Laws he enforced and made f. 129. B. C.
D. He divided his Kingdom among his Sons Ibid. Miles Cogan made Governor of
Dublin f. 357. C. He overthrew and beheaded Hasculf Ibid. D. He was made
Constable of Ulster f. 369. C He was treacherously slain f. 371. A. Richard his
Brother succeeded him Ibid. D. Cogidunus a Britain confederated with the Romans
f. 15. A. Sir Edward Coke his Assertion about the Norman Law groundless f. 180.
D. William de Coleingham his Courage and Fidelity f. 511. lin. 4. Comes, a
Title of great Honor and Office f. 80. E. Comes Britanniae, who he was f. 41.
D. Littoris, who he was f. 42. lin. 1. and E. What Soldiers and Garrisons under
his Command f. 42. B. He was a Judge in the German Laws f. 79. E. Commodus the
Emperor Strangled by Narcissus f. 29. C. Community of the Clergy and Laity sent
Letters to the Pope and Cardinals f. 598. A. B. C. They choose twelve to
represent them in Parliaments f. 627. A. C. The Names of the Twelve Ibid. D. E.
Conradus Salicus his Constitution about Fees f. 73. lin. 1. Conservators of the
Peace appointed by Henry the Third while he was S. Montforts Prisoner f. 642.
D. They summon four Knights from every County Ibid. F. f. 644. A. And displaced
them at their pleasure Ibid. B. Constantine the Great, how he Governed the
Empire f. 33. C. He drew the Garrison off from the Frontiers Ibid. D. He called
two Councils at Arles and Nice Ibid. E. He divided the Empire between his Sons
f. 34. lin. 4. The Junior murdered f. 34. A. Constantin a Citizen of London,
Author of a great Riot there f. 530. E. f. 531. lin. 3. He and two more
Executed Ibid. A. Constantius Clorus sent into Britain against Carausius f. 32.
A. He burnt his Ships after his landing, and defeated Electus Ibid. C. He gave
Christians free Exercise of their Religion Ibid. F. His Death at York f. 33.
lin. 1. Convention or Council of the Great Men at Oxford f. 276. lin. 1. A
general one at London, and who called to it f. 291. F. Of Bishops and Chief Men
at Wallingford f. 299. B. Of the Bishops and Chief Men at Roven f. 304. A. Of
the Bishops and all the Chief Men at London f. 309. F. Of Bishops, Earls and
Barons at Northampton f. 324. F. Of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons at
Windsor f. 333 E. Of Bishops, Abbats, Earls, Barons, Clerks and Laics at
Gamlington f. 343. E. At Northampton, and who were the Constituent parts f.
441. D. At St. Albans f. 487. E. At Reading f. 490. B. At St. Paul's, London f.
492. A. B. In a Meadow between Stanes and Windsor f. 496. F. The two Charters
of Liberties and Forests granted there f. 497. C. Of the Great Men at
Westminster f. 529. E. Vid. Parliament. Conveyances of Land where entered f. 79.
C. Philip de Covel made Sheriff of Middlesex by Henry the Third f. 654. A.
Council of Bishops called at Hartford by Archbishop Theodore f. 106. D. At
Hatfield at the Command of four Kings Ibid. E. At Becanceld where King Withred
presided f. 107. C. The Acts of it subscribed by Women Ibid. At Cloveshoe where
Elthelbald presided f. 108. A. A second there, where Archbishop Cuthbert
presided Ibid. C. D. E. At Winchester where Tithes were settled f. 112. C. At
Aenham by Ethelred f. 126. lin. 1. What Canons were made there Ibid. A. B. At
Winchester by the Conqueror f. 212. F. At Lambeth by Anselme f. 235. lin. 3. At
Roven f. 247. F. At Rhemes under Pope Calixtus f. 250. B. At Westminster under
Anselme f. 257. F. At Troyes to dispose of vacant Churches f. 262. E. At
Winchester to which King Stephen was cited f. 278. A. Another at Winchester,
which set up Maud the Empress f. 283. F. At Lateran under Innocent the Second
f. 294. A. At Northampton by Ottobon the Legate f. 659. E. At Westminster called
by the Popes Legate f. 287. B. At Devises by Maud the Empress Ibid. F. In
Normandy with the Decrees made there f. 410. F. and 411. At Westminster by
Richard Archbishop of Canterbury f. 414. D. At York by Archbishop Hubert f.
458. D. At Reading by Jo. Ferentin the Popes Legate f. 475. D. Court of Guard
whence it came f. 4. F. Leet and Baron whence derived f. 55. A. Courtesy of
England what f. 175. A. From whom brought f. 71. F. Croyland Abbey plundered by
the Danes, the great Treasure found in it f. 114. E. Cross, The Controversy
between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York about bearing it f. 414. E.
Crusado undertaken by the Kings of England and France f. 342. D. Such as
refused, were to pay the Tenth of their Estates f. 344. B. Ibid. E. Cuneus,
what it signifies in a Military sense f. 47. E. F. Cunobelin made Governor of
the Trinobants f. 11. A. John de Curcy, sets upon Ulster, took Down, and
obtained a great Victory over Roderic f. 366. B. C. D. He entered into an
Alliance with Amoric de S. Laurentio f. 367. A. B. His second Battle with the
Irish at Fern Ibid. E. F. f. 368. E. F. and 369. B. He was made Governor of
Ireland f. 372. F. Cursac, Emperor of Cyprus taken Prisoner by Richard the
First fol. 430. F. He was sent Prisoner to Tripoli f. 431. lin. 4 He is set at
Liberty f. 438. A.
D.
DAnes Invade England f. 109. C. They are vanquished by King Egbert f. 111. A.
They receive constant supplies of Men f. 112. A. 114. D. E. They come under the
Conduct of Hingnar and Hubba fol. They Pillage and Destroy Religious Houses,
and all other places f. 114. B. They are overthrown by Aelfred and beg Peace f.
115. B. What King Elthelred granted them f. 123. E. F. Dane-geld, what it was
Ibid. Danes said to be Massacred on St. Brice's night f. 124. A. The Truth of
the Story questioned Ibid. E. Danish Fleet assist Edgar Etheling, and his
Confederates against the Conqueror f. 195. B. David King of Scots invaded
England f. 274. C. A Peace between him and King Stephen Ibid. He assisted Maud
the Empress f. 279. F. His Army routed by the English f. 280. lin. 1. David
Prince of Wales offered his Homage to Henry the Third fol. 575. A. Ibid. B. C.
His Treachery to his Brother Griffin f. 578. lin. 1. He Swears Fealty to King
Henry Ibid. C. The Articles of his Charter of Submission f. 580. A. B. C. He
offered to hold his Kingdom of the Pope f. 592. D. He besieged and took
Monthalt Castle Ibid. F. He died without Issue f. 594. B. Deans rural, who they
were f. 537. F. Dermot Fitz-Murchard, Prince of Leinster, ravished Prince
Ororic's Wife f. 350. E. He was driven out of his Country, and came to implore
the King of Englands Assistance Ibid. F. He obtained the Kings Letters Patents
f. 151. A. He gave large Promises to the English to assist him Ibid. C. D. His
Bargain with Richard Earl of Strigul, and Robert Fitz Stephen Ibid. and f. 352.
A. He reduced Wexford, and Marched to Ossery f. 353. A. B. The Osserians
routed, and their Prince Swear Fealty to him Ibid. D.C. He concluded a Peace
with Roderic f. 354. C. He wasted the Country about Dublin Ibid. E. He designed
to make himself Monarch of Ireland f. 355. A. He sent for more English Forces
Ibid. B. His Death f. 357. B. Dermot Mac-carti Swore Fealty to King Henry the
Second f. 359. F. Ralph de Diceto, His Account of King Richard's Coronation
fol. 422. A. B. Aulus Didius, Claudius his Lieutenant in Britain f. 17. A.
Dinoth, Abbat of Bangor opposed Augustine f. 103. B. C. Dioclesian Saluted
Emperor f. 31. D. He was a great persecutor of the Christians f. 32. E.
Disinherited vid. Barons, Such as had no Lands how punished f. 659. A. Ditches
of Defense where usual cast up f. 87. B. Devils Ditch where, and its extent f.
86. D. Domesday Book, by whom made, and in what Method f. 205. A, etc. Why so
called, and how Towns and Manners were entered f. 206. and 207. A. Donald O Bren
breaks his Oath to Henry the Second f. 363. A. He besieges Limeri^ f. 364. A.
Dorchester made a Bishops See f. 105. F. Dublin besieged and taken by Reymond
f. 356. C. D. Besieged by the Irish Princes, and much pressed for want of
Victuals f. 357. E. F. It Is delivered up to Henry the Second King of England f.
360. D. Duncan by the Assistance of William Rufus obteins the Kingdom of
Scotland f. 222. E. He was treacherously slain f. 223. E. Dunstan enjoined King
Edgar seven years penance for forcing a Nun f. 121 F. Dunwich made a Bishops
See f. 105. C.
E.
EAdbald, Son to Ethelbert, relapseth to Paganism, but is again converted by
Laurentius f. 104. B. Eadmer, Chaplain to Archbishop Lanfranc, elected
Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland f. 268. D. He ws rejected for his
haughtiness Ibid. E. Earls Chief Justiciaries of England f. 151, 152. Earldom,
a name of Office, and when it became Hereditary f. 81. B. Not hereditary in
King Elfreds days Ibid. D. What Possessions and Profits belonged to it Ibid. F.
and f. 82. A. Easter, a great Controversy about the observation of it f. 106.
A. Edgar reproved the Clergy for their idleness and viciousness f. 121. A. He
appointed three Bishops to reform them Ibid. B. Ibid. His great Strength at Sea
Ibid. D. He enjoined the Welsh a Tribute of Wolves Ibid. C. Eight Kings swear
Fidelity to him Ibid. E. His inordinate Lust punished by seven years Penance
Ibid. F. He built and repaired forty seven Monasteries f. 122. A. Edlingi, who
they were f. 82. B. Edmund King of the East Angles slain by the Danes f. 113.
E. Athelstan his success against the Danes f. 120. A. He made many
Ecclesiastical Laws Ibid. B. He was unfortunately slain by a Thief Ibid. C. D.
Edmund Ironside set up by the Londoners f. 126. D. He was totally defeated by
Cnute* f. 127. A. Edmund Archbishop of Canturbury f. 559. D. He opposed the
Popes Legates Demands, but at length consented to them f. 575. E. Pontiniac
Ibid. F. His Death f. 577. lin. 1. Edmund the second Son to Henry the Third
Invested with the Kingdom of Sicily and Apulia by the Pope f. 615. C. He
undertook the Cross f. 664. E. He was Married to Avelin, daughter to the Earl
of Holderness f. 665. B. Edred subdued the Northumbrians and Scots f. 120. E.
Edric his Ingratitude and Treachery to his Prince f. 124. F. His barbarous
advice to Cnute f. 127. F. He is put to Death f. 128. B. Edward the Elder
fought the Danes with good success f. 117. D. He confirmed the League with
Godrun, and Enacted many Ecclesiastical Laws f. 118. A. Edward the Younger
Murdered by his Mother in Law Elfred f. 122. E.F. Edward the Confessor made
King f. 130. E. Goodwins Daughter f. 131. A. The Encouragement he gave the
French Ibid. B. C. The English murmur against their Preferments Ibid. D. He
sent his Queen into a Nunnery f. 133. A. The difference between him and Earl
Goodwin composed, and his Queen again received Ibid. E. F. He declared William
Duke of Normandy his Successor f. 135. A. Prince Edward Eldest Son to Henry the
Third born f. 572. C. The Londoners swear Allegiance to him f. 575. A. He was
made Governor of Gascoigny and received their Homage f. 608. A. B. He was
Married to Alienor, Sister to the King of Spain f. 613. A. His return into
England, and adhered to the Barons fol. 637. B. C. He was made Prisoner by
Montfort f. 640. C. He was sent to Dover Castle f. 642. lin. 2. He purchased
his Liberty, but continued a Prisoner at large f. 649. B. D. He made his
escape, and raised Forces f. 650. E. His Father declared him a Rebel f. 651. C.
He Surprised and Defeated Simon Montfort f. 652. A. B. C. He and his Brother
Edmund are signed with the Cross f. 664. E. His preparation for the Holy Land
f. 665. C. He was kindly received by the King of France at Tunis Ibid. F. He
escaped a great and dangerous attempt upon his Life at Acon f. 666. B. C. Edwin
King of Northumberland converted, and then he built York f. 104. B. 105. A.
Edwin ejected the Monks out of Monasteries, and brought in Seculars f. 120. F.
Egbert first Monarch of the Saxon Heptarchy f. 110. B. He vanquished the Danes
f. 111. A. He gave the Name to England Ibid. B. Peter Egeblanck Bishop of
Hereford, his project to supply Henry the Third with Money f. 615. A. B. He
puts it in Execution f. 619. A. Ely Isle defended against William the Conqueror
f. 196. C. D. The Abbat and Monks submit upon Terms Ibid. E. F. The Bishopric
erected out of Lincoln f. 264. lin. 2. The Churches Plea for Recovery of Lands
f. 141. lin. 1. Bishop William Chancellor to Richard the First, and Chief
Justiciary f. 425. A. F. He was made Legate f. 426. A. He made the Ditch about
the Tower of London Ibid. B. He levied an Aid for the Kings use, and displaced
the Sheriff of York, and punished the Citizens and Military Tenants Ibid. D. E.
A great difference between him and Earl John the Kings Brother f. 429. A. His
haughtiness Ibid. B. He imprisoned Geofry Archbishop of York f. 432. E. He was
summoned to appear in the Kings Court, but refused Ibid. F. A Skirmish between
his, and Earl John's Retinue f. 433. A. He was charged with great Misdemeanors,
and deposed from his Chancellorship Ibid. B. C. The different Characters of him
f. 434. A. B. C. His Bishopric seized to the Kings use Ibid. F. He has only
the Character of the Kings Messenger f. 437. C. Ely Isle taken and plundered,
and the Cathedral redeemed from burning by the Prior f. 506. F. The
disinherited Barons secure themselves in it f. 657. F. Emme, Mother to Edward
the Confessor put to the fire Ordeal f. 133. B. The truth of the story
questionable Ibid. C. England by whom so called f. 111. B. Divided into Shires,
Hundreds and Tythings f. 116. E. English Church Government Independent of the
Roman See f. 88. A. The Popes Confirmation of several Donations no Argument of
his Jurisdiction here Ibid. B. Three Objections against this Assertion answered
Ibid. C. English Lands how divided and subdivided f. 159. C. D. E. Eorpwald
King of the East Angles converted to Christianity F. 105. B. Ermin-street f.
49. lin. 2. Henry de Essex his Cowardice f. 299. D He was accused of Treason by
Robert Montfort. His punishment Ibid. E. Essoins in what Cases allowed f. 166.
C. Ethelbald conspired against his Father, and divided the Kingdom with him f.
112. D. E. His Luxury f. 108 B. Ethelbert his Laws made after the Roman Example
f. 59. D. He received the Christian Faith f. 102, 103. Ethelmar recommended by
King Henry the Third, to the Bishopric of Durham f. 602. E. He was chosen
Bishop of Winchester with great reluctance f. 604. B. C. His Election confirmed
by the Pope f. 605. E. He was forced out of England by the Barons f. 628. E. f.
635. B. F. Ethelred the Third, Son of Ethelwolph fought the Danes nine times in
one year f. 114. A. Ethelred the Son of Edgar by Elfrid, an easy and unactive
King fol. 123. A. He was betrayed by the Nobility, and bought his Peace with
the Danes Ibid. E. F. He with his Queen, and Sons, fled into Normandy fol. 125.
He was recalled by the English, and joyfully received Ibid. C. His whole Race
abjured by the Bishops and Abbats f. 126. C. Ethelwolph granted the Tithes of
all England to the Church fol. 112. A. B. All the Kings and Nobility of England
subscribed it Ibid. C. He gave 300 Marks yearly to Rome f. 113. lin. 4. Evesham
Battle between Prince Edward and S. Montfort f. 652. C. Eustace Earl of
Bulloign makes a visit to Edward the Confessor f. 132. A. Eustachius, Son to
King Stephen, his death f. 292. F. Exchequer, English the same with the Norman
f. 160. E. Common Pleas holden there f. 61. A. Who Judges, and Assessors, and
the diversity of Pleas used there Ibid. B. Normans first sat there Ibid. C.
Exetor City stands out against the Conqueror f. 192. F. They submit and are
pardoned f. 493. A.
F.
Foelix, a Burgundian converted the East Angles f. 105. B. Falcasius de Brent,
his Policy and Courage f. 526. B. His unwillingness to part with what he had
gotten, by Rapine and Plunder in time of War f. 528. A. B. His Rebellious
Practices f. 534. B. He was excommunicated, his Submission and Imprisonment
Ibid. D. E. F. He is sentenced to abjure the Kingdom f. 536. A. B. He was
encouraged in his Treasons by some great men Ibid. C. Otho the Leg at moved in
his behalf, but without Success fol. 537. C. D. A great Fair proclaimed at
Westminster to hold fifteen days f. 601. F. Fees when first Hereditary f. 81.
B. When and by whom made Servile f. 156. B. They were Originally Military Ibid.
C. Three sorts called Tenure in Capite f. 157. lin. 1. Military upon what
account granted Ibid. A. To what forfeitures they were subject Ibid. C. D. E.
Feudal Tenures, from whence they arose f. 56. D. Feudal Law, not written till
Frederic the First f. 72. F. It obtained in France and Germany f. 73. F. How
and when it might be relaxed f. 160. A. Feudal Investiture f. 203. F. Fines
levied in County Courts f. 146. B. C. Flemmings removed into Wales by King
Henry the First f. 246. D. E. They desert King John f. 510. F. Folkland, what
it was fol. 66. A. William Foret seized Biham Castle, and plundered the Country
fol. Pope Formosus, His Letter to King Alfred suspected to be a Fogery f. 90.
E. 91. B. William de Fortibus, vid. Albamarle. Fosse way, where f. 49. lin. 2.
France Interdicted f. 463. C. Francs, who they were, and where they dwelt. f.
60. E. They Married not their Daughters, without their Kings consent f. 73. D.
Their Children brought up in the Kings Court Ibid. E. Frederic, Abbat of St.
Albans with many others take refuge in the Isle of Ely f. 196. B. C. Frederic
the Emperor Married Isabel Sister to Henry the Third fol. 562. F. He summoned
a meeting of all Christian Princes f. 567. C. He was excommunicated by the Pope
f. 572. C. French, they refuse to join with King Richard in the Seige of
Jerulem f. 431. E. The Nobility Arm themselves one against another f. 544. C.D.
They refuse to submit to the Queen Regent, and leave the Court Ibid. E.
Freemen in Germany, who, and their Condition f. 83. E. They were constantly
bound to their good behavior under the Saxons Ibid. F.
G.
GAfolland, what it was f. 67. F. Galgagus, General of the Caledonians f. 25.
F. Gilbert de Grand made Earl of Lincoln by Prince Lewis f. 513. D. Gascoigns
Subdued by Earl Richard of Cornwall f. 535. F. They do Homage to Henry the
Third f. 545. B. S. Montfort, Earl of Leicester, his success against them fol.
602. F. 606. A. Ibid. F. They repeat their Complaints by solemn Messengers fol.
607. A. B. Prince Edward made their Governor f. 608. A. B. English Affairs
there in an ill Condition f. 610. C. They crave the King of Englands Assistance
f. 611. D. Gavelkind, what it was f. 165. C. Geofrey, Son to the Earl of Anjou,
Married to Maud the Empress f. 254 B. England by his Wife, but delayed his
coming f. 288. A. D. He gave Anjou to his Son Geofry by Will f. 299. F. An
Agreement between him and Henry the Second his Brother f. 300. B. Nants chose
him for their Lord. His Death Ibid C. Geofry, Son of Henry the Second, does
Homage to Philip Son of King Lewis of France for Britany f. 307. D. Britany
Ibid. E. He was Knighted by his Father f. 333. C. He did Homage to his Elder
Brother Henry f. 338. E. He was slain in a Military Conflict f. 341. E. His
Wife left with Child of Prince Arthur Ibid. Geofry Bishop of Ely died
Intestate, and his Estate seized by King Richard f. 420. F. Geofry, Elect of
York, appealed by the Bishops of Salisbury and Durham f. 424. B. His Election
confirmed by the Popes Legate, and he restored to his Arch-bishopric by King
Richard Ibid. C. Appeals against him released f. 424. E. His Oath to King
Richard f. 425. F. He breaks his Oath f. 432. D. He was imprisoned by the
Chancellor, and released by Earl John Ibid. E. F. f. 441. F. He is reconciled
to the Chancellor f. 444. B. C. The Canons of York complain against him to
Hubert the Justiciary f. 445 D. He was disseised of his Manners Ibid. F. He paid
2000 Marks to the King, and was reconciled to him f. 447. E. Geofry Archdeacon
of Norwich deserts King John's Service fol. 480. E. His punishment Ibid. Geofry
Fitz-Peter made Justitiary of England, by King Richard fol. 450. A. He sent
forth Itinerant Justices f. 455. F. Maurice Fitz Gerald Landed at Wexford in
Ireland with great Forces f. 354. D. German and French Laws when first composed
f. 60. lin. 1. They refused to admit of any Laws, but their own f. 62. A. How
they valued men's lives f. 63. lin. 3. How they valued their Cattle and Grain f.
64. A, etc. What punishment they inflicted on persons insolvent Ibid. D. E.
What was their rate for all sorts of faults and mulcts Ibid. F. How they purged
themselves when accused f. 65. A. Their Tenures agreeable to the Saxons f. 71.
B. Their Habiliments of War went with the Land Ibid. D. Their Tenures Feudal f.
72. B. They held their Courts twice in a year f. 74. B. The Bishop and Earl sat
together in their Courts f. 74. D. What Matters triable in their Hundred Courts
f. 75. C. D. How they forced an Appearance f. 76. C. A Form of their ancient
Judgment f. 77. D. E. F. Their Testes and Jurors the same f. 78. lin. 1. What
sort of men their Testes were to be Ibid. Their Judges and Officers like to the
English Saxons f. 79. E. Their Servants and Freeman, who, and their State f.
83. B. C. D. Their manner of making Laws, and how they agreed with the English
Saxons f. 84. B. They secured their Lands by great Ditches f. 86. A. When they
held their Councils f. 87. C. Their Princes called and presided, or others by
their appointment, in those Councils Ibid. F. Gessoriacum where it was f. 13.
F. Gilbert Prince of Galloway does Homage to Henry the Second f. 329. B. C.
Glanvil Justiciary of England of Norman Extraction f. 152. B. Glota where it
was f. 24. B. Godfrey Bishop of Winchester disseised f. 443. F. Godwin Earl of
Kent his Extraction f. 131. E. He refused (though sent) to punish the Citizens
of Canterbury f. 132. B. He was summoned to appear before his Peers for his
refusal Ibid. C. He raised an Army, and made bold demands Ibid. D. He and his
Sons banished Ibid. F. They much infest the English Coast fol. 133. D. The
difference between the King and them composed Ibid. E. F. His sudden death f.
134. A. Gogmagog Hills a Roman Camp f. 48. B. Goisfrid Bishop of Constance
Chief Justiciary of England f. 151. C. D. Gothrun King of the Danes converted
to Christianity f. 115. B. Northumberland granted to him by Elfred Ibid. C.
Gratian otherthrown and slain by Maximus f. 37. D. John de Gray Bishop of
Norwich, chosen by the Monks Archbishop of Canturbury f. 474. E. The
Suffragans oppose his Election f. 475. A. Ibid. B. His Election nulled by the
Pope f. 476. A. Walter de Gray chosen Archbishop of York, and gave 10000 l.
for his Pall f. 405 C. He was made Governor of England by Henry the Third f.
583. E. Gregory the Ninth made Pope f. 540. A. He voided and confirmed
Elections of Bishops at his pleasure f. 542. B. C. A Tenth of all Movables
granted and paid him in England and Ireland Ibid. E. F. His Policy to get Money
from the English f. 565. D. He Excommunicated Frederic the Emperor f. 572. C.
He and the Conclave chose Robert Brother to Lewis King of France, Emperor f.
573. F. His Demands of the Abbat, and Convent of Burgh f. 577. C. Ibid. D. His
Death 581. B. His Collector too nimble for Henry the Third Ibid. Griffin, Son
of Lewellin Prince of Wales treacherously used by his Brother David f. 578.
lin. 1. He offered to become Tenant to Henry the Third Ibid. A. and 579. C. His
unfortunate Death f. 589. F. Ralph de Guader conspired against the Conqueror f.
20^. B. C. He was defeated and put to flight, and his followers barbarously
used Ibid. D. His Valor in defense of Bretevil Castle f. 249. D. E. Guido the
first Legate ever the Pope sent into England f. 256. E. Baldwin de Gysnes
Governor of Monmouth Castle defeated by Richard Earl Marshall f. 557. A.
H.
HAdrian Saluted Emperor, and came into Britain with an Army f. 27. C. He made
a wall eighty Miles in length Ibid. D. Hageneth Castle taken f. 315. F.
Harde-Cnute made King by the English and Danes f. 130. B. He laid a great Tax
upon the Nation f. 130. C. His sudden Death Ibid. D. Harold sent into Normandy
by the Confessor to do Fealty to Duke William f. 135. B. His Promise to Duke
William to Marry his Daughter, and to secure the English Crown for him Ibid. D.
E. F. He was Crowned King by Aldred Ibid. His Answer to Duke Williams
Messengers f 136. A. His success against his Brothers, and other Enemies Ibid.
B. C. He was overthrown and slain by Duke William f. 137. B. His Sons invade
England f. 194. C. Hasculf attempted to regain Dublin f. 357. C. He was
repulsed, taken and beheaded Ibid. D. Helena, mother to Constantine, who she
was f. 33. A. B. Hengest and Horsa Chiefs of the Saxons f. 94. A. Kent given to
them for a reward Ibid. D. Henry the First King of England born f. 193. C. His
Charter for holding County and Hundred Assemblies f. 144. E. He convened the
County at his own pleasure f. 144. B. Controversies between great Barons
reserved to his own Court Ibid. C. Various accounts of his ascending the Throne
f. 233. C. D. E. He is Crowned, he sealed a Charter, and revoked Anselme f. 234
B. D. E. He was reconciled to his Norman Nobility f. 235. E. F. He made Peace
with his Brother Duke Robert 236. B. C. He summoned several great men to their
Trials f. 237. D. The great men of Normandy invite him thither f. 240. C. He
settled Peace among them, and rebuked his Brother Ibid. D. E. His second
Expedition into Normandy, and success there against Duke Robert his Brother f.
241. A. B. E. F. and f. 242. C. He sent his Brother Robert Prisoner into
England f. 243. A. He resumed his Fathers Lands in Normandy Ibid. B. C. His
Justice upon all Outrages, Rapes and Coyners f. 244. C. D. His Success against
the Earls of Montfort and Anjou fol. 245. C D. F. A Peace made between him and
the King of France f. 246. A. He made a Complete Conquest of Normandy Ibid. B.
C. He destroyed his Enemies Towns and Castles there, and overthrew Lewis King
of France f. 248. D. E. F. Pope Calixtus moved him in behalf of his Brother
Robert, f. 251. C. His Return into England and Marriage Ibid. F. and fol. 252.
B. He defeated the Confederacy of the Norman great men Ibid. C. E. F. They
submit to him and are received into Favor f. 253. A. He sent for his Daughter
Maud the Empress Ibid. B. He was disturbed by Geofry Duke of Anjou his Son in
Law f. 254. E. F. His Clemency and Bounty a little before his Death fol. 255.
B. He named his Daughter Maud his Success or Ibid. C. His kindness to the
Clergy, and rigor to Seculars Ibid. E. His quarrel with Anselm about
Investitures f. 257. A. B. E. He is reconciled to Anselm and parted with the
right of Investitures f. 261. A. and 263. B. His great Exactions to raise Mon^y
f. 261. C. D. He kept the Archbishopric of Canturbury five years in his hands
after Anselm's death f. 265. E. He would not prefer any English Man f. 266. l.
1. He would not suffer a Legate to come into England until desired f. 268. A.
269. B. He confirmed the Canons of Councils Ibid. D. And compounded with
Priests to let them live with their Wives Ibid. E. His Taxes and Impositions f.
270. His Issue Legitimate and Natural Ibid. C. D. f. 271. What Treasure he left
f. 273 B. Henry 2d. Eldest Son to Maud the Empress, comes into England and
Scots f. 288. D. E. f. 290. F. He received the Dukedom of Normandy f. 291. A.
He married Alienor Countess of Poictou, and secured Normandy, and returned into
England Ibid. D. E. F. and 292. D. Overtures of Peace between him and King
Stephen f. 292. F. The Terms on which the Accommodation was made f. 293. A. How
he came to the Crown of England f. 298. C. He Banished Strangers, and revoked
the Crown Lands alienated Stephen Ibid. D. F. His Son Henry born f. 299. B. His
Great Men swear Fealty to his Son William Ibid. He Subdued the Welsh and
received their Homage Ibid. C. D. He was absolved his Oath to his Brother
Geofry by Pope Adrian f. 300. A. The Agreement between him and his Brother
Ibid. B. Nants Surrendered to him by Conan Earl of Britany Ibid. E. Ibid. F. He
claimed the Earldom of Toulouse f. 301. B. His Expedition to pursue his Title
and Success Ibid. D. E. and f. 302. A. B. A Truce between him and the King of
France Ibid. D. The Number and Pay of his Soldiers Ibid. E. F. A firm Peace
between him and France f. 303. A. He received Giso^s and its Dependencies, and
took into his Normandy Ibid. C. D. F. He and the King of France were Yeomen of
the Stirup to Pope Alexander f. 304. B. He settled his Affairs in France and
returned into England Ibid. E. The King of Scots, Princes of South and North
Wales, and their great Men, do Homage to him and his Son Henry Ibid. F. A
breach between him and France f. 305. F. f. 306. A. 307. A. He subdues the
Rebellious Poictovins, Aquitans, and Britans f. 306. C. E F. A Peace between
him and France f. 307. C. He was in danger of being Shipwrackt in his return
home Ibid. F. He appointed Inquisitors in all Counties in England f. 308. A.
The Articles of their Inquiry Ibid. D. E. F. He caused his Son Henry to be
Crowned, and his Great Men to do him Homage and Fealty f. 310. A. B. C. He
passed into Normandy and l^ft Young Henry Viceroy Ibid. E. His Son deserts him
and adheres to France f. 312. E. His great kindness to his Son the young King
f. 313. A. A general Insurrection against him in France. f. 314. A. He routed
the King of France, and reduced his Rebellious Britans to Obedience. Ibid. D.
E. F. and f. 315. B. He treated his Sons with great kindness Ibid. C. D. A
Truce between him, the King of France, and King of Scots f. 316. E. His return
into England, and prevents his Sons designs f. 319. B. He passed again into
Normandy, and beat the French Ibid. F. and f. 320. A. B. C. Articles of Peace
between him and his Sons f. 321. A. B. They do him Homage f. 322. C. 323. B. He
returned into England with his Sons, and Fined all his Great Men for
Forfeitures in his Forests Ibid. C. D. His Sons received the Homages of the
King of Scots and his Nobility Ibid. F. and 324. A. B. He divided England into
six parts, and sent three Justiciaries f. 325. He Demolished several Castles in
England, and Normandy f. 329. A. He removed several Constables of Castles in
England fol. 330. D. The Welsh Kings and their Nobility do him Homage Ibid. F.
He appeals from the Legate to the Pope f. 331. C. D. Articles of Agreement
between him and France f. 332. A. etc. The Oath he put upon the Legate f. 333.
D. He divided England into four Circuits Ibid. E. He made young Philip sensible
of his Duty to his Father Lewis King of France f. 335.336. He received the
Homage of Philip Earl of Flanders fol. 336. A. The Peace between him and Philip
King of France confirmed Ibid. B. C. He appointed an Assise of Arms in his
Dominions Ibid. D. E. His Sons confederate against him f. 339. A. He sent Aid
to Pope Lucius Ibid. F. He did Homage to Philip King of France for all his
Transmarine Dominions f. 340. A. His Sons reconciled to one another f. Ibid. B.
He and the King of France undertook the Cross f. 342. D. Articles of Agreement
between them how to carry on and maintain f. 343. A. etc. Articles concerning
such as had undertaken, and such as refused the Cross f. 344. A. etc. He levied
a Tenth upon his Subjects, and imprisoned such as refused to pay it. Ibid. E.
His Answer to the Patriarch of Antioch's Letter f. 345. E. F. His Son Richard
with the King of France entered and wasted his Dominions beyond Seas f. 346. A.
B. 347. D. His Army routed by King Philip f. 348. B. He makes Peace, and does
Homage to him Ibid. D. E. What furthered his design of Conquering Ireland f.
350. A. etc. He recalled his English Subjects from thence f. 357. A. He Landed
at Waterford with a great Army f. 359. E. f. 360. A. B. Ireland confirmed to
him by the Pope Ibid. He confirmed the Decrees of a Council held at Cassil Ibid
C. He settled the Government and hastened into Normandy Ibid. F. and 361. A. He
made his Son John King of Ireland f. 369. E. He divided that Kingdom amongst
his Great Officers f. 370. D. His Title to Ireland f. 374. D. The Affairs of
the Church in his Reign f. 377. to 414. His Laws condemned by the Pope f. 394.
A. His Edict against the Pope and Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canturbury Ibid.
B. C. D E. F. His Edict against such as should bring Letters of Interdiction f.
396. D. Rome were punished Ibid. F. His Answer to the Popes Letter in behalf of
the Archbishop f 397. E. F. His Kingdom threatened to be Interdicted f. 403. C.
D. He appealed, and promised to submit to the Pope Ibid. F. His Reply to the
Excommunicated Bishops Petition f. 406. D. The Archbishop of York exasperated
him against the Archbishop of Canturbury Ibid. F. Rome f. 408. A. B. His
Expense at the Court of Rome Ibid. C. D. His purgation for the Death of Thomas
Becket f. 409 D. His Oath of Satisfaction and Penance f. 410. A. etc. The
manner of his Approach to St. Thoma's Tomb f. 412. D. E. F. He Cursed his Sons,
and soon after died f. 349. B. C. His Taxes and Issue Legitimate and Natural f.
416.417. The great Treasure he left f. 421. lin. 3. Henry 3. declared King and
Crowned f. 522. C. D. His Oath and Homage to the Pope Ibid. E. He rec^ived the
Homages of the Bishops and Earls. Ibid. A T^uce between him and Prince Lewis f.
524. B. A Peace concluded between them. The Form of it f. 527. B. C. D. f. 529.
C. 530. B. He Confirmed the Charter of Liberties f. 532. lin. 2. His Writ of
Inquiry to 12 Knights to search what they were Ibid. A. He demanded Normandy of
King Lewis Ibid. ^. He was declared of full Age by the Pope f. 533 A. B. His
Lenity to Rebels an encouragement to them f. 529. F. His grant to his Great Men
to take Scutage of their Tenants f. 534. F. He granted the Charters of
Liberties and Forests f. 535. B. C. He Knighted his Brother Richard and made
him Earl of Cornwall Ibid. E. H^ appointed 12 Knights to set the number and
bounds of Forests f. 536. D. E. He forbad the Prelates obliging their Lay-Fees
to the Pope f. 538. C. D. He Fined the Londoners and Cancelled the Charters
lately granted f. 539. D. F. A great quarrel between him and Earl Richard f.
540. D. E. He is reconciled to his Brother, and his Great Men f. 541. A. He
appointed new Measures of Grain, Wine, and Ale Ibid. B. He made a
disadvantagious Peace with the Welsh Ibid. F. He was invited into France, but
rejected the Offer f. 542. A. His Messengers at Rome promised the Pope a Tenth
of all Movables in England, and Ireland Ibid. B. He prepared to go over Sea,
but wanted Ships f. 543. B. C. He laid the Blame on Hubert Earl of Kent Ibid.
D. An Enterview between him and the King of Scots Ibid. F. A great Sum granted
for his Expedition into France f. 544. l. 1. He received the Homages of the
Britans, Anjovins, Poictovins, and Gascoigns Ibid. A. B. and f. 445. B. His
Army impoverished, and his return into England Ibid. D. E. He demanded Scutage
of his Military Tenants f. 546. A. He was dissuaded from marrying the King of
Scots Sister f. 547. E. His Great Men deny him an Aid f. 548. A. B. He pleads
his Poverty, and called his Great Officers to an account f. 549. E. F. He was
much incensed against Hubert Earl of Kent f. 550. D. A fortieth part of all
Movables granted to him Ibid. E. His Severity to Hubert f. 551. C. 552. A. B.
He is moved to compassion toward him Ibid. C. He removed Englishmen from his
Councils f. 553. F. The Insolent Message he received from his Barons f. 554. F.
His Military Tenants that refused to obey his Summons treated as Traitors f.
555. C. D. He broke his promise to Richard Earl Marshall f. 556. lin. 3. He
commanded the Bishops to Excommunicate him, but they refused him Ibid. D. His
Army defeated by the Mareschals Policy Ibid. E. F. He was advised by the
Bishops to remove Foreigners from his Council, and his Answer f. 559. B. C. He
reformed his Court, and made a Truce with Wales Ibid. E. F. and f. 560. F. His
Summons to his old Counsell^rs to stand to the Law f. 561. B. He sent
Assistance to the Earl of Brittan f. 562. A. He married Alienor Daughter to the
Earl of Provence f. 563. A. He removed several Sheriffs and Court Officers f.
564 D. E. His Chancellor refused to deliver up the Seal Ibid. F. He endeavored
to void such Grants as wanted the Popes confirmation f. 565. A. His gracious
Offer and Demand f. 566. A. A thirtieth part of all Movables granted, and the
condition upon which it was to be paid Ibid. E. and f. 567. lin. 1. f. 568.
lin. 3. An Agreement between him and the King of Scots Ibid. C. D. He sent
Assistance to the Emperor f. 571. A. A Plot against his Life discovered Ibid.
D. His displeasure against Simon Montford f. 573. A. The Emperors complaint
against him f. 574. C. He owned himself the Popes Feudatary Ibid. D. He
countenanced Papal exactions on the Clergy. f. 576. B. f. 577. D. He received
the Homage of David Prince of Wales f. 578. C. He Resolved upon an Expedition
into France, though dissuaded by the Parliament. f. 581.582. How he was received
in Gascoigny f. 583. F. His Daughter Margaret contracted to the King of Scots
eldest Son Ibid. He refused to renew the Truce with France f. 584. B. March
deserted him f. 585. D. He was put to great streights and many flights Ibid. B.
and f. 586. A. B. Scutage paid him all over England f. 587. A. His Great Men
leave him and return to England Ibid. B. He sent into England for supplies of
Victuals and Money f. 587. C. and 588. A. He was much deceived by Foreign
Counsels f. 587. D. France confirmed f. 588. B. His return into England, and
Pompous reception Ibid. C. D. He seized the Normans Estates in England f. 589.
D. E. The King of Scots refused to be his Tenent f. 590. A. The Great Men
refuse him an Aid unless their Grievances were redr^ssed Ibid. C. E. F. A new
Government projected for him f. 591. B. His promise to the Great Men Ibid. E.
Scots f. 592. A. His success in his Expedition against the Welsh f. 593. F. and
594. A. He first prohibited, and then consented to the Popes Exactions f. 596.
B. C. D. E. He restrained the Jurisdiction of the Clergy f 599. D. E. He was
sharply reproved by his Great Men, and then promised f. 601. A. His Speech to
the Parliament Ibid. C. He was constrained to sell his J^wels and Plate Ibid. D.
E. His wants forced him to ask Money of his Subjects f. 602. B. C. D. He and
s^veral of the Nobility undertake the Cross f. 603. B. He retrenched the
Expense of his Household f. 604. E. His Daughter Margaret married to Alexander
King of Scots f. 606. B. The Pope solicited him to assist the King of France
Ibid. D. Simon Montfort Earl of Leicester gave him the Lie f 607. E. The Great
Men take his part against him f. 609. D. His want of Money reduced him to great
streights f. 610. D. A tenth of all Church Revenues for three years, and a
Military f. 611. A. B. His Expedition into Gascoigny and success Ibid. D. E.
His Message to the Parliament at London for Assistance against the King of Spain
f. 612. B. The Answer of the Queen, Earl Richard, and the Great Men Ibid. C. D.
E. F. The Expenses of his Expedition. f. 613. B. He asked Money of his Great
Men, but was denied f. 614. A. His journey into Scotland to remedy his
Daughters Complaints Ibid. E. His Brother Richard and the Great Men refused to
lend him Money f. 615. E. F. His Demands for his Expedition into Sicily f. 617.
B. C. D. Hard Conditions put upon him by the Pope f. 618. E. F. His kindness to
his Brothers, and various ways to raise Money f. 620. E. F. The great Interest
of his Debts f. 621. A. He demanded his Rights in Normandy and France f. 622.
C. He appeased the Pope with a Present of 5000 Marks f. 623. lin. 3. He is
upbraided by Montfort f. 624. B. He put himself under the Popes power Ibid. D.
What he granted the Barons in the Parliament at Oxford f. Ibid. E. F. Why he
l^ft out the Titles of Duke of Normandy and Anjou f. 635. C. He employed the
Treasure in the Tower to repair it f. 636. D. False Stories report^d of him
Ibid. E. The Pope absolved him from his Oath to the Barons Ibid. F. He is
reconciled to his Great Men, and confirmed the Oxford Ordinances f. 638. A. B.
He displaced such Officers as were appointed by the Barons Ibid. D. The reasons
why he stood not to his Oath Ibid. E. The Articles of the Peace between him and
his Great Men f. 640. A. His Success against several places, and refusal of the
Barons Offer Ibid. E. F. and f. 641. D. He and his Brother Richard taken
prisoners Ibid. He appointed Conservators of the Peace f. 642. D. None to bear
Arms without his Licence^ f. 643. A. He was forced to agree to a new Form of
Government f. 644. He stood obliged to confirm whatever Peter Montfort should
swear f. 645. E. And forced to own whatever Simon Montfort suggested f. 646. A.
etc. His Command to all Sheriffs to keep out Strangers Ibid. B. C. D. E. F. and
f. 647.648. A. He was put under Guardians and Keepers f. 649. A. His endeavors
to reconcile Simon Montfort and the Earl of Gloucester f. 650 A. B. He declared
his Son Prince Edward a Rebel Ibid. E. F. He prohibited all his Subjects to
assist him, and commanded the f. 651. A. C. He was forced to declare his Loyal
Subjects Rebels Ibid. F. He was wounded in the Battle at Evesham f. 652. F. He
seized the Liberties of London f. 653. D. The Rebels Lands given him by
Parliament Ibid. E. His Grant of them to his Faithful Subjects Ibid. F. His
Clemency to such Rebels as submitted to him Ibid. He appointed a Custos of the
City of London f. 654. B. F. f. 657. B. He was forced to pawn his Jewels f.
660. F. A Tenth upon all Ecclesiastical Revenues for three years granted to him
by the Pope f. 663. B. C. He reduced or dispersed the Disinherited in the Isle
of Ely f. 664. C. D. His great care to secure his Subjects Goods Ibid. F. His
Sickness and Death f. 667. B. f. 668, 669, etc. Taxes in his Reign f. 671, 672.
The Irish Affairs in his Reign f. 673, 674. His Issue f. 675. Henry Eldest
Sonto Henry 2. born f. 299. B. He was married to Margaret Daughter to the King
of France f. 303. B. He received the Homages of the Bishops and Abbats of
England, Scots, Princes of N. and S. Wales, and their Great Men f. 304. C. F.
He was made Seneschal of France, and does Homage to that King f. 307. C. He was
Crowned King, and made Viceroy of England f. 310. A. E. He was Crowned again
with his Queen f. 311. C. He was alienated from his Father by the King of
France f 312. D. He forced his Servants to swear Fealty to him against his
Father f. 313 B. He received the Homages of many Great Men and Princes Ibid. E.
His designed Expedition into England prevented f. 317. A. 318. F. and 319. B.
He was recalled by the French King Ibid. F. f. 321. A. B. C He did Homage to
him f. 323. B. He passed over into Normandy with his Brother Richard fol. 329.
lin 1. His undutifulness to his Father, and submission f. 338. C. D. His
Brother Geofry did him Homage, but Richard refused Ibid. E. F. He and Geofry
con^ederate against their Father f. 339. A. ^e undertook the Cross against his
Fathers will Ibid. B. His Death Ibid. Henry Son to Richard King of the Romans
sent as an Hostage by the Barons to Dover Castle f. 642. l. 2. He was slain at
Viterbo in his return from Jerusalem fol. f. 666. l. 2. Henry Bishop of
Winchester King Stephens Brother made Legate in England f. 277. l. 1. He
Summoned King Stephen to appear before him Ibid. A. He sideth with Maud then
Empress f. 283. B. He acknowledged her to be Queen Ibid. D. E. His Speech to
the Bishops in her behalf against King Stephen f 284. His Answer to the
Londoners Petition Ibid. E. He deserted the Empress and adhered to King Stephen
f. 285. F. His complaint against the Empress, and design to ruin her f. 287.
B. He deposed her, and Excommunicated her Friends Ibid. D. His Repentance, and
labors for an Agreement f. 293. A. Henry Earl of Britan does Homage to Henry 3d
f. 543. E. He prevented the French Kings designs f. 546. E. He surrendered
Britany to the French, and turned Pyrate f. 562. C. D. Henry of Bath Justiciary
of Henry 3d accused of Bribery, etc. fol. 605. A. The King much incensed
against him Ibid. C. Earl Richard stood his friend and made his peace Ibid. D.
Heregeat or Heriot what it was f. 69. l. 1. And when paid f. 82. D. Hereward
defended the Isle of Ely against the Conqueror f. 196. C. D. He made his escape
f. 197. A. Herlot the Popes Notary sent into England f. 623. C. He privately
withdrew himself f. 632. F. Hertoldus Governor of Mirabell Castle, his fidelity
to Hen. 3. f. 586. B. He was kindly used by the French King Ibid. C. Herulians
who they were and where they dwelt f. 35. C. D. Hidage what it was f. 204. B.
Hingnar and Hubba, two Leaders of the Danes f. 113. D. Honor what it was f.
199. F. Honorius 3d made Pope f. 528. A. He declared Hen. 3. to be of Age f.
533. B. His demands of the English Prelates by his Legate f. 538. B. Their
Answer to his Demands f. 539. B. His Demands opposed and rejected in France
Ibid. E. F. His Death f. 540. A. Horesti who they were and where they dwelt f.
26. D. Hubert Bishop of Salisbury accompanied King Richard to the Holy Land f.
428. l. 1. He was Elect^d Archbishop of Canturbury and made Justiciary of
England f 438. l. F. He excommunicated Earl John and his Accomplices f. 441. A.
He was made the Popes Legate f. 447. E. He desired to be eased of his
Justiciariship, but was denied f. 448. B. What he raised in England in two
years for the Kings use Ibid. C. The Monks of Canturbury complain against him
to the Pope f. 449. F. He was removed from all Secular Offices upon the Popes
Letter f. 450. A. Beckets Tomb Ibid. E. He Crowned King John, and Queen Isabel
f. 468. A. His Death f. 474. C. Hubert de Burgh made Governor of Dover Castle
f. 509. F. His resolute Answer to Prince Lewis his Summons f. 523. C. He
Married the King of Scots Sister f. 530. B. How he punished the London Rioters
f. 531. A. B. The great Men's complaint against him f. 533. A. f 539. F. He
appointed what every one should pay for renewing their Charters f. 540. A. He
is made Earl of Kent Ibid. C. He fell under the Kings displeasure, but is soon
reconciled fol. f. 543. C. D. E. The King wholly guided by him f. 545. A. He
was accused for countenancing those that plundered the Italian f. 549. A. He is
removed from his Office and charged with great crimes fol. 550. A, etc. He took
Sanctuary and refused to plead Ibid. F. He was forceably drawn from thence f.
551. C. He was restored, but after carried prisoner to the Tower Ibid. E. F. He
submitted to the King, and was committed to four Knights f. 552. B. D. fol.
557. C. D. He escaped into Wales in a Soldiers Habit f. 558. lin. 3. He is
reconciled to the K. and received into his Council f. 560. D. F. He incurred
his displeasure, but was soon reconciled f. 567. B. He stood close to the King
when most deserted him f. 569. C. Articles of high Treason drawn up against him
f. 573. D. His defense, and how he appeased the King Ibid. C. Huctred or
Uctred, Prince of Galloway his cruelties and barbarities f. 318. A. He was
slain by his Brother Gilbert f. 322. D. Hue and Cry when and for what allowed
f. 166. F. Hugezun came Legate into England at Henry 2d his request f. 415. A.
He reconciled the two Archbishops, and gave the King leave to implead Clercs
Ibid. B. Hugh de Abrincis made Earl of Chester f. 200. D. E. Ibid. What great
men held of him, and his Grandeur f. 201. A. B. C. D. E. Hugh Bishop of Durham
made Justiciary of England f. 422. F. He was ill treated by the Bishop of Ely
the Chancellor fol. 427. lin. 3. He complained to the King and was relieved
Ibid. A. Huntington Castle built by the Conqueror f. 194. A.
I.
ICeni Refuse to submit to the Romans but are vanquished by Ostorius f. 14. C.
D They and the Trinobants revolt f. 19. A. Jews not permitted to have a Coat of
Mail f. 337. E. They were abused and Murdered at King Richards Coronation f.
422. C. They murder one another in the Tower of York f. 426. C. Articles
concerning them given to the Itinerant Justices f. 446. B. C. D. E. F. They
were forced to pay one third of their Estates to King H. 3. f. 544. A. The were
fined 20000 Marks f. 577. B. They were again forced to pay great Sums f. 588.
E. One Fined for falsifying a Charter f. 604. A. Ikenild-street where it was f.
49. l. 1. Image Worship when first used in England f. 109. l. 4. It was wrote
against by Alcuni Ibid. A. Ina King of the West Saxons his Ecclesiastical Laws
f. 107. B. He granted Peter Pence to the Pope f. 108. l. 1. Inland what it was
f. 67. F. Innocent the 3d made Pope at 30 years old f. 450. D. He Solicited
the Kings of England and France to relieve the Holy Land f. 470. C. D. E. His
Letter to King John to receive Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canturbury f.
476. C. His Reply to King John's Letter f. 477. A. He threatened to Interdict his
Kingdoms Ibid. C. D. He commanded the English Bishops to Excommunicate him, but
they durst not execute it f. 480. C. D. He absolved all his Subjects from their
Allegiance f. 482. A. He deposed him f. 483. C. His zeal to have him dethroned
Ibid. D. E. King John put himself under his Protection f. 501. B. C. He voyded
the Charter of Liberties granted by King John Ib. D. and f. 502. B He wrote to
the English Bishops and Barons to obey their King f. 501. E. F. He charged them
with evil practices against him f. 502. C. D. He excommunicated them f. 503. D.
His Character by Paris f. 507. F. He called K. John the Vassal of the Roman
Church f. 508. B. His Answer to Prince Lewis his Messengers f. 511. C. D. E.
His opinion of Prince Arthurs Death f. 512. D. He claimed England as his
Property f. 513. l. 3. His resolution to Prince Lewis his Messengers Ibid. C.
His death f. 528. A. Innocent the 4th made Pope f. 588. E. He sent Martin to be
his Legate in England f. 589. A. His Grant to English ^atrons of Benefices f.
593. F. He imposed upon the English Bishops at Lions f. 595. E. What exactions
he put upon them Ibid. F. His severe Letters to the English Bishops f. 596. D.
He treated the Clergy rigorously Ibid. E. A general Clamor against him and his
Collectors in all France f. 597. D. The method he used to appease them Ibid. E.
His Umbratile Privilegium to Hen. 3. f. 598. D. He sent two Friars to be his
Collectors in England Ibid. E. Their arrogant Behavior to the Prelates Ibid.
F. and 599. A. French Prelates prohibited to lend him Money Ibid. B He desired
leave of H. 3. to reside at Burdeux f. 604. C. 605. E. He Demanded a Tenth of
the English Clergy for 3 years f. 608. E. He offered the Kingdoms of Sicily and
Apulia to Richard Earl of Cornwall f. 609. F. He made the same offer to Edmund
2d Son to H. 3. f. 613. C. Investitures of Church not to be received from
Laymen f. 231. A. 256. D. E.. Forbidden by the 2d Lateran Council f. 294. A.
Hen. 1. by Archbishop Anselm f. 259. B. Joanna Sister to Hen. 3. married to
Alexander King of Scots f. 530. B. Her Jointure f. Ibid. C. John youngest Son
to Hen. 2. contracted to Alice daughter to the Earl of Savoy f. 312. A. He
refused to do homage to his Brother Geofry f. 339. E. He was Cursed by his
Father for his rebellious practices f. 349. B. Ireland by his Father f. 349. E.
He passed into Ireland, and treated them very ill f. 372. C. D. E. He returned
into England, and did nothing considerable there f. 373. A. E. F. His Brother
Richards kindness to him f. 420. E. His Oath to him f. 425. F. His joy at King
Richards imprisonment, and contrivance to secure the Crown of England to
himself f. 432. A. Ibid. B. C. He received the Fealties of the Londoners as
King Richards heir f. 433. D. The Pope wrote to the Bishops to excommunicate
him and his followers, but they refused f. 434. E. F. His endeavors to restore
the Chancellor opposed by the great men f. 435 B. Richard Ibid. E. F. He
demanded the Kingdom affirming his Brother was dead f. 436. A. He was opposed
by the Justiciaries Ibid. B. C. He swore fealty to his Brother f. 439. A. His
offer to the Emperor to keep his Brother Prisoner Ibid. B. C. His Letter
delivered to King Richard Ibid. E. The Insolence of one of his Servants, his
designs discovered and England Seized f. 440. E. F. He and his followers
excommunicated f. 441. A. His Castles taken, and judgment given against him Ib.
B. C. and f. 442. A. He is reconciled to his Brother King Richard f. 444. D. He
is girt with the Sword of Normandy f. 461. f. The English Swear fealty to him.
f. 462. A. B. He landed in England. His Coronation Ibid. D. His Answer to the
King of Scots Demands Ibid. F. He made Truce with France f. 463. A. King
Richards friends adhered to him Ibid. F. His Nephew Arthur reconciled to him f.
464. A. He took an Aid of his English Subjects Ibid. E. He did Homage to Philip
King of France f. 465. A. He was divorced from his Queen and Married Queen
Isabel f. 466. D. E. They were both Crowned f. 468. A. He received the Homage
of William King of Scots Ibid. B. C. D. E. His Progress through England with
his Queen f. 469. A. His Barons demanded Restitution of their Rights Ibid. B.
C. D. His Design upon the Poictovins defeated f. 470. A. His Grant of a Relief
to the holy Land Ibid. E. He denied the King of France his Demands Ibid. F. He
made a legal Assise of Bread to be observed f. 471. F. His Luxury and
Negligence f. 472. B. C. His Nobility left his Court Ibid. D. He accused and
taxed them for deserting f. 473. A. He denied Relief to his Transmarine
Subjects f. 474. A. He lost Normandy, Tourain, Anjou and Poictou Ibid. His
Policy to get Money Ibid. B. His Success in Poictou, and a Truce for two years
agreed fol. 475. C. D. He caused a thirtieth part to be levied on all his
Subjects Ibid. F. He was displeased at the Election of Stephen Langton fol.
476. D. His resolute Letter to the Pope Ibid. F. The Pope threatened to
interdict him f. 477. C. D. His condescension to receive Steph. Langton
Archbishop Ib. F. He threatened the Bishops and Prelates f. 478. lin. 3. His
Kingdom of England Interdicted Ibid. A. B. His Treaty with the Bishops Ibid. C.
D. E. His revenge upon all Ecclesiastics f. 478. F. He seized their
Temporalties and Goods f. 479. A. B. C. His kindness to such as did not comply
with the Interdict Ib. D. E. He required Pleges of his great men for their
Fidelity Ibid. F. His Agreement with the King of Scots, and the Terms f. 480.
A. He received the Homages of all above 12 years old Ibid. B. He seized on the
Bishopric of Lincoln, and forced all Churchmen to compound f. 481. A. B. His
Expedition into Wales Ibid. E. His willingness to receive the proscribed
Bishops Ibid. E. His Subjects absolved from their Allegiance f. 482. A. He
hanged up the Welsh Hostages Ibid. C. A Conspiracy against him discoved Ibid.
D. E. His dissoluteness f. 483. A. He was Deposed by the Pope, and Philip of
France Commissioned to Execute it Ibid. C. D. His preparation to oppose King
Philip f. 484. C. D. His Submission to a form of Peace drawn by the Pope f.
485. A. etc. He sent for the Exiled Bishops and made his Submission to them f.
486. E. F. His Oath at his Absolution f. 487. A. He caused inquiry to be made
into the Bishops Damages Ibid. B. 491. C. His great men refuse to obey his
Summons Ibid. D. His Endeavors to reduce them hindered by the Archbishop f. 488.
A. His offer to turn Mohammedan, a malicious Calumny Ibid. f. His large offers
to the Clergy f. 489. B. and 490. A. He renewed his Subjection to the Pope f.
489. D. E. He held his Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Fee of the Pope, and
what Annual Rent he paid to him f. 485. D. E. His Success beyond Sea f. 491. D.
E. The Conditions on which the Interdict was released f. 492. A. D. Lewis but
his Barons of Poictou refused f. 493. A. B. His English Barons Confederacy and
Demands 494. A. etc. Homage renewed to him in England, and he was Signed with
the Cross f. 495. A. He refused to grant his Barons Demands Ibid. F. They most
of them desert him f. 496. D. His grant of Magna Charta and Charta de Forestea
f. 497. C. Ibid. D. E. 25 Barons chosen to see he observed these Charters f.
498. D. F. His Command to his Sheriffs and other Officers to obey them f. 499.
A. B. C. The Caution he gave for the observation of what they did Ibid. F. He
sent to the Pope to void this Engagement f. 500. C. D f. 501. B. C. He made the
Pope Vmpire between him and his Barons and owned his Kingdom to be St. Peter's
Patrimony f. 502. A. B. Rochester Castle Besieged and yielded to him f. 503. A.
B. He wasted his Rebellious Barons Estates f. 504. E. F. His great Successes
against the Barons f. 405. A. D. E. F. He is charged with inhumanity by Mat.
Paris. Ibid. B. C. He could not hinder Prince Lewis from Landing f. 509. f.
Lewis his Commissioners f. 512. A. etc. He raised an Army to oppose him f. 514.
B. C. He secured his Treasure at Lyn f. 515. C. What marches he took every day
a Month before he Dyed Ibid. D. E. F. He was joyfully received at Lyn, and gave
them a Cup and the Sword from his side f. 516. C. Regalia in the Washes Ibid.
He was taken ill of a Fever and Dyed at Newark f. 517. A. He caused the English
Laws and Customs to be observed in Ireland f. 519. A. Church Affairs in his
time Ibid. D. E. Taxes in his Reign f. 520. His Issue Lawful and Natural. f.
521. John, Prior of Canturbury, chosen Archbishop by the Convent fol. 549. C.
He went to Rome and renounced his Election Ibid. Friar John sent into England
by the Pope to be his Collector f. 598. E. He sent to the Pope for Additional
Powers f. 600. B. Joseph of Arimathea his coming hither an improbable Story f.
20. D.E.F. Irish Clergy held a Council at Ardmah f. 356. F. They Decreed
English Slaves should have their Liberty fol. Their Princes and Clergy submit
to Henry the Second, and swear Fealty to him, and his Heirs f. 360. A. B. What
encouraged them to endeavor to cast off the English Yoke f. 361. E. F. Their
unanimous Insurrection against the English f. 362. D. They submit to the
Government of Hugh de Lacy f. 371. B. The Chief Adventurers in the Conquest of
them f. 375.376. Their endeavor to extirpate the English defeated f. 544. F.
The same Customs to be observed there as in England f. 673. C. A free Trade
settled between them and the English Ibid. F. The Statutes of Merton to be
observed there f. 674. lin. 2. English Laws no advantage to them Ibid. C.
Isabel, Sister to Henry the Third, Married to Frederic the Emperor f. 562. F.
Her Portion Ibid. Italians sent hither by the Pope to be beneficed f. 602. lin.
2. and 575. F. The Revenues of their Churches to be paid to the Barons
Receivers, vid. Clergy. f. 636. B. Itius Portus, where it was. f. 6. F. Julian
the Apostate durst not venture into Britain f. 34. E. He was made Emperor f.
35. lin. 5. Jurisdiction Feudal, and Commissions, what f. 161. E. Justiciary of
England, who the first f. 151. B. His Office and Power above the Chancellor f.
153. A. Barons not to be impleaded but before him Ibid. C. What remains of this
Dignity and Power at present Ibid. D. This Office and Name from Normandy, the
same with Seneschal, his great Power and Authority Ibid. E. When this great
Office determined f. 154. A.B. Justiciaries of the Kings Bench, and Common
Pleas, by whom appointed Ibid. Justices Itinerant, by whom sent f. 446. A.
William Kele, a Mediator between Henry the Third and his Barons f. 566. A.
Kenelworth Castle stood out against Henry the Third f. 655. C. Their barbarous
usage of the Kings Messenger f. 656. D. The Kings Clemency to the Defendants
after it was taken f. 657. D. Dictum de Kenelworth, where and upon what account
made f. 658. A. etc. Kent given to Hengist the Saxon by Vortigern f. 94. D.
Kentish-men of their own accord submit to the Conqueror f. 189. E. They
attempted Dover Castle but were beaten f. 192. A. Knighthood, when first
instituted f. 56. A. All that had 10 l. per Annum forced to receive the Order
f. 620. lin. 4. Knights-Fees, why called Scuta f 211. F. Twelve chosen in every
County to inquire evil Customs and Practices f. 499. C. All that refused to
obey them to be imprisoned. Ibid. D. E. Four sent by the Barons to the Pope f.
632. B. Four chosen in every County to inquire into grievances fol. 633. A.
Ibid. B. Three in every County summoned by the Barons to meet at St. Albans f.
637. F. Four summoned in every County to meet the King at London f. 642. F.

HUgh de Lacy made Governor of Dublin by Henry the Second fol. 360. F. 370. C.
He was revoked, and soon after restored f. 371. D.F. He was discharged f. 372.
A. His Prudent Management and Government of the Irish fol. 371. C. f. 374. A.
Lands how transferred before the Norman Conquest f. 204. lin. 1. When first by
Writings and Sealing Ibid. A. Lanfranc, Archbishop of Canturbury, his
Controversy with Odo Earl of Kent, for Land belonging to Canturbury f. 140. A.
B. He pleaded his own Case, and recovered his Lands Ibid. D. He presided in
many Councils f. 215. A. The Controversy between him and York about Primacy
determined f. 214. A. Stephen Langton chosen Archbishop of Canturbury f. 476.
B. He and other Bishops supplicate the Pope against King John f. 483. B. He
pronounced the Sentence of Deposition against him, and encouraged Philip King
of France to execute it f. 484. A. B. He hindered King John from reducing his
Barons f. 488. A. He confederated with them against the King Ibid. C. D. E. f.
490. F. He was the Head of the Barons Conspiracy f. 495. D. He was suspended
for Disobedience to the Pope f. 503. F. He is absolved f. 507. C. He and the
Great Men demanded a Confirmation of their Liberties of Henry the Third f. 531.
D. He Excommunicated Falcasius and his followers f. 534. D. His Decree against
Priests Concubines f. 536. F. f. 541. B. Simon Langton his insolent reply to
King John f. 478. E. He was chosen Archbishop of York, but refused by the Pope
f. 504. C. He was made Chancellor to Prince Lewis f. 510. D. He was
excommunicated by Walo the Popes Legate Ibid. E. Roger de Lasci his Courage and
Fidelity f. 472. F. 473. F. 2d Lateran Council held under Pope Innocent the
Second f. 294. A. Canons and Constitutions made there brought hither Ibid. B.
C. D. Amoric de Sancto Laurentio, His Adventures and Courage in Irish
Engagements f. 367. A. B. C. 368. B. Laws, Salic, Lombard, Burgundian,
Wisigoths and Saxons, when first written f. 60. D. G^rman how made f. 84. C. D.
English Saxon how made f. 85. A. Danish and Mercian, why so called Ibid. C.
Different among Germans and Saxons Ibid. B. D. No Nation governed by the same
f. 155 C. The chief of ours were Norman Ibid. E. and f. 161. A. B, etc. The
Practice alike in both places f. 179. D. etc. Of England not carried into
Normandy by the Confessor fol. etc. Canon Law when first brought into and used
in England f. 296 E. Laws against Robbers of Warrens and Parks f. 594. C.
Lawrentius succeeds Augustine in the Arch-bishopric of Canturbury fol. 104. A.
Popes Legates, none here before the Conquest f. 88. A. Not received in England
before Henry the First f. 256. E. None to be sent hither, but upon the Kings
request f. 268. A. An Oath put upon one by Henry the Second f. 333. D. Legion,
how many men it consisted of f. 2. F. Pope Leo the Ninth, his Letter to Edward
the Confessor suspected fol. 91. C. D. Leofric Earl of Mercia opposed Earl
Goodwin f. 132. D. Lewellin Prince of North Wales besieged Buet Castle without
success f. 530. A. He bound himself by his Charter to satisfy for damages done
to Henry the Third f. 532. D. He made Incursions into England f. 546. D. He and
his followers Excommunicated Ibid. A Truce between him and Henry the Third f.
560. F. It was violated, but again renewed f. 563. F. The conditions of it f.
564. A. B. He put himself under the protection of Henry the Third fol. 567. A.
Jews, a Battle fought there between Henry the Third and the Barons f. 641. D.
E. Lewis King of France invaded Normandy f. 248. D. He was overthrown by Henry
the First Ibid. F. His complaint of King Hen. in the Council at Rhemes f. 250.
D. He was divorced from his Queen f. 291. D. His hatred to Henry the Second f.
311. E. His kindness to the Rebellious Sons of Henry 2d f. 313. C. D. He was
routed by King Henry, and hindered a peace between f. 214. D. E. 215. F.
Articles of Agreement between King Hen. and him f. 332. A, etc. He came into
England to visit St. Thomas his Tomb f. 335. A. His kind reception by King
Henry and beneficence to the Monks Ibid. His Son Philip Crowned, and proves
undutiful to him Ibid. D. E. His death f. 33^. D. Prince Lewis Son to Philip
King of France, chosen King of England by the English ^arons f. 5^7. A. He
encouraged the Barons to persist in their Rebellion f. 5^^. A. His Reasons
against King John and the Pope Ibid. E. F. His Claim to England f. 5^9. l. ^.
He lan^ed in the Isle of Thanet Ibid. D. E. f. 51^ A. He was excommunicated by
Walo the P^pes ^egat Ibid. E. His Envoys Objections and Replies to King John'^
Commissioners f. 512, 513, He ravaged over Essex, Norfolk, and Suffolk Ibid. C.
D. Alexander King of Scots did him Homage and a^i^ed him Ibid. ^. and 514. D.
His designs against the English Barons discovered Ibid. E. F. England f. 522.
C.D.E.F. He passed over Sea and lost his interest with the Barons f 524. C. His
Army routed at Lincoln f. 526. B. The Succors sent him by his Wife beaten and
taken Ibid. E. F. The form of Peace between him and Henry 3d. f. 527. B C D. He
borrowed Money of the Londoners and left England Ibid. E. His Answer to King
Henry's demands of Normandy f. 532. F. He gained Rochell by his Money f. 534.
l. 1. Lewis f. 539. C. His designs to Invade Britany defeated f. 546. E. F. His
preparation against Henry the 3d. f. 584. l. 1. His concern for his Fathers
Oath to King Henry f. 584 C. His repeated Successes against the Earl of March's
and King Henry's Forces f. 585.586. The Pestilence in his Army forced him to a
^ruce with King Henry f. 586. ^. England and France f. 589. D. His design upon
Gascolgny f. 597. ^. He was taken Prisoner by the Saracens f. 604. D. He Nulled
the Oxford Provisions f. 659. A. What he thought of the Barons proceedings f.
648. B. His kind Invitation and bountiful Offer to Prince Edward f. 665. A.
Tunis Ibid. F. Robert Earl of Leycester came into England with an Army of
Flemmings f. 315. F. He was defeated and taken Prisoner by Humfry de Bohun f.
316 A. B. He is restored to his Liberty and Estate f. 420. C. He died in his
journey to the Holy-^and f. 428. E. John de Lexinton prohibited the Clergy from
paying any Contributions f. 596. F. Limeric in Ireland taken by Reymund f. 363.
D. Relieved by Meiler f. 364. B. D. Fired by the Inhabitants f. 370. F. The
Honor granted to William de Braiosa by King John fol. f. 518. A. B. (...) His
destruction contrived by the Kings Counselors Ibid. D. E. He passed over into
Ireland, and was there betrayed and slain f. 560. A. B. The King much lamented
his death Ibid. C. Gilbert his Brother restored to his Estate and Honors Ibid.
E. He was refused entrance into the Kings Palace, and received a severe
Reprimand from the King f. 571. F. He was reconciled to the King f. 576. F. He
was unfortunately killed by a fall from his Horse f. 577. E. Walter his Brother
was at first denied, but soon after restored to the Mareschalcy f. 581. A.
Market where anciently kept f. 209. E. Geofry Marsh his Treachery to Richard
Earl Marshall f. 560. A. B. Geofry Martell Earl of Anjou opposed Duke William,
but without success f. 187. A. Martin sent Legate into England f. 589. A. His
Exorbitant Power and practice Ibid. B. C. His Demands of the Clergy f. 591. D.
He was roughly treated by Fulk Fitz-Warine f. 593. B. He left England Ibid. D.
Maud the Conquerors Wife Crowned by Archbishop Aldred f. 193. C. Maud the
Empress Daughter to Henry the First returned into England f. 253. F. The Great
Men Swear to make her Queen after her Fathers decease f. 254. A. D. She was
married to Geofry the Earl of Anjou's Son Ibid. B. She was Named by her Father
to the Succession f. 255. C. She landed in England f. 278. F. Several Towns and
Castles do Homage to her f. 279. C. The War between her and King Stephen
carried on with continual Rapine and Barbarities f. 280. A. etc. King Stephen
was averse to Peace with her f. 282. B. C. He was presented Prisoner to her f.
283. B. Her Oath to the Bishop of Winchester the Legate Ibid. C. She is owned
Queen by him and the Great Men Ibid. D. E. She gave Orders and Directions for
the Government f. 285. C. She refused the Londoners Petition for King Stephen
Ibid. D. They Conspired against her and the Legate deserted her Ibid. E. F. Milo
of Gloucester his faithfulness and kindness to her fol. Her ruin contrived by
the Legate f. 287. B. All her Friends were Excommunicated by him Ibid. D. She
sent for her Husband the Duke of Anjou f. 288. A. She was besieged in Oxford,
but made her Escape f. 289. C.D.E. She passed into Normandy to her Husband f.
290. D. Her death and Charity to the Religious and Poor fol. 303. lin. 3.306.
B. Maximus excited the Soldiers to Sedition, and is saluted Emperor fol. 37. C.
His success against Gratian Ibid. D. He was Conquered and slain by Theodosius
f. 38. l. 1. Abbat of Medeshamstede not Legate in England in King Ecgfrids Reign
f. 89, 90. Meiler Eminent for his Courage and Conduct in Irish Engagements f.
359. A. 363. C. Melitus Ordained a Bishop by Augustine f. 103. E. Vicount Melun
discovered to the English Barons how Prince Lewis designed to treat them f.
514. E. F. Great Men, vid. Barons Mercians Converted by Finian f. 106. lin. 1.
Merleberge, vid. Statutes. Merton, vid. Statutes. Messina taken by the English
f. 428. B. Military Service required by the Saxon Laws f. 68. A. By Edward the
Confessors Laws f. 69. C. Proved by several Instances in Domesday f. 70. B. The
Service called Free service f. 71. A. How much the Member of one Fee was f.
166. A. Milites called Liberi homines f. 70. F. They only served upon Juries
Ibid. Milo of Gloucester a constant Frind to Maud the Empress f. 286. A. Monks,
their quarrel with the Seoulars f. 122. C. D. Almerio de Montesorti took Arms
against Henry the First f. 247. C. He persuaded Lewis King of France to make
War with him f. 249. B. He is reconciled to King Henry f. 251. A. Simon
Montfort a great Favorite of King Henry 3. f 568. B. He married Alienor the
Kings Sister f 569. A. He first corrupted her f. 573 A. His Marriage stom^shed
by the Nobility f. 569. B. He went to Rome and got his Marriage confirmed fol.
570. A. B. He was kindly received by the King and Court. Ibid. He was made Earl
of Leycester f. 572. A. f. 573. A. He is again kindly received f. 574. F. His
Courage in a Battle with the French f. 585. C. He subdued the Rebellious
Gascoigns f. 602. F. A supply granted him for Gascoigny f. 604. F. His success
against the Gascoigns, and return f. 606. A. The Gascoigns Complaint against
him Ibid. E. He pleaded his Innocence and Merits, and is sent thither again
Ibid. F. He treated them very rigorously f. 607. lin. 1. The Gascoigns repeat
their Complaints against him, and desire a Trial Ibid. A. B. C. Earl Richard
stood his Friend Ibid. D. He Impudently gave the King the Lie Ibid. E. He was
supported by the Great Men Ibid. F. He returned into Gascoigny f. 608. A. f.
609. D. He resigned his Patent of the Custody of Gascoigny f. 610. A. He
sawcily upbraided the King f. 624. B. He and the Barons Arm themselves to make
good the Oxford Provisions f. 639. D. He made Prince Edward Prisoner, but
released him on Conditions f. 640. B. C. He Took the King and his Brother
Richard Prisoners fol. 641. D. He referred himself to the King of France to
make Peace Ibid. F. His Son made Constable of Dover Castle f. 642. C. He
inflam^d the People against the King by false reports fol. 645. F. He forced
the King to own whatever he did f. 646. A. He marched about the Kingdom with a
Body of Horse f. 647. B. And carried the King about with him f. 648. D. What
provision he made for himself and Family Ibid. E. The whole Government managed
by him Ibid. F. He disgusted the Earl of Gloucester f. 649. F. He was overthrown
by Prince Edward and slain f. 652. C. D. His Character by Rishanger f. 653. A.
A discovery of his Villainous practices f. 653. A. None to call him Saint f.
659. B. Simon Montfort His Son submitted himself to the Kings pleasure f. 655.
A. B. Morcar taken Prisoner f. 197. A. Morgages, where entered f. 79. C.
Registered in Counties and Hundreds. f. 146. A. B. William Earl of Mortain
demanded the Earldom of Kent of Henry f. 241. F. He joined with Duke Robert,
and Robert de Belism fol. 242. lin. 3. All his Estate in England seized and his
Castles demolished Ibid. A. He was taken Prisoner and sent into England f. 243.
A. Hervey Mount-Maurice his Cruel Policy f. 356. A. Roger Mowbray erected a
Fortress in the Isle of Axholm f. 316. F. It was demolished by Geofry Elect of
Lincoln f. 318. C. Fitz Murchard, vid. Dermot. Murder, how punished by the
Saxon Laws f. 62. D. F. f. 119. A. Murdrum used in the German Laws, when first
used in the English Laws f. 62. E.
N.
NAnts yielded to King Henry the Second f. 300. E. Neat-land, what it was f.
67. F. Ralph Nevil Bishop of Chichester Chancellor to Henry the Third, refused
to deliver the Seal when demanded by the King f. 564. F. He was chosen Bishop
of Winchester, and his Election voided at Rome f. 571. B. C. He was invited by
the King to resume his Office of Chancellor, but he refilsed f. 572. B. He was
received into the Kings favor. f. 583. E. Newcastle, when and by whom built f.
202. D. Nicholas Bishop of Tusculum sent Legate into England f. 489 A. He took
an estimate of the Clergies Damages Ibid. B. He was accused as a favorer of
King John Ibid. C. He filled all vacant Churches f. 490. D. E. His Opposition
to the Archbishop and Bishops f. 491. A His Character of the King Ibid. His
Answer to the Religious that sued to him for Restitution f. 492. E. F. Nicholas
Bishop of Durham resigned his Bishopric f. 602. D. Nobility, vid. Barons
Normans a Miscellaneous People f. 139 C.D. They were Court-Officers and great
Ministers of State fol. 152.181 E. They were the Bishops, Abbats, Priors,
Judges, and Lawyers f. 154. C. D. E. F. Most of our Laws from them f. 155. B.
An abstract of their Laws f. 161. D. etc. Who anciently were their Judges f.
163. A. f. 167. D. How the English were treated by them after the Conquest fol.
192. B. etc. Their Lust and Luxury f. 235. A. Norman Bishops in England before
the Conquest f. 189. B. Norman Ladies want their Husbands f. 194. D. Norman
Nobility favor Duke Roberts Title f. 235. C. D. They petition King Hen. 1. to
come into Normandy f. 240. C. William Duke Roberts Son f. 247. C.D. and 252. E.
F. They submit themselves to King Henry f. 251. A. B. How they executed their
private Revenges f. 281. D. E. F. Their Soldiers sold the Prisoners they took
f. 282. A. Their submission to the Earl of Anjou and the Empress fol. 288. D.
Simon Norman removed from b^ing Chancellor by Henry 3d. f. 576. F. Normandy
Interdicted by the Archbishop of Roven, and the Occasion f. 453. D. The
Int^rdict released f. 454. C. Again Interd^cted by the Legate f. 463. C.
Northampton taken by Henry the 3d. f. 640. D. C. Norwich Castle yielded to the
Conqueror f. 202. D The City burnt by Hugh Bigot f. 318. B. A great Quarrel
between the Monks there and Citizens fol. 666. D. E. The Cathedral burnt and
the Citizens punished and fired Ibid. Nottingham plundered and burnt f. 318. D.
Robert Nunant refused to be Pledge for King Richard f. 440. A. Judgment given
against him f. 442. A. He is reconciled to the King, and pardoned f. 447. E.
O.
OAth of Confederaoy of the Barons f. 629. Oaths, how and when administered by
the Germans f. 147. D.E.F. How valued f. 120. l. 1. Oblations of the People
divided into four parts f. 102. B. Octavian sent Legate into France f. 467. A.
He admonished King Philip to receive his Queen Ibid. B. C. Odo Bishop of Baieux
the Conquerors chief Justiciary f. 151. A. B. He was left Viceroy of England by
the Conqueror f. 191. B. C. His Justice and Equity Ibid. F. He was made Earl of
Kent f. 198. B. His Treasure seized and he Imprisoned f. 203. D. E. Offa's
Ditch where, and its extent f. 86. B. He built St. Albans Monastery, and gave
Peter Pence to Rome f. 109. A. B. Ordeal, what it was, and the Trial f. 65. B.
When and by whom prohibited f. 147. C. Water Ordeal Established f. 326. B.
Orders of Men the same in Germany as in England f. 82. B. Ordericus Vitalis his
Account how the Romans treated the English fol. 192. B. etc. Ordovices who they
were f. 15. F. They were almost Extirpated by Agricola f. 22. E. Peter de
Orivallis made King Henry the 3d. his Treasurer f. 549. F. He is removed from
his Office and the Court f. 559. E. He is again received into Favor f. 565. l.
1. Ororic Assaulted Dublin, but was repulsed f. 359. B. His Treachery and
Contrivance to destroy Hugh Lacy f. 361. B. C. His death Ibid. D. Osculum
pacis, what is was f. 537. E. Ostorius sent Lieutenent into Britain by
Claudius f. 14. B. A Triumph Decreed him at Rome f. 16. D. He died with Grief
f. 17. B. Otho sent Legate into England f. 537. B. He declared to the Bishops
the Popes demands f. 538. A. Their, and the Mareschals Answer to him Ibid. C.
D. He is revoked by the Pope f. 539. A. Otho Nephew to King Richard Crowned
King of the Romans f. 457. D. Hugh Oto made Governor of London by Henry the 3d.
f. 654. B. Otto came Legate into England at the request of Henry the 3d. f. 567.
E. He reconciled the Noblemen that were at variance Ibid. F. His design to
visit Scotland prevented f. 568. D. E. He was revoked by the Pope, but
contrived his stay here f. 569 A. His reception and affright at Oxford f. 570.
C. D. E. He was again called home, but continued upon the Kings request f. 472.
A. His great Exactions upon the Clergy f. 573. B. He was refused entrance into
Scotland, but at last admitted under Conditions Ibid. C. His policy and
contrivance to get Money f. 574. E. He demanded a fifth part of the Clergies
Goods f. 575. E. His Oppression and Extortion from the English Clergy f. 577.
A. The manner of his leaving England Ibid. Ottobon sent Legate into England f.
654. C. He Excommunicated such BPS. as favored S. Montfort f. 659. E. His
Admonition to the disinherited Barons Ibid. F. He held a Council at London f.
664. E. Oudoceus Bishop of Landaf Excommunicated three Welsh Kings for Murder
f. 100. F. Oxford Interdicted by Otto the Legate f. 570. E. On what conditions
released Ibid. f. A great difference between the Scholars and Townsmen f. 575.
lin. 2. Oxgange What it was f. 141. f.
P.
PAgi what they were and are f. 55. C.D.E.F. Pall what f. 102. F. Pandulph sent
Legate into England f. 483 F. He affrighted King John into a compliance with the
Pope f. 484. E. f 486. B. Panis Benedictus what it was f. 537. F. Papal
Exactions and Extortions f. 542. F. 543. A. 594. E. 595. A. A general clamor
against them in France f. 597. D. And in Ireland f. 599. C. Papinianus Chief
Minister of Justice in Britain f. 30. D. Parage what f. 165. F. and 204. E.
Matt. Paris charge King John with inhumanity f. 505. B. C. Innocent the 3.d
f. 507. F. His inconsistency with himself in his History. f. 582. F.
Parliament, At Oxford f. 473. D. At London f. 531. E. At Northampton f. 534. A.
At Westminster f. 535. lin. 1. At Westminster f. 536. A. At Westminster f. 542.
D. Westminster f. 546. A. At Westminster f. 548. A. At Lambeth f. 550. E. F. At
London f. 564. C. At Winchester f. 565. A. E. F. At York f. 568. C. At London
f. 581. F. At Westminster f. 590. B. London a general one f. 594. D. At
Winchester f. 596. B. At London f. 597. F. At London f. 600. E. At London f.
610. E. At Westminster f. 621. B. At London f. 623. F. At Oxford f. 624. C. f.
627. E. F. Three to be held every year f. 626. C. At Kenelworth f. 658. A. etc.
At St. Edmunds-bury f. 661. A. B. The Kings and Legates Demands made there and
the Answer they received Ibid. C. D. E. F. At Merlebergh f. 665. B. Hugh
Pateshul made Justiciary f. 561. F. St. Paul's when built, and made a Cathedral
f. 103. F. Paulinus Ordained Bishop, and Baptized Edwin f. 104. E. F. Paulus
Catena his cruelty f. 34. C. Peculiars their Original f. 215. C. Pelagian
Heresy propagated in Britain f. 38 E. Perennis a great Favorite of the Emperor
Commodus f. 28. F. He was accused of Treason by the Soldiers, and put to Death
f. 29. A. Pertinax sent into Britain by Commodus f. 29. B. C. Peter the Hermit
preached up the Holy-War f. 223. B. His Prophecy f. 483. lin. 3. Peter pence by
whom granted f. 108. lin. 1. Philip Earl of Flanders a Confederate of young
Henry's against his Father King Henry the 2d. f. 317. lin. 1. 318. F. He was a
great Director to Philip Son to Lewis King of France f. 335. E. He did Homage
to the King of England f. 336. A. Philip Bishop of Beavais his complaint to the
Pope against King Richard and the Popes Answer f. 455. A. B. Philip Son to
Lewis King of France Crowned at Rhemes f. 335. C. His undutifulness to his
Father Ibid. E. He was made sensible of his Duty by Hen. the 2d. King of
England f. 336. A. His Agreement with the King of England to undertake the
Cross f. 342. C. The King of England does Homage to him f. 348. D. The
Agreement between King Richard and him to undertake the Cross f. 423. B. His
Treachery to King Richard f. 429. E. The difference between them composed f.
430. A. His arrival at Acon Ibid. B. He desired King Richards leave to return
home f. 431. C. His Oath to King Richard Ibid. D. His promise to Earl John upon
Marriage of his Sister f. 435. D. His offer to the Emperor to keep King Richard
Prisoner f. 439. C. He ravaged, and destroyed King Richards Dominions f. 444.
E. F. He was totally Routed by King Richard f. 445. A. and 451. B. C. D. His
cruelty to the English f. 450. F. Articles of Peace between him and King
Richard f. 453. lin. 1. He Knighted Arthur Duke of Britany and received his f.
463. D. His Demands of King John Ibid. E. He besieged and took his Towns and
Castles f. 471. A. He demanded to be divorced from his Queen f. 467. D. E. The
Pope empowered him to Execute the Sentence of Deposition against King John f.
483. C. D. His preparation for England f. 484. A. F. Pandulph the Legate advised
him to desist f. 486. B. His Victory over Otho the Emper^r f. 493. E. His
Answer to Walo the Popes Legate f. 508. C. His Death f. 532. E. Picts who they
were f. 35. B. F. They harras and spoil the Britans f. 38. A. 39. C. D. Aulus
Plautius sent into Britain by Claudius f. 12. A. B. Pleas for Church Lands in
the Conquerors time how held and before whom f. 140.141* 142. None between
English-Saxons and Normans f. 143. A. Sometimes held in Churches, and
Churchyards f. 146. D. Pleadings were in the French Tongue and why f. 155.
lin. 1. Plebs who f. 55. F. Robert Poer made Governor of Waterford, and
Treacherously slain by f. 370. B. 374. B. Poictovins subdued by Henry the 2d.
King of England f. 306. C. They do Homage to Henry the 3d. f. 545. B. They were
invited into England by him and had the Wardships of Noblemen given them f.
554. A. They were discharged the Kings Service f. 559. F. They submit to the
French King upon Summons f. 586. B. Their great Insolence to the English f.
608. C. D. Polycletus sent into Britain by Nero to reconcile Julius
Classicanus, and Suetonius f. 21. A. Adam de Port Impeached of Treason and
Outlawed for not Appearing f. 312. lin. 1. William Poweric his complaint in the
Council of Lions against Papal Extortions f 593. D. E. He was sent to Rome to
complain of Grievances f. 596. A. Prefecture what, and how many it consisted of
f. 43. C. Presential why so called f. 41. F. Presutagus King of the Iceni made
Caesar his Heir f. 18. E. Priests Marriage forbidden f. 126. A. Such as lived
in Cities and Burghs might retain their Wives f. 215. C Severe Laws made
against their Wives f. 263. F. They were prohibited their Company by Hen. 1st.
f. 265. B. They were sometimes dispensed with by the Archdeacons and Ibid. D.
They compounded with the King for their Wives Company f. 269. F. If Married, to
be deprived of their Benefices f. 294. B. A Decree against their Concubines f*
536. F. Their Sons dispensed with to succeed them f. 262. F. Prim^cy of
Canturbury confirmed by the Pope f. 259. E. Probus conquered the Vandals, and
Burgundians f. 31. C. Oxford f. 626.627. They were Nulled by the King of France
f. 639. A. They were repealed in the Parliament at Kenelworth f. 659. A. B. All
who Sworn to observe them, absolved Ibid. C. Publicans who and from whence they
came f. 377. C. D. They were pronounced Heretics, burnt in the forehead, and
whipped f. 378. A.
Q.
QUadrilogus, or an Account of the difference between King Henry the 2d. and
Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canturbury f. 389.390, 391.
R.
RAchinburgii who they were f. 76. B. E. Ralph Archbishop of Canturbury
contended with Thurstan Elect of York about his Profession. f. 266. B. C. He
was made Legate, but opposed by the Bishops Ibid. D. His Death f. 269. C. Ralph
de Guader vid. Guader Ranulph Bishop of Durham imprisoned by Henry the 1st. but
made his escape to Duke Robert f. 235. B. Ranulph Earl of Chester surprised
Lincoln f. 282. D. The Empress Maud assisted him against King Stephen Ibid. E.
F. He took King Stephen Prisoner f. 283. A. He made his Peace with King Stephen
f. 290. C. Ranulph Canon of St. Paul's falsely accused of Treason f. 572. D
Raymund Earl of St. Giles did Homage to Henry the 2d. and to his Son Richard f.
312. B. He was overthrown in a Battle with Earl Richard f. 345. A. B. He did
his Homage to King John f. 466. F. Raymund sent into Ireland by the Earl of
Strigul f. 355. C. His great Victory over the Irish, and Clemency to them Ibid
D. E. His Success against Dublin f. 356. A. C. The Soldiers d^sired him for
their General f. 361. F. He Married Basilia at Wexford f. 363. lin. 3. His
great Success against the Irish Ibid. A. D. He assisted Dermot against his
Rebel Son f. 364. D. Rhulupia where f. 34. F. Richard 2d. Son to Henry the 2d.
contracted to the Earl of Barcelona's Daughter f. 301. A. He did Homage to the
King of France for Aquitain f. 307. C. He Rebelled against his Father, and upon
his Submission was Pardoned f. 320. E. F. He demolished the Castles in Poictou
erected against his Father f. 322. F. He refused to do Homage to his Brother
Henry f. 338. E. His intimacy with the King of France f. 342 A. He seized his
Fathers Treasure, and was again Pardoned Ibid. B. He entered France and wasted
the Country f 346. C. France f. 347. B. He wasted his Fathers Dominions Ibid.
D. His Fathers Treasure, and Castles delivered to him f. 419. B. His kindness
to such as adhered faithfully to his Father f. 420. D. How he was received in
England, and his bounty to his Brother John Ibid. F. His preparation for an
Expedition into the Holy Land f. 421. A. Ibid. B. C. D. E. He exposed his
Castles and great Office's to Sale to raise money f. 422. D. E. He and his Great
men, and King of France agreed to undertake the Cross. f. 423. B. C. He
received the Homage of the King of Scots and released the subjection of that
Kingdom f. 424. A. He granted many privileges to the Church of York f. Ibid. D.
Durham and Ely his Justices f. 425. A. Articles of a firm Peace between him and
France Ibid. B. C. D. The care he took to preserve peace in his Fleet f. 427.
D. E. He received the Scrip and Staff of Pilgrim^ge Ibid. E. His arrival at
Messina, and Success against that City f. 428. A. B. His Demands of Tancred
King of Sicily Ibid. C. D. Arthur his Heir Ibid. E. He discovered the King of
France his Treachery to him and refused to Marry his Sister f. 429 E. F. The
Difference between them composed f. 430. A. His Fleet separated by a Storm
Ibid. C. D. He took the Emperor of Cyprus Prisoner Ibid. F. He was Married to
Berengaria and sent the Emp^ror Prisoner to Tripoly f. 431. A. France deserted
him, and went home Ibid. C. D. E. He made Truce with Saladine and hastened into
England Ibid. F. He is taken prisoner in his return, and delivered to the
Emperor f. 432. A. His Brother John rejoiced at his misfortune Ibid. He
invested the Emperor with his Kingdom for his Liberty f. 435. C. The pr^ce of
his Redemption 140000 Marks f. 436. F. How and upon whom this sum was levied
f. 437. A. B. 438. D. What the Emperor gave him at his Departure Ibid. E. F.
What Earl John, and the King of France offered the Emperor to keep him Prisoner
f. 439. ^. His generosity to the German Bishops and Nobility f. 440. C. His
arrival in England Ibid. D. He demanded Judgment against his Brother John and
the Bish^p of Coventry f. 442. A. B. And aid granted him in a great Council at
Northampton Ibid. C. His grant to the King of Scots Demands f. 443. C. D. E. He
imprisoned or sined such as he took in his Brothers Castl^s f. 444. B. He
passed into France and routed the King of France Ibid. D. He took his Camp, and
discovered who were his Rebellious Subjects f. 445. A. B. He sent Itinerant
Justices through England f. 446. A. The Articles he gave them concerning the
Jews Ibid. B. C. D. E. He Fined his great Officers, and made a new Seal f. 447.
A. He instituted Tiltings in England Ibid. B. He Pardoned Earl John his
Brother, and the Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Coventry Ibid. E. He
appointed an Assize of Weights and Measures to be observed, and penalties upon
Offenders f. 448. C. D. He took an Aid of every Hide, and required his
Feudataries to find him 300 Horse f. 449. A. How it was Collected and by whom,
and what Fees expected Ibid. B. C. D. E. He beat the French and took many
Prisoners f. 451. B. C. D. Articles of the Peace between him and France f. 452.
A. and 453. lin. 1. The difference between him and the Archbishop of Roven
adjusted f. 454. A. B. D. He caused all Charts to be renewed f. 456. C. He and
several people confederate against Philip King of France f. 454. F. He refused
to harken to the Popes advice f. 457. B. His Nephew Otho Crowned King of the
Romans Ibid. D. He demised his Kingdoms to his Brother John, and dyed Ibid. F.
His generosity to his Servants and privileges he granted to the Norman Clergy
f. 458. A. E. His Taxes f. 459. His Issue f. 460. Richard Brother to Henry 3d.
Knighted and made Earl of Cornwall f. 535. E. He was sent into Gascoigny and
reduced them Ibid. F. His f^rther Success against the Gascoigns f. 539. C. He
confederated with the Barons against the King f. 540. F. He and the King
reconciled to one another f. 541. A. His Marriage with Isabel Countess of
Gloucester f. 546. C. He was called Heir Apparent to Henry the 3d. his Brother
f. 563. E. and 569. D. He represented to the King the State of his Realm f.
568. A. He blamed him for adhereing to Foreigners f. 569. B. He rejected the
Offers and advice of the Legate Ibid. C. He was reconciled to the King f. 570.
lin. 1. He was kindly received in the French Camp, and procured a Truce f. 5^5.
A. He advised the King his Brother to provide for himself by flight Ibid. B.
His second Marri^ge with Cincia Daughter to the Countess of Provence f. 588. F.
Thirty thousand Dishes provided for his Wedding Dinner f. 589. lin. 1. The
Magnificent Treat he received from the Pope f. 603. C. Sicily and Apulia
offered to him by the Pope f. 609. F. He is chosen King of the Romans and
Crowned at A^en f. 621. A. C. His great Treasure and Riches Ibid. D. His desire
to return into England f. 633. D. The Conditions on which he was to return
Ibid. F. f. 634. A. B. He defied the Barons, and is taken Prisoner f. 641. B.
D. And sent to the Tower f. 642. lin. 4. His Death f. 665. E. Richard Prior of
Canturbury chosen Archbishop and made Legate f. 412. A. B. Richard Chancellor
of Lincoln chosen Archbishop of Canturbury f. 542. C. His opposition to the
King in the Tax of Ecclesiastics f. 546. A. His complaint against Hubert de
Burgh, but without Remedy Ibid. B. He went to Rome and complained to the Pope
against King Henry the 3d. and Hubert his Justiciary f 547. B. C. His Death
Ibid. D. Richmont Castle by whom Built f. 199. B. C. Ibid. D. E. What Lordships
the Earl was possessed of f. 200. B. Baldwin de Ripariis, or Rivers, made Earl
of Wight f. 574 A. Ripuarii who they were f. 60 F. Rishanger his Character of
Simon Montfort Earl of Leycester f. 652. E. Petrus de Rivallis Bishop of
Winchester, Protector to Henry the 3d. f. 529. B. He was removed from Court f.
539. F. f. 553. F. His Answer to Richard Marsechal f. 554. C. His advice to the
King to reduce his Rebellious Barons by force and Arms f. 555. A. His Answer to
the Preaching Friars exasperated the Bishops f. 556. B. He slighted their
Threats of Excommunication Ibid. C. He was removed from all secular Offices f.
559. E Tower, but taken out by the Arch-^ishop of Canturbury f. 561. B D. E. He
was sent for to Rome by the Pope to assist him in his Wars against Frederick
the Emperor f. 562. E. His Death f. 571. B. Robert Duke of Normandy dyed in his
return from the Holy Land f. 186 A. Robert Eldest Son to William the Conqueror,
set up for King of ^ngland f. 218. D. His Chief Friends and undertakers Ibid.
E. He is reconciled to King William his Brother f. 221. E. He mo^gaged his
Dukedom to him and undertook the Cross f. 223. A. B. His Preparation to invade
England after King Williams Death f. 235. C. D. The Ternis on which he agreed
with Henry the 1st. his Brother f. 236. C. D. He released his Annuity to his
Brother f. 237. B. He granted Robert Belism his Fathers Honors and Fstate f.
240. A. He is taken Prisoner and sent into England f 243. A. His Death and
Burial at Gloucester f. 254. D. Robert Earl of Gloucester his conditional Homage
to King Stephen f. 273. C. D. His great concern for Maud the Empress f. 274. F.
He defied King Stephen f. 275. C. His Possessions and Castles in England seized
Ibid. D. He Landed in England with the Empress f. 278. F. He went to Treat with
the Legate and was taken Prisoner f. 286. C. F. He was exchanged for King
Stephen f. 287. A. He put King Stephen and his Brother the Legate to flight f.
289. A. F. His Death f. 290. D. Robert Brother to Lewis King of France chosen
Emperor by the Pope and Conclave f. 573. F. Rochel Surrendered to Lewis King of
France f. 534. lin. 1. Rochster made a Bishopric f. 103. F. Roderick King of
Connaught his resolution to oppose Dermot f. 354. A. He solicited Fitz-Stephen
to desert Dermot Ibid. B. A peace between him and Dermot Ibid. C. He was
overthrown by Fitz-Stephen f. 355. lin. 1. Roger Bishop of Salisbury a favorer
of Maud the Empress f. 275. E. F. His submission to King Stephen f. 276. B. C.
His severe charge in a Council at Winchester f. 277. F. His defense, and
threats to appeal to Rome f. 278. B. Rolland usurped the Government of Galway f.
340. D. He made his peace with King Henry the 2d. f. 341. D. Rollo the Dane
entered France with an Army, had Normandy and Britany assigned him f. 185. C. D.
He turned Christian and divided his Dominions among his followers Ibid. E. F.
Romans entrenched their Army every night f. 8. B. F. They were amazed at the
hideous habits and gestures of the Britains f. 18. C. Their barbarous usage of
Boadicia and the Britains Ibid. E. Their Subversion and ruin portended by
Prodigies f. 19. A. B. Eighty thousand of them slain by the Britains Ibid. C.
D. E. F. They revenge themselves on the Britains with a like slaughter f. 20.
D. E. Their Division of Britain f. 36. E. F. Their departure out of Britain f.
40. A. Their Military Establishment in Britain f. 41. etc. Their Garrisons upon
the Wall f. 45. C. Their Garrisons placed in the Frontiers f. 48. A. Their
Castra Stativa, Hiberna, and Aestiva Ibid. B. C. D. Their Ways and Stations
Ibid. F. Their Soldiers burdens, when they marched f. 50. A. B. Ibid. William
de Ross unkindly treated by Henry the Third f. 587. A. Roturiers, who f. 160.
C. Walter, Archbishop of Roven, Interdicted Normandy f. 453. D. The Popes
advice to him f. 454. B. Rowena Hengests Daughter married to Vortigern f. 94.
D. Peter Ruby sent into England to be the Popes Collector f. 576. l. 2. His
Policy to get Money Ibid. A. John Rufus a quasi Legatus sent into Scotland f.
599. C. His Extortion there Ibid. Rustand sent into England to be the Popes
Collector f. 615. D. The Powers granted to him and the Archbishop of
Canturbury Ibid. His Accusation and Removal from his Dignity and Office f. 623.
A. B.
S.
SAher, Earl of Winchester, adhered close to Prince Lewis f. 524. E. Saladine,
Emperor of the Saracens offered King Richard a Truce f. 431. F. Salic Laws,
when first written, and why so called f. 60. A. E. Salustius Lucullus,
succeeded Agricola in Britain f. 27. A. Sapientes among the Saxons, who they
were f. 85. E. Peter of Savoy, Earl of Richmond resigned his Castles to Henry
the Third f. 581. C. D. Saxons, who they were, and from whence they came f. 44.
E. They made use of the Roman Camps f. 48. E. No exact History of their Actions
to be expected f. 51. C, etc. Their Vsages and Customs not found in our
Historians f. 52. E. Nor mentioned by Tacitus Ibid. F. Their Seat and Country
mentioned by Ptolemy f. 53. B. Ibid. C. D. To whom their pecuniary Mulcts were
paid Ibid. E. Their way of Inheritance and Succession Ibid. F. Their propriety
only Annual f. 54. A. Their manner of eating and drinking Ibid. B. The time of
their Assemblies, and who was Chairman Ibid. D. Who declared their Laws and
Rights Ibid. E. f. 56. B. Theft allowed among them Ibid. C. Their Foot how
raised Ibid. F. Their Servants and Slaves, who, their Office and Employment f.
57. A. They exercised Pyracy Ibid. E. They Invaded the British Isles f. 58. A.
Where their Seat in Germany, and who joined with them Ibid. C. D. When and by
whom called into Britain Ibid. F. Their manner of Government f. 59. A. B. Saxon
Laws, when first made, and by whom Ibid. D. E. F. They were the same with the
Germans f. 62. C. The Agreeableness between them and the German Laws Ibid. and
f. 63. How they punished Murder, Theft, Slander and Trespess Ibid. Saxon
Tenures f. 66. A. 67. E. F. Their Lands held by Military Service f. 68. A. B.
How they proceeded in judgment f. 76. A. B. No Forms of their Writs to be found
f. 77. B. Their Agreement with the Germans in the manner of their making Laws
f. 84. B. and 85. They secure their Lands by great Ditches f. 86. A. When they
held their Councils f. 87. C. D. Their Princes always presided, or others by
their appointment Ibid. F. The Bulls, Charts, Privileges and Epistles kept in
their Monasteries, esteemed Cheats f. 91. E. A perfect Form of their
Law-proceedings not known fol. 139. F. They were invited into Britain by
Vortigern, and had the Isle of Thanet assigned them f. 94. A. They vanquished
the Scots and Picts Ibid. B. They quarrel with the Britains, and take part with
the Scots f. 95. B. D. Their treachery and cruelty to the Britains f. 96, 97.
Their Heptarchy and Catalogue of their Kings Ibid. He that had most Power, was
esteemed King of the English fol. West Saxons converted by Byrinus f. 105. E.
South Saxons converted by Wilfrid f. 107. l. 1. Their great Devotion and Piety
f. 109. E. F. The Ignorance of their Priests and Bishops f. 115. D. E. Scabini,
who they were f. 76. B. Scotalls, what they were f. 487. F. Scotland, their
King's Demand of King Richard f. 433. A. King Kichard's Answer to them Ibid. B.
Scots, who they were f. 35. B.E. They invaded and spoiled the Britains f. 38.
A. 39. C.D. What Hostilities and Barbarities they committed in Northumberland
f. 317. A, etc. Their King and many Great Men made Prisoners Ibid. F. Their
Bishops, Abbats, Earls and Barons swear Allegiance Henry the First and his Son
f. 324. A. B. C. And owned a submission to the Church of England Ib. and f.
415. B. Their King did Homage to Rich. King of England f. 424. l. 2.
Segintiaci, who they were f. 10. l. 2. Stephen de Segrave made Justiciary of
England by Henry 3d f. 550. A. He was removed from his Office, and called to an
Account fol. 561. F. He was fined f. 562. D. He is again received into Favor f.
565. lin. 1. And made one of the Kings Chief Counselors f. 572. F. Senana,
Prince Griffins Wife, her complaint to Henry the Third fol. 579. C. Her offer
to King Henry in her Husbands behalf Ibid. D. Seneca his Extortion and
Covetousness f. 18. F. Seneschal of Normandy, who, his Office and Power f. 163.
C. Grand Serjeanty, what it was f. 80. F. Sergeants of the Sword, who f. 162.
D. Serlo, Bishop of Seez, exhorted Henry the First to Conquer Normandy f. 241.
A. His Invective against long Hair, and then polled the King Ibid. C. Servants
their Condition in Germany f. 83. B. Servi, who they were f. 206. F. Services
all base and ignoble but Military f. 160. F. Severus defeated Albinus, and slew
him f. 29. D. He was saluted Emperor, and came again into Britain Ibid. D. E.
He affected the Name of Britannicus f. 30. l. 1. His great endeavors to conquer
the Britains Ibid. A. D. He repaired Hadrians wall Ibid. D. York, and dyed
there Ibid. E. Sheriffs that were unjust removed, and corruptions in that
Office prevented f. 564. D. They were cited by the King to pay their Rents into
the Exchequer f. 619. F. Sigibert, King of the East Angles, converted to
Christianity f. 105. B. Silures, who they were f. 15. A. They vex and destroy
the Romans f. 16. E. f. 17. l. 1. They were repulsed by Didius Ibid. A.
Sithcundman, who he was, and his Office f. 68. E. F. Siward, Earl of
Northumberland opposed Earl Goodwin f. 132. D. He vanquished the Tyrant
Macbeth, and made Malcolme the Third King of Scotland f. 134. B. Slaves when
first in Germany f. 82. C. Statutes of Clarendon renewed at Northampton f. 326.
Verneul f. 332. D. E. F. Of Merton f. 563. B. Of Merlebergh f. 665. B. Stephen,
the Third Son to the Earl of Blois, claimed the Crown of England f. 272. B. C.
D. The Bishops adhere to him contrary to their Oaths Ibid. His Coronation Oath
Ibid. E. F. His Title confirmed by the Pope f. 273. A. Henry's Treasure, and
received the conditional Homage of some Noble Men and Bishops Ibid. B. C. D. E.
He confirmed his Charter to the Church by his Oath Ibid. F. A Peace between him
and David King of Scots f. 274. C. His usage of the Church and Churchmen Ibid.
lin. 1. His treacherous dealing with the Earl of Gloucester Ibid. D. E. He
granted his Crown Lands to his adherents f. 275. A. B. Robert Duke of Gloucester
defied him Ibid. C. He was cited by the Popes Legate to appear before an
Ecclesiastical Council f. 277. A. His faults aggravated by the Legate Ibid. B.
C. D. He was defended by Alberic de Ver Ibid. E. f. 278. D. The Legate and
Archbishop of Canturbury cast themselves at his Feet Ibid. E. The War between
him and the Empress managed with Rapine and Barbarities f. 280. A. etc. He took
and Garrisoned the Isle of Ely f. 281. A. B. His Lords assumed to themselves
Rights of Majesty f. 282. A. His great aversness to Peace Ibid. B. C. His Army
beaten, and he taken prisoner f. 283. A. He was fettered at Gloucester Ibid. B.
His Queen and the Londoners Petition for his Release fol. His adherents
excommunicated by the Lagat f. 285. A. He was exchanged for Robert Earl of
Gloucester f. 287. A. His complaint against his Vassals and Feudataries Ibid. B.
The Tower of London delivered to him f. 290. A. He was basted at Lincoln Castle
by the Earl of Chester Ibid. B. He called a General Council at London f. 291.
F. The Archbishop refused to Crown his Son Eustachius fol. Several Great Men
swear Allegiance to his Son Ibid. B. The Death of his Queen and Son Ibid. C. F.
A Peace and Agreement between him and Duke Henry fol. 293. A. His Death Ibid.
B. Ecclesiastical Affairs in his Reign Ibid. D, etc. No Taxes or Subsidies in
his Reign f. 297. A. His Issue Legitimate and Natural Ibid. B. C. D. Stephen
the Popes Chaplain sent hither to Collect a Tenth promised by Henry the Third
f. 542. C. He was opposed by all the Laity Ibid. E. He had Power to
Excommunicate such as refused Ibid. F. He grievously oppressed the poor Clergy
f. 543. A. Robert Fitz-Stephen in assisting Dermot was repulsed at Wexford fol.
The Agreement between him and Dermot renewed Ibid. D. Wexford surrendered and
granted to him f. 353. A. He with Reymund and Maurice routed Prince Roderic,
and spoiled his Camp f. 358. B. C. He was taken Prisoner by a Trick Ibid. E. F.
He was delivered to King Henry the Second, and by him imprisoned f. 359. F.
Cork granted to him and Miles Cogan f. 396. F. Sterling, why so called f. 211.
F. Stigand Archbishop of Canturbury deposed f. 212. F. Richard Strongbow, Earl
of Strigul, his Agreement with Dermot, Prince of Leinster f. 351. D. He landed
in Ireland, and obtained a bloody Victory fol. 356. B. He Married Eva Dermots
Daughter Ibid. D. He relieved Fitz-Stephen, and delivered Dublin to Henry the
Second f. 359. A. B. C. His Death at Dublin f. 365. C. He granted his whole
Right and Title in Ireland to Henry the Second f. 374. D. William de Stutevill
his Trial for a Title to a Barony f. 465. F. Suetonius sent Lieutenant into
Britain f. 18. B. Britains f. 20. D. E. Sueves, whence they came f. 38. B. F.
They with the Alans and Vandals troubled the Empire Ibid. C. D. Suitors to
Courts bound to attend under Forfeitures and Mulcts fol. 145. C. None to be
Jurors, but such as knew the Case Ibid. D. E. Sunnis, what it signifies f. 76.
D. Swain, King of Danemark invaded England f. 124. B. His success and
cruelties Ibid. He imposed great Tributes on the People f. 125. A. F. Richard
Sward fell under the displeasure of Henry the Third f. 555. A. He is again
received into the Kings Favor and Council fol. 560. E. F. He was banished the
Kingdom f. 564. E.
T.
TAncred, King of Sicily, Answered King Richards Demands fol. 428. D. He
discovered the French Kings treachery to him f. 429. E. Tenures of the Saxons,
what they were f. 66, 67, 68. Normandy f. 156. A. Tenures of Homage, when made
easy and heritable f. 159. E. How many ways they became free and hereditary f.
160. lin. 1. In Franc-Almoigne, Burgage, Soccage, Bordage and Gavel-kind Ibid.
B. C. D. Terms and Vacations, from whence f. 178. E. F. Testudo, what it was,
and its use f. 7. F. Thainland, what it was f. 80. D. Thames River frozen f.
293. B. Theft how punished by the Saxon Laws f. 63. B. Thegns or Tains were
Military Men f. 70. C. and 80 B. C. D. Theobald Archbishop of Canturbury
refused to Crown Eustachius King Stephens Eldest Son f. 292. A. He was forced
to flee, and his possessions were seized Ibid. B. His endeavors to reconcile
King Stephen and Duke Henry fol. 293. F. Lateran Council Ibid. F. Theodore made
Archbishop of Canturbury by Pope Vitalian f. 106. C. He erected Latin and
Greek Schools there Ibid. The whole English Church submitted to him f. 107. A.
He erected Bishoprics and distinguished them into Parishes f. 107. A.
Theodosius sent by Valentinian into Britain f. 35. C. His success against the
Scots and Picts Ibid. He secured the Government of Britain f. 36. A. B. C. He
was recalled and made Emperor f. 37. B. Thrinsa, what it was f. 119. F.
Thurstan, Elect of York, refused to make his profession to Canturbury f. 266.
B. C. He desired the Kings leave to go to the Council of Rhemes f. 267. E. He
procured his Consecration from the Pope Ibid. The King prohibited his return
into England Ibid. F. He was at length permitted on conditions f. 269. A.
Tiberius made no attempt upon the Britains f. 11. B. Tinn-Mines, when first
discovered in Germany f. 58. F. Tithes not paid in Augustins time f. 102. F. Of
all England granted to the Church by Ethelwolph fol. 112. A. B. The Grant
subscribed by all the Kings and Nobility of the Kingdom Ibid. C. Tithings, why
so called f. 84. F. Roger de Toenio opposed Duke William's Succession f. 186.
B. He was overthrown and slain Ibid. C. Togodumnus slain f. 13. B. Tolls and
Customs for what paid f. 209. D. Tosti, Harolds Brothers, made Earl of
Northumberland f. 134. B. His Tyranny over the Northumbrians Ibid. F. He was
driven out of his Earldom Ibid. Tower of London, by whom built f. 203. A.
Trebellius Maximus, Lieutenant of Britain f. 21. C. Treviri, who they were f.
35. B. E. Trinobantes, who they were f. 9. F. They yielded themselves to Caesar
Ibid. D. Henry de Trubleville sent by Henry the Third to Frederic the Emperors
Assistance f. 571. A. Trial by Ordeal, Oath, Battle and Decretory Morsel f. 65,
66. Trials under 40 l. value where had f. 144. D. In the Conquerors time for
Church Lands and Tithes fol. 141. A. etc. Between Men of the same Jurisdiction,
how and where fol. Between Men of different Jurisdictions, where Ibid. B. By
Juries used at the making of Domesday f. 146. F. By Assise when first
introduced f. 147. lin. 1. By Ordeal when prohibited Ibid. B. C. By Battle or
Duel, when claimed Ibid. F. Who allowed to undertake it f. 148. C. The
punishment of the vanquished Ibid. E. A Writ of seizure granted the Victor f.
149. lin. 3. In criminal Cases when allowed Ibid. B. When Appellant or
Defendant were vanquished, how punished Ibid. D. By Combat in Civil or Criminal
Cases, under whose Direction Ibid. E. From whence and by whom Instituted f.
150. C. Tungrians, who they were, and where they dwelt f. 26. B. Turkill, a
great Commander among the Danes f. 125. l. 2. Richard de Turnham, his
Controversy with the Bishop of Durham fol. 456. A. B. Robert Tweng alias
Thing, plundered the Italian Clercs of their Corn f. 548. D. He justified what
he had done before the Inquisitors fol. 549. A. B.
U.
f. 179. B. C. Vandalls, from whence they came f. 37. F. Vectius Bolanus sent
Lieutenant into Britain f. 22. A. He gained the Affections of the Britains
Ibid. Vendome taken by Henry the Second f. 316. E. Alberic de Ver, his defense
of King Stephen before the Popes Legate f. 277. E. F. 278. D. Veranius made
Lieutenant of Britain f. 18. B. Verulamium plundered by the Britains f. 19. E.
Vespatian rescued by his Son Titus from great danger f. 13. A. He fought the
Britains thirty times, and took the Isle of Wight Ibid. C. He was made Emperor,
and subdued the Britains f. 22. B. E. Vicount, who and his Office f. 162. C.
Vicus, what it signifies f. 54. F. Villani, who f. 206. F. Virgata Terrae, what
f. 205. C. Ulster granted by King John to Hugh de Lasci f. 518. B. University
of the Kingdom, who, and their complaint against Papal Exactions f. 593. A. E.
The Popes Answer to them Ibid. F. Volusinus sent by Caesar into Britain f. 1.
E. Vortigern, King of the Britains f. 93. C. He called in the Saxons to assist
him against the Scots and Picts f. 94. A. He Married Rowena, Hengists Daughter
Ibid. D. Urban the fourth chosen Pope f. 636. A. His Death f. 654. C.
W.
WAles vid. Welsh. John Walerand made Custos of the City of London by Henry the
Third f. 654. F. Walo or Gualo sent Legate into France f. 508. A. He dissuaded
Prince Lewis from invading England Ibid. D. King Philip's Answer to him Ibid.
His Plea for King John f. 509. A. B. He left France in a Fret Ibid. C. He
Excommunicated Prince Lewis and Simon Langton Archbishop of Canterbury f. 510.
E. He accompanied the Kings Army against Prince Lewis fol. 525. B. C. The
encouragement he gave the Soldiers Ibid. E. He refused to absolve the Religious
that assisted Prince Lewis f. 527. F. He suspended such, and forced them to
compound f. 528. l. 1. He returned to Rome f. 530. l. 1. Robert Fitz-Walter
chosen General of the Barons f. 496. A. He was named the Marshal of the Army of
God and Holy Church Ibid. He subdued Essex and Suffolk f. 511. B. Walter,
Archbishop of Roven Interdicted Normandy f. 453. D. Wambais, what f. 337. B.
Wans-ditch, where f. 86. C. Wards Married to Foreigners f. 598. E. Warham
Castle taken by King Stephen f. 288. E. Retaken by the Earl of Gloucester f.
289. A. Fulk Fitz-Warin treated the Popes Legate roughly f. 593. B. William
Warlewast King William Rufus his Messenger to the Pope fol. 230. E. F. He was
sent thither by King Henry the First f. 259. B. His resolute Demands of the
Pope Ibid. C. D. He prohibited Anselm to return into England Ibid. F. The King
owned and maintained his prohibition f. 260. B. He is again sent to the Pope f.
261. C. Watling-street, where it was f. 49. l. 1 Ways made by the Romans in
Britain, four in number Ibid. D. E. The privileges that belonged to them Ibid.
F. Welsh invade England f. 222. F. They join with Robert de Belism against
Henry the First fol. 238. B. They are subdued by Henry the Second, and do him
Homage fol. 299. C. D. Their Kings and Noblemen do Homage to Henry the Second
f. 330. F. They do Homage of their own accord to King John f. 480. B. They make
Incursions into England f. 482. B. Their Hostages hanged up by King John Ibid.
C. They made several Incursions and Revolt f. 449. D. 590. A. They were wholly
subdued by Henry the Third, and received the English Laws f. 605. E. They again
revolt, invade, ravage and spoil the Borders fol. 620. C. D. 621. E. F. They
offered a Submission, but were refused f. 622. A. What moved them to rebel at
this time f. 623. E. They are Reduced, and a firm Peace Established f. 663. E.
F. David Welsh, his great Courage f. 363. B. Henry de Wengham, chosen Bishop of
Winchester, but refused it f. 635. D. Weregild, what it was f. 62. F. Wexford
surrendered and granted to Robert Fitz-Stephen f. 383. A. They besiege
Fitz-Stephen in Karrec Castle f. 357. F. They are routed and their Camp spoiled
f. 358. B. C. They took Fitz-Stephen Prisoner by a trick Ibid. E. F. Widomar of
Limosin found a great Treasure f. 457. E. Richard demanded the whole of him
Ibid. F. Wilfrid, Archbishop of York, displaced by King Ecgfrid f. 88. E. He
appealed to the Pope, but without success Ibid. He was restored by Alfrid his
Son f. 89. A He was again put out, and appealed, but to no purpose Ibid. He
converted the Saxons and Isle of Wight f. 107. A. William Duke of Normandy,
afterward the Conqueror, but eight years f. 186. l. 4. Bastardy accounted no
bar to his Succession Ibid. B. His Success against all that opposed or
confederated against him f. 187. A. B. C. etc. He claimed Anjou (...) his I
heritance. f. 188. C. His Piety, Temperance, and Justice Ibid. D. E. F. He came
over into England f. 133. A. His Message to Harold, and his Answer f. 136. A.
Ibid. He was declared Successor to Edward the Confessor f. 135. A. He
propounded to his Great Men an Expedition into England f. 136. D. E. The
Motives that induced him to undertake it f. 137. A. He landed in Sussex with
his Army Ibid. His offer to Harold refused Ibid. C. His Success and great
Victory over the English Ibid. D. E. and The Kentish men and Londoners submit
to him Ibid. E. He was Crowned at Westminster by Aldred f. 190. C. He
distributed Harolds Treasure to his followers Ibid. D. E. He received the
Fealties of Edwin and Morcar, and granted them their Possessions f. 191. A. He
placed Frenchmen in places of Trust Ibid. He passed into Normandy, and took
the chief of the English Ibid. B. D. He cajoled both the English and Welsh f.
192. E. He severely taxed the English f. 193. C. D. He built Castles all over
England f. 194. A. B. He wasted Northumberland, and quieted all Merica fol.
195. D. E. Gospatric and Waltheof reconciled unto him Ibid. Ralph de Guaders
Conspiracy against him defeated fol. 202. B. C. D. He commanded Lands taken
from Bishoprics to be restored fol. 140. B. Trials for Recovery of Lands in his
Reign f. 141. A, etc. He subdued the Isle of Ely, and used them babarously fol.
196. E. and 197. He divided the Nation among his Followers Ibid. C. D. E. His
Grant to the Earl of Britain f. 199. A. He invaded Scotland, and made them
submit f. 202. l. 1. His Son Robert rebelled, but was soon reconciled Ibid. E.
fol. 203. lin. 4. He wasted the King of France his Country Ibid. B. He seized
his Brother Odo's Treasure Ibid. D. E. He Established a settled Revenue f. 204.
B. The several Branches of it Ibid. and f. 208, etc. 209. D. 210* A. How his
Rent was paid f. 210. B, etc. His yearly Revenue, what f. 211. A. His Army not
paid out of his standing Revenue Ibid. He brought Church Lands under Military
Service f. 212. A. He quartered his Soldiers in Monasteries, and carried away
the^r Treasure Ibid. B. C. D. He brought in the Norman Laws, and called
Ecclesiastical Ibid. E. F. He brought in the Servitude of Fees f. 156. B. He
displaced English Bishops and Abbats, and put Normans in their room f. 213. A.
B. He allowed no Pope to be owned but by his Command Ibid. C. He suffered not
his Barons to be excommunicated without his leave Ibid. D. He distinguished
Ecclesiastic from Civil Jurisdiction f. 214. C. What privileges he granted to
Battle Abbey Ibid. F. He refused to become the Popes Feudatary f. 215. A. His
Death and Issue Ibid. D. E. F. William Rufus, second Son to the Conqueror,
brought his Fathers Donation to Lanfranc f. 217. C. D. Who were his greatest
Assistants in gaining the Crown Ib. E. F. Duke Roberts friends opposed his
Succession f. 218. C. D. E. The Natural English, and all the Bishops took his
part f. 219. A. Rochester Castle surrendered to him on conditions Ibid. D. The
Arts by which he settled himself f. 220. l. 3. A Peace between him and his
Brother Robert Ibid. D. E. He was much caressed by all for his bounty f. 221.
D. A Conspiracy against him in England discovered f. 222. A, etc. His Brother
Robert Morgaged Normandy to him f. 223. A. Aquitain pawned to him by William
Duke of Poictou fol. He was slain before he could take possession of it Ibid.
D. Ecclesiastic Affairs in his Reign f. 225. The great Controversy between him
and Anselm f. 226, 227, 228, 229, 230. He was accused by Eadmer for Judaizing
f. 231. C. His Revenue as great as his Fathers Ibid. D. E. F. William King of
Scotland taken Prisoner by the English f. 317. F. He did Homage to Henry the
Second King of England f. 323. F. The Agreement between both Kings sealed f.
324. D. He offered 5000 Marks toward the Holy War f. 344. F. His Demands of
King Richard, and his Answer f. 443. A. B. His Demands of King John by his
Envoys f. 462. C. He was admonished in his sleep not to invade England f. 464.
B. He did Homage to K. John, then made his demands f. 468. C. F. William Earl
of Pembroke Protector to Henry the Third, vid. Marshall. William de Warrenna
restored to his Earldom by Henry the First fol. 237. C. William, Son to Duke
Robert, set up by the Norman Great Men fol. 247. C. D. He was Married to the
Sister of Alice Queen of France fol. 253. C. He claimed Normandy, but was
rejected Ibid. Flanders by King Lewis Ibid. D. He was slain before Alost Castle
Ibid. E. Duke Roberts Issue extinct in him Ibid. F. William, Eldest Son to
Henry the First, married the Earl of Anjou's Daughter f. 248. C. He and 300
more drowned in their return from France fol. 252. A. B. William, Abbat of St.
Osiths, chosen Archbishop of Canturbury f. 269. C. Stephen, but was satisfied
f. 273. A. William with the Beard caused a Sedition in London, is taken and
hanged f. 448. A. William Witham vid. Robert Tweng. Winchester made a Bishops
See f. 105. F. Wings of Soldiers, what they were, and their number f. 45. F.
Wisigoth-Laws, by whom composed f. 60. C. Witena-Gemotes, what they were f.
112. E. Worcester, the Bishops Plea for Recovery of Lands f. 141. B. The City
taken and burnt by the Citizens of Gloucester f. 280. B. The Rapine of the
Soldiers there Ibid. D. E. Earl Walerans revenge for destruction of the City
Ibid. fol. 281. B. Earl Philip made Governor of Ireland f. 372. A. Writ of
Right, where first brought f. 144. D. Now become obsolete f. 150. E. f. 151. A.
Of William Rufus for assembling the County f. 143. B. C.
Y.
YOrk, the Archbishop to make his Profession of Obedience to the Archbishop
Canturbury f. 264. F. He contended with the Bishop of London about Crowning the
King f. 265. A.
FINIS.

