THE Life and Death OF THE GODLY MAN, EXEMPLIFIED IN A SERMON Preached Nov. 12.
1676, AT THE FUNERAL OF That Pious and Faithful Minister of Christ, Mr. THOMAS
WADSWORTH.

By R. B.

Isa. 57. 1, The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and
merciful men are taken away, none considering, that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Collier, at the Bible on
London Bridge. 1676.

To the READERS: more especially such as were the Hearers of this Sermon.
IF ever I was pulled and haled to any service, it was to this, of preaching
and Printing upon this occasion; not for any want of love to him that is
deceased: for I can truly say, that I loved him above any man in the World. But
I would have had this last Office done for him by one who could have done it
better. It Is pity He who deserved a pillar of Marble, should have but a heap of
Stones for a Monument.

The Truth is, I did so often gainsay it, till I began to think it was Pride,
and not Modesty made me so much against it: for had it been a Sermon larded
with Rhetorical strains, and crammed with Quotations, it is very likely I should
have been more willing to it is, publication; but because out of my meanness I
could prepare nothing but what was plain and homely, this might make me loath
to have my poverty exposed: but it seems I must either print, or be printed:
which I have chosen to do by the best Copy I could get, to prevent the going
abroad of a worser.

If any that knew this blessed man, find fault that his Picture is no better
drawn (as it is likely many will) I must say, It Is their fault in part, who did
not choose one that could have done it better.

What is here spoken of him, is so far from being above, that it is far below
that true Worth which was in him. Indeed, who is able to draw the Image of his
Mind? the perfections and Beauties of his inner-man? His shining gifts? His
lively Graces? His love to Truth? His compassion to Souls? His zeal for God?
His melting Prayers? His affectionate preaching? his heavenly Discourses? His
holy Example, with that warm sincere Spirit which breathed in him? We can no
more draw to the life these Divine Colors and lineaments of his better part,
than we can paint the heat of the Fire, or the brightness of the Sun.

It is an amazing, and I wish it may be an awakening Providence to us, that God
(surely though in anger and displeasure against us) is still snatching away his
faithful Ministers from us. No less than five or six have been laid in the dust
within this five or six Months. When such burning and shining Lights are put
out, have we not cause to fear a night of darkness coming on? When those that
should stand in the gap are removed, may not we tremble to think of the wrath
that is breaking in upon us? Oh, if you have any Tears in your Eyes, pour them
out before the Lord. If you have any groans in your Breasts, send them up to
Heaven. If you have any Interest at the Throne of Grace, improve it in praying
the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into the Harvest.

To conclude, Let us be followers of him, who followed the Lord fully, and is
entered into rest; let us study and strive to walk before God with a perfect and
upright heart as he did; let us love God and his holiness as he did; let us do
the Will of God, and eye his Glory as he did, and then our end will be peace,
as his was.

If any say, but we want his Graces: I shall answer in some of his own dying
words: when one said to him, Oh Sir, There are many who could wish their Souls
in your Souls stead: His Reply was: The same Grace that saves me, is able to
save you also.

Your Souls Servant, R. B.

An Elegy upon the death of Mr. Thomas Wadsworth.
FOnd Scribler! will thou venture now to Write,
When Age and Tears have so obscured thy sight?
Let youthful Muses dance on Verses feet,
Thy cripled palsy Pen is no way meet
For such Heroic strains, as now are due
To blessed Wadsworths memory, who drew
His breath but lately with us, but is fled
Alas, too soon from us; some say he is dead,
But that is too gross a word; for men profane
Dye while they live, but holy men do gain
True life by death; thine heavenly winged Dove
Has left us creeping worms, and is above,
A Bird of Paradise; blessed Soul we joy
Thine happiness, but grief must us annoy,
Poring upon our loss, which is so high,
An Handkerchief from Heaven must dry our eye,
Or else our grief may blind us; none can stay
This Flood from drowning, but the Lord of Day
And pitchy Night, whose Royalty it is
To bring Light out of Darkness when he please.
Oh, for a Transmigration, that so
Thine holy Spirit into our Breasts might flow;
This, this, might dam the Water, when we find
Wadsworths blessed Mantle yet is left behind:
But wishes are the poor man's wealth; we may
Desire this Garment: but our thin array
Exposes us to cold and storms, a frost
Is in our Zone; our Torrid Zone is lost
Now thou art gone; thy Zeal provoked much,
We only live to wish that we were such.
Farewell dear Friend and Saint, now out of breath,
Thine absence makes us long the more for death.
W. T.

A Sermon Preached November 12, 1676. at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas Wadsworth.
PSALM. XXXVII. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.


NOT to spend time in Prefacing; In the words read, we have these Two things
worthy our consideration.

First, We have here the Life and Death of a godly Man described to us; his
Life, so he is styled the perfect and the upright Man; his Death, and so his
end is said to be peace.

Secondly, We have that which is our duty, in reference to this godly Man; and
that is to observe him, and to take special notice of him both living and
dying; This is given us in two words: First, Mark him; the word signifies to
mark, as one that is upon a Watchtower. And secondly, Behold him, which
signifies to behold him narrowly, and exactly: The doubling of the word, shows
that we should diligently consider him. This is our duty with reference to the
good and godly Man.

If you compare this Verse with the foregoing, you shall find that the Prophet
does, as it were, draw two Pictures; in verse 35, he draws the Picture of the
ungodly man; and he draws him in his best attire, he draws him in his best
colors: I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading himself like a
green bay tree. Here you have a goodly picture; but his colors they are all
fading, and his beauty and glory is soon gone; for so it follows at the next
verse, Yet he passed away, and lo he was not; yea, I sought him, but he could
not be found. He is soon withered root and branch, all his pomp and bravery it
does quickly end in dust and ashes.

Now in opposition to this, the Prophet does here draw the Picture of a godly
man, and he gives us these two lineaments of him; he calls him the perfect man
and the upright; That is the Picture of his Life: And then he gives us the
Picture of his Death too, or of him dying; and so his end is peace. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

The observation or lesson I shall commend to you is this, It is our duty to
observe and take special notice of the good and godly man, both in his life and
death. Such as are holy, gracious, and godly men, it is good for us to observe
them living and dying; to mark how perfectly and uprightly they live, and
behold how peaceably and comfortably they dye.

Here are three things to be spoken too, 1. The Life of the godly man. 2. His
Death. And 3. Our duty with reference to him in both these.

First, Let us a little view the Life of this godly man, as it is given us here
under these two Characters of the perfect man, and the upright; The perfect
man, who is he? or what is it to be perfect? That is perfect in a strict sense,
to which nothing needs be added; and so he only is a perfect man, that has
nothing of imperfection remaining in him: But then, where shall we find this
perfect Man? For if Noah and Abraham had their imperfections, if Elias is said
to be a Man of like passions with us, if Job and David were not without their
defects, where then shall we find this perfect man? We must therefore
distinguish; Perfection is either absolute, or comparative:

Absolute, and so they only are perfect, who are free from all sin and
imperfection; and thus the Angels in Heaven, and the spirits of just men above,
are perfect.

And Secondly, there is a comparative perfection, and so the godly man may be
said to be a perfect man, if compared with the wicked, who have no grace at
all; or compared with the hypocrite, who has grace only in appearance; or
compared with other Saints, who have less grace than he.

Or secondly, we may thus distinguish it: Perfection is either Legal, such as
the Law requires; or Evangelical, such as the Gospel accepts of.

First, Legal perfection, That lies in a sinless obedience, and an exact
conformity to the Law of God; and such a perfect man, is not to be found
amongst men in this World: For the Scripture concludes all men under sin. Job
durst not avouch himself to be thus perfect, Job 9.20, If I say I am perfect,
it shall also prove me perverse. And St. John durst not aver himself to be thus
perfect, John 1 Epist. 1.8, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. To find a Man that has nothing of darkness
or ignorance remaining on his mind, that has no evil thoughts or inclinations
rising in his heart, that has no defects or imperfections in any of his duties
and services; you may as soon find a man that has no ill-humours, no seeds of
sickness or death in his body.

But then, Secondly, There is an Evangelical Perfection, such as the Gospel
does accept of; and thus the godly man may be said to be perfect; and that,
these Two ways.

First, Perfect as to his justification before God through Jesus Christ; a
godly man he is perfectly justified, that is, his sins are fully pardoned, they
are all blotted out and remitted, as if they had never been committed; he that
truly repents, and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, he has the perfect
righteousness of Christ imputed to him; and upon that account is perfectly
justified, he is acquitted from all his sin. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? Romans 8.33. We are complete in Christ, Col. 2.10. Complete
in him, not in our selves; it is in him we have a perfect righteousness for our
justification before God; in our selves we have none, but what is as a filthy
rag, and has a Thousand bracks and cracks in it.

Secondly, A godly man may be said to be perfect too, as to his Regeneration
and Sanctification, and that in Two respects.

1. Because he has the perfect beginnings and seeds of all grace and holiness
wrought in him; even as a Child as soon as it is born, has the perfect limbs
and lineaments of his Father, eye for eye, and hand for hand, and foot for
foot, though he be still capable of further growth and increase in every
member; and so it is with those that are born of God, they have all the lines
of Gods image drawn upon their souls, they have all the limbs of the new
creature, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; love
to God, hatred of sin, and so of the rest, though they are still capable of a
higher increase and perfection in every grace; so much the Apostle intimates, 1
These. 5.23, where he prays that God would sanctify them throughout, in Soul,
Body, and Spirit: Mark, they are sanctied in the whole Man, though not wholly;
they are sanctified throughout, though not thoroughly; there is no faculty of
Soul that remains unsanctified, no member of Body that remains unsanctified;
grace it does extend it self, as far as corruption did, unto every part; so
that the godly man, though he be Regenerate but in part (for we know but in
part, and we believe but in part, and love but in part); yet he has this
perfection, that he is regenerate in every part.

And 2. He may be called perfect, in regard of the aims and intentions of his
desires and endeavors; for perfection is that which a godly man does aim at,
and which he drives at, as in 2 Cor. 7.1, Let us cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
Mark, he speaks of it, as a work that is continually a doing, it is still in
progress, and in proficiency; for there is no man that is made perfectly holy
at the first, as there is no man that is grown a perfect man the first day he
is born; and thus St. Paul, Phil. 3.12, 13, Not as though I had already
attained, or were already perfect: But this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things that are before: I
am pressing onward, etc. Thus now it is with every godly man, there is no
imperfection remaining in him, but what he longs to be fully rid of; and no
grace and good thing wrought in him, but what he desires to be fully perfected;
he would be emptied of sin to the very bottom, and filled with grace to the
brim; and in this respect he may be called a perfect man: for in a
Gospel-sense, they that would have no sin in them, they have no sin in them;
and in a Gospel-sense, they that desire and strive after perfection, they are
counted perfect. Thus we have done with the first term, the first Character
that is given of a godly man, as he is styled the perfect man.

Secondly, He is styled the Upright man: and some distinguish between these
two, as between the Root and the Fruit, the Fountain and the Streams;
Perfection they refer to the inward state of the Soul; and uprightness to
outward walking before God and Man: but we need not be very curious in
distinguishing these two, for they are often put one for another: and indeed, a
Christians perfection, it lies in his uprightness; and therefore Asa, and Job,
and David, are said to walk before God with a perfect heart; that is, with an
upright heart. Now then to be upright, it is to be downright in Religion, to be
plain-hearted and single-spirited in what we do; when we are true to our
profession, and real in what we do; and thus Jacob is said to be a plain man;
that is, a perfect and an upright man, without any foldings or doublings in his
spirit: it is opposed to Hypocrisy and false-heartedness, to dissimulation and
empty shows in Religion; as the Phaerisees you know they made great shows in
Religion, they did many things, but they were false-hearted in all that they
did; they made long Prayers, but it was under a color to devour Widows houses:
they gave Alms, but it was to be seen of men: they had by-ends, base and
sinister respects in all that they did; they did seek themselves, and served
themselves in their serving of God; they did not do it out of conscience and
obedience to God, to please God, to honor God, to enjoy God, this was the dead
Fly in all their Ointment, this was the Leven that did sour all their Services:
for without this inward Truth and uprightness of heart, all that we do in
Religion, is nothing at all; our most glorious performances they are but
abominations in the sight of God, if there be not this Truth within, if they be
not done out of conscience and obedience to God; it is the same with that
simplicity and sincerity you read of, 2 Cor. 1.12, In simplicity and godly
sincerity we have had our conversation in the world. In simplicity; not a
foolish simplicity, but a godly simplicity, as God is said to be a Simple
Essence without mixture; so Paul's simplicity was without all mixture of guile,
or fraud, or deceit in what he did. I might show you what are the Ingredients
of this Uprightness; when it is that we do act in the uprightness of our hearts.

First, Love to God, that must be the spring and principle from whence all
comes: for if we do not love God, we shall not seek to please him in what we
do; and if we do not love God, God will not be pleased with us neither, in what
we do; for what are all our performances to God, if they do not slow from Love?
and how can we love him, except we know that he has loved us first? and
therefore there must be Faith apprehending the love of God in Jesus Christ, at
the bottom of all, without which all that we do in Religion is but Morality.

And secondly, The Will of God must be the Rule of what we do: for it is not
properly a duty or service done to God, if it be not done in obedience to his
Will. What Master will be served by his Servant as his Servant will? if in our
serving and worshipping of God, we serve him according to our own will, and not
his Will; we do but serve our selves, and not God; nay, indeed we do but set up
our selves in the room of God.

And Thirdly, The Glory of God that must be the end of all: not that we may
have praise and glory from men, but that God in all things may be glorified by
us: if we have any good thing in us, it is from the grace of God that we
receive it; and if there be any good thing done by us, it is by the grace of
God we are enabled to do it; and therefore the glory, and the honor of all
that we have and do, belongs to God. The upright man he is always an humble
man, he has the lowest and meanest thoughts of himself of any in the World; he
has to do with God in all that he does, and so he can see the defects that are
in himself, and in his services: and therefore when he has done all, he does
acknowledge that he is but an unprofitable servant. Thus you see who this
Upright man is; he is one that does study to approve his heart unto God, more
than his ways and actions to men.

We might here show you what are the signs and evidences of this uprightness of
heart; but I must not engage too far in that. All that I will say, is this,
There are two Verses in David's Psalms, if you are able to repeat them, and your
hearts not give your tongues the lie in the saying of them, it will be a great
proof and evidence of your uprightness: the one is that in the 139 Psalm, ver.
the last. Lord, search me and try me; and see is there be any way of wickedness
in me. If you can thus pray to God, that God would try you, and search you, and
see if there be any corruption in you that does endanger your Salvation, this
is a great sign of your Uprightness. That is a sure Rule: He that repents truly
of any Sin, he does repent of every Sin, for every Sin has the nature of all
Sin in it; and therefore he that says, This Sin I must reserve; herein the Lord
be merciful to me: this pride, this lust of mine I would have spared, as Saul
spared the fattest of the Cattle, and as David would have the young man Absalom
dealt gently withal; he is no upright man. The other Text is Psalm 119.6, Then
shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect to all thy Commandments: Mark, true
Uprightness it has an eye to all Gods Commandments: to all that is good, to
know the whole Will of God, and to practice it; He does not pick and choose
amongst the Commandments of God: he that truly makes conscience of one Command,
makes conscience of every Command; partial Obedience, it is hypocritical
Obedience. So that here now is your Trial, Christians, when there is no Sin
that you would have hid from Gods eye, and no Duty that you would have hid from
your eye; when there is no Sin which God reveals to you to be a Sin, but your
hearts are against it; and no Duty which God reveals to be your Duty, but your
hearts are for it; when you make conscience of the least known Sin, and of the
least known Duty; this, and nothing less than this, will prove your
Uprightness, will prove your Sincerity. I will add but one thing more, and so I
shall have done with this first part of the Text: it is to mind you of that
Scripture you have in Ecclesiastes 7.29, God made man upright at first, but he
sought out many inventions. This Uprightness, my Brethren, was a part of that
perfection wherewith Man was endowed in his Primitive state: but man had no
sooner fallen, but presently he discovered the doubling of his Spirit with God,
and seeks for hidings and coverings to himself: Since the fall, our hearts are
as full of this deceit, this falsehood, as ever they can hold: the heart of man
is deceitful and desperately wicked above all that we are able to know; we have
the poison of the Serpent in us, and are become full of turnings and windings:
you may see it in your little Children, one of the first things they learn, is
to lie, and to equivocate, and to excuse, and to hide things, and to play the
Hypocrites: I say, we have it all in us by Nature. By Nature we do seek our
selves, and aim at our selves in all we do, and not God. Do not think that the
Pharisees only were prone to this Hypocrisy, to draw nigh to God with their
lips, and to have their hearts far from him, or to do Duties to be seen of men.
I tell you, we have every one a Pharisee in our bellies; therefore we have need
to beg of God that he would make us upright again, and to pray as David did;
Lord, create in me a new heart, and renew a right spirit within me.

I come now to speak of his death, and I see I must be shortest there, where I
thought to have been longest; having been longest already, where I intended to
be shortest: well, the end of this man is peace. His end is peace in a twofold
opposition: First, To a wicked man, though his life may be pleasant, and his
way smooth and strewn with Roses, yet his end is bitterness; his Deathbed
stuffed with Thorns; as the Cloud which had a bright side toward the Israelites,
had a dark side to the Egyptians: so Death, that has a bright side to a godly
man, it has a dark and blackside toward a wicked man: as they say in Logic,
the conclusion always follows the worser part; So it is with the wicked, his
conclusion follows the worser part of his premises.

Secondly, His end is peace, in opposition to his own life; Perhaps a godly
man's life may be full of trouble; he may meet with many Temptations, with great
Trials, but his end is peace; he shall be brought to a quiet Port, and land on
a shore of Rest.

But how is a godly man's end peace? and why is it peace? Let me speak a little
of these two. How is his end peace? His end is peace these five ways:

First, If you take Peace for Peace with men, so his end is Peace; he does
endeavor as much as in him lies to live peaceably with all men; and he desires
to die in peace with all men: As he did not live in Quarrels, so he does not
die in Quarrels; he does not suffer the Sun of his Life to go down upon his
Wrath. Possibly men are at War with him, malign him, persecute him, even unto
death, as they did Stephen; yet he is at amity with them, and prays, Lord lay
not this sin to their charge: And with Christ, Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do; He has learnt that Lesson which Nature will never teach
a man, Matthew. 5, To love his Enemies, to bless them that curse him, to pray for
them which despightfully use him.

Secondly, They have peace with Angels: for when they die, these blessed
Spirits do conduct and accompany their departing Souls unto Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16.22; and at the Resurrection will gather together the bodies of the
Elect from all corners of the Earth, where their dust has been scattered. Heb.
1.17, We read how Angels, who are Executioners of Gods Judgments upon the
wicked, do stand ready to avenge the quarrel of God upon his Enemies; as Joab
the Captain of David's Host was ready to have taken off Shimei's head when he
cursed the King, if he had but said the word. These Angels which are the Hosts
of God, are sent forth as ministering Spirits, as friends to the Saints.

Thirdly, His end is peace with God, God is reconciled to him, and he is
reconciled to God and to all his ways: being justified by faith, we have peace
with God; no more anger in his Bosom, no more frowns in his Face toward him,
but all his anger is turned into Love. Oh that peace of God which passes all
understanding, that fills his heart and mind! What a sweet thing is it, my
Brethren, to be at peace with that God whom we have so offended by our Sins? to
have his Face smiling upon us, and his Arms embracing us? Who knows the
sweetness of such smiles, but those that have felt his frowns? therefore Christ
calls them his Friends: for a man when he lies sick, to have the bosom of a
reconciled God and Father to be his pillow; and when he dies, to die in the
Arms of Christ, this must make it sweet dying indeed.

Fourthly, He has peace in his own Conscience, peace in his own Bosom: This is
our rejoicing, the testimony of a good conscience; and that bird in the bosom,
does oftentimes sing most sweetly, when the man draws nearest to his death.
Great peace have they that love thy law, says the Psalmist, and nothing shall
offend them; thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee.
This follows upon our reconciliation with God, peace of Conscience, that is
more worth than a Thousand worlds; and to have Conscience to be our enemy,
continually accusing and upbraiding of us, striking us with fear; to have the
worm gnawing in the Soul, before the worms are feeding on the flesh; This is a
continual dropping, this is an Hell upon earth: As a good Conscience is a
Heaven begun, so an evil guilty Conscience is a Hell begun. That is a fourth
thing they have, peace of Conscience; as the sting of death is taken away, so
the sting of Conscience is taken away likewise.

Fifthly and lastly, His end is peace, for he enters into peace, into full and
perfect peace; so in Isaiah 57.1, 2, Where the Prophet is bemoaning the
righteous man's death, that no man lays it to heart, he shows, that they need
not lay his death to heart, in reference to him; for he enters into peace. And
so Simeon, Luke 2.29, 30, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace
according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation; and blessed are
the dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors. In the Third
Region, the upper Region of the Air, they say there are no Clouds nor Storms,
no Thunder nor Lightning. In the Third Heavens, in those celestial Mansions, I
am sure there are no troubles, no storms, no fears, no temptations, but
everlasting rest and peace. But why is this Man's end peace? It must needs be
peace with him in the (...) for the God whom he serves, he is (...), and the
Christ in whom he be^^^^ the Prince of peace, and the Spirit that dwells in
(...), the fruits of that spirit is joy and peaces, and the Gospel that is
Prach'd, it is called the (...) and the Ministers that are his Teach^^^ the
Ambassadors of peace: their work is (...) publish peace; and the Kingdom of God
in which they are, or rather which is in them, it does consist in peace, in
righteousness, and joy in the holy Ghost, and (...) Covenant that is between
God and them, it is a Covenant of peace; and the great Benediction and blessing
of the Gospel, it is grace and peace; and they themselves are styled the sons
of peace, and the children of peace; and therefore they must needs have peace
in the end.

I must not speak to all these, I will content my self, only with these two
grounds of the point.

First, A godly man's end must needs be peace upon this ground; Because Jesus
Christ has made his peace, procured his peace, and left peace to him; he made
peace for us, Col. 1.2^, Having made peace through the blood of his cross; and
the chastisement of our peace was upon him. Sin had made a breach between
Heaven and Earth, and Christ comes to stand in the gap, and take up all
quarrels* and therefore having made peace, when (...) to dye, he bequeathed
peace to all his people as their (...), Joh. 4.27, Peace I leave with you,
(...) unto you, not as the world (...) your heart be troubled, neither (...).
And the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, (...) ^^^ecutor, who is a faithful (...) peace
to the Soul; he is the Dove that brings this Olive Branch of peace to the Soul,
to tell us that the Waters of Gods anger are alswag'd.

Secondly, The end of a godly man must (...) peace too upon this account.
Because all (...) are removed and taken out of the way, (...) his peace; Sin
and Satan, the two (...) and disturbers of our peace, are taken (...).

1. Sin: What makes God frown upon (...) and what makes us afraid of God, but
(...) says Christ, thy sins are forgiven thee: And when sin, the cause of the
breach, is removed, then peace must needs follow: Now all sin is fully pardoned
and forgiven to the godly Man; God has removed his sins from him, as far as
the East is from the West; What then should hinder his peace? And as there is
no sin that is left unpardoned by God, so there is no sin that is unrepented of
by the godly Man, and therefore peace must needs follow: when God puts away our
sin by pardoning it, and we put away our sin too by repenting of it, then peace
follows: God puts away our sins, as far as the East is from the West, so as
(...) to remember them more; and when we part away our (...) as far as the East
is from the West, so as never to return to them any more, (...) follows peace
indeed. While sin is unrepented of, never look for peace when any sin is
indulged in the Soul, there cannot be peace with God, whiles we are at peace
with any sin; one known sin kept up in thy heart, is enough to breed an
everlasting war between God and thy Soul: But now, when God puts away sin by
pardoning and we put away all sin, by repenting and renouncing (...) every
weapon of war, then peace (...).

2. And then the Devil who is the great Accuser of the Brethren, and Enemy of
our peace, he is destroyed, That by death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil, Heb. 2.14. What power has the Devil over
Death, not of a Judge, but of a Jailer and Executioner, having destroyed him?
How is the Devil destroyed by Christ, not as to his being, but power, which he
had to make Death terrible? Well then, if Sin be taken out of the way, and the
Devil be destroyed too, then peace must needs follow to the godly man. I know
there is an Objejection may be made.

You say, that the godly man has peace in his end: What, are there not some
whom we have cause to judge are perfect and upright men, and yet have died far
from this peace; they have set in a Cloud, died in a dark and disconsolate
state?

For answer to that, I will only say these two things: First, That the most
general Rule may have some exceptions; though this be laid down as a general
Rule in Scripture, yet God may make some exceptions to it; it is possible a
good conscience may be an unquiet conscience, though it is a rare thing for a
godly man to die without any peace; for the righteous has hope in his death.

Secondly, I say, That though a godly man may not always have peace in his
death as to his own sense and apprehension, yet his state is a state of peace
and reconciliation with God; though his peace be not always clear, yet it is
always sure. A wicked man may have no bonds in his death, and yet his estate
may be never the better for that; and a godly man may sometimes die full of
fears and tremblings, and yet his estate be never the worse for that. He has
matter for peace, and his trouble is for want of understanding things aright:
though he sets in a Cloud in this life, yet he rises without a Cloud in the
other life.

There is a third part of the Doctrine behind that I should have spoken to, and
that is our Duty -- to mark this perfect man, and behold this upright man: And
I might have shown you wherein we should mark him.

Mark him, 1. In his Ingress, in his entrance upon the ways of God; mark him in
his conversion to God, in his turning from sin to God.

2. Mark him in his Progress, how he holds on in the ways of God, how he walks
with God.

Thirdly, Mark him in his Regress, how he returns again; if at any time he go
out of the way, if he do fall, and be overtaken, how he rises again by
repentance: Mark how he confesses his sius, and sincerely bewails them, and
does not excuse them as Saul did.

And Lastly, Mark him in his Egress, how he goes out of the World, how he dies;
and if the dying speeches of Gods Children had all been recorded, it would have
been a Book more worth than Gold: In all these respects, there are many things
in the godly that are worth our observation; the truth is, there is no man else
in the World that is hardly worth the looking at, but the Godly man: As the
Prophet said to that great King, 2 Kings 3.14, As the Lord of Hosts lives,
before whom I stand, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the
King of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee. Though he was a
great King, yet he was but a contemptible piece in the Prophets eye, because
not a godly Man. We are apt to gaze upon the great ones of the World, to look
at them, because of their Greatness, and Riches, and Honors; but the truth is,
only the godly man is worth looking at, this is the Man that God looks at: To
this man will I look, says God, as if he were taken with the sight.

I might show you too, to what end we should mark the godly Man: Not as
Daniel's enemies marked him, to see if they could find him tripping; and not as
many that mark David, to encourage themselves to sin: But we are to mark him,
as the Apostle directs us, Phil. 3.17, Mark such, that you may follow their
example. And then how far we are to follow the example of the godly, Be
followers of me, says the Apostle, as I am of Christ. But I cannot stand upon
these things.

Use First, This might show us the happiness of the godly Man: we use to say,
That is well that ends well; then sure it will be well with the godly Man, for
he ends well, his end is peace, he enters into peace; and what a comfortable
thing it is to stand by the Bedside of a godly Man, to hear how comfortably he
talks of going to God? I know, says he, whom I have believed; and how
familiarly he can speak of Death; Oh Death where is thy sting! And with what
desires and longings he waits for his great change; I shall but change my
place, I shall not change my company. And with what quietness he can lie down
in the Grave; with as much quietness as he can put off his Clothes to lie down
in his Bed: For indeed, the Grave is but the Bed of a godly Man, where he lies
down to sleep; he is glad that the time of his departure is so nigh, and can
say, Come ye Angels, and do your office.

Secondly, This would inform us of the misery of wicked and ungodly men, it is
the perfect the upright Man whose end is peace: What then is like to be the end
of the ungodly? What peace, as he said, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother
Jezebel remain? So, what peace can there be to thee, sinner, whiles thou art
going on in ways of wickedness, whiles thou art a lover of thy pleasures, a
lover of thy lust, a lover of these more than a lover of God? You know that
speech of the Prophet Isaiah, There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.
It is not I, but God that says it, says the Prophet; false Prophets may cry
peace, peace, to you, saying, you may repent at last, and do well enough; and
your own hearts may cry peace, peace to you, God is merciful, and all are
sinners as well as we: I, but there is no peace to the wicked, says my God. God
has said it, That men going on in ways of wickedness, there is no peace to
them; but it will be bitterness in the latter end: Such a one will say, oh!
what will become of me? what shall I do? which way soever thou look, thou
can see nothing but that which may disquiet thy poor Soul: If thou look
above thee, there is the wrath of an Almighty Insinite God hanging over thy
head; if thou look within thee, there is a guilty Conscience accusing thee;
if thou look beneath thee, there is the bottomless pit gaping on thee, ready
to devour thee; so that which way soever thou look, above thee, beneath
thee, within thee, without thee, thou can see nothing but blackness, and
darkness. There are other Uses might be made of it, but I must pass them by,
that I might speak a little to the occasion of this Discourse.

MY Brethren, the Text that we have now opened to you, I may truly say, has
been fulfilled before your eyes in the Life and Death of this precious Saint and
Servant of God, that is taken from you: I might go over the Text again, and
show you how he was this perfect Man; whether you look upon him as a Man, or as
a Christian, or as a Minister, he had those perfections in him that did render
him beloved and honored by all that knew him; and if there be any that had not
a respect and value for him, it was because they did not know him: He was no
empty-Cask, but a Vessel filled with choice and precious Liquor, as appeared by
those gracious and savoury Discourses, which did so often come from him. As to
the Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit, he had them both in a very high degree of
perfection; he was both able to teach, and apt to teach, which is but a rare
conjunction; for many that are most able to teach, are not always most apt and
ready to teach; and some that are most apt and forward to Teach, they are not
always most able to Teach; he had a spring of living waters within him. In his
Prayers and Preaching, he need not Pump, for they did flow from him as waters
out of a full Fountain; out of the abundance of his heart, we may truly say, he
did both Preach and Pray: God had given him the Tongue of the Learned, whereby
he was able to speak a word in season upon all occasions.

The Word of God did dwell so richly in him, that he needed not any long time
in preparation, but could speak to any Subject both pertinently and profitably
upon very short warning.

He was one fitted, not only to declare the Truth, but to defend the Truth;
witness that book of his concerning the Immortality of the Soul. He was mighty
in Prayer, and powerful in Preaching. I have often thought he had a more than
ordinary presence of God in all that he did.

But secondly, He was this upright man; and indeed, his great perfection lay in
that uprightness and integrity of Spirit that appeared in him. In all that he
did, he did not seek himself, or serve himself of the Gospel; he had his eye to
his Masters glory, and not to his own gain or glory: though he had the
oversight of two Congregations, yet he did not take the oversight of them for
filthy lucres sake. I suppose many here can bear him witness, that he made not
one penny of profit in the Year, but rather spent many pounds upon their
service. God had blessed him with an Estate of his own, and he rejoiced to preach
the Gospel freely; though he had a double Care and a double Charge upon him,
yet he had not a double Benefit: he could truly say, as Paul, Act. 20.33, I
have coveted no man's silver or gold; no, it was the holy lucre of gaining of
Souls to Christ that his heart did most covet, and therein God gave him the
desire of his heart. His Ministry was not blasted with dry breasts, and a
miscarrying womb; but as he traveled with the salvation of Sinners, so he saw
the fruit of the travel of his Soul, and was satisfied; as he labored
abundantly in the work of the Lord, so God prospered and blessed his labors
abundantly. He did not run in vain, pray in vain, preach in vain: God made him
a blessed Instrument of good, of Eternal good to many Souls. And he did as
little mind the praise and glory of this World, as he did the profits and gain
of it. He sought his honor in God only, and was carried forth with pure aims
and respects to his glory. I have sometimes heard him profess, that he scarcely
knew what it was to lie under the temptation of desiring the praise and
commendations of men in what he did. He saw such an emptiness in all humane
applause, and had his eye so fixed upon his Masters glory, that it put out all
vain humane glory in his estimation. I have often admired him for the good
things of the Spirit of God that I saw in him: for that spirit of Faith that
dwelt in him: he lived in as firm and lively belief of the Eternal and
invisible things of the other World, as any man that ever I knew: For that
Spirit of Adoption that rested upon him (for he was as much above the spirit of
Fear and Bondage, as any man that ever I knew); For that Spirit of
Heavenly-mindedness that he lived in continually: He had his heart and
conversation in Heaven, as much as any man that ever I knew: For that Spirit of
holy Courage he was filled withal: for he was one that would stand for God in
the worst of times: and when he judged that the Cause and Truth of God required
it, he would not be daunted and driven from his Duty by the fear of men.

But above all, his glory and Excellency lay in this, the uprightness and
integrity of his spirit, that he served his Lord and Master with such a single
eye, and such a single heart. I have sometimes seen him rejoice in spirit, and
speaking of the great comfort that he found in his Soul upon this account; that
his Conscience did bear him witness, that he sought the glory of God in what he
did, above all the world, and expected his reward from God only; I have often
thought, that if ever I saw an Israelite indeed in whom was no guile, he was
one.

And as he was thus perfect and upright in his life, so his end was peace and
blessedness: I saw him only the Evening before he died, and asked him how he
did? He answered me, That he had been under a very sharp rod; But it was that
which my heavenly Father (said he) has laid upon me; for as many as I love, I
rebuke and chasten: that is a Paradox, said he, to the world; but everlasting
Arms are underneath me: and I bless God he has taken all the terror of Death
quite away from me. And when another asked him, If he had not the restimony and
witness of a good Conscience; he would say, Truly, I have served God in
sincerity; and can truly (...) I have believed, and therefore have I spoken.
then those that were about him, pitied him because of his great pains and
Agonies: You know not, said he, what my pains are, and you know not what my
Consolations are! Oh, how sweet will my glory and triumph be after these sharp
pains! And when his Relations wept about him, he would be displeased with them,
saying, What, are you troubled that God is calling home his Children? If you
think I am afraid of Death, you are mistaken, for I have no fear of death upon
me. He had not the least Cloud upon his spirit in all his sickness, that could
be perceived by those about him. And in the midst of the sharpest pains (which
could not but be very sharp, by a large stone in his bladder and kidneys: one
of them being wasted, and the other extremely swollen); under all his pains, no
other language came from him, but, Father pity thy Child. But I see I must
break off: for the clouds return again after the rain, and the waters are ready
to overflow the banks, and I would not have you drowned in tears: What shall I
say, my Brethren? precious in the sight of God is both the life and death of
his Saints: the memory of the righteous shall be blessed; the name of holy men
it is as a precious Ointment poured forth, and so is the name of this holy man.
We need not bring any Spices to embalm him, we need not raise him up any Tomb
or Monument: he has a better Monument erected in the hearts of Gods people,
and of God himself, than any we are able to erect unto him. This I must say,
and this is all that I will say, I verily believe there are few men that have
been more beloved whilst they lived, or more bewailed when they died. Though
the day of his Funeral was a clear Sunshine day without any Clouds, yet I am
sure there were many showrs of Tears that fell by the way as he was passing to
his grave. I should have spoken something to those that are left behind.

1. To his Relations, a word to them: Do not you mourn as those that are
without hope; why should your eyes be pouring out tears for him, when all tears
are wiped from his eyes? he is with God and Christ, and the innumerable company
of Angels, and Spirits of just men made perfect: he is before the Throne
triumphing; and if you could hear him, he would say to you, Weep not for me,
shed not one tear for me; but weep for your selves. You have not one doubt, not
one fear concerning his everlasting happiness; and Oh what a quieting
consideration should that be to you!

2. To you that were his Church and People, I should have spoken a few words to
you: 1. Be you sensible of your loss, lay to heart the breach that God has
made amongst you; and such breaches as this should not be looked upon with
unbroken hearts: You know how they lamented Samuel when he died; and how they
lamented Aaron and Stephen when they died; and you have great cause of
lamentation. You will say, We have wept again and again. I, but weep not only
for your loss, but for your sins: we can many times pour out floods of tears
upon our losses, when we can look upon Sin that was the true cause of all, with
dry eyes all the while. I tell you, if your heads were Fountains of waters, and
your eyes Rivers of tears, you could never enough bewail those sins by which
you have sinned so many godly Ministers into their graves of late: for when
faithful and pious Ministers are going off so fast from us, it is a sad sign of
some severe judgment that is coming on apace: therefore lay this loss to heart.

To lose such a painful, pious, faithful Labourer as he was, it is no little
loss. He had a large heart, as the sand upon the Seashore, for the doing of
good: he was one that did bestir himself to do good: and did much work in a
little time. Oh, my Brethren, he is one that will be dearly mist by all: His
Family will miss him, and his People will miss him; the Country will miss him,
and the City will miss him too: Saints will miss him to build them up in their
Faith: and Sinners will miss him, to awaken and rouse them out of their sins:
the Poor will miss him, to raise Collections for them, to refresh their bowels:
and the rich will miss him, to spur and quicken them up to be rich in good
works.

The second thing I would say to you, is this: That you would live as those
that have sat under the Ministry of so pious and worthy a Person; how is that,
you will say? first, walk as Children of Purity: Secondly, as Children of
Peace: for he was a Friend to both.

First, Walk as Children of Purity: those pure, heavenly and spiritual
Exhortations that you have heard from him, they do call for a pure and heavenly
Conversation from you: though he be dead and buried, do not let his Sermons die
and be buried with him; the death of the Minister should indeed revive his
Instructions, and enliven and imprint the remembrance of them the more deeply
upon the hearts of the people.

Secondly, Walk as the Children of peace too, and maintain Peace and Unity
amongst your selves; though the Shepherd be smitten, yet let not the Sheep be
scattered; let not this breach that God has made, be the occasion of any more
breaches amongst you: Remember the words of David, How sweet and lovely a thing
it is, for brethren to live together in unity. Remember the words of Christ,
That blessed are the peacemakers. And read over those words of Paul when you
come home, 1 Cor. 1.10, for I have not time to read them: Take heed, Brethren
of walking so, as to bring a dishonor and an evil report upon your Pastor and
Teacher now he is gone: O! think with your selves, Did my Pastor teach me to be
proud, or to be covetous, or to be unjust, or to be censorious? If he could
return again upon the earth, and see any of you such, Would he not say to you,
Did you learn these things of me?

Lastly, A word of Counsel in general, and so I have done. Do we desire to have
peace in our end? I, that is it which we all desire. Would we fain dye
comfortably? Who does not desire to do so? Here is your way; Two things I would
leave with you:

1. Mark the perfect and upright man, to imitate his example. It Is the command
of the Apostle, Heb. 13.7, He would have them mark them that labor amongst
them, and follow their conversation: O! it is a matter of great concernment,
whom you follow, whom you imitate! Alas, if you live with the wicked, if you
follow vain persons, you must dye with them; do not think to live salsly and
dissemblingly, and yet to dye comfortably; do not think to live with Pharaoh,
and yet to dye with Moses; to live with Judas, to live with Demas, and yet to
dye with Paul: No, we must live with the pure, with upright and perfect men; we
must make them to be our examples, if we would dye with them; we should make a
good use of every good example that God has given us. A godly Man when he
dies, bequeaths us this Legacy, he leaves us the Picture of his Life to walk by.

2. You must not only mark the perfect man's example, and behold the upright
man; but you your selves must live so, as you may give and leave a good example
to others: Brethren, it is not only the duty of those that teach you, to give a
good example, as Paul exhorts Timothy and Titus to be examples to the
believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in faith, in purity: But it is
the duty of hearers to give good examples one to another. The Apostle exhorts
aged Women, Tit. 2.2, by their example to teach the younger Women; and exhorts
Wives, to have their conversation so in fear, (1 Pet. 1.3,) that their Husbands
beholding their good conversation, may be won to the truth; it may be thy
Husband is not won by the hearing of the Word, but thou should labor to be
so holy, humble, loving, and obedient in thy conversation, that hereby thou
may convince him. What know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife?
and what know thou, O woman, whether thou shall save thy husband? Are there
not many Husbands that have cause to bless God for their godly Wives? Are there
not many Wives, that have cause to bless God for their godly Husbands? Are
there not many Children, that have cause to bless God for their godly Parents?
There are many in Heaven who will be blessing God to all eternity, that ever
they saw the faces of such and such persons, by whose holy conversations they
were won to the love and liking of the ways of God.

Now then, Labor to imitate the examples of the godly that have gone before
you, and to live so your selves, that you may be an example to those that are
round about you; this is the way to have your end peace; and then this Epitaph
may be written upon your Graves: Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright:
for the end of that man is peace.

FINIS.

