A True RELATION OF The Proceedings, Examination, Trial and HORRID MURDER OF
Col. Eusebius Andrewe. By John Bradshaw, President of the pretended High-Court
of Justice, and others of the same Court.

Published by FRANCIS BUCKLEY Gent.

Who was assistant to Mr. Andrewe in the time (...)Imprisonment (...) an Eye
witness to all the said most Blood^ (...) execrable proceedings.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Paken^^ at the Sign of the Rainbow in Fleetstreet.
1660.

A True RELATION OF The Proceedings, Examination, Trial, and Horrid Murder of
Colonel Eusebius Andrewe.
ON Monday the 24th. of March 1649. Col. Andrewe, was taken prisoner at
Gravesend by Major Parker, and by a Troop of horse that night conveyed to the
George in Kings street Westminster.

The next day, he was convented before the Lord President Bradshaw, Sir Henry
Mildmay Knight, and Thomas Scot Esquire, three of the Members of State,
delegated by the Council for the taking of the examination of him, and of Sir
Henry Chichley Knight, Doctor Henry Edwards, and Mr. Clark, casually found in
the same Inn with Mr. Andrewe.

Those Gent. examined him so punctually to every action and circumstance that
had passed on his part since he took up Arms, and especially since the render
of Worcester, and his return from thence to London; and also concerning his
several Lodgings, Names, Acquaintances, Removes, Abodes in the Country,
correspondencies by Letters, and interest in places and persons, as if they had
kept a Diary for him. Which considered, and that Sir John Gell Baronet, Major
Barnard, Captain Smith, Captain Benson, and Captain Ashley, (with whom he had
the last and most questionable correspondence,) were all in custody, he found
himself to be betrayed, but could not at present guess by whom, but well saw
that he had better be fair in his confession then to deny what he saw by the
perfectness of his examirers, would be proved against him, by the discovery of
some of those formerly secured, and examined before his coming up; and was
resolved to bear the worse, and not so much to shame himself, or his matter,
as to deny things evident, or easily evidenceable, but rather to cast himself
upon God, and come off as well as he could with a truth in his mouth, as the
best way to meet death without shame.

In his Answers, he would have bin circumstantial, but was kept close to the
Question; at his departure he desired that he might set down his own Narrative,
according to his own sense, which was granted him to prepare, and to send or
bring to them as there was opportunity. And having totally, as much as in him
lay, excused (as was just for him to do) his fellow prisoners, as to any thing
related to his Delinquency, he was with them committed to the Gatehouse.

Wednesday following, he was reconvented and reexamined.

On Friday, he was again convented, and delivered in his Narrative to the Lord
President, and the House by business happenning detaining the other two
examiners, he was by the President returned.

On Saturday, he was recalled, and the^ as at all times before, used and
treated with civility, and no little pressure to dcisover some great persons,
his supposed confederates; the aim, as he conjectured (and that upon strong
inference, and some expressions) was at Sir Guy Palms, Sir John Curson, and
Sir Thomas Whitmore etc. But he accounted it a great blessing in his
inhappiness, that his misfortune was not cumulative, nor fatal to any his
friends or familiars, who yet knew nothing of the reason of his Imprisonment,
more then for what they were beholding to common fame, and had no share in his
fault, (such as it was) and he was glad that he could as well engross the
suffering to himself.

On Sunday next, he was called out of his bed, and by two Messengers, his
Keeper, and his Man, brought into a boat at Kings-bridg at Westminster, and
thence carried to the Tower. The warrant which at the Lievtenants house was
read, imported, That he was committed close prisoner for high treason, in
endeavoring to subvert the present Government, etc. To be kept till delivered
by Law.

He was designed by the Lieutenant, Colonel Francis West, to a prison-lodging;
but having notified to him his quality, he was put into the custody of Mr.
Richard Standon, one of the Yeomen Warders, in his house, equally convenient
with the best in the Tower. At his coming to the Tower he had but two shillings
in his purse, and supposing he should have been provided for diet as the States
prisoner, he sent to the Lieutenant, to know what he would order for him? who
returned, That if he had money he might have what he would, but at his
provision nothing.

His Keeper was upon his delivery to his charge, commanded to keep him safe,
and if he escaped threatened to be hanged, and a sentinel set immediately at the
door, and that day two Gentlewomen coming to see him, were all night
imprisoned in the Round-house, and next day carried to the Council of State,
and strictly examined.

His Waterman that week brought him some money, for which, and some
affectionate words spoken of him, he was convented before the President,
examined, rebuked, and dismissed; and a sentinel set at the window of M.
Andrews Lodging, that he might not speak to any without.

The Narrative follows.

To the Right Honorable the Council of State.
The humble Narrative of Colonel Eusebius Andrewe, as to the Questions and
matters of charge whereupon he was examined before the President, Sir Henry
Mildmay, and Thomas Scot, Esquire, in that behalf delegated by the Council the
27th day of March 1650.
May it please your Lordships.
BEing unfortunatley, and by a treacherous practice seduced into an action
which renders me obnoctious to your Lordships displeasure and Justice, and
thereupon convented and brought to examination, I assured your Lordships
delegates, that I came with a resolution to deal heartily, and not to preserve
my life by framing a Lie, or by denying a Truth. The same purpose I still
retein, casting my self wholly at your Lordships feet; humbly praying leave,
that while I answer to matter of fact, I may be permitted to cloth it with the
pertinent circumstances; That while the one lays me liable to your Justice,
the other may bring me within the capacity of your mercy; which in case it be
afforded, I shall embrace with all humility and thankfullness. And if denied, I
shall find cause within my bosom to justify God Almighty in his permission of
my ruin, and I hope Charity enough to forgive whosoever have, or shall be
instrumental to it, and bear the gurdon of my folly with a sober confidence of
Gods reserved favor.

My Engagement for his late Majesty began soon after Hillary Term 1642. and
continued until the surrender of Worcester in July 1645.

I have omitted to make my composition, not having a considerable, and not
willing to own an inconsiderable estate.

I have not taken the Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, Negative Oath,
nor subscribed the present engagement.

John Barnard, sometimes Major under me, and by reason of his good parts and
sober demeanor, being in my good opinion, at my return to a private practice
in my calling for my necessary support, frequently visited me, and imparted to
me such occurrences as he met abroad in discourse, and did often intimate the
discontents of the Reformades, the factions of the Levellers and Agitators, and
the proceeding of a certain Committee, or select Council of Officers, of which
Col Cook was chief, and himself their Clerk, upon a printed charge against
some for oppression, and against others for concealed delinquencie, to the
penning, promoting or counselling in which, I was originally a stranger, This
is mentioned because the Speaker and I his Brother hold me in jealousy and
were both accused by that printed paper.
nor did ever interest my self therein further then the hearing his discourse,
neither did ever mediatly or immediately meddle with any of the persons or
actions of the Reformades, Levellers, or Agitators upon any his discourses.

This error in time, as some others both of substance and circumstance, are
rectified upon better memory by some following papers sent to the Lord
President M. Bush though discovered by B^nson, and first upon my examination
and after by my Nar^. mentioned, yet was not apprehended, which gave me ocasion
to believe him a dissemblor.
About Trinity term last, Major Barnard obtruded to my acquaintance one Captain
Holmes, who soon after brought with him one John Benson, (who pretended to have
had command under Sir John Gell, was anciently his servant, and until this time
his dependant,) who uninvited frequently produced to me transcripts of Letters,
(with the coppying of which he pretended to be entrusted under Mr. Rushworth)
which did appear to purport the occurrences in reference to the affairs of the
State, and their concernments at home and abroad, from their several agents;
which I only read in his sight, and immediately delivered them back, he
pretending that he was to carry them to Mr. Thomas Bushel to be transmitted
over sea.

Captain Holmes, and John Benson, in their discourses did insinuate that their
interest was great in the Reformades, and that by them great advantage would
upon any importunity be done for the Royal party, and magnified Sir John Gells
interest in his country, his reluctance at what he had done in the Parliaments
service, and his willingness to expiate his former fault with a beneficial
service to the Prince. And Major Barnard propounded, that a former design in
the time of the war laid by me for the taking of the Isle of Ely, might by
their help, and the conjuncture of some strength to be raised by Sir John Gell,
then to me a stranger, and by Holmes and Benson, pretended to be willing and
able to raise considerable numbers, be revived and executed; and thereupon it
was concluded, This relation is rectified by another Pap^r being mistaken in
time etc.
that I should with Benson try who in Cambridgshire would engage in it, and
then ride down to Sir John Gell, to see if his strength and purpose were such
as pretended; and this not to be executed but upon the contingency of successes
in Ireland, and Scotland, was let fall as soon as conceived.

About the middle of December, Captain Holmes brought me instructions, to draw
a petition for Sir John Gell, for the getting of his arrears, which I drew
accordingly, and not long after, I was invited to give him meeting, till then
having not seen or corresponded with him, and received an invitation and
instruction to arbitrate between him and his Lady, with Sir Thomas Prestwich,
and amongst other discourses, Sir John Gell did take notice of his irrequital
for his service, and his losses, and the misapplication of his, and other
services, to an end they intended not, and that he desired to be so understood,
and when opportunity should be, This had been confessed by Benson and all
particularly questioned of me.
to be so represented to the Prince; and did intimate, that if ever he took up
arms again, it should be for the Prince: and at several other subsequent
meetings, the discourses were general, and much to this purpose, but no
particular design laid or contrived.

The time limited by the Act for departure, etc. being near expired, and my
self being purposed to withdraw into the country, until the summer voyage into
some of the Plantations, and to that purpose being in treaty with Sir Edmond
Plowden, about the conditions of New Albion plantation, of which he writes
himself Count Palatine, and Proprietor; on Saturday 16 Martii, I was
unexpectedly visited by Major Barnard, and John Benson, and they enquiring my
resolution concerning my leaving the Town in obedience to the Act; Bernard and
Bensons proposition.
I signified my purpose to go to New Albion, or to Virginia; upon which they
took opportunity to make proposal to me in effect, that they had a considerable
design laid, and friends and money to set on foot and back it, and that I
should have two hundred pounds in hand, and power to draw money by bills of
exchange for what more should be necessary for my supports, and manage of what
should concern the said design in Holland, if I would undertake to go over, and
promote it to the Prince: and they did then in general terms signify, that it
was an easy matter, especially, the Cavaliers going out of the Town, by
correspondence in all counties, to surprise the horse of the army in their
several quarters; and did intimate, that Major Barnard had a design in a
draught, which as I remember he produced, and I believe was concerning such
surprisal, but was not read, but referred to further time of consideration. My
Answer was, My Answer.
That if the money were ready I would divert my former purpose from any
Plantation, and entertain the motion.

Sunday morning, they came again and informed me, that several persons of
quality and fortune in Kent, Buckingham, and Dorset, were, or would then
presently come up near the Town, and would join in an engagement, and advance
moneys, and that Sir John Gell would also engage, and might with a word of his
mouth bring in his friends, and Sir Andrew Kniveton, Sir Guy Palms, and Mr.
Fitzherbert, and a fourth person, whose name I remember not; and therefore
desired me to draw an engagement, (which I did in a loose paper, after the
sense by them or one of them, the said Barnard, or Benson, instructed) and to
move Sir John Gell to join in such an engagement, but did not press me to join
in the same at that present, for the encouraging of their before mentioned
friends, amongst whom, I remember only these Sir-names Boys, Thatch, Baker,
all to me absolute strangers.

That day I spoke with Sir John Gell, and acquainted him with their offer and
proposal to me, Sir John Gell.
and desire from him. He answered, That he would not meddle with acting in that
design (which he took upon him to be acquainted withal,) for which he was as
then in no capacity, nor would be engaged under his hand and seal, to be bound
to be any future action for them, for that Benson was a fellow given to drink,
and lavish of his tongue; but entrusted me that if I went over upon rhis
occasion, to possess the Prince with a good opinion of him, and that he would
do nothing against him; and if he were at all in command, he would be so to his
advantage, or to that effect.

I returned to them Sir John Gells answer, with which they were not, or seemed
not altogether unsatisfied, and appointed on Monday five of the clock, that the
persons of the Counties of Kent, Buckingham, and Dorset, or some of each
County from the rest, should give meeting at the Three Cranes at the Savoy
gate, and be all satisfied in the Design, and agree their respective
proportions of monyes to be paid in present, and raised for the future;
desiring me to take care to move, that they might be also provided for to be
able to hold intelligence, and ride about from place to place to lay the design.

At the time I came, and Major Barnard produced two letters, one subscribed by
Smith, another by Thatcher, purporting, that the Kentish Gentlemen were come as
far as Rochester, and would that night be within twelve miles of London, and
lie there all day, and then in the evening, on Tuesday by eight of the clock,
would at any place give meeting to himself, and his Colonel; and that they had
sent an especial guide to bring Barnard to them that night, whether he was
instantly desired to repair and that they durst come no nearer in fear of the
watchfullness of Colonel Blunt; and that two hundred and fifty pounds were
ready to be laid down to perform their undertaking. No man of any County
giving any meeting according to the first appointment at the Cranes, but the
said Barnard, and Benson, and one who calls himself Captain Ashley, only known
in face to me, who pretended to be privy and knowing of the truth of all what
their former discourse and these letters tended to; and Barnard pretending to
go instantly to horse from Westminster; I brought him and Benson, to the water
side, and in the walk they importuned me again to obtain Sir John Gells
signature, and seal to the engagement, which Benson had then ready engrossed,
and that I would go persently to Westminster with them about it; which I
refused, and told them, that I was able to satisfy any man of quallity,
discretion, and secrecy, concerning Sir John's reallity, though not actually
engaged; and so left them.

That night about eight of the clock, one Smith, to me (till then) an absolute
stranger, and Captain Ashley came to me, and brought me a letter from Major
Barnard, highly reproving me, and Sir John Gell of backwardness, in witholding
our own hands from the engagement, and that we intended our own honors upon
their dangers, without giving them assurance of our secrecy and constancy; and
that unless the engagement were subscribed b^ Sir John Gell, his Kentish
friends would not proceed further, aywas known to Mr. Smith, who took upon him
to come as from them for satisfaction in that point. And in answer, I under a
vow of secrecy told him, that I was satisfied concerning Sir John Gell, and
presume, that if any Gentleman of quallity in whose Judgment the rest would
abide, should address to Sir John, that under an Oath of secrecy he would
satisfy him, but durst not trust Benson, and Barnard was to him a stranger;
with this they departed, assuring me that they thought no more would be
expected from Sir John, and that they would, or one of them, away that night to
the company, and that the next day being Tuesday the money should be paid at
the Palsgraves head.

They brake their time, and my occasions pressed me into London, being next day
to be gone by the Act, and about nine of the clock at night, This was done by
three and confessed, but omitted here but is by another paper supplied, etc.
I was sent for by Captain Ashley and Benson, who delivered me a letter from
Barnard, pressing me to subscribe the engagement which Benson engrossed, and
that being done, he would go with me next day to Gravesend, and the Gentlemen
of Kent should meet there, and there the money to be paid.

The tide being fit for passage, on Wednesday Barnard came not, but Benson
pretended him to be at Tottenham Court with the Buckinghamshire Gentlemen, and
that he was well horsed, and would come presently, and should follow; and so
Captain Ashley and my self, with no more then fifty shillings in my purse,
presuming upon the money there, went to Gravesend, and expected till Thursday
night, but found no Kentish men, and no one from London coming. Captain Ashley
went that night with the evening tide for London to enquire the reason, and on
the Friday morning early came Major Barnard, and Mr. Smith with a letter from
Benson, purporting that if Sir John Gell would not co-ingage under his hand and
seal, with those whose names were subscribed (of which I only know Barnard,
Smith, Benson, and Ashley,) they would go over themselves (meaning himself and
Barnard) to the Prince, and spoil both mine and Sir. John's credit with him,
and disappoint all that I intended in his favor, and that he had letters from
Sir John which he could produce should make him repent his refusal, or to such
effect, and therefore desired me to write to Sir John Gell, to let him see his
danger, which I did, laying the case before him, and not pressing him, but
leaving him to do as God should direct him, and his judgment lead him: with
which letter Barnard and Smith went away, with assurance that whether Sir John
Gell engage or not, I should hear next day from them, and if he did engage,
they would come down and go for Rochester, where their former undertaking
should be performed to me; and if he did not, I should be disengaged, and have
my subscription and seal sent me, and the design should fall. I expected till
Saturday night, and finding no answer, resolved on Monday to intendmy privicie
in the Country upon my first purpose for new Albion, and in the morning early
was seized by a party of horse, and brought to London.

My Lords,
In that Narrative you will see a believing nature wrought upon by treacherous
men, such who cannot be true to any, whilst false to parties.

The pretended design vanished, as never being more then a phantasm, and not
worth your regard, the real design effected so far as they had power or
opportunity, that is, to bring the game into the toil, and there leave them to
be entangled and made a quarry.

You will find me passively Active, being prompted and enticed by their
insinuation, and not once but hearkening to them.

It lies in your Lordships power to cut me off, Since I saw the Act I am of
another opinion if Law be not altogether out of fashion.
by extending which you can arrive no honor amongst men, and possibly by an
Act of lenity you may do an office acceptable to God.

Cujus fiat voluntas modo in ruina mea. Whosoever shall be present at my Trial,
or into whose hands this Narrative shall fall, will easily conclude with me.

Quos vult perdi Deus, hos dementat prius. Eus. ANDREW


On the Tuesday after his remove to the Tower, 1 Apr.
he was called to be further examined, and at his return writ back to them some
particulars ( viz) concerning Captain Holmes by want of memory not before
signified. And in case the State should have suffered ought by the said Holmes,
it might have made Mr. Andrews incapable of lawful favor, by reason of his
tenacity concerning the said Holmes, who (for ought Mr. Andrewe knew) was
guilty of his being betrayed; And if so, might as well intimate his knowledge
of Holmes purposes, to the end that Mr. Andrews concealment of them might
augment his crime, He was much pressed concerning Mr. Bar.
and also concerning Mr. Thomas Barnard, who being at large and unquestioned,
Mr. Andrew had cause to have the like jealousy of.

On Friday sevenight following, 11 Apr.
he was called again, and was confronted with Sir John Gell, and avowed what he
did indeed neither directly deny, nor was troubled that he did averr; freely
telling the President, that howbeit he did not remember some things in point,
yet he was confident that he would not do him, nor any man wrong; And then
declared to the President that he looked upon Sir John Gell, as upon himself,
as a betrayed man, but as concerning others, he knew not by whom he had been
free in his confessions though to his own injury.

He then acquainted their Lordships, that he had something to rectify in his
former examinations and papers, upon better memory in point of material
circumstances. They directed him to put them into writing, and to send them,
and they called for his hand to the former examinations and papers; which he
gave them, and the same day writ to them as follows.

To the Right Honorable the Lord President and Council of State.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to the favorable license by your Lordships to me given, I have
digested into writing those matters of circumstance, wherein my examinations
and narrative, are in defect of my memory only uncertain and short; humbly
praying that they may be recieved and made a part of that relation, which I
must abide by at my Trial; and that the former errors may be rectified and
defects supplied so far, as by this suppl^mentary account upon my serious
recollections given, may be done. And I shall then be confident, I shall appear
not to have wilfully concealed (however guilty) or misrendred any thing
pertinent, whether the same carry with it my condemnation, or excuse.

What passed between my self and Mr. Barnard, before my acquaintance with
Holmes and Benson, and which is expressed in my answers, and narrative, was in
time before Easter Term last, when there was an order for departure of persons
in my condition, from this Town, and I in obedience thereunto, did leave this
City on Saturday the sixth of May, and came to Mr. Osborns house at Carleton
Hall in Suffolk, on Thursday following, from whence I stirred not at any time
more then five miles, until the sixth of August, when I was sent for to make
assurances between a Kinswoman and her husband in point of Jointure, Arth.
Wollaston Anne his wife Jane Andrewe Mr. St. John.
by them to me mutually referred, in which business, and in other matters
between another Kinswoman, and a Merchant of London, being under refference to
Arbitrament: as also in endeavoring to get some friend to contract in the
behalf of my daughter, for the reversion of a Lease holden of the Deane and
Chapter of Ely, in which she is interested for a Life in being, I continued in
and near the City, until the third day of September, in which time Barnard
voluntarily brought to my acquaintance Holmes and Benson, upon the pretenses in
my Answers and Narrative set forth, and to which I humbly referr.

The note which mentions Bensons going with me to Cambridgshire, and so to
Sir John Gell, which in my Answers I have expounded, was drawn from me by
Barnards importunity, and written at his request, but what use he made of it,
(other then to lay it up and reserve it for his present purpose) I know not,
nor had any account of it, but went away the third of September, there being no
conclusion of any thing to be done in substance, or circumstance positive. But
Mr. Barnard who knew how to direct o me, promised by Letter to intimate further
to me, from whom after that, I never received any letter or message to that, or
any other purpose, until my return near Michaelmas Term, when he told me,
that the insuccesfulness of things in Ireland had been the impediment.

As to the day, viz. The 18th day of October, being the Fair day at Ely, it was
only in discourse mentioned to be an opportune time, in case the Isle were (as
indeed it was not) Garrisond. Neither any solemn or serious design or
conclusion, then to-fore or then after made or laid, other then in transient
communication, nor any person engaged so much as by word or promise, until this
fresh stratagem was set on foot by Barnard.

I drew Sir John Gells petition before Christmas, and had several complements
from him by Holmes, (at least pretended) before I saw him, and I believe after
Twelftide I was invited to him, and entrusted by him in the composing the
differences between him and his Lady: In the last Term I drew his answer, and
in the several times of our casual or occasional meeting, the discourses have
amounted to what I have before signified, and in your presence and his avowed,
and how more exactly to give your Lordships an account in time I cannot.

As to the matter of the engagement I abide by what I have formerly said, with
this only, that at my engaging, which was late in the night, before my going
out of Town, in obedience to the Act, I was promised by Benson, that if Sir
John Gell, and their pretended friends of the Country did not co-engage, I
should be disengaged; and in the hour of my going away, Barnard being not ready
according to promise, but by Benson pretended to be at Tottenham Court with
some Buckinghamshier men, and that he would undoubtedly follow, I told Benson
as I remember in the presence of Captain Ashley, that whether he came or not, I
must for the present remove to Gravesend not having convenience of horse to go
elswhither so suddenly, and if there were performance on Barnards part with me,
I should be ready on mine, and if not, I desired to be disengaged, and left to
pursue my private occasions into Surrey, and I did really carry with me deeds
of my Clients, to have employed my self upon, 11th Apr.
in case of their failour with me.

I humbly beg your Lordships pardon for a favorable interpretation of this
trouble, Dated by mistake the 13th but writ and sent the same 11th day of April.
which is a duty to truth, and right to others, and my self; which could not be
omitted by

(My Lords) Your Lordships humble prisoner, and servant. Eus. ANDREWE.

This together with a petition penned by their own direction, for allowance and
liberty of friends resorts, being the same day signed in the presence of the
Lievtenent were sealed up, and sent by Mr. John Standon, who delivered them to
the Lord Presidents own hand.

This was his second petition, which with a former to the same effect, (and not
of moment to subscribe) did never receive any answer.

At the same time he writ to Sir Henry Mildmay, on the behalf of the Gentlemen
who were taken with him in these words.

Honored Sir.
The past nobleness I am sensible of at your hand, used toward me, in the
civil treating me when before the State, though a great delinquent, gives me
this encouragement, and you this trouble by my present address. It is no small
increase of my proper misfortune, that I see such who were taken with me, as
Companions to my person, to share so deep in the punishment, as do those
Gentlemen Dr. Edwards and Mr. Clarke, persons so free from the guilt of my
evil, that I am confident they cannot yet give an account for what cause I am
deservedly a prisoner, though it were made the price of their liberty. I am an
humble suitor to you, that you would take them into your favorable
consideration, and to mediate their enlargement. And that you would not let
them have a worse place in your thoughts for that they are recommended to your
favor by

Sir, Your most humble Servant. Eus. ANDREWE.


This was read by the Leivtenant and sent with the other two, etc.

Mr. Andrews at several times took upon him to averr to the Committee of
States, that they had spies upon him for some years, and particularly Barnard,
which the Lord President did not deny, but justified the State, by the practice
of all States to set watches upon persons of ill affections to them.

This day the Lord Gray was with the other three of the State

His third petition sent about Easter, being by Sir Henry Mildmay, and Mr.
Scot, put upon it, to submit himself, with promise of favor if he sought the
State in such manner; which for his relations sake he did, but with some
caution in these words.

To the Right Honorable the Lord President, and Council of State.
The humble Petition of Eus. ANDREWE.
Shows.
THat your petitioner is seriously sensible, and humbly acknowledges, that for
his high delinquency against the State, he is become forfeited to their Justice.

That he has not in the least prevaricated with your Lordships, in the
confession of his proper faults and follies, nor has kept ought reserved
concerning himself, or any person, or thing, which may satisfy your Lordships,
and more secure the State, and is not hopeless to be looked upon as capable of
your present favor and future mercy, which he now does, and shall always
implore.

That his present deserved condition is made more uncomfortable, by his wants,
and the exclusion of his friends and relations, without a supply in which, life
it self becomes a punishment.

Your petitioner casting himself at the feet of your Lordships, humbly prays.

That his being prosecuted before the High Court of Justice, may be suspended.

That by your order, his pass and future charge of necessaries may be
discharged, whilst he remains your prisoner.

That his friends and kindred may have recourse to him, and that he may have
the freedom of his pen.

And in case your petitioner shall be bound in the least to misapply those
favors, he shall adjudg himself worthy of a total deprivation of them, and of
your future goodness toward him.

And your petitioner, etc.

This was less then was looked for, though as much as he could venture on; in
which his desire for respit of his Trial was inserted, to prevent only his
being the first, and exasperating them by giving others aim in the scrupling
the Court.

This petition was solicited 33 days, but no answer could be obtained, and his
wants growing upon him daily, he sent this following Letter to the Lieutenant,
who had begun to appear for him, but had declined it again.

Honored Sir.
NEcessity has bin long since out-lawed, and is in it self apology enough for
that crime, of which uncompelled I cannot be guilty, The breach of good manners.

In what condition I was sent to you the States warrant tells you, with what
punctuallity that has bin observed your self well know. To which if you please
to lay the conventing of my Waterman before the Lord President for supplying me
with my own, and the imprisoning of my Kinswoman in your Round-house all night,
and carrying them to the Council, for but intending me a visit in my distress,
the interdiction, and orders of the Tower being to them strange; as also the
placing of a days Sentinel against my window next the river, whose greatest
use (for ought I know) was to tell the inquisitive passers by, my name and
dangerous quallity; you will easily infer an impossibility for me to live of
my self, or to be sustained by friends, to whom it is visibly imputable as
crime enough but to be related to me, either in blood, or amity; and what is
not safe for them to do, is not honest in me to invite.

That I have not been wanting in praying for relief from the State my three
petitions, to which you were privy, inform you, having in them said so much,
that more I cannot say, and to repeat the same, would but argue that I thought
my self hither to not understood, which may not without a new fault be made a
question; how dilligently those have bin solicited, you have bin often a
witness, and by my case A case concerning his condition besides my 3 peritions
where was by the Lievt. presented to the President.
presented to you may find that I may not in modesty longer press a person to
me unrelated, and by me no ways obliged to make his time and purse mine, by
pursuing and undertaking, upon so little encouragement as ten weeks past
fruitless attendance, and the expense of more then four pounds, which as all
reward for his travail are become as desperate in his thoughts, as I am in the
opinion of all observers.

What by Mr. John Standon began, was by him and me intended in your ease,
though (if I understand your words) misconstrued as a neglect of you to whom it
belongs, (pardon that I must say it) as a duty to your place, not the persons,
to acquaint the State with the wants of your prisoners, being not only obliged
to keep a prisoner safe from avoiding the Law, but in a condition of life to be
produceable to the law when called, which is at present understood and
practiced in less honorable prisons, and was in this, in the Government of your
Ancestors.

Though I would not willingly beget you trouble, and do set a better price upon
you, then to make you my solicitor; Yet when life and breach of complement are
put into the balance, my hand may justify a little enclining of the Beam.

Having thus premised to you, I must and do call upon you to be instant with
the honorable Council of State, that by their order upon my last petition I may
receive releif in what is thereby desired, in such measure as they shall think
me capable.

Sir, If you shall please to give your self, your honor, and conscience an
account in this serious matter, I shall not doubt to receive, by your pressure
and the States condescension, a seasonable help, and you shall not think it a
concernment worthy of your place and person to take notice of; I must beg you
pardon if I acquaint my wants to the people by hanging out a box for releif,
which will beless dishonor for me to do, then for you to necessitate me unto.

In this letter be pleased to distinguish my capacities, a Gentleman, and a
prisoner, in this I am not unreasonable your trouble, in the other I am and
shall be.

Your humble Servant. Eus. ANDREWE.


This letter engaged Mr. Leivtenant, and he stirred again till he was weary,
and then took to his assistance, and noble Lady who had obtained an order to
speak with Mr. Andrews but in the Lievtenants presence. And because the former
coals were dead, he put in the Lievtenants hands this following petition, which
with a Letter was sent in a letter of the Leivtenants to Sergeant Dandy, by the
hands of Mrs. Elizabeth Colchester, and was both by her, and the Leivtenant
several times attended but not answered.

The Petition, with style as formerly etc.
Shows,
That your Petitioner has been 12 weeks close prisoner, his friends neither
permitted to visit, nor daring to relieve him, his score for necessaries swollen
beyond his abillity to discharge, his credit protested, and nothing more
visible to him then his immediate perishing.

That he has not been wanting to pray your favors, having three petitions
lodging with your Lordships, constantly folicited, but unanswered.

That he has in his confessions spared nothing which can more conduce to the
States security, or his own condemnation.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays

That if at all he must, he may speedely receive his trial, he being ready to
submit to the will of God in the issue.

That if mercy be reserved for him, which he has, and does implore, your
Lordships would please to admit him to sue out his pardon, and to a free
conversation in this Commonwealth, upon security given for his future good
demeanor.

That in the mean time he may have the liberty of the Church and Tower, and the
freedom of his friends resorts, and that order may be given for the debt
incurred there in the time of his close restraint to be discharged.

And your Petitioner etc.

Mrs. Colchester a person of quallity having many suits, in which Mr. Audrewes
had bin formerly constantly and only her Council, as to all the advising and
penning part of her business, after a months solicitation, and with the
assistance of some powerful friends obtained the following order. Which was
strictly observed.

Whereas we are informed by the Petition of Mrs. Elizabeth Colchester that she
has several suits at Law, wherein she has formerly employed Eusebius And ewe
Esquire, now prisoner with you, by warrant of this Council, and that no other
person can enable her to instruct other Council, and has thereupon petitioned
us that she may have access unto him. These are to will and Authorize you to
permit and suffer the said Mrs. Colchester to speak with the said Mr. Andrews,
provided it be in your presence, and within you hearing, and that it be not
about any matter concerning the affairs of the Common wealth, but about her
own particular affairs only. For which this shall be your warrant.

Given at the Council of State this Thirtieth of May 1650. Signed in the name
and by order of the Council State appointed by Authority of Parliament. Jo.
Bradshaw President.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London or his Deputy.
When this order was granted Mr. Andrews three Petitions, were with the State,
and moved by many friends, might have been taken into consideration, but were
not; and had not his life been preserved by this Gentlewoman, who under color
of the said order did often relieve him, he must of necessity have perished,
having been fourteen weeks close prisoner.

The Warrant of Commitment which I could not get a Copy of till the 14th of
July, is as follows.
THese are to will and require you herewith, to receive into your custody the
body of Eusebius Andrewe Esquire, and him you are safely to keep in close
imprisonment in the Tower of London, in order to his further examination, he
being committed unto you for high Treason, in plotting and endeavoring the
subversion and alteration of the present Government; of this you are not to
fail, and for so doing this shall be your warrant.

Given at the Council of State sitting at White Hall this 30th. day of May
1650. Signed in the name, and by the order of of the Council of State appointed
by Authority of Parliament. JOHN BRADSHAW President.

To the Lieutenant of the Tower of London.
This warrant is vicious in it self, Cook 2d par(...) Inst it. so, 5(...) 590.
591. allowed for b(...) the Parliame(...) fol. ult.
in two reasons which make a right warrant of Commitment.

1. That it is not done by due process of Law.

2. That it has not a conclusion, viz. and safely to keep until he be
delivered by course of law.

But leaves it indefinite and is rather a condemnation to perpetual, at least
to arbitrary imprisonment, which is worse.

The close imprisonment, is but in order to his further examination, and he had
been twice since examined, and signed his examinations before Easter, and did
not refuse to answer any question demanded of him.

The warrant is dated from the Council of State sitting at Whitehall the 30th
of May, whereas he was brought to the Tower the 30th. of March, being Sunday,
by seven in the morning, at the opening of the Gate, (no Council sitting) and
the warrant signed on Saturday the 29th of March.

Having attended a Month in expectation of an answer to his last petition,
without answer he addressed the following letter to the Speaker, and the
Petition enclosed to the Parliament, of which these following are the true
Copies.

Right Honorable,
NOthing but an Iron necessity could have induced me to the fault of begetting
you this present trouble, and to intrude upon that little vacancy you have from
the public, to intend your personal affairs, of that necessity the enclosed
is the epitome: the treachery of my betrayers, and mine, and my innocent
friends sufferings, by the inflexbility of those under whose immediate power I
am hereby fallen, are extendible into no small volume. I am therefore compelled
Fontem petere, and wanting the opportunity of a familiar, to make use of this
extraodinary way of address, which I hope will meet such goodness in you as
will not need a larger apology. Pardon I pray that I press your Honor, in
sense of honor and piety, to present the enclosed as the humble representer of
my sad condition, and, in my intendment, humble desires. And when it shall come
to be by that grave Assembly taken into consideration; that your self, and
those honorable persons would reflect upon me, however clouded under my present
(though nothing justifiable) crimination, as upon a Christian, and a Gentleman,
and of that, in it self, honorable long Robe, though sullied by my wearing. I
will not multiply your distubance by an impertinently long Epistle, knowing I
am easiely understood, and hoping to find a propensity in your honor to afford
what favor may be lawfully extended to.

Honored Sir Your Honors most humble servant. Eus. ANDREWE
Tower, 20 July 1650.

The Petition to the Parliament follows.

To the High and Honorable the Parliament of England.
The humble Petition of Eusebius Andrewe Esquire close prisoner in the Tower of
London.
Shows
THat your petitioner has been by a confederate pack of setters, wrought into
action; which (abstracted from their circumstances) render him liable to your
justice, and this done, not without their further hope, that your petitioner,
as they supposed, had interest to have drawn diverse persons of quallity and
fortune into the same entanglement.

That failing of that part of their aim, the said confederates did betray your
petitioner to the honorable Council of State, by whose warrant he has bin 16
weeks a strictly close prisoner, without a fortune of his own, the access of
friends, or means of substance allowed; and is like to perish by his wants,
before it be distinguished by a public Trial, whether he be a fitter object for
the applying of your justice, or your mercy.

That he is hereby disabled to be accountable to the service of God, the duty
to his family and friends, and to those who give him credit for bread. And in
case he should be called from such his close restraint to his trial, must be
destitute and deprived of all fair means of making his reasonable defense,
which however it may suit with policy, will not be consistent with Religion
and Honor.

Your petitioner having, for releif in the premises, by all opportune
addresses, and by four petitions improtunely solicited and sought the said
Council of State without answer. In the deep sense of his pressing sufferings
humbly appealeth to this high Court, casting himself wholly thereupon, and as
humbly prays.

1. That you would prevent your Justice by your mercy, and admit him to sue out
his pardon upon security given for his future good demeanor to the State in
this Commonwealth.

2. That if that be too great a favor you would grant him license to depart
the Common wealth he engaging not to act or contrive ought to the disservice of
the State.

3. That if he be not thought capable of either, but that he must receive a
public trial he may have a convenient time of preparation after a quallifying
of his imprisonment.

4. That in the mean time he may have the liberty of the Tower, and resort of
his friends, and that by your order his debt for livelihood incurred in his
close restraint may be discharged.

In all which your petitioner is ready to submit to the will of God, whose
providence has put Justice and mercy into your present dispensing.

And shall ever pray

The humble Answer of Eusebius Andrewe Esquire, Answer. 1.
in his defense to the proceeding against him before the Honorable the High
Court of Justice presented 16th. day of Aug. 1650.
THe said respondent (with the favor of this honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and liberty of making further Answer,
offers to this honorable Court.

First, That by the Statute or Charter styled Magna Charta, which is the
fundamental Law, and ought to be the standard of the Laws of England, confirmed
above thirty times and yet unrepealed, it is in the 29th. Chapter thereof
Granted and Enacted,

1. That no freeman shall be taken, or imprisoned, or be disseised of his free
hold or liberties, or free custom, or be outlawed, or exiled, or be any
otherwise destroyed, nor we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him, but by a
lawful Judgment of his Peers, and by the Laws of the Land.

2. We shall sell to no man, nor deferr to any man Justice or right.

Secondly. That by the Statute of 42 of Edward 3d. Cha. 1.

1. The Great Charter is commanded to be kept in all the points. And

2. It is enacted that if any Statute be made to the Contrary, that shall be
holden for none, which Statute is unrepealed.

The Respondent observes that by an Act of the 26 of March 1650. Entitled an
Act for establishing an High Court of Justice, Power is given to this Court to
Try, Condemn, and cause Execution of Death, to be done upon the Freemen of
England, according as the Major number of any 12 of the Members thereof, shall
judge to appertain to justice.

And thereupon the Respondent does humbly infer and offers for law,

That the said Act is diametrically contrary unto, and utterly inconsistent
with the said Great Charter, and is therefore by the said recited Statute to be
holden for none.

That it can with no more reason, equity, or justice, hold the value and
reputation of a Law (the said Statute before recited being in force) then if,
contrary to the second clause in that 29th Chap. of Magna Charta, it had been
also enacted, that Justice and Right shall be deferred to all freemen, and sold
to all that will buy it.

Thirdly, That upon premising, by the Petition of Right 3d Car. that contrary
to the great Charter Trials, and Executions, had been had and done against the
Subjects by commissions Martial, etc. It was therefore prayed, and by the
Commission enacted, That

1. No Commissions of the like nature, might be thenceforth issued, etc. and
that done

2. To prevent, least any of the Subjects should be put to death contrary to
the Laws and Franchise of the Land.

The Respondent humbly observes and affirms, That

This Court is (though under a different style) in Nature, and in the
proceedings thereby directly the same with a Commission Martial; the Freeman
thereby being to be tried for life, and adjudged by the major number of the
Commissioners sitting (as in Courts of Commissioners Martial was practiced, and
was agreeable to their constitution) and consequently against the Petition of
Right, in which he, and all the freemen of England (if it be granted there be
any such) has and have right, and interest, and he humbly claims his right
accordingly.

Fourthly, That by he Remonstrance 15 of December, and the Declaration 17
January 1641. The benefit of the Laws and ordinary Courts of Justice, are the
subjects Birthrights.

By the Declarations of the 12th July and 16th October 1642. the preservation
of the laws, and the due administration of justice, are owned to be the
justifying cause of the war; and the ends of the Parliaments affairs, managed
by their swords and Councils; And Gods curse is by them imprecated, in case
they should ever decline those ends.

By the Declaration of 17 Apr. 1646. promise was made not to interrupt the
course of Justice in the ordinary Courts thereof.

By the Ordinance or Votes of non-addresses, Jan. 1648. it is assured of the
Parliaments behalf, That

Though they lay the King aside, yet they will govern by the laws, and not
interrupt the course of Justice in the ordinary Courts thereof.

And thereupon the Respondent humbly infers and affirms, That

The constitution of this Court is a Breath of that public faith of the
Parliments, exhibited, and pledged in the Declarations, and votes to the
Freemen of England.

And upon the whole matter the Respondent (saving as aforesaid) does humbly
affirm for law, and claim as his right.

That this Court, in defect of the validity of the Act, by which it is
constituted, has not power against him, or to press him to a farther Answer.

That by virtue of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and the before recited
Remonstance and Declarations, he ought not to be proceeded against by this
Court, but by an ordinary Court of Justice, and to be tried by his Peers.

And prays, That this his present Answer and Salvo may be accepted, and
registered, and that he may be tried by his Peers accordingly.

Eus. ANDREWE.

The farther and second Answer of Eus. Andrewe Esquire. to the Honorable the High
Court of Justice, Answer. 2.
presented the 16th day of Aug. 1650.
THe said Respondent (with the favor of this Honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and liberty of making further Answer (if it
shall be adjudged necessary) in all humbleness for present answer, offers to
this honorable Court;

That by the letter and genuine sense of the Act, entitled, An Act for
establishing an High Court of Justice, the said Court is not quallified to try
a free man of England (and such the Respondent averreth to be) for life in case
of Treason.

First, For that 1. The said Court is not constituted a Court of Record, and
(but upon Record) cannot at all have that account of their freeman, which Kings
were wont to have of their Ministers of Justice.

2. The Free man and such who are and may be concerned in him, can have no
Record to resort unto, by which to preserve the rights due to him and them
respectively. viz of 1. A Writ of Error, in case of erroneous judgment, due by
the Presidents. Pasch 39 Ed. 3. fol. of Gaunts case. 4. Ed. 3. Rot. Parl. Number.
13. Count de Arundels case. 42. Ed. 3. Rot. Par. Nu. 23. Sr. Jo. of Lees case.
2. A plea of anterfoyes acquit, in Case of new question for the same fact; the
right to which, and the necessity of such Record, appears by Wetherel and
Darlyes Case 4. Rep. 35. Eliz. Vaux his case ibidem 33 Eliz.
3. A being enlarged upon acquital, as is the freemans due, by the Stat. 14.
Hen. 6. and the Case thereupon grounded. Dyer fol. 120 and abridg: fo. 33. 4. A
Writ of Conspiracy against those who have practiced the betraying the life of
the Respondent not to be brought before acquital, and no acquital, but upon
Record, as appears by The Poultiers Case, 9 Rep. fol. 55.

This Court is to determine at a day, without account of their proceedings;
have power to try, judge and cause execution, but not to acquit or to give
enlargment; so that the nocent are thereby punishable, the innocent not
preservable; the injured and betrayed, not vindicable; which are defects
incompatible with a Court of Justice, and inconsistent with Justice it self and
with the Honors of a Christian nation and Commonwealth.

Secondly, for that the members of this Court are by the Act directed to be
sworn.

1. Not in conspectu populi for the freemans satisfaction. 2. Not in words of
indifferency, and obliging to equallity. 3. In words of manifest Partiallity.
viz.
You shall swear that you shall well and truly, according to the best of your
skill and knowledge, execute the several powers given unto you by this Act.

The Respondent humbly offers, That

1. The Court in their capacity of Tryers ought (in reason) to have been
appointed by their constitution, to have been sworn as Tryers in full Court,
according to the practice in all equal ways of Trial.

2. The Court as Commissioners of Oyre, and Terminer, (being authorized by the
Act to hear and determine) should in like reason be appointed an oath, such as
is usual for persons so qualified, as provided 18. Edw. 3. viz.

You shall swear that well and lawfully you shall serve our Lord the King, and
his people ( mutatis mutandis) in the office of Justice, etc. and that you deny
to no man common right, etc.

Or some Oath equivalent at least to that of a Justice of Peace, Dalton fol. 13.

I A. B. do swear that I will do equal right; and according to my best wit,
cunning, and power, after the laws and customs of the land and the Statutes
thereof made etc.

3. The Court in the capacity of tryers should (in reason) be obliged by an
oath, of as equitable sense as that usually administered to Jurors; viz.

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, ( mutatis mutandis) and the prisoner at the Bar; so help you
God.

Whereas when this Court shall (as it is now constituted) have condemned the
freeman, the Respondent, or other, by applying their skill and knowledge, to
their power; whether justly or not, the oath by them taken is not in the letter
broken; as to be exactible by man, though God will provably have a better
account.

And therefore upon the whole matter premised, the Respondent (saving as
before) offers for law and reason, that the honorable Court, the high Court of
Justice, is not, by the letter and proper sense of the words of the Act, by
which it is constituted, qualified in respect of the preobjected defects to
pass upon him for his life, upon a charge or crimination of high Treason.

And humbly prays that this his second Answer, and Salvo, may be received, and
registered, and that he may be tried, as in his former answer he prayed Eus.
ANDREW.

The farther and third Answer of Eusebius Andrewe Esquire, Answer. 3.
to the Honorable the High Court of Justice, presented the 16 day of Aug. 1650.
THe said Respondent (with the favor of this honorable Court) reserving and
praying to be allowed the benefit and liberty of making further answer, (if it
shall be adjudged necessary) in all humbleness for present Answer, offers to
this honorable Court.

That First. It is his right (if he must admit this Court to be duly and
legally established and constituted, as to their being a Court) to be tried by
his Peers, men of his own condition, and neighborhood.

2. It is within the power of the Court by the letter, and sense of the Act, or
at least as being not repugnant to the Act, to try him by such his Peers, etc.

First, That it is his right to be so, and only so tried, appears by Magna
Charta Ca. 29. 25 Edw. 1. Ca. 1. and 2. 5, Edw. 3. Ca. 9. 25. Edw. 3. Ca. 2.
and 4. 28. Edw. 3. Ca. 4. 37. Edw. 3. Ca. 18. 42. Edw. 3. Ca. 3.

By all which Statutes made in full Parliament, consisting of the head, and all
the members actually, as well as virtually, this the Respondents right is
maintainable, and demandable, and the contrary proceedings thereunto are To be
held for none, and redressed, etc.

To be held for void, and error, etc.

So that, If the laws and Courts were not obstructed, (in the cases of some
sort of freemen of England,) the whole proceeding contrary to these laws,
without a Jury of his Peers, were avoydable, and reservable by writ of error,
as appears also by the Presidents vouched by the Respondent in his second
Answer.

Secondly. That it is in the Courts power to try the freeman, and consequently
the Respondent, by a Jury of his equals, the Court is humbly desired to
consider the words of Qualification.

The Court is,

First, Required to hear and determine; and so, if at all Commissioners, then
Commissioners of Oyre and Terminer, and such Commissioners in their natural
constitution and practical execution, do proceed against the freeman according
to law, by a Jury of his equals and not otherwise.

Secondly. Authorized to proceed to trial, condemnation, and execution, etc.
But not restrained to the manner of Trial, Limitative, as to trial by the
Courts opinion as tryers, Non exclusive, as to trial per Pares; But is left in
the manner, as in the Judgment it self, to the opinion of the major number of
12, and if they shall think fit to try by a Jury, it will be no offense against
the Act, there being no clause or prohibition to the contrary.

And therefore the Respondent humbly claims his said Right, as consisting
with the said Power.

And the more to enduce the Court to grant him such his right, and the benefit
thereof, the Respondent humbly represents the manifest wrong, and multiplied
disherison, done to him, and in him to the Freemanry of England, in the
following particulars of their like just right, (depending upon such trial to
be allowed) if denied him, by this Honorable Court.

First. The benefit of Challenge to the tryers, 35 peremptorily, and for
treason Sans number.
Stampf. pl. Cor. fol. 150. Tit. Challenge Poynings case 32. Henry 6. Fitz. fo.
26. Allowed Hill. 1. Jacobi to Sir Wall. Rawleigh and Brooks.


Secondly. The liberty of

Seeing, hearing, and counter-questioning the witnesses, for clearing the
evidence in matter of circumstance, as well as in matter of fact; which appears
to be the Respondents right, by Stamf. pl. Cor. fol. 163, 164 The Stat of.
1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, Cap. 10. and 11. 1. Edw. 6. Chap. 12.


The Authority of (the laws Oracle) Cook 2. part Inst. fol. 12. commenting upon
the words in 25. Edw. 3. Ca. 2. Provablement Attanit, because the punishment
was heavy, the proof to be Punctual, and not upon presumptions, or inferences,
or strains of Wit, but upon good and sufficient proofs; also by the Stat. of
1. Eliz. Ca. 6. 13. Eliz. Ca. 1.

Thirdly. The being

Convinced, or acquitted by a full, free, and fully consented virdict. For

First. A verdict by a Jury passes from all, or not at all. In the proceeding
by voices, a sentence passes by way of Concurrence, with which the
Star Chamber, High Commission, and Courts Martial were branded, and condemned
of In-equality.

Secondly. A verdict passes upon a Jury before discharged, upon their affairs
of Estate, or supplies of Nature, to prevent corruption of money and power, but
as this Court proceeds (if it will proceed by voices,) a trial may be had this
day, and a sentence may be given at leisure; when the Will of those, by whom
the Freeman is prosecuted, be first known.

And upon the whole matter

The Respondent humbly claims the be nefit, and right, of being tried (if
before this honorable Court) per Pares, men of his own condition, and of his
neighborhood, and that he may hear and see all the witnesses produced against
him; viva voce et aperto vultu; And may have power, liberty, and time to
produce witnesses in his defense.

And (saving as formerly) humbly prays that this his Answer, and Salvo, may be
received, and Registered.

Eus. ANDREWE.

HIs engagement originally for the King was lawful by the Stat. of 11. Hen. 7.
Cap. 1.

By his Commissions producable.

The King not virtually in the Parliament; but both virtually with us his
Soldiers, and unlawful for the Parliament to compel him, etc.

Hugh Spencer and his Son. Calums Case 7.


That homage and allegiance were due to the King only in respect of his Crown
(which is a virtual allegiance and by which, Rep. Coo.
or upon the same reason the Parliament inferrs their necessity or interest of
Acting.

That the Leiger may remove the King.

That he might be reformed per asperte by force.

That they might and were bound to govern in aid of him, all damned by the Act
of Exilius Hugonis le Ospence in Edw. 4. and in 25. Edw. 3. 2.

The natural, and politic bodies are indivisible and incorporate, 4 Eliz.
resolved as law, Plowd. Com. fol. 113, by Sir Roo Ca'thline a Just. Sir Jam.
Dyer a Just. Co. pl. Sands a Bar. Russel, Brown, Corbet, Weston, Fren^t, Just.
Carewe and Pewterel Sergeants, Gerrard At. Genesis Caret At. Duchy, Plowden
himself.

If the virtual power be in the King his assent needless, from 9. Hen. 3. to 1.
Hen. 7. the styles were.

The Kings ordinances at his Parliament, etc. or by advise of his Prolator, 1.
Inst. Coo. fo. 234.
and Barons, and at the petition of the Commons.

Since 7. Hen. 7. Ca^ 14. by the King, Lords spiritual and temporal, and
Commons assembled, etc.

The Queen summoned a Parliament 23 Jan. 1. 3. Eliz. Dyer 203.
of her reign, and in regard of indisposition of health prorogued till 25
ejusd. Resolved, that the Parliament then and not till then began.

Where was the virtual presence when the King was in Newcastle, Holmby, Hampton
Court, Carisbrook, Windsor, St. James's prisoner.

Declaration in Apr. to the Scots papers 22. Nov. page 8. that the King was not
in condition to govern.

The Oath of a Parliament man, till which taken he is not effectually such.

That the King is Supreme Governor, etc.
His being with the Prince.
My being with the Prince in Holland, I was there before him, and in good
manners having been his Soldier, Secretary to the Lord Capel, visited the
Court, and took a friend from, and pulling him off, and this in his fathers
life time, he being by him commissioned.

Refused command for Ireland, having expectation upon the treaty then on foot;
when it seems war was so precious, that the Petitioners for peace were Voted
Malignants, and disabled, etc.

My message to Lord Hopton and Letter, was to certify to the King my Interest
in the Office of the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland; and to pray him, that if he
surrendered there, he would not give away my right in my absence; which was a
duty I owed to my Family and Person, and which every man in my condition would
do.

The answer was only pertinent to such request, and as then not prohibited to
be done, either to send or receive from any.

Mutual Interest the Commons are not to take notice of, being private and
obscure, and only current amongst their relators the Soldiery.

Testimony of Barnard not allowable; for unless he can fix upon me, he loses
his reward; and all done only in confidence of him, who held intelligence with
the Lord President Bradshawe: so that no danger at any time to the State, but
an expectation in them to get by the bargain, by my drawing in others, and then
all to be snapt.

Smyth a counterfeit name, and Pit his name, party with Barnard.

My name Dudley only as to Barnard in this kind of casual; to others only to
prevent arrests of other men's debts, least by a suspicion on my place of abode,
my name should be discovered to my Creditors.

My name and person known and perfect where ever I lay, Gravesend.
at Feres, at Sartaines, at Coopers, at Perkins, at Manes ordinary,
Carleton-Hall.
and known to all the streets and people.

Detaining them close prisoners, December. 15. 1641.
without the liberty of using Book, Pen, Ink or Paper; denying them all the
comforts of life, Remon. fol. 7.
all means of preservation of health, etc. denying them the means of spiritual
consolation, not suffering them to go abroad to enjoy Gods Ordinances in Gods
House, or Gods Ministers to come to them, to administer comfort to them in
their private Chamber.

And the ordinary course of Justice, And fol. 8. Compare 9. Act for Removal.
the common birthright of the Subject of England obstructed unto them.

The restraint of the liberties of the Subjects in their Habitations, Act for
Engagement.
Trades and other interests.

Starchamber deprive men of the society of their friends, exercise of their
professions, comfort of books, Fol. 9.
pen, etc.

Judges awed that they durst not do their duties. fol. 10.


New Oaths been forced upon the Subject against Law. fol. 10.


New Judicatories erected without Law. fol. 10.


The pretended Court of Earl Marshall, fol. 10.
was arbitrary and illegal in its being and proceedings.

They imposed a new Oath upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects, The Bishops 113.
both Ecclesiastical and lay, for maintenance of their own Tyranny.

And then Magnifying their own doings in this Parliament, they say, That

These things will appear only in future times in story, fol. 17.
to give us and our posterity more occasion to praise God for his Majesty's
goodness, and the faithful endeavors of the Parliament.

The Laws of the triennial Parliament, fol. 16.
and the non dissolving of this without consent of both Houses, may be thought
more advantageous then the former.

What can we the Commissioners do without the conjunction of the House of
Lords. fol. 22.


Acusatores.
Carere debet omni vitio qui paratus est in alterum dicere. Cic. in ver.


Nulla salus Reipublicae major est quam eos qui alterum accusant, non minus de
laud, de honor, and de fama sua, quam illos qui accusatur de capite ac
fortunis suis pertimes;cers; Itaque semper hi diligentissime laboriosissimeque
accusarunt qui se ipsos in discrimen existimationis veniri arbitrati sunt.

Exempla*
Domitianus dum Rapinis intendit anamu^ ita Aures delatoribus patifecit ut
nihil cuiquam Tutum esset. Allex: ab Allexandro Lib. 4. Cap. 22. Multa esset
oportet in eo qui alterum accusat primum integritatem atque; innocentiam, Nihil
est enim quod minus ferendum est quamrationem ab altero vite reposcere cum qui
non possit suo reddere. Cicero in Ver. Tuta frequensque via est per amici
fallere nomen
Tuta frequensque licet sit via Crimen habet.
Fr^us fidem in parvis sibi praeservis ut cum opere precium sit magna ^^rcede
fallat. Barnaldus vidit omnia, and perdidet omnes. To Plot.
Must argue the Propounder and Consenter to be both of one mind; If not, but
that one intends not the thing purposed, but to betray the other by his consent
thereto, cannot be a Plot in any interpretation.

The same for Contrive or Endeavor, 2 Clan.
as to the second Clause in the Act for Establishment.

Est innoeua adversitas ubi iniquitas Null A.
Est vita infelicissima in qua adversitas Null A.
Sat Miser est qui semel est Miser.
Periissem si non periissem.
Eiat voluntas Dei modo in ruina mea.
Eusebius Andrewe.

The Several Arguments of Colonel Andrewe at his Trial.
The First Argument.
My Lords and you Gentlemen Members of this Honorable Court.
I Have (as becomes me) been attentive to the charge which has been read
against me. It appears in that dress it is put already, (though I presume it
shall be clad in other apparel by Mr. Attorney) so specious, and so great, as
that my friends (if I have any here) begin to fear, the indifferent to doubt,
and the partial to desire, and join in my condemnation, my self (I hope I am
not partial to my self) believe, that it will be no more then the mountains
labor, Perturient montes etc.
and when it shall come to be dissected, will prove to be inane aliquid, like
the Apples of Sodom, that however they take the first sense the eye, as this
the ear, do rather foul the fingers that touch them, then satisfy the
appetite in its expectation upon them.

My Lord, I am at an unusual Bar, and engaged in a great cause of a far
extendible concernment, my fee is life, and my duty is self-preservation, which
in it self were less considerable, if by a president of my suffering, the
consequence would not prove mischievously Epidemical.

I do not wilfully refuse to plead to the charge, but humbly crave leave to
offer my reasons for the suspending of my Plea. And if I be importunate (yet
within the bounds of civility) I beg your pardon, and that I may have a full, a
free, and an uninterrupted hearing.

My Lord, When the Jews pressed Pilate to sentence Christ, they obtruded to him
that they had a Law, and by that law he ought to dye. What they thought
reasonable to claim, when it served their turn to vent their Malice, Jer. 26.
6. Jehova justi^^ nostra.
will be I hope warrantable for me to lay hold on in a better sense, for the
vindication of Christ, who suffers when Justice is a sufferer. We have a law
too, and by that law, I ought not to plead, not to be tried, not to be judged.

The Laws of England were not unknown, but mispractised; when the Barons fought
King John into a consent to the (not new making but) restorement of the ancient
Laws.

And Magna Charta it self, Cook 1 part instit. fol. 81, 82.
is but a confirmation or restitution of the Common Law, and is become the
Standard by which Laws are reduceable, and is the foundation of all other Acts
of Parliament.

It has been at no time dismembered; no part abrogated by any repeal.

It has been confirmed above 30 times, and commanded as often to be observed
and put in Execution.

In the Act called Confirmatio Cartarum, 25 Edw. 1. ca. 1.
it is directed to be allowed as the Common Law in judgment, in all points, by
all the Judges and dispensers of Law, Bracton 414. 491.
or which have the law to guide.

It has in former ages gained an honorable esteem in the old books: Fiecta
lib. 2. c. 48. lib. 3. c. 3
Charta libertatum Communis libertas Angliae, Mirror c. 2. 18. Britton fo. 177.
Charta de Libertatibus, etc. these are the Appellations.

It was a Noli me tangere, 17 Henry 3.
and for seeking a Reversal or Avoidance of it, Rot. Clamem. 1. 2. Rot.
Proutrius. M. 1.
Hubert de Burgo was sentenced by the Barons, and the sentence confirmed by
King Henry the Third.

The great Hugh Speneer in the reign of Edward the second, 14 Edw. 2.
was banished but for rashly counselling against the Encounter la form de la
granda Charter.

And to draw downwards yet one Kings Reign, 42 Edw. 3. c. 1.
and to the point to which I would apply; I find in the 42 year, this great
Charter was not only barely confirmed and commanded to be kept in all the
points, for those are the words; But to prevent any alteration of it, is
enacted, That if any Statute be made to the contrary, that shall be holden for
none.

By this Magna Charta it is granted, Cook. 1 Justi^. fol. 81.
and Enacted too; if my Lord Cook say true, who says it is a Statute, as well
as a Charter, being made by Assent and Authority of Parliament. That

No Freeman shall be taken or Imprisoned or be disseised of his Freehold, Ma.
Cha. c. 29.
or Liberties, or Free-customes, or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed; nor shall not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment
of his Peers, and by the Law of the Land.

We shall sell to no man, nor deferr to man either Justice or Right.

If this be Truth and Law, which I have in these particulars promised to you,
then (my Lord) give me leave to take notice.

That by that Act by which you are constituted a Court of Justice, you are
authorized to try the Freemen of England; not per Pares, upon or for offenses
against Articles, and the punishment to reach to life, as the Major part of any
12 of the Commissioners shall judge to appertain to justice.

Laying these together, a Posting Rider may Read, that these Laws are
diametrically opposite, and consequently inconsistent.

The latter has its doom inherent by its innate contrariety to the former, and
is a building a superstructure so unsuitable to the foundation, that if it had
not a double edged support, it need no help to be demolisht, but would fall I
know not whether to say sua mole, or sua pensilitate.

The Constitutors of this Law are Gladiis cincti; and therefore as I am not in
opportune place to speak to them, so there is something of danger to speak too
freely to them; but (my Lord) your Lordship as you are in this place, are (I am
sure ought to be) like the Escochions of Princes, with their addopted
Supporters, Knowledge and Conscience, and if you are, I am confident you will
doubt of your Commission, or warrant to proceed against me, and compel me to
preserve an inch of life, by giving away mine and my Countrymens Liberty, in
condescending to a Plea and Trial, in this contra-legal way, and by power of
this Act.

The second Argument.
My Lord,
I Shall further beg leave to call to your memory the Petition of Right;
Petition of Right. 3 Car.
which was made the business of the Parliament, at the time when it was
preferred, and received the Royal assent, must never be forgotten by those who
hold in esteem the care of Parliaments, and gracious concessions of Kings.

In the Proeme or leading part of that Petition, the Statute of Magna Charta is
instanced as to this particular, trial for life by proper Courts, with other
the Laws and Statutes (some of which I have cited, and the rest shall upon
another point in their place;) and as it is complained, that proceedings had
been by Commissioners Martial; when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes of
the land they had deserved death, by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other laws ought to have been judged; so is it prayed, and
accordingly enacted, That no Commissions of like nature may be henceforth
issued to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed, etc. and this to
prevent, least by color of them any of the Subjects should be destroyed or put
to death, contrary to the laws and franchize of he Land.

My Lord,

1. The Commissions Martial were not evil in respect of the persons
commissioned, being as this power is to you, so those always given to persons
of quality and learning; but the evil of them were their Proceedings by their
own will and opinion, being themselves the Judges, and the Jury; offices
incompatible and inconsistent with the peoples Liberties, by the former Laws
become their rights; when your Lordships shall read the Act by which you now
sit, I am confident you will grant this power to be of the same nature, though
not under the same name, and consequently in that Petition complained of, in
supposition that such might be, and enacted against in Terminis, that none such
should be.

2. For that you are called by the Act, Commissioners, and yet have no
Commission, but the Act it self; whereas you should, in regard you are not a
Court of Record in your selves, have Commissions returnable at a day into some
Court of Record, where your proceedings might be extant and visible; and as you
are now constituted, you have a day prefixed to determine in; but that being
come, you are to vanish, and your vestigia will be as inperceptible to the
times and men to come, as the trace of a Swallow in the Air, which is
inconsistent with the honor and justice of any Kingdom, or of any Christian
Commonwealth.

For that you have only by this Act, a bare and single power to adjudg, R^ades
Case. Dar fol. 120. 10 Eaw. 4. fol. 19.
and cause execution to be done, in case you shall judge it to appertain to
justice; but you have no power if you think it appertain to justice, to acquit,
and upon acquittal to discharge the person tried, 14 Hen. 6. 1. Oath of a Juror.
as is the law expressly in my Lord Diar; and in the year-book of Edw. 4.
grounded upon the Statute of Henry the 6th. 14 of his reign Ca. 1. That

Justices of Nisi prius (who are Commissionary Justices) shall have power of
all the cases of felony, and of Treason, to give their Judgment, as well where a
man is acquit of felony, and of treason, as where he is thereof attainted at
the day and place where the Inquisition, Inquest, and Jury shall be taken; and
then from thenceforth to award execution to be made by force of the same
judgments, which in an acquitted man's case can only be enlargement.

But (my Lord) you have only power if you can to reach my life, if in your
opinion deserving it, but not to reach me out of Prison; so that if you kill me
not here with the sword of Justice, you must leave me in worse hands, to be
buried alive in restraint and want.

Which all is against the laws of Nature and Nations, and particularly of this
land, that are all so balanced and poysed, as that they have equal regard to
the delivery and freeing the Innocent, as to the condemnation of the nocent.

And Isadore in his Etimologies says of a law, thus, Erit autem lex honesta
justa, possibilis, secundum naturam et consuitudinem patriae; Loco, temporique
conveniens necessaria, et utilis, manifesta quoque, ne aliquid incantum per
obscuritatem captione contineat; nullo privato commodo, sed per communi civium
ultilitate conscripta.

And as laws should be, so should Courts and the dispense^ of laws be.

But (my Lord) if this Court must be granted to be a Court, your selves can
make no more of it then a Court, ex part, and set up to serve a particular
end, with the privation of the common utility and liberty, however ushered with
a preamble of an other style, of preservation of peace, and prevention of wart;
but Thucidides will tell you my Lord in his fourth book, That Turpius est his
qui impia tenent insidiare honesto pertextu, quam insidiosa, mallevolentia,
uti, nam violentia videtur aliquid furis habere, propter potentiam a fortuna
datam, sed fraus tantum ab injustitia oritur.

The Third Argument.
BUt (my Lord) if your Lordship be in your judgment and conscience satisfied,
that the Act it self, in, and as to its constitution, is good and valuable, and
impowereth you sufficiently to proceed against me, some way then Argumenti ergo
dato, sed non juris ergo concesso, that it is a law, or an Act, and that all
those Ordinances are out of doors; yet I pray your Lordships leave, that I may
make evident to your Lordship, that you are not hereby constituted a Court
capable, in defect of the very letter of the Act, to pass upon any man, and
consequently not upon me, in matter of life, or where life may may be the
concernment.

1. For reason you are not constituted a Court of Record, Wetherel and Darly's
Case 35. Eliz.
which is absolutely necessary, having life and forfeiture of lands in your
charge.

First, Apeal de murder convict de Homocide bonb^r^l endictment per murder.
For the State that they may have an account, (not in their Council Chamger,
but upon Record) what is become of the matter in issue, and of the person put
upon his Trial.

2. For the Freeman of England, that in case he be acquitted of the crime
wherewith he shall stand charged before this Court, Affirm quo ho^re ne doit
m^t^e, presuavic Deux fois per uncuosen.
he might at all times resort to the Record, upon any new question for the same
Fact in any other Court holding Pleas of that nature, by which Record to plead
his Auterfoyes acquitte, and to make his defense, as also to preserve his
estate, Si non legalment aquitte eu le Poulters Case 9. R. Benegist demant
acquittal null req. si non de Record. as also my benefit, a writ of Conspiracy.

To come nearer our own times, 17 Car. Act for abolishing Star Chamber.
the like cause to complain, and the same redress is given in the Act for
abolishing of the Star Chamber, upon the grounds and reasons drawn from these
Laws; the Innovations and Invadings upon which (as being Fundamentals) was a
great part of the substance of the grand Remonstrance, communicated to the
whole World against the late King by the Press: Articles contra Strafford, Art.
1, 2. partis 1. 14 parti secundo.
The charges against he Earl of Strasford and the Archbishop of Canterbury.

The interest of the Subject in these laws, was cried up to be so precious, as
that it had influence even to the absolving of all old Oaths, and the imposing
of new, and to bring to adventure Estate and Life, and soul, rather then to be
usurped, or in the least entrenched upon.

Four several Declarations of the present Parliament have entitulated the
subject to them, Declar. D.c. 15. 1641. Jan. 17. 1641.
and to the benefit of the ordinary Courts of Justice, as their Birthright. I
have owned the preservation of them to be the Cause of the War. July 12. 1642.
and the ends of their affairs managed by their Swords or Councels, Oct. 23.
1642.
and Gods curse is by them imprecated, in case they should ever decline the
Ends.

My Lord, Declar. April 17. 1646.
We have the Parliaments word and promise, not to interrupt the course of
Justice in the ordinary Courts.

And in the Ordinance of Non addresses to the late King, Jan. 1648.
they say, Though they lay the King aside, yet they will Govern by the Laws,
and not interrupt the Course of Justice in the Ordinary Courts thereof.

My Lord, I am entitulated to all these Laws, and these Promises and
Declarations; and if this Court proceed against me, those notwithstanding, (the
Ordinary Courts of Justice being open and unobstructed.) I am robbed, and
divested of them all, and in me the Freemanry of England are all despoyled, at
the Parliaments will (according to this president) disployleable, and may with
Mr. Stampsord in his Pleas of the Crown, take up this saying, It will serve for
a Lamentation, Misera servitus est ubi jus est vagum, and incognitum.

The Fourth Argument.
THomas Acquinus (who though a Papist, is not the less worthy to be vouched,
Beat. Thomas 1. 2 Q^, 90. Art. 1.
where not Religion, but Policy, is the thing in question) Says, That Lex est
regula and mensura actuum agendorum vel omittendorum, not Actorum, and
Omissorum.

And St. Paul says Concupiscentian nesciebam nisi lex diceret non concupisces.
Romans 7. 7.


My Lord, your Authority is in two several places to proceed against as
Traitors, such who have broken the Articles before they were made, viz.

Whosoever has, Art.2.
or shall I lot, Contrive, or Endeavor, etc.

Whatsoever Officer, Art. 7.
etc. has, or shall desert their trust, etc. shall dye without mercy.

And thus my Lord, the end of Laws and Law-makings is perverted, which are not
merely to punish offenders, but to prevent offenses, which amongst Christian
men was never otherwise done, but by way of premonition; by laws first
Interdictory, and then Subpenatory.

The Earl of Strafford did (and very reasonably) take it unkindly, and so
expressed himself upon his Trial; That a neglected Law should lie moulding
amongstold parchments 200. years unused and unexercised, and at last brought
out to measure his passed Actions by, or to use his own words, To lie like a
Coal raked up in the ashes, to be at pleasure blown into a flame, and to make
him and his family the first fuel to feed it. Truly if he had seen these
Articles (as he felt after somewhat like them) he would have cried out, and but
modestly enough, That it is not the mending of the fault, but the destruction
of the person which is manifestly defigned in these Articles of Retrospection.

Disusage of a law, is some excuse for him who falls into a transgression; but
the non existence of a Law, is a Justification to the greatest offense.

And my Lord, as you are to look backward to Actions done before the Law made,
so you are to take Cognizance of offenders against two former Acts, which make
the Crimes therein certain in the matters of fact, fault and punishment; and if
they be laws, they must be deemed part of the laws of the Land, and
desirable and dispensable by the ordinary Courts of the Land, in cases
Criminal; for extraordinary Courts of that king, have long since even (by the
Parliament, of which this is the sarviving part) been denied.

And although it is true, that when some particular fact is committed by some
one or more particular persons against the laws Crimi^al, it often falls (and
properly enough) that especial Commissions of Oyre and Terminer are for some
urgent and expedient reason issued to try the matter and men: yet those
Commissions do not restrain the Commissioners to proceed only against those
persons, and upon those particular crimes which the common fame has rendered
Hac vice to be Tryable, but run in general terms, and with general enablement
to try all manner of Treasons, Felonies, etc.

And the Reason is,

1. For that it might possibly fall out, that a grand Jury will not find the
Bill against Jo. at style, and if not, the Commissioners are sent down without
their arrant, if only directed to try, J. S.

2. It may fall out, that where there are Treasons or Felonies committed by Jo.
St. they may be accompanied with misprisions or misdemeanors, in Jo. O. And if
the particular crime of Treason, and the particular person of J. S. be only
authorized to be enquired of, then the Commissioners can do but half their
work: And therefore this Commissionary power of yours (My Lord,) (the ordinary
Courts being not obstructed, and you limited to particulars) is so far against
the Common Law and usage, that it is against common and vulgar reason; and
(pardon that I must say it) savours more of a Snare, then of a Law; and more of
a warrant of Arbitrary Execution, then of an enablement, to and for a judicial
and legal Proceeding or Trial.

The Fifth Argument.
My Lord, In all Courts of Justice, as there is supposed to be an equality
intended to such as shall fall under their Cognizance and Enquiry, which is a
principle of merality innate, as well as a practical Policy: so there have
always in this Nation, at least beyond memory, Not sworn.
or indeed record to the contrary, been certain Oaths Obligatory, and of
indifference administered to Persons either enquiring of, or passing judgment
against or upon the Subjects in all cases whatsoever; and the same thing is but
necessary in your Lordships and this Court to be done, (if at all you will
proceed in so weighty a matter as life) against which I make this exception.

1. If you are at all sworn, you are not sworn in Conspectu, and if you will be
my Jury and my Judges also, I ought to have a satisfaction that you are so
sworn. Had you been only my Judges, and constituted after the ordinary manner,
and to ordinary ends, I would have taken your being sworn for granted.

2. If you are sworn, (and to no other words of an oath then what are comprised
in the Act) (which my self and all men else will easily believe you are not)
then you are not sworn to any manner of Equality.

The words are, You shall swear that you shall well and truly, The Oath of the
Commissioners.
according to the best of your skill and knowledge, execute the several powers
given unto you by this Act.

I beseech your Lordship, 18 Edw. 3.
that I may compare these words with the Oath of Judges in England when it was
a Kingdom.

The words Pertinent only are these, You shall swear that well and lawfully you
shall serve our Lord the King and his people in the office of Justice, Oath of
Justices.
etc

And that you deny to no man common Right, by the Kings letters, or none other
man's, nor for none other cause, etc.

I A. B. do swear that I will do equal right, Dalton J.P. fol. 33.
etc. according to my best Wit, Cunning and Power, after the Laws and Customs
of the Land, and the Statutes thereof made, etc.

My Lord, these will concern you as my Judges, to consider how little the
styles agree, and how far your Oath is in respect of these unobligatory, and
consequently unsatisfactory to the persons which are or shall be concerned,

1. As to the first, yours contains no such words of Equality.

2. As to the second oath, yours has such words as skill and knowledge, holding
some resemblance with those of wit, cunning and power. But my Lord, if your
words were as well ushered, and as well paged as those, it were some
satisfaction, viz.

To do equal right according etc.

After the laws and customs of the Land, and the Statutes thereof made.

My Lord, as you are my Tryers also, as well as my Judges, I beseech you to
observe the oath of a Juror, and the difference in sense, (in letter I know for
the dignity sake it ought to differ.)

You shall well and truly try, and true deliverance make between our Sovereign
Lord the King, Oath of a Juror.
and the prisoner at the Bar, etc. I presume it is still the same (mutatis
mutandis.)

Truly my Lord, when I look upon your enablement to try the matters and
persons, which, and whom you are to try; you have power to destroy, and not to
save; though ^o spare, yet not to acquit, or discharge; and your obligation by
oath to execute that power according to your best skill and knowledge, I must
needs say, and it is apparent, that when you have destroyed me, you have
discharged all the duty that man can exact from you (though God will have a
better reckoning) and in stead of being tried by sworn Jurors, and adjudged by
sworn Justices, my self, and all who are or may fall into my condition, are to
be tried by our sworn Adversants, I might have said sworn enemies: and we
cannot in reason expect more Justice, then, when the Son lays the wager, the
Mother keeps stakes, and the Father is Judge in a point of controversy.

More and better you may do, more or better we cannot by any light of reason
expect.

The Sixth Argument.
BUt (my Lord) if all this be but wind against a Rock, and move you to no
declining of the exercise of your Power, My right to be tried by a Jury, and in
their power to try me so.
though against my right; yet certainly (my Lord) where your power and my right
may be consistent, you will not stretch your power to the taking away of my
right, but rather by giving me my right, magnify your power.

This I may reasonably expect.

It is my right (granting you to be my Judges) to be tried by my Peers, the
good men of my neighborhood, and it is in your power (if your power be not
inward) to try me so.

That this is my right I must revisit Magna Charta, M. Chapter 9 Hen. 3. 29.
Nisi per legale Judicium Parium suorum.

The Law of Edward 1. having confirmed the great Charter, 25 Ed. 1. Ca. 1. and
2.
says, And we will that if any judgment hereafter be given contrary to the
Points of the Charter aforesaid, by the Justices, or by any other our Ministers
that hold Plea before them against the Points of the Charter, it shall be
undone and holden for naught.

And upon this very Law or Clause, Cases adjudged in the Point.
a writ of error was brought by the Earl of Lancaster, for the misattainder of
his brother, Pasch. 39 Edward 3.
whose Heir he was, and in that the Points were two, and upon them both,
judgment given for a reversal.

1. Quod non fuit araniatus and ad responsionem positus tempore pacis, Jo. of
Gaunts Cases.
eo quod cancellaria, and alia Caria Regis fuerant aperta, in quo lex fiebat,
unicuique prout fieri consuevit. Attinctus.

2. Quod condemnatus sivi adjudicatus fuit absque araniamento seu responsione,
seu legali judicio Parium, Contra legem, and contra tenorem Magnae Chartae. The
like reversals, 4 Ed. ^ N^. 13.
and upon the like reasons, have been had,

In the Count de Arundels Case. Rot. Parl. 42 Edw. 3. Nu. 23.


In Sir John of Lees Case.

It is provided, Rot. Parl. 5 Ed. 3. 9.
That no man from thenceforth should be attached by any accusation, nor
fore-judged of life, nor of limb, nor his lands, etc. against the form of the
great Charter, and the law of the land.

My Lord, 52 Edw. 3. 2.
our fathers saw a Parliament (and reaped the blessing of it) which was called
Benedictum Parliamentum, (which has circumscribed the loose interpreters of
Treasons to a standard, and not left it to be Individium vagum) and there it is
said, That persons guilty of high Treason* (and my charge is not for less) must
be provably attaint of open deed by people of their own condition.

And again it is accorded, Ca. 4. ejusd.
assented and established, That from henceforth none shall be taken by
petition, or suggestion made to the King, or his Council, unless it be by
indictment or presentment of his good and lawful people of his neighborhood
where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by writ Original at
the common Law: The like in effect in 28 E^. 3. 3. 37 Ed. 3. 18.
Nor that none be ousted of his Franchises, or of his Freehold, unless he be
duly brought to answer, and forejudged of the same by the course of Law; and if
any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed, and holden for none.

It is Assented and Established (for the good governance of the Commons) that
no man be put to answer without presentment before Justices, 42 Ed. 3. 3.
or matter of Record, or by due Process and Writ original, according to the old
law of the Land; and if any thing from henceforth be done contrary, it shall be
void in Law, and holden for error.

My Lord, That it is my right to be tried by a Jury of 12 men de vicineto, is
evident; and it is as evident, that if you otherwise proceed with me (if law
were not out of fashion) you would but weave Penelopes Web, and one days
judgment would be unravel'd by the next days Writ of Error.

But after-games for Life are dangerous; and for Estate I have no great cause
to be solicitous: but my right is my duty to preserve, as in relation to my
self, and my honor to keep it, if it may be, from being in my president taken
also from my Countrymen the freemen (if any such be now) of England, who have
equal reason, though they may be wanting (some of them) of the same reasons
wherewith to defend it.

That your Lordship may proceed by Jury, for ought is said or contained in your
Act to the contrary, This may proceed by Jury.


1. I pray consider the before recited laws are all unrepealed, and therefore
if this law intend to oppose those laws, it should have repealed them, No
repeal or non obsta^^e.
or at least have afforded a slight non abstante, or have given the Subject the
comfort of a hac vice tantum, that we might not have thought our selves robbed
of all, but only plundered of a part of our right for necessity and experience
sake, or at least have given us the favor of the Earl of Straffords Act, that
it should never be drawn into example; but I am sure in this Act, that
proceeding against him is super-exampled.

2. I desire you would consider your qualification; you are made Commissioners,
and that of Oyre and Terminer, and those are not proceeders in their own proper
natural and habitual constitution and practices, upon and acording to their own
judgments in matters of fact: you are in these words, viz.

Required to hear and determine, etc. constituted Commissioners of Oyre and
Terminer. fol. 746.


3. You are authorized to proceed to Trial, Condemnation and Execution, etc.
but you are not restrained to the manner of such proceedings to Trial
exclusively, as to Trial per Pares, but left to do the manner of the Trial, as
well as the Judgment or Execution, as you, or the major part of you, or 12 of
you shall judge to appertain to justice: And if such major part shall think fit
to proceed by Presentment and Jury, doubtless such your proceeding is no
Praemunire against the power given you by the Act, but is justifiable to fall
within the letter of the Act, and that without a strained construction.

4. And if when you may lawfully (I mean) by your own law, if ( Argumenti ergo)
it be granted a law) try me by a Jury, and will not, then my Lord (pardon me)
that I must aver, that you take from me, and in me from the communalty of
England three great privileges, Franchise and Rights; to which I and they are,
by the known, ancient, and unabrogated, unrepealed and constantly practiced
laws, entitulated, which will be neither equitable nor honorable for you to do.

1. You take away the benefit of challenge, Benefit Challeng.
which I might make to a Jury or Jurors.

And that is contrary to my right which is given me by the Common Law, Stam.
pl. Cor. T. Chaleng (...) 150.
In favorem vitae, to challenge in case of high Treason (for I go no less) 35
peremptorily, and for reason of challenge Sans Number.

This was adjudged in 32 Henry 6. Poynings Case.
abridged by Fitz Herbert, fol. 26 per Challeng. where 8 Jurors were sworn,
the rest challenged, a new return made, and those 8 returned, and though
formerly allowed and sworn, yet challenged, and adjudged good,

The like allowed in Hill. 1. Ja. Sir Wall. Rawleign, Brooks.
in the Cases of Sir Walt* Rawleigh and Brooks.

If this benefit were allowed me, my Lord, to except or Challenge the whole
Court, who are in number and in quality my tryers, as a Jury are, I should not
need to be peremptory in my challenge, being furnished with abundant reason.

A Jury of Middlesex will be no more nor less, if what I am accused to have
endeavored should take effect, and therefore are not less concerned; I cannot
say the same of the Court, (or if I should, I should not be believed) and he
that but whispers against Diana at Ephesus, makes all the Crafts-men his
enemies.

2. The second benefit and right, Acts. C. 19.
which by denying me a Trial per Pares you take from me, is the benefit of
seeing, hearing, and counterquestioning the witnesses produced against me;
which in such way of Trials, ought to be viva voce.

That such is the law, Stam. P. C. fo. 163. 164. St. Ph. and Ma. 1. and 2. C.
10.
Mr. Stamford averreth in his Pleas of the Crown. And

In treason, two sufficient witnesses by the Stat. of Edward the sixth, 1 Ed.
6. C. 1^. Clau. sult. Cook. 3. p.
sufficiently in relation to their quality, and to the fullness of their
testimony.

Sir Edward Cook (an Author as authentic as any) puts this for law in his
expositions of the words in the Statutes for Treason Provablement attaint;
Inst. fol. 12. Stam. P. C. 164. 89. 1 Ed. 6. C. ^2. 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. 10,
11. ^ Ed. 6. and 16. Eliz. 1.
Because the punishment was great, the proof should be punctual, not upon
presumptions or inferences, or strains of wit, but upon good and sufficient
proofs. And this he makes good by the Authority of Stamford, and the several
Statutes of Philip and Mary, and of Queen Elizabeth, and of Edward the sixth.

Now, my Lord, an evidence either taken in writing, as the person will
voluntarily give it, or cautiously taken as the examiner will ask it, (who is
not sworn to take it indifferently, no more then the framers of the questions
are to propound then fairly,) may be a seeming fair opposite, and a full
testimony; which upon enquiry into circumstances, either concerning the person
giving testimony, or concerning the Modus, the Vbi, the Quando, etc. the whole
laid together may prove either nothing, or a malicious thing.

The Case of Sir Thomas Moor Lord Chancellor, accused for Bribery, is common,
and I hope if mine have fair play it will prove no worse.

3. The third and last right and privilege you take from me, is the many of all
the rest, and to the making of which, (as it should be made up) all the rest
are but conducing, and leading; that is, of a fair Verdict.

My Lord, By a Jury a verdict passes from all, or not at all; and one knowing
and conscientious man, may preserve that Innocent man, whom eleven either
ignorant or careless men would destroy.

This Courts sentence is to be stated by number of voices, and some of them
possibly not judging their own Judgments, but concurring where their opinion of
another Judgment shall lead them; which as it was the great evil of the late
Court of Star Chamber, so wheresoever it is used (in trials of life especially)
it is and can be no other then an evil.

My Lord, By and from a Jury a verdict passes before their discharge upon
their necessary affairs, nay affairs of nature, and therefore will give it both
the righter, because their evidence is fresh in memory, without the
intervention of other matters, as also for that they are without opportunity to
be perverted by money, or friendship. If this Court receive the evidence to
day, they may at any time (before the 29 day of September next) give their
sentence; for vere dictum I never expect but from a Jury; and in the mean time,
how much their own affairs may put the remembrance of me out of their heads,
and how much the States power may put my safety out of their hearts, I have
just cause to suspect; for fear I will not, being resolved never to be in love
with that life, which the common law of England cannot protect; and had rather
die the Laws Martyr, then live the States slave.

The Close.
My Lord, I have said, and now it only remains that I tell your Lordship that
I desire you to take into consideration what I have said; and that you would
not suddenly, but deliberately give your Judgment, Whether I ought to plead
before you as Judges, and to the charge in Articles, and not in a presentment
or Indictment? whether to be tried without a Jury, and condemned upon evidence
unseen? Which this is (and I desire it may be recorded.) As I do not now
wilfully refuse to plead or answer, but offer my reasons for the suspension of
my Plea, until your judgment in the points be known and pronounced; so, if I be
in them overrul'd, I shall then give such Answer to the charge as shall become
a man in my condition.

Fiat voluntas Dei, modo in ruina mea. Eus. ANDREW.
3. 7. 2. 1650.
Here the At. Genesis Prideaux put a stop to Mr. Andrewe, telling him that the
Court was not at leisure to take notice of those law cases, but of his
confession; that he had an affection to act, though nothing acted, was
sufficient Treason, and for that affection he deserved death, and thereupon the
Court pronouned sentence against him. Thus was the Birthright of the Freeman
of England denied by most cruel murderers, whose only will was their Law.

IF I be overrul'd by the Court, that I must either answer or be sentenced for
my wilfulness,

Then I move that I may have a Copy of my charge, and a day assigned me to
deliver in my Answer under my hand.

Upon these Reasons.

1. If the Court proceed upon Articles, Genesis issue to particular Art
they cannot in reason conceive that I can plead the general issue to
particulars; for in so doing, in case I be convinced of any one Article, I
shall receive the doom of all.

2. For that De facto some of the Articles may be true, Defacto and de modo.
yet de modo they may not be valuable against me, and upon the general issue, I
shall not be received to qualify fact with circumstance, and so in stead of
being allowed the freedom of my defense, which is allowed to every thief at
Newgate, I shall be tried and snared by such confession or proof as will serve
the turn of my prosecutors, and not preserve my self by making my self and
actions understood.

The Articles are of several kinds and crimes, Several crimes and several Answ.
necessary.
and as one single Plea will not be applyable to them all, so it is but
requisite that I have a Copy of them, to give thereby to each one his proper
Answer, which though in Indictments is not allowed, yet in this way of
proceeding was never denied in the most Arbitrary Courts.

The Council Table gave a charge, Practice of Council table, Star chamber, High
Commission, Spiritual Court, Lord Stafford, Arch Bishop of Canterbury.
and received answer in writing in cases of contempt against themselves or
their commands.

The Star Chamber afforded the Defendant a Copy of the Bill, and liberty to
examine and cross examine witnesses, in case the fact charged were denied by
the Answer.

The High Commission the like, by their Articles and proceedings upon them.

My Answer, if not in writing, may either not be understood, or misapprehended,
or miss set down by the Clerk, to my prejudice.

If this be denied me, Pretended Justice but intended malice.
then I must conclude they intend to wipe of my head with the smooth glazed
sword of pretended Justice, and must apply my self to my memory, in reference
to the charge, and shall hear it read, which by my own knowledge of what has
passed between the State and me, I may conjecture, and therefore prepare these
following heads to help memory, which in a case of so much concernment, is not
totally to be relied upon.

First, As to what may be alleged against me in general terms, as a
disaffected person, and oppugner of the State, or otherwise, etc.

There are two things which draw subjection, and oblige persons to a
Commonwealth.

1. Protection in the State.

2. Personal engagement, or fealty in the Subject.

First, Protection I have received none, but stand in the condition of a
proscribed person.

1. State (if any) sequestrable, and not permitted by the laws of the nation to
vindicate it.

2. Calling taken away, which the Turk would not have done, had he been
conqueror.

3. Dwelling not permitted where I can subsist, Hyl. Proclamation of remove to
each man's dwelling part of the remonstrance, against him.
but where I may be obnoctious to want, and to the States infliction of
punishment, when they shall take occasion to repeat upon me any thing which
they shall call a crime, in reference to my passed Actions for the late King,
and my now Sovereign.

4. Right I can have none, unless I will damn my soul to preserve my estate, or
repair my wrong by a contra-legal and contra-evangelical engagement.

This was sufficient reason, Declar. 17. April 1646. Ordinance Non addr. in
Jan. 1648.
owned and justified by the Parliament for their substraction of obedience,
(...), by their Declarations, and Ordinances.

2. Fealty or personal engagement I have given none viz.

1. I have not taken the Protestation of May 1642.

2. I have not taken the solemn Oath and Covenant, yet if I had, I might have
justified my Actions by them.

3. I have not taken the negative Oath, because my oath of Allegiance (from
which no man can absolve me) is a negative to that, etc.

4. I have not taken the present engagement, much more against my oath of
Allegiance then the negative oath.

If I had had so little conscience as to have taken them, I would have had so
much as to have kept them; and the State cannot in reason expect from me, or
any other, that we should take a second, when we see no conscience made of
keeping the first; and to take a third, the first and second being broken,
without other dispensation then Power, which like Alexanders sword cuts the
Gordian.
knot which it can not untye.

Neither has any man assurance, if he should take the last engagement, that he
should have liberty to keep it longer then the fancy of the State held to the
now new fashion of Government.

And therefore I stand clear as a downright subject of England, to stand or
fall by the Common Laws of England; and if they will deny me that, they deny my
Birthright, which is equally righteous, and no more just, then to deny me my
estate, my calling, my abode, my means of right-

Secondly, As to my action at Linton, I justify my self by the late.

1. Kings Commission, which my accuser knows I had, and under which he was by
the same King constituted my Major.

2. Foreseeing his murder in this maxim, That Kings never survive their powers
and liberties.
What was done, 11. of Hen. 1. Ca. 1. That the Subjects of this realm are
obliged by reason of their allegiance to serve the Prince.
was so done, when he who gave me the Commission was in being, For if time
being in his wars for defense of him and the land against every rebellion
power, and might read against him within the land or without; ought not to
suffer in life, member, estate nor office for so doing.
and oppressed by injurious imprisonment, and what I did was in order to his
enlargement from his Thraldom, and restorement to his lawful power, which was
that to which my duty as a Subject by my oath of Allegiance did bind me in
general terms, and the duty of my qualification in particular obligation.

It was done before the now reputed Parliament were, or pretended to be the
Supreme Authority of the Nation, or had assumed the power of Government, or
were framed into a State, and consequently I am not answerable to them for any
opposition to them, further then the Common Law binds to Parliaments without
their head, and hand, or defective in their members; and as to such offense (if
it be one) this Court is not qualified to take any cognizance.

Thirdly, Col. Gibsons Case in 2. war at the Castles in Kent.
As to the design concerning the surprise of the Isle of Ely, it was but a bare
discourse or communication, and no formal design said, agreed unto, nor person
engaged in it, so much as by promise.

And in Cases of conspiracy against the lives of Kings, there were some
statutes made, that very words and communication should be reputed I reason;
but all repealed, or expired.

And not thought fit by wisdom of Lawmakers (having indisputable power to
make Laws) to be revived since the days of Q. Mary, notwithstanding those very
many treasons hatched and designed against Queen Elizabeth, and King James, etc.

If in the highest point of treason, communication be not treason against
lawful Princes, certainly, an affection where the offense (such as it is) is of
a far inferior nature of it self, so it had a far inferior object, or subject
concerning whom such discourse was holden.

Fourthly, As to my supposed corresponding with the King, the Lord Hopton and
Earl of Cleveland, (if true) it was so long since, as that it falls not within
compase of this Courts Commission to try, being confined to infant matters of a
year old, and my charge not exhibited to the Court of Justice before Monday In
the second Act.
the 15 of July. My last letter received from Lord Hopton, beats date at the
Hague, 18. or 28. of June, and was received in two days into Sussex.

Fifthly, As to the Drawing, Signing, Sealing of the engagement, it consists of
several branches.

That De facto I did it, and must not deny it, because I have confessed it,
which was more their needed, to them who knew it without enquiry; for I dare
averr, that they had their instrument, by them employed, and cherisht in
betraying me to it.

And have some years past had a man in my bosom to watch me and my motions,
which I did affirm to the Lord President, and he not denied, but said, it was
no more then did become any State to do, who had so much cause to hold an
active man in suspect, as they had me, having never come in, and laid down the
Cudgels, but held to my principles, and was ready upon every occasion to take
fire.

And this I will prove, if I have legal (or because that word is worn out of
use) fair dealing from the Court. And

Out of that I may justly infer, what will be visible enough that it is the
States Act, and but my consent, and they in no danger of me, but that I should
preserve my self from their new laws, into the lapse of which I was not
otherwise, or by any other action fallen.

As to the parts of it.
1. It consists of an oath of secrecy. 2. An owning of Charles the Second to
be such. 3. A resolution to endeavor to make him such, 4. A crimination of the
State, under the names of Rebels, and opposers, who would not have him to be
such.


To these as they are rankt.

The oath of Secrecy has relation only as to the not discovering the
co-engagers in that resolution, These two will interweave.
and the resolution it self being not Treason, the oath of keeping secret that
resolution is not greater then the thing resolved.

1. The thing resolved was to endeavor, but was nor an actual endeavoring.

2. If it were an actual endeavoring, yet it can only be supposed, that it
must be endeavored by a war to be levied; and the endeavor to levy a war
never actually leavyed, is not treason against the King, against whom only, and
his relations, by our old laws, which are Laws, a treason can be committed; and
petty-treason I am not accused for.

That a bare intention, Cook. 3. p. Inst. fo. 14. and 38.
resolution, or engagement to levy a war is not treason, I report my self to
my Lord Cook; who tells us, (and he is a man of credit) in his Book (printed
and allowed for law by the Houses when they were two) that a conspiracy (and
this engagement amounts not to so much, but rather to an intention only to
conspire) to raise a war, (as has been said, and so resolved) is no treason
by the Act of Edward the third, 25. Ed. 3. Ca. 2.
until the war levied, as within, or to be reached by those words in that law,
( overt Act;) and if it were not treason in those words in the original, it
falls not within the words of the translation of this new born law viz. by any
open deed. Open deed.


So as the first and third branches of the engagement which are interwoven, and
what ever, I conclude that neither of them, that is to say, neither the oath,
nor the resolution, are treasons either within the old, or the new laws, either
in respect of the persons against whom, or the progress made in the thing it
self.

2. As to the owning of Charles the second, it falls not within your Law; for
that it is not a Publishing, Proclaiming, or publicly Declaring his Title; The
words of the Act are, [ Proclaim, Declare, Publish, or any way promote] which
promoting is matter of Action more then a private owning. 30 Jan. 1648.


And this by the Oath it self was not to be published, nor could, without
publishing the Engagement it self, which was contrary to the Oath.

And though it may be objected, that the raising the war could not be done,
but by a publishing his title, and the Engagement at last; yet that, if it be
granted, was no forwarder then in intendment; no more was this publishing, and
being not done, falls not within your Act.

The crimination of the State is but guessed at by implication (for they are
not named) to be meant, and I believe your law reaches only to things literal,
and not constructive only; and for the word Rebels, I hope they will not take
that to themselves, and the word opposers is a very innocent expression, and at
the worst is all but a scandal.

Lastly, Be this Engagement what it will, yet the terms upon which I signed and
sealed it were such, as that it was my act not absolute, but upon condition,
and to be undone and avoided, in case of the non-coengaging of others, by the
States decoy assured to be ready to do it; and at whose instance, and for whose
satisfaction it was pretended to be desired at my hands.

If the Court proceeds by way of Indictment, then I shall move, that those
persons may be confronted, whom in my Narrative, Examinations and Letters I
have named; and that I may demand of them, etc.

As also that Major Parker may be produced to be likewise demanded of as a
person by me lately, and since my papers sent to the State, discovered to be of
the Plot to betray me.

If the Court proceed by way of Articles, and upon Examinations taken against
me; I desire, and that is but reason, that I may examine, my defense, as in all
Courts, where such proceedings were used, was allowed.

If it be objected, That it was not used in cases of Treason, I answer, it it
true, if they hold the ancient way of Trials, not; but if they proceed this
way, it is but just; and otherwise the Court are at liberty to use all means,
public or private, to catch me; but I have none to defend my self: So that it
appears that they seek not to do Justice, but Execution.

And whether they be confronted or examined, these questions are to be
propounded, either viva voce, or Interogatory; and if by Interogatory, I must
stand upon a fair way of Examination, viz.

That some one from me, as well as one for the States behalf, may be present,
and set down the examinations or depositions; and that I may have a Copy of
them as well against me, as for me, as well taken already by the State, or to
be taken upon my motion.

The Questions.
1. Whether he knows Major Burnard? how long? etc. What communication and
correspondence concerning me, Major Parker.
or my actions held between them? Whether he knew of the supposed design
against the Isle of Ely, and of the late Engagement? how he knew them, and upon
what reason, and to what end discovered to him, and by whom? 2. Whether he did
inform the State (or any member of the Council) of them, and how long he has
so informed? 3. Whether he ever had in his custody the Engagement under the
hands and Seals, and my letter to Sir John Gell? if so, where, and whether not
at Gravesend at my being there? Whether he were sent to watch me, and knew of
my being there, before my being apprehended? The same questions ( mutatis
mutandis) to be propounded to Barnard; and farther to him, and to Benson,
Holmes, Ashley, Smyth, as they are marked. 4. Whether he did propound in both
designs to me, Barnard.
or I to him? Whether I sought him, or he me? In what disposition he found me,
upon the time by the Act limited for departure, etc. 5. Whether he were real to
me in the particulars of persons, Idem and Benson.
confederates or monyes, ready to engage and to be advanced, and if not, then
to what end he feigned these to me? 6. Whether the Letters by him to me
produced from Smyth and Thach or Thatcher, Bar. and Benson.
were true, or seigned? and if seigned, to what end, and by whom let on work?
7. Bar.
Whether he were set upon me to watch my ways and motions? And whether he were
not promised, or did design unto himself profit for the discovering of me, and
such whom I should bring in? 8. Bar. and Benson.
Whether I framed, or ever read the said supposed design? Or was to be de
future acquainted with it? 9. Bar. Benson Holms.
Whether he brought, or I sought Benson, or Holmes? And whether confederates
with him, or designed upon by him? 10. Ashley and Ban.
Whether my engagement were absolute, or conditional, and what I signified at
my departure, and upon Barnards not coming, and where Barnard was pretended to
be, and where he really was? what promise I had concerning the return of my
engagement in case Sir John Gell did not engage at Gravesend? 11. Ben, and
Holms Mr. P^t subscribed to the Copy of the Letter, Smy. Bar. and Benson.
Whether Copies of Letters weekly showed to me, were real of feigned? and if
feigned, why pretended to be real? 12. Whether were there really any Kentish,
Dorset or Buckinghamshire men, and who confederites? etc.


These preparations formerly made in rough notes, were transcribed and put into
form, and finished the 8 day of July 1650. by Gods good assistance;
notwithstanding my abundant disadvantages of close Imprisonment, and want of
Books, or Advice; and I commit and submit the issue to God, whom I beseech to
fortify my spirit, and enlarge my understanding when they shall come to be
made use of; my self resolving to be the Laws confessor while I live, and (if
called to it) to be the Laws Martyr when I die by the hand of the impending
violence, under the specious name of Justice.

Sed terra astraea reliquit, and Judica me Domine in furore, etc. Eus, ANDREWE.
8. 7. 2. 1650. Domini.
Mortem minatur Deus (...) in mortem
Vis in timore securus, offe, securitatum time.
Nil eam long ab^st a nabis quam ipsi nos.
In manibus Domini sunt exitus mortis.
Arumnarum requies Mors.
Fraus fidem in parvis sibi praestruit ut ^um opere pr^eium sit ^um majori
mirced^ sallat.
His Exceptions to his Tryers.
J^hn Hurst Esquire Bartin Hazelrigge.
a man who has had his hand in blood, viz. Mr. Bartin Hazelrigge in a duel,
for which arraigned, etc.

A person trying, viz. a Juror, and in this way of Trial he is such, ought to
be a freeman, viz. not only free in person, but in his prejudicating opinion;
which he is not, having published that the respondent was the greatest Traitor
in England, and that there was enough under his hand to hang him the Respondent.

Sir William Roe, Captain John Stone, two of my tryers were employed to examine
the Respondent, on the 2. of July 1650. and brought with them all the evidence
against him, and therefore in their capacity of my triers, by the rule in
Challenges, they are challengeable, and incapable to sit.

The last Will and Testament of Colonel Eusebius Andrewe, 14. of August 1650.
IF it be the unalterable, and uncontrollable will of God, that I Eusebius
Andrewe Esquire, shall for my manifold and high provocations of his Divine
Majesty be shipwrackt by that storm which at present impendeth over my head; I
most humbly and cheerfully submit unto such his good will and pleasure; freely
and from the bottom of my heart forgiving my betrayers, prosecutors, and
Judges, and all other my injurers, as I desire him for his Sons my Savior
Christ Jesus sake to forgive me my many and enormous transgressions; and do lay
down my life, (though under his present wrath, yet) with a sober confidence of
his reserved favor: And desire that my body may be privately interred in the
Parish Church of Alhallowes, Barkin London, as near as may be to the Reverend
Archbishop of Canterbury, there with him to expect a joyful Resurrection, at
the coming of Christ to Judgment; of which through his merits, and through
them only, I am right well assured.

I beseech God to bless my Daughter Matilda Andrewe, and to supply unto her,
what by my improvidence, (and the accidents of the late tempestuous times, in
which I could not swim to Riches without the drowning of my conscience,) is in
my being taken away become deficient; and that he would preserve her from want,
and dishonor, and from being by any evil Counsel or Example led aside into the
foul errors of this Nation, in matters concerning her Souls health. And to that
end, I hereby give her and the whole world an account of that faith and
profession, wherein by Gods assistance I shall be found at my death, and shall
seal with my blood; and in which I pray to God, she, and all my dear friends
(whom I spare to name, because I love them) may live and die.

I renounce all dependence upon the Pope and Church of Rome, and that out of a
serious consideration of their adulterate errors and doctrines, inconsistant
with the truth and light of the Gospel; and not merely out of habit, as being
bred a Protestant, nor out of the general noise now made against them, as if
all the evil in the Land were from them: For so abominable have been the
actions of the Presbyterians on the one side, and the Sectarians on the other,
that if I had not both found my conscience and judgment unsatisfied in the the
Romish Doctrine, and my soul comforted in hope of Gods returning in favor to
his late mutilated Church, I had long since professed my self a Roman Catholic,
rather then have submitted to the multiplied Tyranny of the one, or the
Babylonish confusion of the other.

I have hitherto lived, and resolve (by Gods gracious aid) to die a true
protestant; that is to say, a member of that Church, and professor of that
faith, and obedient to that discipline which has been professed, and
maintained, and exercised in England, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and Charles the Martyr; which I trust God will again restore to its
former purity and power.

I look upon the Presbyterian, as upon one whose discipline is inconsistent
with, and improper for the natural and long habituated Government of this
Kingdom and Church, and the Author of all this Lands mischeifs, in the
supplanting that ancient and Apostolical Governance by Bishops, and the taking
away of the life of the King, by exposing him to the madness of the
Independent, by their first opening the gap to Anarchy and confusion in Church
and State, by breaking the Golden Chain of either due prerogative.

I consider the Independent, as fire out its place, which is always
mischievous; who has already given earnest (in his making a superstructure
upon the Presbyterians basis,) for his performing the whole work of confusion
upon Religion and Law, if God prevent not by confounding their politic
Councils, as much as themselves have done their Fanatic opinions: God in his
good time put a hook in their nostrils, and their Leviathans.

Of those to whom I am any ways indebted, I ask their pardon, it not being my
intendment, in case God had pleased to have preserved me from the snare and
violence under which I am fallen, to have been (to my power) irresponsible to
any.

I desire such who approve my profession, to cover my faults in their charity,
and to let me be sweet in their memory. As for the rest, I wish them a
seasonable repentance, but set no price upon either their opinion or report.

Vivat Rex, currat Lex, floreat grex, fiat voluntas Dei, modo inruina mea.
EUSEBIUS. ANDREWE.
14. Aug. 1650.
A Letter from a friend to Colonel EUSEBIUS ANDREWE.
Friend,
YOu have been long the subject of my prayers, now take my council; while I am
not able to do what I would, accept of what I can.

I hope I shall not need divert your thoughts from the fears and terrors of
death; you are too well acquainted with that Monster, to shrink at his menaces;
you know the Statute, All men once to die; your death is accellerated by the
malicious machinations of a bad man, under the name of friend; if he had not
betrayed you, a Fever, or other violent disease, or 1000. other mischiefs
would have done it; a few inches of time are cut from your life, be not you
offended to hasten to your immortality; you would have been glad to have been
freed from your prison, let not your soul be clouded while it hastens to its
glory; do not look to the next causes of suffering, so much as to that
providence which orders all things wisely to the glory of his name, and the
salvation of your soul. (I attest your own conscience) Had you died under the
bloody hand of War, or in the height and heat of your youthful aberrations,
could you have appeared so cheerfully before the great Tribunal, as now in this
time of humiliation and preparation you may? May be, the unworthy condition of
your betrayer, works your dispositions to high indignations; yet your dear
Savior betrayed by as great a pretender, said no more, but, Do thou betray
me with a kiss? Strange way it was (then,) but from that arch-traytors example,
its now become familiar; Do not entertain animosities against your Judges; you
know who said, Father forgive them. And that great Martyr (dying,) Lord lay not
this to their charge. Be assured they must (one day) give an account of your
sentence, before an higher Court of Justice. If they have rightly judged,
complain not; If they have done you wrong, you know to whom vengeance belongs
(shortly:) In your patience, possess your soul that time you have to live,
abandoning all thoughts and ears of this world; study how to appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, to give account for your 42 years; consider what
answer to make to that Judge which renders to every man according to his works;
let all your disquisition be, what to do to obtain Eternal Life.

Much I have to say to that question; Reduce all to these two, those two ways
which Almighty God has chalked out for all men to Eternal Glory. One of
innocence; the fathers before the flood had none other, those after were
directed by that; Our blessed Savior resolves that question, What Is written in
the Law, that do, and thou shall live. Consider first, how far or right you
have walked in this way; but if you perceive your aberrations, despair not; our
good God has propounded a second way unto that end; it is humble penitence; If
you have erred from that good way, come into this; Repent you truly for all
your sins; Afflict your soul for offending your merciful Father; Implore his
pity, mercy and pardon, and your Soul shall live. Remember you have a most
gracious God, That desires not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should
repent and live. You have a blessed Mediator, Intercessor, Savior, who dyed
for your sins, and rose again for your Justification; and be assured, Whosoever
believes in him shall not perish; be confident, he that believes on him,
shall live though he die; and he that lives and believes on him, shall not
die Eternally.

I am straightened, while I would direct you in all the steps of this way, which
are humble Confession, hearty Contrition, serious Detestation, and (so far as
you are able) real Satisfaction; These four.

I have already exceeded the limits of an Epistle; what is wanting, I shall
beseech you to make your addresses to the most learned and reverend Bishop of
Ely; entreat his help and direction, follow his counsel, implore his
absolution, and consider how much gain it should be to you, though you lose all
the world, so your Soul may be saved.

The God of all goodness in mercy look upon you, direct you by his Wisdom,
guide you by his Counsel, comfort and sanctify you by his holy Spririt, that
alone shall make you wise unto Salvation, and lead you through all the miseries
of a perplexed life and untimely death, to that glory which is beyond my
expression and your apprehension, is the daily prayer of your real partaker in
all your sufferings.

August 17. 1650.
Mr. Andrewe, his answer to the aforesaid Letter.
Friend,
YOur words sent to me were such and so seasonable, that I have given them the
same entertainment and lodging as becomes me to afford to Apples of Gold with
pictures of Silver; and if I be after my decollation dissected, you may find
them in my heart, where your self have always held a Mansion.

If fear were absolutely a necessary passion by which to denote a man, I must
as yet be accounted amongst some other species of animality, there being not a
scruple in the whole frame of my mind and body of so tenuous a Composure. The
fear of Isaac has banished all other dreadings.

I look upon death, as upon that rod in the hand of God, with which he would
not have corrected me, if less correction had not been unprevailing; and which
he does now exercise upon me, because he is resolved not to let me be less then
a son beloved; and I am content to bear the stripes, and kiss the Instrument.

I am sorry that my rod is bound together with the sin of my betrayer, and wish
him repentance, that when the Rod comes to be burned, he suffer not in the
flame. I shall not need to say I forgive either him, or my Judges, having
already forgotten them in all, my prayers excepted.

I am proud and covetous to be released from the double imprisonment I lie
under, of the flesh, and bonds, and am ready for the opportunity to make my
escape, though in a fiery Chariot. All things betwixt me and God are removed
from my sight, and I see him clearly without reflection upon my accusers and
Judges, and submit cheerfully to his fatherly dispensation and judgment.

It is Gods mercy that I was not long since consumed; for an earlier death, in
my heats and follies, had not proved less then a total consumption of all,
which now will become precious in despite of ignominious Death, or attending
nauseous Corruption.

My betrayer wanted only Judas his subject to make his sin as great, being
transcendent to his in the circumstance; and I wish him Peter's tears to wash
away Judas guilt, and to avoid Judas his punishment, by Peter's repentance.

My Judges have done me no wrong; they have a law for their warrant, and my
confession for their evidence; neither have capacity to be Chancellors in
matters of life; let them go free, and the Lawmakers and inforcers of it, for
their errors of constituting them, before the padling in blood grow too
customary to be thought a sin worthy their confession or sorrow; which I desire
for the sakes of their souls, and the lives of the oppressed, and indeed
proscribed Free-Christians of the Nation.

The Fathers Plea of Innocence I cannot make, but I can say, (and bless God
that I can say) Very penitence est pene innocence; I have erred, and cannot say
I have voluntarily returned, but I am graciously brought home, as a lost sheep,
not to be eternally slaughtered, but put again amongst the flock, to be kept
safe under the staff, as well as the rod, for the great shepherd of my soul
Christ Jesus.

I dare not tell you I have not sinned, you are a witness against me, if I had
none within me; but I can tell you what my faith dictates to me, and Gods holy
Spirit assures me, that the Lord has put away my iniquity.

I am already sensible (and that in a measure unexpressable) of Gods goodness
to me; who as he will be glorified upon me on earth, so he has given me an
earnest of my future glory in heaven, by the sweet perfume he has cast upon my
name amongst the people, and the Christian-like compassion he has begotten for
me amongst all men, who have yet an eye of expectation upon his return in mercy
to this poor distressed Nation, and oppressed People. The God of all goodness
has in mercy looked upon me, directed me, counseled me, comforted me, and
sanctified my affliction to me; and I am ready to fall into his merciful
hands, as soon as the heavy hand of the Executioner shall have given a Nunc
dimittis to.

Tower, August. 19. 1650. Your old and constant Friend. EUSEBIUS ANDREWE.

The last speech of Colonel EUSEBIUS ANDREWE, on the Scaffold on Tower Hill,
August 22. 1650.
THe Lieutenant of the Tower delivering the Colonel to the Sheriff, said, he
had brought him thus far on his journey; The Col. replied, I hope I shall
neither tire in the way, nor go out of it.

When he came on the Scaffold (kissing the Block) he said, I hope there is no
more but this block between me and heaven. After he had been some while on the
Scaffold, he spoke to the people as follows.

Christian Gentlemen and good people, your business hither this day is to see a
sad Spectacle, a man brought in a moment to be unmann'd, cut off in the prime
of his years, taken from further opportunity of doing service to himself, his
friends, the Commonwealth, or especially to God. It seldom happens but upon
very great cause; and though (truly) if my general known course of life were
enquired into, I may modestly say, there is such a moral honesty, as some may
be so forward as to expostulate, why this great judgment is fallen upon me? But
know, I am able to give them and my self an answer; and out of this breast, to
give a better account of my Judgment and Execution, then my Judges themselves,
or you. It Is Gods just displeasure toward me, for my sins long unrepented of;
many judgments withstood, and mercies slighted; therefore does my gracious
father chastise me with this correction, that he may not lose me; and I pray
you assist me with your prayers, that this rod may not be fruitless: That when
under his rod I have laid down my life, by his staff I may be comforted, and
received into Glory.

I am very confident, by what I have heard since my sentence, there is more
exceptions made against the proceedings against men, then ever I made; my
Tryers had a Law, and the validity of that Law is indisputable for me to say
against it, or to make a question of it: I should but shame my self and my
discretion: In the strictness of the Law, something is done by me, that is
applyable to some clause therein, by which I stand condemned; the means by
which I was brought under that interpretation of that which was not in my self
intended maliciously, being testimony given by persons whom I pity, so false,
yet so positive, that I cannot condemn my Judges for passing Sentence against
me, accorcing to legal justice; for equity lies in higher breasts. For my
accusors, or rather betrayers, I pity, and am sorry for them; they have
committed Judas his crime, I wish and pray for them, St Peter's tears; and I
wish other people so happy, they may be taken up betimes, before they have
drunk more blood of Christian men, possibly, less deserving then my self.

It is true, there have been several addresses made for mercy, and I will lay
the obstructions to nothing more then my own sins; and seeing God sees it fit
(I having not glorified him in my life) I shall do it in my death, I am content.

I profess in the face of God, particular malice to any one of the State or
Parliament, to do them a personal injury, I had never; for the cause in which I
had a great while waded, I must say, my engagements and pursuance in it has
laid no scruple upon my conscience; it was upon principles of Law, whereof I am
a professor, and upon principles of Religion, my judgment rectified, and my
conscience satisfied, that I have persued these ways; for which (I bless God.)
I find no blackness upon my conscience, nor have I put into the bed-role of my
sins.

I presume not to decide controversies, I desire God to glorify himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and
plenty here, when I shall enjoy my God.

In my conversation in the world, I do not know where I have an enemy with
cause, or that there is a person, to whom I have regret; but if there be any
whom I cannot recollect under the notion of Christian men, I pardon them as
freely as if I had named them; yea, I forgive all the world, as I desire my
heavenly Father for his Christ to forgive me.

For the business of Death, it is a sad Sentence in it self, if men consult
with Flesh and Blood: But (truly) without boasting I say it, or if I do boast,
it is in the Lord, I have not to this minute had one consultation with Flesh
about the blow of the Axe, or one thought of it, more then my pasport to Glory.

I take it as an honor, and I owe a thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they have sent me hither to a place, however of punishment, yet of
some honor, to dye a death somewhat worthy my Blood; and this courtesy of
theirs has much helped toward the satisfaction of my mind.

I shall desire God, that those Gentlemen in that sad Bed-rol to be tried by
the High Court of Justice, that they may find that Really there, that is
Nominal in the Act; An High Court of Justice, or Court of High Justice; High in
its Righteousness, not in its Severity: no more clouded with the Testimony of
folk that sell Blood for gain. Father forgive them, and I forgive them, as I
desire thee to forgive me

I desire you now to pray for me, and not give over praying until my last
moment; that as I have a very great load of sins, so I may have the wings of
your prayers assisting those Angels that shall conveigh my soul to Heaven. And
I doubt not but I shall there see my Blessed Savior, and my gallant Master the
King of England, and another Master which I much honor, my Lord Capel; hoping
this day to see Christ in the presence of the Father, the King in the presence
of him, my Lord Capel in the presence of them all, and my self with them, and
all Saints, to rejoice for evermore.


Dr. Swaddling. You have this morning, in the presence of a few, given some
account of your Religion, and under general notions or words, have given
account of your Faith, Charity and Repentance: (then speaking to the standers
by) if you please to hear the same questions asked here, you shall, that it may
be a general Testimony to you all, that he dies in the favor of God.

( To the Colonel,) Now, Sir, I begin to deal with you; you do acknowledge, that
this stroke you are by and by to suffer, is a just punishment laid upon you by
God for your former sins.


Col. Andrewe. I dare not only not deny it, but dare not but confess it. I have
no opportunity of glorifying God more, then by taking shame to my self; and I
have a reason of Justice, for justifying God in my own besome, which I have
entrusted to yours.


Dr. You acknowledge you deserve more then this stroke of the Axe, and that a
far greater misery is due to you, even the pains and torments of Hell that the
damned there endure.


Col. I know it is due in righteous judgment; but I know again, I have a
Satisfaction made by my elder Brother Christ Jesus, and then I say it is not
due; it is due to me, but acquitted by his Mediation.


Dr. Do you believe to besaved by that Mediation, and no other?


Col. By that, and that only, renouncing all Secondary Causes.


Dr. Are you truly and unfeignedly sorry before God, as you appear to us, for
all these sins that have brought you hither?


Col. I am sorry, and can never be sorrowful enough, and am sorry that I
cannot be more sorry.


Dr. If God should by a miracle, not to put you to a vain hope, but if God
should, as he did to Hezekiah, renew your days, what life do you resolve to
lead hereafter?


Col. It is a question of great length, requires a great time to answer; men in
such streights would promise great things; but I would first call some friends
to limit how far I should make a Vow, that I should not make a rash one, and so
offer the Sacrifice of fools; but a Vow I would make, and by Gods help
endeavor to keep it.


Dr. Do you wish health and happiness upon all lawful authority and government?


Col. I do prize all obedience to lawful Government, and the adventuring
against them is sinful; and I do not justify my self (what ever my judgment
be) for my thus venturing against the present Government; I leave it to God to
judge whether it be righteous; if it be, it must stand.


Dr. Are you now in love and charity with all men? do you freely forgive them?


Col. With all the world freely; and the Lord forgive them, and forgive me as I
freely forgive them.


Dr. You have for some late years laid down the Gown and took up the Sword, and
you were a man of note in these parts where you had your residence; I have
nothing to accuse you for want of diligence in hindering, in doing of injuries;
yet possibly there might be some wrong done by your Officers or those under you
to some particular men; if you had your Estate in your hands, would you make
restitution?


Col. The wrongs themselves you bring to my mind are not great nor many; some
things of no great moment; but such as they are, my desire is to make
restitution, but have not wherewithal.


Dr. If you had ability you would likewise leave a Legacy of thankfulness to
Almighty God; something to his poor Servants, to his Lame members, to his Deaf
members, to his Dumb members.


Col. My will has been always better then my ability that way.


Dr. Sir, I shall trouble you very little farther; I thank you for all those
heavenly Colloquies I have enjoyed by being in your company these three days;
and truly I am very sorry I must part with so heavenly an associate: we have
known one another heretofore, but never to Christianity before: I have rather
been a Scholar to learn from you, then an instructor.


I wish this Stage whereon you are made a spectacle to God, Angels and the
World, may be a School to all about you; for though I will not diminish you
sins, nor shall I conceal or hypocrize my own, for they are great ones between
God and my self; but I think there is few here have a lighter load upon them
then you have, if we consider things well; and I only wish them your
repentance, and that measure of faith God has given you, and that measure of
courage you have attained from God, and that constant perseverance God has
crowned you hitherto with.

Col. His Name be praised.


Here the Doctor prayed with him almost a quarter of an hour, after which the
Colonel turning himself again to the people, spoke as follows;

One thing more I desire to be clear in, There lies a common imputation upon
the Cavaliers, that they are Papists and under that name we are made odious to
those of the contrary opinion. I am not a Papist, but renounce the Pope with
all his dependencies, where the distractions in Religion first sprung up. I
might have been thought apt to turn off from this Church to the Romish, but was
utterly unsatisfied in their Doctrine in point of Faith, and very much as to
their Discipline. The Religion I Profess is that which passes under the name
of Protestant, though that be rather a name of distinction, then properly
essential to Religion: but that Religion found out in the Reformation, purged
from all the Errors of Rome in the Reign of Edward the 6th, practiced in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles, that blessed Prince
deceased; that Religion before it was defaced I am off, which I take to be
Christ's Catholic, though not the Roman Catholic Religion.


Then he turned himself to the Executioner:

I have no reason to quarrel with thee; thou art not the hand that throws the
Stone: I am not of such Estate to be liberal, but here is 3l. for thee, which
is all I have; now tell me what I lack.


Executioner. Your hair to be turned up.


Col. Show me how to fit my self for the Block.


After which, his doublet off, his hair turned up, he turned himself about to
the people, and prayed a good while before he lay down to the Block. He spoke
to the people as follows;

There is none that looks upon me, though many faces, and perhaps different
from me in opinion and practice, but has something of pity in it: And may that
mercy that is in your hearts, fall into your own bosoms when you have need of
it: And may you never find such a block of sin to stand in the way of yout
mercy as I have met with.

I beseech you join with me in Prayer. Then he prayed, leaning on the Scaffold,
half a quarter of an hour. Having done, he had some private conference with Dr.
Swaddling; then he taking his leave of the Sheriff and his friends, kissing
them, and saluting him next him, he prepared himself for the Block, kneeling
down, said, Let me try the Block, which he did: After casting his eyes, and
fixing them very intentively above, he said, When I say, Lord Jesus receive me,
Executioner then do thy office; then kissing the Axe, he lay down, and with as
much undaunted, yet Christian courage as possibly could be in man, did he
expose his Throat to the fatal Axe, his life to the Executioner, and commended
his soul into the hands of God, as into the hands of a faithful and merciful
creator, through the Meritorious passion of a gracious Redeemer. Saying the
forementioned words, his Head was stricken off at one blow.

Vera copia exam.
FINIS.

