The Imperfect Promulgation of the Gospel, considered. A SERMON Preached in the
Church of St. Mary le Bow, January 7. 1699/1700.

Being an Appendix to the Lectures of the last Year, appointed by the
Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire;

By SAMVEL BRADFORD, Rector of the said Church, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His
Majesty.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside
near Mercers-Chapel. 1700.

Mr. BRADFORD's SERMON, Preached at St. Mary le Bow, January 7. 1700.

JOHN 3.16, 17. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish; but have everlasting Life.
For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; but that the
World through him might be saved.


THese are the Words of our Blessed Savior, who, as he best understood the
Extent of that Love, which moved the Almighty Father to send him into the
World, so he has here expressed it in the fullest and most comprehensive
Terms. The Love of God, not to any particular Nation, but to the World in
general, was the Motive upon which he gave his Son. The Design of our Lord's
coming was to save not any particular Race of Men, but the whole Race of
Mankind, the World in general, without Exception. There is indeed a Condition
required of those who would partake of this Salvation, viz. that all, to whom
the Gospel of Christ is published, should believe in him; no other Limitation
is set, but this very reasonable one, That whosoever believes in him, should
not perish; but have everlasting Life. This is indeed a Truth so plainly
asserted in diverse other Texts; it is moreover so agreeable to the Design and
the Tenor of the Gospel throughout; it is finally so suitable to the
Apprehensions which we naturally have of the infinite Goodness of God, that I
shall not insist upon the Proof of it; the Purpose of this Discourse being
rather to obviate an Objection, which will easily arise in the Minds even of
serious Men, such as are not disposed to cavil, but are used to contemplate
both the Works and the Word of God, with Sobriety and Reverence, for whose
Satisfaction I thought it worth the while to take this Matter into particular
Consideration.

The Objection is this; If the love of God expressed in giving his only
begotten Son, be so Great, and so Universal, as it is here represented; whence
comes it to pass, that so small a part of Mankind seem to have received Benefit
from the Christian Revelation? The Case of all Men seems to have been equally
deplorable, and compassionable: If then the Love of God, testified by our
Redeemer, were extended to all Men, if the coming of the Son of God into the
World, were designed and fitted for the Benefit of all; is it not very strange,
that four thousand Years should be run out before he came; and that since his
appearing so small a Part of the World in comparison should be blessed with the
Knowledge of what he has done for them, or of what he offers to them?

Now for the easing our Minds under this Difficulty, I shall proceed gradually,
laying down several Propositions, which will mutually support each other, and
which being impartially considered and laid together, may suffice to silence
this Objection, if not fully satisfy those that make it. And,

First, If we were able to give no tolerable Account of this Matter, yet we
ought not to be surprised or stumbled at it, because of the infinite distance
between God and us.

They are very reasonable Questions which Job's Friend put to him, when he in
the bitterness of his Soul complained of his grievous Afflictions, and was at a
loss with Respect to the Justice of God's Dealings with him. Job. 11 7.8, 9.
Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto
Perfection? It is as high as Heaven; What can thou do? deeper than Hell; what
can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broader than
the Sea. Great is our Lord, says the Psalmist, Psalm 147.5.
and not only of great Power; but his Understanding also is infinite. And shall
we finite Creatures think then to comprehend his Ways? Shall we reckon our
selves competent Judges of his Actions? St. Paul thought otherwise, when
contemplating a Difficulty of Providence, of the same kind with that before us,
he cries out, Romans 11.33, 34.
O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For who has
known the Mind of the Lord; or who has been his Counselor? It must be owned,
that we are not able to account for the Methods of Divine Providence in many
other Instances; and whosoever is not abandoned of all Modesty, must readily
acknowledge, that it is reasonable that it should be so. For we have not the
entire Scheme of Providence in our Heads at once; we cannot see from the
beginning to the end of God's Ways; we know not what are the Designs, and what
will be the Issues of his Counsels; and therefore ought to suspend our
Judgments, till the Conclusion and winding up of Things. Which will appear to
be more especially fit in this Case, if we consider,

Secondly, That we our selves may discern several Particulars, in which we are
manifestly ignorant, which yet ought to be known by us, if we would pretend
fully to account for the Difficulty before us. I might give many Instances; but
will content my self with two plain Ones.

He that would give a full Account of this Matter, must be acquainted with two
Particulars, which no mortal Man can certainly know, without an especial
Revelation from God; namely, Whether those to whom the Gospel is not published
during this Life, shall ever hear of it in any future State: And again, What
Measures God will at the last Day take with those, to whom the Gospel was not
published.

No Man certainly knows, whether those who never heard of the Gospel in this
Life, may not in some future State have it published to them.

It has been supposed by some, that those Pagans, who shall have approved
themselves Honest and Sincere in this their State of Trial, may, when their
Souls shall be separated from their Bodies, have the Gospel revealed to them in
their separate State, in order to their becoming capable of the Rewards of
Christians, at the last Day.

A late Learned and Ingenious Writer has essayed to make it probable, Mr.
Sta^^e, of Salvation by Christ alone.
from a Prophetical Paragraph in the Apocalypse, that those, who shall have
lived and died without hearing of the Gospel in this present State, shall,
after our Savior's return, before the final Period of this World, be raised
again, and have the Gospel preached to them, and thereby be put into a new
State of Trial, in order to their Salvation or Damnation, as they shall then
acquit themselves.

Now though I will neither affirm nor deny either of these Opinions to be true,
nor so much as say, that they are probable; yet this I will venture to say,
That I believe it very difficult for any Man to prove that they cannot be True;
and yet if either of them should prove True, the Difficulty before us would be
perfectly solved. And thus much we may safely infer from these Conjectures,
that if contemplative Men can think of some such possible Ways for the solving
this Difficulty, there may be many more Ways of doing it known to the Divine
Understanding, and which will be clear and easy to our Understandings also,
when it shall please God to reveal any of them to us. And I confess, I would
suppose any thing that is plausible, nay, any thing that is possible, much
rather than entertain one hard thought of the Maker and the Redeemer of Mankind.

But yet farther, no Man certainly knows what Measures God will take at the
last day with those, who shall have lived and dyed unacquainted with the
Gospel. We are certainly informed, how God will deal with those to whom the
Gospel is published; He that believes, shall be saved: And he that believes
not shall be damned. Mar. 16.16.
But this believing, or not believing plainly supposes the Gospel preached to
them, it being impossible, as St. Paul suggests, that they should believe in
him, of whom they have not heard; Romans 10.14
and as impossible that they should hear, without a Preacher. And how God will
deal with those who were under this disadvantage, the Gospel has not so
expressly told us, it is Declarations being to them, to whom it is published. But
because this will fall under consideration in another Place, I will add no more
here, but proceed to my next Proposition, viz.

Thirdly, We may our selves discern very much of the Reasonableness and fitness
of that Method, which Providence has taken, both as to the time of our
Savior's coming into the World, and the way and manner in which he ordered his
Gospel to be published.

Almighty God, having made Men reasonable Creatures, has all along dealt with
them as such, in a way very suitable to their Nature, and their present
Condition in this Life. His Providence wisely and gently orders and overrules
the Affairs of Mankind, with as little Violence as is possible, drawing and
leading Men to Repentance and Amendment, rather than driving and compelling
them. Accordingly ever since the Fall, it has pleased God to use such Methods
as might reasonably promote, though not necessitate their Recovery.

Thus in the first Ages of the World, besides the Impressions which God had
left of himself upon the Minds of Men in their very make, and what they might
farther have learned of him by contemplating his Works, there was a plain and
certain Tradition both of his first forming Man, of the Law he gave to our
first Parents, of their Fall, and of the kind Intimations of the Divine
Compassion toward them after their Fall; there was, I say, a plain and certain
Tradition of all these and many more Particulars, easily derived down from Adam
to Noah; Adam being able fully to inform Methuselah, and Methuselah to inform
Noah of all that each of them knew. And this one would in reason judge had been
a sufficient means of instructing and reclaiming the sinful Race of Adam. And
accordingly there were some in each Generation, who were recovered from their
fallen Estate to that degree, as to become acceptable to God themselves, and
Instructors and Examples to others. Genesis 5.24.
Thus we read of Enoch, that he walked with God, that is, pleased him by a
pious and virtuous Course of Life, and not only by his Conversation reproved,
Jude, 14.15.
but, as St. Jude tells us, prophesyed also against the ungodly Sinners of that
Age, and was indeed so much too good for a bad World, that God took him to
himself, as an Encouragement to the few Good, and a Warning to the many Bad Men
of those times. Genesis 6.9.
Noah was such another, of whom it is said, that he was a just Man, and perfect
(or upright) in his Generations, 2 Pet. 2.5.
and that he walked with God; as likewise that he was a Preacher of
Righteousness to the World of the Ungodly. And besides these external Means of
Instruction and Reformation, it is intimated, that God's Spirit also was all
that while striving with Men. Genesis 6.3.


Indeed when none of all these Means would prevail, but the Case of Mankind was
become deplorable and utterly desperate, Genesis 6.5.
when God saw that the Wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every
Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was only evil, and that continually;
then, and not till then, he determined to interpose miraculously, by destroying
Man from the Face of the Earth, Verse 7.
reserving only Noah and his Family, as the Seed of a new and better World.

When by this Means there was a new Beginning of Mankind, when Noah, being
himself a good Man, and extraordinarily preserved and instructed by God, was
able to convey to his Offspring a certain Tradition, both of what he had
derived from Adam, before the Flood, and of what he had learned of God since,
and especially to give them an Account of that Stupendous Judgment whereby the
old World was destroyed, one would have thought again, that this should have
effectually secured his Race in the Practice of Piety and Virtue for the future.

But when his Posterity also soon degenerated, so that in the Space of somewhat
more than four hundred Years, even Idolatry began to infect the purest Branch
derived from him, God then by a special Providence again interposed, choosing
Abraham, calling him forth from his Country and his Kindred, instructing and
guiding him, and as a Reward of his Eminent Faith and Piety, appointing his
Posterity to be his peculiar People, whom he preserved and governed in a
miracuious Manner from one Generation to another, thereby to awaken other
Nations, if they would observe the wonderful Works of Providence toward that
People; or at least to preserve one Nation from the General Contagion.

Amongst them God raised up a Great Lawgiver, with a Succession of Prophets,
discovering still by degrees more of his Kind Intentions toward them and all
the World, and promising in due time to raise up of the Seed of Abraham, One
who should be the great Deliverer and Savior of Mankind.

When the fullness of the time was come, as St. Gal. 4.4.
Paul emphatically expresses it, God sent forth this great Person into the
World, dignified with the Title of his only begotten Son. By which Expression,
The fullness of the time, (as has been often observed by those who have
considered this Point) is not only to be understood, that it was the Time to
which all the Predictions relating to the Messiah pointed; but moreover, that
it was the fittest Season, that ever yet had been, for the Appearance of such a
Person. It was then, when all other proper means, having been tried, had proved
ineffectual. When the Messengers formerly sent from God, could not prevail,
last of all he sent his Son. Matthew. 21.37.
It was then, when by the disposal of Divine Providence the World was best
prepared for the receiving him. It was, when he was become the Desire and
Expectation of all Nations, Haggai 2.7. Suct^nius. Tacitus.
as not only the Scriptures, but some of the Roman Writers themselves do assure
us, which Expectation was probably derived partly from the Jews who were
dispersed, and especially from the Divine Oracles, which about three hundred
Years before our Lord appeared, had been by Order of Ptolemy Philadelphus
translated into the Greek Language, and thereby the Predictions concerning the
Messiah divulged. Finally, it was then, when first by the Grecian, and
afterward more fully by the Roman Empire, a considerable part of the World was
not only conquered, but civilized also, and an intercourse between many Nations
established, and thereby a Way made for the more easy Publication of the
Gospel, from Judea, throughout the then known Regions of the Earth. And
certainly This was the fittest Season, that ever yet had been for the
Appearance of the Savior of Mankind.

If we farther proceed to consider, in what manner our Lord appointed his
Gospel to be published, and what Course the first Preachers of it took to that
purpose, we shall still perceive more of the Reasonableness and Fitness of the
Method which Providence has used in this Case.

When our Lord commissioned his Apostles, it was to make Disciples out of all
Nations, (...) 28.29, ^^k 1^.1^.
and to go into all the World and preach the Gospel to every Creature. And the
Doctrine which they were to preach, was admirably suited to this End. It was a
Doctrine Rational and Pure, fit to be understood and received by every Nation
under Heaven, containing nothing Singular, nothing Narrow, nothing that might
separate or distinguish one Nation or Family from another; but equally adapted
to the Condition of all Mankind.

There was indeed an occasion here for a miraculous Interposition of
Providence, and accordingly it pleased God to interpose. For because those,
whom our Lord sent to preach his Gospel, were unable to speak the Languages of
the several Nations, to which they were sent, and considering farther the
strong prejudices that the World lay under against this (to them) new Religion,
God therefore bestowed upon them the Gift of speaking whatsoever Languages
should be necessary for propagating the Crhistian Doctrine, and also a power of
working other Miracles, to excite and move their Auditore, first to gain their
Attention, and then to convince their Judgments; which Powers continued in the
Christian Church, as long as they were necessary, that is till the GOSPEL was
considerably spread abroad, and able to support and propagate it self by more
Natural Means.

Such indeed was the Fidelity and Industry of the Apostles and their immediate
Successors, and so conformable were their Lives to the excellent Doctrine which
they preached, that Christianity had incredible Success in those early times,
insomuch that in about three hundred Years, it prevailed against all the false
Religions, which had been so long received, and became the established Religion
of the Roman Empire.

This was the Course which Providence took for the dispersion of the Knowledge
of our Savior and his Religion throughout the World, which as it was the most
Natural and most reasonable Means to that End, so I can hardly doubt, but that
if the Christians of the Ages following had continued to recommend their
Profession by the Exemplariness of their Lives, and had retained that Zeal
which their Predecessors showed for propagating it in the World, it had long
before this been the established Religion of Mankind. So that if the Gospel be
not published to the World universally, it proceeds not from any defect in the
Provision which God has made to that purpose; but from the Fault of those to
whom God had committed so great a Trust. Had Christian Princes been as zealous
to promote the Religion of our Lord, as to extend their Empire; (I mean not by
Violence, but in Methods suitable to the Nature of this Religion;) had
Christian Subjects been as eager to advance the Knowledge of our Maker and
Redeemer in Foreign Parts, as they have been to settle Trade and Commerce
there; had all of us, who call our selves Christians, showed forth in Christian
Tempers and Practices, the Virtues of Him that called us, and the Excellency of
the Religion he has taught us; there would probably have been no Occasion for
enquiring, as we now do, why the Gospel of our Lord is confined within so
narrow Bounds.

Fourthly, As I have just now mentioned the open and evident Cause's, of the
Gospel being not farther propagated, so there may be another more secret and
hidden Reason, of God's permitting some Parts of the Earth to remain ignorant
of the Christian Revelation. It Is what we cannot be sure of, in all the
Instances of this kind: But it is what seems highly probable as to some of them,
and what some Passages in Scripture seem to hint, viz. That God has in Justice
permitted this, either because, when the Gospel was first preached to some
Nations, they utterly rejected it; or because he knew, what God only can know,
that some Nations were so wholly indisposed to receive it, that the Preaching
of it to them would have had no other effect, but to have aggravated their
Condemnation.

We read that St. Paul and Silas, with Timothy, were forbidden of the Holy
Ghost to preach the Word in Asia; Acts 16.6, 7, 9, 10.
and again, When they essayed to go into Bithynia, the Spirit suffered them
not; and presently after, that a Man of Macedonia appeared to Paul in a Vision,
and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us; upon which they
immediately bent their Course that Way, assuredly gathering, that the Lord had
called them to preach the Gospet unto them. Now although there might be, and
probably were other Reasons, in these particular Instances, why they were
diverted from Asia, and sent into Macedonia at that time; yet hence it plainly
appears, that the Divine Providence did particularly direct the first Preachers
of the Gospel, where to publish it; and this might sometimes be the Reason of
such Direction, that in some Places they were better disposed to receive it,
than in others; which may be confirmed by another Passage, a little after in
the same History. It is said that at Corinth, the Lord exciting St. Paul by
another Vision to preach the Gospel there, assigned this as one Reason, For I
have much People in this City, Acts 18.10, 11.
that is, many who would, and accordingly did readily embrace the Christian
Doctrine, and accordingly the Apostle continued there a Year and six Months,
teaching the Word of God among them. And who knows, but that this may be the
hidden Cause why God permits some Nations to fit in darkness, because, when
they had an Opportunity of having the Gospel promulg'd amongst them, they
obstinately rejected it; or it may be, because they have so universally and
grossly sinned against the Light of Nature, despised the Dictates of Conscience,
and degenerated into such vile and devilish Dispositions, that if the Gospel
were preached amongst them, it would only serve to aggravate their Condemnation?

This is very agreeable to the Directions, which our Lord gave his Apostles,
Matthew. 1^.11.14.
when he sent them abroad to preach; Into whatsoever City or Town ye shall
enter, enquire, Who in it is worthy. And again, Whosoever shall not receive
you, nor hear your Words, when ye depart out of that House or City, shake off
the Dust of your Feet, namely, Mark 6.11.
as a Testimony against them, that they had the offer of the Gospel, but were
so wicked as to reject it. It Is consonant also to our Savior's Declaration,
that Whosoever has, to him shall be given, Matthew. 13.12.
and he shall have abundance: And from him that has not, shall be taken away,
even that which he has; which is the Reason he assigns, Verse 1^, 11.
Why he spoke to the multitude in Parables, Whilst he revealed to his Disciples
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, adding Therefore speak I to them in
Parables; Verse 13.
because they seeing, see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they
understand, etc.

It Is certain, that this may be assigned as a Reason, why the Light of the
Gospel is departed from, or at least very much obscured in diverse Places,
where it once shone very bright, namely, that it was not duly improved by those
whom it enlightened. We know how our Lord threatened the Church of Ephesus, Rev.
2.4, 5.
for leaving her first Love. Remember therefore, says he, from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent,
which Threatening has been long since remarkably fulfilled, in the prevailing of
Mahometanism in those Parts; and if GOD has not dealt as severely with others,
who may have deserved it as much, his Goodness should not make them presume;
but lead them to Repentance.

Fifthly, I have yet farther this weighty Consideration to offer in this Case,
viz. That the Efficacy of our Savior's Undertaking for Men, does certainly
extend much farther than the actual Knowledge of him does.

This must be supposed as to Infants, at least such as are entered into the
Christian Covenant by Baptism, that they are capable of Salvation by Jesus
Christ, without actually knowing and believing in him. This must again be
allowed, as to all the good Patriarchs, and other pious Men amongst the Jews,
who although they did believe and hope in God, for the fulfilling of the great
Promise of a Messiah to come, yet did not see that Promise fulfilled, nor could
actually know and believe in him, as we do.

Such in truth was the Goodness of God to Mankind, as to testify his
Compassion toward them immediately after the Fall, by the Promise then made of
the Woman's Seed, that is, of the Messiah, which Promise as it was renewed upon
all occasions, so as an Effect of his Interposition, were conferred all the
Benefits which Mankind received from God, after the sin of our first Parents.
It was upon his account that they were respited from present Death; and that
their Posterity have been blessed with all those Favors, Temporal and Spiritual,
which they have enjoyed from that time to this; insomuch that the Efficacy of
our Lord's Undertaking is to bear date from the first Promise of it; nay, from
the Purpose and Intention of God before his actual Promise. But more
particularly yet;

Sixthly, The Holy Scriptures do every where represent our Savior, as having
made Expiation for the sins of all Mankind, without Exception, as well those
who were born before his appearing, as since; and those who live in the
remotest and darkest Corners of the Earth, as those to whom the Gospel is
published.

He is the Propitiation for our sins, says St. John; 1 John 2 2.
and not for ours only; but also for the sins of the whole World. There is,
says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6.
one Mediator between God and Men, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be
testified in due time. And the same Apostle in a set Discourse, expressly makes
the Benefit of Christ's Death, in the design of it, to extend as far as the sin
of Adam had done. Romans 5.13, etc.
The Author to the Hebrews affirms, that our Savior took our Nature upon him,
Heb. 2.9.
that he by the Grace of God might taste death for every Man. And the same
inspired Writer is very express in declaring, that the Sacrifice of the Death
of Christ did in its Merit and Virtue reach buckward to the beginning of the
World, as well as forward to the end of it. Not, says he, that he should offer
himself often, Heb. 9.25, 26.
as the High Priest enters into the Holy Place every Year with the Blood of
others; for then must he often have suffered since the Foundation of the World:
but now once in the end of the World has he appeared, to put away sin, by the
Sacrifice of himself; whereby is plainly intimated, that this one Sacrifice had
its Effect from the foundation of the World. If it be asked, wherein the effect
of this Appears so extensive, I answer by my next Proposition, viz.

Seventhly, That by means hereof God was so far reconciled to Men, as to give
Place for Repentance, and to accept of it, wheresover it was sincere.

In the first Covenant made with Adam, there was no Allowance made of
Repentance after Transgression: but upon the Interposition of our Redeemer, and
in Virtue of that Expiation, which he was to make, when he should come into the
World, sinners were allowed and encouraged to repent and turn to God, in hopes
of obtaining his Favor. The very respiting our first Parents from the execution
of the Sentence denounced, was an intimation that Repentance would be
acceptable to God; the Promise made soon after the Fall was a Confirmation of
the same thing. God's commanding and encouraging Sacrifices still farther
encouraged Repentance. The Question which God put to Cain, If thou do well,
shall thou not be accepted? Genesis 4.7.
plainly signified his pleasure in this Case. The Goodness of God continually
exercised toward all Mankind in so many Instances, Romans 2.4.
naturally tended to lead them to Repentance. All along throughout the Old
Testament, both in Moses and the Prophets, Repentance is inculcated and
encouraged. That peremptory Declaration and Oath of God, though made to the House
of Israel, Ezekiel. 33.11.
yet is in very general Terms, and such as seem to concern all Mankind; As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; but
that the Wicked turn from his way and live; with much more to the same purpose,
in the following Verses. In the Prophet Jonah, we find that Nineveh, a Pagan
City, was spared upon the Humiliation of its Inhabitants. When our blessed
Savior came to declare the Will of God more fully, it was in these Terms, Luke
24.47.
That Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name, amongst
all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And although this Doctrine is preached only
to those, to whom the Oracles of God are published; yet we cannot from thence
fairly conclude, that if in any other part of the World there be found any true
Penitents, their Repentance shall not be accepted of God, because they were not
expressly told so beforehand. On the contrary, as the Consideration of the
Divine Goodness will dispose us to hope the best, so there are diverse Hints in
the Oracles of God themselves, which may incline us to take the favorable side
in this Controversy. St. Peter seems to have done so, when upon observing how
God had accepted the Prayers and the Alms of Cornelius, he owned himself
convinced of a Mistake which he lay under before, crying out, Of a truth I
perceive, Acts 10.34, 35.
that God is no Respecter of Persons; but in every Nation, he that fears God
and works Righteousness is accepted with him.

It Is true, sometimes Faith is made the Condition of Acceptance with God, as
well as Repentance, particularly in our Text, it is expressly made the Condition
of Salvation: but then if by Faith be to be understood an express believing in
Jesus Christ, it must be restrained to them to whom he is preached. For, as I
observed before, the Patriarchs, and other good Men of the Jewish Nation, were
accepted upon their Faith, believing the Promises of God, and obeying his
Commands, before the coming of our Lord and when they had very obscure Notions
concerning him. And the Apostle to the Hebrews, in his excellent Discourse of
Faith, Heb. 11.6.
even that Faith which is acceptable to God, defines it in general, a believing
that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Which
indeed will include believing in God, as a Rewarder of them that seek him
through Jesus Christ, where the Gospel is published: But it seems evidently to
imply also, that God will accept such a degree of Faith in him, as is suitable
to the Revelation he has made of himself, be it more or less. What else can we
think of such a Man as Job for Instance, concerning whom it is said, Job. 1.1.
that he was perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed Evil? Who
yet was not of that Family, which God had chosen to be his peculiar People, and
to bless with his more particular Revelations; but an Arabian. What shall we
again think of Abimelech, a Philistian King, in whom was likewise found the
Fear of God, to that degree, that upon his Admonition, he readily eschewed that
Evil which he was before in danger of, Genesis 20.6, etc.
though unwittingly, and in the integrity of his Heart? And although I dare not
profess my self assured of the State of Socrates, or Epictetus; yet I cannot
but be strongly inclined to hope, that the Expiation of our Redeemer may have
rendered their Repentance and Obedience in a good degree acceptable to God. And
God only knows, how many more penitent and sincere Souls may be found, in the
dark Corners of the Earth. It may be, for ought we know, in this Case, as in
that of Elijah, who imagined himself left alone, 1 Kings 19.14, 18.
when God knew of no less than seven thousand in Israel, who had not bowed the
Knee to Baal. But yet farther,

Eighthly, Another Effect of the Expiation made by our Redeemer, may have been,
for ought any Man can know to the contrary, the secret Operation and Influence
of the Divine Spirit, enlightening and moving the Minds of Men, in all parts of
the World.

It Is acknowledgd, that no Man can either repent, or believe in God, or obey
him acceptably, without the Assistance of the good Spirit; it is confessed also
that this Asistance is expressly promised only through Jesus Christ: but I
should be very loath to affirm, that it was never imparted to any, who were not
actually instructed in the Christian Doctrine. There can be no doubt, with
respect to the Patriarchs, who were the Friends and Favorites of God, and by
their Faith and Piety demonstrated, that they were enlightened and moved by his
Spirit. The Law of Moses did not expressly promise the Assistance of the Spirit;
and yet there is no Question, but that pious and good Men among the Jews did
partake of it. And shall we confine it to them only? No! I would rather hope
that Job and Abimelech before mentioned, nay, that Socrates and Epictetus also,
in their Measure, partook of the same; the Fruits of that Divine Spirit
methinks very evidently appear in many of their Expressions and Actions.
Diverse Pagans, as I observed in a former Lecture, have been sensible of this
Truth, and openly avowed that the Inspiration of God was necessary to Virtue,
and accordingly believed that such as were truly Virtuous amongst themselves,
were so by the assistance of the Divine Spirit. And it seems highly worthy of
God, to believe thus; at least not to believe otherwise.

And indeed if we reflect upon the Notion, which was current amongst the best
and most ancient Christian Writers, and which the Holy Scriptures seem to have
led them into, concerning the Dispensation of God toward Mankind, by our
Redeemer, we shall the more easily be disposed to be of this Judgment. For they
looked upon our Savior, as not only designing, but beginning his Transactions
for the good of Men, from the time of their first Creation; and for the
Recovery of Sinners, from the time of their Fall. They believed that diverse of
the Appearances, mentioned in the Old Testament, were really of the Son of God,
in Angelical Form, anticipating thereby and prefiguring his Appearance at last
in Humane Nature. They believed that it was He, who conducted the Israelites
from Egypt into Canaan; that it was He, who was in the Tabernacle, and in the
Temple, in the midst of the Cloud, toward whom therefore the Jews paid their
solemn Adorations. And for the like Reason they believed, that it was He, who
inspired all the great and good Men, that were eminent for Piety and Virtue,
either among the Jews, or in any other Nations. In a word, John 1.9.
they understood St John to mean as much, where he says, That was the true
Light, which enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World, not only by
imparting the Powers of Understanding and Reason to them in their first
Formation; but also by farther opening their Understandings, and improving
their Minds, as they should become capable, by the secret Suggestions and
Motions of his Spirit. So that, although he did not appear in Humane Form, till
four thousand Years were elapsed; yet he had not neglected Mankind all that
space of time; nor does at present neglect those who have not heard of his
Incarnation; but was and is in the World, even in those Parts of it, where
they know him not, using those Methods, Verse 10.
which to his Divine Wisdom seem meet, for the training up well-dispos'd Minds,
which do not resist the Grace which he offers to them. There is but one
Proposition more that I have to add, and it is this, viz.

Ninthly, That at the great Day of Judgment, all Men shall be accountable to
our Lord, with due Regard had to their Respective Advantages or Disadvantages
in this their State of Trial.

Our Lord has expressly declared, that unto whomsoever much is given, Luke
12.48. Matthew. 25.14. etc.
of him shall be much required; and that Men shall be called to an account for
the Talents committed to them, by their Lord, whether more or fewer, in so much
that he that had but one, shall be accountable for that one only. St. Paul in a
set Discourse seems to have determined this Matter peremptorily, as between Jew
and Gentile; so by parity of Reason, between Christian and Gentile also. Romans
2.5, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 14.
He calls the Day of Judgment, the Day of the Revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God, who will render to every Man according to his Deeds, to the
Jew first, and also to the Gentile; adding, For there is no respect of Persons
with God: For as many as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without
Law, and as many as have sinned in the Law; shall be judged by the Law: And
again, When the Gentiles, which have not the Law, do by Nature the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves.

It Is very true, that the Salvation of the Gospel is by the Gospel promised
only to those who believe and obey it, and consequently to whom it is preached;
as Damnation is therein expressly threatened to those who reject it; and we are
not so plainly told what kind and what degrees of Rewards and Punishments God
will dispense to others: but we are in the general assured, that the
Recompenses of that Day shall be all just, and carry a Respect to the Deeds
done in the Body, bearing some Proportion to the different Circumstances and
Conditions of Men. And therefore St. Paul a little before his Discourse just
now cited, lets us know, that the Condemnation of wicked Gentiles would be very
just, by Reason of their having despised the Dictates of Nature and Reason,
because they withheld the Truth in Unrighteousness; for, Romans 1.18, 19.
as he argues, That which may be known of God, is manifest in them; for God
has showed it unto them. God has, as he there farther proves, rendered
himself so conspicuous to all Men, as the Maker and Governor of the World,
that those who are ignorant of him must be without Excuse. verse 20.
He is so near to every one of us, as the same Apostle elsewhere discourses,
since in him we live, Acts 17.27, 28.
and move and have our Being, that we may even feel after him, Romans 2.15.
and find him; and he has written his Law in such visible Characters in all
our Hearts, showing us the plain Difference between moral Good and Evil, in the
chief Instances thereof, causing our Consciences to bear witness, and our
Thoughts to accuse or excuse, as we demean our selves, that he may justly call
us to an Account for such our Demeanor.

So that the whole Matter at last comes to this Issue. Some Men have, by
hearing the Gospel preached to them, far greater Advantages, than others; but
then they are accountable likewise for those special Advantages: whereas such,
as not through their own default, but by the mere Providence of God, want those
Advantages, shall be answerable for no more, than what they have been entrusted
with. God has done more for those, than for these; and it is but fit, that he
should freely dispose of his own Gifts, after the Counsel of his own Will: but
if he does what is abundantly sufficient for all, and will expect no more, than
in proportion to what he gives, there remains no just Ground of complaint to
any.

And thus I have done with what I thought fit to be offered on this difficult
Argument; and I hope, if what I have proposed be considered without Prejudice,
it may suffice to make us humbly acquiesce in the Dispensation of God by Jesus
Christ, acknowledging that the Design of our Lord's coming was to save Sinners
in general; and confessing to the glory of the Almighty Father, that his love
was manifested to the whole Race of Mankind, by sending his only begotten Son
into the World for our Salvation.

I shall conclude all with two practical Inferences, viz.

Frist, We may infer from hence the great Obligation which lies upon us, to
whom the Gospel is published, to comply with the Terms of it, particularly that
mentioned in the Text, as comprehensive of all others, believing in Jesus
Christ. Whatever gracious Allowances God in his infinite Goodness may make to
others, we cannot hope for Salvation upon any other Conditions, than a grateful
Acknowledgment of this infinite Love of God, a firm and steadfast Faith in his
only begotten Son, together with an hearty Resignation of our selves to his
Conduct. As by these our Privileges we are exalted to Heaven; so upon our
abuse of them, we shall be cast down to the lowest depth of Hell. This (as our
Savior declared, Verse 19.
a little after the Text) is the Condemnation, that light is come into the
World; but Men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

Secondly, If the Love of God toward Mankind be so extensive, it becomes us
then, instead of caviling at the Divine Providence on account of the Gospel's
not being published to all the World, to do our part toward the Propagation of
it

The Princes and great Men of the Earth may do very much to this purpose, as I
have already observed. Others also, especially those Bodies and Societies of
Men, which have Commerce with the Gentile World, might contrive Methods for
propagating their Religion together with their Trade. This the pious Founder of
these Lectures had a great sense of, when by a Clause in his Will, he obliged
those who should preach them, to be assisting to all Companys, and encouraging
them in any Undertaking, for propagating the Christian Religion in foreign
Parts.
And all of us might contribute to this generous Design, by our earnest Prayers
to God for the enlarging of his Son's Kingdom, and that it would please him to
excite the Spirits of those who have Power and Interest to adadvance this Noble
Work. In fine, we may all contribute toward it, by living Christian Lives; and
if we have neither Power nor Interest to promote the Profession of our Religion
in Foreign Parts, we may at least promote the Practice of it at Home, by our
Examples. Nothing in truth would so powerfully recommend our Holy Religion to
Mankind, in order both to the Belief and Practice of it, as to have it fairly
represented by the Tempers and Lives of its Professors. May Almighty God revive
the Spirit of Primitive Christianity, in those who take upon them the Christian
Name; and may their light shine so clearly and brightly, as to enlighten the
darkest and remotest Regions of the Earth, to the Glory of God and our
Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Sermon I. P. 5. l. 2. read, into the World. p. 23. l. 8. r, misled. Ser. III.
p. 9. l. 29. r. (...). p. 20. l. 7. r. Mediator. p. 23. l. 10. r. he. Ser. VII.
p. 3. l. 14. r. so it. p. 15. l. 33. blot out, his. p. 26. l. 28. r. valuable.
Ser. VIII. p. 10. l. 18. r. their, ibid. l. 27. r. Men. p. 12. l. 22. r.
Evangelist. p. 14. l. 25. r. be. p. 20. l. 18. r. blessing then. Ser. XI. p. 6.
l. 15. r. not believing. p. 13. l. 16. r. Cause. ibid. r. Gospel's.


