A True and Exact HISTORY OF THE SUCCESSION OF THE CROWN OF ENGLAND:

Collected out of Records, and the best Historians.

Written for the Information of such as have been deluded and seduced by the
Pamphlet, called The Brief History of the Succession, etc. pretended to have
been written for the Satisfaction of the Earl of H.

LONDON, Printed for Cave Pulleyn, in the Year MDCLXXXI.

A True and Exact History of the SVCCESSION of the CROWN of ENGLAND.
IN the Year 1594. Parsons the Jesuit; or, as In his Eliz. f. 482.
Mr. Camden says, He, Cardinal Allen, and Sir Francis Inglefield, under the
name of R. Doleman, wrote a Book entitled, A Conference about the next
Succession to the Crown of England, Title Page.
divided into two Parts. The first, pretended to have been the Discourse of a
Civil Lawyer, concerning Succession by Proximity of Blood in general, contains,
for the most part, in nine Chapters, the very Principles of Sedition and
Rebellion; proved and maintained, as is there also pretended, by Examples and
Texts of Holy Scripture; Examples in France, Spain, Germany, England, and other
Nations. The English Examples and Instances, generally, are partially cited, or
mis-applied, or not fully understood by the Author; and are matter of fact only.

The Second Part is there said to be the Speech of a Temporal Lawyer, about the
particular Titles of all such as might pretend, within England, or without, to
the next Succession after Queen Elizabeth: which, according to his Account,
were ten or eleven: yet this Author says (if any body will believe him) That
this Treatise was wrote out of In the Epistle Dedicatory.
singular Affection and Devotion to that excellent Princess, and with special
care of her Safety.

It was dedicated to the Earl of Essex, with design, after the Queen of Scots
was taken off, Ibid. f. 481, 482, 483.
to baffle the Title of King James, who was her immediate Heir; and either to
fix it upon the Earl, (for whom he had made a Title,) or to promote a
Contention between the King and him about it, while by some means or other
(which was their main intention) the Infanta of Spain, by a far-fetched Title,
might obtain the Kingdom, and thereby advance their own Purposes and Religion.

How justly this Book is censured by the Judicious Camden, and branded with
Perfidiousness, and Design to delude and abuse the People, raise Tumults and
Seditions, the Reader may see in the places cited in the Margin.

In the Year 1648. as a Preparative to the Deposition and Murder of King
Charles the First, there was published a Pamphlet, and printed at London by
Robert Ibbitson, under the Title of Several Speeches, delivered at a Conference
concerning the Power of This is the common Cheat, to call the two Houses, or a
prevailing Party in the two Houses, or in one House, a Parliament. So it was in
the Reign of Edward II. Richard II. and Charles I. That Rebellious, restless
Faction, that murdered them when they were Prisoners, called themselves a
Parliament: when as nothing can constitute a Parliament, but the King, Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, all in perfect Freedom.
Parliaments to proceed against their King for Mis-Government: And the Heads in
the Title Page, upon which these Speeches are pretended to be made, are in
number nine, and the very same, verbatim, with the Titles of Doleman's nine
Chapters in his first Part of the Conference touching the Succession to the
Crown: and the Matter and words of the Speeches themselves, almost in all
things, are the very same, except the Transitions, Connexions, and some few,
not material passages, which are left out.

From these Conferences of Doleman, which by crafty Men were published by
Retail, in several Pamphlets, Speeches, Declarations, pernicious Deductions,
etc. and from the nine Speeches last mentioned, all the Factions in the late
times of Rebellion, were furnished with Arguments, Reasons, Examples and
Pretenses for their Seditious Practices.

And the Suggestions of the Act for the Trial of King Charles the First, and
the Materials of the long Speech Bradshaw made, to declare the Grounds of the
Sentence, and aggravate the things laid to his charge, by mis-applying both Law
and History, were borrowed from these Books: as likewise was much of the most
seditious part of Milton's Book, entitled, The Defense for the People of
England.

Also in the Year 1655. at London, was printed an Abstract of Parsons his Book,
containing the Substance, and often the Words of it. The Chapters being divided
into several short Sections, with Titles to each of them; this bears the name
of a Treatise concerning the broken Succession of the Crown of England. To what
end it was at that time published I cannot guess, unless to set up a Foreign
Title, or make way for Oliver Cromwell's Kingship.

And how lately there has come forth a Pamphlet, under the name of A Brief
History of the Succession, collected out of the Records, and most Authentic
Historians; for the Satisfaction of the Earl of H.

Much or the Materials of this Pamphlet, and most of the History contained in,
it concerning the Succession, are taken out of the Jesuit's Book, the Speeches
and Abstract before mentioned; but this Author's industry leads him further
than Polydor Virgil, who is mostly cited by his three Predecessors; and
sometimes Stowe and Hollinshead. And for the making his Work more plausible and
passable, and more readily to be received by his ordinary Readers, he takes
very little notice of Polydor (who pointed him to his Authors and Places) but
cites William of Malmsbury, Henry of Pluntington, Simeon Dunelm. Ailredus,
Abbas Rievallensis, Brompton and others, ancient Writers, in his Saxon
Instances especially: whose Words, if faithfully cited, would have been of no
use to him; for often, in the middle of the Sentences, and of Records he has
cited, he has left out such Words and Matters as would have ruined the Design
or his History. A Parallel of his Words, with the true Words of the Authors from
whence he had them, will be given at the latter end of this Treatise.

Hence we proceed to the Succession; by a true History whereof, Men will be
able to judge what was the Government, and how the Crown has Hereditarily
descended for many Ages in this Nation: And though History is so deficient, and
the many Rencounters, and Invasions of one another's Territories and Bickerings
between the petty Kings and Governors of the Saxons in the time of the
Heptarchy, the Succession cannot be well made out; yet (though not in all) we
may be able to make out a Succession in the greatest and most Illustrious
Kingdom of them; which was that of the West-Saxions.

The Saxon Succession.

Egbert, who is commonly said to be the first Saxon Monarch, though he brought
not the whole Heptarchy under his Power and Government, succeeded Brihtric.
King of the West Saxons. The Words of the Saxon Chronicle are these only; Anno
Dom. 801.
BEORHTRIC CYNING FORTHFERD and ECGRYHT FENG to WEST-SEAXNA RICE. Which words
the Translator thus renders, Beorhtricus Rex Occidentalium obiit, Egbryhtus
Occidentalium Saxonum Regnum Capessit.

And Anno eod.
Florence of Worcester, who strictly follows this Chronicle, says, Rex
Occidentalium Saxonum Brihtricus obiit and Egbertus successit: that is,
Brihtric died, and Egbert, King of the West Saxons, took the Kingdom, or
succeeded him.

Anno Dom. 802.
Simeon Dunelmensis says, Defuncto Rege glorioso Brihtrico Occidentalis regni,
suscepit post ipsius obitum Regnum and Impertum Egbertus Rex, qui ex regali
illius gentis prosapia exortus Diadema totius regni capiti imposuit.

De Cest. Reg. fol. 8. a. n. 10.
William of Malmsbury is more particular in this matter, and reports the
Jealousy Brihtric had of Egbert, Quem solum regalis prosapiae superstitem,
validissimum suis utilitatibus obicem metuebat, Franciam fugandum curavit. Who
only of the Royal Line was left, and the greatest Cheek to his Design, he
caused to fly into France.

Ibidem.
Nam and ipse Brihtricus and caeteri infra Inam Reges licet naturalium
splendore gloriantes, quippe qui de Cerdicio originem traherent, non purum
tamen linea regiae stirpis exorbitaverant. For though Brihtric himself, and the
rest of the Kings since Ina, boasting of their Lineage, as drawing their Origin
from Cerdic; yet they did not a little exorbitate from the true Royal Line.

The Pedigree of Egbert.

Chron. Sax. Anno Dom. 854. Flor. Wigorn. 849.
Egbertus fuit filius Ealmundi, Ealmundus Eafae, Eafa Eoppae, Eoppa fuit filius
Ingildi: Egbert was the Son of Ealmund, Ealmund of Eafa, Eafa of Eoppa, Eoppa
of Ingild, Gul. Malm. fol. 7. a. n. 30.
the only Brother of Ina, King of the West Saxons; who left his Kingdom, went
to Rome, lived a Monastic Life, and died Childless.

Chron. Sax. Flor. Wigor. Anno Dom. 836
Ethelwolfe succeeded his Father Egbert in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, and
he gave to his other Son Aethelstan his Conquests; Kent, East-Sex, Surrey and
Sussex; of which he made him King. Fol. 20. a. n. 30.
Malmsbury says thus; Ethelwolphus West-Saxonum regno contentus, caetera quae
pater subjugaverat Appendicia, Aethelstano filio contradidit, qui quanto and
que fine defecerit incertum.

Malm fol. 72. a. n. 20. and b. n. 30 Flor Wig. An Dom. 855.
Ethelwolph by Will divided his Kingdom between his Sons Ethelbald and
Ethelbert. Chron. Sax. An. Dom 854.
To Ethelbald he gave West-Saxony; to the other Kent, etc. and by Will gave the
Kingdom of West-Saxony to his Sons Ethelred and Elfred, after Ethelbald's
Death, Successively.

Ethelbald lived but five Years, when Ethelbert possessed the whole Kingdom, Vt
justum erat, says Fol. a. n.40. An. Dom. 860.
Asser, Florence of Worcester, and Simeon Dunelmensis.

Flor. Wigor. Chron Sax. 866. Malm. fol. 22. b. n. 50.
Ethelred, third Son to Ethelwolph, and Brother to Ethelbert, succeeded him in
his Father's Kingdom, who Reigned five or six Years.

Ibid fol. 2^. a. n.4^. Chron. Sax. An. Dom. 871. Flor Wig.
Alfred, fourth and youngest Son of Ethelwolph, succeeded his Brother Ethelred.
Fratribus suis Sccundarius fuit: He was a Coadjutor, or Assistant to his other
Brothers. Asser. fol. 7. 50.

To whom succeeded his Son Ibid. Anro Dom 901. Malm. fol. 25. n. 40.
Edward, called the Elder.

To him succeeded his Son Chron. Sax. An. Dom. 925.
Ethelstan, EADWEARD CYNG FORTH FERD and AETHELSTAN his SUNN FENG to RICE. King
Edward died, Ejusque filius Aethelstanus capescit regnum: And his Son
Aethelstan succeeded in the Kingdom. These being the usual Saxon and Latin
Words by which the Succession is expressed.

Both in An. Dom. 924.
Florence of Worcester, and Simeon of Durham, both say, Rex Edwardus Sen. ex
hac vita transiens Aethelstano filio regni gubernacula reliquit: King Edward
the Elder dying, left the Government of the Kingdom to his Son Aethelstan. Lib.
2. cap 6. fol. 27. a. lin. 27.
Malmsbury says thus in the History of Edward the Elder; Jussu Patris in
Testamento Aethelstanus in Regem acclamatus est: By the Command of his Father,
in his Will, Aethelstan was proclaimed King.

By some Aethelstan is affirmed to be a Bastard, from the report of Lib. 1. C.
6.
William of Malmsbury, in the Book and Chapters last cited: Who tells us that
one Alfred, a Man of Ibid fol. 29. lin. 32.
great Insolence, and his Faction, opposed Aethelstan, upon pretense he was a
Bastard. Occasio contradictionis ut serunt (says the Historian) quod
Aethelstanus ex Concubina natus csset: The occasion of Contradiction was, that
Aethelstan was born of a Concubine, as was reported. Sed ipse praeter hanc
notam si tamen vera est, nihil ignobile habens: But he had no other Mark of Ill
upon him but this, if it were true. And telling the story how King Edward the
Elder (as it was reported) stole a Leap with a Shepherd's Daughter, by the help
of his sometimes Nurse; of whom, it is fabled, he begat Aethelstan; he says he
had it from Ibid. n. 10.
trite Tales and Songs; and that he related it not to defend the truth of it,
but because he would keep nothing from his Readers. Nor indeed is the story
credible; for the same Author in the same Ibid. fol. 27. l. 28.
Chapter reports, that his Grandfather, famous King Alfred, in his Lifetime
wished him a prosperous Reign, embracing him as a Child of great Hope, and
excellent Behavior, and Knighted him in his Childhood; putting on him a
Scarlet Cloak, and girding him with a Belt set with Gems, and a Saxon Sword in
a Golden Scabbard. This so wise and great a King as Alfred was, would never
have said and done to a Bastard.

Chron Sax. An. Dom 941. Flor. Wig. Sim. Dunelm 940.
Edmund his Brother succeeded Aethelstan in the Kingdom.

After him Ibid. Anno Dom. 946.
Edred, third Brother to Aethelstan, succeeded in the Kingdom, and was
consecrated King by Odo Arch Bishop of Canterbury. This was done in the Nonage
of King Edmund's Sons, when they were very young, and the Nation under great
difficulties. The Saxon Chronology says, EADRED AETHELING his Brother FENG to
RICE regnum ^apessit. Florence of Worcester, Edredus proximus haeres fratris
succedens regnum suscepit. Fol. 30. a. n. 50.
Malmsbury, Edredus tertius e filiis Edwardi regnum suscepit. Simeon
Dunelmensis, Edredus frater Edmundi in regnum successit.

Edwy Chron. Sax. Flor. Wig. An. Dom. 955.
the Son of Edmund succeeded his Uncle Edred: He banished Dunstan, turned out
Monks, and placed Secular Priests in Monasteries; and Nothing of this story in
the Saxon Chronology.
was so displeasing to the Mercians and Northumbrians, that they rejected him,
and chose his Brother Edgar; who also succeeded Edwy in the Kingdom of the
West Saxons. Chron. Sax. An. Dom. 957.
Eadwigus Rex Kal. Octobris obiit, and Edgar his Brother FENG to RICE: Edwy
died on the First of October, and Edgar his Brother took the Kingdom. Flor
Wigorn. Abomni Anglorum populo Electus regnum suscepit. Fol. 30. b. n. 40.
Malmsbury, Edgarus adolescentulus se december annorum regnum adipiscit.

Edward his Son, called the Martyr, succeeded him; filiumque suum Chron. sax.
An. Dom. 575. Flor. Wigor. 975. Sim. Dunelm. 975.
Edwardum and regnt and morum haeredem reliquit: And left his Son Edward Heir,
as well of the Kingdom, as of his Virtues and Endowments. But there happening a
Contest between him and this Brother about the Succession, Ibidem.
Quidam Regis silium Edwardum, quidam illius fratrem eligerunt, Ethelredum:
quam ob causam Archipresules Dunstanus and Oswaldus cum Co-episcopis.
Abbatibus, ^uc^busque quamplurimis in unum convenerunt, and Edwardum ut pater
eius praeceperat eligerunt, Electum consecrarunt, and in Regem unxerunt: Some
elected Edward, the King's Son, some his Brother Ethelred: wherefore the
Archbishops, Dunstan and Oswald, with the Bishops, Abbots, and very many
Noblemen, being gathered together, elected Edward, (as his Father had
commanded) consecrated and anointed him King. Malms. fol. 33. b. n. 40.
This Contest was managed, and set on foot by Elfrida, second Wife to Edgar,
and Mother in Law to Edward.

Who Flor. Wigor. An. Dom. 978. Sax. Chron. An. Dom. 973.
by her Contrivance being murdered, was succeeded by his Brother Ethelred.
FENG ETHELRED AETHELING his BROTHER to RICE: and Ethelred Aetheling his Brother
enjoyed or possessed the Kingdom.

The Danes, ever since the beginning of King Egbert, having by continued
Invasions, harassed, and grievously wasted and molested England, in the Reign
of King Aelfred, by Faed. Aelsr. and Guthr. c. 1. Lanob. fol. 36.
Pact and Bargain between him and Guthrum, enjoyed East-Saxony, or Essex, and
the Country of the East Angles, and a far greater part of this Nation, as many
think. And in this King Ethelred's Reign, Swane, King of Denmark, with a great
Army invaded, and made himself Master of the whole Nation; forcing Ethelred and
his Wife Emmy, Sister to Richard, second Duke of Normandy, with their two Sons,
Edward and Alfred, into that Country.

But Aelfred. vit. Appen. 7. fol. 210.
Ethelred had a former Wife Elgive, Daughter of Duke Thored: By her he had many
Sons; of whom Edmond called Ironside being the third, Aethelstan and Egbert
dying without Issue, by the Ingulph, fol. 507, b. lin. 5.
Election of the Londoners and West Saxons, succeeded his Father in the Kingdom.

Florence of Worcester says, Anno Dom. 1016.
again, after the death of Ethelred, the Bishops, Abbots, Duces and quicque
Nobiles Angliae met, and chose Cnute the Son of Swane; but the Londoners, and
that part of the Nobility which was with them, by one consent made Edmund King.

After Ibid.
several Battles fought for the Sovereignty of the Kingdom between these two
Pretenders and their Adherents, being weary on both sides, they were persuaded
to part the Kingdom between them; which was done. But not long after Edmund
died at London: The Arch-Traytor Ibid. Anno Dom. 1017.
Edric, after he had caused Edmund's Brother Edwy to be murdered, advised Cnute
to kill his two Sons also, Edward and Edmund. But he thinking it a great
scandal and disgrace to him that they should be killed in England, sent them to
his Friend and Confederate, the King of Sweves, to be slain; who not complying
with his desire, sent them to Solomon, King of Hungary, to be preserved: where
Edmund died, and Edward married Agatha, Daughter to Henry the Roman Emperor: by
whom he had Edgar, Aetheling, Edmund, Christiana, who all died without Issue,
and Margaret, Queen of Scotland, whose Daughter Maud was married to Henry the
First.

After the death of Cnute, the Londoners, as Fol. 509. 2. lin. 2.
Ingulph of Croyland, and Lib. 2. c. 12.
William of Malmsbury do report, chose Harold; but the English had a mind to
choose Edward the Son of Ethelred, or at least Hardecnute the Son of Cnute by
Emme his Wife, the Widow of King Ethelred, who was then in Denmark; and that he
coming over, the Kingdom was divided between them; and taking Possession of his
Share, returned into Denmark: and that Harold, in his absence, made himself
Master of the whole Kingdom; who Flor. Wigor. Anno Dom. 1040.
living only four Years, after his death, both English add Danes sent for
Hardecnute into Denmark to succeed him. The Author of the Encomium of Emme Fol.
164. c.
says, Cnute gave both this and his other Kingdoms to his Son Harde-Cnute, by
Emme.

Edward, Flor. Wigor. Anno Dom. 1042, 1043.
by the Policy, Power and Industry, chiefly of Earl Goodwin, and Livingus
Bishop of Worcester, was made King at London, and was anointed King at
Winchester by the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, and almost all the
Bishops in England. He being in England at the time of the death of his
half-Brother Harde-Cnute Malms. f. 450. n. 10, 20.
was in a great straight, not knowing what to do, and thinking to retire into
Normandy, as he was advised by the Normans, applied Gemet, lib. 6. c. 9.
himself unto Earl Godwin, who minded him whose Son he was, and of his Right to
the Kingdom; and agreeing to marry his Daughter Edgith, and to other Conditions
propounded to him, being forced by necessity to consent thereto, Godwin (a
Council being immediately called) by his Reasons and Rhetoric, made him King.
Gul. Gemeticensis Ibidem.
says, Hardecnutus reliquit Edwardum fratrem totius regni Haeredem:
Harde-Cunte left Edward his Brother Heir of the whole Kingdom.

Ailred, Col. 371. n. 30, 40, 50.
Abbot of Rievalle, tells an idle Tale in the Life and Miracles of Edward the
Confessor; that his Father, King Ethelred, being solicitous about a Successor,
though he had at that time two Sons, Edmund Irorside and Alfred; yet in a great
Convention of Bishops and Noble Men before him, and a great Concourse of
ordinary People, by the Prescience and Direction of God Almighty, this Edward
was chosen King while he was in his Mother's Womb. Praebet electioni Rex,
consensu laeti praebent proceres Sacramentum, and inasitato Miraculo in ejus
fidelitate jurarunt, qui utrum nasceretur ignorarunt. The King consents to the
Election, and the Noblemen joyfully; and by reason of an unusual Miracle,
swear Fealty to him before they knew whether ever he would be born. He is the
only Author of this Legend that I know of, and do think it a little too gross
to be believed.

Edward the Confessor designed his Nephow, Prince Edward, the Son of Edmund
Ironside, for Ins Successor; and in the thirteenth Year of his Reign, nine
Years before he died, sent for him out of Hungary; where he then was in
Banishment; but in a short time after he died at London, Sim. Dunelm. Col. 189.
n. 20.
Anno Dom. 1057. Clito Edwardus Regis Eadmundi ferret lateris, filius, ut ei
mandarat suus Patruus Rex Edwardus de Hungaria, quo multo anno in exilium
missus fuerat Angliam venit, decreverat enim Rex illum post se Regni haeredem
constituere, sed ex quo venit parvo post tempore vita decessit Londoniae.

After the death of Edward the Confessor, Harold Ingulph, f. 511. b. n. 50.
Throno Regio se intrusit: And as Ailredus before cited has it, De Geneal.
Reg. Angl. Col. 366. n. 50.
Quidam Edgarum Adeling, cui Regnum Jure haereditario debebatur Regem
constituere moliuntur, sed quia puer tanto honor minus idoneus videbatur,
Haraldus Comes de genere perditorum, cujus erat and men's astutior, and crumena
faecundior, and miles copiosior sinistro omine Regnum obtinuit: Some
endeavored to make Edward Atheling King, to whom the Kingdom belonged by
Hereditary Right: But because he was a Child, and seemed not fit for so great
Honor, Earl Hurold, a crafty Traitor, being better furnished with Money and
Soldiers, by sinister Fater obtained the Kingdom. To the same purpose Henry of
Huntington says, Quidam Anglorum Eadgar Adeling permovere volebant in Regem;
Haraldus vero viribus and genere fretus Regni Diadema invasit: That is, Some of
the English would have had Edgar Atheling King; but Harold, being well
furnished with Forces, and assisted by his Kindred, invaded the Crown, f. 210.
b. n. 10.

From the various Expressions of the ancient Writers of the Saxon Story,
concerning the Succession, an unwary Reader would think the Saxons agreed not
in one Rule of Succession, or that they had no Rule at all. But whoever
considers with understanding what here is said, will find they had, and pursued
a sure Rule of Succession; which was either Right of Blood, or the Nomination
and Appointment of the preceding King (as we hinted before) which Nomination by
the Saxon Kings mostly happened in the Minority or Nonage of their Children,
and that only Vit. Aelfred. fol. 9. lin. 4. sect. 9.
was thought and allowed Cause sufficient for the Father to prefer his
Brother's Son before his own, or a Bastard before his lawful Issue. For by the
subsequent Instances it will plainly appear, that the Saxons did in their
Subjection, owning of, and Submission to their Princes, acknowledge both
Proximity of Blood, and Nomination of their Princes; often both, sometimes only
one of them; but never followed any other Rule.

Aethelwolph, the Father of Elfred, notwithstanding by Proximity of Blood his
Sons were his Heirs, yet Testam. Aelfred. Asser. f. 22. n. 20.
bequeathed his Kingdom successively to Ethelbald his Eldest, Ethelredg his
Third, and Aelfred his Fourth; having before given Kent, Surrey and Sussex,
etc. to his Second Son Ethelbert: Flor. Wigor. Anno Dom. 860, 86.
yet he succeeded Ethelbald in all his Dominions, and Ethelred and Aelfred both
succeeded him according to their Father's Will, Vit Aelfred. f. 9. in Not.
notwithstanding it is said Ethelbert had two Sons, Athelm and Aethelwald. This
Testament of Ethelwolph fol. 584.
Florence of Worcester calls Epistola Haereditaria.

Edgar Flor. Wigor. Anno Dom. 975. Sim. Dunelm. Ibid.
filium faum Edwardum and Regni and morum hoeredem reliquit: Left his Son
Edward Heir of his Kingdom and Endowments. Archipresules Dunstanus and Oswaldus
cum Coepis. Abbatibus and Ducibus quamplurimis una convenerant, and Edwardum ut
pater ejus praeceperat, eligerunt, electum consecraverunt, and in Regem
unxerunt: The Archbishops Dunstan and Oswald, with their Fellow-Bishop,
Abbats, and very many Dukes, or prime Men, chose Edward, as his Father had
commanded, and consecrated and anointed him King.

Eligerunt here signifies no more than Recognoverunt, They acknowledged, owned,
submitted unto him as their King, as his Father had commanded, and by Will
appointed.

This King's Command was stricter than a Conge D'estire; where the King
nominated the Person to be chosen Bishop, and he is always accepted and owned
by the Chapter; and yet they are said to choose, though limited by the King's
Nomination. So in many Corporations and Bodies Politic, in this and other
Nations, they have a Person nominated to them; and yet they are said to choose
him, though they can choose no other.

Rex Edwardus ( senior ex hac vita transiens, Sim. Dunel, Flor. Wigorn. An.
Does. 924.
filio Aethelstano Regni Gubernacula reliquit: King Edward the Elder dying,
left the Government of the Kingdom to his Son Aethelstan.

Malms. de gest. Regn. l, 2. c. 6. f. 27. a. lin. 27.
Aethelstanus jussu patris in Test amento in regem acclamatus, est: After, him,
his Brother Edmund swayed the Scepter.

Cui Flor. Wigorn. An. Dom. 946.
Edredus proximus here is fratri succedens Regnum suscepit: To whom Edred, the
next Heir, succceded his Brother Edmund, and undertook the Government.

What next Heir could Edred be his Brother Edmund. but a Testamentary Heir,
when at that time he left two Sons, Edwy and Edgar, both small Children, and
both were Kings successively, after their Uncle.

Concerning this Testamentary Heir it is said, Viventis non est haeres; for the
Testator might alter his Will when he pleased. These Testamentary Heirs were
either Scripti, as when the Testament was written by the Testator: or
Nuncupati, as when it was written by another, and dedicated by the Testator, or
they were declared Heirs only before many Witnesses without writing; and
without doubt often it happened that our Saxon Kings did only call together the
Bishops and Nobility, or such of them as they pleased, and declared their minds
concerning their Successor.

Cnutoni virorum dignissimo [d] pater Swanus Sceptrum commiit Regale. Swanus
Danorum Rex Angliam vi suo subjugandat imperio, Enecomlum Emmae, fol. 164. B.
moriens ejusdem Regni Cnutonem Successorem constituit: Swane, King of Denmark,
having subdued England by force; dying, appointed Cnute his Successor in that
Kingdom.

By Emme, Ibid.c.
Widow to King Ethelred, whom he had married, and made his Queen, he had
Harde-Cnute his Son: [ e] To him his half-Brother Cnute gave all that had been
any ways under his Government. But Harde-Cnute being in Denmark when his Father
died, whereof he had made him King, Harold possessed himself of England.

Who was Ibid. 174. A. B.
] Cnute's Son by a Concubine, or a Bastard Son of a Maidservant brought into
his Concubine's Chamber, and imposed on him by her. And for this reason Elnoth
Archbishop of Canterbury, refused to consecrate him King, and to deliver him
the Crown and Scepter.

Harold being dead, Cul Genment. hb 6. c. 9.
Harde-Cnute, so soon as he was consirmed and settled in this Kingdom, called
his half-Brother Edward by his Mother Emme (afterward called the Conseffor) out
of Normandy, and caused. him; to live with him; who dying within two Years,
Ibidem.
Edwardum totus Regni reliquit baredem, Left Edwardum Heir of the whole
Kingdom. He could be no other than a Testamentary Heir, there being Heirs of
the right Line, both of Saxon and Danish Blood, before him.

Rex Edwardus Ingulph Histor. hine fol 512. b. n. 40.
] Robertum Archiepiscopum Cantuariae Legatun ad Gulielmum Comitem Normaniae a
latere suo direxit, illumque designatum sui Regni Successorem tam debito
cognationis quam merito virtutis sui, Archipresules relatu insinuavit.

King Edward sent Robert, Archbishop of Canterbury, Envoy to William, Earl of
Normandy, to let him know he was appointed his Successor in his Kingdom, as
well for that he was of his Kindred, as for his great Virtue.

With Ingulph agrees Fol 181.D These three last Authors were living at that time
William of Poictou: and adds, the Succession was given to him by Edward, Cum
optimatum suorum assensu.

Harold Eadmer. f. 5. n. 10.
going to William, Duke of Normandy, to release his Brother and Nephew that
were Hostages with him for his Father Earl Godwin's Good Behavior toward King
Edward, he told Harold that King Edward had faithfully promised him, that if
ever should be King, Jus Regni in illium iure bareditario post se transferret:
That he would, after himself, transfer the Hereditary Right of the Kingdom to
him. Yet Ibid. n. 40.
Eadmer says, Juxta quod Edvardus ante mortem statuerat, in Regnum ei successit
Haraldus: according as Edward had appointed before his death, Harold succeeded
him in the Kingdom.

Florence of Worcester f. 632.AnDom. 1066
says, Haraldus quem Rex ante suam Decessionem regni Successorem elegerat, a
totius Angliae primatibus ad regale culmen electhus est.

Simeon of Durham Anno Dom. 1066.
has the same words.

Harold, whom the King had chosen his Successor before his Decease, was elected
to the Royal Dignity by the chief Men of England. Here we see how the Election
was bound and limited by the Nomination of the Successor by the Predecessor.

These are the words of Florence of Worcester, and such as follow him. Which
notwithstanding, he certainly was a plain Usurper according to fol. 511, b. n.
50.
Ingulph of Croyland, and Aifred Abbas Rieval. and Henry of Huntington before
noted, the Donation of Edward being a mere pretense.

From Egbert the first Saxon Monarch, to Ethelred the last Saxon King, by Right
of Blood, for the space of two hundred and sixteen Years, we read not of many
Elections: and where we do meet them, they are bound and limited by Proximity
of Blood, or Nomination of the Successor by the Predecessor: And where the word
Election, or any thing in that Sense is used, it signifies only a Recognition
and Submission.

The Saxon Expression concerning Succession and the Successor is always the
same. FENG to RICE, variously turned by Translators, Regnum capessit in the
Saxon Chronology, which renders it verbatim; by others, Successit, electus est,
etc. He took Possession of the Kingdom, He succeeded, He was chosen, etc.

The Danish Kings stayed not long here after Swane had conquered the Kingdom;
they all four reigned not much above twenty five Years, their best Title was
the Sword: notwithstanding, they either brought hither the Custom of the
Predecessor naming or giving the Kingdom to his Successor, as probably it might
have been practiced in their own Kingdoms; or used it as they found it here
practiced by the Saxon Kings.

The Saxons were very weary of the Danish Government, and without doubt, very
forward to set up a King of their own Nation; yet the Donation of Harde-Cnute
was as great a step for Edward the Consessor to the Throne, as the Power and
Policy of Earl Godwin and Livingus the Bishop of Worcester.

Ingulph, Secretary to William when Duke of Normandy, reports the Donation of
England to him very confidently, and as if in those times such Gifts were not
much questioned: Anno eodem Rex Edward senio jam gravatus, cernens Clisonis
Edwardi nuper defuncti filium Edgarum Regio so lio minus idoneum tarn cord
quam corpore Godwini que Comitis multam malamque sobolem, quotidie super terram
crescere, ad cognatum suum Willielmum Comitem Normaniae animum apposuit, etc.
eum sibi succedere in Regnum Angliae: voce stabili savivit: In the same Year,
King Edward grown infirm witli Age, perceiving Edgar, the Son of the late
deceased Edward Aetheling, neither in Mind or Body fit for the Government, nor
to bear up against the growing Power and Malice of Godwin's Sons; thought upon
his Cousin William, Earl of Normandy; and by a firm Declaration decreed he
should succeed him in the Kingdom.

Norman Succession.
FRom what has been said, the Pretenses and Causes of William, Duke of
Normandy, his succeeding Edward the Confessor, and enjoying the Crown of
England, are very evident; as also, are the same to his Dukedom. Gul. Gemet.
lib. 5. c. 12.
He was the only Son of his Father Robert; who going on Pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, called together the Noblemen of his Dukedom, and brought his Son
William, though Illegitimate, before them, and earnestly exacted of them, that
in his stead they would choose him their Lord: who, though but a Child, they
forthwith, according to the Decree of the Duke, acknowledged him for their
Prince and Lord, swearing Fealty unto him. Ibid.
Robertum ergo Archiepiscopum cum optimatibus suis Duc atus accersivit, and
illis velle se appetere Jerosolimitanam pergrinationem manifestavit, exponens
autem eis Willielmus filium suum, quem unicum apud Falesiam genuerat ab iis
attentissime exigebat, ut hinc sibi loco sui dum eligerent, Qui licet sub
tenerrima detineretur oetati puerili juxta Decretum Ducis protinus cum prompta
viracitate collaudavere principem and Dominum, pangentes ti fidelitatem non
violandis Sacramentis. And R. Hoveden affirms it to have been the custom in
Norway (from whence the Normans came) for Bastards to inherit, and that in his
time it was so. R. Hoveden. f. 425. a.n.20.
Consuetudo Regni Norweiae est usque in hodiernum diem, quod is qui alicujus
Regis Norweiae dignoscitur esse filius, licet sit spurius and de ancilla
genitus, tantum sibi jus vendicat in Regnum gentitus and ideo fiunt inter eos
proelia indesinenter, donec unus eorum vincatur, and interficiatur. And so it
happened between the Curators of Duke William in his Nonage, and the Pretenders
as Heirs to his Grandfather of the Duchy of Normandy.

The same Right of Succession, as Testamentary Heir to his Father, William
Rufus had to the Crown of England. Fragment. de Gul. Conquestore, f. 32. n. 30.
Ord. vit. f. 659. C.D.
Metuens Rex ne in Regno tam diffuso repentina oriretur turbatio, epistolam de
constituendo Rege fecit Lanfranco Archiepiscopo suoque sigillo signatam
tradidit Gulielmo Rufo silio suo, jubens ut in Angliam transfretaret continuo.

This was done a little before the Conqueror's Ibid. n. 20, 40. Ord. vit. ut
supra.
Death: and he did it for that his Son William always stuck close to him, and
had in every thing, according to the utmost of his power, been dutiful and
obedient.

Ibid. f. 663. B.
Rufus brought his Father's Epistle, by which he had constituted him King of
England, to Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury: who, having read it, hasted
with him to London, and consecrated him King in the old Church of St. Peter at
Westminster on the Flor. Wigor. f. 642.
26th. of September, his Father dying the 9th. of the same Month, Degest. Reg.
f. 67. n. 20. Paris, f. 14. n. 10.
Willielmus Willielmi filius, says Malmsbury, a patre ultima valetudine
decumbente in Successorem adoptatus est, accessit and favori ejus maximum rerum
momentum, Archiepiscopus Lansrancus, eo quod eum nutrierat and militem fecerat:
quo Authore annitente, Die Sanctorum Cosinae and Damianae Coronatus est. That
is, William the Son of Willaim was by his Father, in his last Sickness, adopted
his Successor: but it was matter of great moment, and the greatest Addition to
his Success, that Archbishop Lanfranc had educated him, and made him a It was
then the custom for Bishops to make Knights September. 27. F. 642. 1088.
Knight; by whose Authority and Endeavor he was Crowned on the day of Cesina
and Damianus.

Florence of Worcester, who only says that he was consecrated King at
Westminster by Archbishop Laufranc, has noted, that not long atter his
Coronation there arose great Discord and Contention between the chief Men of
England: for part of the Great and Noble Normans favored King William, but it
was the least; and the other part of them favored Robert Duke of Normandy,
which was the greatest. Odo, who Malms ut sup. lin. 49.
mortally hated Lanfranc, headed the Duke's Party, and Lanfranc headed the
King's; who, with the King, Flor. Wigor. ut supra.
Congregatio quantum ad presens poterat Normanorum, sed tamen maxim Anglorum,
equestri and pedestri (licet mediocri) exercitu, etc. Having raised such an
Army as he could of Horse and Foot of Normans, These English were Stipcndiary
Soldiers, Paris, f. 15. n. 10.
but the grratest part English; (though but a mean one) and by using the common
Bait of Liberty, declaring he would relax the rigid Laws, give free leave of
Hunting, etc. Also by insinuating into Roger Earl of Arundel and Shrewsbury,
the chief Person for the Duke, next unto Odo Bishop of Baieux and Earl of Kent,
brought him off to his Party. By these means he brake the Force of his Enemies,
and ever after ruled by an Army. More of this story may be seen in Eadmer. Ord.
Vit. f. 666. etc. Florence of Worcester, and Malmsbury, in the places before
cited, who all lived at the time.

Here we see Rufus claimed as Testamentary Heir, and by reason of that Claim
was advanced to the Throne, by the Assistance of Lanfranc's and the Bishops
Faction, who then swayed the People, and ruled by the help of an Army ever
after. Whoever rightly considers this story, cannot call it an Election.

After the death of Rufus, Fol. 650. lin. 9. F. W. died 19 Hen. 1.
Florence of Worcester only says, that Henry, his third Brother succeeded him;
and that the day he was crowned by Maurice Bishop of London, he gave great
Liberties to the Church and Kingdom; and commanded that King Edward's Laws
should be observed, with such Amendments as his Father had amended them. And
further says Ibid. lin. 27.
that very many great Men sent for Duke Robert over, and promised him the Crown
and Kingdom: and coming, they did some of them adhere to him, and Ibid. lin. 41.
others, dissembling their Kindness and Affection, stayed with King William
until they had an opportunity of showing it. But the Bishops, the Common
Soldiers and English (stuck close to King Henry; by whose means he raised a
very great Army, and were ready to fight for him; when they came to an
Agreement by the Mediation of the wise Men of both Parties.

Eadmer tells us that most of the great Men either did, Fol. 59. n. 10, 20, 30.
or were ready to revolt from King Henry; but Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury,
who had given him great Assistance in raising his Army, upon great Promises
made, that all the Church Affairs should be left to his direction and
disposing, and that he would for ever after obey the Decrees and Commands of
the Pope, Eadmer was Anselm's Chaplain at this time.
procured the great Men to assemble; and then so wheedled and cajoled them and
their Army, that he altered theit Intentions: And it was from his Fidelity and
Industry that Henry lost not the Kingdom.

This King Henry was a plain right down Usurper, he had no pretense of
Donation, no Testamentary Right from his Father; and therefore, as Fol. 88. a.
n. 20, 40.
Malmsbury shows us more particularly, he was advanced by a Faction; there
being only five great Men, Robert Fitz-Haymon, Richard de Redvers, Roger Bigot,
Henry Earl of Warwick, and Robert Earl of Mellent, his Brother; all Normans
that favored him: and by the contrivance of Henry Earl of Warwick he was
elected King. All others sent privately to Duke Robert to come and be their
King, or openly reproached Henry. This was an excellent Election made by a
Faction and an Army, and perhaps with a bawling multitude after them; and
indeed, there could be no other Election than such an one as this, Flor.
Wigorn. f. 649. l. 27.
for Rufus was slain in New Forest on the 2d. of August, being Thursday; and
Henry was Crowned on the 5th. of August, being Sunday: So that it was
impossible for all that were or ought to be concerned in such an Election, all
the Kingdom over to have notice, meet and dispatch that Business in two days
time.

These Historians lived at the very time these things were done. It is true he
says in his own Charter, Paris, Anno Dom.1100.fol. 55. lin. 42.
That he was Crowned King by the Common Council of the Barons of England.
Sciatis me misericordia Dei, and Communi Concilio Baronum Regni Angliae ejusdem
Regni Regem Coronatum esse. And he must say this, or nothing; for no other
Pretense or Title he could have; and there never was any other Usurper in his
Circumstances, but must say so, or some other thing, to make out a Title. King
Stephen, in his Charter of Liberties, says, He was elected, A Clero and Populo.
King John, in his Charter of Fees of the Seal, affirmed himself right Heir to
the Crown, when Arthur Duke of Britain, and his Sister Eleanor, Son and
Daughter to his Elder Brother Jeffrey, were then living: and they were both
vain Affirmations, as will appear in their several stories.

Some later Historians than these, Patis died, An. Do. 1259. Brompton, 1326.
Westminister, 1377. Knighton, 1380.
as C. 8. Col. 2374.
Matthew Paris, who wrote above an hundred Years after them. Mat. Westminster,
and Hen. de Knighton, and Brompton, who wrote at least two hundred and fifty
Years after them; all say he was elected: But only Knighton, amongst them all,
tells us the most considerable reason why Robert, his elder Brother, was
rejected, C. 8. Col. 2374.
Robertus, says he, semper contrarius and adeo innaturalis extiterat Baronibus
Regni Angliae, quod plenario consensu and consilio totius Communitatis Regni
IMPOSUERUNT EI ILLEGITIMITATEM, QUOD NON FUERAT PROCREATUS DE LEGITIMO THORO
WILLIELMI CONQUESTORIS, UNDE UNANIMI assensu suo ipsum refutaverunt, and pro
rege omnino recusaverunt and Hen. frem. in Regem erexerunt. Robert was always
averse, and so harsh to the Barons of England, that they, by full Consent and
Advice, voted him Illegitimate, because he was not begotten lawfully by William
the Conqueror; and for that reason, by unanimous Assent, they refused him, and
set up Henry his Brother to be their King. From this Passage of Knighton, we
see the Community, or Baronage of all England fixed the Right of Succession in
the Legitimate Right of Blood; and therefore this King, his two elder Brothers
being dead without Issue, desired to secure the Succession unto his Lawful
Issue by Right of Blood. To that end, Malms. fol. 93. a. lin. 36.
all Freemen of England and Normandy, of what Order and Dignity soever, and of
whatsoever Lord they held, or were Fendataries to, were forced to do Homage and
swear Fealty to his Son William, then but twelve Years old.

And in the Ibid. fol. 99. a. n. 40.
twenty seventh of his Reign, he caused all the great Men of England (after the
death of his Sons, William and Richard) to recognize Maud the Empress, his
Daughter, Queen; to whom the Ibid.
only Lawful Succession was due from her Grandfather, Uncle and Father that
were Kings; and from her Mother many Generations.

In the thirty first of King Henry, Malms. s. 100. a. n. 40.
he and his Daughter coming into England, at a great Meeting of the Nobility,
or Parliament, at Northampton, those which before had sworn Fealty renewed
their Oaths to her; and those which had not done it before, then did it.

Paris tells us that the Clergy, and Great or Noble Men made Conditions with
Henry; who promised them what is before related: and in that gave them
satisfaction. But as all Usurpers ever did, so he changed his Mind; and his
Canting Speech had no other effects than to enslave them: Paris, f. 61. n. 50,
f. 62. n. 10, 20.
] for with a seared and cahterized Conscience he had obtained the Kingdom, and
usurped upon his Brother Robert, who had manifest Right; Iid. 61. lib. ult. 62,
lin. 1. etc. ibid. lin. 23.
impudently violating the Laws, and Promises by which he had drawn in all Men
to serve him: and afterward, taking him Prisoner, caused his Eyes to be Ibid.
6.. n. 10.
pulled out, and kept him in Prison Ibid. f. 73. n. 20.
twenty four Years, until he died.

Malms. Hist. North. f. 100. b. n. 30.
King Henry having thus provided for the Security of his Daughter Maud, being
asked in his Sickness by Robert Duke of Gloucester, and the Noble Men that then
were with him, about a Successor. Filiae Vid. hic. f. 105. b. n. 40. omne
Reguum Augl. simul and Ducatum Normaniae.
omnem terram suam citra and ultra mate, Legitima and perenni successione
adjucavit: Adjudged his Daughter his Lawful Successor in all his Territories.

Pitsius in that Year, Col. 505. n. 40, 50.
Radulphus de Diceto, Dean of Saint Paul's, who died, Anno Dom. 1210. says,
that Has Bigot, Steward of the King's Household made speed out of Normandy
(where the King died) into England, and made Oath before the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that King Henry upon his Deathbed, upon some differences which
happened between him and his Daughter the Empress, did dis-inherit her, and
made Stephen Earl of Boloign his Heir. Whereupon William Archbishop of
Canterbury giving too much credit to the words of the Steward, consecratcd
Stephen Earl of Mortaigne King at Westminster. If this story be true, he was
Testamentary Heir, and had a Testamentary Right; and in that Right he was made
King: But be this story true or false, his Advancement to the Throne was as
follows. Notwithstanding, all the Nobility, and amongst them, King Stephen
himself, had sworn Fealty to Maud the Empress; yet by the Interest. of his
Brother Malms. n. 10.
Henry Bishop of Winchester, and the Pope's Legate (without which he could have
done nothing) he was made King: he brought off Roger Bishop of Salisbury, a
great and powerful Prelate; also William de Pout-Arch, Keeper of King Henry's
Treasure, which was Ibid. n. 40, 50.
100000 l. in Money. And by his own Dexterity, the Artifice of his Brother, and
Roger Bishop of Salisbury, and the advantage of this Money, he inclined the
minds of the Noble Men much toward him, and to secure himself raised an Army
mostly of Flemings and Britains. At his Ibid. n. 20.
Coronation were only three Bishops, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops
of Winchester and Salisbury, no Abbots, and few Noblemen.

I think this looks not like an Election; Ibid. 101. b. n. 10.
yet he in his Charter of Liberties, which he chiefly granted to the Church,
says, he was elected by the Assent of the Clergy and Laity, and confirmed by
the Pope.

Afterward, Stephen using the Bishops roughly, lost his Brother Henry's
favor; who, by his Legantine Power, Ibid. 105. b. n. 20, 30, 40. Malmsbury,
says he was present in this Council. Ibid. lin. 26.
called a Council of the Clergy at Winchester, to consult of the Peace of the
Kingdom: Where they conclude, that the Right of choosing and ordaining Kings
chiefly belonged to them. And therefore, having first called upon God, they
chose Maud the Empress Queen, Ibid. f. 106. a. lin. 1,2,3.
Ad Cleri ius potissimum spectat principem eligere and ordinare, invocata
itaque in auxilium Divinitate, filiam Regis, in Angliae Normanni aeque Dominam
eligimus, etc.

But not long after, Ibid. f. 107. n.10,20,30,40
being displeased with Maud, he entered into a Confederacy against her; and,
Ibid. f. 108.a. n. 30, 40, 50.
as Legate, called another Council at Westminister, in which was read the Pope's
Bull in favor of Stephen; who was then advanced to the Throne again. And the
Kingdom being wasted and destroyed with continual Wars, Gervas Dorob. Col.
1375. n. 10. Paris, f. 86. n. 10. Hoveden, f. 281. a. lin. 21.
the Archbishop, this Legate and the Bishops mediate a Peace between Stephen
and Henry Duke of Anjou, Son to the Empress: by which it was agreed, that
Stephen should adopt Henry his Son, who, after his death, should enjoy the
Crown, and Stephen quietly to wear it during his Life, etc.

Which Agreement is most fully and clearly related by Matthew of Westminister:
Fol. 246. n. 10. An.Dom. 1153. This Accord was made at Wallingford, by the
diligence, of Archbishop Theobald and Bishops of the Kingdom.
Rex Stephanus omni horede viduatus praeter solummodo Ducem Henricum,
recognovit in Conventu Episcoporum and aliorum de Regno optimatum, quod Dux
Henricus; jus haereditarium in Regnum Angliae: habebat, and Dux benign
concessit, ut Rex Stephanus tota vita sua suum Regnum pacifice possideret. Ita
tamen confirmatum est, quod ipse Rex and Episcopi tunc praesentes cum caeteris
Regni optimatibus jurarent, quod Dux Henricus post mortem Regis, si illum
superviverct Regnum sine aliqua contradictione obtineret: that is, King Stephen
not having an Heir, except only Duke Henry, did acknowledge in an Assembly of
the Bishops and other Chief Men of the Kingdom, That Duke Henry had the
Hereditary Right to the Kingdom of England; and the Duke kindly granted that
King Stephen should, during his life, peaceably enjoy his Kingdom. The
Agreement was so confirmed, that the King himself, and the Bishops then
present, with the rest of the best Men of the Kingdom swear, that Duke Henry,
after the death of the King, if he should outlive him, should enjoy the
Kingdom without all contradiction.

This Accord afforded Quiet and Tranquillity both to Henry and the Nation, with
certain Confidence of enjoying the Kingdom after the death of Stephen; which he
did. But as to his Right and Title, it added nothing to that, it being
Hereditary: for he was acknowledged the true Heir by his Adversary Stephen, in
the presence of the Bishops, and the best Men of the Kingdom: who all likewise
acknowledged it by owning the Accord, and swearing to observe it.

On the Ibid. n. 30. Anno. Dom. 1154.
24th. of October, the Year following, King Stephen died, and on the 19th. of
December following, Henry was Crowned at Westminster by Theobald Archbishop of
Canterbury. And Maud the Empress, being satisfied with the Enthroning of her
Son, quitted her Pretensions.

King Henry the Second dying in France, July 7. 1189, Hoved. f. 372. b. 40,50,
f.373. a. lin. 7.
his eldest Son and Heir, Richard, was by Walter Archbishop of Roven, girt
with the Sword of the Dukedom of Normandy, on the 20th. of the same Month, in
the presence of the Bishops, Earls and Barons of Normandy. And before his
coming into England, Ibid. n.50 and b. lin. 7. Quod fidem portabit Regi Angliae
Richardo, Regis Hen. filio, etc.
every Freeman of the whole Kingdom, by the Command of his Mother Alienor,
swear Fealty to Richard, King of England, Son of King Henry, as to their Liege
Lord, against all Men.

Afterward, Ibid. f. 374. a. n. 10.
coming to London, Congregatis ibi Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus,
Baronibus, and copiosa Militum multitudine in occursum ejus, quorum Consilio
and assensu ipse Dux 3. Nonas Septembris, Consecratus and Coronatus est apud
Westmonasterium in Regem Angliae: a Baldwino Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, etc.
The Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and a copious multitude of Knights
met him: by whose Advice and Assent, the Of Normandy.
Duke was Crowned King of England by Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury, many
other Bishops there named assisting. Et omnibus fere Abbatibus, and Prioribus,
and Comitibus, and Baronibus Angliae astantibus. Almost all the Abbots, Priors,
Earls and Barons of England being Spectators.

Ralph de Diceto, then Dean of St. Paul's, London, who, in the Vacancy of that
Church and Bishopric, Rad. de Diceto, Col. 647. n. 40, 50.
supplied the Office of the Bishop at King Richard's Coronation, has this
passage, Comes itaque Pictavorum Richardus HAEREDITARIO JURE PRAEMOVENDUS in
Ragem, post tam Cleri, quam Populi solemnem and debitam Electionem involutus
est triplici Sacramento, etc. Therefore Richard, Earl of Poictou, being by
Hereditary Right to be made King, after the solemn and due Election, as well of
the Clergy as the Laity, swear to three things. Ibidem.
Scilicet, Quod opem impendet pro viribus, ut Ecclesia Dei populusque
Christianus veram pacem obtinent, quod interdicet omnibus Rapacitatem, quod in
judiciis equitatem praecipiet and misericordiam. That is to say, That he would
use his utmost power, that the Church of God, and Christian People might enjoy
true Peace: That he would interdict Rapine to all Men: That he would command
Mercy and Equity to be done in Judgments.

What can this solemn and due Election signify here? what can it mean further,
than that Richard being King by Hereditary Right, was so owned and recognized
by the Clergy and Laity?

John, in his Brother Richard's Lifetime, Hoved. f.398. b. n.30,40,50, etc.
399. b. n. 40. An.Dom. 1191.
had a mind to be King; and taking advantage or his Absence in the Holy Land,
and his Imprisonment in Germany, practiced with the Nobility and Londoners to
that purpose. The last swear faithful Service to their Lord, King Richard, and
to his Heirs; and if he should die without Issue, Vt reciperent Comitem
Johannem fratrem Richardi Regis in Regem and Dominum. That they would receive
Earl John, the Brother of King Richard, for their King and Lord: and swore
Fealty to him against all Men, saving their Fealty to his Brother King Richard.

Two Years afterward, Ibid. f.41 2.a.n. 40,50. Anno Dom. 1193.
confederating with the King of France against his Brother, and being assisted
by him, he returned into England, and brought many Strangers with him: and
coming to London, demanded the Kingdom of the Archbishop of Roven, who was
then Justiciary, and the other Justiciaries of England, and Fidelitates Hominum
Angliae; affirming the King of England, his Brother, was dead. But not
believing him, they and the other great Men of the Kingdom rejected him.

Then, Ibid. 6. lin. 1. etc.
swelling with Fury, he fortified his Castles and places of Strength, and
seized the Crown Lands. Many came in unto him; but being deceived, they were
punished according to their deserts.

And for these and other Ibid. f. 417. b. n. 30. Anno Dom. 1194.
Treasons committed the Year following; as combining with the King of France,
and offering great Sums of Money to the Emperor to keep King Richard in Prison,
and making new Ibid. f. 418. a. n. 40.
Disturbances in the Nation. Ibid. b. lin. 6.
Per Commune Consilium Regni Definitum est quod Comes Johannes dissaifiretur de
omnibus Tenementis suis in Anglia. By the Common Council of the Kingdom it was
decreed he should be disseized of all he held of the King in England. And
presently all his Ibid. n. 20.
Castles were besieged and taken from him.

Yet for all this, the next Year King Richard Ibid. f. 428. a. n. 20. Anno Dom.
1195. 6. Ric.
pardoned his Brother John, and restored to him the Earldom of Moreton, or
Mortaigne, the Honor of Eye, and Earldom of Gloucester, except the Castles; and
for his other Earldoms and Lands, allowed him Yearly eight thousand Pounds of
Anjou-Money.

And in the last Year of his Reign, Ibid. f. 449. b. lin. 37.
Cum Rex de vita desperaret, divisit Johanni fratri suo Regnum Angliae, and
omnes alias terras suas, and fecit fieri praedicto Johanni fidelitates ab illis
qui aderant, and praecepit ut traderentur ei Castella sua and tres parts
Thesauris sui. When the King despaired of Life, he devised to his Brother John
the Kingdom of England, and all other his Lands, and made all present swear
Fealty to him, and commanded that his Castles and three parts of his Treasure
should be delivered to him.

Richard being dead, Fol. 450. b. n. 10. King Richard died, Apr. 6. 1199.
John stayed in Normandy (where, by Walter Archbishop of Roven, he was girt
with the Sword of that Duchy, April 25. on St. Mark's Day) and sent Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Pope's Legate, and William Marshal Earl of
Strigvil, into England, to keep the Peace; together with Jeffrey Fitz-Peter,
Justitiary of England, and other Barons of the Kingdom. Ibid. n. 40.
Qui fecerunt homines regni tam de Civitatibus quem de Burgis, and Comites, and
Barons, and libere tenentes jurare fidelitatem and pacem Johanni Normannorum
Duci filii Henrici Regis, filii Matildis Imperatricis contra omnes homines. Who
made the Homines Regni could be no other, seeing Fealty and Homage was due only
from such as held Lands subject to that Service.
Homagers of England, as well of Cities as Buroughs, and Earls, Barons, and
free Tenants, to swear Fealty and Peace to John Duke of Normandy, the Son of
King Henry, the Son of Maud the Empress, against all Men.

Ibid. n. 40.
Notwithstanding this, all the Bishops, Earls and Barons which had Castles,
Manned, Victualled and stored them with Arms. But Hubert the Archbishops,
William Marshal and Jeffrey Fitz-Peter, Justiciary of England. met at
Northampton, and called before them those which they most doubted: David,
Brother to the King of Scots; Richard Earl of Clare, Ranulph Earl of Chester,
William Earl of Tutesbury, and Walran Earl of Warwick, Roger Constable of
Chester, William de Mowbray, and many other Earls and Barons; to whom they
promised and engaged, that John Duke of Normandy should restore to every Man
his Right, if they would keep Faith and Peace with him: Ibid. n. 50.
Sub hac igitur Conventione supradicti Comites, etc. According to this
Agreement, the said Earls and Barons swore Fealty and faithful Service to John
Duke of Normandy, against all Men. This was done while he was in Normandy.

Ibid. f. 451. a. n. 10.
On the 25th of May following, Duke John crossed the Seas from Normandy into
England, and the next day came to London; and there were convened in
Expectation of him, Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, John Archbishop of
Dublin, William Bishop of London, Gilbert of Rochester, John of Norwich, Hugh
of Lincoln, Eustace of Ely, Godfrid of Winchester, Henry of Exeter, Sefrid of
Chichester, Jeffrey of Coventry, Savaric of Bath, Herbert of Salisbury, Philip
of Durham, Roger of St. Andrews in Scotland, Henry of Landaff, Bishops: Robert
Earl of Leicester, Richard Earl of Glare, William of Tutesbury, Hamelin de
Warenn, William of Salisbury, William de Strigvil, Walran of Warwick, Roger
Bigot; William de Arundell, Ranulph de Cestre, Earls: and many Barons. And then
Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury Consecrated and Crowned the said John Duke of
Normandy, King of England, in the Church of St. Peter at Westminster, on the
27th. of May, being Ascension Day.

Not one word here of any Election by, but only a Submission from the Barons
Spiritual and Temporal, to King John; and a Recognition that he was their King.
And all this related by Hoveden, in all probability an Eyewitness of this
Translation.

Indeed Matthew Paris, King Richard died, An. Dom. 1199.
who died Anno Dom. 1259. was then either unborn, or so young as not with
Judgment to take sufficient notice of this Affair, relates it thus; Paris, f.
197. n. 20.
Congregatis in adventu ejus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus and
Baronibus, atque aliis omnibus, qui ejus Coronationi interesse debuerant;
Archiepiscopus stans in medio omnium, dixit, audite universi, noverit discretio
vestra, quod nullus proevia ratione alii succedere habet Regnum, nisi ab
universitate Regni unanimiter invocata Spiritus Gratia electus, and secundum
morum suorum eminentiam praeelectus, ad exemplum and fimilitudinis Saul primi
Regis inuncti, quem praeposuit Dominus populo suo, non Regis filium, nec de
Regali stirpe procreatum, similiter post eum David Jesse silium: Hunc quia
strenuum, and aptum Dignitati Regiae; illum quia sanctum and humilem, ut sic
qui cunctos in regno supereminet strenuitate, omnibus praefit, and potestate
and regimine, verum si quis ex stirpe Regis defuncti aliis prepolleret, pronius
and promptius, in electionem ejus est consentiendum. Haec idcirco diximus, pro
inclyto Comite Johanne, qui praesens est, frater illustrissimi nameri Richardi
jam defuncti, qui haerede caruit ab eo egrediente, qui providus and strenuus
and manifest nobilis, quem nos, invocata Spiritus Sancti Gratia, ratione tam
meritorum, quom Sanguinis Regii, unanimiter elegimus universi, Ibid. n. 30, 40.
nec ausi erant alii super his adhuc ambigere, scientes quod Archiepiscopus
sine causa, hoc non sic diffiniverat, verum Comes Johannes and omnes hoc
acceptabant, ipsumque Comitem in Regem eligentes and assumentes exclamant,
dicentes, vivat Rex; Interrogatus autem postea Archiepiscopus Hubertus, quare
haec dixisset, respondet ve praesagia mente conjecturare, and quibusdam
Oraculis Edoctum and Certificatum fuisse, quod ipse Johannes Regnum and Coronam
Angliae foret aliquando corrupturus, and in magnam confusionem praecipitaturus,
and, ne haberet liberas habenas hoc faciendi, ipsum electione, non successione
haereditaria, Elegi debere affirmabat. That is,

The Archbishops, Note here Successione haereditaria eligere, which can
signify nothing but to recognize, and acknowledge him King by Hereditary
Succession
Bishops, Earls and Barons, and all others (Officers probably required to be
there) which ought to be present at his Coronation meeting at London. The Arch
Bishop standing in the middle of them, said, Hear all of you, your Discretion
shall know, that no Man has Right to succeed in the Kingdom, unless, after
seeking God, he be unanimously chosen by the University of the Kingdom, (that
is, those that are here said to meet at London.) And according to the Eminency
of his Endowments, pre-elected, according the Example and Similitude of Saul,
the first anointed King, whom God set over his People; not the Son of a King,
or of the Royal Line. likewise after him, David; the Son of Jesse. This because
stout and fit for Royal Dignity: the other because holy and humble. That so he
which exceeded all Men of the Kingdom in Strength or Prowess, should be set
over all in Power and Government. but if an of the Progeny of the dead King did
excel others, they ought more readily to consent to the Election of him. These
things we have therefore said in the behalf of the famous Earl John, who is
here present, the Brother of our most illustrious dead King Richard, that died
without Issue of his Body; who is Provident, Stout, and manifestly Noble, whom
we, having invoked the Grace of the Holy Spirit, have all of us unanimously
chosen. Nor dare any others so much as doubt of these things, knowing the
Archbishop had not thus decreed this Matter without Cause. But Earl John and
all there acquiesced in what he had said; and choosing or acknowledging, and
receiving him for their King, shouted, saying, Let the King live. But
Archbishop Hubert being asked afterward, why he said these things? answered,
that he guessed, and was taught and ascertained by certain Oracles, that John
would bring the Kingdom and Crown into great Confusion: And therefore, lest he
might have too much Liberty in doing it, he affirmed, he ought to come in by
Election, and not by Hereditary Succession: and so was Crowned as before
rehearsed.

This Learned Doctrine and Preachment of the Archbishop asserts not any Right
of Election in the Convention of Bishops, Earls, Barons, and others required to
be at the Coronation; but by his own Answer, when he was asked why he said
these things, it clearly discovers a Design only and Artifice in the
Archbishop, to cause them to set up, and make John King: In which also he
denies any such Right of Election.

Hoveden has none of, nor does mention this Harangue; and therefore it seems
rather to be an invention of Matthew Paris, than a Sermon of the Archbishop.
Historians commonly make Speeches for other Men they write of Brompton takes no
notice of it; all he says is, that Col. 1281. n. 40, 50.
Johannes Lundoniam veniens in Festo ascensionis Domini, VI. Kalend* Junii,
Anno Dom. 1199. ab Huberto Contuariensi Archiepiscopo in Ecclesia B. Petri
Westmonasterii inungitur and in Regem Angliae coronatur, assistente Prelatorum,
Comitum, Baronum, and aliorum Nobilium multitudine infinita. John coming to
London on Ascension-Day, the 27th of June, 1199. was Anointed and Crowned king
of England By Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, in St. Peter's Church in
Westminster, an infinite multitude of Bishops, Earls, Barons, and other Noble
men assisting him. Not one word here, or in Hovedon, or Paris, of the ordinary
People.

And this Doctrine of the Archbishop concerning the Election of Kings, if
meant according to the Modern Understanding of it, was then new; for Gervase, a
Monk of Canterbury, in the Year, 1122. speaking of the Coronation of Henry the
First, says, It was manifest, and known almost to all Men, than the Kings of
England were only obliged and bound to God for the Possession of the Kingdom,
and to the Church of Canterbury for their Coronation. Col. 1338. n. 30.
Manifestum est autem and omnibus sere notur, Reges Angliae soli Deo obligari,
and teneri exipsius regni adeptione, and ECclesiae Canturiensi ex Coronatione.

King John does say in a Moderat Feod. Mag^. Sigilli.
Charter dated the first Year of his Reign, that he came to the Crown, Jure
haereditario and mediante tam Cleriquam populi unanimi consensu and favore: By
Right of Inheritance, and by unanimous Consent and Favor, as well of the
Clergy as Laity. This unanimous Consent of the Clergy and Laity was rather
their Acknowledgment and Submission than any thing, else: for, according to
Hoveden's Relation of his coming to the Crown, which is the most exact extant,
They submitted and swore Fealty to him against all Men before he came into
England some time before his Coronation. Nor could it be true that he had an
Hereditary Right; for Arthur Duke of Britain, Son and Heir to his elder Brother
Jeffrey, and his Sister Eleanor, was then living: unless ho had regard to the
Donation of his brother Richard, and so esteemed himself a Testamentary Heir.

After the death of King John, Paris, f. 289. n. 10.
Henry the Third, his eldest Son, and Heir, by the Assistance of the Loyal
Barons, was Crowned King, notwithstanding the Barons which had made War against
King John, when they were reduced to great Streights, Ibid, 279. n, 20.
called out of France, Jews, the King's Son; to whom Ibid. 282. n. 10.
they, with the Londoners, swear Fealty, and advanced him to the Throne, and
adhered to him against their own Prince; Ibid. 296. n. 40. 297. n. 30. 299. n.
20.
until by Force they were reduced, and he driven out of the Kingdom. This
Treasonable calling in of Jews some that are pertinacious in the fancy of
Election, will have it to be one. Paris, f. 288. lin. 2. Westmin. f. 276. n. 40.
Indeed King Henry the Third at this time had no good Hereditary Title; and
therefore, Johannes ex hac vita transmigravit, Henricum primogenitum suum regni
constituens haeredem. And this Donation of his Father, or his making him his
Heir, was his best Title; for until that Eleanor, the Daughter of his Uncle
Jeffrey, died, in the twenty fifth Year of his Reign, he was not true Heir by
Right of Blood. Obiit Eleanora (says Matthew Paris) filia Galfridi Comitis
Britanniae: in clausura diuturna carceris sub arcta custodia reservata, fol.
574. n. 40. 25 H. 3. Anno Dom. 1241.

To Henry the Third succeeded his eldest Son Edward the First, though the
Lancastrians said his second Son Edmund, commonly called Crouch-Back, was the
eldest, and laid aside for his deformity; on whose Person was originally
founded the great Contention between the two Royal Houses of York and
Lancaster. But that he was really the eldest there can be no pretense, however
the Lancastrians imposed upon the People. For Edward was born Paris, f. 488. n.
30, 40.
June 16. 1239. and Edmund upon the Ibid. f. 654. n. 20.
16th. of January, 1245. being Marcellus his Day, six Years after. Edward, by
that time he was a Year old, was acknowledged the Firstborn of his Father, his
Brother Edmund not then born. Ibid. f. 527. n. 40. Anno Dom. 1240.
Per idem tempus Rex Cives Londinenses, and quinque portuum custodes, and
multos alios fecit jurare fidelitatem, and ligantiam Edwardo primogenito suo.
In the Letter from the Loyal, to the Rebellious Barons, he is styled the
Firstborn of King Henry. Ibid. f. 994. n. 50.
Richardus Dei gratia Rex Romanorum semper Augustus, and Edwardus illustris
Regis Angliae primogenitus, etc. And very frequently Matthew Paris, who lived
at this time, and was Historiographer to his Father, calls him his Firstborn.
So that there can be no doubt in History that he was the eldest Son; for King
Henry the Third had only these two Sons, Edward and Edmund.

After the death of Edward the First, Brief. History of Succession, f. 6.
his Son Edward the Second succeeded him; and, as Men of purely
Commonwealth-Principles tell us, he degenerating from so great a Father, the
People grew weary of his Irregular Arbitrary Government; deposed him, and chose
Edward his Son to reign in his stead. A plain Argument, say they, of the
Peoples Power in choosing their Kings, and of limiting and binding the
Succession.

But whoever reads this story, will not find the ordinary People had much, if
any thing to do in this matter, further than as they were excited to Tumults
and Railing at the Government, by many of the Popular Bishops and Barons; for
they always have been, and ever will be, Instruments of designing Men against
the Government, if by remissness thereof, and easiness of Governors, they be
permitted. This King was deposed and murdered by a wicked Confederacy and
Rebellion of many Bishops and Barons. And there is nothing to justify this
Rebellion, Deposition and Murder, in which our Anti-Monarchical Men instance
so often as an Example to be followed, but the mere doing of it: And if a fact
be therefore lawful, only because it is done, we have no need of Laws, Lawyers,
or Officers of Justice, to maintain, plead for, or defend it. The truth is,
this King was not of so brisk a temper as his Father, nor endowed with so much
Courage: he was more soft and easy, and used too great and unseasonable
Indulgence to such as he permitted to guide his Affairs, and the Affairs of the
Kingdom in his Name.

From hence many Rebellious Barons, under pretense of the Vid. Preamble to the
Ordinantes made by an extorted Commission to certain Ordainers, dated Mar. 16.
3 Ed.2. but not executed until the fifth of his Reign. Ordinance, 13, 14, 16.
Rot. part. 5 Ed. 2. Tho. Walsingham, f. 113. lin. 48.
Honor of God and Holy Church, the Honor of the King and Realm, made
Confederations to remove evil Counselors, reform the Court, and to force the
King to let them name all Judges, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and other great
Officers in Court, Gascoigne, Ireland and Scotland.

Thomas Duke of Lancaster, one of those Commissioners and Ordainers, was always
the Head of these Confederacies, Vid. Memoranda Parliamenti, 9 Ed. 2. apud
Lincoln.
who pretended great Affection to the King, to the common profit of the Realm,
and great care to see these Ordinances, cited in the Margin, maintained in all
points, and many things amended in the King's Household, Court and Realm.

At length this great Earl of Lancaster Walsingham f. 116. n. 20, 30, 40.
behaved himself very indecently toward the KIng, and used him with much Scorn
and Contempt; until at last, in the fifteenth of his Reign, he and many of his
Confederates brake out into open Rebellion, at Burton upon Trent; and flying
before the King's Army Northward, was, with many others, taken at
Burrough-Bridge in Yorkshire: and being tried by his Peers, was adjudged to be
Hanged, Drawn and Quartered: which Sentence was pardoned by the King, and he
was only beheaded. The like Sentence had Warren de Insula, William Toket,
Thomas Maudut; Henry de Bradborn, William Fitz-William, and William Cheyne, the
Lord Roger Clifford, the Lord John de Mounbray, the Lord Henry Ties, the Lord
Bartholomew de Badlesmere, and Joscelin de Invilla; most of them Barons.
Propter Roberias and Felonias and resistentiam quam fecerunt contra Regem ad
villam de Burton, Occidentes Regis familiares, and Regis transitum prohibentes,
and partem villae praedictae comburentes, etc. For Robberies and Felonies, and
the Resistance they made against the King at the Town of Burton; killing the
King's Friends and Servants, and burning part of the Town upon their Retreat.

The Ordinances beforementioned, in number forty one, were revoked, and the
Confederations and Tumultuous Barons and their Actions consured, in a Great
Stat. Roll.ab Hen. 3. ad 21 Ed. 3. m. 31. Bib. Cott. Claudius, D. 2. f. 232. a.
Parliament holden at York, 15 Ed. 2. The Ordinances were revoked upon
Examination of them before the Prelates, Earls, Barons, (amongst which were all
the Ordiners then alive) and the Commons of the Realm: For that, by the things
which were ordained, The King's Royal Power was restrained in many things,
against the due Greatness of his Seigniory Royal, and contrary to the State of
the Crown. And also, for that in times past, by such Ordinances and Oxford
Provisions, 42 H. 3.
Provisions made by Subjects over the Power Royal of the Ancestors of the Lord
the King, Troubles and Wars came upon the Realm, by which the Nation was in
danger. and it was accorded and established in the said Parliament, by the Lord
the King, and by the said Prelates, Earls and Barons, and all the Commonalty of
the Realm at that Parliament assembled; That all those things by the Ordiners
ordained, and contained in the said Ordinances from henceforth, for the time to
come, should cease; and lose their Force, Virtue and Effect for ever. And that
from hence forward, in no time, no manner of Ordinances or Provisions made by
the Subjects of the Lord the King, or his Heirs, by any Power or Commission
whatsoever, over and upon the Power Royal of the said Lord the King, or his
Heirs, or against the State of the Crown, shall be of no value or force. But
the things which shall be established for the Estate of the King and his Heirs,
and for the Estate of the Realm and People, may be treated, accorded and
established in Parliament, by the King, and by the Assent of the Prelates,
Earls, Barons, and Communalty of the Realm.

Roger de Mortuo-Mari, Lord of Wigmore, Walsingham, f. 115. n. 40.
submitted himself to the King, which much weakened the Barons Forces before the
Engagement at Burton, and was sent to the Tower of London; from whence he made
his Escape after two Years Imprisonment, in the seventeenth of this King's
Reign, and went over Sea to the King of France; who at this time required the
King of England to do him Ibid. f. 119. n. 20.
Homage for Gascoygn and other Territories he held of him in France. But he
delaying to do it, and excusing himself by Ibid. f. 120. n. 20.
Messengers, who prevailed not, the King of France, with an Ibid. n. 40.
Army, seized Gascoign, and the County of Pontheu: yet by the means of Edmund
of Woodstock, the King's Brother, and other English Noblemen then in France, a
Truce was made with the King of France for a certain time, until a Peace might
be treated of. Ibid. f. 121. n. 30.
The Year following, the Bishops of Winchester and Norwich, with John de
Britannia Earl of Richmond, were employed to that purpose: and after much
desceptation about it, they received a Form of Peace from the King of France.
And at length the Ibid. n. 40. and Cl. 20. Ed. 3. m. 11. Dors.
Queen, by Advice given by the Bishops and Great Men to the King, was sent to
her Brother, the King of France, for making up, and Confirmation of the Peace.
Walsingham, ibid. n. 40.
and it was accorded, that King Edward should give the Prince, his Son, the
Duchy of Aquitain and County of Pontheu, that he should go over into France,
and do Homage for them; which he did accordingly.

But the Prince being in France with his Mother, she had no mind to return. Cl.
19. Ed. 2. m. 2.
The King sent diverse Letters to his Son Edward, and his Queen Isabel;
expostulating the Cause of their stay in France against his Will, and the
Confederation they made there with Roger Mortimer, his Enemy and Rebel, and
others.

Walsingham says, F. 122, n. 10. She was generally reported to be a vile Woman;
cruel and unchaste.
Some affirmed she stayed there against her Will Alii voro asserebant quod
voluntary propter nimiam familiaritatem tunc contractam inter Reginam and
Rogerum de Mortuo-mari si^^ quo and aliis Nobilibus de Anglia profugatis
nolluit dicta Regina redire, and maxim in odium dispensatorum. But others
affirmed she stayed voluntarily, by reason of the too great Familiarity she had
contracted with Earl Roger Mortimer, Ibid. f. 125. lin. 49.
without whose Advice she did nothing; and without whom, and the other
Noblemen that had fled out of England, she would not return; and especially
for the Hatred she bare toward the Spencers; proud, ambitious, haughty and
covetous Men, by whom the King was too much swayed in the Management of his
Affairs; which might give a dissatisfaction to the Nobility, though not warrant
their Actions.

The next Ibid f. 123. n. 20, 30.
] Year, having married the Prince (not then fourteen Years old) to the Earl of
Hanault's Daughter, who furnished her with Shipping, and two thousand seven
hundred and fifty Men, led by his Brother John, she, with Edmund Earl of Kent,
and Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, and many other Great Men who had sled out
of England, landed at Harwich; to whom the Earl Marshal, the Earl of Leicester,
and other Barons and Knights of those Parts, and almost all the Bishops, did
adhere: and proceeding, her Army daily increased; so as at last she took her
Husband, the Ibid. f. 125. n. 30.
King, Prisoner, and put to death both the Spencers; the Younger without Ibid.
n. 50.
Hearing or Answering. 'The imprisoned King was carried and removed from place
to place, but at last fixed at Berkeley-Castle in Gloucester shire, under the
Guard of Thomas Berkeley and John Maltravers, who had allowed Cl. 1. Ed. 3.
Part 1. m. 3. Dors.
an hundred Shillings a Day for his Expenses arid Keeping. The Queen never
would see him during his Imprisonment. Walls. f. 127. lin. 36.
Regina misit sibi Indumenta delicata, and Literas blandientes, sed tamen ipsum
videre nolebat, fingens quod communitas regni non permisit. The Queen sent him
gay Clothes and flattering Letters, but would not see him; feigning the
Community of the Kingdom would not permit her.

He was Ibid. n. 40. Kinghton says, Octabis Epiphaniae, Eight days after
Twelfth Day. Col. 25^9. n. 50.
made Prisoner, November 16. and the Morrow after Twelfth-Day, all the Nobility
of the Kingdom being summoned to Parliament, met at London, and judged the King
unit to rule, and for several Reasons to be deposed; and his Son, Prince Edward
to be chosen King. Walsingham, f. 126. n. 20, 30.
Convenit Londoniis tota Nobilitas regni citata per prius ad Parliamentum
tenendum ibidem in crastino Epiphaniae, ubi cuncti censuerunt Regem indignum
Diademate, and propter plures Articulos deponendum, and Edvardum filium ejus
primogenitum in Regem unanimiter eligendum, quod etiam consequenter factum est.
Of which Transaction, when the Queen had notice, she was full of Grief
outwardly (ut for is apparuit) says Walsingbam: But the Prince, Ibid. lin. 39.
affected with this outward Passion of his Mother, as young as he was, would
not accept of this Title (whether out of his own Apprehension of things, or by
grave and mature Advice, which is most probable.) Et Ibid. n. 40.
Juravit quod invito patre nunquam susciperet coronam Regni: And swore, that
without his Father's Consent, he would never take upon him the Crown of the
Kingdom. Whereupon, several Ibidem.
Messengers being dispatched to the King, then Prisoner at Kenelworth-Castle,
who told him what had been done and concluded of, and diligently required him
to resign his Royal Dignity and Crown, and permit his Son to reign in his stead.

He was much disturbed with the Message; and said, Since it could be no
otherwise, he thanked them for choosing his Firstborn Son; making his
Resignation, and delivering up the Royal Ensigns, or Tokens of Sovereignty.

This done, Edward the Third directs his Writs to the Sheriffs of the several
Counties, for preserving and keeping the Peace; with this Preamble.

Rex Cl. 1. Ed. 3. Part. 1. m. 28. Walsingham, f. 126. n. 50.
Vicecom. Ebor. Salutem. Quia Dominus Edwardus nuper Rex Angliae Pater Noster
de Communi Consilio and assensu Praelator. Com. Baron. and alior. Magnat.
necnon Communitat. totius Regni praedict. SPONTANEA VOLUNTATE se amovit a
Regimine dicti Regni VOLENS and CONCEDENS quod nos tanquam ipsius primogenitus
and HAERES ipsius regni qubernationem and regimen assumemus, nosque ipsius
patris nostri beneplacito in hac part de consilio and avisamento Praelator.
Note de Consilio and Avilamento, not ^lectione, etc.
Com. Baron. Magnat. and Comitat. praedict. annuentes Gubernacula suscepimus
dicti regni; and side litates and Homag. ipsorum Praelator, and Magnat.
recepimus ut est moris. Test Rege apud Westmonas^erium, 29 Jan.

The King, to the Sheriff of Tork-shre, Greeting. Because Edward, late King of
England, our Father, by Common Council and Assent of Prelates, Earls, Barons,
and other Great Men, and also of the Communities of the said Kingdom, of his
own Free Will, removed himself from the Government of the said Kingdom: Willing
and Granting, that We, as his Firstborn, and Heir of his Kingdom, should take
upon us the Rule and Government. And We yielding to the good Pleasure of our
Father, by the Counsel and Advisement of the Prelates. Earls, Barons, Great
Men, and Communities aforesaid, have taken upon Us the Government of the said
Kingdom, and received the Fealties and Homages of the said Prelates and Great
Men according to Custom. Witness, the King, at Westminster, Jan. 29. Nine days
after he was invested with Kingship; and not long after that King Edward the
Second was murdered in Berkeley-Castle.

Any Man, though but of an indifferent Capacity, that seriously considers the
story of this unfortunate Prince, will easily perceive he was deposed by
notorious Rebellion, raised by factious Bishops and Tumultuous Barons; and not
without great suspicion of an intended Usurpation by Thomas Earl of Lancaster:
and may easily see through the Contrivance of the Queen and Mortimer
afterward: and from thence cannot but judge it to have been a Design of wicked
popular Barons, and not the Action, much less the Choice of the People.

In the Fourth of Edward the Third, Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. 3. n. 1.
Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, was impeached in Parliament for diverse Felonies
and Treasons; for assuming to himself Royal Power, making Dissension between
King Edward the Second and his Queen, and for murdering of him, and many other
great Treasons: and adjudged to be Drawn and Hanged, and was executed
accordingly. And the Earl Marshal was commanded to do the Execution; and the
Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London, and Constable of the Tower, to guard
and assist him.

Many of his Accomplices had the same Judgment. Ibid. n. 2, 3, 4, 5.


In the Fiftieth of Edward the Third, Rot. Parl. 50. Ed. 3. n. 40. al. 50.
the Parliament do acknowledge Richard the Second to be very Heir to the Crown,
as Son to Edward the Black Prince, very Heir to the Crown; and petition the
King (his Father being dead) to make him Prince of Wales.

Who, after his Grandfather's death, was immediately by all people, the
Walsingham, fol. 193. n. 40. Ibid. f. 195. n. 10.
Londoners especially, acknowledged, owned and addressed to as King; and not
long after Third Vol. of Chron. f. 508. n. 50.
Crowned with great Solemnity. He lived continually in Tumults, and by his
Great Uncles his Reign was made uneasy, and at length was deposed and murdered
by a Potent Faction.

The Author of the Brief History of Succession, fol. 7. recommends to his
Readers the thirty three Articles drawn up against Richard the Second, as well
deserving to be read; with hope and design, as easily may be guessed, to make
them believe and think he was justly deposed and murdered. But Mr. Hollingshed,
a moderate Writer, who has truly related these Articles, and all the
Transactions of his Deposition and Murder, tells us, [y] that whatsoever
Writers do report, touching the state of the time and doings of this King, yet
if he might boldly speak what he thought, He was a Prince the most unthankfully
used of his Subjects of any one of whom ye shall lightly read: For, although
(through Frailty of Youth) he demeaned himself more dissolutely than seemed
convenient for his Royal Estate, and made choice of such Counselors as were
not favored of the People; whereby he was the less favored himself. Yet in no
King's days were the Commons in greater Wealth, if they could have perceived
their happy State. Neither in any other time were the Nobles and Gentlemen more
cherished, nor Churchmen less wronged. But such was their Ingratitude toward
their bountiful and loving Sovereign, that those whom he had chiefly advanced,
were readiest to control him, for that they might not rule all things at their
Will, and remove from him such as they misliked, and place in their rooms whom
they thought good; and that rather by strong Hand, than by gentle and courteous
means: Which stirred such malice betwixt him and them,

The chief Instruments in deposing this King were Henry Duke of Lancaster,
Walsingham, f. 358. n. 50.
late Earl of Derby, and Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury: who assisted
by others, reduced the unfortunate King to so great Straits, as he was weary of
his Government. They having him in their power, kept him safe in the Tower of
London, until a Parliament was called; which was suddenly done, by directing
Writs in the King's Ibid. f. 359. lin. 1.
Name to those who of Right ought to be there. All things were prepared for the
Resignation of his Crown against the time of the meeting of the Parliament. He
Rot. Parl. 1. H. 4. n. 52.
was, by certain Commissioners appointed by it, deposed; or had rather a
Resignation of the Crown extorted from him, though he seemed willing and
forward to do it.

And then the Duke of Lancaster claimed the Crown in Parliament, and challenged
the Realm, Ibid. n. 53.
ALS DESCENDIT BE RIGHT LINE OF THE BLOOD COMEYNGE FRO THE GOOD LORD HENRY
THERDE.

Postquam quidem Ibid. n. 54.
vindicationem and clameum tam Domini Spirituales quam Temporales, and omnes
status ibidem praesentes, singillatim and communiter interrogati, quid de illa
vindicatione and clameo sentiebant. Iidem status cum toto populo absque
quacunque difficultate vel mora, ut Dux praefatus super eos regnaret,
unanimitur consenserunt.

After which Claim and Challenge, as well the Lords Spiritual as Temporal, and
all States there present being severally asked what they thought of that
Challenge and Claim, the same States, with all the People, without difficulty
or delay, consented the aforesaid Duke should reign over him.

And then showing to the States the Ibid. Suae voluntatis.
Signet of King Richard, which he gave him, as token of his desire to have him
succeed him; The Archbishop, taking him by the Right Hand, placed him in the
Throne.

Here we see the Foundation of the Parliament's Consent that Henry should be
King, was a pretended Right of Blood, and the desire of King Richard that it
might be so.

Henry the Fourth was Son to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son to
Edward the Third, by Blanch his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Henry Duke of
Lancaster, Son of Henry Earl of Lancaster, Brother and Heir to Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, eldest Son to Edmund called Crouch-Back the First Earl of Lancaster,
Second Son to King Henry the Third.

Upon Sir J. Haward's Life of Hen. 4. p. 98.
Consideration had of this Title it was conceived to be insufficient, and that
it would pass for a Blind and Pretense only. And therefore king Henry, upon the
day of his Coronation, caused to be proclaimed, Ibid. p. 99.
That he claimed the Kingdom of England; First, By Right of Conquest. Secondly,
Because King Richard had resigned his Estate, and designed him for his
Successor. And Lastly, Because he was of the Blood Royal, and NEXT HEIR MALE
UNTO KING RICHARD.

In this Claim he takes no notice of any Election by the People, nor does own
the least Right in them to elect him; but founds his Title upon Conquest, and
Proximity of Male-Blood, and Donation of Richard the Second.

Henry the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth held the Crown by Usurpation, without much
disturbance, until the thirty ninth Year of Henry the Sixth; Rot. Parl. 39 H 6.
n. 11.
when Richard Duke of York put in his Claim, as Hein to Philippa, Daughter and
Heir to Lionel, the third gotten Son of King Edward the Third; to whom the
Right, Title Dignity Royal, and Estate o the Crowns of the Realms of England,
and of France, and of the Lordship and Land of Ireland, of Right, and Law, and
Custom appertains and belongs, before any Issue of John of Gaunt, the
fourth gotten Son of the same King Edward.

The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Ibid. n. 12.
the Question being put what they thought of the Duke's Claim, answer, that The
Matier was so high, and of such wight, that it was not to any of the King's
Subjects to enter into Communication thereof, without his high Commandment,
Agreement and Consent had thereto.

The Duke pressing for an Answer, Ibidem.
all the Lords went unto the King, and opened the Claim by the Mouth of the
Chancellor of England; and it pleased him to pray and command all the said
Lords, that they should search, as much as in them was, to find all such things
as might be object, and leyde against the Cleym and Title of the Due.

Whereupon, Ibidem.
in the Morning, October 18. the Lords sent for the King's Justices to defend
his Title, against the Claim of the Duke of York; and in the King's Name,
straightly command them to find all Objections as might he laid against the
same, in fortifying of the King's Title.

Who, Ibidem.
on Monday following, on the 20th of October, answered, that the matter was so
high, and touched the King's high Estate and Regalio, which is above the Law,
and passed their Learning: Wherefore they durst not enter into any
Communication of the same, for that it permined to the Lords of the King's
Blood, and th'Apparage of this his Lands and therefore besought all the Lords
to have then utterly excused.

Then the Lords sent for all the King's Sergeants and Attorney, Ibidem.
and gave them straight Commandment in the King's Name, that they sadladly and
avisely should search, and take all such things as might be best and strongest to
be allegged for the King's Avail in Objection, and defeating of the Title, and
Cleym of the Due.

They answered, Ibidem.
that if this matter passed the Lerning of the Justices, it must needs exceed
their Lerning: and also that they durst not enter into any Communication in
that matier: and prayed and besought all the Lords to have them excused by
geveing any Avice or Counsel therein. But the Lords would not excuse them: and
therefore, by the in Advice and Assistance it was concluded by all the Lords,
that the Articles, following should be objected agenst the Claim and Title of
the Duc.

First, Ibid. n. 13.
It is thought that the Lords of this Land, must needs call to their
remembrance the great Oaths the which they have made to the King, the which may
be leyd to the said Duc of York; and that the Lords may not break their Oaths.

Item, It is thought also, that it is to be called to remembrance the great and
notable Acts of Parliament of diverse of the King's Progonitors. The which Acts
be sufficient and reasonable to be leyd agene the Title of the said Due of
York. The which Acts be of much more Authority than any Chronicle; and also of
Authority to defete any manner of Title, made to any Person.

Item, It is thought, that there is to be leyd ayent the Title diverse Inteyles
made to the Heirs Mules of Henry the Foureth, as for the Crown of England, as
it may appear by diverse Chronicles and Parliaments.

Item, It is thought, to be allegged the Title of the seid Due, that the time
that: King Henry the Fourth took upon him the Corone of England, he said he
entered and took upon him the Corone as right Inheritor to King Henry the
Third, and not as a Conqueror.

To which Articles the Duke answered,

First, That noe Oath being the Law of Man, Ibid. n. 14.
ought to be performed when the same leads to suppression of Truth and
Right, which is against the Law of God.

To the second and third, Ibid. n. 15.
That in troth there been no such Acts and Tails made by any Parliament
heretofore, as it is furmised, but only in the Cap. 2.
seventh year of King Hen. IV. a certain Act and Ordinance was made in a
Parliament by him called, wherein he made the Reaums of England and France,
amongst other, to be unto him, and to the Hetres of his Body comeing, and to
his four Sons, and to the Heirs of their Body comeing, in manner and form as
it apperith in the same Act. And if he might have obtained and rejoysed the
Corones, etc. by Title of Inhaeritance, Discenter, or Succession, He neither
needed or would have desired or made thaim to be granted to him in such wise as
be by the said Act, which tacketh no place, neither is of any force or effect
against him that is right Inhaeriter of the said CORONES, as it accords with
Gods Law, and all Natural Lowes; how it be that all other Acts and Ordinances
made in the said Parliament ^^then, been good and sufficient against all other
Persons.

To the fourth That such seyeing of the King Henry the Fourth may in noe wise
be true; Ibid. n. 17.
and that the contrary thereof, which is troth, shall be largely enough
showed, approved and justified by sufficient Autorite, and matter of Record;
and over, that his said seying was only to shadow and cover fraudulently his
said unrightwyse and violent Usurpation, and by that moyen to abuse
disceyveably the People standing about him.

Upon consideration of this Answer, and Claim of the Duke of York, Ibid. n. 18.
it was concluded and agreed by all the Lords, That his Title could not be
DEFETED; and therefore for eschuying the great Inconvenients that may ensue, a
mean was found to save the Kings Honor and Estate, and to appease the said Due,
IF HE WOULD; which was, That the King should enjoye the Corone during Life, the
Duke to be declared the true Heir, and to possess it after his Death etc.

In the first Article of this Agreement, or Accord, (as it is there called) the
Title of the Duke of York is set forth; and the Judgment of the Parliament
given, what then was, and before had been the Foundation and ground of the
Succession to the Crown of England, tint is, Proximity of Blood. The Articles
follow, so much of them as is pertinent to this matter.

First, Where the said Richard Due of York has declared and opened, as above,
his said Title and Cleyme in manner as follows. That the right noble and
worthy Prince Herry King of England the Third, had Issue and leefully gate
Edward his first-begotten Son, born at Westminster the xv Kalend of Juyle, in
the Vigil of St. Mart. and Marcellian. the Year of our Lord M.CC. XXXIX. and
Edmund his second gotten Son, which was born on Seint Marcell. day, the Year of
our Lord M. CC. XLV. The which Edward, after the death of the said King Herry
his Fader, entitled and called King Edward the First, had Issue Edward his
first-begoten Son, entitled and called after the decease of the said first
Edward his Fader, King Edward the Second; which had Issue and leefully gate the
right Noble and Honorable Prince Edward the Third, true and undoubted King of
England, and of France, and Lord of Ireland: Which Edward the Third, true and
undoubted King of England, and of France, and Lord of Irelond, had Issue and
leefully gate Edward his first begotten Son, Prince of Wales; William Hatfield,
second- begotten; Leonell; third-begoten, Duc of Clarence; John of Gaunt,
fourth-begotten, Duc of Lancaster; Edmund Langley, fifth begoten, Duc of York;
Thomas Woodstock, sixth-begoten, Duc of Gloucester; and William Wyndesore, the
seventh-begotten. The said Edward Prince of Wales, which dyed in the life of
the said Edward King, had Issue and leefully gate Richard, the which succeeded
the same Edward King, his Grandfather, in Royal Dignity, entitled and called
king Richard the Second, and dyed without Issue. William Hatfield, the
second-goten Son of the said Edward King, dyed without Issue. Leonell, the
third-goten Son of the same king Edward, had Issue and leefully gate Philippa
his oonly Daughter and Heir, which by the Sacrament of Matrymony copled unto
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, had Issue and leefully bare Rogier Mortimer Earl
of March, her, Son and Heir: Which Rogier Earl of March had Issue and leefully
gate Edmund Earl of March, Rogier Mortymer, Anne, and Alianore; which Edmund,
Rogier, and Alianore dyed without Issue. And the said Anne, under the Sacrament
of Matrymony, copled unto Richard Earl of Cambridge, the Son of the said Edmund
Langley, fifth-begoten Son of the said King Edward, as it is before specified,
had Issue and leefully bare Richard Plantagenet, commonly called Duc of York:
The said John of Gaunt, the fourth-goten Son of the said King Edward, and
younger Brother of the said Leonell, had Issue and leefully gate Hen. Earl of
Derby, which incontinent after the time that the said King Richard resigned the
Corones of the said Reaumes, and the said Lordship of Ireland, unrightwysely
entered upon the same, then being on live Edmund Mortymer Earl of March, Son
to Rogier Mortymer Earl of March, Son and Heir of the said Phelippa, Daughter
and Heir of the said Sir Leonell, the third Son of the said King Edward the
Third; to the which Edmund the Right and Title of the said Corones and Lordship
by Law and Custom belonged.

Before we pass over these three Usurpers, Lib. 22. sub initio, fol. 433. n. 30.
we must take notice of a Passage in Polydore Virgil concerning Henry V. in
these Words: Princeps Hen. facto Patris funere, Concilium Principum ad
Westmonasterium convocandum curat, in quo dum de Rege creando more, mojorum
agitabatur, Ecce tibi de repent aliquot Principes ultro in EJVS VERBA jurare
coeperunt. Quod Benevolentiae Officium Edw. I. was in Palestina when his father
died, yet acknowledged K. before his return. K. John was acknowledged King
before his Coronation also.
nulli antea priusquam Rex renantiatus esset, praestitum constat: adeo Hen. ab
ineunte aetate spem omnibus optimae indolis fecit. Creatur itaque Rex ad
quintum Iduum Aprilis eo Anno quo Pater e vita excesserat, and Quintus ejus
Nominis Henricus dictus est.

The Fol. 7.
Author of the Brief History of Succession thus renders this Sentence: The
words are Concilium Principum convocandum curat. If this was a Parliament, he
must be King before be could call it.
Immediately upon the death of Hen. IV. a Parliament MET at Westminster, and
there, according to the Custom of the Realm; it was debated who should be King:
But all men had entertained so good, thoughts of Prince Henry, that without
staying till the whole Assembly had declared him King, diverse of them began to
swear Allegiance to him: a thing strange, and without president, as only
occasioned by extraordinary Opinion which was generally conceived of him
before, and the certain Title vested in him by He means the Act of Entail of
the Usurpation, 7 H. 4. c. 2.
Act of Parliament.

In his Citation of the Latin he leaves out these Words which belong to this
piece of Story, and do declare the meaning of it: Creatur itaque Rex ad quintum
Iduum Aprilis eo Anno quo Pater e vita excesserat, etc. He was Crowned King on
the fifth of the Ides of April, the same year his Father died.

Tho. Walsingham who lived at this time, says, Hen. IV. died Mar. 20. 1413. And
then, eodem Anno coronatus Londoniis Henricus Primogenitus Regis Henrici nuper
defuncti quinto Iduum Aprilis, etc. The same Year Henry the Firstborn of King
Henry lately deceased, was Crowned at London on the fifth of the Ides or tenth
of April. By which Words of Walsingham it is evident he has mistaken the
meaning, and falsely translated the Words of Polydore; for they ought to be
Englished in this manner.

Prince Henry having buried his Father, caused a Council of the Chief Men of
the Nation to be called at Westminster, in which they treat, or debate about
Crowning the King, according to the Custom of his Predecessors; forthwith some
of the Great Men began to swear as he dictated to them, which officious
Benevolence was performed to none before he was declared King; such hope he had
given from his Childhood of an excellent Disposition: therefore he was Crowned
King on the fifth of the Ides of April, that Year his Father died, and was
called Henry the Fifth. An intelligent Man would wonder how the Writer of the
Brief History, etc. should SQVEEZE his Translation out of these Latin Words.

But Polydore, who, as I hinted before, was very unfit to write the English
History, has very oddly in Latin expressed this Relation, as he likewise has
done many other Stories. His Character take from Sir Hen. Savile, in his
Epistle to Queen Elizabeth, before his Edition of the old English Writers after
Bid. Polydorus (says he) ut homo Italus, and in rebus nostris hospes (etc.
quod caput est) neque in Republika versatus, nec magni alioqui vel judicii, vel
ingenii, pauca ex multis delibans, and falfit plerumque pro veris amplexus,
Historiam nobis reliquit cum caetera mendosam tum exiliter sane and jejune
conscriptam. Polydor, as he was an Italian, and a Stranger in our Affairs, and,
which was the chief matter, not understanding our Government and Laws, nor
otherwise of great Wit or Judgment, choosing a few things out of many, and
oft-times taking false things for true, has left us a very faulty History,
slightly and pitifully written.

After the Reign of these three Usurpers, and Deposition of Henry the Sixth, in
the Rot. Parl. n. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.
first of Edward the Fourth, the Proceedings against Richard the Second are
Repealed, where it is said, That Henry Earl of Derby, afterward Henry the
Fourth, temerously against ryghtwisnesse and Justice, by Force and Arms, against
his Faith and Ligeance, rered Werre at Flynt in Wales against King Richard the
Second, him took, and imprisoned in the Tower of London, in great violence,
and usurped and intruded upon the Royal Power, Estate, Dignity, etc. And not
therewith satisfied or content, but more grievous thing attempting, wickedly,
of unnatural, unmanly, and cruel Tyranny, the same King Richard, King Anointed,
Crowned and Consecrated, and his Liege and most Sovereign Lord in Earth,
against Gods Law, Man's Ligeance, and Oath of Fidelity, with uttermost
punicion, attormenting, murdered, and destroyed, with most vile, heinous, and
lamentable Death, etc.

The Commons being of this present Parliament, Ibidem.
having sufficient and evident knowledge of the said unryghtwyse Usurpation and
Intrusion, by the said Henry late Earl of Derby, upon the said Crown of
England; knoweing also certainly, without doubt and ambiguity, the Right and
Title of our said Sovereign Lord thereunto true, and that by Gods Law, Man's
Law, and the Law of Nature, he, and none other, is, and ought to be, their
true, ryghtwyse, and natural Liege, and Sovereign Lord, and that he was in
right from the Death of the said Noble and Famous Prince his Father, very just
King of the said Realm of England, do take, accept, and repute, and will for
ever take, accept, and repute the said Edward the Fourth their Sovereign and
Liege Lord, and him and his Heirs to be Kings of England, and none other,
according to his said Right and Title.

And that the same Henry unryghtwysely, Ibidem.
against Law, Conscience, and Custom of the said Realm of England, usurped
upon the said Crown and Lordship; and that he, and also Henry late called King
Henry the Fifth, his Son, and Henry late called King Henry the Sixth, his Son,
occupied the Realm of England and Lordship of Ireland, and exercised the
Governance thereof, by unryghtwyse, intrusion, usurpation and no otherwise.

That the Amotion of Henry, Ibidem.
late called King Henry the Sixth, from the Exercise, Occupation, Usurpation,
Intrusion, Reign, and Governance of the same Realm and Lordship, done by our
Sovereign Lord King Edward the Fourth, was and is rightwyse, lawful, and
according to the Laws and Customs of the said Realm, and so ought to be
taken, holden, reputed, and accepted.

Further, Ibidem.
Some if not all the Grants made by Henry Earl of Derby, called Henry the
Fourth, the said Henry his Son, or the said Henry called Henry the Sixth, or by
Authority of any pretenced Parliament in any of their days, were reputed null
and void.

That the unrightwyse and unlawful Usurpation and Intrusion of the same Henry
upon the Crown of England and Lordship of Ireland, Ibidem.
was to the great and intolerable hurt, prejudice, and derogation of Edmund
Mortimer Earl of Maroh, next Heir of Blood of the said King Richard at the
time of his Death, and to the Heirs of the said Edmomd, and to the great and
excessive Damage unto the Realm of England, and to the politic and peaceable
Governance thereof, by inward Wars moved and grounded by occasion thereof.

In the First of Richard the Third, the Exact Abridgment, fol. 712. In this
Abridgement the whole Record of 1 R. 3. is printed.
Three Estates, after having much faulted the Government, Marriage, and Person
of Edward the Fourth, and affirmed, That the Right and Title of the Issue of
George Duke of Clarence was barred by his Attainder, and extolling the Parts,
Wisdom, and Justice of Richard his Brother, declared him undoubted Heir of
Richard Duke of York, Father to Edward the Fourth, very Inhaeritor of the Crown
of England, and Dignity Royal, and as in Right King of England Ibid. fol. 713.
by way of Inheritance; and therefore having in his great prudent Justice,
Princely Courage, and excellent Virtue, singular Confidence, did by Writing (in
all that in them lay) choose him their King and Sovereign Lord, to whom they
knew of certain it apperteined to be so chosen, etc.

And do further declare, Ibidem.
That the Right, Title, and Estate which King Richard the Third had to, and in
the Crown and Royal Dignity of the Realm of England, with all things thereunto
within the said Realm, and without it, annexed and apperteining, was just and
lawful, as grounded upon the Laws of God and Nature, and also upon the ancient
Laws and laudable Customs of this said Realm, as also taken and reputed by
all such Persons as were learned in the abovesaid Laws and Customs.

And then they proceed, and say, Yet nevertheless, forasmuch as it is
considered that the most part of the People is not sufficiently Ibid. f. 714.
learned in the aforesaid Laws and Customs, whereby the Truth and Right in this
behalf of likelihood may be hid, and not clearly known to all the People, and
thereupon put in doubt and question. And over this, how that the Court of
Parliament is of such Authority, and the People of this Land of such a nature
and disposition, as Experience teaches, that Manifestation or Declaration of
any Truth made by the Three Estates of this Realm assembled in Parliament, and
by Authority of the same, makes before all other things most faithful and
certain quieting of Men's minds, and removes the occasion of Doubts and
seditious Language.

Therefore at the Request and by the Assent of the Three Estates of this Realm,
Ibid. f. 717.
THAT IS TO SAY, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of this Land,
assembled in this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, be it
pronounced, decreed, and declared. That our said Sovereign Lord the King was
and is the very undoubted. King of this Realm of England, with all things
thereunto belonging, within the said Realm, and without it, united, annexed,
and apperteining, as well by Right of Consanguinity, and Inhaeritance, as by
lawful Election, Election here signific nothing but Recognition.
Consecration, and Coronation.

Haereditary Right, and Right of Blood, was the Ground of this Establishment.

Henry the Seventh having no Haereditary Title of his own, and being always
Bacon's Hist. f. 7.
averse to take upon him the only true and undoubted Title of his Queen, eldest
Daughter and Heir to Edward the Fourth, procured an Act of Parliament Rot.
Parl. 1 H. 7.
That the Inhaeritance of the Crown of the Realms of England and France, with
all the Preheminencies and Dignities Royal to the same apperteining, and the
Ligeances to the King belonging beyond the Seas, etc. shall be, rest, remain,
and abide in the most Royal Person of our most Sovereign. Lord Henry the
Seventh, and in the Heirs of his Body lawfully coming, perpetually, and so to
endure, and no otherwise.

It may be noted from these words, That the inheritance of the Crown should
rest, remain, and abide, in the King, etc. That he designed not a Declaration
or Recognition of his Right, but rather an Establishment of that Possession he
had gotten by the Sword; for not thinking this Act a Sufficient Security for
him, nor depending on this Parliamentary Title, he extended his pretenses
beyond this Establishment, in at much as he procured it to be confirmed the
year following by the Bull of Pope Innocent the Eighth, in which this Statute,
with his Titles of Couquest, and Descent, are mentioned, and confirmed.

In Cotton. 1. Libr. Cleopat. E. 3.
The Bull says, That the Kingdom of England belonged to him by undubitable
right. Non modo jure Belli, ac notorio and indubitato proximo successions
Titulo, verum etiam omnium prelatorum; procerum, Magnatum Nobilium totiusque
ejusdem Regni Angliae plebis Electione, et noto ac decreto statuto et
ordinatione ipsius Angliae Regni trium Statuum in ipsorum conventu Parliamento
nuncupato:

That is, Not only by the right of War, and the notorious and indubitable next
It is true, if (...) in right of his Queen. And note, He prefers his Title by
Conquest and Succession, before that by Ad of Parliament.
Title of Succession, but also by the election of all the Prelates, and great
Men, and of the whole Commonalty of the Kingdom of England, and by a known and
decreed Statute and Ordinance of the Three Estates of the same Kingdom of
England, their meeting called a Parliament.

And afterward in the Thirteenth of his Reign he got his Bull renewed and the
Act confirmed again by Ibidem.
Pope Alexander the Sixth, under pain of Excommunication and Curse to such as
should upon any pretense whatsoever, disturb the peace of the Nation, and
create trouble against this Title of Henry the Seventh.

So that notwithstanding this Act of Parliament, which was cunningly penned to
Establish his possession he had obtained by the sword, He thought that, and the
Popes Bulls of Confirmation his best Title, yet not omitting his own pretended
indubitable next Right of Succession.

Henry the Eighth, next heir to the Crown by Proximity of Blood, as right Heir
to his Mother Elizabeth, Daughter and right Heir to Edward the Fourth,
succeeded his Father in his Kingdom; who in all Extravagant Acts concerning his
Queens and the Succession, ever founded it in pretended legal Proximity of
Blood, and Lawful next Heirs of Blood according to the due course of
inheritance; the pretended want of which, was the only suggestion for passing
these Acts.

In the Twenty fifth of Henry the Eighth there was an Act for the Succession;
Cap. 22.
the preamble this. In their most humble wise shown unto your Majesty your
most humble and obedient Subjects the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons
in this present Parliament, etc. That since it is the natural inclination of
every man to provide for the suerty both of his Title and Succession, although
it touch his only private Cause; we therefore reckon our selves much more
bounden to beseech and instant your I lighness to forsee and provide for the
perfect suerty of both you, and your lawful Succession, and Heirs, upon which
depends all our joy, and wealth, in whom also is united and knit the only
mere (...) the (...) and H^ir of (...) Houses of York and Lancaster.
TRUE INHERITANCE, and TITLE of this Realm without any contradiction. And then
mentions, that certain divisions arose upon ambiguities; and doubts not
perfectly declared from froward intents, to expound them contrary to the right
legalty of the Lawful Succession, and posterity of the lawful Kings and
Emperors of this Land.

After this confirming the Divorce of Queen Katherine, as also the King's
Marriage with Anne Boleyn, the Parliament entayles the Crown upon him and his
Heirs Male by her, and for want of such Issue upon Elizabeth their eldest
Daughter, and their Heirs Females according to the due course of Inheritance.

From whence it appears that the Succession was founded upon inheritance, and
the design of the Act was that Henry the eighth might have Lawful Issue to
inherit the Crown, that so all Ambiguities, and Doubts about the Succession
might be taken off. And all the Kings Subjects were bound under pain of
misprision of Treason to swear to observe the Contents of this Act.

The Act for Succession, 28 Hen. 8. c. 7. affirms there were many Lawful
impediments, unknown at the making of the Act of Succession, 25 Hen. 8. c. 22.
which since that time were confessed by the Lady Anno before Themas Archbishop
of Canterbury sitting Judicially for the same: Pult. Stat. f. 628. 630. Ibid.
^. 633
By reason of which impediments, the Kings Marriage with her was never good,
nor consonant to the Laws; and therefore Q. Elizabeth was declared
Illegitimate, and it was declared Treason for any Man to judge or believe the
Marriage between the King and the Lady Katherine, or Anne, to be good, Ibidem.
lawful, or of any effect. It was also in this Act declared Treason for any one
to take, accept, name, or call any of the Children born and procreate under
those unlawful Marriages, Ibis. f. 631.
legitimate, or lawful Children of the King. And therefore the Crown was
settled upon the King and his Heirs Males by his Lawful Queen Jane; and for
want of such Issue by her, upon his Heirs Males by any other Lawsul Wife; and
for want of Heirs Males, Ibid. f. 632.
upon his Heirs Females by Queen Jane, or any other Lawful wise. And for lack
of Lawful Heirs of his Body to be procreated and begotten as is limited by
this Act, to such person and persons in Possession and Remainder, as should
please the King; and according to such Estate, and after such manner, Ibidem.
form, fashion, order, and condition, as shall be expressed, declared, named,
and limited by his Letters Parents, or by his last Will. And then follows, And
we your most humble and obedient Subjects do faithfully promise to your Majesty
by one Common Assent, That after your decease, and for lack of Heirs of your
Body lawfully begotten as is before rehearsed, We, our Heirs and Successors,
shall accept and take, love, dread, serve, and alonely obey, such Person and
Persons Males or Females, as your Majesty shall give your said Imperial Crown
unto, by authority of this Act, and to none other; and wholly to stick to them
as true and faithful subjects ought to do to their Regal Rulers, Governors and
supreme Heads.

To provide for Lawful Heirs was the pretended Ground of this Act of
succession; not to exclude them, and to give the King a strange unheard of
Power to dispose of the crown. etc.

The Thirty fifth of Henry the Eighth, cap. 1. recites how the Crown was
entailed, 28. Hen. 8. and what Power was given to him to dispose of the Crown.
To the intent therefore that His Majesty's disposition and mind therein might
be openly declared, and manifestly known, His Majesty designing a Voyage beyond
Sea; it was enacted by his Highness, with the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same,
That in case it should happen, the King's Majesty, and Prince Edward, Heir
Apparent, to die without Issue of their Bodies lawfully begotten, so as there
be no Heirs Male or Female of either of their Bodies to have and inherit the
said Imperial Crown, that then it should be to his Daughter Mary, and her Heirs
lawfully to be begotten under such Conditions as should be limited by the
King's Letters Patents, or his last Will: And for default of Issue, to his
Daughter Elizabeth upon the same Conditions. But if no Conditions were
appointed, then the Succession to each of them, one after another, abosolutely.

And for want of Heirs by his Queen Katherine, his Lawful Wife; and for want of
Lawful Issue or Prince Edward, his Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, then the King
to dispose of the Crown at his only pleasure from time to time.

All these Acts of Succession were made by the King's Solicitation, Authority,
Command, or other Procurement; and were not other wife moved, contrived or
offered to him.

In the First of Queen Mary there is an Act, 1 Mar. Session. 2.c. 1.
declaring the Queen's Highness to have been born in most just and faithful
Matrimony; and also repealing all Acts of Parliaments and Sentence of Divorce
made or had to the contrary. The intention of this Act was to declare the
Succession to be in Inheritance by Right of Blood.

In the First of Elizabeth, Eliz. c.3.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons do declare and confess th t
Queen Elizabeth, and in very deed, and of most mere Right, ought to be, by the
Laws of God, and the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, their most rightful and
lawful Sovereign Queen: And that she was rightly, and lineally, and lawfully
descended and come of the Blood Royal of this Realm of England; in and to whose
Princely Person, and the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten after her, without
all Doubt, Ambiguity, Scruple or Question, The Imperial Crown and Dignity of
this Realm was rally and entirely vested. In this Law (whether it were true or
not in her) the right, lineal and lawful Descent of Queen Elizabeth was the
Ground upon which she was declared to be by God's Laws, and the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, most rightful and lawful Queen.

And whatever she and her Council secretly thought of her own Personal Title.
Yet upon the Treaty or Marriage with the Duke of Anjon, in the Answer to the
sixth Article delivered by the French Ambassador, it is declared, that the
Succession in her Kingdoms was, and ought to be Hereditary, according to
nearness in Blood. The words are Liberi ex hoc matrimonio prognati in materna
haereditate succedent in regnis, secundum jura and consuetudines regnorum, viz.
primogenitus filius in Coronam quam Regina matter habet, and si nulli extabunt
filii Masculi, filioe si extabunt, viz, prima and sola maxima natu, etc. Atque
idem ut fiat in hoereditate paterna loequum est, and quomodo consuetudines
locorum id ferent, intelligi parest. That is, The Children begotten of this
Marriage shall succeed in the Mothers Inheritance in the Kingdoms, according to
the Laws and Customs of the Kingdoms; that is to say, The First born Son shall
enjoy the Crown which the Queen Mother has: And if there be no Issue Male, the
Daughters, if there be any, shall succeed that is to say, the Eldest first, and
alone, etc. And that it is just the Succession should obtain after the same
manner in the Paternal Inheritance, if the Custom of the places would allow it.

After the death of Queen Elizabeth, the Act of Recognition, made Upon King
James his coming to the Crown, does not take notice of the Title raised by Act
of Parliament to Henry the Seventh, and the Heirs of his Body: But declares 1
Jac. c. 1.
that he was Lineally, Rightfully and Lawfully descended of the Body of the
most excellent Lady Margaret, eldest Daughter of this most renowned King Henry
the Seventh, and the high and noble Prinress, Queen Elizabeth, his Wife, eldest
Daughter of King Edward the Fourth. The said Lady Margaret being eldest Sister
of King Henry the Eighth, Father of the High and Mighty Princess of famous
Memory, Elizabeth, late Queen of England: Ibibem.
In consideration whereof, the Parliament does acknowledge King James their
only Lawful and Rightful Liege Lord and Sovereign, Ibidem.
And further say, as being bound thereunto both by the Laws of God and Man,
they do recognize and acknowledge Ibidem.
that Immediately upon the Dissolution and Deceasy of Elizabeth, late Queen of
England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of England, and all the Kingdoms,
Dominions and Rights belonging to the same, did by inherent Birthright, and
lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to His most excellent
Majesty, as being lineally, justly and lawfully next, and SOLE HEIR of the
Blood Royal of this Realm, as it is before said. And thereunto they do most
humbly and faithfully submit and oblige themselves, their Heirs and Posterities
for ever, until the last drop of their Bloods be spent.

What can be clearer than that the Succession to the Crown of England was
always thought, judged, had, taken and reputed to be from Nextness of Blood, by
the Opinion of all sober Men, by Law and Custom, by this, and other Acts of
Parliament, and Statutes before cited.

This then being the true History and Case of Succession to the Crown of
England, and its being only founded upon Proximity of Blood, the Author of the
Brief History of Succession, etc. ought to have called it An History of
Usurpations, Seditions and Rebellions. It was written and intended for a
purpose he will not own; that is, to show, that In the English Monarchy there
is not Right of Succession; but that Parliaments or Armies may set up whom they
please.

This, I confess, has been practiced in this Nation; and it was the main Cause
of the War between the Families of Tork and Lancaster; that proceeding from the
Right of the one Patty, and Possession of the other, and the Contrarieties of
Acts of Parliament was caused by the Alternate Victories of both.

But the doing of a thing makes it not lawful: Repeated Wickedness, or the
frequent Repetition of Wiekedness, gives no Authority to any one to commit that
Wickedness, as the frequency of Adulteries or Robberies does not justify
either of them.

I think it is no good Argument to say, Edward the Second was deposed and
murdered, therefore Richard the Second might be deposed and murdered; or,
That they were both deposed and murdered, therefore Charles the First might be
deposed and murdered; or, Because King Charles the First was deposed and
murdered, therefore King Charles the Second may be deposed and murdered.

Precedents are of force only in things lawful, obscure or dubious, but never,
in things unjust.

The Depositions and Murders of Edward the Second and Richard the Second, the
Usurpations and unlawful Actions of Henry the Fourth and Richard the Third,
were in their own times condemned by all good Men, even as the Actions of that
Parliament began in 1641. in ours, which I suppose is the reason why the Author
of the Pamphlet brings not them in as a Precedent; which would have served his
turn better than all his other Instances.

But besides their impious Instances, we ought to take notice of the
Expressions of these Men of Jesuitical Principles. They call Usurpation the
Election of the People; a Faction, the Commonwealth; the Actions of a few they
impute to all; They call Rebellion a just and judicial Proceeding; often and
open Perjury, an orderly Revoking of a Sentence; God's secret Judgment in
permitting Injustice to prevail, his owning and allowance thereof; the
Inconsistency and present Humor of the heedless Multitude, (who judge of
things, not by Reason or Justice, but either by Opinion, which commonly is
partial; or else by Report, which is usually full of Incertainties and Errors,
the most part Doing because others Do; all easy to be drawn in to serve any
wicked and ambitious Men's Attempts) they call the presumed Will and Consent of
the People: According to which (say they) the Succession of the Crown is to be
directed. And by these Arts they do very much impose upon their unwary Readers.

To this History of Succession belongs the Act of the Thirteenth of Elizabeth,
cap. 1. entitled An Act whereby certain Offenses are made Treason; which, as
many great and learned Persons think, was, upon the debate and making of it,
intended and designed to declare a Power in the Queen and her Successors for
ever, by Authority of Parliament, to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force
and validity, to limit and bind the Crown of England, and the Descent,
Limitation, Inheritance and Government thereof.

Sir Edward Coke 4 Instit. f 52.
says, Many Acts of Parliament are hardly to be understood, unless the History
of that time be joined thereunto. This Parliament met Pult. Stat.
April 2. 1571. 13 Eliz. and was dissolved Com. Jo^^a. mar. 29 Maii. fol. 39.
May 29. following.

This Parliament, we see, was holden in the beginning of the Year 1571. Some
Years before, but most especially in the Year1570. immediately preceding, Sei
Camden's Eliz. An. Dom. 1568, 1569, 1570, 1571.
there had been many Practices, and Seditious and Treasonable Contrivances
against Queen Elizabeth, by Foreign, as well as Domestic Enemies: By the Pope
and King of Spain, Duke of Guise in France, Duke D'Alva in the Netherlands, the
Fugitive English, etc. abroad: And at home, frequent Conspiracies to deliver
the Queen of Scots out of Prison, Attempts upon the Queen's Person, the
Rebellion in the North by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, the
Match of the Duke of Norfolk with the Queen of Scots; Ibid. fol. 171.
her Usurpation of the Crown of England, with the Title and Arms thereof; and
the Bull of Pope Pius the Fifth, by which he declared her a Heretic, etc. and
impiously, and without any Authority, other than Papal Tyranny; deprived her of
her Title, Dominions and Kingdoms, and absolved all her Subjects from their
Obedience and Allegiance.

All these, but Ibid. 149.
more particularly the Pope's Bull, and the Conspiracy of Norfolk, created much
trouble in the mind of Queen Elizabeth: And she sent to the Queen of Scots,
Cecyl and Sir Walter Mildmay, to consult with her by what means most
conveniently the Dissentions of Scotland might be compounded, her self
restored, and Queen Elizabeth, and her young Son, safe and secure.

Amongst the Propositions made to obtain these ends, these were two, Ibid. f.
1570.
That the Queen of Scots should renounce her Title and Claim as long as Queen
Elizabeth, and the Children lawfully born of her Body should live. That if the
Queen of Scots should attempt any thing by her self, or any other, against
Queen Elizabeth, she should, ipso facto, forfeit all her Right and Title she
claimed to England.

To which the Deputies of the Queen of Scots Lieutenants answered, That the
Title should be renounced as long as Queen Elizabeth lived: And That the Queen
of Scots should be excluded from all Right of Succession in England if she
attempted any thing against the Queen of England' s Right, so as if the Queen
of England would be likewise bound in some equivalent Penalty if she should
attempt any thing against the Queen of Scots.

There was no Agreement upon these, and other Propositions then made, because
the Scots-Deputies thought thorn too hard and severe, and not to be assented
unto without the greatest Inconveniences imaginable.

And thence followed new Designs and Contrivances for the Relief of the Queen
of Scots, etc.

The Marriage of the Duke of Norfolk with the Queen of Scots was first
propounded Ibid. f. 118.
by her great Enemy, the Regent Murray; and afterward carried on by the Earls
of Ibid. f. 126, 127.
Arundel, Northumberland, Westmerland, Sussex, Pembroke and Southampton, with
many Barons, and by the Earl of Leicester himself; who, with his own hand Ibid.
f. 128.
drew up Articles which he sent to the Queen of Scots, in number six; two
whereof were, That she should do nothing which might be prejudicial to the
Queen of England, or to the Children born of her, in the Succession of the
Kingdom of England. That she should revoke her Assignment of the Kingdom of
England to the Duke of Anjou. The occasion of this Article was, Ibid. f. 118.
that Murray had reported that the Queen of Scots had made over her Title to
England to the Duke of Anjou, and that her Conveyance was confirmed at Rome:
which the Queen utterly denied. And it was afterward discovered to be an
invention of Murray's to alienate Queen Elizabeth's mind from her.

To obviate all these Mischiefs and Designs; The Queen and her private
Ministers, the Earl of Leicester, Lord Burleigh and Sir Francis Walsingham
thought fit to improve the insinuation and Overture of a Match Ibid. f. 107.
made by the Queen Mother of France, but not very vigorously pursued until the
Year 1571. 13 Eliz. and in the time of the Sitting of the Parliament of that
Year, though 'twas not in that Assembly or their Journals taken notice of, it
being Complete Ambassador, Queens Letter, f. 66. Burleigh's Letter, f. 69.
Queens Letter, f. 83. and Qu. Let. f. 106.
secretly managed by order of the Queen, by her two then great Confidents, the
Earl of Leycester, and the Lord Burleigh, by the Mediation of Sir Francis
Walsingham, then Ambassador in France. Whether Leycester meant honestly and
seriously in this Affair, I cannot determine; Ib. f. 105, 108. June 7. 1571.
Ibid. f. 96.
he made great Professions that he did; the then Posture of Affairs being
represented to him by Walsingham, in a Letter dated from Paris, May 14. 1571.
in these Words.

MY very good Lord, The Protestants here do so earnestly desire this Match, and
on the other side the Papists do so earnestly seek to impeach the same, as it
makes me the more earnest in furthering of the same. Besides, when I
particularly consider her Majesty's Estate both at home and abroad, so far
forth as my poor Eyesight can discern; and how she is beset with Foreign
Peril, the Execution whereof stays only upon the Event of this Match; I do
not see how she can stand if this Matter break off. No particular Respect (as
God is my Witness) moves me to write thus earnestly, but only the Regard I
have to God's Glory, and Her Majesty's Safety.

Your Lordships to command, Fr. Walsingham.


How necessary this Match was at this time for the safety of the Queen and
Nation, we have the Opinion of this great Statesman and Minister; with whom
Leycester and Burleigh concurred in Opinion, as appears by their several
Letters relating to these Transactions. And since the French, in the Sixth
Article delivered in by the French Ambassador the Thirteenth of April, 1571.
propounded the Succession to be secured to the Issue of this Marriage,
according to the Laws and Customs of the Realms; to which Queen Elizabeth,
according to the common Opinion of the Understanding Men of those Times, not
having Right by Inheritance or Proximity of Blood, might think by this Act of
Parliament (that in effect does grant the general Surmise) to make good her
Title, and by this way and means to notify it to be according to the Laws and
Customs of the Realm. For the Duke of Anjou could not but have notice of the
pretended Defectiveness of her Claim, though not mentioned in the Treaty; and
therefore this might happily be done as much as could be to meet with and
satisfy that Objection, if it should be made, and that this might be a
private, though none of the great Considerations, of procuring and passing this
Act. He that will but observe these Particulars of History, and will take the
pains to compare them with this Act, may easily perceive it was made as a
Provision against such things, pretenses, and attempts, for the future, during
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as had then been done, used, and practiced: it being
then doubted whether the Laws and Statutes of this Realm then in force, were
sufficient for the Preservation of the Queens Person.

The Title of the Act is, An Act whereby certain Offenses are made Treason. And
the Bill in the Commons Sabbati, 21 Apr. 1571. fol. 18. b.
Journal was called, A Bill for Treasons.

The Preamble upon the Parliament-Roll is, Forasmuch as it is of some doubted
whether the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; remaining at this present in
force, are vailable and sufficient enough for the Surety and Preservation of
the Queens most Royal Person, in whom consists all the Happiness and Comfort
of the whole State and Subjects of the Realm, which thing all dutiful,
faithful, and loving Subjects ought and will with all careful Study and Zeal
consider, foresee, and provide for; By the neglecting and passing over whereof
with winking Eyes, there might happen to grow the Subversion and Ruin of the
Quiet and most happy State and present Government of this Realm, which God
defend.

Therefore Rast. Stat. tit. Treasons, n. 27 f. 5 54. a
it was Enacted, Declared, and Established, That if any Person or Persons
whatsoever, within the Realm or without, should compass, imagine, invent,
devise or intend the Death or Destruction, or any Bodily harm, tending to
Death, Destruction, Maym, or Wounding of the Person of Queen Elizabeth, or to
Deprive or Depose her of or from the Style, Honor, or Kingly Name, etc. or to
levy War against her Majesty within the Realm or without, or to move or stir
any Foreigners or Strangers with Force to Invade this Realm; or if any Person
of Persons whatsoever shall maliciously and advisedly declare and publish, That
Queen Elizabeth during her Life is not or ought not to be Queen of England,
etc. or, That any other Person or Persons ought of Right to be King or Queen of
the said Realm: or, That shall maliciously and advisedly set forth and affirm,
That Queen Elizabeth is an Heretic, Schismatic, Tyrant, Infidel, or Usurper:
That then all and every such said Offense and Offenses shall be taken, deemed,
and declared, by the Authority of this Act and Parliament, to be High Treason.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, Ibid. b.
That all and every Person and Persons, of what Degree, Condition, Place,
Nation, or Estate whatsoever they be, which shall at any time in the Life of
Queen Elizabeth, in any wi^e claim, pretendi utter, declare affirm or publish
themselves, or any of them, or any other than Queen Elizabeth, to have Right or
Title to have and enjoy the Crown of England during or in her Lifetime, or
shall usurp the same Crown or Royal Style, Title, and Dignity, during or in her
Lifetime; or shall hold and affirm, That she had not Right to hold and enjoy
the said Crown, or shall not (after demand) effectually acknowledge her to be
in Right, true and lawful Queen: They and every of them so offending, shall be
utterly disabled during their Natural Lives only, to have or enjoy the Crown
or Realm of England, or the Style, Title, or Dignity thereof, at any time in
Succession, Inheritance, or otherwise, after the Decease of the Queen, as if
such Person were naturally dead: Any Law, Custom, Pretense, or Matter
whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted, Ibid. f. 554 b.
That if any Person shall, during the Queens Majesty's Life maintain, hold and
affirm any Right in Succession, Inheritance, or Possibility, in or to the Crown
or Realm of England, or the Rights thereof to be in any such Claimer,
Pretender, Vtterer, Declarer, Affirmer, Usurper, Publisher, or
Not-acknowledger, shall be a High Traitor, and suffer and forfeit as in Cases
of High Treason.

And for the Confirmation and making good what had in this Law been hitherto
Enacted, Ibidem.
as much as might be, it was further Enacted, That if any Person should in any
wise hold and affirm, This Clause was mainly intended against the pretended
Authority of the Pope, by which he deposed her.
or maintain, That the Common Laws of this Realm not altered by Parliament,
ought not to direct the Right of the Crown of England; or, That our Sovereign
Lady Queen Elizabeth, with and by Authority of the Parliament of England, is
not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force and validity to limit
and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and
Government thereof; or, That this present Statute, or any part thereof, or any
other Statute to be made by the Authority of the Parliament of England, with
the Royal Assent of the Queen, for Limitting of the Crown, or any Statute, for
Recognizing the Right of the said Crown and Realm to be justly and lawfully in
the most Royal Person of the Queen, is not, are not, or shall not, or ought not
to be for ever of good and sufficient force and validity, to bind, limit,
restrain, and govern all Persons, their Rights, and Titles, that in any wise
may or might claim any Interest or Possibility in or to the Crown of England,
in Possession, Remainder, Inheritance, Succession or otherwise howsoever: Every
such Person so holding, affirming, or mainteining, during the Life of the
Queens Majesty, shall be judged a High Traitor, etc. And every Person so
holding affirming and mainteining, after the Decease of the Queen, shall
forfeit all his Goods and Chattels.

This Statute was a peculiar Law made for the Preservation of Queen Elizabeth's
Person and Title and this last Enacting Clause and Paragraph was made to
strengthen and confirm the former part of the Statute, which was a Provision
and Security against such Pretenses and Practices as were ennumerated in the
preceding Historical Account.

And if we consider how much (if not altogether) her Title to the Crown
depended upon Statute Law, and how Questionable her Birthright was generally
reputed to be, no man can much wonder if for her own advantage and safety, she
attributed more to an Act of Parliament than otherwise she would have done. She
was necessitated to take this course, to establish her self against the
Pretenses of the Queen of Scots, when her Birthright could not do it, it being
very doubtful whether she was Legitimate, considering the Proceedings in the
Divorce of Queen Katherine, Marriage of her Mother, and her Mothers Confession
28 H. 8. c. 7. Pult. Stat.
to Archbishop Cranmer, when the Statute was made for the declaring the
Marriage null and void between Henry the Eighth and Anne Bolein, by which
Statute she was also solemnly Bastardized.

And although Queen Elizabeth, at the entrance upon her Government was
acknowledged to be 1 Eliz. c. 3.
rightly, lineally, and lawfully Descended from the Blood Royal of this Realm,
Ibidem.
which if true, had been a sufficient Title, She being then the only remaining
Issue of Henry the Eighth; yet her right was recognized as depending upon the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and by express mention of and reference to the
Thirty fifth of Henry the eighth; by which Statute the Crown was settled upon
her, and the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten; in several places whereof,
she is by the King her Father, implicitly reputed and declared illegitimate,
and the settlement in that Act is made to her, as not being lawfully begotten,
or having right to inherit.

In the first of her Reign before cited, Ibidem.
when the Crown was declared to be vested in her, and that Declaration and
Recognition, as also the Limitation and Declaration of the Succession of the
Imperial Crown of this Realm mentioned and contained in the Act of 35 Hen. 8.
were to stand, remain, and be the Law of this Land for ever. Which
notwithstanding, when Mary Queen of Scots had claimed the Crown by right of
Inheritance, and had spread abroad that Title unto it, and also the Title of
the House of Suffolk, and other Titles were whispered up and down; the Act of
35 Hen. 8. or this Act of Recognition, were not thought sufficient to secure
the Queen Elizabeth. Then was this Act in the Thirteenth of her Reign made
merely either to create or strengthen her Title, and not to Exclude the Queen
of Scots from the SUCCESSION, unless she attempted any thing against her, or
laid Claim to the Crown, which was also in its own nature a securing Clause to
Queen Elizabeth: But the great Clause of Security to Queen Elizabeth in this
Act, was that Clause by which it was made Treason for any man to affirm that
she by Authority of Parliament could not make Laws and Statutes to bind the
Succession of the Crown, or that this Act or other Laws to be made by the
Parliament of England by her Royal assent, for limiting the Crown and
recognizing the right to be lawfully and justly in her person, is not, are not,
or shall not, or ought not to be for ever, of good and sufficient force. This
Clause was levelled against the Opinion, That the Queen of Scots had the best
Title; which began to spread, and gain much credit, as well amongst the
Nobility as Commons: By all which it is manifest, this whole Act was but
Temporary; and therefore we may note, with Pulton, that it expired with Queen
Elizabeth; and it was no Act of Exclusion, but a Law only to secure her Person,
and to make and confirm unto her a Title, which without Statute Law was in it
self at least doubtful. And the new Clause which was added, That it should be
High Treason, during her Life, for any Person to affirm, she by Authority of
Parliament had not Power to bind the Crown, and Succession thereof; or, That
the Right of the Crown and Realm was not justly and lawfully, in her Royal
Person; cannot affect the Title of a lawful Successor by Inheritance, nor be
brought or made use of as a Precedent to exclude him from, the Succession.

But it may be said, There is a great Forfeiture inflicted upon every Person
holding and affirming, after her Decease, That Queen Elizabeth and a Parliament
could not limit the Succession, and fix the Crown upon her own Head.

This Clause could take no effect after her death, and therefore was added to
preserve her Memory from being defamed after her Death, or slanderously charged
with the heinous Crime of Usurping the Crown, which in must have been the
inevitabble Consequence of affirming she and her Parliament could not limit the
Succession.

For she valued much her Credit and Reputation, and would seem to maintain
still, that he acted nothing against the Queen of Scots; and therefore the Law
is made in general Words, against every Person or Persons whatsoever, of what
Degree, Place, Nation, or Condition whatsoever, that should affirm she was not
in Right true and lawful Queen, or that should claim the Crown, etc.

In the Point of Succession she could never be brought expressly by Name to
exclude the Queen of Scots, or name any other Successor, as is clear from these
several Passages in Camden.

Dudley desirous by all means to oblige and obtain the Favor of the Queen of
Scots, Camd. Eliz. f. 73. A. D. 1564.
accused the Lord Keeper Bacon to the Queen, That he had intermedled against
the Queen of Scots in the matter of Succession; for which he lost the Queens
Favor, and was with much ado at last restored to it again by the Mediation of
Cecil, Ibidem.
upon, which our Author says, Certainly the Queen never heard any thing more
unwillingly, than that the Right of Succession should be called in question or
disputed.

The same Year Queen Elizabeth hearing of a Match like to be between the Queen
of Scots and Henry Lord Darly, Ibid. fol. 75.
to prevent it, advertifed her, by her Lieger Randolph, That that Marriage was
generally so dishked by all the English, that she had Prorogued the Parliament
to another time, against the minds of her Council, left the Estates of the
Realm being incensed, should even for this cause Enact somewhat against her
Right to the Succession. Jus Successionis.
Which that it might not be done afterward, she recommended Leycester unto,
her for a Husband, whom chiefly for that Reason she had created Earl.

In the Year 1566* a Parliament was called to meet on the First of November.
Ibid. fol. 83.
They began to Debate roundly about the Succession; and the Earls of Pembroke
and Leycester, and Duke of Norfolk, thought that an Husband was to be imposed
upon the Queen or a Successor publicly designed by Act of Parliament, even
against her will. Whereupon they were excluded the Presence-Chambcr, and denied
Access to the Queen; but they soon submitted themselves to her, and obtained
pardon. Ibid.and f. 84.
Yet the Upper House did by the Lord Keeper Bacon advise, move, and pray her to
Marry, and to appoint a Successor, if she or her Children should die without
Issue.

But some in the Lower House handled these things more tumultuously. Ibidem.
Bell and Monson, great Lawyers, Dutton, Paul, Went worth, and others, who
grated upon the Queens Authority too much, and amongst other things maintained,
That Kings were bound to design a Successor. At last they offered her far
greater Subsidies than they were wont, upon condition that she would design a
certain Successor. She absolutely refused that extraordinary Offer, and
accepted an ordinary Sum, commending their Affection.

The last day of the Parliament she made a Speech, and gave the busy Men a
smooth Reprehension. Ibid. f. 89.
I find (says she) that in this Parliament DISSIMVLATION has walked up and
down, masked under the Vizor of LIBERTY and SVCCESSION. Some of your Number
there are that thought it LIBERTY to dispute of the SVCCESSION, and that the
Establishment of the same is absolutely to be granted or denied. If I had
granted it, these Men had had their desire, and had triumphed over me; but if I
had denied it, they thought to have moved the Hatred of my People against me,
which my greatest Enemies could never yet do: But their Wisdom was
unseasonable, and their Counsels overhasty, neither did they foresee the Event:
Yet hereby I easily perceived who inclined toward me, and who were averse unto
me, etc.

Upon this Speech Camden makes this Remarque, Ibidem.
Thus a Woman's Wisdom suppressed these Commotions, every day so qualified
them, shining clearer and clearer, that very few besides such as were seditious
and fearful, were troubled about a Successor. And certainly most men, whatever
they pretend, have no more sense of Public Matters, than what concerns their
own Private.

To these Testimonies of the Queens aversion to pass a Bill of Exclusion of the
Q. of Scots, may be added a very clear and convincing one out of the Journal of
the House of Commons, in the Fourteenth of her Reign, after the passing this
Act, which is said so much to favor a Bill of Exclusion. Mr. Treasurer of the
Household, Mercur. 28 Maii. 1572. fol. 53.
Sir Francis Knolles, from the Queen, advised the House of Commons to go
forwards against the Queen of Scots with a second Bill; and that her Majesty
minded not by any Implication or drawing of Words, to have the Scottish Queen
either enabled or disinabled to or from any manner of Title to the Crown of
England; and willed, That the Bill be drawn and penned by her Learned Counsel,
before the same be treated of in the House; and that in the mean time of
bringing in of that Bill, the House enter not into any Speeches or Arguments of
that Matter.

With the Journal agrees a Passage in the Lord Burleigh's Letter Complete
Ambassador, fol. 219.
to Sir Francis Walsingham the Queens Ambassador in France, July 2. 1572. two
days after the Parliament was Prorogued.

Now for our Parliament, I cannot write patiently: All that we labored for,
and had with full Consent brought to fashion, I mean, a Law to make the Scottish
Queen unable and unworthy of Succession of the Crown, was by her Majesty
neither assented to, nor rejected, but deferred until the Feast of All Saints.
But what all other good and wise Men may think thereof, you may guess. Some
here have, it seems, abused their Favor about her Majesty, to make her self
her most Enemy. God amend them. I will not write to you who were suspected. I
am sorry for them; and so would you also, if you thought the suspicion to be
true.

Your assured Loving Friend, Will. Burleigh.


This Parliament did not meet again until the Eighth of February, in the
Eighteenth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, unless there be any better
Authority than Mr. Pulton's, in his Statutes, to make it appear that it did.
And although there never was greater fear and danger of the Introduction of
Popery and Arbitrary Power, by reason of the Queen of Scots Religion, her
Pretenses, and Practices, and the expectation of great Assistance from abroad
and at home, than at this time, yet we find not those that were suspected to
have advised the Queen this great Affair, to have been branded by Public Vote,
as Betrayers of the Queen, the Protestant Religion, and the Kingdom of England,
Promoters of the Scottish Interest, and Pensioners to Scotland.

This is a faithful Relation of the Succession. Whether I have fairly or
partially cited the Records and Histories I have used, any Man (if he please)
may inform himself. Whether it be expedient, just, or lawful to go about to
interrupt the lawful Succession by Birthright, or to endeavor to break or
vacate the Laws and Customs of the Nation, by which it is Established and
Governed, without any Motion, Solicitation, Procurement, or Intention of the
present true and lawful King by Birthright, for and upon the Suggestions in
the Bill mentioned, I leave to the Consideration of Wiser Men than my self. In
smaller Matters than this it was said, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutare.

A Parallel or Comparison between some Citations in the Author of the Brief
History of Succession, etc. And the Words of the Authors themselves.
Author of the Brief Hist. fol. 1. in the Margin.

EDwardum Elegerunt, Electum consecraverunt, and in Regem unxerunt. Sim.
Dunelm. An. 975. f. 160.

Fol. 3. in the Margin.

Hic Robertus semper contrarius and adeo innaturalis extiterat Baronibus Regni
Angliae quod plenario consensu and Consilio totius Comunitatis Regni ipsum
refutaverunt and pre Rege omnino recusaverunt and Henricum fratrem in Regem
erexerunt. Hen. de Knighton, c. 8. 2374.

Fol. 4. In the Notes in the middle of the Folio.

In Conventu Episcoporium, and aliorum de Regno optimatum, Mat. Westminster. f. 246.
an. 1153.

Fol. 4. In the Margin.

Convenerunt interim die Statuto ex Mandato Regis ad Londoniam totius Angliae
Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, Barons, Vice-Comites, Praepositi, Aldermanni cum
Fidejussoribus, Gervas, Hen. 2 fol. 1412. And, fol. 4. in the Body of his
History, says, This was a Parliament in which Henry the Second procured his Son
Henry to he declared King, together with himself, by their consent.

Brief History, fol. 5. in the Margin.

Post tam Cleri quam Populi solennem and debitam electionem, Rad. de Diceto,
fol. 647.

Ibid. f. 5. In the Body of the History.

King John applies himself to the People for a more sure Title [d] who being
summoned together, chose him King.

Ibid. in the Margin, [d]

Praelatorum Comitum and aliorum Nobilium infinita a multitudine, Brompt. 1281.

Fol. 10. in the Body of the History.

Please it your Grace to understand the Consideration, Election and Petition of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons, etc. Cot. Rec. fol. 709. This is
all considerable which he cites out of this Record.

Fol. 11. in the Body of the History.

In the 25th. Year of Henry the Eighth, an Act passed, wherein the Parliament,
in the Preamble, say, They were BOUNDEN to provide for the perfect Surety of
the Succession. They did not certainly reckon themselves bound to do a thing
that was not in their Power, Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 22.

Sim. Dunelm. Anno 975. col. 160. n. 40.

EDwardum, UT PATER SUUS PRAECEPERAT, Elegerunt, Electum, consecraverunt, and
in Regem unxerunt.

Hen. de Knighton, col. 2374. c. 8. n. 10.

Iste Robertus semper contrarius, and adeo innaturalis extiterat Baronibus
Regni Angliae quod plenario Consensu and Consilio totius Comunitatis Regni,
IMPOSUERUNT EI ILLEGITIMITATEM QUOD NON FUERAT PROCREATUS DE LEGITIMO THORO
WILLIELMI CONQUESTORIS, UNDE UNANIMI ASSENSU SUO, ipsum refutaverunt and pro
Rege omnino recusaverunt and Henricum fratrem ejus in Regem erexerunt.

Mat. Westminster. f. 246. an. 1153. n. 10.

Rex Stephanus omni haerede viduatus praeter solumodo Henricum Ducem
recognovit, in Conventu Episcoporum and aliorum de Regno optimatum. Quod Dux
Henricus jus haereditarium in Regnum Angliae habebat, and Dux benign concessit
ut Rex Stephanus tota vita sua suum Regnum pacifice possideret.

Chronica Gervasii, col. 1412. lin. 4.

Convenerunt interim die Statuto ex Mandato Regis ad Londoniam totius Angliae:
Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, Barons, Vice-Comites, praepositi Aldermani, cum
Fidejussoribus suis timentes valde omnes. Quisque juxta conscientiam suam
metuebat, nesciebunt enim, Quid Rex statuere decrevisset ipsa die Henricum
filium suum qui eadem septimana de Normannia venerat militem fecit, statimque
eum, stupentibus, cunctis and mirantibus, in Regem ungi praecepit and coronari.
Not one word here, or in all this story of this Author, of their declaring him
King.

Rad. de Diceto Imagines historiarum, col. 647. n. 40.

Comes Itaque Pictavorum Ricardus HAEREDITARIO JURE PRAEMOVENDUS IN REGEM post
tam Cleri quam Populi solempnem and debitam electionem, etc.

Chron. Johan. Brompt. col. 1281. n. 40, 50.

Johannes ab Huberto Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi in Ecclesia B. Petri
Westmonasterii INUNGITUR ET IN REGEM ANGLIAE CORONATUR ASSISTENT Prelatorum,
Comitum, BARONUM and aliorum Nobilium infinita multitudine.

Exact Abridgment of Records in the Tower, fol, 709, 710, 711, etc.

This is a very long Record, and this is all considerable he cites out of it;
whereas the whole Title of Richard the Third from Parliament in this Settlement
is grounded upon his being (as they pretended) the only true, right and lawful
Heir. See what is noted of this Record, and said concerning Richard the Third
in this History.

Pult. Stat. 25 H. 8. c. 22. The Preamble.

In their most humblewise shown unto Your Majesty, your most humble and
obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this
present Parliament, etc. That since it is the natural Inclination of every Man
to provide for the Surety both of his Title and Succession, although it touch
his only private cause; We therefore reckon our selves much more BOUNDEN TO
BESEECH AND INSTANT YOUR HIGHNESS TO FORESEE AND PROVIDE for the PERFECT SURETY
OF BOTH YOU and your MOST LAWFUL SUCCESSION and HEIRS, upon which depends all
our Joy and Wealth; in whom also is united and knit the only mere true
Inheritance and Title of this Realm, without contradiction.

These are some of his many wilful Mistakes: and indeed, there is scarce one
Instance in the Pamphlet that is not either falsely cited, or falsely applied.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 8. for Emmy, read Emma, l. 15 r. quique. p. 6. l. 16. f.
consensu, r consensum. l. 35. f. preditorum, r. Proditorum. p. 8. l. 11. f.
subjugandat, r. subjugavis. p. 9, l. 11. f. Aifred, r. Ailred. l. 40. f.
Clisonis, r. Clitonis p. 11. l. 11. f. Congregatio, r. Congregato. p. 13. l.
27. f. Adjucavit, r. Adjudicaviit. p. 17. l. 41. f. Numeri, r, nostri. l. 49.
f. Praesagia, r. praesaga. p. 25. l. 25. f. him, r. them. p. 34. l. 42. in the
Margin, r. Complete Ambassador, fol. 85, 86, 87. p. 36. l. 31. in the Margin,
r. Rot. Parl. 13 Eliz. n. 1.


