BRADSHAW'S GHOST: BEING A DIALOGUE Between the said GHOST, AND AN APPARITION
OF THE LATE KING CHARLES.

Wherein are laid down several Transactions that did occur in the many
Passages of his life, never known before.

Patent atri Janua Ditis. Printed in the Year, 1659.

Bradshaw's Ghost.
AFter the fleeting current of many trancient years, Truth, the daughter of
Time, began to show her self, and by making new discoveries of old passages,
so pulled off that visor of Hypocrisy, which had too long been worn, that one
might discover the true Phisiognomy, and as it were digito monstrare, point out
with the finger, the Ass ennobled with the Lions skin; for, the Republican
State-holders had no sooner got into the Saddle, but they began to ride in a
full cariere: the old Proverb in them was truly verified, Set a Beggar on
Horseback, and he will ride to the Devil; and so might they, if they had not
been stopped; for, that State-monster, Bradshaw, for the better modelling of
what was yet but in Embrio into a form, was mounted on the wings of ambitious
malice, and put into an office of the greatest trust and profit in the Nation:
But if (according to the vulgar opinion) Agues be spirits, then was Bradshaw
possessed, and the Devil being entered, he was now fit for what might in any
manner be put upon him; and here, for a while, he lords it, till his Mungrel
Masters now tottering in the Saddle, were by the Soldiery, those Sons of
Valor, quite dismounted, and consequently returned to their first original,
which was to be Terrae filii.

This purgation wrought so strongly, that White Hall began to smell; for the
Members defiled themselves so, that in every corner you would have sworn had
been Atkins: But Bradshaw being exceeding costive, the Devil owing him a shame,
and now intending to pay it him home, the Physic wrought not, but lay
grumbling in the gizzard, till what with that, and the strength of conceit, he
turned up his heels, and like a Jade, yielded the Crow a pudding.

Long had not these two companions the Soul and Body been parted, ere his Ghost
began to appear, and pacing up and down the dismal shades of the more
frightfull night, so terrifying the guilty consciences of his late Associates,
was at last encountered, to its own terror, by the Apparition of the late K.
Charles, which upon the sudden meeting thus accosted him.

Chapter And what art thou (bold fiend) that thus dare trouble these forbidden
lodgings, forbidden (I say) to the steps of such too curious, and more bold
than welcome Guests: speak, speak, I say, whence art thou?


Br. I am (quoth it) the Ghost of Bradshaw, now condemned with unwearied
walking, to trace this loathed place, to get a part, wherein was once my
ambition, though now too dearly and too late repented.


Chapter But tell me (fiend) what was the cause, in life, of your inveterate hate
against me?


Br. To speak the truth, I hated not your person, but your state, and that your
lofty eye did never cast a glance upon my shrub-like growth, I setting a value
on my self, and supposing you ought with Alexander to have given honor, such
as befitted a Princes gift, though by me wholly undeserved.


Chapter Was that the cause indeed? know you not that Providence guides the hand of
blind Fortune, and though we would, we cannot give beyond our alotment? but
surely, there were other motives that induced you to after actings, when you
and your Accomplices first drew the Sword, you threw away the scaherd: such
crimes as yours as great in this attempt, so still must be carried on by acting
greater; for, but to slack the hand, is as it were to lose the day: but pray
reveal the progress of those furious acts, which in a maze have put the
world, and by their various changes almost reduced all into a Chaos?


Br. When first the sound of War was noysed abroad, it was considered by what
means to steal the hearts of the People, no cloak was thought so fitting as
that of Religion; nor any bait so apt to be caught at, as that of liberty:
whereupon an alteration in the one, and a breach upon the other was proclaimed:
we did trace Jeroboam in the like case; the meanest of the People we extolled
and applauded, whose ignorance of what they would have, increased their fury:
'twas therefore closely insinuated, that some great ones must be removed, else
the Work would meet with many dangerous oppositions, I need not relate the
course was taken for perfecting the design; who were engaged, who discarded,
who checked, who countenanced: Reformation was pretended by all, intended by
few, for it is more than probable, that the Sword is an ill instrument for such
a work: but the work was begun, and it must be done; yet I verily suppose, much
of the evils that have happened, might have been prevented, if you had notbeen so
pitiful.


Chapter Truly I repent me not however of it, although long before my death, I was
told by a great man in my Kingdom, when I had with pity dismissed some active
persons against me, which I was advised to try by a Council of War; well (said
he) you may gain the Kingdom of Heaven by these doings; but if ever you get
the Kingdom of England, I never saw the like: how true I have found these
words, I am sure you, and all the world know.


Br. That was it I was coming to; for had you kept the rein of government in
your hands with some strictness, no one had dared to supervise you: or, if
after the War begun, you had driven Jehu-like, you might like him, even but
drawing a bow at a venture, have smitten your enemies in the joints of their
harness, and your self still have sat regnant in the Chariot.


Chapter But upon what account did you enter the stage, and how at last did you
arrive at that height of impudence, that you, of a whole reduced people, durst
undertake to sit as my judge? upon what principles did thy seared conscience
lay her foundation? or with what peace did it ever think to enjoy any thing so
injuriously, and without all right gotten?


Br. When now the Cause began to thrive, and things did succeed, even beyond
expectation, Felix and prosperum nefas virtus vocatur: all Opposers becoming
now Delinquents, and their sequestered Estates without control filling the
new-made Treasuries, I struck in for something, and by application to some of
the Grandees of the then leading faction, insinuated my self, as a Pleader at
the bars of their licentious Committees, wherein I soon became a great
Proficient, for I argued down learning, and endeavored to subvert even the
very foundation thereof, the Universities: whereby, and such other the like
practices, I was now thought a fitting ground for any impression; hereupon I
became acquainted with many Leaders, and in particular, with that sink of sin
and forge of Satan, Nich: Machiavels elder brother in their heathenish
Policies, old Noll, him we looked upon as Soloriens, and all his actions as
fitting Precepts for a State to be ruled by: this man hammering in his head how
to bring that to pass, which he so egregiously afterward effected, by a
counterfeit of zeal gained an opinion of godly; and under that notion his
intended villainies passed the vote without any serious examination. How he did
court you into a trap, your self I believe is too sensible; and because he
could not himself, he undermined your most intimate friends to betray you: what
force could at that time have manacled you, if you had not run into Caresbrook
Goal; and there too he was like to have been outwitted, for had you in that
personal Treaty granted at first what you conceded and yielded to at last, you
had taken Time by the fore-lock, and in all probability had still been King;
but, Post est occasio calva: which he knowing, and not willing to hazard his
design any more, gets you into his clutches.


Chapter But was it his intention at that time to use me as he did afterward?


Br. Yes truly was it, for then was the High Court of Justice a framing, and my
self at last after much debating, chosen President thereof.


Chapter But how did you think to look me your King in the face? with what spirit
were you possessed? or what inducements had you to move you thereto?


Br. I knew an act of that height must be carried on with that undaunted
courage, and when my sentence was past, and you laid aside, I knew honor and
wealth would both attend me.


Chapter But what should you have done, if I had pleaded as you urged me?


Why the thing had been still the same; Cromwell himself said, there was a
fatal necessity, that either You or He must die. Nec Caesar superiorem nec
Pompeius pacem: he joined both humors in his own person, for he could brook
neither superior nor equal. All things now thus fitted, and resolved on, I
endeavored to still my conscience into a belief of the legality of my fact,
and to that purpose I did light on a passage that pleased me, and the more for
that it was out of our own Chronicles; the passage was this: In a Parliament
time there was a certain head of Wax made by Negromancy (as it was reported)
which head at an hour appointed to speak, uttered these words following, at
three times, and then ceased to speak any more: the words are these. First, The
Head shall be cut off. 2. The Head shall be lift up aloft. And, 3. The feet
shall be lift up aloft above the Head. This happened in the time of that
Parliament that was called, The merciless Parliament, not long before that
which was called, The Parliament that wrought wonders. By this thing was my
wickedness heightened, and I so confirmed in my audaciousnesse, that I counted
it a small matter to imbrew my hands in the sacred blood of my King. After that
fatal business, I began to lord it over my brethren, and forgot the turfe
from whence I sprang: thus continuing for some time, at last I was arrested by
conscience, sera venit sed certa venit vindicta. Oh the terrors of a guilty
conscience! how often, in ghastly visions have my thoughts presented before me
your headless person, whose springs of blood have threatened an innundation both
to my soul and body? then have I weighed the calm though provoked Majesty that
sat on your brow, scorning fear, and disdaining the terrors of an enforced
death, rather then make a breach o^ those principles, wherein God and Nature
had tutore you, then is my soul torn in pieces with amazement and feels in it
self the everlasting torments of a reprobated soul, and to add to my griefs,
and heap up the measure of my woes, I was casheired out of employ ments, and by
him, for whom I had ventured so much, and even hazarded that soul which was
once purchased at a dearer rate.

Chapter Why? were you turned out of office? what might be the reason, and who the
person or persons that so either disaffected or feared you?


Br. Even the same that I formerly spoke of Cromwell and his crew of
bloodsuckers, for afterward when his devilish ambition aspired to grasp the
Scepter into his single hand, and I was consulted with, how the same might with
most applause be brought about, I declared, and told him freely, that if he had
such a thought to usurp the government, he and (by his means we) had committed
the most horrid Treason that ever was heard of, to which he answered, his
resolution was fixed and he would go through what ever happened, and so he did;
for shortly after he thrust out of doors those Quacksalvers of State, which for
14 years before had sat and hatched nothing but mischief, and from
henceforwards I was discarded, and he played absolutely Rex; and now began a
grand dispute between Liberty and Tyranny (almost as hot as in your time) for
they are incompatible and cannot meet together, or if they do, they last not;
every one seeks his own perfection, which depending upon the destruction of
another, they seek it there. It seems strange to the People that they should be
free, and yet serve, but is more strange ^o the Tyrant that he should be chief
Lord and not ^ommand, for whilst by violence Liberty is taken away it enforces
withal a violent Government; for to ^ive quietly, it behooves either to be
totally free or totally tied to servitude. Now Noll, according to old Nick's
rule of ingratitude, having pulled down the steps by which he rose, was at
first followed by many, because he conferred on them authority, but before his
end he was hated by them, because he incesed them by bereaving them of it; he
would not endure the Parliament which himself called, and because they took him
as a Companion, whom they accepted as their Prince, he would make them slaves,
whom he took for assistant Officers: thus they grew into factions, till at
last, after one of his Daughters had died frantic and another lived Pockified,
himself in a furious storm and tempest of wind was hurried away, whether to
Heaven or to Hell I will not judge, though probably the latter place was best
deserved.


Chapter It Is an approved rule among moral men, Turpe est doctori cum culpa
redarguit ipsum, my reign was thought bad, though like Solomon's it abounded in
gold and goodness, but my Successors little finger was heavier then my loins,
Coldius accusat gracchos, catilina Cethegum, I was accused for evil
Counselors; but these like Catiline made a conjuration against the
Commonwealth, and caroused to its confusion in boles of blood, O Tempora! O
Mores! but what succeeded after him?


Br. The people yet contriving in their frenzy, set up an Idol after their own
imagination: The people gave their eare-rings, and ecce evenit vitatus iste.
Squire Dicke mounts the Stage, but like a young player danted with that he was
not accustomed, he forgets his part, and so after a little pause, and a turn or
two, with a general hiss, exit, leaving his stink behind him.


Chapter Why? was He forced to relinquish his ill gotten rule, and to retain to a
private life?


Br. Yea verily, and a good shift too, he had Hobsons choice, so or nothing:
and after him returns the many headed Hydra endeavoring with the Bear to
lick themselves into a model, and to that purpose, enter Hieronimo, with the
good Old Cause, like the man in the Moon with a bundle of bushes at his back.


Chapter The Good Old Cause, what was that? bid those Phaeton-like drivers return
to the first principles they had before their rebellion.


Br. Alas! no such matter, but now as they formerly Martyred you, now they were
to drive out another; and here I became useful again, now I was looked upon,
saluted, exalted, and Offices bestowed upon me; once more I made my felf
cock-sure: but see how fickle is our fortune, and how vain are our hopes, even
in the height of our rising, we were suddenly overthrown, and all our
greatness vanished into air. And as to the thing called the Good Old Cause, it
is no other then the Quarrel at first begun with you, and now newnamed,
nicknamed, or indeed rather rebaptised, but it was not long reverenced either
for its age, or goodness, but like an old Almanac laid aside as useless, and
this was it that broke my heart, the air of a Commonwealth, with the profit
arising thereby, might have lengthned my life, but to see Mars triumphant, and
yet our selves casheired, would it not even vex a Saint? I took pleasure in
nothing, not in Deanes and Chapters Lands, though enriched by them, nor in my
high-builded nest, whereby I trample on Churches, for, for the Cause, the Good
Old Cause; my heart did bleed: and what with that, the loss of my employments,
and the certainty of never enjoying the like again, made me like Achitophel
retire and die, and oh that now I might find that so much controverted
Purgatory, but ah ex inferno nulla est redemptio, I had not ever grace enough
to repent, and therefore now must my Ghost wander restless up and down, for in
hell I find no company; the fact that I did was so unparralleld, that it is
with me as the Preacher said once it was with the Jesuits, there was a little
Hell prepared for them on purpose; lest they should breed confusion among all
the rest: so I find there is not only a little Hell, but peculiar torments,
for such heaven-daring regicides, for Pluto himself is afraid to be condemned
and unthroned, if I might be admitted at large in Hell.


Chapter Then stay thou there (foul fiend) and when men see A time to murder Kings
they will send for thee.


The End.

