A SERMON Preached in the Minster at YORK, At the ASSIZES there holden the
thirtieth day of March, 1663.

By Thomas Bradley, D. D. Praebendary of the Cathedral and Metropoliticall
Church there, and Chaplain to his late Majesty of blessed Memory; Oxon' Exon'

YORK, Printed by Alice Broad, living in Stone-gate over against the Star,
1663.

To the Honorable Sir THOMAS GOWER, Knight and Barronet, High-Sheriffe of the
County of York, one of the Deputy-Lievtenants for that County, and a Member of
the Honorable House of Commons.
Right worthy Sir,
IT was your pleasure to lay this task upon me, to preach this Sermon; and
that done, it begat another far greater then it, that was to Print it; to
whom then should I return it but to your self who has the best Right to it?
I will not make my Epistle swel by trumpetting out your Fame and Praise, in the
remembrance of your noble and prudent carriage and deportment in all the great
Offices of Honor and Trust which you bear, (which renders you so worthy a
Patriot) but only (with tender of this Paper present) Subscribe my self.

Your very faithful and ready Servant. THO: BRADLEY.

Job 29.14, 15, 16, 17. I put on righteousness and it clothed me: my judgment
was as a Robe and a Diadem.

I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame.

I was a father to the poor: the cause which I knew not, I searched out.

I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of his teeth.


Here Is a high testimony in this Text of some Honorable Person, but who that
was, this text does not tell us; surely he was a person of great Authority and
power, an eminent Magistrate, a Judge at the least, perhaps a King; nay without
perhaps, the learned Expositors upon the Book of Job tell us that Job was a
King, Non dubito quin Job Rex suerit in orient; (says Didacus) I nothing
doubt, but Job was a King in the East: and if you read over the Inventory of
his Goods and substance, Job 1. you will find that it was so great that it
might well become the State of one of the Kings in those places, and parts of
the world in those times; and as Moses was a King in Jeshurun, so himself
tells us of himself, in the last verse of this Chapter, that he dwelt amongst
them as a King in the Army; and to go no farther then the Text, we see him here
clothed with his Regalia, his Royal Robes and his Diadem: And yet all this
Greatness (and which is more his Goodness too, added to it, and joined with
it) could not secure, nor protect him from the strangest change that ye have
heard of, and from the state of high Majesty, to the lowest estate of Misery
that man could be capable of; here you see him in the text, in State and
Majesty, sitting upon the Throne, executing Judgment and Justice unto the
people, and by and by look upon him in the first of Job, and you find him
sitting upon the dunghill, stripped of all those Robes of royalty and of glory,
and scraping his ulcerous body with a pot-sheard, to day the richest man in all
the East, and to morrow the poorest man in all the world, Irus and est subito
qui modo Craesus erat.

This is all the hold we have of the things of this world, all the assurance we
have of our temporalls, riches, honor, power, glory, all that this world can
give, or lend, they take themselves to the wings and fly away, and leave us in
worse case then they found us: you know the story of the rich man in the
Gospel, Luke 15. in the abundance of these things he sings a Requiem to his
soul, Soul take thy ease, thou have goods laid up for many years; alas poor man
he dreams of many years, and (God know's) he has not many hours to live, this
night (says the Text) they shall setch away thy soul; and then whose shall
these things be? nay, whose shall thou be?

But howsoever this was Job's comfort in the day of his calamity that when
things were better with him, and when he was in his prosperity and power, he
carried himself as he should do, and laid them both forth to do good in his
generation; the remembrance whereof now is a great comfort to him, and upon
which he feeds with much joy, and content. A rare example for all great Ones,
yea for the best of men in their best estate, when they are in prosperity, and
power, and have time, and opportunity, and ability to do good, that they
improve it, and take the advantage of it, to do all the good they can; to do
good while they have time, as St. Paul admonishes us Gal. 6.9, 10. to do
something, the remembrance whereof may be a cordial and a comfort to them, in
the day of their distress; this was Hezekiah's comfort in the day of his
visitation: Isaiah 38.3. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in truth and with a perfect heart; This was his food and his best
Physic, very sovereign for the lightning of his Cross, and the sweetning of
the bitterness of affliction; and so shall we find it to be too in such a
day, Conscientia been actae vitae, mul^orumque been factorum recordatio
jucundissima est; the conscience of a life well spent, and the remembrance of
much good done by us in time of our prosperity, (when we had time to do it) is
sweet and precious: Job found it so here in the Text, and his mind ran upon
it with much satisfaction and content; I put on Justice and it clothed me: I
was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame etc.

But admit all this, does Job well to commend himself for it? Let another man
praise thee, and not thy self, a stranger, and not thine own lips: Pro: 27.2.
It Is true, the praise of a man sounds better out of another mouth, then of his
own; yet there are some cases wherein it is not expedient only, but necessary
for a man to speak in his own praise; where silence against fowl and false
accusations may be interpreted a confession, then it is but necessary that a
man should stand upon his own justification: if another man do a man open
wrong, it is but reason that he should do himself open right, by insisting upon
his own just vindication; and whatsoever seeming vanity or oftentation there
may appear to be in it, they are justly to be charged with it that compel us
to it, not we that did it: I am become a fool in boasting myself, but ye have
compelled me. 2 Cor: 12.11. This was Job's case at this time, (seeing God had
turned his hand against him, and broken down his hedges that he had made about
him) wicked and uncharitable men, begin to censure him and to charge him with
many and fowl and false calumnies and aspertions, that all the fair shows that
he had made of. Justice and piety, were but hypocrisy; and certainly he was
all this while but a wicked man, and now God had found him out, and punished
him for it; nay (to lay his accusation the more close and home) they fall to
instances, and charge him with particulars, clean contrary to these virtues
that here he mentions, Thou have taken a pledge from thy brother for naught,
and stripped the naked of their clothing; thou have not given water to the
weary to drink, and thou have witholden bread from the hungry. Job 22.6, 7. In
such a case of calumny, can any man blame the good man if he do insist more
then ordinarily in his just vindication, by putting in his just defense against
their unjust allegations, for the clearing of his uprightness, innocence and
integrity, as in the Text; Where by the way let us take up this Observation,

Obser. That there is not the wisest, the justest, nor the uprightest Magistrate
that can with all his integrity, justice, or sincerity, free himself from the
calumnies and obloquies of wicked, and unreasonable men.

Was there ever a juster Magistrate then Moses was, that governed the people by
immediate direction from God himself, yet how often do we hear that
unthankful people murmuring against him and against Aaron, many times were
ready to stone them? what do we think of Solomon the wisest of the sonns of
men, Jedidiah, the beloved of the Lord, who had the privilege to ask at the
hand of God what he would, and had what he ask't, a spirit of wisdom and
understanding that he might wisely go in and out before the people; 1 Kings
3.5. yet what grumblings, and murmurings of the people were there under his
government? in what a mutinous manner do they come to Rehoboam the young
King, with their seditious petition, 1 Kings 12.4. Make our yoke easier, and
our burden lighter, thy Father made our yoke grievous, and our burden heavy:
belike the had charged them with some Carts and Carriages to fetch home some of
the materials that were for the building of the Temple; or required some
Contribution toward the charge of that great work; and oh what a grievance this
was! make thou our yoke easier, and burden lighter. So when Kings, and
Princes, and great Magistrates have done their best, and laid out themselves
with their utmost endeavors for the good of their people, and made it their
very study, and their business to preserve their peace, and to guide them with
a faithful and a true heart, and to rule them prudently with all their power;
This is the thanks they have from unworthy people, to be clamoured upon, to be
charged with Tyrany, oppression, and cruelty; if any thing be amiss in a whole
Kingdom, if all parties be not pleased (which is impossible) presently they
fall upon the Rulers, and Governors, (not sparing the highest) when (God
knows) the cause of those distempers are in themselves. 2 Samuel: 24.1. we read,
that God was angry with Israel and he moved David to number the people: here
was a great judgment in the Land, it swept away in three days threescore and
ten thousand of the Subjects: mark how this plague took its rise, it was in
the people; God was angry with Israel, and he moved David to muster the
people; his anger was not against David, but against Israel: 'twas the cold of
the feet that struck up to the head, and caused that distemper. But let not
Kings nor Magistrates be discouraged in the execution of their Offices, and
performance of the duties of their High-calling for all this: let them not
think the worse of themselves for the obloquies of those mutinous tongues that
speak evil of them; but let them remember, they are under the care of him
that is able to deliver them from the strivings of the people, and under the
protection of that mighty power which is able to still the raging of the Sea;
and the madness of the people (as raging as it is when they set a madding) and
will subdue the people that is under them: Psalm: No man could have greater
discouragements and affronts then this holy Ruler had; yet the more they
opposed or resisted the greater courage did he take unto himself to suppress
their insolences; for which purpose, He put on Justice and it clothed him: and
his judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem, etc.

In which words we have a perfect Character of a worthy Magistrate, a Prince, a
King, any in high place and power, to execute judgment: and it consists of
four Parts; 1. His love to Justice, with his zeal, care, and conscience duly to
execute it, in the 14 verse: I put on Justice and it clothed me, and my
Judgment was a Robe and as a Diadem upon me. 2. His inclination to mercy and
compassion, where he found stir Objects for it, in the 15 verse: I was eyes to
the blind, and feet was I to the lame; and a father to the poor. 3. His pains
and patience, his care and diligence, in examining of the Causes that came
before him; for finding out of the truth, that so he might give judgment in
them without error: in the later part of the 16 verse, The cause which I knew
not I searched out. 4. His courage in executing justice and judgment upon
offenders, when he had by diligent search found them guilty, though they were
never so great, or never so insolent, never so mighty; I brake the jaws of the
wicked, and I plucked the preyout of his teeth. First, He plucked the prey out of
their teeth, by causing them to make restitution and satisfaction for the wrong
they had done: And secondly, he break their jaws that they should do so no
more. Of these (something in the order proposed) as the time and business of
the day will permit.


And first, of the first part of his character, in his love, and care, and zeal
to execute Justice and Judgment, expressed in the words of the 14 verse I put on
Justice, and it clothed me, and my Judgment was as a Robe and as a Diadem
upon me. In which words are expressed two things concerning the Magistrate;
first, his Office; secondly his Honor: his Office, in these words, I put on
Justice and it clothed me; his Honor in these words, my Judgment was as a Robe
and as a Diadem: in the former we have his duty, and in the latter his dignity:
the former is intimated to us by this expression of putting on Justice, and
being clothed with it; a metaphor which the Scripture much delights in: Put
ye on the Lord Jesus Christ: Rom: 13.14. Put on bowels of mercy: Coloss: 3.
Put on the whole armor of God. Ephesians: 6. so in the Text here, I put on Justice
and it clothed me; intimating thereby, that look what clothing is to the body,
that was Justice unto him. Now we put on clothes for these three uses; first,
to cover our nakedness, and so they are indumenta, for a covering; secondly,
to protect us from the injury of the weather, and so they are munimenta, for
defense: thirdly, for comeliness and decency, and so they are ornamenta, for
ornaments: and as cloths are all this to the body, so are all virtues to the
mind; and such was justice and judgment to Job, and is to every worthy
Magistrate: from hence arise's this point or Observation.

Obs: 1. That it is the great duty or office, of great Princes, Rulers, and
Magistrates to execute Justice and Judgment unto the people.

Our Lord Jesus Christ (the fountain of Honor and Power, from whom all Kings
and Princes derive that power which they have) accounts it his great honor and
office to execute Judgment and Justice; for of him does the Father say,
Faithfulness shall be the clothing of his reins, and righteousness the
girdle of his loins: and when his titles of Honor are reckoned up, Isa, 9.
this is not the least of them, that he shall sit upon the Throne of David, and
upon his Kingdom, to order and to establish it; and to execute Justice and
Judgment for ever; wh (by these his Deputies, and Vicegerents) he does to this
day: and what greater Honor, Power, and Trust can be committed to them? or how
can they better lay out themselves, then in the faithful discharge of it? it
is the very object of their calling, the sum and substance of their duty; the
end why God has exalted them above other men, anointed them with the oil of
honor above their Fellows, put a greater measure of his Spirit upon them,
stamped a clearer impression of his Image upon them, that so they may rule with
the greater Authority, and the people submit unto them with all that due
reverence and obedience, that belongs unto them.

And as it is their great duty to administer Justice, and to execute Judgment
unto us; so it is our great benefit that God has appointed such an Ordinance
among us, and given such power unto men for the good of us all: without, it
what would become of us? without it, what would become of our liberty, our
property, our peace, our security? which of us could call any thing our own, or
secure our selves of our lives for one hour? it is by the execution of Justice
and Judgment that we live; it is by the benefit of justice that we enjoy any
thing we have, that we sit every man quiet under his own Vine, and his own
Fig Tree, and eat the fruit of our labors. Oh therefore bless God for
Government, for the administration of justice and judgment amongst us: Pray
for them to whom the power is committed to execute it; give them all
encouragement, that they may do it with cheerfulness; and show your
thankfulness to them by yiedling all due reverence and obedience to their just
commands. And so I pass from the Office to the Honor, from the Duty to the
Dignity of the Magistrate, intimated in those Ensigns of honor which he wore,
the Robe, and the Diadem. -- My judgment was as a Robe, and a Diadem.

It aprears by this expression, that in those times, and those parts of the
world, (scarce yet thoroughly civilized) yet they had Government, they had
Magistrates among them: not only reason, but nature it self taught the
necessity of them, inasmuch as in all Nations (though otherwise never so
barbarous) the use of them was taken up.

It appears further, that when they went forth to fit in the Gate, or upon the
Bench, or the Throne to execute judgment, they were clothed with garments of
honor, and wore such Ensigns of Authority and power, as might well become the
dignity of their Office and Calling: so we read of King Priamus, Hoc Priami
gest amea erat cum jura vocatis More dabat populis: Virgill, in the 8. of his
Aehids.
-- These Robes did Priamus wear when he gave Laws and administered Justice to
the people: and when Solomon gave judgment; we read that he sat upon a
magnificent Throne, and was clothed with royal Robes and ornaments, answerable
to his royal State, 1 King: And this is necessary; first, for State and
Dignity, when God had called Aaron to the honor and office of the high priest,
he commanded Moses to give direction, for the making of him rich garments, the
richest that could be made, both for the materials, and the workmanship; for
the materials, they were to be of Purple, and fine Linen, Gold, and Silver,
and precious stones; and for the workmanship, it was of Embroidery, and that so
curious, that the world did not afford men cunning enough to work it, but
Almighty God did endue two chosen men, ( Bezaleel and Aholiab) with a special
and extraordinary spirit for that purpose; and when all was so done, the Lord
tells us, that this was, the special use of them, they were to be made for
Aaron, for Beauty and for Glory. Exodus: 28.2.

Secondly, They were for distinction; as for beauty and glory, so for
distinction: God did not make the world level at the first, nor never meant it
should be so, and although he made all men of one mettle, yet he did not cast
them all in one mould; he has made some high, and some low, some rich, and
some poor; some to command, and some to obey; upon some he has put a greater
measure of his Spirit, then upon others; some he has endued with extraordinary
gifts above others, gists of wisdom, understanding, and knowledge, whereby he
has fitted and enabled them for high Callings, Offices, and Employments above
others; and as there is this internal difference between one man and another,
so it is agreeable to reason, that there should be some visible ensigns of it,
whereby it may outwardly appear to others: nature it self has taught a
difference and distinction of men, one from another; and even in this Kingdom
before clothes were in use (any more then such as the Inhabitants clothed the
nether parts of their bodies with, and they were the skinns of wild beasts,)
they did visibly declare a distinction among themselves, by the painting of the
upper parts of their bodies: hence those that were acknowledged for Primes
among them, and great men, bore in the painting of their bodies, one the Sunn,
another the Moon, another the picture of the Lion, another the Eagle, and so of
other creatures; from whence our great English Antiquary conjectures that this
Island took its name to be called Brittania, from the ancient Brittish-word
Brith, which signifies Painted; and the Greek (...), which signifies a Region
or Country: as if he should say Regio pictorum, the Region of painted men. Upon
this account is it, that Kings have their Crowns, Bishops their Mitres, Nobles
their Ermins, Judges their Robes, and we (of the University) our several Hoods
and Habits, (according to our Degrees) for Dignity, and distinction.

Thirdly, That their very presence may strike an awful reverence in those that
are to be governed by them: Cultus magnificus addit hominibus authoritatem;
says Quintillian, Institut: lib. 1. They speak Majesty, Power and Authority in
them that wear them, and add (in the estimation of the people) glory and
honor, to those that are clothed with them: And state, and magnificence to the
actions that are done in them.

Fourthly, They are documents to them that wear them, and put them in mind what
they are, and what they have to do; and admonish them to carry in them that
state and gravity that becomes them, and so to demean themselves that they may
be a greater honor to their Robes, then their Robes are to them.

Upon all these accounts, how unreasonable are the exceptions of vain and
sordid men against them, who look upon them with an envious, and an evil eye,
and charge them with vanity, and ostentation, and such as might well be spared?
surely had these men been in Moses's time, they would have controlled the
wisdom of God, in appointing such rich Garments to be made for Aaron with an
ad quid haec perditio? what needs this wast? whereto is all this cost? they
would have told us, that God is a spirit, and that Aaron should have worshipped
him in spirit and in truth; and if he did so, it were all one whether he did
Minister in a pair of linen, or of letherne Breeches an Ephod, or a Miller's
jacket: and so I leave this first part of the Character, and come to the
second, His inclination to mercy and compassion where he found fit objects for
it, in that he was Eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and to the poor a
Father.

Under these three sorts of people are comprehended all such poor, impotent,
helpless people of what sort or kind soever, which stand in need of our help
and relief. And if I take the words literally, and so plead the cause of such,
I shall therein do the Text no wrong; for how do the streets swarm with such?
how are the highways and hedges lined with them? besides, how many
Hospitalls, and Almes-houses are there full of such, founded by the piety and
charity of merciful men for their releif, yet (what by the cruelty and
covetuousness of some, what by the negligence and unfaithfulness of others
entrusted for them, what through the inabilty of those that are in them to
help themselves) shamefully wronged and defrauded, and the means belonging to
them in a second, or third generation (well nigh) quite extinguished: now (in
such cases) for the Magistrate to look upon them with a merciful eye, and
provide for their releife, by reviving wholesome Laws made for that purpose,
by setting on foot the Commissions for pious and charitable uses, and taking
care to the due execution of them, is certainly a work not only of Justice but
of mercy too, well worthy the care of a worthy Magistrate, by which he shall
become as Job in the text, Eyes to the Blind, feet to the lame, and to the poor
a father.

But Job had a farther meaning in this Expression then this; he speaks
Metaphorically; by the blind, does Job understand the ignorant man, by the
lame, the impotent man, and by the poor the indigent man: and they all equally
stand in need of help. The blind man has legs good enough to walk with, but
he wants eyes to see his way; and so he must necessarily fall into one of these
two mischiefs, or both, either to err out of the way, or to stumble and fall
in it; the lame man has eyes good enough to see his way, but he wants legs to
go in it, and so is in as ill case as the other: the poor man may have both his
eyes, and his limbs, and yet being poor, and wanting a purse to carry on his
business, he is in as ill a condition as any of the other: the worthy
Magistrate is a releif to them all, and supplies them with those helps that are
most suitable to their several necessities; Ignorantem dirigendo, impotentem
supportando, indigentem sublevando; by directing the ignorant, supporting the
impotent, and relieving the indigent, and thus make good the Character here in
the Text, and becomes Eyes to the blind, feet to the lame, and to the poor a
father. The ignorant man has a good Cause, but wants skill to manage it,
wants eyes to spy out all those niceties which (in his proceedings, and
carrying of it on) might destroy it; and indeed he had need of good eyes
indeed, that can spy out all the windings and turnings, the niceties, quirks,
quillets, quidities, that a good Cause may be subject to, and yet there is not
the least of these, (suppose the misdateing a Declaration, mistaking a Name, or
mis-spelling of it, vitium scriptoris, or some such slight matter) but it shall
be pleaded to the destruction of the whole business; and the poor Clyent shall
be forced either to loose his Cause, or to put his Cap to daying (as we use to
say) or to fetch it about again, and again upon some such other light and
slight Cause, till he become weary of his Suite, and his life too, and choose
rather to sit down and to loose all, then to hazard the recovery of it, by a
remedy worse then the disease: now in such a case for a Magistrate to lend an
eye to the blind, is certainly on Act not only of Justice, but of Mercy too,
and of pure charity. And here by the way, let me propose it to you
nimble-Pleaders as a case of conscience, whether in such a case (when you see
the Cause clearly against you, truth and equity on the other party,) for the
love of a Fee, or to advantage a Clyent you may lawfully undertake in it, and
set your wits upon the tenters to find out some such slight errors or mistakes
to overthrow it, and to use your cunnings against your conscience to the
perverting of judgment. And so I pass from the blind to the lame, another sort
of impotent People here quartered in the next room of this Spittle in the Text;
I was eyes to the blind, and limbs to the lame.

The former sort of impotent people we spoke of, wanted eyes to see, these want
limbs to walk; and so are in as ill a case as they: for though they see their
way never so well, yet if they want legs and limbs to go, there may they sit
still and perish, and without help must needs do so; look what the want of
legs is to an impotent man for walking, such is the want of means to any man
to carry on his business in any undertaking: for instance, In the military way
Rabshakeh says truly 2. Kings 18.20. Wisdom and Counsel are for the war,
they are the eyes; but let those be never so good to contrive, yet if they want
men, munition and moneys (they are the legs or sinews of war, as we call
them) they will make but slow marches or Progress in their undertakings; even
such as a man would do in a journey traveling without legs, or with legs
without sinews: Ha^niball in his war against the Romans found it so; and for
this we may (if we please) multiply instances enough in any kind of
undertaking: take one in that way which is proper for our discourse at this
season; in carrying on of a Suit in Law: An honost man has a Cause good
enough, he has eyes good enough to see it, and knows the way of the
proceedings, and how it should be managed, but he wants wherewithal; he wants
legs: first, he wants a purse, that is one leg; and secondly, he wants power
and friends to countenance his Cause, that is another leg, and that must needs
go hard with him when he wants both legs; if he had but one of them, yet he
would make some hard shift to hop, or halte along, or help himself with a
Crutch, or a wooden-legge, or (rather then fail) a silver-legge (I have heard
of such) but when a man wants both, that must needs go hard with him, and such
were the impotent which Job relieved in the Text; I was limbs, or legs to the
lame: he speaks in the plural number: Now in such a case for a compassionate
Magistrate, to lend a Hand, a Crutch, a Leg, or any thing to a helpless lame
man, is certainly an act of pure mercy, and charity: or if he will not lend a
leg to the man, yet to lend a leg to his Cause, and to his proceedings in it,
that it may go on with expedition, and be brought to some issue, in some time,
and not hang in suspense, and be delayed from time to time, by new motions, and
orders, writs of error, devices to carry it out of one Court into another, till
they tire out a man at a long runnning, for want of legs to maintain his
course. You know the story of the impotent man in the 5. of John which lay at
the Banks of the Bath or Poole of Bethesda, so many years; at certain times
there came an Angel and moved the waters of the Bath, and then whosoever stepped
in next, had certain cure of his infirmity whatsoever it was: this poor man had
lay'n under his infirmity 38 years; how many of these he lay at those banks
(expecting cure) we cannot tell; perhaps most of them; and yet for want of
limbs to help him into the water when it was stirred, still he was carried
back as he came without cure: perhaps you would be angry with me (some of you)
if I should make an allegory of this and apply it by way of allusion to the
method of your proceedings in your course, for the relieving of such impotent
creatures as come to you for cure in their several necessities; if I should
compare that Bath to some of your Courts, soeveraigne enough for their cure if
they could but seasonably get into them, or when they are in, get out again;
the stirring of the waters to your active proceedings in them; the impotent man
lying on the banks to the poor Clyent; his long lying there, toyour long
detaining of him without relief, without dispatch; it would suit but too well
in all the parts of it, for there shall you have a poor Clyent attend from Term
to Term, from year to year, and for well nigh as many years as this impotent
man did; and yet (what for want of the Angels to stir the waters, or of
limbs to help him in, when they are stirred, or out again when he is in) still
he comes back again as he went, without the cure he hoped for: a great
disparagement certainly, though not to the Law, yet to the proceedings in it;
and a great grievance to the subject, that the Sun shall travail twenty times
between the Tropicks too and fro; and he many times twenty as far (as will take
in many of the paralells) for relief; and yet can bring his matters to no
issue; where the tediousness of the journeyings adds no small aggravation to
the tediousness of the delay and expectation: Certainly this one consideration
is much for the justification of those worthy Patriotts in this Kingdom, that
lay out themselves in their endeavors for the resurrection of that Ancient and
Honorable Court of a Presidentship here once established in these
Northern-parts; the reasons for which, are as strong and as many now as ever
they were; and that with some additions.

In the flourishing Kingdom of France, there are eight such Courts, they call
them Parliaments, though from any of them there may be an Appeal to the
grand-Parliament at Paris; yet these are eight standing Courts of great Honor
and Authority erected (in so many several Provinces of the Kingdom) for the
ease of the Subjects, that they may not be forced all (from the remoter parts
of the Kingdom upon all occasions) to come up to Paris, and to travel so far
for Justice, as to make it dear of fetching: for the same reason, have there
bin the like Courts of Justice erected here in England, (though not so many)
one of which is yet in being in the West, and another was here in the North;
and why it should not be continued or restored, I cannot imagine, except it be
this, That as that great City of London (the very belly of the Kingdom) has
engros't unto it self all the Trading, so that other (her sister of
Westminster) would do the like by the Law, and so make of them both two great
Monopolies. And so I pass from this sort of impotent people in the Text, (the
lame) though it be long first: I had been more brief in this discourse, if
those whom it concerned had been so in their dispatches.

The next sort of helpless people in this Spittle in the Text, and quartered
in the next room, are the poor; and to them ( Job tells us) he was a Father.
ver: 17.

Here we are to consider, first, the object of his charity and compassion; they
were the poor: secondly, his charity and compassion toward them, expressed under
the notion and relation of a Father. As to the first, well did the Lord know
that (what through the oppression, covetuousnesse, and cruelty of some, what
through the idleness, ill-husbandry, prodigality, and improvidence of others)
there would be always some poor in the Land; as our Savior tells us Math.
26, 11. The poor you shall have allways with you; and therefore God has
mercifully provided for their releife. In the Law there was a Tithe provided
for them, Deuteronomy. 14.29. that speaks home to us that receive Tithes; and tells
us, that we are not to receive them all, and altogether for our own selves: we
are not altogether Proprietaries; but rather, Usu-fructuaries of them in part:
though we have the best title to them, and share in them, yet they were not
originally set a part only for our selves, but partly in trust; we receive
them to have, but not to hold; we must distribute with one hand, as well as
receive with the other; by this very Law (the equity whereof remains to this
day, and so far forth is Moral) there is a share due out of them to the poor.
Secondly, for the possessours of Fields and Vineyards, the command was, that
they should not reap their Corn clean, nor gather it all into their own
Barnes; but they must leave a portion of it in the corners, and in the furrows
of the field, for the poor, the fatherless, the widow, and the stranger;
Levit: 19. and so likewise, at the gathering in of their Vintage, they must not
gather them clean; but leave a portion of the grapes, and of the olives, and of
their other fruits upon the trees for the same use, a 40th. part, say some of
the Hebrews; a 50th. say some others at the least; and in the times of the
Gospel an Office was erected (chiefly for this purpose) to take care of the
poor, Acts. 6. the Office of Deaconship, much like that of the Overseers of the
poor amongst us: and in these our days, and in this Kingdom, the Laws of the
Land (concorning the Poor) are so wisely made and contrived, as I think it is a
hard thing to devise how to amend or better them; only as a divine Lawyer of
our times (Sir Francis Bacon I mean) once said of the Laws of this Kingdom in
general, That no Nation nor Kingdom under heaven had better, only there
wanted one to enforce the due execution of all the rest: so may I say of these
Laws concerning the Poor, They are as good as wisdom it self can devise,
only they are not duly executed: Hence it is that both Towns and Country are
so full of them, that we had need have in every Village an Hospital to put
them in; and they do multiply so exceedingly upon us, that (as in Pharaoh's
time) the lean Kyne are ready to eat up the fat. And here, my Lord Mayor, with
the rest of the Governors of this Honorable and Loyal City, give me leave to
turn my self to you in a word of admonition: I see no place where they do
more swarm, then here amongst you; so numerous, that a Gentleman cannot come
to Town, nor alight at his Inn, or go into a Shop to lay out his money, but
presently the house is besett with a multitude of these disorderly people; a
great scandal to your Government: This is not for want of Laws to remedy it,
but for want of due execution of them; for certainly if the Laws (that are in
force concerning these) were well executed, not only here, but every where
throughout the Kingdom, this disorder would be remedied; and there would be
none found begging amongst us, but such, as it is either a shame for them to
beg, or a shame for us to suffer them so to do.

But there are two sorts of poor; as St. Paul writing of this subject, 1 Timothy:
5.5. distinguishes of widows, tells us there is a widow, and a widow indeed;
so say I of the Poor, there are poor, and there are poor indeed: in the first
lift of these, I rank all sturdy Rogues, wandering beggars, that are never out
of the way, nor never in it; all drunken, and idle persons, that will not
work; but finding an ease in idleness, go about from Town to Town, and take
up begging for their Trade; these are all poor, but not poor indeed, they are
poor, and they will be so, and it is a just judgment of Almighty God upon
their lewd, loose, and profane courses, that they should be so: Solomon has
given them their doom, Pro: 23.21. The drunkard and the glutton shall be poor,
and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags: these are the very scorn of the
Nation, the reproach of our Government, the sink, the kennell of all
lewdness, profaneness, and uncleanesse; yet to these Job was, and the worthy
Magistrate is a father; but how? not by relieving them, not by protecting them,
not by maintaining and encouraging them in these their lewd courses, but by
correcting them, by punishing them, by putting in execution those wholesome
Laws, providing for the restraining of their lewdness, the setting of them on
work, and reducing them into order: and herein shall he show himself a father
unto these, as well as unto the other by his mercy and compassion.

But these latter are the poor indeed, such as are not only indigent, but
inevitably such; many sick and weak, and old, and blind, and lame, and either
past their work, or, by reason of their infirmities disabled to work,
especially if they be such as while they had ability were laborious and
industrious, and either through unavoidable losses and crosses, or the
greatness of their charge, where there were many more mouths to eat, then
hands to work, have fallen into inevitable poverty; these are the poor indeed,
these the true objects of our mercy and compassion; here, to give and to
distribute, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased; here,
cast thy bread upon the waters, it shall not be cast away, for after many days
thou shall find it; here, give to such, and lend to the Lord, and thou shall
certainly be no looser by it; put it upon his score, he will repay it
seaven-fold into thy bosom: if a cup of cold water so given to a Disciple
shall not loose his reward, surely our charity expressed in more considerable
proportions will not be forgotten; it is a strange argument to persuade to
liberallity, to pious and charitable uses, which St. Paul uses Philip: 4.17.
when he says, that it shall redound to our account another day; and stronger
is that which our Savior uses, Luke 16.9. even to prevail with covetous men to
make them liberal, when he says, that by laying out the Mammon of iniquity,
they shall make themselves friends which may receive them into everlasting
habitations: All this speaks to men as men, persuading them to works of piety
and mercy, and so to become as fathers to the poor. But Job speaks in the
person of a Magistrate, and so such a one in that capacity, though as a man he
may be slack in these works of mercy, yet as a Magistrate he may so carry as
to be a greater father to the poor then a hundred private men can be; a private
man may look to private persons and families, and do good to the indigent
people in the place where he dwells, but a Magistrate (as a more public
person) stretches his arms over whole Countries, and Counties, and by his
prudent care to make good orders for the relief of them, to see to the due
execution of those that are so made, by restraining the covetousness and
cruelty of those that oppress them, and make them poor, by reviving the
co^missions for pious and charitable uses: the like Magistraticall duties may
become the preserver, protector, and reliever of many thousands as Job in that
capacity was (besides his personal charity as a good man, and so he was) and
every good Magistrate is, and ought to be unto the poor a Father.

But more then this; Rulers and Governors, Princes and great Magistrates, are
not only Fathers of the poor, but of the rich also; they are Patriots, and
Fathers of the Country and Kingdom, and all the people under their Government;
so amongst the Romans when any great Officer (civil or military) had done good
service for the Commonwealth, he was honored with the title of a good Patriot
or a Father of his Country; and when men of the best rank amongst them (the
Patricii) came to be listed among the Senators, they were styled Patres
conscripti; listed Fathers: the Kings of the Philistines were styled Abimelech,
which is as much as to say the King my Father; and nothing more frequent nor
familiar with Solomon throughout the whole book of the Proverbs, then
(speaking to his Subjects) to call them his sons: and why all this? but to
show with what a Fatherly affection Princes and Rulers ought to govern their
Subjects, and with what filial, and sonnelike duties of honor, reverence and
obedience Subjects ought to carry toward them again. In the first commandment
of the second Table (which St. Paul takes notice of to be the first
Commandment with promise Ephesians: 6.1.) the duty of Subjects to their King and
Governors is called for under the notion of honor, and the motive persuading
to the duty (that it may come sweetly and cheerfully) is the relation of a
Father; Honor thy Father and thy Mother: thy Father the King, and thy Mother
the Church; thy Father the Civil Magistrate, thy Mother the Ecclesiastical:
for, that this command does not only concern our natural Parents, nor chiefly
them, but principally the Magistrate, our Civil Father, and the Church our
Holy Mother, the reason in the commandment (which is the promise annex't to
such obedience) does clearly evince, That thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee: which clearly declares, that this command
is not principally meant of a family command, but of a National command; nor
the promise, a personal promise, but a more general promise to the People;
nor the duty, so much intended of a family duty, of piety of children toward
their Parents; as of subjection and obedience of Subjects toward their Civil
and Ecclesiastical Parents, the King, and the Church; the neglect of which
duty toward them, and their undutifull murmurings, mutinings, seditions,
conspiracies, treasons, and rebellions against them, is the ruin of Kingdoms,
the destruction of Monarchies, great States, Cities, Commonwealths, and the
ready way to shorten the period of them: for by these they expose themselves to
the Rapine of all their enemies, or of any any Nation (that will take the
advantage of their divisions and dissentions) to fall in upon them, and to make
a prey of them, and so throw them (with their Kings and Princes) out of the
Land which the Lord their God had given unto them, as it is now with this very
People to whom this command was given; as you may read, 2 Kings 17. and 2
Chronicles 36.

The only way for a people to live long in the Land which the Lord their God
gives them, to prolong their days in peace and happiness, is by honoring
and being obedient to their father and their mother, their Rulers and
Governors, both Civil and Ecclesiastical; yet it pleases the wisdom of
God to commend these duties to us under this near and dear relation of Parents
and children, that both the terms in it may from this expression learn their
duty; that Princes and Rulers may govern with a gentle hand, much tenderness
and affection; not as Tyrants, but as Fathers; not as over slaves, but as over
sons: and on the other hand, that Subjects may know how to obey, not as by
compulsion, but of a free and willing mind; not out of a slavish fear, but out
of a filial affection. Thus while Rulers govern their People as Fathers, and
the People honor and obey as sons, it is the only way to prolong our days
in peace and plenty, happiness and security, and to live long in the Land
which the Lord our God gives unto us and all this is taught us under this
sweet notion and relation in the Text, wherein Job professes himself to be
unto the poor a father. And this was the second Character of a worthy
Magistrate; we now come to the third in the next words of the Text,

The Cause that I knew not, I searched out.

These words show the pains and patience, prudence and diligence which Job did,
and all other worthy Judges and Magistrates do, and ought to use in examining
Causes and Persons brought before them, for finding out of the truth, that so
they may judge righteous judgment, all these are comprehended in the word
[searched,] The cause, etc. I searched out. The righteous Judge of all the
world when he came down from heaven to earth (as sometimes he did) to execute
judgment, though he knew the cause before he came, yet before he past
sentence, or executed judgment, he would examine the Cause and find out the
truth by diligent enquiry; see this in the examination of Adam, Gen: 3. the
arraignment of Cain; Gen: 4. the judgment of Sodom, Gen: 19. Adam where art
thou? (to the first) and have thou eaten of the fruits of the tree, of which I
commanded thee thou should not eat? as if he knew nothing of it: Cain, where
is thy brother Abel? (to the second) thy father has lost a son, the world a
saint, and I a faithful servant and martyr; thou must not so carry it, thou
shall not so go away with the murder; ubi est Abelfrater tuus? where is thy
brother Abel? I will go down and see; (to the third) he needed not to go down
and see for his own information; the cry of the City was come up to him, and
might save his labor for going down to them, as to his own information; but by
this his judiciary proceedings, the Judge of all the world would teach all
earthly Judges to know, how warily and orderly they ought to proceed in hearing
and determining causes that are brought before them, that so they may find out
the truth, and give sentence without error: hence it is that Judges were
anciently called Cognitores, and to hear a cause (in the Roman Orators
language) was cognoscere causam, to know a cause; and this requires much pains
and patience, prudence and diligence, not slightly to pass it over, but to
search into it: It is the honor of a King to search out a matter: says
Solomon, Pro: 25.2. a rare example whereof, he was himself in the case between
the two harlots, in discovering the true mother of the child in question; 1
Kings 3. and such is the command in all other cases; in the case case of
Idolatry, Deuteronomy: 17.4. and in the case of false witness, Deuteronomy: 19.17. in the
former (says the Text) Thou shall make diligent enquiry: in the latter, Thou
shall make diligent search: both made good here in my Text, by this worthy
King, Judge, and Magistrate, the subject of our discourse; the cause which I
knew not, I searched out: and great reason is there for all this care, pains,
patience, diligence, and Prudence in searching out the truth; if you consider
these four things.

REASONS.
1. That truth oftentimes lies deep, veritas in profundo; as Democritus:
involuta latet and in alto, (as Seneca to the same purpose) it lies implicated,
inveloped, and perplexed with many foldings, windings, and turnings; clouded
with many mists of error and falsehood; so that he had need of Lynceus's eyes to
pierce into the bottom of it, or Ariadne's thread to lead him to the secret
where it lies.

2. Innocence is often charged by false and unjust accusations, with crimes
which none is guilty of, but the accusers themselves, they laid to my charge
things that I knew not; how hard a case was that of Naboth, that he did suffer?
and of Susanna that she should have suffered upon such false and unjust
suggestions, and accusations?

3. And as innocence is often aspers't with false and foul accusations, so
guilt is often painted with a fair face, and colored with specious pretenses
of innocence; in either of which cases, for a man to justify the wicked, or to
condemn the just, he renders himself equally abominable in the sight of God.

4. Informations are various, for the most part, partial, sometimes false;
that of Ziba, 2 Samuel: 16.2. nay, (which is worse, and fearful to speak of)
oaths themselves oftentimes not to be trusted to; how many such have sometimes
been found to cross shinns, and point blank to cross and thwart one another;
insomuch as it were enough to puzzle the wisest men, and to make them at a
stand, and not know which way to turn themselves in giving judgment; when
from the evidences themselves they can take no certain light; in such cases,
how exceedingly does it stand them upon to use all diligence, not only by
examining witnesses, but observing circumstances, comparing testimonies,
casting in Quaeries upon the by, and by all the ways and means they can devise
(in the cause that they know not) to search out the matter? but Euphormio was
out, when reading Lectures of Philosophy, and seeing brave Hanniball coming
into his School; diverted his discoutse, and fell upon reading a Lecture of
Martial Discipline, and to show how to martial an Army, how to draw it up
into a body, how to cast it into several forms for the better advantaging of
it it self, and dis-advantaging of the enemy, etc. and so should I, if I
should take upon me to discourse of such a subject as this is in such a
Presence. And therefore I pass from this part of the Character, to the next,
and last part of the Character of a worthy Magistrate, and that is, His
courage, in executing of Judgment upon the greatest and stoutest Offenders, in
these words I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of his
teeth.

And the words follow upon the last going before, in a very good method, thus;
He saw the poor oppressed, wronged, and injured by those that were great, and
mighty, and stronger then they; from whose violence they could no way defend
themselves; and so neither save themselves from wrong, nor right themselves
being wronged; here Joh. as a worthy Magistrate (...) on justice, and clothes
himself with judgment as with a Robe and a Diadem; sits him down upon the
Throne or Seat of justice; calls the Parties before him, hears their complaint,
examines the business, and the cause that he knew not, he searches out; and
having found the truth of it, and their complaints to be just; with great
courage and magnanimity (well becoming his place) he falls upon Offenders, the
stoutest of them, and executes judgment upon them: first, by plucking the prey
out of their teeth, and causing them to make restitution and satisfaction for
the wrong they had done; and secondly, by breaking their jaws that they should
do so no more, and so he became a father to the poor; here take up this
Observation.

That it is execution of Justice and Judgment, that is the protection of the
innocent, terror to the nocent and offenders, and that keeps the subjects in
order and in peace: He shall sit upon the Throne of David, says the Lord, Isa.
9.7. What to do? not to sit there in state and majesty for the subjects to
look at him, and no more; but to execute justice and judgment, that is the end
of his power and greatness: It Is not the making of good Laws, but the putting
of them into execution, that must preserve the peace of the Lands without this,
what are the Laws, though never so good? but dead Letters, Ink and Paper,
inanes bullae, vain scarr-crowes which soon come to be despised and trodden
under foot, and render the makers of them ridiculous; it is execution that is
the life of the Law; without it the Magistrate bears the sword in vain.

But we come to the Offenders, upon whom he executed this judgment, and the
crimes for which: The offenders were great Ones, great Oppressors, men of
power, which notwithstanding they did abuse to the crushing of those that were
under them, and therefore compared to wild beasts, ravenous beasts, beasts of
prey, Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tygres, which tear and devour the smaller Cattle
that they seize upon; and such cruel devourers indeed there are amongst
brutish and unreasonable creatures, the Fishes, the Fowls, and the wild
beasts; but amongst men and reasonable creatures, it is strange that any should
be found so unreasonable, so brutish; yet, as strange as it is, it is too
true, and too common, Homo homini Lupus, Leo, Tygris, Demon, one man is even a
devil to another, more cruel then those favage creatures, biting and
devouring one another, at St. Paul expresses it: Gal. 5.15. Eating up my people
as they would eat bread: as God himself speaks of them; and therefore in
executing justice upon them, he is said to break their teeth, and to smite the
jaw-bones of them: Psalm: 3.7. Thou have smitten all mine enemies upon the
jaw bone; thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly: just in the language of
the Text here, I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the prey out of
their teeth. Where, he makes mention of two sorts of instruments of cruelty,
and oppression, teeth and jaws; by the teeth, meaning those fore-teeh, with
which they lay hold, bite, and tear off the flesh; and by the jaws, the
double-teeth that are in the innermost part of the jaw bone, with which they
grind what they have gotten into them, that so they may devour it [called here
molares, grinders:] by which Job seems to discover two sorts of Offenders,
first Biters, secondly Grinders; by the teeth he intimates unto us the Biters;
and by the molares in the jaws, the Grioders; and there are of both sorts but
too many: to instance in some of each sort.

First, The Usurer he is a Biter; from it he has his very name, [Neshek] in
the learned Language signifies Usury, and it is derived from Nashak, which
signifies to bite: so he is most properly a Biter, where he lays hold, he
bites fore.

Secondly, Your Under-Excise-man, that farms the Excise at the second, third,
or fourth hand; he is a Biter, a sorer Biter then the former; for, let it come
through as many hands as it will, they will all gain, let it fall never so
heavy upon the subject; and very heavy it must needs fall; for these two
reasons, first, because there are so many Chapmen one under another, all which
must and will make up their markets, make themselves gainers. Secondly, because
there are so many Underofficers belonging to them; Informers, Gagers, Spies,
Collectors, Clarks, and I know not how many more subservient to the Farmers;
all which will have a living out of it, and some of them more then every man
shall know off, or that any man can take account of them for: all which must be
squeezed out of the poor subject; yet never comes home to the place, or use for
which it was intended; whereas, if it were assess't as now it stands, and
collected [Villatim] as some other of his Majesty's Revenues are, by Officers
of Trust in every Parish; and so transmitted to other higher Officers, till it,
were landed where it should be, the Revenue would be greater, and the Clamor
less: but where there are so many Biters on work at once; and with such long
teeth too, daily and hourly tearing of by such full bitts as they do; no
marvail, if the poor people shrink under their teeth, and complain so sore; no
marvail, if they grow so fatt, and the people so lean, upon whom they prey:
these long teeth of theirs would be filed at least, if not broken off; they are
both too sharp and to long: the Government of this Kingdom is in no
particular Arbitrary, but in this Maladministration of the Excise: the
Excise-man is a Biter.

3. A third sort of biters, are your cunning and unconscionable Barterers in
buying and selling, bargaining or exchanging, Thou shall not defraud thy
brother, nor go beyond him in bargaining; says the Apostle 1 These 4.6. and
that with an intimation too, for the Lord is the avenger of all such things.
(in the same text) there is a great deal of fraud in buying and selling; by
which men go beyond their brethren; by lying and swearing, false weights,
false measures, false gloses, upon counterfeit wares; to set them forth to the
eye, to make them the more vendable; by asking so far above the worth, that if
a man bid but to the half or sometimes to the fifth part, he is sure to be
caught; by recommending things by perswafive arguments above the worth, thus
much it cost me, thus much it is worth, thus much I have been offered, and
never a word true; by trusting at too great an advantage, and a hundred more
such frandes, which it is no wisdom so much as to mention: ne magis admonere
quam prohibere viderer; neither is the buyer free from his frauds too; It is
naught, it is naught, says the buyer; but when he is gone he boasts: and
therefore our Savior takes them both in, when speaking of buyers and sellers
even in the Temple, he calls them both thieves Mat: 21.19. It is written, my
house shall he called the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of
thieves. the cunning and unconscionable bargainer, whether it be in buying or
selling, is a biter, and in the Scripture language a thief, though the Law do
not call him so: under this head, I may rank all Engrossers, Forestallers,
Regrators, Monopolizers, and a hundred more; but what need I go so far as to
the shops and markets to look after them? I doubt they may be found nearer
home.

4. What think you of a driving Lawyer? that is not willing to bring his
Clyents Cause to an issue too soon; but, having discovered a good purse to
follow it, makes it his study to spinne it out with as long a thread as he can.
I heard a soldier of fortune say in the beginning of these late unhappy wars
(a great Officer he was) that if they did husband it well, he did not doubt but
they might so manage their business as to make those wars last seven years:
I wish he had had his wish, so he had had no more; and I the next, he should
have been but little better for them: I doubt there are some other professions
of his mind in these driving and protracting ways; and I should have told you
something more of your proceedings in this kind, but that you heard something of
it already.

5. For a small Officer to grope for a small Bribe, perhaps to excuse a
Jury-man; or, to help a friend or two to be put upon the taly; to help a
verdict; is but a small matter: he is scarce worth the name of a biter, he does
but snap and away; let him pass.

6. But what think you of a Martial; he is an Officer (I think) that has the
ordering of Causes, to put them into rank and file, and to dispose of them in
such a method, and order, as they are to be called on; which, being often times
numerous, are enough to make up a pretty Army: he had need be honest, for great
is his power, and much to the advantage or dis-advantage of those, for, or
against whom he will please to use it: he can alter his ranks and files as
helisteth; cut off his files by the middle; and by a word of command and a
motion (not of his pike, but of his pen) dispose of each of the divisions when
he please; make the whole body of the Causes wheel to the right or to the left,
and so alter the ground, or by a countermarch bring the front into the rear,
and the rear into the front; he had need be honest, he shall have temptations
enough to use this his power and skill for the speeding of Trialls, and too
often does so, but he cannot herein gratify one but he must injure another
as much; and that bites fore but, that is no matter; so he have a morsel from
the one, he will make no bones to snap at the others good; he may well go for a
Biter.

7. There is one sort of beasts amongst you, I know nor whether I may place hi^
among the wild beasts or tame but a deadly biter he is; they call him a
Barrater, a Common-barrater; he is made up of many ingredients, all stark
naught; this is one that makes it his business to create suits of Law, and to
foment them, vexatious suits, and then to employ himself in them with all
treachery, falsehood and unfaithfullnesse that may be, that out of the troubled
waters he may fish to himself advantage: is not this one of his tricks, to sue
a Neighbor unto an outlawry: and he never hear of it, nor know who hurt him
till he see it come out against him? is not this another? for some slight?
respasse to sue a man that dwells the next door by him, a man that keeps Church
and market, and which he sees and converses with every day, yet for
vexationsake sends out his writs into Kent, or Cornwall, or some other the
remotest Counties in the Kingdom to seek him; where God knows he never was:
this writ in Latin you call a latitat; and yet the charge of this and all
these indirect processes, and proceedings, must come in the bill of charges
against him; as if he were a man that hid his head. This other that I mention
is but a poor one, but yet it is common, for a man that has some slight matter
against his neighbor to send for a process for him, in the same process to
put in four several men, and all for trifles not worth the defending: the
design is to call them all severally to composition, this is easily made; but
then every one of them pays the whole charges of the writ and proceedings;
whereas the payment of one discharges all, and so the other three are put up
for clear gain: this is a Biter too, a paltry curr, yet of an ill mouth, his
teeth wrankle where they bite; 'twere good they were knocked out they snap at so
many: these are not the tyth of tricks of this currish biter: but I am weary of
pursuing him, and many more; and therefore turn me from them to those grand
Oppressors in the text, the Grinders, whose jaws ( Job tells us) he brake, that
they might grind no more, I brake the jaws of the wicked.

As there are Biters amongst men, so there are Grinders too; of these the Lord
complains, Isa: 3.15. What mean you that you break my people in pieces and
grind the faces of the poor? and in the Psalms they eat up my people as they
would eat bread. our Savior goes further in the reproof of some of them, and
tells them they are such insatiable Helluo's; that they devour whole houses, as
well as those that are in them; Mat: 23. Of these Grinders and Devourers, take
notice of these four sorts.

First, The cruel Extortioners; who (where he can lay hold and fasten his
teeth) will never let go till he consume all that a man has: Psalm, 109.11.
such are they that lay hold of men and their estates by Bills, Bonds,
Mortgages, that take the advantages of all forfeitures; that deal upon men's
necessities; and pursue them with all rigor and extremity, till they break
their backs and their bones; these are the Grinders, which the Lord complains
of, [ Isa: 3.15.] which beat his people in pieces: and then the unmercifull
Opressour, which withholds from the hireling his wages, or making him work
for naught, lives by the sweat of the poor man's brows; such as Job speaks of,
Job 22.6. which take the pledge from a man for naught, and strip the naked of
their clothing; such as withold bread from the hungry, and break the arms
of the fatherless; that take away the widows bed from under her; and sell the
poor for shoes: (as the Prophet speaks) these are those which God complains
of, in the latter part of that verse, which grind the face of the poor: all
these are crying sins, they make the poor cry; but these sins of oppression
and cruelty, make a greater cry against them, and such as enters into the
ears of the Lord Almighty, and will not be stilled till it brings down
judgment and vengeance upon them: if the sentence of condemnation be
pronuone't against all those which when Christ in these was hungry, gave him no
meat, and when he was thirsty gave him not to drink; what shall become of
those that take from them the bread that they should eat, and the water that
they should drink? if those be guilty that do not visit the members of Christ
in prison; what shall become of those that cast them there? Mat: 25. these may
well be rank't among the Grinders: but there is a millstone which our Savior
Christ speaks of in the Gospel; which though it be not hanged about their
necks here, and they cast into the Sea with it; yet will one day be cast upon
them and grind them to powder.

2. The Second sort of Grinders are your great Depopulators, that lay whole
Towns even with the ground; fair Churches wherein God had been worshipped;
ancient houses wherein had been kept by their Ancestors good hospitallity; all
laid wast: ante ostia solitudo; they stand only as emblems of desolation
places for Zim to lodge in, the houses full of Ohim; for Ostriches to dwell in,
and the satyrs to dance: Isa: 34. these throw out whole families, and turn
them out of doors by whole sale, by droves, without house and harbor, making
them to wander up and down, scattered about the Country (as once the Israelites
did) to gather stubble instead of straw) and forced to embrace the Rock for a
shelter, and all this to make room for their Cattle, or wild beasts, dogs
and horses; either for their pleasure, or personal profit; when to make room
for them, so many hundred Christian souls are turned a grazing: these are the
Nimrods of the world; mighty hunters before the Lord: Nimrod was a mighty
hunter before the Lord; what did he hunt? not so much wild beasts, as men; he
hunted them out of their habitations, and drove them up into corners, that he
might enlarge his Territories and Dominions: such are these depopulators,
mighty hunters, that drive men out of their harbors and habitations to make
them room for them, and for their pleasures, profits, and disports; but let
such remember the woe pronounced against the Assyrian for the like crime, Isa:
33.1. Woe unto thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; when thou have
done spoiling, thou shall be spoiled thy self: the first great depopulator of
this Kingdom was a terrible example of Gods severe wrath and vengeance against
such unreasonable, such unmercifull, and destroying Oppressors the depopulator
is a grinder.

3. A third sort of grinders are the insatiable purchasers: [Poor-chasers] you
may call them, that join house to house, and land to land, till there be no
more room, that they may dwell alone in the earth: to these I may say by way
of allusion as Bildad to Job, (Job: 18.4.) Shall the earth be removed for thee?
so, was the earth made for these alone, that they will not allow others a small
room in it, or a corner of it to dwell in? and when they have done all they
can do in this kind, what have they done? but loadened themselves with thick
clay? and when they have purchased what they can, what have they purchased? but
a lump of earth; and let that lump be never so big, still it is but earth? it is
an inheritance in heaven that must enrich us, and make us happy: what profit is
it for a man to have a share of the earth, and none of heaven? to have great
store of lands and livings, and not one foot in the land of the living? and
when all is done, had one man the whole earth to himself, or that which now
serves manythousads, to his own use; he can use no more of it while he is
living, then will serve one man; and when he is dead, and box't up in his
Coffin, as little room in it shall serve his turn, as shall do the meanest of
those whom he oppress't, and from whom he has taken that which he had to
augment his portion. The royal Prophet rightly apprehended this vain humor of
earthly-minded men; Psalm: 46.11. where he tells them their very thoughts thus,
Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever. and their
dwelling places to all generations; and therefore they call their lands after
their own names: this is the way of them: (says the Prophet) withal it is
their folly too, for ver: 14. They lie in the grave like sheep, death gnoweth
upon them; and more then so, the righteous shall have dominion over them in the
morning: and this is the end of their purchase; but in the mean time, while
their teeth are in their head, they bite sore, and devour whole multitudes;
and therefore are rightly listed amongst the Grinders.

4. A fourth sort of Grinders, I shall acquaint you with, and I shall mention
no more; and that is the Rack-renting Landlord: which, though he cannot manage
his lands himself, and has as much need of the Tenant's labor, as the
Tennant has of his Land; yet is not willing that a poor Tennant should live
upon his labor: he will have rent not only for his Land, but for his Tennant's
labor too, and so live by the sweat of other men's brows; peeping into every
corner, every Cottage, to see whether he can spy any advantage, out of which he
may squeeze if it be but the other crown, to mend his Rencall; though it come
so hard, that he is fain to press blood in stead of sweat to make it up. And
among all your Rack-renters, take heed of your City-purchaser, that has
raised himself into an Estate out of small wares; as for your Nobility, and
Gentry, whose Estates descend unto them from their Ancestors, they have some
sense of honor in them, and a care to uphold the reputation of the Noble
Families they spring from, by keeping up the Ancient hospitality of their
houses, and by preserving the honor of their Forefathers, which (among other
things) consisted much in this, that they were good Masters to their servants,
and good Landlords to their Tennants: but these new Upstarts, that have raised
themselves out of pinns and points, or some such small matters, did so value a
farthing when they were not worth it, that they think it now very ill
husbandry in them, that any man should get penny under them; hence is it, that
they do so exactly dispute the value of every Cottage, every corner, every
foot of Land within their purchase, in which in short time (by the help of
some officious Informers) they become as skillful and expert as ever they were
in their trade: of all kind of Landlords, take heed of such, they bite sore,
and there is no bit so little, but they will fasten their teeth in it, and
never let go till they tear away their hold at the least.

And thus I have given you an account of the Delinquents in the text both the
biters and the grinders: there is nothing remains now, but the breaking of
their jaws, and plucking the prey out of their teeth: herein Job showed both
his justice and his courage; and in both of the^ declared himself a worthy
Magistrate in breaking their jaws, andplucking the prey out of their teeth:
and this will be the honor of all Judges and Magistrates even to the highest,
seeing there are so many Lions and Bears, and Wolves and Tygres amongst men,
as well as among beasts; that tear and devour those smaller helples creatures
which they can overpower: what can be more just, or more honorable, then for
the worthy Magistrates, the Rulers, and Governors of the Land, to cloth
themselves with justice as with a Rohe and Diadem? to sit in judgment upon
them? to reach the head of such insolent offenders? to pluck the prey out of
their teeth, by causing them to make restitution and satisfaction for all the
wrongs, injuries and oppressions, by which they have endammaged innocent and
harmless men; and then to break their jaws by such severe and wholesome Laws,
and paenall Statutes, that they shall not dare to do so any more. And this is
an Act that will require courage and magnanimity, of all other virtues most
necessary in a Magistrate, in these four respects;

First, for preserving the Authority of the Laws which without due execution
will become ridiculous, and render them so that made them; it is a reproach to
Laws, when they shall be compared but to cobwebs which entangle the smaller
Flies, but the great humming Bees break through them.

Secondly, for the maintaining and upholding the honor of their persons and
places, and the high Offices they bear, that they fall not into contempt.

Thirdly, in respect of the Offenders themselves, especially such as the Text
speaks of, Biters and Grinders of the people; they are the Lions, and Bears,
and Wolves, and Tigers, among the smaller Cattle; strong, insolent, and
stubborn, such as hate to be reformed, and scorn to be reproved; here, it is
necessary that a Magistrate cloth himself with zeal, courage, and magnanimity,
to let the proudest of them know; that he bears not the sword in vain.

Fourthly, in [terrorem] to terrify others, that they may see, and hear, and
fear, and not dare to Act presumptuously: severe execution of Justice upon a
few of those great, and insolent Offenders, shall be of more force to keep the
Country in awe and in order, then upon a 100. petty delinquents of a lesser
size.

Fifthly, it declares the integrity of the Magistrate and that he does justice
without respect of persons. Upon all these accounts of all the Magistraticall
virtues, there is none more necessary then courage, and magnanimity; to take
down the insolency of great Offenders: we whip beggars when they go about the
Country begging; we hang up sheep-stealers, and petty thieves; but, what do we
to those great Robbers we have spoken of? that rob by wholesale, rob whole
Towns and Families in them? oh for the courage of Phineas, in such cases, or
of Job in the Text, to break the jaws of such, and to pluck the prey out of
their teeth! And so I have done with all the parts of the Character of a worthy
Magistrate, set forth in the Text: there are three conclusions to be gathered
out of them all (considered together) by good conscequence; which I would have
acquainted you with, if the time would have served for it, as well as the Text;
I will only name them, and so I have done.

1. The first is this, the great necessity of this great Ordinance of
Magistracy and Government: it is the very stay of the world; the pillars and
supporters, not only of the Kingdom, but of the Societies in it; the mother of
our peace and joy. When there are so many poor, and blind, and lame amongst us;
what would become of them, if there were none to be eyes to the one, limbs to
the other, and to the third as Faethers? While there are so many Lions, and
Bears, and Wolves, and Tigers amongst us, ready to bite, and to tear, and to
devour those that are not able to resist them: what would become of us, if we
had not amongst us, such men of wisdom and courage, power and authority, to
break their jaws, and to pluck the prey out of their teeth?

2. The second thing is this, the great happiness of this Nation, in the full
fruition of this so blessed an Ordinance; where we have so many Courts of
Justice of all sorts erected amongst us, and men of choice wisdom, courage,
learning, uprightness, and integrity, sitting in them; unto which we may have
resort at all times, for justice and judgment, upon all occasions; where, that
promise made to the people of God upon their turning to him, is made good to
us: Isa: 1.25.26. And I will turn my hand upon thee and purely purge away thy
dross, and take away all thy tin. And I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning, the Lord has thus gracioussy
dealt with us, and made this word good unto us; he has turned his hand upon
us, and purged away our dross, and taken away all our tin; and he has
restored our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning:
Blessed be God, this day is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears; this day, do
we see it with our eyes. That of Amos, (whether precept, or promise, or
prophecy, or what you will call it) [ Amos 5:24.] is this day the joy and
rejoicing of our hearts; where Judgment does runn downlike water; and
righteousness as a mighty stream; as water, for the plenty of it, and
freedom to it; and as a mighty stream, for the conveyance of it through the
land; it is true the fountain of it is at Westminster; there is the spring, the
well head; but, here is the comfort of it, it is not stagrum, a standing pool:
Justice does not contain it self within those banks, but it runns down as a
stream, as a mighty river like that of Nilus watering the whole Kingdom,
branching it self into many streams, running East, West, North, and South
through all the Counties, all the Countries, all the quarters of the Land in
the several Circuits, allotted unto several learned Judges of the Land, in
which they with their Counselors, and Officers riding from County to County,
from City to City, as so many streams convey justice unto us; bring home
Justice to our houses, carry it to our very doors: That which Moses speaks in
the in the honor of the Isralites, [ Deuteronomy: 4.8.] may truly be said in the
honor of our Nation, in the same respect, What Nation is there so great, which
has Statutes and Judgments so righteous, as is all the Law that I set before
you this day? so, what Nation is there under Heaven, so happy as England, is
this day, which has Statutes, and Judgemenst, and Laws, so righteous as we
have; and such choice men for wisdom, learning, uprightness, and integrity,
to administer Justice and Judgment unto the people according to them? And this
brings on the third Conclusion, and that follows, ex congrue.

3. What thanks do we ow to God, to the King, to the Parliament, and to all our
Rulers and Governors, for so great mercy, blessings, and benefits, which under
their Government, and by the means of it, we do daily receive? we owe to them
our peace, our liberty, our security, our property, all the enjoyment of the
good things we have here; yea, even our very lives: it is by Government, and by
the due execucution of justice and judgment, that we live securely, that we
enjoy our peace and plenty, that we sit every man quietly under his own vine,
and fig tree, and enjoy the fruit of our labors: without it, how soon would
the Biters and the Grinders fall in upon us, tear us in pieces, and devour us
when there was none to help. Oh, bless God for Government; cartainly of all
the blessings that God has sent down down from heaven to earth, (as to the
things of this life) there is none so great as this of Government; therefore,
blessed be God that has eastblish't Government amongst us; and blessed be the
King, which (with good Jeh shaphat) has taken care to send forth Judges and
Officers to administer justice and judgment unto the people; and blessed be
the Parliament, which has made us Statutes, Judgments, and Laws, so just, so
good, so righteous, to be governed by; and blessed be all the Ministers of true
Justice amongst us, which lay out themselves in their utmost endeavors, to
preserve our peace and protect us, from wrong and voilence; from the fury of
the Biters, and the Grinders, that would devour us: and now how shall we show
our thankfulness to them all? but by praying for them, by paying tribute unto
them, where tribute is due; by yiedling all due honor and reverence to their
persons, all Subjection and due obedience to their Orders, Injunctions, and
Commands, which they lay upon us for our good this is the way to preserve our
peace; this is the way to continue our happiness; and to make our days long
in this good Land which the Lord our God has given unto us; AMEN.

FINIS.

