THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF John Bradshaw, President of the High Court of
Justice.

WITH A CODICILL Thereunto Annexed:

Hell from beneath is moved to meet thee at thy coming, Psalm. 14.9. Furor est
ne moriare mori. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF John Bradshavv.
IN the Name of the DEVIL and his DAM, The Good Old Cause, Amen. I John
Bradshaw, the most impious Villain the earth ever groaned under, being
tormented in Body, with the apparent Symptoms of the Plagues of Hell; but
thanks to an evil and affrighted Conscience of bloody Mind, and accursed
Memory, do make and ordain this my last WILL and TESTAMENT, in manner and form
following.

First, I most unwillingly surrender my Loathed Soul into his hands that
seduced it to the Perpetration of so hideous a Murder, being well assured to
be for ever tormented in HELL, and for that trusting solely to my own Merits.

Secondly, my wretched body I require to be laid on a Herce, alias a Hurdle,
and to be drawn from Westminster through the Streets of London to Tower Hill,
to be most ignominiously there Interred in the Grave of Miles Sindercombe (his
Corpse being first thence removed) since being too honest and noble company for
such a Caytiff. And for my Worldly Goods and Preferments with which it has
pleased the Devil and his faithful Servants the Parliament, to store me, I do
herein dispose of them as follows.

First, I give and bequeath unto the Heirs of my Lord Cottington, the Reversion
of his Manor of Hanworth and Freemantle, when neither the State nor my Assigns
can hold it any longer.

Item, I give and bequeath my Manors and Lands in Cheshire, descended to me
from my Ancestors to my good Friend and Countryman Sir Georg Booth (whom I
heartily thank for frighting me to this natural Death) toward the repa^ation
of his Fortu^es, or to any one else that can find them.

Item, I give and bequeath my new made Lodgings at the West end of Westminster
Abbey to any of the present Grandees that are climbing and aspiring to be
highest, (though I cannot wish well to my Cosen Lambert.)

Item, I give one Hundred Groats to Alderman Ireten, in a grateful remembrance
of the damnable advice I had from his Brother, and in respect of his own
mischievous service, to the Commonwealth.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Fellow Labourer the Lord Chief Baron Wild, my
wrought Nightcap wherein I slept so secure and dreadlesse of any direful
apparitions, being exceedingly useful to him against the ^aunting of the Ghost
of innocent Captain Burleigh.

Item, I give and bequeath unto my familiar and close Friend Mrs. Lenthall the
Speakers Lady, as much Scarlet of my High Court of Justice Robes, as will make
her a Petticoat, to be worn against the next Thanksgiving day to be solemnised
at Grocers Hall, and the remainder of it to be burnt to powder to cure the sore
throats that Squire DUN will shortly make among my Consorts.

Item, I give and bequeath to the silent Speaker my Gold trimmed Gloves being
used and accustomed to Bribes, being a suitable qualification for a Master of
the Rolls.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Dishonorable William Earl of Salsbury my
black Silk Garters, that will be fitter for his Neck, than his blew Garter is
for his Leg.

Item, The rest and residue of my Apparel I give unto the Hangman to whom of
due right they only do belong.

Item, I give all my Preferments to my Brother Lisle, having been my Successor
in my grand facinorous employment; excepting only the Judgeship of the Sheriffs
Court, which I would request the Londoners for the great good I have done them,
to confert again upon Mr. Proctor.

Item, I Will and Require my Executors hereafter named, for the perpetuating
that most infamous and abominable Fact of Regicidium to dispend annually one
hundred Pound Sterling on an Anniversary Oration in the Elogie of that Monk
that stabbed Henry the 3d. of France.

Item, I give one thousand Marks to any one that will assume and bear the name
of Ravilla in that Kingdom, and so Continuis vicibus, as often as the w^eel
shall bruise any of them.

Item, Five hundred Marks more to the erecting of a stately Monument to the
glorious memory of Guy Fawks, to be placed in the room of the late Tyrant and
Traitor Oliver.

Item, I give one thousand pounds more for the redemption of Turkish and
Infidel Slaves, taken by Pirati^al Christians, and that Alderman Pack be
Tr^asurer for it, to whom I Will and Require my Executors to pay the same,
taking Security that he pay it within ten days after he has cleared his
account with the Piedmont Protestants.

Item, I do by all means desire, and I do hereby straightly charge my Executors
that Peter St^rry Preach my Funeral Sermon, and that he may (if possible)
regain his credit. I do command him to lay, That I am placed at the right hand
of the Devil.

The rest and residue of all my Goods and Chattels, Lands and Hereditariments,
my Especial and Singular Virtues, my Religion, my Charity, my Mercy, I give to
my dearly beloved Pimp Mr. Nedham, desiring him, that if he hangs not for his
own sake, he would hang for mine, requesting my other Mercury Mr. Will. Lilly,
and the above mentioned Esquire Dunne, to be aiding and assisting to him in the
execution of the premises. Bequeathing unto Mr. Lilly a Hempon Chain, which he
may either make use of himself, or send as a return to the King of Sweden.

Signed, Sealed, and Declared by the aforesaid John Bradshaw to be his last
Will and Testament. In presence of JOHN BRADSHAW. Hugh Peter's: Philip Nigh. John
Can.


A CODICILL. The Testator adds (which through impenitency, or incogitancy he
had omitted in the WILL hereto annexed) these following Bequests and Legacies.
I^em, I give and bequeath unto the Solicitor Cook the High Court of
Justice-Man my broad Bever Hat (it being G^ll ^y ^aw to give it after the Psalm
is sung) to hide (...) ^^int (...); and because I have no better J^wel^ (...)
^e, I ^iv and beque^ h unto him the Millstone ^^ention^^ in the Gospel, to be
worn as a special Ornament in his Hat-band.

Item I giv^ and bequeath a timely Item unto the brood of Doristan, that they
fo^thwith depart this Kingdom, lest they su^^^^ the same at London, which their
villainous Father deservedly underw^nt in the Hague.

Item, I give and beque^th unto the Executors of Edm^^d P^^^^aux my Attorney
General this ensuing Caution, That they reserve the sixty thousand pound
Bribe-Gold in their Hands for the rebeautifying of Cheapside-Cross: And for
that I will speak with him my self.

Item, ((...) there can be any conclusion) as my last Beques^^^ Legacy, would
the Small Pox, the French Pox, the P^ague h^d befallen Mr. Recorder Steel, and
the rest o^ them, b^f^^ I had meddled with them, or their Good Old Cause. So I
begun, and so I have ended.

For the validity and more certain truth of this Codicil, I have desired the
Credentials of Secretary Thurloe, together with a true Copy of Somners Plot, to
be labelled hereunto.

Sic Testator, JOHN BRADSHAW. JOHN THUREN


FI^IS.

